THE Political Testament OF M. Jean Baptist Colbert, Minister and Secretary of
State.

THE Political Testament OF M. Jean Baptist Colbert, Minister and Secretary of
State. Wherein is contained All that has passed under the Reign of LEWIS the
XIV. unto the Year 1684. With Remarks upon the Government of the Kingdom of
France.

Translated out of French.

LONDON: Printed for R. Bentley, at the Post House in Russel Street in
Covent Garden. M DC XCV.

TO THE Right Honorable SIDNEY Lord Godolphin, Baron of Rialton, One of the
Lords Justices for the Administration of Affairs in the absence of the King,
first Commissioner of the Treasury, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
My Lord,
ALL who have the happiness to be acquainted with Your Lordship, know how
litttle You love, or want a Dedication; and I should not have presumed to fix
Your Name to this, were there not a kind of necessity for it; but when I
reflect on the Character of my Author, so like, and in so many circumstances
agreeing with Your Lordships, where can I draw so exact a Parallel, where could
I make choice of so fit a Patron?

For whether I consider the late Famous Monsieur Colbert, either in his public
or private Capacity, in justice to his Memory, I must compare him to Your
Lordship, being otherways unable to describe him as he deserves; and in this,
I am sure, I have outdone the Original, though I fall much short of it in the
Translation.

The Reader may observe, he was Comptroller general of the Finances in France,
the most like to a Lord Commissioner of the Treasury in England; a Station,
Your Lordship has long maintained with so great Honor, Justice, Integrity,
and Prudence, that You never deservedly made an Enemy, nor undeservedly
preferred a Friend; I may well say long, considering the different prevailing
Parties in our Nation; but You have still preserved Your Interest, by the same
Merit You acquired it; what ever Changes have happened, You have never deviated
from Your own just Principles, and none has better demonstrated that
Infallible Maxim, an Honest Man is the best Politician.

But though Honesty is the best, and ought to be the chief Ingredient in a
Statesman, there are other extraordinary Qualifications, Stars of a lesser
Magnitude, which shine bright in Your Lordship, a sound and steady Judgment, a
clear and ready Wit, a quick Apprehension, a perfect Knowledge of Languages,
Foreign Courts and Customs, an absolute Command of the Passions, an easy and
affable Behavior, and a true Application to Business, without its tedious
forms and encumbrances. It Is these Exemplary Virtues that justly recommend Your
Lordship to all Good Men, and all Good Men to Your Lordship.

It is very difficult to quit so fruitful a Subject; but I am to remember to
whom I am speaking; and though I cannot say enough to my Reader, I must not say
too much to Your Lordship. I will therefore trouble You no longer, hoping the
Honesty and Usefulness of the Subject, will atone for the Imperfections of the
Translation, and the importunity of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships Most Faithful and Obedient Servant, William Granvill.


THE EPISTLE TO THE KING.
SIR,
GOD has so visibly appeared in Protecting your Majesty's Reign, that I am
verily persuaded your Majesty does in no-wise attribute to your Own good
Conduct, those happy Events which have made your Kingdom so Glorious, and
humbled its Enemies. GOD answered the Prayers of all your good Subjects, and
gave You to them in a time, when there was little hope of their being heard;
since it was not till after Twenty three Years Barrenness, he began, by the
Miracle of your Birth, to declare, He had chosen you from all Eternity, to be
one of the most perfect Works that have been, for a long time, upon Earth. So
certain a Truth, and so generally acknowledged by all your Subjects, ought also
to be known to Strangers, that they may be convinced, the Mighty Hand of GOD
acts for you against your Enemies. But seeing there is in almost all other
Courts but a mere outward appearance of Piety, while it shines so bright in
yours, they attribute all your Majesty's Prosperity only to your good Fortune,
without lifting up their Eyes to Him who is the Lord of Hosts, and without
whos^ Aid, it is impossible for any one to expect Victory. It were to be wished
your Enemies had been sooner undeceived, and in good time convinced, That it is
GOD alone who protects you; then there had not been so much Blood spilt in the
War, which you have so gloriously ended, and the Lives of an infinite Number of
Men might yet be spared, who seem destined to perish in the same Quarrel. For
your Majesty, by having given a Peace to Europe, has not quite extinguished
the Jealousy of many Potentates, wherewith they feel themselves disquieted.
When they see what great Things are done by you, they do but watch for an
Opportunity to be revenged; and rather than they will yield to those
Submissions which one of your Ministers requires from them, it is very likely
they will hazard All, to keep All.

But, SIR, may I be so bold to ask, Whether all that this Minister does, be any
Service to your Majesty? I fear you may think the little good Correspondence,
which has hitherto been between us, puts me upon this Quest^on. The deep
Wounds, which your Majesty knows better than I, he has endeavored to give me,
by his frequent Addresses to your Majesty, to make you suspect my Fidelity, may
incline you to believe, That my Resentments are still great enough to prompt me
to do by him, as he has dealt with me. But GOD forbid that I should be more
concerned for my own Interest, than for your Majesty's; having no other aim,
but to represent faithfully to your Majesty how things are. A Great KING, who
has in his Hands the Government of a large Kingdom, does not always know what
his Ministers do; especially when he gives them the same Authority, which you
do to the Marquess of Louvoy. Public Ministers Faults are usually imputed to
their Master; and if War happen to ensue, How many People suffer for the Guilt
of one particular Person? It seems to me, that Monsieur Louvoy was the cause
that the War lasted so long. It Is true, the end of it has proved glorious to
your Majesty; but it cannot be said you owe it to his good Conduct: It Is
evident, that by him the Safety of your Realm was brought into danger, out of
which, nothing but the Hand of GOD delivered you. He is then answerable to all
your People for the Blood he has cost 'em. Besides, had your Majesty been less
respected and admired, he might have perhaps made you lose the Love of your
Subjects; for you who are their Father, ought to be as sparing of their Blood,
as of your own. Is it not likewise very strange, that a Minister, who never saw
War but in Paint, should pretend to know more of it than all yonr Commanders,
when your Majesty can justly boast of the best in all Europe? For wherever
the Prince of Conde and Viscount Turenne are named, there is no body but knows
that your Majesty's Reign (destined to have in it all that is great upon Earth)
has two of the greatest Generals Europe has seen these many Years.

Divine Providence, of whose Effects your Majesty is hourly sensible, has led
you out of those dangerous Ways, wherein another would have been lost: Your
Piety, which appears in all your Actions, returns daily Thanks to GOD for it,
who is delighted with your Gratitude. But since every one does not think, that
all which here below comes to pass, is from GOD, the Faults of your Minister
augment the Number of your Enemies; they believe when he exposes your naked
Breast, who should take most care to defend it, they shall at last pierce your
very Heart. Hence it is, that so many Princes in Europe endeavor to do you all
the Mischief they can; and would certainly mortally wound you, were it not
impossible to do Him any harm, whom GOD has so visibly taken into his
Protection.

We can also say, without flattering your Majesty, That never was any Prince
more worthy of that Protection. You have all the Qualities of a Great King, and
of a King truly Christian: If you had any Failings in your Youth, you are,
Thanks be to GOD, so well come to your Self, that you only remember 'em to do
the greater Penance for 'em. He that will please your Majesty, must live in
your Court as if he were in a Cloister, out of which all Vice must be banished.
If Envy reign there, yet no body is suffered to show it: Your Majesty is an
Example of Virtue to all your Courtiers: And though the Corruption of the Age
be so great, that they cannot imitate their Master; yet if they would please
him, they must seem to do it.

This return of your Majesty to GOD, is the Reward of your never having forgot
Him, in what State and Condition soever you were. If through Human Frailty you
have done like a David, or many of those Sinners who are now in Paradise; yet
you never pretended upon that account, to excuse your self from rendering to GOD
that which was due to Him. You endeavored to obtain his Pardon, by Worshipping
him as he ought to be, and by a perfect resignation of your self to him;
because you know it is the way to incline him to Mercy. No Man can say you have
been one Day of all your Life without hearing Mass: And though the deceased
King your Father was very pious, he never could, as you do; refrain, during the
Celebration of that adorable Mystery; from talking with those about him, nor
from many indecent Postures in which he then used to be.

The Fear of GOD, which you have always had before your Eyes, made you
sometimes resolve, to let People, for a while, believe things of you, which
were only suspected, rather than clear your self in their Thoughts, by
frequenting the Sacraments. You forbore coming to them, so long as you thought
your self not worthy of them; or believed your Weakness too great, to perform
the Promises you made to GOD. This was a sign of the Tenderness of your
Conscience, wherein you are so far from being like other Princes, who affect
external Mortifications at that very time they are privately plunging
themselves into all sorts of Pleasures.

What shall I now say of all your Majesty's good Qualities, which make you pass
in the Opinion of those that perfectly know you, for the honestest Man in all
your Kingdom? A Truth equally in the mouths of all your Subjects; and assures
me, I cannot be guilty of Flattering you, though your Majesty were less known.
It is then neither Flattery, nor is it the Gratitude I owe you, for all those
Honors and Favors I have received from your Majesty, which make me say, There
has not, for a long time, been so Great a King upon Earth: I say it, because I
verily believe it is true; and nothing shall ever make me change my Opinion.

For without mentioning the many Strong Places you have taken, and the many
Victories you have obtained, where is the Prince, who after having been so ill
Educated, has better natural Inclinations? I dare not say all that I think in
this particular, because I may be accused of Ingratitude to Cardinal Mazarin,
my Benefactor. It Is better for me to be silent, and only speak of that which
all the World cannot behold without Admiration: Yes, SIR, I will maintain, not
excepting the Caesar's, or the Alexanders, more wonderful Things have been done
in your Reign, than in any of those Great Men's, whom Antiquity does so much
boast. Never did any King go so early into the Wars, as you did; if it be said
you did not properly go, but were carried, because the Condition of your
Affairs required you should be seen by your Soldiers on the Frontiers: In
answer to this, I only ask, Whether it was not of your own accord, and not by
the Counsel of Cardinal Mazarin, that you continued whole Days on Horsback;
which was the cause of that great Sickness, whereof 'twas thought you would
have died at Calais? It Is well known, that Minister daily told you, you would
certainly endanger your Health, by being so much fatigued. It Is also certain,
he would have hindered you from going to the Fort of Mardyke, where the Air was
so much infected, and so many were sick, that he might well be in great fear
for your Majesty's sacred Person: But the Inclination you then had for all that
is Great and Glorious, made you neglect his Counsel; so that he had reason to
think, that would happen which he so much feared.

You being then but Twenty Years of Age, some perhaps will say, that in what
your Majesty then did, there was nothing extraordinary; and that many others
have done as much. But it is fit it should be known, that more than Ten Years
before, you had been in the Field, and seen several Sieges, from which for the
safety of your Person, you were drawn against your will; because you were never
better pleased than when you were with your Soldiers, to inform your self of a
hundred things, which were then above your Age. What pity is it, that a Prince
born with so great Qualities, had not that Education which your Majesty has
given Mon Seigneur the Dauphin? What Miracles had we not then seen in your
Reign? Seeing it is a wonder if a Prince, who has not had the help of good
Education, does not heap fault upon fault.

I could make very good Reflections, upon your Majesty's having so perfectly
well acquitted your self, notwithstanding you never had any knowledge of that
which contributes to the complete Education of a Prince. This also gives me a
good occasion, to speak of all that your Majesty has done, in bringing Learned
and Skilful Men (at your own great Charge) from Foreign Countries, and by
Establishing Manufactures in your own Kingdom: So that the French have now at
home, that which they were obliged with great Expense of their Money, to seek
for abroad; and what is yet more, this has your Majesty done of your self,
without receiving the least light or advice from others.

You were Educated very tenderly amongst Women; I cannot forbear saying so,
because it would rob your Majesty of that Glory which is your due; when it is
known, that notwithstanding so ill an Education, you are become that which we
now see you are. I have yet a great deal more to say of those many things your
Majesty has done, which appear so great and surprising; considering what I
have just now said of your Education: But I pass that by, to keep my self to
the Subject I have here proposed. I must tell you with all the Respect I owe
your Majesty, that the only thing wherein you can be blamed, is, that you are
too good to, and put too much confidence in those on whom you rely in some of
your Affairs. It is not to show my own Parts, that I pretend to find fault with
other Men's Actions: Perhaps I am more subject to Faults than they; but the Zeal
I have for your Majesty's Service, will not suffer me to be longer silent. Be
pleased therefore to let me give you the History in short, of all that has
past in your Majesty's Reign, and show you wherein I think you have been ill
served: Be also pleased to let me tell you, by what means I Imagine you may yet
make your Kingdom more Glorious. I m^st humbly beseech your Majesty to pardon
this Liberty, and to believe I would never have presumed to have said any thing
on this Subject, were it not that I cannot better testify my Zeal to serve
your Majesty. That which more particularly obliges me to tell you my Thoughts,
is, That I find my self daily declining; and that according to all appearance,
I have but a very little longer time to do you any Service. Curts and
Nightwatchings shorten Men's Days; and I have toiled enough, since your Majesty
was pleased to trust me with the Management of your Revenue, to think it is now
time to leave my Place to another. How happy should I be, if in dying, I could
persuade your Majesty to believe, That I am, what all Days of my Life I have
been, with most profound Respect,

SIR, Your Majesty's most Humble, Most Obedient Servant, and Most Faithful
Subject, J. B. Colbert.


A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED In this Volume.
CHAP. I. COntaining a brief Recital of what passed in the Reign of Lewis the
Great, from his first coming to the Crown, 'till the Year 1649. in which the
Paris War began. CHAP. II. Containing that which passed after the War of Paris,
'till the Peace of the Pyrenees. CHAP. III. Containing that which passed after
the Peace of the Pyrenees, to the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle. CHAP. IV.
Containing that which passed after the Peace of the Pyrenees, to the Holland
War. CHAP. V. Containing that which passed after the War of Holland, till the
Treaty of Nimeghen. CHAP. VI. Containing that which passed after the Treaty at
Nimeghen, to the Year 1684. CHAP. VII. Which endeavors to show, that all those
very particular Favors which his Majesty received from GOD, obliged his
Majesty to render to GOD all that was due to him; and that no Kingdom could
prosper, without the Fear of the LORD. CHAP. VIII. Of the Obedience which is
due to the Pope. CHAP. IX. Of the Love which a Prince ought to have for his
Subjects; and where somewhat is also to be spoken of Taxes. CHAP. X. Of all the
Kingdom in general. CHAP. XI. Of the Clergy. CHAP. XII. Of the Nobility. CHAP.
XIII. Of People belonging to the Courts of Justice. CHAP. XIV. Of Men of
Business. CHAP. XV. Of Merchants, and of Trade. CHAP. XVI. Of Husbandmen and
Tillage.
THE TESTAMENT OF M. John Baptist Colbert, CONCERNING GOVERNMENT.
CHAP. I. Containing a brief Account of the Reign of Lewis the Great, from his
coming to the Crown, 'till the Year 1649. in which the War of Paris began.
DID not your Majesty know so much better than I do, that what is most
necessary to make a Kingdom flourish, is a perfect Harmony and Agreement
between all its Members; I would presume to show here what Care a Prince ought
to take, that there be no Discord or Division among 'em: But since this depends
upon a right Establishment of Subordination, your Majesty is better able than
any Man, to order that as it ought to be, who so well understand to act the
Part of a King, that it is enough to distinguish by your Air and Mien, that you
was born to Command.

We see then what it is that gives Beginning to a Kingdom's Prosperity, and
what it is continues it: For if he that is the Sovereign does not know, or is
not able to do, what he ought, he must then have a Minister under him. And
because the same Respect which People have for his Master, is not usually paid
to him; thence arise those Canvasings and Contests, that frequently turn to
Rebellions, and sometimes cause the total Ruin of a Kingdom. The Reign of the
King your deceased Father, was full of such Accidents: The Royal Family was so
divided, that the Mother was against the Son, and the Son against the Mother;
the Brother likewise sought to destroy his Brother and his King. The other
Princes of the Blood stood not much better affected. All which proceeded from
his Majesty's giving so much Power to his Prime Minister, that the Princes
thought it was he that did all, as they had great reason to believe; otherwise
the Queen Mother had not been so abandoned, as to die at Cologne in such
distress, that she had not the one half of what she wanted, to relieve her
Necessities.

Your Majesty's Minority was exposed to the same Inconveniences, because you
were not then able to direct your Affairs: The Queen your Mother, when the King
died, found them embroiled, and in so great confusion, that it was not possible
for a Woman to reduce 'em into order. Your Father, when he died, left no Prime
Minister; Cardinal Richelieu, who with a great deal of Reputation discharged
the Duties of that Place, had left it vacant four or five Years: A thousand
People expected to succeed him in it; and though all France did agree, That among
so many, there was hardly one to be found worthy of the Ministry: Yet so great
a number of Competitors striving to obtain it, occasioned by your Father's
limiting the Queen his Widow's Power, who should have been Regent; made the
Spaniards think our Disorders might turn to their Advantage; they then besieged
Rocroy, which they believed they should quickly carry, and enter into the heart
of the Kingdom. But God confounded their Pride, by the loss of a Battle given
them by Louis de Bourbon Prince of Conde, (then called Duke of Anguien;)
wherein they were so totally defeated, that they have never since been able to
recover their loss. But without robbing that Prince of any part of his Glory,
we may say, That this success was owing to none but God; for had he not taken
your Majesty into his Protection, the Enemy might have advanced to the head of
a narrow Way, through which the General must have past in their presence. They
might also have fallen upon him, when by the inconvenience of the Ways he was
obliged to divide his Army. But beside all these Difficulties, there was an
apparent danger in giving Battle; for had it been lost, the Enemy might have
marched to the very Gates of Paris. But it is sometimes God's Will, that neither
Party shall think of doing that which they should do; and then he leads those
step by step, whom he has resolved to protect.

The happy success of this Battle of Rocroy, was followed with a Joy that was
the more sincere, because your Subjects had a tender Love for your Majesty, and
the Queen your Mother. The Persecution she had suffered, as well as Mary de
Medicis, during Cardinal Richelieu's Ministry, procured your Mother a great
deal of pity; and as Pity is usually accompanied with Esteem, the more unhappy
she had been, the more People resolved to follow her Fortune. However, it ought
to be observed, it was otherwise with Mary de Medicis; for all People saw her
departure out of the Kingdom with dry eyes; no body was concerned, but her own
particular Servants and Domestics. Upon which may be made this very good
Reflection, That Princes soon lose the Love of their best Subjects by their ill
Government. She had shown too much Favor to Marshall d'Ancre, and his Wife,
both of her own Country, to be pitied by the People. And as in France, as well
as in other Places, they do not love to obey Strangers, the Grandees murmured
at it, and left the Court, because the Queen little regarged their Complaints.
The King your Father also grew jealous of their Power, which caused the
Assassination of the Marshall, and the tragical end of his Wife.

However, it was very ill digested; and God be thanked we have not seen your
Majesty's Reign stained with any thing like it. A King never does well to dip
his Hands in the Blood of his Subjects: When they deserve Punishment, they
ought to be legally prosecuted in a Court of Justice; which perhaps sometimes
cannot be safely done, when a Subject becomes so great, that his Master has
just cause to be afraid of him. Wallestein was such a one; and therefore the
Emperor Ferdinand III. was excusable, for commanding he should be killed.
Henry III. had the same reason to rid himself of the Duke of Guise, when he was
upon the point of usurping his Kingdom, and shutting him up in a Monastery.

But, except in such cases, a Criminal is to be put into the hands of Justice;
not only for the Prince's own sake, but because it is necessary the People
should know that the Person is guilty. Henry IV. took this course with
Marshall Biron; for though he feared, that if Biron perceived his Designs were
discovered, he might raise Troubles in the Kingdom; yet that did not hinder the
King from having a greater regard to what he ought to do for his own sake, than
for what might thappen.

The Queen your Mother, SIR, had done well, had she taken example by that which
befell Mary de Medicis; she had not then brought the State, as she did, within
so near being lost, by the choice she made of Cardinal Mazarin to succeed
Cardinal Richelieu. His being a Stranger, made all your Subjects forget the
Obedience that was due to their Sovereign. It was to no purpose to tell them,
He had already done great Services to the Crown, and was still able to do
greater, because he understood foreign Affairs better than any other Person;
which indeed is absolutely necessary for a Public Minister. But they fancied
these Reasons not so good as their own; nor could they be beaten out of their
Opinion, That he being born a Subject of the King of Spain, was never to be
trusted. And accusing the Queen Mother of being more a Spaniard than a
French-Woman, they seemed to repent the Pity they had had for her; which
appeared in their confessing Cardinal Richelieu had reason to persecute her;
though all the Sufferings she had endured, had no other foundation, than a
pretended private Intelligence she kept with the King of Spain her Brother. But
so People might satisfy their Passion, they cared not at what Price they did
it.

I have reason to call all that Passion, which was done a little after the
Death of the King your Father; since it is certain, that your Subjects do not
always call Reason to their Aid: If they had, they would have seen that the
Queen your Mother was not so much to be blamed as they thought, seeing she had
preferred, before others, a Man that was able to keep up the Reputation the
Crown had gotten in foreign Countries, and knew what course was to be taken to
meet there with success. It Is that which all the World does not know, though it
be a thing of very great Consequence. My Brother, whom your Majesty Honored
with making him Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, took the liberty many
times to represent it to your Majesty; but the Marquess Louvoy, who has Maxims
very contrary to those Great Men's, who have preceeded him in the
Administration of the Kingdom, destroyed in a moment all that he strove to do.
But I know not whether the Marquess will always have Reason on his side,
because he makes use of the Strength only of your own Subjects; which Cardinal
Richelieu, who knows as much as he, did not do, when he carried the War into
Germany, made Catalonia and Portugal revolt: and led the way to the lowering of
the House of Austria.

Indeed, though your Kingdom be very powerful, and your Majesty has a third part
at least increased its Strength by your Conquests; yet it is contrary to good
Sense to exhaust all its Forces. Your Majesty will be better able to maintain
the War, by arming other Princes in your Favor: But to do that, you must treat
them like Sovereigns, as they are, and not pretend, as Monsieur Louvoy does,
because they are your Majesty's Inferiors, they ought to look upon themselves
as Slaves. Your Majesty perhaps knows not what Answer he made to the Elector
Palatine's Envoy, who complaining at the beginning of the Holland War, That his
Master was no better treated, than those who were actually in Arms against you;
the Marquess told him, That it did not become such a petty Prince as his
Master, to make so great a Noise about so small a Matter: That your Majesty was
not bound to give an account to any Man of your Actions: And, That the
Elector's standing so much on his Points, was the way to lose the Honor of
your Friendship.

Such great Words, SIR, may imprint on Men's Minds, a magnificent Idaea of your
Power: But ought your Majesty to be contented with it? Would it not turn more
to your Advantage, that your Justice should be extolled, rather than proclaim
the Condition you are in at present to oppress your Neighbors. That has never
been the way to enlarge Empires: The Romans, who boasted themselves Masters of
all the World, had more regard for their Allies, than your Minister has for
yours. To subject them, requires more address: It Is better Policy to weaken 'em
by War, of which let 'em suffer the Inconveniences, but reap none of the
Advantages. Conquests are not ordinarily made for them, though they are the Baits
wherewith they are usually tempted and drawn in. They may be weaned from their
part in them, under specious Pretenses: As in the last War, when your Majesty
made the Neighbour-Princes restore the Places they had taken from the King of
Sweden; and which the Emperor did not oppose, because it was his Interest,
that those Princes should not increase their Power; and which was all the
Reward he gave them, for taking his part.

I know not whether that which I have now said be a Digression; because it has
carried me from my Subject: But I could not find a sitter place for it than
here; and the reflections to be made upon it, are of as great consequence as
those I have yet to make, on the choice the Queen your Mother made of Cardinal
Mazarin. To excuse her preferring him before others, three Reasons were given.
The First was, because he was acquainted with Foreign Affairs; the Second was,
That not being a Native of France, he had no kindred or Relations to enrich;
the Third was, That more People would have been displeased and dissatisfied,
had he been a French Man. But these Reasons are so weak, that I believe they do
not much sway your Majesty; as for the First, if Cardinal Mazarin knew Affairs
abroad, he was ignorant of those at home, which were as necessary to be known
as those that were Foreign; and indeed, the Inconvenience is visible, seeing
that which comes nearest the Heart, is of much greater consequence, than that
which lies remote from it. Beside, the knowledge of Foreign Affairs, is not so
very difficult to be acquired; the Situation and the State of Countries is the
greatest part of it, and by that a Man ought to regulate himself.

The Second Reason is not better, but the contrary; for there are a hundred
things to be objected against it: A Stranger has as great a desire as any
other Person, to enrich his Kindred, in what place soever they be: Beside, he
can send for them, when he finds himself well settled. Three of his Nephews, and
seven Neices, who came quickly into France, are an undeniable Testimony of this
Truth; and a Minister could hardly have been taken out of any other Family,
wherein there was to be found a greater number of Kindred and Relations: But a
greater Inconvenience in the Choice, was, that he being a Foreigner, and not
certain how long he should keep his Post, would be every Day transmitting into
his own Country, that which might plentifully maintain him, in case he fell
into disgrace. Beside, it was not to be supposed, that a Stranger could be so
well affected to France, as one that sucked in the Love of his Country with his
Mothers Milk; to which I will add, that seeing he was not Married, nor in a
condition ever to be so, he could not look upon France, as a Country, wherein
he himself, or his Posterity, could ever hope to be settled.

The Third Reason is much weaker than the other Two; which was, that when in so
great a Kingdom as your Majesty's, People of very great Quality and Merit, see
the Ministry put into the Hands of a Stranger; Who is he, that has so ill an
Opinion of himself, as to believe he does not better deserve it, than a Man to
whom no body is related? Whose Manners and good Qualities are not known; and to
whom, were People never so much convinced of his Merit, they would not be so
just as to give him his due? For my own part, I believe the Queen your Mother
had some other Reasons (than those alleged) for her Choice. Perhaps it was,
because other Pretenders did not make use of her Interest to obtain the Place,
and consequently, foreseeing they would not thank her, she, for that Reason,
made the Choice she did. But whatever it was, her Majesty quickly saw so many
new Troubles break out, that though she had been used to the like, in the Reign
of the deceased King, yet she was very much surprised: Their beginning seemed
not so much to be feared, because among all the Malcontents that openly
declared themselves, there was neither a Duke of Orleans, or a Prince of the
Blood, as there was in the time of Cardinal Richelieu's Ministry: But it was in
this, Men were most deceived; for Popular Commotions are more difficult to be
appeased, than those wherein some great Person is engaged; for he by some
particular Favor seasonably bestowed on him, is usually bought off from doing
farther Mischief; whereas, many Arts are to be used to calm a mutinous
Multitude, and especially when they have taken a fancy to Command.

The Revolt (of which I shall hereafter speak to your Majesty) was of this
kind; for the Parliament of Paris was concerned in it, though they decreed the
Queen your Mother, should have the Tuition of your Majesty, with a more ample
Power, than that which the deceased King by his Declaration left her; yet this
being done by the solicitation of her chief Almoner the Bishop of Beauvais, who
had a great many Friends, and to whom she had given hopes to be first Minister,
as soon as he saw himself deceived, and not able to undo what he had done, he
did all he could to stir up Enemies against her. Her Majesty, who had a great
Soul, and worthy of her high Birth, thought this was but a Wave which would
break of it self, and whereof she was not so much as to seem to take any
notice; nevertheless, still aiming at your Majesty's Grandeur, she gave Orders
to the Duke d' Anguien, who after the Battle of Rocroy, had given the Garrison
of Landrecis great Liberty, by demolishing certain Castles that straighten'd
it, to lay Seige to Thyonville. Marshall de Guebriant who was on the other
side of the Rhine, endeavored to amuse the Enemy, that they might not relieve
the Place; nevertheless Mello, who had gotten together the scattered Troops of
the Spanish Army, joining with General Bek, resolved the Place should not be
taken without Blows: But your Majesty's Fortune supported by the Duke d'
Anguien's Valor, frustrated all their Endeavors, so that this Conquest which
made such a Noise abroad, began to make your Reign so Illustrious, that your
Allies, who feared the Death of the deceased King, would make a change in your
Affairs, did now again begin to take Courage.

It was by your means, that the Swedes did not only keep their Conquests in
Germany, but enlarged them. The Duchess of Savoy likewise, by your Assistance,
retook Trin, and Pontdesture, which were in the Possession of the Spaniards.
But that which gave them more Trouble, was the Duke of Braganza's putting the
Crown of Portugal upon his own Head, by the Aid your deceased Father had given
him; and still kept it in spite of all Spain, by the succors he received from
you: The Spaniards had no better Success in Catalonia, where Monsieur La Mothe
frustrated all their Designs; so that that Province revolted at the same time
Portugal did, and maintained it self against all the Power of Spain. Your
Majesty likewise beat them at Sea, where the Duke de Bresse, who commanded your
Fleet, set upon them in the Port of Cartagena. These Miracles were done in the
first Year of your Minority, and lost none of their Luster; but by the raising
of the Siege of Alexandria, which Prince Thomas had a little too imprudently
undertaken; and by a Tumult raised in Rovergne, which was quickly quashed. That
which is yet more wonderful, is, That your Realm, which was not very quiet, did
not promise such favorable Events; and that you were also obliged to cause the
Duke of Beaufort to be seized, who conspired against your Prime Minister: You
at first resolved to have Exemplary Justice executed upon him, and therefore
ordered your Court of Parliament to prosecute him: but you being the best of
Men, caused all proceedings against him to cease, and you were contented he
should expiate his Crime, only by imprisonment.

The following Year, 1664. was not altogether so prosperous, at least the
beginning of it: For Marshall Guebriant's Army was defeated at Teuteling, by
their fault, under whose Command it remained after his Death. That General, who
toward the end of the preceding Year, had besieged Rotuiel, was there hurt
with a Faucon Shot, whereof he died: Which may put your Majesty in mind of how
great consequence it is to you, to have an experienced General; as such a one
is hard to be found, so your Majesty ought not only to set a high Value upon
him; but likewise oblige others to follow your Example. For is it not a strange
thing to see with what Haughtiness Monsieur Louvoy treats your Commanders, even
from the highest to the lowest; it is with so much Pride, that it disgusts all
Men of any Courage; and they would certainly desert your Majesty, if their Love
for you did not prevail over their Resentments. I very well know, when he gives
your Majesty an Account of things, he very much Mis-represents them: He makes
you believe, that unless your Commanders be kept Humble, they will not Obey
you, and you shall never be served by them as you ought to be: But he is much
in the wrong; For all your Subjects love you so well, that they all blindly
obey you. The Marquess, with this Pretense, cloaks all his exorbitant Ambition;
he is very well pleased to mingle his own Interest with your Majesty's, which
might be of dangerous consequence to a King, not so Wise and Virtuous as you
are. It would be an Insensible Usurpation upon his Authority, and there needed
nothing more to plain the way to his Throne. Your Majesty perhaps does not
know, that to get Preferment, it is much better to be his Creature, than to have
Merit; so that he has a greater Court than yours; and all the difference
between them is, that to meet with Success in the one, Men must Cringe, and
make low Bows; but in the other, it is enough to be a Brave and an Honest Man.

The great Affairs, which your Majesty had then upon your Hands, did not hinder
you from giving Refuge to a Princess persecuted by Fortune: The English, who
made War against their King, and by their evil Designs against him, made it
evident, they would carry on their Attempts to the utmost extremity, your
Majesty mollified his Misforune, by giving a Retreat to the Queen his Wife;
which will not be one of the least remarkable Passages in your History; since
pity does not always reign in the Hearts of Kings, they oftener giving ear to
what Policy suggests, than to the Dictates of their Duty. But I can, without
deceiving my self, say, that this Policy is none of the best, since the same
Fate may befall all Sovereigns; and it were better they would with their Arms
punish Rebellion: Then perhaps it would not be so frequent as it is in all
Kingdoms. But this is to advise what is impossible, it being now the general
practice, rather quite to undo, than help an unhappy Man.

For an Action so acceptable, God soon rewarded your Majesty, you made your
self Master of Gravelins, notwithstanding all the Spaniards (under the Command
of General Picolomini) could do to hinder it, your Army kept them from
succouring Germany. You sent thither the Duke d' Anguien, who there gained the
Famous Battle of Friburg, your Troops fighting three Days together to get a
complete Victory. The fruit of your Labors was the taking of Phillipsbourg,
and all the places upon the Rhine near it. Beside, you reconfirm'd your Allies,
who were in great Consternation, for what had happened at Teuteling.

The House of Austria had it is Revenge in Catalonia, where Marshall de la
Motthe was beaten, in endeavoring to relieve Lerida, which was taken, and he
forced to raise the siege of Terragonne, which he had invested to make a
diversion. Balaguier was also reduced, and so had been the whole Province, if
the Spaniards Affairs had gone well in Portugal: But having lost a great Battle
there, they were forced to carry some Troops thither, which did so weaken them,
that they could do nothing more all that Campaign.

That of Italy likewise, was not very prosperous, after several Engagements,
wherein the Spaniards, as well as your Majesty, met sometimes with good, and
sometimes with ill Fortune.

Your Army was forced to quit the Siege of Final; but you succeeded better in
the prosecution of your Rights at Rome, where some endeavored to affront you
in the Person of your Ambassador: The Protection which you gave to the Duke of
Parma, from whom the Pope for his convenience had taken the Duchy of Castro,
weighed much with many in that Country; so that by your Medition, Peace was
made with many Princes, who had taken Part in that Quarrel.

So many great things were not able to satisfy your Mind: you cut out work for
the Emperor, who endeavored to do the like to your Allies; and seeing he made
the Danes Arm against the Swedes, you were not only quit with him, in stirring
up the Prince of Transylvania against him; but you sent an Ambassador to the
two Crowns to hinder their differences from proceeding any further: And since
it was not your humor to give Counsel to others, which you would not follow
your self, you consented to treat of a general Peace at Munster, where some
were come together, with a resolution to put an end to so great a work.

Your mediation was received by the Northern Crowns, in spite of all the
Traverses made by the House of Austria, to render it suspected, and your
Ministers finding so great a Progress made toward the ending of their
Differences, their Endeavors succeeded so well, that a Peace was concluded.
The Sweeds being delivered from their Troubles, caused by this War; you ordered
Vicount Turenne whom you had sent the Year before into Germany, to take upon
him the Command of Marshall Guebrient's Army, and to act in concert with them;
but though he was a great Captain, he was defeated at Mariendall, it being
impossible for him to avoid it. Here begun the Campaign of 1645. wherein you
had quickly your Revenge, almost in all places where you had Soldiers: You
took Roses in Catalonia, having sent thither Count Harcourt, in the place of
Marshall la Motthe, whom you caused to be seized, not only for the Faults he
was guilty of the former Campaign; but because to excuse himself, he
endeavored to blemish the Reputation of your chief Minister, whom he accused
to be the cause of his ill Success, pretending he had let him want all things:
But it is not reasonable, that any Person should justify himself at another
Man's cost; at least, when things are not as clear as the Day. The Spaniards
endeavored to relieve Roses; but Count Harcourt having opposed their Passage,
while the Count du Plessis Praslin was before it; they tried to put in Relief
by Sea, but met with the same Difficulties, because your Fleet was there: Your
Majesty (who takes pleasure in rewarding Men of Merit) sent a Mareschal's Staff
to Count du Plessis. The taking of this Town, was followed with the defeat of
the Spaniards in the plain of Livrons, and the re-taking of Balaguier; so that
after so many happy Successes, all that had gone ill in the former Campaign,
was quite forgot.

The Duke d' Anguien, whom you sent again this Year into Germany, quickly
revenged Vicount Turenne, by defeating the Enemy at Norlingue; while the Duke
of Orleans in Flanders, took the Fort of Mardyke, Link, and Bourbourg. Your
Majesty multiplied your Conquests, with adding those of St. Venant, Lilliers,
Armentiers and Bethunes. You caused the Fort of la Motthe to be demolished, out
of which the Lorrain Troops were driven with great difficulty, and which served
them for a place of Retreat, after committing a thousand Robberies.

Prince Thomas had again signalized the Glory of your Arms in Italy, if he
could have kept Vigevane and its Citadel, which he had taken: But it was
impossible for him to resist the great Efforts the Enemy made to retake 'em.
The Emperor, on his side, sent so strong an Army to the Rhine, that he re-took
all the Places he had lost, Phillipsbourg only excepted. Perhaps it had not
been done, if the Duke d' Anguien had been at the Head of your Majesty's
Troops; but he was fallen Sick, and returned to Paris. Vicount Turenne in the
mean time took Treves, and your Majesty restored it again to its lawful Prince,
whom, after a long Imprisonment, you set at Liberty: You have always been a
Sanctuary to the Unfortunate, witness the Barbarines, to whom you gave
protection, though all Europe thought them unworthy of it, for the War they had
kindled in Italy, which was but just then extinguished: But it was enough when
they were persecuted to have the Honor of your Protection; of which the Duke
of Monaco being confident, threw himself into your Majesty's Arms, and quitted
the Spaniards Party, which till then he had followed.

The Year 1646, was full of great Events; your Majesty took a second time the
Fort of Mardyke, which the Enemy had re-taken toward the end of the Campaign;
your Majesty likewise took Furnes and Dunquerque, which gave so great an Allarm
to all Flanders, that they thought themselves irrecoverably lost. Vicount
Turenne entered into the very Heart of Germany, which made the Emperor
perceive, it was better to make a Peace, than to hearken to the Spaniards, who
endeavored to persuade him, that your Majesty, during your Minority, was not
able to bear the Burden of so many weighty Affairs, you had then upon your
Hands. Nevertheless, your Minister engaged you in an Enterprise, for which he
ought never to be forgiven; since it was in no wise to your Majesty's
Advantage, and that the public Interest was less considered in it, than his
own. He had married one of his Relations to a Nephew of the Barbarin's, and
this Alliance disposing him to do all he could for them, he carried the War to
the Borders of Tuscany, and caused Orbitelle to be besieged: His design in
this, was to mortify the great Duke, the Barbarin's capital Enemy; but this
Enterprise having alarmed all Italy, it gave such Succors to the Spaniards,
as raised the Siege, though your Fleet had repulsed the Enemy's. The Success
which your Arms had at Piombino and Portolongonne, did drown the Memory of
this Loss; but the Joy for that Success was damped, by the raising of the Siege
of Lerida, wherein Count Harcourt had spent seven Months to no purpose.

The Protection which your Majesty gave to the Barbarines, was so great an
Advantage to them; that their Goods which had been seized by the Pope's Order,
were restored to them. The Cardinal Deste was also sensible of the Honor you
did him, in embracing his Interest; for without it, the Admiral of Castile,
would never have done him reason, who took a pleasure to insult him in the
middle of the City of Rome. You were indeed at that time, the Protector of the
Oppressed, which you made appear to the Venetians, in whose favor you sent an
Ambassador to the great Turk, to dis-swade him from the War he was about to
make upon them: The Respect which the Grand Signior had for your Majesty, made
him promise all things; but Interest will prevail over Promises, when one has
to do with Barbarians; the Turk quickly forgot this, when he saw that
Republique was not in Case to defend it self.

The Year 1647. was remarkable, for your Majesty's then having the Smallpox,
by which you were in great Danger: But we were soon rid of our Fear, when we
saw the greatness of your Courage; for you asked Pardon for one of your
Officers, whom the Queen had commanded not to come near you, she suspecting you
were infected by him. What a loss had it been for France, and how great a
happiness for Spain, if your Sickness had been Mortal, as 'twas feared? The
Spaniards whom, as young as you were, you daily made to feel the weight of your
Arm, were so astonished, that they sent into Flanders the Archduke Leopold,
hoping that the greatness of his Birth, would incite him to outdo those that
had preceeded him in the Government of those Provinces, and make better Head
against your Majesty: He came into the Country with a good Army, and re-took
Amentiers, Landrecis, and Dixmude: But you took from him la Bassee, and Lens,
where you lost Marshall Gassion, who was there Mortally wounded. Your Majesty,
who had been the last Year on the Frontiers, came thither again this Year, and
inspired Courage into your Soldiers, by giving 'em great marks of your
Liberality. But the Archduke hindering you from making any further Conquests
in that Country; your Majesty was very well pleased with the great Success your
Arms had in Germany. The Duke of Bavaria was forced to accept of a Neutrality,
as the Duke of Saxony had done some time before; so that the Emperor had at
that Instant concluded a Peace, had not the Spaniards dissuaded him from it;
their Reasons were, the appearance of some Sparks of the Civil-War, which soon
after broke out; but the Mischief they wished us, fell more upon them, than
upon us; and the Revolt which happened at Naples, put them into strange
Confusion.

Your Majesty supported that Commotion, with all your Forces; and equipped a
brave Fleet to carry Succors thither: But the Duke of Guise, who had thrown
himself into the Place, acting there independently from your Majesty; Cardinal
Mazarin who did not love him, took occasion to recall the Fleet, without
furnishing him with the Necessaries he wanted: The Cardinal was inexcusable,
since it was a capital Crime not to lay hold of so fair an Opportunity; if your
Majesty had not been in full Minority, you had been better served.
Notwithstanding, the Duke of Guise maintained things with a great deal of good
Fortune and Courage, while the Duke d' Anguien, who had now after his Father's
Death taken the Name of the Prince of Conde, saw the Laurels he had gathered in
Flanders and Germany, wither by his ill Success before Lerida, which he had
besieged.

I wish I could pass over in silence the Year 1648. a Year! Fatal to our
Monarchy! and wherein, the greatest part of your Subjects began to fail in
their Obedience to your Majesty; you know the pretense they had for it, were
the many Taxes wherewith they were burdened; but the real Cause was, the
Ambition of the Parliament, which pretended to enlarge its Authority; they
began to examine all that your Majesty did in your Cabinet, and though you
commanded them not to assemble about any other Business, than to judge and
determine the differences and Lawsuits depending between your Subjects; yet
they regarded not your Commands; but condemned your Edicts, whereof the
necessity of your Affairs required the publication. This put the Kingdom into
so ill a Condition, that the Archduke took Furnes, Ettere and Lens: The Prince
of Conde, whom your Majesty sent against him, having taken Ypres the beginning
of the Campaign, retook Ettere, and at Lens gave the Archduke Battle and beat
him: This Success encouraged your Majesty to try to suppress the Sedition; you
caused the chief Rebels to be seized at their going out from the Te Deum sung
at Notredame, for the Victory; but instead of having, by this brisk Action, the
Success you had reason t'expect; it heightened the Rebellion to such a degree,
that you had cause to be surpised at it: The Parisians took Arms in Favor of
the Prisoners, and having made Barricadoes in all the Streets within an Hundred
Paces of your Palace, they obliged you to release them. I draw a Curtain over
the remembrance of an Action so displeasing to you, and so shameful in them; if
the Queen could have prevailed, she would never have consented to it; for she
maintained it would be such a Blow to your Authority, as would be of dangerous
consequence. I think she was in the right, and indeed this Condescension,
served only to increase the Boldness of the Mutineers; so that they were not
long without making new Demands: However, this did not hinder the Emperor from
concluding a Peace with your Majesty, who by having gained the Battle of
Sommerhausen, reduced him to such a condition, that he and those that had taken
up Arms in his Favor, had been lost without it.

You took care of the Interest of your Allies, whom the Spaniards, by their
Intriegues, endeavored to separate from you; but what is more remarkable, you
showed your self the Protector of the Catholic Religion, though all your
Allies are Protestants, and which might very well have embroyled you with them.
But the Emperor minded only his own Interests, and quite forgot those of
Religion, which he had many times, during the War, made a show of maintaining;
but there is great difference between Words and Deeds, which teaches us, that
if we will not be deceived, it is much better to trust to the one, than to the
other.

This Treaty, wherein your Majesty showed your self more firm to the Interest
of your Allies, than to your own; procured you the Friendship of all the
Princes of the Empire, who begun to look upon you as their Protector: They did
no longer fear the Emperor's bereaving them of their Liberty, or that for the
future, there would be any more Princes, who like Charles V. would endeavor to
subject them. What mischief has Monsieur Louvoy done, to trouble a Harmony so
necessary to both Parties? from which the Emperor could never hope for any
good? It may also be said, that this Minister's Imprudence has been very
great; seeing notwithstanding, the just Fears all the Empire ought to have, of
his Imperial Majesty's Power, yet he has so very ill treated all its Members,
that they are now again ready to unite against your Majesty; many Politicians
wonder at it, and say, that seeing they have more Reason to fear the Emperor,
than your Majesty, they will take the wrong side, if they join again with the
Emperor: But to be of their Opinion, it ought to be known, what this Minister
of yours requires of them; he never speaks to them, but with a Cudgel in his
Hand, and since Sovereigns are not used to be so treated, they think if Chains
are to be avoided, they are those which are presented with so much rudeness.

Your Majesty carried the War into Italy, notwithstanding you had so much to do
in the Heart of your own Kingdom: But the Spaniards having taken the Duke of
Guise Prisoner, and pacified the troubles of Naples, they made the Duke of
Modena rise from Cremona which he had besieged after his taking part with your
Majesty: But the Spaniards failed in the Design they had upon Marseilles, where
they intended to burn your Majesty's Ships, which were in that Port, and to
seize upon the Town, where many of the Inhabitants held Intelligence with them.
Your Majesty, to whom this was of extreme great Consequence, caused those that
were most guilty to be punished, and pardoned others, that by your Goodness,
they might be induced not to fail for the future, in the Obedience they owed
you: But the continual Attempts of the Parliament, being of very ill Example to
those that were disaffected; in many Places, People lost all respect due to
your Majesty; so that the Hollanders, whom your Majesty, according to the
Example of the King your Father, and of Henry IV. of glorious Memory, had
assisted against the Spaniards, made Peace with them.

Your Majesty, notwithstanding all this, maintained the War in Catalonia, with
a great deal of Reputation; you raised the Siege of Flix, which the Enemy had
invested, and made your self Master of Tortose, in sight of the Enemy's Army
Commanded by Mello, who went out of Flanders thither; and had it not been for
the Rebellion of your Subjects, to how great a pitch had your Glory been
raised? It was very much increased by the Victory your Navy had in the
Mediterranean, though it was much Inferior to that of the Enemies; for it
consisted not of above twenty nine Vessels, when they had Forty Two.
Notwithstanding, this Inequality did not hinder you from sinking Three, and had
not Night came on, they had reason to fear the loss of more.

So many Affairs, and of so great consequence, were enough to take up your
thoughts, and seeing they always tended to the good of your State, you minded
what passed in Poland, where the Glory of your Name frustrated all the
Spaniards Endeavors, to have a King elected that should be a Friend to their
Interest: But they were baffled in their Design; for Casimire Brother to the
deceased, was preferred before the Person the Spaniards proposed, for which he
was wholly obliged to your Majesty.

CHAP. II. Containing what passed from the Paris War, to the Peace of the
Pyrenees.
THE Parliaments Attempts daily increasing, notwithstanding the continual care
your Majesty took to suppress them; it would have been weakness to have longer
dissembled your Resentments, which made you resolve to punish the Offenders.
You left the City of Paris engaged in the Rebellion, and retired to St.
Germains in Lay; you caused Paris to be blocked up by your Flanders Army,
commanded by the Prince of Conde. This punishment ought to have made the
Mutineers return to their Duty; but their Boldness equaled their Disobedience,
and after they had stirred up other Cities of your Kingdom to take their part,
they relied on their own Strength to relist your Majesty. Scarce one (even the
Coadjutor himself, forgetting his Character) but raised a Regiment against you:
The Duke of Beaufort, who had escaped out of Prison, was likewise one of your
Majesty's mortal Enemies; the Prince of Conti, Brother to the Prince of Conde,
also took Arms against your Majesty; the Duchess of Longueville, his Sister,
with the Duke her Husband, fell in with the Parliament, and she, by her Beauty,
drew in the Prince of Marsillae, who had more mind to her, than to signalize
his Disobedience; but this Passion, LOVE, which blinds Men to that degree, that
they know not themselves, made him forget that respect he always had for your
Majesty, and in which he was better instructed than others, because he had an
infinite deal of Wit.

This was not the only mischief which Love did your Majesty; the Jealousy
which this Prince of Marsillac had against the Husband of the Duchess,
together with the fear he had his Passion might be discovered, would not let
him rest, till he got into Normandy, where he made that Province revolt, being
Governor of it. We see what Springs Love sets a going, which we often
attribute to Ambition, for want of searching things to the bottom; but it is a
dangerous Passion, and very much to be condemned, when a Mistress makes us fail
in our Duty to our Sovereign, to whom we are so closely tied, that we cannot be
unfaithful to him, without being so to GOD.

The Bloccade of Paris had not the Effect your Majesty expected; and though that
great City suffered extremely, yet the Parliament continued so great an
Aversion to your public Minister, that they were so Bold, as to require his
being sent out of the Kingdom, before they would lay down their Arms. This
insolent Proposition was accompanied with others of the same nature; but since
the Resolution of these Mutineers, did not answer the Hopes they had of giving
Law to your Majesty, they had Recourse to the Enemies of the Kingdom, to
procure Bread, which they very much wanted; for your Majesty had shut up the
City so close, that it was at an excessive Price; and without speedy Relief,
they were ready to fall into extreme Necessity.

Your Majesty cannot reflect upon these terrible Marks of Rebellion, without
being sensibly touched with them; and seeing it was of great Consequence to you,
not to suffer your Enemies in that unhappy Conjuncture, to enter into the Heart
of your Kingdom; you did that, which brought the Parliament again to
themselves; you sent a Herald at Arms to make some Proposals to them, whereupon
the Parliament being assembled, they thought in some manner to repair what had
been done, in sending back the Herald without hearing him; but at the same time
assured your Majesty, they had refused him Audience, out of the profound
Respect they had for you, because they could not pretend to receive such a
Person, as was never used to be sent, but to Sovereigns.

This returning to their Duty, gave your Majesty occasion to exhort them to do
better for the future, than they had done at present; and the Conjuncture
requiring, that you should seem not to resent the bold Attempts, they had made
on your Authority, you granted a general Amnesty to the Parliament, and to
those that had followed their Party.

Your Enemies did not fail to take Advantage of these Disorders, the Duke of
Lorrain, whom the King your Father had driven out of his Country, for having
often failed of performing the many Promises he had made him; entered again into
it, and made himself Master of many Towns; he was likewise almost assured of
retaking Nancy, from which Marquess de la Ferte's Avarice had diverted all
manner of Provisions: But when he saw that it might cost him his Head, he
quickly came and caused all the Harvest of Corn and Fruit thereabout, to be
carried into it, and thereby made some amends for the Fault he had committed;
upon which your Majesty, and all other Monarchs may make this Reflection; That
when a Subject prefers his own private Interest before his Prince's, he is not
only unworthy of any Favor; but is likewise responsible for all the Evils the
People suffer: For it is plain, that what they do suffer is from such Men in
Authority, who care not how they Ruin 'em, to Enrich themselves: However, your
present Circumstances did not then permit your Majesty, to take such Order in
that Case, as at another time you might have done. Beside, this Marquess
behaved himself so Prudently on other Occasions, that his Wisdom and Courage,
in some measure, excused his Covetousness.

The Parliament did not cease to pursue their Designs, though your Majesty had
had the Goodness to pardon them; yet they were not altogether so bad as the
Parliament of England, who were so wicked as to cut off their King's Head. Your
Majesty was never seen to be so angry, as when you heard that News; but the
great Affairs wherein you were then engaged, hindered you from punishing so
foul a Crime: You had enough to do to oppose the Archduke, who retook Ypres and
St. Venant, while Count Harcourt was besieging Cambray; but that Enterprise did
not succeed. Though he was obliged to quit it, yet he attacked Conde, and took it
by Composition. Maubeuge opened her Gates to him; so that the Enemy would not
have had much cause to brag, if they had not prevailed in Catalonia.

This Province being so remote, that your Majesty could not send any Troops
thither without a great deal of charge; and no Recruits going to supply the
place of those that perished there the Year before, the Enemy took Constantin,
de Salo, and de Sirges; but Count Marein brake their Measures as to Barcelona,
which they thought to have taken. In Italy also your Affairs received a
considerable check: The Duke of Modena, who feared the War of Paris, would put
it out of your power to give him the Succors he wanted, quitted your Party;
whence followed the loss of many considerable Posts, which had cost a great
deal of trouble, and many Men.

But it was of much greater importance to your Majesty, to settle a Calm in
your Kingdom, than to preserve your Conquests which were so far off: Therefore,
after you had reduced Paris to its Obedience, and sufficiently provided for the
Frontier of Piccardy, which the Enemy threatened, all your aim was to make
Provence and Guyenne submit; where there were as great Commotions, as in the
Capital City of your Kingdom. This was happily effected by your Majesty; and
having also the good Fortune to divert a Storm that was gathering on the
Frontier of Germany, where Viscount Turenne, instigated by his Brother,
endeavored to debauch the Troops he Commanded, your Kingdom would have
recovered its former Luster, if the Prince of Conde had not set so high a Price
on the Services he had done your Majesty, that it was almost impossible to
satisfy him.

His Ambition could not, without murmuring, bear his being denied some Favors;
though he had obtained many from your Majesty for his Relations that had born
Arms against you; who for that Reason, rather deserved to be punished than
rewarded. It was Prudence however in your Majesty to conceal your Displeasure
for his Affronts; and there was danger in opposing the Prince; because the
great Things he had done, had got him much Credit in the Army. The intelligence
which he also kept with the Frondeurs, who all, and every where, declared
themselves against your Majesty, made you Prudently dissemble the Distaste you
had against him: but your Minister having found an Italian trick, to sow
dissension among his Party, which would not have been pardonable, were it not
to secure the Liberty of your State; you resolved to cause the Prince to be
Arrested, which was executed with a great deal of Dexterity*

Your Minister in the mean time was so afraid you would miss your Blow, that he
kept himself Booted to be gone the very Moment it had failed: But Success
having answered his Hope, he again took Courage; so that there was no question
of preventing the ill Consequences of so bold a stroke; your Majesty provided
against 'em, by doing two things which were absolutely necessary: The one was
to let the People know the true Reasons you had to arrest him. The other was to
march in Person where it appeared he had most Friends, and consequently where
there was most likelihood of any Commotion.

What an excellent thing, SIR, is Prudence! Your Majesty had already been
accused of not acknowledging the great Services a Subject had done you: Your
Minister likewise passed for a very ungrateful Person, in the Opinion of the
People. He knew, had it not been for the Prince, he could hardly have secured
himself against the Hatred of the Parisians and the Parliament. But when the
People knew the Prince's Services had been rewarded, with the Place of Great
Master of your Majesty's Household, with the Governments of Burgundy, Berry, and
Guyenne; with a Grant of the Demesnes of Clermont, Stenay, and Jammets; of Pont
de l'Arche, and of Diep, which he had gotten for the Duke of Longueville; of
Danvilliers, and the Government of Champagne, for the Prince of Conti; and a
great number of other Favors, as well for himself, as for his Creatures. There
was not a Man but changed his Opinion, and loudly declared, That if there were
an ungrateful Man in the World, it was the Prince of Conde.

The Voyage you first made into Normandy, and after into Burgundy and Guyenne,
pacified those Princes, where the Prince's Creatures, (supported by the Prince
of Conti, and the Duke of Longueville, whom you likewise caused to be Arrested)
endeavored to animate the People against your Majesty. You did not think sit
to go your self into Berry, where the Danger did not appear so great; because
that Province was shut up in the middle of your Kingdom, and could receive no
assistance from the Spaniards, who watched an Opportunity to take advantage of
so many Accidonts that seemed favorable to them. You sent thither the Count
St. Agnan, who kept the Province in Obedience, but had not Strength onough to
drive the Marquess Persan out of Montrond, a strong Place that belonged to the
Prince of Conde.

How well had your Majesty been pleased, could you so easily have settled things
in other places, which you had reason to fear could not be done, in the midst
of so many Troubles that lay so heavy on you, and under which another must have
sunk. Viscount Turenne, who retired to the Archduke, after he had missed his
Blow, came to Stenay, where his Love to the Duchess of Longueville, did not
keep him from entering into the Kingdom, at the head of an Army, which he had
raised with the Money lent him by the Archduke, and with his Mistress's Jewels,
which he pawned to the Jews of Metz. He thought, during this time of Disorder
and Confusion, he should be able to get again into Sedan, which the Duke of
Bouillon his Brother had given to the deceased King, to spare his Life in great
danger, for his having entered into the Treaty of Madrid. He came near the
Place, thinking the Memory of his Ancestors would have procured him Friends;
but every one kept to his Duty; and seeing the Town was well provided, and a
brave Man, with a good Garrison, commanded in it, he was obliged to turn his
Arms another way.

If a Man may make any Reflections upon his Attempt, it seems to me not well
designed; or at least that the Inhabitants of the Town would have done very
ill, had they preferred the Government of his Family before your Majesty's; for
those People are unhappy, who are Ruled by petty Princes; they having not
Forces enough of their own to secure their Fortune, are under a continual
Obligation of being assisted by foreign Troops; where their Subjects are often
exposed to the Calamities of War, and are sometimes a Prey to one, and
sometimes to another. Which are not to be feared, when People are under the
Government of a Great King, who when any Storm arises, can quickly allay it.

It was not only your Frontier of Champagne which was threatened, but likewise
that of Piccardy: The Spaniards appeared there with an Army; and having made
themselves Masters of Catelet and la Chapelle, they attempted Guise; but not
thinking it fit to lose Time about it, they resolved to join with the Archduke
and Viscount Turenne, who were entered into Champagne. Viscount Turenne, who
knew what was best to be done, advanced so far as Ferte Milon, with an
intention to deliver the Prince of Conde out of Vincennes: But your Majesty
having broke his Measures, by causing the Prince to be carried to Marcoussis,
and from thence to Havre de Grace, the Viscount was obliged to return, and join
the Archduke, who had taken Rhetel, and some other Places.

Champagne, which groaned under the Tyranny of the Spaniards, who put all to
Fire and Sword, took Arms, and augmented the Army of Marquess du Plessis, whom
your Majesty had sent to guard that Frontier. He thought with these Succors to
have been able to retake Rhetel; and having invested it, the Archduke
endeavored to raise the Siege. This proved of great Advantage to your Majesty,
to whom the Defeat of your Army would have been of very dangerous Consequence.
Nevertheless, since it was impossible for you any longer to see your Enemies in
the heart of your Kingdom, you sent Cardinal Mazarin to the Marshall; that
upon his own knowledge of your Strength, he might give order either to fight or
retreat. The Cardinal, who was naturally very fearful where there was danger,
was at first of Opinion not to run any hazard; but the Marshall du Plessis,
who convinced the Cardinal of what ill Consequence it would be, to give the
Enemy any signs of their Weakness, it was resolved in a Council of War, wherein
this Minister was present, to fight.

The Marshall du Plessis having raised the Siege, marched directly toward the
Enemy, who was now become more numerous by the Duke of Lorrain's Troops. The
Fight was sharp and obstinate on both sides; but God gave your Majesty so
complete a Victory, that Viscount Turenne was forced to fly only with sixteen
Persons, being abandoned by all his Troops; for the Archduke went off one of
the first, and left him to shift for himself. He was very near being taken in
so long a retreat as he had to make, and wherein he was so hotly pursued; but
having defended his Life and Liberty, at their cost who attacked him, he saved
himself in Barleduke, into which when he entered, People thought him very much
wounded, being covered all over with Blood; but it proved only the Blood which
he had drawn of your faithful Subjects.

Your Majesty heard of this Victory with unspeakable Joy; and sent to Marquess
d' Aumont, d' Hoquincourt, and de la Ferte, each a Mareschal's Staff, who had
very particularly signalized themselves in that Battle. It was to excite others
to follow their Example; for there is nothing more animates your Nobility, than
the Honors you bestow on them; and the French are of that Temper, that they
will sacrifice a thousand Lives (if they had so many) in the Service of their
King, if he give 'em but a good Word, or the least Preferment.

It Is for this also, that your Majesty is beloved by your Subjects; you that
have the Secret, even in refusing to grant Requests, to oblige those whom you
deny, by your manner of denying them: For a Prince ought to have the Gift of
not only making himself to be feared, but that also of making himself beloved.
For Fear without Love degenerates into Distrust; which makes People suspect,
that he who ought to be both Father and Master, will turn Tyrant. And this
Suspicion is so dangerous, that there is nothing which a King should not do, to
keep it out of his Subjects Minds.

If the Prince of Conde's Party, which he had in France, did your Majesty so
much harm upon the Frontiers of Picardy and Champagne, it did you a great deal
more in Italy; where it was impossible for you to succor Piombino and Porto
Longonne, which fell again into the Spaniards hands. Your Majesty, to whom the
Preservation of Catalonia was of great importance, sent thither the Duke of
Mercoeur, who seized Count Marcin, the Prince of Conde's Creature, and who did
all he could to debauch the Troops you had in that Country. This foresight
saved Barcelona, where the Enemy kept intelligence, having a great mind to
recover that Place. But the Duke of Mercoeur being no great Captain, and the
state of your Affairs not permitting you to send him any considerable Succors,
all languish'd in that Country, and your Reputation began to decline in those
Parts.

However, the Choice of this General was not to be imputed to your Majesty; it
was a Court-Intrigue that obliged you to prefer him, before many other
Commanders of much greater Experience. But there being a Reconciliation made
between your Minister, and the Duke of Beaufort, whose eldest Son Mercoeur was;
he was to have a share of those Favors, which, when the Accommodation was
made, were agreed on. Beside, the Cardinal designed to marry one of his Nieces
to him, and therefore thought it much better to prefer him than another: Your
Majesty was then too young to perceive what prejudice you received by it, and
how dangerous it is for a Minister to prefer his own Interest before his
Masters. But, God be thanked, it was not long ere our Eyes were opened in so
nice a point; and no Prince ever knew better than you, to give to all Persons
those Employments which are sit for them.

This was not the only Fault which Cardinal Mazarin did. The desire he had to
be the sole powerful Man in the Kingdom, made him seek how to amuse those he
made use of, to destroy the Prince of Conde. The Bishop of Langres, Favorite
of Monsieur the Duke of Orleans your Uncle, without whose privity the Prince
was arrested, from that time never forgave the Cardinal; so that joining
himself with others who envied the Fortune of that Minister, they all strove to
ruin him.

The Parliament, who sought by all means to augment their Authority, and being
persuaded, that during your Minority was the properest time to effect it,
diverse Counsels were held, wherein they resolved to demand the Enlargement of
the Prince of Conde, and his Brothers, with the Banishment of Cardinal Mazarin.
Your Majesty opposed it, with a Resolution becoming your great Courage; but
Monsieur the Duke of Orleans heading those who designed the Destruction of this
Minister, and all the States of the Kingdom joining with 'em, you were obliged
to grant what they desired, in point of Policy, though it was very much against
your Will.

Cardinal Mazarin seeing himself forced to depart the Realm, thought to make
the Prince of Conde's inlargment a piece of Merit to himself; he went to Havre
de Grace, and delivered to him a Letter under the Privy Signet, antidated
before another which was sent to set him at Liberty: The Prince who had been
informed by Perraut. Overseer of his Household, (who had leave to see him,
under pretense of his Mothers Will) what endeavors had been used to get him
out of Prison, owned the Cardinal's Civility, which he showed in coming himself
to bring him such good News; yet it was impossible not to suspect all the
Protestations he made him of his Friendship, and those humble Submissions he
used in desiring the Prince's.

The Prince of Conde did not break out into any Passion against him, were it
that he thought him not worth his Anger, or that the Joy he had for being at
Liberty, calmed his Resentments. Cardinal Mazarin retired to the Elector of
Collen, and the Prince came back to Paris, where he was received in Triumph,
though they had made Bonfires throughout the whole Town when he was Arrested. But
such has always been the Peoples Inconstancy, that no body knows how so to fix
'em, as to secure their esteem; but as soon as a Man steps out of the way, be
it to the Right or Left, they presently return to their old Inclination. The
Prince was adored by the People, when he fought with so much Reputation against
the Enemies of your Kingdom; but lost their Favor when he took Arms against
them: though he only obeyed your Majesty's Orders in punishing their Treason,
which was so great, that they deserved to be treated by him, as the most cruel
of your Enemies.

The Parliament past diverse Sentences against your Minister, without at all
consulting your Majesty: They caused his Library to be sold by Outcry, they
set a Price upon his Head, and did many other things of like Nature: which your
Majesty very prudently Dissembled, because it had beeen a gross Fault to have
opposed a Torrent, which was become so violent. Your Majesty forgave Viscount
Turenne, who having acknowledged his Fault, came to ask Pardon for it: In the
mean time, the Prince of Conde grew very Powerful; but your Minister was Faulty
in not performing his Promise, to those who had taken part with him, in
Arresting the Prince. Which was not warning sufficient to the Prince, to keep
him from doing the like. For he began to despise, and disoblige his Friends.
Viscount Turenne was one of the first of those who were so treated by him; for
having desired the Prince to give good Winter Quarters to some Troops which he
looked upon as his own, though your Majesty paid 'em, the Prince took no notice
of his Request: The Viscount also knew, the Prince used to rally him for his
Love to his Sister, and made it a common talk among those who were most in his
Favor; which touched the Viscount so much to the Quick, that he came to the
Queen, your Mother, and promised her, that nothing in the World should make him
fall into the same fault he had committed; and that for the future, he would do
all he could, to blot out the Memory of it; assuring her Majesty, she might
rely upon his Fidelity.

He said as much to your Majesty, and obliged his Brother the Duke of Bouillon
to make you the same Protestations: This Example teaches us how dangerous
Railery is, and how much it provokes Men of great Courage. But this is a
needless Reflection to be made to your Majesty, who never speaks ill of any
body, and when you speak of your greatest Enemies, it is only of those Qualities
you know commendable in them; neither will your Majesty suffer any to speak
evil of others in your presence, wherein your Majesty is much in the Right,
seeing there is little difference, between evil speaking and approving it.

The Prince did very ill in another thing; He had assured the Duke of Beaufort,
the Duchess of Cheveruse, and the Coad jutor, that for the future his Interest
and theirs should be the same, and that the Prince of Conti should Marry the
Dutchess's Daughter. This Promise being made when he was in Prison, was not
thought Valid by the Duchess, because it looked as if it had been forced; she
therefore came to the Prince, and released him of it: But he told her, though he
was not obliged, yet because she treated him in so civil a manner, the thing
should be done. Though he was now doubly obliged, yet such was his Humor, that
he would not be beholding to any body. He quickly forgot his Obligation, nor
was he so Civil, as to do any thing to discharge himself of it.

In the mean time, your Majesty, who did not like your Minister's being forced
from you, tried all ways to have him return handsomely, without causing any new
Troubles in your Kingdom: But the aversion which every one had against him, and
the Arrests that had past to exclude all Foreigners from the Ministry, would
have made it very difficult, had it not been for the Prince's ill Conduct,
which daily increased, being pressed by the Prince of Conti, passionately in
Love with Mademoiselle Chevereuse, to consent to his Marriage, he told him he
would not, and that he would not have him take the Coadjutor's, the Marquess of
Laicques, and Caumartin's leavings.

These Three often visited her, and there needed no more to make the Prince of
Conti believe that what the Prince of Conde had said was true: He presently
quitted her, in spite of his Love, and seriously told all the World, how much
he was obliged to his Brother, who had drawn him from a Precepice, from whence
he was falling headlong. This Discourse was carried to Madam Chevereuse, and to
those who were concerned in it, and wrought more for the return of your
Minister, than all that your Majesty could have done. So true is it, that
Chance produces many unforeseen Accidents, which prevail over all humane
Reason and Prudence. The Duchess of Chevereuse, whose Cabal was very strong,
offered your Majesty to employ her Friends to facilitate your Minister's
return. And now your Majesty being in your Fourteenth Year, you were declared
of full Age, you went to the Parliament to have the Declaration registered, and
at the same time carried thither two Edicts, which served for marks to
Posterity of your Piety toward God, and of your Love to your People. The
first, was against those that blasphemed God's holy Name. The other was against
Duels, which you swore on the holy Bible to see exactly executed, that you
might never be importuned concerning it; and resolved never to retract what you
had sworn.

In this you did not like many others, who in a few days forget their Promises:
For, ten or twelve Years after, some considerable Persons of your Nobility,
having fought, contrary to this Edict; you had made them an Example, had they
not gone out of the Kingdom; but that which is more remarkable is, that the
Pope interceded with you for them, and offered to absolve you from your Oath;
but the tenderness of your Conscience would not suffer you to grant what he
desired. You thought that when once People believed your Pardon might be
obtained by Mediation, those disorders would never cease, to which your Majesty
was fully resolved to put an end. Beside, you would not let it be said, that
Recommendation had a greater Power over you, than Justice.

Your Majesty could not endure your People should give Law to you, concerning
your Mininister Cardinal Mazarin's return. You retired a second time from
Paris. The Duke of Orleans your Uncle would not follow you, neither would the
Prince of Conde, who a few Days after, possessed with a Panick Fear he should be
Arrested, left the City; and being gone to his House at St. Maur, you did all
you could to cure him of this Suspicion; but because when a Man knows himself
guilty, he never thinks himself secure from Punishment; he went into the
Country and retired to Montrond. The Prince of Conti, the Prince Marsillac, and
some others, at the same time took up their Quarters in Guyenne: The Duke of
Rochefoucaut having stirred up some Troubles in Poitou, you had those two
Provinces to reduce, as well as the City of Paris, which openly declared
against your Majesty.

The Pretense of all these Revolts was, that you would have Cardinal Mazarin
return, against your Word given to the contrary. But seeing most of the Heads
of this Party had promised you to consent to his Return, for Favors done them;
you could not believe that was the true Reason: You plainly saw, that Ambition
had a greater share in their Disobedience, than the Hatred they had for the
Cardinal.

It was easy for the Spaniards, at this time, to do their Business: They
re-took most of the Places you had conquered since you ascended the Throne: But
your Majesty thought the safety of your Kingdom to be of greater Consequence to
you, than any thing else: You ran to the Place where there was most Danger, you
went into Poitou, after you had in Person reduced Berri, where the Prince of
Conde had raised some Troubles. You declared him a Rebel, and a Disturber of
the public Peace, with all his Adherents. But this made none of 'em return to
their Duty, and your Authority was so little regarded, that in two Months time,
the Parliament would not register your Declaration; though their Interest were
different from the Prince of Conde's, and with whom they did not act in concert.

The strongest Cabal which took part with your Majesty, was that of the Duke of
Vendosm and the Coadjutor: But you were necessitated to buy both; which was by
giving one the place of Admiral of France; and by promising the other you would
nominate him for a Cardinal's Cap, at the next promotion that should happen.
You thought these Favors nothing in comparison of the Services these Men could
do you in so nice a Conjuncture; especially in relation to Paris, which had not
yet declared for the Prince of Conde, and where they had many Friends.

Your Presence in Poitou quickly suppressed the Rebellion there; the capital
City of that Province opened its Gates to you, and the Cardinal being come
thither to you with some Troops which he had raised in Germany, you forced the
Rebels to quit the Siege of Coynac; you drove them also out of some Posts they
had possessed; but could not reduce 'em in Bourdeaux; for the Prince of Conde,
who was come thither, had infused new Courage into those, who before seemed
disposed to submit to your Majesty.

In the mean time, Paris (which went nearer, your Heart than any thing else)
seeing Cardinal Mazarin return, publicly declared for the Prince of Conde.
Monsieur the Duke of Orleans likewise acted against your Majesty, though he had
many times said, he was not to be suspected for his not being at Court. But how
could he clear himself from Suspicion, who had hearkened to evil Counsel all
his Life, and always had near him the Bishop of Langres, who was enraged to miss
the Cardinal's Cap, which had been so often promised him. Beside, Mademoisolle
de Montpensier, who had a great desire to be Married, feeding her self with the
hope the Prince of Conde gave her, she should have his Son; spoke for him to
her Father, without making any Reflection, that she was old enough to be the
Mother of him she had a mind to make her Husband.

Among so many declared Enemies there were some secret ones, whom your Majesty
did not distrust; but on the contrary, had reason to think them your most
Faithful Subjects. The Duke of Beaufort for a time was one of this Number,
notwithstanding all you had done for him and his Family. But weary of wearing
the Foxes Skin, he put on the Lions, and took the Field against your Majesty.
The Coadjutor did not declare himself so openly, but vexed to see that by
Cardinal Mazarin's Return, he was never like to come into his place; did,
underhand, all he could to ruin him, though he was sure it would very much
displease your Majesty. The Jealousy which arose between the Duke of Beaufort,
and the Duke of Nemours, who were both jointly to command an Army; gave your
Majesty an Opportunity to draw near to them, that you might take some Advantage
of their division: But the Prince of Conde prevented you, by passing incognito
through all the Provinces beyond the Loire; and by putting himself at the Head
of the Army, where his Presence was necessary to settle a right understanding
between the two Princes; of whose disagreement, the only cause was their
Ambition to command singly and exclusively to one another. Your Majesty did all
you could to have taken the Prince in so long a March, and where there were so
many Rivers to pass; you set guards upon all the Fords, and sent out many
Parties into the field, which was all you could do. But since all the care in
the World is to no purpose, where Men will be false and treacherous; Bussy
Rabutin let him pass, so that he came safe to his Army, which was then near
Chatillon upon Loin.

Your Majesty, who knew not at first in what manner he had escaped, thought to
repair this Blow by a Battle, wherein you hoped to have the better. The two
Armies joined near Bleneau, where the Avantguard of yours, commanded by
Marshall Hoquincourt, was so ill treated, that if Viscount Turenne had not
come to his Relief, your Majesty, who was at Gergeau, had been in danger of
being taken: But his Experience having placed you Beyond a narrow Pass, he
defended it with so much Courage till Night came on, that the Prince, who
promised himself an entire Victory, could he have passed the Defile; was
obliged to be contented with that advantage he had gotten.

Your Majesty was happy, that the Prince had then so great a desire to go to
Paris, where he thought this new beam of Glory, would procure him a Reception
with some kind of Triumph. It Is certain that Ambiton was not the sole cause of
this Voyage; and that Love had a great part in it: For he had given up his
Heart to the Duchess of Chatillon, and the desire he had to see her, made him
lose the Advantage he might have drawn from this Victory. This was a Fault
which many great Princes commit, and it is a Miracle if they conquer their
Passion. The Prince of Conde is not the only Person that has been faulty in
this kind, and your Majesty knows, that there is a Prince beside him, whose
Reputation is much greater than his, that is fallen into the same Fault. A Man
may be in Love, and yet do his Duty; for though it be dificult, yet it is but to
remember, that every one has his Eyes upon what he does, and nothing can stop
their observation. A Prince, who has care of his Honor, will never suffer
such hold to be taken of him; he will rather conquer himself for a time, than
give the least Stain to his Reputation: Beside, an Opportunity once lost, is
not easily retrieved; whence we are to conclude, that when a thing can be done,
it never ought to be put off till to Morrow.

The Prince of Conde's Absence, gave your Majesty an Opportunity to recruit
your Army with ease; so that in some time after, it was again in a Condition to
be feared. The Duke of Orleans, who had wholly declared himself against your
Majesty, fearing to be run down, sent to his Brother-in-Law the Duke of Lorrain
for his Assistance; and the Spaniards, who every Year hired his Troops,
consented to it. He entered France, and marched toward Estampes, which Viscount
Turenne had besieged. The Place of it self was not considerable, but being
defended by a good Garrison, it held out longer than People thought it would;
so that the Duke of Lorrain might have come time enough to have relieved it,
which much troubled your Majesty; but according to his ordinary Practice, being
more used to Plunder than to Fight, he made such little Marches, that the Place
was taken before he came to it.

Viscount Turenne in perfect spite marched against him, and forced him to
repass the Seine; he encamped at Villaneue St. Georges, where without great
disadvantage, he could not be forced to fight, he pillaged all Brie* as well as
the plain Country about Paris, for which he had the Curses of the Parisiens,
who flattered themselves, he was come to relieve, and not to Plunder 'em: But
all their Complaints were to no purpose; your Majesty, who was as much
concerned as they, seeing they could not be ruined without your being sensible
of it; endeavored to gain the Duke of Lorrain, that he might cease pillaging
the Country: there was some appearance of prevailing with him, your Majesty
having wherewith to tempt him; for you were possessed of his Country which you
offered to restore upon reasonable Conditions: But he loved ready Money, better
than Offers so advantageous to him; your Majesty having granted him a Pass, he
went out of the Kingdom to their great astonishment who called him in: Your
Majesty was likewise much surprised, not believing a Prince of his Birth, could
act in such a manner, upon so base an Account: But Kindness to his Children,
which he had by the Princess de Cantecroix, made him think of nothing but
getting Money, seeing he could not settle the Country of Lorrain upon 'em, for
two Reasons; the one was, because it was his Wife's Inheritance; the other was,
he had those Children not by his Wife, and therefore being incapable of
succeeding him, he resolved to give them Portions in Money for their
Maintenance.

The King of England, the unfortunate Son of a more unhappy Father, who was
come to seek Refuge and Relief from your Majesty, served you perfectly well in
this Treaty, which troubled you very much, till it was ended: For if the Duke
of Lorrain would, he might have put Viscount Turenne hard to it, whom you
thought for some time in great danger, because he was come too near his Camp;
but he happily got out of the Briars by his admirable Conduct, which gained him
a great deal of Reputation, as well with the Enemy as among his own Soldiers.

Your Majesty having made a good end of so difficult an Affair, gave no leisure
to the Rebels, and by your Presence so encouraged your Army, that the Prince of
Conde saw himself, and his Troops ready to fall into your Hands: For you
pursued him so hotly, that he was forced to possess himself of the Bridge of
St. Cloud, by which he thought to avoid a Battle, but your Majesty having laid
a Bridge over the Seine, he saw himself ready to be attaqu'd in Front and Rear,
he then got under the Walls of Paris, and marched round it to get to Charenton;
Viscount Turenne who observed it, followed him so close, that he begun to
charge his Rear near Port du Temple and Port St. Martin; which obliged him to
hasten his March, and being come to the height of the Fauxbourg St. Antoin, he
made use of some Retrenchments which Chance afforded him, they having been made
to secure the Citizens against the Thievery of the Duke of Lorrain's Troops.

There he lodged his Foot, in better Order than the shortness of the time
seemed to permit, and drew in his Cavalry; he sent the Duke of Beaufort into
the City, to persuade the Citizens to let in and secure his Baggage, and
declare for the Prince: But the Fear the Parisiens had to be pillaged, made
them shut and place Guards at their Gates. The Prince of Conde, when he saw
this, ranged all his Baggage along the Ditch, and caused Holes to be made
through the Houses, where he saw your Forces advance. Your Majesty was posted
at Menill to see this Attack, which would have rejoiced your great Heart, had
it been to fight with your Enemies, and not against your Subjects: The Onset
was furious, and your Troops having forced the Retrenchments, Vicount Turenne
brought up his Canon to a Place called the Throne; because one had been there
erected, to receive your Majesty, when after your Marriage you made your
entrance into the City. The Prince of Conde did all he could to sustain your
Peoples Efforts, who encouraged by your Presence did Wonders, and God, who
would not suffer the Rebellion to continue, gave your Majesty an entire
Victory; so that the Prince of Conde had been utterly lost, if Paris had not
opened its Gates to him, where he saved his remaining Troops. Mademoiselle
Montpensier did the Prince this Service, and caused the Canon to be discharged
upon your Majesty, and your Minister, who was very near you.

This Victory astonished the Parisiens, and those who were of the Prince of
Conde's Party; your Majesty having some faithful Subjects in this great City,
who made People sensible how much they had failed in their Duty to your
Majesty, so that they were a long time in suspense, before they agreed to give
the Prince that Assistance, he so much wanted. This occasioned an Assembly,
which met two Days after at the Townhouse, where were a great many Persons,
who, in some manner, represented the States general, of whom a Convocation had
been demanded of your Majesty, and which you had promised, to free your self of
their Importunities: But as you had there your Creatures, as well as the Prince
had his, while they were disputing what Resolutions to take, the Mutineers
broke open the Doors, and killed some of the Deputies, an only Son of a
Councellor of the great Chamber, a considerable quality in that time, was with
some others slain. This Murder having caused great Confusion, those of your
Majesty's Party, put Paper in their Hats to be known by one another; the other
Party wore Straw in theirs, which Mark, some of the greatest Lords in your
Court, were forced to wear, as well as others in Paris: They that put Straw in
their Hats, quickly became the stronger Party, and falling upon those that wore
Paper, the Marshall de L' Hopitall Governor of the City, had much ado to save
himself. Many were of Opinion, that it was the Prince of Conde who stirred up
this Tumult, and would have charged it on Cardinal Mazarin, to render him the
more Odious, but whether the truth were discovered, or People begun to be weary
of disobeying their Master, every one thought of making Peace with your
Majesty; the Duke of Orleans made Propositions to you, and so did the
Parliament; but you found them so high, and so void of that respect which was
due to you; that instead of hearing them, you were so angry with the
Parliament, that you removed it to Ponthoise.

This Action accompanied with many other of the like Nature, quite astonished
the Mutineers; the Prince of Conde nevertheless endeavored to warm his Party
again, who were ready to leave him: But the Parliament being upon the point of
turning their backs upon him, as well as your Uncle the Duke of Orleans; he
threw himself into the Arms of the Spaniards. Your Majesty made a prudent use
of this Conjuncture, and to unite all Parties, you feigned to send Cardinal
Mazarin away a second time, whom many made the pretense of their Rebellion; so
that no longer having a Cloak to cover it, they all resolved to return to their
Duty, provided your Majesty would grant them a general Act of Oblivion; you did
not think sit to refuse it, Appanage signifies the Portion given to the King of
Franc's younger Children.
and the Duke of Orleans being retired to Blois, a Town assigned him for part
of his Appanage, your Majesty had now no more to do, but to return to the
Capital City of your Kingdom.

You were humbly importuned to do it by your Parliament, and in the Name of the
Clergy by the Coadjutor; who according to the promise given him, had been made
a Cardinal, and who came expressly to wait upon you at Compiegne; your Majesty
called a Council there to be advised, whether you should not cause him to be
Arrested, to punish him for his breach of Faith, in not performing the Promises
he had made you: But it was thought sit, first to make a firm settlement of
your Authority, and when that was done, you would be much better able to do
what you thought good. It Is indeed Prudence to let things ripen, and to do a
thing out of season, is to spoil all.

Some blame the Prince, who might have had your Majesty's Pardon, had he sought
it in a decent manner: because he took a fancy to follow the Duke of Lorrain's
example, who pillaged and plundered Friends and Enemies without any
distinction; but it is not to be believed, that a Prince of his Birth and great
Mind, could have any Thoughts unworthy of the one or the other; yet he
ransacked the Frontier of Campaign as he went off, and after he had taken
Rhetel and St. Menehout, he retired to Namur.

He had there some Conference with a Minister of the Arch-Duke's, who before he
would let the Prince come to Bruxells, would know whether he would give him the
Hand. This Proposition made the Prince sensible, to what Displeasures he had
exposed himself by his Disobedience; but his great Courage not suffering him to
hesitate what answer to make; he sent the Archduke word, that the Honor he
had to be the first Prince of the Blood of France, had too well taught him,
what was his Right for him, ever to part with it: He therefore pretended to
take place of the Archduke were he not in the Low Countries, where he
represented his Catholic Majesty, in that Quality he would give him the upper
Hand when he went to visit him; but when the Archduke in his turn came to see
him, he expected the same. The Archduke was not pleased with so haughty an
Answer, and believing that after what the Prince had done, there was no more
returning for him into France; he insisted upon the Prince's giving him place
every where, to which the Prince would never consent: The thing at last went so
far, that he caused the Archduke to be told, that unless he accepted the Offer
he made him, he would in eight Days be gone; and that he was not yet so to
seek, but he knew very well where to go. the Archduke was then forced to let
him have his Will; but seeing it was much against the Arch-Duke's, it showed
the Prince what Inconveniences attend a Man's forsaking his own Country, and
going into a Foreign Court, especially, when a Man is looked upon as a Rebel,
and is obliged to buy his Protection, whatever the Price be, he must pay for it.

He had the same dispute with the Duke of Lorrain, who lived for the most part
at Bruxells; and many times, 'twas thought, they would come to Blows; but 'twas
hindered by their Friends, without undertaking to decide the Difference about
eithers Pretentions; for the Duke of Lorrain would not endure any Competition,
and the Prince of Conde could not hear of giving place, without falling into
great Passion; but that which gave him the greatest Distaste in that Court,
was, that Prince Francis, the Duke's Brother, did likewise dispute Precedence
with him; which caused such Heats, as were not like to end without Fighting:
That which most angered the Prince of Conde was, that the Archduke would not
regulate the business, though the Prince prayed him to do it, confiding in the
Justice of his Cause. The Archduke had a mind to mortify the Prince of Conde,
and would not disoblige Prince Francis, whom he resolved to keep still with
him; especially at that time when he feared he would be gone into France, where
many endeavors were used to gain him.

See what unexpected Displeasures Men meet with, when they put themselves into
the Service of a Foreign Prince; but it is otherwise, when a Man stays in his
own Country, where the Place due to his Quality, is not only regulated; but it
is also the Sovereign's Interest, to do nothing to the prejudice of a Prince of
his Blood. It Is but just a Man should do Penance for his Faults, because it
brings him again to himself, and there is nothing which makes us wiser, than
those Mortifications which we did not expect; they that have the Wind still
with them, run the hazard of never knowing themselves.

The Prince having quitted his party, your Majesty thought rather of pacifying
your Kingdom, than of driving the Enemy from the Frontiers, which you flattered
your self might be easily done, when it was at Peace within it self: The
Province of Guyenne was still in Arms for the Prince of Conde; the Prince of
Conti was in Bourdeaux, where, as a Prince of the Blood, he was so
considerable, as to draw many to take part with him in his Disobedience; the
Count d'Ognon was in Brouage, where ill Example made him play the Tyrant. Great
Forces were required to reduce those People, because of their Intelligence with
the Spaniards, from whom they received Assistance: But your Majesty considering
it would be easier to gain them by fair means, you made the one Marshall of
France, upon Condition, he delivered up the Place he kept into your Majesty's
Hands; and granted the other very considerable Terms, if he would quit his
Brother's Party.

Your Majesty who had found a way to make Cardinal Mazarin return, and to
settle Peace in Paris, where you had again fixed the Parliament in its usual
Seat. And having now no more Domestic Troubles to fear, you did not only raise
Forces to secure your Frontiers; but to raise your Reputation very much
lessened abroad. You had lost all you had in Catalonia, your Affairs in Italy,
were also in an ill Condition, those in Flanders not in a much better Case, and
of so many Conquests, which I have already mentioned, no more remained to your
Majesty, but Arras in Campagn; the Enemy kept St. Menehout, Mouzon and Rhetel;
upon the Frontier of Picardie, Le Catelet and Capelle; in Bourgundy, Bellegard,
wherein were the remains of the Prince of Conde's Faction. Here was work enough
for a young Prince, who had not yet the experience of Riper Years; but your
Majesty having prudently begun with that which seemed to be of greatest
Consequence; you besieged Bellegard and became Master of it, having thereby cut
off the Head of the Rebellion. You hardly knew what to do next, so much were
you pressed on all sides: The Prince of Conde was entered into Picardy where he
had taken Roye; the Archduke threatened Campagn, these two Places were of like
Importance to you; but you could not remedy all at once, the Forces of your
Kingdom were exhausted; so that your Majesty was obliged to do things by
degrees, one after another. You marched to the Relief of Picardy, made the
Enemy quit Roy; and afterward, besieged Rhetel, which being taken, you made
your self Master of Mouzon: In the mean time the Enemy possessed themselves of
Rocroy; for which you were revenged, by reducing St. Menehout to your Obedience.

Your Arms in Catalonia began to be dreaded; you took there several strong
Places, and you had taken the Town of Gironne, had it not been for a Miracle
wrought by Heaven, in favor of your Enemies: They placed on the Rampart a
little Cabinet, wherein were the Relics of a holy Bishop of that City; and
presently there appeared such an infinite number of Flies, which fell upon your
Army, that all your Cavalry was astonished at it. The Horses, not being able to
abide it, broke their Bridles, and run cross the Fields, they rolled themselves
in the Mire to get rid of the Flies, and many perished; so that seeing the
Enemy was ready to make use of the Advantage they had by so favorable an
Accident, it was thought fit to raise the Siege.

In Italy, you carried the War into Milanez, where the Count de Grance, whom
you had made a Marshall of France, took Carpignan, and beat the Marquess
Caracene, whom the King of Spain sent against him.

You were now obliged to acknowledge the Government of England, though at the
same time, your Kindness and Justice, led you to protect him who was the lawful
Prince thereof: But the Spaniards, who sought to make an Advantage of your
Aversion to Cromwell's Usurpation and were treating with him to your Prejudice;
you had recourse to the only means left you, to secure your self against the
Mischief they intended you. You offered him your Mediation to accomodate the
differences amicably, which were then between England and Holland, of which you
were very willing to see an End, because they might have proved very much to
your Enemies Advantage.

This was a great deal for a State which had been so Sick, to be free from
Convulsions which had like to have brought it to its Grave: But as in long
Sicknesses there are often Relapses, Count Harcourt, whom your Majesty had made
use of to reduce the Rebels to their Duty, became one himself. He found a way
to get into Brisac, where the Garrison being at his Devotion, he designed to
erect a Kind of Sovereignty in Alsatia, if he had been strong enough to support
the Burden. The Spaniards did all they could to oblige him to put the Place
into their Hands; but not offering enough to tempt him, he refused them, and
thought of agreeing with the Duke of Lorrain, who had enough to pay him well;
for there was not a Prince, who had so much ready Money as he; but being an
Idolater of it, he could not resolve to part with so much as Count Harcourt
demanded; so that the Business hanging long in Suspense, it came at last to
nothing, because the Spaniards, who distrusted him, caused him soon after to be
arrested.

Your Majesty, to whom this Business appeared to be of great importance, as
indeed it was; sent often to and again to make him return to his Duty: But
seeing he could not come to any Resolution, you besieged Beffort to cut off all
Relief which he might hope to have from that side; you made your self Master of
it in the midst of Winter; for it is fit the French should learn to make War in
any Season, they who under your Majesty ought to despise Heat and Cold, and to
habituate themselves to either: This Conquest joined to the very good Terms you
offered Count Harcourt, prevailed with him to accept 'em: You gave him the
Government of Anjou, you let him enjoy all his Estate, and his Place of Grand
Ecuyerr; he being to deliver up all he held in Alsatia.

This Business being thus over, and so well for your Majesty; you next thought
of re-taking Rocroy, where the Garrison spoiled all the Country round about it,
under the Command of a Governor who was not a sleep, and had learnt his Trade
under the Prince of Conde; I mean Montall, whom your Majesty has so
succesfully employed, and who did you great Service in the last War. But you
believed the taking of Stenay was of much greater Advantage; and therefore you
marched your Army thither under the command of Marshall Fabert: This General
was much to be valued for his great Fidelity to your Majesty, because he was
almost the only Man, among those who were Governors of Places, who refused the
Prince of Conde's Offers, who did all he could to debauch him out of your
Service: But he resolved not to follow the Example of others, and kept Sedan,
which your Majesty put into his Hands.

The Prince to whom Stenay belonged, desired Forces from the Archduke to
relieve it. The Archduke promised him, and indeed did all he could to oblige
Prince Francis to lend him his Troops: But because this Place had been
dismembered from Lorrain, he would not but upon Condition it should be
reunited; to which the Prince would not yield, and this Business having
increased the misunderstanding that was between 'em, the Archduke had much
ado to keep 'em from coming to down right Blows. Your Majesty came in Person to
the Siege, after you had been at Reins, where the Ceremonies of your
Consecration had been performed: Your Majesty was very liberal to your
Soldiers, who all admired the Inclination they saw you had to War. While your
Forces were before Stenay, the Prince of Conde prevailed with the Spaniards to
besiege Arras; supposing, that because this Place was of much greater
consequence to you, than the other, you would raise the Siege of Stenay to
relieve it. But they were deceived in their expectation, it only made your
Majesty the more diligent to take it, and you were no sooner possessed of it, but
you made have to relieve Arras.

The taking of Arras was of such importance to the Spaniards, that they
neglected nothing to make themselves sure of it: Their Lines were the best that
ever was seen, and at equal distances they had raised Redoubts, by which they
were the more secured; and not content with all this Precaution, they had made
Holes in the Ground within, to stop the Cavalry: But the Siege began with an
ill Omen; for the Chevalier Crequi who had not yet any great Reputation for a
Soldier; but has since so well behaved himself, that your Majesty, after
making him a Marshall of France, has given him the Command of your best
Armies; threw himself into the Place, at the Head of Five Hundred Horse.

This Relief did Montjeu great Service, who commanded within, and who to spare
his Purse, had but an indifferent Garrison: for in those Days, your Majesty,
not being able your self to order your own Affairs, the Governors of Places
appropriated to themselves the Contributions without rendering any Account to
your Majesty, with which they undertook to defend the Place wherein they
commanded; which was very inconvenient, for instead of maintaining a good
Garrison, they thought of nothing but heaping up Treasure; this your Majesty
could not remedy; but by changing this Custom, and putting things into the
State they are at present. And indeed, as now your Safety is greater than it
was before; so you have taken away a Company of petty Tyrants, who as soon as
they were put into the command of any place, thought themselves as great as
your Majesty.

Montjeu, who was a brave Man, held out near two Months, without letting the
Enemy get much Ground upon him: in the mean time, your Army under the Command
of Vicount Turenne appeared in view of their Lines, and begun to entrench,
because he feared they would come out and fight him, and that they being
stronger than he, he might receive some Affront. It was the Prince of Conde's
Advice, that they should go out of their Lines, and fight Turenne, because,
said he, they expect the coming of Marshall Hoquincourt, with the Troops he
commands, and then they will know how to talk with us. But the Archduke
maintained, that they could not go out of their Lines, without quitting some
Outworks which they had taken, and if they did not quit 'em, the Garrison
would again beat them out of 'em, which was still the same thing; and therefore
they were better continue their Attaques, and endeavor to take the Town before
Hoquincourt should arrive.

The Arch-Duke's opinion was followed, because amongst the Officers that were
in a Council of War, there was none but the Prince of Conde, who durst
contradict him. This gave Vicount Turenne time, to put his Army into a
condition not to be insulted, and to expect the coming of Marshall
Hoquincourt; who as soon as he came, attacked the Abbey of St. Eloi, and carried
it. He lodged there with his Army round about him, and acting in concert with
Vicount Turenne who was on the other side of the Lines, they cut off the
Enemies Provisions, and hindered all Convoys from coming into their Camp.

Montjeu seeing himself so near being relieved, felt his courage increase; and
having repulsed the Besiegers in two Assaults they made upon one of his
Outworks; they were in such consternation, that Viscount Turenne thought it a
fit time to set upon them in that disorder. The Prince of Conde who foresaw
they could make no resistance, said to the Archduke, That since he would not
believe him at first, he hoped he would now; and seeing there was no more time
to be lost, the only way they were to take in their present condition, was to
raise the Siege and fall upon Hoquincourt, to whom Turenne could give no
assistance. The Archduke seemed well enough inclined to it, and fell into
particular discourse of their Retreat; but having consulted Count Fuensaldagne,
who past for a great Soldier among his Countrymen, was by him wholly
dissuaded from it.

St. Louis's day being come, which Viscount Turenne had chosen to make his
Attack, he gave the Signal agreed on with Marshall Hoquincourt; so that both
having marched, Viscount Turenne forced the Lines in that part, which was
guarded by Fernando Solis. But Marshall Hoquincourt missed his way, which gave
the Archduke time to think of Retreating; but Viscount Turenne following his
blow, beat the Lorrainers in their Quarter, which was next to Solis. The Prince
of Conde seeing the disorder, advanced to a little Rivulet, which separated his
Quarter from the rest; and there making head against Vicount Turenne, and
Marshall Hoquincourt, who had now joined him, he gave the Archduke and the
Troops he had brought out of France, time to retreat in good order; his
infantry never the less suffered very much in their Retreat with the Prince,
who was the last man, and which he managed with so much prudence, that the
Spaniards admired him; among whom he got very great credit for so brave an
action.

The Enemy's Cannon and Baggage fell into Your Majesty's hands. You went to the
Cathedral Church of the City, and there gave God thanks for the Victory he had
given you; for you still attributed all things to him like a good Christian,
believing that your good conduct, or the force of your Arms could do nothing
without his aid. The taking of Quesnoi was the fruit of this Victory, and
therewith ended this prosperous Campaign.

Your Conquests were likewise increased in Catalonia, by the taking of
Villafranca and Puicerda; from whence the Enemies continually made Inroads into
Rousillon; but you did not make the same Progress in Italy, though you spared
nothing on that side, to signalize the Glory of your Arms. For the Duke of
Guise who had engaged you in great Expenses, under pretense of his maintaining
correspondence with Naples, and that he should no sooner appear but that whole
Kingdom would rise; yet came back without taking any thing but Castellamar,
which he was forced to quit.

This Enterprise however gave Your Majesty Reputation, though the Spaniards
endeavored in that Country, to make people believe you were a Prince that
could not easily get out of that confusion, into which the Civil Wars had cast
you; though you now scarce feel the effects of it, having put all things into so
good order every where; for it is not only on the Frontiers that you have
established your power; but you have likewise done it in the heart of your
Kingdom, where there remained but two things to be done, and which appeared
very pressing and absolutely necessary. The one was, so to settle again the
Power and Authority of your Minister, that he might meet with no more such
Strokes as had like to have tumbled him quite down. The other was, to punish
those, who under pretense of being your Friends betrayed you.

You did the first, by marrying his Eminencies Nieces, to such great Lords,
that the chief Persons in your Court, were engaged to preserve him; one of his
Nieces was married to the Duke of Mercoeur, and another to the Prince of Conti.
This begot a great desire in the greatest and most Eminent Men about you, to
court the other, who were not yet old enough to be Married, and who might
pretend to any thing, after their other two Sisters had gotten Husbands of such
Quality.

As to the Punishment of those who had deceived you, you made that Exemplary in
the Person of Cardinal de Rets; whom you caused to be Arrested; but because the
regard you had to his Character, would not permit you to punish him according
to what your Justice required, you therefore only resolved to take from him his
Archbishopric, which gave him by the Dignity of it, so much Power over the
Clergy, as to be able to engage them in Factions prejudicial to your Service;
you proposed to him a Resignation of his Bishopric into the Hands of the Pope,
and that then he should have his Liberty. Monsieur Bellievre first President of
the Parliament, who was sent to him to let him know your Majesty's Pleasure,
was his Friend, but none to your Minister; so that instead of counselling him
to accept of the Proposition; he advised him to the contrary; saying, he spoke
to him as a Friend, and not as one sent from the Court.

Now seeing this Magistrate had the Reputation of being one of the Honestest
Men in France, and a Judge of as great integrity, as has been a long time in
Parliament. It will not be impertinent to give your Majesty a Character of the
Man; it is very true, that he was an Honest Man, and incapable of doing a base
thing; however, I can say, your Majesty did your self no good when you preferred
him; if he were a Virtuous Man, his Virtue was very Austere, and would never
consider the necessity of your State: He affected the Name of being a Man for
the Public Good, which kept him without any other consideration from acting
conjunctly with your Majesty, for the Good of your Affairs: He was also of so
high a Spirit, that if Cardinal Mazarin had sent for him, unless it were in
your Majesty's Name, he would not come; and then if your self were not upon the
Place to tell him what your Pleasure was, he would not stay; yea, such was his
Pride, that he could not endure his Eminence should think, there was any
difference between them.

But your Majesty should never put such froward untractable Men, at the Head of
your Parliaments, which have already done enough to convince you, that you
ought never to let them have a President, that will join with them to usurp
upon your Authority. Nothing is of greater Consequence to your Kingdom; and
when there wants such a Head, you ought to prefer a Subject who will be a Curb
to them. Your Parliament has already Power enough not to covet more, and that
which I have before said of them, relating to the War of Paris, is a sufficient
Reason for you to set Bounds to their Power: But the Inclination you always had
to reward your Servants, joined with the necessity wherein you then were, made
you take the first comer, who offered to repair his ill Fortune, who before had
the Place, and whose extreme Poverty you could not see without blushing, being
not then in a Condition to help him; so that you permitted this Magistrate to
treat with his Predecessor, which nothing but the Misery of the times could
excuse: For I can assure your Majesty, it may occasion many Inconveniences, as
your self will confess, when you consider, that they who arrive to Places of
Honor, for which they think they have no Obligation to their Master, are never
so submissive to him, as they are, who for the Places they hold, depend solely
on him.

The Cardinal de Rets took his Friend's Advice, because there is nothing so
grievous to a Man, as the loss of his Liberty, he thought to procure his, by
feigning to hearken to what was proposed: He sent your Majesty word, he was
ready to sign a blank Resignation, but when that was done, since the Price
offered for it, was what depended only upon the Cardinal, whom he could not
trust; he would be glad to know before hand, what assurance you would give him
he should have his Liberty. Your Majesty, who acted with great sincerity, but
would not be tricked; gave him to understand, that you left it to his choice,
to take such Measures as he best liked; and that you would be contented,
provided you might be secure: So that now the matter being left to him to
resolve, he agreed with your Majesty, that if you would let him out of
Vincennes, he would remain under the Guard of Marshall Meilleray, who had
married one of his Relations, till the Pope had accepted his Resignation.

He was conducted to Nantes, where the Marshall was, whose Vigilance he
designed to deceive, because he well knew, that the Pope, with whom he dealt
underhand, to make him refuse that which the Cardinal seemed to desire, would
not fail to declare himself against your Majesty. The Marshall, who was a good
honest Man, and did not think the Cardinal a double Dealer, commanded that he
should not be kept too close, but some Liberty should be allowed him, so that
the Guards let him go daily out upon a Bastion, and did not keep the Door by
which he went to it; but he, who thought of nothing but escaping, got a Rope
made of Silk, of the height of the Bastion, and his Physician, who was with
him, holding it, he let himself down by it, and got away upon a Horse,
purposely brought thither. Some thought his Design was to go to Paris, there to
foment new Disorders; but his Horse falling on the Pavement of Nantes, which is
very bad, he fled to Machcoul, a Castle which belonged to the Duke of Rets, his
Brother.

Marshall Meilleray prepared to go thither and besiege it; which made the
Cardinal go thence to Bellisle. The Marshall would likewise have followed him,
if your Majesty would have given him leave; but one Reason of State why you
would not permit him, was, because you feared that the Marshall, who was very
powerful in that Province, would not keep it for you; and that after your
Endeavors to put things into good Order, you your self might be the occasion
of new Disorders.

But seeing it had been a kind of braving your Majesty, to have stayed in your
Kingdom, after he had been so unhappy to incur your Indignation, he went into
Spain, and from thence to Rome, from whence, your Majesty would not suffer him
to return, till he had given you the Satisfaction you expected. Indeed, it
concerns the Majesty of a great King, not to suffer a Subject to beard him, but
to reduce him to his Duty; otherwise it would be an Example to others of
dangerous consequence.

Your Majesty knowing that the Spaniards had not well recovered their Rout at
Arras, hastened to take the Field; where after having taken Landrecis, Conde
and St. Guillain, the Archduke was so alarmed, that he thought every Moment
you would attack him in Bruxells, the fear of it made him employ ten thousand
Peasants, to make a kind of Fortification about it, and it is for your Majesty's
Reputation Posterity should know it; because it cannot but take notice, that
after the Archduke had made you tremble in your Capital City of Paris, you
should do the like by him in so short a time, and that you must be a great King
to do such Miracles: But what I can say, is, That you forget nothing which is
for the public good of your Kingdom, and that then you knew as well how to
Treat, as to make War.

It plainly appeared in the Treaty you made with Prince Francis, whose Design
you discovered, by his letting the Lord Inchequin who managed all his Affairs,
fall into your Hands at the Rout of Arras: For instead of thinking he was taken
Prisoner by chance, you concluded it to be a premeditated Contrivance, which
made you stand so stiff upon the Propositions that Lord then made. Who still
pretended all that he said was from himself, without having any Order from the
Prince his Master: But even from his Feigned Story, your Majesty rightly judged
necessity obliged him to treat with you, which showed you a prudent, and well
advised Prince, seeing to conclude only from appearances, is the way to be
deceived in all a Man does.

It were to be wished, your Majesty had been able to be present in all your
Armies, as well as in that of Flanders; you then had seen with your own Eyes,
in what manner things went; you might then have weighed all Enterprises, before
you gave your consent to their being put in execution; but seeing your
knowledge of Places, and your Enemies Forces were but imperfect, you met with a
check in Italy, of which only Cardinal Mazarin's easiness can be accused.

He was so fast tied to his own Country, notwithstanding all the Wealth and
Honors he had heaped in France, which ought to have made him forget it; that
he endeavored to get a Husband there, for the Sister of the Princess of Conti,
and the Duchess of Mercoeur, but of all those that presented themselves, he
liked none so well as the Duke of Modena. This Alliance the Cardinal
represented so considerable to your Majesty, as if he had no other end, than
drawing in this Prince to espouse your Interest; so that he prevailed with you,
to give the Duke the command of your Army in that Country, jointly with Prince
Thomas; and these two Generals being joined, broke the Marquess of Caracene's
Measures, who designed to surprise Regio; which so raised their Courage, that
they thought themselves in a condition to besiege Pavie: But they were forced
to quit the Siege, which had very much lessened your Majesty's Glory, if that
which happened elsewhere had not repaired your Reputation; for beside that
which you did in Flanders, your Army in Catalonia did not only preserve its
Conquests; but enlarged 'em: For it seized upon Cap-daquiers, and being entered
into the Campourda, put all under Contribution home to Gironne.

The Fault whereof your Minister was guilty in Italy, was not the only one of
which his Ministry may be accused; he was very fond of a Maxim, which no body
but himself approved, and which your Majesty suffered, because you had so much
confidence in him; he employed in all your Affairs two Persons instead of one,
which was always the Ground of perpetual jealousy between 'em, and which must
necessarily produce very ill Effects: For two Men with equal Power and
Authority, look upon one another as two Enemies, though they seem not to do it,
and they will never let slip an Opportunity of doing one another an ill turn;
they are never better pleased, than when one of them does a Fault; and they
commonly suborn People to procure each other's Ruin. To redress this, is very
difficult; but it is absolutely necessary for the good of your Kingdom.

Your Majesty is far from liking this Maxim; you know, that the most perfect
Government is, that which comes nearest to GOD's; and therefore you give
absolute Power, to those that act under your Orders: It Is enough, that they
render you an Account of what they do; but you do not put Persons in equal
Balance one with another, if you did, you should be sure to be but ill served;
for if they that have Commission to do a thing, do it not with all the
Authority of their Master, they are always ill obeyed: Beside, if two Persons
have Power to command the same thing, one usually crosses what the other
undertakes; their differing in Opinion, produces this Effect, as well as the
Jealousy which is between 'em; so that we ought to conclude a State is ill
governed, where there are so many Masters. We likewise see, that Monarchical
Government is counted the most perfect, and that the best Policy'd Republics
are those, where there is the least Confusion.

Whatever was the matter, this Disorder reigned in your Revenue, and in your
Armies; you know that in Italy there were two Generals; in Flanders likewise,
Cardinal Mazarin was pleased this Year, to join two Men together, whose Humors
and Inclinations, were quite contrary to one another's; I mean, Viscount
Turenne and Marshall de la Ferte, who could never agree, and who also had
lately quarreled. The Marshall took out of the Viscounts Hands a Prisoner,
under pretense of exchanging him for one of his Men taken by the Enemy; but in
truth it was to hang him, in revenge for a Lorrainer in your Majesty's Service,
whom they had put to Death. The Marshall had reason to do it, and no body can
say the contrary; for otherwise, no Lorrainer would take Arms to serve you; but
your Majesty will confess, that Viscount Turenne had just cause to complain of
the Mareschal's abusing his Credulity, and though it concerned your Service, yet
there is no Pleasure in being made an Instrument to the bringing a Poor Man to
the Gallows.

These two Generals, whose Army consisted of Thirty Thousand Men, resolving to
employ it in some glorious Enterprise, thought none greater than the besieging
of Valenciennes, each took his Quarter opposite to one another: Your Majesty
instead of expecting every Moment to receive News of the Town's being taken,
heard that Don John of Austria in the Arch-Duke's room, was marching with the
Prince of Conde to relieve it. Viscount Turenne, who always used to be cautious
and stand upon his Guard, was now in so good a Posture, that Don John to
succeed in his Design, thought the best way, was to fall upon Marshall de la
Ferte's Quarter. Turenne, who spent a great deal upon Spies, acquainted the
Marshall with it, and offered to send some Troops to help him to repulse the
Enemy; but his Jealousy would not let him accept the Offer, so that Don John,
though he did not find him unprovided, yet he fell upon him with so much
Advantage, that he defeated the Marshall, and took him Prisoner: Don John
would have gone on, and attacked Viscount Turenne's Quarter; but he was ready to
receive him in so good Order, that he saw he had to do with another guess Man
than the Marshall: Turenne retreated to Quesnoy, where he stayed to expect
those that fled, and kept so good a Countenance, that Don John durst not offer
him Battle; but thought it better to take the Town of Conde, which Turenne
could not relieve; but to repair that loss, he made himself Master of Capelle,
which your Majesty had no opportunity to re-take, since you lost it.

Another, not so courageous as your Majesty, would have been very much troubled
with the ill Success of this Siege, and would have vented his anger upon the
Prisoner; but you did not only appear unmoved in this reverse of Fortune; but
took it upon your self to justify the Mareschal's Conduct, whose Ransom you
also paid; for you are always bountiful to them that serve you, and the
greater their Misfortunes are, the more consideration you have for 'em.

You were not so ill treated by Fortune in Italy this Year, as you were the
last: Your Army, commanded by the Dukes of Mercoeur and Modena, took there the
Town of Valence, in sight of the Spanish Troops, who durst not come to a
Battle. In Catalonia you likewise maintained the Honor which your Arms had
there acquired, so that the Luster of your Crown, obscured that of Spain, and
every one strove to be your Allye.

Indeed, you forgot nothing to make your self considerable, and the Swiss, your
ancient Allies, falling out among themselves, you, by your Mediation, happily
ended their Differences: For your Majesty knows, that nothing is to pass in
Europe, without your taking notice of it; and that such great Princes as you,
ought so to interpose their Authority, that no body may take Arms, without
their consent.

You received into your Dominions the Queen of Sweeden, who had resigned her
Crown to her Cousin-German; she was extremely pleased with the Reception you
gave her; but you were not so with her Proceedings; for in one of your Royal
Houses, she caused one of her principal Officers to be assassinated, who it
seems had displeased her; they who pretend to penetrate into secrets, believe
there was some Mystery between them; and that the Gentleman's Indiscretion, was
the cause of his Misfortune: Discourses so much to the Dishonor of this
Princess, with the little satisfaction you had in what had happened, put her
upon parting sooner than she intended; she went to Rome, the place she had
chosen for her Retreat, and there having abjured her Religion, she found, that
there are a thousand Disgusts in a private Life, which People, who never tasted
any before, would never have expected.

Your Majesty, about this time, was engaged in so nice a Business, that you
never met with the like, since you ascended the Throne.

I mean that of the Jansenists, a Sect so much the more dangerous, because it
covered it self with the Cloak of Piety: It was condemned at Rome, and then you
thought you were not to tolerate it in your Dominions; so that you would not
permit those to stay, who would not subscribe to the Pope's Decree: But their
Faction being strong, though they were out of your Kingdom, they kept
intelligence with some in it; all Paris was full of their Books, and People ran
so eagerly to read 'em, that they said, Rome was mistaken in condemning 'em:
Their manner of Living, wrought much upon the People in their Favor; for they
did nothing, in appearance, but what tended to Perfection; and all that could
be objected against their Doctrine, was, that they made the Gates of Paradise
too narrow: It was indeed dangerous to hear 'em; for their Words were perfect
Honey to purified Souls, and those were hardly able to return from their
Errors, whom they had once thrown into Despair: But your Majesty believing you
were not concerned to enter into a thorough examination of such matters, kept
close to the Pope's Decree, and ordered the Sorbonne to confute their Writings,
which were Public: They took great Pains to do it; but some Doctors refusing
to submit to the Opinion of others, conformable to what had been decreed at
Rome, they were expelled the College, which was approved by your Majesty,
because 'twas the only way to suppress the Schism, which was ready to break out.

Indeed, a Wise and Prudent King, ought to cut off the Current of all
Innovations, especially in matters of Religion, whereof the Consequences are
always greater than in other things; unless it be done, there can be no safety
either for Kingdoms, or Consciences; and it would be in the Power of every
false Zealot, to make a Religion according to his own Mode; he would not fail
of having Disciples, provided he carried things to extremity; for the Mind of
Man, is of that Temper, that at first sight, he finds himself taken with great
Respect, for those things, which he thinks most perfect, without considering
that when they are carried to so high a Pitch, they are far above the reach of
Humane Frailty, to which there ought still some regard to be had.

Your Majesty, soon after, undertook the Siege of Cambray; and though it were
with your usual Prudence, and therefore might hope for good Success; yet your
Conduct was forced to give place to Fortune; the Enterprise wholly depended
upon Diligence, and Your Majesty made account your Lines should be perfected,
before the Enemy, who was a pretty way off, should have notice of it; but the
Prince of Conde, who unluckily took a review of his Troops, the Day after
yours, encamped before the Place, and being on Horseback, when the News was
brought him, he presently Marched, and so well took his time, that he passed
through your Army, without being known; after which you were obliged to raise
the Siege; but resolving to repair this Affront by some considerable
enterprise, you besieged Montmedi. The Enemy's Army full of Pride for that
which had happened to you at Cambray, flattered themselves, they could give you
the like Check before Montmedi.

The Prince of Conde, who was their Hero, was prayed to undertake the care of
it; but Viscount Turenne who observed him, having marched Night and Day, with a
Party of the Troops which he commanded, and Marshall la Ferte, whom you had
charged with this Expedition, being in a good Posture, though his Lines were not
yet finished: The Prince of Conde durst not undertake the Attack; so that you
reduced this strong Place under your Obedience. Viscount Turenne went and
rejoined his Army, after the departure of the Prince of Conde, who, as great a
Captain as he was, could not hinder Turenne from taking St. Venant.

When the Prince of Conde saw that; he with Don John of Austria, went and
besieged Ardres, hoping, that Viscount Turenne, would either quit his
Enterprise, or let him finish his, without giving him any Trouble: The Prince
thought he should sooner do his Work than Turenne; because St. Venant was
defended by a good Garrison, and that there was scarce any body in Ardres: But
Viscount Turenne, who knew that one of the best Qualities in a General, was not
to lose a Moment of time, used such Diligence, that he obliged the Enemy to
Capitulate two days sooner than the Prince of Conde imagined; and presently
marched against the Prince; who having notice of it, was half Mad; for had he
given the Prince but four Hours time more, he had made himself Master of
Ardres: being just ready to spring a Mine, which had done all that he could
desire, and then there was no appearance the Governor could have held out
longer; but he knowing he was so near being relieved, refused to hearken to any
Capitulation. The Prince, not being so strong as Turenne, resolved to raise the
Siege, which was no little Honor to the Viscount, whose Diligence had made the
Prince fail both of relieving Montmedi, and of taking Ardres.

Not to lose any time, is so necessary a Quality in a General, that without it,
no Man can ever hope to be a good Captain: For in War, some times All depends
upon an Instant, and he that knows not how to make use of it, does not deserve
any great Esteem.

Turenne did not yet end his Campaign, he likewise took La Motthe au Bois, and
many other Forts upon the Canal of Bourbourg, after which he made himself
Master of Mardik.

That which passed in Catalonia, would not deserve to be told, were it not
convenient it should be known, that the Reason why your Majesty made no more
Conquests there, was, because you thought it enough, to keep those you had
already. The Country which is divided from Rousillon and Cerdaigne, by a Chain
of Mountains of a prodigious Height, and whose Avenues are so narrow, that two
Men can hardly pass in Front, seems to be made for another Sovereign, and it
would be to force Nature, to unite them under one Government; so that your
Majesty, contenting your self with the Bounds, which God seemed to have set
between your Kingdom, and that of the King of Spain, you resolved not to enter
into his, but only to let him see, you had Troops sufficient to guard your own;
so that all which afterward passed, was only some light Skirmishes, (which
caused little alteration) till a Peace was concluded.

The Prince of Conti, who commanded in this Country the last Year, seeing there
was now little Honor to be gotten by him there, prayed your Majesty's leave,
to go and supply the Place of Prince Thomas, who was dead: You granted his
Request; but it had been much better for his Reputation, to have stayed in
Rousillon, than to go into Italy, and be forced to raise the Siege of
Alexandria de la Paille, which he had jointly undertaken with the Duke of
Modena.

If your Majesty would know, why you met with more ill turns of Fortune in that
Country, than in any other; it is easy to give your Majesty a Reason for it.
The Spaniards look upon the Milanez of very great Consequence to them, the loss
of which, would certainly draw after it other Places they possess in that
Country; so that whenever they are attacked, they use all imaginable means to
relieve them: Beside, the Princes of Italy do not ordinarily Pray for you, when
your Armies come amongst 'em: They are very well pleased with your Protection,
but do not care for your Neighborhood. It is enough for your Majesty to have a
Door open to help 'em in time of need, and if you suffer no body, especially
Spain, to meddle with 'em, you shall still be in great Reputation among 'em:
All then, which I think you ought to do in that Country, is to continue the
Alliance which you have with the Duke of Savoy; with whom, a good
Correspondence is not only necessary for the keeping of Cazall; but likewise of
Pignerol: That of other Princes is of no use to you, but may prove prejudicial,
by making others believe, you have great Designs upon their Liberty; and
therefore may put them upon entering into a Confederacy against you. I know,
that at this time your Majesty is in so great Reputation, that a League of the
Princes of Italy against you, would turn to their Confusion, if it were not
supported by the Forces of all Europe. But your Majesty must take heed, the
Italian Princes do not serve for Trumpets to other Potentates, who are Jealous
enough of your Majesty, and would readily join to interrupt your Prosperity.
Beside, you must do all you can, to avoid allarming the Swiss, of whom you have
more need than you Imagine; for should they recall the Troops they lend you, it
would deprive you of a Strength you cannot spare: To which I may add, that in
such a Revolution, the Duke of Savoy may leave you, and then by his Defection,
your Frontiers, which are not fortified on that side, will suffer very much.

I know very well, that when a Prince resolves to make War, he ought not only
to think, by what means he may succeed; but also, what is like to be the Sequel
and End of it. I consequently know, that the Princes of Italy, are too well
advised, to declare themselves against your Majesty, from whom only they can
hope for help, when they are oppressed, and against whom they cannot arm any
other Potentates; but those of whom they ought to be extremely jealous: To
which Branch soever of the House of Austria they address themselves, they have
reason to fear it; for that of Germany, pretends they are Feudataries of the
Empire, of which the Emperor holds the Reins, and consequently ought to
command them. That of Spain, has upon 'em the right of Convenience, which is
as good a Title as any other; so that to which side soever they turn, they will
find it much safer for 'em to maintain Friendship with your Majesty, than to
address elsewhere; but then your Majesty ought to perform your Part, because,
when People see themselves neglected, their Resentment of it will not always
permit them to Reflect on what they should do; and the Desire of being
revenged, is sometimes so deeply rooted in their Hearts, that they will buy
Vengeance at any Rate.

Amidst so many important Affairs, which your Majesty had on all sides, your
Mind was never the less set, upon all that might procure the ease and quiet of
your Subjects; there was not a Year passed, wherein you did not publish some
good Laws; among which, I cannot forget that excellent Edict, which did forbid
all Pages and Footmen to wear Swords. You commanded that it should be so
exactly observed, that those Disorders which before daily happened, begun to
cease; your People were also very much obliged to your Majesty, for delivering
them from the troublesome Importunitys of Beggars, of whom Idleness, for the
most part, made so great a Multitude, (who would rather beg than work;) that no
body in any place could be quiet for 'em, the Streets were full of 'em, as well
as the Churches, where People could not say their Prayers, without being every
Moment interrupted by 'em. You commanded, that they should be shut up in the
Hospital General; your Edict concerning it, made the Deaf to hear, the Dumb to
speak, and the Lame to walk; this Law wrought more Miracles, than ever were
seen done at one time under the Gospel; it was an intolerable Abuse, to see so
many Idle People lying in all Passages upon Bundles of Straw, with Limbs, to
appearance, Distorted and out of Joint, to move Compassion; yet, when they were
to be shut up, were all Sound and Straight, and could work as well as others.

The League, which your Majesty made with the English, procured you the Year
following the Service of their Ships, to besiege Dunkirk, which you invested
both by Sea and Land: Don John of Austria and the Prince of Conde came to
relieve it; their Army had in it a new Rebel, upon whom your Majesty had
heaped many Favors; but he covered his Ingratitude and Breach of Faith, with
pretending he had cause to complain against your Minister; it was Marshall
Hoquincourt; he endeavored to make the Town of Peronne, whereof he was
Governor, to declare for that Party, into which he had thrown himself; but the
Fidelity of his Son, and of the Inhabitants, kept the Place for your Majesty.

The Importance of Dunkirk, obliged the Eenmy to hazard all, rather than suffer
it to be lost; so that being come to view the Lines, Viscount Turenne went out,
and gave them Battle: Your Troops answered the hope you had conceived of their
Courage, and having beaten the Enemy's Army, the Town Rendered it self to your
General; you came your self thither, to put it into the Hands of the English,
who, according to the Treaty made with them, were to have it; which you were
necessitated to do, to keep them from joining with your Enemies; but it was a
vexation to you, to see so fine and considerable a Town, fall into any other
Hands but your own: You contented your self with requiring a Condition to be
made good, which was very advantageous to the Catholics, they being thereby
allowed to enjoy their Liberty of Conscience, contrary to the practice of the
English in their own Country; but the necessity which obliged you to give them
the Possession of the Town, obliged them likewise to yield to so just a Demand.

The Defeat of the Enemy before Dunkirk, opened to you a Door to greater
Conquests; Gravelin, Bergues, Furnes, Dixmude, Menim, Oudenard, Ypres, and some
other Places, fell under your Dominion; for which Success, your Peoples Joy had
been much greater, had it not been lessened by the fear of losing you; for it
was about this time, you were so sick at Calais, that it was believed you could
not recover. Great was the Grief of your Court and Army, every one was in such
a Consternation as cannot be expressed; you only appeared every Day the same,
endeavoring to Comfort the Queen your Mother, and the Cardinal, who stood
despairing at your Bed's side. You were at last given over by all your
Physicians, so that the last Remedy thought of, was to give you a Vomit, which*
tho not then in use, was ordered by a Man, expressly sent for from Abbeville,
upon the Reputation he had, for having done many great Cures: You were thought
to be so near lost, that there were two or three of your Courtiers, who
complemented Monsieur your Brother, upon his being in so fair a way to succeed
you: Indeed the Curtains of your Bed were drawn, and it was believed, you were
so near dead, that your Almoners were ready to begin the De Profundis: But at
that very Instant, you gave some Signs of Life; so that People seeing they were
mistaken, they gave you the Vomit, which you would not take, till you had asked
Cardinal Mazarin, whether he thought it would cure You.

He told you, he hoped it might; which so encouraged you, that you drank it all
at a Draught, and without making any Face: You had that day a hopeful Crisis,
and People begun to perceive some Change, which made the Man, in whose Hands
you were, give you another Dose, which perfected the Cure. Your Majesty's Youth
contributed very much to it, as it does in all kinds of Diseases, you so
perfectly recovered your Health, that a Month after, it could not be perceived
that you had been Sick.

The Loss which your People feared of your Majesty's sacred Person, made the
Queen your Mother, Earnestly desire to Marry you. The Queen's Inclination, as
well as your own, was to the Infanta of Spain, which Alliance had produced a
general Peace, and also given your Majesty a Princess of exemplary Virtue,
whose Beauty was not to be despised. But the Spaniards, who feared this Match
might one day bring them under your Dominion, because she was the presumptive
Heir of their Kingdom, showed shuch an horrible Aversion to it, that you were
obliged to cast your Eyes on the Princess of Savoy. Your Majesty went to Lions
to see her, and conclude the Business. The Duchess of Savoy came with her
Daughter to meet you, and you were so well pleased with the young Princess,
that the Duchess her Mother was overjoyed, thinking she could never expect a
greater Happiness: All your Courtiers likewise believing it was a done
business, begun to look on the Princess, as she that was to be their Queen. But
the Spaniards, foreseeing that if this happened, all Flanders would fall under
your Majesty's Power, and after that you would force them to restore Navarre,
which they ujustly kept from you, they sent Pimentel to Lions, with Power to
break this Marriage, and propose that of the Infanta.

Your Majesty acquainted the young Princess with this Proposal, and withal told
her, that the Inclination you had for her, made you less sensible of this News,
than you should have been at another time. But these Words, how sincere soever
they were, not being able to comfort her, she returned to Turin, very much
afflicted for missing such a Fortune.

Monsieur de Lionne having personally conferred with Pimentel, made a rough
Draught of the Treaty of Peace, of which Cardinal Mazarin would have all the
Honor: He went to the Frontier of Spain, where his Catholic Majesty on his
Part, sent Don Lewis de Haro, his prime Minister; their Conferences were held
in the Island of Phosants, upon the River Bidassoa, which separates your
Majesty's Dominions from the King of Spain's; and there having agreed all that
de Lionne and Pimentel had left to be done; your Majesty sent Marshall de
Grammont to Madrid, to demand the Infanta of her Father; which Ceremony being
over, with all others that were to precede the Marriage, you came to Bayonne,
with a Magnificent and Splendid Court, after having punished the Inhabitants of
Marscilles, who took a very ill time to rebel, when you were so near having a
Peace; your Majesty there espoused the Infanta, and pardoned the Prince of
Conde, to whom you restored all the Places and Governments which he had before
his Rebellion. The greatest part of your Conquests you still kept by this
Treaty; but you were to restore all Lorrain, excepting only a Highway, which
was to remain to you in Sovereignty, to go into Alsatia; and the Duchy of Bar;
which was still to continue under your Majesty's Subjection.

As to the Spaniards Fear, whereof I have already spoken, your Majesty, in that
Particular, gave them all the Satisfaction they could desire; you renounced
your Succession to Spain, in express Terms, and with all the Clauses that Crown
required; so that having given your Subjects Peace, after so long a War, you
thought of nothing but of letting them enjoy it, and of enjoying it your self.

CHAP. III. Containing what past since the Treaty of the Pyrenes, to the Treaty
of Aix la Chapelle.
BEfore your Majesty came back to Paris, you stayed a while at Fountainbleau,
to give the Inhabitants of that great City, time to prepare for your Reception.
The Entry they made for you, was so Stately and Magnificent, that in the Memory
of Man, never was any thing seen like it: Your Majesty stopped, when you came
into the Suburb of St. Antoin, where was erected so glorious a Throne, that it
was fit only for you, and the Queen your Wife; you there received the
Compliments of the Supreme Courts, and of the whole Body of the City; after
which you went to the Louvre, preceded by your Nobility, and in the midst of so
great a Concourse of People, that it looked as if all France had come together
to admire your Majesty.

Amidst so many things, wherewith your Majesty could not choose but be very well
pleased, you applied your self, as you used to do, to the Government of your
Kingdom, and taking care of your Allies, as well as of your own People; you
pacified a great Difference which had happened between the two Northern Crowns,
and which had produced a cruel War. All Europe was likewise ready to be engaged
in it; so true is it, that a little Spark will kindle a great Fire: But you, by
your Prudence having quenched the Flame, found your self daily in a better
Condition to enjoy the Repose, which by your Virtue you had acquired.

I had not yet the Honor to be known by your Majesty, though upon the Death of
Monsieur Roy, chief under Secretary to Monsieur Tellier, Secretary of State for
the War, I was by him put into Monsieur Roy's Place, to keep it for Monsieur
Villacerf, a Relation of his and mind, who was not then of Age to execute it;
after which, I entered into the Service of Cardinal Mazarin; when I was with
him, I had the Honor to speak to your Majesty; but it being only as you were
passing by, and to answer some Questions you asked me, it might perhaps have
been a long time before I had been known to you, if the Cardinal, who found
himself daily dying, had not recommended me to your Majesty, as a Man, who very
well understood your Revenue, and was able to discover their Frauds who had the
Administration of it.

Two Things made him say this Good of me to your Majesty; the one was, The
Abuses which were really committed by those who managed your Revenue. The other
was, The good Order into which I had brought his own Affairs, which he had
trusted to my Care. I know not whether I may not put two other Things into the
Account; the one was, The Hatred he bore to Monsieur Fouquet, Superintendant of
the Finances signify all Taxes and Dutys whatever paid to the King to make up
his Revenue.
Finances, with whom he had some Words a few Days before, and who was a very
proud Man, because he had been the Parliaments Attorney General. The other was,
because the Cardinal saw himself on the Bri^^ of his Grave, which made him
think of quitting the World, and all its Grandeurs. Whatever it were, it was
your Majesty's Pleasure to have some private Conference with me, wherein I was
so Happy, to give your Majesty Satisfaction: Your Majesty then commanded me to
draw you up some large Memoirs of that, wherewith I had the Honor to entertain
you; which I did the next Day, and with which your Majesty seemed very well
pleased.

In the mean time, the Duke of Lorrain, who complained he had been sacrifis'd
in the late Treaty, came to Paris, where he used all possible Endeavors, to
have the Treaty altered, in those Articles which concerned him: But after all
that he had done in your Father's Life time, and in your Reign; for which he
had his Country taken from him; there was little appearance he would succeed.
Indeed your Majesty judged with a great deal of Reason, by what had past; it
was not safe to take his Word for the future; so that you rejected all he
proposed, and signified to him, he must rest satisfied with what had been done.
When he saw this, he applied himself to the Cardinal's weak side, and proposed
to him a Marriage of one of his Neices, either with himself, or with Prince
Charles, his Nephew, feigning he was not yet fully resolved, whether he should
Marry again or no; for the Duchess of Nicolle was then Dead, and his Marriage
now would be much firmer, and more legitimate, than that was, which during her
Life, he had made with the Princess de Cantecroix. The Proposition was so much
to your Minister's Advantage, that it made him forget your Majesty's Interest;
wherein he was very much to be blamed, because he, upon whom a Prince relys in
all his Affairs, ought to prefer them, before all that can be proposed, for his
own particular Benefit. I have lately in my own Case, put this Rule in
practice; for a very good Match being offered to me for my eldest Son, it did
not move, or at all tempt me, because it consisted not with your Majesty's
Service.

The Duke of Lorrain, knowing that by his Address, he had put his Business into
a fair way, feigns himself in Love; because he found the Cardinal had more mind
his Niece should Marry him, than his Nephew; for he thought thereby to gain
time, and to put in practice some new Invention: To this piece of
Dissimulation, he adds another, to deferr the proposed Marriage: He pretended
he was Sick; but this feigned Sickness, did not hinder him from pursuing the
Success of his Business; he engaged the Duke of Guise in it, deceiving him
first; so that he very faithfully promoted the Duke of Lorrain's Interest.

The Duke of Guise, who indeed was a Prince of great Sincerity, and whose great
and generous Soul would never have suffered him to be instrumental in deceiving
any body; this Duke, I say, believing the Duke of Lorrain to be a Man of his
Word, acted for him with as much Zeal, as he could expect from so noble a
Prince; and the Cardinal knowing him to be a Man, upon whose Honor and Faith
he might rely, put so much Confidence in him, that he signed a Treaty in your
Majesty's Name, much more to the Duke of Lorrain's Advantage, than that which
past in the Isle of Phesants. The Cardinal now expected his Niece should be
Duchess of Lorrain, either by being married to the Duke himself, or to his
Nephew Prince Charles: But the Duke, who gloried in never performing any thing
he promised, and having obtained all that he could desire, disclaims what was
promised by the Duke of Guise, which was, that he should Marry the Cardinal's
Niece presently after the Signing of the Treaty.

It may, perhaps, be thought Strange, that this Cardinal, who was so very
cunning, did not cause the Treaty to be ratified by the Duke of Lorrain, before
the performance of that which the Duke of Guise promised in his behalf. But the
Reason was, because your Minister would not have your Majesty know, what was
the Price the Duke of Lorrain was to pay for this new Treaty, which was so much
in his Favor: So that for being too Crafty, the Cardinal was deceived; which
teaches us, that there is no trusting Men of a certain Character, and that too
much Cunning sometimes does Men more Harm, than less would do.

There was Reason to think, that the Cardinal, who was an Italian, and
consequently loving Revenge, as all that Nation do, would never pardon the Duke
of Lorrain; and in the Post the Cardinal was, it was almost impossible, but he
should meet with a very fit Opportunity of being revenged. But having now taken
his Bed, he was to think of Things of much greater Consequence; which was, to
render an Account to God. It was his Custom, to make every one pay him, and he
to pay no body: The Account he was to make up with Heaven so much perplexed
him, that he fell into great Convulsions; but believing, in the Condition he
was, he should hazard nothing if he told the Truth, he confessed he had robbed
your Majesty, and your People. Mr. Joly, Curate of St. Nicholas in the Fields,
who was his Confessor, told him he could not give him Absolution, unless he
made Restitution; which, as Rich as he was, was more than he could do; and
beside, he loved his Wealth so well, that he could not find in his Heart to
part with it. He had run a Risque of dying, without being absolved, if your
Majesty had not had the Goodness to make a Gift to him of all he had taken from
you. Mr. Joly satisfied himself with the Declaration your Majesty made to that
purpose, which so quieted the Cardinal's Conscience, that he died much more
peaceably than he would have done without it.

Your Majesty, that very Night, came into your Closet; where you asked me,
whether the Cardinal had not hid some Effects, and the Place where I thought
they might be: I told your Majesty all I knew, and you seized upon what was of
great value; but yet left a great deal to his Niece Hortensia, whom he made his
Heir, upon Condition, that her Husband should bear the Name and Arms of
Mazarin, which gave great distaste to all the Princes of the Blood; but your
Majesty, who was always very kind to him, continued it after his Death; for you
would let no body touch any thing of that which he left to his Niece.

All France, now fixed their Eyes upon your Majesty, to observe how you would
behave your self, being, upon the Cardinal's Death, left to your own Conduct:
For though by what you had done before, it appeared by a thousand Things, you
would one Day be a Great King; yet the ill Education you had had, with your
having been always, if I may so say, under the Ferule of that Minister, made
People doubt, whether you had been guided by your own Discretion, or by his
Dictates. Beside, as the Vivacity of our Nation, does not incline us to have
any great esteem for that which looks Heavy and Dull; there were a great many
who found fault with your looking so Grave and Serious in all your Actions;
they could not believe that a Prince of your Age, could be so Wise; especially
in a Court where there were so many weak Heads, who without making the least
Reflection, said all that they thought.

But I made a contrary Judgment of your Majesty, by the first Conference I had
the Honor to have with you; you weighed all things so well, that I was
persuaded, the Advantages of a good natural Disposition, very much prevail over
an ill Education. It was not long e're all your Subjects were of my Opinion;
especially when they saw you knew so well how to Act the King. You obliged them
to pay as much Respect to you, as they had taken Liberty, under your Minister
Cardinal Mazarin; the just Answers, and so much to the purpose, which you gave
to those Ambassadors that resided in your Court, begot a great Opinion of your
Wisdom; so that in a little time, Foreigners, as well as the French, were
undeceived, in some Discourses that had past to your Prejudice. The least
appearances are enough to make People speak ill of a Prince upon the Throne;
but a Multitude of Events, and considerable Actions full of prudent Conduct,
are required to give him Reputation; which teaches Princes, that they ought
always to do Good, when Occasion requires it. Every one has his Eyes upon 'em
to give them their due, according to their Actions, whether Good or Bad.

But your Majesty had nothing to fear upon that Account: I can bear Witness to
Posterity, that you did an Action, worthy of immortal Glory. As I have already
said, you were educated among Women, and you fell in Love with the Eldest of
Cardinal Mazarin's four Nieces, then at Court; you loved her so desperately,
that they, who had not the Honor to know you, believed your Passion would make
you forget your Duty to your self. This Niece, fomented your Passion cunningly
enough; and every day, more and more to inflame you, used those Arts, which
crafty Women practice, who are proud of their Conquests. But your Majesty,
instead of running into the Snares she laid for you, consented she should be
Married; and saw her part, notwithstanding all her tender Reproaches, and though
your own Heart told you, you were cruel to your self, in resolving not to
enjoy, (in the Condition you then were,) the sweetest of all the Pleasures of
this Life.

This Victory over your self, was followed by another relating to the same
Person: The Pleasures which she had tasted at Court, and perhaps also, the
Remembrance of your Majesty, which she could not blot out of her Mind, having
made her not live so very well with her Husband, she quickly returned into
France. Many believed, that she had great Hopes, that the Fire which had been
so quick and ardent, would be easily rekindled: She was therefore returning to
Court, with full Sails; but your Majesty, having Notice of it, sent a Courrier
to tell her, she must retire into a Monastery. I know very well, Sir, I have
antedated the time when this past; and to do things in order, I should not have
spoken of this, in this Place; but the connection which is between this
Circumstance, and the other I have mentioned, would not suffer me any longer to
forbear speaking of it; I do not undertake to write your History in due Method
therefore this Transposition may be pardoned.

Your Majesty, having no confidence in the inconstant and unquiet Humor of the
Duke of Lorrain, and fearing he might enter into Cabals, which might be to your
prejudice; you designed to Marry his Nephew, Prince Charles, who was right Heir
to the Dukedom of Lorrain and Bar, to some Person in France: His Father, who
stayed in Paris, was ravished that your Majesty had so good Intentions for his
Son, whose Uncle, without you, could never be brought to do him right. He
proposed to you his Son's Marrying Mademoiselle Montpensier, and your Majesty
consented to it, because it was indifferent to you, what Lady he chose,
provided he put it out of the Duke of Lorrain's Power, to do you any mischief.
Mademoiselle, who had willingly hearkend to the Proposal that had been made her
of the Duke d' Anguien, who was then but a Boy; was much more pleased with this
of a Handsome Prince, and of an Age more suitable to hers. She grew so much in
Love with him, that she became jealous of her Sister, whom the Prince of
Lorrain could have better liked, had she not been designed by your Majesty for
another; you had indeed promised her to the Duke of Tuscany, eldest Son to the
Duke of Florence; who not long after Married her. She, and the Prince of
Lorrain, though both knew they were not born for one another, could not refrain
from being often together; and the Prince, growing daily more and more
enamored of her, gave her a Picture which he had from Mademoiselle
Montpensier. The Vanity which all Women have to boast of their Conquests,
especially when they think they can vex a Rival, made her discover what the
Prince had given her, though it concerned her very much, to have kept the thing
secret. Your Majesty did not like it, and she being to go so speedily into
Italy to be married, it was not fit her Husband should suspect her guilty of
any amorous Intriegue; but all those Reflections did not hinder her from making
this false step. So true is it, that Youth, Prudence, and Love, very seldom
keep Company. Mademoiselle Montpensier no sooner knew this, but she broke with
Prince Charles; his Father, who was extremely troubled that his Son should miss
in all respects so considerable a Match, did what he could to bring the
Business about again; but Mademoiselle, whose high Spirit, was answerable to
the greatness of her Birth, despised all the Promises which were made to
appease her.

Your Majesty would not force her, though you thought this Marriage necessary for
the good of your State. In the mean time, Prince Charles having lost so good a
Fortune by his own Fault; some body proposed to him the Duchess of
Longueville, newly become a Widow, and who was very Rich: Were it that the
Prince could not forget the Duchess of Tuscany, or that the Widow had some
Defects, he did so little relish the Proposition, that he could not make one
Step toward her.

The Duke of Lorrain, who could not part with his Dukedom, was much troubled,
that his Nephew should marry Mademoiselle Montpensier; though it appeared 'twas a
thing to which he had given his consent: But knowing his aversion to the
Duchess of Nemours, he pressed him to marry her, purposely to clear himself
from the Suspicion your Majesty had, of his playing a Thousand Tricks to hinder
the other Match with Madam Montpensier: But the more Pains he took to bring him
to it, the further was Prince Charles from it; yet he felt in himself an
Inclination for Mademoiselle Nemours the Dutchess's deceased Husband's Niece,
who had somewhat more than her Aunt to engage the Prince; so that at last he
became so entirely hers, that he quite forgot the Duchess of Tuscany. Your
Majesty, being told of it by the Prince's Father, who at first did not approve
of this Match, because he valued Wealth more than Beauty; your Majesty made him
consent to it, and there was no Qestion of your making the Duke of Lorrain do
the same: But the little disposition he had to give him his Estate, made him
make a thousand Excuses; which your Majesty finding very frivolous, and without
any Foundation, you told the Duke, if he did not take a Resolution conformable
to your Will, and to Reason; the thing should be done, without consulting him
any further. This Declaration was like a Clap of Thunder to him, and believing
it was impossible to prevail with your Majesty to altar your Resolution; he
offered to declare you Heir to all his Dominions, if you would grant him the
Honor of your Protection against his Nephew.

His Design in making this Proposition was to deceive your Majesty, and having
cunningly insinuated, that his Nephews Right and Title to the Dukedoms of
Lorrain and Bar, was not so firmly established, but that he could dispute it
with him; and quoting some Precedents, to prove the Salique-Law was still in
force in his two Dutchies; your Majesty treated with him, and left the
Prosecution of the Marriage with Mademoiselle Nemours, which wanted nothing but
Consummation, all the Ceremonies having been performed by Proxy.

See how Interest sometimes works upon great Souls, as well as upon those of
meaner Quality; which yet is not so pardonable in them, because they ought to
have more care of their Reputation, than of their Fortune, which is already
great enough, not to purchase new Establishments, with the loss of their
Honor. In controversies of Things dubious, let justice still carry the Cause,
and let no man think to maintain a Title by force, which cannot support it
self. That of which I am now speaking, was of this Nature, and it were to be
wished, your Majesty had seriously considered it: You would then have seen,
that this was only a Bait thrown out, the better to deceive you, and also that
this Treaty contained some things in it, which rendered the Execution of it
impossible, as I shall hereafter plainly show your Majesty.

This Business, of which I have spoken all in a Breath, because I was engaged
in it, by mentioning your Majesty's Design to marry Mademoiselle Montpensier to
Prince Charles, ought not (to do things in order) have been placed here; but
the Excuse I made before, must serve me again, without making any other.

Your Majesty, having declared in all the Conferences I had with you, the great
Desire you had to do something effectually toward the Reformation of your
Kingdom; called for those Memoirs that had been drawn up in Cardinal
Richelieu's time concerning it: The sudden Death of that Minister having
prevented the doing of it himself: You found, in those Papers, many things,
against which you had reason to object; because the time which had past since
that Cardinal's Death, had changed the State of Affairs; and that which was
good under his Ministry, was not so now: But your Majesty made choice of the
Good, and left the Bad; wherein you showed so much Judgment, that I can never
enough commend you.

You resolved to make the Farmers of the King's Revenue.
Partisans render again what they had swallowed; for, abusing your Minority,
they had filled their own Coffers, by emptying yours. You intended to begin
with their Master, who was, as you thought, most faulty; I mean the
Superintendant of the Finances, whose Abuses I had discovered to your Majesty,
and who was himself so conscious, that to avoid the Punishment he deserved, he
thought of saving himself by a greater Crime. To that purpose, he had bought
Belle Isle of the Family of de Rets, where he intended to stand upon his Guard
against your Majesty, having by Pensions, made several Governors of Provinces,
and Frontier Places, of his Party; of which a Draught was found amongst his
Papers, when he was seized; so that if Justice had been done upon him, he
should have been brought to a Scaffold.

The Place which he had in Parliament, made your Majesty think it dangerous to
prosecute him, till he had quitted it. You persuaded him to part with it, under
pretense, that all the Affairs of State, being since the Death of the Cardinal
in his Hands, his Place in Parliament would be now of little worth to him.
Fouquet ran into the Trap, and having sold his Place to one of his Friends, you
went into Britany, and there had him arrested. At the same time you seized upon
Belle Isle: The thing was executed in the same manner your projected it, and
having appointed Commissioners to try him, you caused him to be prosecuted.

Monsieur Tellier was his capital Enemy; but his trimming Politics would not
let him act against him. He begun to be jealous of your Majesty's showing me so
much Favor, and as he would not have been displeased if you had not put so
much confidence in my Services; so he would, if he could, have made the
Prosecution of Monsieur Fouquet pass for Injustice. See how they, who desire to
pass for Wise Men in Public; yet cannot dissemble, when they think their own
Interest is at stake; so that to judge of Things rightly, a Man must not do it
rashly by appearances: A Prudent Man ought to stay till such Accidents happen,
as use to move Peoples Passions; for it is then we are to make a Judgment of
Men's Wisdom, and not where that which passes does not concern 'em; for then
it is no wonder if they appear insensible.

Your Majesty erected a Court of Justice, to enquire how the Farmers of your
Revenue had behaved themselves; which drew upon me the public hatred, because
the number of those who had robbed your Majesty, was so great, that half Paris
was concerned in it, either by themselves, or by their Friends and Relations.
Indeed, the prodigious Wealth of those Blood-suckers of your People, was so
great, that they were allied to most of the Considerable Military, or Gownmen:
They had also brought the Sale of all Places to so excessive a Price, that no
body but themselves were able to buy: Fieubet offered for the
Attorney-General's Place, sixteen hundred thousand Francks. That of a Chief
Judge, was not less worth. That of a Master of Requests, was valued at a
Hundred and ten thousand Crowns. A simple Councellor of Parliament's Place, at
two Hundred and I know not how many thousand Livers.

I very plainly foresaw what effect this would have against me; and that it
would be said also, there was no Faith in your Majesty, who after People had
served you with their Purses, you paid your Debts with excessive Taxes, and
sent such People to Hospitals, who before had lived as handsomely as any in
Paris; though the baseness of their Original, was an infallible Proof that they
had gotten their Wealth by Rapine; and consequently, there was no Injustice in
obliging them to disgorge it: But there was a great deal of difference between
what was done during your Minority, and what you did your self: The one
requires, that a Prince should make good his Word, otherwise he would find none
to serve him in his necessity, whence would happen greater Inconveniences, than
any humane Prudence would be able to remedy: So that a Prince would be very ill
advised, who should by his ill Conduct deprive himself of that Assistance,
which sooner or later he shall be sure to want: For though he may Reign but a
little time, yet those Things may fall out, which he could not foresee, let his
Management be never so frugal: They may sometimes be of such consequence, that
the funds which he has provided, are not sufficient to help him. There ought
to be no greater a Provision of Ready Money, than what is proportioned to the
running Cash of a Kingdom; otherwise, a Prince would bring his own Revenue to
nothing, by rendering his People unable to assist him with their Purses, the
Prince himself having all the ready Money in his own Hands.

A Consequence so dangerous obliges a Prince to keep his Word; but yet he
ought not to let his Farmers get so excessively, as to ruin his People and
himself too: for it is manifest, if he does not manage his Affairs like a good
Father of a Family, he will be obliged to lay Tax upon Tax. The Farmers on
their side, must not think to grow vastly Rich in a short time: because then it
will be no Injustice to Fleece 'em, whereas, when their Gain is moderate, they
are suffered to enjoy the Fruit of their Labor.

After these Remarks, I return to what I just touched upon before, when I said,
there was great difference, between what a Prince does himself, and that which
during his Minority is done by his Minister; for if his Minister has
mismanag'd, and not taken care of his Affairs, he is not bound to approve of
those Faults he committed; for a Prince ought not to be in a worse Condition
than a Private Man, who can help himself against that which his Guardian has
done prejudicial to his Interest. Beside, the People having usually an
irreconcilable Hatred against those that Farm the public Revenue, it is a
Pleasure to them to see 'em lose some of their Grease: To this I add, that the
time of a Prince's Minority being commonly troublesome, and his Coffers charged
with a great many Debts; he cannot take an easier course to pay them, or that
which will make less noise; because it touches none but some particular
Persons, and the generality is so far from being discontended, that they
rejoice at it; because they had rather the Prince should have their Substance,
than those wretches, who in Fattening themselves with it, often do the People a
thousand Injuries.

By this way of prosecuting the Partisans, your Majesty paid a vast number of
Debts; and in the mean time, God blessed your Marriage with a Son, who inherits
his Father's Virtues, your Majesty has taken such care of his Education, that
joined with his natural disposition, it must be a wonder if he prove a Prince
less perfect than your self.

About this time, you married Monsieur your Brother, to a Princess of England;
he took the Title of Duke of Orleans, after the Death of Monsieur your Uncle,
who left no Male Issue. This Alliance maintained a good Correspondence between
your Majesty and the English, who after the Death of Cromwell, in the Year
1658. found his Son Richard so unfit to succeed him, that they set their Lawful
King again upon the Throne. About that time fell out an Accident in that
Country, which had like to have engaged your Majesty in a new War: Your
Ambassador having sent his Coaches to meet the Sweedish Ambassador, who was to
make his Public Entry, the Spanish Ambassador, that his Coach might go before
yours, hired Men to cut the Traces of your Embassador's Coach, so that the
Spaniard had what he desired: But his Triumph lasted not long; for your Majesty
being justly incensed against what he had done, demanded Satisfaction of the
King of Spain, who seemed a while Deaf before he would yield to what you
required: But your Majesty having commanded your Ambassador at Madrid, to tell
the King of Spain, unless he gave you the Satisfaction you expected, there must
be a Rupture between the two Crowns. The fear the King of Spain had of your
Majesty's Arms, made him not only disclaim what his Ambassador had done; but
also declare it was not his Intention to dispute precedence with your Majesty.

This Declaration was made by the Marquess de la Fuentes, his Catholic
Majesty's Minister, residing in your Court, in Presence of other Ambassadors
and Ministers who were also there; and their Masters were by them certify'd,
this Difference was ended to your Majesty's Satisfaction. After this, you
suppressed the Place of Collonel-General of the French Infantry, vacant by the
Death of the Duke d' Epernon, who had carried the Authority of this Place so
high, that he seemed to have almost a mind to contest it with your Majesty,
pretending to dispose of all Commands in the Infantry, without excepting so
much as the Companies of your Guards; which was of such Consequence, that it
might have been the Cause of many Inconveniences.

You made many excellent Regulations among the Soldiery; so that they became
subject to Discipline, which before they were not; for such Disorder reigned
among 'em, that there was as many Masters as Captains; especially in the old
Corpse, where they were so far from acknowledging the Authority of Colonels,
that they would hardly submit to that of a General. You likewise positively
Commanded that all the Soldiers should have what they wanted; and whereas
before they went almost naked, and in the same Company one was Clothed in
Gray, another in Blue, Red, or any other Color; you Ordered they should have
Shoes and Stockings, and that every Companies Clothes should be all of one
Color. This other Princes liked so well, and thought so necessary, that they
have all since followed your Example; and your Majesty may boast, that all the
Soldiers in Europe, owe to you the Conveniences they now enjoy.

But you have not done any thing so much to their Advantage, as the taking away
from their Captains the Power of trying them for their Crimes; because the
impunity which they hoped for, encouraged them to commit many Disorders.
Certainly, there is nothing more unjust, than to leave the Punishment of an
Offense, to them whose Interest it is to save the Offender: and it is well
known, that a Captain, who must give money for a Soldier, in the room of one
that is Cashiered or Hanged, is seldom so great a Lover of Justice, as to buy
it at his own Cost.

This Reformation among your Partisans and Soldiers, preceded all others;
because you looked upon it, to be the Foundation of all sure and solid
Government; rationally concluding, that when you were Powerful in both, all the
rest, without meeting with any difficuly, would do well of it self. For
certainly, a Prince that has Money and a good Army, is not only sure of his
own Peoples Respect, but of his Neighbors also. It Is that which gives him
Reputation, and without which a Kingdom cannot Flourish. So likewise a Prince
who takes care of his Affairs, will make it his chief Business to gain
Reputation; wherein he will find more Advantage, than in making himself feared
by unjust Enterprises, though they should meet with Success: For the one draws
upon him the Enmity of all other Princes, when the other procures him their
Respect and Esteem: When a Kingdom has many Enemies, it sooner or later
receives some deadly Blow, all striving against it: Whereas, when its Power is
founded upon Right and Reason, it has always faithful Allies, who will never
fail to assist it in time of need. A Prince therefore, who is well advised,
ought not to undertake any War that is unjust; for if nothing but Ambition puts
Arms into his Hands, his old Friends presently become his Enemies; for which
they are not to be blamed, since their safety is no greater than others. Yet
this Truth, as Evident as it is, and from which Princes should never depart, is
not always the rule of their Actions: A corrupt Minister often endeavors to
insinuate other Maxims, and instead of taking good Heed, they mistake the
Shadow for the Substance: I am troubled that this may be said of your Majesty;
but because you are to fear Flatterers more than declared Enemies, I am
resolved to be none of the first Number; but will in due time make it appear,
that Monsieur Louvoy, abusing the Credit he has with you, has advised you to
do that which is directly contrary to your Interest, and has stirred up a
world of Enemies against you: For though the prosperous Condition wherein you now
are, keeps them yet silent; nevertheless, to make good what I have said, there
needs no other Proof, than the Answer which the Baron Delval made to your
Minister Monsieur Louvoy, when showing him the Arsenal at Douay; he said, if
ever your Majesty had a War, this would make a brave Noise. I believe it
answered the Baron, and I am sure, such a Noise, as will awaken all Europe. I
think there is no need of explaining this Answer to your Majesty, it
sufficiently expounds it self; and nothing could more ingeniously reproach your
Majesty, for the many Enemies your Minister has raised against you. I know his
Enterprises have been prosperous, which keeps him still in your Favor; but
upon serious Reflection, your Majesty will find, it had been a thousand times
better for you, you had never been so Powerful, and that you had been much
happier had you been quiet: For now your Mind must be still taken up with the
Intriegues, which you know are daily hatching against you in Princes Courts,
heretofore full of Affection toward you; but as things now stand, instead of
concurring with you for your Safety, there is not one but is now to be
suspected by you.

If your Majesty be not sensible enough of these Truths, that you may be fully
convinced of 'em, I beseech you to call to Mind that which happened in the Year
1662. and compare it with what has past since; and you may thereby judge, what
Power, Justice supported by a good Reputation, had over those, who were not
accustomed to bow: And I believe, if the like should fall out now, Satisfaction
would not be so speedily given you; the hope of being assisted by your Enemies,
would encourage People to affront and oppose you, and your Majesty would be
obliged by actual Arms, to obtain that Satisfaction, which in those Days cost
you but a Threat to make use of 'em. I might likewise mention what happened to
your Ambassador at Rome, to whom the Corses of the Pope's Guard showed so
little Respect, that to Revenge some of their Comrades, who had been ill
treated by your Embassador's People, they affronted him in his very Palace. The
Duchess of Crequi his Wife, was likewise in danger of her Life; for in her
Return out of the Country to the City, they shot at her, as they had at her
Husband, so that she had a Page killed, and some of her Servants wounded: The
Tumult, at last grew so great, that they both left Rome, and went to St.
Quirico; of which, when your Majesty had notice, you sent your Complaint to the
Pope, who, encouraged by some Cardinals that were no Friends to your Majesty,
seemed to approve what the Corses had done; but you firmly and positively
resolving to have Reparation for the Affront, Ambition having no part in the
Quarrel; the Pope's Quality did not hinder you from requiring Satisfaction; and
though his Holiness did not think you would have pushed things on so far, yet
because you demanded nothing but what was just, it was agreed, that the
Corses, who always used to guard the Pope, should not only be cashiered, but a
Pyramid should be erected, whereon should be inscribed in golden Letters, what
Satisfaction had been given you: His Holiness also consented, that Cardinal
Chigi should come into France, and pray your Majesty to accept this Reparation,
and to forget what had past.

Behold an Effect and Proof of what I have been saying; and as I have already
observed, I very much doubt, should the like happen now, whether your Majesty
would meet with the like Satisfaction. I have already given you Reasons for it,
to which I will only add, that Reputation is as necessary for a Prince among
his own Subjects, as his Neighbors; for Power is not founded upon Force and
Injustice; his Subjects may Fear him, but they will never Love him, and by Fear
without Love, he will never compass his Ends: The one without the other
commonly does more Harm than Good; Fear continues no longer, than People see
the Prince in a Condition, to make all bow and submit to his Pleasure; but as
soon as his Fortune changes, they presently despise him. On the contrary, though
Fortune changes, Love does not; and the more unfortunate a Prince is, the
greater Endeavors are used to restore him to the Prosperity he has lost.

Your Majesty, who so Gloriously supported your Interest in Foreign Countries,
did that upon your Frontier, which was of very great Advantage to you; you
bought the Town of Dunkirk of the English, for Two Millions and Two Hundred
Thousand Livers, which you gave for it, and thereby safe-guarded your Kingdom.

The Treaty which you made with the Duke of Lorrain, so much displeased his
Nephew, that leaving a Ball, where he danced with your Majesty, he got out of
the Kingdom, and went to Rome, where he thought the Pope would espouse his
Interest. But his Holiness desiring to be excused, he went to Vienna, where the
Emperor gave him a Retreat; at which you were not troubled, because you had
nothing to do with him to make good your Title. But it appeared his Presence
was necessary to the Treaty, because of the express Terms in it, that it should
be ratified by him, and all the Princes of the Family. You went to the
Parliament to have it registered; but your Majesty fearing you might meet with
opposition, because there was a Clause in the Treaty that all of the Family
were to be acknowledged Princes of the Blood, and capable of succeeding to the
Crown, in case the House of Bourbon should come to fail, you went thither with
your Regiment of Guards, which consisted of Three Thousand Men.

The Respect which was paid to your Presence, was the Reason why your Majesty
was not told that this Treaty wanted other Solemnities to make it valid; for it
was not the Parliament's Business to examine it, but the States of the Kingdom,
to whom it belonged to choose a Master when they had none: And it was this
Clause I meant, when I said it was an invincible Obstacle to your Designs. For
beside this Difficulty, there were many others, among which the most
considerable was, that which concerned other Foreign Princes, now naturalized
and settled in your Kingdom, who would receive Wrong by it; paticulatly the
House of Longueville, which pretends the States of the Kingdom heretofore
declared, that for a Reward of the Services done by the Count de Dunois to the
Crown, it should belong to that Family, whenever the Throne became Vacant. The
Dukes and Peers, who likewise would not give Place to any of these Lorrain
Princes, were also a great Obstacle to this Affair. Nevertheless, your Majesty
flattering your self, that you should effect this Business by your Power,
pressed the Duke of Lorrain, according to this Treaty, to put into your Hands
the Town of Marsall; and because he doubted what Resolutito take, you threatened
by Force of Arms to make him do it. But notwithstanding all your Threats, he
continued irresolute, and you went toward Lorrain, with so great a number of
your Nobility, that never were so many seen together at one time: You found the
secret of making People pay that Respect which was due to your Majesty, by the
Favors you so seasonably bestowed, and which engaged a great Number of
Gentlemen to wait on you, who in the time of your Minority, would not have
taken the Pains to have gone out of their Doors. Your Court shined brighter
than ever it had done, and the more, for the many Blue Ribbands you made, which
were no little Ornament about your Person.

Soon after this, you also created a great many Dukes and Peers, wherein you
showed a great deal of Policy; for most of the Grandees, who had no mind to
this Dignity, kept close to your Majesty, to avoid the like Reward.

The Prince of Conde, who at his Return thought to find you the same you were
in Cardinal Mazarin's time, was much surpised to see you so different from
what he thought you. He looked so little in your Majesty's Presence, and you
took so little notice of him, that scarce any body would believe when they saw
him, this was the Famous Rebel that had been so much talked of. But you took
Pleasure to mortify him at his first coming, to make him leave his Proud
Humor, of expecting to be every where Lord and Master.

If you made the Prince of Conde tremble, I need not say his Example taught
others not to depart from that Duty, which by their Birth they were obliged to
pay your Majesty. All Persons appeared in your Presence with a Respect that
added Luster to your Royalty; and gave it quite another Figure than it had in
the time of which I have already spoken. The Desire every one had to please
you, made People apply themselves to that which before they scorned to do. All
the young Gentlemen of good Families, listed themselves either in your Company
of Musketeers, which your Majesty had again set on foot, or in your Regiment
of Guards; and seeing you took delight in all that looked like War, which your
greatest Enemies cannot deny, you spent a great part of your time in
disciplining this Company; so that If I may make a Comparison, which perhaps
some will not like, I will presume to say, never did any Spanish Jennet better
perform the Exercises of Manage under a skilful Rider, than this Company did
every thing that was commanded by your Majesty.

Of this I can yet say more, which others observed as well as my self, and by
which a Man might judge, what you one Day would be able to do; seeing you did
it in your Youth. What could those Seven or Eight Hours together signify,
which your Majesty stayed in the Court of the Louvre exercising that Company in
the depth of Winter? But the Application wherewith you would in time to come do
your Duty, and that you would despise both Heat and Cold, when you designed to
get Glory.

But yet it cannot be said, this was a domineering Humor in your Majesty,
because you took the like care of all that concerned your Royalty. I have
already said, your Majesty commanded me to bring you Cardinal Richelieu's
Memoirs; the esteem you had for the Memory of that great Man, and your own
sincere Piety, without Ostentation, inclined you to perfect what he had so
happily begun; which was the extirpation of all the Heretics in your Kingdom.
But your Majesty knowing that it is very dangerous to pass from one Extreme to
another, you have by little and little so prepared things to ripen, that in
Twenty Years time the Work may come to Perfection.

Your Majesty's Presence brought the Duke of Lorrain to a fixed Resolution, he
having agreed to the Terms upon which he was to deliver the Town of Marsall to
your Majesty. You came back from Metz in so little time, that the Post could
not make more haste; you having ordered the best running Horses in your Stables
to be laid on the Way: Every one took the Liberty of enquiring why your Majesty
made such Haste, and as there are always some that guess right, what you
intended to keep secret, was presently talked of all the Town over. Which ought
to teach Princes not to undertake any thing which they would not have People
know. For they cannot with all their Power keep Men's Curiosity from prying
narrowly into all their Actions.

Your Majesty being pleased with my Services, I took the Liberty to lay before
you all that Cardinal Richelieu had designed for the Glory of your Realm. There
was nothing of so great importance in his Papers, as Trade and Navigation; but
neither could be maintained without making your self strong at Sea, which was
properly your Majesty's Work: To me you committed the care of this, as well as
of your Buildings, wherein there were great Disorders; I acquitted my self in
both to the best of my Power. In the mean time your Majesty having thought sit
to attempt something on the Coast of Gigeri, the Success whereof promised great
Advantage to the Trade of the Levant, and to your Majesty's Reputation in that
Country; you caused some Troops to pass into Provence, where Vessels lay ready
to receive 'em. They were safely Transported, and Landed almost without any
Opposition made by the Barbarians: But the chief Commanders, on whom you
relied, having taken ill Measures, the Business miscarried, though well designed,
and better digested: For it is not enough for a thing to be so well ordered in
Council, as that none can object against it, unless it be likewise well
executed. So that a Prince cannot take too much care, to make a good choice of
those he employs, seeing his Reputation depends upon it; especially when his
Enterprises lie so far off, that he is not able to remedy the Faults that are
there committed.

Some would make me believe, that Monsieur Tellier was not well pleased with
that free access I had to your Majesty's Person, nor with my being trusted with
what concerned the War: He would have had your Majesty choose more experienced
Officers, in whose Hands the B^^^ness would have prosper'd better; but though I
have heard such Reports, I will do him right, and I had rather attribute that
which happened at Gigeri to Fate, which sometimes ruins the best laid Designs;
rather than wrong Monsieur Tellier's Reputation. To make that Misfortune yet
greater, the Vessel upon which the Chief Officers of the Regiment were
embarked, was so Leaky that it sunk, which extremely troubled your Majesty. My
Enemies, who must be many after that which I have said, would have imputed the
Misfortune to my Fault, pretending that I having the Oversight of the Marine
Affairs ought to have taken care the Vessel had been good; but it having been
visited by experienced Shipwrights before it was put to Sea, your Majesty, who
does Right to all the World, was not at all displeased with me. The Fault was
that the Ship had not for a long time been in Service, which does Vessels more
harm, than if they were continually at Sea.

This ill News, because it came after that which is better, did not make that
impression, which otherwise it might have done upon your Majesty's Mind. You
were pleased with the good News you received out of Hungary, where your Arms
had acquired you no little Glory, and where without them the Emperor, who had
already received a Check, had been totally defeated: For when the right Wing of
his Army had been beaten by the Turks, which gave them hopes of an entire
Victory, your Troops, which were in the Left, charged so bravely, that they
trod down all that opposed 'em, and having, by their making a Stand, renewed
the Fight, they beat the Turks; showing so much resolution and Courage, that
the Emperor, instead of returning them Thanks, grew Jealous of 'em; and
instead of resolving to improve the Victory, which had caused a great
Consternation among the Turks, he made a precipitate Peace; as if he had been
afraid your Trops would have taken his Crown from him.

These two particular Events, of good and bad Fortune, hindered your Majesty
from mounting to that high pitch of Glory where you now are. The excellent
Order which you settled every where throughout your Kingdom, which was still
sensible of the Abuses which in Cardinal Mazarin's Time had crept into it, are
an evident Proof that you were a great King. You reformed the Order of St.
Michel, which before that of the St. Esprit was the Reward wherewith Kings your
Predecessors honored the greatest Men in their Kingdom; but was so little
estem'd after the Institution of the other, that all Sorts of People were
indifferently received into it; and at last became like the Order of the Star,
which in time was so despised, that one of your Predecessors, to make it more
Vile and Despicable, bestowed it upon the Archers of the City Watch. Your
Majesty prudently resolved to reform this Abuse, especially because the Order
of St. Michel is joined to that of the St. Esprit, and that the Knights of this
last Order, could not be received into it, unless they had been before of the
first.

However, I must say that your Majesty did not so thoroughly purge it of the
mean Persons that were in it; but that some still remain. For it is the
inevitable Misfortune of all Princes, that when they rely wholly upon others,
it would be a wonder if Favor or Faction should not prevail against Justice.
Therefore if Princes would have things done according to their own directions,
they ought to overlook those they depute to see their Pleasure performed. For
if they trust wholly to their Fidelity, it is the way to have their work but
half done.

Your Majesty for the good of your Kingdom Incorporated likewise a Company for
the Trade of the Indies; and indeed a Kingdom cannot flourish so long as that
Trade is driven by Strangers. It should be taken out of the hands of the
English and Dutch, who were suffered by your Predecessors to be the sole
Masters of that Commerce. This Establishment very much displeased those two
Nations, who were so jealous of one another, that after some coldness they were
ready to quarrel. It Is Interest that sets all People together by the Ears.
After some flashes of Lightning followed Thunder, and after a Breach, the
English and Dutch came to an open War.

Your Majesty offered to both your Mediation, that things might go no further;
but the English, who pretend to the dominion of the Sea, and to impose
Conditions upon all others, stood so stiff upon their Points, that your Majesty
thought your self obliged to take the part of your Ancient Friends, against the
Old Enemies of your Crown. Your Majesty put out a Fleet at Sea in favor of the
Hollanders, and equipped another at the same time against the Algerines. The
Duke of Beaufort, who commanded it, having received your Orders, fought the
Algerines with such success, that he beat them twice in three Months; he took
several of their Ships, among which was the Admiral: This Advantage wrought a
good Effect among those Barbarous People; who endeavored to lessen your
Reputation, by what had happened at Gigeri. But that which increased their
Terror, was your setting out new Ships on the Ocean, and in the Mediterranean,
which made all Europe think, that in a little time you would be in a Condition,
not only to dispute the Empire of the Sea with the English, but with any other
Nation whatever. Beside, these Ships, which considerably increased your Fleet,
you had Magazines full of Stores, Materials and Workmen; you wanted no Seamen
or Pilots, so that it was thought you intended to dispute that Dominion, which
belongs only to him that is strongest.

I do not pretend to magnify my self by what I have said; though I have done the
best I could in it. To speak the truth, I must confess this Design was not
mine, I did but finish what Cardinal Richelieu first began. I know it was he
that put the King your Father upon augmenting his Power at Sea; or I should
rather say, to make himself known there: For before him, all his Predecessors,
even Henry the 4th. himself, had not one single Ship. But this Project was but
lamely carried on, under the ministry of that great Man; so that it may be
truly said, the Glory of it was reserved for your Majesty.

About this time your Majesty did two things, very much for the good of your
self and People; and which the deceased King your Father attempted in vain. You
reduced Persons of Quality, and those of the Long Robe, to perfect Obedience.
You did the one under the pretense of Justice; the other by your absolute
Power: Many Gentlemen, by the licentiousness of the times, had usurped so much
Authority, that they were in their Provinces like so many petty Tyrants, and
made all tremble under 'em. The Judges in those Provinces, who were bound by
the Duty of their Places to oppose such Innovations, did not dare to do it, in
a time when they feared to be run down. Beside, they were unwilling to concern
themselves; for People commonly prefer their private Interest, before the
public good. They were afraid to contest with those petty Kings of the
Country, so that they stirred no more, than as if all that past had been
indifferent to 'em. But your Majesty who thought your self obliged not to
suffer such Abuses, because none but you could pretend to Supremacy; being
bound to protect your Subjects, and secure them from Violence; your Majesty, I
say, not being any longer able to suffer what was derogatory to your Authority,
and so contrary to the Peace of your People, you Established the Grands-jours,
that is a certain number of Justices in every Province, where they were to take
Cognizance of those that were guilty of vexation. Many were Imprisoned, others
ran away, and some having been punished by demolishing their Castles, or by the
loss of their Heads, you got the love of all your People, who found themselves
freed from Slavery by your Justice.

Behold how a wise and a judicious King, does at one and the same time his own
and his Subjects business. Your Majesty did not tell them, that what you did
was as much for your own sake as for theirs; but on the contrary, it was
necessary they should believe all you aimed at, was only to deliver 'em from
Oppression. Otherwise, as they would have thought you had not merited much from
them, so certainly this was the way to meet with no opposition from the common
People; for could the Gentry have persuaded them you had other designs, it was
to be feared they might have mutually assisted each other; which perhaps might
have given your Majesty trouble. When a King would lessen the Power of his
Nobility, he must irritate the common People against them; which is not
difficult, because Noblemen are naturally inclined to domineer, it is easy
therefore to make the Multitude Jealous of 'em. Now seeing the Nobility can be
so easily humbled, they should renounce all kind of Cabals, especially such
wherein the People are engaged: For the Nobility ought to believe, they have no
Enemy greater than the Common People, what Countenance soever they carry toward
'em: Though the People may in appearance show them Respect, yet they are in
continual fear of their Lording it over 'em, from which they still seek to be
freed. Undeniable Truth makes it evident, that their Interests are directly
repugnant to one another's, which plainly proves, that the Nobility cannot hope
for any Advantage, but from a perfect Union with their Prince; whose Interest
likewise it is to use them well: They ought always so to agree, that it is not
possible to divide 'em. The Foundation of this Union ought to be perfect
Obedience on the Subjects part, and a just Retribution on the Sovereign's; they
ought to do their Duty, and he must do his.

The other thing which your Majesty did for your own and your Peoples Good, was
to take away the Abuse crept into the Sale of Places of Judicature; grown to
that height I have already mentioned; which was the Reason why those that had
Places were so Proud; and why many, made necessitous by paying Interest for the
Money they borrowed to buy their Offices, did not scruple the selling of
Justice. This was a nice Business, because what Regulation soever your Majesty
made, they were, to speak properly, both Judges and Parties; for they were to
register the Edict: But if a Man were to judge what would be done now, by what
had passed heretofore; there was no likelihood the thing would succeed; because
this would be a considerable Prejudice to them, by lessening the value of their
Places; when some Years before they rebelled only for retrenching their Wages.
But your Majesty going to the Parliament, accompanied with Four Thousand Men,
as soon as you presented to them the Edict, they not only Registered it, but
also gave your Majesty Thanks for the care you took to reform the Abuses which
were crept into your Kingdom.

I do not pretend to persuade your Majesty, that these Thanks were given you
willingly; for I believe they were a little forced, and that the Four Thousand
Men you had with you, did more contribute to the Parliaments Gratitude, than
any esteem they had for your Government. However, this serves to let all
Princes know, that there are proper Seasons to cause their Will and Pleasure to
be obeyed; and that at other Times it is dangerous to require it. They must
therefore undertake no more, than they have Strength to perform; for their
being born Sovereigns, is not enough to enable them to command absolutely, they
are more than others subject to the Vicissitude of Times; and Fortune has as
much Power over them, as over the meanest of all their People. A Prince ought
likewise to be very Prudent, because the Failings of a private Man, can at most
but prejudice himself and his Family; but when a Prince does ill, he sometimes
involves his whole Realm in such fatal Consequences, as can never be remedied.

The Jansenists endeavored again to stir up new Troubles in the Church; which
obliged the Pope to condemn their Doctrine a Second Time. Your Majesty followed
his Example, and showed the more Circumspection in this Affair, because you saw
the Consequences of it might be considerable. Some Persons of the best Quality
in your Court, had suffered themselves to be seduced, as well as some Religious
Societies, whose Heads were so full of it, that you were forced to employ your
Royal Authority, to bring 'em again to their right Senses. They suffered very
much, before they could resolve to acknowledge their Error; So true is it,
that People are very obstinate in Matters of Religion, and there is nothing
more dangerous, than Contests about it, under pretense of Devotion.

The Clergy by your Command assembled at Ponthoise, as well to remedy this
Abuse, as to take necessary Resolutions concerning other Matters of great
Importance then before 'em. They were extremely pleased with the Piety
wherewith you entered into their Interests; which likewise procured you the
Esteem of your People, because there is nothing gives a Prince more, than his
rendering to God that which is his due.

Many things contributed to celebrate your Name both at home and abroad. One
single Ship of yours fought with so much Resolution against Thirty Three
Turkish Galleys, that they left the Vessel, not being able to take it. The
Succors which you sent to the Hollanders against the Bishop of Munster, who
had attacked 'em, kept 'em from receiving an Affront: For though their State in
it self was more Powerful than his, yet after the Peace they made with Spain,
they took more care to maintain their Trade, than the Reputation they had
gotten by their Arms; and there fore they were in a much different and weaker
Condition than they had formerly been. People are very much deceived, that
think their Strength consists in Riches; they are indeed needful to make a
State Powerful; but it is an Army that ^s more necessary, and without which it
cannot subsist. A Country ought to have Soldiers enough to defend its
Frontiers, and likewise to keep its Neighbors in Awe: For if they see a
Country so weak, that they may without Fear invade it; it is Folly to trust to
their Promises or Treaties. If People will live in Peace, they must take care
not to be despised; the Richer and more Flourishing any People are, the more
jealous they ought to be of their Safety: For there are so many who will envy
their Prosperity, that some of their Neighbors will endeavor to rob 'em of
what they have.

It was about this time, that your Majesty began to employ Marquess Louvoy, to
whom you had granted the Reversion of his Father's Place. He was so rough-hewn,
and so little inclined to Business, that Monsieur Tellier desired your Majesty,
not to trouble your self any more, with one that was never like to come to
Good: He was so given to his Pleasures, that his Father looked upon him as a
Son more like to spend the Estate he had gotten, than to add any thing to it by
his Industry. But your Majesty, having a very great Kindness for Monsieur
Tellier's Family, told him he must have a little Patience, what was not done in
One Day, might be effected in Two; and therefore you did not despair but some
good might be done with his Son; that Youth was to be indulged and reclaimed by
Kindness, and not by Threats.

Your Majesty took Pains to frame and fashion him; and, as it must be confessed,
notwithstanding what I have already said, and shall say hereafter, the Man has
many good Qualities; so it ought to teach us, that time is to be given to Men,
as to Fruits to ripen: Whoever hastens things too fast, rather spoils than
brings 'em to Maturity. There are some, whose Parts advance so slowly, that it
would turn their Brains to endeavor to make 'em understand any thing before
their time; they must be brought to it by Degrees, without using the least
Violence. Beside, it is not to be thought Men can be presently made fit for
business, especially Youth, that cannot endure Pains, and loves nothing but
Pleasure. Application to Business comes not till the Judgment be formed, and
it is then we insensibly habituate our selves to it, and afterward think it
little or no trouble. It Is Business makes Men; as the common saying is, Forging
makes a Smith.

Monsieur Louvoy did not at first much love taking Pains; yet had the same
Faults, which those have that grow Proud of their Services, he grew jealous of
all those to whom your Majesty was pleased to show any Kindness, more
particularly of me, who had the Honor to discourse often with your Majesty, as
superintendant of your Finances and Buildings: For your Majesty, who is great
in all Things, did then build at Versailles and at the Louvre, of which I was
to give you an Account every Week, and sometimes every Day, because you often
changed somewhat in your Design, which I was to see done.

But because Monsieur Louvoy's Employment did not require his conferring with
your Majesty so often in times of Peace, as when you were engaged in an actual
War; he did all he could by the Counsel of his Father, to persuade your Majesty
to begin a War: he took an Opportunity to do it upon the King of Spain's Death,
which happened much about this time. He told your Majesty that some Provinces
in the Low Countries were fallen to the Queen your Wife, according to the
Custom of those Places, which made her Heir to her Brother Don Balthazar, who,
had he lived, was to have succeeded his Father, before his Catholic Majesty
now Dead.

This was the Gilded Pill the Marquess offered to your Majesty, and knowing you
would not swallow it, unless he covered the Poison it contained, with the
Shadow and Color of Justice: He therefore did not speak of it, as a dependence
upon the Succession of the King your Father-in-Law, which you had so solemnly
renounced by the Pyronean Treaty; but he disguised the Business under the Name
of Don Balthazar, making your Majesty believe it had no relation at all to your
Renunciation. Which was an Artifice very gross, for Prince Balthazar had no
Right to succeed his Father, till his Father was Dead; nor had the Queen your
Wife any Right to succeed Prince Balthazar, but what was merely imaginary;
because he died before his Father. That Law also with which Monsieur Louvoy
kept such a stir, in Favor of Daughters succeeding before the Children of a
Second Bed, signified nothing to the purpose: For had Prince Balthazar survived
his Father, you had so formally renounced all claim to that whereto the Queen
your Wife could pretend any Right, that you could have no Color of Title to
it, unless you would declare your self a Perjured Person to all the World. But
this supposed Succession to Don Balthazar; your Martial Humor, and the desire
of perpetuating your Name, put you upon what was not so much to be blamed,
because it seemed necessary to be done for your Justification, before you began
a War. You caused the Lawyers to consult what Title you had to the Succession
which you claimed in Right of your Queen: The Person you sent to these Lawyers,
was Monsieur Louvoy, who was too much concerned, to bring any Opinion against
what he had maintained to your Majesty; those Advocates therefore, whom the
Marquess had feed, maintained by long, but very weak Arguments, that your
Majesty's Renunciation was absolutely null, and not at all binding; because it
was contrary to the constitutions of your Kingdom; which are, that the King may
make void what he has done, and relieve himself against it, as if it had been
done in perfect Minority. They chiefly insisted upon the pretended Prejudice
they said you had done to the Dauphin your Son, by the Renunciation; and
enlarged themselves upon this further Argument, that neither Divine or Humane
Laws did permit, any Fathers to dispose (according to their own Fancy) of their
Sons Inheritance; concluding, that this alone nullified all that you had done,
and consequently you had Reason to pursue your own and your Son's Right by
force of Arms.

But there were many things to be objected against all this. The first was,
That it would be dangerous to set the Crown upon such a Foot, that there could
be no security in treating or contracting with it: For if it is sufficient to
say your Majesty is always a Minor, what Trust or Confidence can any body put
in your Promises? Or when a War is once begun, what way can be found to end it?
This Argument is so full of Reason, and may be carried so high, as to confound
all those who maintain such pernicious Maxims. Your Majesty is too knowing, to
want any Instruction in a Matter so clear and indisputable; I will not
therefore trouble you with Reasons, but show that they by whom you are so ill
advised, give just Occasion to the whole World, to accuse you of intolerable
Ambition; which is so ill a Character, that it turns your ancient Friends into
Enemies, and indispensibly stirs up all Princes against you: For who can ever
think himself secure against your Injustice? Or who will trust a Prince, whose
Word is not to be taken in Peace or War? People are not safe in either; in the
one, they are in perpetual Distrust, and in the other in continual Perplexity,
not knowing what to fear.

While these things were transacting, the Queen your Mother dyed; who, had she
lived, would have been very much troubled, to see a Peace broken, upon which
she had set her Heart. You obliged the Bishop of Munster to make Peace with the
Hollanders; but you found it more difficult to bring the Duke of Lorrain to any
compliance with your Majesty, tho one would have thought by the Mortifications
you had given him, he would have been more flexible.

This Duke, who was a Riddle to all Mankind, came after the Business of Marsall
to Paris; where he seemed to have so little Sense of the ill condition of his
Affairs, that he would have married a mean Citizen's Daughter, that was one of
Mademoiselle Montpensier's Domestic Servants; and the Business was so far
advanced, as to come to a Contract of Marriage: But your Majesty was requested,
by his Friends, to interpose your Royal Authority to hinder the Match.

The Duke's Relations had again recourse to your Majesty in another Business of
the same Nature, but somewhat less Shameful; because the Woman he courted was
the Daughter of a Gentleman. Your Majesty being extremely angry, that the Duke
would so dishonor himself, commanded the Maid's Father not to suffer his
Daughter to marry him. The Duke at last seeing your Majesty would not let him
marry so Dishonourably in your Dominons, went to seek a Mistress in his own;
where he married the Daughter of Count Appremont; she was hardly Thirteen Years
of Age, and he above Threescore.

Having gratified his Love, his next Business was to satisfy his Ambition,
which would not suffer him to live quiet a Moment. He begun to make Levies,
under pretense that the Elector Palatin committed hostilities upon his
Frontiers. Your Majesty, by your Authority, appeasing that Disorder, he had no
other Pretense to continue in Arms; yet his Falsehood still readily furnished
him with another; as often as your Majesty gave him Reasons, why he ought to
prefer your Frienship before all other Considerations. Your Envoy often
discoursed him upon that Subject, and told him that since he had so often
abused your Majesty's Patience, it was to be feared you would deal with him as
he had deserved. But he seemed to be, or indeed was insensible, or did not
remember what had past: For he could not resolve to do what your Majesty
required of him; though he knew there was not any Body in all Europe that could
take his Part, and save him from being ruined, if your Majesty should once fall
upon him.

While this Business was in agitation, Louvoy doubled his Endeavors, to
persuade your Majesty to undertake the War of Flanders; whereof he pretended
the Success must be Infallible, because the English and Hollanders were engaged
in a War, wherein your Majesty had taken part with the Dutch, more out of
Policy, than any real Intention to assist your ancient Allies. For if you
resolved to conquer the Low Countries, it was not likely this Alliance would
continue long, because the Dutch were highly concerned, not to suffer a Potent
King to become their Neighbor: So that what you had done in taking their part,
was only to keep up the Quarrel the longer between them and the English, and
that it should not end, unless you were called in to the making up a Peace; for
your Design was to know what passed, that you might not take false Measures.

Indeed your Conduct was suitable to your Interest, and the Succors you lent
the Dutch, were neither proportionable to your Forces, nor to the Promise you
made them, of doing your utmost to enable 'em to beat their Enemies. You
declared your self for 'em; but they beginning to suspect the great
Preparations you made, thought it better to make a Peace with the English, than
to prosecute the Advantage they had, and which gave them a prospect of greater,
after that fatal Disaster which befell the English, by the burning of Three
Parts of the City of London; which cast the Inhabitants into so great a
Consternation, that the Dutch if they pleased might have done their Business.
Nevertheless, you did yours; for you drove the English out of the Island of St.
Christopher's, and took from them the Fort they had built; but resolving no
longer to delay the War of Flanders, you went thither in Person, at the Head of
a brave Army.

The Spaniards were sufficiently frighted, and not without Cause; for your
Majesty had taken care (ever since the Peace of the Pyrenees) to keep your
Troops in as good Martial Discipline, as if they had been continually in the
Field. You caused them to be frequently mustered, you cashiered all that were
unfit for service, and discharged those who had Listed themselves in your
Guards, on purpose to be freed from paying Taxes; this Reform went so high as
Officers, many of whom were never in Service, and were much fitter for a Court,
than to look an Enemy in the Face.

Turenne commanded this Army under your Majesty, and the Confidence you reposed
in him, made you prefer him before all others to teach you the Art of War,
wherein you looked upon him as the most experienced in all your Kingdom.
Therefore to reward his Services, and to let all the World see how great an
esteem you had of his Conduct and Courage; you declared him Camp Marshall
General of your Armies, a little before the Peace between the Two Crowns; a
Title that set him above all the Mareschals of France, and which in some manner
revived the Place of Constable, which was suppressed after the Death of the Duke
de Lediguieres, who was the last that enjoyed it.

The Confidence which you had in this great Man, displeased Monsieur Louvoy,
whose Ambition was already grown to that height, as not to be willing your
Majesty should consult with any body but himself: But he had many bitter Pills
to swallow.

Your Majesty sometimes stayed till Noon shut up with Turenne, while Louvoy
waited in your Antichamber. This begot in him that Hatred which he always had
for Turenne, and which has been often prejudicial to your Majesty's Affairs,
as I shall make appear in the sequel of this Discourse. Upon which be pleased
to permit me to make a Reflection, which your Majesty will find very Just, viz.
That there is nothing so dangerous, as the giving too much Credit to Men puffed
up with Pride and vain Glory. The Reason is, because such Men still envy the
Reputation others deserve for their good Counsel, and disparage every thing
which proceeds not from themselves; wishing nothing should prosper, rather than
the Glory of it should be attributed to another. So that a Prince cannot be too
reserved and cautions in the choice of a Minister; for though he should find in
him all the Qualities requisite for so great an Employment; yet if he has not
that of preferring the Public, before his own Private Interest, it is vain to
expect any good from him. To perform the Duty of a Public Minister, a Man
ought to be Proof both against Love and Hatred, and do nothing but for the
Public Good. What is done for other ends, may prejudice his Master, whose
Service requires, that his Minister should not be subject to any Passion.

The Spaniards, upon your Majesty's approach, blew up the Fortifications they
had made in a new Place, which they called Charleroy. So that in less than
Eight Days, they demolished all that which with Prodigious Labor they had been
building a Year, at the Expense of more than Three Millions. Your Majesty
resolving to continue the Fortifications they had begun, to keep a Pass upon
the Sambre, where this Place is situated, made your Army work so hard, that in
Three Weeks the Place was made defenfible. After this you went on, and in so
short a time as is almost incredible, you took the Towns of Aoth, Tournay,
Douay, and the Forts round about it. Oudenard and Alost likewise submitted to
your Arms, while the Marshall d' Aumont took in Armentieres, Bergues, Furnes,
Dixmude and Courtray. The English and Dutch hastened to clap up a Peace; but
your Majesty, keeping on your Way, besieged Lisle, wherein were Four Thousand
Men, all regular Troops, and Ten times as many Burghers, able to bear Arms;
which made the Spaniards believe you could not take the Town, having called to
their Relief Count Marcin, who commanded their Army: He drew near the Place to
fall upon you, and thought you so weakened as to be easily beaten; but your
Majesty, having in a little time taken the Town, so totally defeated Marcin,
that he was forced to save himself on Foot through a Marish.

This Victory promised you more; the Season not being yet far advanced: But
your Majesty was so set upon returning to Paris, that you contented your self
with what you had done.

There is a Time when a Man will prefer his Pleasure before his Business; which
however much lessens his Reputation: For the least failing in the Life of a
great Man, is a Stain which clouds the Glory and Luster of his Actions. But who
in this World is free from Faults? Especially when they proceed from a Passion
to which Heroes are usually more inclined than other Men.

Your Majesty's Success augmented your Minister's Reputation, who became so
proud of your Favor, that he did all he could to ruin me* But your Majesty
was just to me, notwithstanding all his Endeavors; and in truth your Majesty
was bound to protect me, since it was for you alone I exposed my self to the
Hatred of the People. I had advised you some Years before to suppress a a part
of the Rents of the The Townhouse like the Guild Hall of London.
Hotel de Ville; which were established on so small a Consideration, that the
very Arrears they demanded, exceeded the Principal they were bought for: So
that one might properly say, there was Money due to your Majesty, instead of
your being in Debt. But seeing it would have made those People desperate who
were concerned therein, had your Majesty suppressed that Fund, which you might
have done with very great Justice, you resolved I should only fright them to
retrench those Rents, that they might not be so chargeable to your Majesty for
the future. But People will be blind, where their Interest is concerned, for I
was like to be torn to Pieces by the Multitude, particularly being one Day with
the Chancellor, some of 'em were so bold to threaten me. I pretended I was
willing to hear what they had to say, that I might know their Names, and your
Majesty might cause 'em to be imprisoned, which I thought would keep 'em in
Awe. However, they continued to insult me every Day; so that my Deputies, who
were more terrified than I, did all they could to persuade me to meddle no more
in the Business.

The Zeal I had to serve your Majesty, made me take little notice of my
Servants Fear, which was so great, that one of them, who was a very industrious
Fellow, but guilty of being a little too much given to Wine, which was his
greatest Fault, started one Night out of his Sleep, fancying some of the Hotel
Ville Men were come to cut his Throat. The Fumes of the Wine had so clouded his
Brain, that he did not perceive his Fear proceeded only from a Dream; so that
he put all my House into an Uproar, which frighted my Wife and Children; I
awaked with the Noise he made, and had I believed my Wife and Servants, I had
run out of the House to save my self: But thinking it fit to know first what
was the Matter, I quickly perceived it was but a Drunkard's Vision, so that my
House was quiet again. Next Morning I turned him away, because I resolved not
to keep him after he had caused such a disturbance in my Family; especially,
after I had so often told him, if he did not mend, I would not keep him any
longer. But there are some things to which People are so addicted, that they
cannot leave 'em if they would, especially when they are become habitual.
Drinking is one of those Habits, which the older a Man grows, the more subject
he is to it; the Reason is, because the Natural Heat decaying, he fancies that
Wine gives him new Strength, whereas the excess of it takes away that which he
has yet left: The cause is not the same in Men's Inclinations to Women, which
for a natural reason cannot be so great when Men grow Old, as when they are but
Five and Twenty. Of all the Passions wherewith Men are Troubled, I know none so
dangerous as this; beside, how little does it suit with those, who find
themselves totally disabled by Age. Whence we ought to conclude, that we must
endeavor from our very Infancy to conquer this Inclination, especially, when
we consider it renders a Man unsit for every thing, and consequently is to be
trusted in nothing.

Your Majesty doubting that your Neighbors would grow jealous of your
Conquests, made a League offensive and defensive with Portugal; which by the
Succors you lent, kept it self from falling again under the Dominion of the
Spaniards; of which they often complained during the Peace; because your
Majesty was obliged by one of the Articles of the Pyrenean Treaty, not to give
Portugal the least Assistance. But it is in vain to Promise some things, which
Men when they promise know they can never perform; and which are always to be
reckoned in the Number of those Things, which are directly contrary to the
Interest of a Crown. So that Whatever Allyances are made between neighboring
States, their Promises last no longer, than they are for the Common and Public
Good. There is little ground therefore to depend upon 'em, and they that do,
deceive themselves.

The Duke of Lorrain, who had always mischievous Designs against your Majesty,
was by your Precaution rendered utterly unable to put 'em in execution. You
made him (much against his Will) lend you his Troops to assist you in your
Conquests. This made him endeavor to stir up the Spaniards and Dutch against
you, who envied your Prosperity, and entered into a Treaty with the Kings of
England and Sweeden, to compel you to make a Peace; into which the Duke
resolved to enter, to be in a Condition to make you fear him: He demanded his
Troops again, to come and take Winter Quarters with him, under pretense of
defending his own Dominions, that were environed on both sides by the
Spaniards; and that he might dispose of his Troops as he pleased; but you were
as cunning as he, and would not let them go out of Flanders; which made him try
to debauch 'em.

Your Majesty seemed to take no notice of it, because you had Business of
greater concern on your Hands; therefore narrowly watching those Troops, to
hinder 'em from deserting, you went in the sharpest Season of Winter into the
County of Burgundy, being well assured of conquering it, because the Prince of
Conde had beforehand treated with the Marquess of Hienne, who was Governor
there. A thing not to be blamed, it being Wisdom and Prudence in a Sovereign,
to spare the Blood of his Subjects as much as it is possible; and therefore when
it costs him nothing but Money to get the Keys of a Town, he is much better
advised than they, who venture many a Thousand Men's Lives for it, and yet often
receive a Baffle, and go without it: For let a Prince's Forces be what they
will, Success does not always answer his Expectation; so that it is a certain
conclusion, that when a Man has found out a sure way to do his Business, he
must not scruple to put it in practice. I except Poisoning and Assassination;
two things which are so base, and ought to be so far from the Thoughts of a
Prince; that there can be nothing more shameful and dishonorable to him.

The War which you maintained, did not hinder you from taking care to see
Justice done to your Subjects: You obliged your Parliaments to follow the Code
Civil and Criminal, you employed some about it before your departure for
Flanders, it being a Work that would very much shorten Proceedings in
Lawsuits. Some Judges, who did not find their Account in it, and who believed
it would be in this, as it used to be in other Cases, where Penalties are
threatened, but seldom exacted; they took their Liberty to do as their Fancy
led 'em; but your Majesty being informed of it, suspended them from their
Offices; which Punishment so scared others, that they learnt to be Honest and
Wise at other Men's Cost.

CHAP. IV. Containing that which past after the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle till
the Holland War.
YOur Majesty now thought it a fit time to make Peace, that those Potentates
who envied your Prosperity might not become your Enemies.

The Spaniards having consented by the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, that you
should keep your Conquests, restoring to them the County of Burgundy; you
became more Powerful in Flanders than ever you had been.

You caused so many Places to be fortified, that your Neighbors wondered how a
Kingdom of no larger extent than yours, could do so many things at once: For
though these Fortifications cost a prodigious Sum; yet you went on with your
Buildings both at the Louvre and Versailles. Beside, you bought so great a
Quantity of Rich Furniture, Antiquities, Jewels, and gerally all Things which
express the Magnificence of a Prince, that it may be said, your Predecessors
were but little men compared to you: You caused a Coat to be made, which you
wore at the ception of Ambassadors, the Diamonds upon it, and on your Hat, were
valued at more than Sixteen Millions of Livres computed, At 12 Livres to the
Pound Sterling, amounts to One Million Three Hundred Thirty Three Thousand
Three Hundred Thirty Three Pounds Six Shillings and Eight Pence.
Sixteen Millions, and the Gallery before the ascent to your Throne, through
which People were to pass, was so full of Rarities and Vassas of Massy Silver,
that it might well be thought you had made a Collection of all that was in the
Indies, to show your Grandeur. The Matter or Substance of which these Things
were made, was not so much to be considered, as the Workmanship; every thing
was so curiously wrought, and by such admirable Artificers, that the Fashion
cost more, than the Matter whereof it was made.

People will wonder that your Majesty in this, differed so much from your
Father, who cared so little for Things of this kind, that Strangers who went to
see his Royal Houses, wondered that such a Prince as he, should have no better
Furniture; but you did not all this out of a vain Expensive Humor; but that
you knew what People would think of it: For all that is Splendid and Great
begets Admiration; of which Princes have sometimes as much need as of Power:
For there is nothing makes 'em more respected, which they seldom fail of, who
know how to set a Value on themselves.

Your Majesty likewise gave Order, that your Tables should be furnished
suitable to the State of so great a King. You had choice and plenty of all
Things, and yet your Expenses were less than they were before, because you
would not suffer your Servants to cheat you, as they used to do. You did not
think it beneath you, to see that your Liveries should be new, and changed
every Year, to prevent their Abuses, who made them serve beyond the limited
time, to put the Money into their own Pockets.

So that all your People begun to have so great a Respect for your Reign, that
it was now no more a Question, whether your Majesty should go your self to the
Palace to see Edicts registered. You thought it enough to send them by any body
next at hand; a Thing which will astonish Posterity, considering what I have
here before said: But it was your Reputation that did all this, and you made
your self obeyed, without using the least Rigor.

When Things are once settled upon a good Foot, they will then go well of
themselves, without requiring much Pain about 'em: Which ought to teach all
People whoever they be, to put their Affairs into good Order and Method;
without which they can never go well. This likewise must be done at first, and
as soon as Men have any employment; for if they stay till they find their
Business goes ill, then the case will be the same, as it is with neglected
Buildings that are falling into decay; for by not putting in one single Stone
in time, they perhaps come to be so past all Repair, that of necessity they
must be pulled down and new built, to the great Charge and Prejudice of the
Owner. How much therefore is every Man concerned to be a good Husband?

Your Majesty, having concluded the Peace, made Three Mareschals of France, the
Marquess Bellefonds, de Crequi, and Humieres. The French Gentry, who were
always pleased with being in Arms, having now nothing to do on the Frontiers,
asked your Majesty leave to go to the Relief of Candy, which had a long time
been besieged by the Turks: Your Majesty gave them leave, and appointed the
Duke of Feuillade to be their Commander in chief. But because the Venetians did
not do their part in assisting the French to raise the Siege, they were never
the better for those Succors. The Venetian General fell out with the Duke of
Feuillade, who so despised the General, that he often affronted him to his
Face. The French returned without doing any thing that was considerable, so
that the Turks hoped to be Masters of the Town in a short time.

Notwithstanding the Discouragements given by the Duke of Feuillade, the Relief
of the Place was of such importance to all Christendom, and so much desired by
your Majesty, that you sent the Duke of Navailles with some regular Troops,
convoyed by a Squadron of your Fleet, commanded by the Duke of Beaufort. The
Duke of Navailles landed his Troops, notwithstanding the continual Fire the
Turks made with their Canon. As soon as he had rested his Forces, and sent out
to view the Turkish Camp, they made so brisk a Salley, that all gave way before
'em: But a Turkish Magazine of Powder by chance taking Fire, and the French
thinking it a Mine sprung on purpose, they were so frighted, that they
retreated. The Turks perceiving their Fear, charged them, and cut off some of
their Heads, which so increased the Confusion of the rest, that several Persons
of note were killed; of whom the only Son of Marshall de Faber was one,
because he was never seen after the Fight, nor found among the Dead, nor was
the Duke of Beaufort ever heard of, who very imprudently went a Shore, against
the Duty of an Admiral, which is to fight at Sea only, and never to quit his
Ship, unless it be when it is ready to sink. This Expedition having had no
better Success than Feuillade's, you gave Navailles but an ill reception, which
made those that were present in the Action, lay all the Fault of what had
happened upon him; though it did not appear there was any Reason to blame the
Duke, since it is impossible for a General to foresee such an Accident as this
was, or to rally Troops seized with a pannick Fear. But it being difficult to
justify a Man's self at Court, especially when a Minister is at his Back, or
he is not well with the Ladies, Navailles was ordered to retire.

The Place held out but a little while longer; but it was so shattered and
beaten with the Canon, that the Turks were forced to rebuild it. There has not
been known a more memorable Siege, wherein ever passed more warm or braver
Actions: None can compare with it for the length of the Siege, or for the
Number of Men killed on either Side: For it lasted many Years, the Besiegers
lost before it a Hundred and Twenty Thousand Men, and the Besieged near Thirty
Eight Thousand.

The Grand Signior was not at all pleased with the succors your Majesty lent
the Venetians, and therefore sent a Chiaous to expostulate the Business, and to
renew the Treaty of Commerce that had still been between the Two Nations: but
your Majesty had too much Courage to follow the Example of some of your
Predecessors, who suffered Sultans, sometimes to send them rough Complements;
for you silenced the Chiaous, as soon as ever he begun to talk higher than
became him.

Notwithstanding the Peace which your Majesty settled in Europe, by the last
Treaty concluded at Aix la Chapelle; the Duke of Lorrain daily went on arming,
because he thought those Potentates who were against it, yet would not suffer
him to be quite ruined. That which encouraged him, was the Dutch, who were
become Rich and Powerful, did no longer keep any Measures or comply with your
Majesty. Van Benningen often spoke of the Strength of the united Provinces,
intimating, that they could not suffer your Majesty to disturb the Peace of
their Neighbors: His boldness came to that height, that he caused a Medal to
be stamped, alluding to the Miracle of Josuah's stopping the Course of the Sun;
thereby designing to pique your Majesty, who had taken the Sun for your Device,
and knew that Van Beningen's Name was Josuab: It was plain, that he meant he
had stopped your Course, by the Treaty he had obliged you to make. In the Medal
(which was very well done) was his own Picture, about it were these Latin
Words, in conspectu meo stetit Sol. From whence the Duke of Lorrain concluded,
he might venture to provoke you. But your Majesty having received notice of
what the Duke did, you sent to tell him that if he were not Wiser, he would
find himself deceived; and if he forced you once more to seize upon his
Country, he should never come into it again: You therefore required him
presently to disarm, and that you allowed him but Six Weeks time for the doing
it.

This Message sent in such plain and imperative Terms, astonished the Duke.
Nevertheless, endeavoring to cover his ill Intentions under a specious
pretense, he told your Majesty he was not yet secure against the Elector
Palatin, who from time to time made Incursions upon his Frontiers, and
therefore prayed you to accomodate the Business. Your Majesty knew very well it
was but a feigned Excuse; however, because what he demanded seemed but Just,
your Majesty sent an Act of Guarranty both to him, and to the Elector Palatin;
whereby you promised to aid either, in case any one of them should presume to
break the Treaty made between 'em.

The Elector Palatine acquiesc'd presently; so that the Duke, having now
nothing more to pretend, was forced to obey you.

Your Majesty, seeing no appearance of any Broyls on that fide, desired nothing
more, than to be revenged on the Dutch, whose Insolence you could not digest.
The Marquess Louvoy, that wished for nothing but War, pressed you to it, by
representing to you the Ingratitude of those People, who had so particular an
Obligation to you; not mentioning what they owed to Lewis XIII. and to Henry
IV. your Father and Grandfather, without whose Assistance they had never been
able to make Head against the House of Austria: But had they had no more to do,
than to show they were Ungrateful, it had not been difficult; for whatever
Obligation one State may have to another, yet no People are bound to put a Rope
about their Necks. They therefore had done nothing, but what might by honest
Policy be justified, when they hindered you from conquering the rest of
Flanders. But the Case was not the same as to those other Causes of Complaint
you had against them, and for which no body can excuse 'em.

Whatever was the Cause, your Majesty positively resolved to make the Dutch
repent, as soon as you could find an Opportunity. You commanded me to fill your
Coffers, which by your late prodigious Expense; were quite drained, though your
Revenues had been considerably augmented, and many extraordinary Courses had
been taken, that raised a great deal of Money.

But I must confess, I did your Majesty but ill Service, in the Business of
enquiring who were Gentlemen, and who were not; and if ever the like
Inquisition be made in your Reign, or any of your Successors, care ought to be
taken to follow my Example: For Affairs of such a Nature must not be put into
the Hands of Partisans, whose only Business being to get Money, persecute true
Gentlemen who have none to give 'em, and substitute Plowmen in their Places, if
they have ready Money to buy the Privilege they have to declare whom they
please Noble. This is an Abuse not to be suffered, and which will lose your
Majesty the Love of your Gentry, when they have just Reason to complain, that
the Persecution they suffer, is not to discover who are Ignoble and no
Gentlemen; but to pick the Pockets of those who really are so. It is much
better such an Inquisition should be made by your Attorney General and his
Substitutes, and that you should appoint Receivers, into whose Hands the Fines
of such as are found and condemned to be no Gentlemen should be paid, and by
them brought into your Majesty's Treasury. If this Course were taken, your
Majesty, can never be reproached, with delivering up Widows and Orphans to
Blood-Suckers; but all you do will appear Just; then you will find a great many
Gentlemen of a new Impression, who owe their Gentility to their Money. So that
after having bought a Quality which does not belong to 'em, it is but reasonable
to make 'em pay something more for their Usurpation, because your Majesty is
obliged to punish all those, who make use of Ill means to obtain their Ends.

The Command your Majesty gave me to fill your Coffers, made me think of an
Edict which appeared profitable to the Public, and really is so, if it be
seriously considered. It was to establish a Control upon all Acts and
Proceedings in Law Courts, to prevent the Tricks and Cheats heretofore
practiced in them by Antedates: And tho perhaps it might not keep Sergeants
from playing the Knave, because by this Control they might render their
Declarations and Falsifications more Authentic; yet all imaginable Care was
taken against it, by obliging them to get Witnesses to testify all they did;
which I think was a certain Remedy against any ill that could happen by
Antedates. Your Majesty finding it very Reasonable and Just, established this
Control throughout the Kingdom, though in many Places it met with opposition;
whether from Judges that did not like it, for Reasons I do not understand, or
that it displeased some particular Persons, whose Genius did not reach so far,
as to understand of what consequence things are to them: But your Majesty was
forced to do them good against their Wills.

That which I thought very strange, was, that the Parliament of Thoulouse were
in this guilty of a Fault; for which, though your Majesty pardoned the whole
Body; yet you thought fit to punish the Particular Member who was most
culpable; that the Punishment of one might serve for Example to the rest; there
would otherwise be still Danger of relapsing into the like Offense. The Matter
of Fact was this; That Parliament had given Judgment that a Horse should be
restored, which had been sold for the Payment of a Fine, Ordered by the Edict
to be levied on such as offended against it. Now this was a very insolent
Sentence, because it did indeed nullify the Validity of your Majesty's Edict,
or at least so little regarded it, that it was in a manner to say, no body
should submit to it unless he pleased. But seeing in such Cases, nothing ought
to be done imprudently, lest your Majesty's Authority be made use of to no
purpose; I caused the first President to be told, who had not meddled in the
Business, that if the Sentence they had passed were not revoked, they must
expect to be all Fined; which it was his Interest, as President, to prevent,
and on whom the Fault would be laid, though he were Innocent. I wrote likewise to
your Attorney General, and to your Advocates, without whose Knowledge the
Sentence had passed, that they should take better heed another time to do their
Duty; and having a little reproved 'em, the first President assembled the
Parliament in his own House, where the Farmer-general of your Majesty's Demeans
was by my Order present: He desired to speak, and the Assembly having given him
leave, he told them, That no Reparation could be made for the Fault they had
committed, but by a Revocation of the Sentence that had been given. I was
indeed desirous to spare your Majesty the trouble of punishing them: Beside,
when a Minister can save the Appearances, and not bring his Master's Authority
into dispute, it is Prudence in him so to do.

The Parliament would fain have shifted off this Affront, by proposing many
Expedients, whereby they thought to have saved their Credit. But the Farmer
stuck close to his Proposition, so that the Parliament, to avoid the punishment
due to them, revoked the Sentence they had past.

I did not acquaint your Majesty with this Business till it was ended, because
when I took upon me the Administration of your Revenue, you declared you would
trust to my Fidelity in all things relating to my Function. And indeed, whoever
you choose to execute that Office, his Authority must be absolute* otherwise, he
can never discharge the Duty of his Place. Your Majesty in Affairs of this
Nature, should consult none but such as are of your Council; for if you call in
Judges of Courts to advise you, I dare say you will be sufficiently abused.
Lawyers understand nothing of the Business, but will be sure to perplex it;
they will start a Thousand Difficulties about the Point of a Needle, which by
all means is to be avoided, because in the Finances, all the Secret is
Expedition.

To prove it, I will mind your Majesty of that which I suppose you cannot but
remember: You made Monsieur de la Reinie Governor of Paris, and that this
great Capital City of your Kingdom, (which for its Beauty, Grandeur and Wealth,
deserves to be the Metropolis of the whole World) might be better governed than
formerly it had been; I say, Monsieur Reinie, who by his Place, was to have the
Particular Inspection and Oversight of all that past in it; would have opposed
my requiring Security for a Duty belonging to your Majesty, which was to be
paid for Scoops to clear Boats of Water: He fancied, because it concerned the
Fish-Women, and other such clamarous People, it would raise a Tumult. His Fear
was not to be blamed, because he meant well; but he was mistaken, for no body
stirred, and your Majesty had the Duty quietly paid.

I could quote many Examples of this nature whereby your Majesty would see,
that such Peoples Understanding reaches no farther than their Trade; and the
reason is, because their Imaginations are false, they fancy Bugbears in every
thing, and fight with their own Shadows; they think that in your Finances, it is
as in a Lawsuit, a Man ought to be always upon his Guard, against the
Subtelties of a litigious Petty-fogger. They deceive themselves more than
others, and rather than they will depart from their Maxims, they will consent
the Government should be turned upside down.

Your Majesty approved of all I did, relating to the Parliament of Thoulouse.
You sent a Letter under the Privy Seal to displace the President of the Bench,
who past the first Sentence; and gave a Pension of Two Thousand Livers, to the
Premier President who past the Second: For Reward and Punishmeut ought to go an
even Pace, to encourage those that do Well, and to terrify those that do Ill;
otherwise there would be no such thing as Emulation or Restraint, both
absolutely necessary to make a State flourish.

Yours has flourished so much, that the very sound of your Name kept the
Prince of Lorrain from being elected King of Poland, which otherwise he might
have been. That Nation chose a Sovereign contrary to their usual Custom, and
against the Constitution of the Kingdom, which they resolved rather not to
observe, than discontent your Majesty, who would have been displeased, if the
choice had fallen upon that Prince.

About this time, your Majesty appeared very Pensive, and I taking the Liberty
to ask why you were so; you did me the Honor to open your Heart, and tell me
there was something a brewing against the Peace of your Kingdom; and that there
was a Man whom you did not yet know, but whose Description had been sent you
out of England, that went into all Courts, where under pretense of preserving
the reformed Religion, he stirred up all Princes against you. That out of
England he was gone to the Northern Kings, to persuade them to enter into the
triple League. That this deserved Exemplary Punishment; but you knew not how to
take this Fellow and make an Example of him, because you thought no Prince
would deliver him up, and therefore you resolved to surprise and take him by
force; which appeared impossible, every one being jealous of his Liberty, it
would expose those whom you employed in it to too much danger. Beside, you
said, you knew not whom to trust, in an Affair of such Consequence that ought
to be kept Secret, and which you had communicated to no body but my self.

I asked your Majesty, whether the Man of whom you spoke were a Frenchman; you
told me he was, and it was that which made you so very angry. I could not blame
your Resentment; but said, my Opinion was, that your Majesty could do well to
acquaint Monsieur Turenne with the Business, who knew better than any body, who
were Men of Courage and Resolution; and that he could choose such, as would
undertake to seize this Man, and bring him into France, or if that could not be
done, they should kill him. Your Majesty said, you would not have him killed,
because before you punished him, you would willingly know his Confederates,
believing he had many; but that in every thing else, you would follow my
Counsel, which you approved of, because you were confident that Monsieur
Turenne would be faithful to you, though he were a Hugonot, for he was not
converted till about two or three Months after.

I took the Liberty to pray your Majesty, you would say nothing of the Business
to the Marquess de Louvoy; because I knew his Spleen against Monsieur Turenne
might perhaps prevent the Design's taking Effect; which was enough to let your
Majesty know, I did not think Monsieur Louvoy so well affected to your Service,
but that for his own Private Ends, he might forget the Public Interest. Your
Majesty, understanding what I meant, promised not to say a Word to any body;
but yet reproved me for judging so ill of my Neighbor.

Your Majesty kept your Royal Word, and said nothing of what had past to any
but Monsieur Turenne; who appointed Five Officers to undertake the Business.
And seeing your Majesty knew where the Man in question was, and what he had
been doing, the Officers went into Swisserland, where he had newly arrived;
they seized him as he was traveling from one Place to another, and brought him
into France; having very prudently avoided the danger they were in if they had
been taken. You put him into the Hands of Justice, to be immediately prosecuted.

This miserable Wretch was a Citizen of Rochel and a Hugonot, and though he was
taken as it were in the Fact, and by the Proofs against him must conclude, that
what he had been doing was discovered; yet he would not confess a Syllable, nor
answer to any thing that was asked him; so that he was Tried and Condemned.
When he saw that he was to dye a shameful Death, God so forsook him, that he
resolved to kill himself; and finding some Pieces of Glass in the Dungeon where
he was, he with the Glass made a shift to cut off his Privy Parts, hoping to
Bleed to Death, and avoid the Punishment which he was condemned to suffer. His
Keeper coming into the Room, and seeing him look very Pale, suspected what he
had done, and found the Glass he had hid. Upon Notice given to your Judge of
it, he was broke upon the Wheel within Two Hours after.

This was the end of this Miserable Man, who endeavored in those Courts to
which he went, to cover his Crime with Zeal for Religion; and though People do
not think they can be deceived in the Profession they make of it, because they
verily believe it is the certain way to Salvation, especially when they have
been educated in it; yet it is certain, their Religion, does oblige them to be
obedient to their Sovereign, and not to instigate other Princes to make War
against him; because both Divine and Humane Laws condemn it. So that we see
Religion is commonly made a Cloak to cover Men's Crimes, as it was in this Case;
wherein all that was done, did plainly proceed from a false Zeal, seeing it was
followed by a desperate Action, wherein there appeared so little of God, that
he who attempted it, must necessarily be forsaken by him.

I have been a little the larger upon this Subject, the Circumstances whereof
are perhaps of no such great Concern to your Majesty, as to deserve so
particular a Relation. But I am glad of this Occasion to mind your Majesty of
all that past; that I might at the same time tell you, the Persons employed by
Viscount Turenne, did you a piece of Service great enough, to have been better
considered by Monsieur Louvoy. But he being angry that this Business was done
without acquainting him with it, he became so much the Officers mortal Enemy,
that he caused them to be cashiered one Year after another, under diverse
pretenses, and at last treated Briquemaut a Colonel of Horse so ill, that to
avoid his Persecution, he quitted his Country, and went to seek an Employment
under the Marquess of Brandenburg. It is impossible that your Majesty should
know every thing that is done in your Kingdom, having so many weighty Affairs
to look after, and therefore ought not to be troubled with things of little
Moment. Nevertheless, your Majesty being often abused, I desire you should know
it, because it concerns your Service.

While this passed, your Majesty being convinced, that since it was the Duke of
Lorrain's Interest to live in Amity with you, he would avoid all occasions of
giving you Distaste; and that he could no longer retain the Suspicion he had,
that you would take his Country from him; yet instead of dealing sincerely with
you, he grew jealous of your endeavoring to get his Nephew out of the
Emperor's Hands, believing still it was to keep him in awe.

His Trouble was so great, that though the thing did not succeed; yet without
considering what would follow, he begun to fortify Chate, and Epinal, contrary
to the Treaty he had made with your Majesty. He was likewise so bold, as to
take away the Posts upon which were placed your Majesty's Arms, for a Testimony
of your Jurisdiction there, which he would by no means allow. Beside, your
Majesty knew that he raised Forces in Germany, and that he still kept up those
Regiments which he pretended to disband. Your Majesty, being no longer able to
bear this, sent the Marquess Fourilles into his Country, where he missed but a
Quarter of an Hour of taking the Duke; who, as soon as your Troops appeared,
had notice given him time enough to get on Horseback, and being conscious of
what he had done, saved himself in the Mountains of Voges, where not thinking
himself secure, to avoid your Displeasure, he went wandering up and down,
sometimes not daring to tell who he was. A strange condition for a Prince to be
brought to, who might have lived at his own ease, if he had been Wiser; which
shows us, what difference there is between the Fortune of a Wise Man and a
Fool's.

Your Majesty then took Possession of his Country, which made little
resistance, and having demolished the Places you suspected, you acquainted the
Diet of Ratisbone, with those just Reasons you had for what you did; because
you thought he would endeavor to make the Empire jealous of you, and
consequently take Arms against you. You proceeded in this manner to prevent his
evil Design, and that Europe might not attribute that to your Ambition, which
was but the Effect of your Justice. Thus all Wise and Prudent Princes use to
do; for should they be silent, and not justify themselves, the World would
say, they knew themselves to be Faulty, or that they presumed upon their Power,
and would not vouchsafe to give any Account of those Actions, which might be
justly suspected; especially, when they carry Two Faces, and Ambition so
plainly discovers it self, that People must be blind not to see it.

The Duke, after having been some time a Fugitive, retired to Collen, where he
stayed brewing new Mischief against your Majesty; and, in perfect spite to you,
counseled the Town to receive a Dutch Garrison. He likewise treated with the
Spaniards, to let them have some Regiments he had still on Foot, giving the
command of them to Prince Vaudemont his Son, by the Princess of Cantecroix, to
whom he would willingly have given Lorrain, and disinherited his Nephew.

Your Majesty, who had now more mind than ever, to make War with the
Hollanders, seeing the Duke not satisfied with what he had done, but still
endeavoring to league the Princes of the Empire against you; you sent
Ministers thither to counter and oppose all his Designs; and knowing that
nothing could be a greater advantage to you, than the breaking of the Triple
League, which still continued; you drew near to England, upon pretense of
visiting the Places which belonged to you on the Seacoast, and when you were
there, Madam the Duchess of Orleans, being now not far from England, was so
desirous to see the King her Brother, that she asked your Majesty's Leave to go
thither. You could not refuse her, all Things being before concerted between
you; particularly, that when she was with her Brother, she should endeavor to
draw him off from the Triple League, and persuade him to espouse your Interest.
She carried with her a very pretty Woman called Madam Kerouel, who had done all
she could to make your Majesty in Love with her; but her Stars being averse to
your liking her so well as she wished, she descended to content her self with
the Conquest of the King of England, whose Weak Side was the Fair Sex. The
Duchess of Orleans, who knew his Constitution, had Madam Kerouel gloriously
dressed, and to make her Shine the more, presented her with fine Jewels. The
Duchess took her time, when her Brother was in a good Humor, to make her
Propositions. Madam Kerouel, by her Mistress's Order, very dexterously slides
into the Room, and promised the King, she would come back to him, as soon as
your Sister-in-Law was returned into France, if he would grant what her
Mistress desired. Thus did this Prince sacrifice the Dutch to his new Passion,
renounced the Triple League, and took new Measures with your Majesty, to humble
that Commonwealth.

The Marquess de Vitry, whom at the same time you sent into Sweden, in the
Quality of your Ambassador extraordinary, prevailed also with his Swedish
Majesty to quit the Triple League, he being as much in Love with your Money, as
the King of England was with Madam Kerouel. Every thing contributed to your
good Fortune and Satisfaction. The Elector of Collen, who had a good while been
your Friend, endeavored to make the Dutch recall the Garrison they had in the
Capital City of his Electorate, which was very difficult; because the
Inhabitants pretended to a greater Power there than the Elector; which is the
Reason they are still jealous of him. But while this was a doing, your
Sister-in-Law the Duchess of Orleans dyed in an Hour's time, after she had
drunk a glass of Succory-water. This sudden Accident, considering her
Constitution, which in all appearance was very good, together with her Youth,
made many suspect she did not dye a natural Death; she her self saying before
she dyed, that she was poisoned. This was thought Probable, because your
Brother the Duke of Orleans, kept a sort of People about him, who made it their
Business to make him jealous of her. Your Majesty did all you could to find out
the Truth of the Matter: For as you were concerned to punish so foul a Crime,
if it had been proved, so you had Reason to fear it might have made a Breach
between your Majesty and the King of England. Beside, it was necessary to
search this Business to the Bottom, to discover from whence this Poison came,
whereof the Consequences were very dangerous. Especially, when many begun to
talk of the like Accidents in Paris, where People every Day dyed suddenly,
which could not be imputed to any Natural Cause.

Your Majesty caused the Dutchess's Body to be opened by your Surgeons, your
Physicians were likewise sent for, to declare their Opinions in the Presence of
the English Ambassador, whom you had also desired to be there. But though they
narrowly inspected all her Entrails, they said, they saw nothing upon which to
ground a Suspicion of her being poisoned; but it will be very difficult, to
make Posterity believe the Truth of their Report.

Whatever was the Cause of her Death, yet the King of England was satisfied
with what your Majesty did to make a Discovery of the Truth, and continued his
Resolutions to humble the Hollanders. Your Brother the Duke of Orleans being
now a Widdower, your Majesty thought of marrying him again into Germany, to
secure to your self the Friendship of some Prince of the Empire. The Elector
Palatin had a Daughter very fit for your Purpose, and your Majesty making her
your Choice, you negotiated the Match with her Father. There was but one
Obstacle against it, which was difference of Religion; but the Rub being
quickly removed, both sides agreed upon the Marriage Terms.

The Bishop of Munster likewise promised to join with your Majesty in abasing
the Dutch; while you set upon them on your side, he designed to attack them on
his; so that they should hardly be able to defend themselves against both. But
in such a Case, I do not comprehend the Policy of a little Prince, who is so
blind to believe, he shall share with a greater in the Spoils of an Enemy,
whose wealth is so great, that every Body envies, and is still contriving to
get it. They must come to an Account sooner or later, where he that is
strongest will be sure to give Law to the weaker.

I find this still practiced, though it is dangerous for a weak Prince, to
interest one that is very Powerful in his Affairs. When the Princes to whom
appertained the Succession of the States of Juliers and Cleves, called in to
their Assistance the House of Austria, the Emperor seized upon the Succession,
and could never be brought to restore it, but by down right Blows. For an
Example of another kind, let what past in the War I am now about to speak of be
remembered; Would the Emperor ever part with Phillipsbourg, though he promised
before he took it, that as soon as he was Master of it, he would restore it to
the right Owner, who is the Bishop of Spire? It Is great weakness in any Prince,
to depend upon one that is greater than himself. France is not freer than
others, from Injustice of this kind; so that Princes, who are not very Potent,
ought to have a Care how they trust themselves with those that can talk to them
like Masters, and that make their own Interest the only Rule of their Actions.

The Dutch, when they saw themselves threatened on all sides, were in such a
Consternation that may better be imagined than described. There was likewise
such a Division and Confusion among 'em, that the Consequences of it were more
to be feared, than the Danger wherewith they were threatened from abroad. They
had not yet conferred any Authority upon the Prince of Orange, because applying
themselves wholly to Trade, they thought of nothing but making it flourish in
all Parts of the World; so that their Power and Strength was reduced only to
that which they had at Sea, taking little or no Care to keep up any Forces at
Land.

John de Wit, Pensionary of Holland, was at the Head of the Commonwealth, a
Man very well versed in the Government of it. But though he had many good
Qualities, which his greatest Enemies cannot deny him; yet he was guilty of
that Fault whereof I have already spoken; which was, to prefer his own Private
Interest before the Public. He resolutely opposed the Prince of Orange's being
invested with any Power or Authority, because his Father had been ill treated
by the Prince's Father, who kept him for some time in Prison. But seeing no
State can long subsist without credit and Reputation, and that which this
Commonwealth had, consisted only in their Riches and Strength at Sea; some of
the Wisest Heads proposed restoring to the Prince of Orange, the same Power and
Authority which his Predecessors formerly had in the Government. The Reason
they gave for it was, That they ought to have a Sovereign, whose Name carried
some Stroke in Foreign Countries, where de Wit was known but to some particular
Persons, who looked upon him as a very good Merchant, but no great Statesman.
That the Prince of Orange was an otherguess Man, whose Ancestors brave Actions
spoke for him; that he was near of Kin to most of the Princes of Germany, which
would facilitate making Allyances with them. That he was Nephew to the King of
England, which deserved their Consideration in the present Juncture; the Prince
being thereby capable of warding off England's Blows, and of managing their
Interests.

These Reasons at last prevailing with the Major Part, supported by the Prince,
and by all those that were Friends to his Family; he was declared Stadholder;
that is to say, Captain General and Governor of the Country. de Wit, who
openly opposed it, because the Commonwealth, upon the Death of William II. had
past a Decree, that those Places and Powers which that Prince enjoyed, and
which consisted in being Stadholder and great Admiral, should never more for
the Future be conferred upon one single Person. De Wit, I say, seeing himself
like to be discarded, used his Endeavors to have this Decree executed, and to
cross the Prince all he could.

The Prince of Orange, on his Part, made it his Business to destroy de Wit's
Cabals, whom he hated the more for being so Insolent, as to think himself the
Prince's Equal; and he had Reason, for there is nothing more provoking to a
Person of great Birth, than to meet with a Minister, who so much forgets
himself, as not to pay his Superior the Respect that is due to him. It Is what
is unpardonable, and in any Government but a Republic, he that is Supreme
ought to take notice of it, and in a prudent Manner punish it; if he do not,
the evil Consequences of it may fall on himself; for if a Person of Quality be
Injured or Affronted, and his Prince will not take cognizance of it, nor resent
it; he himself becomes the Object of the injured Person's Hatred; who because
he has not Right done him, may perhaps stir up great Troubles, which a little
thing will do, and the least neglect sometimes has very ill consequences. A
Prince, nevertheless, is obliged to take his Minister's part against all the
World, otherwise no body would care to serve him, especially in such a Post,
wherein it is impossible for a Man not to create Enemies. But then a Prince
ought to weigh things, and do according to what Justice requires of him; he
ought to make a right Judgment of what his Minister does, and to discern
whether he acts out of Zeal for his Service; or abounding in his own Sense,
does things out of mere Humor and Caprice.

CHAP. V. Containing that which past from the War of Holland, to the Treaty of
Nimmeguen.
THese Reflections I have last made, having interrupted the Course of the
Relation I was giving your Majesty of your great Actions, I now begin again
where I left off. After you had, as I have already said, declared War against
the Dutch, you quickly invaded their Country. They had recalled their Troops
from Collen, into which, in their Room, entered Three Thousand Men of the
Circle of Westphalia. Your Army was in all Respects very Formidable; so Brave
and Numerous a one had not been seen a long time; and to show your Power, the
Prince of Conde was at the Head of another almost as great, besides a flying
Camp which was commanded by the Count Chamilly.

The Duke of Lorrain had no mind to stay for you in Collen, he went out of it
the last Year, for you had sent some Troops to Winter in that Country, into
whose Hands he was afraid to fall. He retired to Francfort, where he begun to
make new Levies, believing that this War made so near the Empire, would create
you so many Enemies, that he should quickly meet with an Opportunity to show
his ill Will to your Majesty. But nothing could stand before you; in less than
a Month, yout took Forty fortified Towns, one of which could heretofore have
held out a whole Year, against a considerable Army. But your Conquests, I say,
raised you new Enemies; the Emperor sent an Army against you, to which the
Marquess Brandenburg joined his Troops. They pretended to make the Princes of
the Empire repent their so far taking your part, as to let you have Winter
Quarters in their Country, but all they could do, was but to augment your
Majesty's Glory, since instead of repulsing you, Viscount Turenne drove them
into the Country of Mark, where he quartered all the Winter.

A little before this great Action, your Troops past the Rhine by Swimming,
which caused such a Consternation among your Enemies, that you were within a
little of being Master of Amsterdam. But a Burgh-Master of the Town, by giving
Counsel to open the Sluices, and let in the Sea, rather than submit to any other
Sovereign, saved the City. Nevertheless, being reduced to extremity, they sent
your Majesty Propositions of Peace, which the Prince of Conde, who had been
Wounded in passing the Rhine, advised you to accept. All your Generals were of
the same Opinion, and their reason for it was; because the Emperor and the
Elector of Brandenburgh having already declared themselves against you, there
was no doubt, but the whole Empire, alarmed by your Conquests, would likewise
follow their Example. But Marquess Louvoy, who pretended that he alone knew
more than all these great Men put together, persuaded your Majesty that the
Dutch were brought so low, that they could never rise again; and therefore you
should accept of no other Composition, than their acknowledging themselves to
be your Subjects: To which they must certainly yield, because they were not
able to bear the payment of what the Princes (who declared for them) demanded
for the Succors they lent them. He persuaded your Majesty to strike while the
Iron was hot, and not to take other measures by making Peace; and if your
Majesty did let slip this Opportunity, you could never while you lived expect
the like.

To make good what he said, he pretended he had Intelligence from several
Persons in the Country: And your Majesty confiding in him, because all the
secret Dispatches went through his Hands, sent back the Dutch Ambassadors, who
were come into your Camp to offer you very good Conditions. And though they came
again a few Days after with much better. Terms, yet your Minister, who was not
for Peace, because his private Gain was so great by continuing the War, kept
things from coming to any Conclusion. The Inhabitants of the Hague in the mean
time Massacred John de Wit, who had sent those Ambassadors to you, but they
were recal'd soon after his Death.

This should teach Men never to refuse good Terms in hopes of better; and that
it is not prudence to make an Enemy desperate. Beside, Affairs sometimes change
their face in an instant, and therefore we ought not to let things cool, but
come to a Conclusion while they are warm. Which should have been done in this
case, because your Majesty had declared you begun this War only to humble the
Hollanders. You sufficiently humbled them, in forcing them to offer you so much
as they did; and in not pretending to more, you had made it appear, that
Correction, not Conquest, was your design. But proceeding so far as you did,
procured you new Enemies, so that you see how much you were obliged to Monsieur
Louvoy. I am confident that the great Hatred he bore me, was one reason why he
gave your Majesty such ill Counsel. He foreseeing the continuance of the War
would be prodigiously Expensive, and consequently that in a little time I
should not be able to find Money enough, to defray the vast Charge your Majesty
would be put to, to maintain it; I should then be disgraced, and lose the
Honor of your Favor.

But this was not the only fault Monsieur Louvoy committed this Campaign, it
was he that was the cause why the City of Amsterdam did not open its Gates to
your Majesty. For after you had put a Garrison into Vtrecht, the Marquess of
Rochefort was sent to Command there. This General of a new impression, was
guilty of so great a fault in not seizing upon Maiden, that your Majesty's
goodness is to be admired, you did not punish him with the loss of his Head.
You know the reasons why Monsieur Louvoy protected this General; they were the
same with those that made him so bold, as to desire your Majesty to make Madam
Fresnoy a Lady of the Bedchamber, to the Queen. She was Wife to one of the
Marquess's Deputies, and he the Son of an Apothecary, by the Daughter of a
little Deputy in the Post Office. When all the World knows, that Persons of the
greatest Quality, even Dutchesses, would have thought it a great Honor to have
had the place. I wonder he was not ashamed to recommend a Woman of no better
Reputation to a place so near a Wise and Virtuous Princess, such things are
never to be pardoned, but give me an occasion to admire your Majesty's goodness.

Your Majesty's refusing, by Monsieur Louvoy's persuasion, to accept of a
Peace; put all Europe into Combustion. The Spaniards, who were more concerned
than the Emperor or the Electour of Brandenbourgh, to keep you from Conquering
Holland; took the Field to favor the Prince of Orange's Designs. They joined
with him, and had you not been so cautious as to gain Count Marsin, who
Commanded the Spaniards, they had defeated the Duke of Duras, who Commanded
your Flying Camp after Monsieur Chamilli's Death. But Marsin purposely kept the
Spaniards so long from passing the River Roer, that he gave the Duke time
enough to save himself.

A Naval Combat accompanied these great Events, to your Majesty's Glory; for
your Ships which joined the English Fleet came so seasonably in to their
Assistance, that otherwise the English had been beaten. The Dutch who did not
think your Majesty was so much to be feared at Sea as by Land, were surpised
with this Action, which gave them another Idea of your Power, and was one of
the reasons why they made such Applications to your Majesty for a Peace. They
saw they were like to speed no better with you at Sea than at Land, and
therefore desired an Accommodation, rather than expect uncertainties that might
deceive them.

The end of this Campaign proved more successful to your Majesty, than the
beginning. The Enemy besieged Charleroy, when Montall the Governor of it was
gone to Tongres, which he thought they designed to attaque: But he got again
into Charleroy with a Squadron of Horse, and made the Enemy raise the Siege.

All these happy Successes made some envy your Majesty, whom you had no design
to molest. Many took part with the Enemy against you, but the Duke of Bavaria
resolved to stand Neuter, and would not declare against you; but employed the
Money which your Majesty gave him, to Levy new Troops. The Duke of Hanover
promised you to do the same, but as I shall presently show, he was (much
against his will) kept from making good his word.

Your Majesty having thus ordered your Affairs in that Country; as soon as the
Spring came on, you laid Siege to Mastricht, which you took in thirteen Days
after opening the Trenches; though the Enemy looked upon it as a Rock that would
break all your Designs. From thence you went into Lorrain, to hinder the Duke
of that Name, who joined with your Enemies, from drawing that Country into his
Party. You caused the Capital City to be fortified, which was not then Tenable,
and after you your self had seen the Works begun, you went into Alsatia to give
such Orders, as in the present juncture you thought necessary. Your Majesty
took in some places there, which properly belonged to the Inhabitants
themselves, according to certain Privileges obtained from their Emperors; and
though after the Treaty of Munster, you did not think fit to meddle with them;
yet your safety now obliging you to take another Course, you presently caused
them to be demolished.

It concerned your Majesty to do it; for the Emperor had a second time sent an
Army into the Field, to oppose your Designs. Viscount Turenne faced 'em, and
twice offered 'em Battle; but Montecuculi, who Commanded the Emperor's Army,
declined Fighting, and Encamped so strongly, that Turenne could not force him
to an Engagement. They lay observing one another, both endeavoring to gain the
Bishop of Wirtsburg, who had not yet declared himself. The Bridge which he had
upon the Mein was not to be surprised, because it was so near the Capital City,
and was of considerable advantage to both Parties. Monsieur Turenne thinking
himself sure of the Bishop, because he had promised him to let no body pass,
which was all that Monsieur Turenne desired; he provided Magazines at Waxtheim,
in case he should be obliged to stay there any time; but when he thought
himself safe, relying on the Promise which had been made him, the Bishop
treated with Montecuculi, who passed the Bridge, took Waxtheim and all your
Provisions.

It required extraordinary Conduct and Prudence in General Turenne, to get out
of the Straits, whereinto this breach of Faith had brought him. Nevertheless,
like a great Captain, long experienced in the Trade of War, he Posted himself
very advantageously, and made a new collection of Provisions, hoping to break
Montecuculi's Measures. But the five Villages, wherein were his new Magazins,
being all at a time set on fire, and burnt, he was now in a worse condition
than before, by the Bishop of Wirtsburg's Treachery.

I cannot conceal from your Majesty, what was said in your Army upon this
strange Accident. I dare not say, I believe what I have to tell you; it is so
terrible and surprising, that you your self cannot but tremble with indignation
to hear it. But though perhaps I should do well not to speak of it, yet how can I
keep from your Majesty, that which you are so much concerned to know? All your
Army believed, those Villains, who burnt your Magazins in the five Villages,
were employed by Monsieur Louvoy, because his hatred to Turenne increased
daily. That which caused the suspicion, was this Great Man's saying at that
very time; the Enemies which your Majesty had out of your Kingdom were not so
much to be feared, as those you had in it.

Your Majesty seized upon the City of Treves, whose Elector had boldly enough
declared against you, by delivering up to your Enemies Coblents and Hermestein.
Montcouculi past the Rhine at the first of those places, and having joined the
Prince of Orange, they laid Siege to Bonne: A place, though not very
considerable, yet they were three weeks before they could make themselves
Masters of it. Your Majesty knows the Reason, why you suffered the Place to be
taken, without striking a blow to relieve it; and if credit may be given to the
Officers of your Army, and to some others, who have the Honor to be near your
Majesty; this was another trick of Monsieur Louvoy's, to keep Viscount
Turenne's Reputation from growing too great.

The Campagn ended with making the Bishop of Wirtsburg repent his breach of
Faith, Turenne ruining a very fine Castle of his, having first burnt all the
Movables and Furniture, without suffering the Soldiers to plunder or take any
thing, that the Bishop might not underhand buy his Goods again of them; who
generally sell what they get, for the tenth part of its value, and then the
Bishop would have been no great loser; for in truth he could not be punished
enough, because when such Men as he break their words, they deserve to be very
severely dealt with. But it must likewise be confessed, that Monsieur Turenne on
his part was too credulous, to believe a Person that in respect of his Birth
was not to be trusted, and who might be presumed to be rather your Majesty's
Enemy, than your Friend.

Not long after this, the Elector Palatin turned his back upon you, under
pretense that he suffered as much by your Troops, as if he had been your
declared Enemy: Which was not in your Majesty's Power to redress, because the
Imperialists were privately trucking to have Phillipsburg delivered to them. So
that there was a necessity of drawing your Forces near to cover it. The taking
of Bonne, and the Prince of Orange's taking of Narden, through the Cowardice of
the Governor, for which he was exemplarily punished; were two Misfortunes that
contributed very much to the Elector Palatine's deserting you: For you were
forced to abandon Vtrecht, and the Duke of Luxemburg, who Commanded on that
side, in the place of Marquess Rochefort, whose incapacity obliged you to quit
that Frontier, had much ado to save himself and his Army. But having done it,
contrary to the Opinion of many, who concluded he must needs suffer very much,
in so long a March as he had to make, he took care to guard that which is
called French-Flanders, upon which the Spaniards seemed to have a design.

While this past, the King of Sweden's Mediation was accepted by all Parties,
to end this great difference. There was a Congress at Collen, where they met
from all parts; but the Preliminaries, as is usual in such Cases, being very
long; there was no appearance things would be soon Accommodated. In the mean
time, your Fleet still joined with the English, beat the Dutch three several
times this Campagn, and was so far from losing the Reputation you had got the
Year before, that your Fleet very much increased it, by the Courage and
Resolution it showed in those three Naval Combats: There was nothing decisive
on either side, and because your Conquests gave cause of jealousy to your
Allies, the English begun to think of leaving you.

But your Majesty did all that was Humanly possible to be done, to preserve
their Alliance. You provided a Wife for the Duke of York, presumptive Heir to
the Crown of England. This Prince had so many Mistresses in five or six Months
time, that one would have thought he would have Married all the World. The
first he had, was Mademoiselle d'Elboeuff, upon which account, he sent my Lord
Peterborough to Paris, who conferred with me about it. According to the Orders
I received from your Majesty; I was very desirous that the business should take
effect; because I had a great value for that Princess: But my Lord Sunderland,
the then English Ambassador, and my Lord Peterborough, falling out, the
misunderstanding between them, broke off the Match.

After Madam d'Elboeuf, the Princess Mary Anne of Wirtemberg came upon the
Stage; and the Business was carried on so far, that your Majesty Signed a
Contract with Commissioners, deputed by the Duke of York for that purpose. I
had Orders to write to Madam the Duchess of Wirtemberg, to come and be present
at her Daughter's Marriage; but when every body thought the business sure, it
quite broke off, upon some Ill Things reported of the Lady; her Enemies
pretended she had certain defects which I never perceived. Whatever it were
that was said of the Princess, a mean Person whom she had disobliged, was
thought to be the Author of it. So true is it, that a very little Enemy may
sometimes do a great deal of Mischief, against which the best fence and remedy,
is never prepensly and with set purpose, to do to any body the least harm. A
Rule seldom observed by Princes and Great Men, who take such a liberty of
saying what they please, that many times they let fall words, which they would
give a great deal to recall. But when an Injury is once done, it can never be
undone, and wounds given by the Tongue are incurable. It Is an Offense which
Brave Men will resent the longest day of their Life, and will certainly be
revenged, unless God turn their Hearts. But thanks be to God, this is a Vice
whereof your Majesty is not guilty; for as you say little, so you always speak
to the purpose, and without ever reflecting upon your Neighbor. To your Honor
be it spoken, I can also say, that you know not what it is to be Angry. I have
lived at Court full Forty Years, and Five and Twenty of them, I have had the
Honor to be near your Majesty, in which time I can safely Swear, I never saw
you but once a little moved. It was when Monsieur Werthamont, who, though a
severe Sentence had past upon him for several Crimes, was yet so bold, as to
come into your Presence. I observed your Majesty grew Red with Anger, and the
Tone of your Voice when you told him he should come no more to Court, was not
like that wherewith you used to give your Commands at other times.

The Marriage of the Princess Mary Anne failing, for the Reason I have hinted.
That of Mademoiselle Crequi, who has since married the Duke of Tremouille,
came next to be talked of. It was said her Father was very Rich, and had made
his Fortune while he was Ambassador at Rome; where others use to undo
themselves. But the Duke and Duchess of Crequi being resolved not to give so
much, as a Match of such advantage for their Daughter required, they lost by
their Covetousness, that which others would have bought with their Blood.

The Duke of York at last pitched upon the Princess of Modena; to whom Monsieur
the Cardinal her Uncle had left a Hundred Thousand Franks, which I had in my
Hands. This Marriage was without any difficulty concluded, to the Satisfaction
of both Parties.

From what I have said, the Lesson which a Prince ought to learn, is, that he
should still so well manage his Affairs, as never through weakness to do any
thing unworthy of his Birth. For though Mademoiselle Crequi were a Woman of
Quality, yet she was not a Person suitable and considerable enough for a
Prince, who was so near stepping into the Throne of England. But yet I know,
without looking very far back into the History of that Nation, Henry the 8th.
Married two Wives, who were not of a better Family, perhaps of not so good: But
there is a great deal of difference between what Love does, and that which is
done with design, and after mature deliberation. The two Cases are quite
different, and though there may be faults in both, yet whoever does an imprudent
thing deliberately and wilfully, is more to be blamed, than he, who in what he
does is not Master of himself.

Seeing I am now discoursing of Marriage; I will not leave the Subject, till I
have given your Majesty an account of somewhat whereof I lately boasted. I told
your Majesty that I did refuse a considerable Match offered me for my Son. It
was Mademoiselle Bournonville, now the Duchess of Noailles. The Proposition
was made to me by her Father, who sent me word it should be upon such
advantageous Terms for my Son, as should likewise satisfy me. Civility obliged
me not absolutely to refuse what he proposed, and therefore I thanked him for
the Honor he did me; but when we came to treat further concerning it, he
required that I should endeavor to prevail with your Majesty, to restore him
to the Government of Paris, which your Majesty had taken from him, because he
was so great a Friend to Monsieur Fouquet, and had also behaved himself so ill,
that though he had for several Months lived in a House near the very Gates of
Paris, without ever coming to pay his Respects to your Majesty, when he was in
very good Health, and daily made Merry with his Friends that came to visit him;
yet he made your Majesty believe he was troubled with Vapors, which would not
suffer him to go any where out of his House. But the Feasts he made, and the
pleasant Life he led, giving his pretense the Lie, and your Majesty being
informed of it, thought fit to use him as you did. I thanked him for the Honor
he intended my Son, but I thought it better to lose the advantage of such an
Alliance, rather than to run the hazard of Your Majesty's Displeasure.

Though your Majesty had to do with so many Enemies, yet you took care to secure
the Peace of Italy, which was upon the point of being disturbed, by the
difference which happened between the Duke of Savoy, and the Republic of
Genoa. But by interposing your Authority, your Majesty prevailed with both
Parties, to accept of your Mediation, and you brought both to an Agreement.

You had the same work to do over again in Poland, upon the Death of the new
King there without Children, who had Married the Empeperour's Sister; before
she was Married, the Prince of Lorrain was in Love with her, and it was said if
she might have had her will, she would have preferred him (though he had lost his
Country) before the King and Crown of Poland. Whatever was the matter, she made
so great a Party for him in the Kingdom, that every body thought he would have
been chosen King. The Poles were so little satisfied with the Deceased King,
that they were inclined to revive the Law which was against choosing a King of
their own Nation. Your Majesty seemed to approve the reviving of this Law, by
your endeavors to have the Eldest Son of the Duke of Newburg preferred, before
the Prince of Lorrain. In the last Election you were for the Old Duke of
Newburg the Father, with whom then stood Competitors, the Prince of Lorrain,
and the Prince of Conde. But because the Poles then objected against the Duke,
as being too Old, and his Age now being greater than it was then, your Majesty
to please them, now proposed the Son in stead of the Father, and spent a great
deal of Money to get him Elected; which, if not, might at that time have been
prejudicial to your Affairs. But though the Prince of Newburg was not chosen; yet
by the Address of your Ambassador, the Prince of Lorrain was likewise put by,
and a Native of Poland preferred before all the Princes proposed. For John
Sobiescki, great Marshal of Poland, was made King, which very much displeased
your Enemies, they imagining he would be a Friend to your Majesty, because he
had Married a French-Woman, who was the Daughter of Marquess d'Arquyen, Captain
of the Hundred Swisses, of your Brother's Guard.

You had need of this Aid, against the Designs of the House of Austria, who
fancied you would never come off with Honor, in the War you had begun. The
Emperor possessed with this Opinion, did two things which were mightily cried
down by all People, not transported with Passion against you. One was the
seizing upon Prince William of Furstenburg in Collen, who was Abbe of Stravelo,
and the Elector of Collen's Plenipotentiary; under which Character he could not
be seized, without violating the Law of Nations. The other was the taking away
by force, Fifty Thousand Crowns which your Majesty had in the City, and which
for the same reason ought to have been Sacred. But because the House of Austria
had a mind to obstruct the Peace, and could find no better Obstacle; it past
over all other Considerations.

Prince William was first carried to Bonne, where he had Ten Hours Conference
with Marquess de Grana, Governor of the Town. Who reproached him with being
born a German, yet had in several Occasions, which he particularly named,
betrayed his Country. Which Prince William denied, but owned he had served your
Majesty, after he had many times endeavored to deserve the Emperor's Favor,
but could never obtain it. From Bonne he was Conducted to Newstat, where the
Emperor resolved to have him put to Death in Prison, after a private Sentence
past against him, where only a few Persons were present, who Condemned him to
be Beheaded. But your Majesty, who beside all your other good Qualities, has
that of diving into the most secret Councils of your Enemies, found a way to
engage the Pope's Nuncio, to represent to the Emperor, that he ought not in
such a manner to put a Churchman to Death. The scruple being easily put into
the Emperor's Head, he stopped the Execution, and caused him to be removed to
another Prison.

Your Majesty complained to the Court of Vienna, of the Violence offered to the
Person of Prince William; and at the same time demanded Restistution of the
Fifty Thousand Crowns that had been taken from you. But receiving no
satisfactory Answer to either, you recalled your Ambassadors who were still at
Collen: The other Princes did the like, seeing after what had been done, there
was no more safety for them, than for Prince William. But since they that are
strongest, are still thought to have most reason on their side; your Enemies
listed so many Troops, that few were of Opinion, your Majesty would ever be
able to make Head against 'em. The Bishop of Munster was of that mind, and
therefore quitted your Party. The Elector of Collen would have done the like,
if the Bishop of Strasburg had not dissuaded him. But when People thought you
could not but sink under the weight of so many Enemies, you attacked
Franch-Conte, to which you had offered a Neutrality. The Swiss who had
concerned themselves in the Negotiation, were angry with the Spaniards for
refusing what you offered; and therefore guarded their Frontiers, to keep the
Spaniards from being assisted by their Allies. Your Majesty went into
Franche-Conte in Person, and there did that which was never before known to be
done at the taking of any place. You caused Canons to be hoisted up, and
planted upon Mountains so very high and steep, that a Man could hardly clamber
up; by which you became Master of Besanson, that your Enemies thought
impregnable.

The Conquest of this Province, gave your Majesty new strength, of which you
had need enough in the condition you were in. For the King of England was in a
manner forced to a Peace with the Dutch, by his own Subjects, who were more
jealous of your Conquests than others. But the King of England still left his
Troops in your Majesty's Service. They were some Regiments, of which the most
considerable, was called the Royal Regiment, Commanded by the Duke of Monmouth.
Some of the Officers were very insolent, so that one of them gave ill Language
to one of Monsieur Louvoy's Grooms, who to go the nearer way crossed their Camp.
Your Minister, who expected Respect should be paid to his very Liveries, put
this Officer under a Guard, whereupon the others Mutiny'd. But seeing the
Marquess had not the same Power over the English, that he had over your Troops,
he was obliged to release the Officer; this was some Mortification to Monsieur
Louvoy's excessive Pride. A Minister, or any Person, of greater or less
Quality, might well be ashamed to take a Servant's part against a Gentleman,
unless the ill usage of the Servant; were intended for an Affront to the
Master. One of your Majesty's Captains was of a more phlegmatic Temper, who
seeing his Coachman that used to drive him, lustily cudgel'd; when next day the
Person that beat him came to excuse himself, by saying he knew not whose Man he
was, the Captain told him he was obliged to him, and should be more, if all the
Men he kept, had but so good a hand as he, for then People would be more afraid
of his Men than they were.

The Franche-Counte being thus reduced, your Majesty resolved to have it better
Fortified. Marquess Louvoy pitched upon an Engineer called Combs, a Man of
good Skill and Experience, having given Proofs of his Ability in Holland, where
he had been employed in Fortifying several places. But the Marquess reserved
Besanson to be Fortified by Monsieur Vauban, which so dissatisfied Combs, that
he took the liberty to tell Monsieur Louvoy, he had been a chief Engineer in
Holland, and therefore 'twas an Affront to him, to have another put over his
Head. But the Marquess, whose Temper is to be obeyed without reply, sent him to
the Bastile; where he was so cruelly treated, that he was shut up in a Chamber
three days without a Bed. The Man, who thought he had not deserved such ill
usage, took it so to Heart, that he fell Sick, and Monsieur Louvoy about eleven
days after, going to see him, asked whether he would be wiser for the future?
Combs said he had something else to think of now, which was, to give God an
Account of his Actions, being in a little time to leave the World. Though your
Minister presently gave him his Liberty, yet in three days after he dyed. Which
ought to Teach Men never to make too severe an use of their Authority,
especially to Men of Courage; who seldom refuse to obey, but where they think
their Honor concerned. And in such Cases, if they be faulty, they ought in a
friendly manner to be advised, and not Corrected with too much Rigor.

Your Majesty's great Success, made your Minister so very bold, that he every
day begged new Favors of you. He obtained an Order from your Majesty, that I
should yearly furnish him with Forty Millions, to defray the Charge of the War,
and to Account for it to none but your self. The Account was given in a single
sheet of Paper, which one would think, not big enough to contain the several
Items of such a Sum. I do not believe it is by this alone, he has got that
prodigious Estate, which some say, is greater than many Sovereigns have. All
the Regulations he has made during this War, which under specious pretenses
have rendered your Officers poor; were I believe intended more for his own
Profit, than your Majesty's, you gratified him so many ways out of your
Officer's Pay, that in perfect distaste, many of them quitted your Service.

Yet this did no more satisfy his Avarice, than did your Majesty's granting
him the Foreign Posts, which amounted to a vast Sum by his Exorbitant Taxing
of Letters, whereof the least paid as much again as it used to do in Monsieur
Noveau's Time. He begged a Patent to have the sole power of Licensing People to
keep Hackney, Stage, and Hired Horses, upon which he laid an Imposition. Not
content with this, he obtained a Privilege for those that kept such Horses, to
be free from Quartering of Soldiers, for which Exemption, some gave him a
Hundred Crowns; not that they got so much by their Horses, but because
Quartering of Soldiers was so great a burden to them, that whatever they paid
to be freed from it, yet they thought they had a good Bargain.

The Marquess became at last so great a Favorite, that he did whatever he
pleased, without any body's daring to contradict him: Every one strove to show
him Respect, and all Favors passing through his Hands, it was a shame to see
what base and servile Bows and Cringes were made to him by the greatest Persons
in your Kingdom. For my own part, I was too Stiff to worship him. Finding the
Forty Millions which your Majesty ordered me to pay him, such an infinite
Charge to your People, and that a greater Burden was yet to be laid upon 'em to
answer other Expenses, I began to examine how so vast a Sum could be laid out.
As soon as I cast my Eye upon the Account, I discovered a considerable Cheat,
of no less than Fifteen or Sixteen Hundred Thousand Crowns a Year. I must speak
likewise of the Abuses practiced in the Years 1673. and 1674. concerning the
Routes oppointed for the marching of Soldiers from Place to Place. To be but
one of your Minister's Lacquies, was Merit enough to have had Five or Six of
them. Several Officers were likewise settled in Paris, to dispatch, as 'twas
pretended, your Majesty's own Affairs; where nothing could be done without
ready Money; so that if these Abuses had continued any long time, Forty
Millions would not have been sufficient to answer the Charge of these
Disorders. Your Majesty heard what I had to say concerning these Abuses, and
thought fit to name Commissioners to inquire into 'em. They who were the
greatest Criminals saved themselves, and those that were seized, not being able
to speak so pertinently as others, were, upon payment of their Fines, let out
of Prison.

This was a Business bad enough, to have stopped the Carier of your Ministers
good Fortune; but your Majesty drawing from it Supplies to support the War,
which was so much his care; he had Opportunities to be heard in his own
Justification, and saved himself, by laying the Blame of all that had been done
upon your Officers: So that there are lucky Conjunctures, when things shall be
forgotten, which at another time would be punished with severity. It is also
observable, that Men in great favor shall pass for innocent, when others who
are less culpable shall be ruined and undone. But this is an Evil that has
long reigned in the World, and looks as if it would continue much longer,
before any Remedy be provided against it.

The Elector Palatin and the Bishop of Munster forsaking your Party, obliged
your Majesty to quit all your Conquests in Holland, excepting Graves and
Maestricht. You drew out all your Garrisons, and made up a good Body of an
Army, which was what the Prince of Conde had some time before advised your
Majesty to do; but Monsieur Louvoy continually opposed it. In the mean time,
Viscount Turenne, when he had shut up all the Passes of the County of
Montbelliard, by which the Duke of Lorrain designed to succor the County of
Burgundy; having no more to do on that side, marched back again into Germany,
where he took Germesseim, and caused it to be demolished; thereby taking away
the hope which the Elector Palatine had, that this Place should streighten and
keep the Garrison of Phillipsbourg from desolating his Country. He then went
toward the Rhine and past it, to fight the Imperial Army, to which were now
joined the Duke of Lorrain's and the Bishop of Munster's Troops: He found them
so advantageously posted, that he must run a great Risque in endeavoring to
force them; but considering it would be an affront to him, to come so far and
then retreat, and also if he staid longer, the Enemy would be stronger than he,
by the Duke of Bournonvill's coming up to them: Considering, I say, what
Resolution soever he took, he had a great many Difficulties to grapple with, he
resolved to do that wherein there was most Honor, which was to fight. However,
it must be confessed, we have a great deal of reason to say, that in Battles God
only is the Giver of Victory, seeing without him, it was impossible, in this
Action, for your General to have come off with Honor. He was in the first
place obliged to force the little Village of St. Seim, into which the Enemy had
put their Infantry: There was no coming to it, but through Defiles guarded by
their Dragoons; but he overcame all those Difficulties with so much ease, that
had his Troops been the best that ever were in Europe, yet they could never
have done what they did, unless God had fought for him. They routed the
Dragoons and took the Village; they afterward advanced against the Horse through
narrow Lanes, beat 'em, and put 'em into so great a Fright, that they never
thought themselves safe, till they had past the Necker.

This Victory cost your Majesty dear; for you lost in the Fight a great many
good Officers, that might have done you great Service: You had so much to do,
and in so many Places at once, that to direct and order what was fit to be
done, required such a Head as yours. Count Souches, who commanded the greatest
part of the Imperial Forces, entered into Flanders, and joined with the Prince
of Orange, whose Army consisted of Threescore Thousand Men, and that part which
remained in Germany grew strong in a little time, by the Forces which came to
it from all sides; so that they were scarce sensible of their late loss. Your
Majesty was obliged to provide for the Safety of Rousillon, where the Spaniards
made a show of undertaking somewhat. But that which most troubled you, was,
that the Hollanders, who being now Masters at Sea, by the King of England's
deserting you, threatened the Coasts of Normandy and Britany; where the Alarm
was so great, that one would have thought all had been lost: But after roaming
to and fro they attempted to surprise Belle Isle, where they received a
Repulse; which obliged them to retire, and then landing upon the Island of
Noirmoustier, they pillaged it, and exacted a Sum of Money from some of the
best Houses, which they threatened to burn if it were not paid them. This
Invasion, which looked as if it would have swallowed up your whole Kingdom,
ending thus in doing so little, they went to seek for better Fortune in
America, imagining that when you had so much to do at home, you could take care
of nothing there. But they having besieged St. Thomas, met with so great
resistance, that it holding out till the Season was too far spent to keep the
Sea, they were forced to raise the Siege.

In the mean time, Viscount Turenne, after the Battle of St. Seim, came back on
this side of the Rhine to join a part of his Army he had left there to make the
more haste: but understanding the Enemy was to be re-inforc'd, he re-pass'd the
River to fight them a Second time, before they should grow too strong for him:
But they retreated over the Mein, under the Canon of Francfort, the General
following them so close, that he charged their Rear in passing the River, and
cut off near Eight Hundred of their Men: But not being able to force them out
of that Place, he returned back to destroy the Elector Palatin's Country, which
very much provoked the Elector; especially the burning some Villages, though
without the General's Order; it being in truth done by the Soldiers, that
resolved to be revenged upon the Country, for barbarously murdering some of
their Comrades.

The Elector, in his Passion, sent by a Trumpet a formal Challenge to Viscount
Turenne; but he was too prudent a Man to accept it; but made him this answer,
That having the Honor to command your Majesty's Army, he could do nothing
without your Orders; as to the Elector's complaints against him, they were
without ground, for had the Elector's Subjects not dealt so cruelly with your
Majesty's Soldiers, they had never thought of burning their Houses. That he
did not refuse the Honor the Elector did him, in offering to sight with him,
provided each of them were at the Head of an Army, and then he hoped he might
do your Majesty some Service.

The Imperialists having staid long enough under the Canon of Francfort, to
reinforce themselves with the Recruits which were sent them from several
Princes of the Empire: Viscount Turenne found their Army stronger than his own,
so that he entrenched himself between Landau and Weissemberg. When the
Imperialists saw him retreat, they took their turn to follow him, and came to
Mentz where they pretended to pass the Rhine: but the Elestor of that Name,
with whom your Majesty had taken measures, would not do as the Bishop of
Wirtsburg did, but prayed 'em to seek a Passage somewhere else.

The Prince of Orange's Army remained all this while encamped, and your Majesty
wondered at it, not being able to guess why he attempted nothing, with so
considerable a Force. The Prince of Conde observed him, but being much the
weaker, he thought fit to entrench himself, and not to fight, but when he saw
an opportunity. The Prince of Orange seeing all your Troops employed, either to
make Head against him, or to observe the Imperialists, whose Army would in a
little time be Sixty Thousand Men, by the joining of Marquess Brandenburg, who
was already on his March; gave Order for the besieging of Graves, by Rabenhaut
an Officer who had gotten some Reputation against the Bishop of Munster, when
that Prelate was of your Party. Count Chamilli, younger Brother to him of whom
I have made mention, commanded in the place, and defended it so well, that
Rabenhaut had time enough to catch cold before it. The Garrison made frequent
Sallies, so that at three Months end, he was not much farther advanced, than he
was the first Day; though he had promised to give a good account of the Town in
three Weeks.

In the mean time the Prince of Orange seemed to design entering into France,
which he thought easier to do, than to begin a Siege in sight of your Army,
which would not have suffered it without coming to Blows. The Prince of Orange
in order to his Design began to march, and the Prince of Conde followed him,
and fell on his Rear so rudely, that he killed above Three Thousand Men, made
as many Prisoners, and took his Baggage and some of his Canon, before he could
recover himself, or well know what was to be done: The Country which was full
of Hedges and broken Ground, made by Torrents of Rain, offered the Prince of
Orange an advantage, which he could not have met with in an open Plain: He
threw his Infantry into these Posts, which hindered your Majesty from advancing:
But the Prince of Conde was so eager in pressing still forward, that he did
things, which another would have thought impossible. He had a great many Men
killed, and had himself Three Horses shot under him; so much did he hazard his
Person, by his Example to give warmth to the Action: But by the great
resistance made by the Enemy he was still repulsed, till night came on, and
parted the Combatants, both attributing to themselves the Victory. But there
was no color for the Enemy to pretend to it, because that which makes a
Victory, is to remain Master of the Field, to have the pillaging of the Enemy,
taking Prisoners, and several other things not necessary to be specified. All
this fell out on your Majesty's side, but nothing of it on theirs; unless
perhaps the Enemy might boast, that the Prince of Conde lost as many Men as
they, and it may be a greater number of Officers.

But it must be confessed, that the end of this Battle did not answer the
beginning, which could not be more to any General's Glory: But the desire he
had to get all, made him lose more than he imagined, and till that very Day, it
could not be decided, which of the Two, the Prince of Conde, or Viscount
Turenne, knew most, in the Trade of War. Many were prepossest in the Prince's
Favor, and thought the Prize due to him, but others now began to be of another
Mind, and gave it to his Rival.

This Battle however spoiled the Prince of Orange's Design; who now thought no
more of entering into France. Monsieur Louvoy, who did not love the Prince of
Conde, was very much pleased with what had happened; because it gave him an
Opportunity, of doing the Prince ill offices to your Majesty: So that since
this Campaign, he has not been any more employed, and I believe never would
have been again at the Head of an Army, if Viscount Turenne had not been killed
the following Campaign; there being then a kind of necessity, that a General of
Reputation should succeed in his Place.

As Monsieur Louvoy knew how to do a great deal of Mischief to his Enemies, so
he was able to deliver his Friends out of Danger, and those that were so happy
to have his Protection; as appears by what he did for Monsieur Bret, Lieunant
General of your Army in Catalonia, where his Vanity and Imprudence made him
commit a Fault, which deserved exemplary Punishment.

Your Majesty, some time ago sent him into that Country, and left him there
some preceding Years, with the chief command of your Army, because then there
appeared no considerable Enemy. But the Spaniards having sent thither the Duke
of St. Germain, a General of Reputation, with a part of their old Troops; your
Majesty thought fit to send against him Count Schomberg, not inferior to him,
and who had often engaged him, when they were both in Portugal. This was some
mortification to a Man so Vain as Monsieur Bret, who was now but a Lieutenant
General; which not being able to bear, he did so rash a thing of his own Head,
that none but Marquess Louvoy could have saved him. The Enemy, after having
taken Bellegard, which gave them entrance into Rousillon, came and encamped
within Canon shot of your Army, which so displeased Monsieur Bret, that he gave
them Battle while his General was yet in Bed, and without expecting any Orders
from him: But he was beaten to the purpose, and if Count Schomberg, who
wondered at his Boldness, had not by his good Conduct repaired his Fault, your
Majesty's Army had been totally defeated. Your Cavalry, which without viewing
the Ground, he had engaged among Pits and Places broken with currents of Water,
were many of them cut off, and Rabliere, who commanded them, was taken
Prisoner, with other Officers of note: Those that came off, were in no
condition to have made any considerable resistance all that Campaign, if that
which happened elsewhere had not obliged the Enemy to return again into
Catalonia.

Messina, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Sicily, having a long time
complained of the Extortion and Tyranny of their Viceroys, and having often
informed the Council of Spain thereof, without receiving any redress; they
resolved one day to try, whether they could shake of their Yoke, and after
having made themselves Masters of the Haven, and one of the principal Forts of
the Town, they all cried Liberty. That Word tickled the Ears of the Multitude,
who, against reason, often think they shall better their Condition by changing
their Master; and made above Sixty thousand Men take Arms. The better sort of
Citizens, considering it was impossible to resist their Sovereign any long
time, unless they were supported by a Power able to assist them; consulted what
was best for them to do; whether to address themselves to your Majesty, or to
have recourse to the Turk. They were not long deliberating on the choice they
were to make, those that had a little care of their Religion, declared, that in
all respects, their best and most justifiable way would be, to implore your
Majesty's help, and send Deputies to request your Protection.

The Offers their Deputies made you, were, that they would deliver themselves
up to your Majesty, upon Condition you would treat them better than the
Spaniards had done: Whereupon you assembled your Council, who finding it would
be of great advantage to you, to lay hold of this opportunity to cut out work
for the Spaniards on that side; the Deputies had assurance given them, that
your Majesty would assist them with all your Forces: But it was not thought fit
you should accept of the Sovereignty which they offered you, but that it would
be better to endeavor to turn their Government into a Commonwealth.

You sent back the Deputies with fair promises, which at the same time you
effectually performed, by giving order to the Marquess Valavoir to take some of
your Men of War, and Convoy to Messina some Vessels laden with Provisions, of
which they had great need, and which came very seasonably to them; for they
began to be in extreme want. The rebelling of Subjects against their Sovereign,
is a business which should be well considered before it be attempted, it is
always attended with such ill consequences, that were they not bound by their
birth and allegiance to be faithful to him, yet their own interest should
oblige them to it.

But as Subjects owe their Sovereign perfect obedience, so the Sovereign on his
part, ought not to use his Subjects like Slaves, nor lay heavier burdens on
them than necessity of State requires. Otherwise they will quite sink under
their load, or else like a resty Horse will kick against the Spur, as it
happens when we endeavor to break and tame a young Horse, all at once, without
using him by degrees to insensible correction.

The revolt of Messina, rendered the Enemy's Victory in Rousillon of little or
no advantage to them; for being obliged to leave that Province, and go where
there was most danger, their absence gave Your Majesty an opportunity to drive
them next year quite out of the Country, by retaking the Castle of Bellegard.

The disgrace which your Troops received in Catalonia, was so largely
recompensed by the prosperous success of your Arms, the next Campaign in
Germany and Flanders; that your Majesty had all the reason in the world to be
well pleased. Your Army had twice triumphed under Viscount Turenne, and tho in
the Battle of Seneff the Prince of Conde lost many brave men, yet it produced a
very good effect. One thing I forgot to speak of till now, which was of great
advantage to you, the Baggage of Count Monteri, Governor of the Spanish
Flanders, was taken in that Battle, and some Papers found which discovered a
Conspiracy that was hatching in your Kingdom, to deliver up certain places upon
the Coast of Normandy; they at least made mention of some such thing, but for
my own part, I cannot believe there was really any such Conspiracy, the person
supposed to be chief in it, and all his Accomplices, were people of so little
credit, that I rather think it was a trick to get Money from the Spaniards by
one not worth a Groat, and who was up to the ears in debt.

The principal Conspirator was the Chevalier de Rhoan, who was a very handsome
well made man, but so extremely debauched, that he lost the good opinion your
Majesty once had of him; he used all his Relations, and his own Mother so ill,
that she not long ago complained to your Majesty that he had robbed her, and
many times after that so abused her, that she was about to pray your Majesty to
do her the favor, to send him to the Bastille. To complete his imprudence, he
parted with his place of chief Huntsman of France, by which he subsisted; so
that not knowing how to live, he did that of which I am now speaking.

The business concerned your Majesty too much to be neglected; for had he
designed nothing but the getting a little Money, yet he deserved to be
punished, that it might not be an ill example to your Subjects. Whatever it was
he intended, your Majesty ordered he should be seized, and sent to the
Bastille; and the Major of your Guards went to Rouan to take one of his
Confederates called Lautremont. The Major surpised him in his Bed, and though
he should have immediately brought him away bound Hand and Foot, yet because he
had some acquaintance with him, he gave him leave to go into his Closet, where
he had two Pistols ready Charged, one he fired upon the Major, but missed him;
one of your Guards that went with him, shot Lautremont with a Musquetoon
through the Body; which displeased Your Majesty, because he being killed, you
could not come to the knowledge of several things, which you hoped he might
have confessed; for it was he that was trusted with the management of the whole
Intrigue, and who had sent into Flanders a Schoolmaster that was a Stranger,
and had a Lodging in the Suburbs of St. Antoine; this Fellow would have run
away, but you gave Order that he, the Marchioness de Villars, and the Chevalier
de Preaux, should all three be seized.

If the Chevalier de Rhoan had known what passed, he certainly would not have
confessed any thing; for no body but he that was killed at Rouen, knew that he
was in the Conspiracy. When the Schoolmaster was examined, he said, what he
had done was by Lautremont's direction. The Marchioness de Villars, and the
Chevalier de Preaux likewise said, they knew nothing. But he that Interrogated
the Chevalier de Rhoan, by promising him Your Majesty's Pardon, made him
confess that none but he knew any thing of the business; which promise being
made without any order from Your Majesty, you did not think your self obliged
by it; so that the Chevalier de Rhoan was condemned to have his Head cut off.
He beginning to think matters did not go well with him, because for some days
he was not suffered to have a Knife at Table, which was formerly allowed him,
he prayed that Father Bourdaloue the Jesuit might come and confess him.

In two and twenty years he never received the Sacrament, but now on the sudden
became so altered, that no body would have thought him the same man. He was
very penitent, humble, and with great resignation submitted himself to God's
will; so that when the Executioner came to bind him, and asked whether he
should take off a Ribband from his Coat to do it? he said no, take a Rope, for
so great a sinner as he was, could not be too rigorously used. He showed so
many signs of Humiliation, that he drew tears from the eyes of diverse
Spectators. Being come out of the Bastille to the place of Execution just
before it, he stood still, and showed so much courage, that many pitied his sad
condition. Before he mounted the Scaffold, he asked Father Bourdaloue, whether
any body had taken care to comfort his Mother; he begged her pardon in a very
passionate Letter he had written to her; he spoke a few words to the
Marchioness de Villars, and to the Chevalier de Preaux, who were to suffer with
him. Then stretching out his neck to the Executioner, he cut off his head at
one blow.

His body was carried in a mourning Coach to St. Paul's, where it remained till
it was removed from thence to the Abbey of Souars, where he desired to be
buried. The Marchioness de Villars, and the Chevalier de Preaux, were likewise
executed; and after them the Schoolmaster, who was hanged; a warning to all
that waste and spend their Estates, never thinking what shall become of them;
and when God has forsaken them, make no scruple of committing any kind of
Wickedness. Let Libertines also learn, who live as if there were no God, that
there will come a time when he will suffer them to fall into the Hands of
Justice, and they shall then know, though too late, how much mistaken they have
been, in not serving him, whose Grace given to them as it was to this Person of
whom I have now spoken, can only make them Happy.

I now return again to tell your Majesty what passed in Flanders, where the
Prince of Orange having besieged Oudenard, the Prince of Conde marched to
relieve it: But the Imperialists not coming to assist the Prince of Orange, as
they were to have done, he was forced to raise the Siege, and leave Count
Souches, with whom he was so much displeased, that he complained of him to the
Emperor; charging him with being the Cause, that the Affairs of the Campaign
had no better Success. The Emperor, to content the Prince of Orange, would not
for some time see General Souches; but he, after a while, finding an
Opportunity to justify himself, was again restored to the Emperor's Favor.

The Siege of Graves lasted till now, and there was no likelihood that it
should end, having still some Outworks which were not taken. Beside, the ill
Weather was now coming on; so that there was little hope of reducing a
Garrison, which without receiving any Relief, had been the Death of so many
Men: For Rabenhaut had the ill luck still to be beaten, in all the Salleys made
by Count Chamilli. But for a greater Mortification to him, one of your
Majesty's Colonels of Seventy Years of Age, came purposely from Maestricht, and
carried away the best part of the Fruit he hoped to reap by taking the Town.
When your Majesty withdrew your Forces from Holland, you demanded a great Sum
of Money of them, and the Towns which could pay down but part of what you
required, gave you Hostages to be security for the rest. These Hostages were in
Graves as in a Place of Safety, and Rabenhaut who had besieged it, made
account, that by taking it, he should save Holland a very considerable Sum for
which they were still accountable: He had good ground to believe he should not
be deceived in his Expectation, because Ruremond and Venlo which belonged to
the Spaniards, hindered your Majesty from relieving the Place. But Melin Mestre
de Camp of the Cavalry, came, as I have already said, with a party from
Maestricht, past through Rabenhaut's Guards, entered the Town, took away the
Hostages, and went back to his own Garrison, by the same way he came.

General Rabenhaut hereby lost so much of his Reputation, that the Prince of
Orange had not that esteem for him he had before; and he concluded he must not
rely upon him for the taking the Town. The Prince therefore, with some Troops
he had drawn together out of Flanders, went to Graves himself, and became
Master of the Place.

Graves being fallen into the Hands of the Prince of Orange, the Campaign ended
on that Side; but continued still with a great deal of Heat in Germany. The
great Force which the Enemy power'd into Alsatia, did a little astonish your
Minister Monsieur Louvoy, who being afraid the Province could not be saved,
advised your Majesty to give Viscount Turenne Order to leave it, and go to some
other Place, where his Presence was more necessary. This was a Pill which your
Majesty could not well swallow; and to lose a whole Country at once, which had
cost you so much Blood to conquer, was very hard to be digested. But Marquess
Louvoy representing to you the necessity of it, and that otherwise you would
lose Lorrain, whither the Duke of that Name was marching, with great hopes to
enter again into it; you consented that General Turenne should be recalled; but
he knowing things were not in so ill a Condition as they were thought to be,
sent Monsieur Louvoy word, that some body must have given your Majesty ill
Counsel, in advising you to take such a Resolution. That he being on the Place,
saw better than others, how things were, and therefore prayed him to deliver a
Letter to you, which he had done himself the Honor to write, wherein he had
given your Majesty such Reasons for changing your Resolution, that he hoped you
would do it as soon as you had read his Letter.

Marquess Louvoy thought it great vanity in this General, to believe he knew
more than he, and without showing his Letter to your Majesty, sent him new
Orders, expressly the same with the first. This great Man suspecting that your
Majesty was not privy to these repeated Orders, and that if his Letter had been
delivered, you would have done him the Honor to have answered it; he resolved,
before he would do what was commanded him by the second Orders, to write again
to your Majesty; and sent the Letter to Cardinal Bouillon his Nephew, to be by
him safely delivered. The Confidence which your Majesty had in the Wisdom and
Prudence of this General, as soon as you had cast your Eyes on his Letter, made
you conclude that Monsieur Louvoy had not given you good Counsel, and that you
were best to follow your General's Advice, and not your Minister's: You
therefore wrote a Letter with your own Hand to Viscount Turenne, wherein you
told him, that you referred your self wholly to his Judgment, and that he
should use his own Discretion, to do what he thought best.

This was Vexation enough to your Minister, whose Custom it was to be Absolute;
but believing he knew more than any Man, concluded if things fell out ill, as
he had predicted, Viscount Turenne must then lose the good Opinion your Majesty
had of him, and consequently you would for the future confide wholly in the
Marquess: But he reckoned without his Host, and found that the General
preserved both Savern and Hagenau, which the Enemy besieged one after another.
He likewise broke the Design they had upon Brisac, which they had begun to shut
up so close, that it being in great want, they hoped they should quickly have
it without blows. Though these Actions were very considerable, yet they were the
least wherewith the General ended this prosperous Campaigne; for feigning to go
and take Winter Quarters in Lorrain, he Marched through by-ways, and fell
unexpectedly upon the Enemy, who had separated, the better to subsist; and went
on beating them one after another, till they made a stand at Turquem; but he
likewise drove them from thence, and forced them to pass the Rhine. He took
from the Inhabitants of Strasbourg what Effects they had abroad, because they
let the Enemy pass over their Bridge, contrary to the Promise they made him.

Your Majesty who does not use to let any Service of this Nature remain
unrewarded, sent the General the very next day after he came to Paris, a
Hundred Thousand Crowns in Louysd'ors, and gave him many other marks of your
Favor. You sent Marquess Louvoy to him, to ask his Pardon for many things, for
which the General had just cause of Complaint against him. Monsieur Turenne
upon this occasion Treated him, as we see a great Mastiff uses to do a little
Cur; he heard his Complement, without showing him any respect, or sign of
Anger, and sent him away with an Answer, which it is supposed did not please
him. The Prince of Conde came to see Monsieur Turenne, and to know of him what
past at this Enterview.

Viscount Turenne having given an Account of it to the Prince of Conde, who had
no reason to love your Minister; the Prince prayed Monsieur Turenne, that they
might go both together to undeceive your Majesty, in many things which possessed
you with so good an Opinion of him. Viscount Turenne promised the Prince he
would, but Monsieur Tellier* having notice of it, came to the Prince of Conde
and beseech'd him to pardon his Son, who should for the future pay him all the
Respect he could desire; so that pacifying the Prince by fair Promises, he
prevented his Son's Ruin; which had been inevitable, if these two Great Men
had resolved it. For it was an easy thing to have demonstrated to your
Majesty, that many things wherein Monsieur Louvoy made you believe he had done
you great Service, would upon Examination have appeared, to deserve quite
another Name.

As for Example, I may put into that number, the change Monsieur Louvoy
persuaded your Majesty to make, in the Hospitals which were Erected for such as
had the Leprosy; and to convert the Revenue which belonged to those Houses,
into Rewards for such as Served you in your Wars. I presume to tell your
Majesty, when you have seriously considered it, you must be convinced, your
Power does not extend so far in things of this Nature: These Foundations are
Works of Piety which you are obliged to maintain: I know very well it has been
pretended, these Hospitals are of no use, because it is now said the Leprosy,
for which these Houses were intended, is the effect of mere Debauchery, and not
an incurable Disease, as People heretofore believed. But be it, or be it not
so, yet your Majesty is not Authorized to seize the Revenue, and give it to
whom you please. If you can dispose of it, the most you can do is, to Assign it
to some other Hospitals, or so to convert it, that it may answer the Founder's
Intention; for to give it to People, who make use of it to gratify their
Passions, is what Casuists do not allow.

I doubt, whether you can legally unite it, to the Hotel Royal des Invalides,
which you have caused to be built so Magnificently, and have laid out so much
Cost and Charge upon it, that it seems to be intended rather for a Palace, than
an Hospital for Maimed Soldiers. Your Majesty is obliged to provide
Maintenance for them out of your own Revenue, and not out of what properly
belongs to others; it would be in some sort a shame to do it, seeing you would
lose the Glory of such a Noble Establishment, could it be said you had built it
at another's Cost, and not at your own.

The Year 1675, was no sooner begun, but your Majesty thought of securing a
Communication with Maestricht, which the Enemy had cut off toward the end of
the last Campaign, by taking Huy and Dinant: Which was done by the
Imperialists, when they separated from the Prince of Orange's Army; and which
made him desire to re-take Maestricht. To this end he prevailed with the
Emperor, to send Cardinal Baden to Liege, a Canon of that Church, who under
pretense of Residence, endeavored to make the Town declare for the Emperor;
which would have very much favored the intended Siege of Maestricht. His
Eminence found the Town very well disposed to do what he desired, and I must
tell your Majesty, that Marquess Louvoy was the cause of it: He had upon
several occasions discontented the Citizens of Liege, who were formerly well
enough affected to him, he had often caused the Houses which they had out of
the Town to be pillaged, which was done in spite, because one day passing by
the Town, one of the Canons railed at him, and spoke so loud that Mounsieur
Louvoy heard him.

But the Count d'Estrades, who took care of your Majesty's Affairs, prevented
the Cardinal of Baden, by Treating with the Governor of the Citadel, who
delivered it up into his Hands. The good Success of this Negotiation, having
put it out of the Leigeois Power, to do the Mischief they intended; Cardinal
Raden, who had nothing more to do in the Town, desired a Passport from the
Count d'Estrades, for his safe return into Germany; but making use of it to
carry away Arms with him, the Governor made that a pretense to stop the
Cardinal and his Train. All Europe accused your Majesty of breach of Faith, in
making your self Master in this manner of the Citadel of Liege; but how easily
can you clear your self, and show what reason you had to do it: For his
Eminence had done the same thing, if you had not prevented him, as appeared by
his Papers that were seized, of which some were kept, that made mention of all
the Cardinal had been brewing. This so silenced all those that endeavored to
blast your Majesty's Reputation, that there was not a word more said of the
matter.

This great Affair being ended in the manner I have mentioned; Your Majesty
besieged Dinant; when you had taken it, you cleared all the Meuse from that
Town to Maestricht, by taking the Town and Castle of Huy. From thence you went
and besieged Limbourg; the Prince of Orange made a show as if he would Relieve
it, but not doing it, you became Master of it, and Viscount Turenne returned
again into Germany, to make Head against Montecuculi, who the Emperor had sent
into that Country.

Viscount Turenne had not now so great Forces to deal with, as he had the Year
before, for you had contrived a diversion in the North, by the King of Sweden's
declaring War against the Marquess of Brandenbourg. The Duke of Hanover was to
second the Swede with an Army of Fifteen Thousand Men, to keep those in awe who
had a mind to assist the Elector: But Constable Wrangell, who Commanded the
Swedish Army, being gained by his Master's Enemies, did not Execute the Orders
which were given him; so that the Duke of Hanover durst not declare himself.
Nevertheless, this made the Elector of Brandenbourg recall his Troops from the
Imperial Army, whereupon, the Marquess de Vaubrun, one of your Lieutenant
Generals, took Dachsteim in the absence of Viscount Turenne.

Monsieur Louvoy believing, that by the King of Sweden's declaring War, he had
made amends for the Fault he committed, in dissuading your Majesty from making
a Peace, so much to your Advantage; thought of nothing but continuing the War
now kindled in so many different places. The Messineses being in very great
distress, and beginning to cry Miserere, you sent Vallavoir, with a second
Convoy of Corn, which he had the good luck to conduct safely to 'em, though the
Spaniards waylaid him in his passage, with Forces much superior to his.

I know not what made your Majesty change your Modest Resolution concerning the
Messineses: You accepted the Sovereignty which at first you refused, and sent
thither, in the Quality of your Viceroy, the Duke de Vivonne, General of your
Galleys, Brother to Madam Montespan: Who because he was her Brother, Monsieur
Louvoy prevailed to have him preferred to that Command, though there were many
other Competitors much sitter for it. He was indeed very successful at his
first coming to Messina; for he entered the Haven in spite of the Spaniards,
and took from them a Vessel of fifty Guns. He reduced some Forts which the
Spaniards still kept, and taking the Field, he drove 'em out of all the Posts
they had within four Leagues round the Town. That done, he went abroad again,
made a Descent upon Calabria, and brought thence a considerable Booty. But when
there was most need of his doing somewhat to the purpose, he slept upon his
good Fortune, which occasioned many Plots and Conspiracies against him;
however, 'twas his good Luck, to be delivered from 'em all.

Viscount Turenne being come to his Army, found it in a very good Condition, by
what Marquess Vaubrun had done, for since the taking of Dachsteim, they had
plenty of all Provisions; and being eager to Signalize themselves, he passed
the Rhine, and offered Montecueuli Battle, which he refused. He could not force
him to fight, because he was so Advantageously Posted, but having tried all
ways, he at last reduced him to so great a scarcity of Victuals and Forage,
that Montecuculi must have certainly been forced to decamp first, and then
Turenne would have fallen upon him; but advancing to the top of a Hill, to take
a view of the Imperial Army, he was unfortunately killed with a Canon Bullet.

This sad Accident changed all things in an instant; so true it is, that an
Army without a General, is like a Body without a Soul. Montecuculi, who was
making the best of his way, when he knew in what a Consternation your Forces
were by the Death of Monsieur Turenne, returns again to charge 'em. The
Lieutenant Generals who Commanded, thought of nothing but repassing the Rhine.
While they were consulting what course to take; a Soldier said a very pleasant
thing. General Turenne, cries the Fellow aloud, used to Ride upon a Pied Horse,
take the Bridle, and but lay it on his neck, he will know better than our
Commanders where we should go. But Count de Lorge conducted the Army safe over
the Rhine, after having given the Enemy Battle; who thought to have made a much
better hand of it.

The Merit of this great Man, made your Majesty very sensible of his loss,
which will every day appear greater, by the want you will find of him. But it
was otherwise with Mounsieur Louvoy, who when all France mourned for his Death,
he and his rejoiced. I certainly know what I tell your Majesty is true, and if
he could have hindered his being so Honorably Buried, he would have done it.
His Funeral Pomp was very great, and I know no body but your Minister that
spoke against it. The Memory of those Great Things he had done, is so deeply
Ingraved in the Hearts of your Subjects, that it is hard to say, whether he was
most Esteemed or Beloved. He did not only deserve to be commended for those his
Military Accomplishments, which are the Glory of a Hero; but for all other
Moral and Christian Virtues so, rarely to be found in one Person.

The Duke of Lorrain was upon the Moselle, with his own Troops, and those of
Lunenbourg, Munster, and some of the other Confederates, and having heard of
this Accident, laid Siege to Treves; where Vignori an old Soldier Commanded.
Of whose Experience the Prince of Conde (under whom he had Served all his Life)
assured your Majesty. He was not at all discouraged at the Siege, knowing
Marshall Crequi was marching to his Relief; but while he was giving Orders on
Horseback, his Horse frighted with a clap of Thunder, threw him headlong from a
Bastion, of which he dyed in a few days. This fatal Accident made the Marshall
hasten his March; fearing that Vignori's Death might so dishearten his
Soldiers, as to deliver up the Town. But the Duke of Lorrain saved Monsieur
Crequi the labor of advancing further, and met him at Consarbrik, where the
Sarre and Moselle join. The Duke past the River, where the Marshall, if he
pleased, might have taken the advantage of charging part of his Army, before
the rest could have got over: But neglecting it, I know not for what Reason,
nor perhaps he himself, he was so soundly beaten, that all his Troops, ran some
one way, and some another, and he narrowly escaping, with four more, got into
Treves; where, in perfect despair, he resolved to bury himself in defense of
the Place, though it was of no great importance. Indeed, the resistance he made,
was so much greater than the Enemy expected, that they offered him very good
Terms; but resolving not so much as to talk of yielding, a Captain of Foot
called Boisjourdan, told the Garrison they had nothing to do with the
Mareschal's desperation; that though he had a mind to perish, yet they were not
bound to follow his Example. Some were of his Opinion, and told the Marshall,
the Place was not in a Condition to hold out any longer; but his Passion not
permitting them to say any more. Boisjourdan Treated with the Enemy, and let
'em into the Town. Marshall Crequi saved himself in the Church, where he
resolved with some Officers, who did not approve of what Boisjourdan had done,
to stand it out; but seeing the Enemy preparing to force 'em, they told the
Marshall, your Majesty and all France, would blame his desperate Resolution,
and at last persuaded him to yield at discretion.

Your Majesty in truth was not pleased with what he had done, and would have
been less satisfied if his desperation had carried him further: But knowing
what was done by Boisjourdan, was an ill Example not to be endured, you caused
him to be seized, and he and some of his Companions were Condemned by a Council
of War to be Beheaded. The Sentence was Executed at Metz in the presence of the
Garrison: No body pitying him, because no Soldier can be a Man of Honor, who
is guilty of Disobedience.

Your Majesty after these ill Successes, had reason to fear the Enemy would
enter into France; but your Prudence prevented it, by raising a Jealousy
between the Princes of the House of Brunswick and the Duke of Lorrain; the
Princes, maugre all the Duke could say, resolved to return to their Country.
It Is the Fate of Confederates never to agree, what one will, the other will
not, and it would be a Miracle to see them hold together, while they have
different Interests; which is the Reason their Designs so seldom prosper.

After the Death of Monsieur Turenne, your Majesty fearing the Enemy would
prevail in Alsatia, you sent thither the Duke de Duras, whom three days after
his Uncle's Death, you had made a Marshall of France. You conferred the same
Honor on some other Officers, and Monsieur Louvoy so far prevailed with you,
as to let Marquess Rochefort be one of that number, though he had done nothing
more than he had before to deserve it. The others were the Count d' Estrades,
the Duke of Navailles, whom you had recalled from his Banishment, Count de
Schomberg, the Duke de Vivonne, the Duke de la Feuillade, and the Duke of
Luxembourg. But because the Duke de Duras had not so much Experience as his
Uncle, you gave the Command to the Prince of Conde, whose Reputation only was
of great advantage to your Majesty, in the present conjuncture.

The Enemy having past the Rhine at the Bridge of Strasbourg, (the second time
this Town had falsify'd their Promise to you) believed they should presently
take Hagenau; but the Prince of Conde having obliged them to raise the Siege,
they attacqued Saverne, which they thought to carry with more ease. But their
Success there was the same they had at Hagenau, so that this Campaign, which at
first threatened your Majesty with a turn of Fortune, ended so little to your
disadvantage, that your Majesty had no cause to fear on that side.

The Sweeds came not off so well. They were at last advanced into the Elector
of Brandenbourg's Country, where they took some Posts of no great consequence;
but they went on so slowly, that they seemed to act in concert with the
Elector; he taking as little care to oppose them. But the Elector knowing that
the King of Sweden being pressed by your Majesty, would at last act more
vigorously against him, made haste out of Holland, where he then was, to defend
his own Country; and had the good Fortune as soon as he arrived, to rout the
Swedes at a Pass called Felbeling. They lost there the greatest part of their
Cannon and Baggage, a blow they could not recover, during that Campaigne. The
King of Denmark, who with the Princes of the Family of Brunswick, took part
with the Elector, had now an opportunity to do his own business. They all at
one time fell upon the Swede, in the Duchy of Bremen, in the Isle of Rugen,
and some other of his Frontiers. And finding little resistance any where, the
King of Denmark besieged and took Wismar, a considerable Port upon the Baltic
Sea.

Your Majesty having now more Reason than ever, to be sensible of the ill
Service Monsieur Louvoy had done you, in persuading you not to make Peace;
accepted of the King of England's Mediation, which he offered to all the
Princes engaged in the War, in order to make an end of it. They all consented
as you did, and sent their Plenepotentiaries to Nimeghen, where yours arrived
first. The Spanyard till now appeared most averse to the Peace; but the
Business of Messina had brought down his Pride, and he feared that you would
become Master of the whole Kingdom of Sicily, as you already were of the
Capital City, and of Augusta, where the Duke of Vivonne had placed a Garrison.
This last Town was not considerable for its strength, but being a Retreat for
your Shipping, was of great advantage to your Majesty.

The Dutch on the other side were grown weary of the War, which was a very
great Charge to 'em, by the Subsidies they had paid to those Princes who came
to their assistance. Beside, they began to think they were not so much
concerned in the War, your Majesty having quitted their Country, and there was
now no more to be considered, but the Interests of the Emperor, with those of
the Princes of the Empire. But those being so different, promoted the Peace;
since it is certain they had less reason to distrust your Majesty, than their
own Party. For as the Emperor's Power which he insensibly increased, gave
great cause of Jealousy to all the Princes; so the Emperor on his part, could
not be well pleased, to see them maintain a good Correspondence one with
another, and often confer together concerning their Interests, without calling
him to their Councils.

Things being in this condition at the beginning of the Year 1676, Monsieur
Louvoy, who had still a Spleen against me, about the business of the Routes,
endeavored to be even with me in an Affair relating to the Finances, wherein
he suspected I had been tampering. But I made it appear to your Majesty as
clear as the day, that I was no way concerned in it, and that if any thing had
been done which could not be justified, Damarets my Nephew was to be called to
an Account for it; who had had the ordering of the whole business. I told your
Majesty at the same time, I would not be answerable for him, knowing him to be
a dangerous Person where there was any thing to be got. I never trusted him he
was so Covetous, yet I was one of the first he endeavored to deceive. Your
Majesty was much more kind to him than he deserved; you gave him a Hundred
Thousand Crowns, in the first business he undertook for you; but there are some
People so insatiable, that should your Majesty give 'em half your Kingdom, they
would not be contented. However, you were so gracious to him, as to pass all by
for my sake, which is not the only thing for which I am indebted to your
Majesty. Though I can say without boasting, I never had recourse to your Favor
to be pardoned for defrauding or robbing your Majesty. I have always
endeavored to walk uprightly, and I desie any Person to accuse me of the
contrary.

The Heir of one Named Friois, by Nation a Swiss, who had got a very
considerable Estate in your Kingdom, could testify what I say, were he called
to it. Friois dyed very Old, and was never Married. The Person of whom I speak,
as Heir to him, claimed what he left; but was opposed by one that Farmed your
Majesty's Demesnes, who pretended a Title to it in your Majesty's Right,
because Friois was a Bastard: So that according to the Law of your Kingdom, all
he had got belonged to him that had got the King's Title. This Contest, put
them upon making Friends. He pretended Heir to the Swisse, thinking he could
find no body that could do him more Service than my self, offered me Two
Hundred Thousand Francks, if I would stand by him. I told him, no Sum, were it
never so great, could tempt me to do any thing that was unjust; so that seeing
he could do nothing with me, he addressed himself to some very near Monsieur
Louvoy, who for that Sum (divided among 'em,) did his business. Villacerf and
Pouange had Twenty Thousand Crowns apiece; Stouppa, and a certain Man whose
Name I have forgot had the rest. The Farmer of your Majesty's Demesnes made his
Complaint to me, and prayed me to inform your Majesty what wrong had been done
him; but I found your Majesty so prepossest, that it was impossible for me to
do any thing for him.

I know many other Cases, wherein there has been the like prevarication; and
your Majesty may be assured, that during the War, there has been a base
unworthy Trade of Selling vacant Places, even so low as Ensigns. This has made
one Alexander the Son of a pitiful Scrivener so Rich, that he thinks himself a
Companion for Persons of the best Quality. It Is by the like abuse, Charpentier
and Bynot his Brother-in-Law, are become so wealthy; though one but the Son of a
little Townsman of Compeigne, and the other the Son of a Sergeant of Tonnere.
Your Majesty may make bold with these Men's Purses when you have occasion for
Money, and need not fear any body will find fault with it. The one will throw up
whole Companies he has sold, and the others will disgorge the Blood of entire
Corporations, wherewith they have fatted themselves. The poor Village of
Courtisoux in Champaign, whose Wealth consists only in Cheeses, has for
several Years given Charpentier three thousand Livers, per an. to free them
from Quartering Soldiers: But when they could no longer pay him so great a
Sum, and desired an Abatement; he forgot their Presents, and ordered Soldiers
in their passage, to Quarter upon 'em.

I might fill this Paper with the like Abuses, yet should never have done. Your
Majesty knows it was not long since I showed how you were cheated, in what was
appointed to defray the extraordinary Expense of the War. Where you were made
to pay one Regiment twice, by a secret Compact between the Commissary and the
Treasurer. I know very well this cannot be directly charged upon Monsieur
Louvoy; but as he is bound to Answer for those that are employed by him, so
it is he, and not I, that is to supervise them. My place finds me work enough,
and I desire no new Employment. It Is your Majesty is concerned, and your
People, upon whom the burden of all these disorders falls; because it is from
them you expect Money, when your Exchequer is empty. I do not pretend to give
you a particular Account of these Frauds, it is impossible for me to do it,
without depriving my self every Night of four or five Hours sleep, which are
absolutely necessary for my Repose, after I am quite wearied with more Business
than I am able to bear. Your Majesty I hope will reflect on what I have said
when you think fit, in the mean time, I return again to the prosecution of your
History.

The Spoil which the Garrison of Phillipsbourg made in the Elector Palatin's
Country, obliged the Emperor (to be rid of his continual importunities,) to
keep that place blocked up all the Winter; and promised him to take the Thorn
quite out of his Foot, by besieging it in the Spring, which no body durst
undertake while Monsieur Turenne was alive. The Count de Lorges importuned your
Majesty to bestow the same favor on him, that you had upon his Brother, and so
many others whom you have Honored as I have already said, with a Mareschal's
Staff of France. He brought to your Account the Service he did your Majesty, in
conducting your Army over the Rhine after his Uncle's Death, and the long time
he had served your Majesty. You had no great mind to grant his Request, not but
that you thought him a Man Brave enough, and that he very well understood his
Trade: But having a small Estate, you thought he would be unable to support the
Dignity of his Title. Monsieur Louvoy who looked upon him as the Nephew of a
Man he never loved, did him ill Offices, believing he would never be his
Friend. When I perceived it, and that your unwillingness to grant Count de
Lorge's Request, was only for the Reason I have now mentioned; I told your
Majesty, if the Count would make Love to Fremont's Daughter, and had but her
Father's good Word, I would undertake he should certainly get her. Now to do
him effectual Service, I threatened Fremont underhand, to have him questioned
concerning some Affairs, and how he came to be counted the Richest Man in all
Paris. This frighted him, and knowing he had need of Protection, he hearkened
to the Proposition made by Count de Lorge; upon condition he was first made a
Marshall of France. I acquainted your Majesty with what was like to happen in
Count Lorge's Favor, so that you being persuaded this Marriage would much
better his Condition, you gave him the Staff he so earnestly desired. He then
Married Mademoiselle de Fremont, who brought him so great a Portion, that he
bought with ready Money, the Captain's Place of your Majesty's Guards. He also
Treated for the County of Quintin, which is one of the most considerable
Estates in all Brittany; the Yearly Rent whereof amounts to Fifty Thousand
Livers. And as Fortune, when Men begin to be Happy, heaps upon 'em her Favors;
so it fell out in this case, for he of whom this Land was bought, who was to
have his Debts discharged, and a great Pension paid him during his Life, died
in a short time after, so that Marshall de Lorge had a very good bargain.

What I had contributed to his good Fortune, made Monsieur Louvoy keep him out
of Employment this Campaign, though he had behaved himself much better than
Marshall Rochefort, who did not Execute his Orders, to put Men and Provisions
into Phillipsbourg. Your Majesty knows what a Fault he committed in
endeavoring it, and that he dyed with grief for having failed in the attempt;
which was more for want of Courage than Conduct. This should teach us never to
be exalted too high, lest our Heads turn, and our Fall be the greater. A Man
may get that Reputation in an inferior Post, which perhaps he would lose in a
higher. Prudence prompts us to measure our Ambition, by the knowledge we have
of our selves; otherwise to our own ruin we may find there was Truth hid in the
Fable of Phaeton.

Your Majesty opened this Campaign with the taking of Conde, which was followed
by that of Bouchain. The Prince of Orange drew near your Army in order to their
relief, but did not think it safe to attack you, with an Army so much inferior
to yours. After the taking these two Places, you returned to Versailles,
leaving the greatest part of your Army under the Command of Marshall
Schomberg. The rest you sent to the Duke of Luxemburg, who Commanded in
Germany. The Prince of Lorrain was there at the Head of the Emperor's Army,
and at last besieged Phillisbourg; which made so good a defense, that the Duke
of Luxembourg had as much time as he could wish, for the relieving it.

The Prince of Orange sat down before Maestricht, where the Commander in chief
(as the Governor of Phillipsbourg had done) so well performed his Duty, that
Marshall Schomberg gave Marshall Humieres, time enough to form the Siege of
Aires. For which he lent him part of his Troops, but recalling them again when
the Siege was ended, he Marched directly toward Maestricht, so that there had
been a bloody Battle, if the Prince of Orange, who had lost six weeks time, and
six or seven thousand Men at this Siege, had not thought fit to quit it.

This prosperous Success of your Majesty's Arms, made the Dutch sick of the
War; but that which troubled them more, was, the misfortune that befell them the
beginning of this Year at Messina. They had sent into those Seas the Famous de
Ruyter, who from being at first but a common Sailer, was now preferred to the
chief Command of their Fleet. Never was a Man more famed upon the two Seas, he
came off so bravely in all Engagements, that his very Name was enough to make
his Party Victorious; but your Fleet got the better of him. About three Months
after, not thinking himself sufficiently beaten, he tried a second Engagement,
and was worse handled than at first, for he was not only beaten, but received a
wound, of which in ten days after he dyed at Syracuse.

After these two Victories, your Majesty could desire nothing more to complete
your Glory, and continue your Protection to the Messineses, than to have had
the like happy end of all your Enterprises in Germany. But the Duke of
Luxembourg met with so many difficulties there, that having tried a hundred
ways in vain to relieve Phillipsbourg; he quite abandoned the design. So that
after a Siege of more than three Months, the Prince of Lorrain, who had never
yet commanded in chief, had the pleasure of reducing so strong a place. But he
was like to have met his Death in the midst of his Triumph, for the Bridge by
which he was to enter into the Town, as he was passing over it, fell under him:
Which, Report says, was contrived by some of the Greatest Persons in the
Emperor's Court, who seeing him in so much Favor, had resolved to destroy him.

The Swedes continued the War, but unfortunately lost Elsembourg, Lanscron,
Christianstat, and some other places. And though they had an advantage over Major
General Duncan, and a Victory at Lunden, yet were they never the better for it.

Fortune was constant to none but your Majesty. The City of Valenciennes fell
into your Hands the next Campaign, though it was one of the strongest in all
Flanders, and defended by a good Garrison. If you would have taken the
advantage, you might have put all to the Sword; but your Clemency became an
Advocate for those poor unhappy People, and you freely gave 'em both their
Lives and Goods, when they did not expect to have saved either. After this, you
attacked Cambray and St. Omer at a time; which obliged you to divide your
Forces, so that the Prince of Orange thought now or never was his time to do
somewhat. He advanced as far as Cassel, where he was defeated by Monsieur your
Brother: After which Cambray and St. Omer did not long hold out; your Majesty
having done all this before the time other Generals use to take the Field, your
Reputation (which was already very great throughout all Europe) was now exalted
to so high a degree of Glory, that you were looked upon as the greatest Man in
the Universe

The Prince of Lorrain, whose great and generous Soul did rather emulate than
envy your brave Exploits; redoubled his Courage, and came to your Frontiers at
the Head of a gallant Army. Having taken Mouzon, a Place of no defense, he sent
a Detachment over the Meuse, which put the Province of Champagne into a Fright,
but did them no great harm: For this Detachment durst not go far from their
Army, nor their Army follow the Detachment, Marshall Crequi being advanced in
order to observe 'em. But it is not so easy a thing to enter into an Enemy's
Country, for a General must consider, whether he can go out again when he
pleases; especially when he has no Places near to retreat to, nor Neighbors
from whom he can expect any assistance.

However, the Prince of Lorrain* did not despair of entering again into his own
Country, to which he now pretended a greater right than before, by the Death of
his Uncle, which happened a little after the taking of Treves. But since this
depended upon the Prince of Orange, who had promised to march into France; he
waited for the Effects of that Promise, to regulate accordingly his own
Attempts. The Prince of Orange's hope was grounded upon your Majesty's way of
prosecuting the War: You had not many Troops, but made use of them with that
Judgment and Prudence, that though the Enemy's forces were more numerous than
yours, yet every Year you added some Town to your Conquests, which you did by
keeping your Troops together all the Winter; whereas the Enemy was obliged to
separate theirs, and quarter them in places so remote from one another, that
they could not come together, when you opened the Campaign. Taking this course,
you did your Business early in the Spring, and then sending a Detachment into
Germany, you acted the defensive Part in Flanders all the rest of the Campaign.

It was upon this account, the Prince of Orange resolved so late in the Year to
attempt the Siege of Charleroy. I have already told your Majesty why he had
such a mind to this Place: But he had now another Reason, he pretended if he
took it, he could march into France when he would, though he was much mistaken in
his account; for upon notice that Marshall Schomberg was marching directly to
him, and that your Majesty was preparing to follow, he stayed for it her, but
raised the Siege.

Upon this Check given to the Prince of Orange, the Prince of Lorrain saw he
could no longer depend upon him, but frustrated of his hopes, he quitted
Mouzon, and marched back again up the Rhine: Marshall Crequi followed him, and
after diverse Encampments on both sides, they came so near together at
Kokesberg, that there passed a very hot Skirmish between 'em. The Emperor's
Cuirassiers handled your Majesty's light Horse very rudely; but your Guards de
Maison had the same advantage over them; so that both Armies fled before, and
pursued the Enemy in half an Hour's time.

The Prince of Lorrain judging by this little Trial, that it was better to go
into Winter Quarters, than to stay longer in the Field, retreated farther back
into Germany. Marshall Crequi made a feignt, as if he would have done the
like; but marching back again, he attacked and took Fribourg, before the Prince
could come to relieve it.

You beat the Enemy in Catalonia, and ravaged that Country every Year. The
Spaniards lost there the Battle of Pouille: Nor could they do any thing at
Messina, though they distributed a great deal of Money, in hopes to have 'em cut
the Throats of your Garrison. Your finished this prosperous Campaign, with the
taking of St. Guillain, which so abated the Courage of the Hollanders, that tho
the Prince of Orange had married the Duke of York's Daughter, and promised by
that Match to make England declare for them, yet the Dutch had more mind than
ever, to make Peace.

Monsieur Louvoy had served your Majesty so well in all your Enterprises, and
was become so great a Favorite, that I was no longer able to stand against
him. When Chancellor Seguier died, I was a Competitor with Monsieur Louvoy's
Father for that Place, which he did all he could to obtain for him, I got my
self to be made an Advocate, A Qualification required in the Person that has
that Office; but your Majesty to reconcile us, gave it to Monsieur d' Alligre
Councellor of State, though his great Age and Infirmities rendered him incapable
to execute it; so that his Son officiated for him: But he was of so odd a
Humor, that no body cared to have any thing to do with him. D' Alligre dying,
Monsieur Tellier and I renewed our Contest, which lasted not long on my Part;
for your Majesty commanded me to quit my Pretensions, and gave that honorable
Office to Monsieur Tellier.

The Prince of Orange's Marriage wrought a real Change in England; it begot
such contentious debates, that the King of England was in a manner forced to
sign a League against your Majesty: He re-demanded his Troops, which (not being
able to refuse) you sent back to him. But by so long a way about, that Monsieur
Louvoy had time to debauch the greatest part of 'em. For instead of suffering
them to imbarque at Calais, or some Port near their Country, he chose one that
was farthest off; pretending that his Britanick Majesty had no just cause to
complain, because no particular place was named* in your Treaty with him. Which
may serve for a Lesson to all public Ministers, when they treat with a foreign
Prince: For if the least thing be omitted in their Negotiation, they may be
sure it will be made use of against their Master; and when a Fault is once
done, it is too late to think of mending it.

This Change in your Majesty's Affairs, obliged you to quit Messina; where
there was no longer any safety for your Troops: For if the English joined their
Forces with the Dutch, it was impossible to resist them. This was what I long
ago foresaw, and I took the liberty to tell your Majesty, that you would be
necessitated to augment your Fleet, by building more Ships: but Monsieur
Louvoy, who would, if he could, have destroyed the Marine Establishment, always
opposed it; pretending two Reasons for it. The First, That no cause of
Jealousy was to be given to England. The other, That your Kingdom was not able
to support so great a Charge. He made use of the same Pretense, to dissuade
your Majesty from the making a Harbor upon the Coast of Normandy, which you
will want, in case you ever have a War with England: For if your Ships at any
time should receive much Damage, where shall they find a Retreat? It Is a long
way out of the Channel to Breast and Rochefort, which ought to be seriously
considered by your Majesty.

It Is not long ago I gave you my Opinion concerning such a Port. The Bay of
Colville, seems a Place to have been expressly designed by Nature for it. I
thought your Majesty, when you had heard my Reasons was so well satisfied, that
you would presently have given order to begin the Work. But I since understood
that Monsieur Louvoy put by the Business, though so absolutely necessary for the
good of your Kingdom, insinuating that the Place I have mentioned, was not so
sit as I represented it: And that the Reason why I did so much commend it, was,
because I was willing to oblige the House of Matignon, to which my Son was
allied; whose Lands lying near the Place, and they having the King's
Lieutenancy in that Country, it would both increase their revenue, and augment
their Credit.

What Poison there is in Malice, and what dangerous Effects it does produce, I
leave your Majesty to judge. But it seems very difficult for a great King, who
sees with other Men's Eyes, to defend himself against the Artifice of those that
would deceive him; especially, when they have done him such Services, as may
incline them to think their Intention is good. I know but one way for a Prince
to secure himself in such cases, which is to trust no body; but strictly to
examine things himself, and rather be upon the Place to see what is done, than
be deceived by being too credulous; for in trusting a third Person, there are
many Inconveniences. There are few Princes but must rely upon a Minister in
most of their Affairs; and though it is not so in your Majesty's Court, where
there are two or three Persons, who will not bend and submit to Monsieur
Louvoy's Authority; yet for certain, there is a secret Jealousy still retained
in the Heart which commonly works the very Effects that are feared.

Your Majesty's Prudence, which never forsakes you in the reverse of Fortune,
seemed to increase: you were not at all daunted with the Change of his
Britanick Majesty; but on the contrary rather made it serviceable to you, in
bringing the Dutch to a Peace. You put such Jealousies into their Heads, that
they wrote to their Ambassadors, they should endeavor to remove all
Difficulties that would obviate a Peace.

Your Majesty knowing that the way to make them more desirous of it, was to
terrify them by some new Conquest; you besieged the City of Gand, which made
little resistance. You knew so well how to blind your Enemies, by pretending to
attack some other Place, that the Town was in a manner taken, before they
perceived your Design. You afterward made your self Master of Ypres, and of
Fort Lewen; which by its advantageous Situation, was thought impregnable: But
was surpised one clear Night by the Garrison of Maestricht, and taken by
Scalado.

Such prosperous proceedings should in all appearance, have made the Spaniards
as desirous of a Peace, as the Dutch; But they knowing that what had passed in
England, had already made your Majesty quit Messina, and inferring from thence,
the League they had made with that Crown, would do Miracles in their Favor;
they endeavored to keep the Dutch from making a Peace; but your Majesty
removed all those Obstacles, by a piece of Policy which Posterity will admire.
You concluded a separate Peace with Holland: But before the Prince of Orange
was informed of it, he concluded, if he fell upon your Army, which then blocked
up Mons, and could give it a Blow, he should hinder the conclusion of the
Treaty; he very furiously charged your Troops; The Duke of Luxembourg, who had
heard the Peace was concluded, and imagined the Prince of Orange likewise knew
it, relying upon it, was not in such a Posture of Defense, as he should have
been, so that he and the Intendant had like to have been taken.

The Spaniards and the Emperor were, after this, so happy as to come to an
accommodation with your Majesty; but the Northern Princes were unwilling to
restore to the King of Sweden, what they had taken from him. Your Majesty
obliged them to it by the Treaty you had signed; in consideration of which, you
restored Maestricht to the Hollanders, and several Places to the Spaniards,
from whom you had lately taken Puicerda. Prince Charles of Lorrain, who was
this Year come again into Germany, where he made no better a Campaign than he
did the Year before; because Marshall Crequi not only prevented his design of
retaking Fribourg; but beat a party of his Troops in the Plain of Rhinfield,
took Sekinghem, Offembourg, the Fort of Kell, burnt the Bridge of Strasbourg,
and did so many other Exploits in that Country, as made him pass for another
Turenne. The Prince of Lorrdin I say, was comprehended in the Emperor's
Treaty, by which your Majesty was obliged to restore to him his Country; but
under such hard conditions, that rather than submit to them, he chose to retire
to his Imperial Majesty, whose Sister he had married the beginning of that
Winter.

CHAP. VI. Containing that which past after the Treaty of Nimeghen, till the
Year 1684.
YOUR Majesty having now nothing more on your Hands, than the War of the North,
for which the Emperor was to give you passage: You ordered your Army to march
on that side. Marshall Crequi, who commanded, knowing the Truce which your
Majesty had made with your Enemies was expired; drew near to the Weser, where
Spaen, General of the Marquess of Brandenbourg's Troops, resolved to oppose his
Passage. But your Army, which had passed the Rhine in the Face of your Enemies,
passed this River also in spite of Spaen. The Elector and his Allies, then saw
they were not able to deal with your Forces; and it being in your Power to make
what Treaty you pleased, you restored those Places to the King of Sweden he had
lost, among which were some of greater consequence than those I have mentioned.

Your Majesty, having in this manner given Peace to Europe, the King of Spain
sent the Marquess de les Balbaces to your Majesty, to demand Mademoiselle your
Brother's Daughter in marriage. This Princess, who would have been much better
pleased to marry Monseigneur the Dauphin, wept bitterly when she heard the
News: But your Majesty, without any delay, named the Chancellor, the Duke de
Villeroy, Monsieur Pompone and my self, to treat this Affair with the
Ambassador; but no body could pacify the Princess. Your Majesty, thinking
there could no where be found so good a match for her, without consulting
whether she liked it or not, signed the Treaty of Marriage.

She was now to leave France and your Majesty, which she did with such a
torrent of Tears, that made all the Court pity her: She never ceased weeping
all the way, though Prince Harcourt and his Lady, who had the care of conducting
her, told her, what prejudice it might be to her in the Court of Spain; where
were those, who without any occasion, would be ready enough to do her ill
Offices. But her Affliction was so great, that she was incapable of Counsel,
and she seemed to have a secret Sense and Forefight of that which afterward
happened to her.

I had prayed your Majesty to give this Employment to the Prince and Princess
Harcourt, who stood in need of your Majesty's Favor; for his Father was very
unkind to him, and led so strange a Life, that I thought sit to speak of it to
your Majesty; he kept a Woman, and as some say, caused her Uncle to be drowned,
because he was against their living so scandalously together. Your Majesty, who
will suffer no such Disorders, commanded me to send and Exempt of your Guards
to Harcourt, to bring away the Woman to Prison, who was supected to be
accessory to the drowning of her Uncle; but he had sent her into England; so
that the Exempt came back without her.

This was a Lesson, one would have thought, might have made the Son wiser. But
Examples are sometimes to very little purpose, unless we have dispositions in
our selves to make good use of them. This Prince, though he Married a very
handsome discreet virtuous Woman, yet cared very little for her, and managed
all his other affairs so imprudently, that by his own fault, he lost a very
great fortune. The Family of Guise was extinct by the death of the last Duke of
that name, who was the Son of a daughter of Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, your
Majesty's Uncle. Madam Guise, Heiress to the deceased Duke, was an old Princess
never married, and being a very good Woman, had a mind to revive her Family.
She cast her Eyes upon Prince Harcourt; a Friend of hers, but who was more a
Friend to the Prince, having given her a very good Character of him: So that
she sold him the Duchy of Guise, whereof the yearly Rent amounted to Forty
Thousand Crowns, beside other Lands: He not being Master of Money enough to pay
for it, she acquitted him of a Million. But instead of giving his Friend
Thanks, who had done him so great a Kindness; he began to speak ill of him to
the Princess, who judging by his horrible Ingratitude, what an unworthy Man he
was, undid all all she had done, having by contract reserved to her self, a
Power of Revocation. Thus we see, what great Fortune Men sometimes lose by
their own Folly. But to your Majesty's Praise be it spoken, you gave the Duke
of Main better Counsel, when you preached Gratitude to him, on the like
Occasion, when Madam Montpensier gave him the Principality of Dombes, and the
County of Deu: Two as considerabe Estates as any in France; whereof, one alone
cost Seven Hundred Thousand Crowns. Certainly, there can be no Fault in Man,
greater than Ingratitude; and if it be so great in a Private Man, it is much
more in a Prince, who ought to have a generous Soul, and a Disposition always
to do Good.

Your Majesty, whose Power was become considerably greater, by the advantageous
Peace you had made: began a war in your own Dominions, which necessity had for
a while kept back, the Circumstances of your Affairs requiring you not to
disturb the Hugonots, of whom you long ago resolved to purge your Kingdom; but
you went on with this Work, first by taking away the Chambers of the Edict,
established in the Parliaments of Toulouse, Bourdeaux, and Grenoble. Your
Reputation was great enough now to venture upon many things, which you durst
not attempt before. You caused Mass to be said in Geneva, which had never been
done since the Year 1535, when the Priests were driven out of that Town.

There are certain times more proper than others, to give success to what one
undertakes; and it is in choosing such times, that a Prince shows his admirable
Prudence. A Prince cannot expect absolute Submission to his Will and Pleasure,
till he has magnified his Name, by some great Actions; and he ought to know,
that sometimes his Reputation will do him more Service, than his Power.

The Neutrality which the Duke of Bavaria observed during the War, cost your
Majesty a great deal of ready Money. Beside, you promised the Duchess his
Wife, that Monseigneur the Dauphin should marry their Daughter: But seeing a
Prince should always take care beforehand what he promises, because he must
never break his word; you sent to enquire whether this were like to be a sit
Match, and whether this Princess's Person and good Qualities did deserve so
good a Husband. But finding nothing to discourage you from desiring this
Alliance, a good Education, a great deal of Wit, and in appearance, great
respect for your Majesty and the Dauphin; who though he were not above Nineteen
Years of Age, yet you resolved no longer to defer marrying him; you sent my
Brother who had been one of your Plenipotentiaries at Nimeguen, to the Court of
Bavaria, to conclude this Match; and you were so impatient to hear whether some
Obstacles were removed, which he met with, because her Father and Mother were
dead, that you ordered him to dispatch Courier upon Courier, to bring your
Majesty Intelligence how things went. He who was first sent to give you notice
the Contract was signed, went, as was usual, to Monsieur Pompone, Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs, which Place you bestowed on him, when he least
dreamt of it, and for which he was obliged to Monsieur Tellier, who fearing you
would have given it to Cardinal Donzi, or to the President de Memes, who both
stood for it; and that their Merit would have eclipsed his Son's, who was not
yet in his full Luster. He therefore employed his Credit with your Majesty, in
Favor of Monsieur Pompone; since which, Monsieur Louvoy has been still
designing to unite this Secretaryship to his, pretending to your Majesty he
ought to do the Business of both, and that the Secrets of the War, and of
Foreign Affairs, ought to be in the Hands of one Person.

Your Majesty had the Goodness to communicate to me, what had past. Whereupon I
took the Liberty to say, that it did not become Monsieur Louvoy to be so
Ambitious: That it appeared by what he desired, he had an itch of commanding
others, which perhaps another Monarch would not like. That by his Carriage he
gave People occasion to think, nothing could satisfy him, till you had put
your Crown upon his Head; and that if I were in your Place, I would give him
such an Answer, as should teach him to know himself so well, as never for the
Future to make the like Request.

In this Condition were things, when my Brother sent me a Duplicate of the
Letter he had written to your Majesty; but which Monsieur Pompone had not yet
delivered, because he was in the Country looking after his Building. I
complemented your Majesty, thinking I should tell you nothing but what you
already knew; your Majesty answered, Monsieur Pompone had given you no notice
of any thing, and that you wondered at it. When Monsieur Pompone returned, and
would have excused his Fault, your Majesty told him he might go home again,
since he had so much Business of his own, and that you would put another in his
Place, that should take more care to do his Duty: And at the same time sent for
me, and told me that you would give Monsieur Pompone's Place to my Brother. I
thanked your Majesty, and dispatched a Courier to Munick, to acquaint my
Brother with the good News.

I know very well, what a Story some made of this Business It was said, I held
Intelligence with my Brother, and that I received a Letter from him, before
Monsieur Pompone had any, and that we played him this Trick to get his Place.
But I appeal to your Majesty, who better knows than any Person whatever, the
Truth of all that passed in this Affair.

This Favor which your Majesty did me, was a new Subject of Jealousy for
Monsieur Louvoy. But not daring publicly to show his Malice till he had a fit
Opportunity; he soon met with one, at least he thought it such, seeing he did
not fail to speak against me to your Majesty; you daily went on with the Works
at Versailles, or to say Truth, you were re-building it new from the Ground:
For you had twice pulled it down, to build it according to a new Model that had
been given you. But though it be not usual to see a Floor fall in a new built
House, there did one sink, which alarmed the whole Court, every one being
sufficiently frighted. Monsieur Louvoy made a greater Noise about it than any
body else, and I knew he endeavored to persuade your Majesty, that I was not
so Honest as I should he, in my Overseer's Place of your Buildings. That I and
the Workmen agreed together, or else it was impossible your Majesty could be so
ill served. As you did me the Justice not to believe it, so you had the
Goodness not to tell me what he had said; but being informed of the Discourse
he had with your Majesty, I was quickly even with him, in telling you; that if
to prove a Man a Knave, who had the oversight of others, there needed no more,
than to show that those who were employed by him, did not do their work well.
Monsieur Louvoy was more faulty than I, for he had ordered many Fortifications
to be erected, which were no sooner finished, but under specious Pretenses were
pulled down again; and that in many of your Garrison Towns, it was observed,
things were done and undone, without seeing any necessity for it. That your
Majesty knew that I had done nothing but by your Command, and that I never in
my Life proposed of my self, the pulling down any Building. That Builders and
Workmen had played the Knaves, could not be denied, but I made them, at their
own Charge, build up again, not only what had fallen down, but that also which
should be found defective. And it were to be wished, the like would be done for
your Majesty in all Places where Faults may be found: Particularly at Tournay,
where the Engineers have done nothing well. They made a Ditch much wider than
it should have been, but he that set them to Work, never found fault with them,
till your Majesty spoke your self of it: But instead of doing what was
necessary, and mending the first Fault, they committed a Second much worse, by
making a Fausebray in the Ditch, which rendered the whole Fortification so
defective, that unless all were new done, the Place would never be worth any
thing. My Brother, to whom you gave the Government of it, and who understands
these things better than I do, can testify what I have told your Majesty: By
which you may conclude, that If I am Faulty, your Minister is much more than I
am, who believes he knows much more than Monsieur Vauban, and all the Engineers
in Europe.

All that was to precede the Dauphin's Marriage being now agreed on, your
Majesty sent the Duke de Crequi, First Gentleman of your Bedchamber to Munick,
to carry the Marriage Presents to the Princess of Bavaria. They showed your
Majesty's magnificence, and dazzled the Eyes of all her Brother's Court. To whom
the Dauphin sent his Procuration, who as his Proxy espoused the Princess. She
parted to come for France, and being arrived at Schelestat, she there found the
Duke and Duchess of Richelieu, to whom your Majesty had given the Government
of her Househould. She received their Respects in so proud and haughty a
Manner, that the Duchess of Richelieu wrote me that very Day, if she had known
what she had now seen, she would have prayed your Majesty she might still have
waited on the Queen your Wife, as she did before. All the Court, and especially
your Majesty, had so great an Opinion of this Princess, that I durst not tell
you what had been written to me: I thought it best to stay till you your self
had seen her, which would be suddenly, because you had fixed a Day to go and
receive her in Champagne. You and your Queen went near Fifty Leagues to meet
her; but I know not whether your Majesty thought your self paid for your Pains,
since it was impossible for you not to observe this Princess's Pride, of which
the Duchess of Richelieu had given me Notice. For my own Part, I saw it but
too well; when I had the Honor to pay my Respects to her, she scarce
vouchsafed to hear what I said, and I should certainly have been more troubled,
if I had known she had treated Monsieur Louvoy any better. But I my self was a
Witness, with what coldness she received him and all other Persons of Quality.
Your Majesty, whose Prudence is to be admired in all things, some Days after
begun to praise the Queen your Wife, and said in her presence, she had so
gained the Love of all the French, by her Courtesy and and sweet Disposition,
that they loved her better than they did you.

The Dauphiness, who had Wit, knew well enough that this discourse was intended
for her. But it being very difficult to reform those Faults which are natural
to us, she could never bring her self to that affable and gracious Air, which
gains the Hearts of the French Nation; and which they value a thousand times
more than they do any other thing.

This Marriage followed that of Mademoiselle de Blois, a very beautiful
Princess, in whose Praise I should be large, were it not that some would say, I
thereby designed to recommend my own Wife, who had the Care of her Education.
She married the Prince of Conti, the Son of him of whom I have already spoken,
who died about the Year 1666. and was Governor of Languedoc; which Government
your Majesty afterward bestowed upon the Duke de Vernevil, who was very old, so
that this young Prince hoping after the Duke's Death, you would gratify him
with it, behaved himself very dutifully to your Majesty, but did not treat the
Princess his Wife so well. I took the Liberty, by your Majesty's Order, to tell
him of it. You said, he ought to set a greater Value upon so beautiful a
Princess, and whose Wit was equal to her Beauty. But the ill Company he kept,
made him deaf to all I represented, which so much displeased your Majesty, that
when the Duke of Vernevil died, you gave his Government to the Duke of Main.

This shows us, that in a Court virtuously governed, men must be virtuous if
they expect Rewards. No Man should value himself upon the greatness of his
Birth, nor upon the Protection he naturally ought to have. A Monarch regards
neither, who as your Majesty regulates all his Actions according to Merit and
Justice. In such a Court as yours, a Person of great Birth, who does not do his
Duty, is less regarded than another; because he has been better taught. Your
Majesty will know all that he does, and of what he is capable, which is the
Reason why your Majesty makes so little Account of some Persons, who by the
Rank they hold in the Kingdom, one would think should make a better Figure,
than at present they do. But it is a difficult thing to be both Young and Wise:
When the Prince I now speak of, shall come to riper Years, I will undertake,
that your Majesty will be better pleased with him. No young Person is free from
Faults, and the deceased Prince of Conti, who died like a Saint, was guilty of
more than his Son. There is no remedy against the Follies of Youth; I can give
your Majesty a Proof of it in my own Family: be pleased to cast your eyes upon
my Son, I have been many times forced to treat him very ill, without being able
to do any good upon him; nothing but time wrought his change, so that he would
have put me out of all patience, if I had not had enough to wait till his
understanding grew riper.

It was in this year, that Monsieur Fouquet died at Pignerol, whom you
condemned to perpetual imprisonment, instead of the Banishment to which he was
sentenced. He bore his disgrace with a constancy, which could never be expected
from a man who in the midst of the troublesome affairs of his place, mingled
all the pleasures, I should rather say, all the Debaucheries of Youth; but God
gave him the Grace to recollect himself, and die a good Christian. Whence we
ought to conclude, that God knows better than we what is fit for us; and that
we are not sensible of our own wants, when we murmur against Providence; since
we oftener lose our selves in prosperity than in adversity; but nature is so
corrupt, that we would have the way to Heaven strewn with flowers, instead of
the thorns we meet in it.

The Peace was already become a burden to Monsieur Louvoy, though it were so
lately made, that people scarcely had had time to reap the fruits of it. He
advised Your Majesty to make your self Master of Strasbourg and Casal; but
seeing he knew that to attempt it, would again Arm all Europe, he sent persons
he could trust to both those places with Bills of Exchange for very great Sums,
in hopes to succeed in their Negotiation.

While this was transacting, Your Majesty resolved to send your Fleet against
the Corsairs of Tripoli, under the Command of du Queen, who was another de
Ruiter. Eight of their Ships not being able to recover the Port from whence
they came, retreated to Chio, where they thought themselves safe, because that
Island was under the protection of the Grand Seignior, with whom they believed
Your Majesty would never willingly have any Quarrel. But du Queen knowing that
by the Treaty of Commerce, which you had made with the Turk, he was not to give
any Retreat to those Pirates, he fell upon 'em and beat 'em to pieces with his
Cannon. This boldness of du Queen occasioned great trouble to your Ambassador
at the Port, where he was very ill treated, and had been used much worse, had
he not pacified the Grand Seignior, with very considerable Presents. You had no
mind to consent to it, yet knew there was a necessity for it, when you
considered your Dominions were too far distant from his, to make him sensible
of your Power. Besides, if you had not prevented what he threatened, you might
have lost the advantage you made of the Levant Trade; so that a Prince is as
much obliged as a private man, to have a regard to his interests, which are
often of such consideration, that he is in prudence bound to dissemble many
things.

The secret Negotiation concerning Strasbourg and Casal, had all the success
Monsieur Louvoy could wish. These two considerable places delivered themselves
into Your Majesty's hands, without striking a blow. But though they made so
great an addition to your Power, that it seemed you now made all Europe
tremble, yet I know not whether I may Congratulate Your Majesty upon it, seeing
it has done that which I predicted, when I told Your Majesty what answer the
Envoy of Spain gave your Minister, when he showed him your Magazine at Douay.
This bold stroke has awakened all those that are jealous of your glory, and
they will be glad of an opportunity, to do you all the mischief they can.

Du Queen, after the Exploit he did at Chio, became so terrible to the Turks of
Tripoli, that he forced them to beg peace of Your Majesty. The year following
he chastis'd the Algerines, and Bombarded their Town, to show all the Barbarous
people on that Coast, how great was your Power. The King of Morocco and Fez
sent Ambassadors to desire your Amity, the Treaty you made with him was of
great advantage to your people, who begun to drive a Trade in the Levant, of
which all other Nations became jealous.

This among all Politicians, past for an effect of that prudence, which I have
always observed in Your Majesty; but they never yet understood, what made you
give credit to those flatterers, who begun to embroil you with the Pope.

The difference begun about so small a matter, that to speak freely, it is not
worth a man's pains to mention it. Madam the Duchess of Orleans your Aunt,
whose Marriage was contested by Cardinal Richelieu while he lived, and never
approved till your Majesty's reign; made a Vow if she could get off from that
affair with honor, to build a Religious House in this Kingdom; and to perform
it, founded one at Charonne. She brought young Ladies from her own Country, who
by virtue of a Bull from the Pope, settled themselves there, and chose among
themselves an Abbess every three years. The first and last Abbess was still the
same person, who being much beloved by the Duchess, they to please her, at
every three years end, Elected the same again till she died.

She died in the year 1673, and my Wife who sometimes went to this Covent,
never seeing but the same Abbess, desired me to pray Your Majesty to bestow the
place upon one of our Relations. Your Majesty, without examining any more than
I did, whether the nomination belonged to you, granted my request; but she for
whom I had made suit, met with opposition when she came to be received by the
Nuns, who pretended it was their right to choose a Superior. Vanity which reigns
more in Covents than abroad in the world, suggested to them, that it was
against their interest to suffer any but one of their own House to be Abbess,
seeing all of them one after another, might come to be preferred to that
Dignity. But she whom Your Majesty had named, being at last thought by them a
very fit person, having many good Qualities, not so easily found in another,
they all agreed to receive her, still saving to themselves their right of
Election.

This good Woman had lived but three years Abbess, when Monsieur Louvoy begged
her place of Your Majesty, for a person that was recommended to him: You gave
him a grant of it, but she being of a quite different temper from her that
died, so frighted the Nuns, that there was a necessity of using Your Majesty's
and the Archbishop's of Paris authority, to get her Installed. The Pope in the
mean time did not only refuse his Bulls, but sent a Brief to the Nuns to choose
another Superior; which so piqu'd the Archbishop, that he counseled Your
Majesty to condemn and cancel the Bull. The Parliament which is ever ready to
extend their Authority beyond all legal limits, past such a Vote as the
Archbishop desired. The Pope thundered against this Vote, and things grew to
that heat, that the Parlia-past another Vote, by which the Nuns were sentenced
to quit their Covent, which was executed with strange rigor. The Parliaments
pretense in passing this Arrest, was that the Covent owed almost as much as it
was worth, and therefore it was fit to keep it from undoing a great many
people, by running deeper in debt.

The same thing almost happened at the Abbey of Longchamp, where the Duke de
Feuillade would have made one of his Sisters Abbess, against the will of the
Pope; but Your Majesty having seen the Records of the Abbey, by which it
appeared that the Kings your Predecessors had granted the Nuns the right of
Electing their Superior; you suffered 'em to enjoy it, without any further
disturbance. The Pope was much displeased with what had past at Charonne; at
another time, less matter would have provoked him to raise troubles in your
Kingdom; but Your Majesty's Reputation was now arrived to that height, that
his Holiness fearing the event of things, dissembled his resentment, resolving
nevertheless to show it to the purpose at a more seasonable opportunity.

He was very angry with the Archbishop of Paris, who instead of pacifying him,
incensed him more by that which at Rome was looked on as a direful encroachment
on the Authority of the Holy See; though called by another name at Paris, and
other parts of the Kingdom. The Pope's Nuncio being fallen sick in the
Fauxbourg St. Germain, where he dwelt, instead of sending for the Parish Priest
to give him the Sacrament, sent for a Monk to confess him, and give him the A
Term in the Church of Rome for the Sacrament, which is given to People at the
point of death.
Viaticum. The Archbishop prosecuted the Monk and his Covent for coming without
his leave to the Nuncio, who dying 'twas thought the Archbishop would not
permit him to be buried in Holy ground, so great was his fault for not applying
himself to his Pastor; but he was at last Interred in the place he himself had
appointed, upon condition he should first be carried to his own Parish Church.

In 1677. there arose another difference between his Holiness and Your Majesty,
to the Vacant Benefices in the Diocesses of Alet and Pamiers; to which you
claimed a right by virtue of the Regale; which being opposed by those two
Bishops, you made use of the Civil Power to make good your Nomination. These
Bishops, who lived very Pious Lives, and were an Example to all the Clergy,
laid open their Case to your Council, who took no notice of it; but so far
approved of what Your Majesty had done, that the Bishops were forced to write
to the Pope. His Holiness having referred the consideration of the business to
a Consistory, dispatched a Brief to Your Majesty, whereby he exhorted you to
desist from an attempt wherein you were engaged by evil Counsel; but the
Archbishop who did not love the Court of Rome, for not being disposed to give
him a Cardinal's Cap, so far persuaded Your Majesty you were in the right, that
you answered the Pope according to his advice.

The Pope sent you another Brief, wherein he answered the Reasons you gave him;
but the Archbishop of Paris, who would have been glad of a Schism to have made
himself greater than he was, persuaded Your Majesty to seize the Temporalties
of the Bishop of Pamiers, that necessity might force him to a Submission. But
this Bishop who led a much better Life than the Archbishop, with a true
Apostolic Zeal, resolutely maintained the Rights of the Church; which so vexed
the Archbishop, that he prevailed with Your Majesty to have him arrested, after
which he thought he should meet with no opposition, and that when the Shepherd
could no longer watch over his Flock, he might do what he pleased. But he was
much mistaken; for those Clergymen who were of the Bishops Sentiments, and all
of the Chapter, made use of their Authority to maintain the right for which
their Bishop was imprisoned. The Archbishop of Paris declared War against 'em;
and having dispersed 'em by Exile or Imprisonment, the Pope, who had sent Your
Majesty diverse other Briefs, to which Answers were returned not a jot more
satisfactory than to the first, undertook the Bishop of Toulouse, whom the
Archbishop had persuaded to act as Metropolitan, and cancel several Decrees
made by the Grand Vicars that took part with their Bishop. The Archbishop at
last prosecuted the business with so much heat, that after he had procured a
Sentence against one of the Grand Vicars, to have his Head cut off, he set upon
the Pope, and advised your Majesty to have his Briefs examined, wherein he
pretended were Expressions that struck at your Royal Authority, and which were
against the Liberty of the Gallican Church.

If your Majesty would have taken my advice in this affair, as well as in that
of your Finances; I would freely have told you my opinion. Which is, that your
Majesty will never get any thing by falling out with his Holiness. But as this
business was above my reach, so you consulted none but Men of the Mystery, and
parties concerned; most of them gave advice, from which posterity will think
they can never clear themselves. your Majesty by their advice in 1681, called
together an Assembly of Prelates, to examine the Popes Briefs; they met the
first time at the Archbishop's of Paris, to the number of seven Archbishops,
and thirty Bishops, they chose for their Presidents the Archbishops of Paris
and Rheims, both of them very able men; but upon this occasion, there was not
so much need of Science as Sentiments of Religion.

The others who made up this Assembly, were most of them of the same mould, and
so devoted to your Majesty's Will and Pleasure, that if you had commanded them
to preach the Alcoran instead of the Gospel, they would certainly have done it;
that which was to be debated was no sooner proposed, but down went the Pope,
and all of the Bishop of Pamiers Party. This Assembly stretched the Regale much
further than was intended by your Majesty; and to their greater shame, writ a
Letter to you in so particular and odd a Style, that one would hardly believe
it came from Men of Parts; as there were some among them.

But their Complaisance and their Passion went so far, that after examining the
Briefs, they fell to disputing the Pope's Authority; which they so curtailed
and circumscribed, that the Vltra Montanes looked upon their decision to be the
foundation of a Heresy. Nevertheless the Parliament, (which for a long time
has done nothing but what your Majesty commands them) Registered it as a
fundamental piece, among the Archives of the Crown: it was also Enrolled in the
Records of the Sorbonne, and the University, whereof some members of a contrary
opinion, desiring the matter might be aagain debated, were expelled by Letters
under the Privy Signet.

This new way of proceeding, has yet done your Majesty little good or harm,
your Authority being now so great, that the Pope dares not contend with you;
but the more powerful a Kingdom is, the more subject it is to Revolutions; so
that it is to be feared one may soon happen. The Pope who has hitherto defended
himself only with the Pen, when he sees an opportunity may hereafter make use
of the Sword. Indeed gentler courses might have been taken, to maintain your
Majesty's Rights; and if the Archbishop of Paris, to show his Authority to all
France, had resolved to persecute those Bishops whose Pious and Exemplary Lives
were a secret reproach to his own, (in no wise conformable to his Character) he
should at least have forborne to persecute his Head; whom he ought to obey. But
he thought to repair all, by advising your Majesty to extirpate Heresy; as if
Calvin's were more dangerous than that he endeavored to introduce: Certainly
if his designs had succeeded, he would have opened a door to far greater
mischiefs than can be feared from a Sect which may be easily suppressed; because
the Principles are known upon which it is founded. But the Case is far
different, when the Head of the Church is renounced; as it happened in England,
where there are many Religions instead of one, an example against which nothing
can be alleged.

However the Clergy obtained a Signal Victory over the Hugenots; considering
the great number of Conversions that were made. But I know not what Posterity
will say of the Judges or Officers of Justice sent by the King into the
Provinces.
Intendants employing your Dragoons, which I presume was a Maxim not approved
by your Majesty, but broached by violent and cruel Men; for till then, you made
use of no other but fair and gentle means to convert your People; wherein you
showed more than ordinary Prudence. For example, you would not suffer a Hugenot
to enjoy any Place or Office, either in your Court, or in the Civil Government,
and you at last so reduced them by several Edicts that they were either forced
to live idly, or obliged to follow some Trade or turn Soldiers. This converted
some, who rather than quit their Places would go to Mass: Yet these were but
few in respect of the vast numbers that were A gentle word for Persecuted, but
it is the Author's, and must be faithfully rendered. He makes some amends for it
at the end of the Paragraph.
persuaded by the Dragoons. It Is said, that in the single Province of Poitou,
they converted above 35000, to which the promised Pensions contributed very
much, and were only given to those who were most likely to draw others to
follow their Example: But yet some stood it out, and would not submit to the
Mission. The Intendants perceiving it was your Majesty's Design, totally to
extirpate the Religion, made use of Fire and Sword; and if we may believe the
Complaints of very many, there was a great Number that suffered such cruel
Torments, and yet continued obstinate, that if they had been in the right way,
they might have very well deserved the Name of Martyrs.

While this passed, Louvoy made another sort of War, in the Dominions of the
King of Spain, which suffered a thousand times more than when your Majesty was
in actual Hostility against him. The itch which your Minister had to be always
necessary to your Majesty, made him follow the same course he took to be Master
of Strasbourg and Casal. He chose a fit time, for the Emperor being engaged in
a War with the Turk, Monsieur Louvoy observed no rules of Justice, no not of
Civility or good Manners: He set asoot several specious Pretenses to enter into
Flanders, and because People would not submit to what he required, he first
demanded Contributions, as if they had been in actual War: After this
Hostility, his next way was, to require the like Sums from those that were his
Friends, which if they did not pay, he threatened to burn their Houses.

The poor Flemings, to prevent this ill treatment, paid the Sum your Minister
demanded; but when this was done, he began to undermine their Houses, on
purpose to draw from them the last Penny they had, being made to believe, that
otherwise their Houses should be pulled down. When he saw they had nothing
left, their Houses were demolished, and the combustible Materials burnt, that
they might be of no farther use to the poor miserable People. I am persuaded
your Majesty never knew this, and all that have the Honor to be near you,
believe you so far from approving such cruelties, that you would rather have
had them exemplarily punished.

I will not say the same was done beyond the Meuse, where your Army, commanded
by Marshall Crequi, seized upon many Posts dependences on the Duchy of
Luxembourg, and blocked up that strong place. I do not think it was done
without your Majesty's Order, because Monsieur Louvoy made you believe, the
Spaniards still did you great Wrong. Your Minister, some Years since, employed
one of Metz to spoil a great deal of Paper, and though at first he disliked him,
yet this Man at last became his great Favorite, by telling him he knew a way
how to put your Majesty in Possession of all on this side the Rhine, without
striking a Stroke.

His means were altogether imaginary; for he maintained, that whatever
heretofore held of the Lands your Majesty now possessed, must still hold of the
same: So that Monsieur Louvoy approving his Reasons, made use of them, and sent
one of the Sergeants of your Parliament of Metz, to summon the King of Spain to
come at a Day prefixed to do Homage and Fealty to your Majesty, for many things
he held of you: But his Catholic Majesty, thought this new way of proceeding
very unreasonable, and indeed it was more against Your Majesty's Interest than
for it; because the Emperor might as well pretend, that you owed him Homage
and Fealty for your own Kingdom, which was heretofore a Dependent on the Roman
Empire: The King of Spain laughed at this ridiculous Summons, and protested
against whatever should be done to his Prejudice. Monsieur Louvoy, who expected
as much, procured a Sentence to pass, by which, for not appearing and answering
according to the Summons, your Majesty was to take possession of what you
demanded; which was very easy, your Majesty having the Power in your own Hands.
Monsieur Louvoy by eating got an Appetite; and by this Sentence, procured you
more than you could have expected from a Ten Years War.

The Complaints the King of Spain made hereupon, begot several Conferences at
Courtray, between your Majesty's and the King of Spain's Deputies: but seeing
your Majesty would abate nothing of your Pretensions, they separated without
doing any thing: And the King of Spain resolving, that what you took should be
by force, rather than by Treaty; you became Master of all the Country from
Sedan, home to the Gates of Luxembourg, which you blocked up so close, that the
Spaniards could put nothing into it.

Some time after, your Majesty raised the Blockade, as you said, because the
Turks were ready to enter into Austria, and you would not favor their designs
by giving the Emperor any diversion. For my own part, I believe what you said
to be true, and I know your Majesty has too much Sincerity to say one thing,
and mean another. The Spanish Ambassador has published to the contrary; but
what I have to say is, that if you will preserve the Glory you have acquired by
your Moderation; you must do nothing to contradict what you have said: Your
Reputation is in your own Hands; for as it will be your Glory to keep your
Word, so it will be your shame to give your self the Lie. You ought therefore,
to reject the evil Consels that may be given you, which are the bane of
Princes; though the Poison that is in 'em, be hid under fair and specious
Pretenses.

I fear all those Camps, which Monsieur Louvoy has marked out on the Frontiers
of Germany, tend to some new Design: But your Majesty, who is so great a Lover
of Justice, must consider, that you can never gain Glory by Conquests that are
unjust; yet if you could, be your Power never so great in this World; there is
another, where Kings as well as private Men, must give an Account of their
Actions.

The Algerins, whom you had chastised the last Year, were become never the
wiser for it: So that you were forced to send du Queen a Second time, who made
them sensible, that it was better to implore your Majesty's Pardon, than to
expose themselves to a new Punishment. He threw in a great Number of Bombs,
which totally ruined the Town they had endeavored to repair. But the Contests
and Divisions which were among 'em; some being for Mezzomorto, and others for
Balucbachi, the one for Peace, the other for War, kept them from following the
best Advice; which was, to give your Majesty Satisfaction. I doubt their
Constancy will not be Proof against your Thunder; for I know your Majesty is
not used to be baffled in what you undertake, and I presume you will send your
Fleet thither ten times, rather than not bring those Pirates to reason.

I shall here conclude what I have seen done by your Majesty, which would have
been to your immortal Glory, if the confidence you have reposed in Monsieur
Louvoy, had not led you to undertake some things, more out of Ambition than
Justice; your Majesty knows best, whether I speak Truth or no, and cannot be
deceived after my relating so many Circumstances. To make your Reign perfectly
Glorious, you have nothing more to do, than to regulate your Future Actions by
your own understanding; which is so free from Falsehood and Injustice; and which
will demonstrate to the World, you have had no part in any of those things, I
have now told your Majesty. I hope you will take in good part, the Liberty
wherewith I have addressed, my self to you, for the good of your Kingdom, at
least I think so: But if I am mistaken, I willingly submit my self to your
Majesty's Judgment, and to that of all Honest Men.

CHAP. VII. Which shows, that those particular Favors which your Majesty has
received from God, oblige you to render to him that which is his due; and that
no Kingdom can prosper, without the fear of God.
IF I have been so unhappy to have displeased your Majesty, by relating many
things with more Freedom than I should have taken; yet I cannot be guilty of
the same Fault in what I am now about to say, since I am certain, that in
matters of Piety, and wherein the Service of God is concerned, your Majesty
thinks no Man can speak too boldly, nor can any thing be said, that can better
please you. Many Churches rebuilt at your Charge, others to which you have
added more Maintenance to supply their wants, Blasphemers severely punished,
the Poor relieved, and many things of the like kind, which for brevity's sake,
and not to be thought a Flatterer, I do not mention; are all convincing
Testimonies, that the Glory of God is your Majesty's chief care: Though in this
you have done no more than what all the World is bound to do; yet I say, it is
your Majesty's Duty more than another Man's; not only because as you are a
Sovereign you are obliged to give good Example to your Subjects; but because
you cannot omit the doing of it, without being very ungrateful to God.

If your Majesty will but cast your Eyes, on the Favors you have received from
him, you will see many things which require an Eternal Acknowledgement. I do
not speak of such things as are common to you with all men; but reflect if you
please on those Blessings, which God's Providence has in so particular a
manner poured out upon your Majesty.

How are you bound to thank him for your Miraculous Birth? his giving you Being
to fill the noblest Throne upon Earth, is one of the least of his Favors; and
to draw you doubly, I may say, out of nothing as he did, after the Queen your
Mother had been Barren three and twenty Years, is a Blessing that cannot be
forgot without double Ingratitude.

If you follow step by step what God has done for you, you will find his
Protection over your Person has been very singular: Remember that almost
universal Rebellion of your Kingdom, that Confederation of the Parliaments
against your Authority, the insolence of your People, and how easily you
quelled these Monsters. You will then confess, this was not the Work of Man,
but the Hand of God. If after this, you call to mind the Fidelity of your
Commanders and Soldiers, even to the prejudice of their Ancient Rights; and
that Victory still wedded to your side, forced the Spaniards to yield to the
Peace of the Pyrenees, notwithstanding their great aversion to it: You will see
that this likewise, was a Favor of Divine Providence, which never forsook you.
How can you choose but be thankful, for the Miracle it wrought in recovering you
from that terrible Sickness, which I have already mentioned? I know God made
use of Natural Causes, to which impious Men attribute all that is
extraordinary; but, by their leave, there was something more in that recovery;
for you were not only given over by your Physicians, who I confess are many
times mistaken; but you were more than half dead, as those that were present
did verily think, and can testify I spoke Truth, when I said your Curtains
were drawn.

If your Majesty please, let us follow the course of your Life, and see whether
that which happened after this, be Natural. Do you in good earnest believe,
that so regular and mature a Judgment, as appeared in you presently after the
Cardinal's Death, notwithstanding the ill Education he gave you, was only the
Gift of Nature? It Is to God alone you are indebted for it, and to whom you are
to return thanks. 'Twas not in your Power to make your self wise, especially in
a Court where you were suffered to do what you would, and where none but Women,
had the care of your Education.

What shall I now say of the Wars wherein you have been engaged by evil
Counsel, and if I may dare say so, by your own Ambition? And yet, how happily
are you come off! All these Miracles are from Heaven, God having sent you into
the World, that you might Glorify him by your Actions, and has more
particularly engaged you to praise him, by many Obligations heaped upon one
another: If you do not do that which God expects from you, what will all the
World say, that know the Chararacter of a good Man is to be Grateful?

As it is your Majesty's Obligation, so it is your Interest to be thankful: For
if a Prince take no care to give to God that which is his due; how can he
expect his People should do their Duty to him, whose greatest Glory is to be
the living Image of God upon Earth. If he thinks to be obeyed, because as a
Master he commands others, and believes his Subjects must Love or fear him,
because Reward and Punishment are in his Hands, he is much mistaken: For the
Power of a Prince be it never so great; would quickly be brought to nothing; if
those that obey him, did not do it for God's sake, who is greater than he? It Is
Religion that first made Subjects fear their King, and still continues that
Fear: As a Tree which does not continually receive Nourishment from the Earth,
grows dry and withers by degrees; so take away Religion in a Kingdom, the
Respect and Fear of a Sovereign, which Subjects suck in with their Milk,
insensibly decays, till it be quite Dead; whence follow a thousand Mischiefs,
greater than can be Imagined or expressed; and then, neither Hope of Reward, or
Fear of Punishment, can prevail with Subjects to do their Duty. A Wretch, that
does not believe in God, thinks there is much more to be got by Disobedience
and Rebellion, than ever he could expect from his Prince; and what Effect can
the fear of Punishment have upon him, who believes there is no other World
beside this, and that one quarter of an Hour will put an End to all his Pain.

Not to give God his due, is to open a Door to all manner of Wickedness; and a
Prince thereby exposes himself to the Hazard of being driven out of his
Kingdom. Look but upon the Ottoman Empire, which is much more subject to
revolutions than any other Kingdoms, because the greatest part of its Subjects
think the Religion they profess to be mere humane Invention; and when a Man
once comes to that Belief, it is a very hard matter to conquer his Prejudice,
and raise him up to the Knowledge of the true God. Besides, such an Opinion
blinds and makes Men so brutish, as to attribute all things to Nature, and it is
extremely difficult for 'em to find the way out of their error.

Let us come a little nearer, and see what has been done in England, the want
of Religion in that Kingdom, was the cause of all that happened there, since
the time of Henry the 8th. the introducing of so many Sects, brought the People
at last to dip their hands in their King's blood.

Come we now to your own Kingdom, where we may observe the same disorders in
the reign of three or four Kings one after another. If you would know the
reason, read but their History. One was a Blasphemer, instead of punishing that
sin in his Subjects. Another was an Atheist, and so of the rest. So that their
Subjects who had very little more Religion than they, attempted to dethrone 'em.

These Confusions lasted till the Reign of the Deceased King your Father. The
Vicious Lives of the Clergy cannot be remembered without horror. A Bishop never
visited his Diocese, but to receive the Rents due from his Tenants; if he
stayed there, 'twas to enjoy a Mistress, whose company pleased him; and when he
was weary of her, he returned to Paris to find another, upon whom he spent that
which he should have given to the Poor; with the rest he kept Horses and
Hounds, an abuse so general amongst 'em, that he was accounted covetous who did
not live at this rate.

I have also heard my Deceased Father say that when he was young, Bishoprics
were bestowed usually to gratify Favorites (who had procured 'em) with part
of their Revenues; they knew how much they were to give, and the rest was for
themselves. The same thing was practiced with relation to Abbeys, and I may say
all the Benefices in France. The Monks who lived at their ease, spent their
overplus very scandalously, but liked the Trade so well, that in spite of all
reproof, they would not leave it.

Cardinal Richelieu, who knew that the first and most important care of a
Minister of State, is to establish Religious Worship, especially among those
whose good or evil example is of great consequence in a Kingdom, applied
himself entirely to it. God blessed his Endeavors, and it is to him we are
indebted for our present better change. Your Majesty has likewise done your
part, in not bestowing favors but upon those who for their good behavior and
learning are worthy of 'em; for your Majesty well knows that they who are to be
set over others, should be able to teach and instruct them; seeing want of good
Precepts may be the cause of as much mischief, as ill example.

By the particular knowledge I have, I am a daily witness, that in the
distribution of Benefices and other favors, your Majesty will be informed, not
only of the good lives and conversation of those persons that are proposed to
you; but also of their other requisite qualifications. Now after this knowledge
I have nothing more to say, than to exhort your Majesty to continue the Conduct
you have shown, since your coming to the Crown; for nothing so much prevails
with Subjects, as the good example of their Sovereign. Your Majesty's present
Exemplary life will be a Spur to those who are so lazy, as not to keep pace
with your Majesty, in the good way you are going.

Endeavor above all things to keep from your heart, Slanderers and Hypocrites;
whereof the number is much greater than you imagine The first like love,
insinuate themselves by degrees into Men's minds, but kill as soon as they take
possession, a Detractor gets into the heart of a Prince, by pretending his
interests are dearer to him than his own; and when he has infused his poison,
he will never let him rest till he has made him suspect the fidelity of his
best servants. Hypocrites are yet more dangerous, because under color of
Devotion they infect you with mischievous Maxims, whose venom it is impossible
for you to discover.

There are other Vices which tho your Majesty ought not to suffer; yet they are
not so prejudicial to your Government. A Man that minds nothing but pleasing
his senses, hurts no body but himself; a Drunkard is in the same case, and so
are others of the like nature; so that the service of God a part, the
Commonwealth is not concerned. If it suffer any thing, it is because God who is
just, does not usually bless those places where such disorders are permitted;
and I attribute all the Misery of Flanders to their Idolatry; I cannot without
indignation see them pay so much veneration and respect to an Image of the
Virgin Mary, or of some other Saint, and yet have no regard at all, to the Holy
Sacrament that is upon their Altars.

It Is the Monks that are the cause of this abuse, which they had heretofore
established in France; but that it does not reign there, so much as in former
times, we are to thank the Heretics. It was one of their complaints against
the Roman Church, and the people who in those days lived in very great
ignorance; now they are illuminated, know they were in the right; the Monks
themselves never doubted it, and the thing is too clear of it self, to be any
longer a block of offense. Nothing but interest has prompted 'em to make such
a change in Religion; and to load us with Indulgences and Fraternities. They at
first wrought upon the minds of weak Women, to establish their Maxims, and then
infused them into their Men; who as I have said were so ignorant, as not to
perceive the snares that were laid for them.

If these Monks had kept close to the first rules of their institution, this
abuse could never have crept in; it came in first by Confessions, which by
degrees they have now applied to themselves, through the secular Priests
neglecting their duty, the care also they take, to get Customers to their
Churches, by things which attract the eyes more than the heart; has drawn
people from their Parish-Churches, to which by the Canons they are obliged to
go under pain of mortal sin: So that we see 'em deserted and empty, while the
Churches of Covents, have not room enough to contain those whom curiosity or
dangerous zeal has allured thither; but God be thanked, we begin to know
better, what is our duty; it is your Majesty's part to remedy other abuses, God
having put power into your hands, to root out the Tares which grow amongst the
good Corn.

The means are easy, and the putting it in practice absolutely necessary, both
for the good of your Subjects, and the security of your State; for the good of
your Subjects you should not suffer Monks to meddle with what they have nothing
to do; entering into the Secrets* of Families, where they often make strange
work: And for the security of your State, how can you expect it? where they
that are bound by an Oath of Fidelity to the Pope; must prefer his Interests
before yours; which will occasion greater inconveniences* than you can imagine;
this will appear to be a manifest truth, if you call to mind what past in the
Reigns of Hen. 3. and Hen. 4. of which I need say so no more; since Your
Majesty knows what then happened, better than I do. The surest way to prevent
these two inconveniences; is first to destroy these Monasteries, or at least
not to suffer such a multitude of 'em: but since this will be a difficult thing
for Your Majesty to do, though your power be so great, yet I think it may be
compassed, if Your Majesty please, first to establish again among 'em the
ancient Discipline of their Founders, wherein they are very remiss. 2dly, If
you forbid them taking Confession; whereby they insinuate themselves into
Women, out of whom they wiredraw the Secrets of all Families. 3ly. If you
suffer none to take upon 'em the habit, till they shall be of such an age as
you shall prescribe; that they may know what it is to enter into Religion. If
this were done, their number would quickly be known, and there would not be so
many among 'em, who bite their Nails for having done that which they did not
well consider before hand. 4ly, If you reform the Ornaments of their Churches,
and reduce 'em to the Usage of Cathedrals, and of St. Peter's at Rome it self,
which should serve for a Pattern to others; where there stands upon the High
Altar, nothing but a Cross, and a few Candlesticks, instead of all the Trinkets
we see in the Covents. 5ly, If Your Majesty forbid the shameful Traffic of
Fraternities, driven in Service-time, which distracts People Devotion; also
that the Blind of A kind of Hospital in Paris, where the Blind are allowed to
beg at their Church-doors, and at the corners of Streets.
Quinze Vingt, may be kept out of the Church, that those who are at their
Prayers, may not be interrupted. These two last abuses reign as much in
Parishes, as in Covents, which Your Majesty should reform. 6thly, If you forbid
Monks and Friars talking with Women at Churchdoors, or in any other place
within the limits of their Monasteries: For what can they have to say to 'em?
does any body think they entertain 'em with Devotion? whether it is that I am
more corrupt, or that I take more notice of things than others do; but it has
been always my observation, that Old Women are still excluded from their
conversation; they are never to be spoken with, when young and pretty Women are
by; do they think to persuade us, they have charms to keep themselves from
burning, when they approach so near to the fire? Your Majesty ought to remove
this scandal, but if you cannot by the means I have proposed, there are others
which you may have recourse to in case of necessity.

Care must be taken, that Parish-Churches, in which there are many things that
want Reformation, should give so good example, that people might of their own
accord return again to 'em without any compulsion. I have observed that
Parish Priests are very negligent in their duty; it is a shame to see how at
Funerals they look to the right and the left, and behave themselves so, that no
body can think 'twas zeal for God's service, engaged them in their profession,
but that they entered into Orders only to get a livelihood, they make Devotion
a mere Trade. A Shoemaker when he is making Shoos, minds more what he is about,
than they do.

It Is Your Majesty's concern to remedy so great an abuse; but it is not to be
done, unless you resolve to augment the number of Parishes in your City of
Paris. A Priest who has no mind to give good example, is hid in the multitude
of his Parishioners, of whom the hundredth part do not know him; which would
not happen in Parishes of moderate extent. What necessity is there for their
being so large? Or that Priests should have five and twenty thousand Livres
yearly Rent? Divide one Parish into six, that will not only make the Priests
but the People more virtuous; they may then have their eyes upon every
particular person, and hinder the scandal they now encourage for want of due
care and reproof. Beside, this is the only way to abate the Pride of the Monks,
who think we cannot be without 'em, for the administration of the Sacraments,
and really the extent of some Parishes is so great, that the Church cannot
contain the thirtieth part of the Inhabitants, so that they, who cannot get
places, go some where else, or stay at home. In the mean time the Covents are
thronged with Customers, which is contrary to their first Institution.

When there are more Parishes in Paris, and in other places where it is
necessary: and when Archbishops and Bishops suffer none but Secular Priests to
come into their Pulpits, Your Majesty will quickly see People leave running
after Monks and Friars, and the Worship of God return to its first purity.

I say nothing of the Laws which Your Majesty should make against Monasteries
growing so excessively rich; you have done it already, especially in relation
to Nunneries, which you have ordered for the future, to take no Money of those
who desire the Habit. It Is much more necessary for the Support of Your
Majesty's Government, that Lay-families should be richer than Religious Houses.
This will produce another good effect, that none will be received into them,
but good Subjects; of which they take little care, provided People bring Money
with 'em. But this Law is so ill executed, that it signifies no more, than if
Your Majesty had never made it, the only effect we see of it is, that whereas
there were Contracts for the receiving of a Nun, there are none made now; yet
People pay never the less Money for it, which is contrary to Your Majesty's
intention, and for which you ought to provide a remedy. God requires it of you,
the Religious of both Sexes being become so covetous, that they receive all who
have Money to give 'em, preferably to those who have none, tho never so unfit;
the way to rectify this abuse, is to bring an Information against those who
have transgressed your Law, and punish them so severely, that they may serve as
an example to others.

For to what purpose are Laws if they be not executed? It were better as I have
already said, they had never been made. It Is exposing Your Majesty's Authority
to an affront, which could never happen if things had remained as they were
before the Law was made. I do not mean that Your Majesty should punish this
fault as if it were a crime of State; it is enough to make 'em restore the Money
they have received with Interest, it will not be difficult to prove the taking
of Money, though it were done in private, 'twill be divulged as soon as Your
Majesty's intention is known; Fathers and Mothers who have Daughters to provide
for, will be the first who will reveal the Secret; seeing it is Your Majesty's
Pleasure they shall be relieved, whether they will or no; but they should have
no part of what is restored, the Givers being as faulty as the Receivers, and
equally transgressing the Law. So that Your Majesty will grow rich at their
cost, and no body blame you, since the World will see that Your Majesty designs
nothing but the Service of God and the good of your Subjects.

CHAP. VIII. Of Obedience to the Pope.
THIS Chapter cannot be better placed than here, it having such a relation to
that which precedes it. That it may be truly said, when People refuse Obedience
to the Pope, they are not far from forgetting that which they owe to God; and
when we are not sensible of that submission and respect, we ought to have for
those whom he has as his Ministers set over us, the fear which we have of God
himself will quickly vanish. The reason is plain, because we forget that
command he has given us, to honor those who are the living Images of his
Divinity. There is no Prince be he never so little, that will suffer those to
whom he commits his Authority, to be despised, and there is nothing more
common, than to pay them the respect they require from us. This is not only
observed to the Governor of a Province, but even to the meanest Judge; and
proceeds from the Character, wherewith the Prince has honored them, in which
it is his Interest to support them? how can it then be believed that God is less
jealous of that Authority which he has entrusted in the hands of his
Ministers, and upon which depends the safety of Religion.

I know very well that the Kings of the Earth are the Lord's Anointed, and for
that reason are exalted above all other Men; but yet they must know their
Rights are distinct and different from those of the Church; and as the Church
never allows Subjects, upon any account, to be disobedient to their Prince; so
a Prince ought not to permit his People to refuse paying Obedience and respect
to the Church.

If the Church had continued in the state it was in, in the time of the
Apostles, and had not joined the Sword to the Mitre; things would have been in
another condition than now they are; but since what has been done, has been
by God's permission, we ought to submit to what he has ordained, and not give
a new occasion of scandal. I know that Churchmen have gone beyond the bounds of
their Duty, and that Bishops and Popes have had their faults; yet by whatever
they have done, they cannot lose their Character, and since it is to this
Character our respect is due, they cannot by any of their actions lose, or be
deprived of it. The case is the same with Crowned Heads, who though they do not
their Duty, yet Subjects cannot dispense with the obedience they owe them.

Would to God, Sir, your Ministers had well considered this Truth, they would
not then have exalted the Authority of your Crown, so far above that of the
Mitre. I very much doubt, whether Equity has been the rule of their Actions.
Had I been Learned and able enough to have decided this great Controversy
which you have had with Rome concerning the Regale, and some others that have
followed it, I would have determined the question positively without a perhaps,
and speaking doubtfully; but I confess my self too ignorant, to give a
definitive Judgment, in things above my reach. Now if any ask, since I confess
my incapacity, why then do I condemn rather than approve what has been done: I
pray Your Majesty to consider, that you have had not only Rome against you in
this business, but many Bishops and Doctors of your own Kingdom; who have been
always thought examples of Piety and Virtue, and have lived very exemplarily.
We see also they have chosen to suffer Exile and Imprisonment, rather than
submit to that which they believe is unjust, to say that what they have done,
is because they are opinionative and obstinate, is to impose only upon the
simple; for wise men are of another mind. Is it likely they could premeditately
design to displease their Master, especially you that are the greatest King
upon Earth, and so much respected and esteemed by all your Subjects? It is much
more reasonable to think, that Your Majesty seeing these things, with those
persons eyes, on whom you rely; the desire they have to make themselves
necessary, has put 'em upon doing what they cannot justify before an
Impartial Tribunal: They do not consider that they expose Your Majesty to new
Enemies, whose number they need not increase, since you have already made your
self too many by your Conquests, would they but reflect upon what some persons
at least as wise as themselves, who have grown old in Embassies, have
represented to the Kings your Predecessors; they would proceed a little more
warily; he deceives himself, who weighs what he undertakes, only by the power
of him for whom he acts; if Justice do not hold the Balance, it were a
thousand times better, nothing had ever been attempted. I would fain have these
Great Politicians tell me, with what Laurels they have Crowned Your Majesty, by
the Banishment and Imprisonment of so many Pious and Learned Persons; whom the
Pope in his Bulls has not only declared to be such, but has likewise exhorted
them to suffer for the love of Truth. I wish they would also tell me, what
Victory they expect by those Orders of Council, which might I dare say so, do
without any regard had to the Bulls of his Holiness, so insolently command the
Literal execution of all that, which they in the fits of their Frenzy have
decreed.

There are milder ways, and more befitting a Most Christian King, to determine
those Differences which may happen between Your Majesty and Rome. It does not
become a Son to rebel against his Father, who is to be disarmed by Kindness
and Submission, rather than by holding a Cudgel over him. Tho it be glorious
for a Man to have the better of his Enemies, yet it is shameful, to desire like
a Master to command those to whom he owes obedience and respect. So that should
Your Majesty take Rome, and conquer all the Ecclesiastical State; yet you are
prudent enough to know, you would get the same reputation by it, that Charles
the Fifth had in the like occasion, faithful and impartial Historians have
represented him to be a Prince that had no Religion, and who never kept his
word; and tho they that flatter him most, have been forced to cast a Veil over
his taking of Rome; yet the foulness of that action appears plainly through it.
I know very well there will be a gloss set upon what Your Majesty does, to
secure your Glory; but you will not find that all Pens are to be bought and
kept in your Pay, there will be some left that may go to the bottom of this
business, and give the World a true account of it. Slander is generally better
received than Truth, and if it be true, as we must agree it is, that the
greatest Kings cannot hinder People from taking the liberty to examine their
actions; how many will say that a Prince had better see with his own eyes, than
trust to other Men's. Besides, when a Man is about to do a thing, he ought to
consider what may be the end and the consequences of it. I would ask the
Archbishop of Paris, and all others, on whose advice Your Majesty relyes in
Ecclesiastical Matters; what is to be got by Quarreling with the Pope?
certainly nothing; for if Religion be not totally destroyed by it, all your
Attempts against his Holiness, will recoil back upon you: The Reason is,
because Europe cannot continue in the same State it is now, and the Pope's
Authority being so great as it is, as well in Temporal as in Spiritual Cases,
he becomes an Enemy to you, no only in his own Person, but in that of his
Successors; and a dangerous Enemy who has Thunder in his Hands; which will do
more Mischief than your Majesty's great Guns, though perhaps it may not make so
great a Noise. The People are generally very credulous on such Occasions, and
your Majesty is too clear sighted, not to foresee the ill consequences of it.
Rome's Fulminations have caused the overthrow of very great Kingdoms; and your
own have felt such furious Shocks, as has required more than a Day to recover
it. History is full of such Events, and though your Majesty's Glory and Power,
secure you at present from fearing the like; yet you ought to look on your
Heirs, who though they inherit the one, may not have the good Fortune to acquire
the other.

CHAP. IX. Of the Love which a Prince ought to have for his Subjects, and of
Taxes.
NOthing does better prove a Prince's Love to his People, than his reflecting,
why they have made themselves his Subjects, and given him power over them.
Every thing has a Beginning, and seeing we own Pharamond to be our first King,
it is evident we had none before him, or at least have no Knowledge left of
any; when the Gauls were under the Dominion of the Romans, much is said of some
famous Captains among the Gauls; but that was all the Title they had, that of
King being never given to them. We do not read they commanded any where but in
the Army, and when their Enemies retired, they returned to a private Life. If
they were esteemed and respected above others, it was for their Valor, and not
for any Authority that still remained in their hands; since they had none but
when they were in Arms.

The great struggles the Gauls had to preserve their Liberty, which they had
taken so much pains to obtain; made them think of choosing a Master; but such a
Master who had only the Name, and was so far from making himself a Tyrant, that
he concurred with them, to keep 'em again from falling into Slavery. Without
doubt, had they thought that he on whom their Choice was fallen, would treat
them as their Old Masters the Romans had done, they would certainly have soon
set Bounds to his Authority. The Establishment of Royalty was at first properly
no more, than the election of a Sovereign, who was to be universally obeyed,
for the Public Good; and who was to have the same Affection for his Subjects,
that a Father of a Family has for his Children and Servants. And though in later
times, there have been great changes in Monarchies, we ought to return to their
true original Constitution. No body can be in Love with arbitrary Power, and
had it not been introduced among the Turks, their Emperors might have sat more
securely on their Thrones. A Prince should endeavor to reign in the Hearts of
his People by Love, rather than subject them to his Will by Power. Many Kings
have pretended to a despotick Power, of doing what they pleased; but that gave
occasion of calling together the States, or such Assemblies as in some places
are termed a Parliament or Diet. But call 'em by what Names you please, they
are still but the same thing, seeing they represent the whole Body of the
Kingdom, composed of the Clergy, of the Nobility, and of that which is called
here in France the Third State. Such, for Example, are the Parliaments in
England; but our Parliaments in France, are Courts only established to
administer justice to your Majesty's People. In your Minority the Parliament of
Paris, pretended to meddle with Affairs of State, which was an Usurpation upon
your Majesty's Authority, for which you had just Reason to punish them. Good
Princes have always been the Protectors of these Assemblies of the States in
this Kingdom, and of Parliaments and Diets; not being concerned whether they
were assembled or no, because they never intended to do any thing, but what was
for the Good of their People. And to speak properly, these States and
Parliaments, are the People's Guardians; but those Princes that have a Design
to take away their Subjects Liberties, and to introduce Arbitrary Government,
are always afraid of Parliaments, because they are a Rock, on which usually
their Desires and Hopes split.

I will not say it is fit these Assemblies should meet as often as they do in
England; because by the length of their Debates, Opportunities are many times
lost, that can never be recovered. Nor does it become Subjects to have the
Wardship of their King: If it were to be permitted, it ought to be at most but
in very important occasions, and where it seems necessary that all the Orders
of the Kingdom give their Consent; in all other things, the Prince with his
Council may be a sufficient Judge, it being to be presumed he will do nothing
but for the good of his People.

If it were proper in this place to ask, whether a Prince's Council ought to be
agreeable to his Subjects; and consequently, whether your Majesty's Subjects
had reason to press you to banish Cardinal Mazarin, it would be a very ticklish
nice Question: For as it is the Peoples Interest and Concern, that no body
should give Evil Counsel to your Majesty; so on the other hand, many
Inconveniences might happen, if a Prince should have no Council, but such a
one as his People like; for that were to reduce Monarchs to the Condition of
being Sovereigns only in show. But since what we treat of here is quite another
thing, I will only say, that the Consequence which results from the
Establishment of the States, cannot possibly be denied; which is, that a King
ought to have a very tender Affection for his People, which he is obliged never
to depart from. The Reason is, because there had been no need of such an
Establishment, if they should have had Power to do what they thought good. But
seeing such Assemblies were created, to be as I may say, Guardians and
Protectors of the People, and have right to interpose their Mediation with the
Prince, that nothing may pass to their Prejudice: It is an infallible Proof,
that Princes ought to be Fathers to, and not Tirants over their Subjects.
Otherwise the Convocation of the States, and Meeting of Parliaments, must have
been created to favor the one, and to take away the Rights of the other. Now
whoever saw an Assembly of the States accused for assuming to themselves an
Authority that was not due to them? But that Suspicion falls often upon the
Princes, and many of 'em are not able to defend themselves from it.

If it plainly appear by what has been said, that Kings have an Obligation to
their People; that which remains to be said, will no less clearly prove it, if
we examine what are the Obligations of the one, and of the other. We shall see,
that if Subjects be bound to obey their Prince, the Prince is obliged to love
and protect his Subjects.

A Prince, to speak properly, is in his Dominions, that which the Heart is to
all the Parts and Members of the Body. If the Heart be sick, the whole Body
presently resents it; if any part of the Body be ill, the Heart at the same
time suffers. Therefore to be in perfect Health, there must be between the
Heart and all parts of the Body a constant Union and Agreement; and they must
in their several Functions mutually help each other. Between a King and his
Kingdom the Case is the same: There must be a perfect Harmony and Agreement
between him and his People. As the Heart gives Motion to all parts of the Body,
so does the Prince to all the Actions of his People: And as the Heart receives
Succor from all the parts of the Body, to keep it in a vigorous and healthful
state, that the whole Body may enjoy the same; so ought a King to receive Aid
from his People, to support his Power and Authority, that he may preserve their
Peace and Welfare.

If this be an indisputable Truth, which no Man can doubt, then this Agreement
between a King and his Subjects depends solely upon himself; for if he be just,
his People will certainly be obedient. Now to be just, is to do every
individual Subject right, and not to suffer the Strong to oppress the Weak.

Your Majesty seems to have sufficiently provided against it by the good Laws
you have made, and by sending Magistrates into the Provinces, to see them put
in Execution. But the Question is, whether this is sufficient, and whether
there be not greater Outrages committed in your Majesty's Name, and under your
Authority, than were to be feared from the Great Men of your Kingdom: For it is
you, Sir, that are stronger than the strongest; and if the Power of others be
suppressed to make your Majesty's the greater, yet you ought not to do any
thing that is unjust. The Covetousness of the Partisans is so intolerable, that
provided they can fill their own Coffers, they care not what Reproach they
bring upon your Majesty. Your Council sometimes goes too fast, in making Orders
to authorize their Extortions. Your Council's chief Care is to please you in
all things they think are for your Advantage, without ever examining what are
the Rights of your People. I have observed in some Cases their blindfold
Complyances, which I may boldly call criminal; since they violate Justice,
which your Council ought to defend. Your Majesty knows I have often opposed
such Orders; for as I will always be for that which I believe is Just; so I
will never consent to that which I think is not so.

Your Majesty may remember when the Duty of There being a Duty laid on Wine
resembling our Excise, what is made and consumed (like Beer and Ale brewed) in
Private Families is exempt from all Duty. But by this Tax there is only an
allowance of so much Wine to every Family proportionable to their Number, and
if they exceed that Allowance the Officer returns Trop bu, and they pay Excise
for the Overplus.
Trop bu came to be debated, I did as much oppose it as possibly I could, and
could I have prevailed it had never been ordained; I knew the injustice of it,
notwithstanding all the fine Colors some endeavored to put upon it; but at
last it made such a Noise, that your Majesty thought fit to revoke this new Tax.

There are some of this nature which still remain; but here are such Complaints
and Outcries again 'em, that they cannot last long. One of this kind, is the
making People in some places, pay two several Taxes which are incompatible, as
in Cities and Towns whose Payments by Composition, are limited to a certain
Sum, to require the Payment of the A Tax much like our Toll, which is taken at
the Gates of Paris, and of other Cities, for all sorts of Provision and
Merchandise that enters therein.
Droit d'entree, and the Taille too. Though your Majesty does not enter into a
strict examination of this Matter, yet you are made responsible for it, as well
as my self. Some think this is done by your Majesty's express Order, and by my
Advice: But the Governers of Provinces have more hand in it than any body; the
desire they have to make their Court to your Majesty by increasing your
Revenue; is the reason of their being Instruments to vex the People.

They become so, because the Council out of which they are taken, and whose
Members are designed to succeed them, think it is to do themselves wrong not to
follow their Orders. All Causes which concern your Majesty's Rights, come
ordinarily before the The King's Officers, who makes the Assessments of all
Taxes and Aids within their several Provinces, and judge and regulate a^l
Differences relating thereto.
Elus, and then what Justice can your People expect, when they plead before
Judges, who are in Truth Parties? For there is not an Elu in France, that is
not a Pensioner to the Partisans; which is an Abuse your Majesty is bound to
reform, and you know I have often spoke to you of it. The Case as to the
Intendants is somewhat more nice, because it is necessary for the good of your
Kingdom, that in those Posts there should be none, but such as are zealous
Promoters of your Majesty's Interest: For otherwise your Affairs would soon be
in an ill Condition. That which ought to be observed by them is, that they
should not by flattery aggravate things; and it is your Majesty's and your
Council's part, not to countenance their being Favorites. Their so
passionately desiring to heap up Riches, is that which begets the good
understanding and secret correspondance, which is always between them and the
Partisans; therefore to rectify this abuse, your Majesty ought not only to
choose Persons capable of the Employment; but likewise those that are able to
maintain themselves in it, without doing any thing that is base or unworthy:
For as a King has the Glory of all the good that is done in his Kingdom; so he
ought to bear the Shame of all that is ill done.

Now seeing all these things contribute either to the Love or Hatred which
People have for their Prince; he ought to be careful, that his Subjects be as
little charged as possible, with new Impositions; and he should also be very
circumspect in his Examination and Choice of those Persons, with whom he trusts
his Authority.

CHAP. X. Of all the Kingdom in general.
WHen I attentively consider the Kingdom, and in what manner it is composed and
settled; I find in it Six different Estates of People; which all, except one,
contribute to its Grandeur; but that one is so far from it, that it is rather
like to prove its utter ruin. The 1. is the Clergy. The 2. the Nobility, and
Gentry. The 3. is that which we call the Third State, in which are comprised
all those that are concerned in the administration of Justice. The 4. the Men
of Business. The 5. the Merchants, or Tradesmen. The 6. Husbandmen and
Laborers. The Clergy can never be thought an unprofitable Member of the
Kingdom, since their business is to maintain Religion, which, if taken away or
neglected, I have already showed what irremediable Mischief will follow.

The Nobility likewise is a Body, that does not only give Luster to the
Monarchy, but is the firmest Support of it.

He considers things but superficially, that thinks the The Lawyers.
Gens de justice, that is, all concerned in the administration of Justice, to
be more useful and necessary than the Clergy and Nobility; whereas, they are so
far from being necessary in the State, that they are rather the ruin of it.
The multiplicity of Royal and subaltern Courts of Justice, the Bailywicks,
Presidial Courts, and the Parliaments, are so many Blood-suckers. They gnaw and
grate your Subjects, and I will maintain, they cost your People every Year,
above Two Hundred Millions. I will think what course may be taken to remedy so
great a Mischief; but I cannot pass by other Leeches, no less decryed than
these I have mentioned, though somewhat more serviceable, and useful to the
Public.

I mean the Gens d'Affaires, that is, the Bankers, whom the People think to be
the Instruments of all their Misery. And indeed, in so thinking, they are not
altogether deceived. I confess this Abuse may be more easily reformed than the
other; but cannot be totally suppressed. I will say more of it, but must first
speak of those things which ought to precede it.

The Tradesmen, as well as Husbandmen and Laborers, are included in that which
is called the Third Estate; but indeed they should be separated, and have a
Place by themselves; since it is not just, that they, who take so much Pains to
preserve the Kingdom, should be mingled with a company of Pettifoggers, whose
business it is to destroy it. I know your Majesty is too Prudent, not to
protect, and in all things concur with them, to make Trade and Tillage
flourish* Were I not obliged to observe order in my Discourse, I would here
more largely show, what Advantages your Majesty may procure them: But seeing I
must not go before those, of whom I have first spoken, I return again to the
Clergy, who take Place of all the other Orders of the Kingdom.

CHAP. XI. Of the Clergy.
PIety is so absolutely necessary to an Ecclesiastic, that your Majesty has
all the Reason in the World, not to bestow Benefices, but on such as appear to
be good and virtuous Men. But seeing People know how to dissemble, when it is
for their Interest and Advantage; we should not always judge by Appearances,
but strictly examine and enquire into their Lives and Conversations. The
Universities and Seminaries established for this purpose, are of very great Use
and Benefit; for though many come to them with dissolute and worldly Minds; yet
they are in a fair way to be reformed by good Example, which they have daily
before their Eyes. But I think there should be a certain time limited for
Peoples staying in those Seminaries, to which all Persons of Quality, as well
as others should be subject, and none by any Privilege exempted: For it is not
by long living in Universities, but by coming abroad and conversing in the
World, that many things are learned, necessary for a Clergy Man to know, and
which he can never so well learn any where else.

Pluralities are now grown common; But still condemned by tender Consciences.
Those that are scrupulous, question whether the going from one Church to
another, ought to be suffered: Because as a Lay Man is forbidden to change his
Wife, or to have more than one at a time; so a Clergy Man ought not to have two
Livings, or to commute that which has been given to him.

The Covetousness of Churchmen, and of other Persons of Consideration, joined
with that necessity which has often obliged your Majesty and your Predecessors
to reward their good Services; first introduced this abuse of Pluralities. But
your Majesty will do well, to consider what ill Consequences attend it, against
which, a timely Remedy must be provided. Ecclesiastics well born, and bred
high, are seldom sit Persons to edify the People; for having lived in very
great abundance, and kept the great Men company, they must needs retain some of
their Vices. Their Tables and their Stables, consume the Patrimony of the Poor,
and if in the midst of their Plenty, they chance to cast their Eyes on a poor
Wretch, they command he should be taken out of their sight, instead of taking
pity on him.

Were Church-mens Possessions proportioned to their Character, they would live
more frugally, and give less Scandal. Great Riches often ruin Men; and, if what
the Gospel says be true, that whatever a Clergy-man's Revenue be, yet he ought
to take no more of it to his own use, than necessity requires; how dangerous
then must it be to have a Hundred or Fourscore Thousand Livers Yearly Rent,
which we see many Church men do enjoy. Did they bear any part of the Burden of
the State, your Majesty would be obliged, God's Portion set apart, to reward
their good services; but as they are in that respect unprofitable Members of
the Kingdom, so being priviledg'd by their Character, they load others with
paying Tithes, and other Duties: While with great care they free themselves
from the Burden which in justice they ought to bear.

Your Majesty in so large a Kingdom as yours, has need of a great number of
good Servants, and you would have wherewith all to reward 'em, if you divided
among many, what you sometimes give but to one, and yet not content him. You
should above all things consider, that the Service of God, and the Salvation of
an infinite number of Souls, are brought into danger. Riches are a Rock upon
which many a Man has been wrecked, and rich Churchmen for the most part, make
an ill use of their wealth, and become a Scandal to their Diocese; whereas if a
Bishop had but a competent Revenue, he would employ it in things profitable,
and tending to Edification.

To put things into this State, there is no necessity to take away the Revenue
belonging to Bishoprics and Abbeys; but to oblige those that are worth more
than Ten thousand Livers Rent, to maintain a Vicar or Schoolmaster in Parishes
which have none, but where one is very necessary. For when People are poor, and
not able to bear a new Charge, without being overburthen'd, their Children will
want instruction; and Ten thousand Livres a year, are more than a sufficient
maintenance for a Bishop or an Abbot; the Service of God does not require their
having such rich and sumptuous Equipages, nor such Magnificent and Dainty
Tables. In the time of the Primitive Church, Luxury did not reign so much among
'em, and then there were more Saints than Bishops or Court-Abbots.

Another good effect that would be wrought by lessning the Revenue of the
Clergy, is, that Persons of Quality, who enter into Orders upon no other score,
but to have part of the Wealth that belongs to the Church; would not take upon
them the Priesthood, unless they were truly called to it. So that for the
future, there would be none in the Church, but Men of great Zeal and Piety,
whose Example only would be sufficient to invite others to the same life; for
nothing more prevails on Men, than to see what good Lives those lead, who are
their Superiors.

CHAP. XII. La Noblesse properly signifies the Ancient Gentry, who all call
themselves Noble in France.
Of the Nobility, or Gentry.
THE Gentry were heretofore very considerable in France, and Your Majesty's
Enemies so dreaded their Valor, that when they were known to be in your
Armies, the Enemy was still unwilling to come to a Battle; but of late the
Gentry have lost much of their Luster, and are fallen into so great Poverty,
that it is hard to know who are truly Noble. There are some Politicians who
pretend this to be for Your Majesty's advantage, because if the Nobility were
as flourishing as in times past, Your Majesty's Power would not be so firm and
stable, as now it is. But such Maxims look more like the Politics of
Machiavil, than those of a great King. A Kingdom built on the love of the
People, is of much longer duration, than that which is founded on Tyranny. The
times are not always the same in a state, and when they come to change, it is to
be feared, that they who have been ill u'd, will show their discontent, by some
signal disobedience.

I have observed diverse Subjects of Complaints among the Gentry; the first is,
That they are drained and consumed by the War, and their Services very ill
rewarded. The second is, That the Intendants uphold their Vassals against them,
by protecting them often very unjustly. The third is, That under specious
pretenses, they are made a prey to the Covetousness of the Partisans, who
design their ruin. The fourth is, That the rank which they have always held in
the Monarchy, is now very little regarded, and that Your Majesty respects them
no more, than if they were born of the lees of the People.

As to their first complaint, I think it not wellgrounded; for Your Majesty as
powerful as you are, is not able to reward all the World. Gentlemen ought to
consider the Creation you have made of the Companies of Cadets, and the
Establishment of the House of A Monastery for Women of Quality out of which
they may Marry, or go again into the World.
St. Cir; which is in some sort a reward for their Services; since it frees
them from the Charge of their Children, who are maintained at your Majesty's
Expense, and put into a condition to be several ways preferred, by an Education
suitable to their Birth.

If they pretend these Rewards are not distributed according to Merit, and that
Monsieur Louvoy disposes of them upon all occasions, as he thinks fit; this is
what your Majesty cannot help, because it is impossible that you can take notice
of all things, or know the merit of every Officer, in the several Armies you
have so far distant from you. Your Majesty must in this particular trust him
who has the Charge of the War, and if he impose upon you, it is he only can be
blamed.

The second complaint indeed seems more just and reasonable; for as a Gentleman
is not suffered to oppress his Vassal, so the Vassal ought not to fail of
paying all due respect to his Lord. But because the one more rarely happens
than the other, the Lord is most commonly suspected to be the wrong doer; and
he who has the power in his hands, is more like to be guilty of vexation, than
he that has none. So that the Gentleman is generally the person condemned;
which cannot be always justified, since there is nothing so insolent as a
Peasant that knows he has some body to back and protect him. It Is difficult in
such Cases to determine on which side the right lies, for if a Gentleman should
be believed on his word, we should often run the hazard of being deceived; and
if credit should be given to a Peasant, we cannot be assured he speaks truth.
All that I know to be done in such a Case is, that every Intendant should make
it his endeavor to search out the truth if possible, before he order any
Information or Process; for such an order gives great distaste to an innocent
person, especially when he is prosecuted by one that is his inferior, and owes
him respect. But that this expedient may not delay the speedy doing of Justice,
let the false accuser be exemplarily punished, and on the other hand, let not
the person accused be so far indulged, as to be permitted to oppress any body,
that has just Cause of complaint.

For the third, I confess there is very good Ground, and against which nothing
can be alleged. I have heretofore told Your Majesty, that the manner of
inquiring who are noble, and who not, is very vexatious and chargeable to
Gentlemen. To prevent the like trouble for the future, 'twould be a better
expedient how to know them, to make one general exact search; but not by the
Partisans: And when such a search is made, let there be a Catalogue or List
Registered of all that are Noble in every Province, and let them and their
Descendants, be for ever after free from all other searches. To hinder
Plebeians from pretending to be of a good Family that may be extinct, let every
one be obliged to give in a Note of all that are Baptized or Buried in his
Family: If this course be taken, no body will be able to make himself a
Gentleman that is none; and for those that shall for the future be made Noble,
let them be obliged to have their Patents Registered.

If Your Majesty think fit to make such an order, and oblige every one to the
strict observation of it, you will not only get the love of your Nobility, but
do an act of Justice. For to say truth, a Gentleman who has been at a great
deal of trouble and charge to get out of the hands of the Partisans, must think
it very strange, to see himself in a little time plagued again, in the same
manner, and under the same pretense he was before. Others likewise give
Gentlemen a great deal of trouble concerning the Tenure of their Lands, and
though they know that upon former Inquisitions, they have made out their Titles,
yet require them to do it again. There ought to be some standing rule
established, once for all, to settle the repose of the most considerable Order
of Men in your Kingdom. Your Majesty is more concerned to do it than you
imagine; they are the chief support of your Crown, and did they not give good
example to others, by their zeal in your Service, all would quickly be turned
Topsie-turvy. Though your Majesty has done a great deal for the Gentry, as I
have already showed, yet you are obliged to do more; which might be easily
done, if you would oblige the Nunneries to receive young Women that desire to
enter into Religion, without a Portion.

It would ease their Parents of a burden, and be an advantage to Your Majesty;
for that Money which is now given with Daughters, might be bestowed on the
Sons; and consequently enable them to serve in your Armies, which would be a
great help to the Gentry, and silence many of their Complaints. It must be
confessed, they are not much the better for the Establishment of St. Cir. That is
but as a drop of water to one that is thirsty, and the House is not able to
entertain the hundredth part of the Women, that would seek a retreat there. How
many Maids for want of such a refuge, lead sad languishing lives, and yet are
happier and wiser, than others, who are obliged by Poverty to marry very mean
Men, and work for their Living.

However such a retreat as this, is much better than what is given to most of
the Maids of St. Cir. Where tho the House be under the care of very great
Persons, yet one who has a heart as great as her Birth, is often forced,
against her Will, to Marry A Word of Ignominy and Reproach in France.
a Tax or Toll gatherer. Those who have other Sentiments, are not truly noble,
but only so in show and appearance. To prove what I say, I need only tell, what
lately happened in the House of a great Lady, where a Young Woman very well
born, by the baseness of her Parents, who Sacrifis'd her to their Private
Advantage, was forced to marry one of their Domestics, she died with Grief:
And the Man that married her, now courts another, who, may she have her Will,
will never have him; but because some in very great Power are for him, he will
certainly marry her in spite of all she and her Guardian can do to the contrary.

Your Majesty is much dishonored by interposing your Authority in such cases;
for these things are commonly done by Letters under the Privy Signet, by Virtue
of which, Daughters are taken from their Parents, and forced to enter into
Religion; where they are necessitated to be disobedient, being obliged to do
that, which by the Laws of God and Man, they are forbidden to do. How many
Women that are Heiresses to good Estates, are sacrificed in this manner, and
they that do it, never consider how your Majesty loses the hearts of the
Gentry, whom it concerns. The Countess of Tallard, and the Marchioness of
Thiange, were married against the Will of their Parents, and though to Persons of
Quality, yet what Satisfaction is that to a Father or Mother, who perhaps had
taken other Measures, and thought themselves secure under your Majesty's Reign
from any such Violence?

The Gentry stand in need of another Help, which they can expect from none but
your Majesty: They are up to the Ears in Debt, out of which, if you do not take
some course to deliver them, they will be all undone; it is not very difficult,
and 'twill be an act of Justice in your Majesty; for you will restore that
repose to them, which they have lost on your Account; it being a certain Truth,
that they have been ruined in your Service. Moreover, you will infinitely
oblige their Creditors, by saving them the trouble and Charge of a multitude of
Suits, which the Malice of Judges, and the Knavery of Lawyers will make
endless. Your Majesty needs do no more, than order all Debtors to sell to their
Creditors, such a Portion of Land, as is worth the Money they owe them; which
Land shall be valued at a reasonable Price, not at the rate it goes now, but as
it went Twenty five Years ago: For Gentlemen would be quite undone, should
their Estates be valued at no higher Rate, than the present Rents; the misery
of the Times, which cannot always continue, having made Land less worth by a
third Part, than formerly it was. It Is manifest, that when better Order is
taken, Lands will return again to their former Value.

But that Creditors may not complain, your Majesty will do well, to reduce all
Land to five and twenty Years purchase; and all Money to Four per Cent.
Interest, and then let the Creditors take their Choice, whether they will have
their Principal and Interest at that Rate, or take the Land that is offered
them. Julius Caesar did almost the same thing; for when he saw the Romans so
much in debt, that they were not able to clear themselves, he ordered they
should pay their Creditors in the manner I have proposed, and that their
Creditors should be satisfied with it.

If your Majesty would do this, you would find a great Advantage by it: For
Gentlemen would not only be in a better condition to serve you; but when your
Majesty wanted Money, you might, if you pleased, have all in the Kingdom, at
Five per Cent. Interest; for every one would rather lend his Money to your
Majesty, than to any body else.

Were so good an Order once established, it would be observed for the Future:
Were that done which was intended Twelve Years ago, but not put in execution,
because there were such contests about it in Parliament; there should be
Registers appointed to record all Obligations and Contracts; then no body could
be deceived or cheated; for by looking over the Register, every Man's Debts
might be known, and a Man might presently see whether he that desired to borrow
Money could give good Security for it. The Parliament had no mind this should
be done, because it would have cut off the Hydra's Head of all Process and Law
Suits; by which they grew Rich. Their Pretense against such a Register was,
that all the Grandees of the Court, as well as others, would be ruined by it:
for owing more than they had wherewith to pay, they would not be able to borrow
Sixpence, when their Debts came to be discovered. So that prevailing (by this
Pretense) with many considerable Persons to be of their Mind, they so caball'd
together, that your Majesty revoked the Edict you had made concerning it.

But this was too weak a Reason, to hinder the doing of so much good. It is
absolutely necessary to oblige People to deal faithfully and honestly one with
another, and they that lend Money, ought to have good Security for it. Private
Men's Credit must likewise be kept up, otherwise, when they have occasion for
Money, though they have an Estate, they will not be able to borrow, because they
are thought to owe more than really they do: and it must appear plainly to
Lenders, that they have good Security. When such a Register is established, it
will not be in Peoples Power to cheat one another, as they now daily do.

There is another Benefit which your People will have by it; against which
there can be no Objection, which is, when Men want Money, they now apply
themselves to Usurers, by whom they are soon and certainly undone: But when
Registers are settled, they will have no occasion to deal with them; for
whoever has an Estate in Goods or Land, may have what Money he wants at
reasonable Interest, and then they that have nothing, will not be able to
deceive any body.

CHAP. XIII. Of Lawyers, or those concerned in the administration of Justice.
IT may be thought strange, I should maintain, that they who are employed in
the administration of Justice, are a Sort of People that ought to be destroyed:
As if I thereby designed to introduce Libertinism and Violence, two Things
intolerable in a Kingdom. But though I maintain that the rooting out of these
People, is the way to reform all Abuses, and make the Kingdom flourish; yet let
it not be thought, I any more intend Justice should be banished, than the Fear
of God and the King. There are ways of doing Justice, without making it so
chargeable to the People, and it may be done with ease, by putting what I am
about to say, in practice.

That which makes those who administer Justice, so burdensome to the People;
is the Sale of their Offices and Places, introduced by the Kings your Majesty's
Predecessors, and by Taxes from time to time laid upon them, which they must
have out of those that unhappily fall into their Clutches; but fearing it would
make too great a Noise, should they flea them all at once, they prolong suits,
and fleece them by Degrees, that their Robberies may not be perceived. They
will have the last drop of their Clients Blood, a Misery to which all they that
go to Law are exposed; a Man must leave his Business at home, to run about
soliciting, and sometimes lie in Town many Years, to lose his Quiet and waste
his Estate, and in truth, to lead as wretched a Life as the Galley Slaves.
Would there be any need of this, if Justice were honestly and duly administered?
Of what nature soever any Cause be, is there a necessity of disguising it with
so many Forms of Proceedings? If Truth be uniform and naked, why is it
represented in so many Colors? To remedy this, let all the present Forms of
Prosecuting Law Suits be abolished; and for the future, let Causes be
determined as they are in Turkey, or by Consuls upon the Place, without having
any thing to do with green Bags, and Bundles of old Papers. But it being
impossible to make Men leave a Knavish Trade, by which they get their Living,
there is no way to reform so great an Abuse, but to cut it up by the Roots.

This may be easily done, if your Majesty will but suppress the Is the Sixtieth
part of the Price of any Office in the Law or the Finances, which is annually
paid* to the King by all Officers, that they may have leave to sell or to
dispose of their Places during that Year, and when an Officer dies without
paying la Paulette his Heirs lose the Benefit of his place. It takes its Name
from Charles Paulet, who invented it about the Year 1600* and was authorized by
an Arrest of the Privy Council the 12th of Dec. 1604.
Paulette, which though it brings a great Revenue to your Majesty, by annual
Payments and Loanes, yet not comparable to the Benefit which the taking of it
quite away will be, not only to the Public, but to your Majesty in particular.
I have already said, that they who are concerned in the administration of
Justice, cost your People Two Hundred Millions Yearly; which will be easily
made out, if we consider what a vast number of Blood-Suckers are to be
maintained, and what great Charges People are put to in going to Law. A poor
Countryman that is Plaintiff or Defendant, does not only lose his Money, but
what is dearer to him his Time. How can he get his Living, when he is forced to
run soliciting from House to House, the Doors being often shut against him, if
he has not a Silver Key to open 'em.

The Benefit all People would find, by having Justice administered in another
manner than now it is; is so visible, that I need not say much to prove it.
It Is evident that your Majesty and the whole Kingdom, will reap very great
advantage by it. Your People would be much eased, their Purses less drained,
and they would be better able to supply your Majesty's Wants; and when this
Generation of Leeches has nothing to do, they will be forced to follow some
other Trade, more beneficial to Monarchy. Some would turn Soldiers, especially
those that are Rich, and would vie with People of Quality: others would become
Merchants or Bankers, which would be of equal Advantage to your Majesty* For
the more Soldiers you have, the more Formidable you will be to your Enemies;
and the more Merchants you have, the more will your Kingdom flourish. These two
Professions and Tillage, are enough to complete its prosperity, but I will add
one thing more, which shall be mentioned hereafter; and when I have given my
Reasons for it, let Peoples Prejudice against it be never so great, yet I hope
they will be of my mind. But I must first finish this Chapter, which would be
very imperfect, if I did not show in what manner I would have Justice
administered, when the present practice in the Administration of it, and all
Offices and Places be longing to it, are quite laid aside and suppressed.

In the Jurisdiction of every Bayliwick, I would have your Majesty make choice
of Three understanding Persons; and make them Judges of all Differences that
should arise there; these Three should be chosen out of the Clergy, the Gentry,
and the Third State. Every one should plead his own Cause, and he that was not
able to do it himself, should get a Friend to plead for him. All Papers and
Writings relating to the Cause, should be brought in, and laid on the Table. No
Process should be issued, nor any Money paid for hearing the Cause. The Party
condemned should not only pay Costs, but likewise a Fine. There may lie an
Appeal to your Majesty, and for that, there should be a certain number of
Judges established in Paris, whereof, some should take Cognizance of the
Appeals of one Province, and some of another, but no longer than for one Year
only, and at the end of that time they should change their Offices one with
another. Their Salaries like those given to the Judges of Provinces, should be
paid by the People, for which there should be a Tax laid upon them* like that
which is levied for your Majesty.

If this were done, there would be an end of all Process, and your People will
eternally bless your Majesty, for having restored to them Peace and Plenty, by
so excellent a Regulation.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Men of Business, such Bankers or others who farm the King's
Revenue.
IN so great a Kingdom as your Majesty's, where its Bounds have been so much
enlarged by your Conquests, there ought to be a constant Fund of ready Money,
that in Case your Enemies should have a mind to be revenged for their Losses;
your Majesty may be in a condition to oppose and repulse 'em. It is impossible
you can do it at your own Charge, though your Revenue be great, for if you should
make it your Business to gather and hoard up Money, your People would presently
be sensible of it: The Money which is necessary to maintain Trade in a Nation,
must be in a continual circulation, to make a Kingdom flourish.

When War was declared by a Herald; a Prince had some time to prepare for it,
by filling his Coffers beforehand. But since nothing is so much practiced by
Princes, as surprising one another, there is a necessity of having ready Money,
which must be supplied by Bankers, whose Credit keeps all Trade in continual
Motion. It is therefore your Majesty's Interest, not only to make use of, but
likewise to protect them. They must not however be suffered to suck your
Peoples Blood, but should be severely punished, when they are found guilty of
Extortion: It Is just they should get something, but they must not be permitted
to rob your Subjects, and go unpunished.

To encourage them by an Honest Gain, I think it sufficient to allow them a
sixth Part for Management, and 10. per Cent. upon extraordinary Occasions; for
those Branches of your Revenue which are farmed out, I think there can be no
better establishment than the present; I would not have 'em let at a Rent
certain, as in Loans, and no account to be given of the Overplus.

That would be to revive the Ministry of Monsieur Fouquet, and open a Door to
all the Abuses that were committed in his time. A Farmer that looks forward,
and considers what may happen hereafter, must not by bold Frauds make too much
haste to be Rich, and hazard the undoing of himself, and his Children after
him. There may a time come, when he shall be called to a strict Account, and be
forced to disgorge all he has swallowed, and rot in a Goal: He were much
better for his own Peace, be contented with reasonable Gain.

In farming out your Majesty's Revenue, it is necessary that the Person on whom
you rely to do it, should never depend on the Fidelity of the Commissioners:
For, let him be never so cautious, they will, if possible, deceive him in their
Accounts; they will dexterously charge too much or too little as they see their
Advantage; and sometimes between the Intendant of the Finances, who has Power
to let them; and the Farmers that rent them; there may be so Good an
understanding, as to divide the Cake, and defraud your Majesty. To prevent
this, there should always be joined with the Farmers, an honest Man who may be
confided in; he will be a continual Spy upon the rest, and be so distrusted by
them, that they will be afraid, though they have never so much mind, to do your
Majesty Wrong.

It being impossible for a Comptroller General, to know of himself, all the
ways and means which may be used to raise Money; he ought to deal faithfully
with those, that give him information how it may be done. I always, without
respect of Persons, gave Rewards to those that brought me any good Memorials,
or Proposals to that purpose. It Is the way to sharpen Men's Wits, and to
discontent such Men, may be very prejudicial to your Majesty's Affairs. Their
Papers must be examined, to see what is good, and what is bad in their
Proposals. I would fain know what a Minister of State could do, if he were not
sometimes assisted by other Men's advice, he will find it so much trouble to
look over and rectify those Memorials that are brought him, that he will
hardly have time to sleep quietly.

There are sometimes hard Bargains, where a Company loses considerably,
notwithstanding the Allowance that is made 'em: As when Commodities are
assigned to 'em for Payment, which they cannot sell or put off. The Case is
then the same, as if nothing had been given them. A Minister of State, ought on
such Occasions to do them Justice, and not let 'em suffer: For if your Majesty
will have Money, you must protect, and not Persecute those that are to furnish
you with it; for if they are to advance it, it is requisite People should
believe they are Men of Substance, and in a good Condition; when once they
think the contrary, they will be wary how they part with their Money, to those
that are upon the brink of Ruin.

I remember a Conjuncture of this nature, since I have been in the Post to
which your Majesty was pleased to prefer me; but I presently applied a Remedy:
It was in the Year 1670. when People kept their Purses sast tied, and there was
little or no Money stirring. The Bankers came daily, and told me, their Credit
was quite lost, that People thought them engaged in ill Bargains, and would
trust 'em no longer. I then did two things which succeeded very well; first I
appointed Persons to enquire what Losses they had sustained, with a Promise
that when I knew what really they were, I would make 'em Satisfaction: Next I
sent for the Principle Agents of the Bank, and after having had your Majesty's
Consent, I distributed Three Millions among 'em, which they presently employed
in Trade. They that knew not whence the Money came, concluded presently, that
these Men would never run the Risque of so great a Sum, but upon very good
grounds, they immediately followed their Example, and People universally began
again to open their Purses.

In a time of scarcity, especially of Wine, the like inconvenience may happen,
because they that farm the Duties upon it, would be undone, if there were not
some allowance made them, proportionable to their loss. Now not knowing how it
will go with them, till your Majesty's pleasure be declared how much they shall
be abated; every one keeps his Money in his hands, and all the Banks are shut
up at once, they likewise who are Sub-farmers will pay nothing, because they
also expect an abatement; pretending they are not able to pay, when sometimes
they have a great deal of Money in their hands, which they will not part with,
though you should Quarter Soldiers upon them, or send them to Prison. To avoid
this, which in time will be extremely prejudicial to your Majesty's Affairs;
your Minister must appoint Commissioners to make him a true report of the state
of Affairs, but they must never be chosen out of the general Farmers; because
that would be to put Your Majesty's Concerns, into the hands of suspected
Persons, not to be trusted. Who under borrowed names, are often partners with
the Sub-farmers; and will be sure to aggravate their losses, pretending them to
be much greater than in truth they are. And when they are not concerned, will
not trouble themselves, let what will happen.

Your Majesty must forbear as much as possibly you can, and the state of your
Affairs will permit, the imposing of any new Taxes; but there is one that has
not yet been laid, which I think very just and necessary, and will be so far
from doing hurt, that it will certainly do a great deal of good. All France is
of late years, so over run with Luxury, and Vanity reigns every where to that
degree; that it is impossible to know a Peasant from a Gentleman, a Citizen from
a Magistrate, or the Rabble from Citizens. Their Families in the mean time
suffer, and it is an abuse which Your Majesty is obliged to suppress, not only
that Men's several conditions may be distinguished, but also to keep them from
being miserable. A bare Law in this Case, will be but an uncertain remedy;
because we daily see Laws last but a little time, and are frequently broken as
soon as made. Your Majesty must therefore lay a Tax upon all those that wear
Clothes beyond their Quality, and you must by an Edict declare, who may wear
Gold and Silver, who Silk, and so downwards; and that they who ought not to
wear Gold or Silver, and yet presume to do it, shall pay so much; and they that
wear Silk, or any other forbidden Stuff, so much. This imposition will make all
People live within compass, according to their condition, or will be a very
considerable Income to Your Majesty; for if you oblige those to pay a Crown or
two, that contrary to the Law wear Gold or Silver, and those to pay a little
less that wear Silk, Lace, or whatever else shall be prohibited; how many that
by the Law ought not to wear such or such things, will rather pay their Money,
than (as is usually said) not go like other folks; and yet no body can complain
against such a Tax, because it will be voluntary, no person being bound to pay
it, but he that will.

CHAP. XV. Of Tradesmen and Commerce.
THERE is nothing so necessary to make a Kingdom flourish as Trade; and for a
Demonstrative proof of it, we need but observe the difference between a Town
situated upon a good River, and an Inland Town. The one is rich and plentiful,
the other poor and miserable. But Towns near the Seaside, have yet an
advantage, which others have not, because they abound more in all things, than
those upon Rivers, or in any other places; so that whoever has a mind to
follow any employment, may if he please live very comfortably. Now if so many
advantages attend Trade, which no body can deny, it should be an incitement to
Your Majesty, to promote and protect it. Many have formerly, and still blame
me, for persuading Your Majesty to encourage and countenance Manufactures,
exclaiming against me, that nothing we can do, will be comparable to that we
have from foreign parts. But they are much mistaken, for though I confess we did
not in our first attempts, bring things to that perfection we desired; yet it
must be granted, that in what we have done since, we have excelled all others.
I will instance only in the Glasses made at Paris. We never had from Venice any
so great, as are now made in the Fauxbourg St. Antoine. The Venetian Ambassador
himself was surpised, and till he saw it with his own eyes, would never
believe any could be made so large; and though he wrote to Venice what Glasses he
had seen here, yet they were so incredulous, that they thought it impossible.
It Is true our Glass does not look so clear and lively, as that which comes from
thence; but it may be easily refined. And the difference between theirs and
ours, is not so great, that we should send thither three Millions every year,
to buy Looking Glasses and Coach-Glasses.

What can be objected against our Tapistry made at Beauvais; and at the
Gobelins? I would fain know whether Your Majesty be willing, I know not how
much Money should go into Flanders, to bring Hangings from thence? If Your
Majesty had not so long suffered it, you might e're this have been Master of
those rich Provinces. For it is certain that they have maintained their War with
French Money; for by that very Manufacture in three several places, they have
drawn out of France many Millions, and if Your Majesty would forbid the
bringing likewise of Hair, and Lace from thence, they would soon fall into
great Poverty. Your Majesty should therefore lay so great an Imposition upon
these Commodities, that no body would care to import them. What need have we of
Tapistry, of Hair, or Flanders Lace? Your Kingdom is great enough and full
enough of Ingenious Men, to furnish all these things. The Importation of them
must be discountenanced, by Your Majesty's being the first that leaves using of
them; for people will certainly follow your example, since in imitating you,
they never consider, whethey do well or ill.

The Case is the same as to our Cloth, and other Manufactures. We must do all
we can, to stop the current of our Moneys going out of the Kingdom. If any
complain that our first attempts do not succeed, yet we must not give over; no
Prentice does immediately become a Master, but by constant forging becomes a
Smith. All beginnings are difficult, and nothing but time makes things perfect;
Water in the Spring is not so clear as it is in the Stream, and it is patience
that brings Men to the End they aim at.

I know that they who are not of my Opinion, make this Objection against it. If
we resolve not to have any Commerce with Foreigners, they will not Trade with
us; so that it is best to let things stand on the same foot they now are, and
have always stood; but they that talk at this rate, ought to know, that our
Neighbors have need of us, but we no need of them. France has generally all
things necessary within it self, very few excepted; but it is not so with other
Countries that confine upon us; they have neither Wine, Salt, Corn, Hemp, or
Brandy; and therefore must have it of us; and we should make but an ill use of
that which God has given us, if we let others have it, for that whereof we
have no need. If Strangers must have our Money, let it be only for that which
cannot be had in our own Kingdom; as Spices which are to be fetched from the
Indies, or bought of the Hollanders; for any thing else, we may be without it,
and let not Luxury tempt us to do any thing prejudicial to our Native Country.

They are so rigorous in many great Cities of your Kingdom, that they will not
receive Tradesmen among them; which is an abuse Your Majesty ought not to
suffer; for it keeps many from applying themselves to Trade, who perhaps would
thrive better, than those that are in it. What necessity is there of serving an
Apprentioeship to a Master? It may perhaps be necessary for Handicrafts-men and
Artificers, because no body should venture upon a Trade which they do not
understand; but for others, why must they lose their time, or why must they be
hindered from following a Trade they have learned in Foreign Countries, or
because they cannot show a Certificate that they served an Apprenticeship? Is
it just or reasonable, that Your Majesty's Name should be made use of to keep
industrious persons from getting their Living? you are the Common Father of
your People, and ought to take them all into your protection.

If you would publish an Edict to abrogate all Bylaws in Corporations, against
People's setting up Trades there without their leave, it would do no harm. Your
Majesty would find your account, in obliging People to take Letters of License
from you; for which they should pay a small Sum. The number of those that
would come for Licenses would be so great, that though they had 'em for little,
yet Your Majesty would find it very considerable. Beside, they would think
themselves obliged to you, because what they gave you, would be less than it
costs them in Corporations, to get leave to keep a Shop.

Particular care should be taken by Your Majesty to regulate the Trade of
Stationers. It is in Country-Towns so subject to the Inquisition of the Paris
Booksellers, who by virtue of Privileges obtained from the Chancery, keep all
other Booksellers throughout the Kingdom in such dependence; that they must
either starve, or run the hazard of being undone. If Your Majesty will take
compassion of 'em, you must confine the Privileges of the Paris Booksellers
to the City of Paris, and permit all others to sell without Control. Paris
alone is more worth than all the rest of the Kingdom, but it is not reasonable,
that more than two thousand Families, should perish for the sake of a few.

The Council is full of instances of the like kind, and your People have reason
to expect, you should favor the oppressed. The Books that are brought from
Paris are so very dear, that poor People are not able to come up to their
Price. A poor Parson whose living is worth but a hundred Crowns a year, has as
much need of Instruction, as he who has two thousand; and if it be expected
that he should Preach and do his Duty, he must not be trod under foot.

The only thing that can be objected against so good and just a Regulation, is,
that Your Majesty may have reason to lessen the number of Booksellers; for
Libels are now so frequent and common, that Bookselling may be thought a Trade
more pernicious than profitable to the Government. When there are fewer
Booksellers, the Authors of these Libells may be discovered. It may also be
necessary to bring all that sell Books to so low a condition, as to force them
to follow some other Employments; for indeed there is no need of so great a
number, Learning and Letters will flourish without it. But whatever Your
Majesty's intention be, you may do as is done in Spain, where Books are Sold at
a Price certain, and he that Prints them, is not permitted to put such a rate
upon them, as they that have need of them, think unreasonable.

CHAP. XVI. Of Husbandmen and Tillage.
TIllage and Husbandry, being the great Wealth of the Kingdom, your Majesty is
not only concerned, to contribute all you can, to the maintaining of it in its
present condition; but if possible, to put it into a better. In many Places of
the Kingdom, a great deal of Land lies Untilled, because the People are very
poor, and have not Beasts or Cattle to Manure it, nor any other means to
improve it. To relieve and help your People in a business so necessary, Your
Majesty would do well to lessen the Taxes, a Burden under which they are ready
to sink; and lend them Money to buy Cows and Sheep. Five or six Millions
dispersed among the Provinces, would make them all flourish, and Your Majesty
would be the first that would reap the benefit of it; for as soon as your
People are in a better condition, they will be the better able to aid and
assist you.

One of the greatest causes of the Sterility of the Earth, is the Poverty of
those that should cultivate it; for we see one and the same Soil, produce more
or less, as it is well, or ill Plowed and Dressed. Therefore it will not be
enough for Your Majesty to give Husbandmen Money to buy Cattle if they still
want Horses: I call such poor Jades, as are hardly able to draw a Plow, want of
Horses. For when the Earth is but scratched up, and not Plowed deep enough,
what Crop can it produce? your Majesty must therefore give 'em Money to buy
better, and stronger Horses; and the rather, because you your self will find
the benefit of it. Let them have Mares of a good size, and they will bring
Colts that will serve to mount your Cavalry; and then there will be no more
need of going into Switzerland, or Germany, to buy Horses of Stature for that
purpose.

They likewise that keep Stallions, must take more care of them, than they have
done hitherto. It Is therefore my opinion, that they should be put into the
hands of Gentlemen, who know best how to order them: and it is more their
business than theirs who now keep them. But the Sum which Your Majesty has
hitherto been pleased to lay out for this purpose, is not sufficient for it.
Fourscore and four Stallions in the whole Kingdom, are but enough for two or
three Provinces, and there are others which are very proper, to keep Races to
breed by.

FINIS.

