THE MEMOIRS OF THE Count De ROCHEFORT, CONTAINING An Account of what past most
memorable, under the Ministry of Cardinal RICHELIEV, AND Cardinal MAZARIN, WITH
Many particular passages of the Reign of Lewis the Great.

Made English from the French.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for James Knapton at the Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard; Richard Parker at the Unicorn under the Piazza of the Royal
Exchange; and Tho. Not at the Queens Arms in the Pall Mall. 1696.

PREFACE.
THE Translation of this Book may perhaps stand in as much need of an Apology
as another, to make some Excuse for a great many Errors; but the Translator
professes, he has that indifference for it, that he had rather own 'em all, and
leave it to the Readers Discretion to damn or forgive 'em, as he pleases, than
trouble himself any more about it.

For one Excuse, amongst a thousand others used upon these occasions, he might
say that the Translation suffers extremely for want of Leisure, but he has not
the Face to pretend such a thing, when it is but too apparent that it suffers
indeed for want of a little Application. This Negligence is his Unhappiness,
but too late to be helped now: Nay, what is worse, if it was to be done again,
it is to be feared he could not be prevaild on to take the pains to revise it,
for the Reputation of Writing never so correctly.

As for the Work it self; the Translator when he read it, fancied he found
something more pleasant and entertaining in it than ordinary, and that engaged
him to make it English, which when he had once undertaken, he was no longer at
liberty to reject some other things that to him appeared trifling enough. To
make amends for which it must be confessed, that through the whole Book there is a
great Variety of very surprising Passages, and that most of 'em are very
diverting. If any doubts the truth of them, he is referred to the French
Preface, which is writ on purpose to justify the Author's Sincerity. Tho after
all, the passage about his Birth is reckoned by some not only a doubtful Story,
but an Impossibility: But perhaps he might himself be imposed on in that; for
it is no New Practice to call such Births Miraculous, which happen a little too
soon for the Credit of the Family.

As for the Style, if after what has been said the Reader will be so
unreasonable, as to expect the Language in the Translation to be very pure and
just, he must be informed, that the Original in that respect is none of the
most finished pieces in its own Tongue. For tho the Author was a person of
Quality, and of extraordinary Parts and Address, yet 'twas his Misfortune, that
his Education was not only far from that of a Man of Learning, but much
inferior to his Condition.

His Subject, is the Particularities of his own Life, which required no more
than a free, easy, and natural Style, and that he has for the most part
observed well enough. It Is sufficient then if the Translator has not mistaken
his Sense, and that it is hoped he has not done, nor in the main done him any
great Injury.

THE French Publishers PREFACE.
THE Count de Rochefort was a person so well known, and died so lately, that it
seems almost needless to offer to justify any thing that he has mentioned in
his Memoirs. There is none of those Gentlemen, who knew him either at Court, or
in the Camp, but know that in his Conversation, he was so averse from
disguising the Truth, or relating any thing fictitious, that it can never be
imagined he should be guilty of writing a Falsity, with a Design to impose upon
the World. There has not lived for these many Ages a Man of greater Honor than
he was, which I do not speak, because I have ever professed a Friendship for him,
but because I am obliged to do him that Justice. If therefore in the beginning
of these Memoirs, he relates something of his Father, which is very surprising,
the Reader is not immediately from thence to call his Reputation in question,
as if it were not true. We are so used every day to extraordinary Adventures,
that none but those who are unacquainted with Paris, are any longer surpised
at them. There is not a Year passes, but this great City affords Subject of
Sorrow to some, while others laugh at their Expense. Yet is the Story of his
Brother-in-law and Sister not so very uncommon. How many Husbands have pursued
their Wives, and courted them to a Reconcilement, when the Separation has not
been upon the account of Devotion, as in this case; but upon such just and good
grounds, as extreme Weakness only could forget. I know some, that have been at
a great deal of Cost and Pains to have themselves declared Cuckolds, and it has
been done very much to their Satisfaction; yet afterward have expressed as great
Impatience to have the Dear Spouse home again, (tho a little faulty) as ever
they showed Desire for a Divorce. This is no more than what I know my self to
be true; or else it would appear more incredible, than that a Man should take
his Wife again, whom he never had any other reason but to esteem. But perhaps
it may be objected, that the person who we are talking of, was turned Priest,
and after that ought not to have taken his Wife again. But why not? Since the
Parliament judged it lawful, and a Man of Honor has affirmed it; whose
Sincerity too appears the more in this, that he recounts those things of his
own Family, which a great many others in his place would have industriously
concealed. And I will add this further proof of the Truth on it; that happening
the other day to be in the Company of Monsieur, the President Bailleul, and my
Mind running upon these Memoirs, I asked him if he did not remember such a
Process, and some other particulars which the Count de Rochefort had mentioned
of him, and he told me, that he remembered it as perfectly well, as if the
thing had been done but that moment. After this can it possibly be doubted,
Monsieur de Bailleul being a person of that noted Integrity, that his Testimony
alone is enough to convince the most incredulous? Yet I must confess I was an
Infidel my self, with respect to what Monsieur the Count tells us of the Swiss:
For who could ever imagine, there were any people in Nature so simple, as to
take Puppits for young Devils? Yet is there nothing more certainly true than
this. For I was not content only with inquiring the Truth of it from Biroche,
but from Monsieut Du Mont too, with whom I was very well acquainted. They both
owned it to me, but in a different manner; for Biroche made his Brags of it, as
if he has shown a great piece of Wit; whereas Du Mont could not think of it
without flying out into such a passion, as was a sign he had not yet forgot his
Disgrace.

If then the Count de Rochefort is so just in a Story, which has so much the
Air of a Fiction, how sincere must we conclude him in his other Relations? In
effect, where lies the Difficulty of believing what he says of Cardinal
Richlieu? Are not all Ministers of State mysterious, or should be so at least,
and was not that a quality which the Cardinal affected above all things, as the
Count de Rochefort takes very good notice? Is there any thing more natural than
what that Minister made Sauve to do; or is there any thing more surprising,
than the Ambition of that Man, who was content to sacrifice his Wife to advance
his Fortune? All which may serve for instructions for our own Conduct, which is
one of the greatest advantages we can gain from the reading of any Book. I am
persuaded too, that the Count de Rochefort was not so much induced to write out
of vanity, to show he was concerned in the private Intrigues of State, as out
of a desire to render other People wiser by his Example: And I am the more
confirmed in this opinion, when I reflect how often he reproaches himself for
making so ill use of Cardinal Richlieu's favor, and so severely reprehends his
own Follies. However, should these Memoirs not prove so very profitable, I am
confident they will be found to be very curious, discovering a great many
things which are no where else to be met with. I believe too they will be found
to be very diverting, and that none will ever think them tedious. But
Friendship perhaps may be thought to have a large share in this Discourse, and
indeed the Author of these Memoirs, and my self, were such dear Friends, that I
must confess I have a strange Indulgence for any thing of his; yet as I have
not been the only person that has read 'em, but others have been of my Taste, I
shall venture to declare 'em once again, the most agreeable of their kind.

There is another thing too I must confess, but from that I know not how I
shall be absolved; I publish here these Memoirs against the Last Will and
Intention of the Author, who upon his Death, which happened in a month or two
after his Retirement, ordered me to suppress 'em. I cannot imagine for what
reason, except that being then upon the point of leaving the World, he was
willing to spare some People, whom he had formerly had some differences with,
and whom he had no great cause to speak well of. But this did not appear to me
a sufficient reason to deprive the Public of a Work so curious; therefore such
as I received it without either adding or diminishing, here it is at the Readers
Service.

MEMOIRS OF The Count de Rochefort, etc.
BEtween Paris and Estampes, on the Right hand of Chastres, lies a Castle
called Olinville, which had formerly been one of the Kings Houses, but now
belongs to the Family of Marillac. My Father going once to pay a visit there,
being related to Monsieur De Marillac, took my Mother along with him, who was
big, and above four months and an half gone with Child: As they went, they
called at one Monsieur Grigni's, a Gentleman of the Neighborhood, where their
Coachman having got drunk, made bold to overturn the Coach at the very gate of
Olinville, tho the way was the smoothest and best in the World. By this
accident, my Father, instead of the diversion he expected there, met with an
inexpressible affliction: For my Mother, who received some hurt, having brought
me into the world the next day, lived but two days after it; to the grief of
the whole family, who had a very great respect for her. My Father was in such a
passion, that had it not been for Monsieur de Marillac, he had certainly killed
the Coachman: It was impossible tho to persuade him, but that he was guilty of
the death of my Mother, (as casually indeed he was) so he had his Process made,
but after two or three months Imprisonment he was acquitted.

No body imagining that I could live, they took care to have me immediately
Baptized: Monsieur De Marillac. and one Madam D' Arboville, who happened to be
in the house, performed the Offices for me at the Font. I was called Charles
Caesar, which was my Fathers Name, and given me to oblige him. They took a
Nurse for me there, whom my Father sent with me to his Castle, which was at the
entrance into the Forest of Orleans, and having some business at Paris, went
himself thither. My Father having no more Children, and every body believing
(as I said) that I could hardly live, they all advised him to marry; and he who
was still young, and no hater of the Sex, was easily prevailed on. Several
young Ladies were proposed to him of the best Families in Paris; but being
desirous to see before he engaged with any, he found none that he liked;
whether it was that none of them were really fine Women, or that his Fate had
reserved for him the accident I am now to relate; and for me the worst
Mother-in-law that ever was in the world. However it was that he seemed so
difficult, a relation of his who was Curate of one of the best Churches in
Paris, and had the Character of a very holy man, as indeed he was; came
earnestly to tell him, that he had done his business for him, in finding a
young Lady, very well made, handsome, rich, virtuous, and of quality; in short,
a Jewel for the age, that was so extremely corrupted. Tho my Father knew 'twas
a dangerous thing to take a Woman on the word of a Priest, yet the sanctity of
this Curate satisfied him, as knowing, that there was no general rule without
exception; he made him this answer, That he knew better than himself what was
fit for him; that he was extremely obliged to him for his kindness; and for the
Lady, he would make no enquiries of her, after the character he had given her:
The Curate returned, That this Confidence of his was the cause that he had
preferred him to many of his other relations, whose fortunes would have been
made by such a Match: That the Lady would have an Estate of twenty thousand
Livres per annum: That she was of the Family De la Force, one of the most
considerable houses among those of the pretended Reformed Religion; of which
she had lately made her abjuration to him; that as soon as he had married her,
he might get the Estate of the Family into his hands, of which the succession
was vacant; and for her Mother, he might easily oblige her by his address; that
his Wife's changing her Religion should be no prejudice to him.

It is impossible to say how this discourse charmed my Father, he was impatient
to see the Lady; and the Curate having showed her to him at the Convent where
she was retreated, he returned so smitten that he could not rest till the
affair was concluded: However, as he was a Man not to be fooled, or at least
thought himself such, he wrote to some Friends of his at Again, where the Ladies
Estate was said to be; and they giving him an account that she was a very
virtuous Lady, had a very good Fortune, and was only retired to Paris to make
her Abjuration; he married her, fancying himself the happiest man in the world:
His happiness continued about three weeks, in which time, no young Lover could
have carest his Mistress with more passion than he did his new Bride: He
carried her to the Ball, to the Play, to the public Walks, and in short, when
ever he was obliged to be absent from her but an hour or two, he would return
with such eagerness as was almost unpardonable for a Husband; every body was
surpised that enjoyment had not moderated his transports: but he told all
those who hinted any such thing to him, that if it used to be so with respect
to other Wives, it was not so with him, since his had nothing in her capable of
disgusting the Appetite.

In all this hurry I was easily forgotten, and if sometimes I was spoken of, it
was only to ask if I was not yet dead; for my Father not doubting but he should
soon have Children by his new Wife, and retaining no more the remembrance of my
Mother, began already to advance the sentiments of tenderness that are so
common to those of a second Bed.

He believed himself now at that pitch of Happiness as to be exempt from the
attacks of Fortune, and dreamt of nothing but how to pass away the time till
the Spring should come on, when they resolved to make a short Journey to view
his Wives Estate; in the mean time he presented her with a very rich Coach, and
all things agreeable. But all this could not divert her, still there appeared
on her face an air of Discontent, and a melancholy so deeply rooted as
extremely afflicted my Father; he was every moment pressing her to tell him if
she wanted any thing, adding, that she needed but to speak, since the man whose
heart she so entirely possessed could deny her nothing; joining to this obliging
discourse the tendrest Caresses in the world: But one day as he was treating
her in this sort, he perceived something more than ordinary under her Shift
upon her shoulder, he demands of her what it was: But she instead of answering
him strove to get from him, which increasing his suspicion, he took hold of her
and would see what it was, then she used entreaties with him, told him it was
nothing, and tried again to get loose from him, but finding it in vain she
struggled with him, nor was it but with great difficulty that he pulled down
her Shift, which discovered to him a thing, that had he not been in Bed had
struck him to the ground, he saw (shall I dare to speak it) the fair impression
of a The mark with which they brand Malefactors in that Country.
Flower-de-luce, which at once undeceived him in the good opinion he had had of
her; she who had so often proved the force of her Caresses, attempted to calm
him by a kiss, and he who was become insensible, suffered her without the least
notice; but in a moment recovering himself, Go infamous Creature, said he, if I
cannot have so much justice as to have you hanged, you shall certainly die by
my own hand: He got up in all haste and immediately finds out the Curate, and
treats him with the worst Language that rage and despair could inspire him
with; but seeing that all this was to no pnrpose, he demands of him what remedy
he would pretend to apply to the Disease he had procured him.

The poor Curate could not soon be persuaded to believe him, but being
satisfied at last that it was but too true, he threw himself at his feet
begging his pardon, and lifting up his eyes made a thousand exclamations upon
the abominable wickedness of the woman, who had under covert of Confession made
him a party to her impostures. But my Father still continuing almost
distracted, so that the people began to crowd about them, a Priest that had
formerly been an Advocate stepped to him and told him, 'twas indeed a sad Case
but not altogether incurable, that she had counterfeited her Name, and
therefore the Marriage was void; that he had no more to do but immediately to
enter his Action, and tho he might meet with some difficulty (the Parliament
being very nice in such cases) yet he must follow it close, and needed not to
doubt the success. As in a general Shipwreck men catch at any thing that is
likely to save them, my Father embraced this advice as if it had been sent from
Heaven, and running directly to the The Palace is in Paris, as Westminster Hall
is here the place for the Courts of Justice.
Palace, he consults with three of the most able Council, who all of them were
of the same opinion; but told him withal that it would be needful for him to
make some Friends, especially if he found she had any body to stand by her;
this disturbed my Father above all, who was ashamed to make use of his Friends
about such a business as this, and 'twas several days before he could be
brought to it, till he found a considerable person engage in the affair for
her, which obliged him to do that which otherwise he would never have done.

But to his sorrow he found that she had outwitted him there too, that she had
not changed her Name, but was really called Madelain de Caumont, just as she
had signed the Contract, and had also given the true names of her Father and
Mother; and all the falsification they could fix upon her, was, that she had
dignified her Father with the Title of Knight, and Lord of several Manors, and
her Mother with that of a very great Lady, instead of what they really were, a
Miller and the Millers Wife. The case being so very nice, they advised my
Father to treat with the young woman for a sum of Money to consent to a decree
against the Marriage; but her Friend owing my Father an ill turn on the account
of an old quarrel, and glad of this opportunity to pay it him, would hearken to
no accommodation; upon which my Father was advised to engage the Judge Advocate
on his side, and to prosecute her for an abuse to Religion: for indeed she had
made a public Abjuration, whereas she was born a Catholic, and had always
been so; this trick of the Law put both her and her friend to a stand: She
absconded immediately, and set some Persons to treat privately with my Father,
who by this means got clear of her for a thousand Crowns, whereas before he had
offered her two thousand.

My Relations, who saw plainly that this Match would have ruined me, were not
sorry for his mortification, hoping that this would teach him some wit; but he
was hardly out of one error before he had like to have fallen into another. He
Lodged at a rich Merchants at the entrance into St. Dennis-street, for the
convenience of being near the Palace, who had in the house an only Daughter
between Nineteen and Twenty years of age, tollerably handsome, but very well
made; he had been extremely pleased with her Conversation, which very much
diverted him when he had most need of it: Having therefore ended his business
he thought he could not do better than to take up with her, who was a Woman of
sense, brought up under the eye of her Mother, no wanton Coquet, that had an
Estate, and who would think her self honored in marrying a Person of Quality.
Her Father and Mother had several times taken occasion to let him understand,
that having no more Children they should be very glad to see her well settled;
and he believing that this would be a person very fit for his turn, he breaks
it to the Girl, who was easily brought to be willing; he was overjoyed to find
her so favorably inclined, and having now nothing to do but to gain her Father
and Mother, he moved it to them, and had presently their consent.

As he had before made more haste than good speed, he now resolved for once to
take advice, and Monsieur de Marillac being one of the most considerable of his
Friends, he was first acquainted with it. My Father took a great deal of pains
to reconcile him to a Match that seemed dishonorable to the Family, and to
that end failed not to magnify the Person of his Mistress, her Behavior, her
Breeding, her Discretion, not forgeting her Estate, and the Honesty of her
Parents; and in short, omitted nothing to remove any prejudice in his thoughts
against it. Monsieur de Marillac, who was a Man of Honor, and vexed to see his
Kinsman going to match with a M^c^^nick, told him, he wondered he would run
headlong upon such an affair, in which he might perhaps find something to
dislike that he yet knew not of; that 'twas not his wonder that the young Lady,
tho she had a good Estate, was so willing, because young Girls are all willing
enough to be married; but that her Parents, who were Citizens, and consequently
had a natural aversion to a Country Gentleman, should be so very forward,
seemed to him to have some mystery in it, that deserved to be inquired into;
and saving his respect for him, (said he) while you think you are marrying a
Maid, what if she should chance to be a Widow? Had it been any body but Mr. de
Marillac, my Father would never have born this discourse with any patience; but
having been born, as it were, with a respect for him, he only replied, that
there was nothing to be feared of that sort, and that he would venture it.
Monsieur de Marillac told him smiling, That 'twas his own business, and if he
had said any thing in it, 'twas purely for that he thought himself obliged to
it; not only as he was his Relation, but also from the Friendship which had
always been between the two Families.

The matter rested there, and my Father resolved to go through with it,
notwithstanding all this good counsel. There was in the Country a Cousin German
of his, a jolly old Fellow, a Batchelour, who had never been so fond of
marrying as he; and who designed to leave his Estate to our Family. My Father
sends for him, and the Old Gentleman, before he would appear, would needs have
some fine Clothes; and talking to his Tailor about the occasion of his coming
to Town, that it was to the Wedding of his Cousin and Heir, who was to be
married to the Daughter of such a Merchant. Bless me Sir! said the Tailor, What
does he mean? Is there no other Women in Paris? This startled the Old Man, and
asking him why he talked at that rate? Why Sir, says he, she has had a Child by
one of her Fathers Prentices; but I should not have spoke of it, Sir, for it
was but One, and I suppose she is very honest ^ow. How! says the Old Gentleman,
why then it is nothing with you here at Paris, for a Maid to have a Child? I
don't say so, Sir, replied the Tailor; and rather than a young Woman should
lose her Reputation, I was resolved never to have spoke of it; but that it is a
thousand pities, that an honest good Gentleman should be cheated; for she not
only continues her Debauchery, but it is come to that pass, that there is hardly
a day comes over her head, but she is to be seen at a certain place, right
against my House; she disguises her self so, that she fancies she is not to be
known, but she forgets that I have formerly dealt with her Father, and know her
well enough.

This discourse, and the freedom and honesty of the Tailor, very much surpised
our Cousin; he sent presently for my Father, and repeating this story, asked him
what he meant, by meddling with such a creature. My Father looked upon it all as
Malice and Lies; but the Old Man seeing him so resolute, told him in a rage,
that for his part, he would not come to the Wedding, and besides that, would
disinherit him if he proceeded any further in the matter. Yet my Father
slighting all his threatenings, comes the same day, and brings the Contract of
Marriage for him to sign; instead of which, he snatched it out of the Notarys
hands, and tore it in a thousand pieces; and not content with that, goes
immediately to Monsieur de Marillac, tells him the whole story, and begs him to
interpose his Authority to prevent so scandalous a thing. Monsieur de Marillac
stepping with him into his Coach, they came together to my Father, and told
him, That knowing how obstinate he was, they did not come to desire him quite
to break off the match, but to persuade him to inform himself of the truth;
that perhaps these reports might be false, but he must own that they ought not
to be neglected; that they only designed to open his Eyes, and if they could
not make the thing plain to him, he was at his Liberty; that they desired but
one thing of him, which was, that he would pretend extraordinary business
obliged him to go to his House in the Country for a few days, during which
time, they offered to discover the truth for him, or if not, they were content
he should proceed.

This was too reasonable a request to be denied, so my Father having taken
leave of his Mistress for eight days, upon his promise to return then without
fail, he went and lodged privately at the Tailors, where he placed himself as
Sentinel, to watch for what he hardly dared to see; 'twas but the next day that
he very fairly saw his Lady, muffled up in her Scarf, going into the
Bawdyhouse; but not trusting his Eyes at that distance, and through the Glass,
he goes down, and throwing his Cloak over his Face, he stalks up and down in
the street, till she should come out; he knew her again well enough, but as if
he would fain believe it was not she, he followed her to her Fa^^ers door, and
confirmed by her going in there, he was strangely confounded; but yet imagining
that possibly there might be some other family in that house, he still
justified her in his thoughts, till he should be informed how it was: But the
Neighbors having satisfied him of the contrary, as also the Tailor, he was
resolved not to be convinced unless he could see even what she did there with
his own eyes: To which purpose he goes himself to that honest place, where he
soon got acquaintance, and for his Money they brought him a Girl; he would not
ask for another, for fear of giving suspicion, but paid her very generously,
and so from that time past for one of their best Customers. The next day he
came again, and having desired them to show him something that was
extraordinary, they brought him the person he wished for, or feared rather; for
at the sight of her he was so touched, as made him cry like a Child; and going
out without speaking one word to her, took Horse and rode home to his own
house, without seeing so much as Monsieur De Marillac.

But it is not so easy a thing to get out of the hands of the Parisians; and
my Father having had the discretion, notwithstanding all that had been said to
him, to sign the Contract, they fetched him back sore against his will, to clear
himself of the Ecclesiastical Court, where they had obtained a Sentence against
him for two thousand Franks, with Damages and Interest. He never paid any thing
in his life with so ill a will, wherefore he made an Appeal to the Parliament,
and consulted with his Lawyers, seeing he was like to be cast, but all this did
but increase both his sorrow and his debt; for the same trick that had helped
him before, undid him now, and instead of his fine of two thousand Franks, he
was forced to pay three thousand.

Tho he was incorrigible after the first mischance, every body thought that on
the addition of this adventure, he had done with the thoughts of marrying: But
it being decreed (as I said) that I (...) have a Mother-in-law, and that one as
bad as possible, he married a Person of Quality in the Country, who so mastered
his temper, that she was no sooner come home, but I was turned out of doors,
and my Nurse too: I was carried back to Olinville, on purpose, as I suppose,
that as that place had been fatal to my Mother, it might be no better to me; I
was kept there a whole year before my Nurse ever heard a word from my Father,
tho she had writ several Letters to him, and her Husband had gone himself to
his House; but at last one of his Carters passing near the Town, sent to tell
my Nurse, that he had order to leave with her about twelve Bushels of Wheat: As
if that had been enough to satisfy her for my keeping; and to avoid being asked
for Money, they let me lie there another whole year, without enquiring whether
I was alive or dead: The poor people with whom I was, notwithstanding all this,
used me like their own Child, whether taken with the little diversions of my
behavior, or because they had no Children themselves, I know not, for they
could have no other reason for it.

My Father in the mean time forgot me with less difficulty, for that he had one
Son already by my Mother-in-law, and she was ready to lie down of another; yet
he could not avoid being often asked by the Neighbors what was become of me; my
Mother had her answer readier than my Father, (who was something puzzled with
these questions) and would reply briskly that I was well, but they did not
fetch me home because I should not bring the memory of my Mother into his mind;
none but Sots could be wheedl'd with such an answer, and my Mothers Relations
living above eighty Leagues off, and having no body to regard me, I continued
three years longer with my Nurse, and I believe should have been there still
had it not been for Monsieur de Marillac; who seeing me at Mass at Olinville,
asked notwithstanding the poor plight I was in, if I was not his Cousin R's
Son? I had always a good heart, and when I found my Nurse would not answer for
me, I spoke boldly to Monsieur de Marillac, and told him that I was indeed the
Son of Monsieur L. C. De Rochefort, but that it had been my misfortune never to
have seen him that I remembered: my answer pleased him, tho it was nothing but
what I had learnt by hearing my Nurse say so; however being a brisk Boy, and if
I may say it, genteel enough, he made one of his Pages lead me to his Castle,
where he ordered me to be clothed suitable to my quality; and having kept me
there till he was obliged to return to Paris, he sent his Steward with me to my
Father, to whom he writ, that I began now to be of an age in which he ought to
take more care of me.

My Father received me because he could not help it, but much against his will
I am sure, for he used me so roughly the very day I came to him, that as young
as I was, I could plainly see he did not much care for me; if I had dared, I
would have asked him the reason of it, and leave also to return to my Nurse,
where I had received quite contrary usage; but being afraid to open my mouth, I
stood in a corner as if I had not belonged to the Family, while they carest and
fondled one of her Children, tho he was as mangy and scabby as a Hound; this
madded me intolerably, for being now almost six years old, and beginning to
have some knowledge of matters, I was ready to burst with spleen. I lived thus
however about a year and a half, eating with the Footmen, having no countenance
from any body but from our Curate, who was a very good man; I prayed him to
teach me to read, for they never thought of putting me to School, and the
Curate was so pleased with my motion, coming from my self, that he took a great
deal of pains with me, insomuch that in three or four months I could read
perfectly in any sort of Books.

Every day my Mother-in-law plagued me with one thing or another, and not only
did me all the mischief she could, but told an hundred Lies of me to my Father,
to set him against me; and my Father, who did not much care for me, believed
all she said, and would often beat me without knowing for what, which made me
so desperate that I resolved to poison my self. There was a Weed in the Garden
which they had often told me was poison, I took some of it; and after saying my
Prayers I eat enough to have killed me twice over, if I had not happily wanted
wit to know Hemlock from another Herb; or, as I have often thought, that I was
guided even by a Miracle to mistake, for I was so far from having any symptoms
of one that was poisoned, that it never so much as made me sick; I had newly
begun to go to Confession, and therefore could not conceal it from the Curate,
who chid me severely, laying before me the heinousness of the sin, and charged
me to ask God forgiveness, and made me promise him never to do so any more
without first telling him of it.

The cruelty of my Mother-in-law and the unkindness of my Father, not only
continuing but increasing, truly I even resolved to run away; and so waiting
for an opportunity, I told the Curate my intention, who told me I was fit for
nothing at that age, being but eight years old; and therefore persuaded me to
bear a little longer, till I was fit to go into the Army; but that being a long
time, I told him resolutely that I neither could nor would endure it: He
finding that unless I was prevented I should quickly be gone, acquaints my
Father with it, who seeming not to believe it, told him he should not trouble
him self about me, but let me go if I would; the Curate seeing him so unnatural
could not forbear weeping, and taking me in his arms entreated me once more to
have a little patience; but finding it impossible to shake my resolution, he
pulled out of his Pocket two Crowns and gave them to me, telling me that he was
sensible I should want them, and was sorry he was not in a condition to assist
me better; so praying God to bless me, told me I was always to remember that I
was born a Gentleman, which obliged me to suffer a thousand deaths rather than
to do a base action, or any thing unworthy of my quality. My design was to find
out Monsieur de Marillac, from whom I had already received so much kindness;
but there happening at that time to be a Troop of Gypsies in our Village I fell
in with them, and asking them if they would take me with them, they told me
with all their hearts, if I were able to travel.

This was enough to make me one of the Gang, and having left our house without
taking leave of any body, and soon forgetting the good advice of the Curate, I
began that very day, like a true Gypsy, to steal all the Cocks and Hens I
could lay my hands on, not regarding that it was but at my Fathers door, and
that all the Farmers thereabouts were his Tenants: Thus I went on without
giving my self leave to think what I was doing; and every one having got his
booty they were to bring it to the Captain, who seeing me have six or seven
Fowls for my share, gave me a dram of the Bottle and told the rest what a
hopeful beginning I had made, and that in time I should make a brave fellow: we
feasted that Night at the expense of the Country, and as liberty is sweetest to
those who have been under constraint, I thought my self in Heaven in comparison
of the life I lived before.

I led this wretched sort of Life almost five years, in which time we traverst
not only all over France but many other Countries; at last a small misfortune
befalling us (only that some of our Society chanced to be hanged) we were
forced to take refuge in our Native Country; so we returned into France through
the Province of Burgundy, and taking the Road to Dijon we came into the Country
of Lyonne, and from thence into Dauphine, and so into Languedoc, till at last
we came to the County of Foix: Here we thought our selves secure, for the
Country being Mountainous, would the better shelter us we fancied from the
Peasants, if we found them so uncivil as to resent our Thieveries: but we had
taken wrong measures, and they were too cunning for us, for the very first
Night, while we were all scattered here and there, after our Game, they came
upon us and plundered our Baggage: this happened to us by the neglect of those
we had left to look after it, who foolishly running after some Fowls left on
purpose by the Peasants to draw them from their charge, they who had placed
themselves in Ambuscade surpised our Camp and ruined our whole Army; and to
add to our misfortune they had penned up all their Fowls, so that tho we came
back very much fatigued, we were forced to take up our Lodging on the hard
ground, and without our Supper.

This Life began to grow irksom to me at last, tho I was pleased with it a
while when I knew no better; for as my understanding encreast I began to be
ashamed of my self, remembering my Birth and what that required of me; I cried
often by my self, and finding no body to consult with, I was sensible of the
want of good advice; at last calling to mind what the Curate had said to me at
my coming away, I seriously asked my self, Is this the Life of a Gentleman?

This thought, which had not so much as once came into my head before, made
such an impression upon me that I resolved to desert, and being sent abroad as
usual, I took that opportunity to get away; so making to the Mountains of
Capsi, I entered Rousillon by Ville Franche; as I went I saw on my right hand
Canigout, one of the highest of the Pyrenees, on the top of which is a Lake,
with abundance of very good Fish; but that which is most strange is, that if
one throw a stone into it, it presently falls a raining: I asked the people
thereabouts the reason, but they could not tell me.

I had hitherto kept the Curates two Crowns in my Pocket, and they did me
special service at this juncture. My design was to list my self in the first
Company of Soldiers I could meet with, and did not question but I should be
entertained, for they did not measure Soldiers by inches in those days. My
Gypsies complexion made me pass among the Spaniards for a Native of the
Country; and tho we had War with Spain at that time, yet they neither stopped me
at Perpignan, nor at Salses; at last I got to Locates, which was our Frontier
on that side, and listed in the Governors Company, who was Monsieur De St.
Aunais.

There was not a Party made out against the Garrison of Salses but I would be
one, and having learnt a little Spanish, I fancied that looking so like a
Spaniard I might have an advantage one time or other to do something that might
distinguish my self: for I must needs say I began to despise the life of a
common Soldier, and Ambition was so got into my Crown, tho but 15 years old,
that I could not sleep quietly for dreaming of great things: I asked leave
however of Monsieur De St. Aunais, and he gave it me, but seeing me come home
always and nothing done, Soldier, said he, you don't do well, a Man should
rather lose his Ears than do as you do; we may see our Enemies when we will,
but he that asks leave to see them must go near them. I have been near enough,
Sir, returned I, but we were too many of us, and I don't intend to share the
honor I shall get with a whole Company. Why, how many were you? said he: We
were eleven, Sir, said I, and that was too many by nine; but if you please to
let me go again to morrow with only my Comrade, you shall have no cause to
reproach me. Will Not you run away then? said the Governor: If I had a mind to
run away, Sir, said I, I would never come to ask leave: I have been twice up to
the Enemies Pallisades, and if I had intended to have gone over, no body could
have hindered me. This boldness pleased him, and he asked me who I was? I told
him if I succeeded in my design I would give him an account, but if not I would
wait for a more favorable opportunity: This answer pleased him better still,
and concluding by my discourse that I was some body more than ordinary, he
loved me from that moment, and 'twas not long before he gave me proofs of it.

Having leave to go out the next day, and being come within two Musket shot of
Salses, I made my Comrade lie down in a Ditch while I advanced a little nearer,
and having observed when I was out before that an Officer of the Garrison, who
had an intrigue with a Wench, used to meet her in the Ruins of an old house, I
thought to have hid my self in the same house, but I had observed too that he
always sent a Soldier a little before him to see if the Coast was clear, and I
was loath to run the hazard of failing in my Enterprise; but having pitched upon
a place for my Ambuscade, I made as if I was washing of Clothes; still keeping
an Eye upon the place; at last out comes the Soldier, and having scouted in
every corner, he had no sooner made his report, but I perceived Mademoiselle
coming one way, and Mr. Officer another; but while they were warm at it, I
rusht in with a Pistol in each hand, and in this surprise he suffered me to
disarm him as tamely as a Lamb: after which I bid him walk before me, and told
him, if he offered to speak a word, I would shoot him into the Guts: He did not
think fit to try if I was a man of my word, and I thinking it proper to bring
his Mistress along with me, if 'twere only to prevent her giving the Alarm, I
brought them to the place where I had posted my Comrade, who having joined me,
and thereby taken from them all hopes of escape, they were very disconsolate;
but for my part I was so transported, that I hardly knew what I did: we marched
in this figure a long hour, till my Comrade, who took a fancy to the Girl,
finding we were out of danger of the Enemy, would go no further, till he had
had a touch with her; I asked him if he was mad, but he only laughing at me, was
very fairly going to work with her. This put me into a passion, but finding he
was resolved upon his design, I threatened to shoot him. He told me he was ready
for me, and presented his Pistol at me, I was not startled at all, but coming
boldly up to him with my Prisoner in one hand, and my Pistol in the other, the
Brute fired at me, but missing me, and expecting my return, made all the haste
he could to get away: I did not much care to follow him, but made the best of
my way, for all my fear was he would run over to the Garrison of Salses, and
give an account of the matter; and my safety was wholly owing to this speed,
for just as I imagined it fell out; I was hardly got under the Walls of the
Town, when appeared three Officers well mounted who had pursued me; but seeing
me just at the Gates they thought not fit to advance any further. I entered
Locates in triumph, every one running out into the street to see a Boy of
sixteen years old bring in two Prisoners, and I was well guarded to the
Governors House. As soon as I saw him, Now, Sir, said I, you see I have been
near enough to the Enemy, I told you a great number would not do the business,
for tho we were but two, we were too many by one. He asked me what I meant by
that? whereupon I told him in short the Adventure with my Comrade. He was
pleased to speak very much in my praise, and to magnify the Action much more
than it deserved, and immediately giving me a Colors in the Regiment of
Piccardy, which was wholly at his disposal, as well as all the Vacancies of the
Garrison; he very obligingly told me, he should not stop there, but would take
particular care of my fortune.

But that which made the most noise was, that the Prisoner I had taken happened
to be a Lieutenant to the King of Spain, and Monsieur De St. Aunais having sent
word of it to Court, and the particulars of the action, Cardinal Richelieu writ
to him to send me forthwith to Paris, and ordered me a hundred Pistoles for the
charges of my Journey. I leave you to imagine the inexpressible Joy I was in;
and having given Monsieur De St. Aunais all imaginable thanks, whom I
acknowledged to be my Benefactor, he desired me before I went, to tell him who
I was: so I gave him a brief account of all my little Adventures: He told me,
that tho Virtue was to be valued where ever it was found, yet he was glad to
hear I was a Gentleman, because it always received a Luster from a Person of
Quality. Go, says he, and wait on the Cardinal, he loves a bold man, and is
very fond of engaging such in his Service, and if I am not mistaken, he intends
to do something considerable for you.

I left Locates with a great deal of satisfaction, having bought a couple of
Horses, and got me a Man to wait on me; and that Pride which is so natural to
youth, being gotten into my head, nothing would serve me, but I must go show my
self in this figure in my own Country; and never considering the loss of my
time, I turned out of the great Road at Briare, and came that night to the
House of my old Friend the Curate. He was surpised, and overjoyed to see me,
and after I had told him my adventures, and whether I was bound, I gave him a
great many thanks for his former kindnesses, and presenting him with ten
Pistoles, I assured him, that if ever I made my fortune, I would not be
unmindful of him: He told me I should find my Fathers Family much encreast,
that he had seven Children, not reckoning me into the number; that his affairs
also were in no very good condition, having lately met with a very great loss,
which he believed was a judgment upon him for his cruelty to me; whereupon he
gave me an account of a very strange accident which befell him, as you shall
hear. There was one Courtilz, a Kinsman of ours, a Person of Quality, and
related to most of the Gentry of that Province, but had the misfortune not to
have an Estate answerable to his Birth, and to the figure he made, for he was
one of the genteelest Men in the Kingdom; as he was waiting for some Preferment
his business lay mostly at Paris, and whether he was supplied by some of the
Sex, or had a lucky hand at Play, he always lived high, and kept the best
Company; he falling in Love with a young Widow, that had a very good Estate,
courted her in hopes to carry her by his Gallantry, and that obliging manner
which was so peculiar to himself; but the Lady, who either had no inclination
for him, or which was most likely, had obliged her self to a religious Life,
desired him in short to trouble her no further: The difficulty encreast his
Passion, he haunted her every where, and tho she had forbid him her House, he
contrived his business so well, that he saw her every day, either at Church, or
at some friends house or other; but she, to be rid of him for good and all,
retired her self into a Convent; this madded him so, that he threatened to fire
the house; and she, for fear he should be as good as his word, was fain to
remove: But finding that she continued resolute not to admit him, he contrived
to steal her; of which having some intimation, she prevented him by going
privately out of Town, and having told no body of her going but one particular
friend, nor taken any of her servants with her, her relations were in a fright
for her, and having not heard of her in several days, they concluded Courtilz
had carried her away, as he had been heard to say he would do; so they
complained to the Court of Justice against him, and upon the hearing of their
Witnesses they obtained an Arrest against him. Any man but Courtilz would have
prevented all this, for he being innocent had nothing to fear; but whether he
was otherwise employed, or thought it not worth his while, he wholly neglected
it, till at last he was fain to take Sanctuary at my Fathers, and finding
himself discovered there, was forced to remove from thence too. It happened
just at that time my Father had received a considerable sum of Money, about
twenty thousand Crowns: Some Rogues having notice of all this, they dressed
themselves up like Poursuivants, and pretending to search the house for
Courtilz, they seized upon my Father, and clapping a Pistol to his throat,
demanded where was his Money? which he, having no occasion to dye, was obliged
to discover to them; with which they loaded one of his own Horses, and he had
the satisfaction of seeing them make their escape over the Forest, from one of
the Turrets of the Castle, where they had locked up both him, and all the Family.

This was a great loss for a Gentleman of but twenty thousand Livres a year
Estate, and eight Children; so not doubting but he was very much concerned, I
did not know whether I had best see him or not, for my company being never very
agreeable to him, I thought now it might increase his affliction; but thinking
also he might reflect upon me if I was wanting in my Duty, I went to wait on
him, and was received by him not a jot better than I expected: for my
Mother-in-Law supposing I was come to dwell with them again, and lest I should
pretend to be one of the Family, forbid the Servants giving my Horses either
Oats or Hay. My man giving me an account of this, I sent hi^ for some to the
Curate; and my Father happening to be in the Stable, saw it all, without giving
orders to the contrary: Tho this did not at all agree with me, and I was ready
to burst with anger, yet being resolved to go away the next morning, I took no
notice of it, but went up to my Chamber earlier than ordinary; and as I was
just going into Bed, up comes my Father, and my Mother-in-Law, and asked me in a
sort of rallying, if I was going to wait upon the Cardinal by his order; as my
Man it seems had said among the Servants. I plainly saw the bottom of the
Question, and that 'twas only to stand fair with me, in ^ase I should chance to
meet with any thing, and therefore answered very coldly, that it was true; my
Father told me he was very glad I was like to come to preferment; and with that
word my Mother-in-Law invited me to stay, and told me I should be welcome, and
hoped, she said, that when I had made my own Fortune, I would not be unmindful
of my Brothers: I answered her in the same tone of indifference, that 'twas not
yet a thing done; but if I should be so fortunate as perhaps I might, I should
always return Good for Evil.

This sort of discourse gave me light into her temper, and I dare say was the
occasion, that she began to make excuses for her behavior to me, and
particularly for refusing Hay to my Horses; she told me 'twas because the Groom
did not know me, and they had charged him ever since their late misfortune to
give none to Strangers; but she would take care to prevent it for the future. I
knew well enough what I thought of this; but discretion and respect obliging me
to conceal my resentment, I told them that it was but a small matter, and not
worth taking notice of. My Father then began to enquire what had become of me
all this while, and gave me a small reprimand for never letting him hear from
me, and begun to talk to me a little like a Father.

After a thousand other questions, they left me to go to Bed; and having told
them I must go away the next day, I found in the Morning a Breakfast prepared
as if there had been a Wedding. They sent two hours before day to all our
Relations, that were any thing near, with a sort of a circular Letter, to
acquaint them of the occasion of my going to Court, and to invite them all to
come and take their leave of me: Away they come, some on Foot, some on
Horseback; and I was smothered with Compliments from a matter of ten or twelve
Gentlemen, as if I had been already some great Person, and in a condition to
make all their fortunes. To deliver my self from this Farce, which was very
uneasy to me, I begged my Father to permit me to hasten, for I had lost too
much time already; and the Cardinal who expected People should be punctual,
would perhaps think me long: That I had come two days Journey out of my way, on
purpose to pay my duty to him, but I hoped he would not desire me to prejudice
my self. My Mother-in-Law, who was present at this Compliment, no sooner heard
it, but she goes her self into the Kitchen, and never stirred thence till
Dinner was served up.

This which I saw at my Fathers, was but the very same which I afterward found
to be the practice at Court. As Soon as I was arrived there, and it was known
that I was the Cadet of Locates, every one made their Compliments to me; and I
was strangely surpised to see those People, whom I should have thought it
honor enough to have spoken to once a week, wait upon me to beg my friendship.
The Captain of the Guard to his Eminence, to whom I had addressed my self, having
told him that I was in the Antichamber, I was ordered to be called in: Who
seeing that I was but a Beardless Boy, and very short too of my age, he turned
to four or five great Lords that were with him, and said smiling St. Aunais
surely has put a trick upon us: Why? This is but a Child.

My Lord, said I, making a profound Reverence, I know not what Mr. de St.
Aunais may have informed your Eminence, but if it was only that I took the
King's Lieutenant of Salses, and his Mistress, I can assure you it is nothing
but the Truth. Ay, but he has told us more than that, replied the Cardinal: We
have a long Story here, how you prevented the Soldier that would have kissed the
Girl; and how you attackt him, and he fired his Pistol at you; notwithstanding
which, you drove him away and brought off your Prisoners. It Is all very true,
my Lord, said I, but these are but small matters: I hope if I may be so happy
as to find an opportunity, I shall perform much greater, for the Service of the
King and of your Eminence. He is a bold Lad, said the Cardinal to the Lords
again, but he is but a Boy still; and it is pity to expose him so young, and as
it were to force nature. This discourse put me in great fear he would do
nothing for me, wherefore I returned presently, I am more capable, my Lord,
than you may think me, and your Eminence may find me so, if you please to
command me any thing for your Service. He made me no answer, but speaking
softly to the Captain of his Guards, bad him entertain me with the Gentlemen,
and to inform himself who I was, and so retired into his Closet* This both
surpised and afflicted me; for I expected that I should no sooner have
appeared before him, but I should have had some great matter.

The Captain of the Guard not failing to do as he was directed, and having
given the Cardinal an account that I was a Gentleman, after Dinner I was called
into the Closet, where his Eminence told me he had, as a mark of his favor,
resolved to entertain me in his Service; that I should be wise and faithful,
and I should have no cause to repent me. I made him a low Reverence in token of
my acknowledgment, still expecting some very considerable Business, or Office
to be bestowed upon me; but I was surpised to find all my preferment sum'd up
in a Livery, and that at last I should have come so far to be the Cardinals
Footboy. I was not so much Master of my passion, but that he perceived it in my
countenance: Let not this trouble you, said he, with a sweetness that
reconciled all things, It Is because I would have you always near me; time may
be, I shall be perhaps but too kind to you.

The obliging way with which he spoke this, scattered all the discontent that,
as I said, appeared in my face, and having made him again a most profound
reverence, I expected presently to go and change my figure, or at least that
some body should be ordered to take measure of me for my Clothes. But the
Governor of the Pages told me, I must write to my Father to send me four
hundred Crowns for my Livery, and Trimming, and Presents that I must make, and
that nothing would be done before. I was in a great confusion at this, I knew
well enough to how little purpose 'twould be for me to write to my Father: I
was content to sell my Horses, but that would not raise my Stock above fifty
Pistoles, which was not half the Sum he talked of: To ask my Relations I thought
very improper, since they all thought my fortune was made, and expected great
things from me. I slept not a wink that night for thinking what method I should
take to get over this affair, I resolved at last to try Monsieur de Marillac,
which was all the hopes I had left; but having been disordered all night, 'twas
too late e're I got up to go to him till after dinner: And in the mean time to
show my self assiduous, I went to wait on the Cardinal, who no sooner saw me,
but he asked me why I had not my Livery on? My Lord, said I, it is truly for want
of Money; and our Governor tells me, I must bring him four hundred Crowns
first, and that then it shall be disp^^cht. What an exacting Rogue is this,
said he, to those that were about him, shrinking up his shoulders, and turning
to me, Go, says he, and tell him from me, if he offers to take one Farthing of
you, I shall turn him out of doors immediately; and further, that if it be not
done by to morrow morning without fail, he should please to seek out a new
Master.

You may easily imagine I was very well pleased with this errand, and knowing I
was well backed, I did not leave out a word of the message, but told it with all
the advantage I could, for his mortification; however he observed the order
punctually, and I laid out only ten or twelve Pistoles to buy some little
necessaries which he gave me not: and this the Cardinal not only paid me, but
made them give me three times that sum for my reimbursement.

Tho I was to be but a Page, yet I failed not to be the Favorite, for his
Eminence had none so agreeable to him as my self; he would have me do every
thing, and I to show my sense of his favor, was constantly at his Elbow, ready
to receive his Command: at Table, 'twas I still that served him the Wine, not
for want of others readiness, for they envied me for it, but he would call me
by my name, as if there had been no body else there, to prevent their
diligence. When he went to Madam D' Eguillon 'twas the same thing, there was no
body but I went with him, where he placed me in the Antichamber, into which no
body came, but if he wanted to speak with any body, I was sent to them, and
brought them in, and let them out, by a private Staircase, that 'twas
impossible for any body to discover them.

I know 'twas reported he was in Love with that Lady, who was his Niece, I do
not say it was not so, she was handsome enough to tempt as great a man as he;
but this I am sure of, that for my part I should have been transported to have
had but the esteem of so fine a creature, tho I had been a Cardinal my self.
And this I think my self obliged to say to undeceive posterity, that he went to
see her many times upon other business than his diversion, where he locked
himself up with persons that he could see in no other place without suspicion,
especially Strangers, sometimes disguised like Monks, sometimes like other
Ecclesiastics, and sometimes like Merchants* It fell out once, that after one
of these conferences, he ordered me to take a Bag, I know not what was in it,
but 'twas very heavy, and to go along the road to Pontoise, telling me at the
entrance into a Village called Sanois, I should find a Capuchin asleep, with
his Coul or Hood hanging down behind him; that I should say never a word to
him, but put the Bag into the Coul, and come away: I found every thing just as
he had told me, and executed his orders punctually.

But before he employed me in such secret things as these, he made trial of me
by a passage that was very particular. He had a Man called Sauve, whom he used
to employ about such matters, and had sent him two or three times into Spain,
to discover some intrigues that were carrying on there against his interest.
This man had a very handsome Wife, and being ordered by the Cardinal to try my
fidelity, he sets his Wife to work, with whom he suffered me to use such
liberty, that one might swear for him he was not jealous. His Wife was at first
sight very free with me, and the design being to entrap me, by the most
infallible snare in the world, especially to a young man, she began to be
pleasanter than ordinary. But having, by I know not what means, obliged her,
she told me downright the whole cheat, and cautioned me to have a care; after
this she gave an account to her Husband just as I directed her, and the
Cardinal being informed from him (who to gain his favor, told him ingeniously
he had sacrificed his Wife, and would not stick to sacrifice himself for his
service) he had from that time such confidence in me, that I was always
employed in affairs of the the greatest consequence.

A few days after this he ordered me to put off my Livery, and go into the
Horse Market, to a certain house which he directed me to; that I should go up
four pair of stairs, and if I found a Cross made with Chalk on a Chamber Door I
should come down, and stay below till Sauve came to me. I found just as he had
said, and having placed my self at the Street Door, with my Cloak thrown over
my face, Sauve came to me, and asked me how it was? I told him I had found that
which his Eminence desired; then he asked me if I had not seen two men go out,
one habited like a Priest, and the other with a short Cloak like an Abbot; I
told him No: he bid me look out sharp, and if they should appear, I should walk
along before them, till I came to the Hospital de la Pit^e; and if not, I
should stand Sentinel there till he came again. It was an hour and half before
he came again, but 'twas in good company when he did come, for he brought a
Squadron of the Guards with him, of whom a Party beset the house, and the rest
went up stairs, where they found in the Chamber, the two men described to me,
who they took and carried to the Bastile: But there was but one of them
committed, the other was let go, and I carried him the next day ten thousand
Crowns in Gold, which was the recompense they had promised him, for betraying
and selling his Companion.

Finding my self employed in such secret affairs, I heartily wished my self a
year or two older; for I fancied the Cardinal would find me other business,
when I was a little too old for a Page, and I longed to be in the Wars, to
which I had a particular inclination. In the mean time my Father, and my
Mother-in-law, having informed themselves that all my hopes were ended in a
Livery, were sorry for those little civilities they had done me; but this
hindered me not from thinking, if I could possible, to do something for my
younger Brothers, who had need enough; and to give them assurance of my good
will, I wrote to them all to give me notice, if any Benefice should present in
their Country: but they sent me word, that I needed not to show my self so
vain, for they knew well enough what interest I had, and were content I should
make use of it for whom I pleased.

I should have taken this as a great affront from any body else, and so I did
from them too; and the Cardinal being pleased a little after that, to enquire
of me about my Family, I told him not only this passage, but what usage I had
received when I was but a Child; he was extremely taken with all my freedom,
and finding he delighted to hear me relate the little adventures of my life, I
took occasion to tell him of the kindness I had received from the Curate,
magnifying the obligation I thought my self under to him as much as I could: He
told me he was glad to see me so grateful; but at the same time, as I happened
to speak of the Messieurs de Marillac, he asked me if they knew I was with him,
and if I had seen any of them lately? I told him No, but I intended to wait on
them with the first convenience: to which he answered, that I must not do so,
if I thought of continuing in his favor. I durst not reply to so positive a
command*^ and he perceiving that I was not only surpised, but astonished; At
least, said he, if you should meet with any of them, never open your Lips of
what I have said to you; and be assured if you ever should, you have nothing
more to hope for from me. I told him, 'twas enough for me to know his Pleasure,
and that I should know neither Friend nor Relation, when his Eminence's Service
was the question.

He was very well satisfied with my answer, and continued to employ me as
freely as before; among the rest he sent me one time with a great Bag full of
Gold, and ordered me to lay it under a broad Freestone, which I should find
upon a heap of other Stones, a little beyond Montfaucon, on the Road to St.
Denis; and withal I was not to come back the same way, that I might not see, I
suppose, who should come to fetch it: Another time I carried such a like Cargo
to Nostre Dame, to a Man whom he told me I should find leaning against a Tree,
with his head on one hand, and the other hand behind him, just for all the
world in such a posture, as Moliere acts the covetous Physician; I was to put
the Money into that hand which he held behind him, but not to see his face at
all, and so to come my way; I thought there was more mystery in all this than
there was occasion for, and that it was only to make proof of my Fidelity, or
to render his management of affairs more valuable for its secrecy. However it
was, I spent two years in such sort of businesses, in which time there were
many Plots at Court to remove him from the Ministry, but all to no purpose.

In the mean time, having writ to the Curate as well as to my Father, to inform
me if any thing happened in their Country that I might beg for him, there came
now an Express to me from him, to tell me that a small Abbey of about four
thousand Franks per annum was become vacant, I immediately begged it of the
Cardinal, and he granted it me at the first word, but would needs know who it
was, I begged it for. My Lord, said I, for our Curate, who taught me to read,
and to whom I told your Eminence I had so many obligations. And why not for one
of your Brothers, said he, I think you told me you had several, and they needy
enough? It Is true, my Lord, said I, but as Providence has done by me, I am
obliged to prefer my Gratitude before even my natural affection; thus your
Eminence can judge, if after all the obligations I have to you, I ought not to
serve you above all the world. We shall see that, replied the Cardinal smiling,
and may chance to put you to the trial sooner than you think of.

I was just going to answer him again, when the Prince of Conde came into the
room, which made me spoil my Compliment to help him to a Chair: He made but a
short visit, and the Cardinal waiting on him to the Chamber Door, spied
Monsieur De Charrost, who was but an inconsiderable person then, but one who we
have seen since Captain of the Guards du Corpse, Governor of Calais, Duke, and
Peer of France: The Cardinal had a mortal aversion to him, so that he was no
sooner stepped back into his Chamber, but he ordered me to call the Captain of
his Guard, whom he gave a strict charge, at any rate to rid him of that piece
of Impertinence, and that he should order the Guards to deny him entrance: The
Captain of the Guard asked him if he should turn him out of the Antichamber? I
don't say so, says the Cardinal, but that you should keep him out for the
future. This Order being known all over the house in a moment, every body
turned their backs upon the poor Gentleman, and were as shye of him as if he
had had the Plague: I know not whether he apprehended any thing, but he took no
notice of it, and staid three long hours in the Antichamber. The Cardinal, who
had a mind to go out, sent me to see if he was there still, and having told him
that he was, he chose rather to stay in his Chamber, than expose himself to his
Compliment. The next day Charrost came to the door again, and offering to come
in as usual, the Guards thrust him away; and he asking to speak with their
Captain, the Captain ordered them to tell him he was not within; he besieged
the house thus two days, before he could see the Cardinal, but on the third day
he put himself just in his way, as he went to Mass: The Guards routed him
again, and would let him stand quietly no where; whereupon he leapt up into a
Nich, that was designed to set a Statue in; and when the Cardinal came by, My
Lord, said he, your Guards have refused me entrance at your Gate; but if you
shut me out at your Door, I Will come in at the Window. The Cardinal could not
forbear laughing to see him stand so like an Image; and finding him so very
zealous to him, he was ever after very kind to him. Monsieur de Charrost having
thus gained admission, continued to make his court to him very diligently,
without asking any thing, tho he had need enough; the Cardinal was obliged the
more at that, for he was always pleased if he saw himself loved without a
principle of Interest; and would do the more for any person for not being
importuned. In the mean while an opportunity offered so happily for him, that
now was his time to make use of the Cardinals favor: wherefore waiting to find
him in a good humor, he comes briskly to him one day; If I durst, my Lord,
said he, I would ask your Eminence to help me to 200000 Crowns, without one
farthing charge, either to the King or your self. How then, Charrost? replied
the Cardinal smiling. To Marry me, my Lord, with your own hand, returned
Charrost; I have found out a Fortune, and if your Eminence will but speak a
word for me, my business is done. If it stops only there, said the Cardinal,
you may reckon it done indeed. He threw himself at his feet, and embraced his
knees, in token of thankfulness; telling him, that all he desired of him, was
to send and demand Mademoiselle Lescalopier for him. The Cardinal did it, to
the astonishment of all people, who knew that he never cared to meddle in such
sort of things. The Relations of the Lady could not refuse a man of his
Authority; so Charrost having got such a Fortune, was in a condition to buy
some considerable place, and the Cardinal, who never suffered any body to be
near the King but such as were his own Creatures, and wholly at his service,
treated for him to be Captain of the Guards du Corpse.

In the mean time I got my little Abbey, as I said before, and sent the Bulls
all Perfumed to the Curate, which wrought these two different effects, that he
was like to dye with Joy, and my Father and Mother-in-law with sorrow: They
came all to Paris, the Curate to give me thanks, and acknowledge my kindness,
and they to load me with a thousand reproaches: They asked me, If I was not
ashamed to provide for strangers, when my own Brothers had so much occasion;
but at last, when they had vented their passion, they began to talk at another
rate, and sell to persuading me to beg another Abbey of the Cardinal; I told
them it was not my fault they had not this; but this was not the way at Court,
for 'twas not always a fit time to ask, and the certain way to get nothing was
to be always begging: That if the Cardinal had been so kind to me, being but
his Page, I hoped to be more in his favor, when I was in a better condition to
serve him; that I was not without natural affections, tho I had no great reason
for it; but that I should always consider what my honor obliged me to, without
calling to mind any of my just resentments; and with these sort of hopes I
appeased them. I had no sooner cleared my hands of them, but I had all our
Province about me, thinking, because I had gotten this Abbey for our Curate, I
could not but be very prodigal of my favors to them all; some of them came
from the very further end of Berry, whom I had never seen nor heard of, ^eizing
me every hour with their Genealogy, making it out very plainly, that they were
my Cousins in the third degree, and therefore hoped I would use my Interest to
procure them some preferment. I made short with them, and told them, I had as
good a will to serve them as any man in the world, but it was not in my power,
which they might easily see, for that I had got nothing yet for my Brothers,
who being in the first degree, 'twas but reasonable should be first regarded;
and that then I had some Relations in the second Degree, who pretended to some
privilege before them; that when I had preferred them all, then they might
depend upon me, that I should do them all the service I could: They understood
me well enough, and so getting rid of them they left me in quiet.

At last the happy hour was come, which I had so long wished for, when I should
lay down the office of a Page, with which I was never very well pleased; the
Cardinal gave me two hundred Pistoles to buy me Clothes, and told me I should
be one of his Gentlemen. I had hopes now he would have done some great thing
for me; however I did not continue long idle, but went over into England, and
into Scotland, with Letters written in Ciphers; and those Countries being in
Arms, I was seized by a Party of the King of England's Army, whom I was as much
afraid of, as of those of the Parliaments: They immediately searched me, but
found nothing about me, for I had put my Letters into my Posthorses Saddle;
the Plates of which I had made on purpose at Paris, being of double Iron,
contrived to hold the Letters in the inside, and unless they broke them, they
did nothing. They ransackt the very Pummels of the Saddle, but to no purpose,
for they could not find my Packet: Then they asked me whence I came? whither I
was going? and a thousand impertinent questions; and I answered them all as I
found proper, being prepared to meet with such like interruptions; telling
them, I was a young Gentleman that was traveling: But this gave them the more
suspicion, finding my Equipage did not agree with the Character I gave my self,
so they stopped me four or five days, at which I was very uneasy, for I carried
along with me (if I am not very much mistaken) business of no small
consequence; such as if I should be discovered with, I knew my fate: but what
comforted me was, that my Letters were perfect Magic, and written in such a
character, that the Devil could not have read them. They had no regular
Alphabet, as is customary in such cases, but the same stroke or dash would
signify twenty different words, that it was impossible but for them that had
the key, to make any thing of it: as for example, you must know it was agreed,
that one stroke should signify an entire word of a Line in St. Austin, and to
know which it was, the figure of the Page was put under the stroke, and the
number of the line, and the number of the word in the line, and to make it the
plainer, the mark or stroke was to be the first letter of the word. As to
explain it; suppose the word was Have, and that this word was to be found in
the 10th Page of St. Austin, the 10th line, the 5th word in the line, the
cipher would have been thus*

This being so contrived, I leave any one to judge, if 'twas possible, without
conjuring, to have found out my Errand, and yet I trembled every joint of me;
for I knew if they found out my Letters, the more difficulty they had in
discovering the Contents, the worse I might expect to be handled by them. But
it being my good fortune not only to secure my Packet, but also that they
believed me too young to be capable of such sort of Negotiations, they let me
go, and I delivered my dispatches, and returned safe with an answer. I was very
well paid for this Journey; for I had an order to the Financier for two
thousand Crowns, and one of the Pay-masters demanding a consideration of me for
prompt payment, was turned out of his place upon my complaint to the Cardinal.
I know not whether the Genius of the English Subject to take up Arms on every
light occasion, or this Voyage of mine wrought the effects that followed, but
those three Kingdoms, who, as I said, were disturbed before, immediately upon
this broke out into confusion, insomuch that the King of England, who had given
us no great marks of his good will in several cases, found his hands so full at
home, that there was no great fear of his being troublesome to us.

And what makes me think we had a deeper hand in this affair than others, is
something that happened to me three months after my return; being one morning,
as I seldom mist, at the Cardinals Leve^, he whispered me, and bid me go to the
Fauxbourg St. Marceau, over against the Conduit, to the sign of a Woman without
a Head, and to go up two pair of stairs, where I should find a man lying on a
Bed with yellow Curtains, whom I should order to be at Madam D' Eguillons, at
Eleven a Clock at night without fail. I delivered my message immediately, and
being not forbidden to see this man's face, as in other cases, I called to mind
that I had seen him in Scotland, and I believe he knew me too, for I observed
that he looked earnestly at me, as if he would have recollected who I was; we
neither of us said any thing of what we thought, only that he told me he would
not fail the appointment. At the time aforesaid, I was ordered to stay for him
at the door, to introduce him into the Cardinals Closet; he came disguised like
one that cries Wafers in the Streets, and I, hearing a man cry Wafers, was far
enough from imagining that 'twas he; but he knowing me, and discovering
himself, I brought him to the Cardinal, with whom he was shut up till four a
clock the next morning; all the Cardinals men had orders to go home, which gave
further occasion to the talk that was made of him, and of his Neice Madam D.
Eguillon; no body imagining he had any business to keep him there all night,
but to lie with her; besides they had taken out the Keys, that they might go
out when they pleased, and this made the Ladys Servants be as forward as any in
the report: I don't say this to affirm that there was no privacies between
them, but to show, as I said, that all the times he staid there were not the
effects of an Amor.

The conference being over, my Wafer-merchant comes out of the Closet, at the
door whereof I had waited by the Cardinals order; his Eminence made me lend him
my Cloak, for 'twas no time of night to cry Wafers, and ordered me at the same
time to go with him two Streets on his way. Two days after he called me to him
again, and bid me go to Monsieur de Bullion, Superintendant of the Finances, to
order him from him to deliver me that parcel which he had made up, and then to
carry it into the Rue de ^a Huchette, to the same person I have been
mentioning, whom I should find at his Lodgings, at the Sign of the Sow and
Pigs, at the further end of the Court, up one pair of stairs; I found the
parcel ready, but it was so heavy that it had more need of a Cart to carry it,
which Mr. de Bullion knowing before, had provided one, and having put it into
the Cart, he gave me a Note that contained the particulars of what was in it;
telling me I must take that, and give it to the person I was to go to. Being
come to the Sow and Pigs, I found my Gentleman walking up and down the Chamber,
and having given him the Note, and told him the Goods were at the door, he
looked upon the Bill and gave it me again, telling me I was mistaken, that I was
to go to some other person, for it did not belong to him. I told him that I was
not mistaken, for he was sensible that I knew him, and that my order was for
him; but he throwing away with a sort of discontent, walks about the Chamber
again, and at last said to me, Sir, It is not for me, and you have no more to
do but to return with it.

After I had taken a great deal of pains to persuade him to receive it, but
found 'twas all to no purpose, I even took his counsel, and carried it back to
M. de Bullion, and so went to give an account to the Cardinal; he asked me if I
had the Note about me, I told him I had, which he looking upon, it put him into
a violent passion at Bullion, saying, he would teach him another time to
observe his orders; and sending for him at the same time, asked him the reason
why he sent but five hundred thousand Franks, when his order was for six
hundred thousand: Bullion replied, that he understood his Emine^ce had told
him, but two days ago, that they should manage that affair to get it as cheap
as they could; that he did not question but the other would have been content
with what he sent him, but seeing he was not, he would go and send him the rest.

By what I could understand of this, for I was present at their discourse, it
seemed to me, that Mr. de Bullion had a mind to put a hundred thousand Franks
in his own Pocket, tho he pretended only good husbandry for the public: in the
mean time, while the other hundred thousand Franks was telling, his Eminence
sent me to find out the man again, to tell him he should have content, and that
'twas only the fault of the Superintendant; and ordered me to acquaint him,
that I had seen him reprove de Bullion for it. I found him making up his
Baggage, as if he was to be gone, and seeming surpised to see me, he stepped up
to me, and asked me, if I had any thing to say to him; I told him my business,
at which seeming indifferent. There is no Faith in man, said he, with a surly
sort of tone, and I cannot understand it, that after having so positive a
promise, it should be forgotten in two days. I went back immediately to Mr. de
Bullion, and fetching the six hundred thousand Franks, I brought them all to
him, and returned to the Cardinal, who was very uneasy till he knew what was
done in it*

Tho this sort of employment was not my element, and I had much rather have
been in the Army, yet having so much the favor of my Master, it was the
pleasanter to me. Having one time asked me if I had yet seen Mr. de Marillac,
whose Brother was now in great favor, for he was not only made a Marshall of
France, but had married a Relation of the Queen Mothers; I answered, that I
remembered better than so, what his Eminence had commanded me; and that I had
already told him, I should know no Relations when his Service was the question,
and that my greatest grief was, that I could give him no better proof of it
yet. He told me with a voice that seemed as if he were pleased, that it was
well enough; and indeed if he had not been very confident of my fidelity, he
would certainly never have trusted me in a thing of such a nature, as he did
about a month after. In which, to discover what temper he was of, 'twill be
necessary to look back a little to the beginning of the story.

The King was of a very mild and easy disposition, came to the Crown very
young, and left the government of all things to the Queen Mother, a Princess of
a vast ambition, but not beloved by the French; not only from a natural
aversion as she was an Italian, but also because she made a Favorite of one of
that Nation, whose Merit was as mean as his Birth: As Governments are supported
by fear sometimes, as well as by other methods, so this man had made himself a
terror, even to the Princes of the Blood; and his Wife (which was more
intolerable than the other) was come to that degree of Insolence, presuming on
the Queens Favor, whom she entirely managed, that she trampled all the world,
as it were, under her feet. It being however necessary for her to make some
Creatures of her own, to resist so many Enemies, the Queen Mother had gained
some already, and among them the two Brothers de Marillac, of whom one was a
Statesman, the other a Soldier, and both very honest Gentlemen, and worthy of
the great Places they enjoyed; but notwithstanding all her forecast, the number
of the contrary party was so great, that she could not save her Favorite from
their hands. De Luines, whose ambition could not bear the insolence of this
Italian, insinuated to the King, that his Mother rendered him contemptible to
the people, leaving the Government to be managed by Strangers. It is not
certainly known, whether he accused her of Incontinence or not, and of making
away the King his Father, but however it was, he knew well enough how to work
upon the King, into whose favor he had wrought himself, by gratifying him in
his little delights, and diverting him in such manner as he found most suitable
to his inclination; he got a private order, to find out some body to kill this
Favorite, which was accordingly executed by Vitri, Captain of the Guards du
Corpse.

From hence forward de Luines endeavored to improve all the advantages of his
Authority with the King to the prejudice of the Queen Mother; but as his
shoulders were too weak for such a burden, and on the other hand the Queens
Party being jealous of his Ministry, and united against him, he was forced to
yield to the strongest side. Those who were in her interests, and had absconded
for fear they should fall in the same disgrace with her Favorite, were
immediately recalled to Court, and as the Messieurs de Marillac were the chief
of these, so they had the greatest marks of her respect; he of the long Robe
aimed at no less than the Ministry, and seemed so well qualified for it, that
all people thought he deserved it: but the Queen Mother having taken into her
service the Bishop of Lucon, afterward Cardinal de Richelieu, this Genius did
so in all things excel Monsieur de Marillac, and shone with such luster, that
the other was quite obscured.

The greater Marillac's ambition was, the more impatience he showed at the
advancement of Richelieu, whose designs were at least as great as his; and
ambition being as subject to jealousy as love, this produced a hatred so
inveterate, that they could not endure one another; and the death of Luines
making way for a more unlimited Ministry, very much encreast it: But Richelieu
soon got above, not him only, but even the Queen Mother her self. This Princess
resented it extremely, and mustered up all her Friends to join with her in
pulling down this New Minister, before he was settled too fast. Monsieur de
Marillac and his Brother, having more reason than any body to desire his fall,
entirely embarkt in the design with the Queen; they laid an infinite number of
plots against him, and any thing, but such a Genius as his, must have sunk
under the power of so many Enemies; but as he never willingly forgave an
injury, so as soon as he had settled himself in his new Authority, he set
himself to suppress every one whom he had the least reason to fear; and not
content to have forced the Queen Mother, who had been his Benefactress, to fly
the Kingdom, he resolved the destruction of the two Marillac's.

This was the reason of his asking me so often, if I had seen them; but to make
an effectual proof of my fidelity, and withal to take off the odium from
himself of apprehending the Marshall, who was a man generally beloved; he said
to me one day, You have often assured me, that you would know no Relations, nor
Friends, when my Service required it, I shall now put you to the trial. Here is
an Order, said he, giving me a Packet, to apprehend the Marshall de Marillac;
You see I am very willing you should know what it is, go and carry it as
directed, and remember, my Confidence in you merits very well your Fidelity to
me. This I Will assure you extremely perplexed me, and taking it, My Lord, said I,
if your Eminence would be content with this proof of my fidelity, that I know
how to keep your secrets, I should have been very much obliged to you. I do not
refuse to obey you in this, but I beg you to consider, that if you should
employ another in such a Message as this, against one of my nearest Relations,
I should not be less obliged to your Eminence. Go, I tell you, returned the
Cardinal, and take heed I don't do as you desire me.

I had nothing left me but to obey after so severe a command, tho I never got
to Horseback with so much regret, and was often tempted to go and acquaint
Monsieur de Marillac, who was at Paris, of the misfortune that was coming upon
the Marshall his Brother. I fancied sometimes the Cardinal, who was always so
very secret in his affairs, had put this into my hands on purpose to make me
run away; but at last my duty carried it against all the obligations I had to
others, and I made such haste to show my zeal for my Master, that I delivered
my Packet six hours before they imagined I could be there.

The Imprisonment of this great man made noise enough; every one accused the
Cardinal of cruelty and injustice, so that daring not yet to bring things to
the last extremity, he sto^t the course of Justice for a time, which was
disposed to do any thing he desired. And I, after I had thus punctually obeyed
him, thought he would have been generous enough to permit me to interceed for
him, and the more too, because what I should ask of him would but show him that
I had a principle of honor, more than in hopes to effect any thing, where
there was so powerful an Accuser; but I had no sooner discovered my intention,
but I plainly saw, that great men are not without their failings. He told me,
all in a passion, that he was glad with all his heart, that one of his own
Domestics was against him, and withal cast such a look at me, as made me
tremble from head to foot; and I may say I was as much afraid, as if I had been
in the Trenches, or in a set Battle.

I durst not come near him any more that day, but attending next morning at his
Levee, he made as if he did not see me, and so took no notice of me at all: As
I had enemies enough in the house, my disgrace was presently published,
especially because one or other of them heard my Compliment, and the Cardinals
answer. The Count de Soissons, who was an enemy to the Cardinal, and had a mind
to serve him a trick, made this an opportunity of offering to entertain me in
his service; but tho he was a Prince of the Blood, and proposed to me great
advantages, I returned answer, That I was too much obliged to the Cardinal, to
think of changing my Master. Another perhaps would have acquainted his Eminence
of this proposal; indeed he could not endure to have any thing hid from him,
especially where his service was concerned, but considering the terms I stood
in with him, he might think, I fancied, that I did it to ingratiate my self
again, so I never troubled his head with it.

La Ferte, the Father of him whom we have since seen Marshall of France,
belonged to this Count, but was a very treacherous Servant to his Master; for
he was a perfect Spy upon him for the Cardinal; and having discovered, I know
not how, that I had been spoken to, the Cardinal heard of it from him, and from
that time reckoned me a Traitor; and looking on me still with an evil eye, he
asked me one day if I had nothing to acquaint him of? and I answered him No,
that he had locked up my mouth by the answer he had given me. Have not I locked
up your heart too, replied he, since that, and have you not had a mind to be
revenged of me? Of you, my Lord! said I, surpised with his words (for I saw by
his air and discourse, that he had something extraordinary that moved him) How
is it possible for such a thought to enter into my head? You, who have been
such a Master, and who has made me what I am. I know all that well enough,
replied he; but in short what business have you with the Count de Soissons? and
what are you two plotting together? I saw by these words, I was betrayed, and
that nothing but telling the truth could save me. My Lord, said I, if I did not
give you an account of that, it was not to make a secret of it; but your
Eminence having chid me, I thought 'twas enongh to do my duty, without making
my court to you from the merit of my answer to the Count de Soissons; he sent
to me indeed to entertain me in his service; but if those who told your
Emin^nce that story, had also told you what return I made, 'twould have been so
much to my advantage, as would effectually have re-establisht me in your
favor. I know all, says the Cardinal, to me hastily, to terrify me, and if you
would have me to pardon you, you must confess the whole matter freely. I ask no
Pardon, my Lord, said I, but to do me Justice only. I told him that I had too
good a Master to think of changing him, and I will always say so, as long as
your Eminence will please to accept of my service. Then you have nothing else
to say, returned the Cardinal very seriously; Well, take heed, you will repent
it before it be long.

I said to him all that an innocent man could say; but as he still doubted the
truth of it, he continued eight whole days without taking any notice of me; in
which time he employed La Fer^e to discover how it was. La Ferte did all he
could, but understanding 'twas one Mezieres had spoke to me, who was a man very
faithful to his Master, and from whom he had no hopes to learn the secret; he
tried if he could pump it out of the Prince himself; he told him that I was a
gallant Fellow, and behaved my self so at Locates, and had been very faithful
ever since I belonged to the Cardinal, but that the Cardinal had used me very
ill, and I had reason for some resentment; that this was the time for him to
gain over such a man into his service, who was worth having, and if he pleased
he would attempt it. The Count de Soissons, who was a man without artifice or
disguise, told him 'twould be in vain, that Mezieres had spoke to me already,
but there was nothing to be done with me.

This restored me to the Cardinals good opinion, but not to any capacity to
relieve Mr. de Marillac; on the other hand the Cardinal was resolved to cut him
off, the more to despite the Queen Mother, who was always forming Parties
against him; and whereas the pretenses on which he apprehended him were too
weak, he came upon him for false Musters, a fault that every Captain in the
Army is more or less guilty of. And indeed what General can be safe, if he is
answerable for all the actions of his Subalterns? 'Twas on such a slight matter
as this, that the Cardinal begun the ruin of so great a person; and having
gotten a Court Martial of his own Creatures, they questioned him on a thousand
trifling stories, that as a very worthy Gentleman said, if they had been all
true, were not crimes sufficient to have whipped a Page, and he answered them
Article by Article so readily, and so directly, as puzzled all his Judges: But
the Cardinal, who saw them wavering, sending them word they should take heed
what they did, the fear they had upon them of his displeasure, made them pass
the sentence he desired, for they condemned him to have his Head cut off; which
was executed the same Afternoon, in the Place de Gr^ves. Knowing the nicety of
his humor, I asked his Eminence, if he would give me leave to put my self into
Mourning; he told me I might do what I would, which I understood too well to
venture upon it.

A month or two after this, a match was proposed to me, which seemed to be much
for my interest; the Cardinal also was very much for it, but not for any reason
he saw in the thing, so much as for the aversion he had to the Count de
Soissons; and the Lady was Niece, and Heir, to the Baron de Coupet, a sworn
Enemy to that Family. Indeed that Prince, who carried it very high, had sent
the Captain of his Guards one day to abuse a Baron in his own house, on
pretense that he had spoken dishonourably of a certain Lady whom he had a
respect for: This occasioned a great deal of disturbance, all the Gentry who
thought themselves touched in such an affront to a person of Quality, were got
together, an account of it being sent to them by the Baron de Coupet, and they
all agreed that his Dignity secured him from his resentment; but yet they
resolved that from that time forward they would universally slight him, and not
one of them come into his company; and that whoever he was that should break
this agreement should not be looked upon as a person of honor. This resolution
was exactly observed, and the Prince, who had some friends, and some creatures,
found himself at once abandoned by them all; he did all he could to regain the
good opinion of the Nobility, but finding that not one of them would so much as
see him, he su'd for the Command of the Army, and the Enemy being at that time
advanced as far as Corbie, the Ban and Arrierban was to be raised, which he
thought to be ^ fit occasion for his purpose. He was prodigious extravagant,
keeping twelve Tables of five and twenty Dishes for all come^s, caressing every
body, offering Money to several, and sending it to others, whom he believed in
want: By which means he recovered the Friendship of most of them. But the
Relations and Friends of the Baron de Coupet would never forgive him, and as
they breathed out nothing but revenge, or at least pretended it, they cast
their eyes upon me, in the proposal of this Marriage, hoping by that means to
be protected by the Cardinal; they obtained it at first word, and the Cardinal
told me I could not do better: I was surpised at the motion, I that had
neither Estate nor Employment, at least considerable enough to expect a
fortune, and at the same time mistrusting something in the bottom; the sad
example of my Father made me resolve to go fair and softly: In the mean time I
saw the young Lady, who was really very agreeable, but a little too free, for
the very second time I saw her, she was pleased to tell me, that being already
as it were Man and Wife, if she did give me those little liberties I might
desire, I should not construe it to her prejudice: This was enough for me, I
could understand the rest, and these words made me examine her more nearly, and
I fancied she looked a little big, upon which I grew cold in my Courtship all of
a sudden. It seems I was not deceived, for it was even so; and as her Relations
were much in the right to get her a Husband with all speed, they took it mighty
ill that I should draw back, insomuch that the Baron de Coupet thought himself
so much affronted, as to fight me; and to ruin me effectually, they possessed
the Cardinal, that 'twas the Count de Soissons that had dissuaded me from this
match, and that I had taken his part so violently, that they believed I had
quarreled with their Kinsman upon that account, for that neither of us were to
be found. They might well tell him this circumstance, for 'twas themselves who
set us together by the ears. Nevertheless the Cardinal believing every word of
the story, had privately resolved my ruin, which appeared plainly enough, for
at my return he ordered me to be clapped up in Prison, without hearing me speak
for my self.

I applied my self to La Houdiniere, the Captain of his Guards, who was my
Friend, and having sent to beg him to come and see me, I told him I was a lost
man, unless he would speak for me; that my Enemies must have prejudiced the
Cardinal against me, or he could never have been brought to use such
extremities with a man he had been pleased to trust in so many considerable
affairs; one of his Domestics, and one who could never have so offended him,
as to be denied the liberty to vindicate himself. I begged him to ask the
Cardinal what it was I stood charged with, and if I was guilty, he should need
no Judges to give sentence upon me; that my own hand should do the Office of
the Executioner, and that I could not outlive the loss of his presence and
favor. La Houdiniere promised me all that I desired, and coming to see me
again the next day, he told me he was sorry he had nothing but bad news to
bring me; That the Cardinal was in such a rage at me, that he swore he would
have my throat cut; that he had nourisht a Serpent in his bosom; that I kept
correspondence with the Count de Soissons, a^ whose instigation I had not only
refused to marry the Niece of the Baron de Coupet, but had fought with the said
Baron to gratify the Count. I could not forbear smiling at this Accusation,
and after having told him that great men were mistaken sometimes as well as
others, I desired him to tell the Cardinal from me, that I would not only be
contented to have my throat cut, if it could be proved, I had either seen, or
heard from the Count de Soissons, since the business he knew of, but to be
broken alive upon the Wheel; That I would not indeed marry the Baron de
Coupet's Niece, that is, I would not marry a Maid with Child, and none of my
own getting neither; that she was at least four months gone, and that his
Eminence did not use to require those sort of basenesses from his Servants.

La Houdiniere carried this story word for word to the Cardinal, and he was
perfectly astonished when he understood this creature was with Child; and fixing
his Eyes upon him, without speaking a word for a good while, at last he cried
out, Is it possible, La Houdiniere, that I should be taken for a Fool? and that
these little Vpstarts should have the Impudence to impose upon me? La
Houdiniere answered, that ever since he had known me, he had observed me to be
cautious enough, and since I had affirmed it, there must certainly be something
in it, but that he had thought of a way for his Eminence to find out the truth,
which was either to send for the Girl before him, or to order a Midwife to be
sent to search her. The Cardinal laughed at this proposal, but at the same time
sending for the Baron de Coupet, who was at liberty, tho I was in Prison; he
told him he should have a care of telling him a lie; that he was upon his life;
that the question was, whether his Niece was with Child or not? whether it was
the Count de Soissons who had broken off the Match? and whether he had any way
been the occasion of our fighting? Such a question as this perplexed the poor
Baron, who would fain have avoided giving a direct answer; but the Cardinal
beginning to thunder at him again, he threw himself at his feet, and begged his
pardon; upon which the Cardinal sent him immediately to Prison, and sent for me
out. As Soon as I came into the presence, he gave me his hand to kiss, telling
me he would repair the injury he had done me. I kissed it very respectfully, and
submissively thankt him for his goodness to me, begging him to believe, that I
was wholly incapable of Treason against him.

Being thus in favor again, the Cardinal bad me a few days after go and liquor
my Boots, and be ready for a little Journey he had for me: the design was to
Brussels, whether Madam de Chevreuse was fled; she had pretended to manage the
Queen Regent, and had made a thousand Plots in the State, and the Cardinal had
a suspicion, that she still corresponded with some of the Grandees, and I was
instructed to discover it. In the mean time, that it might not be suspected, I
was dressed up like a Capuchin; and to make a little Brother, that was to be my
Companion, believe that it was really so, I wore the habit several days before
I went; and besides, I was admitted to lodge at the Convent of the Capuchins,
in the Rue St. Hon^^^e, a^ if I had been of some Convent in the Country. The
Superior received me as one of the Religious, being before instructed about it
by Father Joseph, the Cardinals Favorite; and I received also my orders from
the same Father Joseph, who was a man that minded other business sometimes than
telling his Beads. Thus I parted for Brussels, purely from a principle of
Passive Obedience, but otherwise very unfit to take so long a Journey on foot;
however 'twas a case of necessity, for fear I should inform the young Monk how
little I was of a Capuchin. But being not able to bear such fatigues, nor used
to beg my subsistence for God's sake, I cursed this Voyage a thousand times, and
wished as often that I had not been so far engaged in the intrigue; I arrived
however after fifteen days travel, and tho 'twas thought an ill thing in the
Convent, I lay a bed two whole days after it, for I was all cut and galled with
those hard Beds upon the Road, having been always used to other sort of
Lodging; and to complete my misfortune, I was called upon to officiate at the
Church, so that I thought the Cardinal had sent me into Purgatory.

During this time I scraped acquaintance with some Frenchmen that used to come
to our Convent, and making as if I did not know a certain man I saw oftentimes
in the Cloister, I asked them who it was, they told me it was the Marquess de
Laicques, who was the very man I wanted. He had been Madam Chevreuse's humble
Servant a great many years, but at last, she being resolved to take him upon
honor, she had now exchanged the ceremony of a Gallant, for the familiarity of
a Husband, and treated him as the late Mr. de Chevreuse. I was instructed in
all this at Paris, and that this Gentleman was the Archdukes Favorite, but
the Cardinals design was to draw him off from the interests of the Archduke, or
if that failed, I was to order it so, that I might inform the Archduke, and
make him jealous that his Favorite held correspondence with the Cardinal.

De Laicques, who I longed to be talking with, gave me a very fair opportunity,
by coming directly up to me, and asking me several things concerning the
Convent; I failed not to lay hold of the occasion, I entertained him with
discourse, and making as if I spoke broken French, I made my excuse that my
Mother was a Walloon, and that my Father had had several misfortunes, and
received some wrongs, and the like; he was very much pleased with my discourse,
and came very often into our Convent to see me; till now, I durst not discover
my self not to be a Capuchin, but he prevented me of his own accord, by asking
me if I would venture to carry some Letters of consequence into France? I told
him I should be very glad to serve him, but in this case the danger was so
great I durst not; he did what he could to encourage me, but I always excused
my self, that he might be the more eager, and withal to avoid all manner of
suspicion; he pressed me again, telling me I should do a service to my Country,
for which I had expressed so much inclination, that is to say on account of my
Mother, who I had told them was a Fleming. I still made excuses, and to color
them the more, told him, that if I should promise him to do it, it was not in
my power, being under the subjection of Governors, and besides what
pretensions could I make for going into France; which they all knew I hated.
This was the very argument he watched for; he told me then, if that was all the
difficulty, they would remove it without giving me any trouble, that I had
nothing to do but to give them my word, and he would take care of the rest.

It was a long time before I could be persuaded, and seeming then to be
prevailed with by his importunity, they spoke to the Superior, who being also
solicited by the Archduke himself, could not refuse it; it was resolved then,
that I should pretend to go and drink the Waters at Forges, and that I should
send notice to the persons they would write to, to fetch their Letters there;
in the mean time they gave me a Brother of the Habit to go with me, and away we
went to Forges, when we came about half way thither, I met a Courier which I
had writ to the Cardinal to send me, to whom I delivered the Packet I received
from de Laicques. The Cardinal after he had taken an account of the contents,
sealed it up again very exactly, returned it to me, and commanded me to give
notice to the person for whom it was directed, that I was come; this was one la
Pierre an Advocate, who lived in a blind Alley near the Place Maubert. He left
Paris also at the same time to meet me there, but before I saw him, I had a man
ready to watch him, that we might know whither he went. He mistrusting nothing,
at his return to Paris, went directly to the Count de Chalais, Grand Master of
the Wardrobe, which was sufficient to make us conclude, that the Packet was
for him; and what was more, it was also discovered, that this la Pierre, had
been one of his Domestics; but we needed none of these remote circumstances,
for the Count de Chalais wrote an answer himself, which I having sent to the
Cardinal, his Eminence knew it immediately to be his own hand; he was very much
surpised at the contents, where they talked of taking off the King, marrying
the Queen to the Duke of Orleans, and for himself, his death should finish the
Tragedy, to make way for the success of the Conspiracy. This was but too much
to bring Chalais to the Block, and the King would have had him apprehended
immediately, but the Cardinal being willing to discover all the Conspirators,
prevailed with the King to delay it, on condition they should keep a strict eye
upon him, lest he should get away: In the mean time, to draw him from Paris,
they made a pretense to take a progress into Bretagne, and I returned with my
dispatches to Brussels. The Count de Chalais, who was far enough from the least
suspicion of the misfor^une which attended him, had sent into Spain, pursuant
to the concert of matters in the Letters delivered him by la Pierre, which was
to finish the Treaty they had begun at Brussels, and of which the King of Spain
had been informed by an Express from the Queen, who had a hand in the
Conspiracy, that is, so far as it concerned the Destruction of the Cardinal,
whom she hated, but of all the rest she was innocent; and was so far from the
thoughts of marrying the Duke of Orleans, that she did all she could to marry
him to her Sister the Infanta of Spain. The King of Spain granted Chalais all
that he desired, but he had no further enjoyment of it but in hopes, for his
Courier was seized upon at his return, and the Cardinal having now sufficient
to convict him, delayed no longer his Execution.

When this happened I was at Brussels, and knowing well enough what a hand I
had in it, I was not without some apprehensions of being served in the same
kind, if I should chance to be discovered; and any body may judge how it fared
with me in the Convent, where I received from time to time my orders from the
Cardinal. The Marquis de Laicques was still very intimate with me, but told me
not a word of what his intrigue had come to, being loath to discourage me, by
telling me of the ill success of their contrivances; for he had a design of
making further use of me about a young Lady, whom he often spoke to me of, and
expressed an extraordinary kindness for: if I had not in appearance embarkt my
self so far in the Spanish interest, 'twould have been a very fair opportunity
to have spoken to him about reconciling himself to the Cardinal, but I durst
not do it, considering what had happened, for 'twould have been too plain a
discovery that I had a mind to deceive him. To speak of it to Madam De
Chevreuse or to her Gallant was to expose my self also to an apparent danger,
for they did nothing without one another; so finding I could not be any more
serviceable in those parts, I earnestly solicited the Cardinal to be recalled;
but he knowing that most of the Grand^es were discontented, and expecting they
would all have their recourse to the Spanish Court, obliged me to continue
there, that I might if possible discover it.

I lived therefore in this fashion two whole years, tho I cursed my Employment a
thousand times a day: Here I was forced always to play the Hypocrite, and to
talk in Disguise, a profession very unpleasant to me; here I was forced to go a
begging, work in the Garden, and to go with many a hungry belly: I often
reflected upon my leaving Monsieur de St. Aunais, to come to Court; it would
not have been long before I should have been a Captain there, and now I knew
neither what I was, nor what I was like to be; but that which troubled me most
was, that I heard frequent consultations about the Wars, the thing my
inclinations led me most to, which made my present condition the more
intolerable.

In the mean time I went frequently to Monsieur De Laicques, and was as well
known there and at Madam De Chevre^se's, as I was at the Cardinals: One day as
I was coming out of the door, there came two or three Gentlemen, and one of
them stopping to look full at me, In good faith it is Rochefort himself, said he
to those with him, I am very certain of it. I no sooner heard my name, but
without looking behind me, I began to mend my pace, and turned down the next
street I came at, where, having my Begging Wallet at my back, I threw it in at
a door, and going directly to a Brokers, I whispered him in the Ear, and told
him that if he would sell me Suit of Clothes, I would give him his own price;
for I always had a small Purse about me, which was well provided, and in that I
only differed from a Capuchin: The sight of my Money conquered the Conscience
of the Broker, who for a share of my Gold made no scruple to assist a Capuchin
to make his escape; for he verily believed that I was only a Monk that had a
mind to cast my Frock, upon which account the Rogue asked me three times the
value of the things. I pitched upon a Suit of Clothes of the Spanish mode, and
he provided me with a Shirt, and a C^evat; and went out to fetch me a Perriwig,
a Sword, and a pair of Boots, which completed my accoutrements. In this
equipage I hired Posthorses, and riding on before the Post-boy, I got out of
the Town as fast as possible; fear gave me wings, and hope gave me new vigor
and life beyond what I ever experienced before; and tho for not having been
often on Horseback I could not bear it so well, yet I rid at such a rate that I
left the Post-boy to come after me; I never stopped till I got out of Flanders,
where by this time they were making search for me, for that person who knew me
again, happened to be the late Count de Chalais Gentleman, who was come to
shelter himself at Brussels, not that he was concerned in the design with his
Master, but fearing to be apprehended on suspicion, he chose to absent himself
for a while; he knew me, as we say, as well as a Beggar knows his Dish; and
being surpised to see me so strangely disguised, he would have run after me,
to ask me how long I had been a Capuchin, who was never suspected to have any
inclination to turn religious; but seeing that I, as it were ran from him, he
began to doubt there was some Roguery in the case, and knowing well enough that
I belonged to the Cardinal, he thought himself obliged to tell this adventure
to the Marquis de Laicques. The Marquess told him he was mad, but he who knew
well enough what he said, justified it with so much assurance, that the Marquis
de Laicques run immediately to the Convent, expecting to find me, where being
told that I was not yet come in, but they supposed I would not be long, he
asked to speak with the Superior, and told him, that as soon as I should set my
foot within the Convent, he should be answerable for my forthcoming; and that
in the mean time he was going to acquaint the Archduke of something that
concerned the State. In short, going to the Archduke with the Count de
Chalais's Gentleman, he surpised him also with the relation of this accident;
he sent the Captain of his Guards to confirm the order from him, which the
Marquis de Laicques had given to the Superior; and to make all sure, caused the
Gates of the Town to be shut, that I should not be able to make my escape.

He made strict search after me, and my disguise being so well ordered that no
body perceived me, they all persuaded the Archduke that I was still in the
City: these delays were my security, and they found at night, seeing I did not
come home, that I had mistrusted something, but still they fancied I was hid
somewhere in the Town, and so they sent out a Proclamation for apprehending me,
with a great Penalty to any that should conceal me; but finding nothing come of
it, they pursued me, when 'twas too late.

The Cardinal was very much surpised when he saw me, especially returning
without his order, and supposing I came away only because I was weary of my
employment, he began to chide me in a furious manner, but when I told him the
danger I had been in, and how narrowly I escapt, he changed his language, and
told me I had done very well; and he himself a little after gave me an account
of the particulars I have related, and of the trouble the Archduke was in, that
he could not find me out; and he told me also, that my Companion was clapped up
in Prison, and was still there, and he believed was not like to get out, till
they had put him to the torture.

I found at my arrival several changes at Court; the Marquis d' Humiers, Father
of him who is now Governor of the new Conquests in Flanders, and Marshall of
France, had received orders to quit his place of first Gentleman of the
Bedchamber, and came every day to solicit the Cardinal to endeavor the
recovery of it; but the Cardinal told him, he must address himself to the King,
from whose mouth he had received the sentence. His disgrace was occasioned by a
very slight matter, and he had this satisfaction at least, that it was not from
any default of his: He was red-hair'd, and Pe^riwigs were not so commonly wore
in those days; wherefore he knowing that the King hated the sight, combed his
hair with a Comb made of black lead, which colored his hair as if it had been
died, so that the King knew nothing but that 'twas naturally black; till one
day, as they were a hunting, there fell so much rain that washed out the
artificial color, and discovered the cheat; this was enough for the King to
command him, as I mentioned, to lay down his Office, and all the Friends he
could make, could not prevail with the King to re-admit him.

I received a great deal of kindness from the Cardinal, after I had shown him
the necessity there was for my return; but whether it was that he loved to have
me always about him, or that he intended me no preferment, he contented himself
with gratifying me from time to time, without thinking of any settlement for
me: I had 2000 Louis d'ors given me at my return, which was a consideration
noble enough, but I was not of a humor to be rich, and therefore laid up never
a Groat: For I lived so extravagantly, that if I had had a hundred thousand
Crowns per annum, I should have balanced the account at the years end; I knew
well enough 'twas a foolish way, yet I could not tell how to help it: That I
might therefore have somewhat to trust to, I asked the Cardinal to bestow upon
me a Company in the Guards, there happening a vacancy at that time; but he told
me I knew not what I asked, for there was never a Captain in the Guards, but
would change Posts with me, and besides, that he had somewhat for me to do. Now
was I to think my self obliged, and to thank him for the favor of his refusal,
tho I did not think it such an obligation, as he was pleased to account it:
however he gave me another Abbey of six thousand Livres per annum, and I
bestowed it upon one of my Brothers, at the very time when my Mother-in-law was
telling every body, that I had no interest in the Cardinal, and that he had so
little value for me, that I had lain two years in Prison for debt.

She meant my Journey to Brussels, when she talked thus, which she understood
nothing of, but tho I heard this from several, yet it did not at all hinder me
from doing what I thought my duty; there was a great many in his condition who
would have thankt me for this; but when I came to propose, that she shonld give
me a little consideration, as is usual in such cases, she flew out against me
like a mad woman; she not only made a noise of the difference I had made
between my Brother and the Curate, whose Benefice I had given him gratis, but
that I made my Brother pay more than 'twas worth; so away she goes to Orleans,
to consult the Casuists, makes it a Case of Conscience, and desires to be
informed, if she should not be guilty of Symony, in accepting this Abbey for
her Son.

All this did not hinder me from doing my endeavor for another of her Sons;
knowing the eldest of them did but lose his time in a Country Village, I got
him into the Academy, where I paid for his Entertainment, and at last brought
him to the Cardinal, and asked him how he would please to have me dispose of
him. My design was to enter him among the grand Musketeers, but knowing that
the Cardinal was not very well with Treville who commanded them, I would not do
it without acquainting him with it; I found I took the best way too, for he
told me, I should have a care of doing so, and should rather let him carry a
Musket in some other Regiment; upon which I placed him in the Guards, and in
about six months time, the Cardinal procured me a Colors for him, and he told
me, when he gave it me, that I might see what difference he made between those
who were in his favor and others, for to those he gave leave to serve him if
they pleased, but these he took care to bind to him by obligations beyond their
merit.

These things stopped the mouth of my Mother-in-law for the present, and she was
indeed afraid to reflect upon me so openly, for fear people should throw stones
at her; but my Brother being unhappily killed the first Campaign he made, at
the Siege of a Town in Flanders, she begun to open louder than before, telling
about, that she knew me better than others; that I had made away my Brother,
that I might get the Estate, and that 'twas for the same design I had gotten
two more of her Children to Paris, where I had put them into the Academy, and
if I had indeed gotten a Benefice for another, 'twas only that he might be
obliged not to marry. Every one advised me to let her alone for a mad woman,
(if I may so call her) and do no more for them; but what I did being for my own
sake more than hers, I never let the Cardinal rest, till he had given me the
Colors my Brother left, who was killed, to the eldest of the two that were in
the Academy: In the mean time, when he came to march, I was fain to be at the
charge of all his Equipage, so that I may truly say, that I had the trouble and
charge of Children, without having had the pleasure of getting them.

These things, together with my extravagant humor, emptied my stock, which made
me often tell the Cardinal in jest, that I was a Basket without a bottom, but
that he was like to pay for it all. So when ever I was out of pocket, I would
come to him and cry, Good my Lord, have pity upon a poor Father who has six
Children. It Is true I knew my time when 'twas fit to make these sort of
compliments, I took him when he was in a humor to laugh, and he seldom denied
me any thing; in short I got about fifteen thousand Livres a year of him in
this manner, one year with another, besides the two Abbeys, and the two Ensigns
in the Guards; he placed also one of my Sisters in the Nunnery de Monmartre,
without costing me a Farthing; all which made me looked upon to be not a little
in his favor, and yet I was still very much discontented with my condition,
for 'twas a daily mortification to me to think that I had nothing certain, and
if the Cardinal should dye, I knew not where to hide my head. He was about this
time building the Sorbonne, and waiting on him once thither, My Lord, said I,
if I might but one time or other come to have a Chamber here, with a Doctors
allowance, I should think my self a very happy Fellow. Thou art never
satisfied, said he, thou costest me more than any four of my Servants, and yet
thou art always grumbling. God forbid, my Lord, said I, but I am young now, and
am afraid of wanting when I grow old. Why art thou such an ill husband then,
replied he. Ah my Lord, returned I, your Eminence knows very well what a charge
of Children I have, and that I never ask you till I am in great necessity, and
that notwithstanding all your bounty, I have not a penny aforehand. I know your
meaning, said he, you would have something settled on you in case I should dye;
well, I will think of it. I thankt him very heartily, for those words comforted
me exceedingly; 'twas above a fortnight after this, before his Eminence took
any more notice of it; and thinking it not proper to importune him every day, I
gave my attendance constantly without speaking a word more to him of it; but at
last he took me into his Closet, and opening a little Cabinet, Thou ask, me,
said he, for subsistence, and it is but reasonable thou should have it; so
pulling out a small Parchment tied with little Ribbons he put it into my hands.
Here, said he, there is a thousand Crowns a year upon the Bank of Lions, I
think thou art so ill a Husband that thou art not fit to be trusted with it,
but as it comes in annually.

You may easily guess how overjoyed I was at this noble present, I was better
pleased with it than if he had given me twenty thousand Crowns, for in short I
knew my own humor, and was not ignorant, tho I could not help it, that I was
not capable of laying up a penny. This created me a great deal of envy in the
Family, when it was known how generous his Eminence had been to me; and the
other Servants muttered at it, that all the kindness was shown to the new
comers, while the old standers were neglected; but all this was nothing to the
noise and outcrys of my Mother-in-law: She told about, that it was in vain to
think to throw dust in her eyes, that my ill nature would appear too plain,
whatever disguise I put upon it, but that it had never appeared better than on
this occasion, when I pretended to have received a Present from the Cardinal,
to color my design of cheating my lawful Heirs: That I had put the Money into
the Bank my self, and that I so concealed whatever I got with the same design.
My Father coming up to Paris, I complained to him of this conduct of hers, but
he poor man was so weak, and so cowed by his Wife, that 'twas to no more
purpose to speak to him, than to run ones head against the Wall.

We were very much at Ruel, where the Cardinal had a most delicious Seat, and
it being a very fine Country for sport, which I extremely loved, I never
thought the time long we spent there. There was one Beaumont, who they
nick-nam'd the Dragon, the Captain of St. Germain, and we being intimate
friends he used to call me out often to hunt with him; and one day among the
rest, having run down a Deer in the Forest, after the Sport was over, he would
needs have me with him to see a little piece of Gallantry that he kept at a
by-house, out of the road; I excused my self for that time, and having left
him, he went all alone, without so much as a Valet; as he came back, he meets a
Country Gentleman's man with a Fusee on his shoulder, and having asked him, if he
did not know that that was forbidden; the Fellow seeing him all alone answered,
Yes that he did, but he had a mind to kill a Hare, and what then? Beaumont, a
little stirred with this answer, asked him if he knew who he spoke to. Know you?
said the Rogue insolently, Yes, very well, you are marked plain enough, any body
may know you. Beaumont you must understand had but one Eye, and therefore was
touched to the quick with this impudent answer; but seeing the fellow upon his
guard, he blew his Horn, that if any body had been near him, they might come to
his assistance; upon which the fellow, who was no Fool, retired immediately,
and got away safe to his Masters house, where I happened to be just at that
time; he told us not a word of what had happened to him, if he had, we could
have made it up at first with a word speaking, but as we were at Table, and he
newly gone down into the Kitchen, we heard a noise in the Court, which made us
rise to see what was the matter; I was surpised as well as the Master of the
House, to see the Yard full of Blue Coats, being a party of the Guards, that
Beaumont had sent. The fellow ignorantly came out to them himself, and asked
them their business, who not knowing his face, inquired for him by his own
name, which was enough to tell him their errand: So he took no notice at all,
but told them, he would go in and call him. Instead of which he went and laid
himself all along upon a beam, which was but that morning put up in a house his
Master was building, and he lay so, that 'twas impossible to see him; in the
mean time, the Gentleman taking this for a great affront, that these men should
come thus into his house, was just going to discharge a Fusee at them, if I had
not stopped him gravely, by telling him, that the less passion, the less mischief
always, and stepping up to the Guards, who all knew me, I asked them what was
the matter, they told me the whole story as I have related it; so having
desired them not to press into the house, till I came to them again, I went and
told the Master, and proposed that he would let one of the Guards go in with
me, to convince them that the Servant was not in the house, I had a great deal
of difficulty to bring him to this, but having told him the consequences of a
refusal, he was prevailed on; in the mean time, the Guards having beset the
house, so that they were sure he could no way escape, they were for searching
every corner, and there was not a nook, nor a hole, but they pried into; but
finding 'twas all in vain, and the fellow was not to be found, they concluded
nothing less, than that he was beholding to the Devil to convey him away. The
Gentleman knew no more* what was become of him than they, till a good while
after they were all gone, and the coast clear, that he saw him creeping down
from the beam.

When the fellow understood the danger he had been in, he did not think it
convenient to trust himself any longer there, but asked leave of his Master to
go home to his own friends, who lived ten or twelve Leagues beyond Paris; when
he came home he found his Father sick of a violent Fever, but expressing a
great deal of joy to see his Son before his death. The old man being poor, was
but meanly looked after in his illness, and being as it were left alone, he
called his Son to give him some drink, which the fellow did once or twice, but
the old man calling very often, and he being too lazy to attend him, h^ brings
the Pitcher, and setting it by him, bad him help himself; this was a
heartbreaking to the poor dying man, and reproaching him for his unnatural
behavior, this Rascal takes up the Pitcher, and pours it all upon his Father,
telling him he might drink his belly full if he was so thirsty.

After so barbarous an action, he runs away to Paris, and going the next day to
the Palace, he knocks before he was aware, at the President Seg^iers; which
rudeness put the President into such a passion, that he ordered his Officers to
put him in Prison, and it being the custom to examine such as are committed for
any insolences in the streets, they began to ask him the usual questions in
such cases, when finding him faltring in his discourse, and giving but a lame
account of himself; and whether he had a hanging look, or which is most likely,
the Vengeance of Heaven pursued him for the horrid crime he had committed, the
Judges ordered enquiry to be made at the Town where he said he was born; the
Officer who was sent, found his Father dead, but he had told so many People of
the inhuman action of his Son, that the whole Town came in against him; the
Officer having made this report, and due proceedings being made thereon, they
sentenced him to be hanged; he confessed at the Gallows several unheard of
crimes, which had they been known before, he would have been broken alive upon
the wheel.

This was without doubt a good lesson to all those, who flatter themselves with
hopes of escaping divine vengeance, which tho it had permitted this man to go
unpunisht for many great crimes, brought him at last to public shame for a
trifle.

I had, as I said, obtained an Ensign in the Guards for my Brother, who had
been at two or three Sieges which had been made that Campaign; and the
Cardinal, being desirous to know how he had behaved himself, inquired of the
Marshall de Grammont, who came one morning to make his Court to him; the
Valet, who was in waiting at that time, told me of it, and that the Marshall
made answer, that he was a very brisk young fellow. I took my measures from
this, to do something yet better for him, but being ashamed to be always
asking, I went this way to work: we had yet a Brother whom the Cardinal had not
seen, who began now to be of age fit to go into the Army, and was a very
complete young Lad; I presented him to the Cardinal, and asked him, as I used to
do of the others, how his Eminence pleased I should dispose of him? the
Cardinal charmed with the sight of him, told me I ought to be very well
satisfied to have a Brother of his shape and mien. My Lord, said I, at the same
time, an Ensign of the Guards would sit very well on such a Gentleman as he is
like to make, and a Lieutenancy on his Brother; and since it happens that there
is such a Vacancy now in the same Company, if your Eminence would please to
bestow it on him, I would say, if I durst, that he will not be wanting in his
Duty, or Courage for the Kings Service, when there shall be opportunity. He
considered a while of what I said, and then returned upon me, You have a mind
to bring me, and Monsieur d' Espernon together by the Ears; don't you know he
will let no body encroach upon his Office, and that the other day he would needs
quarrel with the King, for but offering to give away a Company in the Guards
which belonged to him. My Lord, said I smiling, if he quarrels with your
Eminence, here is three Brothers of us will be your Seconds; and the rest, as
they grow up, shall all engage on your side. Thou spaekest fair, says the
Cardinal, but go to him from me, and tell him, he will oblige me in gratifying
you. I did not fail to return him thanks for so considerable a favor, and
going immediately to Monsieur d' Espernon, he was pleased to tell me, that I
needed not his Eminences Recommendation for so small a matter, which I should
have commanded from him at a word from my self.

Certainly the bounty of my Master, the Cardinal, was without example, and all
my trouble was, that I was not able to make any suitable return for so many
obligations; I sought however, as much as it was possible, for opportunities to
express my gratitude; and being one day drinking with several Gentlemen, one of
them, that was an Englishman, began to reflect upon the Cardinal, whether it
was that the Wine was gotten into his head, and so talked he knew not what, or
that he had some private malice against him, I know not, but I desired him very
civilly to speak in other language of my Master, unless he resolved to
disoblige me; but he talking the more reproachfully for my taking notice of it,
I lost all patience at that, and taking up a Plate I threw it at his head; he
was presently for drawing out his Sword, but I was ready for him, so he lost
his design, which was to have surpised me before I could have drawn; our
Friends stepping in, prevented our fighting for that time, and endeavored to
reconcile us, but it was impossible to bring him to any thing, for going out he
made a motion to me to wait upon him. Every one of the Company offered me their
service, but I thankt them, and told them I saw no occasion to fear, however
two of them would not leave me till they saw me at my Lodgings, that if we had
met him, who had also two friends, who went out with him, we might have been
upon equal terms, but we saw no body, tho we went the direct way on purpose.

The next morning before I was up, my Valet de Chamber came and told me, there
was one wanted to speak with me; I presently imagined it was from the
Gentleman, and bid him let him in, and desired him to sit down by my bed side.
I knew him immediately to be one of those two persons, that went out with him;
so making a sign to him to say nothing of his business, till I had sent my man
out of the way, I held him in discourse of one thing or another, as if we had
been very well acquainted, till I made an errand to send away my man, and then
he made me his compliment, which was thus, That I had affronted his Friend, who
was a Person of Quality, and that nothing but my life could repair the injury I
had offered him: That he waited for me with one of his friends, not reckoning
himself, so that I must bring two of mine along with me to entertain them.

There was nothing in all his compliment which troubled me, but that I should
involve any body in my quarrel; I could not tell who to think on a good while,
but immediately recollecting that I had two Brothers, who had some right to the
quarrel, as having so greatly shared of the Cardinals bounty, I resolved to
seek no further; so I sent for them, and taking them with me toward the Bois
de Boulogne, which was the place appointed, where we found our Adversaries
ready; we immediately drew, and fell to it. My younger Brother was wounded the
first Pass, and tho it was a very dangerous thrust, yet he at the same time
disarmed and wounded his man; I had done the same with mine, and going together
to assist our eldest Brother, his Adversary at that very moment made a Pass
through his body, with which he fell dead at his feet: This was a sight enough
to have moved any Brother to revenge; besides the blood which flowed from his
wound who was left, had arguments in it to urge me to refuse him quarter; but
he begging his life upon our pressing him very hard, I thought it would not be
for our honor to refuse him.

We brought off three Swords, a small Trophy compared to the loss of our
Brother, whom we left dead upon the spot; and yet this was not all, for the
wound my younger Brother received, having pierced his Vitals, tho the strength
of his constitution mastered it for some days, I was astonished to see him give
up the ghost in my arms; I was never so grieved in my life, seeing my self the
cause of the ruin of two such hopeful youths, whom I had, as it were, led to
be slaughtered on my account: It Is easy to be imagined the clamor of my
Mother-in-law at this news, she said against me all that rage and fury could
put into her mouth, which I knew not what to say to, only that if I had known
what would have happened, I should have been more cautious of afflicting her. I
might have said something more for my justification, but I thought 'twas more
proper to let others speak for me, and I flattered my self that there was none
but were sensible of the innocence of my intention; but among all these
troubles which were not small, you will say, I had yet another which rackt me
night and day, for tho the Cardinals honor had been the cause of our quarrel,
yet Duelling being so strictly forbidden, he would not see me, and I was
obliged to abscond as if I had been a Murderer; they told me at the same time,
that he had ordered search to be made for me, in order to deliver me over to
the Judges, and that he had sent for the Procurator General about it. La
Houdiniere, who was always my Friend, was the first that advised me to keep out
of the way, telling me the Cardinal was in such a passion, that he durst not
expose himself to speak in my behalf; I durst not desire him to do it neither,
for fear his Eminence should suspect he had seen me, and I thought he would be
more serviceable to me, if without taking notice of any thing, he should
endeavor to sound the intention of the Cardinal. Things continued thus three
months, which was a long while for a man to lie incognito, and if I had any
Enemies, this was their time to ruin me, and it is impossible to reckon how
many stories they told of me to the Cardinal.

The Count de Maulevriere of Normandy, was one of these, tho I had laid several
obligations on him, and therefore always looked upon him as my friend; for 'twas
through my means that he got to be an Ensign in the Guards, which he had been
refused; and since that I had introduced him to the Count de Harcourt, to go
with him to the Army; and I may truly say, that he showed him a great deal of
favor on my account. This man, who was of a Family of the long Robe, and such
a one as there were a thousand better in that Province, was always cracking,
and valuing himself upon his Nobility, in such manner, that to hear him talk,
one would not question but he could derive his Pedigree from St. Lewis: I had
told him my opinion of this foolish way of his a little freely, which he
pretended to take very friendly; but my disgrace coming upon this, he proved
the greatest Enemy I had; in short, I was told by several, that he never had
any opportunity to discourse with the Cardinal, but he used it to my
disadvantage; which I resented so ill, that though I was reduced to this
condition for fighting, I desired to be at liberty for nothing more than to
demand satisfaction of him. La Houdiniere was one of those that gave me account
of this, and coming to see me one day told me, I should lay aside all those
thoughts, for the Cardinal himself had sufficiently revenged me of this Norman.
I no sooner heard that word, but I was impatient to know the History of it,
which was thus. That he being come to his Eminence, and beginning to reflect
upon me as he used to do, the Cardinal told him, 'twas a trick of a Rascal to
abuse one who was absent, and could not answer for himself; that he had known
me longer than he had done, but that it was not my practice to speak ill of any
body; that I was a fellow who had behaved my self well, but was no boaster of
my own actions, and that perhaps my misfortunes would not last always. I could
not believe this was a discourse likely to come from the man that prosecuted
me; however I took it as a good Omen, and it encouraged me to have patience,
till time should produce something to my advantage.

'Twas a whole month before I had the least reason to hope, but at last, when I
began to despair, La Houdiniere came to me from the Cardinal to tell me, that I
should surrender my self to Prison, and fear nothing; he told me also, that his
Eminence asked very kindly after me, telling him, that he knew him to be my
constant Friend, and further says La Houdiniere, I am mistaken if you have not
as great a share in the Cardinals favor as ever.

I need not say, that I was very sensible of the kindness he expressed, and that
I desired La Houdiniere to assure his Eminence, that I had all imaginable sense
of his goodness; so I presently surrendered my self to Prison, without
requiring any assurance of my safety, more than the Cardinals word. Those who
heard what I had done, but knew nothing of what had past between the Cardinal
and me, thought I was out of my wits, and pitty'd my folly: Others, who wished
me ill enough, took this occasion to solicit against me, and tho, as the
Cardinal did me the justice to say, I never did any man any wrong, yet I found
a thousand that were glad of the opportunity they thought they had to ruin me,
and the worst Enemy I had, was the Count de Maulevriere, who had married to his
second Wife, a Relation of the President de Bailleul, and he employed her
underhand to engage her Uncle against me; and if that Magistrate had not been
an honester man than he, I had been in great danger; but I found the
Information against me so favorable, that if I had drawn it up my self, I
could not have contrived it better. Instead of aggravating the matter, or
indeed of telling the very matter of fact, as I have here done, there was a
relation, how the man not only abused me at Table, but lay in wait for me at
the Bois de Boulogue, as I was returning from Versailles with my two Brothers;
that se defendendo, I was obliged to draw as well as those that were with me,
and that nevertheless I had first endeavored to tell him, the regard he ought
to have had to the Kings Edicts, and the danger of disobeying in such cases as
this; and being filled with a great deal of such stuff, and having so much care
taken of me, without my help, my justification was both short and easy.

I was still ignorant to whom I owed this obligation, and tho I sometimes
fancied it must be the Cardinal, yet I could not think so long, when I
reflected, that a man who had so much kindness for me, should let me lie so
long neglected in my misfortunes; and would rather have told me how it was,
than send me a bare message not to fear: Being however got out of Prison, I
went to throw my self at his Eminence's feet, whom I told I would deal more
sincerely with, than I had done with the Parliament; that I would honestly
confess to him, that I had broken the Kings Order, but if I had been to be a
Vagabond twice as long as I had been, or to have lost my head upon a Scaffold,
I could never bear to hear him abused. Have a care who hears you, said he,
taking me up, it is I that have brought you out of this business, tho no body
knows of it; and whereas I did send indeed for the Procurator General to make
your Process, it was only with design to save you; if I did not inform you as
much, continued he, 'twas because I make no man Master of my secrets:
Bouteville and de Chappelle, were executed but the other day for the same thing,
and what would they have said of me, said he, if I had saved one of my own
Servants, when I but just before had taken off a Relation of one of the first
Princes of the blood, and two Gentlemen allied to the chief Families in France.

So obliging a discourse as this made me throw my self again at his feet, and
embracing his knees, My Lord, said I, when shall I be so happy, as to dye for
so good a Master; I must have liberty to sight against all that declare
themselves his Enemies. He was extremely pleased to see me so zealous, and he
took so much delight in hearing me express my self in this manner, that he
thought not of raising me from his foot.

What he had told me of Bouteville and de Chappelle was very true, but he did
not tell me how he gratified his private grudge in executing the rigor of the
Law upon them. Bouteville being Father to the present Marshall de Luxemburgh,
was Cousin to the Prince of Conde, as he told me, but to speak strictly to the
Princess his Wife; but that honor was sold him very dear: You must know that
the Duke D' Enguien, eldest Son to the Prince of Conde, having married
Mademoiselle de Bresse, the Cardinal's Niece, and his Father having been
forced, against his Will, to consent to that Match purely to save his life, or
at least his liberty, his Son, who knew how he was imposed upon, looked upon his
Marriage as a mark of his bondage to the Cardinals tyranny; and from thence
despising both the Relation and the Wife, he reproacht her daily with a
thousand reflections, and not altogether without cause; her Birth was
considerable, and she came of a very Ancient Family; but the Duke D' Enguien,
having employed a man verst in Heraldry to search out the Original of her
Family, and he, after turning it from side to side, made his report, whether
'twas true or no, that the House de Maille, of which she was descended, came by
Basterdy from an Archbishop of Tours; this was enough for that Duke, not only
to insult his Wife, but also to be very sharp in reproaching the Cardinal; and
nothing being done but he had his Emissaries to inform him of it, he was so
moved at this, that he only waited for an opportunity to show his resentment,
and 'twas not long before had one* Bouteville, who happened to fight a Duel,
not only against the Kings Edict, but against a particular order to himself,
was so closely pursued, that he was apprehended before he could reach into
Lorrain, the Count de Chappelle his Cousin, who was his Second, and sled along
with him, was also taken; and it being to do a despite to the House of Conde,
the Cardinal caused them to be executed by the Hands of the Common Hangman,
under pretense of Justice, but indeed to satisfy his private revenge.

After I was thus restored into favor, the Cardinal, who loved me more than
ever, made me several gratifications, and asked me, If I had never another
Brother to prefer? I told him I had two, one to whom I had given the last
Abbey, which his Eminence was pleased to bestow on me; but that for the other,
I did not desire to concern my self for him, for having the misfortune to be
accused of the death of three others, I was unwilling to expose my self to the
like reproach: I told him however I had a Sister that past in the world, for
something handsome, and intended to marry her to one of my Friends, a Gentleman
of Brettany, and that I only waited for my Father and Mother-in-law's answer.
He hearkened to all this with a singular goodness; and a Benefice falling near
us, which was in his Gift, he gave it me without asking, and I presented it as
freely to my Brother, who was already in Orders; which opened the mouth of my
Mother-in-law afresh, who complained now that one must have all and the other
none; and that I ought rather to have given it to him that had nothing. I e'n
let her say what she would, and only waited for an answer to the business about
my Sister, which it was three months before they would vouchsafe to grant me;
at last, my Father, having a suit at Law that brought him to Paris, and being
glad to make use of some friends of mine to solicit for him, he sent me a Note
where I might find him; I went to him immediately, and after paying him my
respects, I asked him how it came about that I had not heard from him all this
while? It Is long of your Mother, answered he very ingenuously, who believes you
have a design to deceive us: But Sir, said I, what do you believe of it? In
troth, said he, with the same freedom, I know not what to think of it, for when
the Debate lies between a Wife that a Man loves, and a Son who has obliged him,
one has a difficult task to decide it. You have no Obligation at all, Sir, to
me, said I, but methinks you ought at least to do me a little more Justice.

I did not care to urge it any farther out of respect to him: His Cause was
against Monsieur de la Vieuville, a Man from whom we have seen a great many
Dukes and Governors of Provinces, and great persons descended; so that it was,
as I may say, the Earthen Pot floating by the Iron Pot, which made me doubtful
of the Event, and I told my Father 'twould be best for him to accommodate the
matter; he told me he was willing to do so, upon which I spoke to the Cardinal,
who had done so many things for me, that he would please to concern himself in
this. His Eminence spoke of it that very day to Monsieur de la Vieuville. But
he, who thought that upon the account of his powerful interest, he was able to
crush my Father, as I hinted before; or at least that he should tire him out,
answered the Cardinal, that he would do any thing he desired him, but entreated
him rather to leave their Controversy to the decision of the Law; the Cardinal
could not well insist upon it after that, so he told me, that my Father must
not expect any accommodation, for Mr. De la Vieuville would not hearken to it;
but that for my sake he would espouse the Cause himself for my Father: I
carried this great news to my Father, which at first he could hardly believe.
So the Process began, and my Father having set forth in his Bill of Complaint,
that Monsieur de la Vieuville had committed several Wastes, in a Village that we
had near Nogent L' Artha^t, which belonged to him; he had not only the
impudence in his Answer to give him the Lie, but run on in such ill language
against our Family, as if we had not been so much as Gentlemen. As no Reproach
can offend but what is grounded on truth, so nothing vexed me in this but the
Lie, tho I was better satisfied afterward, when the Lawyers told me, that
these were but words of course, which they always put into their Pleas, without
any design of particular affront; and withal being strictly charged by the
Cardinal not to demand any other satisfaction, I resolved to use the same Arms
against them, and the next day returned them the Lie, and proved our Nobility.
At night the Cardinal asked me how our Cause went on, and I having told him what
had happened, he wondered he said, that Monsieur de la Vieuville should stand
so much upon that Nicety, his Nobility being not so much above ours, and if I
knew what Henry IV. had said one time to his Father, I might have been
sufficiently even with him upon that score.

He had no sooner said thus, but I begged his Eminence to tell me what it was,
which he made no difficulty to do, but told me, that the Father of this de la
Vieuville belonged to the Duke de Nevers, who to recompense him for some
services which he had done him, so often importuned Henry the Fourth to make
him Knight of the Order, that he could not put him off; and it being the
Custom, that when the King puts on the Collar of the Order, the Knight kneeling
down says, Domine non sum dignus; Monsieur de la Vieuville repeating the same
words, the King replied aloud, I know that well enough, but I must give it you,
or my Cousin de Nevers will not let me be quiet. The Cardinal could not have
pleased me so well, if he had given me a hundred thousand Crowns, as he did
with telling me this story which I carried immediately to the Lawyers, and
making them put it into their own language in our reply, it was a singular
mortification to our Adversary.

This was good sport for the Judges, who are glad to have something of any side
to laugh at, and Money into the bargain, I had my fill of it, and my Father
too, and that which was most strange, Mr. de la Vieuville could not forbear
laughing himself. The History of Domine non sum dig^us, brought him a little to
reason, fearing lest those that were acquainted with circumstances so very
particular, should also ransack his Genealogy, and dispute his Original which
was from Flanders, and began to be sorry that he had refused the Cardinals
Mediation. In short, there being several other things which he was loath we
should enquire into, he came to the Cardinals, and meeting me at the door told
me, that he was surpised at what he had heard just now, for he had never known
before, that his Adversary was my Father, which if he had been informed of
sooner he would never have disputed it. I knew well enough what this meant, and
being not of a humor to flatter him, I told him, I had reason to value my self
extremely, since he was pleased to grant that to me which he had denied to the
Cardinal; and tho my Father had been at great charges in the Suit, yet I was
ready to move him to an accommodation; and that if he pleased to acquaint me
with the conditions, I would bring him an answer; this discourse vexed him, and
telling me, that I did not accept his civility as I ought; he flung away
without saying a word more.

So our Proceedings went on still, but finding that he treated us with better
language, we also desisted reproaching him; our Process was to be heard before
two Judges, Monsieur Turcan was one, a man who having been first divorced on
pretense of Impotence, chose rather to be thought so, than to live with his
Wife who was an infamous Woman; he was entirely our Friend, but the President,
who was the other, was not; so that when he came to sum up the matter, as he
read a clause that was in our favor, the President asked him, if that sentence
he read was in the writing; Turcan who was very hot, whatever complaints his
Wife might make of the contrary, and the Trial being in the Evening, having two
great Wax Candles by his Seat on the Bench, he took one of them and threw it at
his head, saying, That a Man who suspected such a thing as that was a Rascal,
and ought to be used accordingly. The President by stooping down his head
avoided the blow, but asking him what he meant, and at the same time catching
up the other threw it at him, and struck him on the head; this disorder put a
stop to the Cause which was just upon deciding. The President went out to make
his complaint, and Turcan went home to his own house, where he received an
Order to lay down his Office.

Our Cause by this means lay asleep, and out Friends on both sides took that
opportunity to mediate an accommodation, and we being both pretty well tired
with the Law were the more easily brought to compliance; they agreed that all
reflections on either part should be absolutely forgotten, and indeed 'twas the
best course they could take, for 'twas not possible to enter into the discourse
without recriminating on each other. So the matter being concluded my Father
returned home; but before he went away, I desired him to consider of what I had
proposed to him about my Sister, which was so much his interest to effect; he
promised to speak to my Mother-in-law about it, and two days after he came
home, he sent me word, that they would give their consents to what I proposed,
provided I would do it without their disbursing any Money; I admired, or rather
pitied the sordid stupidity of these people, who having no more Children, as
one might say, should venture the loss of such an opportunity to advance their
Daughter, rather than part with about twenty thousand Franks, purely from
Covetuousness, to say no worse of it, for they wanted no Money; the Cardinal
having for my sake, to pacify my Mother-in-law, for the death of my two
Brothers, permitted her to sell the Commission of the eldest, which he had not
disposed of, thinking I had another Brother to whom he would have given it, by
which she got a good sum of Money, and more than would have paid the Portion
for my Sister: However a little after I received another Letter which explained
the former; in which they told me, that since I thought this so good a Match,
they desired me that I would not let it slip for want of a little of my
assistance; that I was in a condition able to do it, and it would be but a
small matter to me, and for which my Sister would be eternally obliged to me.

I was damnably vexed at this, and so I gave them to understand, and my passion
appeared so in my countenance, that notwithstanding all the care I took to
conceal it, the Cardinal easily discovered it, and asked me what the reason of
it was, but fearing he should think it was only an artifice of mine to draw
more Money from him I begged him to excuse me telling him 'twas nothing but some
of my private affairs, not worth disturbing his Eminence with; he was not
satisfied with these reasons, but thinking I equivocated with him, he told me,
that he would have me tell him positively the business, I defended my self
still with the same pretense, but the more he saw me unwilling to discover my
self, the more he pressed me, so I was forced to tell him, but at the same time
told him my fears, lest he should think I had a design upon him. I thought,
said he presently, 'twas some business of vast consequence, and is this all the
matter: Go, continued he, I give this also for your sake, ^ut upon condition
that you shall not call them your Children any more, for methinks they are mine
rather, confidering what they cost me every day,

I could with all my soul have run into the fire for him if there had been
occasion, I had such a fence of his bounty and many favors to me, but it being
my misfortune to be only a poor useless fellow, I contented my self to express
my passion by my zeal for his service. Thus my Sister was married at last to
the person that I had proposed, and lived several years with the greatest
happiness in the world, only that it pleased God she had no Children; but about
six years after, her Husband was taken with a fit of Devotion, and she, who
made it a pleasure to her to suit herself to his temper, lived with him so
piously, that she became an example to the whole Province of Brettagne; but
both of them growing zealous to excess, he turns Priest, and she became a
Vo^ary; and while he was a kind of a Missionary in his own Country, she retired
into a Convent near Meulan, to which she had been a Benefactrice.

A few days after the Cardinal had done this last favor for me, he was seized
with so deep a melancholy, that one could not know him almost to be the same
person; I could not forbear expressing to him my trouble for the condition I
saw him in, and the satisfaction which it would be to me, to be instrumental to
his recovery; he spoke slightingly of it, but yet I could perceive plainly
enough, there was something more than ordinary in it, notwithstanding all the
pains he took to conceal it from me, for I had studied his humor so well, in
that long time I had the honor to have belonged to him, that I knew his temper
as perfectly as if I had been himself; however after such an answer 'twas my
Duty to be silent, tho I was sensibly afflicted to see that his discontent
rather encreast every day. To pass away these troublesome hours, which held for
two months at least, I used to go to Luxemburgh to divert my self with a Lady,
who very well deserved my acquaintance, and that I might not bring any scandal
upon her, I always left my men at the Market Gate, and went alone on foot to
her House. One night as I came back to my Servants, I saw a man go out at the
Gate, who I presently remembered to have seen at Bruffels, being a person whom
I knew was employed in Intreigues of State; the unseasonable hour of the night,
for 'twas past two a clock, made me imagine, that a man of his character would
not be so late abroad for nothing: I presently acquainted the Cardinal, who
told me I was mightily to blame I did not follow him, I told him I had a good
mind to have done it, but that he perceived I knew him, and I was loath to
increase his suspicion; he told me I had done well, and pausing a while, he
asked me what manner of man he was, enquiring of his age, his statute, his
complexion and the like; I gave him the best description of him I could, and he
immediately gave orders to all the Posts, Carriers and Coaches, to take notice
if any such like man offered to go out of Town, and laid men upon all the
Roads, if possible, to apprehend him if he traveled any other way*

I guest by all this, that this very man was the cause of the Cardinals
disturbance; and seeing he intended to place a Sentinel near Luxembourg, I told
him there was no body could be so proper for that Post as my self, for that I
knew him, and he should not escape me; he told me that was true, but on the
other hand he might know me too, and so might mistrust something and avoid me;
to remove this objection, and the thoughts of employing any other person, I
told him no body could know him so well by the bare description I had given of
him, as I could do with my own Eyes, and therefore any other might suffer him
to pass and not know him, whereas in a disguise I had in my head, I would defy
him to know me, let him be as cunning as he would; he asked how I had contrived
to disguise my self? I told him I would dress my self up like a Beggar-man, and
laying my self down in the street like a poor Cripple, I should have the
advantage of looking every one that came by in the face; he liked my project
very well, and would needs have a view of me in my Robes; so I bought very
privately a pair of old Crutches, a patched ragged Coat, and in short all the
necessary accoutrements of an arrant Beggar; and I played my part as well, as if
I had been Apprentice to the Trade: The Cardinal bid me go, and told me, that
if I succeeded, I should do him the greatest piece of service that ever I did
in my life.

There needed no more to excite me to do my utmost, so having taken my post at
the corner of the Rue de Tournon, I begun to screw up my countenance and make a
hideous noise, as if I had been in great pain, besides my poverty; a good many
charitable people gave me Money, but several Coaches happening to come by
together, I was afraid my man should pass by in the hurry, so I placed my self
as near the Gate as I could get: The Swisses that kept guard there were so
disturbed with the noise I made, that they would have driven me away, but that
I was fain to promise them to be more quiet; I lay in this posture three days
and three nights without making any discovery, which made me fancy he might go
in and out by the Port des Carmes, so I changed my Post, and that very night I
saw him, to my no little joy, come with a Key in his hand, and opened the Gate
himself: The Cardinal had placed a man that came almost every minute to me, to
enquire if I had seen any thing, and besides that there was men posted from
street to street to relieve one another, if there should be occasion to follow
him; things being thus disposed they watched for his coming out; about an hour
after this, I saw another man who came and opened the Gate just as the the other
had done before, he was wrapped up in a Cloak so that I could not know him; but
ordered the people I mentioned, who attended for that purpose, that they should
not fail to dog him when he came out again, which they did so dexterously, that
he never had the least suspicion of them, but went strait to his lodging,
without so much as offering to look behind him.

This effectually discovered the man, who proved to be no less a person than
Monsieur de Cinqmars, Grand Querry of France, Son of the Marshall d' Effiat;
and the Cardinal no sooner knew it, but he told me he was an ungrateful man,
and he should dye for it, or he would know why not. Indeed it was the Cardinal
that had advanced him at Court, and to requite him he was plotting his ruin,
with the Duke d' Orleans, who after having formed a thousand Intreigues against
the Cardinal, which always proved fatal to those that engaged in them, was now
hatching another, that was not like to meet with much better success; for the
other man was dogged in like manner, and the Cardinal being informed, that he
lodged at the Fauxbourg St. Germain, in the Rue de Canetes, he was so well
observed, that he could not stir a foot but he knew it; they discovered several
of their haunts, where one Fontrailles, a little crooked, but very cunning
fellow, used to be with them: I pressed the Cardinal to apprehend the
Conspirators, for it was in his power, and it was needful too, that he might
prevent any design that they might have against his person; but as all he yet
knew of the business was but circumstantial, he waited for plainer proofs to
convict them; he sent me to lie on the Road to Bayonne, as a Guide to such as
rode Post, that I might observe all such as went to or returned from Spain; in
the mean time they kept a strict eye upon the Conspirators, and the Cardinal
having caused Fontrailles, to be followed to Estampes, he took post there, with
design as was thought, to go into Spain; the other man of Brussels followed him
a few days after, and I sent the Cardinal word they were gone, and I had
conducted them as far as Bayonne: 'twas a very simple thing of these people to
go two of them the same way, but God, who infatuates those who lie in wait for
blood, not only blinded their eyes in this, but suffered the Fleming to come
back the very same way, where I had orders to apprehend him; he was very much
surpised, and knowing he carried enough about him to prove him guilty, and
would endanger his life, for he was a Frenchman, whereas I thought he had been
a Fleming, he poisoned himself with somewhat he carried about him, without my
perceiving it, which was so strong, that he swelled in less than two hours
time; I did what I could to save him, but having no suspicion of it, and no
help at hand, the Poison had wrought its effect before a Physician could be had.

I found quilted in his Boots, the Original Treaty which Fontrailles had been
negotiating with the King of Spain, in the name of the Duke of Orleans, the
Duke de Bouillon and de Cinqmars; and taking post at the same time to bring it
to his Eminence, and give him an account of what I had done, I took the Road to
Languedoc whether he was gone, with the King, who was going to the Siege of
Perpignan; I found him distempered both in body and mind, but chiefly the
latter; for Cinqmars had prepossest the King against him, and his friends had
just given him notice that he was ruined with the King, which obliged him to
quit Narbonne, to be nearer Provence and Dauphine, the Governors whereof were
at his devotion: Cinqmars had taken upon him to assassinate him in that
Journey, and they say he had promised the Duke of Orleans to do it, who hated
him mortally, but having slipped an opportunity which he had one day, being alone
with him at least a quarter of an hour, he could never get the like afterward.
His Eminence received me as if I had been his good Angel; and being not at all
concerned that the man was dead, since I had got the Treaty, he sent me with it
to the King, after he had taken a Copy of it for himself.

Having made me the Confident of his present trouble, I took the liberty to
advise him to keep the Original by him, and send only the Copy to the King,
since no body could be answerable for what might happen, and if they should
chance to get it from me, he would be at a loss to make out what he pretended;
but he told me in the condition things were, there was a necessity to undeceive
the King immediately, and that if he did not send him the Original, perhaps he
would not believe the Copy: Upon this answer I went away immediately; and the
Count de Charost who was in waiting, very civilly introduced me to the Kings
presence. The King being alone I surpised him extremely with the present I
made him, he communicated it to no body, and asked very kindly how the Cardinal
did: I told him, as I was instructed, that he was very ill, which was the
reason that he had not waited upon his Majesty according to his order; for I
forgot to tell one thing that was very particular, which was, that before the
Cardinal came to Tarascon, he had sent to tell the King he was coming to Court,
and that the King had answered, he should not give himself that trouble, but
might stay in the Country for the recovery of his health.

This was the reason why they told him he was undone, and also why he retreated
toward Provence and Dauphine: In the mean time, as he was the greatest
Politician of the age, he knew there was no way so likely to recover him in the
Kings favor, as to reduce the King to some want of him; for the King, who was
a timorous irresolute Prince, was not capable of directing himself in the least
difficulties: The Marshall de Grammont, who was wholly devoted to the
Cardinal, played this card for him, and suffering himself to be beaten on
purpose by the Spaniard in the battle of Honnecourt, he left by that means all
the Frontier Country of Picardy open to the Enemy; the King upon this news
immediately has recourse to the Cardinal, and he having made a fair pretense
not to come to Court, was now not only ordered to come away with all speed, but
the King goes part of the way himself to meet him, supposing he was not able to
make haste enough; so the Siege of Perpignan was broken off.

'Twas in this interim that I brought the King the Treaty that I mentioned; he
bid me go back immediately, and let no body know that I had been with him; I
met the Cardinal on the way, who was not so sick but he could follow me, and
being come to the King, Monsieur de Cinqmars was immediately apprehended, and
Monsieur de Thou to whom he had committed the secret. The King carest the
Cardinal most passionately at their meeting; but this great man had conceived
so much indignation in his mind, at the Kings usage of him after so many
services, that he fell into a distemper called the Hemorrhoides, which
tormented him extremely; all this however did not eclipse the vigor of his
mind, which was not to be equaled tho under the languishment of a cruel
distemper; he made them pull down the sides of the door to bring him in as he
lay in state upon the Bed; and he was carried all the way on men's shoulders,
the Swiss Guards most commonly performing that service.

I was extremely cast down to see my Master in this condition, while the Court
generally rejoiced at it; for he had ruined the fortunes of a great many
particular men, tho he had raised the Glory of the King, so that every one
would have been glad to have seen him dead, in hopes to recover themselves
again, which the weakness of the Kings capacity gave them reason to think would
be easy if he were out of the way. The King, like a most Christian Prince, shut
himself up often in his Closet to pray, but as Prayers without Endeavors are
fruitless, the Court was full of caballings in prejudice of his Authority, In
the mean time they entered process against Monsieur de Cinqmars, and Monsieur
de Thou, whom they had sent to Lyonn, and committed to the Castle de
Pierre-Encise. The Youth of one, for Monsieur de Cinqmars was not above two and
twenty, and the Reputation of the other, made them to be universally pitied,
and opened the mouths of a multitude against the Cardinal, for he was not very
well beloved by the Populace, who exclaimed at his Cruelty, not regarding the
Justice he had now on his side, nor considering the crimes they were guilty of;
they cried out he was merciless and blood-thirsty, and ripped up the story of the
Marshall de Marillac. His Eminence being told of this, for he loved to be told
whatever was said of him, would say to me sometimes, that he was very unhappy,
that 'twas allowed to private men to pursue even to death, one that attempts to
assassinate them; but that for him, he must not be allowed, besides the
particular attempts upon his own life, to take notice of those made upon the
Royal Authority, but Envy would censure all his proceedings as so many acts of
Injustice. I have seen him so affected, when he has been talking to me of these
kind of matters, that he could hardly refrain weeping, and when I would reply
to him, that he ought not to regard public fame, which oftentimes said it knew
not what; he replied, that 'twas that nevertheless which made a man immortal,
and 'twas hard to take so much pains for that sort of immortality, and yet at
last leave the world with the scandal of a Tyrant.

He spoke these things with such sensible accents of sorrow, that sufficiently
testified the greatness of his Soul. In the mean time they cut off the heads of
Monsieur de Cinqmars, and of Monsieur de Thou; and Monsieur de Bouillon had run
the same fate, having been seized in Italy, had he not bought his life with the
loss of his Principality of Sedan. People admired the Cardinal should spare
him, having had several Testimonies of his ill will, for this was not the first
time, that he had attempted to embroil the Kingdom, and especially to side in
all occasions against the Cardinal; in short, 'twas but the other day that he had
been pardoned for being concerned in the Rebellion of the Count de Soissons,
whom he had not only sheltered in his House, but had taken up Arms for him; but
all that can be said to this is, that the Cardinal could forget injuries to
himself, when the Honor of the King and Kingdom required it.

Let them say what they will, this was the man born to lay the Foundations of
the present greatness of France, and whom all good Frenchmen ought to have
wished had been immortal; but God, who puts an end to all things, having
determined him to certain limits, which he could not outlive, took him from
hence, and he died, to the inexpressible grief of all his Servants. I had
foreseen it two or three months before, for his distemper was attended with
visible tokens of death from the beginning, and I was troubled extremely to see
most people rejoice at it: The King himself was doubtful of his recovery, tho
he had those about him that insinutated a notion into him, that the Death of
the Cardinal would be his happiness: This was something strange, if we reflect,
that this great Minister, who found things in such a sorry condition when he
first came to the Helm of the Government, had reduced the rebellious Hugonots,
had humbled the House of Austria, by taking from it the Kingdoms of Portugal
and Catalonia, and the greatest part of Alsace; saved Italy, and in short had
done so many wonders, that Posterity begins already to acknowledge, that a man
who did such great things, must have something in him extraordinary. He told me
as he lay a dying, that he had always loved me above any of his Servants, and
that he was sorry he had done no more for me; that if the King would take his
advice, it should be to employ me in affairs of the greatest consequence, for
that I had all the Conduct, Courage and Wit that was necessary to accomplish
any design, all which he had experienced in several cases.

If I had ever been sensible of the marks of his esteem in his life time, I was
much more so now, all his past favors came at once into my mind, and thinking
what I was going to lose, and that in a moment, this man who had made all
Europe temble, should be no more, I was so afflicted, that I am sure if the
present sense of it had continued but two days, I should have been distracted.
His Eyes were no sooner closed, but the King made it appear that he disliked
all he had done, for he immediately recalled all those who had fled for fear of
the Cardinals power; this gave me such an aversion to the Court, that I
resolved not to continue in it a quarter of an hour longer: Several Persons of
Quality invited me to their Service; the Duke d' Orleans spoke to me by
Egremont one of his Gentlemen, who to prevail with me, told me, I needed look
no farther for my Encouragement than to him, who had made his fortune in the
service of that Prince, that he had gotten two hundred thousand Crowns, and
that if he should live but to be fifty years old, he did not question but to
get twice as much, but he did not tell me that he had got all this by ways that
I should not care to practice; he played at Tables with his Master, and having a
parcel of Sharpers that went halves with him, they made sport for the Duke to
laugh at, which caused him to commit several errors in play, and gave him
opportunity to play false, or to set up a Game or two more than there was:
Thus, as I said, he came to get so much Money, but as such gains seldom
prosper, he grew so litigious, that he spent all that in Law which he had
gotten at play.

The Prince of Conde also spoke to me by the Duke de Rochefoucaut, who began
now to appear at Count, from whence he had been a long time banished with the
rest; but tho he was a Prince of the greatest Politics, he did not show it in
this, to send a person to me that was one of the greatest Enemies my Master
had. I was just going to retire my self when the Queen Mother did me the honor
to send me word, that she would have me go to Brussels to do her a small piece
of service there; I was amazed at this proposal, from one who I knew could not
love any of the Creatures of my Master, from whose Ministry she had received so
much mortification; for besides other things, he removed all her Friends from
her by one means or another; and had so little respect for her, or rather so
much zeal for the public service, that upon information that she had received
Letters from Spain, he had caused her to be searched, without any regard to
modesty, or the respect due to her Sex: This was an insolence she would never
forgive him, and which I thought also should make her extend her resentment to
any thing that belonged to his Eminence; I believed too, that this was only
proposed to me, that they might have an opportunity to take me off, and that
Madam de Chevreuse having informed them of my escape out of Brussels, intended,
if she could get me thither, to bestow that upon me which escaped before; being
possessed with this opinion, returned her Majesty thanks for the honor she
designed me; but being not contented with my excuses, I was fain to shift it
off with telling her, that I was employed in the Cardinals time in that Court,
where I was so well known, that the way to have an affair effectually miscarry,
was to put it into my hands.

Thus I concealed my fear, and dexterously put her off with excuses; but the
Queen, who had, just as I guest, been informed by Madam de Chevreuse of what
had happened to me in that Country, told me, that I should not trouble my self,
for she knew what I meant, but that going from her I should be safe, and that
she would give me her royal word for my security: Such a continued importunity,
in spite of all I could say, made me suspect her the more, so I thankt her
Majesty again, and begged her pardon; and she sent in my room Morville, one the
Cardinal Mazarin helped her to, who since the death of my Master was become
Chief Minister of State. This errand was to discourse with la Port, the
Duchess de Chevreuse's Confident, and to know from his own mouth, if 'twas
possible to gain the Count de..... who was the Archdukes Favorite; that in
case of the Kings death, which 'twas thought could not be far off, there might
be an Army ready upon the frontier to assure the Regency to the Queen; she made
no question of gaining this Favorite by the help of Madam de Chevreuse: But
Cardinal Mazarin, who knew already what power she had with the Queen, and was
loath she should increase it by a new service so considerable as this, too
readily insinuated into her, that la Port would manage this matter by himself
with less noise and more safety; and the Queen who had not so much affection
for Madam de Chevreuse as she had formerly, was easily persuaded.

Morville being arrived at Brussels, easily gained la Port, with the hopes of
being made first Page to the King, he charged him whatever he did, not to
reveal it to the Duchess de Chevreuse; and he, who owed his fortune to her,
who from a Mechanic Tailor, which was his Trade, had been raised by her, even
to her Bed, readily consented to betray his Mistress and Benefactrice, in hopes
of further advancement. The Comte de..... was more in favor with Madam de
Chevreuse than la Port thought of; for she being an amorous Lady had given him
unquestionable proofs of her esteem, so that la Port had no sooner broken the
secret to him, but he discovered it all to his Mistress; it is impossible to
express the Dutchesses resentment, she flew out in all the reproachful language
she could think of to la Port; but he who was a fellow of a very sharp wit,
imagining that so great a confidence of the Comte de..... could not proceed but
from an affection that had met with some soft returns from her; instead of
appearing surpised at what she said, returned her reproaches upon her self for
her Inconstancy; telling her, she had purchased this discovery at the price of
her honor, and that a man who was abused in so sensible a part as his Love,
ought to revenge himself by all possible methods. The Duchess, tho she was
nettled at this sort of return, especially from him, and was going to casheer
him, yet on second thoughts she durst not venture to do so, for fear he should
return into France, and give the Queen an account what a life she led, and of a
thousand intreagues she had been concerned in against her Majesty; and
apprehending too, that he would sacrifice her to the Marshall de Schomberg's
Lady, who after having resisted solicitations from the King himself, yet as
report went, did not stick to admit to her arms so pitiful a Fellow as this.

The Comte de..... who was jealous of la Port, was surpised that after all
this, the Duchess still carried it but coldly to him, and did not throw off la
Port as he expected, and to free himself from a Rival was resolved to poison
him; but la Port, who knew not only the humor of the Spaniards, but was also
sensible of the resentment of the Duchess, kept himself upon his Guard, and
would not eat or drink but at his own house, and continued to do thus till he
returned into France; which caution of his, in all probability, was the saving
of his life.

During all these Intreagues the King declined so in his health, that 'twas
plain to all the world he could not live long, and Madam de Chevreuse having so
much influence upon the Queen, attended with impatience for the news of his
death, not only that she might be recalled to Court, but not questioning the
raising of her fortune; wherefore to oblige the Queen, and fix her self in her
Majestys opinion, she resolved to effect that by her own interest, which the
Queen had attempted to do by an underhand treaty with la Port; but fearing
that as long as la Port was with her, the Comte de..... would never heartily
engage in her design, she concerted matters with la Port, and agreed with him
that he should return into France to manage her part with the Queen; by which
means, tho not without regret, he consented to leave her to his Rival, in hopes
of advancing his Fortune.

Indeed, the promise they had made him of being Page to the King, had so gained
upon him, that he slighted every thing for it; so that as soon as ever he came
to Paris, he went away to the Queen, whom he told, that not being able to
succeed in his negotiation for her Service, Madam de Chevreuse had undertaken
it, and would doubtless perform it better than he could have done. The Queen,
who had such confidence in the Cardinal, as we before noted, having acquainted
him with this, instead of approving of it, he was exceedingly troubled at it,
and told the Queen she was going to ruin her self, for if the King should come
to discover what had past she was undone; his aversion to Madam de Chevreuse
being invincible, that 'twas well enough to entertain la Port, because he was
looked upon as a Person out of favor, and therefore would not be suspected, and
might some time or other be of use to them; but for Madam de Chevreuse, it was
neither safe to hold any correspondence with her, nor could she be any way
serviceable at this time.

The Queen, who knew this to be very true, was the easier to be persuaded, so
they sent Madam de Chevreuse word, that they were very much obliged to her for
the pains she had taken, but that in the present posture of affairs, they did
not think fit to proceed in those measures any further: In the mean time, the
Cardinal set la Port at work upon the Queen, to lessen her esteem for Madam de
Chevreuse, and made that service the further condition of the preferment they
had promised him; which nevertheless they delayed till after the Kings death,
and then gave it him as if it had been at the intercession of Madam de
Chevreuse, who as cunning a Woman as she might be otherways, was made a
property in this case, to take that for a favor done on her account, that was
the reward of his Treason in betraying her.

In the mean time, 'twas a Masterpiece of Policy in the Cardinal, after having
put by the Queen, from those methods she had taken so much to her advantage, to
find out other ways to secure the Regency to her. He feared Monsieur Desnoirs
most, who was Secretary for the War, and would have been very glad to have him
removed, and yet made use of him to make the proposal to the King, and he had
two designs in so doing: first, if the King consented to make the Queen Regent,
then he had effectually obliged her, as being the first contriver of it; but if
the King should resent it ill and fly ou^ into a passion at it, then 'twould
disgrace his Adversary: Monsieur Desnoirs was such a Fool, as to be prevailed
on to engage in this affair; but knowing that 'twould be a difficult thing, he
set upon the Kings weak side, that is, he engaged his Confessor in the matter;
who represented to him, that having in probability not long to live, he ought
to think of settling his Conscience; that nothing was so much required of us at
our going out of this World, as forgiving our Enemies, and that he ought now to
forget all the discontent, that had been between him and the Queen; that he had
already recalled to Court those whom he had suspected on her account, that
nothing remained now, but to give her some Testimonies of his reconciliation to
her: that the present circumstance offerr'd him one; which was to make her
Guardian of her Children, a thing so naturally her right, that the Law excluded
all other Relations from pretending to it: That if he did otherwise, 'twould
look as if he had still some reserve on his mind, and that nothing was so
dangerous, as to equivocate with his Conscience.

The Confessor was very ready to go upon this foolish Errand, whether that he
thought himself obliged to it by his Office, or that he thought to do a piece
of Service to Monsieur Desnoirs; but he was immediately casheer'd for his
pains; and the King coming to know afterward, that this came from Monsieur
Desnoirs, he served him in the same manner, giving his Office of Secretary to
Monsieur le Tellier, who is now Chancellor of France. The Fortune of this
Monsieur le Tellier and the Marquis de Louvois his Son, being so strangely
great, that they seem to equal that of Sovereign Princes, if not to exceed
them. I shall speak a word to it, to demonstrate, that where Merit is really
the foundation, there is no structur can be too great to build upon it.

Monsieur le Tellier's Father was one of the Long Robe, and brought up his Son
in the same Profession, and having made him capable of business, he had a mind
to get him the Office of the Kings Procuret de Chatelet, which is a thing
independent from any of the other Courts, and very considerable. He that sold
it having several Customers about it, preferred him to them all, on condition
he should pay the Money down at a certain time, which was very short. But
wanting 10000 Crowns to make up the sum, he had like to have lost it, when
Monsieur de Pelletier, who had an Office in the same Court, lent him the Money;
so that all obstacles being removed, he entered upon the place, and behaved
himself with so much reputation, that he was looked upon as a Man, that had not
his fellow for wisdom; but all this did not prevent a very odd accident
befalling him. Being one day riding through the Town, there happened some Tumult
in the Streets, and his Office (being a Magistrate) obliging him to take notice
of it: The Grooms of the Kings Horses laid hold of his Bridle, and not knowing
who he was, they carried him with them into the Great Stable, but the Querrys
who knew him well enough made their excuse, and made the Grooms ask his Pardon;
he was so good humored, that he made no complaint of this violence; which if
he had, might have brought them into a great deal of trouble. In the mean time,
Monsieur de Bouillon having some public business with him, and finding him to
be a Man of a prodigious capacity, he persuaded him to resign his Office, and
to come into the Council.

'Twas by doing this, that he began to make himself known to my Master, whom I
have often heard speak of him, very much to his advantage; when he appeared at
the Bar, he met with all the marks of esteem that use to be given to Persons of
his Merit, and at last was preferred to be Secretary of State, as I have
mentioned before: but it was upon condition, nevertheless, that he should pay
Monsieur Desnoirs 400000 Franks, which he sent to him accordingly, but he
refused them, expecting that if any sudden Change should happen at Court, he
might get into his place again: So Monsieur de Tellier had his Money again, and
Monsieur Desnoirs dying quickly after, the Cardinal Mazarin with the consent of
the Queen Mother, gave him this sum, excluding the Heirs of Desnoirs; this and
such like Obligations fixed him in their Interests, and he gave good marks of
his Ability in the nice occasions, which happened about that time; the Civil
War being just then broke out, in all which he continued firm in the Interest
of the Queen Mother and Cardinal Mazarin, whom he always looked upon as his
Benefactor.

After the Cardinal Mazarin's Death, he so gained upon the young King, who had
wit enough to distinguish who served him faithfully and who not; that the same
reasons, which obliged him to value Monsieur de Tellier, obliged him at the
same time, to apprehend Monsieur de Ponquet. There had been some difference
between these two, which made People think, that Monsieur de Tellier did
contribute underhand to his disgrace; but to let the world see how they were
mistaken, he never so much as solicited the King or meddled with the process;
either of which, if he had done, the other had undoubtedly been lost.

The King had no prime Minister at all after the Death of Cardinal Mazarin, but
if any body could pretend to that place, it was without doubt Monsieur de
Tellier, he had two Sons and one Daughter. The Daughter is married to the
Marquis de Villequier: who is now Duke d' Aumont; for his Sons, he bred up the
Eldest, who is the Marquis de Louvois, to Business, and the youngest to the
Church, and who is now Coadjutor to the Archbishopric of Rhiems, under
Cardinal Antoine; by which means he is certain to be, one time or other, Duke
and Peer of France; and the other had the assurance of being Secretary of State
after his Father. His great Services are so fresh in the memory of all Men,
that it is needless to mention them; all the great transactions of Europe were
formed in his head, and he manages the place at this day, with as much
reputation as my Master did in his time, which is enough for any man to say in
his Commendation; only I must be allowed to make this difference, between the
present time, and the days past, that my Master was so far from being seconded,
by a vigorous young King, that he had none opposed his directions, more than
him who he endeavored to serve most; whereas his present Majesty, is the first
a Horseback, to execute those Designs, that have been projected in his Cabinet.

However it was, the Services both of the Father and the Son, could not be
better rewarded than they are now. The Father is Chancellor of France, the
greatest honor that can be conferred upon the Gown, and who is the leading
Man, both at Court and on the Bench: The Son is Secretary of State, chief
Minister, and in a word, the Person on whom the King relies, in matters of the
greatest moment, whether for Peace or War. In the mean time, I must not forget
one Circumstance, which proves the gratitude of both the Father and the Son.
Monsieur Colbert, who had the Administration of the Finances, being dead about
two or three years ago, they procured his place, for the Son of Mr. Pellitier,
whom we have spoken of, as a recompense for the favor they had received from
his Father.

I have been a little larger than ordinary upon the rise and fortune of the
Chancellor, and the Marquis de Louvois his Son; 'twill be acknowledged not to
be so remote as may be thought, being to relate in what follows, many great
Actions, which have past under their Ministry, and I ought to give an Idea of
those, which managed the Government, to show that such Masterpieces of Policy,
could not proceed from any Persons, but such as were perfectly verst in the
nicest affairs of State.

But to return to my own Case, ever since I refused the Negotiation at
Brussels, I was frowned upon every where, and was so slighted by the Queen and
the Minister, that I resolved to retire. The King in the mean time, having
exiled Monsieur Desnoirs, for having but offered to speak in favor of the
Queen, did not however proceed with the same vigor against Cardinal Mazarin,
nor Chavigny who had espoused her Interests: It Is true, they did it genteely,
and instead of proposing it downright to the King, to make her Regent, they
only advised him while he was in a condition to do it, to settle his Affairs as
he pleased they should be managed after his Death; that the Infancy of his
Children required this at his hands; at least he would have this satisfaction
at his Death, to know what should become of them; whereas, if he omitted it,
they would be exposed to strange unforeseen Accidents.

The King could not deny, but what they said was highly reasonable, but he met
with a great many invincible difficulties, as soon as ever he went about this
settlement; he could think of no body to leave the Government of his Children
to, but the Queen or the D. of Orleans his Brother; but the latter appeared to
him, to be of too unsettled and unquiet Spirit, and the other too much of a
Spaniard: so he took the middle of these Extremes and joined them both in the
Administration, hoping they would temper one another, and perform the duty of
so great a Charge the better: It happened to this Contrivance, as it does to a
State that continues Neuter, while its Neighbors are fighting out their
Quarrel, neither one nor the other were pleased with what the King had done for
them, and new Plots were set at work on both sides, to make him alter his
resolution; the Courtiers observed the Contrivances of both Parties, but none
knew which would prevail, or who should govern the Queen, if she should happen
to get the Power absolutely into her hands, for she carried it so fair to all
sides, that she had every day new favorites: the Cardinal Mazarin did his
utmost to incline the Scale on his side; and to the end that the Queen might be
prevailed on, by his zeal to her Service, he improved every moment of the Kings
Life, to endeavor to gain him to do something more in her favor: He laid it
before him, how a Mother had natural Obligations, and would certainly
distinguish the Interest of her own Children, from that of the nearest
Relations; that 'twas not the same thing with respect to the Duke of Orleans,
for he who durst several times take up Arms against his Majesty himself, would
make no scruple to do the like against a Child; that in the most flourishing
condition of the State, his Birth occasioned that a Multitude of the Nobility
made their Court to him, which they would have more reason to do, when joined
with so great an Authority. The King was not moved with all this, but answered
that he had taken care of all, by the form of Government, that he had settled
in his Declaration; and so died without making any alteration.

I had been so used to the Court, that notwithstanding the resolution I had
taken to retreat from it, I could not bring my self to do it. I followed the
fortune of the Duke de Richelieu, who was a Person, to whom my Master had
bequeathed both his Estate and his Title; some say he was his Son by Madam d'
Eguillon, but he had not wit enough to be the Son of so great a Man, which
makes me give no credit to that report: However it was, finding he did nothing
worthy of that Name, I took my leave of the Court, without giving him any
reasons for it, being very melancholy at parting from a place, which I thought
was the most charming in the world. My design was to engage in the War, which
was very hot on all sides on our Frontiers; for tho I had lost a great deal of
time, yet I found my self able and vigorous enough, as I thought, for the
hardship of the Service. This obliged me to make my court to Mr. l^ Tellier, to
whom I was particularly enough known, to give me ground to hope for something
from him: But as he was all policy, he spoke to the Cardinal of me, who forbid
him giving me any Employment: I knew immediately that he must have received
some such order as this, for Monsieur le Tellier did not speak to me as he used
to do, and instead of giving me positive assurances, as he had done before,
that I should have what I demanded, he put me off now with telling me, he
should be very glad to do me any Service; This was a word so customary with
him, when he intended to do nothing at all, that I e'ne took it forgranted: In
the mean time, I was vexed that he had held me in suspense so long, and Monsieur
de la Chastres having observed, that I was grumbling and fretting, as I came
out of his Office, he told me that if I pleased he would find me out a Master,
who would make up all my losses and sorrow for my old one: I told him I should
be glad of it, provided before hand, that it should not be the Duke d' Orleans,
and he naming to me at the same time, the Duke de Beaufort, I answered him I
had always a great esteem for him, but he being engaged in Interests contrary
to the late Cardinal my Master, he could not put any Confidence in me; nor
indeed could I serve him heartily: he asked me if I thought I did wisely, in
talking at that rate, and that after having lived so long at Court, I had made
so little advantage of what I had seen, as not to know that nothing but
Interest rules opinion: that as long as Cardinal Richelieu was alive, I did
well not to engage with any of his Enemies; but now at this time when I was
slighted by the present Minister, I ought to join my self to the Interest and
Friendship, of those who had cause to hate him, and if any one was on those
terms with him, 'twas certainly the Duke de Beaufort, who had been robbed by
him of the Queen Mothers favor, when but for him, he might by his power with
her, have done any thing for his Friends; that he was a brisk bold Prince, and
knew how to value a man of worth, and one, in short, whose Service he was very
glad he had entered into; that if I pleased he would speak to him for me, and
'twould be enough to establish his Confidence in me, but to tell him the
aversion I had to the Cardinal Mazarin.

The difficulty I had to quit the Court, and the eager desire I had also to
revenge my self of the Cardinal, made me the readier to accept this offer; so
he spoke to Monsieur de Beaufort, who expressed a very extraordinary desire to
have me. And having told him that I should find him at Anet, whether he was
going, I parted from Paris with one of my acquaintance, who had a house on that
Road, and with whom I had made a Match to play at Longue Paume; so we sent our
Men before us, and following our selves, we took the way to Cour la Rein^, so
to go from thence by the Bois de Bolog^e to St. Cloud: as we were a little
beyond the Marshall de Bassompier's House, where there is now a Convent,
somebody threw a stone at the Gentleman that was with me, and hit him on the
Back, and looking behind him to see who it was, he saw some People upon the
Leads of the House, who nodded their heads at him, and thinking they had been
Women, Morbleu, says he, they laugh at us; as he was saying this, they hollowed
and threw stones at us again; and now we could easily discern, that they were
not Women as we thought, but Men, who did not conceal themselves, but began to
Jeer at us and Banter us, and to over do it too, so as 'twas not to be born: So
my Friend drew a Pistol, and a Stone coming at him, and hitting him on the Arm,
he made no more ado but fired, and narrowly mist killing the person that he
shot at; and was going to draw his other Pistol, when the people of the place
told us, that it was the Duke of Orleans, who was there with all his Court.
This advice came too late. We took it for granted we should be immediately
pursued; and having no way left, but to ride for it, we set Spurs to our
Horses, and made off as fast as we could: We were hardly got to the top of La
Montagne de bons hommes, when 5 or 6 Horsemen showed themselves coming full
speed after us; and tho our Horses were all in a foam, we spurred on amain,
without giving them breath: They had need have been good Horses, to have
secured us from these pursuers, for they came on as if they had flown, and were
almost up with us, before we got to the Bois de Bologne; so that seeing no way
to escape, we resolved to face them; and my Friend who wanted no Courage, was
going to fire the Pistol he had left, when one of his Friends being of the
Party, and knowing him, called him by his Name, and told him since 'twas he,
all was well, and he might put up his Pistol again, at the same time running to
him, he embraced him; so the rest put up their Pistols also: we very civilly
told them, that if we had known it had been the Duke de Orleans, we should not
have behaved our selves as we did; and they assured us on the other hand, that
if they had known it had been us, they should have used us better: But I
question whether they would or not; for a man that would go a Sharping, and
catching Cloaks off Peoples backs in the Night, on the Pont Neuf, as the Duke
of Orleans used to do, would not have been easily prevailed on, to be civil to
us.

The Quarrel being thus ended, nothing would serve them, but we must go back
with them, which I opposed with all my Power; as well for that I would
willingly be punctual at the place I was going to, as also because I knew I
should be suspected in that Company: but all I could say was to no purpose, so
I was obliged to go with them. We found the Duke d' Orleans, with five or six
others engaged in a Debauch; he never took notice that I had lived with
Cardinal Richelieu, or that I had refused his Service, but set us down at the
Table, where having drank excessive hard, he had a mind to show himself a
Prince; that is, to have a Frolic, that should have something in it
extraordinary. There was the Colonel of the Regiment of Languedoc there, whose
Name was Wallon, a prodigious fat fellow, and took so little heed to his shape,
that instead of Dyetting himself for it, all his delight was in cramming
himself with good Cheer: This Colonel was to lie down flat upon his back, and
the Duke was to eat an Omelette of Eggs upon his Belly; Wallon lay down very
readily, and exposed his bare Belly for their Table, and the Cook clapped the
Omelette out of the Pan upon it; while he was so drunk that either he did not
feel it burn him, or else in point of honor he would not confess it.

After every one had eaten of this Ragout, and expressed their satisfaction with
it, both the Duke and all his Company, they must needs go all to Paris, to
Madam la Neveu, a Lady who was very well known: let my business be what it
would, I was fain to go along with them in spite of my Teeth; They did there
all they were capable of doing in the condition they were in, till the woman of
the House, being enraged at their usage of her, and some other Whores they had
sent for: The Duke of Orleans to pacify her, told her he would make her some
sport; so he sent for a Commissaire, under pretense of some disturbance in the
House: The Commissaire came well guarded, and the Duke d' Orleans having hid us
in a Chamber out of sight, there was no body appeared, but he and Wallon the
Colonel; they were both lying on the Bed, with Madam Neveu in the middle; and
the Commissaire thinking now he had caught them in the fact, and not knowing
who they were, bid them get up, but they refusing, he bid his followers pull
them out by force; and they beginning to lay hands on them, they were surpised
to see us sally out of our Hole, and the more, for that we did not come on as
if we intended to attack them, but with our Hats in our hands, making our
Respects to the person they were a going to lug out of the Bed; they were
further surpised when they saw the Rich Habit, that was brought to the Duke,
when he went to dress him; but when they saw the Blue Ribbon, they were
Thunderstruck and perfectly astonished: The Commissaire began then to see his
Error, and threw himself at the Dukes Feet to beg his Mercy; the Duke bid him
fear nothing, and he should come off cheap enough: We did not know what he
would do, but he was not long a contriving: he called down the other Women, who
had not yet appeared, and set them on the Bedside in a row, and taking one at
a time, he made the Commissaire and all his Attendants naked in their Shirts,
with a wax Candle in their hands, come and do homage to something he showed
them. thereby to make, as he called it, an honorable satisfaction to the
Ladies.

After this, we had every one Liberty to go whether we pleased, and having lost
a great deal of time, I was afraid that Monsienr de Beaufort would be got to
Anet before me, so I Traveled all night, for fear he should think I would
disappoint him; but when I came there I found he was not yet arrived, which I
was very glad of; But two days being past, and not a word of him to be heard, I
could not tell what to make of it; Being very impatient and not knowing how to
dispose of my self, I took my Horse and went out upon the great Road, to see if
I could meet with any body, at last I saw a man come galopping along, and
immediately concluding that it was somebody from him, I would have stopped him to
have asked what news he brought; but he taking no notice of me, rode on, and
went into the Castle: as soon as he was in they shut up the Gates, at which I
was surprised, for it wanted a good deal of night; I came, and knocked at the
gate to get in but all to no purpose, tho I waited above an hour; at last, as I
was just going away, I heard a great many Dole^ul cries within, and at the same
time saw them let down the Drawbridge, I went in, and found that this
affliction was occasioned by that person who brought them the News, that the
Duke de Beaufort was apprehended at Paris.

This Prince had been much in favor with the Queen Mother, who had given him
so many marks of her esteem, as left it without question; for one day when they
thought the King was just a dying she put her children into his hands, which
was the cause that all the Princes of the Blood were Jealous of him: if the
Duke de Beaufort had managed himself wisely after this, there was all the
appearance in the world that he would have been made Chief Minister, at least
he would have been the Favorite: But having plotted with Chateauneuf and others
to ruin the Cardinal Mazarin, he no sooner saw himself settled above their
Power to shake him, but he dispersed the whole Faction, causing some to be
apprehended, and others to fly the Kingdom: though I knew nothing of all the
intrigue, yet I was it seems involved in the mischiefs of it; for some body
having told Mazarin that I had been seen talking with Monsieur de la Chastres,
he put me down in the black Roll of those he intended to secure, and was
surpised with a witness when at my return from Anet I saw my self very
decently sent to the Bastile; de la Chartres came off better than I, but was
fain to Surrender his Commission of Colonel General of the Swiss, to purchase
his Liberty.

He did not continue so long in Prison as I did, for having none of those
powerful friends that he had, I was forgotten in my misery, and had not so much
as the poor comfort of being Visited; my Father and my Mother in Law, seeing me
embroiled in state affairs, would not expose themselves to the displeasure of
the Minister; and for fear my brothers should be kinder, they forbid them
coming at me. I cannot express how much I was afflicted at the beginning of my
Confinement, but as there is nothing so harsh but grows familiar by custom, I
made a virtue of Necessity, and bore it very patiently six whole years without
any diversion, but that of a few books, which they gave me liberty to send for:
in the mean time the Duke de Beaufort made his escape from Vinciennes, where he
had been confined; and finding all sorts of people dissatisfied with the
management of Cardinal Mazarin, he began his intrigue anew, but with a little
better success than before; I had been so long in prison, that I began to think
that all the world had forgot me or thought I was dead: but when I dreamt of it
least of all, I saw a man come into my Chamber whom I remembered to have
belonged to the Cardinal Mazarin, he told me that he came to offer me my
liberty, if I would promise him that after I had recovered it, I would honestly
accquaint him with all that I knew of the Duke de Beaufort's designs; I made no
pause upon his words, but answered him immediately, that I never understood
till now, why I was committed, which it seems was upon suspicion that I should
hold intelligence with that Prince, which God knew was no such matter* but though
I had no concern in the least with him, nothing was capable of making me accuse
a man by whom I was but supposed to be esteemed; he would have said several
things to have made me alter my mind, but giving him no answer, but that I
scorned to be a spy for any man, he left me as he found me; and went to carry
his story to his master.

I presently concluded from hence, the Duke de Beaufort had made his escape,
and that they were afraid of him, and I longed now to be at liberty to join
with him in his Resentment, and after thinking seriously how I might effect it,
I found that there was but one way, and I resolved upon that; I bribed the
fellow that brought books to me, who coming so often was not mistrusted, and he
brought me at several times, Rope enough to reach down from my Chamber window
to the Ditch; how great soever the danger seemed, yet I ventured one very dark
night, and having gotten down with some difficulty, I made a shift to get
through the Ditch, having before taken exact notice of every step I was to
make; so I got off and came into Paris, at the Port de St. Martin: I lay under
a Stall all that Night, it being too late to disturb any of my Friends; but at
break of day I went into the Fauxburgh de St. German, where I got me a
Lodging: I inquired there what News was stirring, and was told that all the
Town was in Combustion, upon the account of an Edict which the Cardinal had
published, by which be Taxt all the Sovereign Courts. The Hatred I bore him,
made me forget the Love I bear to my Native Country, which was threatened with
great Revolutions; in short, the Parliament, whom it principally concerned,
gave at the same time a decree against Mazarin; and some of the Members were so
violent against him, that if the rest would have followed their Council, they
would have ventured once to revenge those many attempts, he had made upon their
Liberties and Laws, with the price of his Blood.

The People, who saw themselves ruined with Edicts one upon the neck of
another, joined with the Parliament, and all things seemed to be in a posture
for a revolt: but that which completed all was, that the Queen Mother clapped
some of their Body up into a P^ison, which served like a signal for all the
rest to take up Arms. In a Moment the Chains were drawn cross the Streets, and
all the Lanes and Passages barricadoed, and the Citizens left their Shops and
Employment, and formed themselves into Regiments for the War: So great was the
public Hatred against the Cardinal. The Queen Mother thought to appease this
Tumult with good words, but finding it to no purpose, she brought together some
of the Guards, which served indeed but to enrage the People. I thought now I
might venture out without danger, and a Boy that had formerly lived with me,
knowing me cried out, Here, Here was one would be sure to side with them, for
he had suffered deeply by the Tyranny of Mazarin, and coming up to me at the
same time saluted me; but I was so vexed to see he had discovered me, that
instead of accepting his Compliment, I fell to reprimanding him severely; but
the Crowd hearing what he said, flockt about me, and asking me a hundred
questions, which I answered as well as I could. They made me go with them to
the Main Guard, telling me I should be their Captain, if they met with any
resistance, for I looked like a Soldier.

This disturbance would have run further, if the Queen Mother, who had before
refused to set at liberty those she had made Prisoners, had not now been better
advised; but she releast them, and every one went home quickly. I was afraid
however, that this matter would be a new Cause of Quarrel at me; and in short I
made no question, having been so rudely handled by him already* but he would
accuse me now of having been a Ringleader in the public Tumult; and tho the
Queen had promised to forget all that was done, yet knowing very well they
never wanted pretenses, when they had a mind to ruin a man, I thought it my
best way to get some Protection; that of the Parliament was the securest as
things then stood, for they had not only the love of the People, who foolishly
thought all this had been done on their account, but had also engaged several
Provinces in the Quarrel, who had no less good will to pull down Mazarin. The
Parliament received my Petition, which was presented by the Duke de Beaufort,
who was a person very agreeable to the Parisians, principally because they
thought him irreconcilable to Mazarin, so my request was granted; and being
then safe enough, I adhered to the Duke de Beaufort's Party, who all of them
hated the Cardinal. If I should mention all the Intrigues and Contrivances laid
against him, 'twould swell these Memoirs into many Volumes: but being resolved
to speak of nothing but what I had a hand in my self, I shall content my self
with telling you that the Parliament having done all they could against him, he
resolved to humble them; but 'twas impossible to bring it about, without
reducing Paris to Obedience, who having taken part against him with so much
heat, and being still ready to break out into Arms again, upon the least
occasion, the Enterprise did not only seem difficult, but above his strength.
There was above a Hundred Thousand fighting Men in the City, to whom the Kings
Troops were as good as nothing: Nevertheless the Duke d' Enguien, who was now
Prince of Conde, by the Death of his Father, being returned from Flanders, and
having promised him to espouse his Quarrel, he drew his Army out of their
Quarters; and the Court being withdrawn from Paris, the City was as it were
blockt up. Paris being certainly the most Populous City in the World, the
Passages being stopped up, brought them into great distress: every one said 'twas
a shame they should be starved so, by a handful of People; so they appointed a
day for a general Muster. The Forces being all come together, the Captains who
were all Counselors (for the whole was an Army of Burghers) were for drawing
them up in Battalia, that the General might take a view of them, but no body
knew which way to go about it; This was so pitiful a Business, that it made
those People laugh, that knew no more how to do it than they: at last out steps
a fellow from the Ranks all in a heat, and blustering about, said aloud, that
this was not according to the Rules of Discipline; that he had been six Months
a Soldier in the Guards, and he was very much deceived, if he could not do it
better himself; every body was overjoyed that they had gotten a Man of
Experience among them, and having delegated him the Command by a great shout of
God bless the Parliament, and our New Officer: he was made Major General of the
Infantry, and as the mark of his Office, he received the Truncheon, from the
hands of Videau de Grammont Counselor aux Enquites; Grammont was just a going
to give him his Corslet, but being afraid of bringing a disgrace upon his
Family, who had the Reputation of being of a Warlike disposition, he caused
them to procure him another: His Son is as chary of his Corslet, to this day,
as he is of his Beard, and wears it in Carneval time, which makes him look like
an old Corporal, disguised like a Counselor.

This new Major was a little out in ordring his Battalia: However all people
admired what he had done, and the Officers of the Regiment carried him home to
Dinner with them in Ceremony, giving him the upper end of the Table; there they
consulted of the means to raise the Blockade of the Town, and all that the
Major said was received like an Oracle; but all this did not hinder the Prince
of Conde from attacking Char^nton, where the Parisians had posted three
thousand Men under Command of one Claucleu, and this Post being of great
Consequence, they detached a Party of twenty Thousand Men to relieve it; I went
among the rest, and had the honor to be one of the Principal Officers among
the Cavalry, which was ordered to support the Infantry; we left them them to
take the Front when we went out, but they were not ambitious for that which
they they thought was not their due. The Prince of Conde appearing with three
or four Hundred Horse, they were very desirous to take the Rear-Guard, but the
order of Battle being disposed otherwise, we would not allow it, and continued
to give them the honor of the Van, by retiring our selves full speed back into
the Town: they called this a Flight, tho we say, 'twas but our obedience to the
Command that ordered us to keep in the Rear; however 'twas, if the Prince of
Conde had pleased, he might have cut off all our Infantry, but he contented
himself with taking Charenton, where he lost the Duke De Chatillon, his Kinsman.

I was ashamed to go into the Town again after such an action as this, for
though, perhaps I was none of the first that fled, yet it was enough dishonor
but to have been in such bad Company; we would several times after that try our
Fortunes with the Enemy, but being always beaten, though we were ten to one, I
saw plainly I should get but little Honor by fighting at the Head of such a
Militia; in the mean time the Parliament abated nothing of their hatred to the
Cardinal, but in their condition the old Proverb would not hold good, Arma
cedunt Togae, so they thought of an Accommodation, and the more too, because
all the People of Quality, though at first they took part with them, began to
hold Correspondence with the Court; 'twas however, opposed by a great many, who
were for demanding assistance of the Arch Duke, and the Prince of Conti, who
was declared Generalissimo of the Party, was of this opinion, so they nominated
the Marquess De Noir^oustier and Laicques to go thither, I was also of this
number, not in the quality of a Plenipotenciary, as they were, but in that of a
subaltern Minister, who was to follow their Orders.

I was not afraid now to show my self there, going in so good a Character, and
did not doubt but we should be well received; in short, the Archduke promised
us to march his Army to remove our Blockade, and I was left with him, to put
him in mind of his Promise; but I was not there above eight days, but I
perceived that the Count De -- who was still his Favorite, countermin'd all
our Designs. He did not care to have a Man so clearfighted as I to dive into
his matters, and sent word to De Laieques, who was his Friend, that they should
recall me immediately; and all that I could understand from this Conduct* was,
that Madam De Chevreuse, who seemed to desire the ruin of the Cardinal, was
always well with that Count, and endeavored to hinder these Troops entering
into the Kingdom* to make a more advantageous Treaty for herself; our Journey
had disturbed the Court, so that she was obliged to meet them half way to make
up the the Peace, and as the Archduke was too slow in his Marches, and the
Parliament beginning now to repent of having called in Foreign Aid, the thing
was immediately concluded.

Every one was for making his advantage in this Accommodation; some agreed for
Money, and others for Places, whilst poor I was the only person that got
nothing, though the chief of the Party had all along promised to take care of
my Fortune. I was then sensible how little confidence was to be reposed in the
assurances of Great Men, who promise largely when we can be serviceable to
them, but fail not to forget us when we cease to be so any longer. In short, I
had been reduced to very mean Circumstances, but for my yearly Income at Lions,
which was all I had now to trust to, after I had maintained my Brothers all
this time at my own Charge. 'Twas not for me then to set up for Quality, yet
was it sufficient to maintain me, with good Husbandry, which at last I
practiced, having never another Cardinal Richlieu, to whom I could have
recourse for what I wanted, and so reduced my attendance to a Valet de Chamber,
and a Footboy, whereas in the Cardinal's days, I never kept less than six or
seven Servants in Family. This seemed something odd to me, because I had ever
lived great, but I knew not yet what it was to be necessitous, though it was
not long before I did to some purpose.

Mazarin, who hated me mortally, as well for making my Escape out of Prison, as
for siding against him in the late disturbances, caused my Revenue at Lions to
be stopped, and several Attachments to be made on it under borrowed Names, though
I never heard of it till I went to receive the Money, and then I was surpised
indeed to find my self indebted to People I never knew; but making light of it
at first, I went to my Attorney, who told me the same story, and that I must
sign a grant of Possession to them, till the Cause should be decided. In the
mean time he asked me for the Attachments, but I was not so prudent to take
them up, and so was forced to go back to the person that used to pay me, and
who put me off till the next day; the next Morning I went to his House, but
they told me there that he was gone to a Sister's of his, who lay a Dying,
about ten Leagues from Paris.

'Twas with this Excuse they held me in suspense for a Fortnight at least, yet
in all this time I never dreamt of this Fellow's holding Correspondence with
Mazarin; at last one told me he had seen him in the street, whereupon, with
abundance of Joy for his Return, I went to enquire for him; but when I saw they
used the same Pretense as before, I concluded then, there was some trick in it.
I told them roundly that I was informed of his being in Town by several People,
who had seen him, and vowed I would not stir till I had spoke with him. He was
not very far off it seems, for hearing what I said, he cried out at a distance,
that all was well enough, and they should let me in. He made me then a thousand
Excuses for going out of Town without giving me the things I required, telling
me, that being but just come to Town, as I saw, he must have one Night to look
amongst his Papers, and the next day I should certainly have them at my own
Hour. I was such a Fool as to believe him again, and came next Morning by break
of Day, when feigning himself Sick, he told me in the condition that he was, he
could not possibly be as good as his word, and endeavored to put me off
another day. But my Patience was quite worn out with waiting, so I directed my
Attorney to draw me up an Order to make him deliver the things. He no sooner
heard what I had done, but never talking any more of the Attachments, he
returned answer that I must make application to those at Lions, his Commission
being at an end, and to prove what he said, he showed me the Sham Copy of an
Order to recall it. This was a reference with a Vengeance; however, being
obliged to write to Lions, I sent my Contract by the Post, to the end, that the
Person whom I writ to about this Affair, might as soon as he received it,
proceed with all Expedition. I expected two or three Posts to hear from him,
but all in vain, for my Contract was lost it seems, and another Man, to whom I
had got one of my Friends to write, sends me this Account.

I lost a great deal of Time in this manner, but 'twas longer yet before I
could procure a rough draught of my Contract; at last they sent me word from
Lions, that the Play Master, who was formerly there, was restored to that
Office, and that I must address my self to him. Accordingly I sent another
Summons, to which he answered, That he had the Attachments in his Hands 'twas
true, but I could not oblige him to deliver them till they were copied: I
ordered him then to send me the Copies, which he was content to do, so he gave
me in the Names of seven of my Creditors, whom, as I said, I never had so much
as heard of in my Life: I desired them to appoint what Court they would proceed
in, and after they had appeared by their Attorney, there was three of them who
declined the Jurisdiction of Chatelet. One of them was for removing the Trial
to the Requests du Palais, another to the de L' Hotel, and the third to the
Grand Council, where all his Business was done, as he pretended At last* after
our Cause had depended above three Months, and when it was just going to be
decided, they brought it into the Privy Council for the sake of that Judge's
Regulation. 'Twas my ill luck to have a Solicitor who naturally hated to take
Pains, so that I thought our Trial was delayed more out of his Laziness than
Malice; but I was mistaken, for having gained one of his Servants with a little
Money, the Fellow told me as a Secret, that in short, 'twas to no purpose for
me to wait for any conclusion to my Affair, for his Master was expressly ordered
to the contrary. I asked him how he came to know that, and he told me, there
was a certain Man who came often to his Master from the Cardinal on this
Errand, and by the Description he gave me of him, I knew it could be no other
than Bellinzani, the worthy Servant to such a Master.

It Is impossible to express the Rage I was in when I heard this: I spoke of it
with some Passion to the Master of Requests, but finding I was not likely to
get any Satisfaction from him, I went to make my complaint to the Chancellor
Seguier, who promised to do me Justice. He continued but three days in that
Mind, for after Mazarin had spoke to him, he never regarded his Word, and
though I gave my constant Attendance on him every day, I made no Progress in my
Business. In the mean time Money began to grow scarce, and I was forced to
borrow of those Friends who were inclined to pity my condition. My Father I had
often writ to on that account, but received no answer, and might have starved,
if all the World had been like him. I was advised to Petition the Queen Mother,
a Princess of a very compassionate Nature, and who only was not beloved by the
Parisians, because they did not know her. I begged her therefore that she would
be pleased to order the Chancellor and Solicitor to do me Justice, and to
hasten the Trial of my Cause, but 'twas my misfortune that that Princess
committed all things to Cardinal Mazarin, from whom you may be sure, as he was
a party concerned, I had little reason to expect any Favor.

It fared with me at that time as with all in Misery, I was forsaken by those I
had the most depended on, and after I had two or three Months longer solicited
in vain, I was reduced to such extreme Poverty that I was ashamed of my self,
and knowing not where to hide my head, my last Refuge was to go to my Father's,
in hopes after what I had done for his Family, he could not deny me some small
Relief, when he should see me suing for it in another manner than what I had
done in my Letters. I scarce had wherewithal to carry me down, and 'twould
certainly have moved any one to see a Man who was lately in such Splendour,
forced to starve himself for fear of wanting, Money on the Road. When I light
at the Door, the old Servants of the Family, who had seen my Grandeur, and saw
me now, could not believe their own Eyes, but my Father and Mother-in-Law could
not help knowing me, or they were willing enough else to forget me; for though
I found them at Table when I came in, they hardly had the civility to make me
sit down, and when I did, the most of my Entertainment at Supper was the
Reproaches they made me for my extravagance, which had brought me into this
condition. How strange a thing is this Misery, that the Mind as well as the
Body should sink under its oppression! I was so dejected, that I knew not what
to say for my self, and but I that sighed at every word they spoke, I seemed to
have lost both Life and Sense.

After this Welcome the first day, I would not have stayed another in the
House, if I had known whither to have gone; for alas, my old Friend the Curate
had been dead above two Years, and Heaven it self seemed to conspire to load me
with Misfortunes. Tho I bore them all, as well as I was able, and endeavoring
to bring my Father to Reason, I sounded him to find how he stood affected to
lend me some small matter to carry me back again to Paris. I told him mine was
a plain case, that they could not always deny me Justice, and 'twould not be
long before Cardinal Mazarin would be weary, and cease persecuting me, if it
were only to be free from the Complaints I should make against him. I told him
abundance of other things, to make him sensible that his Money would not be
thrown away, and that I intended to repay him; but ^e all in a Fury,
interrupting me, Why surely then, says he, you take me for one that is easily
to be bubbled, but you are mistaken Sir, go banter somebody else with your sha^
Stories, I know the reason well enough why your Money is stopped, and pity the
poor Creditors you rail at, as they are not only like to lose their Due, but as
they have to do with a Fellow of such wicked Principles.

These words made me so desperate, but that I reflected on the Sin I was going
to commit, I had certainly stabbed my self at the very instant; yet I could not
forbear using a thousand Reproaches, and though I knew well enough what my
Respect obliged me to, yet I did, and said many things which were not so decent
to be done to ones Father. He took occasion from this ('it was either he, or my
Mother-in-Law) to forbid me their Table: and to put me out of all doubt, there
comes up one of the Servants about Ten in the Morning, and spreads me a Napkin
on the Table in my own Chamber, and acquaints me with their Pleasure; though the
Cloth was laid so early, it was not till after they had dined that I had any
thing brought me to eat, and then I had the honor to share in their Scraps,
with the Servants. But what madded me above all was, to see how great my
Brothers lived, particularly the Abbot who grew so wealthy, there was none in
all the Country, as he fancied, that could compare with him. He kept two or
three packs of Dogs, two Huntsmen, five or six good Horses, and yet never was
the Man that once invited me to hunt with him, though he owed all his Greatness
to my means.

It Is but mere Railery to say that any one dies of Grief, for if 'twere true, I
could never have outlived mine. At last, after I had lived there three Months
in this manner, and not being able to endure the ill treatment I met with, I
resolved to return to Paris. Much ado I had to squeeze from my Father Money
enough to bear the Charges of my Journey; but I was not got above two Leagues
on my way, before he that was his present Curate overtook me, and brought me
ten Pistoles, telling me that he had a good while intended to present me with
them, but being in the Hands of one of his Friends, he could not have them
before, adding, that his Predecessor was obliged to me, as he had been to his
Predecessor; so begged me to accept of them, and wished he could have commanded
more for my sake.

I had received in my Life many considerable Sums from the Cardinal, but I
profess I never was so sensible of his Liberalities, as of the kindness of this
poor Curate; I told him therefore that I heartily accepted of his Present, and
if Heaven should favor me with an opportunity, I would give him proof of my
Gratitude; for not to dissemble with him, but to tell him plainly how things
stood, I was in such necessity, that without this seasonable relief of his, I
must have certainly starved. After a great many Compliments on both sides we
parted, and I kept on my way to Paris: When I came there, I found the Civil War
ready to break out again. The Prince de Conde was gone to St. Maur, upon a
false Alarm, with a Troop of Attendants little inferior to the Kings. This
Prince, who had done Cardinal Mazarin so much Service, as I have mentioned, was
in requital confined to a severe imprisonment, out of which being escaped by
mere good fortune, he continued so apprehensive of the like usage, that he
never rested from the thoughts and contrivances of War, being instigated by a
great many People that hated Mazarin: If I had been in the Equipage I could
have wished my self, 'twou'd not have been long before I would have waited on
him, and offered him my humble Service; but being now in a condition, so f^r
different from what I had appeared in, I was forced to content my self, only
with making Prayers and Wishes for the success of his Designs.

In the mean time the Parliament began again to make Decrees against Mazarin,
so that he was forc'^ to fly the Kingdom to avoid the fury of the common
People, who all cried out to have him removed. Observing therefore so
favorable an opportunity, I presented my Petition to the Court of Judicature,
in which I declared the state of my Case, and what injustice I had suffered for
a long while; and I had this relief by it, that notwithstanding the Cause was
depending in the Council, my Adversaries were ordered to be heard before this
Court. Upon this, no body appeared, and I obtained a Judgment against the
Play Master General, who was obliged to disburst me the Money, which he had
before taken for his own, with giving him a full discharge for it: He durst do
no otherwise, for fear I should have set an ill name upon him, and have made
him pass for another Mazarin, which was a Character at that time, sufficient to
have a man's brains knocked out, especially at Paris, where the Populace hated
the very Name of him. I received then all at once a good Sum, which I had no
sooner done, but I sent twenty Pistoles of it to our Curate, ten for the
Principal, and as many more for the Interest. The removal of the Cardinal, was
all this while nothing but a sham to amuse the People; for he had still as much
authority in the Council, as if he had been present there. Every one was
disturbed at this, but especially the Prince de Conde, who had a strong Party
in the Parliament, and was favored by the People. For his Reputation, that was
founded on so many Glorious Victories which he had obtained, gained him those
who had only heard of them, as well as those who had been witnesses of such
great Actions. He pretended, as I said, fear of the like usage which he had met
with; but the real motive was to advance his own Greatness, as was evident by
his Conduct: For at the same time that he appeared irreconcilable to Mazarin,
he treated with him under hand; and if he could have brought him to his
Demands, he would not only have suffered the Cardinal to return, but would have
been ready to offer him his Friendship. It Is not known certainly what broke off
the Treaty, unless 'twas, that the Ambition of that Prince tormenting him
continually, he made new Demands every day, still as the other granted the old
ones. But this I am informed from good hands, that the Cardinal sent often to
tell him, that he should have whatever he required, and that the Troubles which
happened presently afterward, were purely owing to the Prince de Conde.

If I were disposed to give a particular account of all the Actions of the War,
I could do it as well as another; but that being the business of an Historian
more than of one that writes Memoirs, I shall content my self with telling you
only this, that after a great many Messages backwards and forwards to no
effect, they both had recourse to Arms. The Prince de Conde, who had several
places of strength in his hands, sent some of his Creatures to all of them, to
provide all things necessary in case of a Seige, and especially to Montrond,
which was in the Heart of France, and at that time held to be impregnable. My
resentment would not let me stand Neuter in this War, so I joined my self to
the Duke de Beaufort, who was now reconciled to the Prince de Conde, through the
Interposition of the Duke of Orleans, after so violent an Enmity, that nothing
would serve their turns, but the immediate death of one or the other. Now you
must know that the Duke of Orleans was wholly ruled by the Cardinal de Retz,
the Duke de Rohan and Monsieur Chavigny, and these three persons having their
several Interests to recommend, they had often hindered the Peace from being
concluded, when the Duke himself might have done it as he pleased, since the
Prince de Conde, who had declared for him, durst not have opposed him. Cardinal
Mazarin, who was come to Court again, seeing himself on the brink of so many
Troubles, was resolved to make his last effort to prevent them, to give the
Duke of Orleans and the Prince de Conde all the satisfaction they could desire,
provided they did not insist too much on the Terms of their Adherents. He
desired the Prince de Conde, to send him one of his Friends whom he had a
confidence in, but that he should be one who was never known to have been
employed in any of their former Negotiations, that their Treaty might not be
suspected, by them whose Interest it was that they should not agree. The Prince
de Conde chose out one of his own Gentlemen to send on this Errand, to whom he
delivered his Demands in writing, with order to tell the Cardinal, that it
would be to no purpose to consider a longer time on them, for he would never be
brought to any lower conditions. This was a hard Chapter for the Cardinal, who
had nothing now to choose but Peace or War; but one seeming much more eligible
than the other, he signed the Treaty, telling the Gentleman, that there being
several things in it which required some time before they could be performed;
he begged the Prince de Conde to desire the Duke of Orleans (whose Interest was
not forgotten) to conceal them from his Lady, because the Cardinal de Retis,
the Duke de Rohan and Chavigny, who had so great an influence over her, would
certainly hear of it, and never rest till they had broke the Treaty.

If the Prince de Conde had followed this advice, he had without doubt
prevented abundance of mischief; but fancying the Cardinal started this
scruple, only to appear more mysterious in his Conduct, he comes publicly with
an excess of Joy and Gaity, crying aloud at a good distance to the Duke of
Orleans; We have trapp'd the old Fox at last, and have got him fast in a Noose.
Here, my Lord, says he, delivering him the Treaty, is your Demands, and for
what concerns me in it, I am very well content. The Duke showing it to his
Lady, she immediately communicates it to the Cardinal de Rets, the Duke de
Rohan and to Chavigny. They all in a surprise come to the Duke of Orleans, and
ask him what in the Name of God he designed to do, to sign such an Agreement;
telling him, that all the advantage was on the Prince de Conde's side, who had
not only been addressed to, to negotiate with, but to whom here were the greatest
Concessions made: That he was already possessed of Offices enough in the Kingdom,
without suffering him thus to ingross all. That his Ambition was insatiate, tho
he endeavored to palliate it: That the care he took of the Inter^st of his
Creatures, p^oceeded not out of any good Nature he had to oblige them, but out
of the Necessity which he foresaw, he might one day or other have of their
Service: That he himself was concerned more than any one, to hinder this
increase of the Prince de Conde's power, for after himself he was next Heir to
the Crown: That if he took not some speedy course to suppress his greatness,
'twou'd be soon too late. In short, That they prayed him to consider, that on
the concluding or breaking off of this Treaty, depended the Prosperity of the
State, the Safety of his own Person and of the whole Nation.

But it was in other Terms that they spoke of this Treaty to the Duchess of
Orleans. They represented to her, that the design of the Prince of Conde was to
possess himself of the Crown; that in the Reputation he was with the People for
his Victories, his Usurpation would be less odious, if not altogether
agreeable; that after which, her Husband would certainly be confined to a
Cloister, if he were not kept a Prisoner all his Life in some other place; that
for her self, she was not to expect a better fare than to live all her days in
a Convent, and it would hardly escape 'em, but they would dispute the
legitimacy of her Children, because her Marriage had never been approved of but
by force: That the only remedy she had to prevent all these misfortunes, was to
break off the Treaty, while they on their part did all that lay in their power,
to disengage the Duke her Husband from a person he had so much reason to
suspect: That she was particularly concerned to take this care of him, because
he loved her tenderly, of which he had given her sufficient proofs: That they
would not pretend to give her Instructions, but if they might urge it without
violating their respect to her, they would then say, that she ought to employ
all her Charms to accomplish this design: That the Bed was the most proper
place to set upon one of her Husbands disposition; that they had nothing more
to say, but to with her to make use of it, as they were sensible she could do
with success.

On this occasion these arguments wrought but too effectually on both of them.
They were hardly ever in private together that they had any other discourse,
and the Duchess perceiving her Husband inclinable to receive all the
imp^essions, with which she had been prepossest, pusht on the affair to that
extremity, that the Treaty was broke off, without so much as any tolerable
reason given by the Duke of Orleans. The Prince of Conde than saw his Error in
not following the Cardinals advice, but since 'twas now too late for any
remedy, he resolved on other measures, and raised new Troops to begin a second
Civil War. The Cardinal having a mind to dispossess him of Montrond, caused
some Troops to march that way, every one being in great expectation of what
would be the event between the two Parties. They were not long without
Skirmishes, and a Colonel of the Prince of Conde's Troops, called Concressant
being taken Prisoner by the Count de Bougi, who Commanded in Bourges; they were
in a dispute how to treat him, whether as a Rebel or as a Prisoner of War. The
Duchess of Longueville, who was in Montrond, fearing lest they should use him
as the latter, writ to the Count de Bougi about it; and having received an
answer as civil as could be desired, it was a very great encouragement to the
Officers of both sides to expose themselves, who before were in no small
apprehensions on that account. However, this was no law to the Cardinal, for he
ordered another Officer that was taken to be hanged; but the Prince serving
some of his in the same manner, he forbore to use any more such Severity.

The Duke of Orleans, for all the jealousy he had entertained of the Prince,
did not yet separate from his Interests, to which he was retained by many
considerations: he had raised some Troops as well as he, and gave them to the
Command of the Duke de Beaufort. I serv^d him in the quality of Aid de Camp
all the Campaign, and so constantly attended him, that no body can be better
acquainted with all that happened to him than my self. He had been so
persecuted by the new Minister, that the Parisians looked on him as
irreconcilable, and this resemblance of his Sentiments with their own, joined
with some popular ways, which he had made him so agreeable to them, that they
seemed not content to love him, but something more, even to adore him. The
Fish-Wives above all were those that made the most show of their kindness for
him. These every day were making him Presents, and upon all occasions were the
first to run to get a sight of him in public. Upon this he was called in
derision the King of the Mobb. But all their kindness was nothing to that of
one of those honest Women I am going to tell you of; she comes to him one
morning, and brings with her a young Girl of about Seventeen or Eighteen, a
sweet pretty Creature, and told him that having no more Children in the World,
she should think her self the happiest body that could be, if his Grace would
do her Daughter the honor not only to lie with her, but to get her with Child.
The Duke de Beaufort was not like his Father, who was thought to be a greater
lover of Men than of Women: So he told her very pleasantly that he was mighty
glad to oblige her, and would engage for the one, tho he could not be certain
of the other, yet he would do his best to gratify her in that too; and at the
same time to show her that he designed to be as good as his word, he took and
led her Daughter into his Chamber, where after he had lain with her, he sent
them both home very well pleased with their Entertainment.

This Prince had a Sister married to the Duke de Nemours, a Person of a
thousand good Qualities, with never a bad one. The Prince of Conde having
occasions* that called him into the Province of Guienne, which had declared in
his Favor, gave the Duke de Nemours the Command of his Troops, with orders to
act in Concert with those of the Duke de Beaufort. If the Relation of
Brothers-in-law could have been sufficient, as one would have thought it
should, to have united two Tempers so vastly different as these two, then the
Prince of Conde did not commit such a great mistake, to leave 'em together, and
go into Guienne: But not foreseeing that his absence would beget a mortal
hatred, between these two Princes, who had been before at variance; he ran the
greatest risque that he ever did in his Life; for hearing on all hands, that
their enmity was not only arrived to that pitch, that they were ready every
moment to cut one another Throats, but that all affairs were like to be ruined
by it; he made a desperate Journey to them from Again, by his presence to
rectify this disorder. The Prince was to pass the Loire, and tho he took all
possible care to conceal his departure, by giving out that he was gone to
Bourdeaux upon some special occasions, yet the Count de Harcourt, who Commanded
the Kings Army on this side of the River, had notice of it, and presently
detached a number of small Parties, to possess themselves of all the Passes
both by Land and Water: but he disappointed them, notwithstanding their extreme
Diligence, for traveling Night and Day, he was gone by, before they could come
up to the Passes.

In the mean time, the Marquess de Levi, one of the Prince de Conde's Party,
had procured of the Count de Harcourt a Pasport to retire to his own House,
persuant to a design of the Prince's, under the favor of this Pasport, to wait
on him disguised like one of his Retinue. The Marquis stav'd for the Prince
till he came at Langres, and from thence they both took the Road of Auvergne,
the greatest part of the Marquiss's Estate lying thereabouts. While they were
there refreshing themselves, the Prince of Conde, who was sensible the Cardinal
had lined the River with his Soldiers, sent to Bussi Rabutin, who was in la
Charity, and obtained a promise from him that he would favor his passage; and
he was as good as his word, for he drew off the Guard that stood right against
the Ferry of Allier, and the Prince of Conde at the same time coming up to that
place, passed over without any manner of opposition. After this escape he made
the best of his way, tho the length of the Journey and the badness of the Roads
had so tired their Horses, that they could not make all the haste they desired.
The King, who was on the side of Angers, came marching up the Loire; and had
sent out Expresses to all places, with orders that they should apprehend the
Prince, and secure him alive or dead. There was one of these Scouts came so
near him, as to know his Favorite Guitaut, and suspecting that the Prince
himself was not far of, inquired for him of a Valet de Chamber who stayed a
little behind: If they had had the least presence of Mind in the World, they
would have certainly killed that Courtier upon the spot; the Duke de la
Rochefaucaut thought of it a moment after, but then the Fellow was gone.

The King, as well as the Cardinal, was informed of this Adventure, and
immediately detached a Party of Horse after him; who taking the Road of
Chatillon upon Loin, so closely persu'd him, that he very narrowly escaped
falling into their hands: But his good Fortune delivered him, and having
reached Chatillon, he passed on to Lori, where his Army than lay. At his
arrival there, he found matters infinitely in a worse condition, than what they
had been represented to him. The Dukes of Nemours and Beaufort were at open
defiance one with another, for they could not dissemble any longer their
resentment, after the occasion I am going to tell you of. The Inhabitants of
Gergeau, (a Town belonging in Apanage, to the Duke of Orleans) had promised the
Duke de Nemours to give him notice of the approach of the Kings Army, that so
he might have time enough to send them a Garrison. This they did not fail to
do, and he accordingly drew out of the Duke of Orleans's Troops five or six
hundred men for that purpose. But the Officer that commanded them having
received false intelligence by the way, that the King had already entered the
Town, proceeded no further, but came directly back again: Upon which the People
of Gergeau sent another Express, to let them know that if they neglected them
in this manner, they should be obliged to open their Gates to the first that
appeared. Whereupon the same Troops were remanded thither, but then 'twas too
late, and they returned just as they had done once before.

The Duke de Nemours was mightily incensed at this accident, and whether he
really did suspect some Treachery in it, or that he was glad of that pretense
to vent his Spleen against the Duke de Beaufort, is uncertain, but he did not
stick publicly to accuse him of holding Correspondence with the Enemy. The
Duke de Beaufort gave him the Lie, and had not the whole Army interposed to
persuade the Duke of Nemours to suspend his resentment, there would have
followed some strange disorder upon it. A few days after this had happened the
Prince de Conde arrived, who presently undertook to mediate an Accommodation,
but the Duke de Nemours, would by no means hearken to it; yet out of his
respect to the Prince, and the Interest of their affairs which would not permit
him to attempt any thing at that time, he was content to constrain himself (he
said) but that afterward, all the World should not hinder him when he saw his
convenient time. The matter being thus made up for the present, or rather
deferred, he marched against the Kings Army, commanded by the Viscount de
Turenne and the Marshall de Hoequincourt, who took their Quarter separate one
from the other; but the Marshall lying more exposed, he attackt him, and took
four of his men Prisoners, before the rest could be brought to their Arms. The
Marshall lost all his Cavalry in this Encounter; and if his Infantry had not
saved themselves by flying at the very beginning, he could not have been more
entirely routed. The Viscount de Turenne provided a little better for his
security, for possessing himself of a considerable Post, he not only made head
against the victorious Troops of the Prince of Conde, but put them to a stand;
and afterward Night coming on, retired to Gien.

One of the Prince of Conde's Gentlemen happened to be taken Prisoner some time
before this, and it being publicly known that this Marshall was reflected on
at Court upon the account of the late Action, the miscarriage of which they
attributed to his neglect; the Prince found a way to let him know, that if he
would engage in his Interests, he should meet with more gratitude from him.
Hocquincourt, who was acquainted of this by some of his Friends, asked this
Gentleman of the Prince's, what advantage it was that he might expect from his
Master, and he engaged to procure him a hundred thousand Crowns, provided he
brought over with him some of those Troops which were at his Command.
Hocquincourt joined with the Proposal, and told the Gentleman, that if the
Prince of Conde had Money enough to purchase them, there was the Count de
Grandpre and two or three German Colonels more at his Service. And indeed they
all gave him their words, but the Prince had not a Fund sufficient to do it,
and so the business dropped; which if it had taken effect, would have been of the
last consequence to the Party.

The Prince of Conde, after so glorious an Action, was resolved to take a turn
to Paris, where he was received with an universal applause. But the Ladies were
those that expressed the most esteem for him, some of them being so forward as to
wish they might prove, whether he could acquit himself as well in an Amorous
Engagement, as he had done in the late Battle. Mada^^ Pie, Sister to
Concressaut whom I have mentioned, was one of these longing Ladies: She writ to
him, to tell him, that she had some affairs with him, of that importance that
she durst not confide 'em to any, but begged that he would give himself the
trouble to let her see him, and he should then judge if they were not of
consequence. The Letter was writ in terms too pressing to admit of any excuse;
so he waited on her; when instead of some mighty matter in relation to the
State, which he expected, she made him a Confession of her weakness, but begged
him to make use of it like a Gentleman, and a Man of Honor. The good Prince was
touched with com^assion, and prepared instantly to give her the most sensible
proof; of it; but being at that time in her Closet, where unfortunately there
was no Bed, he was put to his thifts, yet by taking the Cushions and placing
them one upon another, he did his best to ob^ige her. I came to Paris the very
same day of this Adventure and having a Letter for him from the D. de Beaufort,
I found him at his own House, the Hostel de Conde, he would needs make me stay
Supper; and while we were at Table, who should come in but Concressaut: He told
Concressaut what a rare Adventure he had had that a certain very fine Lady, tho
something of the tallest and biggest size, had sent that morning to desire to
speak with him; that waiting on her accordingly, he past through Apartments very
stately furnished to her Closet, which was very rich and magnificent, and hung
all round with Looking-glasses; that the Lady refused him nothing, and that in
short, he was extremely well pleased with the Adventure, but for one thing.
Concressaut asked him what that could be. He said, it was because he had found
all the parts of that Lady's body to bear an exact proportion with her Shapes,
and by that bid him guess if he could, who it was. There needed no more to make
Concressaut jealous of the truth, nor indeed he did not stick to say, he
believed it was his Sister; but was the first of the Company that fell a
laughing, and so prevented the raillery of the rest, who were prepared to fall
on him. For all that, the Prince, for fear we should not believe it, and to put
it out of all manner of doubt, drew the Letter out of his Pocket, and showed it
to every one that had had the curiosity to see it.

The Prince of Conde was then in the Vigor of his Youth, and had a great many
little fellows about him that were called Masters: These were most of them lewd
and debauched, and led him into abundance of Extravagancies, which not only
ruined his Health, but his Affairs. For some time after this, that the Duke of
Lorrain had entered France, and that the Viscount de Turenne was enclosed
between his Troops, those of the Princes, and those of the Duke of Wittenberg,
the Court Party being in that distress, that they knew not which way to turn
themselves, if their Army was routed, at that juncture. I say, the Prince of
Conde was retained at Paris, by a distemper which it is not decency to mention,
but which had nothing of a Fever in it, but the name; by which means he lost
his Advantage, and could not discover the Intelligence which was held between
the Court and the Duke of Lorrain; for that Duke having received a considerable
Sum of Money on that account, suffered the Viscount de Turenne to retire to
Melun, which had been impossible for him to do, if the Prince of Conde had been
with his Army.

Tho the War seemed to be carried on by both Parties with great vigor, yet
there were several Treaties set on foot, and managed underhand. I was twice or
thrice at St. Germains upon such an account, from the Duke of Beaufort, whom
Mazarin had offered to make Admiral of France, and to pay him down two hundred
thousand Crowns, if he would leave the Princes party, and bring over with him
the Duke of Orleans, on whom it was known, that he had a great Influence. My
Fortune was to be made effectually too, and I was to have a Company in the
Guards for my pains in this affair; the Duke was willing enough to accept of
the proposals, and was not wanting in his endeavors on his part, but all our
measures were broke by the means of Madomoiselle de Mompensier, who being stark
mad to be married, the Prince of Conde had amused with the hopes of having his
Son, the Duke d' Enguien.

The Army lying just at the Gates of Paris, we were every day in the City, and
there I met with my Sister, who to avoid the effects of the public
disturbances, had left her Convent and was come to Paris. I was surpised to
see she had quitted the Religious Habit, but was much more so, to understand
that she was returned to her Husband. She, it seems, had met with him when she
least of all expected it, and as true Love is increased by absence, he no
sooner saw her, but was tempted to forget the Obligation he lay under by the
holy Orders, he had too rashly taken; nor was she behind hand with him, but
laid aside all her thoughts of Devotion. What happened on this was something
extraordinary: She, who in five or six years that they had lived together
before, had never been with Child, was become in a few months as big as she
could tumble. I expressed my surprise at these proceedings, but all the
satisfaction I could get from her was this, that she was bound to obey her
Husband, and being joined together by the Holy Sacrament of Marriage, were to
be separated by nothing but Death.

To relate this Affair, which made a great noise in Paris, without breaking off
the thread of my discourse, I must tell you that my Sister was brought to bed
of a Son, in her due time, and that they lived together three or four years
after, at the end of which my Brother in-law died. My Sister going to enter on
the Estate, which was very considerable, met with opposition from his
Relations, who used this as a pretense, that her Son was Illegitimate. Upon
which a great Law Suit was commenced, which the pretended Heirs had a mind to
carry to be tried in Bretagne, because some part of the Estate lay there; but
they having caused the Goods which were at Paris to be seized, and the Contract
of Marriage being made there, these two things brought them within the
Jurisdiction of the Justice of the place; besides that, it solely belongs to
the Parliament of Paris to take cognizance of all things relating to the
Validity of Marriages.

The pretended Heirs being now obliged to come to a Trial here, committed their
Cause to one of the ablest Council to manage, and he in his Plea forgot nothing
that the most artificial Rhetoric could urge, when it intends most to
persuade. He exaggerated what a Reflection it would be on Religion, to tolerate
such an abuse as this, which was the very way to authorize what the Hugonots
maintain, that it is lawful for a Priest to marry; that not only the Child ought
to be declared illegitimate, but the Mother ought to be punished for so black a
crime, so h^rrid a Sacrilege: That nothing had forced the married Couple to a
Separation; but when once they had done so, to devote themselves to God, it was
a Vow of that nature, from which none but the Pope himself could dispense 'em:
That the present Case was still different; here was a Man who had not simply
promised to devote himself to God, but one who was consecrated by all that is
most Holy in Religion: In a word, a Priest, one who had a thousand times
offered the Sacrifice, by which we all hope for Salvation: One who had received
an infinite Number of Souls to the Sacrament of Penance; had given the
Communion, and in short, who had done all that so sublime and sacred a
Character could entitle him to do: That it ought to be considered what would be
the consequences of allowing such a Sacrilege; how many Confessions, and how
many Sacraments would be rendered ineffectual, and consequently how many Souls
eternally damned.

'Twould be too tedious to recite all his Plea at length, in which he was not
sparing of Invectives against my Sister, who being present, could not hear them
without an extreme Confusion. At last her Council began to speak, upon which
every one was silent, and he said, That he could not but admire, an Action
should be represented so foul and criminal, which was only a Slip of Weakness,
or Humane Frailty: That he did not conceive the fault lay so much in his
Clients living with her Husband after a Separation of 5 or 6 years, as in the
suffering him in a foolish fit of zeal to turn Priest. That God had expressly
forbid to separate those who were thus joined, how then could they suffer one,
who had sworn Fidelity to his Wise, to violate an Oath he had taken in the Face
of the Church? and Marriage being a Sacrament, the other Sacrament, which was
subsequent, could not dissolve the first; That the Child had nothing to do with
the Indiscretions of his Father; that his Legitimacy was confirmed by his
Fathers Contract with his Mother, and by the Marriage Benediction he received.
In short, if the Parliament, as they had often, in uncertain Cases, adjudg'd
the just Intention of a Marriage sufficient to legitimate the Children; how
much more reason had he to hope for the same Justice, in a Cause where the
Honor of the Mother was so far from being called in question, that it was
never so much as suspected.

The Judges were a long time in suspense, during which it is no hard matter to
imagine mine and my Sisters Fears. I was but just come in, as the last man had
done his Plea. The People that stood by, but did not know me, told me the
substance of the other Councels Plea, and some of them were so prejudiced by
his reasons, as to tell us our Destiny; but we were happy, that they were not
our Judges. They were mistaken in their opinion, as it proved, for we
unanimously carried our Cause, and our Adversaries were condemned to all the
Costs and Charges of the Suit.

This Affair however was the occasion that some time after, Monsieur de
Villemontee, being nominated to the Bishopric of St. Malo, was refused his
Bulls, because he was parted from his Wife; but on another account than that of
my Brother. The truth of which was, he had discovered some Intrigues of hers,
when he was Intendant of Justice, and Master of the Requests; and that with the
disappointment put him so out of conceit with the World, that after he had made
her retire to a Convent, he gave himself wholly up to Devotion.

This business of my Sister's having caused me to make some digression, 'twill
be convenient now to return, and resume my discourse of those matters I was
upon before. The Prince of Conde having broken off the Treaty (I mentioned
formerly) purely by his own fault, was resolved to push things to the
extremity, rather than not compass what he drove at. The other Princes were no
less forward, and met every day at Luxemburg, to consult how they might oblige
the Queen to relinquish the Cardinal, and to give them a larger sh^^e in the
government of affairs, which was the cause of all their discontent. In the me^n
time, the Dukes of Beaufort and Nemours, were several times ready to quarrel
about precedence; which the Duke of Orleans and Prince of Conde being willing
to prevent, a^judg'd the first place to him, who came first to the Council. The
Duke of Beaufort complained of this regulation; the Bastards of France having
this Previledge in the Kingdom, to take place of all Foreign Princes; but he
was answered that it could not be recalled, and all his redress would be now,
to constrain himself a little to come something the sooner. And he did not fail
to do so, insomuch that 'twas taken notice of, and said, that he stood Sentinel
there every day, to watch till the door should be opened.

At length, after they had fully resolved the ruin of the Cardinal, and the
means to accomplish it, the Prince of Conde, left Paris to go to the assistance
of his Tro^ps, which were in no small apprehensions of those of the King,
exceeding them much in number. His Presence, with some other precautions he
used, made the Count de Mi^ssens, who was advanced on the side of St. Cloud, to
retire, but not content with that, he turned his Forces against St Denis; in
which there was a Royal Garrison. The place being of no strength was easily
carried, and for the same reason could not be kept for any time. The Prince,
who had experienced what kind of Soldiers the Parisians were, when he had to
do with them near Charen^on, found them not more brave now they fought for him,
for they deserted him before St. Denis, and if he had not had those who stood
by him, he had been baffl^d before a little paltry Town.

The Prince of Conde was come back to Paris, but in a few days returned to his
Army, perceiving the Kings had taken the Field, on purpose to dislodge his,
which by the means of the Bridge of St. Cloud, was often covered by the river
of Scine, so as to avoid coming to a Battle. He found the Enemy had made a
Bridge of Boats ready on the side of St. Denis, to pass over part of their
Army, while the other marched on this side of the River. Being therefore afraid
to be enclosed, he decamped, and intended to retire between Charenton and Ville
neuve St. Georges, where he hoped the rivers of Marne and Scine would serve him
for a good Re^renchment. The Viscount de Turenne, whom he had to deal with,
pe^etrating into his design, fell upon him from the rising grounds of the
Fauxbourg St. Martin, and furiously charged his Rear: The Prince seeing himself
so hotly pressed, and despairing of gaining the Bridge of Charenton, which he
could not pass neither without defiling, resolved to fight, since he was forced
to it, and commanded his Vanguard to halt. They were come up as far as the
Entrance of the Fauxbourg St. Antoine, where he found several Retrenchments,
the Parisians had cast up, to cover themselves from the Spoil of the Duke of
Lorrain, who had ravaged the Countries all thereabouts. The Prince, as he had
the greatest knowledge in Military Affairs of any man in his Age, immediately
concluded, that nothing could have happened more advantageous, than what
Fortune herself here offered him; so he drew his Troops into these
Retrenchments, and lodged them as fast as they came up.

The Kings Army was stronger by half than the Princes; but the Marshall de la
Ferte who commanded a part of 'em, being still on the other side of the Seine,
their Forces were pretty equal. The King, who did not imagine that the Prince
of Conde could escape him, posted himself on the rising grounds about
Menilmontunt, from whence being out of danger, he might see all that past. He
proposed two advantages to himself in doing this, one was, by his presence to
animate the Soldiers; and the other, that it would hinder the City of Paris
from giving the Prince a retreat. And indeed it had this effect, that they did
refuse to let his Baggage come in, which was for^'t to be left upon the Bulwark.

The Marshall de la Ferte hearing the Viscount de Turenne was going to engage
the Prince, made all the haste ^e could to repass the Seine; but that was a
thing not to be done in a moment, so the Battle begun without him. The Viscount
de Turenne advancing to the entrance of the Fauxbourg made a vigorous attack
upon it, while at the same time he sent some of his Troops, to my to enter some
other part of the City.

I had always till now, a good opinion of the Courage of the Duke de Beaufort,
and thought the Reflections made on him by the Duke de Nemours, proceeded
rather from the hatred that was between them, than from any just occasion; but
I saw now that he did all he could to get into the Town, upon pretense of
declaring for the Prince of Conde, but indeed, as I thought I had good reason
to believe, to avoid fighting. For the rest, having told you the zeal of the
common people, in assisting some enterprises of his, I ought also to tell you
how it came to pass, that they had now an other Opinion of him; you must know,
that he not only grew weary of the War, but complained his Troops were exposed
to all the Hardships of an Enemy, which the Prince of Conde could not help,
having not Money to pay them, that so they might have been kept in Discipline;
however the fight being begun, as I have just now said, was maintained on both
sides with such Resolution, that 'twas not known for a good while who would
have the better of it; but the Viscount de Turenne, knowing that the Marshall
de la Ferte was marching with all speed possibly to join him, made such efforts
that he disappointed his hopes of sharing with him in the Victory. The
Barricadoes were forced in two places, and tho the Prince of Conde disputed
their passage with an incredible obstinacy, he was in great danger of having
all his men cut off. If Mademoiselle de Montpensier, who was always his Friend,
had not done him a great piece of Service. She seized upon the Bastile, a
Fo^^ress at the Gate de St. Antoine, and letting fly the Cannon among the Kings
Troops, not regarding that he was (...) himself, obliged him to make a
precipitate Retreat, and also to order Turenne to do the like.

I had not been in very many actions, so I could not say this was hotter than
usual, but I heard several old Officers say 'twas, and I know very well, some
Squadrons charged five times; and tho they had been often broke to pieces, yet
they rallied again as often; here was abundance of men killed and wounded, and
the Duke de la Rochefaucaut was among the latter; he received a hurt under his
Eye, by which he lost his sight for the present, but he has recovered it again
since; they carried him into Paris, which Mademoiselle obliged at last to
declare it self* and through which the Prince de Conde* marched his Army. The Duke
de la Rouchefaucaut, thinking his Wound had been mortal, sent for a Priest to
be confessed, who told him 'twas to no purpose, unless he would count this for
one crime, his taking up Arms against his King, and would promise never to
continue in it. 'Twould have been very well if all the Confessors would have
acquitted themselves as this fellow did, the disorders would soon have been
ended; but they were not all so honest: And the Cardinal de R^tz, who ought to
have been an example to others as a Cardinal, and Archbishop of Paris, was so
far from that, that he was one of the first in the Revolt.

It pleased God to preserve me in this action, tho I fought in a Tro^p of which
above half were killed upon the place; but seeing the Duke de Beaufort behave
himself, as I have noted, it very much lessened my esteem for him, and I
resolved to leave him; which I did, three days before he fought the Duel with
the Duke de Nemours, in which the latter was killed. If the Prince of Conde had
thought it worth his while he might have prevented this misfortune; but he was
not sorry that he was thus rid of this Prince, who was his Rival in the
Duchess de Chatillon, and as he thought, better received there than himself;
so that when they told him he was killed, he hardly behaved himself decently;
for shutting himself up with his Favorites, he gave himself such a liberty,
that he was heard to laugh so loud, that the People could not but take notice
of it.

When I left Monsieur de Beaufort, I resolved to have no more Masters but the
King, that is to serve in the Army, if he would entertain me; and the
conj^ncture of aff^irs was such, that I did not find it so difficult a thing as
formerly. I got a Troop of Horse, and orders to wait on the Cardinal; he asked
me as soon as ever he saw me, if he might trust me, and answering him readily,
that he needed not to doubt me in the least, he sent me to Bourdeaux to
endeavor to bring over the Prince of Conti from his Brothers Party. I addressed
my self to Sarasin, the same whose Works have been published since his Death;
and Sarasin having cautioned me to take care of being discovered by the Count
de Marsin, or by any other Creatures of the Prince de Conde, he gave ear to my
Propositions, which were more advantageous to himself than to his Master; for
they promised him 20000 Crowns ready Money, whereas they offered the Prince
nothing but a Wife with some Pensions from the Court: Nevertheless his own
condition not pleasing him, he was willing enough to change it, and agreed with
me to marry Mademoiselle Martinotsi, the Cardinals Niece. To conceal my self
the better in the Town, I took the Habit of a Franciscan, being ordered to
confer with one Father Faure at the Convent of the Cordeliers, who was one of
the Cardinals Friends, being trusted with a secret of no less value than the
reducing the City of Bourdeaux to obedience; which he was to do by fomenting
certain divisions reigning among the Chief of the Town. He was a famous
Preacher, which made him very much respected every where; besides tha^, he was
Confessor to the principal Families in the City, so that employing both his
talents to bring to pass his designs, he had the easier success; for which
service he was preferred to the Bishopric of Amiens, which he enjoys at this
time.

The Prince de Conti according to our Treaty dese^^ed his Party, and came to
Court, where the Cardinal received him with great respect, and being married a
few days after in the Kings Closet at Fontainblea^, he very nobly jointur'd his
Lady in a Clap. He resigned all his Benefices to the Cardinal, under the name
of one Montreuil, and his Eminence, who made no scruple of the Symony, gave him
instead thereof a very large Pension: As for Sarasin, they laughed at him when
the business was done, and instead of the 20000 Crowns they promised him, they
put him off with a small Benefice; he cursed and stormed at the Ingratitude of
Mazarin; but he needed not to have been so concerned for the reward, having but
a short while to enjoy it. The Prince of Con^i vexed to see himself slighted by
all the Gentry, on account of his Marriage, and enraged at a Letter sent him by
the Prince of Conde, who abused him, both in word and action, he so laid it to
heart, that he died in a few days after.

The Cardinal behaved himself very well to me after this success, but not like
my old Master Cardinal Richelieu, their maxims being far different; this
carried it civilly to none but his own friends, and that behaved it alike to
all. I went then into the Army which was in Flanders, were we made some
Conquests, which had been greater, but for the division that happened between
the Viscount de Turenne, and the Marshall de Ferte. I served under the latter
of these, who took such an affection to me, that he could scarce live without
me. My fortune casting me upon him as it were, I thought my self obliged to
show him more respect than the other, tho my esteem was not equal for them
both. He was mightily pleased to see me so sensible, and this (...) that
confidence in me, that he told me all his affairs, even to the private concerns
of his Family, and th^rein of the dissatisfaction that he had with his first
Wife; when I saw him so hearty, I begged him not to think me rude, if I asked
him the reason of it; he told me he would freely inform me for since the ^e^st
was dead (those were his words) he was not n^w c^^cern'd at her Extravagancies;
whereupon he ^old me, how he married her against her inclination, and being
d^sirous to win her to his humor, he told he^ the first day of their Marriage*
that if she did not think fit to ^i^e as he pleased, she must expect to lead
but an uneasy life; that she should quit all her old Acquaint^nce, and make no
new ones; but above all, should hold no correspondence with any of those people
whom she had ever any thoughts of marrying; that she answered very honestly,
that she had no desires but to obey him, but he quickly discovered the
contrary, and ^ound her a Jilt in the highest degree, and in a word was obliged
to dispatch both her and her Gallant a little before their time.

I was extremely surpised at this great Ingenuity, especially in a man that
was not accounted to have overmuch; nor indeed did I understand the d^ift of
the matter, which was to inform me downright he was jealous; and that if any
was so venturous as to attempt upon the Lady he had now married, there was
nothing so desperate but he durst undertake against them. Now he knew I was
very intimate with a certain person that used to visit her very often in his
absence, and 'twas reported it was on such an account; when I understood what
he meant, I took no notice at all, as if I knew nothing, and tho he often run
over the same Chapter, I always turned the deaf ear, till at last he was forced
to explain himself, and told me, that he took me to be so much his Friend, that
I would keep a secret; that his Wife kept company with a person he did not
like, who it seems was of my acquaintance; that I should give him a caution of
it, and that 'twas dangerous to give but an umbrage to such a man as he; that a
Letter might miscarry, and therefore he chose to have me go my self; that I
should also go to his Wife, and tell her as much; and if she took it unkindly
^e suspected her, I should tell her that he took it more unkindly she should
give him cause.

It was strange methought that I should be the person picked out for so great a
confidence, and I could not forbear telling him so; to which he returned, that
he had known me a long time, and was not ignorant of the many important affairs
I had managed for Cardinal Richelieu, and therefore concluded I was fit to keep
a secret, and he hoped I would do it for him, and promised in requital to use
his interest to get me a Regiment, which he thought the Cardinal would not
refuse him.

My fate threw me always upon such Negotiations as these, and I was forced to
obey it, so I came to Paris; where I saw my friend, who told me the Marshall
was mad; that he had seen his Wife indeed, but 'twas as he saw all the rest of
the Sex, without any other design than to pass away the time, and if her
Husband would return him all the Money he had lost at play to her, he would go
to a Notary, and bind himself never to come near her any more, but till he had
his revenge, he would not promise him. I thought this answer very weak, and
made only to put me off; I told him I wondered he would deal in this manner with
a friend; I knew nothing of his Intreague, being never curious to inform my
self of things that did not concern me, but that this business must have made
some noise, because it had ^e^cht the Husbands Ears, who always is the last
informed of such things as those; that sometimes indeed 'twas not so great a
misfortune, all Husbands being not of a humor to publish their infamy, but if
I was not mistaken, the Marshall was none of them; for I had heard say, that
he killed his first Lady upon a bare suspicion. I prayed him to consider what I
told him, that he had to do with a violent passionate man, and one besides who
was in great favor at Court; that I meant by this, he was able to oppress him
without any relief on his part, of which I could show him daily examples;
therefore I begged him not to tell me, that they could not ^ast out a Gentleman
and go unpunisht; that it mig^t be true when we had to do with a man of our own
quality, but when we talked of a Marshall of France, there is no having
satisfaction of him, unless y^u will downright assassinate him.

He heard me quite out with a great deal of patience, and then returned, I
thought, said he, that you had been one of my Friends, and I am very sorry to
find my self deceived. Suppose I had loved Madam de la Ferte, I made no
question but you would have been the readiest man in the world to have assisted
me; for you know it is a thing that we always undertake freely for one another,
but it is enough, that you give me the same liberty you take your self: However
I Will tell you one thing as a Friend, that Monsieur the Marshall is jealous
without cause; I have had no concern with his Wife, but at Play, and I will
have one opportunity more to recover my Money again, and will come no more at
her as long as I live.

I saw however there was more Intrigue in this than he would have known, but I
reckoned I had discharged my self as a Friend, so I went to discourse with
Madam La Ferte, who knew me well enough, but not so well as to imagine I was
trusted with such an Errand; for when she understood it she was mightily
concerned: She told me she was not much surpised at the proceedings of the
Marshall, that he went to pick a quarrel with her that he might have a
pretense to make her away as he had done his other Wife, but she had some
Friends would revenge it if he did; that if she had given him any occasion to
do thus, why had he not told her of it, for he had not said a word to her of
any such thing; that it was no strange thing to see a Husband jealous, who had
a wanton gossiping Cocquette to his Wife; that as for her, all the world knew
she never stirred abroad, and excepting at play, kept no Company at all; why
should he accuse her then of Crimes which were not to be managed without much
intriguing and assignations before hand.

She would have talked all day I believe, if I had not interrupted her; but
finding there would be no end of it, I stopped her, by telling her that I was not
instructed to receive her Justifications; that as for me I was persuaded she
had more Prudence, but that was not enough, if her Husband was not so; that the
way to satisfy him fully, was to avoid the company of the man whom he
suspected; and since she did not see him, except at play, as she said, she
needed not matter it, there being a great many in Paris she might play with as
well as with him, and that being done, I did not doubt but her Husband would do
her justice to acknowledge her virtue as well as I; that this was only his nice
humor, which was for preventing any scandal, tho in the great post he was,
Malice it self could fasten nothing on his conduct; yet if she should give
occasion for it to work on hers, it would be full as bad.

She answered me, I might turn things as I pleased, but she must judge as she
saw, that her Husband was a Brute and a jealous-pated Man, that she should be
always unhappy with him, but since it was her misfortune to be so, I might tell
him, she would obey his arbitrary will and would see the person no more, there
was all this ado about; and if he would too, she would hide her self from all
persons that came to the House, even from her own Servants, for one was as
reasonable as the other. These words did sufficiently demonstrate her concern,
however as it was not my business to take any notice of it. I took my leave of
her, but with so mean an opinion of her virtue, that I very much doubted she
would not keep her word. In the mean time to put a stop to this, and to avoid
any further suspicion, she broke off the Meetings for Play which used to be at
her house, and kept in several days without being seen; but having privately
entertained the person I mentioned, she made her self amends for the Penance
she had undergone.

The Marshall being informed of this, by Spies which he kept always about her,
and resolving to punish both her and her Gallant, he sent three Dragoons of his
Regiment to Paris, with order to assassinate the one, and to poison the other;
the first of these was easier to be done than the second: My Friend coming home
one night very late from Play, at the Marshall d Estrees, was set upon and
killed in a moment; the Dragoons would have made their escape, had not one of
them fell into the Common Shore near the Ru^ St. Louis; so they took him and
clapped him up into Prison, and made him pay for the other; they put him to the
torture to make him discover his Accomplices, and by whom they were set on work
to do such a fact; and ^e having discovered all that he knew, the Lieutenant
Criminel Tardieu went to carry the informations to the Cardinal, and asked him
what he pleased should be done with them. Mazarin, who was obliged to the
Marshall, ordered him to suppress them, and to cause the Dragoon to be
strangled in Prison, which was done accordingly. But the Cardinal being afraid,
that Madam la Ferte should fare after the same manner, he sent her word
privately to take care of her self, and to endeavor to regain the good opinion
of her Husband; she had been very much disturbed at the misfortune of her
Gallant, but this Compliment made her very serious. She fled to the Queen
Mother for protection, and feigning her self religious, she began to attend her
to her Devotions. The Marshall finding such an alteration in her at his
return, took it very well, and believed all the reports he had of her to be
scandals and fals^^ies; and having been a long time from her, he received her
more like a Mistress than a Wife. However she would not put up all this so
easily, but would have it examined into, which proved so much to her advantage,
that her Husband himself asked her pardon for his suspicion.

All this while the War continued, but the heart of France was free from it,
and the Prince de Conde after all his great designs, was obliged to retire into
Flanders, and take Sanctuary among the Spaniards; abundance of People of
Quality followed him, and neither regarded their Fortune nor their Families to
testify their aff^^^^on to him: One of whom fell into the hands of the C^urt
Party, and there being a discourse as if they would behead him, the Prince de
Conde, who had taken Lancon of their side, sent word, that he should have the
same usage that they gave to the other; ^eve^the^ess for the respect he had for
him, he permitted him to send to the Cardinal, to acquaint him of the danger he
was in, and to solicit him to take care of him. This offer was of too great
consequence to Lancon to neglect it, so he sent an Express immediately to
Cardinal Mazarin, but he being resolved the other should dye, sent him word,
that he must think of making his Escape: insomuch that seeing this was no
jesting matter, he threw himself out of a Window three stories high; and tho he
was very much bruised, and quite crippled with his Fall, yet fear gave him
Leg^, and he got off clear.

I was g^ne to Paris to remind the Marshall de la F^rte ^f the promise he had
made me, to help me to a Regiment which he still assured me of, and made as if
he went about it; but the Cardinal told me that this would open the mouths of
all the World, and that he had rather give me Money out of his Pocket, and that
I must have patience. I knew there was no great heed to be given to his
promises, so I concluded my business was at an end; but I did not perceive it
was a trick of the Mareschal's, nor did I know it till above two years
afterward: and indeed, the Cardinal having a business for me to do, which I am
going to mention, told it me himself; however, as I was even with him, and had
no cause to complain, I never troubled my head with it. As luck would have it,
I fell in with the Count d' Harcourt, a younger Brother of the present Duke d'
Elbeuf; and being gotten drunk together one day, 'twas resolved we should go
and Rob upon the Pont Neuf, a diversion the Duke of Orleans had brought in
fashion much about that time: It was in vain for me to oppose going, all the
Company being set upon the frolic, so I was forced to go in spite of my
teeth: The Chevalier de Rieux, younger Brother to the Marquis de Sourdeac, who
was on my side, was no sooner come to the Pont Neuf, but he whispered me, that
to avoid being concerned with the rest, we would get up upon the The Statue of
Hen. IV. on the Pont Neuf in brass.
Statue of the Horse that stood there, and there we should see all that
happened and be safe our selves; 'twas no sooner said than done; we made use of
the reins of the Bridle to mount upon the Horses neck, and there we both of us
sat very pleasantly: The rest fell to their work, and had presently whiskt off
four or five Cloaks; when one of those that had been thus served having been to
complain, the Officers came* and our Sparks finding themselves too weak to
encounter with them, scamper'd away as fast as they could; we would have done
the like, but the reins of the horse catching Monsieur de Rieux by the legs,
threw him down upon the Pavement,, while I stood pearcht like a^ Owl* The
Officers had no need of a dark Lanthor^ to discover us, for Monsieur de Rieux,
who had hur^^ himself in his fall, cried out as if he had been going to give up
the Ghost; and they coming in at the noise, helped me down against my will, and
carried u^ both to Chatelet. As it is impossible, but that eve^^ one has some
Enemies, some people took a great deal of pleasure to make their reflections on
this adventure; and Cardinal Mazarin who now had the Sovereign Authority,
hearing a great many false reports of this Action, ordered us to be prosecuted
with the utmost vigor: so we were examined, and that as strictly as if we had
been the worst of Malefactors, and I especially, having had some words formerly
with him that was now our Judge, who fancied that I did him an ill Office once
with Cardinal de Richlieu. If I had been conscious of any guilt, I would
without doubt have excepted against him, as a Party prejudiced against me; but
knowing my self clear, I made no scruple of being examind by him, which he was
very glad of, thinking now he should have an opportunity to be even with me: In
short, I perceived that the Clerk, who held correspondence with him, and took
my Examination, wrote a great deal more down than I spoke, which made me
dissatisfied with his reading it, so I would not sign it till I had read it my
self; but he told me that was not their custom, and they would not make a new
Law for me. But this made me suspect them the more, insomuch that telling them
plainly that I would not sign it then, he not only gave me a great deal of ill
Language, but committed me to the Dungeon. O God! What a passion was I in, to
see my self used like a Highway-man or a Murderer for a bare frolic, with no
hopes of getting out, and kept so close that I could have no Friend admitted to
me, nor no body to speak a word to, but the Keepers: I begged one of them to
convey a Letter for me to a Friend, and to help me to a Pen and Ink to write
it, and promised him to do him more kindness than it came to, when I should get
out of Prison; but he was so far from being touched with my entreaties, that he
gave me very ill Language, enough to have madded a very patient Man. The
Chevalier de Rieux fared not a jot better than I; and being both accused of the
same Crime, the Lieutenant Criminel was obliged to treat him exactly in the
same manner, lest he should be thought to prosecute me, upon a private Picque.
The Chevalier was a very lewd person, and little better than his Brother (who
we have known to be a notorious Debauchee) and had like him, the guilt of very
many and great Crimes upon him, which now reflecting on a little seriously, he
thought this a judgment on him for his wicked courses; and as Mariners in
distress make vows for their deliverance, so he made solemn promises to reform,
if ever he got out of this unhappy business; but he soon forgot them all when
God had heard his Prayers, and instead of reclaiming, grew more vicious than
before; till he wasted his Estate and left himself not a bit of bread, and then
put himself into a Monastery, that he might not starve for want: But this life
not agreeing with his inclination, he quitted his Cassock, and little Band, and
took another turn abroad; when having tried his Fortune all the ways he could
think of, he turned Ecclesiastic a second time, more to avoid Humane Justice,
which he was in danger of, than Divine; and taking Orders, is now a Curate in
Normandy, where he behaves himself no better than he did at Paris.

But to return to my own case. The Cardinal being solicited every day to make
an example of some body or other, for the terror of those that practiced this
way of robbing in the Streets, which indeed was absolutely necessary, to stop
the insolences constantly committed in the Street, so that 'twas not safe going
abroad in the Night, he commanded the Lieutenant Criminel to bring him the
informations; and having seen ours, in the manner the Judge had been pleased to
draw it, he ordered them to proceed against us. This Order was too public not
to be known at Court, and the Chevalier de Rieux being related to almost all
the People of Quality, he made no question but they would intercede for him,
for fear of suffering a blot upon the Family, which they did; and applying to
the Lieutenant Criminel, he told them he should be very glad to serve them,
provided it might be done without my receiving part in the favor; that our
Crimes were the same, but if they who we had said were with us, would submit to
be examined, which had not yet been done because of their Quality, and would
testify that 'twas I that prompted them not only to go on the Pont Neuf, but
also to do all those ill things we were accused of. These were the conditions,
and such did these Gentlemen accept of; and having proposed it to the others,
they found them very willing; so they purchased their own liberty with my
ruin, and I was charged with a thousand things that I never so much as dreamt
of; so I was as it were a Victim delivered up to the malice of the Lieutenant
Criminel; and had doubtless been sacrificed, had not God sent me deliverance by
a way which I least expected. There came one day into my D^ngeon one of the
Keepers Wives, with her Husband, and this woman moved with my distresses, looked
on me, as I could easily discern, with a more compassionate Eye than usual: she
durst not however speak a word to me while her Husband was by, but coming again
a second time, she took an opportunity to show me, that she had a Letter for
me, which I should take so as her Husband might not perceive it; but this was
impossible to do, this man kept his Eye so continually upon me, which obliged
the woman to make as if she was looking upon my Straw-bed, and turning it up,
she threw the Letter directly into it, where I found it when she was gone: The
Contents was, that she perceived the Lieutenant Criminel acted against me with
a Passion, more like an Accuser than a Judge, which had moved her compassion;
that I was a lost Man, if I did not get some person of very great Interest to
stand up for me; that she would endeavor to bring me a Pen, Ink, and Paper;
that I might write to my Friends, and she would take care to convey it for me.

This was very seasonable for me, my Persecutor being ready to confront me with
his Witnesses, and waiting immediately upon that to give Sentence upon me,
which would also have soon been confirmed by the Parliament. Besides, they had
made new informations, and whereas in the former, the Officers deposed that
they found me upon the Brazen Horse, they deposed now, that they took me in the
fact, Robbing on the Pont Neuf, and caught me as I was endeavoring to make my
escape. The Keepers Wife was as good as her word, and made use of the same
device to convey me the Pen and Ink she had promised me, as she had to leave me
the Letter; so that having wherewith to do it, I wrote two Letters, one to
Cardinal Mazarin, the other to Mousieur de Marillac, Son to him that was Keeper
of the Seal; I directed both of them to him, and the Keepers Wife having
delivered them to him, he told her, he wondered what I meant; that while I was
in favor, his Family, whatever occasion they had of me, never heard from me,
but as soon as I was in Affliction I had recourse to them; however, he would
not fail to do me all the service he could, and would have done it before if he
had known my necessity. This being reported to me by the honest woman, I
confessed in my mind it was an answer very true and very generous, for I had
given him no cause to have any thoughts of me to my advantage, for they knew
nothing, how earnest I was with Cardinal Richlie^, to be excused in the case of
the Marshall his Uncle; on the contrary, they very well remembered, that 'twas
I that carried the Order to have him apprehended; for all which, he delayed not
a moment, but that very day presented a Petition in my name to the Parliament;
by which he declared that the Lieutenant Criminel was my mortal Enemy, for the
reasons I have already given, and as I had instructed him in my Letter, acted
against me with so much private spleen, that he had suppressed the first
Information to make new ones; and not only so, but had himself suborned
Witnesses against me, and the Chevalier de Rieux among the rest, and that he
had suppressed my Petition to recriminate upon him, not letting it be brought
before them that would have done me Justice, and that without a kind of
miracle, I had never had opportunity to present this Petition; and in short,
that I was so innocent of the Crimes laid to my charge, that tho I was indeed
in such Company as forc'^ me against my Inclination to go, yet I was separated
from them, and not at all concerned in what they did.

The Credit of Monsieur de Marillac (who had a great many Relations and
Acquaintance in the Parliament) joined with the justice of my cause, procured a
speedy grant of my Petition, and the Lieutenant Criminel was forbid to proceed
any further in my process; and the Officers who took me, were ordered to come
and depose before an Officer of the Parliament, but not one of them durst
appear; and I obtained a personal Summons for every one of them, which was
afterward turned to a decree to take them up; and I took three or four of
them, and had them put into the Common Goal: when they were in Custody they
told the truth, and how all had passed, so that I was just a going to have a
Judgment, by which the truth of the whole matter would have been extorted from
the Lieutenant Criminel, if he had not been advised to transfer it to the
Counsel. The Parliament who had already received several reprimands from the
King, for having slighted the decrees of the Council, knowing they had given
one, by which he was forbidden to proceed any further, durst not go on with it,
which spun out my business to a great length: Nevertheless, Monsieur de
Marillac having represented to the Council the injustice that was done me, the
Lieutenant Criminel was defeated, and was forbidden to be Judge in the case,
and the Dean of the Counselors du Chatelet was substituted in his place, who
had order to take new informations; and he be^ having himself like a Man of
honor and honesty, the truth was brought to light, and my Enemies were proved
to be Liars: So I came out of Prison, after having been confined four Months,
whereof I had been two Months and a half in the Dungeon. My first visit was to
Monsieur de Marillac, who received me very kindly, without speaking one word of
what he had hinted to the Keepers Wife; he returned me the Letter I had wrote
for the Cardinal Mazarin, not finding it convenient to deliver it.

After having acknowledged this obligation, I thought of discharging another of
no less value, which was to pay my thanks to the good woman, the Keepers wife;
to whom having made an offer of a very considerable Present, I was surpised to
see her refuse it. This affliction gave me leisure enough to reflect upon my
self, and having given my self up to the Pleasures of the World, like a Man
that never considers he must one day dye, I had made a resolution to change my
course of Life: Nevertheless, it coming into my head, that this woman could not
do all this for no end, or with no design; and since she had refused my
Present, I concluded it could be no other than that of Love, and thought my
self obliged to content her that way too, without considering that I was going
already to break the promise I had made to God in my Troubles. But if I was
surpised at her refusing my Present, I was much more so, at the manner in
which she received my Complement; for without that Preamble, that it is so much
the fashion for Women to make, who would be thought more virtuous than they
really are; she told me roundly, that I did not deserve the Deliverance that
God had so wonderfully bestowed on me; that I had more reason to return him
thanks than to pull down his vengeance on me, by an account so criminal, as the
Adultery I had compassed in my Thoughts: That if she had obliged me, 'twas only
because she knew the injustice that was offered me, and this was but an ill
requital, to propose so horrid a Crime to her. I was heartily glad to stand
corrected by so Christian a reproof: and as virtue commands our esteem, so I
had more real value for her, than I should have had love, if she had yielded to
my solicitation.

I had no sooner lost the thoughts of this crime, but I entertained another in
my breast; I resolved to revenge my self of my false Witnesses, and begun with
the Chevalier de Rieux, whom I forced to draw in the street, having met him by
accident: as he naturally was but a Coward, he would endeavor to convince me,
that I was under the greatest mistake in the world, to offer that to him who
was always one of my best Friends; but as I knew well enough what I ought to
believe, I took no great heed to what he said, but gave him several blows with
the flat of my Sword, seeing he would not be persuaded to draw; but I was not
satisfied with all this: Next I meditated revenge against the Count d'
Harcourt, who I knew had treated me uncivilly behind my back: Tho he was of a
most honorable Family, and tho his Quality exempted him from giving me the
common satisfaction in such cases, yet I was resolved one way or other to let
him know, that I was not insensible of the affront; and it was not long before
I had an occasion put into my hands; there was a Captain in the Marine Regiment
called Desplanches, who was one of his Neighbors in the Country, to whom he
had behaved himself very imperiously, upon pretense that his Ancestors had
raised their Estate by being Rent-gatherers, or Stewards to his Family, by
which means they had left their Heirs a better Estate than their Master,
intimating as if they had dealt unjustly by him. It Is true this Desplanches had
been so, and had little less than thirty thousand Livres a year Estate; and
having obtained Letters Patents for his Nobility, and a Coat of Arms, now he
thought he ought not to bear all those meannesses, which was imposed upon him
by the haughty carriage of the Count: Besides this, that Prince had a great
mind to a piece of Land that belonged to him called Rufflais, which joining to
his Estate at Harcourt, he was always encroaching upon.

I no sooner was informed of all this, but I offered my Service to Desplanches,
whom I had no acquaintance with before; but I found means to let him
understand, that I was like to be very hearty in joining with him against one
that was so much my Enemy as well as his. This man, who was the greatest
Drunkard that ever I knew in my life, never thankt me, nor nothing, but told
me, he should be very glad to drink with me; and not to delay it, desi'rd me to
dine with him at the Flower de luce, where he lodged, near the Hostel de
Soissons. He told me however after his first Compliment, that he was obliged to
me, but I did not find him so eager of the thing as I thought he would have
been; so that I concluded either that he wanted courage, or that he was afraid
of embroiling himself with a Prince of that interest. I held of this mind till
Dinner, when having eaten his Soup, and taken off two or three Bumpers, he
began to talk very scandalously of the Count de Harcourt: I told him he must
excuse me in saying, this was no^ the way he ought to revenge himself of his
Enemy; that I had heard the Count d' Harcourt had offered him several insults,
even in his own house, and if he pleased we would go home with him, and see if
we could persuade him, to come and do the like again. Desplanches, whose
passion encreast with his Wine, told me, he liked the proposal very well; and
having asked two or three Officers of the same Regiment, that were with us, if
they would be of the party, they all agreed immediately they would go: So he
ordered his Horses to be saddled, and desired us to send for ours. I thought we
had nothing to do now, but to put on our Boots and to mount, but 'twas not his
way to rise from Table so soon, and 'twas six a Clock at night before he would
stir, and then he was so drunk, that instead of going about what had been
agreed, he fell to quarrelling with one of those Officers, so that if I had not
clapped in between, the quarrel would not have ended without mischief; I
endeavored to make him sensible of his error, but he being no more capable of
reason than a Horse, was the more unruly, till the Officer that knew him better
than I, was obliged to go out of the Room, for fear-of pushing the humor too
far: The two others, lest I should think he did so for want of courage, told me
at the same time softly, that 'twould be best for us to withdraw too; that when
he was drunk he was quite mad, and if we did not, we should, it may be, find
some of the effects of his disorder: I saw reason enough to believe them, so we
sent back our Horses and went home to our own Lodgings, while Desplanches was
fighting with his Men, and quarrelling with his Landlord and Landlady for
letting us go.

The next morning before I was up, he comes into my Chamber, and taking no
notice of last nights work, he asked me if I held my resolution, of going with
him into the Country as I had promised. I told him Yes, and was ready to go
when he pleased. He told me he would go as soon as ever the other Gentlemen
were ready, to whom he had sent that morning, and so desired me to rise: and
then he took five or six turns in my Chamber, walking hastily as if he had some
great thing in his head; at last it came out, and he told me that he was
disturbed in his thoughts, for fear he should make a broil with the Count de
Harcourt, who wanted nothing but such an opportunity to out him of his Estate:
This made me sensible that such sort of people always retain something of the
meanness of their Nature, in spite of all the Patents of Nobility their Money
may procure them; and if the Officers had not come in, in that very moment, I
had put off engaging with a fellow of so mean a resolution: I told them what
Desplanches had been saying to me, at which they shrunk up their shoulders; but
being Men of Honor, they told him, he ought rather to dye than to bear the
affronts he received every day; that they did not design to go and quarrel with
the Count de Harcourt at his own House, but they would only go with him and
Hunt upon his Lands, that lay next to the Count's, to let him see that he was
not afraid of him.

And to hearten him up, they gave him leave to go to Breakfast first, upon
condition he should drink but his share of two Bottles of Wine; and this having
the desired effect, we got on Horseback and took the direct way to Normandy:
Now tho this Man had nothing to do, but to make haste to our Journeys end, yet
all we could do, could not prevent him staying a whole day at Mantes, where he
lighting on some excellent Wine, made them fill a hundred Bottles of it, which
we set in the head of our little Troop, and convoyed to his House. And lest the
Count de Harcourt, who was at home, should have notice of our coming, we
thought it best to come in in the Night; and having forbid the Servants telling
any body how many we were, we went a Hunting the next morning, and rod up even
to the very edge of the Count de Harcourt's Land, which lay next to Rufflais.
The Count being immediately informed of it, and supposing it to be only
Desplanches and his Men, laid an Ambuscade for them as they should come back.
In short, as we were riding under a Hedge, we were saluted with two shots from
the other side, one of which struck off the Pommel of my Saddle, upon which I
turned about immediately, and being very well mounted, I came up with one of
the Fellows that had shot, before he had time to charge again; I could easily
have killed him if I would, but not being willing to do so, I contented my self
with beating him most unmercifully with my Fusil: The Fellow knowing me, called
me by my Name, and told me he belonged to such a Gentleman, and hoped that for
his Masters sake, whom he thought to be one of my very good Friends, I would be
pleased to pardon him: It Is your Master Sirrah, said I, is the cause that I use
you at this tate, but I will let you go, provided you will promise me to tell
him so. He made no difficulty of promising me this, and going another way to
escape Desplanches and the Officers, who were in chase of the others, he got at
last to the Castle de Harcourt, all over battered and bruised, and his Clothes
torn almost off of his back, so that any body might see he had fallen into very
bad hands: Desplanches and his Friends blamed me extremely for letting him go,
thinking that I ought rather have seized him and delivered him to Justice; but
I who aimed most at my private revenge, was very well pleased with what I had
done. In short, the Count de Harcourt was so enraged at the affront, he had as
he thought received; that he assembled all his Friends, and not considering
that he was the Agressor, he resolves to pull down the very house at Rufflais,
and to bury us all in the Ruins. This was not to be done so secretly, but we
had notice of it, and the House being not defencible, we retre^ted to the House
of the Count de Crequi Bernieulle, who was no Friend to the Count de Harcourt,
and whose House was then the Seat of a little War between him and the Marquis
de Sourdeac; for there was not only a Suit at Law depending between them, but
'twas grown to that height, that they made a formal War against each other; and
oftentimes met one another in the field, with fifteen or sixteen hundred men of
a side, as if they would come to a set Battle; so we offered our Service to him
to engage in his Party against both the Count de Harcourt, and the Marquis de
Sourdeac: There was a great deal of difference between these Troops and
regulated Soldiers, as appeared particularly one day, when the Count de Crequi
being advanced, the Marquis de Sourdeac had no sooner fired one shot from a
Fauconet at the Castle de Nieufborg, but all the Squadron scoured away as hard
as they could drive, every one laying the blame afterward upon his Horse, who
was not used to stand fire; but as the disgrace was general, those that stood
were willing enough to take it for an excuse. As they made war upon the Marquis
de Sourdeac, so did I upon the Count d' Harcourt, upon whose ground I ventured
two or three times to kill some Partridges: The Bailiff came, and desired me
civilly to forbear, pretending his Master was gone to Paris, but I knew well
enough that was a sham, for the very next night he came with his men, and cut
down the Trees, at the very Gates of Rufflais.

I thought however I had done enough to testify my resentment, and Desplanches
being on the other hand obliged to return to the Army, I was obliged to bear
him company to Paris, for he durst not venture to have gone alone; being
arrived at Paris, I went presently to Court, and the Cardinal seeing me, asked
me whence I came, which made me believe, that he knew all that had past;
nevertheless I durst not tell him the truth, lest he should give me a reprimand
for it, and perhaps something worse; but I was surpised, when instead of that,
he told me I had done very well, and he should like me the better for it as
long as he knew me; that one Folleville le Sens, who was a Gentleman of that
Country, and who belonged to him, had told him all, and that I needed not be
disturbed at it; but on the contrary, might depend upon his Protection. I
humbly thankt him for this goodness, but I asked him withal how he would please
to dispose of me: For while I was under confinement, he had given away my
Company; so that I looked methought, in my present condition, little better than
a Valet out of Service: he bid me take no care of that, but attend upon him,
for he went every year into the Army with the King; who began now, not only to
show himself great, but also to give an early proof of what he would one day
appear. In short, he delighted in the War above all things, and tho they
cautioned him with regard to his Health, not to expose his Person so in the
Heats and Rains, yet he seldom mist being on Horseback as long as any Daylight
was left.

I had spent more time in the Court than in the Army; and seeing however my
Inclination led me to the Profession, yet that 'twas impossible for me to
manage my self in it, as well as those who had been bred to it, I was not sorry
for the Command the Cardinal laid upon me. I waited upon him therefore with the
greatest assiduity possible; and tho I say it, omitted nothing that might
oblige him. However, there was several Poeple, who pretended to persuade me
that I took wrong measures, and among the rest one Artignan and Besmau, who
complained that they had done the same thing all their lives, without any
advancement more than what they were at first; and indeed they made but a very
sorry figure, and were in such a pitiful condition for the most part, they knew
not where to get a Penny to buy a Dinner: This obliged them to think of
retiring from the Court; but as they were of the furthest part of Gascogne, and
that they had not wherewithal to undertake so long a Journey, they tried all
ways possible to raise a little money, but all People were so kind to them as
to refuse them: for if they had got together but ten Pistoles, we should never
have seen one of them Commander of the first Company of the Grand Musketeers,
nor the other with an Estate of Three Millions of Livres, as he is at this
time: However, all they could say was not capable to dishearten me from
following his Eminence to the Frontiers. The Count de Harcourt went the same
time with the King, and looking a little disdainfully at me, I sent him word by
one of my Friends, that if he was not pleased, he had nothing to do but to tell
me so. He returned again, that I did not know my self, but he should find a
time to make me do it. This was a Bravade which I laughed at, and other People
laughed as well as I; for tho he was a Prince, he ought not to have carried it
so high; and several as good as he, and those some of his own Family too, had
not thought it below them to measure their Sword with a Gentleman; however, my
Friend advised me to have a care of my self, but I slighted it, thinking a
Prince of his Quality was incapable of a base action; but those who I thus gave
my opinion to, told me, that he who had done his best to take me off when I was
in Prison, might very well be thought to attempt it now I was at liberty:
However, I was not deceived in him, and whatever his endeavors had been to
revenge himself, he never attempted any of those ways they seemed to suspect:
For I do not understand that any private Ambuscade, had been laid at any time
for me; and tho I did attribute to him an accident which happened to me a few
days afterward, yet I ought always to say for the honor of the Person I had
to do withal, that he fairly gave me time to draw my Sword; and if I was
roughly handled, it was by the Fortune of the fight, and not a private assault.

There was one Breaute a Gentleman of Normandy, who was a Man brave enough, and
a very handsome Person, but of a behavior so extraordinary insolent, that it
rendered all the other good Qualities he had, not worth taking notice of: He
had this ill temper by inheritance, from the Marquis de Breaute his near
Relation, who had so good an opinion of himself, that he challenged five and
twenty Spaniards, to fight them all one after another; but Monsieur de
Grobendonc Governor of Boleduc laughing at his insolence, told him, that he
should have enough of one; and to make it good, added, that he should bring
four and twenty French men along with him, and he would send five and twenty
Spaniards to meet them. Breaute enraged with this answer, asked leave of the
Prince of Orange, under whom he served, to accept of the Challenge, and having
obtained it, he managed the fight so unhappily that he was killed upon the
spot, and two and twenty of his Men, and the two other cried for Quarter, who
being brought Prisoners to Boleduc, Grobendonc immediately hanged them, which
action deminish'd his honor, and sullied the Victory his Party had obtained;
but he gave this reason for it, That all the Combatants had sworn to maintain
the fight to the last drop of their Blood rather than to demand quarter, and
'twas but just that these who broke their word, should expiate the perjury with
their lives, for a satisfaction to their Companions that performed their vow to
the last. Breaute, tho as you see, he had no great cause to brag of this action
of his Kinsman, yet he had the story always in his mouth, and at every turn
would repeat it, to show that his Family had been always men of Courage; and to
make himself more ridiculous, he would bring it out, that if Grobendonc's Men
had had to do with him, they should not have come off so well. I have heard him
tell this story very often, which has made very good sport to all the Company:
But having been taught by experience, that we should not always laugh at the
follies of others, I was the only Person that kept my Countenance at these
relations, and consequently was furthest off from the thoughts of a Quarrel;
and yet when I least thought of it, I was obliged to fight him, upon pretense
that I had been as rude with him as the rest. My honor would not permit me to
refuse him, but imagining there was something more in the matter, and being
willing to know the bottom of it, I told him that if he had no other cause to
quarrel with me than that, he might put up his Sword again, for I had never so
much as dreamt of it; and that the Gentlemen that were with me would give me
the same satisfaction, that I did not say this out of fear, I believed I had
given proofs enough of my courage in several occasions, not to have it called
in question at such a time: while I was saying this I kept at Swords length
off, if possible to have avoided fighting: But he despising my justification,
or rather being excited on some other account, threw himself upon me in a
strange fury, and wounded me in the side. I became raging mad at the sight of
the blood, and making a desperate thrust, I ran my Sword to the Hilt through his
Thigh, but he presently revenged himself, for at the next pass he ran me quite
through the Body, upon which I dropped immediately, and he disarmed me.

I had a suspicion, that this was done by the procurement of the Count de
Harcourt, which was confirmed by what I heard the next Morning; for they told
me, that he carried my Sword to that Prince, and that for joy of the Victory
they made such a Debauche of it, that all the Company that were there, were
sent home in a lamentable pickle, and the Count himself made no scruple to own
the fact: 'Twas very dishonorable for him to tell all the world thus, that he
could not fight but by Proxy, he had a name bad enough already, after the
manner that he lived and treated his Lady, he needed not have taken such pains
to increase it. In short, he lived more like a Bully than a Prince, which was
the cause that he treated his Lady after such a sort as I hinted but now: That
'twas reported that he used to beat her, I know not whether this was true at
the bottom, or that his being Brother to the Duke d' Elbeuf, who had killed his
Wi^^ with ill usage, got him this Reputation: However 'twas, this is certain,
that this Lady, who was a rich Heiress, not being able to bear his humors,
retired to a Monastery, where she remains to this day.

My wound was too great to be soon cured, my Longs having been pierced quite
through; and you could not hold a Candle to the Orifice, but the wind that came
from it would blow out the light. The Cardinal, who hated the Count d' Harcourt
and his Family, because they were always against him, suspected as well as I
that this came from him, and declared himself openly in my favor; and told
publicly that if he could get Breaute into his hands, who now absconded, he
would teach him how to quarrel in cold blood: Nor did he stop there, but to vex
the Count de Harcourt more than for any kindness he had for me, he sent me his
own Surgeon, and besides that a Bag with about five hundred Crowns: This was so
unusual a thing with him, especially the Money, and above all to a man that was
neither one of his Family, nor indeed one of his Party, that every body was
surprised, and so was I my self, and indeed could hardly tell what to think of
it, till Desplanches came to see me, and informed me that the Cardinal had sent
for him, and told him, that as soon as the Campaign was over he would have him
take some of his Friends with him down to his house, and do all they could
possible to affront that Count; and that his Eminence understanding I should
quickly be cured, would have me be of the Party; and that he would certainly
speak to me of it, as soon as ever I was abroad again. In short, being gone to
thank his Eminence after I was well again for his goodness to me, he told me,
he should be very glad to have me go upon that design, and then ^twas he told
me how the Marshall de la Ferte had juggl'd with me, when he pretended to get
a Regiment for me. I thought that this Confidence proceeded from some
discontent the Cardinal had with him; indeed they said then that his Eminence
had some suspicion that he was not true to him, and that tho the Marshall used
to say of himself, that he never had changed his Coat; 'twas because they were
not so good as their words to him in what they promised him, rather than want
of Inclination on his part.

The Campaign being ended, Desplanches took four choice Lads of his own Company
with a Sergeant, whom he disguised like Valets, that his design might not be
known; and we went all of us to his house, where there came a Gentleman of
Perigor, that was a Captain in the same Regiment. By the way he received a
Letter from his Colonel, who was the Count de Tonecharante, by which he
desired him very civilly indeed, to give a discharge to a certain Soldier of
his Company: It unluckily happened, that the Messenger came in while he was at
Table, and the heat of the Wine adding something to his ugly humor, which was
bru^i^h enough of it self, he told the Express, that the Count de Tonecharante
busied himself with that he had nothing to do withal; that for his part he
would do nothing in it, and if the Colonel did not like it he might take his
course. Seeing him disturbed, we asked him what was the matter, tho he had
spoke enough already to make us guess what it was; but he showed us the Letter,
which was in the modestest terms that was possible; insomuch, that not being
able to see him so brutish, I told him he was to blame to give such an answer
to it; ^^at I had not the honor to be particularly known to Count de
Tonecharante, but he must give me leave to tell him, 'twas not usual to deal so
by ones Colonel, who was so generous to request a thing of him which he could
have done without him; that 'twas what the Captains could not have done without
the Colonel; and if the Colonel chose to go the contrary way, 'twas because
that they were unwilling to use their Authority in prejudice of the Captains;
that this refusal would but put him upon giving the Soldier his dismiss
without him, and that would not be all neither, for he would eternally lose his
friendship, which he ought to preserve above all things; that 'twas the
practice always at Court, as indeed it ought to be every where, that the
Captains did all that in them lay to keep a good understanding with the
superior Officers; that I spoke as his Friend, and prayed him to consider these
things a little; and tho he had an Estate, and so did not value preferment, yet
he should be careful to preserve his Reputation; that infallibly Monsieur de
Tonecharante would be disobliged, and I besought him but to think of that a
little.

I know not how he did to have patience while I said all this; however, 'twas
all one, he would have it, that 'twas the Captains Office to give a dismiss to
a Soldier, and that the Colonel had nothing to do with it: And growing very
high because I was not of his Opinion, he had so little manners as to give me
the Lie in his own House; for we were got to Planches near D' Evreux, which was
not above Six or Seven Leagues from Rufflais, and belonged to him. He had no
sooner let slip the Word, but I caught up a Plate and threw it at his head, and
the Wine having put Courage into him, he closed in wit^ me, though three or four
Persons who were at the Table with us got in between us; by good fortune for us
both we had neither of us our Swords on, so our fight being but with our Fists,
'twas not likely to be very Bloody; however, we were so warm that 'twas not
without great difficulty that they parted us. There was no great likelihood
after this that we should proceed on our Journey, so I ordered my Men to saddle
my Horse; the Gentlemen who were there did all they could to accommodate
matters: But he stood off, and would do nothing; so I came away, and being
pretty late I could reach but to Passi that Night, which was in the Road to
Paris. Nothing would serve him but he would follow me, that he would; but his
Friends, who saw I said nothing but what was true, prevented him, that he might
settle his brains. The next morning 'twas quite another thing, and he told the
Gentlemen that I left with him, that he was extremely concerned for what had
happened, and that they ought to have kept me, and that he would go and
overtake me to ask my pardon. They were all very glad to hear him talk after
this manner, and having saddl'd their Horses, they came all away with him a
gallop. They came up with me at Mantes where I baited, for I had no occasion to
be in any haste; when I saw them, and that their Horses were all in a foam, I
wondered what should be the matter they were in such haste, and presently
imagining it was to affront me. I placed my self at the top of the Stairs in a
posture to receive them with a Pistol in each hand: But Desplanches advancing
before them, and offering me his hand in token of friendship, he prayed me to
forget all that was past, telling me, that I knew well enough when a man's in
drink he is not master of his reason.

I could not find in my heart to be angry, hearing him talk at this rate, for
besides that, I did not believe he had acted himself in that which had
happened; I had a mind also to obey the Cardinal, by whose order, as I have
mentioned, I undertook this Journey: So I went back again with him, after we
had embraced each other, and staying two days at Planches, we came at last to
Rufflais, where we understood that the Count de Harcourt was at home at his
Castle. I courted Desplanches to go abroad that very day, but he pretended he
was not well; so I took my Fusil, and with only my own Servants, went out quite
to the grounds belonging to the Count de Harcourt; there was no game stirring,
but going on more with a design to be seen than to kill any thing, I shot up in
the air; one of the Count's Servants came out immediately to see who 'twas, he
knew me as soon as ever he saw me, and run in to carry the news to his Master:
The Count understanding I had but two men with me, sent out all his men, but
took care to stay behind himself: When I saw I was like to engage nothing but a
Mob made up of Plowmen and Footmen, and that I was in a fair way to be
devoured, I thought it was my best way to retreat; they persued me close, but
being well mounted I got ground of them, till I came to a lane that was just in
the road: These fellows persu'd me still, and made several shot at me at a
distance; but I escaped a greater danger presently after, for I was not gone
fifty paces in the lane, when I received a whole volley of shot from another
side, at which, thank God, I was more afraid than hurt, and not without cause,
for I had three shots in my Hat, and two in my Clothes; just at this juncture I
discovered Desplanches with his Soldiers, and not doubting but they were going
to set upon me, I had certainly killed him, if he had not cried out, and told
me, that he did not think he had shot at me, but at the Count de Harcourt's
men: I was such a Coxcomb to be persuaded into this; and having told them, that
since it was so, we had nothing to do now but to fall upon them, they charged
again, and we turned upon them, and persu'd them. Being returned to Rufflais,
they all made a great stir about the danger I had been in, and he asked my
pardon, with a great many words to convince me, that all that had happened was
by accident; but my Valet de Chamber, who it seems had at that time more wit
than I, told me, as he was undressing me, that I should not trust my self
there, and that I was with a man that made a practice of such kind of
Villainies; for a Countryman thereabouts had told him, that he had killed two or
three so basely from behind a Hedge; and that since I had had a quarrel with
him, 'twould be my best course to get away as soon as I could: This discourse
made me begin to recollect, what a Blockhead I had been to believe all he had
said to me, and resolved to leave a man with whom there was so little safety;
however I wanted an excuse to come away, and having sent one of my men to
Brione, to see if there was any Letters for me, I gave him one which I had
wrote my self, wherein 'twas mentioned, that I was wanted immediately at Paris,
about some business of consequence; so I took my leave of this Traitor, without
taking notice of any thing; and it pleasing God, that I should not continue
long uncertain whether my suspicion was well or ill grounded, it happened that
a Soldier whom my Valet had carried to drink with him, on purpose to pump him,
told him, that I was much in the right of it to go away, for I had escaped a
scowring; he could not get a word more out of him, tho he pressed him to speak
pl^iner; but as this was enough to make me judge of the person, I was no sooner
on Horseback, but I told him, I should remember him as long as I lived, and
that at another time I would tell him more; he stood mute at these words, and
not giving him time to justify himself, I clapped Spurs to my Horse, and got so
far from him, that if he had said any thing, 'twas impossible for me to hear
him.

In the mean time all that I had told him came to pass. Monsieur de
Tonecharante having been informed of his rudeness, gave the dismiss to the
Soldier without him, and not content with giving him this affront, he resolved
to have him casheer'd, the first minute he could get an opportunity: The thing
was difficult to be done at that time, it being not then as it is now, that the
Colonels were absolute Masters of their Regiments; for on the other hand, the
King was in want of Officers, and accordingly was more chary of them, than it
has been since: Indeed they did not come in such crowds for Commissions in
those days, nor were not so prodigal either of their Estates, or of their
Lives; so that Monsieur de Tonecharante, tho he had resolved to do his utmost
to throw him out, found it impossible to bring it to pass, till the Peace of
the Pyrennes; but now the time being come, that there was not so much need of
Soldiers, and the King making a reform among his Troops, he managed it so,
that he got his name into the List of those that were to be disbanded, tho it
was a little out of the order, for he was the fifth or sixth Captain of the
Regiment, and the reform used to begin at the youngest: Desplanches could not
bear this affront without making his complaint, which the Count de Toncherante
had foreseen, and had been beforehand with him, having waited upon the King,
and given him a large account of his behavior, which was not only brutish, but
something worse, for he was grown to that height, that sacred things were not
free from his violence when he was in drink, and he would speak either of God
or the the King, in the same terms, as he did the worst of his Enemies.

For all this he had the Impudence to go to the King, and having pleaded the
merit of his service, how he had been several years in the Army, had always
kept his Company full, and had never been charged with any failure of his duty;
that he had an Estate of his own, and did not serve merely for his Pay, and a
thousand things to the same effect. The King, after he had given him Audience
with a great deal of patience, answered him coldly, that he knew all this as
well as himself, and that since he had been so faithful to him, he had done
this to give him leisure to serve God, as regularly as he had served him; and
tho he did not expect him to be a Saint, yet he would not have him be impious;
that he had been informed from very good hands, that he had pist in the Holy
Water Pot, in contempt of that sacred Element, and of all Religion; that he did
not know how it came to pass he was not prosecuted for it; and but that he
understood at the same time he was in drink, he should perhaps have repented
coming to him else. Desplanches, who knew in his heart, the King had taxed him
with nothing but what was true, insisted no more upon it, but went out with
shame enough, and retired himself altogether to the Country, and never stirred
out of it but once, that he came to Paris to marry the Daughter of Monsieur de
Brillac, Councellor of the great Chamber; but this Lady neither, being not able
to cure him of his Debauchery, he killed himself with drinking in about five or
six years.

I had resolved at my last parting with him to demand satisfaction from him for
the Treachery he had used toward me; but having given the Cardinal an account
of the whole matter, he prohibited me so strictly, that I durst not think of
it: In the mean time he sent me to Brussels, upon a secret affair which I must
not reveal, and in which I could not succeed. The Prince de Conde was still at
the Spanish Court, and it happened while I was there, that Monsieur de Beauvais
was killed; he was Father to the Countess de Soissons, and Master of the Horse
to the Prince; he was a Man of Courage, but ^ad too good a conceit of himself,
which was the cause of his misfortune; for as he was coming down from the
Prince de Conde'^ Lodging, he met a Gentleman coming up, and takes him by the
arm at the top of the stairs with ^uch sorce, that he threw him down, and walked
over him himself. The Gentleman would not so much as ask him the meaning of it
then, from the respect he owed to the Place; but going out immediately, he gets
a Friend, and sends him to Beauvais to demand satisfaction of him for this
affront. Beauvais was not a man that used to refuse any body, so having brought
a Friend with him to be his Second, they fought it out two and two of a side;
one of his Enemies was quite killed upon the place, but he was never the better
for this short lived advantage, for he received a Pistol Bullet in his head, of
which he died in a few days. The Prince of Conde being informed of this
accident, went to see him before he died; and as he saw there was no hopes of
his life, he told him, that seeing the condition he was in, he ought to leave
all other thoughts but those of his soul; that he had kept a certain Lady a
long time, by whom he had had several Children, (one of which was the present
Countess de Soissons) but was never married to her; that he advised him to
discharge his conscience, which he might do by making her his Wife; that he
knew not how to show his friendship more to him, than by advising him for his
good; and that if he would be ruled by him, he would go and send for a Priest
immediately. Beauvais had lost all his senses, and had not spoke a word in four
and twenty hours; but the Prince's voice, or rather the discourse he made to
him, reviving him: No, my Lord, said he, raising his voice, I shall not be
ruled by you, I never promised her any thing, nor I don't see, that I am
obliged to perform any thing. The Prince replied, that he knew that best
himself indeed, and that what he spoke was upon the common report that spread
it about so; to which the other having again answered the same thing, he left
him to dye in quiet.

All this while the War continued with great fury, not only on the Frontiers
with the Spaniards, but also in the heart of the Kingdom; and the weakness of
the Chief Minister encouraged such as were disposed to diminish, if not to
overthrow the regal Authority, and the present form of Government in the
Kingdom: I don't pretend to reflect, in saying this, upon what the Parliament
did, but upon the Impudence of some particular persons, who thou^^t themselves
at liberty in these times of public ^^^straction to establish the pe^ty
Tyrannies they exercised in their own limits. Indeed they had in every Province
two or three of these little Princes, for such they were in effect, for the
Kings orders were but laughed at among them, if they were not agreeable to their
designs. This was a great trouble to the Cardinal, but more to the King, who
had a thousand times more courage, and who was more nearly touched in these
practices than others; but 'twas his time to wink at all this, and as young as
he was, he was extraordinary politic, and chose rather not to reform an abuse,
tho he knew it to be so, than to let it appear that it was too great for him to
attempt, in such an uncertain condition as things then stood. In the mean time,
never was there such a prank played as was done now, by a certain Coxcomb that
had married one of my Relations, and in whose case I had like to have been
involved. This Man called himself the Marquess de Pransac, he was a huge hulky
fellow of himself, but his pride swelled him beyond all dimensions; if he had
any Nobility in his blood, 'twas only that he was Grandson to a President of
Bourdeaux; but since I am fallen upon his Genealogy, I must give you a short
history of his Great Grandfather. He kept a Brandy-shop at Bourdeaux, and made
a figure so mean, that no body reckoned him to be worth above two thousand
Franks. In short, he not only dwelt in a little nasty house, but bought and
sold privately in other Peoples names. He had but one only Son, who he had bred
up well enough and above what 'twas thought he could afford; for not intending
to make him a Brandy Merchant, he sent him to the University. This young fellow
was a mere Thomas Diaforus, that is just such another Blockhead, as Moelier
calls by that name in Malade Maginaje.
his Comedy, or as we may say a very Ben. Johnson.
Bartholomew Cokes. However, he happens to see one day at Church, one of the
Presidents Daughters, and falls desperately in love with her, insomuch, that
but one sight of her brought him into the yellow Jaundice* His Father, who as I
said, had no more Children, and knew himself to be richer than anybody thought,
was almost distracted to see him in such a condition: And after a deal of
pother to know what ailed him, at last with much ado got the Secret out of him.
Pshaw! says the old man, is that all? Never trouble thy self, I Will warrant you
I Will get her for you; and with that away he goes to her Father, and demands her
of him for his Son. The President thought the little old fellow was mad, and
asked him who he was, that he should come with such a compliment to him; and
guessing at the man by the figure he made, which was very indifferent, he was
going to bid his Footmen kick him down Stairs. The little man, not at all
daunted at the scornful treatment of the President, and to come to the point,
asked him how much he could give his Daughter, for let it be as much as it
would, he would give his Son three times as much in ready Money, besides the
refusal of such a place as his was, which he had secured for him when he should
be capable to manage it. The President hearing him talk at this rate, could not
tell what to make of it; and seeing nothing in him that looked as if he were
craz^d, began not only to treat him civilly, but to ask him as civilly, if he
was able to make good what he talked of. The old man told him* he was not very
likely to be deceived, unless his Money would not go, for 'twas all in specie;
and taking him home with him, he showed him a great Iron Chest, and in it above
eight hundred thousand Franks all in Gold.

The Match was soon made up after such a sight as this, and from this
Conjunction sprung the Father of our Coxcomb; I leave any one to judge whether
I have done him wrong in giving him such a Title, when they have heard his
Story. First, tho he knew his own Original well enough, yet his Coach would not
please him unless it was adorned with a great many Coats of Arms; so without
any regard to the Coat that his Grandfather had taken up, and which served his
Father well enough, he picks out such Coats as he liked best, and orders the
Herald to quarter them with his own, and to divide them into sixteen quarters,
the least of which belonged to some Prince or other, and withal gives a most
glorious Livery, that made all the Town stare at him. The City of Paris, like
other great Cities, never wants Sharpers, who live by their wits, at the price
of other peoples follies. One of these observing our Gallant, and finding him
ruuning stark mad after the vanity of Grandeur, presents him with a very formal
Genealogy, by which he made it out as clear as the Sun, that he was descended
in a direct male-line from the Family De Dreux, a younger branch of the Blood
Royal; and that as such, he had a right to bear in his first and fourth quarter
the arms of France, and in the second and third those of Dreux: He was
overjoyed with his discovery, and I happening to be then at his House, he asked
me what I thought of it: I found he was too well pleased with it for me to
contradict it, for I had no mind to disoblige him: So I having given my opinion
in his own sense, I made him so complete a Fool, as that he immediately sends
for his Coach-maker^, bespeaks a new rich Coach, giving him the Arms that he
would have set upon it; he changed also his Plate, and made the same Coat of
Arms be engraven upon that; and to omit nothing that might add to the Luster of
his Family, in some Writings he had making, he caused himself to be styled, The
most Serene Prince L.... de Dreux, adding however the Surname of Rhedon, which
was his true name, but which he intended to drop in process of time, or to
attribute it to some accidental imaginary entail, as a great many other
Families in France do; who, if they were to tell the truth, would be very much
at a loss to make out their Original.

Besides this, the new Marquess de Pransac changed his Livery again, and took
up the same with Mademoiselle de Montpensier's, the Lining only excepted, one
being green, and the other blue; and increasing his Attendants with four Pages
and some Footmen he went beyond several Princes in his Equipage: He took care
in all his greatness not to forget a Canopy of State, and wanting nothing but
the name of his Highness to make him a complete Prince, since he now began to
believe himself to be really one; I was the first, that to carry on the jest,
bestowed that title upon him; he took this so extreme kindly of me, that I must
eat always at his own Table, and if I would believe him, he could not part with
me. He that first set him up for a Prince, was also very liberally rewarded,
and being resolved to outdo me, made one addition more to his title, and styled
him his Royal Highness, telling him, that since he was descended from so many
Kings, he did not see any reason, why he should content himself with the bare
title of his Serenity. Our Marquis thought this very rational, and giving his
assent by nodding of his wise head, he showed how well pleased he was with it;
but being resolved to manage this humor, I began a little to contradict this,
and his Highness was to be Judge between us; I told him then, that was the way
to call the rest of his Titles in question, to give him one that did not belong
to him; that none but the immediate Children of Kings took this Title upon
them, and that was but lately neither, and that the very next remove was that
of Serenity, as in the Prince of Conde, and the Prince de Conti his Brother, to
mention no more: This discourse allayed a little the vanity of his Highness de
Pransac. But the other Gentleman, to engratiate himself further, told him, that
the Title of Royal Highness was well enough, for the Prince of Orange had
assumed it; I replied, that he never knew any body give it him but the Dutch
Gazetteers; and if it was due to the Princess of Orange, as she was a Daughter,
and Sister of a King of England, it did not follow, that her Husband should be
styled so upon that account; that the Princes of the Blood Royal of England, as
well as those of France, never lost their quality, tho they did marry Husbands
inferior to themselves, and therefore 'twas a mistake of his, to give the
Husband the Title, which was due only to the Wise.

His Highness of Pransac was pleased to think me in the right, and to be
content with the character that was his due, so he told us with a very grave,
tho a very foolish manner, that time would bring every thing to pass. All
People were amazed to see him set up such an Eschutcheon, and to appear in such
an Equipage: But he having not an Estate to answer such a prodigious expense,
it shrunk his Revenue, so that to lessen his charge he was fain to retire into
the Country, till his Exchequer should be in a condition again to support his
Pageantry.

This piece of Fopery past well enough so long as the War held, but when the
Court, (the Peace being settled) had leisure to look into civil affairs, the
King gave order to the Procurator General of the Parliament to enquire, how the
Marquis de Pransac came to be a Prince of the Blood: Whereupon the Procurator
General goes with his Officers to make him a visit, and finding how the case
stood, he caused them to break in pieces all the Coaches where the Flower de
Lis were quartered in the Escutcheons, and calling for his Plate, they caused
that also to be bruised, and the Arms to be beaten out; besides they gave him a
Summons, to answer to a Complaint which was presented to the Parliament upon
this subject. Never was man so perplexed as his Highness appeared upon this
occasion; he sent for him that had wheedled him up in this fancy, but he knew
well enough, 'twas no time for him to be seen; then he sent for me, and I went,
for I had a mind to see how he carried it under his mortification. Really the
man deserved Pity rather than Envy; for he was so great a Fool, that he would
still be called his Highness; for having failed in showing him that respect, he
told me with a great deal of gravity, that I should have a care of being too
familiar with him; that his Cause was not yet lost, and that before long he
might be in a condition to make me repent affronting a Prince of the Blood: But
he abated much of his Pride shortly after, when the Procurator General, who
prosecuted him vigorously, condemned him in a Fine of fifty thousand Crowns,
and declared him and his Posterity incapable of the Privilege of the Nobility;
and several other clauses in the sentence to degrade him of his Honor. Besides
all this, the Lawyers advised him to drop his pretensions, and with much ado
prevailed with him to do it; but that which was worst of all, he was forced to
draw up the surrender of his claim himself, no body caring to meddle in such a
business; in which he set forth, that the man I mentioned and my self, were the
persons who insinuated into him, that he was a Prince of the Blood; and that
he, meaning no harm, verily believed it had been so; but that since it appeared
otherwise, the same sincerity obliged him to relinquish the thoughts of it;
that he begged his Majesty's Pardon, and hoped, that having not intended any
way to offend him, he would be pleased to extend his Royal Mercy to him, and
not prosecute him with the utmost rigor. I was summoned to answer upon this
Deposition, and my Friends thought I should have been secured; but being
examined, I made it appear, that I was far from prompting him to that folly,
and only made my self sport at it; that 'twas not my fault, if he had not more
wit to take a thing seriously, which was spoken only to banter him; that I knew
his Original too well to believe it my self; but that in short, 'twas
impossible to make a Fool a Wise Man let one do what one could: My Examination
did him more service than I had foreseen, for there being other circumstances,
that made him appear a very weak person, the Parliament used him gently, and he
got clear with asking the Court's Pardon, and paying a thousand Crowns Fine.

After this business he was obliged to change his Name and his Arms; as for his
Name, he resum^d his own, but for his Arms, 'twas four or five years before he
could resolve upon it; so he bare upon his Coach nothing but his own Cipher
with a Coronet, and nothing at all upon his Plate; at last he gave for his Arms
a Lion Sable in a Field Or, but as he could not forget the Flower de Lis, he
put a great many in the alliances which he quartered with his own, which was as
much as to tell the world, once a Fool and always a Fool. After this, tho he
was threescore and ten years of age, he thought himself young enough to fall in
Love, and to begin his Amors, he makes Love to Madam the Duchess de Saux, but
in so very a respectful manner, that he never spoke a word to her, but
contented himself to go to the Fauxbourg Saint German, where he stays all the
while the Mass was celebrating at the Convent des Minims, only to have the
honor to see her go by, and returns the happiest Man in the world, if she
vouchsafed to take the Holy Water from his Hands, and takes but so much notice
of him, as to bow when he gives it her. The Duchess was a good while before
she imagined any thing, but some body having told her Husband, the Duke de
Saux, he was resolved to observe the humor himself, which having seen, he
ordered his Lady to look a little favorably upon him; which put the good man
so besides himself, that if it continued a month or two longer, he must
certainly have been sent to a Mad-house.

Because I would not break off this story, I have run on through the transactions
of several years, which I must look back again to, for what relates to my own
affairs. I was pretty well with the Cardinal, and tho I had not succeeded in my
Voyage to Brussels, he employed me again in a secret business* he had on foot
on that side, which was to get off the Count de Marcin from the Intrests of the
Prince de Conde, for whose sake he had sacrificed his fortune; for had he
continued in his duty, he had not failed being made a Marshall of France:
Indeed there was few men understood military affairs better, nor that was
fitter for any great enterprise; and yet for all this, the Prince de Conde
quarreled with him, for not having punctually observed some Orders he gave:
The Count de Marcin excused himself, and showed him how the occasion required
him to make some little alterations. But the Prince, who was the passionatest
man alive, turning hastily from him toward the fire, would not hear him speak,
but in a fury, Ah Marcin, said he, who would have thought, that you would have
used me as you do; repeating the same words over and over five or six times
with so much heat, that he bit the Chimney-peice with his teeth for madness.
Marcin, seeing what a rage he was in, thought it his best way to retire, for
fear of something worse. The Cardinal was, by his Spies, immediately informed
of this misunderstanding, which was the occasion of his sending me on this
Errand. The Risque was great in this adventure, for it had been as much as my
life had been worth, if I had been discovered; but going for a Merchant of
Liege, I lodged in a private street, and feigning my self sick as soon as I came
into my Lodgings, I told my Landlord, I had a Letter of great consequence to be
delivered to the Count de Marcin; I wrought so well with my Host, that he
offered me freely to go and carry it to him for me. I charged him to deliver it
to his own hands, which he carefully performed. The Count de Marcin, who
guessing at the thing, carried on the disguise, bad him take care of me, and
that if I wanted for any thing, he should tell me, I should not scruple sending
to him; that he could not come to see me till the next day, because he was just
taking Horse to ride out of Town, but that he would be with me at Eight a Clock
in the morning without fail. My Landlord, coming back with this good news, did
not question but I was at home, but I had posted my self in Ambuscade, about
ten or a dozen doors off to see, if instead of an answer, he did not bring a
Party of Soldiers with him to apprehend me; and I stayed out upon the scout,
at least an hour after I saw him come back; but finding the coast was clear I
returned home; he asked me whence I came, who he had left in no condition to go
out, and if I intended to increase my illness. I told him, that I had a mind to
be at the Mass, tho I was so weak, I was hardly able to get back again. This
discourse being over, he told me what Monsieur de Marcin had said to him, which
I was overjoyed to hear, hoping that since he had lent an ear to the beginning
of my mess^ge, some good issue might probably be made of it. I waited that
night with great impatience, and Monsieur de Marcin being come at the hour
appointed, he asked me what Proposals I had to make to him, and what
Credentials I could show to satisfy him, if he should treat with me. I told him
for that matter I had sufficient; and not to give him any reason to doubt it, I
showed him my Letters from the Cardinal. He told me this was something indeed,
but it was not enough however; that I ought to have had a Letter of Credence
from the King himself; that tho the Cardinal did govern the Kingdom as Chief
Minister, yet he disengaged himself oftentimes from very strict Obligations and
Treaties, on pretense that the King did not approve of them; and that this was
his method, only to try people how they were affected, or to make them
suspected to their own Party; but however I might tell him, what advantages
they proposed to him; that if they were such as he should think worth while to
consider of, I might then return and get a larger Commission; and if not, that
then 'twould be needless to give me so much trouble. He had some reason indeed
in the bottom for what he said of the Cardinal; for he had several times in
that manner, shifted his head out of entangling Cases, while the Civil Wars
lasted: As for example, in the Case between the Prince of Conde and the City of
Paris, where he rendered the Prince suspected by the Parisians; who doubting
the Prince would not perform his Engagements, he broke off several times with
him, when the Prince of Conde thought all things were concluded of: However,
being desired to declare my self, I told Monsieur de Marcin, that if he would
quit the Interests of the Prince, and break off his Treaties with the
Spaniards, the King should give him fifty thousand Crowns in Money, a
Government of a Province in the Heart of the Kingdom, with an assurance of
being made a Knight of the Order at the first Promotion. I had several other
offers to make to him, but I was like our Shopkeepers, who never show the best
of their Commodities till the last. I concealed what I had more to say, till I
had heard him speak, that I might know what his intention was. He told me the
Cardinal banter'd him sure, to make him such offers as these at this time of
day, for he had offered him more than all this long ago; that either he must
believe him to be extremely outrag'd at the Prince of Conde, or that he was
reduced to great necessity, to fancy he was to be tempted with such a little
matter as this was; that he did not offer him half the value of the loss he had
received in his own Estate in France; that this was far from making amends for
the ill treatment he had met withal; that if he had quitted Catalonia, in a
time when his presence was most necessary there, the Cardinal ought only to
blame himself for it; for that after having put him in Prison, at the same time
when the Prince de Conde, the Prince de Conti, and the Duke de Longeville had
been apprehended, tho he had never been concerned in any thing, that might give
the least cause of suspicion; he ought to have kept his Orders more secret,
which he had given to treat him in a different manner from them, after the
Prince de Conde was gone out of the Kingdom; that there was nothing which a man
would not venture upon to gain his Liberty, and that he remembered every day
what the loss of his had cost him; that he was fain to purchase his Escape, at
the price of throwing himself out at Window, from the top of a House, which
broke one of his Legs, and that to avoid the like treatment, there was nothing
so sacred in the world, that he would not violate; that the Cardinal should not
then accuse him, as he did every day, of the blackest crimes that ever were
committed; that if there was any one could be taxed with such crimes, 'twas he
who had caused him to be apprehended, once already, without cause, and would
have done it a second time, if he had not taken care to prevent him; that bare
suspicion ought not to be sufficient ground, to use extremities with men of
Honesty and Honor; but they should have plain Matter of Fact to charge and
prove upon them. He made a long Oration of this sort, full of complaints, too
many to be incerted here; and I would not interrupt him, because I knew, that
when a man has discharged his passion, he is the more tractable to an
accommodation. In the mean time, finding that he began to be cool, I told him,
that I did not pretend to justify the Cardinal, but that I would tell him this,
tho by the by, that a man who is in such a Post as his Eminence, is often at a
loss, and that too much confidence would have ruined him; and that it is the
constant Maxim of Politicians, to secure always the persons of them whom they
suspect, and then to examine whether they were guilty or no; and that if he had
been in his place, he would have done no less himself: That his falling in so
violently with the Prince of Conde, was what the Cardinal could not be pleased
with, who saw that Prince, in the designs laid for his ruin, suffered himself
to be carried to all manner of extremities; that 'twas too late to recall those
things now, therefore 'twas better to drown the remembrance of them in a hearty
reconciliation, which he might make very much to his advantage; that since the
Offers I had made him were not satisfactory, I begged him to tell me what it
was he expected, and that I would use my endeavors with the Cardinal, that he
should have full content. He told me that he would think of it, and that this
Conversa^ion having already been too long, and the Spaniards being naturally
jealous, to take away from them all cause of suspicion, he would not come to me
any more there, but prayed me to go to Liege, and to come to him to his Castle
de Modave, where he would be in eight days time: but he could not tell what I
would do to pass through the Spanish Towns upon the Road, which I could not avoid;
that he would have given me a Passport himself, if the Prince de Conde had
been absent; but as it belonged to him, he durst not encroach upon his
authority, and that it might do me more harm than good if it should be
discovered; that 'twould be better for me to apply my self to the Governor's
Secretary, as if I was of Liege; that those sort of People would do any thing
for money, without much troubling themselves to examine into it. I thankt him
for his Counsel, but I had no occasion to make use of it; for that I was
provided with all those things before I came to Brussels; and instead of coming
by the great Paris Road, I came down the Meuse in a Luggage Boat, which had a
Passport for Liege. The Marshall de Fubert who was Governor of Sedan, having
notice from the Cardinal, that I went from him about affairs of Consequence,
had instructed the Master of the Boat, and that I might pass safely at
Charlemont and Namur, I disguised my self and went for one of his Boys; at
Liege I was directed to a man the Cardinal employed there for a Spy, and he got
me a Passport under the name of a Burgher of that Town, so that having nothing
to fear I went not from Brussels till the day before I was to be at Modave: I
lay that Night at Lovain, and leaving Loo on the left hand, I went on and
entered into the Country of Liege about a League further. I stayed six days in
the chief Town thereabout for News of Monsieur de Marcin, for the Country
People, who came every day into the Town, would presently have brought the News
if he was come home; at last understanding that some of the Servants that he
sent before him were come, I went away and met him there the very day he
arrived: I was disguised like a Mason, as was agreed on before, between him and
I, for such people were not suspected coming to him, because he was a great
lover of Building, so that there was no notice taken, tho we were locked up
together for a great while: he knew me as soon as he saw me, and asking me if I
had brought him the Draught that I had promised him, I answered him yes, and
taking a Paper out of my Pocket I made as if I would give it him, but he bid me
keep it; and when he had viewed a thing, which he was treating with some
Workmen about, we should then go into his Closet and discourse of it.

To avoid all suspicion, when he saw me at a distance that I could not hear
him, he said to them near him, that he did not believe I could do his business;
that I came on purpose from Cologne; but that he had been told by some people
that I was not such an Artist as I pretended. He told me all this a few Minutes
after, and how well it had taken; that some of the Workmen had envied me,
because they thought I came to take the work out of their hands; at last h^ving
taken several turns, and done some little business about the House he took me
into his Closet with him* where I asked him for an Answer, to what I concluded
my last discourse with: He told me, that was easy to do, and so going on with
it, explained himself upon the matter: That they should make him Marshall of
France, Governor of a Province, Knight of the Order at the first promotion,
General of the Army either in Italy or Catalonia, and should pay him two
hundred thousand Crowns in Money. These demands being so extravagant, I was
amazed; however, as my Instructions reached further than I had yet discovered
to him; I told him, I had wrote to the Cardinal about it, since I had the
honor to see him, and had received this answer: That instead of the Government
of a Province, he should be made a Marshall of France, which he did not
question would please him better; and that he should receive one hundred
thousand Crowns in ready Money, and withal that he should be assured of the
dignity of the Order, whenever there was a vacancy: he was in a rage at this,
and asking me if the Cardinal made no difference between him, and the Marshall
de Fouca^t, to whom besides that dignity, they had given fifty thousand Lovis
Dor's. I told him yes, I believed they did, but that he was not master of a
strong place as 'tother was, when he took the opportunity of making such a
bargain for himself; and that when the Cardinal granted him those Conditions,
'twas because he saw plainly 'twould cost much more to recover such a place out
of his hands; that regard must be had to the Circumstances, and all things were
to be considered; that he was but a private Captain among the Spaniards, and
could not do them much more hurt than the Prince of Conde would do without him,
who was left still behind.

I said a great many such things to persuade him, but he would not abate a jot
of his demands; upon which I desired him to give it me in writing, that I might
show it to the Cardinal, to whom I was resolved to return. I meant honestly;
nor did I intend any thing but to justify my self to his Eminence, that I had
done my best; who knowing so well what had happened between Monsieur de Marcin
and the Prince of Conde, made no doubt but I should succeed in my design; and
therefore ordered me not to come up to the offer of a hundred thousand Crowns,
but with a great deal of difficulty; so that I doubted he might blame me for
mismanagement, and I was willing to have something to clear my self: But
Monsieur de Marcin, taking it quite otherwise, rose up in a rage, and told me,
he could find in his heart to sacrifice me that moment to his just resentment:
For what did I see in his face to propose such a thing to him; and if this was
the Cardinals method, to involve a man in Negotiotions on purpose to discover
it to his own Party, he should have a care of him; that if he should have been
such a Fool to give it under his own hand, he made no question but they would
take care to have it published both in Spain and at Brussels, and at all the
Confederate Towns in Europe; that he perceived I was only sent to ruin the
confidence that had been put in him by the Spaniards; that however, he would be
so generous as to let me go, provided I went about my business immediately, for
he had nothing more to say to me. I was quite confounded with the Passion he
was in at me; however, commanding my self, I let him go on without any
interruption, and finding that his fury was over, I told him, that if the
Cardinal had any such design, 'twas more than I knew; but for my self I could
give him an account of mine, and I would ingeniously tell him the reason why I
made such a proposal to him. That I had to do with a Person that was very
difficult, and that expected every thing should come to pass to his own fancy;
that I had seen him so prepossest with an opinion, that my negotiations could
not fail, that I was very careful to satisfy him at my return, that I had done
my best; that I acknowledged to him, that I was to blame to make him such a
Proposal, having not the honor to be known to him, and the desire I had to see
him return into France, where his merit would meet with another sort of
recompense than what he found from the Spaniard, made me willing to give him an
unusual satisfaction, which I would do by showing him my Instructions which I
had kept by me, tho I run the greatest danger in the World, if it should be
found out.

This discourse cooled him a little, but not at all prevailed with him to
lessen his demands; so seeing there was no good to be done with him, I took my
leave, and came back to France, by the same way that I went; and being arrived
at Charleville, I was forced to stay for a Convoy to go as far as Rhetel, for
the Prince De Conde who held Rocroy, and Montal, who was Governor of it, made
such excursions as hindered the Communications between those Towns. The Duke De
Normousteir who was Governor of Charleville, and to whom I was particularly
known, asked me were I had been; but having no order to communicate to him any
of my Business, I told him, I came from the Spaw, where I had been ordered by
the Phisicians to go to drink the Waters: He took this for an Answer, and
having sent out his Cavalry into the Country of Luxembourg for a Military
execution, the People having refused to pay their Contributions, I was obliged
to attend till their return; and there being a great many other people, who
waited as well as I, he granted us a Convoy of the first that arrived, but we
were but little the safer for them, for they were but thirty Troopers, and
those so fatigued with the duty they had been upon, that both Horse and Man
were ready to fall every step they took: If the rest of the Company would have
been ruled by me, we would not have staid for them at all, for we were enough
of us to have ventured; but the majority was against me, and overruled me,
whether I would or no: which we had all of us cause enough to repent of. In
short, Montal, the Governor of Rocroy for the Prince de Conde, knowing well
enough that there was a great many people waited for the return of the Convoy,
set one to give him an account what time they came back, and beset the ways
with several parties; so 'twould have been a miracle if we had escaped them.
When we were come within a mile and half of Pierre-Pont, the Enemy, who were
hid in a Wood, discovered us; and having divided themselves into two Bodies,
one attackt us in the Front, and the other in the Flank; our Guard made but
little resistance, and would have run away if they could, but their Horses, as
I said, being harrass'd, they were taken immediately; for us, we made a body by
our selves, and made a show to defend our selves, and at the first charge we
killed two of their Officers; but being overpowr'd by numbers, we were forced
to seek our safety from the swiftness of our Horses; and so made away to get
back to Charleville. In the mean time, having observed, that the Dragoons had
gotten before us, and had posted themselves in a Defile, by which we must of
necessity pass, I got into a Wood, and tho I was persu'd by three Horsemen yet
I lost them, and coming out on the other side I saw no body appear, which made
me conclude I was out of danger; and I traveled two Leagues without any
opposition, and was just rejoicing to my self that I had escaped, when four
Horsemen very well mounted discovered me; and one of them coming up to me with
the usual question of Qui vive, or who are you for? I had no sooner answered,
Vive France, but he bid me surrender my self, or I was a dead man: In the mean
time, the other, who were coming toward me, and were not above ten paces off,
rendering it impossible for me to escape them, I was obliged to give place to my
ill fortune, and to yield my self their Prisoner; so I was carried into a
Neighboring Wood where the rest of the Troop lay in Ambuscade; and he that
commanded them, having asked who I was, and whence I came: I told him that I
was a Frenchman, and that I came from Charleville. It happened that this was a
Gentleman that lived but two Leagues from my Fathers, so making my self known
to him, he would not suffer me to be searched, or any way roughly dealt with,
but used me very civilly.

I staid there with him till Evening that they broke up their Ambuscade, which
I thought very strange, knowing 'twas not customary to do so till Sun rise: But
he told me 'twould signify nothing to stay there any longer, for they only
waited for any Persons they could find that had got away from the others; ^ut
since they had met with no body but me, 'twas very probable the rest were all
taken; and indeed so it proved* for I found them all got to Rocroy before me,
which was some Comfort to me in my Affliction; yet still I must say, that I was
better treated than any of them, for there was not one of them but had lost his
Money, whereas I kept mine, of which, to my great comfort, I was very well
provided. In the mean time I was in great perplexity, whether I should send to
the Cardinal or no; for on one hand I considered if I did so, he might perhaps
get me out, but then on the other hand my applying my self to the first
Minister of State, might give them cause to suspect, I was not the Person I
pretended to be; for I had told Monsieur de Montal that I was a Lieutenant of
Foot in the Regiment of Grancy; of which Regiment I was thoroughly acquainted
with all the Officers; Insomuch that when he questioned me, I gave him an exact
account of the State of the whole Regiment: At last, having well considered
what I had to do, I thought 'twas best to let it alone, and to discover my self
to the first person that should get his liberty upon Parol, or till the general
exchange of Prisoners, which was expected would not be long; I had also another
reserve, which was since I had Money, to offer my ransom, but Monsieur de
Montal would not accept of it, so I found my self frustrated of that design.
Tho we were not far from the Capital City of the Kingdom, where every one
generally has some acquaintance, yet 'twas not to be imagined, how few there
was that received any assistance from their friends; I could not however see so
many worthy Gentlemen suffer, without sharing with them something of what I had
left, which unseasonable bounty soon showed me the bottom of my Purse; but
still I comforted my self, that I had half a years Arrears due to me at Lions;
but when the time was come, the question how I should endorse a Receipt on the
back of the Order was another perplexity, and I must sign my own name, which I
had concealed from Monsieur de Montal, and called my self by the name of one of
the Lieutenants of Grancy; so because I would not expose my self to appear a
Lier, I chose to continue in that misery, which I had begun to be sensible of
since my Money had failed me. In the mean time, many of those to whom I had
^ent my Money, having received recruits from their friends, concealed it from
me, for fear they should be asked to repay me, and I that assisted every body,
was deserted in such a manner, that my condition was miserable beyond
expression. I was obliged to live above three months upon the Basket; and to
complete my misfortune, my Linen was stolen from me, and I had but one Shirt
and one Crevat left me in the whole world, so that I was fain to lie a bed all
day to have it washed; for my part, when I call to mind how 'twas with me at
that time, I cannot imagine how I was able to bear it; and above all to find
those whom I had assisted in their distress, shun me as if I had the Plague,
tho they knew in their own Consciences, that I had never been reduced to this
condition, but for my compassion to them. All this while there was no
appearance of the General Exchange, which we had so long looked for, although the
Campaign was ready to begin; that was all the news that I inquired after, for I
was, just as it were, sinking under my miseries, my Clothes, and especially my
Shirt, hung all in rags; and for Beer or Wine I had almost forgot the taste of
them. In short, I, who had compassion of every body, found all the world cold
and indifferent to me, they would wish me better fortune indeed, but no body
would do any thing to procure it.

It Is easy to judge, that my mind was perplexed under all this affliction almost
to distraction, and was a thousand times just upon the point of discovering my
self to Monsieur de Montal, choosing rather to dye at once, than to linger out
my life by little and little; however resolving with my self to have a little
more patience, at last the Exchange so long wished for arrived, but 'twas no
help to me, for the Marshall de Grancy having given in the names of the
Officers of his Regiment who were Prisoners, left my name out, as he very well
might, for that he whose true name it was, remained with the body; so I had the
unhappiness to see all my fellow Prisoners go free, and my self left behind. I
remained so overwhelmed with trouble, that Nature it self sunk under it, and I
fell into a Fever which held me two months at least, and being carried to the
Hospital, all my hopes depended upon an Officer of Picardy, whom I thought to
be an honest man, and to whom I had discovered my self; I had desired two
things of him before he went away, one was that he would convey a Letter for me
which I had writ to the Cardinal, in which I had given him an account of the
sad accident that had befallen me; the other was to send me the half years
revenue that was due to me of my rent at Lions, which I desi^'d him to receive,
and to that end gave him a Blank Receipt signed with my hand, for the
Play Master to fill up as usual in that case; but instead of doing me this
kindness, he not only run away with my Money, but was so barbarous as to keep
my Letter which I had written to the Cardinal. I waited with impatience for an
answer from him, and from his Eminence, but I heard from both of them alike;
yet I was such a credulous Coxcomb as to flatter my self for three months, that
there was some extraordinary thing had fallen out to hinder him; at last,
seeing I was forsaken both of Heaven and Earth, if I may dare to speak so, my
despair was so great, that I was ready to lay violent hands upon my self; in
the mean time I relapsed into my distemper, and was come to that extremity,
that they began to tell me I ought to think of settling my Conscience; I asked
then for a Confessor, and having, as it happened, fallen into the hands of an
honest man, I made him my Confident in some part of my sorrows; I told him of
the false name I had taken up, and how it deprived me of that relief which
otherwise I might have had. I durst not tell him any more, lest out of a false
zeal he should reveal my Confession. The good man, after he had given me what
Consolation he could, offered himself very freely, to go for me to Paris; and
having gladly accepted his pro^^er, I gave him a Blank signed, as I had done
the Officer of Picardy, that he might receive whatever there was due to me from
Lions; I did not tell him how much, for I was afraid that Officer had p^aid me
some nick, and indeed he found that he had received five hundred Crowns, which
he was gone away with, but there being by this time another half year due, he
brought me likewise the like sum of five hundred Crowns, excepting a small
matter for the Charges of his Journey. If I durst have trusted him, as I said,
with my affair to the Cardinal, he would without doubt have acquitted himself
honestly, since he was a Frenchman both by Birth and Inclination; but
Providence having ordered things otherwise, I resolved with my self, being
relieved from that horrible necessity* I was in, to have a little longer
patience, and the rather, because they began now to talk of the General Peace,
which the Spaniards, who had always rejected it, seemed now more inclinable to,
since the ill success they had in the last Campagnes; but it all depended upon
this Summers Expediti^n, and if the Spaniards should happen to beat us, all our
hopes would be lost again. The Kings Army was commanded by the Viscount de
Turenne, who had with him joined in Commission the Marshall de la Ferte, but
the latter suff^ing himself to be beaten by an oversight before Valenciennes,
the Viscount de Turenne managed it so, that he had no longer a Colleague, and
affairs were never the worse for it; for before, the Jealousy which arose
between these two, ruined the best of their designs, but now those disorders
being prevented, we got the better of the Enemy on all sides; but as we could
not be satisfied with any Conquests, till we had added that of Dunkirk, which
nevertheless was to be delivered up to the English, by virtue of a Treaty with
them, the Viscount de Turenne marched thither with his Army. Monsieur de Montal,
who apprehended nothing so much as a Peace, said openly, that it all depended
upon the success of this Enterprise; and I, as soon as I heard how it was,
prayed heartily it might come to pass, as I had reason to do, for I saw plainly
enough, that this was the only hope I had left for the recovery of my liberty;
but the place being of the greatest consequence to both Parties, the Spaniards
were not less vigilant in the defense of it, than we were vigorous in our
attacks; and they who had always before shunned giving Battle with a great deal
of caution, now drew all their Forces together into the Field, and the Prince
of Conde having joined them with his Forces, advanced together within
Cannon-shot of our Trenches. The Viscount de Turenne, who did not expect to
take such a place as this without blows, had disposed all things for their
reception, like a great Soldier; and the Enemy knowing who they had to deal
with, resolved to make a discovery of his Lines, before they advanced any
further. Don Juan of Austria, who commanded the Spaniards, would trust no body
for this service, but advanced himself with the Prince of Conde to take the
view; and the Marshall de Hoquincourt who was with them, having with more
courage than wit, adventured too far before the rest, was killed with a
Musket Shot; this made the rest retire, but did not put by their design of
attacking us in our Trenches. The Viscount de Turenne having notice of this by
his Scouts, was resolved to be beforehand with them, and coming boldly out of
his Trenches drew up in a posture to receive them; he did not stand to
encourage them by amusing them with a long Speech, but riding through the Ranks to
see that all things were in order, he showed a countenance so full of
assurance, that put such an opinion into the minds of his Soldiers, as was a
good Omen of a certain Victory.

If I had been in this Engagement my self 'twould have pleased me to have given
you the particulars, the account being so much to our advantage, but I know too
well the errors they are subject to, who write of such things from the mouths
of others, and shall therefore, to avoid the same mistakes, content my self
with telling you in general, that the Viscount de Turenne having broken the
whole body of the Enemies Army, sat down immediately before Dunkirk, which he
obliged in a few days to capitulate; and from thence he marched his Army along
the Sea Coast, and took in all the small Towns thereabouts, for having gained
so great a Battle, and taken so strong a Town in so short a time, they thought
there was no resisting him; and he would have overrun all Flanders, if the
Spaniards had not taken their measures very speedily to obtain a Peace. I was
too much concerned in the issue of these affairs, not to be very inquisitive
about them, my Liberty depending upon them; and therefore I was always teazing
my friend the Ecclesiastic to send me word how things went: First, he sent me
word of the Battle, and how the success of that put the Spaniards upon using
their utmost endeavors for a Peace; this overjoyed me, but I waited in
expectation eighteen months longer before 'twas brought to perfection. I cannot
imagine what the Cardinal thought of me all that while, for 'twas three years
before he had any news of me. Without question he tho^^^ I was dead, or else I
should have let him know what was become of me, but being always in hopes of
getting out, I defer^'d writing to him from one day to another till at last
'twas so long, I thought 'twas to no purpose to write at all; I was blamed for
it by many, but I think with very little reason, considering my circumstances.

At last the happy hour arrived, the General Peace was made, and I was
delivered: as soon as ever I got out I went to wait on the Cardinal, whom I
found at Vincennes; he took me for an Apparition at first, but recovering his
surprise, he asked me whence I came, and how I had the Impudence to see his
face, after I had served him so. I told him, I thought I had reason enough,
considering what had befallen me, and I would make himself my Judge, if he
would please to give me a hearing; I told him then the reasons that prevented
my writing, and repeated the particulars I have just now related; he made light
of it, and shrinking up his shoulders, as if he thought me crazed, he told me
for answer, he was sorry for me, but if I talked at that rate, God help me, he
thought the best he could do for me, was to send me to the Bedlam.
Petites Maison^. I was mad indeed at this discourse, and so scandalized at it
I was, that I went out all in a rage, and meeting with la Cordonniere, who is
now Lieutenant General, but then belonged to him, I told him, that his Master
was so haughty with his good fortune, that 'twas intolerable; that 'twas all
one to him who he affronted, and a Gentleman should have no better usage from
him than a Slave, but I hoped the time would come, that I should revenge my
self of him for the language he had given me. I thought I had spoken this to
one of my friends, when I said it to la Cordonniere, who I had obliged, and
lent him Money several times, when he was but a mean fellow, and wanted it
enough; but forgetting all those obligations, I had no sooner opened my mind to
him with all this freedom, but he began to take his Masters part, and one word
bringing in another, we both drew, and were both of us wounded, and if we had
not been parted by the Marquis de Rennel, we had not left off without some
mischief or other; and it being impossible for us to prosecute the heat after
this discovery, we went off each of us as our occasions directed: Mine was to
hide my self, the Cardinal having publicly sworn, if ever I fell into his
hands, I should come shorter by the head. I made my retreat into a Convent, the
Prior whereof was my true friend; while la Cardonniere was visited by a crowd
of the Grandees, who to make their Court to the Cardinal, could submit to any
mean Rescal that had but his favor. This affair of mine making a great noise
in Paris, the Religious where I was began to be afraid of me, which the Prior
perceiving, was fain to give out, that I was desirous of taking the Habit, and
to that purpose was to pass the Probation; so he directed me to go every night
to the Office, and to make great show of my Devotion, for being to save the
life of a friend, he made no scruple to make use of any stratagem to effect it.
It Is not for me to dispute whether he did well or ill in it; I am sure the
obligation's mine, for without his assistance I had run a great risque of a
Scaffold; for the Cardinal, who was a true Italian, revengeful as the Devil,
when he could not come at my body seized my rent, and had reduced me to a very
miserable condition, if my friend the Prior had not stuck close to me; but he
differed in that, especially from his Brethren of the Order, who study nothing
but their own interest, for the more miserable he saw me, the more he strove to
comfort me; for my part I knew not what to think of my self, but in my opinion
it was my evil destiny rather than any fault of mine: I made a strict
examination of my self, as if I had been to make my own Process, but whether
self love was predominant in me, or that indeed I was rather unhappy than
guilty, I could find no satisfactory reason to condemn my self.

I stayed in this Convent till the Death of the Cardinal, which tho it happened
quickly after, yet 'twas not sooner than I desired, for as godly as I was
grown, I could not heartily wish well to a man that had done me so much injury,
and who, after he had been the cause of my lying three years in Prison, obliged
me now to another Confinement, in a place not one jot more agreeable to me than
the place I came out of; if I had been any thing seriously disposed, I had
certainly become a Religious, and I oftentimes secretly wished, Heaven would
have given me the Grace to attempt it; but being not cut out for that Vocation,
I was fain to have Patience with all my Fury. The Count de Charoft whom I have
formerly mentioned, and who was pleased still to retain a kindness for me,
spoke to the King in my favor before I drust appear, and having given him an
account of my adventure, of which his Majesty was wholly ignorant, he was
pleased with a great deal of goodness to give me his Pardon, provided the
Scuffle I had had with la Cardonniere could not be proved to be a Duel; for he
had solemnly swore at his Coronation upon the holy Evangelists, that he would
never pardon any one that was guilty of that crime, an Oath which we see he
has never yet dispensed with; and if we may judge by what happened soon after
I escaped, we may conclude he never will; I mean the affair of Messieurs de la
Frette, and of Monsieur de Chalais, in which I was very happy that I was not
engaged, as you will see by the following story.

You must understand, that about a fortnight or three weeks before, I happened
to be playing at Tennis with a Gentleman of Poictou, called la Very an Officer
of the Guard; we played at the Tennis Court in la Rue de Vangirard, near
Luxembourg; there was a great many better Tennis Courts in Paris than that, but
we went thither, because our Lodgings being both near it, we had the
convenience of going in our Morning Gowns; we played several Games, and when we
were just a going to give over, the Chevalier de la Frette came in, and
standing by the Ball Basket, as if he had a mind to quarrel, began to toss the
Balls into the lower Hazard of the Tennis Court. La Very lost the Game, and
being a little out of humor upon it, because at that time we did not play by
the Set, but paid for the Balls we should loose, desired him, that he would
please to divert himself with something else; I know not whether he spoke it
surlily or not, or whether the Chevelier de la Frette, who to say the truth was
a sort of a Bully, took it for an affront on purpose to make a broil, but
without any more ado he takes the whole Basket up, and throws the Balls all
about the Tennis Court, this occasioned some hot words between them, and the
Chevelier de la Frette was in such a rage, that not considering that the other
was not only without a Sword, but as a man may say, quite naked, he drew and
made a pass at him: The People that stood by ran in between them, and prevented
him doing any mischief, so we left off the Play, and went into the
dressing room to put on our Cloths. There was no Gentlemen there* so that
having parted us, they apprehended nothing of any further mischief, and we went
away without any notice being taken. La Very told me, if he was ruined by it,
he would have satisfaction. I durst not dissuade him, tho 'twas against my
judgment, lest he should think 'twas for want of Courage, and so I, that was
but just got out of one snare, fell into an other, that was ten times more
dangerous. I was fain to be the Messenger to go and carry the Challenge to the
Chevalier, who lived in the same street, at a great House, now belonging to the
Duke d' Elbeuf. I had nothing to do to make him a long Compliment: He told me
presently he knew my business, and preventing me* told me, that we must get
another man; for that two of his Friends who had heard of the quarrel, had made
him promise that he would not engage without them: Upon this we went to see if
we could find the Count de Beaumont, youngest Son of the Marquis d' Entragues,
who has since taken upon him the Title of Marquess d' Illiers, and was made
under Lieutenant in the Light Horse of the Guards, and lost his life at the
battle of Seneff. But happy enough for him, we could not find him; but as we
^ought for him at his Fathers house, L' Hostel d' Entragues, we met with a
Gentleman who was his Neighbor in the Country, one Chilvant, who made up our
Party; so we fought behind the Convent of the Carmelites, where I was wounded,
and our side had the worst of the day, but no body was killed. We every one
shifted for our selves, knowing we were lost men if we were discoverd'; but as
good luck would have it the thing was never known: La Very returned to his
Post as if nothing had been done, and none of us had the least disturbance
about it. For my part, I had taken sanctuary at the Marquess de Noirmoustier,
Eldest Son to the Governor of Charleville, of whom I made mention before, but
he soon informed me there was no need to be afraid, so I appeared again too as
well as the others.

About a fortnight or three weeks after this, as I hinted before, happened the
quarrel of the Messieurs de la Frette, which did not come off so well: The
Eldest was at a Ball at the Palace Royal, where was a great appearance of
Courtiers: when all was over and every one preparing to go out, this de la
Frette who resented something from Monsieur de Chalais, about a Mistress, and
had a mind to let him know it, rudely justled him several times as he went out.
Monsieur de Chalais looking about to see who justled him, presently knew la
Frette, and gave him some words about it that were disobliging enough. If they
had had Swords there would have been some disorder about it in the Palace, tho
that was a very improper place to quarrel in, but every one being dressed for the
Ball, la Frette would take no notice of it there, but waited without for him to
demand satisfaction. They soon agreed upon it, to fight three to three, and
fixed the place, where they should meet the next day, it being too late for that
night. This was in too public a place to quarrel, and make a secret of it; the
King was made acquainted with it, and immediately sent away the Chevelier de
St. Agnan, to tell Monsieur de la Frette, that he positively forbid him
fighting, and that if he should dare to do it, he should certainly dye for it.
St. Agnan, who was his Cousin German, found him out presently, and made him
this compliment. De la Frette told him, that he hoped he had more regard to his
honor than to make him forfeit his word; that the hour was at hand, and 'twas
in vain to think of disappointing them; and besides being his Friend too, he
should rather expect, that he would make one in their number, and that they
would send to Chalais to provide himself with another man. The Chevalier de St.
Agnan, never considering that he was sent by the King with so severe a message
to prevent it, nor how strictly all sorts of Duels were forbid, rashly
embarques in an affair, which he could never hope to get clear of; and joined
with them in it, so they immediately sent to Chalais to provide a fourth man.
The Marquis de Noirmoustier his Brother-in-law, who was already engaged,
knowing of the affair I had lately had with the Chevalier de la Frette,
immediately thought upon me, and sent about to look for me; but very happily
for me, I was engaged that night at play at a Friends house; and tho it is not
the custom at Paris, upon any occasion, to stay from ones Lodging, yet it being
very late, and that the streets were at that time very full of Rogues, I was
obliged to take a Bed with them. This odd step saved me from all the mischiefs
of this affair, and was the only time that I could say, I was obliged to
fortune for my deliverance; and that tho she had always crossed my advancement,
yet she had not resolved my ruin. The eight Gentlemen who fought, were the
Chevalier de la Frette, Ovarti his Brother, since called by the name of d'
Amilly, and is now Lieutenant in the Guards, the Chevalier de St. Agnan and the
Marquis de Flammarin, on the one side. The Prince de Chalais, the Marquis de
Noirmoustier, the Marquis d' Antin, Brother to Monsieur de Montespan, and the
Viscount de Argenliece on the other. The success of the business was not fatal,
only to the Marquess d' Antin, who was killed upon the spot; but the rest got
off cheaper, yet their condition was bad enough. The King was in a great rage
when he heard of it, but above all at the Chevalier de St. Agnan, who indeed
was more to blame than all of them. In the mean time their danger was equal,
there was a necessity for them to think of getting out of the Kingdom, and that
very privately too; for the King had given severe orders at all the Ports, and
all the Passes on the Confines to stop them. However they got off, some into
Spain, some into Portugal, some one way, and some another, as their own good
fortune guided them. But as whatever a man enjoys in a foreign Country has a
sort of banishment in it, while he is kept out of his own; so with all the joy
of their escape, they had every one time to repent of his folly: No body
pitied the Chevalier de Agnan, all the world said he had no more than he
deserved; the Brothers de la Frette were as little as he, for they were so very
quarrelsom upon every slight occasion, that they were very well compared to a
vicious Horse, that will let no other Horse come into the Stable. For the rest,
every body was concerned for them, and would have been very glad, if it had
been possible, that the King would have a little winked at it on their
accounts: Indeed they were all very honest Gentlemen, and deserved better
fortune; but not one person durst speak to the King for them, and tho the Duke
de Agnan was very near to his Person, yet he was one of the first that told to
the King, his Sons Crime was of a nature too gross to be forgiven, and that if
he knew where he was, he would be the first should bring him to justice; that
therefore he would not trouble his head to ask any ^avour for him, and he
believed that all People would be of his mind. This was a discourse well enough
for a Court Parasite, that suited all he said to the temper of his Prince, but
very ill became a Father, who at least ought to have extenuated the Crime of
his Son, not agravated it. The Relations of the Messieurs de la Frette took
other Measures. If they durst not expose themselves to speak to the King, they
set all their wits at work to prevail with him: The Duchess de Cha^lnes, whose
Husband was Ambassador at Rome, obliged him to speak to the Pope; and tho the
Holy Father at the same time ought to justify the Kings severity in these
matters, yet that did not hinder him from promising his assistance in this
occasion. In short, having a Legate residing at Paris, on some Affairs needless
for me to repeat, he ordered him to speak to the King in his name on their
behalf: The Duchess could not have employed any whose Interest was more likely
to prevail, the Pope having power to dispense with the Oath, which 'twas
supposed was the chief cause, that made the King so inflexible to all sorts of
Application. But he answered the Legate, that he should be glad to oblige his
Holiness in any thing, but that in this his hands were tied, and that none but
God himself could discharge him of an Oath so solemnly taken: Not that he
called in question the Authority of the Holy See, but that 'twas for the Honor
of God who made him a King, that he should be a Prince of his word, and he did
not question but the Pope himself would forbear pressing him any farther, if he
pleased but to consider the consequence of it.

The People adored the King when they came to know the answer he had made the
Pope; and his Holiness himself, who indeed concerned himself in it, but at the
Importunity of the Duke de Chaulnes was overjoyed at the constancy of the King;
and if one may credit what I heard from a Person of Quality secretly, thankt
the King for the refusal: On the other hand, the Duke de St. Agnan coming to be
in extraordinary Favor soon after, no body doubted but he would employ it in
behalf of his Son, but he was very cautious; whether 'twas that he saw it would
be to no purpose, or as others thought, that he was without natural affections.

This affair having made a great noise, as it is generally with things at
first, People began now to forget it, another public accident happening to
divert their discourse. Monsieur Fouquet Superintendant of the Finances was
seized and committed to Prison; indeed he had such powerful Enemies that 'twas
a miracle how he escaped the Scaffold. About the time he was Arrested they gave
out several things against him to render him more odious to the People; but I
owe this Testimony to the Truth, to say that many of them were really false,
which I can more easily justify, than say that I had not a hand in some of them
my self. Monsieur Fouquet was a man of a large Soul, and a very generous
Spirit, and 'twould have appeared more had he been of any Profession but of the
Long Robe. Cardinal Mazarin had taken an aversion to him, for that he being
Procurer General to the Parliament, he could not bear to hear the Cardinal
reflect upon that great Body, of which he had the honor to be a principal
Member: He had however often told the Cardinal that he would not deny, but
there were several Persons in that Assembly that he could wish were not: But
this was not satisfaction enough for an Italian, who made nothing to retain a
grudge against a man all the days of his life, tho being of an effeminate
cowardly nature, he durst never discover his malice, but just when he was a
dying, and then he told the King, that he was a man, who not only profusely
wasted the public Treasure, but also applied great sums of it to his private
use; that he lived in greater splendour than the King himself; that his Houses
were finer than the Royal Palaces, both for the Buildings, and the Magnificence
of the Furniture; that he gave private Pensions to several persons about the
Court, a shrewd sign that he had some dangerous things in his head; that he had
caused Belle Isle to be fortified, a place which he had bought of the House of
Gondi, which had the English, the ancient Enemies of the Kingdom, behind it,
With whom, says the Cardinal, I will not assure your Majesty he does not hold
correspondence; that the only way to prevent such a mischief, was to strike at
the root, and to make sure of such a dangerous man* that nevertheless this was
to be done very cautiously, and to be sure not while he was Procurer General,
because then the Parliament would be his Judges, and he would certainly get
off; that therefore he should take his measures accordingly, and above all,
that it should be done with such secresy, that he might be sure to have no
suspicion of it.

This was just at the time of the Cardinal's Death, who that he might show
himself a true Italian to the last, sent for this very Monsieur Fouquet, and
embraced him, calling him one of his best friends, mentioning to him the many
obligations he had received from him during the Civil Wars, and particularly
how he had sent him fifty thousand Crowns, when he was obliged to fly, and
retire to Liege, which he had not paid him till a long time after: But as this
was his manner to wheedle with those he had a design to betray, so his being
upon the brink of the next world, did not one jot alter his measures; for he
left the King prepossest with all those fine stories he had made of this
Minister. His Majesty, who was perfectly formed for all those great things we
have since seen him execute, was absolute Master of his own secrets, which is
one of the most essential qualities of a great man; and having discovered his
intentions to no soul but Monsieur le Tellier, whose fidelity he had tried in
too many occasions of the last moment, to have any cause to suspect; and to
Monsieur Colbert, who the Cardinal had recommended at his death, as a fit
person to manage the Finances, and these he made exactly pursue the method the
Cardinal had said down, which was not to attempt Monsieur Fouquet till they had
got him out of the Office of Procurer General.

And now, since we have occasion to speak of this Monsienr Colbert, who had
been one of the most profligate wicked fellows of the Age, I Will tell one story
of him, concerning some business that happened between him and I: It was a
great many years ago, and in those days he was counted a very honest man. My
Sister, whom I told you of, had a great Trial about the birth of her Son, had
by her Husband a certain rent charge upon the Hostel de Ville, and the Writings
were left in the hands of this Monsieur Colbert's Father, who as every body
knows was Paymaster of those Rents: Her Husband, however it happened, knew
nothing of it; but my Sister having found a little Memorandum among his Papers
after his death, by which it appeared that he had a demand of five hundred
Livres a year on the Townhouse, and in whose hands the Writings were al^o. I
applied my s^^f to this Monsieur Colbert, who I suppo^^d* being the eldest Son,
had all his Fathers Papers, and sp^ke to him about it: 'Twas not a very
pleasan^ piece of News to him, who since he began to come into favor had set
up for a man of quality, which appeared chiefly in his Retinue, especially
after his pretension to be descended from the Royal Family of Scotland:
However, he demanded to see the Memorandum I mentioned, and I being such a
Coxcomb, as I may well be ashamed to mention, showed it him; as soon as ever he
looked on it, and spied this defect in it, that it wanted a Date; knowing that
'twould therefore be very difficult for us to make any proof of the matter; he
told me slightly, that he had never heard of the thing before, neverthel^ss he
would search among his Papers, and desired me to call on him again in about
weeks a time. I went to him again at the time appointed, and in the mean time
my Sister caused the Register to be se^rch'd if possibly she might find any
thing there to (...) the time. When I came, he told me, he could not yet find
any thing; and thus he led me on from (...) day to another, for above two
months. They that my Sister applied to, said the same thing to her, so that I
began to think there was nothing in it; when there comes a man to me one day,
and tol^ me, that if my Sister would allow him one half of the rent, he would
procure her the Writings: I told him, I could not give him an answer, till I
had spoke with my Sister, because I did not k^ow her mind; but if he would let
me see him to morrow I would discourse with her, and give him a positive
answer. 'Twas a brisk offer, and I could not imagine who it should come from*
unless 'twas from some of them my Sister had been with, or else from Monsieur
Colbert himself; but I resolved to have the man dogged when he came again,
which was effectually done, and he was found to go directly back to Monsieur
Colbert's: Tho 'twas but a presumption of mine at best, yet I found it so
probable, that I thought 'twould be no great damage to go again, and speak a
l^t^le more positively to him about it; so I went again, and telling him
bluntly I came to know if he had yet found our Writi^gs, he answered me, No.
This is base, said I, not only to get Peoples effects into your hands, but to
keep them by force. Come, come, Sir, continued I, don't think to put your
tricks upon us, we know well enough that you sent a fell^w to me to make a
rascally Proposal; I had your Man followed, and I Will prove he came in hither*
besides I have other proofs enough to convict you. Monsieur Colbert, amazed to
hear me talk thus, changed color, but soon recovering himself, whether that he
was u^^d to such tricks, or that he knew me to be a Man of Hon^u^ and would not
use him ill, and that he had better venture upon my Generosity, replied, 'Twas
he indeed that had the Writings, since I would have it so, but not with so much
injustice neither as I pre^^^ded, that my Brother-in-laws Father owed his
^^^her a considerable sum of money, and left this in his hands for his
security, as he found in his Register. I asked him, if he would show me what he
said* and that I would be satisfied, if I saw it in the Register; ^e told me,
'twas not proper to expose the affairs of his Family to other peoples
knowledge, that he was an honest man, and I ought to believe him upon his word.

This was all the reason I could ever understand why the Advocates, to whom my
Sister went for advice, directed her to have recourse to the Register, and to
take out a Duplicate of the first Deed, which nevertheless could not be, till
we had made him swear that he had not the Original: So we caused a Summons to
be given him, and while we attended the sealing of it, we made them look over
all the Registers of the Hotel de Ville; but the Father and Son, being one as
honest as to other, had altered that which only could give us any information
of what we looked for; and our Contract had gone under the names of so many
people on one side, and to other, that neither his name nor ours was to be seen
in it: The only refuge we had left, was the Oath he was to take, but our
friends having very well observed to us, that he that was Knave enough to cheat
us, would also be Villain enough to forswear himself, we were advised to make
up the matter; so we gave him a discharge for all the Arrears which he had
received under borrowed names, and also for the year then going on, and so had
her Writings delivered.

I leave any one to judge, if a man whose Conscience was so well managed, could
be thought to stick at the supplanting poor Monsieur Fouquet, who held a place
which he had so great a desire to disposses him of, and in which he might so
easily rob both the King and the People: So he set all his wits at work to get
him out of his place, that he might then attack him as was concluded; and as it
was necessary to find out a pretense for this, they made a fine story to him,
that now he would be so much encumbred with affairs in the Council, the weight
of all business there lying wholly upon him, since the Cardinal was gone, and
not able to assist him, that 'twould be impossible for him to discharge the
business of the Parliament too, and therefore 'twould be better for him to lay
it down; to carry this on, the King showed himself kinder and mo^e obliging to
him than ever; ins^much that the good man being absolutely deceived, fell
blindly into the snare, and laid out for a Chapman for his place in the
Parliament, which being past all question the best in the Parliament, there was
great struggling amongst the mony'd men who should have the opportunity to buy
it; Monsieur de Fieubet bid most for it, for he offered boldly sixteen hundred
thousand Franks for it; but Mr. Fouquet chose rather to let Mr. de Harlai, one
of his particular friends, have it, tho he got not so much of him by two
hundred thousand Franks. This was a piece of generosity few, but himself, were
capable of, and for which he was admired both by his friends and his enemies;
but the latter, to ^ully an action that got him so much honor, reported
presently, that he had robbed the King of such Sums, that so small a matter was
not worth his taking notice of; and as nothing is sooner credited than an ill
report, every body believed it, till by the issue of his affairs it appeared,
that he was so far from having made himself rich, that he was above two
Millions in debt. Being thus out of that Post, which was his Protection, the
King thought it best to make a Tour into Bretagne, before he suffered him to be
arrested, that if he had any intelligence either within or without the Kingdom,
he might seize upon Belle Isle, where they apprehended a Rebellion. And this
was managed with a great deal of prudence, had there been need of so much
caution; for before Monsieur Fouquet suspected any thing* Soldiers were
planted so near to Belle Isle, that if any of his friends would have attempted
any thing for him, it had been impossible; his Imprisonment startled abundance
of people, nor were they less sorry for him, for tho it happened at a time when
the public Ministers were odious to the people, by reason of the great Taxes,
yet the people observing, he was always a generous man, and did not ^oard up
what he got, as Statesmen do, but spent it freely amongst them, they
distinguished him from the rest, who they had marked out as the public grievance
of the people; others were moved chiefly by their interest, for he had obliged
the affections of abundance by suffering them to get by him, and these could
not see him carried to Prison without regret, who had done every body rather
good than harm; and if he had been guilty of any thing, 'twas only under the
Ministry of Cardinal Mazarin, and in executing his orders too punctually. But
that which moved them most to compassion, was to see the King put Colbert in
his place, one who under the Cloak of Moderation nourisht an intolerable
ambition, always deceitful, tho he pretended to be fair, preaching honesty in
all his discourses, while underhand he robbed every one with impunity, making
himself an Enemy to Mankind* by enriching himself with their spoils;
barbarously cruel, and yet at the same time pressing and recommending nothing
but Clemency and Compassion; being master of not one good quality, but that he
knew how with an exquisite art to hide his own faults. People thought him a man
wholly given up to business, one that had no time for Softnesses and Pleasures,
and yet no man was more Debaucht than he; he had his hours for his Amors and
his hours for his Public Affairs, only with this difference, that in the
latter he always put on a starcht formal gravity; but in the other appeared
with a free humor, and an air of Gallantry.

If it was a great unhappiness to Monsieur Fo^quet to have displeased the King,
'twas no less a misfortune to have such a secret Enemy as Monsieur Colbert; for
tho he had premeditated his overthrow long before with the Cardinal, and had
played a thousand Tricks to render it inevitable; yet, lest Monsieur Foquet
should at last justify himself, he made sure of all the Officers that depended
upon him for false Witnesses; and so ordered it by le Berrier, that all his
Papers were stole from him, by which he should have cleared his innocence: and
not satisfied yet, he spread* abroad all the horriblest reports of him that
'twas possible for him to invent; as that he had Debaucht the greatest part of
the Women of the Court, by means of his money; and his end in this was, that
their Relations and Friends, who would perhaps have assisted him in his
misfortunes, should be provoked rather to assist in his Ruin: And in this case
perhaps I can give a better account than most People; as for instance, they had
raised a report when the Queen Mother expelled Mademoiselle de la Motthe
Agencourt, that it was on his score, when I am assured upon very good grounds,
that it was for entertaining the Marquis de Richelieu against her Majesty's
express Command: This Lady, who was one of her Maids of Honor, was a person
whom I was particularly acquainted with, and that so much, as I was supposed to
have a Passion for her: she was co^^ted one of the finest women in the Court,
and therefore I was not at all displeased to have it thought so, for except
Madamoisel de Meneville (who had her Admirers) there was none that would
pretend to dispute it. 'Twas not for me to decide the case between these two
Beauties, being suspected to be partial, from what I have said before. But to
come to the Story, One day as I was at Fountain Bleau, where both the Queens
continued while the King was in Bretagne, she came to me in a great concern,
and with tears in her Eyes told me, she was ruined if I I did not serve her in
one affair, which was immediately to convey into her Chamber a Suit of Men's
Clothes; but that I should be sure not to be discovered, for she had a great
many Eyes upon her: I asked her what the occasion was, and if she was so much
concerned in the disgrace of Monsieur Fouquet, as to oblige her to fly for it?
No, says she, it is nothing of that, I never was intimate enough with him to be
so very much concerned for his misfortune; but this I Will confess to you, they
will have it, that Love has caused me to commit some faults, foolish enough to
be punished for: That impertinent old Jade de Beauvais has been buzzing in the
Ears of the Queen Mother, that I have seen her Son in Law; and her Majesty, who
suffers her self to be governed by that Wretch, resents it so highly, that she
has ordered one of my Relations to dispose of me into a Cloister; I mean the
Countess de Maulevrier, the same whose Husband you had formerly a quarrel with;
therefore for Gods sake deliver me out of her hands, and do as I have desired
you; and then be so kind as to get me a Horse, and place him at the Kings Wine
Presses on to other side the Ferry de Velvins, that I may be gone.

If I had been in Love, as the World would have me be thought, I leave any one
to judge how this Compliment would have pleased me; but having really never
pretended any thing of that nature to her, I was very ready to assist her,
without any concern at the occasion: so I sent one of my Horses to the place
she had directed, and went my self to her Chamber with a Suit of my own Cloths;
but there being no body there to take it, I put it under the Bed as she had
ordered me; and the Chambers or Lodgings of the Maids of Honor being always
open to the Gallery, I went and fell into a chat with the good old Lady, Madam
du Tilleul under Governante of the Ladies: who was one of my old acquaintance,
and walking up and down with her, I saw lying upon the Toilet several Combs,
and a Powder Box, and all the necessary Impliments of the Dressing Box, and
amongst the rest there stood a little Pot of Pomatum, so I must needs take a
little to rub upon my hands because they were a little rough; I found it quite
of another color than the ordinary sort, which made me fancy it might be good
for the Lips too, and so without any consideration, applied some to mine, they
being a little chopped; but I soon paid for my curiosity, for immediately my Lips
were all on fire, my Mouth was contracted, my Gums shrivl'd up, and when I went
about to speak, I made Madam du Tilleul laugh at that rate, that I might easily
see I had very finely exposed my self; and which was worst of all, I was not
able to bring out one word distinctly; and running directly to the
Looking-glass to take a view of my self, I was so damnably ashamed of the
figure I made, that I run away to hide my self; but just as I wa^ going out I
met the Duke de Roquelaire who was coming to make his Court to one of the
Ladies, and being scared to see me in that condition, he asked me what the Devil
ailed me? I told him very simply my misfortune, but instead of pitying he fe^l
a laughing at me, and told me I was but rightly served; that at my Age I ought
to know that there are several sorts of Pomatum; that the sort I had meddl'd
with was not either for the Hands or for the Hair, but was designed for another
sort of use; after he had had his fill of this rallying, he left me, and went
to the Apartments of the Queen Mother, where he made his Court at the expense
of my misfortune. Immediately all the Town came to see me, and finding that I
had really furnished them with sufficient matter for their mirth, I would have
been one of the first to have laughed at the Jest, if I could but have opened my
Mouth. This adventure was the entertainment of the whole Court, for at least a
Week, they were so taken with it, that they sent an account of it to Nants
where the King was, who as serious as he was, could not forbear smiling at it;
for my part, I had as much inclination to laugh as any body, when I thought of
this accident, but though I washed my Mouth often with fresh Water, and
sometimes with warm Wine, yet nothing but time would bring me to rights again.

This little disgrace however hindered me from showing my self for some days, so
that till I came abroad again, I could not hear any tidings of Mademoiselle De
la Motthe, but then I was presently informed, that the Countess de Maulevriere
had put her into a Cloister at C^aliot, and that this confinement, which was a
true Prison to her, was accompanied with a very severe reprimand made her by
the Queen Mother: I was informed also, that this Lady who was blindly in love
with the Marquis de Richlieu, had given her self a great deal of liberty, in
reflecting upon la Beauvais, notwithstanding the respect which she ought to
have had for the Queen; and reproacht her among other things, that she took
occasion to wait upon the King when he was but very young, and to make him this
civil request, that his Majesty would be pleased to lie with her. I could not
easily believe Madam la Motthe could be guilty of so great a folly, but the
thing being confirmed to me by every one, I asked them if what she reproacht the
little old Lady with one Eye for, was true, and if his Majesty had been so
charitable as to oblige her? They told me, that was not a thing to be
questioned, and asked me where I had lived, that I should be the only man in
France that was so ignorant.

Tho this was the true History of Mademoiselle de la Motthe, yet Monsieur
Colbert had maliciously named her amongst those, whom as he said, Monsieur
Fouquet had been intriguing withal; but this was a small matter compared to the
other methods he used for his ruin. He picked out such Members of the several
Parliaments as he thought were the most needy, and who watched for an occasion
to oblige the Court, to be his Judges: These he fed with hopes, and made them
large promises of Preferment, if they would give their voices as he directed,
and upon this account was so confident of his destruction, that he gave order
to have a Scaffold made privately ready for the occasion. In the mean time he
had so firmly possessed the King, that Monsieur Fouquet could not possibly clear
himself, that his Majesty had ordered his Horse Guards to attend him to
Chartres; a journey which he had contrived, not for any Devotion, as was
pretended, but to be out of the way of any Applications, which he foresaw would
be made to him on behalf of Monsieur Fouquet; for tho he was of no
extraordinary Family himself, he had married one of his Daughters to the eldest
Son of the Count de Charost, and the King was sensible she would throw herself
at his feet for her Father. Thus the King stood ready to be gone, the very
moment they should b^^ng him news that the poor man was condemned; when one of
the Judges (a Councellor of the Parliament of Aix) stood up and spoke for the
Prisoner; He told them he was astonished to find such prejudice in that Court
against a man, as to seem resolved on any terms, right or wrong, to hurry him
out of the world; that at first view indeed there might be some appearance of
guilt; there had been found, 'twas true, among his papers, a rough scheme of a
Rebellion, with several methods how to raise it, and other projects for his
conduct in such an affair, when it should be brought to pass; and many such
things for which Monsieur Fouquet might seem to deserve no less than death: But
when one came to examine into the the proofs of these Crimes, there was cause
enough at least to suspend ones Judgment against him; this was found among a
parcel of old waste Papers, thrown by, not only into a corner of the Room, but
into the Chimny, and designed for nothing but the Fire, as Monsieur Fouquet had
very well observed in his defense; that there was no other marks of it, but as
of a thing formed in his mind, provokt to it by the barbarous usage of Cardinal
Mazarin, who upon all occasions had not failed to testify his malice against
him; that, 'twas a general maxim in the Law, that no man could be punished for
thinking Treason, nor for intending, unless he proceed to some Overt Act; that
here was nothing like it in this case, but on the contrary, very evident tokens
that he had laid aside so much as the thoughts of it; that Kings ought not to
be more rigorous than God himself, who so graciously passes by the inadvertency
of our conceptions; but besides there was something of more consequence than
all this that had been said, that Monsieur de Fouquet affirmed expressly that he
had wherewithal to prove beyond contradiction, his repentance of that very
intention, if they had not inhumantly stole away his Papers; that 'twas true
those words might be spoken only to excuse himself, but 'twas also true, that
it might be really so; this was certain, and not to be denied, that they had
found among his Papers several Petitions adress'd to Mons. Colbert, with the
title of my Lord, which was never given to him till since the imprisonment of
Monsieur Fouquet; that this was a proof, they had come into his House without
his knowledge, and searched there at their own pleasure; and 'twas an infallible
consequence, that they did so with a design to ruin him, because, that under
pretense of searching in that manner, they had carried away all the Papers
which he should use for his Justification; that notwithstanding all this, he
had cleared himself of the great Crime; his enemies made such a stir about, of
wasting the Revenues of the Crown; that he had laid before them an account of
his estate, what he had when he entered upon the Ministry, and what he had with
his Wife; (which rogether amounted to above a million) what Pensions he had
received, and what had sell to him upon other occasions. And though these were
very considerable, yet he had not only spent all this in the service of his
Majesty, but was run into Debt above two Millions: that his extravagance ought
not to be reckoned criminal, since he had means enough of his own to do it,
without wrong to the King, and he had done no injury to any body, but himself,
poor man, and his Family.

The greatest part of the Judges were amazed, not so much at the discourse of
this man, though that had a great deal of force with it, but to see how little he
valu^^ the great Men, whom he knew he should disoblige ^t the highest rate.
Now, as we cannot do our Neighbor a better service than by a good example to
set him in the right way, all those that spoke after him, were of the same
mind, and those who had before given their Voices for his Condemnation, being
ashamed of so unjust a Sentence; retracted their judgment, so that in a moment,
there was seen such a change in the Court, as if some influence from above, had
wrought a miracle upon them: However, as there was cause enough to inflict some
punishment upon Monsieur Fouquet, either for that project of a revolt I
mentioned, or that he had fortifyed Bell Isle on his own account, they thought
fit to condemn him to Banishment. They were very much surprised at Court, at a
Sentence so little expected; and it quite broke off their journey to Chartres,
and Monsieur Colbert fearing that if Monsieur Fouquet should ever be at
liberty, he would find an occasion, some time or other, to let the King know
certain things which i^ concerned him to have kept secret, prevailed upon the
King, to change the Sentence of Banishment, to a perpetual Prison. After then
he had laid I kn^^ not how long in the Dungeon at Vincennes, they carried him
to Pignerol, where he continued at least sixteen or seventeen years: But this
was the Penance for his faults, for they who knew him in that place of
Persecution, say he made so good use of it, that nothing could have happened
more to his advantage. And since I have named this, I cannot forbear telling
you a story, that happened upon the occasion of his meeting with Monsieur De
Lausun, who was committed to the same Prison about ten years after, and from
whom I received this account. Upon the first meeting they saluted one another,
and Monsieur Fouquet not recollecting immediately where he had seen him, asked
him his Name? Whether or no he had forgot him in the time of his Disgrace: Or
that, as 'twas most likely, Monsieur De Lausun was not so considerable in his
time, as to be known to him? But Monsieur De Lausun having given him
satisfaction who he was, goes on to make himself known to him, with the common
vanity of telling ones own History, by acquainting him with the particulars of
his life.

Monsieur Fouquet heard him very intently, for he was extremely surpised at
some discourse he pretended to have had with the King, about Madam de Monaco;
How he had told his Majesty he was no better than a Tyrant, in offering to take
away his Mistress from him, and how he refused to serve in his Office of
Colonel General of the Dragoons, in the Army which marched into Italy; how he
had asked the King to be made General, and upon the refusal had thrown up his
Commission. In short, how his Majesty had sent him to the Bastile, from whence
nevertheless he was released in four and twenty hours* to rise the greater in
his favor: Monsieur Fouquet gave him the hearing, but observing the man, and
taking notice of the very mean figure he made, he could not persuade himself,
the King, who was a Prince of the nicest judgment, and known to be of a fierce
and violent temper, should suffer himself to be Nosed at that rate; and should
so far forget his Character, as to bear those Insults from a Subject,
especially one so despicable as he appeared; however Monsieur Fouquet concealed
his sentiments, and would by no means interrupt him, but when he came to relate
his Marriage with Mademoiselle de Montpensier, how the King had given his
consent to it, and afterward recalled it, and the concern that Princess was in
at the disappointment, and all the consequences of that affair; he could not
forbear turning to another Prisoner of State, that had joined them just before,
and making a sign to his Forehead, as we do when we would signify a man is
crazed, he gave him to understand that he thought no better of this Gentleman.
Monsieur De Lausun perceived it, but made as if he took no notice of it, and
went on with other strange passages of his life, which did but confirm Monsieur
Fouquet in his former opinion.

But to return to Monsieur Colbert, who was now by the disgrace of this
Minister become so powerful at Court, and had the Kings ear so entirely, that
he grew uneasy to Monsieur Tellier; this latter had been an old Courtier, and
having done very great services to the State, it was but just he should expect
some marks of distinction. The first method that Colbert took to fix his
Reputation, was to change the whole form, and establish a new exact order in
the Chamber of the Finances, reforming the number of Offices, and suppre^^ing
the Under-Treasurers and their Dependencies, who were all clapped up in Prison
upon pretense of having cheated the King; so that those, who pretended to have
vast Sums due to them, were so far from recovering their Debts, that they were
forced to part with all they had to satisfy his extravagant Demands: Indeed to
say the truth, there was very gross abuses practiced in the Finances, and 'twas
no more than necessary they should be redrest But here were several great
persons touched by this Affair, for these fellows being rich, had allied
themselves to several considerable Houses, as the Duke de St. Agnan for one,
whose eldest Son the Count de Seri, was to marry Mademoiselle de Monero, the
Daughter of one of these Officers, with whom he was to have two Millions of
Livres. This Duke being very much in favor, as we have formerly said, and
Monsieur Colbert apprehending some ill Offices from him, who was also a very
rising man, he appeased him by promising him his eldest Daughter for his Son,
instead of Mademoiselle de Monero. 'Twas thought he made this promise against
his inclination, the Duke being not very rich, and he had a prospect of
marrying her more advantageously; but whatever his thoughts were, he durst not
have gone back from his word, if the Count de Seri had lived to accept of it:
Wherefore to preserve his friendship with the Duke, he told him, that tho it
had pleased God to dispose of his Son, yet that he had another left, and tho he
was young, that should not hinder their alliance, since he had a younger
Daughter of a suitable age, and he would give him his word she should be
reserved for him. The Duke de St. Agnan, who had occasion for money, and knew
no where to get a greater fortune for his Son, easily consented to this offer;
when they were grown up, Monsieur Colbert was as good as his word to him, and
they were married accordingly.

The reason which induced Monsieur Colbert to be so fond of this alliance, was
because the Duke de St. Agnan, as we mentioned before, grew every day more and
more in ^avour; for the King, who was now fallen in love with Mademoiselle de
la Valliere, one of the Duchess of Orleans's Maids of Honor, a Lady of no
extraordinary beauty, but one who was more agreeable than those that were
infinitely more handsome, and had a mind to conceal it from the Queen, committed
the management of that intrigue to the Duke. This young Lady was but of an
indifferent Family, she was the Daugh^er of one of the principal Burghers of
Tours, which tho they pretended to ^ome Nobility, 'twas only that Henry 3d,
when he retired to Tours in the time of the Civil Wars, had enobled her Great
Uncle, which descended but to his Heirs, if he had any, and which she could lay
no claim to; but her Father indeed having got a considerable Post in the Army,
married a Lady of Q^ality, which gave his Children some pretenses to it.
However it was, she was entertained by the Duchess of O^leans, without
scrupling her Gentility; and before the King had any thoughts of her, there was
a Gentleman so in love with her, that he intended to marry her; he was of a
very good family near Chartres, and Heir to an Estate of twenty thousand Livres
a year, which was counted an advantageous Match to her, his Name was
Estourville, and was a Lieutenant in the Guards; he had but one misfortune,
which was, that his Estate lay so much in the power of his Father, that he
durst not marry without his consent: So he was obliged to leave his Mistress
for a while, to solicit the old Gentleman upon that account. It was gone so
far on her side, that she desired him to make as short a stay from her as was
possible; and 'twas gone so far on his side, that he needed no such
importunity, but he had a Father to deal with, that required more time to
consider of it than he was aware of, for the meanness of her Birth, and
especially of her Estate, were difficulties which were not so soon over with
him, but took up so much time, that when he had reconciled things, and returned
at last with his Fathers consent, he found things were strangely altered in his
absence, for the King had not only appeared to be in love with his Mistress,
but she had prevented his Addresses by making a discovery of her passion for
him. He met with this News for his first welcome to Paris, but being loath to
believe it from any mouth but her own, ^he went to the Palace Royal to wait on
her; he did not find his access to her so easy as formerly, the King having
placed those about her whose observation made it necessary for her to be
cautious who she converst with; which she understood so well, and withal being
full of her new Grandeur, that when he sent up his name to her, she made
strange of it, and returned that she knew no such person. Estourville knew how
to interpret this answer, and tho he made no more doubt of the truth of his
misfortune, her ingratitude so overcame him, that he kept his Bed upon it. His
Friends, who knew the particulars, accused him of folly, in being concerned for
so perfidious a creature; but being incapable of impression by all their
reasons, he left them an example, that it is not impossible for a true Lover to
break his heart, for indeed he languish'd about three weeks, and then died*
exclaiming on the Ingratitude of Mademoiselle de la Valliere to the last,
charging one of his F^iends, just as he was expiring, to tell her, that she was
the only cause of his Death.

Monsieur Colbert engaged in all the interests of Mademoiselle de la Valliere,
from the first moment that he found she had an influence upon the King, and
this gave him the advantage of all pretenders to the Kings favor. In the mean
time, I, who had lived all my days among the Grandees, found my self now as it
were alone, and forgotten of all the world, and if it had not been for my
little Income, I have so often mentioned, I should have been in but an ordinary
condition. My Father was yet living, and tho he was very easy on account of his
family, most of them being provided for by the good Offices I had done them,
yet I could never have the benefit of the least supply from him; on the
contrary, if a Glass of Water would have saved my life, I verily believe, he
would have suffered me to perish for want of that relief: This was a sensible
grief to me when I reflected on it; but as it pleased God I was not quite
reduced, I bore it with the more patience, especially when I considered, that
it was not from any fault of mine. At last, about the latter end of the year
1663. I received a Letter from his Curate to come down with all speed, if I had
any desire to see him before he died. I had no business to hinder me, so I took
Post immediately, and in six hours time I was at his House; he was surpised to
see me, and imagined presently that I had been privately sent for, but however
he made as if he was glad to see me, and told me I had prevented him, for his
design was to have sent for me; that he being weak, and his great age making it
improbable that he should recover, he was willing to settle his affairs, and as
there was nothing he desired to prevent more, than Law Suits among Relations,
he did not suppose I would refuse, considering the condition in which I saw
him, to agree matters now with his Wife and my Brothers; and he pretended to
oblige me in doing it. For this purpose he ^old me, he intended his Estate
should be equally divided, his Wife coming in for a part, besides her Jointure;
that this was for my advantage, for she had brought a great fortune to him, and
which his Estate was engaged for; so that if she should come to demand it, as
is customary in like cases, she would carry away above half the Estate. I made
no answer at all to a Proposal so unjust, he having no regard in that discourse
to the Jointure of my own Mother, which was my Birthright, and which he ought
to have reserved for me, when he married again. He took my silence in this case
for an assent to his Proposal, and without pressing me to any reply, sent away
for a Notary. I suffered all this without giving him the trouble of any
contradiction, in respect to his indisposition; but when I saw the Notary was
come, and he began to dictate these things to him. I begged him to defer it,
till I should take some advice about it; that I desired him to remember, that I
was his Son as well as the rest, that they had always enjoyed the privileges
of his house, which I had been deprived of. That his eldest Son by this second
Wife was already provided with two good Benefices, so that he might not only
very well bate his Legacy, but was in a good condition to assist his younger
Brother; that I had disposed of his Daughter, who was rich enough also to have
no need of it; that I did not say this with any thought of depriving her of the
Inheritance, nor to take that from them which Nature had given them a right to,
but that he ought to consider me upon the same account; that I would consent,
if he pleased, that he should give my Mother-in-law a Pension as large as he
thought fit, which I was ready to con^irm, and also another to my youngest
Brother, that so, if his Brother should not be kind to him, he might have
wherewithal to subsist; but for the rest he must permit me to advise upon it,
as I had said before.

There was nothing could be more fair than my Proposal, and indeed it was a
mere impoverishing my self to enrich others: But my Father was so bewitched to
my Mother-in-law and her Children, that he would certainly have got up and
struck me, if he had been able to lift himself up in the Bed; he told me, that
now he saw all that had been said to him of me confirmed; that I was an
unnatural Dog, and one that would shorten his days by my Disobedience; that he
had made me a Proposal too much to my advantage, but that I would deprive my
self of it purely in malice to disturb the Family; that he did not wonder I had
so many broils with my Masters, who were better acquainted with my humors than
him; that another in my place would have made his fortune, but that God had
dealt with me as I had dese^v'd; that I should get out of his sight, that he
might not be discomposed at his departing out of the world; that if I continued
in that resolution, he would leave me his hearty Curse, and that I should
consider of it, whether I was willing he should dye in that opinion.

I must confess to you, I wished my self a thousand miles off when I heard him
talk at this rate; I endeavored to pacify him by the most profound
Submissions, and laboring to make him sensible, that what I demanded was
nothing but justice. I told him once more, that if he did not please to let
things go in the ordinary way of Justice, for fear they should be too much to
the prejudice of my Mother-in-law, I was willing they should have the Estate
who wanted; that I had as much occasion of it as any of them, especially since
there was a talk of suppressing the Bank of Lion, or at least of retrenchments
upon the particular rents of it; that my Brother the Abbot was like to be
richer than all of us together, from whom I had reason to expect nothing,
since, tho he owed all his fortunes to my procurement, he never offered me a
farthing when he saw me in so much necessity.

My Passion perhaps might make me think this the most reasonable discourse in
the world; I thought so indeed, but my Father it seems was of another opinion,
and I had the unhappiness that he died without being reconci^'d to me; 'twas
none of my fault, and so I believe his Curse had not the effect he desired upon
me. At his Death I entered upon the Estate, and set my Seal upon the Goods,
which you may be sure put my Mother-in-law into a great rage: She, who, when I
did all I could to oblige her, persecuted me with so much cruelty, would not
fail to exclaim against me upon this proceeding; I did now as I used to do
formerly, let her say what she pleased, and the rather, because she never had
more occasion; however that she might have nothing justly to reproach me with,
and not out of any distrust of my own Title, I offered her a thousand Crowns a
year, provided she would relinquish her other pretensions: this was a Present
she ought to have looked upon as very civil in me, for in justice she could
hope for nothing but her own Fortune, of which the best part was never paid;
but she having taken some measures which I knew nothing of, sent me word, that
I ought to have accepted the offers my Father had made me, if I had been well
advised; but that since I had not, I should see in a short time whether I was
in the right or no.

This sort of talk did not trouble me, having no apprehensions of the trick
they were going to play me, but I went on to make out my Title, and was busy
with the Advocates, who according to their rules, declared, I ought to have the
whole Estate, if it was never so great: So I concluded to take off the Seals
which I had put on, which I did in the customary form, and found among the
papers, that my Mother-in-law was a Feme sole by the Contract of Marriage: I
supposed my Case was the better for that, because that then if there had been
any payments made out of her money, the Estate was not answerable for them; and
imagining, that since she had shown so much ill nature, she might have
forgotten this particular, I was such a Fool to tell her of it; but all the
answer she made me was, that the end of the matter would discover the truth,
and perhaps it might spoil my mirth I could not comprehend for the soul of me
what she had in her head, till at last it discovered it self in a moment, to my
no small disturbance. The person that made the Inventory brought me a bag of
papers tied together, with a Ballet or Ticket upon it, in which was written
with my Mothers own hand as follows, Disbursements paid of my Money out of the
several parts of my allowance, due to me from my Husband, for which I have the
Preference of Demand upon his Estate, before all other Debts. I was not much
surpised at this, till I had looked a little further; but taking the papers
out of the bag, I saw some contracts of Settlements, made by my Grandfather to
some particular persons in trust, for payment of Debts, one of which was for no
less than fifty thousand Crowns; so that if what my Mother pretended had been
just, she might well say, I had no cause to laugh, she would spoil my Mirth;
for I was removed out of the Family when I was but a Child, and had never any
account of their affairs, so that I could say nothing to this till I was better
informed: I saw well enough there was a juggle in it, and the most favorable
construction I could pass on it, as to my Mother-in-law was, that she had
employed the Revenue of her Sons Benefices to her own use; that which confirmed
me in this thought was, that tho my Brother the Abbot left all his affairs to
the management of his Father and Mother, yet I found but eight Livres and a
half of ready Money in the House when my Father died, a fine sum for a Family
that made such a figure in the Country; or rather a very good mark of my
Mothers extraordinary management. However, after I had mused upon this Case a
while, I began to consider, that 'twas impossible my Grandfather should leave
so many Debts, since the whole Estate did not amount to more, and my Father had
married two of his Sisters, and had paid them five and twenty thousand Livres
each for their Portions; and from hence I thought this was an infallible
consequence, that my Father was far enough from having his Estate so much
encumbered; but that they were old Contracts that they had revived by some
clandestine methods, to make pretensions upon the Estate; the chief of those
Creditors being all Relations of one kind or another to my Mother-in-law.

I acquainted some very judicious persons with my suspicions, who were
presently of my opinion, and after them the Lawyers, who advised me however,
before I made any stir about it, or commenced any Suit at Law in the case,
which could not but be very inconvenient to me, that I should try if I could
any way underhand discover the Cheat. I tried all the ways that I could
possibly think of, having set several Persons of Quality of that Province to
work for me, who knew what I had done for the Family, and were moved to
compassion to see me used in such a manner: But tho they used their utmost
skill* and very heartily too, the Agents my Mother-in-law had employed, had
played their game too sure to be discovered, and no doubt had been well enough
paid, so that all our endeavors were to no purpose, and I was forced at last
to begin a tedious Suit at Law. Then I charged them with Forgery concerning
those pretended Reinbursements, and having obtained the liberty to publish a
Monitory thereof, I caused it to be read in the Churches of those Parishes
where they lived, whom I suspected had a hand in the f^aud, hoping that the
time of Christmas being at hand, when every one was to pass for Absolution,
'twould oblige them to consult seriously with their Consciences. My Sister
showed me at this time a particular mark of her Gratitude; she came to me and
told me, that tho she knew what she was going to say would embroil her with her
Mother, if ever she should come to hear of it, she would nevertheless witness
the truth so far as to tell me, that she had heard my Father often say, in
discoursing of several things with my Mother-in-law, that his Father had not
left him one Farthing in debt, but that on the other hand he found eight
thousand Franks of ready money in the house at his death: She told me she
remembered this, as perfectly as if it had not been above a quarter of an hour
ago, and that if it would do me any service, she would make affidavit of it
before a Judge: I gave her a thousand thanks for her good will, but not being
willing she should incur the hatred of her Mother for her affection to me, I
told her it should suffice me to see such a proof of her Love, without making
her a sacrifice; that I was sorry I was in no better a condition for her sake;
that I had resolved she should be my Heir to that little I had, for I loved
such an honest principle; in short, she did all I could desire, for she gave me
a Declaration two or three days after, whereby she relinquisht any claim for
her part in any thing her Mother might pretend upon my Fathers Estate,
acknowledging that it all belonged to me, and charging her Son, in case of her
Death, not to meddle with it, but to make me restitution: She forced the paper
of this into my hands, and made me take it, but I laughed at her, and having
torn it in her sight, I told her we should easily accommodate the case between
her and I, if there was no body else concerned; that I took this as kindly of
her, which she had now done, as if she had given me a hundred thousand Crowns;
and that all my trouble was, that I was not in a condition to requite her
kindness.

Our Cause, which had at first been commenced in the Country, was quickly
brought to Paris, by the means of one of my Mother-in-laws pretended Creditors,
who supposing he should serve her the better there, where he had a great
interest, made her remove it to Paris, where he did all his business. I was so
far from being sorry for this, that they could not have pleased me better,
having perhaps as many friends there as he, and hoped they would not abandon me
in a Cause so very just. In short, every one proffered me his service, and I
that had always hated Law Suits above all things, carried on this with so much
vigor, that I minded nothing else. When I think of this sometimes, I wonder
what it was wrought so great a change in me, unless it was, that my Mother
having on all occasions exasperated me, I was very willing to have my turn in
vexing her too, and plague her as much as I could. In the mean time however,
the Cause was against me, and every body told me, that when it came to a
hearing I should be cast, unless I could produce some Deeds to make out the
Cheat I pretended was put upon me. I had brought the Contracts of my two Aunts,
whereby it appeared they had received fifty thousand Franks, and that 'twas
likely my Father had a great deal more, because we lived in a Country where
'twas the custom to be favorable to the Male Children; but the Lawyers laughed
at this, and told me, that in matters of Law they did not use to judge by
supposition.

I was to be sure strangely embarrast at this sort of discourse, and saw my
self at the point to be cast for the charges; when a certain Councellor of the
Great Chamber sent to me to tell me, that if I would promise to marry his
Daughter, he would engage I should carry my Cause. I asked of the Messenger who
this Councellor was, but he told me, he was not to tell me, unless I accepted
the proposition; but that as soon as I had given him my word, I should see both
my Father-in-law and his Daughter. I replied, that folks did not use to marry
they know not who, and before I promised any thing, I should be very willing to
know who I had to do with; that in the first place the proposition seemed a
little freakish, or to speak seriously, it seemed to come from a man that was
not very scrupulous; that my Father-in-law pretended belike to sell me Justice,
since it might chance I should buy it with the loss of my Liberty, and perhaps
of my Honor; and in the second place, this caution he used to get my promise
before I should be suffered to know him, looked as if he had no great confidence
of his own reputation; that I could not imagine who it should be, and could
guess but two or three persons, whom I would not name; but if it was any one of
them, I defied them, and would rather run the hazard of being miserable all my
life, than to buy my Estate with so dishonorable a Match: The man let me go on
without the least interruption, till I had quite done, and then shrugging up
his shoulders he told me, this discourse from a man of twenty year old would be
well enough, but for one that had seen almost fifty, 'twas an inexcusable
folly, that I called it then selling of Justice; that he would help me with his
credit and interest; what obligation had a man to prefer my interest before my
Mother-in-laws, who in all appearance had the right on her side; that those
Gentlemen who I talked so scandalously of, were at the same time the chief men
in the Parliament; that all persons were at their beck, and that if I should
have so little wit and so much boldness, to offer them any ill language, I
should certainly lose my Cause, which if I should be so much a Fool to do, I
should soon also be made to pay the costs; and that if he should hear the News,
that all this was come to pass, he should be the first to say I was served as I
deserved.

I confess I was sensibly touched with this threat, and endeavoring in my self
to excuse the proceedings of this pretended Father-in-law, I told the
Messenger, perhaps he was not so much to be reflected on as I imagined; that
perhaps the methods he would use to assist me might be only interests, not
unjust; that such men as they saw further into a Cause than other People, and
doubtless it was upon that score, that he pretended to be able to help me in
mine; on the other hand, 'twas not so strange, he should demand for his
recompense, that I should marry his Daughter; for it is fair every man should
ask what wages he pleases for his pains; that in this case, to say the truth,
'twould not be my giving his Daughter a portion, but his Daughter giving me an
Estate, since without her I was just a going to be not worth a groat. In short,
to say the truth, the aversion I had for my Mother-in-law, reconciled me to all
the difficulties of this affair, more than I thought 'twas possible for me; so
I told the man I would venture, provided my Father-in-Law that was to be was
not Monsieur Genou, and that the Woman was not infamous. I had an implacable
enmity in my mind against Monsieur Genou, for a piece of Injustice that he did
to some very honest Gentlemen of my acquaintance, which I could not forgive
him; and he run so much in my head for a notorious fellow, I would be sure to
avoid, that it put others out of my memory, who were every jot as bad as
himself; the man taking it for granted the business was done, names to me
Monsieur de Canae, who was such another Villain as Genou, if not a worse; the
very name made me cry out as if some sudden disaster had surpised me: The
fellow perceiving his mistake, and that no good was like to come of it, bid me
have a care what I did, that the loss of my Suit at Law depended upon my
managing this affair; that the young Lady was a discreet person, and agreeable
enough; that to refuse it now would make her Father outrageous, and he would
certainly be my Enemy, and so I might only thank my self, if my Cause
miscarried. I replied, the thing must be as it pleased God, but I could never
consent to be Son-in-Law to Monsieur de Canae; that he might indeed make me
lose my Suit, without blackening his Conscience, since he had been guilty
before of so many Villainies, as had already brought it to the color of the
Chimney; that I could not but wonder he had not found the means, of marrying
his Daughter, who by this time began to grow something stale; since without
doubt he had many such affairs as mine in his way; and might find some Client
or other to make a Cully of; but it would not pass upon me.

I said too much indeed, considering I had a Suit depending, and that he was
one of the Judges, and especially before a person he particularly employed in
such underhand practices; who having given him an exact account of what I had
said, my Mother-in-Law herself did not solicit her Cause, with so much
eagerness against me in public, as he did in private. However 'twas to his
advantage, that I refused his Daughter, for he married her to Monsieur
Montigni, Son to the Governor of Diep, who was richer than I should have been,
if I had recovered my Estate; and this cost him nothing, but doing a little
injustice for him, just as he offered to me.

However, I never repented that this Gentleman carried away the Prize, for she
wears the Breeches manfully, and all that her Husband can do to show that he is
Lord and Master, is that, when he pleases he will go to Chartres and get drunk,
because she will not suffer him to have a drop of Wine at home. I suppose I may be
allowed to mention this story, that reflects on his Son-in-Law, because I have
so much reason to hate the Father. In short, he was the occasion that about a
Fortnight after I lost my Cause, and was condemned to pay the charges, and
since that I have not had an Enemy, has done me half the mischief which he has
endeavored to do.

The charges amounted to a huge sum, and my Mother-in-Law who had no thoughts
of favoring me, took out Execution against me, at the persuasion of Monsieur
de Canae, and clapped me into Prison, at the time when I least of all expected
it: The sum was no less than two thousand livres, and money being very scarce
then, as well as now, I could meet with never a friend, would help me to such a
sum: However abundance of them came to see me, and exclaimed with me at the
ingratitude of this woman, but that was a small relief to me, so I was forced
to take it as patiently as I could: I found in the Prison, a great many honest
Gentlemen, whose misfortunes had brought them into the same condition, but they
were not so much concerned at their afflictions, as I was at mine, for I saw
them seek all manner of ways to divert themselves, as if they had been at
Liberty; but not being of their humor, I spent my time in cursing of my Judges,
and railing at the times, in which there was so little Justice to be had; and
there being Spies there, as well as in other places, they informed against me,
so from a Debtor, I was made a Criminal, and was carried away to Pierre Encise.
I was a long time before I could guess what they were going to do with me, and
what I had done to deserve this sort of usage; but recollecting that I had
spoken a little too freely of a certain Minister, I troubled my self no further
for a cause of my removal; but the Crime being of no great consequence, they
gave me liberty to walk abroad. The other prisoners seeing a new comer, were
very eager to hear my story; I made no difficulty of telling them all the
particulars, and protesting my innocence, but I found this was so common a tale
in such a place, that they were all as innocent, as by their own accounts.
Among the rest I found the Marquis de Fresne, whom I had known well enough to
give him more particular respect, than the others, and on that account, I told
him my case ingenuously, and asked his advice what co^^se I should take, to make
satisfaction for my imprudence; he told me, he knew not what to advise me to,
in so nice an affair, and that he stood in as much need himself, his misfortune
coming from a like cause: He surpised me in saying so, having always been told
'twas for endeavoring to ^ell away his Wife to some Pirates, and I could not
forbear telling him what I had heard; he answered, that since I had been so ill
informed, he would acquaint me in a few words, with his true History. Having no
great matter of business in such a place, I was as willing to hear this
adventure, knowing it must be extraordinary, as he could be to relate it: So we
sat down on a bank, upon the Platform where we was walking, and he told me,
That before he was married, he was passionately in love with her, who was now
his Wife, that tho 'twas his constant maxim, that Daughters took always after
their Mothers, and that he knew well enough what was the manner of her Mother,
yet it spite of his own-notions, he was such a fool to fall into the snare, and
after having tried all possible means to enjoy her, and finding them
ineffectual but by marrying her, resolved to satisfy his inclination at any
rate; so he asked her Mothers consent, which the old woman, not caring to part
with her money, had refused him; that this repulse had but increased their
passion on both sides, so that they resolved to do it without her; upon which
he had taken her away, and having gotten a Priest ready to marry them, this
obliged the old Gentlewoman to give her consent; that upon this he thought
himself the happiest man in the World. But this happiness lasted no longer than
three months, when Monsieur de Ecuilli, his Brother, fell in love with his
Wife, and she with him, and that they managed this with so little prudence,
that he could not but perceive it presently, and was so enraged at it, that he
was several times tempted to dispatch 'em both; but considering what a noise
such an action would make in the World, he thought of some other method, and
the more, because, as false as she was, he could not bring himself to that
degree of hatred against his Wife; but having not the same tenderness for his
Brother, resolved to fight him, upon pretense of some Estate that was to be
divided, and about which they had formerly had some words, and to urge him to
it, he had frequently taken occasion to discourse about that concern; but that
the love he had privately for his Wife, caused him to take all the reproaches
he made him without any reply. It madded him so much the more to see his
Brothers policy, in avoiding all occasions of quarrel, and he was loath to fight
him without some apparent cause; but a circumstance which he happened to be an
Eyewitness to, made him change his design of fighting him, into a resolution
of dispatching him by a surer way; for one day coming unexpectedly into her
Chamber, he had surpised them in the fact, and before he entered the Room had
overheard them plotting together to assassinate him: that his Brother seeing
him coming in, made as if he had been only toying with her, and he on his part
made as if he believed it, that he might not give them any cause of mistrust;
and so they parted from one another, without any words of the matter, but with
the more resentment in their Hearts: For in short, he for his part had
appointed one of his Servants whom he knew he could trust, to shoot him as he
was a Hunting, and his Brother at the same time, had hired some Soldiers to do
as much for him. However, it fell out so, that neither part was performed, and
yet the design on both sides became public, and made a great noise in the
World. His Servant in particular had taken such gross measures, that he had as
good have betrayed his Maste^, for he made him be suspected, and that perfectly
lost him the favor of the King, and also was taken to be done upon account of
private interest, and not from his jealousy; that after this his Brother having
not opportunity as formerly with his Wife, and she being not of an inclination
to be content without a Gallant, e'n entertained them, where she could find
them, according to the custom of her Family; that among others she happened
upon one who was a Person of great Credit at Court, who being in his young
Blood, gave himself up to his pleasures, tho at the same time, he had great
employments, in the State. He told me, that their behavior was also so
notorious, that he could not refrain taking notice of it, and reflecting upon
the Person, which soon came to his Ears, and there began his ruin. The Person
however deferred his revenge, because the World would say, 'twas too hard to
kiss the Wife, and quarrel with the Husband; and waited only for an
opportunity, which he was not long without. De Fresne could not bear the mocks
and reproaches he met with in all Companies on this occasion, and therefore
resolved when this Courtier should be absent, he would take an opportunity to
convey his Wife away. To prevent all suspicion of this, he made as if he would
be reconciled to her, and became so kind to her, that she was perfectly
deluded, and was as forward for going as he; finding her in so good a humor,
he took her at her word, and taking the Road to Lions, he carried her into
Provence, with a design to have shipped her on board some of the Levant Pirates,
and so to have sold her, having bargained with a Captain of such a Vessel for
that purpose: But he had been so unfortunate, that his Wife had escaped as it
were by a miracle, and that instead of ridding himself of a Whore, he had got
the name of a Villain, and a Rascal, for attempting it; upon which her Gallant,
who, as has been said, waited for a pretense to ruin him, has laid hold of
this, and had effectually lodged him in that place, which was hardly so
grievous to him as the scandal; that his Wife having procured a Merchant to
furnish her with money to carry her back to Paris, she had been so base, as to
force him to go to Law with her for it, before she would reimburse, and this
came before the Parliament, where the said Merchant was obliged to tell the
whole story, to set forth the necessity she was in of the money, and to
aggravate the ingratitude of it; for indeed he had a great deal of reason to
complain of her usage, after having done her such a remarkable kindness; and
tho, as he told me, he owed this Merchant a great deal of ill will, for not
leaving his Wife where he found her, yet he could not but acknowledge, she was
very ungrateful to cheat him of his Money, upon pretense, as she pleaded, that
she was under the Covert of a Husband, and so had no power to make an
Obligation.

Tho I knew a great part of this History before, yet I would not interrupt him;
and he told me some circumstances that I did not know before, as that he was in
Prison for having disobliged his Wives Gallant. This story made me reflect on
my condition, as not altogether so unhappy as some persons, since I had never
been married; and gave me so great an aversion to that Sex, that I made a Vow
never to have to do with any of them. I lived three years in this Pierre
Encise, without so much as hearing either of Friend or Foe, and believing my
self confined for term of Life, I grew so melancholy, and it so altered me,
that people did not know me; and the more I reflected upon my misery, the more
it afflicted me: Sometimes calling to mind my old Master, the Cardinal de
Richlieu, I more passionately bewailed that loss, than ever Lover did that of
his Mistress. In short, having past my time in this condition, with how much
satisfaction you may easily imagine, the Archbishop of Lions, Brother to the
Marshall de Villeroy, who acted as Lieutenant of the Province, sent me word,
that I might go abroad when I pleased, for his Majesty had given me the bounds
of the City, only for my Prison. I returned him my thanks, as if the favor had
come immediately from himself; and he was vain enough to accept my Complement,
as if it had been his due. I had been maintained at the King's charge all the
while I continued at Pierre Encise, and by that means had a little Arrears of
my Rent due to me, with which I made shift to pay my Mother-in-law, and had a
little in my Pocket; and now I began to resolve upon being a good Husband,
seeing to what I had been exposed for want of two hundred Pistoles, to pay
those pitiful Charges. But whatever Resolutions a Man may make, it is
impossible to avoid one's Destiny. The Archbishop, having taken me with him a
hunting, to his House at Nimis, which he had lately called Neuvilli,
notwithstanding he had told me, I should not go out of the City; when we came
back we must needs go to play, and my Complaisance there cost me all the Money
I had in the World. Being in a rage at such a misfortune, it made me reflect
upon the Life of this Man, whose Practice was so wide of his Profession. Indeed
he was a Military Archbishop, and was surrounded with Guards, instead of
Priests; following the Stag at the he^ls of fifty couple of Hounds, rather than
following the Cross; making good Cheer, instead of Fasting; boasting of, and
magnifying the Grandeurs of the Court, rather than practicing, or preaching
Humility; and in short, he governed the City of Lions at such a rate, that he
seemed rather a Tyrant than an Archbishop. I saw before my Eyes a thing no less
strange than true: He would send every now and then for the Magistrates of the
Town, upon pretense of having received some Orders from Court; and if he told
them, that his Brother the Marshall had sent him word he had lost a sum of
Money, they durst do no less than make him a Present of as much the next
morning; this was the Price of his Protection, and this cost me, as well as
others, who had Demands upon the Bank, one quarter part of my Rent; for having
thus exhausted the Town by this sort of Contribution, if I may be allowed that
term, he was obliged to solicit a Warrant from the Council, which reduced the
Rents to three quarters the value.

Having lost all my Money, the Archbishop sent me word, he had Orders from
Court to discharge me; so I was at my liberty to go whither I pleased; this was
the unhappiest piece of good news to me that could be, now I might go about my
business, I had no Money left; so I was fain to continue in my old quarters
till I had recruited a little, and passed away my time there as well as I
could. I had accidental converse with abundance of Strangers, for my Lodging
being at a Public House, and that City standing on a very great Road into many
Provinces, we had new faces came every day to quarter there as they traveled,
and their sort of Conversation I found very diverting; and that for a man who
had no great, but a short allowance, such a sort of life was not very
disagreeable: Among the rest, there came to lodge there one Monsieur St.
Sylvestre, an Officer of some Note in the Army, I did not know him, but his
humor, as well as mine, being free and easy to be acquainted, we soon fell
into Company together; he came from his Regiment, which I think was quartered
in Garrisons in Franche Comte; and having fallen into the Company of a
Gentleman of that City, called Servietes, (Father to him who has the fine
Cabinet) This Gentleman came to him to invite him to Supper; St. Sylvestre
asking him leave to bring me along with him, he was too much a Gentleman to
refuse; and I went very freely. After Supper he asked us if we would play a Game
at Tric-Trac; I took him at first word, being pretty well acquainted with that
Game. We play*d but for half a Pistole an end, and Fortune stood so neuter
among us, that we played above four hours before any one of us had lost a whole
one, and they both crying out we must not part so, truly we played on till
eight a clock the next morning, and by that time I had the good luck to have
won an hundred Pistoles; the Cornet being quite overcome with sleep, told me,
he demanded quarter, for he could hold up no longer: I told him, it was for him
to order that as he pleased; for that tho I had every jot as much an
inclination to sleep as he, yet I would not leave off first, because I had
gained; so being both agreed we left off play, under an agreement to go to it
again after Dinner; so we lay down on the Bed, and having slept about four or
five hours, they brought us some Soup, and then we went to play more vigorously
than before, and Fortune continuing to favor me, I won five hundred Pistoles;
at last, considering he could never recover so great a sum, and that we should
be likely to play all night again, he desired me to play him three hundred
Pistoles a set, for three times running: I agreed to it immediately, and won
the two first currently, but then fortune turning upon me, I lost two more as
quick; so that being just where we began, we agreed to our three Sets again;
these Games were more tedious than the other, both sides playing with more
caution; but I had the worst of it at last, so that I was come to two hundred
Pistoles, which was all I had left, and so we gave over play. This was no
inconsiderable sum for the small Game we began at, nevertheless he had once
lost eight hundred Pistoles, by which we may see there is nothing so dangerous
as play.

This comforted me for my loss with the Archbishop, and having got Money enough
to carry me to Paris, I took my leave of him. It was a good while before I
durst show my self at Court, for I took it for granted, I should not be looked
upon very well, after this last affair of mine. Indeed we were got into an age,
where the Ministers expected as much reverence as if they had been Petty Gods,
and tho they could pretend to no more merit than usual, yet they pretended to
make private Gentlemen show them as much respect, as Princes of the Blood: I
went nevertheless to visit Mr. de Surenne, who I knew carried himself after
another manner; for as he came of a better Family, than any of them could
pretend to, so he was much the more courteous and affable. I had the honor to
know him at Cardinal Richlieu's, and had seen him several times since that; he
received me indeed with all that Civility which is so natural to him, and
telling me that he was better pleased to see me there than at Pierre Encise,
asked me the particulars of that affair, I told him I had a great deal of
trouble in it indeed: That the Cardinal had done by me as the Ape does by her
young ones; for by loving me too much, he had been the cause of the ruin of my
fortune; for if he had left me to follow the Profession of Arms which I had
chosen, I had in all probability been in a better condition; that the War was
my Inclination, and that had made me fall into it again under Cardinal
Mazarine; that Fortune had however seemed to cross my Undertakings, yet I was
resolved to try her again; that on the other hand, I was now of an age which
seemed more to require Ease than a New Apprenticeship; yet I could not but tell
him, if he had occasion for an old Aid du Camp, or some such thing, I should
think my self very well accommodated; that my young blood was sufficiently
tempered by my afflictions, he need not be afraid I should ruin things by my
rashness; that I thankt God my mind was stayed and settled now; and yet when I
was once a Horseback, I was as capable of undertaking the fatigues of the War,
as I was at five and twenty, which he should find if he pleased to make use of
me.

I made him laugh with the manner in which I offered him my service; and taking
me at my w^rd, he told me, he would appoint me a Comrade, who, tho he was not
so old as I, should have no need of instructions; he meant one Clodore, who had
been Captain in an old Regiment, and was one that I knew very well, which
pleased me so much the better. This Man, tho he was very well known for his
Merits in several occasions, yet he was more known by something else, not so
much to his advantage; he had the misfortune to have a Jilt to his Wife, and
one time as he was coming from the Army, one of his Friends having obliged him
to bear him company to a House of ill repute, his Wife, who in his absence took
occasion to divert herself that way, happen^d to be one of the persons produced
for their Entertainment. You may judge how disturbing an Adventure of this
nature must be to a man of his Spirit; he did not only handle her very roughly
upon the place, but secured her, and put her into a Convent; and yet quickly
after, by a surprising turn of his resolution, especially for one who had
always been looked upon as a Man of Honor, he changed his mind, took her back
again, and now actually lives with her. This had been a great Disadvantage to
him, for he was extremely banter'd for it among the Soldiers; so that if I had
been a married man, I should not have cared to have joined with him, for fear
they should have said we were Comrades in every thing; he was overjoyed, as he
said, to see that I would serve again; so we prepared our Equipage together, in
order to make the Campaign in Holland, which proved so glorious.

Since the King had been married we had several short Campaigns on every side,
but the Forces of the Kingdom were never all of them employed, except it were
in that of Lisle; the King had never engaged any Commander of great Reputation
in those little Expeditions, so that their failures made those great men to be
the more esteemed. But having now to do with the most flourishing Republic,
and whose Wealth went beyond most of the greatest Monarchs, he made choice of
the two greatest Captains of Christendom, the Prince of Conde, and the
Marshall de Turenne. The Prince of Conde undertook this charge with a great
deal of satisfaction, having received several Mortifications since his return
from the Spanish interest; for except it was in the year 1668, when they made
use of him for the Conquest of the Franche Comte, they made no Esteem of him;
and this great Employment happened to him, more from the Marquis de Lovoys
Jealousy of the Vicount de Turenne, than any respect to the Prince,
notwithstanding all the great Actions he had done. The occasion of this
Jealousy in the Marquis de Lovoys was, that during the Campaign of Lisle, he
thought the Viscount had the Kings Ear to his prejudice; and so to remove this
great man he brought the other into play, who had been as it were, confined to
his House at Chantilli, and had received several affronts. Indeed this was to
be taken notice of, that when the King sent some Troops into Hungary, the
command of them was given to his Cousin, the Count de Coligny, only to spite
him, because they two were at Enmity, and because every body does not know this
circumstance, it may not be improper to relate it.

In the year 1660, as I take it, the King being to make several Knights of the
Order, the Prince of Conde had the Nomination of one, and the Count de Coligny
made no question, but he should be the man, because of the many obligations the
Prince had to him, or at least it should have been the Duke of Luxemburg, who
was then called the Count de Bouteville; and indeed 'twas thought the Prince
would have certainly have preferred one of those two, as well upon the account
of their quality, as that they both belonged to him; but he having named his
Favorite Guitaut to that Honor, as it were over their Heads, the Count de
Coligny was so scandalized at it, that he went to him immediately, and threw up
his Commission of Captain Lieutenant of his Gens d' Arms, and the same time
told him, that he did not deserve what he had done for him; that he had left
one of the best Offices in the Kings Household to follow his fortune, and in
return of all, he had preferred before him a man that he could not so much as
call a Gentleman; that he had Children, and if ever he should live to see them
grown up, he would sooner pistol them with his own hand, than they should ever
engage in any service but the King's. 'Twas the Prince of Conde's character,
that he was not the most patient man in the world, but whether 'twas that he
considered he had wronged the Count, or that he was willing to regain him by
any means, he treated him very civilly, and told him, he had no reason to be in
such a passion; since if he had named Guitaut, in prejudice of the Duke of
Luxemburg and himself, 'twas because, he believed their quality would, some
time or other, procure it for themselves, which Guitaut could not hope for from
the meanness of his; that if he had known they would have taken it so ill, he
should perhaps have taken other measures; that they should therefore be
satisfied, and it should be no fault of his, if they were not better pleased
for the future. Tho this was a great deal to come from the Prince of Conde, who
did not use to be so complaisant, yet the Count de Coligny withdrew from him in
a passion, and was far enough from any reconciliation.

This was the chief reason, as I noted before, for which they gave him the
command of the Troops that were sent into Hungary; which so madded the Prince
of Conde, that if he had not retired to Chantilli, where he had leisure to give
vent to his passion, he had certainly died with the Grief of it: Here he
continued a long time, under pretense of being troubled with the Gout.

But when the King saw himself entering upon a dangerous War, he changed his
carriage to him, and treated him with all the Caresses imaginable; and shutting
up himself in the Cabinet with him and the Viscount de Turenne, he spent
several whole days with those two great men, to take his measures for the
ensuing War from their known Experience. I shall not take upon me to relate the
success of that Campaign, it would be too affected for Memoirs; besides the
whole World is full with the remarkable History of it: Only this I shall say,
that the Enemy being at a distance, we took our own time, and made but very
slow footsteps at the beginning of this War. The Viscount de Turenne, who
foresaw what would happen, told the King, that 'twould not be always thus, and
that if he did not proceed more vigorously, he would find himself in an error.
The King had a great confidence in Monsieur de Turenne, but the Marquis de
Louvois, who, to speak properly, had indeed the direction of the Army, had no
sooner discourst the King about it, but his Majesty quite altered his mind; so
that Turenne finding he could do nothing with the King by his advices, having
not the good fortune to be believed, let them take their own course without
troubling himself about them. In the mean time I had my Office of Aid du Camp,
which was easy enough to me; and when I thought least of it, they were pleased
to change my quality, and mistake me for a General, coming to me for
Certificates. The Duke de Longueville had a great many Gentlemen in his
Retinue, and amongst the rest the Chevalier de Monchevreuil, Brother to him who
is now Colonel of the King's Regiment; he was a very complete Gentleman, and
had been very fortunate with the Ladies; for the Duke's Mother loved him at
that rate, that one day when he came back from the Army, she her self helped to
pull off his Boots, which was supposed to be, that he might the sooner be ready
to serve her in another way; besides this, he was very much in the favor of
several other Ladies; insomuch, that if he had not ruined himself by gaming, he
might have been in a very good condition; but he would play away all that ever
came near him, whether 'twas his own or no; and one time he lost all the
Advance Money of the Regiment of Normandy, which was put into his hands for
Recruits. He had often practiced these tricks, so that he had not only lost his
Reputation, but in some measure his senses; for he saw himself reduced at last,
to such extremities, that even distracted him; yet for all this he could not
leave off Play. He was no sooner gotten into Holland, but he begun afresh, and
his old ill fortune continuing, he lost every penny he had; which bringing his
old distemper upon him, he became perfectly mad, and a Fever seizing him with
it, in few days carried him out of the world. The Duke, his Master, did not
survive him long, for getting some Wine in his head, in the Prince of Conde's
Camp, just before he past the Rhine, he made that foolish step which cost his
own life, and the lives of a great many brave Gentlemen. There being but a
little time between both their Deaths, the Relations of the Chevalier de
Monchevreuil came to me, to desire me to write to my Acquaintance in their
Country, that he died for Grief at the loss of so good a Master. 'Twas a very
pleasant Request, when I knew that they carried him to Nuits the day after we
entered Rhineberg, which was at least four or five days before we past the
Rhine; but feigning my self ignorant, I told them I would do so to oblige them,
tho I had been informed that he was sick before. I could not imagine, what
should make them desire this piece of service of me, except it was, that they
had a mind to conceal the nature of his Death, to avoid a blemish upon the
Family; but they had another reason, for he having played away a great many
peoples money, they had rather make them believe they had received it again,
after his Death, than that he died for Grief at the losing of it; and after
all, 'twas a fineness that I could never understand, for let it be which way
'twould, 'twas of no great consequence; and on the other hand, they might be
sure to expect, that those persons would demand their money; but the eldest
Sons Estate was entailed, who was the only person they could expect it of; and
if Madam de Maintenon had delayed much longer to take care of that Family, they
had been so far from paying Debts, that they had been reduced into very bad
circumstances. I cannot be thought to speak this enviously to lessen his
quality, if you will but consider what I have said of my self, they may see I
do not flatter; and if it should ever come to pass, that I should be as rich as
the greatest, I should never be for boasting of it. I did not indeed inquire of
those Gentlemen what their end was, but those people to whom I wrote, wondered
what the meaning of it should be; for coming presently after to understand that
he died distracted, his Relations immediately concluded that I was the cause of
it, and upon that account owed me all the ill will possible; however not one of
them had the impudence to charge me with it; but as they were near Neighbors
to Normandy, and Normandy is famous for Treachery, they did their utmost to
ruin me; and if Madam de Maintenon had been in as much favor as she is now,
they might easily have done it, and the best I could have hoped for, had been
to have spent my life in the Bastile; but to my great good fortune her credit
was not so great at that time, and so all they could do was to make Grimaces at
me. The truth of it was, I never sought to disabuse them, but taking not a word
of notice, either good or bad, I let them alone to do their worst.

In the mean time our Army gained ground in Holland, and having past the Rhine,
we came to the Iysel, and passing also that River, laid siege to Doesbourg. The
Duke de Orleans, the King's Brother, was in the Army, and his Birth requiring,
that he should have the principal command, next to his Majesty, he marched on
one side the River, and the King on the other. He had nothing of the Air and
Mein of the King; as much as one was majestic, so much the other had of
meanness in his Countenance, and in his Manners; he had the very Looks of a
Woman, and painted like the Sex, which he did, because 'twas said he had a
Tetter upon his Cheek, and he would have been very much disfigured without it,
which might be; but if he was excusable on that account, yet he was inexcusable
in another, for he wore a Cornet in bed, like a Woman, instead of a Night Cap,
not forgetting a Scarlet Knot, and a Riband of the same to tie it under his
Chin. It Is true, he was so ashamed of it himself, that he would make all
withdraw when he went to put it on; but as always there was some Valet, or some
Favorite, that had access to him, the story became so public over Paris, that
all people knew it, and 'twas necessary he should be very brave to have all
these failings, and yet please the French, who are very nice and censorious;
but indeed he wanted not that quality, for he who avoided the Sun, for fear of
his Complexion, would at the same time expose himself to Fire, fearless of
Death. In short, he laid hold of all occasions to signalize himself, which was
not very pleasing to his Favorite the Chevalier de Lorrain, not so much out of
tenderness of his Master, as of that share he was obliged to take in the
danger; for tho he had acquired some reputation at Sea, some years since, when
with the Count de Guiche, and another, they ventured in a small Shallop to burn
a great Ship of the Enemies; they will have it, that he did it rather by the
excitement of others, than any inclinations he had to such actions: This was
something strange for one, that was Son to one of the greatest Captains, and
one of the bravest Soldiers we have had a great while; this made me believe,
that all the reports spread abroad of him, was nothing but Lies; but tho I was
so charitable, the truth was too plain to be concealed, for the next year at
the Siege of Maestricht, he behaved himself so in the sight of the whole Army,
that there was no more question to be made of his Cowardice. But to return to
the Siege of Doesbourg; Monsieur Martinet, Marshall de Camp, and Colonel of
the Kings Regiment, was very unhappily killed in the Trenches, by a Cannon-shot
which came from the Duke of Orleans's quarter. The King was exceedingly
troubled at it, for he had indeed been very serviceable in the Army, ^eing the
first that put the Infantry into that Order and Discipline which we now see
among them; but the Soldiers, who like Brutes, that know not what is good for
themselves, disliked him for his Severity, and were so far from regretting his
misfortune, that they rather rejoiced at it. I may say too, that a great many
of the Officers were not sorry for it, attributing the innovations in their
Discipline to him; which tho they deprived them of some advantages they used to
make, yet were really very much for the service of the King: However their Joy
did them no service, for things did not return to their old condition again at
the Death of Martinet; the Court too well approved of his Maxims not to
continue the practice. The King, desiring to give the command of his own
Regiment to one who should be capable of following his steps, refused it to
several persons of great quality, who made their Court to him for it, and gave
it to the Count de Montbron, who was but a private Gentleman, but who was
already at the Head of the second Company of the Grand Musketeers, and whose
fortune had raised him to that Post, against the expectations even of all the
world, as well as his own. Indeed tho he had merit, yet that was a place which
was not to be obtained without favor too, and both little enough to gain it:
He had served at first in the Regiment of Picardy, where he was a Captain;
after which he was made Under-Lieutenant in Cardinal Mazarine's Company of
Musketeers. The Cardinal dying, the King took that Company, which was then
called les Petits Mousquetairs, till such time as Colbert Maulivriere bought
them of Monsieur de Marsac, who then had the command of them; the name of the
Company was then changed again, and called the Second Company of the Grand
Musketeers, which was done by the favor of Monsieur Colbert his Brother; in
the mean time Monsieur de Cassau, who died Governor of Bergues, was before Mr.
de Montbron, having always commanded this Company under Mr. de Marsac; he
seeing Mr. de Montbron put in over him, thought he had injustice done him, and
so gave up his Commission, at the same time that Mr. de Montbron had the guard
of Madam De Plessis Belliere, who was confined upon the account of Monsieur de
Fouquett; this was the beginning of his good fortune, which afterward was
enc^eas'd by the affair of Monsieur Colbert Maulivriere, who swelling with
Pride to see his Brother so near the King, resigned his Post, because they
refused him a considerable Government which he would have bought; and Monsieur
de Montbron, who had wisely made his Court to the Marquis de Louvois, got leave
to treat with him about it, and having married a rich Wife he was the better
able to compass it.

By these degrees he came to be what we now see him, and the King having given
him his Regiment, and at the same time having made him Brigadier of Foot, he
quitted the Musketeers to serve at the Head of those Troops. I was overjoyed
that the King had made choice of him for a Post so considerable, and having
been always one of his friends, I was one of the first to congratulate him; he
received me very kindly, and told me he had formerly been obliged to me, and
should be very glad of an opportunity to serve me; I told him that 'twas now in
his power to do it, if he pleased, that I had a Nephew, my Sisters Son, who was
in the first Company of Musketeers, for whom I would beg a Lieutenants place
of him, if he had a Vacancy in his Regiment; or if not, the next that should
happen; he granted it me immediately, and the gentile manner of his doing it,
obliged me more than the Gift it self; for he went himself to Mr. de Louvois,
making the affair his own, and telling him a thousand things in favor of my
Nephew, tho he had never seen him in his Life. That which made him so very
hearty to me was, that formerly, while he was not so great, I did him a very
good p^ice of service. He had seen a certain Lady called the M^rchioness de
Courvaudo^, who was reported to have an ^^tate of 17 or 18 thousand Livres a
year; and believing that she had indeed such a Fortune, he had proposed to
marry her. I happened once to go and see this Lady, but without any design in
the world but to divert my self in the Company, which was generally of the
best; she having put a little confidence in me more than ordinary, desired me
one time very seriously, to give her my opinion of the Count de Montbron, and
of his Estate; I told her, that for his person I could satisfy her presently,
but for the other I desired a little time; that he was a Man of Honor, and
deserved extraordinarily well, and that in general I knew he had a good Estate,
but in two or three days I would tell her more particularly. I went presently
to the Count himself, and informed him of this conversation, and desired him to
instruct me what I should say; and he giving me my Lesson in Writing, I did all
I could to bring about the business; but we had to deal with a Fool, who was
yet not so easy to be managed as we thought for. She had amused a dozen people
at least at this rate, and while thus she talked of Marriage with all the world,
there were some certain Sparks, who without troubling themselves with those
things, had found out a way to come directly to the point, and consummate
without Matrimony. She was both old and ugly, and but that she was a good
Pay-mistress, would have had but few Customers; yet by the help of her Money
she found some who had stomach enough to be concerned with her, and they had so
drein'd her, that now, if she could find a fair motion to a Husband, there
would be no great difficulty in the bargain.

The Siege of Doesbourg was fatal not only to A Swallow.
Martinet, but also to two more, who bore, as he did, the name of an Animal,
which was observed by the whole Army, one was Monsieur de A Worm.
Ciron, Governor of Mene^ou, and the other Monsieur A Mouse.
Souris, Major of a Regiment of Suiss. As for me, I was quite on another side
with my General, he being obliged to command in the room of the Prince of
Conde, who acted with a separate Army, and was wounded in passing the Rhine. We
took Towns faster than we could march to them, for we no sooner came before a
Town but we found the Gates open, or at least they made us no resistance, so
that we took an infinite number of places, and excepting a little opposition we
met with at Nimeguen, we could hardly perceive there was any War; the reason
why the Enemies were in such strange confusion was, the Divisions which were
amongst themselves, besides that, they had no assistance at all from their
Confederates, who seeing the Kings Army so powerful, durst not give him the
least shadow of disgust, for fear he should fall upon them; 'twas in short a
very lamentable thing to see the condition they were reduced to, and not easily
to be expressed, but you may guess at something of it by this, their State was so
perplexed, that they entertained any thing that offered to serve, if there were
but the bare looks of a man. Upon which I have heard a very pleasant story of
an Italian, who offered his service to the Pensioner of Holland to raise a
Company, who being examined if he had been a Soldier, and whence he was, and
the like, after giving answer to those questions, he draws out his Sword, and
tilting at the Wall, showed them that he was a brisk fellow; but the jest of
the case lay here, the Pensioner having objected, that he was an Italian, and
consequently a Papist: Yes, says he, I am so, since you must know it, but this
Sword is a Protestant, and ready to serve the States and your Lordship. The
Pensioner liked his blunt way of answering so well, that instead of a Company,
which he asked, he made him Lieutenant Colonel of a Regiment; but he had no
sooner fingered the Money than he ran away, and never raised a Man.

The Enemy being often thus cheated, and the disorder of their affairs
increasing daily, began to think that a Peace, however disadvantageous it might
be, would be less so than the War; by which in less than a month, they had lost
three whole Provinces: This was the opinion of some of the more timorous
people, but the Prince of Orange was of another mind, and to that end dispatched
his Courriers to his Uncle, the Marquis of Brandenburg, to remonstrate the
state of affairs to him, and how it was his interest to join his Forces with
the States; that we took indifferently his Towns and theirs, all was alike to
us. Tho the King was served the best, and most exactly in the world, yet his
Spies, who he kept in that Country, gave him no account of this, till eight
days at least, after the Viscount de Turenne had advised him of it. I know not
by what means he got this news, but he came himself to the King about it, and
informing his Majesty of what he had heard, told him, Now was the time for him
to make a Peace, infinitely to his advantage; by which, at least, he might
demolish the greatest part of the Towns he had taken, and keep his Army entire
to oppose his Enemies. The King would have the opinion of the Prince of Conde
upon this affair; and having sent a Courrier to Arnheim, whether he was carried
to be cured of the Hurt he had received, the Prince immediately gave the same
advice. The King saw of himself the necessity of their advice, yet could not
take their Counsel; for having left all things to the management of the Marquis
de Louvois, who thought he knew more than both of them, he let slip the
opportunity, being lulled asleep by that Minister, with the hopes of easily
defeating all the Contrivances of the Germans: And as generally one error draws
on another, especially with those that will never acknowledge themselves in the
wrong, they staid till th^se Succors appeared in the Field, and more from other
parts, and never followed that advice, till it came to the last extremity. The
Prince of Conde, and the Viscount de Turenne were very much disobliged to see
the Marquis de Louvois harken'd to, so much to their Dishonor, and the Damage
of the King's Affairs; and if Louvois had not made up this Miscarriage by
extraordinary Services, perhaps the King had not been so well satisfied with
him, as we now see him.

Monsieur de Turenne being come before Arnheim, sent to compliment the Prince
of Conde, and to know how he did, as to his Wounds; and tho the Message seemed
to belong rather to a Domestic, than an Aid du Camp, yet he was pleased to
confer that honor upon me, as well to show that Civility to me, as that I
might discourse of some other affaairs. I found him very much out of order with
the hurt he had received, insomuch that in speaking to me, he was fain to
interrupt his discourse by the pain of his Wound, which occasio^'d me to cut
short my discourse as much as was possible; and just as I took my leave of him,
the Duke of Mecklenburgh came into his Chamber; they had told him in the
Antichamber how bad he was, at which he put on an air of concern and sorrow,
and entering the Chamber in a fantastic manner, or rather like a Fool, Fructus
Belli, Monsieur, begins he, Fructus Belli, and repeating those words at least a
dozen times, he comes up to the Bed, without making him any other Compliment. I
would have staid a little longer in the Chamber to see the end of this Comedy,
but my respect to the Prince obliged me, against my will, to withdraw; all I
could do, was to stay in the Antichamber with Desroches, the Captain of his
Guards, and desire him to go in and see what became of that Maggot; but he told
me, I would take him for a Coxcomb, if he troubled himself to go in for such a
thing, that I did not know the Duke of Mecklenburgh, if I expected he should
say any thing which was not very silly.

In the mean time the Marquis of Brandenburgh, drawn by the force of the Dutch
Money, more than the Prince of Orange's Arguments, had given his word to march
to their relief, upon which they not only broke the Treaty of Peace which was
then on foot, but massacred their Chief Minister, who they suspected to hold
intelligence with us. Many others were ruined in the same fury, and amongst the
rest Mombas, one with whom I had had several affairs for a Gentleman, one of my
Relations, named Brinon, whom he had notoriously cheated. Mombas had lent his
Mother ten thousand Crowns, and had taken the sale of a piece of Land worth 40
thousand Crowns for his security, upon promise of repaying the overplus of the
Money, but the Contract was no sooner made, but he began to put a great many
sham tricks upon him; so that the poor young man, who understood nothing at all
of the Law, had ignorantly given him a Discharge for 40 thousand Francs, hoping
thereby to facilitate the payment of the remainder; but instead of that, Mombas
procures several pretended Creditors, who made Demands upon him; and tho
Brinon, before he engaged the Land, had summoned all his Creditors to make
their Claims, more or less, as was owing to them, and to receive their Money;
yet did he make this a new obstacle, and reduced the poor Gentleman to such an
Extremity, that in a great deal of trouble he came to me. I spoke to Mombas
about it, who pretending to be honest, promised me to end the affair in fifteen
days; but telling me that he had not Money at Paris, he would give it him in
Holland, if he would go thither with him; the unhappy Gentleman went with him,
but when he had him so far off, he forced him to list himself a Soldier in his
Company, and then made him sign to what he pleased. I was in a rage when I
heard of it, but the thing was past remedy, the Notary having signed it, so
(...) 'twas forced to be let alone, and the more, because 'twas at least six
years before he came back again; and for my young Kinsman, he let him perish in
misery, not giving him one penny besides his Pay.

This thing lying always upon my thoughts, made me malicious enough to rejoice
at his disgrace; for it was almost as great as that of the Pensioner of
Holland, saving that he did not lose his life; for he lost at least 20 thousand
Livres a year, and underwent a severe Imprisonment. During this, the Viscount
de Turenne was commanded to march against the Marquis of Brandenburgh, who
approacht at the head of 24000 men; and being about to pass the Rhine, the
Suis^e made some difficulty of it, upon pretense that, by the Treaty with the
King, they were not to be obliged to go into Germany: Monsieur de Turenne told
them, that those were old stories, which they ought not to credit, and their
principal Officers having disowned it, they obliged the Soldiers to follow the
Orders of M* de Turenne; he had given order to consult the Elector Palatine,
and having sent me to him upon some ^^siness of consequence, the Elector would
make me dine with him, he was pleased to let us be very cheary together, and I
was not the first Frenchman that he had invited to dinner; he did his best to
make us all drunk, and if we had been as willing as he, he had sent us home in
a very fine pickle. There was a comical sort of a fellow at the Table, who had
introduced himself into favor by inventing a strange kind of Instrument, I
know not what to call it, but by clapping it to another man's ear, you might
speak to him at a distance, and yet no body hear you; this fellow was one that
put himself forward upon all occasions, but had not wherewith to answer it. He
had a Woman whom he maintained at a sorry rate, and often at the Electors cost;
for when he thought no body saw him, he would slip the Wing of a Fowl, or any
other good bit, underneath his Plate, and afterward very dexterously into his
Pocket. We had not taken notice of his Ingen^ity, but the Steward, to his great
misfortune, happened to see him pocketing up a young Turkey; so he came and
whispered the Elector in the ear, and told him, that if he would give him
leave, he would make him some sport; the Prince, who loved nothing better,
would fain know how; the other excused himself, and said, the story was too long
to give him an account of, but if he pleased to give a hint to the French
Officers, as they rose from Table, that they should not take any thing amiss,
whatever was done: The Prince was very well pleased, and did as he desired him;
and they had hardly said Grace, before the Steward came, and told him, there
was certainly a Knave in the Company, for some body had taken off a piece of
Gilt Plate from the Side-board; and if he pleased, he desired that every body
might be searched, to see who had got it; we being told, as I said, that there
was some Frolic in hand, was not concerned at this, but cried out, by all
means, and that the Steward had reason for what he said; so putting our selves
all in a row, the fellow was obliged to do so too, and after the Steward had
pretended to search some of us, he came to him, and found the young Turkey in
his Pocket; he said not a word till he had hold ^n't, and then lugging it out
by the Legs, he showed it to the Elector, crying out, that in looking for one
Thief he had found out another. The Elector laughed ready to kill himself at
this Farce, and so did we too; without doubt this would have put any man but
him out of countenance, all the Company staring at him; but he, who was as
impudent as a Court Page, laughed as fast as any of us, and speaking to the
Elector; It Is true, my Lord, said he, I took a little sorry Turkey, here, to
carry home to my Dog, that is a little indisposed, and has a weak stomach; but
this Gentleman here, Mr. Steward, methinks should have let it alone, who is so
used ^o cheat your Highness, at least of a whole Ox a day. The Repartee took
extremely, and the more, because 'twas so sharp upon one who use to pretend
very much to that Talent himself. And the Elector was so pleased, that for the
future he ordered he should have a dish of meat always provided for him.

After I had done my business with the Elector I took my leave, and returned to
give an account of my message to Mr. de Turenne. I told him also the story of
the Turkey, which gave him diversion enough. In the mean time the Army marched
along the Banks of the Neckar, and when we were within a league of Wimphem, all
the Officers came and made a complaint to him, that they were paid in Money
that would not go; that 'twas a trick of the Paymaster, who no doubt received
good Money, but put them off with this Money for the advantage of the Exchange.
The Paymaster was my friend, and I resolved to let him know, as soon as
possible, what was doing, I found him so perplexed, that I could easily discern
he was guilty; but seeing him so cast down, I told him there was a remedy for
all things, and therefore he should not be so much concerned; and since it was
so, if he would be ruled by me, I would tell him what he should do: Hearing me
talk thus, he told me in the greatest passion imaginable, he should owe his
Life to me; confessing ingenuously, that the desire of saving somewhat by it
had put him upon doing it; I found him so troubled, that I was afraid, if I did
not tell him what I had to say quickly he would dye with the fright. So I asked
him how much the last Remittance was which he had received, and if he had since
that, paid any other Money than that base Coin; he told me no, for he had
received it from Strasbourg, instead of the Louis d' Ors which he had from the
Treasury; that the last Remittance was of 200000 Francs, but as he had told me,
he had turned it all into this bad sort of Money: When he had told me this, I
bid him go and draw out a particular of all the Money, as well what was paid,
as what he had in Cash, but to disguise his hand so, that no body might know it
to be his writing; that when Monsieur de Turenne should send to search, as he
would not fail to do, he should stand in it, that he had received no other but
such Money, and offer to produce the account to make it out; but in the mean
time to appease the Officers, he should pass his word to them, that if they had
any of that Money left at the end of the Campaign, he would give them other
Money, or good Bills for it; and to make them easy, to desire Mr. de Turenne to
make an Order, by which all the Suttlers were commanded to take it, upon the
penalty of ten Crowns a man; he found my advice very much for his advantage,
for Mr. de Turenne sending immediately after, and seeing the account I
mentioned, he told the Officers, the Paymaster had paid them no Money but what
he had received, that they ought therefore to be satisfied with his Offer, and
making at the same time an Order to the Suttlers, there never was any more said
of it. By this means the Treasurer, not only escaped the Punishment he feared,
but also made a very great Advantage to himself; for the Suttlers bringing back
the Money to him to change, he got three or four Sous a Crown out of them too.
He was so obliged to me, that he offered to lend me any Money I wanted, but I
having no occasion thankt him, and refused it.

Monsieur de Turenne, not contenting himself to have past the Rhi^e, as I said
before, and after that the Neckar, obliged the Marquis of Brandenburgh to
retire beyond the Mein, which he also past after him. I cannot imagine why he
avoided the ^ight so, having more men than we by one third, unless it was, that
if he should hazard a Battle, and have the worst, he knew he should leave his
own Country too much exposed; however it was, tho he was Agressor in this War,
yet he was the first that desired a Treaty of Accommodation, and we promised to
retire out of his Country, provided for the future he should meddle with no
body's affairs but his own. The business of Brandenburgh being thus at an end,
Mr. de Turenne returned to the Rhine, but the Troops were so fatigued with
those Marches, that 'twas even pity to see them; and yet they were so far from
allowing them time to refresh them, that they were immediately forced to begin
a new Campaign, the King being then just going to undertake the Siege of
Maestricht: He durst not attack it the year before, and tho he had always an
Army about it, yet the Garrison failed not to brave them in their Camp; and the
Officers were so bold, that they would come pickeering, and challenge ours to
exchange a Pistol with them, and 'twas none of their fault, if we did not try
our force with them; among the rest, there was none who exposed himself more
than Somerdike, who not only came out as the rest did, but in particular was
continually insulting the whole Army, and no body could shoot him, which made
people believe, he had fortified himself with some Charm; and a Trooper telling
me so very seriously, and that he had known several persons that had done so; I
laughed at him, upon which he told me, I needed not go far to be convinced, for
that he himself had one; and if I doubted it, I should fire a Pistol at him,
and stand but three paces off, and that he had tried several. He set me in a
great fit of laughter at these words; and he finding me still of the same mind,
pressed me to try him with my Pistol, whether he said true or no; which I
refusing, he was so mad, that he told me if I would not make the experiment my
self, I should see him make it before my face: Upon which he immediately goes
from me till he came within Pistol shot of the Counterscarp of the Town. I not
imagining his design, perceived that he endeavored to fetch off a Cow, of
which there was a Herd grazing, as big as a good Flock of Sheep; there was
above 200 shot made at him, before he came at them; and certainly 'twas a very
pleasant sight to see a man run staring after a Cow (having separated one from
the Herd) in the midst of the Musket shot, which in an infinite number were
fired at him from the Town. At last, after having thus diverted the whole Army,
and me in particular, who knew the occasion, he brings the Cow to me, and asked
me if I believed him now? I protest, I could not tell what to say to it, but I
put it off with telling him, that this was all by good fortune, which words
were unhappily the cause of his attempting the same the next day, when he was
killed for his pains.

During the time that all things were preparing for the Siege of Maestricht, I
went to into Alsace and Lorrain, by Orders from the Marshall de Turenne. Going
to Beffort I saw the Governor there, who was but a young Soldier, to command in
a place of such consequence, which I could not forbear taking notice of to the
General, to which he very wisely gave no answer at all; but the Count de
Florensac, younger Son of the Duke D'Vses, who had not so much command of
himself, asked me what Country I came out of, and if I did not know, that the
Women ruled all now adays? that that Gentleman I spoke of, was the Brother of
Madam de Maintenon, the faithful Confident of Madam de Mont^span, and he might
be allowed a place or two, provided he made his Court, as he ought to do, to
the Kings Mistress; by this discourse he seemed to reflect on the conduct of
the Prime Minister, as if it had been him that had made so bad a choice: In
short, to explain himself, he said, that by the example of Monsieur Colbert,
who triumphed in the Reign of Madam la Valliere, so Monsieur de Louvois was
resolved to triumph in that of Madam de Montespan; that it was for that reason
he so much espoused her interest, and if we might credit reports, he was none
of the least concerned in her present advancement. We were all of us surpised
to hear him reason so gravely, who came of a Family that never was famed for
any store of Understanding; but Nature had been kinder to him than to his
Family, for he had sometimes very happy sallies of Wit; and she had added
another miracle in his favor, that he was the first of his Name that could
pass for brave. In short, there was nothing so strange as to see any of the
House D'Vses in the Army; which caused that Satyr upon him in the Scandalous
Chronicle, that he was not the true Son of his Father.

For all this Monsieur, the Governor, understood one part of his Office well
enough, for he had made the Town present him with several considerable Sums of
Money; and had it not been that they knew what power supported his interest,
they had complained of him at Court. I told this to the Count de Florinsac, who
continuing his Vein of Wit, answered, that I needed not wonder at that, for he
had an excellent Schoolmaster, having been documented* by the Ma^eschal de la
Ferte, who tho he had got the Gout in his feet, had not lost the use of his
hands; that one hours instructions from such a Man as he, was better than a
months teaching by another; and then related to me the practices of the
Marshall during his Government of Lorrain, and told me so many passages, as
would take me two days time to relate; but amongst the rest, he told me one
thing I shall never forget as long as I live, and which I Will give you an
account of, as a sample to judge of the rest by. He told me, that the Marshall
being come to Nancy, the Magistrates came to wait upon him, brought him several
Presents, and among others a Purse of Gold Counters, every one weighing two
Louis d' Ors, having on one side the City of Nancy, and on the reverse six
Fuse^s in a Fesse, which are the Arms of the House de la Ferte. That when they
were gone out, he looked upon them again, and liking them very well, more for
the Metal than the Device, he would have been glad of such another parcel at
the same price; and to that end sends for the Townsmen again, he pretends he
did not know what Town that was which they had represented, and they returning
that it was Nancy: You are mistaken, certainly, says he, why this does not look
like it, for it is too little for it; if you had made the Model bigger, one
might have gues^ it to be Nancy, but this does not show it all. I would have
you go and make another, and let the Town be described at large upon it, that
the fine Towers and Steeples may be distinguished, one can see nothing here. The
Magistrates understood him well enough, and being unwilling to quarrel with him
for a matter of 100 Pistoles, they went and brought him a present of Counters
as big as Medals, the size of which pleasing him, he never examined the figure.

This was no story to tell the Viscount de Turenne, tho I had made it public
enough to others; for 'twas not the way to make ones court to him, by telling
him any thing that looked like a reflection upon another person; he was
scrupulous in things of this nature to an excess, and our young Sparks, who
were of different sentiments, used to banter him with it, and say he was not a
man fit to live in this world; but all this could never alter his temper, nor
make any impression upon him. Tho sometimes it might be said of these people,
as it was said of the Father of the present Duke de Lude, who tho 'twas at the
expense of his fortunes, could not forbear breaking a jest upon Marie de
Medicis the Queen Mother, who asking him for her Vail, ( Le Voile in the ^rench
Tongue signifying ^ Vail, or a Sail of a Ship.
Le Voile) answered her, there was no occasion for a Sail for a Ship that lay
at Anchor, alluding to the Marshall d' Ancre, who they said was her humble
Servant. Indeed these young Blades gave him a great deal of distaste by their
foolish carriage; and I having the opportunity of seeing what notice he took of
it, when they were absent, and sometimes to their faces, knew the better how to
govern my self. In the mean time, tho we had made Peace with the Duke of
Brandenburgh, yet the Fire was now kindled in Germauy, of which we soon felt
the consequence. 'Twas the Emperors interest not to suffer the Kings Forces to
come so near the Rhine, especially considering the Leagues he had made with
several Princes of the Empire, which the Emperor looked upon as so many Marks of
his Ambition, and therefore solicited also the Princes of the Empire to
confederate with him. The Dukes of Lunenburgh were very fond of it, as being
afraid to have so dangerous a Neighbor as the French; and several other
Princes being united, the King was not only obliged to send an Army into
Alsace, but also to make a short appearance there himself. After the taking of
Maestricht, Monsieur de Tur^nne was particularly commanded to guard this
Frontier, and having marched into the three Bishoprics I was quartered at Metz,
near a House which was taken up for the Count D' Isle, Colonel of Horse, who
was there with his Regiment. I was not very well, and therefore went to Bed
betimes, and being just got to sleep, I was waked of a sudden with a great
Outcry, as if the House had been on fire. I rose immediately, and slipped on my
Gown to see what the matter was, and perceiving the noise was in the street, I
looked out of Window, where I saw the Count d' Isle's Landlord crying out for
help after a hideous manner; I was not acquainted with the Count d' Isle, but
just knew him, he being a Catalonian, and their Customs were a little too rough
for me, who without boasting, I may say had learnt how to behave my self well
enough, by living with the Cardinal de Richlieu; however being obliged to take
the Soldiers parts, as I was one my self, I dressed me immediately, and having
taken my Sword, I was no sooner got down, but going up to the man that cried
out so, I asked him, if there was no way to quiet this tumult? By good fortune
he knew me, we having lodged together once in an Inn at Verdun, and making some
compliment to me, Yes, Sir, says he, I will be judged by you, you are a
Soldier, and you shall say whether this should be so or no? This Gentleman, who
is quartered at my House, after having eat and drank what he pleased, will
needs have me let him lie with the Cook; now what would he have me to do? Or
what does he take me for? Don't you know me to be a Man of Honor? I profess to
you, tho I came down stairs mighty seriously, this story made me laugh, and
seeing the man had got a great Rabble about the House already, I desired him to
quiet them, and I would go and accommodate every thing for him. I had much ado
to persuade him, he telling me, I had to do with a Devil, that would but laugh
at me; but bidding him not fear, I made him go into his House, where we found
the Count, who had locked himself in with one of the Kitchen Wenches, and would
force her to lie with him: I called to him to open the door, and told him my
Name, but 'twas to no purpose; at last I was forced to tell him, that I came by
Orders from Mr. de Turenne, which he would know better when he saw me. I took
all this care, that he might not suspect me to deceive him, and when he heard
that, he durst not make any farther resistance; I told him Monsieur de Turenne
knew nothing of what had happened, yet, but he would soon, if the uproar
continued, and I would leave it to him to imagine, how he would resent such a
disorder; he, who we knew was a sworn enemy to all such irregularities; that
they said he would needs have a Cook Wench; why he might have twenty by to
morrow, if he was put to such hard shift; but to force a Man of Honor to
furnish him for his Debauch, was a thing no man would take, and the best
construction the World could put on such an action, must be to say he was
drunk, and that it was an ill extremity to be forced to excuse one folly by
another: I desired him to reflect on these things, now while he had time for
it, lest, when 'twas too late, he should come to repent it.

The Count d' Isle hearing me discourse at this rate, grew a little mild;
however it being the humor of those people, that tho they are in an error will
never acknowledge it, he told me, that for my sake, he would relinquish his
right, but that I knew well enough it was his due. This discourse was so
ridiculous, it had like to have renewed the quarrel, if I had not stopped his
Host, who was just rising up again, and having prayed them both to be
peaceable, and live quietly, since it was but for so short a time, I made them
shake hands, and promise to drink a Glass together the next day: His Host, who
was an honest man, told us with all his Heart, and he would give us a
Breakfast; and the Count d' Isle, who pretended to stand upon his honor again,
told us he would consent, provided he might treat us again at Night. These
civilities between them, left me no room to question, but they were both
thoroughly reconciled, so I even went to Bed again, and there had never been a
word made of it, if some body had not foolishly told the story among the
Soldiers, which made the poor Count be most horribly banter'd in the Army; and
when he went by they would say, There goes our Friend that would have kissed the
Cookmaid: Would it not have madded any body to have been so disappointed? And
for me, they told me, that truly I had done very ill to spoil sport in that
manner, and to prevent me for the future, they would have a Law made, that I
should mind my own affairs, and not meddle with them. The Count d' Isle saw
himself so rallied with this sort of talk, that there being Troops to be
detached to Catalonia, he procured an Order from Monsieur de Louvois to be sent
thither, out of the way. The Spaniard was by this time come into the
Confederacy, and to prevent the ruin of Holland, attempted to give us some
diversion, and in order to that, had formed a design upon Charleroy, in which
they were assisted by all the Dutch Forces, but they failed in the attempt;
which might have led them to consider, how unfit a match they were for so
powerful an Enemy. The Count d' Isle thought by this means to have avoided the
raillery of the story we have told, but instead of that, he carried into his
own Country, a character which perhaps would not have reached so far, had he
continued where he was: In the mean time we were preparing for the War in
Germany, the Emperor having now effectually declared upon us; and as Alsatia
was like to be the Scene, on which the first appearances were to be acted, Mr.
de Turenne gave orders for the fortifying Saverne and Hagenaw, besides Brisac,
where several new works were made to strengthen the place. The Soldiers
rejoiced at these great preparations, and they were in the right of it, for
they were safe now from being disbanded, which otherwise would certainly have
followed, if the Peace had been made with Holland; for me, I was too old to
expect making my fortune by the War, and therefore was far enough from pleasing
my self at the news; but on the contrary, was really griev^d for the People,
who had been delivered from the calamity of a ruinous Campaign, if they had
pleased to have used the Hollanders a little gentler upon the Propositions of
Peace; but they carried it so high with them, that contrary to the Genius of
that Nation, they joined with the Inclination of the Prince of Orange, who
pressed them to the War, and was resolved to prosecute it, whatsoever it cost
him, having built all his hopes upon the success of it.

The King, who knew very well, he had no General so fit to command in Germany
as the Viscount de Turenne, continued him there, tho he wanted him elsewhere,
having great affairs upon his hands: For the English, who at the beginning of
the War was on our side, had left us in the lurch, the King of England having
deserted us, and pretended he could not help it, on some reasons of State which
had obliged him to it. In the mean time our Coasts were exposed to the Descents
of the Hollanders; and we, who being all along assisted by the whole Naval
Force of England, and durst do nothing to them at Sea, were not such Fools to
stand in their way now. In this extremity the King was forced to summon the Ban
and Arriereban of the Kingdom, of whom he sent a Party into Lorrain, lest the
Duke, who the King had long ago divested of his Principality, should take this
opportunity to recover the Possession. Seeing such a bloody War at hand, I was
sorry I was no younger; and whatever obligation I had to the Memory of the
Cardinal de Richlieu, I reflected a little on him for taking me from a
Profession, that, as old as I was, I loved so entirely; however I would not be
thought so old as I was, nor I would not keep company with people of equal
years, lest they should make me seem older than I was indeed; but affecting not
only the Company and Manner of the younger Men, but a certain ridiculous Air of
Gaiety, I must needs put on a flaxen Perriwig, when my Beard and my Hair was as
gray as a Goose. Mr. de Turenne had a certain Gentleman called Roisguiot, a Man
that fancied mightily to wear a long gray Beard, and to look always like an old
man; this fellow was my scourge, and as if he had a mind to plague me, he would
be always telling me of Locates, and of my being sent for by the Cardinal
Richlieu. This was certainly the most glorious action of all my life, and yet I
could not bear his telling me of it, because he would be always saying too,
that he was but a Child at that time, and that his Uncle used to cure him with
that story, telling him, that Virtue never went without a Recompense: For by
this story people begun to look upon me, and wondered at me, that being so old,
I would appear so young, telling me that I could not be much less than
fourscore. I was made at this discourse, and blushed oftener for anger than
shame; yet others that were but lately come into the Army told me, that I looked
very well, in which they did not know how they pleased me; yet this did not
stop the other discourse, but every day one Blockhead or another would be
raising of it again, insomuch that nothing was more welcome to me, than when
some Order came to get on Horseback, and there I was as young as any of them. I
have often been ashamed of my self in my own thoughts, that I should be such a
Fool, and that I should be the first that should condemn it in another; how
hard a matter is it for us not to be opinionate of our selves; for after having
experienced this in my self, I never reflected upon other persons for the like.

'Twas a very fine sight to see the Nobility when they entered Lorrain; if one
had not known they had been Gentlemen, one should rather have taken them for
Hog Drivers; and tho most of them were armed with Plumes of Feathers, it became
them just as well as it did me to make my self a young man. However this was
only the appearance, for they did their duty, only that they could not pretend
to keep them in order, especially with such people as commanded them, who knew
no better than themselves, and made greater mistakes than the Soldiers; and yet
as ignorant as they were, they thought they knew so much they needed no
teaching: They endeavored indeed, to find out some old Soldiers among them to
make Captains, but either they had forgot the Service, or indeed never
understood (...) and so were all one with raw and undisciplined M^^. The Duke
of Lorrain, an old experienced Commander, falling in upon these people, made no
g^^at difficulty of routing them; and knowing that the Marquis de Sable, who
commanded the Nobility of A^jo^, loved a soft Lodging, after the French Mode,
and took no manner of care, he beat up his Quarters, pill^g'd them, and took
him Prisoner. If this Sable had been ^ Man of any Spirit, this disgrace would
have enraged him; but he was so very debaucht, that if he did come into the
Army, 'twas purely by force, he had no stomach to it, nor had never made a
Campaign but once at Lisle; and that was because the Duke de Sulli his
Brother-in-law, committed his Troop of Horse to him, being as much such another
Soldier as himself. I may say this without reflection, for all the World knows
what happen^d to that Duke in Hungary; that at the Battle of St. God^art he had
got so much Wine in his Head, that he ^^uld not get a Horseback, but laid
himself down (...) a Couch in his Tent, whilst his Men were (...) engaged with
the Turks; which being kn^wn at Court, was so resented by the King, that he
immediately ordered a Party of Soldiers to be quartered upon his Estate. For my
part I was willing to believe, with the rest of his friends, that this was only
a misfortune which happen^d to him, and that he was really brave enough. But to
have convinced all the World of this, he ought to have done, as the Duke de
Villeroy did, who, in the Campaign of Lisle, having quitted his Post in the
Trenches, and perceiving that people laughed at him for it, braved Death it
self, the next Winter, in the Franche Comte, where he exposed himself more than
the meanest Soldier in the Army.

But to return to the Marquis de Sable, he was carried to Strasburgh, where the
Duke of Lorrain reti^^d, having his ordinary residence in that City with his
new Duchess, who was of the Family of Aspremont; who tho she was a very fine
Woman, having not had the Small Pox, which has since ruined her Beauty, yet
this old Duke married her more for his Interest, than for her Person: There had
been a Suit at Law between him and her Father a long time, in which the Duke
was cast, and to avoid paying the Debt, he made up the business by marrying his
Daughter. The Marquis de Sable, who was a very complete Gentleman, beli^ving
that this circumstance, together with the great disproportion of Age between
the Duke and the Duchess, might be a sufficient ground to form an Aversion
between them, was resolved to make a trial, and having more inclination to an
Amor than to the War; thought 'twould make him some amends for his
Imprisonment, if he could gain so delicate a person to be favorable to his
Addresses. It Is hard to say, whether he succeeded in his design or not; but if
I should be as forward to censure, as the people that lived in the place, I
should make no question of it, but take it for granted, as they do: But as I am
not apt to judge so lightly, and especially in cases of such moment, where the
Honor of a Person of such Quality is concerned, I should rather choose to say,
that tho 'twas probable it might be so, yet it is not safe judging by
probabilities; however it was, the old Duke was not altogether without
suspicion, and to be sure of him, he hastened him away, and sent him back into
France. Any Man, but Sable, would have been more sensible of the Glory of an
Intrigue with such a Princess, than of his Liberty; but he, who took his own
way, was glad to be gone, and so returned to Paris, where he soon comforted
himself for the loss of his Mistress.

As for the Duke of Lorrain, having nothing to disturb him, he spent his time
when he was not in the Field in some Employments, which were very particular to
himself. He would go and visit the meanest Burghers, and would take more
pleasure in their company, than that of Persons of the greatest Quality. I have
seen him play strange pranks when I was at Brussels. I have seen him dance in
the open street among the Mob, to the common Tunes of those people; and he took
that opportunity once to make a considerable Present to a Lawyers Daughter, who
he had an Intrigue with. It was the fashion in Brussels, to give the young
Ladies Garlands of Flowers for the Head; he gave her one, where there was
Flowers indeed, but 'twas set with Diamonds besides. They judged from thence,
that he was extremely taken with her, for Liberality was not his character, but
rather the contrary; but this was not the only proof he gave her of his Passion
for her. She had a Mother who had an aversion to any thing of a Soldiers coming
near her Daughter, therefore he disguised himself like one of the Long Robe,
that he might come to see her, and the young one persuaded her Mother, 'twas a
President of Nancy, and the good Woman very honestly believed her. This sort of
disguise was very common, but he had a great many others, in which no man took
so much pleasure as himself: He lodged in the Rue de Fripiere, called so from
the Pawn-brokers who lived there; and I saw him one day dressed like one of those
people, and he had lain all the Door and Window of his Lodging with old
Clothes; so that one that did not know him, would have taken him for one of
that Trade; and he himself sitting without, in a great Chair, with an Apron
before him, scolding with his next Neighbor, all one as if he had been his
fellow. In short, unless 'twas they who had known him very well, every body
took him for a Broker. One day a Trooper came and cheapned a Buff Coat which
hung up among other old Clothes; the Duke told him he should try it on before
he made him any price; and so taking it down, he put it on for him, which the
other let him do, not imagining 'twas the Duke of Lorrain; but the Duke d'
Arschot coming by with a great many other Officers, could not conceal their
knowledge of him, seeing him in such a figure; by which means the Horseman
finding his error, and not knowing what would become of him, got up a
Horseback, while they were a making their Compliments to one another, and not
daring to stay to pull off the Coat, rid away with it. The Duke, who had no
mind to lose it, runs after him in the street as hard as he could drive, but
the other having six Legs to his two, 'twas all to no purpose. They rallied him
very heartily upon this accident, which they thought might have made him leave
off those sort of diversions, but 'twas all one with him, he was at it again in
two or three days, having a temper so naturally inclined to something odd and
unusual, that he was never better pleased than when he was thus exposing
himself: This was the cause he was so very much beloved by all the common
people where ever he came. In short, he was always familiar with them, and
would go to Dinner with a poor man, as soon as with a rich; he would stand
Godfather to any of their Children, and would have all such whose Children he
had so stood for call him Brother, he would at least call them by no other
name, and often has been seen to stop in his Coach at a poor Tradesman's Door
to ask how his Gossip did, and all the Family.

But to return to the War: The Enemy was so strong, that Monsieur de Turenne
was obliged to give ground, and they took up their Winter Quarters on this side
the Rhine. Our Troops however being cantoned in the Neighboring Villages, with
order to keep strict guard, having apprehensions from several quarters Mr. de
Turenne had posted persons of great experience at every quarter, that if any
thing happened, they needed not come to him for Orders, not he needed not be
obliged to march in person, it being impossible he should be in all places; and
he had chose to post himself about Phillipsburg, where the Enemy seemed to bend
their greatest force: As for me, I had been so extremely fatigued with making
two Campaigns in one year, that I was left behind sick in the Quarters of
Monsieur Pillois, Brigadier of Horse, where, when I verily believed I should
dye, I was cured by a kind of miracle; for when every body had given me over, a
Trooper that was taken Prisoner by one of our Parties, and was put into a House
next Door to where I lodged, told me, he would undertake to cure me, if I would
give him as much as wou^d pay his Ransom. The price was so small, that I made
no difficulty of bargaining with him, s^ he gave me a Dose made up with Brandy,
Sugar, Ci^^^mon, Pepper, and a certain Powder which he had in a Tobacco B^x.
This Composition so strengthened my Stomach, that in eight days time I was able
to get on Horseback. As Soon as I was well, I resolved to go to Mr. de Turenne,
who several times in my Sickness had the goodness to send to the Quarter, to
know how it went with me; but Mr. Pillois would by no means let me go yet, for
fear of a relapse. During the time he kept me thus, I had an opportunity to do
him a piece of service, which very much obliged him, and which, without vanity
I may say, was very much for my Reputation, tho I took no great pains in it
neither; the Enemy had besieged a little Town near Homburg, and he having
Orders to relieve it, drew together what Troops were at hand, which making not
above 2500 Horse, he found 'twould be a difficult thing, the Besiegers having
received a great Reinforcement, so that they were at least seven or eight
thousand Men; he called a Counsel of War about it, and every body was of the
opinion, that 'twas not a thing practicable, without exposing the Troops to
manifest ruin. I saw him so extremely afflicted with it, that made me try if I
could find any way to comfort him: I had heard say, that sometimes Policy goes
beyond Strength, and being resolved to study upon it, I put my invention to the
rack, and at last a thought came into my head, which afterward had a success
as happy as I could desire. This was nothing but to write a Letter to the
Governor, that it not being proper to attempt the relief of the place with less
than ten thousand Men, Monsieur Pillois could not get ready before, but that
now he was marching to his succor, and by two a Clock the next day he would
give the Enemy a Visit, and that he should only hold out the place so long, and
he should be an Eyewitness of the Sport. This Letter was to be carried,
directed to the Governor, but so to be contrived, that it might fall into the
Hands of the Enemy; and also it was to be ordered, that he who carried it
should not be privy to the design neither. Having laid all these measures, I
desired Mr. de Pillois, that he should get the richest Man in those parts he
could meet with, and threaten him, that if he did not carry that Letter safe,
he would not only burn his House down, and all that was in it, but he would
certainly hang him, if ever he came home again; he had confidence enough in me
to do all this for me, without inquiring upon what account; and having got a
Man, he would fain have excused himself upon the account of the difficulty of
passing the Enemies Lines, but he had as good have said nothing. Mr. Pillois
told him, in short, he should either go of this Errand, or of another into the
next World; so seeing there was no remedy, he prepared to go on the Message:
But while he was getting ready, my Host, who I had gained with a promise of a
great reward, got before him, and staying by the way, met him, and made him
believe he was going about some business the same way. Thus jogging on
together, and falling into discourse, he who had the Letter to carry told him,
what a strait he was in, adding that he was undone both ways, that if he should
perform his Message, he should be taken in the Camp, and hanged for a Spy; and
on the other hand, if he did not, he should leave his Wife and Children to the
mercy of Monsieur de Pillois, who besides the plundering and burning of his
House, would treat him in the worst manner that could be imagined; that he had
told him what would be his fate, so that there was no room to flatter himself;
that he had thrown himself upon Providence, being unable to make a choice, when
it lay between his own Life and theirs, who were as dear to him as his life.

My Host pretended to pity his Misfortune, and to gain more upon his belief,
accused Monsieur de Pillois of Cruelty; however after a great deal of talk, and
expressing his concern for him, he told him, that if he was in his place, he
would e'n go and surrender himself into the hands of the Enemies, and tell them
by what Threatenings he was obliged to carry the Letter; that they would let him
carry it into the place, or they would not let him, but either way he would
save his Life, and his Wife, and Children, Mr. de Pillois believing he was
taken, endeavoring to execute his Orders, could have nothing to say to him;
and the Enemy on the other hand, would do him no hurt, seeing he had put himself
voluntarily into their hands. The Man thought this was an admirable expedient,
and resolving to take that course, gave him a thousand thanks. My Host seeing
him in so good a mind, had done his business, and feigning that he was to go no
farther that way, left him, and coming back the same way, he met Mr. de
Pillois, who marched at a venture with his 2500 Horse; he gave us an account of
what resolution he had left the Man in, and we taking it for a good Omen, made
no question, but the Enemy would take it all for truth, and the rather, for
that the Man himself had been really made believe, there was a very great force
ready to march to raise the Siege; in short, what with the Man's Report, and
the Letter together, they were so frighted, that they immediately resolved to
raise the Siege, and retreat.

We received this News when we were come within three leagues of the Enemy; and
Monsieur de Pillois having then no business to go any further, marched back to
his own Quarter, where in a little time he received Letters from the Court,
which complimented him extremely on this happy success; not but that it was
known by abundance of people, that I had a great share in the action, but as he
was the General, and they bear the Reproach of ill success, and so ought to
have the Credit of the good; so also it was just he should have the Privilege
his place afforded him. And indeed I ought to say this in his praise, that he
was a Man that perfectly understood the Cavalry, and perhaps there was none in
the Army went beyond him, of which he gave an undeniable evidence a little
while after; when in the Fight at Einseim, he refused to charge at the command
of Monsieur de Vaubrun; for seeing that the Enemy kept their advantage, he
chose rather to stay till he drew them out of their Post, than to obey and be
beaten. I do not say he did well in disobeying, and he that had served so long,
ought to have known, that nothing can dispense with our obeying the Order of
our superior Officer; and he found the effects of it afterward, being cashiered
for doing it; but yet he showed by that action, that he understood his business
better than Monsieur Vaubrun who commanded him; and the Court was so sensible
of it, that tho they could not allow the fact on account of the example, yet
they allowed him a Pension of a thousand Crowns a year, that it might not be
said he had served so long, and so well, for nothing.

Just as I was come back from this Adventure with Mr. de Pillois, there came an
Officer to me and made me a very pleasant Compliment, which was, that having
been pleased to quarrel with Mr. de Montperoux, Maistre du Camp of the Regiment
de Rovergne, he had occasion to cut his Throat a little, and desired me to be
his Second. I told him I was very much his humble Servant, and I showed my self
so most effectually, for instead of going to fight, as he imagined, I took care
to have us discovered, by which I prevented him from fooling away his Life.
This Monsieur de Montperoux, was a very stout Man, but so very shy, that 'twas
difficult to conform to his temper; he had his Sallies of Humor, which made
him very ridiculous; but of all his Whims that was the pleasantest, when the
King gave him the Regiment; for after the King had told him, he granted the
Regiment to him, he begged his Majesty to give it the Name of some of the
Provinces of the Kingdom; tho it was not the custom then, except for the old
Troops; telling the King, that he was so little known in his own Country, that
if the Regiment should be called by his Name, no body would list themselves in
it. The King thought this was somewhat strange in a Gascon too, who generally
value themselves extremely, and don't use to fail so in their own character;
however the King would not deny him, and he behaved himself with a great deal
of Bravery, till at last, as it often falls out with those who serve a long
time in the Armies, he was knocked on the Head.

I was of an age, as I have often said, that I could not expect to live long;
and so much the rather would not attempt to preserve my Life at the Expense of
my Reputation; however what I had done, on account of this Man that had desired
me to be his Second, gave occasion to my Enemies to reflect on me, as if I had
done it for fear, and they began to count me a Coward: If I had been as much a
Fool as I have been formerly, I should have made some mischief or other on that
account; but besides that my Blood was not so hot now, God first of all, and
then the King, had forbid my taking that Vengeance, we use to call
Satisfaction, and I took another way to let them know, that I had as much
Courage, or more, than they that said so. The first occasion that offered me,
without taking notice of any thing to these Gentlemen, I desired them to go out
with me to discover the Enemy, and I carried them so far, that they began to
mutter at me, and told me, I had certainly been hired by some body, to bring
them all to be murdered; this was all as I would have had it. I told them, I
wondered they should discover any fear, who had been so ready to censure
others; and making no sign of returning, I came within reach of the Enemies
shot, when they were pleased to leave me. This gave me opportunity enough to
revenge my self. When I came back to the Camp, I told all this to their
Acquaintance, and to my own Friends, how they had quitted me as soon as I came
to the Enemies Quarter; and tho some people did not fail to tell them again,
yet they thought it convenient to take no notice of it, lest a Man who valued
his life so little, as they themselves had seen, should not be always in the
humor to bear their Reflections. Indeed I was very unhappy to be so much talked
of, for so small a matter; since the like happened to another Man but the other
day, and no notice at all taken of it. Every body knows, that the Marquis de
Crequi having challenged a Colonel, the Colonel, instead of meeting him as he
had appointed, goes and acquaints the Marquis his Father, who was General of
the Army, and taking him with him to the place, they found the Marquis there
with his Second; who being surpised, as no doubt any Son would have been, to
see his Father in such a case; and seeing there was no way to conceal the
design, he threw himself at his feet, and promised him never to attempt it
more. There is nothing but good fortune and bad in the World. This Colonel was
so far from hurting his Reputation, that he encreast it, and past for a wise
man; and yet I not only suffer^d in such a case, but had the misfortune to have
several of my Friends reflect on me as well as the rest, and I had no
opportunity to tell them my mind, tho I desired it exceedingly; above all, an
account of a certain blustering Fellow called Chateau Bautot, who, if we would
believe himself, was the stoutest man in the Army; I had my Eye upon him, I
never came into his Company but I thwarted him, upon which he grew so reserved,
that I often found he had a great deal of patience, and easily perceived he was
not such a Bravo as he said he was. I ought indeed to have been content to have
mortified him in this manner, but I watched for a further opportunity, which at
last offered it self when I least looked for it. When I returned to the Camp the
next Campaign, I came to St. Disier one day, when there being a great many
Troops in the place, I had like to have lain in the street all night, but that
at last I found out an Host, who by the help of a Crown procured me a Chamber;
so I put my Baggage in and resolved to lodge there; I went out then to see some
Officers of my acquaintance, but while I was walking with them, Monsieur de
Chateau Bautot comes into the same Inn, and finding there was never a Chamber
but mine, makes bold to turn my Baggage out and take possession; as soon as I
came back they told me how it was, and not believing any man could be so
impudent, I run up Stairs to inform my self; I was surpised to find him there
who I wanted such an occasion against, and he was no less, when he saw who it
was he was like to be concerned with; but not giving him time to make his
excuse, I clapped the door to and bolted it, and told him there was no reason I
should have the advantage of the Inn so much, because I happened to come in an
hour or two before him, but I thought he best deserved the Chamber who was best
able to keep it. With those words I drew, expecting that he would do the like;
but instead of that, he told me he would not be guilty of such an ill action;
that he acknowledged he had abused me, and as a further mark of it, he would
immediately remove his Baggage, if I pleased to let them be carried away. I was
ashamed of his Cowardice, and putting up my Sword, I told him that at least
then, he should behave himself more modestly for the future, that I had born a
great deal from him, but I should not always take it so; that I would not use
him as he had done me; tho I had much more reason; that I now was satisfied he
had a great deal more Tongue than Courage, and I should take occasion some time
or other to tell him so, if he did not take care to use me better. Thus I
remained Master of the Chamber, which I was not a little glad of I assure you;
for I must own to you, I had rather it had been he than any Person in the
World, for tho I know I ought to forgive, yet I could not help being thoroughly
pleased at such an opportunity to revenge my self. This accident however made
him quit the Army, and go and serve under Mr. de Schomberg in Catalonia, he had
a Troop of Horse in the Regiment de Gassion; but as he was always a man of
pleasure, he left the Army to run after a Mistress, and as he was coming back
again, was killed by the Miquelets.

As for me, I was still Aid de Camp, and tho the King had several in the Army
who wore long Beards as well as I, as the Marquis de Angeau, and the Marquis d'
Arcy, yet none of them would pretend to dispute the Seniority with me; however
I was still very vigorous, and Monsieur de Turenne would say of me sometimes,
that 'twas pity I began so late, and that, if I had as good a constitution of
body to the War, as I had of mind, I should have been able to do any thing.
Indeed I used to tire two or three Horses a day; I was so constantly riding
about in every corner, that they called me the Petty General of the Army. I did
not do this to make people believe great things of me, but 'twas my delight;
and I always chose rather to please all the world, if 'twas possible, than to
give offense to any; and I know but one man in the whole Army, that complained
of me, and I leave the world to judge, whither that was my fault or no. In the
Regiment of Horse de Harcourt there was a Gentleman of Vexin, called
Bellebuine, whose Father having been one of my acquaintance, a Captain in the
Guards, I thought my self obliged now and then, to give his Son a hint of my
observations of his conduct, and I had told him of several things which I
thought were not very much for his reputation; indeed he was very debaucht, and
tho he had a very honest Woman to his Wife, yet he run away from her, and
followed a Gang of nasty common Whores: This could not but produce ill effects
on him, and all that I had foretold him came to pass; he was looked upon in the
Regiment, as one who 'twas scandalous to be seen with, and besides he had done
two or three very dishonorable actions, and to complete all, he brought the
fould disease with him from Paris; and whether he wanted Courage, or was unable
to serve on these accounts, I know not, but he came to me one day, and desired
me to ask leave of Monsieur de Turenne, for him to go somewhere to be cured: We
had then the Enemies Army just at our Trenches, and thnking it was not a proper
time for any Man to leave the Army, I gave him my opinion, that Mr. de Turenne
would not grant it him; he would not take my word for it, but seeing I refused
to speak for him, he went to Monsieur de Turenne, and asked him himself, but he
told him the very same thing as I had said, which not satisfying him, he went
away without leave. In short, I had good reason for what I said, for the Armies
engaged in a day or two after, and had he staid till then, I should have made
no difficulty to have spoke to Monsieur de Turenne for him; and Monsieur de
Turenne who was very civil to him, told him, if he would have patience two or
three days he should go; but going his own way to work, he was cashiered, as he
well deserved. God knows I never accused him to Mr. de Turenne, but said all I
could in his favor, when they told him of it; nevertheless, he took all the
disgrace that was done him to be my doing, and they wrote to me from Paris,
that he threatened me strangely; I made a trifle of it, and indeed I knew him
too well to be afraid of him, but I was soon taught, that the bravest Men are
not always the most dangerous Enemies; but on the other hand, a Man has nothing
to secure himself against Malice and Treachery. In short, I was no sooner come
back from ^^e Campaign, but one night as I was going along the Fauxbourg St.
German very late, three Men set upon me with naked Swords in their hands, and
I knew him to be at the head of them. I was not so much surpised, but that I
had time to ask him in cold blood, if it was possible for a Gentleman to be
concerned in such a piece of Villainy. I confess he had been in a great many ill
actions, as I have before observed; and now, having reduced himself to the last
extremity, he had listed in the Gens d' Arms, where, tho I do not say but there
may be some honest Gentlemen, yet I shall not fear to say also, there are
others, who will stick at no manner of crime; here it was that he furnished
himself for all sort of Villainy, and I believe 'twas by concert with these
people, he that undertook an action so horrid: I was in the more danger from
these Rogues, because 'twas very late, and I could hope for no help from the
Watch, for they were gone, it being near day: But I had not so much work with
them as I expected; and taking care to set my back against a Shop, that they
might not come behind me, I stood upon my Defense; I have wondered a thousand
times, reflecting on the passage, how it came to pass, since they had Villainy
enough to contrive such an action, that they had not armed themselves in
another manner; but so it pleased God to order it, I kept them off in that
fashion with the point of my Sword, till at last a Coach was heard, which was
the Duke Lesdiguieres; as soon as ever the Villains saw the Flambeaus they fled;
and the Duke, who was in his Coach, knowing me by the light, made his Coach
stop, and asked me what was the matter? I would not tell him the name of him I
had so much reason to have exposed, out of my respect to his Relations, who
were very honest people: I only told him, I had been attacqu'd by three
fellows, I knew not who, and if his Grace had not come by in the minute, I did
not know how it might have fared with me. He stepped out of his Coach
immediately, for fear of a surprise, and we walked along together two or three
whole streets, but could see no body. But this was a day of strange adventures;
coming to a new House, which was not above half finished, we heard a grievous
groaning, which was like a Woman's Voice: Mr. de Lesdiguieres ordered his
Footmen to go into the House, and see what was the matter, and we followed
them; but I was strangely surpised when I saw what it was: 'Twas a Young Woman
extraordinarily well dressed, and to appearance of some Quality, with a Masque on
her Face; she was fallen in Labor in that place, and without any manner of
help but a sort of a Girl, that was not like to be capable of doing her any
service; I was extremely moved at her circumstance, and said something to her
to make her sensible of it; but Mr. de Lesdiguieres, who was a hard-hearted
Man, fell a laughing at her, and was a going to make her pull her Masque off,
and if it had not been for me, I believe he would have done it, for he said a
great many hard things to her which I did not approve of: I had a great deal of
difficulty to get him away, but having at last persuaded him, I did her a great
kindness, for I saw she had almost stifled herself with her Mask for fear of
being known; and if she had been to keep it on much longer there had been no
saving her. I had the Curiosity the next day to go and inqure about her, making
all the description I could of her Dress and Shape, and the like, I got so much
information, that I understood 'twas a Counselors Daughter, that past for a
young Saint: However, tho she was of no mean Family, yet the Child was exposed
to the Parish, and the Commissary was just taking it away as I came by: If I
had thought fit, I could have given him some light into the matter; but
considering that I ought not to ruin a poor Girl, who without doubt had been
drawn in, I never spoke a word of it.

However this affair of Bellebrunne that befell me, made me bethink my self, and
I was just a going to his Captain, the Prince de Soubize, who I had the honor
to be particularly known to, and I knew he would do me justice; but then
considering 'twas a sorry Wretch I had to do with, I thought 'twas not worth my
while, only I would look to my self a little better; so I took care to come
home betimes at night, and if I was out late, I always took some of the Watch,
who for a small matter would guard me to my Lodging; by which means I avoided
him in the night, and he had not Courage enough to attack me by day light.

I had followed the War now three years, in which time I had played the good
Husband so well, that I had three years Rent in Bank, which I think was
extraordinary for my Post, where 'twas not the Custom to be saving; for my pay
was 100 Crowns every six weeks, and truly I made bold to live upon Monsieur de
Turenne for my Diet; so that I never was in a better condition in my life. But
knowing not well what to do with my Money, I inquired after an opportunity to
put it out; and speaking to a Friend of mine about it, he told me, he could
accommodate me himself without my seeking any further; that he had lent 20
thousand Francs to a Gentleman of Provence to buy a place with, and had taken a
Mortgage of him for it, and he would enterest me in it if I pleased; and that,
tho it was not usual, yet he had a Counter Security also upon the place to the
value of 20 thousand Crowns, between him and the Marshall d' Humieres, who had
lent 40 thousand Francs on the same account; so that I should run no hazard in
it, and should oblige him too. This looked so fair that I had nothing to object,
and being also very willing to serve him, I fetched him my Money, tho I had
intended to have put it into the Fund for Annuities, or at least into the
Townhouse. Indeed I had better have done so, but I was born to be a Beggar. I
received the interest but a very little while; and the Gentleman dying, the
King gave the place to Monsieur de Brissac, Major of the Guard du Corpse,
without any regard to the Obligation the other had made: I had laid my measures
so foolishly, that instead of taking an Assignment of the Deed from the person
I lent the Money to, with his Security for the payment, I let him be quit, and
my self be constituted in his place; so that all the hopes I had, was upon the
succession of Monsieur d' Arbouste, who held the said Government; but then
understanding that he owed already more than he was worth, that thought was at
an end; but ^^en we reckoned, that if the King had an account of the Case, he
would cause Monsieur de Brissac to pay us; and the rather because the Marshall
d' Humieres was concerned, who we thought had interest enough to appear for us;
the person I had done this withal had great Friends too, it was Mr. de
Saillant, Brother to Mr. de Montauban, Lieutenant General in the King's Army;
but tho this Man did his endeavor, the other did not stir in it, telling us
'twas to no purpose, for that Mr. de Brissac not being able to pay us, to
trouble the King about it, would but be to ask him to give us so much Money out
of his own Coffer: But this did not satisfy Mr. de Saillant and me; and as I
did not care neither to appear too publicly in it, all the care of the matter
lay upon Mr. de Saillant, who to say the truth, spared no pains in the
business; but 'twas three months before he could have a word of answer, tho he
had given abundance of Petitions to the King with his own hand; at last
Monsieur de Louvois told him, that if he would not offend the King, he should
desist his pretensions in this affair, and think of something else to ask of
the King to make him satisfaction. This was enough to let us know our Money was
lost. But Monsieur de Saillaut thinking himself obliged on my account, but
chiefly on account of his own Family, not to be put off so, presented still
several other Petitions to the King, to one of which the King answered him
himself, that he might know of the Marshall d' Humieres how that affair stood.
Mr. de Saillant having told me this, I troubled my self no further, thinking
that Mr. d' Humieres having already told us his mind, he had made his Court at
the expense of our Cause, but I did him wrong; for very generously he had told
the King, that if he had not importuned him, 'twas because his Majesty had
already been so bountiful to him, and that in his Majesty's favor he could not
be the poorer for the loss of 40 thousand Francs; but that it was otherwise
with Mr. de Saillant, who, besides that he was not very rich, had also a very
great Family; as for me he said nothing, for as I said I did not appear, and I
saw also that Mr. de Saillant did what ^as possible. One would have thought so
handsome a Declaration as this of the Marshall d' Humieres should have done us
some service, and that the King, or Mr. de Brissac would have paid us; but they
thought no more of that, lest they should be obliged to pay the Marshall d'
Humieres too: so that Mr. de Saillant had for his last answer, that he should
not press it any farther, but rather seek for something else to ask of the
King; he cared not for all this neither, but still continued soliciting, tho
to no purpose at all.

But to return to my other affairs, which this story has too much diverted. The
year 1675 being begun, I prepared again in the Campaign with Mr. de Turenne: He
had finished the last so gloriously, that there was nothing known like it; he
had fought four Battles in one Summer, with such unequal Forces, as any body,
but he, would have been overthrown; but his Conduct, or his Courage, always
supplied his Want of Numbers; and in the last fight, with not above 25000 Men,
he drove the Germans back over the Rhine, tho they were at least 70000 strong.
In other places where the War was more dispersed, it was still proportionably
successful on our side, the King having taken the Franche Comte; and the Prince
of Conde, who made head against the Prince of Orange, having taken his Baggage
at the Battle of Seneff, and made him raise the Siege of Oudenard. In all these
places there fell a world of Men, and a Peace seemed equally needful to both
parties, but one thing rendered it impossible to be effected. The Marquis de
Grana had been too cunning for Prince William of Furstemberg, now Bishop of
Strasbourg, and had surpised him in the City of Cologne, and taken him
Prisoner; and this had quite broken off all the Treaties then on foot for the
Peace of Christendom. He was carried to Neustadt under a strong Guard; and the
Emperor, who knew he was deep in the interests of his Enemies, and afraid too
of his capacity, resolved to detain him, tho the action was condemned by all
the world, as against the Laws of Nations; the Prince being at the Assembly at
Cologne, on the part of the Elector of that name; and the violence offered him
there was enough, without any further design upon him: and people were the more
concerned at this too, because of all things the Emperor himself was a Prince
far from any such ill designs; but some of his Statesmen persuading him, that
he could not be safe without it, and that this Prince William had as much
credit in the Empire as himself, he made his Judgment stoop to his Interest,
and so his ruin was concluded on; and if the Emperor had been less religious
he had not lived long. In short, they assembled the next day, more indeed to
make a formal Judgment, than to examine much into his Affair; but the Emperor
would have but three of his Ministers there, of whom the Prince de Lokowits was
one. They condemned him to lose his Head, and the Execution was appointed to be
in private, and not to be known till it was over. But the Prince de Lokowits,
who signed the said Sentence much against his Will, whither it was that he was
a Pensioner to France, as his Enemies gave out, or that he thought that manner
of proceeding would reflect upon the honor of the Emperor his Master, sent
word to the Popes Nuncio, and desired him to go to the Emperor, and to threaten
him with the Censure of the Church, if he suffered this Sentence to be
executed. The Nuncio, who had already Orders from the Pope to interceed for the
Princes Liberty, was very ready to forward the matter, and sent immediately to
demand Audience of the Emperor; who being surpised, when he understood he was
acquainted with an affair which he had committed to so few persons: the Emperor
did all he could to find out how he came by the information; but the Nuncio
told him, his Majesty knew well enough what he told him was true, and begged
his Majesty to consider what might be the effect of such a proceeding. The
Emperor, who is a mighty religious Prince, and whose Conscience would not
permit him to contradict the Pope, suffered himself to be bluster'd out of his
intentions, by the high words of this Churchman, and so changed the Sentence
from that of Death to close Imprisonment. It was also a great step to his
Deliverance, that he had taken up the Habit of an Ecclesiastic, for that was
the Nuncio's great Argument to the Emperor, that he had nothing to do to put to
death a Man who was consecrated to the Church; and that if he was guilty of any
crime, the Pope ought to take cognizance of it.

But if the Prince de Lokowits found means thus to save the Prince of
Furstemberg, he ruined himself by it; for the Emperor presently suspecting that
this Intelligence must come from him, caused him to be arrested, and seized
upon his Secretary at the same time, who they put to the torture. It is hardly
to be imagined the barbarous usage they both received; for besides this affair
for which they were resolved to plague him, the Empress, that then was, owed
him a spleen, for opposing her Marriage, which she could never forgive him; he
had indeed pusht on the Match with the present Empress, and had the other died
sooner, perhaps he might have made shift to have got off clear; but the Empress
hating him, every one made their Court to her by pushing at him, till at last
he was sent to one of his own Castles, where they found means to poison him,
and so sent him out of the way.

These things had raised such a ferment on both sides, that instead of Peace,
or the hopes of it, the Flame of War was kindled more violent than ever. All
the preparations imaginable were made on every side; but after all, fortune
still declared for us, and every year before the Enemy could be got together,
the King had taken two or three of their best places; by this means the Low
Countries grew weaker and weaker, tho indeed 'twas chiefly by the negligence of
the Court of Spain; for instead of committing the Government of those Countries
to an experienced Soldier, that understood things, the Duke de Villa Hermosa
was then Governor, who had never served in any degree above a Captain of Horse,
and was no way a match for the old politic Commanders in the King's Army. The
Spaniard had another failing too, which was that they wanted Money to make
Magazines for their Forces; whereas the King could take the Field in the middle
of Winter, and his Men had no necessities to encounter, but the severity of the
season; all these things ought to have inclined them to a Peace, and most
people thought it would have done so; but the Ministers of State seeing with
other Eyes, they resolved upon the continuance of the War, to the great regret
of all Europe, who was quite weary of such a long and bloody contention.

I had still my old post, and being of so ill an age for action, I sought for
no other; and finding that Monsieur de Turenne was almost ready to go into the
Field, I got away before with my little Equipage: As I went by Courtenai, I
found a Spanish Officer of the Regiment of Grana, called Cueillette, who had
been taken Prisoner at the Battle of Seneff, and was returning into Germany
with some private Soldiers, who had run the same fate with himself; they had an
Order for Quarters, paying for what they took; but the Sheriffs were forced to
put them all into a Barn with Straw for their Lodging; the Officer was lodged
in an Inn, and I becoming acquainted with him there, we lodged together for
three or four times; I found him a very civil Gentleman, he told me he was a
Lorrainer, and that he had been Page to the Prince Charles, now Duke of
Lorrain. His company was very agreeable to me, especially since I traveled no
faster than he, only it cost me a little dearer; for when we came to Bar Sur
Scine, he told me his Money was all gone, and that Monsieur Louvois having made
him attend several days for his Passports, he had spent his Money, and knew not
how to get more till he should reach to Mets; that if I would defray his
Charges so far, and his Men, I should extremely oblige him, and he would
certainly reimburse me when he came there. I believed all he said, and did more
for him than I should have been persuaded to do for one of my own Countrymen;
at least unless I had known him very well: I told him he should not be
disturbed, I would let him have what he had occasion for. When we came to Mets,
he told me, the Man who he was directed to, was gone out of Town, so that
instead of paying me what he had promised me, he must beg me to continue my
assistance to him, and supply him till he came to Strasburg, that there he had
abundance of Acquaintance; and that as soon as ever he came there, he would
punctually repay me all I had laid out for him: I did not mistrust him yet, but
supplied him with whatever he wanted; but from that day to this I could never
see one penny of my Money; and it is the least that I can do, to give this
caution to such as read these Memoirs, to take heed who they trust in that
manner: I have been since told he is become a Capuchin, but he might have paid
his Debts first; for I do not understand they have any more privilege than
other people to rob their Neighbors.

In short, Monsieur de Turenne soon after being come to the Army, he had about
as much cause to be pleased with the Inhabitants of Strasburg, as I had with
Monsieur Cueillette; they promised him a thousand things which they never
performed, but he might have known them, for they had used him just in the same
manner the year before; this obliged him to pass the Rhine, to prevent their
giving up their Bridge to the Enemy; but all the Country being ruined, it is
impossible to tell you what difficulties we were put to for want of Forage,
and for fifteen days together our Horses eat nothing but Weeds we picked up and
down near the Camp. The Quarter Master General of the Horse, gave Monsieur de
Turenne an account of this every night when he went for Orders, telling him the
Cavalry could not subsist any longer, if they were not permitted to Forage,
for it had been a long time since he would suffer them to go out for that
supply; but Monsieur de Turenne answered him, that they would never dye with
hunger, as long as there was Leaves upon the Trees, and if they wanted they
might go and gather them if they pleased. The Enemies fared no better than we
did, and we did nothing on neither side but watch to see which would break up
first, so as the other might make some advantage of it; for if we had a great
Captain at the head of our Army, the Germans had no fool with them, being
Commanded by no less a Man than Montecuculli, who had shown us a piece of his
skill at the beginning of the War in the first Campaign, when feigning to march
way, he countermarcht immediately, and went directly the contrary, and on a
sudden surrounded Bon in such a manner, as we could by no means relieve it.
Thus the two Armies lay and both suffered great inconveniences, till at last
they came so near, as 'twas thought they could not part without coming to a
Battle, and every one was overjoyed at the hopes of being delivered at once
from all these miseries; but just at the very moment, when Monsieur de Turenne
thought the hour of Victory was come, he was killed with a Cannon Bullet, by
the fault, in part, of Monsieur de St. Hillaire, Lieutenant General of the
Artillery; I say by his fault, because Monsieur de Turenne having spoke to him
to go along with him, to view where he might place a Battery, he must needs
stay to put on a Red Cloak, by which they were known to be Officers, and that
made the Enemy fire at them; and the same Ball that killed the one, shot off
the Arm of the other, as he was pointing at something they were taking notice
of together.

If another was to tell this story, you might expect some account of the
strange consternation which seized the whole Army upon this unhappy accident;
but I can give no distinct relation, for the confusion I was in my self was so
great, that I minded no body else, nor took no observations of other matters;
this I know, that every body gave themselves over for lost; and the more,
because the Marquis de Vaubrun, and the Count de Lorges, without considering
that the condition we were in required a common unity for our general safety,
fell to making Factions and Parties, and to draw the great Officers to their
sides, about the principal Command. This had certainly been the ruin of the
whole Army, if it had continued but two days, but some of the graver heads
remonstrating to them, that this was not a time for them to dispute Punctilio's
of Honor, and point of Command, but to consider the Honor of the King, and
that they would be called to an account for it if things miscarried upon this
score: At last they persuaded them to refer their pretensions to some of the
principal Officers, chosen by the rest to decide it between them; and so the
differences being composed, we began to retreat toward the Rhine, where we had
a Bridge of Boats. But we had taken several advanced Posts very near the Enemy,
and 'twas necessary to draw our Men out of them before we decampt, which we did
without any loss, setting fire to our works, and principally at Willessat,
where all the Mills were burnt. The Enemy, as soon as ever they had notice of
the Death of our General, imagining we would resolve to retreat, as we did
indeed, prepared to fall upon us; and decamping the very moment that we began
to retire, they attackt us at a Pass of a little River; the Fight was very
obstinate on both sides, ours being enraged at the loss of their General, and
the other in hopes to make their advantage of our Confusion, knowing we had
lost our principal dependence; but neither Party had their ends, for the
Germans being obliged to repass the River with the loss of a great many men, we
had the honor of the Action; yet however we were forced to proceed on our
Retreat, and that with all the caution imaginable; and the Enemy having waited
upon us to the Rhine, we past that River in sight of their Army.

My Commission being void by the Death of Monsieur de Turenne, I resolved to
leave the War; and there being a great many more in the same circumstances, we
formed our selves into a little Troop, that we might be able to defend our
selves if we should be attackt; for besides that the Country was full of
Schepepans, a sort of people as dangerous as the Enemy, the Germans also had
past the Rhine after us, and filled the Country with their Parties, and we met
with one of them presently, with whom we engaged, and had the good fortune
utterly to defeat them by plain force: We took the Officer that commanded them
Prisoner, and they that took him having searched him, they found a Passport in
his Pocket, which they brought to me, for they had made choice of me to command
them, till we should be past danger. This Passport seemed something particular
to me, for among us there was no body took Passports, but such as belonged to
some Garrisons; but they told me they did not belong to the Body of the Army,
but to certain Troops which the Enemy had posted in several places in Alsace.
While he was talking with me, I perceived some Blood to run down his Coat, upon
which I told him, I doubted he was wounded; he told us he was not, for he knew
nothing of it; but when he saw his Blood he changed color immediately, and
which was very strange, in a moment more he dropped down dead; whether 'twas
really from the greatness of the Wound, or the surprise of it that seized him,
which I am more apt to believe; for certainly Fear is capable of producing more
extraordinary effects than that: And the Marquis d' Vxelles, Colonel of the
Dauphin's Regiment, told me a story a few days ago, that at the Battle of
Cassel, one of the Soldiers fell down dead in the Ranks, before one shot was
fired, just as they were going to charge. 'Twas a great good fortune to us
however, that this Man died thus, without which, I, and all my Troop, had been
taken Prisoners, for we were hardly got a League farther, before we met with
another Party of the Enemies Horse, who were at least three hundred strong. I
was a little surpised, for our Scouts had not had time to come to ask them who
they were for? But some of their body came up to me, and asked me who we were?
It came strangely into my Head, at the very moment, to make use of the
Passport, I told you of, and with a greater presence of mind than was usual to
me in such cases, I told them, we belonged to such a Garrison, naming the place
the dead Officer had belonged to, and to confirm it I showed them my Passport,
which they taking for granted, let us all go. 'Twas a great happiness to me,
that I was pretty well Master of the German language, so that they never
imagined me to be a Frenchman, for that indeed was what deluded them most.
Being thus happily got out of their Clutches we pursued our Journey, and
arrived safely in France, where they had given over all for lost upon the Death
of Mr. de Turenne. The King himself indeed expected some disaster to fall out,
and therefore had sent an Express to the Prince of Conde, who was then in
Flanders, to put himself at the Head of the Army in Germany, with all the
Expedition imaginable. The Germans were set down before H^genau, but the Prince
of Conde advancing with a resolution to fight them, they raised the Siege: They
had also appeared before Sa^erne, and raised some Batteries, and for three days
together had fired upon the Town, and thrown in a great many Bombs; but this
only served to encourage us again, seeing they made no better use of the
advantage they had. I was just arrived at Paris, when the news of these things
came thither; but nothing surpriz^d me like the story they told of some Jews in
those Towns, who had got a way to put out the Fuse of the Bombs, just as they
were going to break. They threw themselves desperately upon them with the Hide
of an Ox just killed in their hands, and stopping the Mouth of the Fuse so that
no Air could get in, they put the Fuse quite out. It had been a brave
contrivance for the Genoeses to have had some of these people with them, upon
the late recounter we had with them; which if they had their City, which was
the most magnificent in the world, had not been reduced to that condition we
are told it now lies in.

The death of Monsieur de Turenne was daily in my thoughts, and if I had had
the least inclination to a solitude, I believe this alone would have caused me
to have retired to a Cloister; but that sort of life having been always my
aversion, I made no advantage of the example that great man left me, who had
resolved to retire himself among the Fathers of the Oratory if ever he had
outlived the War. I speak this to my own shame, that an old Fellow as I was of
above threescore and ten, should be so fond of the World at that Age; that I
could not be persuaded to forsake it. To speak the truth, I did not seem so old
as I was, as I have said before, for tho I might have been trusted safely
enough with Women, yet my Age it seems did not appear so much, but that I was
capable of making some people jealous: Indeed I was the occasion that a
Gentleman of Picardy, whose name I shall conceal, made a pretty sort of an
essay upon his Wife, which might have been a fine History if it had been
public, for being become extraordinary jealous of his Wife, he gets him a
Friars habit, one of the same sort he knew his Wife went to Confession to, and
having bribed her Page to be true to him, he ordered it so that when she sent
the boy for her Confessor, he should bring her word that he was not well, but
that he had sent one of his Fellows of the Order. In the mean time her Husband
dressed himself in the habit, and went to her Chamber, which being a dark Room,
he did not fear being discovered; being there, he began to make strange work
with her, for he instead of acting the Confessor, examined her particularly if
she had not entertained me, and she could not imagine why after all she could
say to him, still he repeated the same question to her over and over, which he
did also to inform himself of some other suspicion which he had in his head, if
I might believe what she told me the next day; he got nothing from her but what
she did not care if all the World knew: But the truth was she knew him by his
voice which made her be cautious, and she had Wit enough not to let him
perceive it; but both made a jest of their Religion, one to satisfy his
jealousy, and to find out, if it had been possible, the Intrigues of his Wife,
and the the other, to cure his Jealousy if she could, which only made him ill
natured.

While I spent my time thus, the Kings Army had enough to do to repulse the
Germans, and hardly could keep them from pressing into France it self; for the
death of Monsieur de Turenne was not the only misfortune that befell us, for
there happened a worse at Treves, were the Marshall de Crequi was so entirely
beaten, that we have very rarely heard of such a defeat; most people,
especially those that did not know how things were carried, thought the
accident which befell M. Vignori, the Governor of Treves, was the occasion;
they thought I say that he having agreed with Mr. de Crequi to sally out and
fall upon the Enemies Rear, and being killed in the march, which the General
knew nothing of, was the cause of the disaster, it being impossible to provide
against all things, but I must explain this; for Mr. de Crequi knew well enough
before that his Horse had thrown him and broke his Neck, the Kings Lieutenant
of Treves having sent him word of it by an Express: the real occasion of the
misfortune was, that instead of 200 Horse, which he had ordered to go out to
forage, the order was mistaken, and all the Horse went out, so that when the
Enemy appeared, there was no Horse to receive the Charge or to cover the Foot.
However 'twas, this affair perplexed the Court very much, if the Enemy could
have made the best of their advantage, but the differences among themselves
were the occasion, that it all ended with the taking the City of Treves.

I had followed a course of Life for four years past which was very agreeable
to me, and tho one would have thought I should have loved my ease better, yet I
could not be quiet but I must return to the Wars, but I could find no
opportunity, for every body knew me, and I was ashamed at my years to go and
beg an employ, so I was forced to sit still whether I would or no; I know not
whether my disquiet at this or any other cause brought me to it, but at last I
began to be out of order, and in seven or eight days I was so bad, that I was
given over by all people; my Distemper was a Dyssentery, and tho they could
find no way to stop it, yet I was of so strong a constitution, that I do not
think I was sounder at 25 years of Age; from whence I could not believe I was
so ill as they said I was, and no body would tell me of it, but seeing my Valet
de Chamber cry, I would know what was the matter with him, and he told me it
was because the Chyrurgeon had told him I was a dead man; I say the Chyrurgeon
because you must know I fell sick in the Country, and having no Doctor at hand,
I would not let them send for one: I was not frighted at what the Boy said, but
finding my distemper increase, I sent to Paris for a Horse Litter to carry me
thither, being about 12 miles off; being brought thither I sent for a Doctor
that used to come to me, one Jonquet, and the first thing he asked me was, if I
had not had a debauch; I asked him what he meant by it, for there was several
sorts of debauches; that if he meant of women, I had not been a hater of the
Sex in my time, but he told me he meant as to Wine, adding withal that if it
was from that, he would not undertake me, for it would be impossible to recover
me; I assured him there was no such thing, upon which he told me then there was
hope, however he would promise me nothing, for I was ancient and therefore he
advised me to send for a Priest, and make ters even for another World, I
believed him, and committed my self wholly to Gods mercy and the Doctors art; he
took me into his management, and kept me in his hands five Months entire, in
which time I took some Physic or other of him every other day: This is a story
every one may not believe, that one of seventy years old should hold out so
long in a Distemper, that often dispatches younger men in half the time; at
last, my Physician coming to see me told me, 'twould be a disgrace to him to
take any more of my Money, and do me no more good; that all that he could think
of to give me, or all that he could be informed of in consultation with others,
served indeed to keep me alive, but not at all to recover me, and therefore he
would come and see me as a Friend but not as a Physician. This was in short to
tell me had given me over, however, tho both from my Distemper and my Age I had
reason enough to fear, yet I had no apprehension on me, I only desired him, to
continue his good Offices, and come to see me as he used to do, but he like a
very honest man, would not take any more Money; and tho my distemper held me
four Months longer, he never failed coming to see me: I should tell you a lie
if I should say, I was in as much pain all that time as I was before, for I had
a great deal of ease to what I used to have, but being not at all cured, and
resolved if 'twere possible, whate re it cost, to get rid of the Distemper, I
had recourse to a thousand Quacks and Mountebanks to relieve me, and I took a
world of Slops and Drugs, but finding all was to no more purpose, than what Mr.
Jonquet had done already, I sent for one Father Ange, a Capuchin, who was
accounted an admirable man for these sort of things; when he came in, I told
him a long story of what I had suffered by this Distemper, and that I hoped he
could tell me of something to cure me, he replied in a doleful Air, that he had
known several that had languish'd a longer time under the same Distemper than
I, that the Duke of Luxemburgh had had it four years together, and perhaps this
might hold me as long; if I had been able I believe I should have beaten him to
hear him talk in such a manner; but I was grown so weak that the least puff
would have blown me down almost; so I was forced to take it patiently, and only
asked him if he could tell me of any thing to do me good, at least that I might
get some rest, for I had not slept, as I may say, in 8 months, and 'twas that
which weakened me so extremely. The good Man to pacify me, brought me the next
morning a miraculous Syrup, which besides its Virtue, was so pleasant to the
taste, that I thought when I took it, I was drinking Rasberry-water. I slept
after it 12 hours without waking; and when he came to see what effect it had on
me, I embraced him, and assured him, that I should be bound to acknowledge the
remainder of my life was owing to him. But I began to rejoice a little too
soon, for all the other remedies he gave me, were so far from having the same
effect, that they only put Nature into a ferment; and all the benefit I had,
was that I found it easy to take his Medicines, for they were all as pleasant
as the first; so I dismissed Father Ange, as I had done all the rest: And I
believe this unhappy Distemper had still been my Companion, if Madam d' Ort,
Sister to the Marquis de Feuquieres, had not happened to come to Paris. I was
acquainted with her, but more particularly with her Husband, who was a very
brave Gentleman; she enquiring after her old Friends* and hearing what a
pitiful condition I was reduced to, came to see me, and brought with her a
certain sort of Bread, which she had made up like a Cake, which I had no sooner
eaten of, but I found my self perfectly cured: I have carried some of it about
me ever since, and I think I may say it has been the preserver of my life.

'Twas impossible to be brought lower than I was; yet this good effect my
affliction had, that it made me more sensible of the things of another world
than I had been formerly; I went to Church a little oftener than I used; and in
short, I began to remember, that I was some time or other to dye: On this
account having heard of a certain Capuchin, called Father Marc d' Avano, who
was reported to work Miracles, I had the curiosity to go and see him. I took
Post from Paris to Flanders, where I heard he was; but being told he was newly
gone from thence for Germany, I followed him, and overtook him in the Country
of Gueldres. I had no occasion to make much enquiry after him, for all the Road
was crowded with people, who came, as I did, from all parts to see him. But tho
every one told me with great earnestness, that they had seen him cure several
Diseases, and particularly the lame; yet tho I looked with all the Eyes I had,
I could see nothing of it, only that the vogue was got so into the heads of
people, that he had never less than an hundred thousand people about him,
wherever he quartred, and made a figure like the Entry of some great Prince;
they built Scaffolds, and paid for standing at Windows to see him go by. My
zeal having made me as much a Fool as the rest, it was not long before I
repented it, for the Scaffold I was got upon to see him, breaking with the
weight of the people, I fell down from a place seven or eight foot high, and
broke one of my Arms; several others had the like misfortune, or were as much
hurt; but tho they say it is a comfort to have companions in affliction, I found
none from it now, and the rather, because I was in a Country, where 'twas a
rare thing to get a good Surgeon. I sent about for one of the best, but they
brought me one that understood no more than one of our Apprentices in France;
and after he had very roughly handled me for about three weeks, I found it was
so ill set, that 'twas all to be done over again. I repented a thousand times
of my Devotion, and cursed the people that put this story of Father Aviano into
my head; but all this did not cure me, I found my ^elf reduced to the necessity
of carrying my Arm to Paris, in the condition 'twas then in; or else to put my
self into the hand of the Hangman of Ruremond. This man understood setting of
bones, as well as breaking them, and had got such a name for it, that several
Gentlemen told me, all people who thought themselves ill cured by others, went
to him. It seemed an odd thing to me, to apply my self to the Hangman; but
considering, I was but in an ill condition to be carried to Paris, I even
delivered my self over to him, like a condemned person in despair: Being come
to his House, I told him what had happened to me, and asked him if he could do
me any good; to which he surlily replied, with the true air of a Hangman, that
he had cured those that had been worse than I; he took hold of my Arm and
stretched it out; and whether it was that he handled me a little rudely, or the
aversion I had to the Man, I know not, but I thought he had done me a
prejudice, and I gave him such a look as would not have pleased him, if he had
seen it: However, after telling me, that he who had had me in hand was a sorry
ignorant fellow, and making it out by a great many terms of Art, which I have
forgot, he asked me if I had any body to hold me, while he performed his
Operation; I told him no, and I thought there would be no need, I hoped I had
courage enough to bear it; and I supposed all the pain he would put me to,
would not force me to cry out. He shook his head at that, which was as much as
to say he believed never a word of it, and told me he was not such a Coxcomb to
attempt it upon that supposition; but since I had no body with me, he would
have some of his own people for that purpose, and that he must stay for them,
for they were gone upon a small Execution about a league or two off. This
little Execution he talked of was; they had been breaking a Man upon the Wheel
that had killed his Wife* by and by they came home, and with their hands all
bloody, laid hold of me, just methought as they had been doing to that
Murderer. The Master took hold of my Arm, and broke it again in an instant,
without any engine but his hands, but not without such exquisite pain to me,
that he had good reason to tell me I must be held. However I was very well
satisfied in going to him, sor I was well again in a few days, and never felt
any weakness in that Arm since, any more than if it had never been hurt.

At last this War ended, after it had held three years, and all was concluded
by the Peace of Nimeguen, as much to the Kings advantage, as the Campaign had
been; for he had found out the way to divide his Enemies in such a manner, that
instead of uniting their common interests, they fell into private Treaties with
him, and every one made their Peace as well as they could. This was such a
false step as the like was never known, and they soon found their error. As Soon
as ever the King had separated them, he lays hold of the opportunity with his
usual policy; and as he had seen by the War, that his Kingdom would never be
perfectly at ease, while Luxemburg continued in the hands of the Spaniard, he
resolved therefore to have it in exchange for Alost, which he had pretensions
to of another sort. This was not such a Chimera neither as some people
pretend^d. The King having taken Alost, among several other Towns, in the
course of this War, and the Treaty of Peace expressing, that all such Conquest
should remain to him, as were not mentioned particularly in the Treaty, this
was doubtless his own, there being not the least notice of it taken in the said
Treaty; all the Objection was, that he had kept no Garrison in it, and so the
Spaniards said it was actually put into their power again, as soon as ever we
had abandoned it. But the King returned, that he had left it to the keeping of
the Inhabitants, who had always been their own Masters, and therefore he would
stand by the Letter of the Treaty. In short, there was no remedy but to decide
the matter by the Sword, or to refer it to the King of Great Britain, who had
been Mediat^r of the Treaty, and was Guarantee of the Peace. But the Spaniards
suspecting, that Prince not to be so much their friend as that required, chose
rather to name Commissioners to accommodate the matter; the King did the like,
and they appointed the Town of Courtrai for their meeting; which having
produced nothing but arguments Pro and Con, and no conclusion appearing likely
to be made, the King ordered Luxemburg to be invested.

Every body thought this would kindle the fire again, and that the War would
break out hotter than ever. The neighboring Princes were so alarmed, that they
dispatched Orders to their Envoys at both Courts, to try if 'twere possible to
soften the matter, and prevent the miseries that threatened upon a rupture* But
it was impossible to adjust it, the King would have Luxemburg or Alost; and the
Spaniards saw, 'twas equally inconvenient to them to part with either; if they
gave up Luxemburg they shut out their Succors from Germany, from whence they
must come; if they granted Alost, it was to give away one of the best Revenues
in all Flanders, the income from that Bailliage bringing in a Revenue of
1600000 Livres a year; and besides, the jurisdiction of it extended even to the
Gates of Brussels on one side, and Ghent on the other: so that it would be to
block up both those Cities. And to say all in a word, in the necessity they had
brought themselves to, the King taught them which to choose; for his Majesty
having more mind to Luxemburg than to Alost, sent them word that was better for
his turn than the the other: But he had not the gift of persuasion neither, if
they could have helped it; but Luxemburg in the mean time continued blockt up,
which if it had not, he must have made use of some force to have opened his
passage on that side the Country. The King of Spain, who saw himself in no
condition to resist such powerful forces by himself, had sent orders to avoid
the quarrel if possible; so that the Soldiers were wholly unprovided when they
should have come to fight. These things will hardly be believed in times to
come, but since there is no other History, I believe, will mention them, I hope
the most incredulous will take my Testimony of them; and if I have given an
account of these things, 'twas not that I was really present there, or that I
am troubled with that itch of scribbling, to write of those things which has
already employed the Pens of so many worthy men* I should have said less of
this affair, had I not been obliged to mention it upon the account of my
Nephew, whom I shall speak of presently, and of an accident which happened to
him, which had certainly been his utter ruin, if he had not found very good
friends to appear for him.

He had quitted the Kings Regiment, where, as I said before, I had placed him,
and had put himself into the Cavalry, where his inclinations led him to serve,
and was made a Captain merely on the account of merit, for a very gallant
action which he had performed; and tho it be not proper for an Uncle to praise
one of his near Relations, yet I must not omit, that he had a very good
reputation in the Regiment; but so it happened, that in one day he lost all that
esteem he had obtained, which nevertheless was not so much his fault, as that
by his action, Luxemburg was prevented falling into our hands at that time. We
had been already a good while before the Town, and the Garrison began to feel
the want of many things, and above all of Money, for want of which the Governor
could not subsist his Men; wherefore he resolved to send some body to Brussels
to get some in if possible. He fixed upon three persons for this enterprise, the
Count de Walsastine, and two other Officers, and he ordered Capt. Gregory, an
old Soldier, for their guard, who knew all the by-ways round the Town for
twenty miles together. Gregory found means to get them clear well enough, but
we having some people in the Town, who gave us an account of every thing that
past, we had advice not only of their going out, but of their errand to
Brussels, and could have traced them thither if it had been needful; but we
contented our selves to watch them so exactly, as to be sure of them as they
came back. Our Spies looked out so well, that we had certain advice when
Gregory and his Companions were come within a days journey of the Town,
whereupon several Parties were sent out, one of which was commanded by my
Nephew; it happened that Gregory fell into his Ambuscade in particular, and
they being but about seventeen Horse, and my Nephew above sixty, they thought
it their best course to retreat, and so made off toward Treves: My Nephew
persuing him kept so close to him, that he was forced to take into the Town,
and appeared at the Gates almost as soon as he; but the Germans not favoring
our party, denied him entrance, on pretense that they must first go and ask
leave of the Governor, my Nephew told them, in short, the King would have a
severe satisfaction for this falseness; but 'twas all one, they made them stay
a full hour at the Ports; in which time Captain Gregory and the Count de
Walsastine consulted together what to do, whether they should stay in the Town,
or go out another way, but at last they reselv'd to stay in the Town; so they
took up in an Inn which had a private back door, against which they threw a
great heap of Horse-dung. The Governor of Treves, supposing by this time they
had secured themselves, orders the Troop to be let in; and my Nephew being
in^^rm'd, that the Spaniards were in that Inn, he quartered his people all
thereabouts, and having visited all the Avenues, he placed Sentinels at every
place which he thought proper; but seeing the Dunghill which I mentioned, he
never imagined there should be a door the^^. In the mean time, Gregory, to
amuse him, and that he might not imagine he would be stirring that night, made a
strange revelling in the Inn, and such a noise as if they had been all drunk,
and appeared at the Windows with Glasses of Wine in their hands, and this they
got some Germans to continue all night. The Sentinels made no question but
'twas the Spaniards all the night; while in the mean time they opened the false
door I told you of, and threw aside the Dung, and went about their business. My
Nephew knew nothing of their going till it was quite day, when finding how 'twas,
and understanding they were gone toward Coblentz, he followed them. Tho
Gregory was a great way before them, yet his Horses were so fatigued, that he
was afraid of being overtaken before he got to the Town; wherefore seeing a
little Chapel upon the road, he resolved to take possession of that, and to
defend it if my Nephew should attack him; but his ill fate would not put it
into his head to look there. So that passing by without discovering them,
Gregory came out, and advised the Count de Walsastine, and the two others, who
carried the Money, to venture with it alone. It was the best counsel that could
possibly be given, for our Parties were very vigilant, and upon the scout on
every side; the Count de Walsastine took his directions, and with the two
Officers betook themselves to the Woods; but they staid three days before they
could get along, and had staid longer, but that they were forced to venture for
mere hunger; Fortune favored their Vigilance, for they past undiscovered in
the night, just between two Squadrons of our Troops. They got into Luxemburg in
very good time, where the want of Money was so great, that the Governor would
not have known what to do if they had staid any longer.

As for Captain Gregory, he wandered a long time in the Woods, before he could
get in; but all the Country being Spanish, he found means to subsist, and so
was not in such necessity but that he might wait for a favorable occasion,
which at last offered it self, and he got safe into the Town; the Governor, who
had been in great pain for him, was overjoyed to see him return without the
loss of a Man. We had News every moment from ths Town, and when the History of
this Escape came to the Army, all were enrag^d at my Nephew, for letting him
escape so; they wrote the account of it to the Court, and very luckily for him,
I was gone that very day to St. Germains. I had some Friends in the Secretary's
Office, and among the rest Monsieur de Charpentier, under Mr. de Louvois, a
very civil obliging Gentleman, and always ready to do offices of kindness to
every body; he seeing me coming from Mass at the King's Chapel, desired me to
come and dine with him. I was going to excuse my self, for that I had promised
to dine with a Friend: I don't ask you, said he, whispering in my ear, for the
good cheer you shall find there, but to inform you of something which concerns
you. He said no more to me then, having another man in his Company, who he was
not willing should know what he had to tell me; but this was enough for me to
put off any other appointment. So I went to him, and there I had the whole
story; after thanking him for his information, I asked him what I had best to
do in it; he told me I should go to Monsieur de Louvois, and not seem to be
surpised at what he should say to me; that I should let him ru^ on and say
what he would, and only tell him, that this was a mischance might have happened
to any body as well as my Nephew, and that he had never had the misfortune to
displease him before; and that if he would please to pardon him this, it would
oblige him to greater circumspection; he told me several other things I should
say, which I observed exactly, but I found Monsieur de Louvois in such a
passion, that instead of hearing me speak, he told me, that he thought he ought
to make out a process against such a man as he; that if he had taken the Count
de Walsastine, he had taken Luxemburgh; and he was going to inform the King,
how much he was beholding to him; I begged of him not to do so with all the
submission imaginable, but he was not a man to be moved with pitiful words, and
he had certainly done as he said, had not a Courier very happily arrived at the
instant, who going with him into his Closet, gave me time to go and seek some
friends to speak to him: Monsieur the Grand Master did me the most service, for
he would not leave him till he had promised his favor to my Nephew; having
thus happily made his peace, I sent him word who he owed the obligation to,
that he might not be ungrateful, but above all I ordered him to thank Monsieur
Charpentier, without whom it had been impossible to have hindered his ruin.

I came acquainted with the Grand Master by the means of the Duchess de Vitri,
who was I think one of the best of Women, and of whom I shall always have a
good opinion, for all that has been said of her Conduct in the World. I had
very great obligations to that Lord, yet seeing him one time when I was making
him a visit; take a great deal of pleasure to reflect on her, I desired him to
do me the favor to refrain from such discourse, assuring him if he did not, I
must go out of the Room; he told me he was glad to see me take my friends part
so vigorously, but he hoped I did think that which he then spoke was not out of
malice, and that he only talked so to see if I could make any excuse for her;
for all the world could tell him, that she kept a certain young German, whom
she had raised from a Lackey to be her Valet de Chamber, and from that to be
Master of her Horse, but he would say no more because she was a friend of mine;
the best could be said tho was this, that she had shown affection enough for
him to marry him; and for his part he believed, they either were already
contracted, or married upon Honor. I know not how he came by these particulars,
but the truth was, that Lady managed her self so unhappily with that fellow,
that every body reflected on her for it; but while we were talking about it,
came in Monsieur de la Tonr, who had married Mademoiselle de Vitri, and I
presently guest 'twas all from him, and that he did it in revenge because she
had opposed his Marriage. His coming interrupted our discourse, but I resolved
to inform Madam de Vitri of it; but that she might not take ill my freedom with
her, I used a great deal of precaution in it: I told her, if she would promise
not to take unkindly one thing I had to say to her, I would inform her
something that should not be to her disadvantage; she told me I should not
scruple saying any thing to her; and after having made a great many
protestations, that I should extremely oblige her, I told her, that being in
company with a certain Duke, I heard her so severely reflected on concerning
her conversation with one of her Servants, that tho I was very much concerned
for her, yet I was scarce able to justify her conduct. I assured her however,
that I had not the least suspicion of her Virtue, and would answer for her to
all the world body for body; but if she would permit me to speak seriously to
her, this Groom was a fellow that deserved to be handsomely chastis'd, since,
when he knew what notice the world took of it, instead of behaving himself
cautiously to prevent the spreading of such a noise, he had increased it by his
impudence, and had made people believe what really never was; that I knew he
had pulled out handfuls of Money among his Comrades, which was as much as to
say, that he who had the privilege of something so extraordinary, could want
for nothing; that this I had taken notice of in particular, but there were a
multitude of such like passages; tho without troubling her with such trifles, I
left it to her self to judge, if this was to be suffered in such a fellow.

Tho she had said a thousand things to urge me to be very free with her, yet I
perceived she was very uneasy at my discourse, her color came, and she blushed
like fire when I touched some particular points; and when I had done, instead
of flying out on the Rascal I had so plainly detected before her, she exclaimed
violently on her Son-in-law, who she said was the Author of all these
Calumnies. It was to no purpose in the world for me to swear and deny it, she
did not believe me, or at least she pretended not to believe me; but at the
same time threatened what she would do to him; and she gave proofs of her good
will in a few days, in attempting to sell a fine Estate she had about Nemours,
that it might not come to him: The sum being at least four hundred thousand
Francs, she could not soon find a Chapman; and Mr. de la Tour did all he could
to prejudice people against it, when he saw them inclined to it. Indeed her
conduct in this affair was inexcusable, not only on that account, but as she
had so little discretion, as to tell the fellow all I had said to her. He, who,
tho he had changed his habit, had still the servile spirit of a Footboy, durst
not express his resentment to me; but he had such an influence upon his
Mistress, that she let me see it in her countenance, which was enough to have
taught me to desist, and if she had a mind to ruin herself, to give her
liberty: Indeed it is so with all the world, and a man ought not to attempt
doing people good against their will; but as I did every thing different from
other people, I went to her again as I used to do, and told her, that for all
her displeasure at me, I was resolved to let her see how entirely I was devoted
to her, and therefore came to tell her, that in endeavoring to sell her
Estate, she made the world talk of her more than ever: That now they said, for
Money to give the Groom, she would sell the Inheritance of her Family, and
ruin her only Daughter; that she might easily guess what the consequence of
this would be, since a person of her quality must needs be more sensibly
touched with such reports than other people; that her Family, and that of her
Husbands too, were concerned and at stake; and if I might venture to tell her
what I had been told, there were not wanting those that had resolved, by some
means or other, to dispatch the Rascal that had exposed her, and made her the
common talk and jest of the Town.

Nothing that I could ever say to this Lady, made such an impression upon her
as this last circumstance; she inquired who it was that told me so, but finding
me unwilling to name any names, she pressed me to it by all the entreaties and
good words possible; but I begged her pardon for not proceeding any further,
which made her imagine I had made the story my self. I told her she was at
liberty to believe what she pleased, but perhaps time would make it appear too
true, that I was wholly incapable either of adding to, or diminishing from the
truth: Upon which I left her without any more ceremony. The next day, passing
through the street where she lived, I met Mr. Theodore, (that was the name of the
Groom) who thinking he had to do with one of his own sort, comes up to me, and
tells me, I was well set a work to go and tell such a parcel of impertinent
stories to his Mistress. He had no sooner spoke the words, but without any
other reply, I gave him his reward with two or three good rubs over the
Shoulders with my Cane, at which he was so surpised, that he did not so much
as offer to put his hand to his Sword. In the mean time he took another method
to revenge himself, and gets an order to have me before the Mareschals of
France, and did not question, I suppose, but according to their usual severity,
I should have been sent to Prison. But I having acquainted the Marshall de
Villeroy of the matter, before whom that Court was held; and also that such a
fellow as he had not a right to summon before them; he could have no Audience
there, but was referred back to the common course of Justice, and there I had
been before hand with him, by the advice of a cunning fellow I employed, so
that he was surpised, when coming to get a Warrant for me, he found himself
arrested by virtue of a Judgment I had obtained against him in the same Case.
Madam de Vitri was but ill pleased with me on this account, and had told some
of my Friends, that I had so little respect for her as to abuse one of her
Servants; that she had always had a great respect for me, but she would never
forgive me this as long as she lived. I desired them to inform her that I was
provoked to it by his saucy language; that it was true I might have considered
that I ought not to have been provoked by any thing such a fellow could say,
but one is not always Master of ones passion; besides a Man ought always to
have regard to his own honor; and if I had failed in that, yet I desired her
to consider, that having a Sword by my side, I ought so much the less to bear
such affronts as those. Another would perhaps have thought these excuses
reasonable, but Monsieur Theodore having a greater influence upon her than I,
she was not at all moderated, but continued as furious as ever. I did not much
trouble my head with it, having the satisfaction of the general approbation in
what I had done. Indeed I dare say she governed herself more by her humor than
her reason, as appeared soon after in her selling her Land for half the value,
to Monsieur de Boisfranc, Intendant of the household to the Duke of Orleans;
this enraged all her Relations against her, and the report went that to make
Mr. Theodore amends, for the affront I had put upon him, she gave him good part
of the Money; Monsieur de la Tour who had the greatest concern, finding things
went thus, thought he ought not any longer to suffer this Wretch; however
before he did any thing, he thought 'twould be best to theaten him, to see if
he could make him run away of his own accord; the design succeeded, for
Monsieur Theodore seeing that all the world was bent against him, marched off
with his Money, without so much as taking leave of his Duchess, and if we may
give any heed to the Scandalous Chronicle, she laid it so to heart, that it was
the cause of her death. This is true tho, that she lived not long after his
departure, and it had been better for Mr. de la Tour that he had gone 4 or 5
years before, ^^e had not then squandred away the best part of her Estate, nor
lost her Reputation, which before was so great, that no Lady could have a
better.

But to return to the Blockade of Luxemburgh; it continued all this while
invested, and tho the arrival of the Count de Walsastine gave new courage to
the Garrison, yet the relief he brought could not last always, and that being
wasted they were reduced to the same condition they were in before; this made
the Governor very thoughtful, but at last he committed one error, for which, if
he had been a Subject of France, he would at least have lost his Government, if
not his Head. When our Forces first approached, he brings a noise of Music to
the Ramparts, as much as to say, he was very glad to see us, and that we had
obliged him in giving him an opportunity to show his Courage, and upon that
made several Balls and Rejoycings in the Town; but he never considered that he
had to do with Enemies, who knew how to dance to other sorts of Instruments,
and whose Courage had been too well shown in the late War, to be suspected; and
if I may be allowed to make a little digre^sion, I would say if they had been
attackt by plain force, it might, for ought I know, have fared with them as it
did with the Prince of Conde at the Siege of Lerida. He being flusht with a
multitude of Victories, which he had gained in Flanders, and imagining that
fortune was bound to follow him into Catalonia or where he pleased, not at all
concerned at the misfortune that had befallen the Count d' Harcourt the year
before, he brings his Violins to play in the Trenches, and not content with
this, he sends to tell the Governor, that he would give him every day such
Serenades; to which the Governor answered, he would endeavor to return his
civilities, but begged his pardon till the next day, his Violins being out of
order, but he would take care they should be in a readiness by that time; his
Violins were a peal from his Cannon, which he caused to fire without any
intermission, and in the heat of it he sallied out and fell upon the Trenches
with a desperate fury: The Prince of Conde stood him gallantly, and there ^as
no Courage wanting in him to beat him back into the Town, but being not so well
seconded as he ought, he was forced to give ground, leaving at least seven or
eight hundred of his men upon the spot.

Now if I might be suffered to give my opinion of so great a Captain, I think
he was very much to blame, for where is the jest of these sort of Bravado's?
are not there a thousand other ways for a man to signalize himself, and if one
comes to be baulk't, as it happened here to the Prince, how foolish does it
look? but I will not run too much on this subject. To go on with the business of
Luxemburgh; the Governor was a man of great bravery, and he must have
degenerated from his family if he had been otherwise, for it has been a house
which has produced a great many Gentlemen of extraordinary worth; and the
action which I am blaming him for, proceeded indeed rather from an excess than
a want of Courage; however he ought to consider that even too much Courage is
an inexcusable fault in a General or Governor of a Town, tho it may be allowed
in a Soldier; however there was less reflection made on him, for this affair,
than for another of a different nature which happened soon after, and 'twas
this I meant, when I said he had been very severely punished for it, had he been
in our service; being one Night at a Ball within the Town, he happened to have
some words with a Colonel of the Garrison called Cantelmo, who thinking
himself affronted, whispered him in the Ear, that if it would oblige him he
would give him satisfaction immediately: The Governor took him at his word,
and without so much as considering that he had an Enemy under his Walls, he
withdrew from the Ball without any noise, and was immediately at the place
appointed, in a by Street of the Town; the Governors Second was the Count de
Walsastine, and Cantelmo's an under Officer of his Regiment; their Footmen had
Flambeaus to light them, and tho the business held but a little while, yet
there was some blood shed; the Governor gave Cantelmo a thrust in the side,
which glanced along upon his Ribs, and whether it was that the Colonel thought
himself wounded worse than he was, or that his feet slipped, it was not known,
but he fell down, and the Governor coming up to him, he asked his life, and was
going to deliver his Sword; when the Officer who was his Second seeing the
danger his Coll. was in, flew to his rescue with such fury, that he had run the
Governor through and through if the Footmen had not stepped in and kept him off with
their Flambeaus, which they run just in his face, and so the battle ended, for
they knocked him down just by his Coll. and the Count de Walsastine being come
up to the Governor, they easily mastered the other two who were down before.
If the Marshall de Crequi, who lay before the Town, had had orders to have
attackt it, no doubt he might have made but short work of it, while the
Governor that commanded it had so little discretion, but tho we had forces
enough yet we durst not attempt it, as otherwise we would have done, for we had
measures to keep with the King of England, who was the more troublesome to us,
the more he was himself disturbed by his own people that hated us, upon which
account he concerted all matters with us. Let not the English think the better
of themselves for what I have mentioned; I don't say we were so afraid of them,
as that we were bound to do every thing they ordered; if they had declared
against us it had not been much the worse for ou^ affairs, but 'twas not
prudence for us to create our selves new Enemies, when there was so many
jealousies already of the progress of our Arms. I allow they are a brave
people, but I don't doubt we have convinced the World we are so too; one thing
we excel them in, and that is, in having abundance of experienced Soldiers and
Officers, bred to the War; and above all a King, who if he abandons himself to
his pleasures, yet abandons all those pleasures, to pursue the course of an
immortal fame.

I shall not give any other account why the Blockade of Luxemburg was raised,
than what went current in the World; it is an action so lately done and so well
known, that all the world must remember it: There were some reflections upon my
Nephew on the occasion of this design failing, which he laid so much to heart,
that I perceived he was grown melancholy; I advised him to lay down his
Commission, but he would not do that neither, but being overcome with
discontent, at last he fell desperately sick: I loved him very tenderly, and
indeed above all the rest of my Family, and therefore I no sooner heard of it,
but I took Post to go and see him; 'twas no difficulty for me notwithstanding
my Age, for that sort of Coach which is an invention we have from the Germans,
carries one so very easy, that it is not the least inconvenience; at my arrival
at Dunkirk, for there was his Quarters, I found him something better, and very
glad he was to see me, for as I loved him, as I said before, so he had the same
affection for me; and it appeared presently; for Company so revived him, that
he began to recover apace, and I never left him till he was quite well: And as
nothing contributes to our recovery from any distemper, more than a proper
divertisement; I endeavored to bring it about for him, by inviting some Ladies
to come and play at his Chamber. This did not continue long, for in a little
while he was well enough to visit them. There were at that time a Poppet-show
in the Town, and all the people went to see it, the famous Punchinello doing
strange things; tho my Nephew, nor I, did not much fancy those things, yet I
carried him to see it; we were exceedingly diverted, and so were a great many
more besides us, by some extraordinary passages in this adventure. Some may
think it very impertinent in writing these Memoirs, to trouble the World with
such a mean story as this of the Poppet-players; yet if they please to have
patience till they have heard it out, they will be better satisfied; the reason
I mention such a trifle as this, is because some History depends upon it, at
worst; it may make 'em laugh, as it has done many more besides my self.

Brioche the famous Poppet-player of Paris, finding people began to be weary of
his fooleries in the City, took his opportunity when most people were out of
Town, to make a turn in the Country; first he went into Champagn, thence into
Lorrain, so into Alsace, and at last he came to Stratsbourg, where abundance of
people having never seen Punchinello, run after him; finding so good success
there, he takes a march into Swisserland, I can not positively remember into
what Canton he went, tho I have been told that too; but in short, 'twas in one
where they were so perfectly unacquainted with those shows, that when he came
to play his tricks among them, they took him for a Conjurer and thought he
dealt with the Devil; away they go to the Magistrates, who it seems were just
as wise as themselves, and in short they were going to give sentence against
him; but as it happen*d, before they would go so far they bethought themselves
of one Monsieur Du Mont Colonel of a Regiment of Swisse, which was in the
French service, and who happened to be then in the Country* he laughed heartily
at their simplicity, and assured them that there was no witchcraft at all in
the matter, and that in France they were so frequent, that they were to be seen
in every Market Town; but Monsieur Du Mont being a jocose sort of a man, and
the Magistrates thinking he only bantred them, they were resolved not to take
their measures wholly from what he said, but to be better informed, they
ordered Witnesses to be examin*d, and there having testified that they heard
little figures in the shape of Men and Women to speak, they concluded they
could be nothing but Devils, and therefore without any more ado past their
decree against Biroche: They carried the sentence to Monsieur Du Mont, who told
them in short, they were going to make themselves ridiculous, and he was
heartily sorry that his C^untrymen should be such abominable Fools. Being not
able with this freedom to undeceive them, he resolved to play 'em a Trick; he
turned his tone immediately and told them, that if he had not confessed the whole
matter at first, 'twas because he saw they would engage him in an ugly piece of
business; that Biroche was a French man, and the French were now so great, that
people ought to consider well what they did before they quarreled with them;
but besides that, he had a great many persons of Quality among his Poppets,
with Princes and Princesses of several Countries, that he did not know what
relation he might have to those great Persons, but to be sure his interest was
very great, since they should give him leave to bring them upon the Stage in
that manner, and that in a word, he found they were going upon a business which
might embroil the whole Canton; but he would say no more, 'twas their part to
consider of it; but in cases where Princes and Princesses were concerned they
could not be too cautious.

This discourse spoken mighty gravely, took with the Magistrates extremely:
They told Monsieur Du Mont, that what he had told them was of consequence and
deserved consideration, indeed, that they would therefore call an Assembly to
advise what was to be done, before they proceeded any further, and prayed him
to continue his good Offices to them on this occasion; in short, they called
their Assembly to consult of the matter, and they soon agreed, which was, that
they should have a care of bringing a troublesome business upon themselves, and
therefore they sent to Monsieur Du Mont to tell him, that they would not
proceed to extremity, but content themselves with banishing Biroche out of the
Canton, on condition that he paid the charges of his prosecution; Monsieur Du
Mont took upon him to carry this message himself; but Biroche would not hear a
word of it, so Mr. Du Mont told the Magistrates, that since Biroche would not
submit to their sentence, 'twas his opinion they should cause his Poppets to be
stripped of their fine Habiliments, for what ever relation they might be to
persons of Quality, Princes and Princesses, they would have him do justice to
be sure, and when they understood he had refused it, they would blame him: They
thought this was the most reasonable proposal in the World; and since they
could have no satisfaction from him, they sent and plundered all his Poppets,
and carried away all their fine Clothes in Triumph, and poor Biroche was fain
to dress them all in new Clothes, before he could appear in Flanders, whether
he went next in his way to Paris.

Tho Monsieur Du Mont had done this fellow no mean service, as you may judge by
the story, yet he thought otherwise, and made him a very ill return for it, of
which I can give a particular account, having been an eyewitness of it my
self. Monsieur Du Mont had been a long time in Garrison at Bruges in Flanders,
and having got a Mist^iss at Dunkirk had a fancy one time to go thither to see
her; he went Incognito, and having concealed himself there some time, his
Mistress would needs have him go with her to the Poppet-show, and promised him
she would so disguise him, that no body should know him; she had much ado to
persuade him: But as it is a hard matter to refuse any thing to a person a man
loves, he agreed to go with her; she dressed him up like a Burgher, and they sat
in a corner by themselves, the young Lady having told her acquaintance it was
one of her Fathers friends; Biroche coming upon the Stage with his Punchinello,
and looking about him, spies out the Colonel, and knew him, tho he did all he
could to conceal himself; so he makes his Punchinello cry out Treason, Treason,
Treason in Spain, Treason in Germany, Treason in England, Treason in Portugal,
Treason in Italy, and at last, Treason in Flanders. Biroche tells him he should
hold his Tongue and look he did not trouble his head with what was done in the
several kingdoms of Europe; but Punchinello run on and names all the other
States of Christendom; people wondered what this meant, because it was different
from what they used to hear, none of the Plays beginning like this; but it all
came out in an instant, for Biroche turns to Punchinello and tells him, that
since he had a mind to talk and prate, he would give him leave, only on this
condition, that he should not say a word that Monsieur Du Mont, Colonel of a
Regiment of Suisse sat there in that corner, dressed up like a Burgher and his
Mistress with him; as there was a great many Officers there who knew the
Colonel well enough, they all stood up and looked on every side, to see if what
Biroche said was true; in the mean time Monsieur Du Mont helped to discover
himself, for being in a strange confusion to find himself surpised in such a
condition, he made a great deal to do to hide himself; but one who knew him a
little more particularly than the rest, made him pull away his Hat from before
his face; so then it signified nothing to endeavor to conceal himself any
longer; if he was in confusion enough, his Mistress was in more, and 'twas well
for her that she pulled her Hoods over her face, by which she prevented her
being known. But the Comedy was quite put by on this occasion: Monsieur Du Mont
swore he would be revenged on Biroche; but he left the Town the same day to get
out of his way, and went to Paris, where he was fain to lie hid too, for fear
of the Colonels resentment.

I have been the longer on this story, because I fancy every body will be
pleased with it, for of all things that have been said of the Suisse, I believe
no one ever heard such a simple business as this. By this time my Nephew was
quite recovered, and I came back to Paris, where telling this story, I had past
for a great Lier, had not Biroche been by to justify it; and I desire all that
read these Memoirs and doubt of the truth of it, to inform themselves from him.
He tells a great many particulars diverting enough, which I omit here on
purpose because I would not make the story too long.

Being come back to Paris, I found I had got a little stock of Money again
aforehand; and tho I ought to have learnt the wit to know what to do with it,
having paid so dear for my experience in the case of Monsieur de Saillant, yet
I must still be considering forsooth how to improve my Money; this good
husbandry was a humor came upon me a little too late; had I been so wise when
I lived with Cardinal Richlieu, I had had no need of it now; but it was my lot
to be ruined, whoever I dealt with.

Monsieur De Saillant must excuse me if I say so, 'twas a word slipped out by
chance, and may well be forgiven a man whom it cost eight thousand Francs
besides Interest, only to do him a kindness; however my design is not to do him
any harm, for he did his best, and so did he that I am going to speak of, and I
forgive them both; I had 2000 Crowns by me in good Gold, and as old age has
this particular quality to love hoards, I enquired of every body if they knew
one to whom I might safely put out this Money; they proposed several to me, and
I chose out one of them, to my misfortune: No body pleased me so well as one
Monsieur Joseier de la Jonchiere, because he made a good figure, and I thought
him a rich man: Any body would have been cheated as well as I, for he had a
place of eight hundred thousand Francs a year, a fine House of his own at
Paris, Rents on the Townhouse, Lands in the Country, and if one had had a
hundred thousand Crowns to put out, he had six times enough to answer it; in
short, I gave him my Money, and thought my self very much obliged to him that
he would take it; but about six months after, going along the street where he
lived, I saw a crowd of people at his door, and enquiring what was the matter,
they told me they did not know the particulars, but the Kings Soldiers had
taken possession of his House; which was enough to tell me my Money was in
danger, and I was too true a Prophet, for tho he appeared several days after,
yet his affairs and mine were not much better than one another; he called his
Creditors together, and I coming among the rest, he told us he had enough to
pay us all, if we would have patience, and the King would have any compassion
of him, that he had had several losses, which the wisest man alive could not
foresee. First, that one of his Factors had run away with a hundred thousand
Crowns. Secondly that upon calling in the Money the pieces of four Sous, and
giving out the marked pieces, he had not above eight days warning, and having a
vast quantity by him, at least six Millions, six hundred thousand Livres, he
lost above eight thousand Francs by them; do whatever he could; that tho
Monsieur de Louvois was informed of his loss, he being a Public Notary
himself, yet he had not spared him in the Tax, but had rated him, as he did the
two other Treasurers General Extraordinary of the War, at five hundred thousand
Livres; that nothing was so unjust as that Tax which was laid on them, on
pretense that they had shared with some of the Under-Treasurers in their
Cheats; that he would not answer for other folks, but for himself he could
safely swear he had nothing to do with them; that all his losses amounted to
fourteen hundred thousand Francs, which had all befallen him in a year or two;
that however he had this to comfort him, that no body needed to lose a farthing
by him.

He could not say this to us without some tears, reflecting on his past
fortune, which indeed compared to his present condition, was enough to move
compassion, who but a few days ago lived in splendour equal to a Prince, and was
now in a moment reduced to such a condition, as not to have a Bed to lie on:
His Wife, who was a Colbert, and married him but for his Estate, deserted him
now she found he was like to be miserable; and his friends, at least such as
called themselves so before his disaster, served him in the same manner; and to
complete his misery, his Brother-in-law, one Brebier, who had married his
Sister, put him in Prison for a Bill of Exchange he had paid for him. In short,
every one run upon him, and did him all the mischief they could, and no body,
but I, regarded the inconstancy of fortune; but I thought myself obliged,
rather to help him than to crush him in this condition; I had rather, that he
should say this than I, because it is of my self; however, tho I was in no
condition to make large gifts, yet I frankly gave him my two thousand Crowns;
and if all his Creditors had been of my mind, he would never have perished in
Prison, as now he is in great danger to do. Perhaps God sent him this
affliction, to punish him for being a little too sure of his prosperity; for
there was nothing rich enough, or fine enough, neither for him or his Wife.
They would not give themselves the trouble of going to the Play, but the Actors
must come and play at their own house. Their Diet was extravagantly nice, and
every thing else answerable, tho at the same time they thought, that they had a
fortune proportionable. He had a place which in time of War never brought him
in less than a Million a year in his turn, and was at other times worth an
hundred thousand Crowns a year, and there were but three of them, who had every
one a year in their turn; a rare example of the vicissitude of humane affairs,
from whence one may learn, that there is nothing so mortifying in a poor
condition, as to reflect upon our former prosperity.

A little after this happened, my Nephew came to Paris, and as he went out
after dinner from one of his acquaintances houses, he was set upon by four
Ruffians, who after having stabbed him in three several places with their
Swords, made off, supposing they had killed him. The Citizens are commanded,
when any such accident happens, or when two draw their Swords to fight in the
streets, to disarm them, and secure their persons; but this is an Ordonance
which is but very little regarded, and it is with justice enough that the
Parisians are accused of Cowardice; the Tradesmen being always very little fond
of parting a Fray in the street; by which means these fellows got away: And tho
I made great search after them, I could never hear a word of them. My Nephews
wounds were very bad, but yet not so dangerous as I was afraid they were, and
so were cured in less time than I expected, which I was very glad of; but
however we were satisfied from this, that he had some Enemies underhand, and
such as were the more dangerous, because they were not to be known, tho we did
our utmost to discover them. I inquired of him who he had given any occasion
to, and on what affair he could affront any body to deserve such usage; and
after having studied a little on the matter he told me, he could not tell who
to suspect, except it was one Bletterie, who was in his Winter Quarters in the
Country, near the Loire; he had been acquainted with his Wife, who had carried
it so very obligingly to him, that he had a very great esteem for her; that her
Husband who was always by, was so far from showing any dislike at it, that he
was always the forwardest to invite him to his house: However since men are not
always of the same mind, so he would not say 'twas not on his account: That
this man having been obliged to go to Paris, about the latter end of January,
he had left some Money with his Wife, with order to give it to one that was
concerned with him in the Farms; but that he happening at the same time, very
unfortunately, to lose all his Money, she let him have two thousand Crowns,
without any respect to the order her Husband had left with her; that thereupon
great disturbance followed, and the Farmer General seized his Goods for want of
payment; that he had wrote several Letters to his Wife, but receiving no
answer, he was forced to come himself; where she finding herself unable to
satisfy him, was fain to pretend she had been robbed; but that upon enquiry the
man was informed, that there was something else lost besides his Money.

My Nephew having made this ingenuous confession, I troubled my self no more at
what had happened, but on the other hand told him, he had but his due; for a
man that could not be content to kiss his friends Wife, but must bilk her of
his Money too, deserved no fair play, but ought to expect to dye in the street,
as he had like to have done. However, this did not hinder my making all the
enquiries I could possible, to find out whether this happened to him on that
account or no. I made one of my Servants I had tutored, hire himself to le
Bletteire, who was to say, he came from the same Town where my Nephew lived,
and had been injured by him; which was to draw something from him, by which he
might guess how he stood affected to my Nephew; but he came away with a parcel
of silly stories, without making any considerable discovery. Another would have
been discouraged after so many fruitless attempts, especially too, after having
spent more Money about it than can be imagined; for it is a custom at Paris,
when they fancy you are eager to revenge your self, to have a number of
sharping fellows come about you, all pretending, some this way, and some that
way, to give you information; and if you hearken to them a little, they soon
find the depth of your Pocket.

I was the Cully to these sort of people for two or three months; at last, one
that had served me like the rest, came and told me, he had found one of the
Ruffians: I thought this was only a trick to get more Money, and so I told him,
if he did not get him about his business, I should have him soundly kicked; but
he assuring me the thing was true, told me, he asked me for nothing till he had
delivered the fellow into my hands; and provided I would then give him ten
Pistoles, he would bring me to the place where he was; that in the mean time my
Nephew should go before, where he should appoint, to see that he would not
deceive me, and that he would order it so, as to help him to a sight of the
man, and if it was he, he should be provided with people ready to secure him*
This Proposal was so fair, that I could not refuse it, but I agreed to all his
conditions, and promised him more than he demanded. So taking my Nephew along
with him, he placed him in a Chamber up four pair of stairs in la Rue de la
Mortelliere, where on the other side of the street, just over against him, the
person lodged whom he meant; he placed my Nephew in ambuscade behind the
Window, telling him he should soon see him come to his Window, and that he
should not have time to escape. In short, in a moments time he came to the
Window, as he had said, with a Woman who betrayed him; and my Nephew having
view^d him very exactly, was so well satisfied, that this was one of the
persons that assaulted him, that he sent to me to come on with the Officers,
which I immediately did with all expedition. First, I posted three or four men
at the corner of the street, and followed my Nephew with the rest, who would
needs be in the action himself, as being most concerned. We presently en^red
the Chamber he had taken notice of, but found no body there; for he being at
the Window when we came to the door, fled to a back room; the Woman whom we had
set to watch, made a sign to us where he was hid, and there we found him; but
he having fastened all the Bolts* we were forced to break the door open: He put
himself at first into a posture of defense, and fir^d a Pistol among us, but
hurt no body; but throwing our selves in upon him, we took him, and carried him
into the Chatelet. My Nephew appeared to prosecute him, and we had very good
proof of the assault, for it was made in the open day, and in one of the most
public streets of Paris; but when they came to be brought face to face with
the Prisoner, truly there was but one would be positive that he was the man,
the other saying, 'twas too long ago to remember particular faces: However,
this was half a proof, and I did not doubt but they would put him to the
torture upon that, as is usual; and I hoped so the rather, because he seemed a
scoundrel kind of a fellow, that had not above two years ago run away from his
Colors. But as sorry a Wretch as he was, he had good friends who solicited
for him very hard, underhand; among whom, Monsieur Genou was one, who having a
great interest in the Parliament, all we could obtain was, that he should
remain in Prison three months longer, to see if we could bring any further
witness to inform them more fully; so it lay upon us to use our endeavor, for
after that time, if none appeared, he would be at liberty: But what could we do
more than we had done? So the three months run out, and we being not able to
make any further discovery, had the pleasure, after a great deal of Money spent
in the prosecution, to have our Process dismissed out of the Court.

I attribute this disappointment to the solicitation of Mr. Genou, and I
believe I am in the right. In the mean time, it was no very hard matter to find
out, what made him so willing to appear against us; for I had done just the
same thing in an affair that he had (or at least Vedeau de Grammont his
Kinsman) against a certain Lady, whose Father was my very good friend; but here
lay the difference between my management and his, that he saved a man that
deserved to be broken on the Wheel, and I did nothing but what every honest man
ought to do; and to the end, the Reader may not think, I say more of my self
than is my due, I will be judged by all that hear the story, which was as
follows. The season inviting me to take the air in the Country, I left Paris
with an intent to go and see a Gentleman, one of my Relations, called Mere, for
whom I had lately done a particular piece of service, in a difference he had
with one Domanchin, who had been a Notary, but now was become a noted Usurer.
In short, this subtle old Fox had cheated him, at least of fifty thousand
Crowns: The Gentleman having been put to great charges on account of other
people, particularly being to pay for hunting Equipage for Mr. de Vendosme, he
had been quite ruined, if he had been forced to pay all that this fellow
demanded of him; he applied himself to me to help him to adjust this affair;
and having found out his Adversary, I got him a Discharge for a very small sum
more than what was really owing, and abundantly short of the vast sum he
pretended to. This person, thinking himself under great obligation to me, had a
long time invited me to come and see him; and the weather being so pleasant as
I said, I had a mind to divert my self, I got on Horseback by break of day, and
arrived the same night at his house; he made me extraordinary welcome, and I
believe I should have been so if I had staid longer; but as I never loved the
Country for any long time together, and also having a mind to make another
visit not far from his House, I took my leave of him. My other visit was to
Monsieur Herve, Counselor of the Great Chamber, and one of my very good
friends, who I was told was at Monsieur Salle's House, who had married his
Daughter; so I went directly to his House, but when I came to the Castle, I
understood that they were neither of them at home, and that no body was within
but Madam Salle. I having had the honor of acquaintance with her at her
Father's, alighted to go and pay my respects to her. I had not been with her
above half an hour, but they brought her word, that some of Monsieur de Vedeau
de Grammont's Footmen, whose Lands adjoined to theirs, were a fishing in the
Motes. As Soon as she heard it she changed color, and turning to me, Sir, said
she, you are too much a friend to my Father to suffer them to put such an
affront upon me; and with those words she rises up in a heat, and going out of
the room, she runs herself to defend her right. I had no thoughts of leaving
her in a case so plain; but tho the fellows were sent on purpose to offer her
that affront, yet they durst not stay, especially as soon as they saw 'twas the
Lady herself, and she snatching away their Lines, they were in such a
consternation, that if she had pleased, she might easily have banged them.
Vedeau, who was not far off, was surpised when he understood how things were,
and especially when he heard that a single Woman had by herself returned the
affront he designed, he was ready to burst with anger. He was a Man of War as
you might guess by his Habit, of which I shall speak presently; and in
particular of a certain blue Coat which he had such a kindness for, that he had
wore it at least ten or twelve years. Away he goes, raises the Ban and
Arrierban of his Estate, and having made a fine Speech to them, to encourage
them to some bold action, he tells them, that they must march against Madam
Salle, to recover the Booty she had made of his Men's fishing Tackle; and he
would have led them on himself, but that it was not proper for so considerable
a Captain as himself, to go on so small an Expedition. If I would say any more
to give you his character, I might easily do it; but I need only say, that this
was because it seems people which have such affairs as these, ought not to be
of the Party themselves; and as it is with those that are out of love with their
own occupations, they will not trouble themselves to know so much as the terms of
art; so he left all those things to the Men of War.

I was newly gone from Madam Salle when this Rabble came there, or else I am
sure I should sooner have been cut in pieces than have suffered them to offer
her such violence: But they having found her all alone, neither her Sex, her
Quality, no nor her Face, which as it was all charming, so was at the same time
very majestic, could not put any stop to their outrage; but seeing that she
had placed herself single at the door of the Hall to dispute their passage,
they rusht in upon her, and she making what resistance she could, they threw
her down upon the ground, and I know not what other insolences they offered
her; they dragged her about the house from place to place, as if she had been a
Criminal, and they had authority for what they did; at last having found what
they came for, they went away, after having said all the beastly things to her
they could devise, and which they deserved to be severely punished for. The Lady
was a person of too much spirit, to bear all this without taking some course to
revenge it. She sent a Man immediately express to her Father, to inform him of
what had past, and he having overtaken me upon the road, and telling me what
had happened, immediately upon my going away, I thought my self obliged in
honor to go back, and offer her my service. I found her perfectly
disconsolate, and it signified nothing to tell her, her Father had credit, and
friends enough to revenge this affront, this gave her no satisfaction; and I
believe, if I had not proffered her my service, to go immedietely out and
pursue them, she had died under the violence of the oppression; and this
discovered to me the Greatness of her Spirit, more than ever I had observed in
my life. She told me it was not reasonable I should expose my self on her
account, and she stay at home out of the danger; but if I would needs undertake
her defense, she was resolved to run the risque with me; that 'twas true she
was but a Woman, but as much a Woman as she was, she believed she was able to
beat Mr. Vedeau. I told her, I hoped there was no need of that, I would only
have her look to her self after so much violence as had been offered her; and
besides, since she was the Party so much abused, she should keep the right of
her side; and therefore I only desired her to let me have one of her Servants
with me* in a design I had thought of. In short, I sent to several friends I
had in the Neighborhood to lend me the help of their Footmen; upon which
message they came away themselves, thinking I had some quarrel upon my hands;
but I sent them all back again, lest I should embroil them, they being all
marry^d men, or otherwise settled in the Country; so they were forced to oblige
me, or else nothing would have been done. Having 5 or 6 jolly fellows with me,
who did not value Monsieur Vedeau, especially not being known, neither to him
nor his Servants; We put our selves into a hunting posture, and followed the
Chase just to his very Gate: He was chief Ranger of that part of the Country,
and had Men for that purpose in most of the Villages about there; one of which
coming out, upon the first shot we made, to know if we had leave from his
Master; we complimented him with a good cudgelling, and bid him go and tell
Monsieur Vedeau, that if he would please to come out himself, we would be as
civil to him; there came three one after another on the same errand, which put
us to the trouble of serving them all in the same kind, and they all run to the
Castle; where tho they all told the Errand, Monsieur Vedeau did not think fit
to venture abroad; however he thought, if he could raise the Country, he should
easily surround us; so he ordered the Church Bell to ring out for an alarm, and
gets himself up to a Garret Window to see, by the help of his Prospective, if
any of the Country people came to his relief. All this did not hinder, but I
kept beating about the Fields for game, and made one shot just at the Gate of
his outer Court; and his blue Coat discovering him to me, I made as if I would
shoot at him, which he perceiving by the help of his Glass, for he was
naturally pur-blind, he popt in his head in a great deal of haste, which I
could not but laugh to see; for indeed he was so far from being in danger, that
a Fusee could not carry above half so far; but all that did not prevent the
fright he was in; by which I learnt, that a man is never the less a Coward for
big Looks and great Whiskers. All this while the Alarm rung, and at last the
neighboring Parishes beginning to make the same jangling with their Bells, I
thought it was time to retreat. Indeed, I found already the Peasants began to
post themselves at the Lanes ends, and Defiles; but none of them daring to stay
my coming, I retired very well pleased with my little Expedition.

Vedeau presently guest this was some of Madam Salle's friends, but having no
proof, he was enraged at the affront he had received; he endeavored to get
some information, and some pretended to tell him who it was, but it was all
uncertain, for it was impossible to have contrived it better; none of us were
known, and if any had seen me at Madam Salle's, they had not ventured to come
so near me, as to know me again. This affront was soon followed with another.
Monsieur Herve having been informed of what had happened to his Daughter, he
made out a Decree against his Men; and having given it to one of the Prevost's
Officers, he gave him power also to put it in execution. The people all fled,
and when the Officer came, all he could do was to make search in their Houses,
where they made strange havoc, and searched every hole and corner. Monsieur
Genou, seeing his Kinsman had so many ^^oils, and that, without his assistance,
it would be impossible to extricate him out of them all, advises him to a very
subtle trick. He made him present a Petition in the name of these Runaways, in
which he set forth, that under pretense of searching for their persons, they
had plundered their Houses, and took away all they had* This they had leave
given them to prove, and there was no want of sham evidence to swear it. Upon
which M. Vedeau got a Decree against the Officer and his Assistants; who
mistrusting nothing all the while, and no body being so kind to tell him what
had past, was taken as he was sitting peaceably in his own House, and carried
Prisoner to Chatau-neuf in Thimerais; this was just in the Neighborhood of
Vedeau, where the Ma^^ lived in very good credit: From whence he cast him, not
only into a loathsome Prison, but also immediately ordered him to be
prosecuted. 'Twas strange that a Man who was obliged in conscience, and above
all by the obligation of his Office, to do justice to all men, should suffer
himself to be led into such a passion, th^s to oppress an innocent man, and
that purely for revenge; for all the crime they could lay on this unfortunate
man was, that according to his Office, he was at his House to search for those
against whom there was a lawful Decree; and the pretense of his stealing things
was so frivolous, they might as well have charged me with it who was not there.
In the mean time the poor man was ready to perish, and the baseness of Vedeau
was such, that lest he should be relieved, by any body that he thought might
assist him, he ordered it so, that neither Monsieur Herve, nor Madam Salle
heard a word of it; all people who had any respect for him, and that knew not
how he had contrived it, wondered they should forsake the Man in such a manner,
especially since he had brought himself to this ruin on their accounts, and
they had promised to bear him harmless. At last, some one of his friends, being
apprehensive of some further danger designed, went to Paris, and acquainted Mr.
Herve of the matter, who was extremely surpised at the News, that being the
first word he had ever heard of it: He was too much a Gentleman not to do his
best for the poor man, the very moment he knew of it; wherefore putting all his
Irons in the fire immediately, he managed it so well, that he obtained an
Arrest, by which the Court of Justice of Chatea^^e^f was prohibited to proceed
against the Prisoner, and that he should be removed to the Conciergerie; and
one of the Officers of the Parliament was immediately dispatched to carry this
News to him; and indeed he arrived in good time, for the King's Solicitor was
just upon passing the Sentence to have him hanged; the best he was to expect,
was to be branded with the Flower de Lis, and whipped, or be sent to the Galleys.
Vedeau was very much troubled, that just when he was going to make himself so
famous in the Country, by such a piece of injustice* he must now go and give an
account of his reasons to the Parliament, where the Father of his Adversary had
at least as much credit, as he and all his Family; but being constrained by
necessity, he came to Paris, and finding that it was necessary to have all the
parties up, the thing being prosecuted in other names, they tried all ways
possible to make it up. Indeed, it was a very dishonorable strife, for both
parties had recourse to all the tricks and shifts of the Law, not to say
injustices, they could devise; and the passion and spleen with which it was
carried on, having made them shut their Ears to all sorts of Proposals, this
was the occasion of opening the whole scene of the affair, and why Vedeau sent
his Servants to fish in the Motes of Madam Salle's Castle. Monsieur Salle it
seems, had refused de Vedeau the use of the Water of a River, that belonged to
him, to water a Meadow of his, for which he was resolved to be even with him;
and to that end he purchases a Fief of about 5 or 6 thousand Francks, in right
whereof he pretended, that the River was not only his, but that Monsieur Salle
had no authority to draw the Water through his Motes. This affair could not but
require a long decision, considering also what happened between, and the
obstinacy of both parties; being on both sides thoroughly acquainted with all
the nice tricks of the Law. In the mean time the poor Officer was the Sufferer;
and tho he was no longer in the Dungeon, yet he was to remain in Prison till
the truth was made out; and to make his misfortune more complete, the
Parliament would not be Judges in a Case that respected such considerable
persons of their own Members; and it took up a long time before they could
agree to name other Judges: At last, they referred the Case to the
Determination of the Requests de l' Hotel, and I having very good friends
there, I joined my interest with Monsieur Herve, which very much displeased
Monsieur Genou and his Son-in-law; not that they thought I had more credit
there than their party, but that they thought it was a bold thing in me, that
was but a mean person to them, to oppose my self so publicly against them.
Monsieur Genou, who was a hot Man, spoke to a friend of mine to dissuade me
from it; but I told him I had always been Monsieur Herve's humble Servant, and
besides happening to be at Madam Salle's House when the first insult was given,
I could not avoid being of their side. I let fall these last words, without
considering that his Son-in-law might suspect me by that, to be the person that
had shot at his outer gate. It had been excusable in a young man to have spoken
thus hastily, but I was of an age to have had more wit: I saw immediately that
I had committed a fault, but it being too late to remedy it, I let it alone to
take its own course, and never troubled my self about it. My friend having told
Monsieur Genou what answer I had given him, without thinking of doing me any
hurt, they presently concluded, it could be no body but me, that had offered
him that affront; and to be more certain of it, Mr. Genou meeting me next day
at the entrance to the Requests de Hotel, where I was soliciting, told me,
Madam Salle was very much obliged to me; that after I had exposed my self, as I
had done, in coming to insult his Son-in-law at his very doors, I should still
be so hot upon the business, as at all hours in the day to be soliciting for
her: When he had said thus he seemed to expect my answer, and that he might
catch me at my words, I perceived he had placed two fellows ready, who making
as if they took notice of nothing, hearkened to what we said, but they all lost
their labor, for I was not to be caught so; for being aware of them, I said
nothing they could lay any hold of; so they went away as wise as they came.
However, Monsieur Genou owed me a grudge in his heart, and having found an
occasion to show me his good will, as I have related, he did it with a great
deal of pleasure.

But to return to the story, the Hotel having again attempted to accommodate
the matter with Mr. Herve, but finding their inveteracy so great, that they
would hear of nothing, they disposed themselves to do justice* and to pass
Sentence: For the affair of the Officer who was still in Prison, they adjudg'd
that he should have liberty to follow the business in the Court till the end of
the Cause, for they had not dismissed his Process, tho they thought fit to allow
him his liberty. In the mean time this affair was like a heap of Snow, which
grows bigger and bigger by rolling to and fro. There were so many Proceedings,
that they had, at least, forty or fifty bags of papers; and it cost Mr. Herve
an infinite deal of Money to carry it on, for he bore all the charge of it, as
well as the subsistence of the Officer; whom in this case 'twas but reasonable
to provide for. However, at last the Process, after having held, I know not how
long, was concluded by a Sentence in favor of my friends; and Vedeau was so
vexed, and ashamed at it, that for fear he should be laughed at in the Country
where the quarrel began, he would not go there for a long time. This was the
end of an affair so much talked of in the world, and in which they might have
saved a great deal of Labor and Money, if they would have been ruled by the
advice of their Friends; for tho Monsieur Salle cast his Adversary in the
Charges of the Suit, yet it cost him at least two thousand Crowns in other
expenses.

The Process being at an end, I was at liberty to dispose of my self as I
pleased, for I was not willing to leave Paris till I had seen the conclusion of
it. There was a Gentleman who lived near Melun, had often times invited me to his
House, I sent him word it should now be in a few days: Besides, I had a great
mind to go into that side of the Country for more reasons than one. In short,
besides that, I had a mind to divert my self in hunting with him; I had also a
great desire to visit Monsieur de Charost, who was at Vaux le Vicomte, where,
as 'twas said, he went to take the Air; but that was a report given out, to
hide a small accident that befell him. The poor man was become a mere Child
again, and tho he was not so very old, his Spirits, which use to die last in
us, had so much forsaken him, that to see him in the present condition, one
would never have thought him so perfect a Courtier as he had been: what I have
said of him before, is more than sufficient to make one believe him such. There
were few that rallied more agreeably than he; I was witness of this once in my
life, and tho it was on a subject not very pleasant to me, yet it did not
hinder me, but I laughed as well as other people; this happened a little after
the Death of Cardinal de Richelieu, my very good Master. I have said, how it
was reported that he was pretty great with the Duchess of Aiguillon, his
Niece, and that they would needs have it at the same time, that the Duke de
Richelieu was her Son. This Report which was common enough while he was alive,
was more publicly discourst of after his death, till at last it became so
common, that not only the ordinary people, but the persons of the first quality
believed it: So that a Court Lady, upon a quarrel with the Duchess de
Aiguillon, reproacht her publicly, that she had been the Mistress of a Priest,
by whom she had had several Children. It Is without question, that some things
are better concealed than divulged; but the Duchess being of the humor of
most Women, to regard nothing so she gratified her passion, comes all in a
fury, and casting her self at the Queen's feet, demanded Justice; the Queen bid
her rise, and let her know what was the matter. I was just then speaking with
Monsieur Charost, with whom I was going to the House of this Princess; but he,
who had no kindness for that Lady, with whom he had had some pique, left me, to
go and inform himself of the particulars. She told the Queen, that Madam de St.
Chaumout had called her Whore, (for she named the word at length) and had
openly told her, she had had five or six Children by her Uncle: When she had
said this, it was thought the Queen would have spoke; but Monsieur de Charost
not giving her time, Alack, Madam, says he, (to the Duchess d' Aiguillon) will
you afflict your self for such a small matter? Don^t you know that we must not
believe above half of what is said at Court? He had no sooner said so, but all
who were present fell out a laughing; and the Queen, seeing every body laugh,
laughed too. This madded the Duchess extremely, who did not use to take such
jests; but the time of her Reign being now at an end, and on the other hand,
the Queen hating her mortally, she was fain to go away without any other
redress.

All people reproach the Unfortunate: This Lady was no sooner out of the Queens
presence, but she found ten upon her instead of one; who repeating the word
Whore, which she had called her self, would taunt her with the word; which if
it was indecent in the mouth of a Man, sure it became a Woman much worse. In
short, they condemned her from this; insomuch, that if I had not known what I
did, this would have been enough to convince me. Indeed, this Woman, who made
all tremble under her in the days of her Uncle, was not company good enough for
Dogs, if I may so say, for having so foolishly exposed herself without any
consideration, as you have heard: And yet a greater folly than this, tho it did
not make so much noise, was that of one of the Queens Maids of Honor, whose
name was Mademoiselle de Guerchi, to whom fell out this very unhappy adventure.
I should have told you, that being with Child by the Duke de Vi^ry, he ruined
her so unfortunately, by endeavoring to hide her disgrace with the Death of
the Infant; and there happened on this occasion, so false a step taken by her
self, that she deserved to have Stones thrown at her more than Madam d'
Aiguillon. The Queen loved her above all the rest; and this happened to her at
a time, when the Queen being busy about some certain private affairs, had
placed her at the Closet door, with order to let no body come in, but such as
she had named: It happened as she stood here Monsieur de Vic came up to the
door, and making an offer to go in, and she not knowing his face, he being
newly come from the Army, she asked him his Name, which he told her
immediately. Now there being but little difference in the French between his
Name, and a certain thing which it is not very decent to mention, she stepped
back in a pa^sion, and flung the Door against him. The Queen, who by accident
had her Eyes that way, observing the disorder she was in, asked her what was the
matter: But she being surpised only told her, that 'twas an insolent fellow,
and that she durst not tell her Majesty what it was he said. The Queen wondering
what should so much disturb her, and make her color so red, called her to her,
and absolutely commanded her to tell her what it was; that if it was a thing
not fit to be spoken in plains terms, she might disguise it, but so as to let
her know the meaning of it; which would not be difficult to do, by one that had
so much wit as she had. Mademoiselle de Guerchi, seeing the Queen had given her
an Expedient, resolved to tell her, but did it with so ill a grace, that if she
had named the thing at length, it could not have been worse. She said then,
that having asked the Gentleman his name, he had told her the name of a thing
with which they say they get Children; Mr. de Gui^au^, Captain of the Queens
Guards, who stood by, fell out a laughing as if he would have burst; and when
he had a little recovered himself, Madam, said he to the Queen, I Am confident
'twas Monsieur de Vic who frighted this Lady, for he came from Flanders but
last night; but the best of the jest was, that the Lady affirmed still she was
not mistaken, but that it was he that changed one letter of the name, tho she
was not so to be deceived.

The Gentleman who I went to visit at Melun, was called the Count de la
Chapelle Gantier, a person of a great deal of honor, and whose Father was my
particular Friend; he was a sworn Enemy to another Gentleman that lived hard
by, called the Viscount de Melun, or rather L' Arbatjete; for he did not belong
to the honorable Family of Melun, of whom the late Constable de Melun, and the
present Princes d' Espinois are descended; he was far enough from such a Noble
Original, having more Men of the Gown than of the Sword in his Family; and yet
if you would believe him, Messieurs de Chatillon are not of a better Descent
than he. The Enmity between these Gentleman began upon this ground, that the
Father of one had killed the Father of the other, a quarrel so reasonable that
no body ever attempted to reconcile them: My Friend was the Party offended, it
being his Father who had the misfortune to be killed by the other, since which
if he had but heard his name mentioned, he would have turned pale, and shook
from head to foot. A Person of Quality, to whom I am very much obliged, desired
me, when I went from Paris, to attempt the mitiagating of this Hatred by making
a Proposal of Marriage to my Friend with Melun's Sister, but I desired to be
excused, for that this was to do a great injury to the Count de la Chapelle,
who I knew to be more of a Gentleman than to marry the Daughter of his Father's
Murderer; and that, in short, I would never undertake such an Errand; for I
knew if I should, it would be to no purpose. The Count de Melun also was a Man
of so much ill nature, that instead of endeavoring by his carriage to make my
Friend forget the Grudge that was between the Families, as he ought to have
done, he took all occasions to increase it: He was very often drunk, and when
he had a Glass or two of Wine in his head he was so abusive to my Friend, that
if the Laws against Quarrels and Duels had not been so severe, he had been
every day in danger of having his Throat cut. This was a crime in any man, but
much more inexcusable in the Son of a man, who had already imbrued his hands in
the blood of my Friend^s Father; besides the King had done as much as was
possible to prevent his being used in this manner, for he pardoned his Father
but upon this condition, that neither he, nor any of his after him, should come
into the Company, or place, where any of the deceased's Children should ^e; and
that if at any time any of those should come into Company where he was, or any
of his Children, they should be obliged immediately to quit the place, which
command of the Kings every one allowed to be very just. But the Viscount de
Melun, instead of conforming himself to this Order, as his Father had done,
used him as I have been telling you: Insomuch, that the first thing my Friend
told me of at my coming to see him was, that he could endure it no longer; at
the same time, he told me at large the grounds of his disgust, which I could
not deny but to be very reasonable. However, I endeavored to put the best face
on them I could, because I would not inflame him, who I perceived was already
disturbed enough; and at the same time I told him, he could not have the least
quarrel with him without endangering himself extremely; for the same Order of
the Kings, which commanded Melun to keep out of his sight, commanded him also
to bear his Adversary no malice. I told him, that he being the party aggrieved
every body would conclude him to have been the Agressor; that in his
circumstances he ought to use more caution a thousand times than another,
having a good Estate to lose, and therefore ought to consider very well before
he did any thing of that nature; that I did not deny, but 'twas a very hard
case for any Gentleman to be forced to bear so much every day, but that the
least evil is always to be chosen; that there was Melun and his Gang desired
nothing more than to have us take some wrong step which they might take
advantage of; and in a word, that we had to do with a Prince that would not be
jested with; and unless his Case was as clear as the day, I would advise him
not to meddle in it.

This Gentleman, who had at least 12 or 15 thousand Livres a year, and expected
very much to increase his Estate by marrying, being sensible my reasons had
some weight, acknowledged himself very much obliged to me for my advice; for
indeed, I believe if it had not been for me, his Passion had run him upon some
foolish action or other in this matter. But having thus calmed him we minded
nothing but our pleasure, he and I together, either hunting or visiting the
Neighboring Gentlemen of that Country; when altogethe^ unexpectedly there
happened a Case which put my friend in a condition of giving himself some small
satisfaction in the matter. One day while we were at Dinner, only he and I,
which was very strange, having generally some Company or other every day, we
heard a noise of Horns sounding in the Park: This made him rise from the Table
in a heat, and run into the Kitchen where he had some Arms; I followed him
immediately, and taking each of us a Fusil, we made out to that part were we
thought the noise came from; presently we saw a great many Dogs running after a
Hare, and that they had come in by a breach in the Park. The Count de la
Chapelle had no sooner spied the man who blew the Horn, but he knew him by his
Livery to be his Enemy's Huntsman, and was just a going to kill him, for I saw
him present his piece at him; but making reflection upon it a little, he
thought he should revenge himself better upon his Master if he killed some of
the Dogs, upon which he fired three times one after another, and killed every
time; he called to me also to do the like, but I seeing him in such a passion,
would not discharge my piece; for I thought if his Enemy, who I supposed was
not far off, should appear, 'twould be necessary one of us, at least, should be
ready for him. In the mean time the Huntsman, who had not blown his Horn but to
call off his Dogs, and who saw he was like to meet with blows there, got him
back by the same Gap he came in at, the Dogs following him, as if they had
known by instinct the danger of staying. The Count de la Chapelle, seeing there
was no body left for him to vent his passion upon, would needs sally out to see
if he could find his Enemy, the Viscount de Melun, whom we concluded was not
far off, for one might hear the noise of Horses galloping up and down without
the Park Wall, which we knew must be he, or some of his Company. But I stopped
him, telling him he had done enough, and ought to be satisfied with it, that if
Melun had done this action to draw him into danger, he was very finely fitted;
and therefore 'twas for his Enemy to run, and not for him; that he had killed
his Dogs, and had this advantage besides, that the other had trespassed upon
him, and he might make his Complaint of it, and perhaps put him in Prison; but
that if he followed him out of his own bounds the Case would be quite altered:
and therefore I advised him not to do it, lest he should do something he should
be afterward sorry for. He was presently made sensible of my reasons, and
being both of us retreated into the House together, where we were hardly got,
before there came in a Gentleman of that Country one Chisi. The Count de la
Chapelle knew him to be an Acquaintance of this Melun, and so took it for
granted he had sent him. This man took no notice of any thing, but sat down
with us at Table, and discoursed s^metimes of one thing, sometimes of another
indifferently, without speaking a word of what had happened; we began then to
think he came in by chance, and knew nothing of the matter, and yet we could
not but have a shrewd suspicion that he was of the party too, and that he came
for Spy to see how strong we were, and it proved no less; for as soon as ever we
had dined, away he goes to Melun, and informing him that we were but two of us,
in a quarter of an hour we had him at the Gates with 5 or 6 Horsemen in his
company. The Count de la Chapelle spying them before they were come up to the
Drawbridge, snatched up his Fusil which he had at hand, at which I thought
something was the matter, and I did the like. We marched up to the faces of them
all, and plainly saw Melun at the head of them, who durst not venture to come
upon the Drawbridge. As Soon as he saw us, he called to the Count de la
Chapelle, and asked him for his Dogs; but seeing him present his piece at him,
he did not think fit to stay for an answer: And he was in the right of it, for
had he stood a moment longer, 'twas very probable this had been the last
affront he should ever have given my Friend, or any body else. Chisi and the
rest did the like, and they made their retreat in very good order, for no body
pursued them.

This business could not but make a great noise in the Country, especially
happening among persons of some condition. I advised my Friend to go
immediately and enter his complaint at the Court of the Deputies of the
Mareschals of France; and my reason was, that having made them acquainted with
it, he might then be excus^d from giving way to an Accommodation, which I saw
plainly the Gentlemen of the Country would propose. But he did not approve of
my advice, whether 'twas that he was not acquainted with the Deputies, or that
he thought it would be better to apply to the Mareschals of France themselves:
But while he was preparing to do this the Marquis de St. Heran, Governor of
Fountain-bleau, came to see him, and desir^d him for his sake to stop his
intended Journey, promising he would take upon him, that he should have all the
satisfaction he could desire; and being an old Courtier who had known me a long
time, he turned to me, and desired me to use my interest with the Count to the
same purpose. I told him, that truly I was his Friend, but he had so much more
interest than I, that if he could not prevail upon him, it was not likely I
should. Indeed he had been an old acquaintance of his Father as well as I, and
besides that, the Post he was in (he was the Head Ranger of that part of the
Country) gave him such a particular authority, that all the Gentlemen of the
Country took care to keep in with him. Monsieur de la Chapelle was perplexed at
this new Proposal; for on one hand 'twas not Prudence in him to make such a man
as he his Enemy, and on the other hand the pleasure of revenging the Murder of
his Father, urged him against all manner of accommodation. So in hopes to
persuade the other to desist from his solicitation, which to say the truth, as
the Case stood, was a little uncivil; he told him, that if there had been no
other quarrel, but that which lately happened, between his Family and Mr. de
Melun, he should have had so little occasion to use entreaties with him, that
he would have returned him thanks for concerning himself in it; but his Quarrel
to the Count de Melun was upon another account, and of a nature not to be
forgot; that he would comply with any thing for his sake, but he besought him
to reflect upon the reason he had to seek revenge, and what the world would say
of him, when having so fair an occasion, he should have had more regard to the
Intercession of Friends than the Blood of his Father; that he begged of him to
consider, that what he desired of him was against the Law of Nature, and would
be a blot upon his Honor, of which he himself should be the Judge; wherefore
he did not question, but that instead of taking it ill, he would have the
greater Friendship for him, tho in this point it was not possible for him to
grant what he desired.

These were the reasons he opposed to Monsieur de St Heran's solicitations,
which I leave to the judgment of any, if they were not very just and equitable.
However Mr. de St Heran, not contented with this, strove all he could to make
him alter his mind, and with me also, to persuade him to it; but finding he
gained nothing, neither upon one nor the other, he told the Count de la Chappelle
that he would entertain no ill will against him for this denial, because he saw
his Passion had got the ascendant over him so much, that he was not at present
capable of taking the advice of his Friends; that indeed he expected to find
him pretty warm, but that a little time perhaps would allay his fury, and he
would then be better disposed to take his advice; that therefore he only
desired him to resolve on no measures for 24 hours, during which time he
desired him to remember, that God had commanded us to forgive our Enemies, and
that nothing procured greater peace of mind, than to practice the Duty in the
very Letter of it; that he hoped he would grant him that small request without
any difficulty; and that it might not be prejudicial to his interest he gave
him his word, the Viscount de Melun should do nothing on his part.

By this means the Marquis de St Heran, without taking any notice, did the
Viscount de Melun the greatest piece of service imaginable; for the Count de la
Chappelle could not refuse so fair a request, especially on the assurance that
his Enemy should take no advantage of the delay: so he let it rest for two
days; in which time the Marquis de St Heran sent away to Court, and informing
the King of a quarrel in general between them, and that it happened about
matters relating to the Game, desired power from the King to hear and determine
it, and, no body being by to speak for the Count de la Chapelle, easily
obtained the Grant: So that instead of a Mediator, which he pretended to be, he
made himself a Judge. My Friend was very much surpised at this Fineness; and
very much displeased with it: But we saw there was no manner of remedy, for now
'twas too late to apply to the Mareschals of France, and 'twas to no purpose to
attempt the Kings revoking his Order. My Friend was then forced at last to go
to Fountain-bleau to see what Justice he would do him, which indeed was but
very indifferent. The Viscount de Melun only asked his pardon for what had
happened, telling him that 'twas not by any design of his that his Hounds had
broke into his Park; and if he had found his Huntsman there, 'twas only to
fetch them back; that it was an accident, that the Hare took over his ground;
and for his coming up to the Drawbridge of the Castle, ^twas only to ask him
for his Dogs which were lost, as he himself could witness, and not to offer him
any affront: However, that if he thought he would have been affronted at it, he
would never have done it; for he was so far from desiring any quarrel with him,
that he should be very glad of any opportunity to show how much he was his
Friend; that in the mean time he promised him to observe more strictly the
conditions which the King had oblig^d their Families to; to which end, if ever
he was hunting, and the Game took the same way that his did, he would
immediately call off his Hounds and a great deal of this sort, which Monsieur
de le Chappelle was forc^d to be content with, and to tell him, that since he
had made so much acknowledgment, he was very sorry he had killed any of his
Dogs.

This was the conclusion of that affair, and 'twas a long time before we could
come to know, what it was occasioned the Marquis de St Heran to be so
industrious to oblige one rather than t^other: But a Gentleman of the Country,
who was of neither party told us, it was upon the account of Mr. de Besons,
whom Melun was related to by Marriage. We could hardly believe it at first,
because that Match was made against his consent; but we understand by another
hand that it was certainly true, and quickly after we had positive proof of it.
This Monsieur de Besons was a person of extraordinary wit, and had by his rare
Genius gained himself abundance of Friends; but the best of them all was
Monsieur the Chancellor, who procured for him the place of Intendant of
Languedoc, tho he had not been yet Master of Requests, which was not customary;
and he had not only enjoyed that Post three years, as is usual for the
Intendants of Justice in the Provinces, but had, by the same favor, been
continu^d there five or six times. In which time he had gained so much credit
and respect in the Country, that the King himself could not have more; for
indeed I have heard him say, that the King might publish an Edict, but he must
have his Warrant to it, if he expected to have it punctually executed. I have
heard him say one thing also more extraordinary than that, and I think I have
ventured to say somewhere, it is grown a Custom in those Provinces for the
Intendants to join their Warrants to every Order that comes from the King, but
whether it be so or no I^m not certain: I Will relate the story as he told it me,
which was, that having received an Order to make out a Process against one
Roll, who had been an Agent in the Rebellion of Vivares, he caus^d his Head to
be set up upon the Gate of Aubenas, but some of the Relations of the person
that was executed took it down in the Night; upon which he published an Order
the next day, that they who had taken down the Head should without delay, carry
it back to the same place in 24 hours time, which was obey^d, and the Head
carry^d back accordingly. I don't know whether all people may be of my mind,
but I think it is very seldom a Governor has influence enough to make himself
obeyed in such a case: But if it be ever so, it is by some unusual Severity,
rather than from the Love of the People. Yet this I must say of him, that if he
was feared he was also loved, especially by all those who loved dispatch in
their business; for never had man a greater Vivacity of Spirit, which made that
Province so much concerned at his removal; and the more, since Mr. d' Aguessea^
who succeeded him, was just in the other extreme. I have seen him dictate to
three Secretaries at once, and yet entertain me at the same time without any
interruption: It was not for such a man to be long unpreferr'd. After he was
called to Court the King trusted him in affairs of the greatest Intricacy: And
the Chancellor, as great a man as he was, did not at all think it below him to
take measures from his advice. He had indeed the greatest Reputation of all the
Counselors of State; so that 'twas no strange thing that Mr. de St Heran
should be so willing to oblige him, he being already in a condition to return
favors to any man, tho his Fortune was nothing yet to what he hoped it would
be; and it was for what he expected perhaps, rather than any gratitude for what
was past, that he appeared so ready to serve the Chancellor or any of his
Family; for he considered, that the King having such confidence in them, as he
really had, the only way to advance himself was to gain their Recommendation:
And yet he was deceived in this point, for tho Mr. the Chancellor, and the
Marquis de Louvois his Son, gave him great Testimony of their friendship in
some cases, they failed him in one where he most desired it. At Monsieur
Colbert's death, his Ambition prompted him to no less than to succeed him in
that place, and no question but he was capable enough to have discharg^d it,
but that favor being denied him, and bestowed upon another, the grief of it
broke his heart and killed him.

The Quarrel that happened at the Count de la Chapelle's, having detained me
longer there than I intended, I had opportunity to be acquainted with all the
Country; for there was hardly a Gentleman that knew of the affair but came to
visit him, and offer him their service, and amongst them some of all sorts,
rich and poor; and among the latter the Count de Kermeno, who was not of that
Country, as his Name will inform you, but who happened to be thereabouts; drawn
not by the Charms of a certain Lady (for I should belie her to say she had any)
but she had been an old acquaintance, which to him was in lieu of all other
Charms. I knew him well enough, the Count de la Chapelle had no need to tell me
who he was, for I had seen him both at the Court, and in the Army, and he was
not one jot more esteemed at the one than in the other; not but that he was a
very good Gentleman born, but he made the meanest figure that ever was seen: He
had taken up the Trade of a Soldier, which did not become him at all. His
Brother the Marquis du Garrot had done the like, and both had found the means
to be very fairly casheer'd, after they had run out an Estate of about a
Million of Livres.

Having known all these things before, it was the reason I took no great notice
of him; which the Count de la Chapelle observing, asked me when he was gone what
that man was, since he had never seen him till he came into those parts. I told
him what I knew, in which I can say, I neither added nor diminisht any thing
from the truth. I acquainted him also of the adventure of his Brother, of which
something was so odd, that the like was hardly ever heard. The Marquis du
Garrot after having spent all his Estate, and not knowing what course to take,
bethought himself of an Expedient, by which he pretended to raise at least
twelve or fifteen thousand Livres a year, for the laying down of about a
thousand Crowns in ready Money. The Project he had for doing this, was to go
and publish among the Herb Women, and such People in the Market, that he would
lend them Money at the rate of a penny a day for every Crown, which was the
usual Interest among those people, and desired them to acquaint their friends
of it, for that all the Money he had in the Bank should be at their service;
and that his Office should be open at such and such constant hours, and a true
Register should be kept, as well of Payment as Receipt. Such news as this soon
spread about, and brought multitudes to his Office; and he gave his Money so
strangely to every body that came for it, that people thought he was be,
divell'd. The Commissary of that quarter hearing of it, goes to the place, but
could not come near for the Crowd, till having made way through the people, he
comes in, and there found the Marquis du Garrot himself, who endeavored to
disguise himself, that he might not be known, but coming up to him he demands
of him what he was a doing; the Marquis asked him what he had to do to ask that
question; adding that if he had a mind to give his Money away to whom he
pleased, he hoped he might have the liberty to do it, without his intruding
himself to disturb him. The Commissary not used to such rough Answers, and
seeing what a sorry figure he made, was a going to carry him to Prison; and he,
not being very willing to go, told him who he was, hoping his Name would make
some amends for his ill Mein; but finding he had to do with a fellow that
valued no body's quality, he was obliged to muster up all his Titles, and tell
him he had married Mr. de Courcelle's Daughter, Councellor of the Grand
Chamber; at which the Commissary, who stood more in fear of a Councellor than
of a Marquis, begun to use him more civilly, and told him, that in respect to
his Father-in-law he would not put that affront upon him, but that he must lay
down his new Trade, for it had made too much noise already to be continued; and
admitting no reply, made him shut up his Coffer and his Register. The Marquis
seeing the Commissary in earnest, asked him what he must do for all his Money he
had given out; to which he gave him this answer, that having so freely given
about his Money to he did not know who, it was for him to find out the way how
to get it again. In short, he seemed like the Man who they say, obtained a
Grant of the King of Spain for a certain Tax upon all such as had seen a
certain Comet, that had appeared a little before, for as he was never the
richer for it, because he could never make it out who had seen it, and who had
not; so our Marquis neither knew who they were that had taken his Money, nor
where they dwelt, nor whether they had taken it in their own Names, or in
others.

At my return to Paris I fell sick of an Ague, which I believe might come from
my eating more freely tha^ I used to do; for the Table was always spread at the
Count de la Chapelle's, and I, who had used my self to a very regular life,
could not but be indispos^d with so unusual a custom; for being obliged to do
as others did, I was ill several times before I came away. I had recourse to
the ordinary remedies in such cases, of Diet and Bleeding; but my Ague still
encrasing upon me, I was advised to change my Doctor, and they directed me to
an English Knight, who was mighty famous for Cures of that kind. Indeed, there
was no sort of Agues or Feavors almost but he could stop them; he cured all
people that went to him, and there was no doubt but I should have had the same
benefit: But I understood, that almost all the people that came to him had
their Distemper returned upon them again in two or three months, so I did not
care for meddling with him. But however to satisfy my friends I sent to him,
and desired him to do me the favor to come and see me; which he did: And among
other things he made me laugh heartily at a story he told me of the Marquis de
Hautefort, one of the Querries to the Queen, a man of about a hundred thousand
Livres a year Estate, but so miserably covetous, that tho he had neither Wife
nor Child to provide for, yet he was afraid of every body that came near him.
He was much in the same condition as I was, and sent to this Doctor to tell
him, he had occasion to make use of his Physic, and therefore desired him to
come and see him. When the Doctor came to him he found him extraordinary bad;
but having felt his Pulse, looked on his Tongue, and the like, he bid him not be
discouraged, for he did not question but with Gods blessing he should cure him,
and that he would have him make use of his remedy. But the Marquis replied,
that before he meddled with it, he would know what the price of it was, for he
had been told by some who had to do with him, that he was a very dear man; that
as Moliere has it, he ought to be so conscionable in his prices, that poor sick
folks might live, who could not else afford to be sick. The Doctor was amazed,
he said, to hear him talk at that rate, considering too what an Estate he had,
and told him, he hoped he was but in jest to talk at that rate to one who was
so much his humble Servant; that he should be very glad if he could but cure
him; he did not use to talk of price to persons of his quality, and he should
do what he pleased with him, as to that they would not differ; but all this
signified nothing, he would have the price fixed, or he would talk no further of
it: The Doctor thinking he ought to obey him, told him, that persons of his
figure never used to offer him less than 50 Pistoles, but that as he had said
before, he should do what he pleased with him; at which words the Marquis
roared out as if he had been killed, that he was afraid the people of the House
would have thought he had offered him some insolence; that seeing him in such a
passion he left him to vent it by himself; when after having raved for a good
while, he called for him again, and offered him four Pistoles; but the Doctor
telling him as before, that he would leave it to him, he flew out in a passion
again, and bid him get him out of his House, he would have nothing to do with
him nor his Physic; upon which the Doctor immediately showed him his back, and
went away; but was no sooner got home, but he was followed by a Lacquey from
the Marquis to offer him one Pistole more; and so for four days successively he
sent the same Messenger to chaffer with him for his Physic, still offering him
every day a Pistole more, till at last he was pleased to dye before the bargain
was made.

I gave the more faith to this story, because I knew a great many sordid tricks
of his before, and had seen one among the rest, than which I never saw a worse,
which was in the Progress we made at the Marriage of the Dauphin, for I still
endeavored to live in the best figure I could; and tho I had but a small
Estate, yet I always followed the Court. In this Journey I happened to lodge in
the same House with this Marquis de Hautefort, and the Landlord one day had
caught the Marquis's Coachman stealing his Oats; upon which he came to tell his
Master of it, and to require satisfaction. For what? replied the Marquis, Why
you say your self, that you only took him stealing your Corn, and that you made
him give it you back again. Yes truly, says the good man, what I found upon him
I made him return, but I have lost half the Oats that were in the Chest; for I
know how many were put in, and there are not above half so many left now. A^,
says the Marquis very coldly, they might be eaten by your own Horses; bring me
Witnesses that 'twas my Coachman stole them, and he shall make you
satisfaction. But, Sir, says the Landlord, is not this Witness enough that I
caught him in the fact, I have no other Witnesses; but I have brought him to
you. More shame for thee, replied the Marquis; Don't you know well enough, that
without Witness there is nothing to be done at Law? Look you friend, since you
have no Witness, pray go about your business, and trouble me no more with such
impertinent stories.

This was all the Justice the poor man could get of him, and so he came to make
his complaint to me, of the wrong he had done him; but I could say nothing to
it, but shrugging up my shoulders told him, there was no remedy but patience,
which he was forced to use; and indeed he had more occasion for that Virtue
afterward: for when he went away, he was so far from paying him for what his
men had spoiled, that he hardly paid him for their Diet; or if he did, 'twas at
such a scandalous price, that the man never received the Money it cost him. But
since I am got into this Journey, I must tell one story, which is very
pleasant, of what happen^d to an A Provincial Judg^.
Intendant: He had got a Mistress in a Town where the King and the whole Court
lodged, and happening to be there when the Quartermaster General came to the
Town, he made friends to have that House exempted: this Intendant had the
misfortune to be a little like the Messieurs du Garrot, that is, to make but a
very indifferent figure, which made the Quartermaster, not knowing who he was,
tell him by way of banter, Yes, yes, he should be excused, indeed, and why not;
but at the same time taking his Chalk, marked that House as he had done the
others. The Intendant was not discouraged, but persisted in his suit, hoping to
do it without discovering himself, for he was then incognito; he spoke to him
again, and desired him to exempt that Lady, assuring him, that if he knew her,
he would think it worth his while; but finding that he did not take much notice
of that, he told him his quality, and that it might lie in his way to return
his kindness. The Quartermaster understanding his character, asked his pardon,
that he had not done it at first, and immediately granted his desire, both on
account of the Lady, and also of his quality. A little before this, just such
an adventure happened to me. A Gentleman of my acquaintance, who had some
business with the President de Bretonvilliers, writ to me to wait upon him from
him. I went to him to his fine Country House in the Isle de Nostre Dame, and
the Porter telling me he was in his Chamber, I went cross the Courtyard to go
up to him: I did not know him in the least, whether he was old or young, or
what manner of man he was; however, I happened to light on him, as I was going
up the stairs, with a wooden Candlestick in his hand, just as if he had been
going down into the Celler; I asked him which was the Presidents Chamber, he
told me he was the man; and if my business was to speak with him, I need go no
further. I was so surpised with this sudden reply, that I stood like one that
had been caught in some ill fact, but he very civilly helped me out of my
confusion himself, asking me if there was any thing he could serve me in; so
that finding he was not affronted, I soon recovered my self. One would infer
from what I have said, that the President was no very gentile man that I should
mistake him so; but I must say this to his advantage, that he was a person of a
great deal of Honor. This accident introduced me into his acquaintance, and
was the occasion that we were afterward very familiar; and this I can say of
my own knowledge of him, that tho every body now adays seem to regard nothing
but their own interest, yet I have seen him do those things which show him of a
truly generous disposition, tho he was Son of one of the Farmers of the Kings
Revenues, a sort of people not very famous for their Honesty or Generosity.

It is not every body would so easily have past by such a mistake, especially
when a man is surpised in any figure below his character, of which I had a
proof a little before that in another case; going to see a Councellor of the
Inquests, called Machaut, who lived in La Rue Michael de Comte, I had a little
process before him, and going by accident by his door, I took that opportunity
to ask him, if he would please to give himself the trouble to examine it. He
that opened the door told me he was at home, and desired me to walk in, and he
would tell him there was one to speak with him. I did so, and coming to a door
that looked into the Garden I opened it, and through it I saw a man in his Drawers,
with a Night Cap on, hard at work till he sweat again: Who should this be, but
my Lawyer, who was a mighty great Florist, and one indeed that seemed fitter to
set Tulips than to try Causes. I looked on him a good while before he turned
about, he was so intent upon what he was a doing; but at last being forced to
raise himself up to take breath a little, he spied me, and coming up briskly,
asked me who I would speak with, I told him with Mr. de Machaut, little thinking
I spoke to him himself; but he presently made me know it, asking me more
briskly than before, What I would have with him; Give him a Brief, said I, with
a little heat, not being very well pleased to be used so; Give it me then, said
he, in the same tone he began with, for^ I am the person you would speak with,
and that you shall know soon enough to teach you to take a better time to speak
to your Judge. Nothing could be pleasanter than our conversation; for my Cause
being but a trifling matter, that I did not much care which way it went, I did
not spare him at all; 'twould have made any body laugh to hear us. However, tho
I was now so much affronted I gave him my Brief, and he vouchsafed to read it;
and he was no sooner come to my Name in it, but immediately changing both his
countenance and his style, he asked me what Family I was of, and if I was not of
such and such a Family, and a kin to such and such, naming their qualities and
offices, more than ever I had heard of, tho I thought I knew perfectly all the
Preferments had belonged to any of our Family; however I answered yes to all,
the sooner to be rid of his enquiry; upon which he embraced me, and told me
that we were Relations, and began to reckon up our Genealogy in such a manner,
that for my life I could make nothing at all of it; however I confirmed every
thing he desired, and so from that time forward he would needs call me Cousin;
telling me tho, I should not mention to any body, that I had spoken to him
before the judgment of my Suit, because if the adverse party should hear of it,
'twere enough to make them reflect on him. I told him, that he might be
satisfied I would not, and so we parted as good friends as any in the world;
and four or five days after he dispatched my Cause, tho 'twas almost a Proverb
of him, that to put a Cause into his hands was the only way to have it never
ended.

But in mentioning of Monsieur Hautefort, I am insensibly engaged in stories
which I had not designed, and am gone off from the story of the Dauphins
Marriage, which I intended, and which perhaps may be as entertaining as any, to
those who are pleased to hear of the motions of great persons, which is a humor
much in fashion now. The Princess being arrived at Sermaises, and the King and
the Dauphin at Chalons, 'twas resolved the first interview should be about the
mid^way. In the mean time the King taking no notice of any thing, sent the
Bishop of Condom, who was the Dauphins* Tutor, to compliment her in the name of
the Bridegroom; but withal to observe, if she was so reserved as she was said
to be, for there was some who had reported, that she was a Princess not at all
of a humor agreeable to the Genius of the French Nation, who are the most
pleasant and obliging people in the world; and desirous above all things, that
the persons who they are obliged to obey should agree with them in humor and
disposition. He had orders also, in case he found it so as was reported, to
insinuate gently in his discourse to her, that the manners of the French were
quite different from those of the Germans; so if it were possible to move her
to comply with the French air as much as she could, that she might not only
oblige the King and her Husband, but also the whole Nation, among whom she had
already a very good character, by what they had heard of her, as a Princess of
the greatest Wit and Gallantry in Europe; but he brought the King word, that
she needed none of those instructions, for excepting that she loved sometimes
to be private, there was nothing more civil or obliging in the world. The King
himself also when he came two leagues from Chalons, had the first rencounter
with her to his infinite satisfaction. As Soon as the King appeared, and before
he could come to salute her, she lighted out of her Coach; which when the King
perceived, and that she was coming toward him, he also alighted, followed by
the Dauphin at a convenient distance, as it had without doubt been all
appointed before by the King, who gave orders in all such cases himself. After
the King had spoke a few words to the Princess, who kneeled at his feet, he
presented the Dauphin to her, and after that all the persons of Quality of his
Train. This first Enterview was in the open field, which being not a place to
s^ay l^ng in, they quickly returned to the Coaches. The King put the Dauphiness
into his own Coach, and plac^d himself by her. The Dauphin, to be near her,
placed himself in the Boot of the Coach. Being arrived at Chalons, the
Ceremonies of the Marriage were solemnized. In the mean time, the King had
plac^d the Duchess of Riche^ieu with the young Lady, and had taken her from
the Queen, whom she waited upon before, knowing her to be the most capable
person in the Kingdom. It was thought strange tho, that being Lady of Honor to
the Queen, she could be in no higher quality to the Dauphiness, which seemed
rather to degrade, than advance her. But she, who was a Lady of great Wit, did
not take it so, for she looked more upon the confidence the King placed in her,
than the Title; and in endeavoring to please her new Mistress, and in obliging
also the King himself, she let us know, that Discretion makes all things easy
to persons who understand themselves.

The King made no stay at Chalons, the Queen waiting for them at Villers
Cotterets; and every hour was a year to her, till she saw the Lady who was to
be her Sons Wife; and the King also, being willing enough to gratify her in so
just a desire, lost no time any where till he came thither, where they had
prepared all manner of diversions to entertain them with; Balls, Music,
Comedies, and every thing they could devise; and tho it was in Lent, yet 'twas
thought, no time could dispense them from demonstrating that joy which every
body was touched with, to see the Heir of so mighty a Kingdom wedded to a
Princess of so great merit. They stayed here fifteen days; after which the King
went for Paris. I cannot forbear here to give an account of my own folly, for I
cannot give a better name to that strong fancy I had to be always following the
Court. I staid at Villers Cotterets all the while the King was there, tho with
so little accommodation, that I was fain to lie upon Straw. Indeed, the place
not being able to lodge the tenth part of the company, some were fain to go 2
or 3 leagues every night for a Lodging; others encampt in the Fields. For my
part, I was so crippled with my hard Lodging, that when I came to get a
Horseback I found my self very uneasy. One of those who had danced at the Ball,
seeing me in such a case, told me, that if I would lend him my Horse, he would
give me his place in the Coach. I took him at his word, for nothing could have
pleased me better: But being got into the company of all the great Dancers of
the Town, there was a parcel of discourse which was so far from diverting me,
that I was more uneasy there than I should have been upon my Horse; and the
weather too proved so bad, that we could take but very short Stages; and at
last, to make up all, the Coach overturned, and in so dirty a place, that it
was half a day before we could get out, for we were forced for help to go to
the neighboring Villages; all this while I stormed, and called my self a
hundred fools for running my self into this needless trouble. We had set out
something before the rest, that we might be at S. Germain as soon as the King,
but now we were like to be left a long way behind. When the King past by us, in
that condition, he sent to see who we were that were in such a pickle? and when
he was told it was the Dancers, he laughed heartily, and said, He had rather it
were they than any others, for they had the best Legs; but he doubted they
would find it hard to dance handsomely upon such a Stage as that. This was told
us by a Gentleman of the Wardrobe, who had a relation among us; and tho it is
the custom to admire every thing the King says, we dispensed with doing it now,
being too dull at our misfortune to laugh at any thing: at last, after a great
deal of patience, we got out of that ugly place, and were forced to get six
fresh Horses for the Coach. We were all Frenchmen, and so naturally apt to
forget our past mischances; we thought of them no more after we once got to
Senlis; we talked of nothing there but making good cheer, and our Gentlemen
finding the Wine very good, drank as much as inclined them all to go to sleep.

The next day we reached our Journeys end, and when I came home found a man at
my Lodgings that stayed for me, with whom I once took a longer Journey than
this, tho not so unpleasant. 'Twas while I was with the Cardinal de Richelieu.
He had sent me into Languedoc to carry some dispatches to the Duke de
Montmorenci, Governor of that Province; and as I was riding post back again, I
met with such a bad Horse a little beyon^ Peage in Dauphine, that I think if a
man was to be flayed alive, he could not endure more than I did. I had done
better a thousand times, as soon as I had perceived this unlucky chance, to have
got upon the Post-boys Horse, or have gone on Foot; but thinking that by
spurring and whipping I should get him along, I fatigued my self so, as I think
I never felt so much pain in my life. In the mean time the Post-boy, whom I had
swore at, and threatened hard enough, run away, for fear I should be as good as
my word; so I was left in the middle of a great Plain, like a Vagabond; then I
tried to light and walk a foot, but that brought me into another perplexity,
for the Jade would not lead, but hung back, till I was afraid she would have
lugg'd my Arm of. I thought I would cure that quickly, so I turned her before,
and let her go loose; but then she would stand stock still till I came up to
drive her; and then instead of going forward she would do nothing, but go from
one side to the other; so being soon tired with that sport I got up again: but
then I was put to the torture again. I short, I believe I should never have
reached the next Stage, if I had not with the help of Whip and Spur overtook a
Horse Litter going my way, where the person who was in it, proved the very Man,
that, as I said, staid for me at my Lodgings, with one of his Brothers. I asked
them how far it was to Peage, and the Man seeing what a sorrowful condition I
was in, told me if I pleased I might come into the Horse Litter, and his
Brother should get up on my Horse, and then the way would not seem half so long
to me. He could not have offered me a greater kindness; then taking him at his
word I got up presently, and really I found him a Man of such an excellent
humor, that tho I was intolerable weary, yet I was mightily pleased with his
conversation. Being arrived at Peage we supped together, and the next day I
made use of his Carriage to Vienne, and from thence to Lions, where (being in
no great haste) I staid 3 or 4 days to rest me. This Man came to Lions to have
a consultation of Physicians for an old Distemper which he had had upon him a
long time, and his Brother came with him only to keep him company; but it was
the pleasantest Consultation, I believe, that ever was heard of; and I can
speak with the more certainty of it, because I was there my self. He told the
Doctors, he did not come to them to know if he should recover his health, by
observing those forms and rules of living which they generally impose upon
their Patients, but whether or no he might be cured, and yet live on at his own
old rate; that he had always eat well, and drunk hard, and loved a Woman, and
intended to do so still; and if they could undertake to cure him upon those
terms well and good. The Doctors star'd upon one another, hearing him talk at
this rate, and all with one voice condemned him to dye; since he was resolved
to live his own way, in contempt of Science and their Rules. However, because
he should not altogether lose his labor, they told him, tho they could say
little to him, since he would not refrain from those Debauches; yet they would
give him some small thing to take, and order him to bleed often. This was
indeed the ready way to kill the Man, and so it proved, for he died the latter
end of that year. He had a Benefice of about a thousand Livres a year, which is
considerable in that Country, and when he died became vacant. His Brother
immediately takes Post, and comes away to me, to desire me to use any interest
to get it for him. I had no great interest truly, but having the honor to
belong to the Prime Minister, made me have some respect more than ordinary in
the world: I went to the Bishop of Valence, in whose Gift it was, and he
granted it me at the first word; and ever since the poor Man is so grateful to
me, that every year he sends me a Present of some thing or other that is rare in
the Country; and whenever he comes to Paris, I am always the first person he
makes a visit to. He was come this time, about a difference he had with the
Marquis de Riv^rolles, Colonel of the Royal Regiment of Piemont, one of the
Grand Priors of the Order of St. Lazarus; and it was upon the account of this
last dignity of the Marquis, that he came to have a dispute with him; for
having some Dues, where the Marquis also had a Claim, their people who lived
there agreed so ill, that their Masters were fain to be concerned in it, and
were now just on the point of going to Law. I told him presently he had better
never begin it, if he could avoid it, because he would have a very powerful
Adversary, not because of the Marquis de Rivarolles, who had no more friends
than other folks, but because of Monsieur de Louvois, who must be a Party, as
he was Vicar General of the Order: he told me he was of my opinion, and
therefore he was come directly to me to beg my assistance, for that he thought
he had heard me say, I was particularly acquainted with Monsieur de Rivarolles,
and having had so much experience of my friendship, he did not question but I
would assist him to the best of my power. I told him he was very much in the
right, for so I would, but that it was not in my power to do him any service in
this Case, for that on certain accounts, which I could tell him, Monsieur de
Rivarolles and I had fallen out, and I had no interest in him at all. Indeed
Monsieur de Rivarolles was a person of a thousand good qualities; he was a very
gentile man, and a man of Wit and Bravery enough, but withal so very covetous,
that he would quarrel with the best friend he had for the value of Sixpence;
by which humor he embroiled himself in a multitude of brangles and quarrels:
But as this did not concern me, so I should not have touched upon it, if he had
but shown himself a man of honor, and kept his word with me. The difference I
had with him was on this account. Meeting him one day at St. Germains, he came
up to me and embraced me, and after a crowd of Caresses asked me, what I had
done for my Nephew. I told him I had placed him in the Kings Regiment; for at
that time he was in that Regiment. He told me, that if I would let him have
him, he would help him to a Company in his own Regiment, and it should not cost
him a Farthing, for he had a Captain who he did not like, and if it were
possible he would have him casheer'd; and if I would join with him, as soon as
ever 'twas done he would acquaint me with it, that I might use my interest to
get it; that he did not care to ask it himself, lest it should be thought he
had picked a quarrel with the other on purpose to oblige me; but to be sure they
at the Office would speak with him before it was granted to any body, and then
he would do his part.

There could be nothing more generous than such a discourse as this; and
therefore thinking my self obliged to acknowledge it, I took my Nephew along
with me to wait upon him, to whom also he renewed the same profession he had
made to me; but he was never able to bring it to pass, and the Captain had so
many friends, that 'twas not in his power to turn him out, as he intended.
However, I thought my self extremely obliged to him for what he had done; and
as my Nephew was grown weary of serving any longer in the Infantry, I advised
him to buy a Company in his Regiment; then I inquired, if there was any Captain
in that Regiment disposed to sell, and I understood the Baron de Montesquiou
had an inclination to lay down. I went to the Marquis de Rivarolles, and told
him, that my Nephew having so much experience of his Friendship, was resolv^d
to serve under him; and that there being no Company to be got gratis, he was
resolved to buy one; that Monsieur de Montesquiou was resolv^d to part with
his; but before we treated with him I was willing to acquaint him of it, and
ask his advice. He told me, I was to blame to be so forward, he was sorry that
my Nephew had not patience to stay a little longer, that certainly one or other
would drop, which it might be in his power to procure for him without paying
for it; but if he was so willing to part with his Money, he thought himself
very much obliged to me for asking his advice, and giving him an opportunity to
serve him, and he would endeavor he should have no cause to repent it; that
they would be Companions, and a great many fine things he said to me of this
sort, and made me stay and dine with him. The Marquis de Teilon, of the Family
of Merodes, who married the Marchioness de Vervi^, dined with us, they having
come together from Avesnes, where his Regiment was in Garrison. We drank
together all four in the greatest friendship in the world; and there he told me
a story how Monsieur de Teilons man dropped a Bag with 500 Pistoles in it as they
came along, and going back immediately, light of the man that found them. In
short, I had all the reason in the world to think my self obliged to him, and
so had my Nephew, we therefore made no more words of it, but went about our
Bargain with Mr. de Montesquiou; and I immediately went to his Lodgings to
speak with him. He was the only Son, and Heir to an Estate of seven or eight
thousand Livres a year, and the Inclination he had to go and see his Estate
made him the easier to treat with, so that our Bargain was soon concluded, and
I went back to acquaint Mr. de Rivarolles, who told me he was very glad of it,
and to testify that he was indeed willing to do us all the service he could, he
told me he would manage the business of the Office for us himself, which was
easy enough for him to do, by acquainting Mr. de St. Pouange, that it was with
his consent my Nephew entered into his Regiment. That this was the best course,
and if I pleased to be at St. Germains such a day, I should see with my own
eyes what pains he would take to serve me.

I had heard a great many people talk of this Monsieur de Rivarolles, and of
ill things done by him; but seeing him so very gentile to us, I began to say to
my Friends that he had certainly very hard measure, and that I never met with
an honester Gentleman in my Life. Indeed, who would have thought otherwise of a
man, from whom one had never received any thing but good will; at least till
some cause had appeared to the contrary? But it was not long before I had cause
enough to alter my opinion; for coming to St. Germains at the time appointed,
and finding him out, he told me he had heard some News that very much surpised
him; that Monsieur de St. Pouange having understood that Montesquiou had a
design to quit, had disposed of his Company to the eldest Son of the Count de
Grand Pre, and he being Nephew to Monsieur de Joyeuse, Lieutenant General of
the Army, he durst not speak against it for fear of breaking with him; that he
was mightily concerned on my account, but the first Company that became vacant
he would take such measures, that we should not be disappointed again. I guest
presently he had trickt me, and leaving him with something less ceremony than I
used to do, I met Monsieur de Montesquiou, who was come on purpose to give his
consent. As Soon as I had told him what had happened. Ay, says he, this is one
of Mr. de Rivarolles usual tricks: I could have told you before, that he would
put some sham or other upon you, when I saw you so confident of his Friendship;
but I thought you would not be long before you found him the worst of Villains.
This is just as he served poor Clausel, who was his Lieutenant, and who is now
a Captain in the Regiment called Chevelier Duc. It is about two years ago that
he got him leave himself to go home; but while he was there he wrote to him, in
short, that he should not trouble himself to come again, but to send him his
Commission (which by the way he had sold for a thousand Crowns) but Clausel
baulkt him; for having made the General acquainted with it, he was forced to
give him the Money, which Clausel had more mind to than the Office, being not
very willing to serve, under a Man, that had shown himself so base. But for my
part, continued he, either your Nephew shall have my Company, or no body shall
have it. Monsieur de St. Pouange must not think to dispose of it without my
consent; and I will speak to the King about it if there be occasion, who I
don't doubt will do me justice.

I was mighty glad to hear him talk thus; for I was so vexed at this wheedle of
Mr. de Rivarolles, that I was very well pleased to think he should meet with
some little mortification, which made me prompt him the more to it. I got him
then to go directly to Mr. de St. Pouange; whom he told, that he was surpised
to hear he had given away his Company, since he had always faithfully served
the King, without so much as the least miscarriage in his duty; that since he
had been in the service, he had always kept his Company full, and in good
condition, and perhaps he could say, the best in the Army; that if he had a
design to quit, he hop^d he might have the same privilege as others had, who
were always allowed to carry off a little Money; that he had spent ten thousand
Crowns of his own in the service, and 'twas but reasonable he should have the
advantage of reimbursing himself a little; that he had treated with my Nephew
by the Kings permission, at a price both parties were content with; and if he
pleased to execute the Agreement, he was there ready to make his Resignation:
^f not; he would spend twice as much more, before he would be bubbled by the
Marquis de Rivarolles. Mr. de St. Pouange was surpised at this discourse, for
Mr. de Rivarolles had told him, that Montesquiou was content, that the Marquis
de Grand Pre should have his Company; however, being a friend of Mr. de
Joyeuse, who had spoke in favor of his Nephew, he returned, that he could say
nothing to it, but that he should have spoke sooner; the thing being now done,
it was past remedy, for the Commission was sealed, and wanted nothing but to be
delivered. Indeed the Commission lay upon the Table, and to put it out of
question he showed it us. Montesquiou replied resolutely, that its being
dispatched or not signified nothing to him; that it was upon the account of his
having no mind to serve any longer, that the King had gratified Monsieur de
Grand Pre; but now his mind was altered, and he declared the contrary; and if
it must be so he would keep it himself, and to convince him, he would
immediately return to Garrison^ Mr. de St. Pouange was not used to be talked to
at this rate, and therefore was very much affronted, and fell out in a violent
passion, telling us, that since he would serve again, Monsieur de Grand Pre
should not have his Company, but that he would take care also, that my Nephew
should never have it, and that he should look that he did his Duty very well,
for he would have an Eye upon his Conduct; bidding him take notice, that if he
received any affront, it should come from no body but himself. With these words
he took up the Commission, and tearing it in three or four pieces, threw it
upon the ground, letting us know by this action, what we had heard of him
before was true, that when he did espouse any man's interest he did it with a
great deal of warmth. We made no question, but all this huff was upon the
account of Mr. de Joyeuse. In the mean time, Monsieur de Montesquiou, being
obliged to keep his Company, gave us an example, that it is impossible to avoid
our Destiny, being killed the next Campaign in Germany. And this obligation his
Father had to Mr. de Rivarolles, whom he had served in several occasions to the
utmost; particularly when he had his Leg shot off by a Cannon Bullet before
Puicerda, and was carried to Toulouse; where he omitted nothing either for his
Recovery or his Diversion; and as soon as he saw it would not be prejudicial to
his health, brought him some of the finest Women in the Town to entertain him.
Yet at the same time, tho he was in a condition fitter to think of another
world than of this, he could not forbear his old Trade of defaming people, and
amongst the rest of a Gentleman in the Army, called Madaillan, a person of
quality, who having some friends in the company that heard it, and informed him
what the Marquis de Rivarolles had said of him; this made him come Post from
Paris to demand satisfaction; and was the occasion of a very pleasant
adventure. Madaillan at his arrival sent him a Challenge, without informing
himself, whether he was in a condition to fight or not. In short, he that
carried the Challenge found him in bed, as 'twas likely enough he should, a
Cannon-shot being not so soon cured, (for he lay by it above six weeks after
that.) However, making show as if he was very ready to give him satisfaction,
he only told the Messenger that he had taken Physic that day; so that it was
impossible he could go out; but the next he did not question, but he should be
able, when he would send word where, and at what weapons he would fight him.
This answer being carried to Madaillan he was mighty glad, and waited the time
appointed with a great deal of impatience. He was awake very early in the
morning, when his Servants, who knew nothing of the matter, came and told him,
there was a Man below would speak with him from the Marquis de Rivarolles. He
made no question, but it was to appoint the place, and manner of their meeting,
as he had promis^d, and so ordered them to bring him in, and to leave them
together. The man, as soon as he was come in, instead of going to the Bedside
to speak with him, as he expected, goes directly to the Table, where he laid
down some things which he had under his Coat; Madaillan be^^n to laugh at the
fellow, and lifting himself up to look what it was he laid down, he was amazed
to see all the Table covered over with surgeons Instruments: But imagining that
the man might have made some mistake, he asked him, if he was sure he was right?
and if he had not said he came from the Marquis de Rivarolles? No, Sir, says
the man, it is no mistake, I did say I came from him, and do so still, for he
sent me to desire you to let me cut off one of your Legs; for having sent him a
Challenge to fight to day, he supposes you are more of a Gentleman than to
fight him at an advantage; and he has lost one of his Legs at Puicerda, of
which he is not yet cured; and being not such a fool as to fight, maimed as he
is, against a man that has all his Limbs; he desires you would either go first
and lose one of your Legs as he did, or if you have such a mind to fight, to
let me cut off one for you, for it is my business. The man that made him this
compliment was really a Surgeon; and Madaillan, for fear he should be laughed at
if he abused him, took no notice, but bid him take up his Tools and go about
his business; but 'twas never a jot the more secret for that, for the Marquis
de Rivarolles took care to make it public enough; and it being impossible
after that to conceal the quarrel, the Deputies of the Mareschals of France
prohibited them fighting, and afterward made them friends.

It Is easy to judge from hence what a condition I was in to assist my friend
in his dispute with Monsieur de Rivarolles, and he being a man of sense, that
knew I had good will enough for him, knew I did not speak to refuse him my
assistance. He applied himself elsewhere, and having found one who had more
Interest in the Marquis than I, he desired him to tell the Marquis that he had
no inclination to go to Law unless he was forced to it, and therefore begged of
him he would do him justice; and if he would not be Judge in his own case, that
then he would leave it to any indifferent person whom he himself would choose.
But the Marquis would be brought to no terms, nothing would serve him but the
relinquishing all his Dues; which the other being not willing to do, was forced
to go to Law with him: In the prosecution of which, I endeavored, with some
other of his friends, to serve him as well as we could with the Judges. At last
there comes a person to him, who told him he should not be afraid to deal with
him, for he should not fail either in Prosecution, or in making Friends; and
that the Marquis himself should not make better; and in particular, he would
undertake that Monsieur de Louvois should not interest himself in his Cause,
and that he might depend upon this notice. He brought me this news himself, at
the same time telling me that he knew not who this man was, nor whence he came,
nor would he ever let him know him; but when he asked him who he was, and told
him 'twould be a greater encouragement to him to believe what he said; he
answer^d, that he had Orders to do what he did, but he should see that he would
not forsake him when he had occasion.

I was at a loss, nor could I imagine for my life, who it should be that had
sent him this message; for tho I knew the Marquis de Rivarolles had made
himself a great many enemies, yet I could not guess who it should be, that
durst undertake for such a powerful protection: If they had used more Modesty,
I should have thought it had been the Marquis de Carman, who had been Colonel
of the Regiment of Languedoc, and who had more cause to hate him than any body;
and the History of it will give a true character of the man, and therefore I
shall give a distinct account of it, in all its circumstances, and yet as short
as I can. The Marquis de Rivarolles fell in love with Madam de Carman, who
dwelt then at Perpignan, the Capital City of Rousillon, but made no advances in
her favor; till at last understanding by one of her Women, that she wanted
Money, he brings a hundred Pistoles with him in a Purse; with this he comes
himself, at a time when he knew she was in Bed; whether it was, that he thought
at that time she would be most inclined to pleasure, or that he thought he
might oblige her to comply with him with less difficulty; and being admitted
into her Chamber, and after some time having discovered his passion, he at the
same time presented her the Purse, which rendered his discourse the more
persuasive; the Lady making as if she had been yiedling, and yet, that if she
did, it was not for the sake of his Money, bid him lay the Purse upon the
Toilette, thinking she should get those hundred Louis d' Or very cheap; but the
Marquis de Rivarolles, after he had done what he pleased, seeing the Purse upon
the Toilette as he went out, caught it up again, and took it with him without
being seen. When the Lady rose, she went to please herself with what she
thought herself sure of, but was strangely surpised when she found 'twas gone,
and began to be in strange fears what should become of her, having heard often
enough what kind of a Man the Marquis de Rivarolles was, which indeed might be
the reason she would be paid beforehand; but this she saw had not succeeded.
She concealed her resentment; but took up the strangest resolutions possible,
and such, as had she had power suitable to her courage, might have had very ill
effects. In the mean time, he, as if it had not been enough to have abus^d her,
made it as public as he could, and made sport of it in all company. Such a
story as this soon spread all over the Country, which when she came to hear of
it again, it is an easy matter to imagine what condition she was in; she was a
thousand times about to have exposed herself to the first that would revenge
her upon him; but while she thus meditated mischief, she received a Letter from
her Husband, who by this time had heard of it too, which bid her expect to live
no longer than he should return, which joined to her guilty Conscience put her
into a grievous fright; and as if she was not yet unhappy enough, she finds
that she was with Child by this fact, which aggravated her grief to the last
extremity, and made her take up a resolution which I cannot relate without
horror; for tho I did not know her, yet I had the honor to be acquainted with
her Father, who was a useful man, and very well in esteem with Cardinal
Mazarine. In short, she poisoned herself, as soon as she knew her Husband was on
his return from the Army; so he was disappointed in his furious design, which I
think he ought rather to have vented upon him who was the Author of his
disgrace. But tho he was high enough in threatening his Wife, he had not courage
enough to revenge it upon the Adulterer; and tho he came into his company a
thousand times, he never durst take notice of it.

All the world knew this story, and that made me think, that tho Monsieur
Carman durst not openly quarrel with him, yet he would have been glad to have
some mischief befall him, and so had sent privately to my friend about his Suit;
but a little after I altered my opinion, and rather thought it might be the
Marquis de Feuquieres, with whom he had some difference but a little before.
However, he was not to blame in this affair; for whatever my quarrel was at
him, I must tell the truth, and will do so. They had been at play together
several times, and the Marquis de Rivarolles had lost 3 or 400 Pistoles to him,
which he had very honestly paid him, and having won back about one hundred and
fifty, could not get one penny of it; when at last, having asked him for the
Money a great many times, and he had made him a great many promises, but never
kept one, he goes away to his Tent and seizes upon his Horses, and one of his
Grooms making some opposition, he Can'd him very handsomely. The Marquis de
Feuquieres being a person of quality, such an affront as this went very near
him; and tho there was afterward an Accommodation, yet 'twas thought he had
still a grudge in his mind against him, at least I thought so; and having told
my friend this story, we concluded that it must be from him, and that if it
was, his business would certainly go well, for Mr. de Feuquieres was a person
who had Relations and Friends of very good credit; but that which gave me the
greatest hope was the assurance he gave him, that Mr. de Louvois should not be
against him.

However, to know whether this was a thing to be trusted to or not, I advised
him to go and see this Minister, and acquaint him, that Monsieur de Rivarolles
had forced him to a Process which was very cruel and unjust, and that before he
did any thing in it, he was come to throw himself and his concerns into his
hands; that as it was a thing which had some relation to the interest of the
Order of Saint Lazarus, he knew his duty too well to do any thing before he had
asked his leave; that he desired no better Judge than himself, if he could admit
himself from his more weighty affairs to determine it; and if not, he should be
infinitely obliged to him, that he would appoint any fit person to hear it. Mr.
de Louvois received him very kindly, and told him he would leave it to the
ordinary Judges, but promised him he would not any way hinder him from having
justice done. So the Proceedings began, and the Marquis de Rivarolles, who knew
he was at a distance from home, made at first a great many shifts and tricks to
tire him out. In the mean time, the man who had promised to solicit for him
was as good as his word, and assisted him considerably. However, seeing that do
whatever he could, and his friend too, the affair went on very slowly, he began
to be sick of the Town, and very impatient; so that at last, being overcome
with a violent desire to return into the Country again, and live in quiet, he
offered the Marquis de Rivarolles two hundred Pistoles to make an end of it.
The Marquis, who saw the stream run against him in the Court, and that the
King, who every year took the field, was now preparing to form a Camp, whether
'twas very likely he should be obliged to go, was overjoyed at the Proposal;
especially for the convenience of so much ready Money too, which he had no
small occasion for.

My Lodgings were in the Fauxbourg St. Germain. In the morning it was my
constant employment to visit my friends, and after Dinner to divert my self at
play; for tho I knew well enough, that Gaming is a dangerous Exercise, yet
being too old for the Ladies, there was a necessity I should do something to
pass away the time. One day a friend of mine carried me to a famous Gaming
House, which was not far from my Lodging, at the little Hotel deCrequi. A
dangerous place it was indeed, but especially for young folks, who have but
little experience in the world. In short, 'twas a mere public cheat, and I
wondered that in so orderly a City as Paris, the Government did not take notice
of it* and above all, I admired the Duke de Crequi, under whose name they kept
it, and who had had a thousand complaints made to him of it, should never take
any notice of it. But he left the management to the Officers of his Guards,
whose Fees it was* being so miserable covetous, that tho he has a prodigious
Estate, and no Children to leave it to but an only Daughter; yet rather than
put himself to any charge, he lets them do what they will, not regarding the
mischievous effect, so he can but save the Sallaries of his two wicked
Officers. One of whom methinks he should not be fond to retain, considering how
little it is for his credit to keep such a fellow in his House, who was before
only a sorry Exempt, and used to be hired to guard Malefactors to the place of
Execution, whether he should have been carried himself long before, if he had
had his due. For the other I cannot say much, being of another sort, having
never saw any great harm by him. He was a Cadet too, so it was more pardonable
for him to get Money by any method, seeing his Master practice it before him.

Under the conduct of these two Gentlemen, this Office of Tricks and Shams was
managed, and the very first day I went among them I saw so many hanging
countenances, that I was afraid, instead of bringing me into a House, he had
brought me into a Wood to be robbed; my friend perceiving my concern told me,
the Rogues that used to frequent that place were fled; for some of the gang
having been taken and severely punished but a little before, had frighted away
the rest, so I needed not be apprehensive of any thing. Indeed there had been
two of them taken, who having lost all their Money, had took to the Highway,
and were broken upon the Wheel; one was the Count de la Salle, and the other
the Chevalier Despine, but their Titles could not save them. All this however
did not give me much satisfaction, no more than the Guards of Mons. de Crequi,
who were placed in the Antichamber, but I went with a great deal of
apprehension into the place where the Scene lay, and where my friend presenting
me to the Directors as a man very fit to assist them in their affairs, I was
complimented at a great rate. However, all this did not please me, and I
believe, if it had been possible, I had immediately came out again, if I had
not seen the Count de Rouvray, a Gentleman of Burgogndy, who was at play in the
corner of the Room with one whom I did not know. I knew him to be a very honest
Gentleman, and a Man of a good Estate; so I went to seat my self by him, but
there being no room, I was forced to sit by him that played with him. They were
playing at Picquet, for no sort of Game came amiss to them here, tho that which
the Directors liked best was Lansquenet, because they got most by it; but now
they were at Picquet. The Gentleman who played with the Count de Rouvray, was
one of those Games^ers, who have no better fortune than others in an honest
way; but I am persuaded he was the finest fellow in the world at cheating. I
must have been very incredulous indeed if I had not been of that opinion,
seeing him, as I did, perform a notable piece of dexterity. I believe he was
not very well pleased with my sitting so near him, which was the reason, that
for some time he durst not play any of his tricks; but fortune inclining to the
Count de Rouvray, made him venture at all hazards, and seeing he was like to
lose perhaps all he had in the world, he cared not what pranks he played to
recover himself. They were playing now for the Set, the two games before he
lost; the stake I believe might be about four and twenty Pistoles, and the
Count de Rouvray, who was eldest hand, wanted but fourteen of being up, and he
nine. After discarding, the Count de Rouvray found that he had got the point,
which being but five to him, he could not reckon up; the other could, if he had
three Queens in his hand, but he had laid out one, yet perceiving the game was
lost if the Count de Rouvray Dealt, whose turn it was, he made bold to reckon
them. I thought this had been only a mistake, and was just a going to tell him
of it; but as I was observing very attentively how this Comedy would end, a
Master Cheat who looked on, as well as I, and was of the gang, taking up the
Card that was laid out, and fooling with it in his hand, at last let it drop
down. The other, in a great deal of haste, as if he had been afraid the Count
should see it, took it up, which was the Card he wanted, and clapped down another
in the room of it. He did this with that slight of hand, that I never was more
surpised in my Life than I was to see that Card in his hand, which I had seen
him lay out. The name of one of these two Sparks was Guetart, and the other was
called the Chevalier de Lignerac, two famous Sharpers. Tho I think all their
Tricks made them never a jot the richer; for the first, who had a good Estate
of his own, had spent it every Groat, tho he was not above five and thirty; and
the other, after having played his Pranks with every body he could, was forced
to sculk about in priviledg'd places, and Gentlemen's houses for protection, for
fear of a Goal.

Any body may guess what opinion I had of this honest place. The next morning,
before I was up, came a Man to my Lodgings, one I had never seen in my Life;
but he told me he had seen me in such a place, and believing me to be a
Gamester, he waited on me to acquaint me who understood things, and who did
not: You must note, he meant by those that understood things, those that could
cheat and trick, as I have described them; and those who he termed ignorant,
were such as played fairly. He told me, if I pleased, he would teach me all
their Tricks; not that he thought I would practice them, but that I might know
them, and prevent being put upon my self. I thankt him for his offer; and tho I
did not think fit to make use of him, yet like the Lawyers, who expect their
Fees tho they do no business, he asked me for something, but very modestly
truly; telling me he was a Gentleman, that he did not use to be in the
condition he was now in, and hoped it would be soon otherwise; and if I would
lend him but four Pistoles, he promised me on the word of a Man of Honor to
repay me. This being at my own Lodgings, and not at L' Hotel de Crequi, I
thought I might easily stand this sort of an attack; but he was so importunate,
that whatever I could say to the point, I could not get off from him, tho I
escaped cheaper than four Pistoles too; for seeing it impossible to bring me up
so high he fell to three, and then to two, and one, and at last to half a
Crown, which I was glad to give away to be rid of him. He gave me a thousand
thanks; and was hardly gone out of doors, but in comes another figure, who I
knew no better than I did the last; and his Compliment was of another sort, he
came to invite me to Dinner; and his business it seems was, when he had lost
all his own Money, to get people together to make a Company at Lansquenet. Then
he began to tell me the History of his good fortune at play; that as mean a
condition as I saw him in now, he had kept his Coach and Horses, with four
Footmen, and such an Equipage, as no Ambassador had a greater; that he used to
wear a different Suit of Clothes every day, with his Sword-hilt and Buttons of
Massy Gold; and he did not question but to live to see himself in the same
condition again, for all this.

After he had run on at this rate a while, he would needs show me, what an
Artist he was at play; and pulling a Pack of Cards out of his Pocket, he showed
me the Tricks and Slights with which they use to manage their Game. I expected
however, that the bottom of all this would be only the same with the the other, a
Petition for some Money; but it seems I had to do with one now, that was not
quite so low and necessitous as the last; and whose place it seems did bring
him in something, for he had a quarter part of the Profit of the Box Charges
deducted; the other three parts being divided between Dugas, Lieutenant of the
Guards to Monsieur de Crequi; Du Four, an Ensign of the same Guards; and one
Bragalogne, a fellow that was once in great credit for these sort of
Gaming-Houses: But the King had prohibited him from keeping any such House any
more, ever since Monsieur Foucaut, a Councellor of the Parliament, and one that
lost all his Estate at gaming, was killed at his House. This Bragalogne had in
his time, all the persons of quality in the Court came to him; and the other
hoping, that he having such a great acquaintance, would bring a great deal of
company to their House, took him into their Partnership: But the House was
grown so infamous, that people of quality would not come near it; and besides
he had quite lost his credit too, particularly in a business about the Abbot de
Lignerac, Brother to the Chevalier I mentioned before. This Abbot had a mind to
counterfeit a little honesty, tho he loved it no better than his Brother; and
being much in the same circumstances, had the good Fortune, or rather the Art,
to win four or five hundred thousand Francs; for he understood things (to use
the Term my Gentleman taught me.) At last, having got a great deal of Money
among them, but not so honestly but he was afraid he should be obliged to make
restitution; meeting therefore one day with a Gentleman whose name is Erouard,
of whom he had got seven or eight hundred Pistoles; he told him, that if he
would release him for threescore Pistoles, of what he might owe him, he would
give him them presently. Erouard, taking this for raillery, and that he only
jeered him, because he had won his Money, told him, he demanded nothing of him,
nor knew of any thing he owed him. Upon which the Abbot pretending to inform
him, told him, that he had some scruple upon his mind about it; that he had
taken the advantage of his Age, which made him remiss, and not mind his Play as
he ought to have done; which made him fear, that the Money he had won of him,
when they played together at Bregalogne's, was not honestly gained; that it is
true many people would not be so scrupulous, but for his part, rather than have
any thing of that kind lie upon his conscience, he chose to make him the
restitution he had offered. Erouard, as old as he was, yet understood the
meaning of all this, and seeing it was better to have 60 Pistoles of his Money
than nothing, readily took them, and gave him a discharge. The Abbot telling
the Money out, told him also, that he should go to Bragalogne, and if he
managed him rightly, he would make him refund too; that he had always gone
halves when they played together, and his own guilt would make him comply. But
it would not take with Bragalogne, who was used to win, but not to return it
again; he told him plainly, the Abbot de Lignerac might well make him such a
Present, because he had a very good Estate; but as for him, his circumstances
were not so well, and in short, he had neither Inclination nor Ability.

Thus these Gentlemen, not content to get all the Gamesters Money at the years
end, by their Imposition and Tax upon Play, which they called by the name of de
Ronde; endeavored also to secure it by other means more short and expeditious.
In fine, he that carried me thither the day before, coming in just as the Man
invited me to Dinner, they got me away in spite of my resolution; where I saw
Monsieur de Four was not far behind Bragalogne: he was at play with a young
Coxcomb newly come from Sea, and had set a Rogue to look on his game, and give
him notice by signs what Cards he had in his hand. Every body saw it, as well
as I, and talked of it publicly, the thing was so plain. I asked them what this
Cully's Name was, and somebody telling me it was the Chevalier de Lissac, I
inquired whence he came, for I remembered there was once a Man of that Name that
did me a particular kindness; they told me he was of the County of Foix, and
the party I meant being of those parts, I imagined he might be of that Family;
and being concerned to see him there, I told him, if he would take my advice I
would have him play no more. Du Four was in some confusion at my saying so,
imagining I suppose that I had perceived something. However Lissac would not
leave off; but du Four left off himself, for fear, I believe, that I should
tell at last what I had observed. In short, I took Monsieur de Lissac aside,
and telling him who I was, I convinced him how much he had been abused; which
put him into such a rage as made him almost mad; for he not only ventured to
quarrel with him in the place, which was indeed a madness, he being in the
midst of his Guards and of his Gang, but dared him to his very Teeth when he
came out. However, there was no mischief done then, because of peoples being
by, and I took him away with me, and told him, that if he was well advised, he
should never set his foot within that Cutthroat place again; that as for me,
I Would tell him plainly, I would be content to be hanged if ever they caught me
there again, tho I had come off without losing my Money, and I w^sht he could
say the same: But he, deaf to all my advice, and transported with rage, would
needs go back again. The affair being already come to the ^ars of Mon^ieur de
Crequi, du Four thought himself oblig^d to renounce his Interest for once,
hoping by that to in^^^uate into the world that 'twas all but a lie; upon
which, tho he desired nothing more than the company of such ^^^^ies, yet he
gave orders when he should come again to shut the door against him. Lissac
durst say nothing to all this, for fear of making Monsieur de Crequi his Enemy:
'Twas very hard to see himself thus dealt with by a Rascal, yet he was forced
to take it patiently. If this was a sensible affront, it proved however a good
fortune to him, since it saved his Money, which he had certainly lost if he had
stayed, for immediately after he had made up his Company, he was obliged to
leave Paris, and so avoided a ruin which a great many young Gentlemen fell
into. I might be excused to seek in this manner to pass away the time, for it is
the misfortune of men of my profession to have a great many idle hours lie upon
our hands; and tho I took all the ways I could to divert my self, sometimes
reading, otherwhile gaming, and sometimes walking abroad, yet putting all
together, I must acknowledge no condition is so unhappy as a Gentleman's; if I
had been religiously inclined it had been a great happiness to me, having so
much leisure for reflection; but indeed I had no manner of motion that way, a
disposition conformable to the strictness of Religion is not given to every
body, and I was one to whom it was denied. I had a Relation of mine who was
married, about 12 or 15 Leagues from Paris, on Normandy side, who had many
times invited me to her House, and now I sent her word, if she would send her
Coach such a day for me, as far as Pontoise, I would wait on her: She not only
sent her Coach, as I desired, but came her self too; and being arrived at the
Great Heart Inn pretty early, she walked out of the Town a little, to see if she
could meet the Roan Stage Coach, by which I sent her word I should come down.
She was no handsome Woman, she would have been to blame to pretend to it; but
however, a good air which she had, and the care she took to set herself off,
made her well esteemed, and several Admirers she had. Among the rest two
Gentlemen, both Strangers to her, tho they were both of that County, taking her
for another sort of Lady than she was, made their Court to her, and behaved
themselves civilly enough at first; she did not refuse them her company. Her
freedom of conversation confirmed them in their opinion of her; upon which,
while she was at the Inn, they resolved to push on the matter. If one may
believe herself, she only intended to banter them, and every body else on that
account. However, she brought herself into a broil with them: For refusing to
consent, and they pressing upon her, she stood upon her guard, and put herself
into a posture of defense, and the business was carried so high, that her
Corne^s were t^re off her head, and all the House was in an uproar about it,
just when I came in. As Soon as I got out of the Coach, and had inquired what
the matter was, I was very much surpised; and running up to her Chamber, I
found her upon the Bed, and telling her how much I was concerned at this
accident, asked her, if she had ordered any course to be taken with the persons
who had offered her this affront. She told me, she had no body to advise with
about it, or to direct her what was fit to be done, and therefore she had done
nothing at all; but that now I was come, she desired me to inform her, what I
thought proper for her to do. I blamed her for having omitted it, and telling
her she ought to have given notice of it to the Officers of Justice; I went
immediately and did it for her. The young Sparks, who had offered this violence
to her, found themselves in an ill case, when they saw what measures we were
going to take with them; and especially perceiving they had to do with a person
of quality, who wanted neither Money nor Friends to prosecute them; and some
body advised them to come and ask pardon of the Lady; and accordingly a person
was sent to know, if that would be accepted; but I told the Messenger, that
would not serve their turn for an action so notoriously foul as this was. It Is
true, I took a false step in applying my self to the ordinary course of
Justice; I should rather have made my Complaint before the Mareschals of
France, where we should have had more justice, and been sooner dispatched. But
my passion transported me so far, that I never thought of that, till I had
begun their process a little too hastily; not considering that we were bringing
our selves into a tedious Suit, that we could not quit when we pleased. In
short, our Adversaries taking advantage of this occasion, got before us, and
made a Complaint there themselves; and tho they could pretend nothing in that
Court against a Woman, yet they so entangled things with their tricks and
turns, that they got an Arrest to stop a Judgment which we had obtained against
them in the other Court.

The business was then brought before the Parliament, and that Court not being
in haste to end matters of this nature, took care to keep this alive, by
bringing up against this Lady and her Husband, (who was now made a party) every
thing that could be thought of in all the course of their lives, and a great
many invented things that had never been acted, that they might, if possible,
tire them into an accommodation. This Gentleman and his Lady had one
misfortune, which is but too common in this age, their Daughter had been a
little too free with her Brothers Tutor, and there was a Child in the case; the
Father was so enraged at it, that once he had like to have stabbed her, and I
believe he had done it, if I had not advised him to send her away to the
Plantations in the West Indies, and give out that she was dead; he liked the
proposal well enough, and so it was first told abroad that his Daughter was
very sick, and then that she was dead, and a formal Funeral was made for her;
in the mean time she was sent away in the night to Rochelle to be shipped off:
however this could not be done so privately, but some whisperings of it got
abroad, and these people got some knowledge of it in general, as that it was
but a sham Funeral, upon which they immediately supposed the Girl had been
murdered, and entered a process for the discovery, requiring to have the Coffin
taken up again, and opened in the presence of the Magistrate; which being
granted, strangely perplexed my Cousins, and they tried a thousand tricks of the
Law to avoid bringing an affair upon the stage so much to their dishonor: and
truly they were got among such a parcel of Lawyers both of Paris and Roan, that
no tricks were to be played of that kind, but they could have them done.
However, all signified nothing, the Coffin was opened, and there was found a
Log of Wood, instead of a Corpse; and Testification of this being made, they had
now the Solicitor General upon their backs, who demanded to know what they had
done with their Daughter. If it was a Mortification to have the whole story of
this brought before the Parliament, which the adverse Lawyers did not fail to
do with all the aggravations they could, 'twas worse to them to find out a way
how to give an account of the Girl herself. For it seems, instead of going to
the West Indies, as her Father and Mother thought she had done, truly she had
got another fellow, that falling in love with her, had procured her liberty, on
conditions much like what she had formerly granted the Tutor. 'Twas a hard
Chapter to tell this to a Court of Justice, and yet harder to prove it, if it
was not believed. In short, the Court was not at all satisfied with it, but
they were ordered to produce the Young Woman, or to answer for her; at which,
knowing not what either to do, or say, they stood as if they had been amazed;
which the Court taking as an effect of guilt, ordered them both to be taken up,
and put into the Conciergeric. I was sensibly afflicted when I heard this news,
and the more, because I was foolishly the occasion of their beginning this
unhappy process, and thinking my self obliged, whatever it cost me, to relieve
them in this distress, I inquired, as privately as I could possibly, of a
certain sort of Women, whose Employment is not very honest, and which you may
guess at, I suppose, without naming. I asked them, I say, if they had not among
their Virgins, such and such a young Lady, describing her as well as I could;
the great reward I promised them, made them bestir themselves a little for the
discovery: For indeed, I did not know who else to apply my self to; imagining,
and that as I thought not without reason, that a young Girl, cast off by her
Father and Mother, and who had already been that way given, would presently
apply herself to such people as those: tho 'twas really a hard case, that any
person of quality should be forced to such a search, and that their misfortunes
should oblige them to save their Lives by the exposing the dishonor of their
Family upon Record. In the mean time, these good Women, taking no notice on
what account it was, procured me the sight of a great number of young Ladies. I
had always heard indeed, that Paris was full of such people, but I never
thought it was possible there could be so many of them. It took me up at least
a month to visit all these houses, and there was never less than ten or twelve
at a place, and yet among them all I could not find out her I wanted; but all I
could learn of her was, that she had been seen at a certain Tire-womans called
La Marchand; that a Gentleman being in love with her, had taken her a private
Lodging, and kept her, but no body could tell me who this man was, nor where he
lived; so that, in short, one had as good look a Needle in a Bottle of Hay, as
the Proverb says, as to expect to find them out in such a large place as Paris:
I put an end to my search. However, since I knew this part of the story was
true, both by some circumstances, as also that she had discovered herself to a
friend, who had told us of it. The Advocates, to defer the Proceedings against
my Kinsman and his Wife, thought it proper to have her heard in Court, for the
Judges could not but know, that such persons as we would not come to a
discovery of that nature, if there was nothing at all in it; but this Woman's
Testimony, because of her Infamy, not being allowed for lawful Witness, all my
labor was lost, and I was forced to take new measures.

Our Adversaries triumphed at all this, and carried it so insolently, that had
we lived in other times, as old as I was, I am sure I had handled them after
another manner. But the King, among a multitude of great actions, like himself,
has done nothing so great, or so much to his glory, as the absolute prohibiting
of Duels; which is so severe on that point, that he is certain to ruin himself
that attempts it; and yet I had much ado to refrain from it, when I saw them at
the Palace; but I could not pass by them, without jostling them, tho they did
not take notice of it; and that which madded me worst was, that they were a
parcel of Rascals we had to do with. In the mean time nothing was done, and the
Judges told me plainly, that unless we could get some better proofs, that the
young Lady was alive, her Father and Mother both was in great danger. Upon this
I went to the Dean of the Commissaries du Chatelet, and prayed them to publish
an Advertisement to all their Officers, that when people came to register
Lodgings and Chambers to let, they should examine the Landlords and
Landladies, whether they had not such a person came to lodge with them; and I
promised a hundred Pistoles to whoever should make the discovery. This made
them do their best, and by this means I came to understand, that a young Lady,
something like what I had described, lodged in la Rue Calande, near la Place
Maubert; and immediately going thither and pretending to take Lodgings, I was
admitted up stairs, and there I found the party I looked for, but in such a
miserable condition, that had I not seen her a great many times, it had been
impossible to have known her.

She was surpised at the sight of me, especially when calling her by her name,
I began to reproach her with what she had done; and fancying she might easily
get away from such an old fellow as I was, she seemed to cry, but watched an
opportunity to give me the slip, and get out of the door; but I had my Eyes
about me, and looked so narrowly to her, as she could not possibly do it; and
having thus perceived her design, I staid with her till I had more company; and
her Father and Mother having got an Order for me to lay her fast, if I should
have the good fortune to find her; I made use of that Warrant, and carried her
to the Madelonet^es, a Prison appointed for Women of ill fame. It was a
singular good fortune to us all, the finding out this young Jilt, her Father
and Mother being upon the very point of being condemned; and I know not what
might have come of it, if this discovery had not been made. But now their
Daughter* being produced, all the projects their Adversaries laid to ruin them
were vain, and their measures broken. They would have still procured them to be
detained, upon pretense of having offered an abuse to the Ceremonies of the
Church, in making a solemn Burial for a Log of Wood, and having the usual
Prayer said over it, as if it had been a Christian. In short, they were fain to
make friends to get rid of this Accusation; and yet they could not come off
without a Fine neither. However, the Judges could not but see, that all this
was Recrimination and Malice; and tho they could not avoid the Sentence which
was past, yet as soon as that was over, they took into consideration the Case of
my Kinswoman, and began to think of doing her some Justice. In short, they
condemned the two fellows, first to pay all the charges of the Process, which
was very considerable; and afterward to be banished, which was a great
dishonor to their Families, who made some figure in the Country.

Monsieur and Madame... were satisfied with so just a Decree; and at their
return home were congratulated by their Friends and Relations upon the happy
issue of this troublesome affair. They would needs have my company down with
them into the Country; where they endeavored by the kindest Treatment in the
world to make me amends, for all the pains I had taken upon their account.
Monsieur... knowing that I loved Hawking passionately, showed me all the
diversion possible of that sott; so that in my life, I never past any time more
pleasantly than I did a fortnight there: and so obliging they were, that when I
offered to take my leave, they would by no means suffer me to stir. I had no
great business at Paris, so was easily overcome by their persuasions. In short,
I continued there two months longer; not that at first I had any thoughts of
staying, but was detained by a particular occasion; which was, that in my
Doting Age I had like to have committed a folly, from which all the rest of my
days I had believed my self secure enough. About five or six leagues from
thence lived a young Lady, the Charms of whose Beauty and Wit it was impossible
to resist, who coming to visit Monsieur and Madam... I saw, and from the first
moment felt my self so sensibly touched, that I could not have been more at five
and twenty. The two days she staid there, I past sighing at her feet; and she
(who had little fortune of her own, and judged of mine by the figure I made)
treated me in such a manner, as gave me no cause to despair. We are all
naturally apt to flatter our selves: I had my share of this vanity, when I
thought one of my years, gay and vigorous enough to inspire Love in so young
and charming a Creature. I had promised to wait on her in a few days, but
before she could well be got half way home, I was preparing to make my visit.
Monsieur and Madam... rallied me very heartily upon this; but I, who could
hearken to nothing but my passion, took Horse immediately, and tho I engaged
not to stay above two days at farthest, yet I staid there a fortnight: And then
returned so transported, or rather so damned foolishly in Love, that when I but
reflect on it now, it puts me into extreme confusion. Monsieur and Madam... who
knew nothing of my circumstances, but imagined, because I had been formerly
pretty well at Court, that I must hay laid up something considerable; told me,
that I ought to marry this young Gentlewoman, and make her fortune; that she
was a person of condition, and of great virtue; and it would be much better to
leave her what I had, than leave it to those whom perhaps I did not care for;
that as to matter of Estate, I ought not to consider it, at my Age, when I was
not likely to have many Children; and the few I might have would be no great
charge to me, since I should never live to see 'em grown up. If they had known
all, they had not needed to have used these arguments with me, for I had before
hand resolved to gratify my inclinations at any rate; and tho I was sensible,
that marrying a Woman with my small fortune, was a certain way to bring her to
misery; yet all these considerations were not powerful enough to reduce me to
reason. The only thing then that seemed to stick with me was my Age, which I
objected; but they told me, I ought not to insist upon that, since I did not
look to be above Forty; and so, in short, if I were disposed to it, they would
serve me in bringing this Match about. I made 'em no answer; but two or three
days after, going to visit the Lady again, I propos^d it to her my self,
assuring her, at the same time, that I would deal ingenuously with her. I told
her, I must confess it was my own fault I was not richer, since I had been a
very bad Husband, and had chose to make other peoples fortune rather than my
own; that I had a Mother-in-law who had ruined me by reviving the old Debts of
the Family, and laying her claim to them; by which means it happened, that I
could make an Offer of no great matter, when I offered her my self: That what I
had now was an Annuity for Life out of the Bank of Lions, which had been
formerly a thousand Crowns a year, but was now reduced to half of it. This
Income, I told her, with about 14 or 15 thousand Livres, which I had put into
the hands of some particular friends, was my whole Estate; and it was for her
to consider, whither she would accept of a Man, who if he had 20 thousand a
year, loved her well enough to lay it all at her feet, but whose misfortune it
was to have a great deal less. For all the sincerity I pretended to, you may
see; I told her, I had more than what really I had, since I reckoned into the
account, the Money I gave Messieurs de Saillant, and la Jonche^e, which was
gone to all intents and purposes. Yet I did not question, but to have ^^me off
handsomely with her, and at last to have satisfied her, when she should have
known all the circumstances of this misfortune. Thus had Love got the ascendant
over my Reason, and made me act, as if I had not been my self.

However, the young Lady liked my Proposals; which compliance of hers so
perfectly charmed me, that I thought I could never do enough for her. She had
dependence upon none but a Mother, with whom she could do what she pleased, so
that our Marriage was soon concluded on, and the report of it spreading round
the Country, we were complimented by all the People of Quality thereabouts.
She, who now began to look upon me as her Husband, made no scruple to allow me
those Liberties that she might do with honor enough, but which inflamed and
transported me so, that some things happened to me, which good manners oblige
me to conceal. This effect, tho I may say they had, as to convince her, that I
was not so old as she took me to be; for such Raptures I was in, that no Young
man, with all his vigor and inclination, could have expressed more force of
nature, or warmth of imagination, than I did upon some occasions. I mention
this to let you see, that Women do not always declare what they think, for tho
she had often perceived the same thing, she never took the least notice of it,
till one day she happened to discover it, to the good fortune of us both. We
had been at Vespers together, but her Devotion not satisfied with that, she
would oblige me to stay the other service that follows presently after. I was
content, and when they came to sing that Hymn, in which there is this passage,
Ne polluantur corpora, she jogged me, and at the repeating of those words bid
me, that I should take care I was not guilty of that frailty any more. I was
strangely surpised to find her so knowing, and asked her who it was that had so
well informed her, at which she only blushed, and was in an extreme confusion.
The more I observed her confusion, the more I suspected some mystery in it; and
not caring to have a young Woman too knowing in those matters, especially one I
designed to make my Wife, I told her plainly, and in some passion too, that I
would be satisfied how she came so well instructed. She told me then, with the
greatest ingenuity possible, that being once at a Gentleman's, one that married
a Relation of hers, and whom she named; he came up one morning and caught her
in Bed, where he behaved himself with that Indecency, that she could not but
take notice of some things, to which before she had been a perfect stranger.
This was enough to possess me, that he loved her. He was a man of a very good
Estate, and one to whom she showed a great deal of respect, which still I
mistook, and imputed to a quite different cause than what she pretended; which
was, she said, for fear of ever having an occasion to make proof of his
generosity. In fine, I grew jealous of him as a Rival, or to speak more
plainly, I thought I should have nothing but his Leavings; for which suspicion
I must humbly ask her pardon, and confess I wronged her, whose Virtue even
exceeded her own admirable Beauty. The wedding day was agreed on, and all
things provided; when under pretense of giving orders about something that was
to be done abroad, I took Horse and left her, but not without writing her a
long and passionate Letter, in which appeared the contest of my Love and
Jealousy, each by turns seeming to have got the better in my divided heart; at
last, I concluded it with a thousand assurances, that I should ever love and
honor her, tho I could not think of her for a Wife. Monsieur and Madam -- soon
perceived the estrangement, and knowing not from whence it should proceed,
would have endeavored to reconcile us; but besides, that her resentment would
not suffer her to hearken to such a Proposal, I was too nice to offer it: I
desired 'em therefore, not to give themselves any trouble, in an affair which I
was sensible would never succeed. If I had had to do with some Women, I should
not have escaped a Process for such an abuse, and without doubt should have
paid for it; but she carried herself like a true person of honor, and not only
disdaining such mean courses of revenge, but much more to be obliged to me,
returned all the Presents I had ever made her, At first, I would by no means
take 'em, and told the person that brought 'em, that he must even carry back
those trifles, which were given without condition to the Woman I once loved
above the world. Yet would she not accept of them, tho they were of the value
of 2 or 300 Pistoles, but sent them back again with orders to leave them with
Monsieur and Madam -- if I should persist to refuse them.

Thus ended this affair, which I should have repented a thousand times that I
mist, if I had an Estate to have made that Woman happy. But Reason coming to
the assistance of my Jealousy, (which my passion might perhaps have conquered
in time) I began to reflect seriously on the consequences of such a Marriage,
and the miserable condition I must have left a Wife and Children in, after my
death. Upon all which I concluded, that it was infinitely the best as it was,
and that she had escaped a misfortune, which it had been a pity a person of her
merit should have ever proved: I had no design to live all my days at Monsieurs
and Madam -- so that now I thought it was high time to take my leave: But they,
who still continu^d their civility, would keep me, tho it was by mere force. I
made all the pretenses possible, and told them, that I had business of moment
at Paris, which I must necessarily attend, but all in vain, for they took them
all for Excuses, and caused the Saddles of my Horses to be laid out of the way;
that when I insisted upon leaving 'em, and was just a going, the Saddles were
no where to be found. I perceived the consequence, and that it would be in vain
to resist their kindness, I told 'em then, I would consent to stay, if they
would fix the time how long, and after that would not stop me. They named eight
days; in which time, as if they had known what should happen, or had resolved I
should be at a Wedding, tho not my own, fell out the Marriage of their
Daughter; who, after all that I have mentioned of her, was yet so fortunate, as
to meet with a Husband of a very plentiful fortune, and one who not only loves,
but dotes on her, and admires her. My time was just expiring, when the very day
before I was to go, about 3 or 4 a Clock in the afternoon, Monsieur and Madam
-- had word brought them, that there was a strange Gentleman without, who
desired to speak with them: The Servants had order to pray him to walk in; and
immediately there enters the Room a man of a very good Mien, but whom I guest,
the first minute, to be a Foreigner by his Dress. I was not mistaken it seems,
for he was a Swiss; and that we all knew well enough as soon as he began to
speak. He told Monsieur and Madam -- in a language half French and half
gibberish, that he was their most humble Servant before ever he saw them, and
that upon the account of their good character; but now, since he had the honor
to kiss their hands, he designed himself a far greater honor, if they pleased
to permit him to render them his most humble Services. This Compliment was a
little strained I fancied, but yet he delivered it with something of that air,
as made me have a better opinion of him, than I had of those Countrymen of his,
who took Biroche's Puppets for young Devils; and for his sake I might have been
induced to believe, that there were some men of. Wit amongst the Swiss, as
amongst other Nations, if it had not been for what happen^d afterward, which
changed my mind, or at least made me conclude, that if they had wit, 'twas
after their own fashion, and was not attended with very much honor. For after
the Compliment I told you of, he desired to discourse Monsieur and Madam -- in
private, where he told them, that having seen Mademoiselle their Daughter, he
was fallen desperately in love with her, and that if they would give consent to
his marrying of her, he should be extremely obliged to them; that he might
perhaps have done this without asking them leave, but he knew his duty better
than that came to, tho he was a Foreigner; and particularly the respect which
was due to persons of their rank and merit: That he did not ask what they would
give with their Daughter; because he chose rather out of a prin^i^le of honor
to marry without Portion, and make t^^ Fortune of a Woman he loved: That he had
(...) Land, but he had a Company of Foot, which was as good to him as an
Estate, and 50000 Livres besides he had in ready Money: That tho 'twas true, he
met with her in a place, from whence others might make some scruple of taking a
Wife; yet he was not apt to believe ill of any, and so it could never enter
into his head, that some reports he had heard of her were any thing but
calumnies: That if there should be something true in them, he was sensible a
poor young Girl was naturally weak, and a failure in one of them was not minded
in his Country; tho a married Woman, who transgrest the Rules of Honor, was
infinitely blamed, because she had a Husband to supply all her necessities; and
a Gallant upon that account was intolerable. In fine, that there were some
censorious people in the world, whom he could not approve, who because a Woman
had committed a fault once, and afterward had been seen to use a little gaiety
more than ordinary in men's company, concluded presently, that she was lewd, and
abandoned; and Lewdness indeed was never to be forgiven.

He added a great deal more of this nature, to prove that what ever a woman did
before Marriage signified nothing, and urged it from the practice of several
very honest Gentlemen, whom he would have named, if they had not been too many
to enumerate; however he would instance, he said, in two or three, who perhaps
they might know; as the Count du Bours, a Colonel of Horse, St. Quintin, and
Mountfabes. The first married a Woman that had a Child by his Father, the
second married a Cast Mistress of the Duke of Espernon, and the third, one of
so notorious a Character, that she had a Trial before the Parliament: Yet there
was none that could deny, but the two first were men of Honor, and if the
other was not esteemed such, it 'twas his own fault, and not his Wives; that
these were French; but for his own Countrymen; he scarce knew one that had not
done the same; that Monsieur Stoup took his Wife from a place, where he had
been himself witness of her Virtue, and yet he lived in great esteem here, and
in his own Country; and was in favor with the King, who had conferred several
Honors upon him; that tho at first Madam Stoup's reputation was a little
called in question, yet now she was no less respected, than if she had never
kept company with any, but Dutchesses and Ladies of the first quality: That
Madam Renold, Wife to a Captain in the Swiss Guards, was one of the same
Character, which she tok care to publish her self before Marriage; so that in
short, all things considered, too much a nicety in these cases, was ridiculous
and only fit for Coxcombs to insist on.

Monsieur and Madam -- could not choose but be pleased to hear him talk at this
rate, and from such just reasoning, and so moving a discourse; thought if he
should ever have the misfortue to be cashiered, that he was sufficiently
qualified with Retorick to make a very able Pleader. Having no mind therefore
to lose such a Son-in-law, they were not long in giving their consent, and that
without any further enquiry who he was, than upon his own word and honor. This
was so great a favor, that the thanks he returned 'em, were enough to convince
'em how highly sensible he was of it. However there arose a little difficulty;
he desired that before all was concluded on, his Mistress might be brought
home, that he might marry her in a more honorable place than where he found
her. But this they excus^d as well as they could, looking upon it as a pretense
to leave her on their hands: All had like to have been ruined by this means,
till communicating to me this matter; I put 'em in a way which I was sure would
leave 'em no room to doubt of his sincerity. I advised 'em then to oblige him
to buy an Estate near them, which if he did, it was a certain sign he meant 'em
no foul play. I thought I had proposed an admirable expedient, but was
answered, that they had rather while they lived, pay their Daughter an Annuity,
than be troubled with such neighbors. That they had better purchase near the
Count du Bourg 15 or 20 leagues off, who was as scandalous as themselves, and
so might be supposed to agree well enough together. When I saw this I told 'em
plainly, they were to blame to trifle in this matter; that there was a
necessity to risque something on that occasion, and tho their fears should
prove just, the inconvenience was not so great but it might be remedied; for if
they should send for their Daughter home, and the man should go back from his
word, at worst, it was but putting her into her Convent again. And so I advised
em upon so groundless a fear, not to let slip such an advantageous offer, which
they would repent of before they died, if they did not embrace: When indeed at
any rate they ought to discharge themselves of one that was a burden and
disgrace to the Family.

Monsieur and Madam -- had not a word to say to this, but yielded to my
reasons, yet told me since it was at my persuasions, that they resolved to make
this Venture, I should not leave 'em till the affair was perfectly concluded. I
had a great mind, I confess, to see how our Swiss would behave himself amongst
all the Kindred, that was to be there upon this occasion; and whether the next
Morning he would appear as well satisfied with the Bride, as the day before his
Wedding. Upon this account therefore, I assured Monsieur and Madam -- that I
was at their service, and they might command me what they pleased. The next
thing then to be done, was to go to Paris and find out the Bride; where they
carried me in their own Coach. She, who was very desirous to get out of her
Convent, and was now more in hopes than ever, had taken a world of pains to
make herself look fair; so that we found her very agreeable when we came there.
Our Lover diverted us upon the Road with a hundred such like stories as he had
told Monsieur and Madam -- in private, which were so very simple, that tho I
had some little knowledge of his Countrymen, I should never have believed from
any bodies mouth but his. Besides all this, to give us the last proof of his
sincerity, he desired before we lite any where, to carry him directly to his
Inn, where begging the favor of his Father and Mother-in-law to go up with
him; he opened a little Box, and took out a Bill for 50000 Livres upon the
Bankers, which he showed 'em for their satisfaction: He would needs that I
should see it too, and brings it to me in the Coach where I was, being taken
suddenly ill with a pain something like the Gout, that I was not able to stir,
but which however the next day I got rid off.

We stayed eight days at Paris, before we returned to conclude this Marriage;
in which time Mademoiselle -- received a great many presents from her Lover. I
could not sufficiently admire her good fortune, when I considered that an
honester woman perhaps, could not have got such luck in a Husband. He was not
above eight or nine and twenty, and for his company in the Guards, which he
said indeed, was as good as an Estate in Land, brought him in one year with
another four and twenty thousand Livres. When I found he was a man of that
substance, I began to pity him: His condition tho I knew was happy, while he
was ignorant, and it came into my head to do him a piece of signal service. He
had repeated a thousand times how that he should never have the worse opinion
of his Wife, for finding her in such a a suspicious place. To continue him
therefore in these good sentiments, I bethought my self of the Pomatum I found
in the Lodgings of the Queens Maids of Honor, which I told you of: I
endeavored all I could to get some of the same sort, to make a present of it
to his Lady; but as fortune would have it, when I did not want it, that I
should stumble upon it, so now I could meet with none when I had so great an
occasion for it. But Mademoiselle de -- God be thanked, had been long enough in
too good a School, to be ignorant of any of those kind of matters; if she knew
not that secret, she was acquainted with another, that did the business as
well; for with the white of Eggs as she managed them, she rectified all
disorders in the case, and so perfectly deceived the good Husband, that he got
up early the next morning, and came transported to tell us, that it was not
without reason that he could assure us now of what he had so often told us. We
gave him joy of his good fortune, whilst he was so charmed with his Spouse,
that he forgot no fondness or complaisance for her, which made us all conclude,
that if there are such things as good Husbands in the world, they are
undoubtedly to be found among the Swiss.

All the Country was surpised at this Marriage, knowing the history of the
young Lady, which was too public to be concealed; and every body, on pretense
of congratulating the new married couple, came to see them, to observe how the
Bridegroom looked, but they could not perceive, but that a Cuckold looks just
like other folks. As for the Bride, she told those with whom she was intimate,
that they should not wonder her Husband appeared so well satisfied, for the
people of his Country were not troubled with too much Wit, and that he was but
too happy for a Swiss; many a Woman, I don't question, who had as much occasion
for such a well-meaning Husband as she had, envied her happiness, especially
when they saw her ride in her Coach with an Equipage and every thing
answerable. The young Lady that I was like to have married was not here all
this while, tho she was very well acquainted in the Family, and I heard
Monsieur and Madam -- often saying, they wondered at it; but for my part, I did
not wonder at it at all, for I guest at the reason of it. Indeed, she hearing,
that I was not only at the Wedding, but that I stayed still at the House, had
never set her foot within the door, while I staid there, if a person of quality
of the neighborhood, had not trepann^d her thither, without letting her know
where she was: she found the Coach just going in at the Castle gate, before she
discovered at what place she was got, she appeared very much dissatisfied; but
the Lady making her the best excuses she could, she was obliged to go in with
her. I was never so surpised in my life as when I saw her, and being very well
acquainted with her humor, I presently guest some violence had been offered
her, and my old Wounds were not so well cured, but that they began to bleed
afresh. I could not cast my eyes on a person I had so passionately loved, and
whom perhaps I loved still, as well as ever I did, without some disorder in my
soul: I wished a thousand times I had been a Swiss, that I might not have been
so nice; and in short, I was so near being overcome, that had any body but
prompted me in the least to the thing, I had fallen under the temptation, and
run into all the past follies again; but some body having so little discretion,
as to speak of that affair before her, she rose up, and with a scornful
countenance, giving them a hearty frown, turned out of the room without
speaking a word, and went into the Garden; which being perceived, no body after
that offered to open their mouths about it, and she going away the same day,
put a stop to the disorder that it procured to us both.

The Wedding being over I returned to Paris, and like those Ladies of pleasure,
who never lodge three months in a place, I took a Lodging now at a Barbers near
St. Paul's; my Landlord was a little brisk man, and fit for any thing, but so
lewd a Rake, that he had not his fellow, and so strangely addicted to gaming,
that he would lose in an hour more than he could get in a month. I laid great
part of the fault to his Wife, who instead of winning him by soft and gentle
methods, did nothing but scold, and rail, and make such a noise at him, as made
him so uneasy at home, that he would never be there any more than needs must.
I knew him first when he was Servant to Dupin, who lived in the Rue St.
Antoine, who was of the same Trade, and where I had lodged at least five or six
years at times; several persons of quality lodged at his House at the same
time, and while I staid there, there happened an adventure which had something
in it surprising enough, as the Reader will acknowledge, if he please to give
credit to the relation; Dupin is still alive, and the people I am going to tell
of, belong to persons of such quality, that their names are not unknown even to
strangers, and it is easy to know of them, whether the story I tell be true or
no: However, I shall blame no bodies incredulity, till they have made some
enquiry, for the thing appeared so extraordinary, that I could hardly believe
my own eyes. There were two men of quality who were very intimate friends, one
was the Marquis de Rambouillet, eldest Brother to the Duchess de Montausier,
and the other was the Marquis de Preci, the eldest Son of the Family of
Nantouillet; one of whom had been Chancellor of the Kingdom, and in so great
favor in the Reign of one of our Kings, that he obliged his Master, while he
govern^d the State with an absolute authority, to get him a Cardina^'s Cap.
These two Gentlemen went both into the Army, as all people of quality do in
France first or last, and falling into discourse of the world to come, after
several discourses, by which they discovered they did not very well understand
what they talked of, they made a solemn promise to one another, that the first
that died of them two, should come and bring an account of those things he saw
to his friend, and having shook hands upon it, in testimony that they really
intended, and resolved if it were possible to perform it, they fell into other
discourse less serious. Two or three months past after this, without perhaps
either of them so much as thinking on this agreement, and the time for the
opening of the Campaign coming on, Monsieur de Rambouillet went away for
Flanders; but Preci, being sick of a Malignant Fever, was left behind at D
pin^s, where he lodged. A month or five weeks after, about six a clock in the
morning, something ^^ung back the Curtains of Monsieur ^reci^s Bed a^l of a
sudden, and he turning himself to see who it was, sees M^nsieur de Rambouillet
stand at the Bed side booted and in Buff; he would have took him about the Neck
to embrace him, but the Marquis de Rambouillet retiring two steps, told him,
those Care^^es were now improper, that he came to him, to discharge his promise
made at such a time; that he had been killed the day before in such and such an
Action, and that there was nothing more certain, than those things which had
been told them of the other world, therefore he should think of living after
another manner than he us^d to do; that he would be kill^d also in the first
engagement he met with, and therefore he had no time to lose. I need not say
how much this discou^se surpised the Marquis de Preci; nevertheless he could
not believe what he heard, but jumpt out of Bed to embrace his friend,
believing he had done this only to amuse him, but he embraced nothing but the
air; and Rambouillet seeing he would not believe him, showed him the place
where he was shot, which was in the reins, and looked as if it were all bloody,
and then he vanished. Preci, who was not much disturbed before, was now
perfectly confounded and frighted, and throwing himself down again upon the
Bed, he cried out at such a rate, as put all the house in an uproar: I got up
among the rest, and running up into his Chamber with Dupin, to see what the
matter was; when he told us the story, we thought it was only the violence of
his Fever (which still was upon him) which made him lightheaded, and so pray^d
him to lie down again, telling him, that this was nothing but fancy. He was
very angry to see we took him to be dilirious; and to convince us, told us all
the particulars as I have related them. However, he might say what he would, we
were of the same opinion, and so continued till the Post came in from Flanders,
which bringing an account that the Marquis was really killed, we began to look
upon one another, and to think there must be something in it, especially
comparing it with the particulars he had told us. The News of this passage
being spread about the Town, folks took it for a made story; but others,
desirous to know the truth of it, came to the house to enquire: I believe I had
a hundred Notes sent to me about it, and as many Visiters; for my acquaintance
knowing I lodged in the house, thought to have a more particular account of it
from me: But for all I could say, they could hardly be persuaded to believe it,
and the truth of it all seemed to depend upon what the Apparition had told
Preci should befall him, that he should be killed in the first action he was
engaged in; and so people had their eyes upon that, as the effectual proof of
the story* and as a convincing argument that what we hear from the Pulpit of
those things, is not all Priestcraft, as our Modern Atheists would have us
believe; which the event soon confirmed it. The Civil War being begun, he would
needs go to the Battle of St. Antoine, tho his Father and his Mother begged of
him as it were on their knees not to go, being afraid of the Prophecy the
Spectre had left of him; but he would go, and was killed, to the great regret
of all his Relations, who had much more hopes of his advancing their Family
than he who was to succeed him, who had married a Wife of a mean Birth and no
Fortune, and one that had none of the best Characters besides. But it is the
fate of good Families sometimes to have dishonor reflected on them by some of
the unworthy members, and he is not the first that has played the Fool; tho that
does not excuse him.

But to return to my new Landlord: His Wife making her complaints to me of his
gaming, I made bold, one time when he was trimming me to tell him of it; but
instead of giving heed to what I said, tho I thought I knew enough of the world
to be able to advise him, he told me he got as much by it as he lost; that he
played at nothing but Tennis, which was a game he understood as well as any
body; that he did not drink, so he might very well allow himself this
diversion. I told him this sort of talk was well enough for a man of ten
thousand Livres a year Estate, but for him who had a Family to maintain, and
nothing to live upon but his Trade, 'twas a very ill course of life; that if he
did not lose his money, yet he always lost his time which was not a thing of
small consequence to a man in his circumstances, to whom diligence in his
business was more proper, and without which he could never expect to make any
thing of it; that what I spoke to him was in good will, and for his benefit,
since the wor^^ would be his own, if he did not make his advantage of it. Thus
I left it to him; but he continuing his old trade, his Wife came to me one day
in a sad condition, begging me to have compa^^i^n on her; that her Husband was
at play at an house hard by, where he was squandring away his Money; and if I
would be so kind to go to him, and persuade him to leave off, I should save him
losing a great deal of Money. I did not care to go to such places, especially
since I was too old for those sort of diversions, I had loved them well enough
formerly, but I was part it now. However, the Tennis Court, being as it were
next door to us, I went thither as if I had come in by accident; where I saw a
man who played so ill, that tho I had not handled a Racket in twenty year, I
durst have given him odds and played with him. I did then what his Wife desired
me, and he not daring to contradict me, I brought him home along with me. The
next morning he came to wait on me at my Levee, and when I told him that I
wondered how he could have the confidence to commend his play, when, by what I
saw of it, I would lay him a Wager, as old as I was, if I would give my self
the trouble, I would beat him. He told me he would give me fifteen if I durst
venture to play with him; and having a great mind to let him see what a Coxcomb
he was, I took him at his word, and went away immediately in my Gown as I was;
but as I told him, I would not play for a small Sum, so I made him car^y all
the Money he had in the House with him. We played at ten Pistoles every eight
games; and I so far mastered him, that I never let him get but when I pleas^d,
yet he would still hold me at fifteen; but I told him no, I was able enough to
deal with him, and if he would play upon the square I Would hold him; he was glad
at the offer, and staking down 20 Pistoles, he ^^st them as easily as he had
done the others. He was surpised to find himself in for thirty Pistoles so
quickly; but having still some left, he asked me if I would play for the rest, I
told him with all my heart, and I would give him fifteen; he fancied by this I
had no mind to go away with his Money, and being mighty glad to have to do with
one that was so generous, he cut several Capers for joy, at which he was more
dexterous than at Tennis; but his joy lasted but a short while, for I minded my
play so that I might not fateigue my self, and having beat him again, I broke
him of threescore Pistoles, and left him in the greatest confusion imaginable.

He prayed me to say nothing to his Wife, and I promised him, but with a design
not to perform it, for I had a mind she should have the pleasure of scolding at
him for losing his Money. In short, I told her as soon as ever I came home, how
I had found out a secret that would reclaim her Husband, that I was deceiv^d if
ever he played any more as long as he lived, after the accident that had
befallen him to day; that I had perfectly broke him, for I had won threescore
Louis d^ Ors of him, and so I told her the whole story, but withal I added,
that I did not design to make use of the advantage I had got, but had done it
to let him see, that he was but a Novice at play, and to beat him off of it;
that I would give her the Pistoles, but she should not speak a word to him of
it, till I gave her leave; she thankt me, as indeed I deserved; and yet the
disorder the first part of my story put her in, could not be stopped, till she
saw the effect of my words by the restitution of the Money, but then she begun
to laugh, and told me, that she would see him reduced to the greatest
necessities, before she would let him have a farthing of it again; that she
would see what course he would take to maintain his Children, of which he had a
great many, now he had thrown away his Money; and she kept her word so
punctually with him, that the Family was without any Victuals for a day or two,
for he was so well known, that no body would lend him a Farthing; seeing him in
such a strait as this, I took occasion one day, to ^e^d him a second lecture
upon the old subject, and the misery he was reduced to made him a little more
tractable than he was before, but the issue was but a dull compliment to me,
and in which I had most need of schooling; for upon the whole he desired me to
lend him ten Pistoles, and I like a Fool could not refuse him, having but just
before won sixty of him, unless I would have told him, that I had given them
all to his Wife, which I was not willing to do; a little while after he came
for ten more, and I being in already, and besides being sensible it was for the
subsistence of his Family, let him have it again, for I thought, that having
given his Wife all the Money before, I should have it again at any time, when I
thought fit to acquaint him with what I had done. In short, he got forty Louis
d' Ors of me at four several times, and all I had to show for it was a Note
under his hand. In the mean time, he promised me every day to be wiser for the
future; and indeed he did take up a little, whether 'twas that having occasion
of me made him dissemble, because he would not disoblige me, or that the loss
he had met with had still some effect upon him; but his Wife found such a
change in him, that she thankt me for it every day with a great many
acknowledgments of her obligation to me. At last, I told her of the Money I had
let him have, letting her know how it was for the necessity of their Family, to
which she made me no answer, but that I was too kind to him.

It Is no such strange thing in Paris for a man not to know the persons that
lodge in the same house with him; under my Chamber lodged a man that made a
figure good enough, but lived so extravagantly, that tho he had something of an
Estate, yet he seldom had a penny in his pocket: This fellow hearing my Valet
de Chamber talking how I had won above two hundred Pistoles at Tric-trac, which
was true enough, resolved to set upon me and rob me; and having communicated
his design to his Valet, who had lived with him a great while, he agreed to do
it for him, and immediately laid his measures for the execution.

My man and he being Companions, he took his time when I was gone out, feigning
to be in a passion about something to come up to the Window, and break a square
of the Glass as near the opening of the Casement as he could; he made as if he
had done this by accident, and only told my man he would paste a piece of paper
over it to keep out the wind, and accordingly pulls out a piece of paper, and
goes to work on it himself; he did this that he might open my Window on the
outside as often as he pleased, for there was nothing but Sashes, without
either Shutters or Bars; having thus made way for his intended mischief, the
next day he makes a bargain with my man to go to the Tavern to drink, and
seeming to be very kind to him he treated him, and kept him there from 3 a
clock in the afternoon till ten at night. I generally staid out pretty late a
nights, but happened to come home that night sooner than I used to do, and
wonder^d my man was not to be found. I inquired if they had seen him lately;
but they told me he went out presently after me: I had a mind to go to bed, so
I called a Boy I kept to undress me, and being just going into bed, my man came
home; I asked him where he had been, and why he staid out so late? he asked my
pardon, and told me, that an acquaintance of his had come to invite him to
Supper, and not thinking I would come home sooner than I used to do, he had
staid there, but that he would take care not to let it be so any more, I said
little to him; for I ever was an ill Master to a Servant, nor ever struck one
in my life; but I went into bed, and fell asleep immediately, and so did my
man, who slept so soundly, that I had much ado to wake him, as I Am going to
tell you. About midnight the fellow that had broke my Window, taking this
opportunity, gets up to the side of my Chamber, for there was a Window out of
the Staircase, that was not above 4 or 5 foot distant from mine; he had
provided a board which he laid cross, and getting out upon it, pull^d off the
Paper, and putting in but two fingers, easily opened the Casement, and so slipped
himself into my Chamber, and immediately stepped to the Door to let in 2 or 3
such Rogues as himself, who he had ready for the purpose; as it happened my
man, who lay upon a Palate Bed not above 3 steps from mine had barred the door,
so that pulling to get the door open, with unbarring it, he made such a noise
as waked me: I thought, the House being full of Lodgers, some or other of them
having found the Key on the outside, had opened the Door to bid me good night;
so I called and asked, Who is there? but no body answering, I called my Valet,
who was dead asleep and snoring, and I had a hard task to wake him. In the mean
time, the noise I made had frighted those without, as well as him that was got
in; as for him, he knew every corner of the Chamber so well, that he slipped
softly back in the dark, and hid himself in the Chimney, and the rest run away
over the tops of the Houses; his Master had posted himself half a score steps
out of his door, to be ready as there should be occasion; but finding his
project had failed, retreated into his Chamber, very much disturbed for fear of
his man, who was got into my Chamber. As Soon as I had waked my man, I bid him
go to the door, and see who it was, for I was so far from apprehending the
danger I was in, that I still thought it was some of my friends; my man being
got up, opened the door, and telling me there was no body there, went back
again to bed, and I went to sleep again; as for him, when I had thus waked him,
it pleased God he could not go to sleep again, so that when the fellow, who had
hid himself in the Chamber, attempted to get out again he heard him, and being
frighted, gets under the Bed, and cried out to me to have a care of my self,
for there were Thieves in the room. This indeed made me afraid, remembering what
had happened before I went to sleep, and taking hold of my Sword, which I
always had at hand, I asked him what it was? By this time my man was got to the
Window, and finding it open, spied the board that was laid cross, by which the
fellow had got in: He threw it down into the Court, lest any more Rogues should
get in there, and come behind him, and then told me what he had done, and that
for certain the Thieves came in that way, and he was sure there was some body
in the Chamber still; for which reason he desired me to defend the Door, and he
would guard the Window. I leave the Reader to guess what condition the fellow
was in all this while, who was in the Chamber; he had made his retreat ^^ the
Chimney again as softly as 'twas possible, but that was of no use to him but
only to hide him a little: I bid my man cry Thieves, and he, being at the
Window, presently gave the alarm to the whole House: The Rogue, perceiving that
he must of necessity be taken, came out of the Chimney, resolving to be killed
rather than to be brought to the light; but as we made passes with our Swords
every way at random, my man happened to give him a wound in the Thigh; and
thinking he had light upon some body, he called to me to have a care of my self
for he had wounded some body he believed. The Thief not at all terrified,
sought more than before to throw himself upon his enemy, and received another
thrust in the body, which however did not hinder him from closing in with my
man, with whom by this time he began to be warmly engaged; I was too near them
not to know how it was with them, but durst not in the dark make use of my
Sword, not knowing which was which, so that all I could do was to encourage my
man, telling him the people of the house were coming, and we should have help
immediately: Indeed I heard them up, and the noise they heard in my Chamber
made them make the more haste; however I thought it very long, and my Valet had
a great deal of difficulty to master that wretch, who fought with the utmost
fury of a man in despair; but at last he eased my mind, by telling me he was
sure now he could not escape him, for he had got him fast by the Throat; and
indeed he needed not have told me so, for I could hear him draw his breath as
if he were almost throttled, which was what he was in a fair way to be in
reality; in the interim, the Barber and his Wife came up with a Light, and
knocked at the door, and being very well satisfied it was they, I let them in,
and then going to see who it was my man had got hold of, I was surpised to see
it was one of the house, and so was the Barber and his Wife: but above all, my
Valet was the most concerned, who but just before came from the Tavern with
him: Wherefore not valuing the letting me know what he had concealed from me
before, O you Dog! says he, was it to rob my Master then that you carried me to
the Tavern to night, and did all you could to make me drunk; you thought, I
warrant you, I should sleep so soundly, I should not be in a condition to help
him. These words made me plainly see what I had escap^d, especially when I was
informed also that 'twas he broke the Square of Glass in the Window, and that
it was a premeditated design: I had certainly run my Sword immediately through
him, if I had been less amazed; but my astonishment struck me senceless,
therefore I only turned to the Barber and his Wife, and asked them if they could
have believed it? they shook their heads at it; and examining the fellow, I
heard him two or three times over say very softly to himself, Ah! Dogs, one
half hour sooner and it had been done. I asked him what he meant, but he would
not explain himself; and all I could gather from it, was, that he had appointed
his Comrades to come sooner than they did, they I mean, who had made their
escape over the Tiles, where we could see their footsteps in a Guttur, by which
they got away; all this while the fellows blood run about the Chamber, as if
one had kill^d an Ox; and being afraid he should die in our hands before he was
examined, I bid them send for the Commissair; they told me, if I would have it
so, they would do it; but they prayed me to consider, and take heed, I did not
bring my self into an affair which might cost me a great deal of Money; that I
was neither wounded nor robbed, and that if I should hang that wretch it would
do me no good: I did not dislike the advice, and the rather, because the fellow
had no Weapons about him; and, to justify himself, said he came only to have
satisfaction of my man, with whom he had quarreled at the Tavern. Indeed, he
being a cunning fellow, had some words with him before they went out; to the
end, if he was taken, he might have that for his excuse: but the Glass, which
had been broke at least three days before that, showed the contrary: and if I
had carried him before the Judges, he must have sung another Song. In short, I
suffered my self to be prevailed on by the entreaties of the Barber and his
Wife, who begged hard for him; which they were sorry for afterward, having
been cheated by his Master, who they discovered to be in the plot with him.

The business being over in this manner, I began to think of leaving a house,
where I had been in so much danger; and having sent my things to a place where
I had formerly lodged in the Fauxbourg Saint Germain, I asked the Barber to make
up accounts with me; he told me the account was very easy to make up, but that
to give me any Money, truly he had none, and therefore desired me to have
patience; I told him smiling, that I would, but that I would not stay long; and
that I had given his Wife the sixty Pistoles I had won of him; and if we had
not told him of it, 'twas only that he might suffer a little for his folly, and
make him out of love with play: He gave me a thousand thanks, and I dare swear
with all his heart, and immediately called his Wife to pay me what he owed me;
but truly she told him, she had nothing to do with his debt, for she was by
herself, and all the things in the house belonged to her.

I saw she was in earnest, which indeed surpised me, considering how I had
obliged her, wherefore I bid her think on it a little, for if she us^d me so, I
should give her such a character, that no body would come near her House; that
she knew in her own Conscience the Money I had given her was in compassion to
her family, and to supply her necessities; and that I had particularly told her
so, that she might not plead Ignorance: that this was far enough from
acknowledging my kindness, which I did not say to reproach her, but she (...)
not deserve to be us^d so generously as I had used her; and I asked no more than
the forty Pistoles I had lent him; however, say what I could I was not able to
persuade her to pay me; and her Husband, tho he was in a violent passion, could
do no more good with her than I; I must do him this justice, that I believe he
did his best, for he not only stormed at her, but banged her too; and if I had
not parted them I believe it might have come to a set battle, for she did not
take it patiently at all, but gave him as good as he brought, and any body but
I, would have given his Money for such a sight: her Husband finding I would not
let him handle her as he had begun to do, told me, he was mightily troubled,
that his Wife was so base to him, and so unreasonable to me, but that I should
lose nothing by him, and that as fast as Money came in he would bring it me. I
was forced to be contented with his fair words, and went my way, but to promise
and perform is always two things, and so 'twas with him, for he not only took
no care to perform, but would always avoid me if he saw me in the street. I
sent to him two or three times to put him in mind, that an honest man is always
as good as his word; but whether 'twas that he took no care about it, or that
he was really not able, he always put the Messenger off with such silly
excuses, that I saw 'twas to no purpose to expect any thing of him; but the
pleasantest jest was, that his Wife one day, when one of my Servants had been
there for Money, bid him get out of doors, or she would claw his eyes out, that
'twas long of his Master that no body came to their house, and that since that
damned business of his, every body shunned her house, as if they should have
their throats cut there.

I did not stay long at my new Lodgings at St. Germains, a friend of mine that
was newly married in the Country, having sent for me, I went down to see him,
where I found a great deal of good company. The Gentleman I went to see was not
only very rich, but was one that designed to continue so too; to which end he
had taken up a certain resolution, which is since grown very much in fashion
among persons of quality, which was to treat very generously all his friends,
but never to entertain either Servants or Horses; and that his friends might
not pretend a necessity to intrude upon him, and break his new custom for lack
of a place of entertainment, he built a good large Inn about 200 yards from his
House, which besides the profit of of it, rid him of the company of those
poorer sort of Gentry which are numerous; for they having not always Money in
their Pockets to defray the charge of their Equipage, chose rather to live as
they could themselves, than to pay for their good cheer at so dear a rate; they
grumbled, and made some reflections, but they were not worth taking notice of;
for Gentlemen of any quality liked the way very well, and found it much for
their convenience. I am sure I made no scruple of it, but sent my Horses and my
Servants thither, as other people did, and went away to see my friend. I never
was better pleased in any company in my life, for we had all manner of
diversions, and which was better than all of it, I won four hundred Pistoles at
play. They say Fortune never sides with old age, and some folks will believe no
other; and yet as old as I was, I had no reason to say^ so, for if I had kept
account of the loss and gain I had made at play, I am sure I should find I had
cleared a thousand Pistoles. And now, that I might put my self out of a
condition to lose it back again, I resolved to put it out to the Bankers,
knowing that then there was no danger; to which purpose, a Gentleman going to
Paris, I desired him to take me with him in the Coach, resolving to come back
again as soon as I had done my business, and therefore took but only a Boy with
me, leaving my Lacquay at the Inn with my Valet de Chamber, giving them order
however to meet me at a certain time and place, but they having a design to rob
me, as-it afterward appear^d, marched quite away, so that when I came to the
place appointed, there was neither Horse nor Men, nor no news to be had of
them: I could not imagine what should hinder them, and never dreamt of what
really was the cause. I fancied some accident had happened to my Equipage, or
that some hunting match having been made in the Country, my friend might make
bold with my Horses, having not enough in his Stable for all the company.

Thus I thought with my self, tho with very little reason, for I might have
considered, if my friend had had never so much occasion, he would not have
taken my Horses, because I was to come back on them; and then as to any
accident befalling my Equipage, they would be sure to have sent me word, and
send me other Horses. However, as we are often most ingenious in deceiving our
selves, I pleas^d my self with these imaginations till the next morning, and
from thence to night again; but hearing nothing then, I began to mistrust some
mischief was in it. Indeed I must say it was my own fault, for I had known
enough by that Valet of mine to give me cause of mistrust, if I had but taken
notice of it. He was one of the impudentest Rogues alive; and as I understood
since I caught him, used to take his time, and go upon the Pad, and strip
People upon the Road. Indeed, the behaving himself so well in that accident,
which, as I have told you, befell me in my Chamber, made me the more confident
in him, but I never thought he had been such a Rascal. Having waited thus till
my patience was quite worn out, I dispatched away a Messenger to the Inn where I
left them, and he brought me word, they had been gone five days before to meet
me, as they said. This was enough to put me out of my pain, I presently then
concluded what was befallen me, and away I went back again to Paris, to advise
what was best to be done in the case. In the interim, my Lacquay having a
Brother who lived in the Fauxboug St. Antoine, I went to him, and desired him
to give me notice if his Brother came to see him, and that I would pardon him
upon his discovering the other, for I knew it was no contrivance of his, but
that he was wheedled and drawn in by the the other, who I knew was a Rascal; that
I was very sorry he should be so led aside, having a great kindness for the
young man; I bid him tell him all this, and withal that 'twas the only way to
save his life, to throw himself upon my kindness, that he had liv^d five or six
years with me, and he knew I was a man of my word; and that if he did not, he
would be in a great deal of danger.

I told him indeed nothing but the truth, for I never had a prettier Servant,
nor one that was more faithful, and I think the other Rogue bewitched him, or he
would never have played this extravagant prank. In a fit of sickness which he
had, not above five or six months before, I had taken as much care of him, as
if he had been my own Child; and fancying if he was brought to recollect all my
kindness showed to him, it might work upon him, and the more too, when he
should know how easy I was to forgive him, if he had been led to commit this
folly only out of excess of Wine. This cours^^ I took, and the success was
answerable, tho I dare say, it would not have succeeded so well to a great many
others; for certainly there are few people use a Servant so gently as I, but
every body does in that as suits with their humor; and the method most used is
not always the best, as appeared in the confidence the fellow put in my
promise; for coming to see his Brother, and hearing what I had said, and that
I, would forgive him, he comes immediately to find me out, and asking my
pardon, told me, he was drawn into the fact by ill counsel, and he knew no way
to convince me of it better, than by coming to throw himself at my feet, as he
now did; that he knew his life was in my hand, and he acknowledged he had
deserved death, but hoped, since I had given my word to his Brother, I would
not be severe upon him. I told him he should fear nothing, provided he would do
but what I desired him; that I believed my Valet de Chamber had debauched him,
and if he expected any favor from me, he must find him for me, for unless I
could take him, he had as good do nothing. Then I asked him where he was, and
what they had done with my Horses? He told me, that for the most security they
had taken their opportunity to come to Town the evening before me, and so
knowing I was out of the way, had carried them to Market publicly, and sold
one to a Horse-Courser in La Rue St. Martin, a little below St. Nicholas in the
Fields, and the the other two were in la Cimitiere St. Jean, in an Inn where they
had taken up their Lodging.

This account pleased me so well, that I confirmed my promise to pardon him,
but I ordered him to go back again to his Comrade, that he might not suspect
any thing, being resolved to take him the next morning in his Bed; to which
purpose I ordered him to come to me by break of day, to a certain place which I
named to him; if there was no danger of being seen in the House; so I got ready
the Provosts men over night, and posting them in the mid way, I would needs go
my self to see him taken. Being come to the place, my Footman came exactly as I
appointed him, but told me, that he did not lodge at home that night, and
desired me to take great care lest I should be seen, for if the least notice
should be taken of my design, I should never catch him. I approved what he said
well enough, and therefore sending the Provosts men away to a Tavern, I rested
upon his care in the matter. I fancied the fellow would certainly come in two
or three hours, but the Rogue having got the Money in his Pocket that he made
of my Horse, was resolved to live well while it lasted; and noon being past
without any discovery, I began to suspect my Footman had been false to me, and
had given him notice; and when he came to me, as he did every now and then, for
fear I should be impatient, I told him plainly what I apprehended of him, and
withal, that if he had trickt me, I should find it out first or last, and then
I should show him no mercy; but he assured me of his fidelity with such
protestations, as fully satisfied me, and I resolved to wait till night; but
'twas all one, the fellow liked his sport too well where he was, and there he
stayed all the next day, all which time I was very uneasy with waiting. Then it
was that I concluded the Lacquay had without doubt deluded me, and the very
thought of it put me in such a passion, that I was just upon the point of
arresting him: but he told me, he was content I should hang him if I found it
so; that he began to think himself, the fellow was fled, but at the same time
he could not imagine, how he should get any notice of our design. Indeed, I was
so far satisfied, that I went to the Inn my self to seize upon my Horses, and
as I was ordering them some Corn before I took them away, they came running in
to me to ask me if my Valet had not such a sort of a Belt on, for they saw a
fellow coming a good way off that looked like him, as I had described him; I
sent my Lacquay, who was ordering the Horses, to see if it was the right, and
ordered him to go and accost him, that they might not be mistaken, for that was
the sign agreed on. In short, being satisfied it was he, he comes up to him,
and tells him, how if he had come a little sooner, he had met with some
Customers for the Horses. While he kept him thus in suspense, the Provosts men
seized upon him, and he struggling to clear himself from them, the noise
brought me out, thinking they might want help; before he saw me he laid about
him with all his might, but when I appeared he made no more resistance; so true
it is, that the Face of the man one has really injured, dispirits the mind, and
the reproach of a man's conscience takes away all his resolution; therefore
putting himself in a posture of submission, Ah* Master, Master, said he, I beg
your pardon heartily. I forgot to tell you, that with my Horses he had carry^d
away all my Clothes, and my Linen, all which he either sold or pawned. Having
secured my man, I had him to a Magistrate of my acquaintance, where, when I had
brought him, I told him, that it was now in my power to prosecute, and perhaps
to hang him; but however, that I would be so kind to spare him, provided he
would restore the things he had stole from me; that he should tell me where my
things were, and carry the man his Money again who had bought my Horse, that
when I should oblige him to restore the Horse, he should not oblige me to
prosecute him. This was without question a very kind proposal on my part, but
the poor fellow unhappily had met with a scurvy accident: In the little time he
had been gone, he had gotten into a gang of sharping Pick Pocket Rogues, who
had drawn him into play, and had cheated him of all his Money; so that instead
of refunding the Money for the Horse, he had not one Farthing in his Pocket; he
durst not tell me how it was, and begun to make excuses; but seeing how it was,
and giving no credit to his pretenses, I let him go to Prison, In the mean
time, that I might get my Horse, without being obliged to prosecute the fellow,
I went to the man who had bought him, and pretending to buy a Horse, among the
rest he showed me my own. I made no great difficulty of agreeing to his price,
knowing already what he cost him, I bid him profit enough, and we soon agreed,
so I desired him to send him to my Lodging, and come and fetch his Money; but
when he come to be paid, I told him how it was, that it was my own Horse, and
that he had been stolen from me, and that he who was a Jocky by Trade, ought to
know a little better who he bought Horses of. The Man was very much supriz'd,
for he was an honest Man, and knew nothing of the matter. However, he told me I
was a stranger to him, and he desired to be satisfied that what I alleged was
true. I told him 'twas easy enough for me to satisfy him of that, for the
fellow that stole him from me, and sold him to him, was now actually in the
Chastelet, and if he pleased, I would go along with him, and show him the Man,
who was my Valet de Chamber; he agreed, and we went directly to the Prison,
where he had the satisfaction of seeing that it was even so, and that he could
have no more claim to the Horse. However, after this, some Attorney having
advised him to present a Petition, in which he made his complaint, that I came
and took the Horse away by main force, he got leave to seize him again, and
sent an Officer at a time, when he knew I was not at home: he that came desired
to see him out, under pretense of carrying him to a place where goods are
attacht, but indeed to give the Horse Merchant possession, after which I had no
remedy but against the poor Stable-keeper, whose Wife it may be would have paid
me with a sham of her being a F^me Sole, as the Barbers Wife had done; but my
Landlord would not suffer that, and chose rather to be the Sequestre, and to
take it into his keeping. This Proceeding of the Jockeys brought me into a Suit
at Law, which I would have willingly declined, and going to Council about it,
they advised me to demand a Warrant. I went then to the new Chatellet in the
Fauxbourg St. Germain, where I lodged, and Monsieur Girardin being Chief in
that Court of Judicature, I needed not go twice to him to be heard, for he is a
person always very obliging to persons of any quality. My Cause was so clear,
that he granted what I asked at first word; however I was forc^d to give
security till the Process should be made out against my Valet, who was
prosecuted by the Solicitor General at the Kings Suit, for one of my friends,
who understood those things better than I, had taken care to order that for me,
telling me the King was better able to bear the Charges than I was; by which he
saved me three or four hundred Franks in my pocket, and I was very much obliged
to him for it.

In the next place, I brought a Citizen of my Acquaintance to be Security, and
having entered into a Recognizance to the Registry, I thoug^t all was over; but
it proved a strange Suit for me. My Valet de Chamber before he came to me,
belonged to the Marquis de l' Aigle, a Gentleman of Normandy, who ma^^y'd the
Marquis de Rarcy's Daughter, a Gentleman of but a mean quality, but being
allied to a Family of good Repute, and of great personal Merit, he lived all
his days in a great deal of Credit; I was acquainted with him, and his
Daughter, who had seen me several times at his House* and knew I was the
fellows Master, who had formerly lived with her Husband, came to me to speak in
his behalf, and prayed me to be favorable to him, and she would so order it,
that I should lose nothing by it, she would give me her word for it; I told her
I desired no more, and before she came to me, I had offered so much to the
Prisoner; that I was sorry she had no Request of greater consequence to make to
me, that I might have the honor to oblige her; that I was an old friend of her
Fathers, and so much hers also, that she might depend upon any thing which lay
in my power to be done: however, I told her, I apprehended there might be some
difficulty now in the thing; that the Man being put into the hand of Justice,
she could not take him out when she would, and we ought to take advice of those
who understood those things, what was to be done; she approved of what I said,
and taking me into her Coach, we went to the Register, who was a friend of
hers. He told us indeed, 'twould be a hard matter to bring the fellow off now;
that if I had not committed him it might have been done, but however he would
try; he said the thing depended on the Deposition of the Witnesses who should
come in against him, and they having not been examined yet, it lay in my power
to direct them what they should say.

Madam de l' Aigle was mighty glad of this expedient, telling me, that now it
was all in my power, and repeating her promises as she had before, that I
should lose nothing, I parted from her, upon condition she should come
forthwith and perform them; but two or three days after she came to me again,
and told me, she was extremely troubled, that she had promised me what she
could not perform; that what she had said, was upon Proposals made to her by
the Prisoner; and that now when it was come to the point, he could not find
Money but just to satisfy the Horse Merchant, and that if I was not inclined
to show him some pity, he was a dead man. This pretty fetch surpised me
extremely, especially coming from such a Woman as she, who ought to have had
all her measures ready-before hand, and besides I thought indeed, she had
intended to have done so much for the poor fellow herself, and so I told her;
upon which she replied, she had done more for him than I thought of, that 'twas
she helped him to the Money to pay the Horse Courser, and that she could not do
any more, and begged me to bear a little of the loss to save a poor Wretch from
the Gallows. I protest, I was very unwilling to do any thing, after her having
broke the promises she made me at first, but considering that I should not be
much the better for hanging a poor fellow, I told her I would do any thing for
her sake, and since she would have it so, it was granted. So we parted, after
her giving me a great many thanks for my generosity, and the like. Things being
issued thus far, I thought I might venture to go a small Journey into the
Country, which I had deferred for some time upon this account. I have told you
before, that I had my Arm put out of joint, going to see Father d' Aviano; and
that falling into the hands of an ignorant Surgeon, I was forced to go to the
Hangman of Ruremond, who had given me ease; but whether it was that he had not
perfectly cured it, or that such accidents as those generally leave pains and
aches which are felt when one comes to be old, I have had since that, every now
and then, a pain there, especially against the change of weather. I had
consulted with the whole College of Physicians, and with those of Saint Come,
and they all advised me to go to Barbottans, near the Pyrennees, a place named
from the Baths that are there, which are different from all Baths, for they are
not of clear water, but very muddy; yet of such virtue, that strange cures are
done by them, upon such as are troubled with weaknesses in the Nerves and
Joints, or the remains of any dislocated part, as mine was. Before I went away
I took my leave of Madam de l' Aigle, and told her, my going out of Town should
not hinder the doing what she desired, that I would leave order for the
Witnesses to come to her for directions before they were examined; and since
the Register had told us, that all depended upon their depositions, she might
be satisfied the thing would be done.

Upon this I went my way, resting upon her promise, not dreaming in the least,
that a Woman of her quality, and who I had dealt so fairly with, could be so
base as to break her word a second time; but she had married a Norman, the
Maxim of whose Country it is, that a Man ought not to be a Slave to his Word.
She had no sooner seen me clear of Paris, but she discovered, that she had also
married the Manners and Customs of the Normans; for after she had ordered every
thing as she desired it, with the Witnesses, according to the orders I had
left, instead of performing her agreement with me, she goes to the Prisoner,
and tells him she would bring him off well enough, that he should now stand in
his own justification, and tell the Court, that instead of robbing his Master,
he had done nothing but what he ordered him; that having not Money to send him
to defray the charges of my Horses and Servants, I had left him a verbal order
to sell my Equipage and Clothes if I wanted; and if he had sold one Horse at
Paris, it was only to pay for the keeping of the other two, having not found me
at Paris as I appointed. If I had been upon the spot, it had been an easy
matter for me to have confuted all these sham stories; but my Solicitor, and
the Witnesses too, having had orders from me to speak nothing of him but what
she directed, I could not blame them if they endeavored to clear him; and she,
instead of bearing me harmless, left me in the lurch, to be cast in the Cost
and Damages of the Trial, and to pay to the Horse Merchant the sum of four
hundred and fifty Livres, which was the price of the Horse, with interest from
the time I bought him. 'Twas certainly as strange a thing as ever befell a man,
in so plain a case as mine was, and a great cause of triumph to a Rascal who
ought to have been hanged; and yet all this was nothing to what followed. The
Horse Courser having gotten judgment against me, and I not being to be found,
he gave notice to the Man who was security for me, to prepare to pay the Money
in my room; and this demand coming upon him, just at a time when he had a great
man Bills to pay, and at the same time one came to be protested for
non-payment, the Man was quite ruined, having neither Money nor Friends to
stand by him at such a pinch. I confess, I cannot speak of this part of the
story without being moved at Madam de l' Aigle, whose base dealing was the
occasion of all this confusion; and had it been a Man, I should not have failed
to have revenged it, when I first heard of it, one way or t^other. But to go on
with the story of this Rascal, which was, I think, the worst that ever happened
to me in my life, tho I have had a pretty many troublesome businesses too.
Within two days after notice given to my Security, as before, they seized his
Goods, and he having no body to redeem them, they carried them off, and exposed
them to sale in the place appointed for Sale of Goods seized in Execution. I
leave it to any body to judge, what a fraction this made in the affairs of a
Shopkeeper; all the remedy he had, was to summon me to stop the Proceedings,
and for default of appearing, to protest against me for all the Costs, Damages
and Interests.

I was upon the road when all this happened, going to the Bath, and not
imagining any such thing could befall me, I had not left directions to write to
me before I came to my Journeys end, so that tho a great many Letters were sent
to places where it was probable I might come, yet having no notice of any such
thing, I met with none of them. ^Twas very strange, I thought, that among such
a multitude of people, that use to call themselves my Friends, and humble
Servants, there was not one to be found would lay down fifty Pistoles for me in
my absence, to have stopped all this Villainy, and above all, to save the poor Man
that was bound for me, who was but in a very ill case; for such people who live
by Trade, are never without a number of Creditors, and these came all upon him,
hearing what had happened, and believing he was pa^^ remedy, seeing he could
not stop such a small thing as that, so falling in with the Horse Courser they
prosecuted the Sale of the Goods, and the poor Man lost all that ever he had in
one days time, and spoiled his Credit too, which was worse than all the rest.
However, as I was really innocent of all that had happened, all my anger was
bent against Madam de l ^Aigle. I will not pretend to describe what a passion I
was in at her, for indeed it is impossible; you must think I thought of nothing
but revenge, and I was very deeply touched to do what I did. I had not
undertaken such a long Journey, as I said before, but in hopes of recovering my
health; now I was upon the spot, and ought to expect the success, yet upon the
news of this I made back again immediately, resolving to do my utmost rather
than to be thus fooled. I have given you an account already how I had been
informed, that my Valet de Chamber had used to rob on the Highway. I now made
enquiry to find out what proof I could have of it, and finding I had too plain
proof to fail bringing him to the Gallows, I had nothing to do then but to find
him out, which as it happened was not so difficult as I thought it was: having
given order to one of my Boys to put off his Livery, and go to the Marquis de
l' Aigle's, upon pretense of getting a place, he presently learnt, that the
fellow was got into his service again; this Norman not mattering wh^ were his
Servants, so he could but get them for little or no Wages. In short, he took
him on that very score, for he was a Man that never mist his advantage, if he
had an opportunity.

Having learnt where this Rogue had hous^d himself, I got a Decree against him,
and resolved not only to take him, but to take him out of his new Masters
House, that the affront might be the greater to him; to which end I got every
thing ready, and taking no less than a Gang of thirty Provosts Men, that I
might be provided in case of resistance, we went to the House betimes in the
morning, and the Door being opened, we took the Rogue out of his Bed. The
Marquis de l' Aigle hearing a great noise, got up to see what was the matter,
and so did his Lady, and hufft at the Officers, theatning them for daring to
enter the House of a person of their quality: but such sort of people don't use
to trouble their heads about folks quality, nor (...) neither, and the she had
like to have found to her cost, one or two of them having offered the butt end
of their pieces at her, and perhaps had done her a mischief, but that the
Magistrate who was at the head of them prevented it; but at the same time the
Commissary (for there is not much difference between one of those Magistrates,
and one of their M^n, as to their civility) told her, that if she had been hurt
she had no more than she deserv^d, that she should know her self a little
better than to threaten those that came to execute the Law; and if she had any
thing to say, she might make her complaint where she ought. This was a great
mortification to a Woman of her spirit, but she was forced to bear it, and also
something more, which I had instructed one of the Officers to say to her, if
she appeared, that made her presently know it was I had brought this about, and
thereupon she and her Husband began to contrive, which way to defeat me again,
(for they were both as excellent at tricking as Lawyers) thinking it was all on
the old business. It Is true, as to the crime, a Man could not be tried twice
for the same fact, nor would further Evidence signify any thing, and this was
what they built upon, and so making it a point of honor, away they went in
their Coach to seach the Jaylors Book of the Prisoners Names, but they were
sent back again with a vengeance, when they understood there was more in it
than they had heard of; and as great as they were they durst not meddle with
it, nor so much as appear, when they heard of a Highway Robbery in the case;
they did what they could, indeed, by their friends, and underhand, but all was
to no purpose, nor much to their credit neither, for all would not do to save a
Rogue, whose crime was as plain as the Sun at noon day; but he was condemn^d to
be broken upon the Wheel, and all they could do for him was, that instead of
being broken alive, as he deserved, (for he had been an Assassinate too) he had
the favor to be strangled first.

This however, did not hinder me from endeavoring to make up the matter with
the Man that had been bound for me, and had suffered so deeply for it. He had
protested, as before, against me, for the Charges, Damages, and Interests, and
it was but just indeed that I should give him something, and that considerable
too: indeed tho I was not the cause of his Creditors coming upon him, yet I was
of the confusion of his affairs, which brought them upon him, and in
consideration of this I offered him 2000 Franks, and after that 1000 Crowns,
but he flew out at me as if I had done him some great injury, telling me six
times as much would not make him satisfaction; that on my account his Goods had
been sold for half the value, and that I was obliged to bear the loss, which
was at least 4000 Crowns; that besides, I had been the occasion of his shutting
up his Shop, where he got his Livelihood, and I ought to give him a
consideration for that; that it would require a great deal of time before he
could set up again, and get into credit as he was before, and the like, and
these he called his Damages and Interests; and he hoped I would not see his
Wife and Children turned into the street a begging for his good will in doing
me a kindness. But indeed he would have sent me a begging if I should have done
as he desired; so I was forced to go to Law with him, his Demands being so
extravagant, which ended so much to my advantage, that instead of 1000 Crowns,
which I had offered him, I was awarded to pay him just half the sum; but
because I would be generous, he having really suffer^d on my account, I gave
him the thousand Crowns I had tendered him before.

And thus ended this affair, which I should still call unfortunate, had it not
very much conducd to show me the vanity of this world; and indeed considering,
that nothing is to be met with here but Affliction, Crosses and Discontent, I
began to resolve to do, what I had a long time intended: And so at last I am
retired into a Religious House, where burdened with years, and deprest with
the infirmities that inseparably attend old Age, I am waiting with patience the
good hour, when it shall please Almighty God to take me to himself.

FINIS.

