THE COUNTER-PLOT; Or the Close CONSPIRACY OF Atheism and Schism OPENED, and,
so, DEFEATED; AND THE DOCTRINE and DUTY of Evangelical Obedience, or Christian
Loyalty thereby ASSERTED.

By a Real member of this most Envied, as, most Admired, because, best Reformed
Protestant CHVRCH of ENGLAND.

-- dabit Deus his quoque finem. LONDON, Printed for HENRY BROM, at the Gun in
St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXX.

The Author to the Reader.
Error shall quit that Station, and begin to stir and bussle for Room, when we
see it crowds to the Chair, and gapes at the Cushion, we do then also most
plainly see, the most natural and necessary Tendencies of such Emotions, as
ever we sensibly felt the effects and results of them. We know as well the
certain mischief and danger of such attempted encroachments, as we can remember
the destruction that was brought upon us by their consequent Usurpations; and
we have no more power not to fear what we have felt, than we have reason not to
expect what we so fear, or to deny the notices of sense, or the Testimonies of
experience, or to hope for any better conclusion, because a worse cannot be
drawn, from the same Premises.

When we see the life of our Father in the same circumstances of danger, by
which that of our Grandfather was first invaded, and then in common and certain
course, we know how destroyed; can we see this without a tongue? or could any
thing excuse us if we did not, but that we could not cry? No certainly, in such
a case (and I pray God the case be not now such) my fear to speak would be as
sinful, as it would be religious to forbear. My guilt would be as deep as my
silence; and the not proclaiming, next to that of procuring the danger; the not
discovering the net and breaking it too if I can, next to the making and
spreading it if I could: or if I only take the Net away, and make it (and lay
it) up, I am so far from doing my duty, that I may be justly suspected to do
against it, and by a specious abstinence from the appearance, to go a nearer
and surer way to the evil it self, and under the pretense of preventing a
present (indeed a prevented or uncertain) danger, to assure to my self a better
prepared occasion, for a less defeasable and more certain ruin.

There is a late Author neither unknown nor unlearned, yet more known by a
notable Dedication of his last fruits, (as he says, but tells us not how he
has disposed of his first) who has taken great pains, and the greater in
respect of his age and other infirmities, to dress up and prepare a ground of
Union, etc. wherein truly (how well soever he can mean) he does nothing but
actum agere in either sense, he does that over and over which had been better
never done at all; for until he first supersedes the necessity of putting such
a case as we have supposed, till he has numbed our sense and experience too of
the force of such a supposal; till he has parted us from that which is as near
as the skin, as concerning as the life, and never to be put off but with our
unclothing of flesh and blood; till he shows us we never had, and that we have
not now any such cause of fear, I say 'till he has first done all this, his
labors will be so far lost, as they cannot appear other or better, than
Left Hand Strewings of green Rushes or dry Sand, and to no better use or
purpose than what the Nurse makes of the one, or the Soldier of the other, to
serve only for Coverings of Filthiness or Design. I wish with all my heart (as
knowing his abilities) he had rather employed his Right hand and Arm too with a
Broom and Lever, to have swept out the Nauseating filth, and removed those
scandalous blocks, and that Rock of Schism, those Blunderbusses and Grenades
which we know to be in the ground, or under the strewings, as well as we know
how they came, and who laid them there, or are acquainted with those
love-killing, and peace-breaking (as he calls them) or (as we could better have
understood both) those King-killing Principles (and Practices too,) which both
six and show them to be there still; and therefore as ( monstrum hoc magis
horret quod sub humana specie, etc.) a Monster is the more frightful the liker
it is a man, we do the more suspect and dread, and shun this ground, because
notwithstanding what we know is upon it, yet it seems reasonably clean and
smooth, and so fitter for the laying a net or scrap, and alluring the silly
bird. However therefore, as considering the Authors personal endowments
together with his mixed Practices, I dare not affirm that he intended ill; so
reflecting the same endowments upon his great and notable experiences, I know
not how to assert (how much soever I am willing to hope) that he meant well.

But I must remember my self accountable to the Reader why I mentioned my Lord
Bacon's opinion, and every man's duty. It was done purposely to give him notice,
that I intended the following Sheets a small but good earnest of this duty, and
a well-meant or wished rather than done or performed Essay of that Opinion.
Wherefore I pray they might be so accepted only as offered thee by thy
fellow-subject to God and the King, whom

GOD SAVE.
THE Counter-Plot.
IT has been well observed by Divines from the Language of the Holy Penmen,
that there is scarce any one word amongst them of a more Emphatical and
Comprehensive sense, than that of Sin, which is therefore Interpreted to us
more especially by those signal names of Folly or imprudence, of Anomy or
disobedience, of Enmity or spightfulness; and we are fully instructed by these
notorious Synonyma's, both in the general and common nature of Sin, and in the
specific and appropriate qualities of sinners, and degrees of sinning. We are
plainly taught, as that besides this, there is properly no other evil in the
world, (which the sense and sound of our English word [Evil] so like in both to
that in the Hebrew for sin does also evidence) so likewise that there can be no
such fool in Nature or Morality, (...)
no such Rebel in Policy, no such Adversary in Religion, as is the deliberate
and designing Sinner: Who if he be not always actually (which the Providence of
God, by the mutual oppositions and clashings of men's lusts, may and does often
hinder,) yet is he always habitually all these, the sillyest and maddest, the
most disorderly and ungovernable, the most malicious and implacable of all
creatures.

Now the reason of this is, because as the folly of such a Sinner lies not so
much in the want, as in refusing the directions of Wisdom: so neither is his
Disobedience so much in his Nature as in his Will, from whence his Enmity is
(Judicially) in both.

Is not he the rashest, and so the greatest fool in the world, that will Bite
the stone, or Curse the dice, or Damn the bowls, or Quarrel the government, or
whatever hits not his humor; and all this merely because his Passion or
Interest will not suffer him to judge of the true nature of things? might we
not beg such a Fool as this, and successfully too in the judgment of Solomon,
who throughout his Proverbs makes him Impleadable as an Idiot? and yet were not
he a worse than this greatest fool, that should take any of this Wise man's
Materials to lay a Foundation for Dominion in Grace; an error that we have seen
built up into an Heresy, and become a Fort-Royal to the Prince of this world;
(whose best Subjects are the worst of Rebels, and his chiefest rule in the
hearts of the Disobedient,) and as tempting a gilded bait for the sense of
man, as any we have yet found laid, in the Romish or Turkish, or Malmsbury
Alcorans? I wonder not therefore when I read in the Sacred Oracles, the foulest
Sins whether of Practice or Opinion branded with the name of folly.

Yet we all know, (if we consider what we know) that the Devil is no fool, it
were a repugnancy to his nature, that he should be, and a contradiction to our
own experience to think him so, who is so far from that, as he can make us wise
to do evil. And yet the sinner must be a fool with a witness that learns of him
because he is an Angel whilst he knows him to be a Devil, (...).
and not more a Tempter in the one, than an Accuser of us in the other, and so
the true Father of those modern doctrines, that directly prompt and advise me
to the greatest evil of Sin, if it does but suit with my Inclination, and the
design of Empire, under the Title of the Catholic Cause. As great as the fall
was, the Devil saved his head, he fell so (as we say) upon his feet, that he
stands ever since the Archest Heretic and Rebel too; in that contrary to his
created nature he would not be subject to his God, and so continues the Enemy
to man now, because he was that Rebel to God then. And those children are
likest this father who would sin as unnaturally as he did, and most likely to
do most mischief for the same reason.

The Commands of God in both Tables have so like an aspect, and lay such an
equal obligation upon all men, that the violation of One makes us guilty of
all, according to that known rule, Bonum ex causa integra, malum est ex
quolibet defectu. Not that there is not a difference in Sins, as there shall be
in punishments (for we read of a greater and lesser damnation) but that a
wilful habitual transgression in any one point does necessarily evince the
insincerity of our obedience to all the rest: in which respect it had certainly
been better for us never to have known the Law, than thus to transgress it.

The weak and wilful Sinners may be equally mischievous to others, yet not
alike guilty in themselves; for though both agree in the want of circumspection
and due consideration, yet they always differ in the measure of knowledge,
whereby it usually comes to pass, that the subtle Serpentine malice of the one,
abuses the inadvertency of the other, who is therefore so much the less, as his
seducer is more guilty, whilst the one means not the least evil in that same
thing wherein the other intends the greatest.

Suppose them both Dissenters from any Public Establishment, whilst the one
measuring himself too much by himself, and so mistaking Persuasion for
Conscience, by not squaring it so exactly as he should by the rule of
Conscience, the Word of God, suspends his Obedience upon the account of his
Christian Liberty: The other taking the advantage of his brothers weakness,
improves it into the mischief of his own wilfulness, and however he knows
distinctly, that to despise dominions, or speak evil of dignities, can by no
means be any part of that Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, but that
to submit to every Ordinance of man, is a prime and integral part of that
liberty; Though he knows experimentally, that Rebellious or Seditious practices
never sail to bring an universal hatred and reproach upon the very Profession
of such Practitioners; though he knows confessedly that our Roman Catholic
enemies (for in that sense if any, the contradiction of that double adjunct is
reconcilable) do so continually, as if they did naturally and necessarily
endeavor, to Destroy by dividing, to Divide by amusing and discontenting the
English Nation, and by this, once already most approved and effectual artifice,
to make Protestants themselves, by the strength and violence of their clamours
against Prelacy, to hale in Popery; and that therefore there seems no other
possible way to prevent its in road, than by our aptest methods of Uniting, to
defeat theirs of Dividing, for that otherwise it would be in vain for us to
confute their errors in Doctrine and Worship, whilst we our selves commit
greater in policy and prudence, by not submitting our single judgments to the
joint determinations of our Governors: though he knows the Pharisees had their
name from their separation, (...)
and this had its rise from their opinion of their own holiness, or that they
were better than other men: though he knows this Protestant English Church, was
and is the envy and hate of Rome, (and therefore as he knows also, not Popishly
affected, as he (therefore also) suggesteth against his knowledge) and the
Ornament and bulwark of all the rest, and stands as the Royal-Fort or Rampire
between them and ruin: though he knows what King James said, at least he must
believe what others have so lately testified, Dr. Oat^ Nar. Is. Causa ^p. 116.
that there are ((...)) Jesuits among us Protestants (however I cannot deny
but it might be hard of digestion, for the strongest stomach and sharpest
appetite of Faith, how any Protestant should eo animo, become Jesuit or
Priest, pro hac vice, to betray both or either, and then eodem animo to return
Protestant; or how (upon such supposal) though he stands (rectus in curia) good
Evidence, as we say, for the King, or in foro humano, how he should stand so
(where yet we are sure he must stand or fall) in foro Poli, or however he might
be rewardable with those things (Riches and Honor) which are (dignum patella
operculum) absolutely the good things of this world, yet he should be so much
as decently, (I say not justly) dignified or remunerated with those (non enim
haec filii tunica) which so notoriously respect another; or how it could acquit
such a person, because nothing can be said against the man, whilst as little
can be pleaded for the Christian.) Though he remembers at what Consults we were
told there was to be, as that since there was a Rebellion in Scotland; so
though he remembers the Firing of London, and the flagitious Achievements, and
most nefandous perpetrations of that Parliament, (did I say? I recall that word
to vindicate this August and salutary name from that sink and draught of the
body politic, and so better notified to us by its like in the body natural,
and therefore, I say, not of that Parliament, but of that same (what do you
call it? The Rump.
) Coccygis mariscae:) though he knows, I say, and remembers all these things,
yet he stifles the consideration of any, claps them all down as it were under
deck and holds the truth in unrighteousness, and by gradual insinuations and
artificial compliances, as in sympathy with the tenderness imposes upon the
credulity of his brother, and at last (which is the greatest shame and affront
to humane understanding) menages him into a very tool or engine to serve his
turn, and makes him thus unwittingly as unwillingly over reached, a property to
his lust, and Tows him from the shore of his first, and perhaps innocent
Scrupling, into the Main sea of Covenants and Associations, and then as wind or
tide pleases, into the bottomless gulf and endless guilt and miseries of
Sedition and Rebellion, Schism and Sacrilege, Anarchy and Confusion.

All which he most compendiously effects, by working (as was said) upon his
brothers mistaken Confidence, till he has hammered it into the Presumption, and
then cast it under the obligation of regular Conscience, though he knows, as
soon as he thinks on it, it can be nothing less, as being confessedly influenc't
by such considerations as are neither competible to the nature, nor consistent
with the rule of right Conscience.

Can that be an obligation of Conscience which may be cancelled by fear or
danger? which makes it my duty to oppose that Government to which I am
Naturally a Subject, and not that to which I am but accidentally or
occasionally so? which makes me Fear my Master abroad, but not Honor my Father
at home? or which makes me deny my Prince and Sovereign that very power which I
challenge to my self, that he may not order matters concerning Religion or the
Worship of God, at least as well, in his larger, as I may and do, and claim to
do in my lesser Family? How can it be Conscience, or indeed common Justice,
that binds me to one and not to both? Surely if the plea of danger be so good
against the practice, as to evacuate the obligation of any necessary duty, we
may as Logically well, plead other, or lesser inconveniences in bar of all.
And if customary or affected Swearing shall be as graceful as native unaffected
Eloquence, if it be fashionable to be profane, or a credit to riot in the day
time (as God knows by the neighborhood of some viler practices these are, I am
sure, the less, as I fear too little infamous) I need not stop from going up to
preferment upon such steps as these; or if it should be a scandal to be
Religious, I may consult my advantage or reputation by being otherwise, as well
as I may think my self bound to innovate Religion established here in England
where I fear no punishment, but loosed again in Italy or Turkey, where I cannot
hope for impunity.

From these hudled premises, as we see by the stirring of the hangings that
some body must be behind them, we are reasonably excited to the necessary use
of so much prudence and caution as may warrant us to suspect and distinguish
our seeming friends, and to detect and expose if we can our most secret
enemies; and that this our suspicion may not it self be suspected, or the
detection so much as questioned, we will now draw back the curtain, and present
our Caballists as in Consult, and in the very manner, that every man may see
for himself, that (as Naturallists report of the Basilisk, that it kills or
dies by seeing or being seen) the Conspiracy thus opened may defeat the
Conspirators, and the very enmity and danger of the Plot, be turned into a
security against it self.

But to clear the prospect that we may take the fuller view of the Club of
Monsters, and see besides the deformity of their single subsistences, the
greater ugliness of their social Confederate beings, their monstrous politic
Coitions and Copulations, that when loose and singlest they are Foxes then, and
mischievously cunning, but when in tayl'd and combined, they are Dragons too,
and fatally pernicious, (the parting of the heads where the bodies are conjoined
compleats the Monster, and however they ran cross in their premises, yet they
never fail (at the old Rendevouz) to meet in, and draw the firebrand into the
knot of the same conclusion) I say that we may discern all this, we shall
endeavor (as Grammarians deal with their Anomala's, which though fewer in
number, give them greater trouble than the whole multitude of regular words) to
bring them into particular Classes, and under a more distinct and peculiar
consideration.

The Enemies of Truth (and by close and necessary consequence, of Peace and
Order) we know to be very many, but the chiefest of them like all other
irregular things fall under one of the extremes, Excess or Defect, and are so
reducible to Two sorts, the Credulous Enthusiast, and the Resolved Infidel; he
that lightly, weakly, easily believes any thing, and he that seriously,
wilfully, obstinately believes nothing; he that in Practice believes every
Spirit, and he that in Print believes none.

We have lived to see such Meteors in Religion, Wandering stars, or glaring
Comets. We have seen multitudes of men and women like empty clouds exhaled by
the heat of strange fire of intemperate Zeal from the turgid misty Fogs of
Pride and Ignorance, combined in Faction, and then hurried to and again by some
violent eruptions, issuing as it were out of the Central cavern of a Flatulent
Hypochondriack body, Rumpers.
and whirled about with perpetual Agitations upon the Vertiginous Axis of that
Globe; so that whoever he were that first gave us notice of a Public
constituted Officer as properly belonging to such as these, Crack-fart.
though in the Name he affixeth to this Officer, he seems not to have been
modest above the rate or besides the complexion of his Sect, yet in the thing
or office it self, he now appears manifestly pertinent and much beyond the
intention of his wit.

We have seen Clouds bagg'd with poison, fixed and ponderous and spouting
downright upon the bare-heads of the disciples of Leviathan, That Monster with
a witness, so destitute of right reason as to be void of Religion too. An
Animal indeed, but so far from Religiosum (which must needs include Rationale)
that he has only a title (and it is pity he ever had that) to bipes and implume.
With him it cannot only rain in drops of problem or Opinion, but it must pour
too in spouts of the most daring and impudent affirmations.

He tells us roundly there is (and for this very good reason when it once
appears) because there can be no incorporeal substance, for that it would be a
contradiction and so impossible there should be any, as if (...) were nothing
akin to Entity, Leviathan p. 214. (...).
to which we all know it is nearer allied than to matter or corporeity; but as
we also know, they are some kind of deformities in our bodies, which make us
most ashamed of being stripped, so it must be some such cause that makes us so
afraid of a separate existence.

If I should say (as I need not) the disciple of the Leviathan is mad, the
Reader knows what I mean, and I speak intelligibly, or if I say he is besides
himself, I am allowed to speak pertinently, and he, could he come to himself
again, would grant me to speak as truly, that he was not himself, and that he
was, when he was not so; how then can he confess the lesser Separation which is
in Lunacy, whilst he cannot so much as conceive that greater Divorce which is
in Ecstacy, whenas it is manifestly repugnant, to know any thing in kind, which
we cannot also apprehend in degree, to know any thing to be actually at a
lesser, which we cannot imagine to be possibly at a greater distance.

So then it is not any contradiction in the terms of incorporeal substance, that
can be the cause why there is none such. What then? why truly this or nothing,
and this less and worse than nothing, because if there were such a substance,
then there must be a Spirit, (and that would put the hook into this Leviathan,
for) then there will be a God, whereas otherwise, (the Monster were free to
take his pleasure and pass time, for) there could be no God, and so no
Religion, and then no good or evil but as forced and made such by our selves.
For that supposing God is or may be, he must be infinite and indivisible, and
therefore also must be incorporeal, because otherwise he must have parts, and
so be divisible, and so finite.

Diogenes Laertius, reports of Pyrrho, In vita ejus.
that he denied any difference between good and evil ((...) but only (...))
other than what Positive law or custom had made; and I think Seneca tells as
much of Epicurus. Besides these two I am not presently aware of any third, till
Mr. Hobbs will needs be teaching ( ubi nulla respublica, p. 72. de Cive c. 12.
etc.
nullum injustum, etc. nihil absolute bonum aut malum, etc. Natura est ad
mandatum relativa, and omnis actio sua natura adiaphora, etc.) that there is
nothing good or evil in it self, or naturally just or unjust, but all so or so
in reference to the Magistrate, being otherwise and in themselves indifferent,
etc. But this Gentleman has forgot, what yet he must needs have learnt from
one of his great Masters ((...)) that there is an Eternal Law every way
inclining us to that which is just and equal; Aristot. de mundo, c. 16.
and that as the Being of God must needs be infinite (as we have shown already)
so must it by the like necessity of his Nature be infinitely holy, because the
perfections of God are not Adjuncts but Essential to his Nature, wherefore he
cannot act but agreeably to them, he cannot approve or disapprove any thing but
suitably to these, so that to imagine one thing to be as congruous to him as
another, good as evil, must needs be Blasphemy and contradiction to boot, and
make God both to be and cease to be what he is; because, that God abhors evil,
is rather from the Sanctity of his Nature and Essence, than from the
determination of his Will, and therefore whatever is properly and essentially
good, must rather be so by its resultanco from this Holy Being, than by any
positive Sanction or precept of Law; and therefore also, it is in respect of its
Sanctity rather than Sovereignty, that the Will of God becomes the measure of
good and evil, which is not such because his Will is Arbitrary, but because it
must be agreeable to his Holiness.

Though we are not born with congenit Notions of good and evil, yet we are born
with such Faculties, as duly exercised between acts and objects will make us
necessarily apprehensive of congruity or incongruity in this or that, whilst
yet this apprehension ows it self not only to the moral, but to the connate and
essential rectitude of those Faculties, which show us, by consideration such a
manifest proportion between some, and disproportion between other acts and
their objects, that without repugnancy and doing violence to those powers, we
cannot judge otherwise of them, than that they are right or wrong, equal or
unequal, from that proportion or disproportion, we thus perceive in them, and
have thereby as certain rational Principles of Moral practice, as any we can
have of Science, and know as well that we are to give every one their due, as
that two and two make four, and therefore two taken from four leave two still;
and those certain determinations which the Soul makes in this rational exercise
of comparing acts and objects, are those very issues which Philosophers call
common Notions, (...).
i. e. the Rudimental innate, or ingrafted Principles of Rational nature,
whereby we find our Intellectual Faculties to be as much affected with moral
evil as our Sensatories are by the most incongruous or ungrateful Objects.

Rhet. l. 1. c. 14. Romans 12.17.
Thus we find some things, (as Aristotle observes) right or wrong by nature, or
(in St. Paul's language) (...), just or honest in the sight or esteem of all
men, q. d. no rational creature can possibly esteem them other than such,
because the faculties wherewith he judges are created by God, who has made
man with such Faculties as make him necessarily judge so and so, and therefore
this judgment of his must be Gods too, and so must be a Law from God given to
man, which, man as rational, cannot depart from, it being the Law written in
his heart, or wrought into the essential frame or composition of his reasonable
nature.

What imaginable account can there be given how the Gentiles, who had not the
Law, could be a Law unto themselves, or do by nature the things contained in
the Law, etc. if there were not a Law in and to that nature abstracted from and
antecedent to all other Sanctions and Precepts whatsoever? They had not the Law
written or revealed to them, what Law had they then but this in their nature
which was born with them? They could have nothing but that Natural light, or
the dictates of right reason, by whose conduct notwithstanding they did those
things, which were also commanded in the Law of God, or as the Poet words it --
sponte sua sine lege fidem rectumque colebant.

This was that Lex scripta in cordibus hominum, quam ne ipsa delet iniquitas,
as St. Aust. speaks, that Law written in men's hearts which sin it self could
not blot out. This was that Law to which a penalty was annexed in case of
Transgression, to be taken upon the verdict or testimony of Conscience, i. e.
that reflection the Soul makes, Conscience what?
and the judgment which by that reflection it passes upon it self according to
Law, without which Law, as there could be no guilt, so without guilt there
could be no Conscience. Therefore if the Law makes not, distinctively, good or
evil, we can neither do well or ill, or have either comfort or regret in the
sense of one or other.

Conscience can never act without respect to a Law, and to the Maker and Judge
of that Law. Its reflection would be an useless and idle thing, if all other
things were indifferent, because the sense of guilt would be incompossible with
the praeclusion of Law; and therefore every man's experience as it feels the
one, so it proves the other.

Witness the perplexity that haunts the Soul of the most cautious and closest
sinner; Witness the lashes that the Monarch feels from the hand of Conscience,
though freed from the touch of any other, patiturque suos men's conscia manes.
Witness the fears and horrors of dying men, who are then most afraid of this
when they are nighest out of the reach of all other punishment.

But besides the testimony of Conscience we have the universal consent of
Mankind, there having never yet been any Nation so barbarous, that believed
every thing naturally alike, or that had not some Principles and Practices too
of Morality. And indeed were it not thus, were not good and evil made such by
nature distinctly, and antecedently to humane Laws, these Laws could signify
nothing; for were there no antecedent obligation to obey those Laws, Rebellion
would presently be as lawful as obedience is necessary. Vain names of Oaths of
Allegiance, or Promises of Fidelity, if it be not first a duty in it self to
keep ones word. I wonder who would then be a Subject, that could hope to better
himself by being otherwise.

Besides, were it not thus, how should humane Laws bind, as we see they do, in
those places where Revelation has not yet been, if the Obligation of Conscience
to Obedience in such places be not resolved into the Law of Nature enjoining
Obedience as due to Governors. Yea, precluding the Law of Nature, (I speak now
with becoming reverence) how could God himself bind us to obedience by any
Positive Law? for unless it be first my duty to believe God because of his
Veracity, I am, after the clearest Revelation, left at my liberty to believe
whether the Law be from God or no; and if I should be so kind as to believe
him, yet if nothing be good or bad in it self, then to despise the authority of
God cannot be evil, and therefore I may choose, as an indifferent thing, whether
I will obey him or not. Yea, why may not men if they please, invert the very
frame of all moral things, and turn Vice into the place of Virtue?

So absurd as we have seen, is this false and dangerous Hypothesis; so directly
thwart to the first Principles of Reason, and to the common sense of mankind,
so plainly effective and introductive of all the evil and misery that can be
done or suffered in the world; that if it could be reasonably believed, that
the Author (a man I doubt not eminently Learned) should not be aware of what so
follows thereupon; it might also be charitably hoped, that he would have denied
himself, upon the first sight of such mischievous consequents, were it not that
we see many other, and some not unlearned, men, who while they abhor the
Principles in terms, yet embrace those inferences, which must needs come from
them in course.

Tell the Schismatic there is no God -- oh! Abominable that it is abominable,
and the Atheist shall feel his arm; but tell him -- Kings are not (or obedience
due to them is not) Gods, -- and you may shake his hand. Suum euique tribuaere.
Tell him there is a natural or original Law of justice, etc. (out upon these
Atheists) he will say so too; tell him right reason is that instrument by which we
discern this Law to be given to our natures; still he is content; but tell him
that therefore Obedience is both rational and natural -- and he begins to start
(what do you mean Sir?) Tell him that therefore it is due to man as Governor,
i. e. as the Ordinance of God -- you amaze him, (what? though he be a Papist)
[where, by the way, we cannot but acknowledge this same though, Modern Papist,
or Infidel.
etc. to be so much the more considerable as it carries with it an Emphasis of
the loudest and harshest sound, Papist, in our English Reformed Translation
being in a manner the same reading with Infidel, or Mohammedan; but whilst I
think it the severest, I may also suspect it for the unjustest too, as being a
supposition however made at first, God knows, not I; yet since that time
manifestly as enviously urged and improved by some to such a popular height,
that it now seems more than probable they had rather suppose it, though false,
than truly not suppose it, and that they would not quit their advantage, or
exchange the pleasure of fixing the guilt and odium, for my comfort in or my
hope of, the improbability of that imputation. Their busy floating upon the
top or surface of common fame, will not let them sink to the depth and bottom
of such humble reflections, as supposing what they suppose, would certainly help
us more, and become us better; for whether is more Evangelical think we, the
language of Ashdod or the speech of Canaan? that roaring clamor -- he is
Popishly affected, and shall never Reign, etc. or that still remorseful voice
-- righteous art thou O Lord, and thy judgments are true, and as we sinned by
thrusting out, as we did, a Protestant King, and Nursing Father, so should
thou punish us, by bringing in the contrary, yet still righteous art thou, O
Lord, etc. But besides that, we may be jealous of this jealousy, as seeing no
more sufficient ground, than we think they have good cause for it, and that we
are not to suspect rashly without such ground, or tumultuously and irreverently
with it; methinks we have this good reason against it, that it got no higher
than a Supposition there, where we doubt not it would, if it could, have been
lifted up to an Assertion; and I know some very near the subject of this
praedicate, that know no more of it than I do, and I now thank God, that thus I
do not know it, and thence may infer my duty not to believe it; my duty I say,
and the rather, because I believe verily such a Supposition can hardly be well
made of any man or Christian, without making another of the ignorance or
unsincerity of the same man, nay, it seems next to a contradiction or moral
impossibility that it should be otherwise, for how can his knowledge admit such
doctrines as are pointblank opposite to the sense and reason of Mankind? or how
can that be Faith which embraces such as are inconsistent with the nature and
rule of Faith? Besides, that the Supposition, as first made, would fitly serve
(which can never be thought of without horror) to justify the Effusion, or
stain the Innocence, or elicit an Ominous Ebullition, of the yet fresh and
purest blood of that ROYAL MARTYR.] (But to return from this unacceptable
digression,) Tell him therefore the lawful King must be obeyed, whatever he is
otherwise, and you confound him (away! he cry's, I see you are a disguised
Protestant.)

Tell another Schismatic -- God has given us a Natural Law, distinctive of
good and evil, and such Faculties, as duly exercised, are sufficient to
discern it, etc. he readily agrees to the words, only he must reserve a sense
for his own practice. He is ashamed not to say as you do, whilst resolved never
to do what you say; and the next news you hear of him, he has transverst those
very Faculties, he is either Transubstantiating Bodies, or Gelding Oaths, or
Deposing Kings, or (a sad pretty thing) Absolving Subjects from the Law of
their own Natures, or, to say all in a word, he is Covenanting against his own
Vows, and so breaking the bonds, blasting the dignities, and consuming the
persons of all men and things, Sacred or Civil, by the breath of that
Fiery-flying-Serpent.

Good God! what Babels of Opinion and practice does the pride and ignorance of
men erect against Thee! every man is building like mad, and every man will be a
master and lay his own foundation. One makes it of the smallest sifted
particles of Atomical dust, which he found by that same good luck, that they
had to meet there. Another lays it only with dry loose stones thrown together
by the withered and tremulous hands of some decrepit and uncertain Traditions,
doting enough to be thought old, and old enough to be found rotten. Another
works it with hewn and squared and polished stone, but joynted with the most
untemper'd mortar of perverse reasoning, and vain Philosophy (a deal of good
stuff spoiled and worse than lost.) Another that says, he sees the vanity of
these foundations, yet builds such an irregular Superstructure, as is only fit
to stand upon these, and worthy for whose sake these foundations themselves
should be razed and overthrown. Such mad work is there made by the lusts and
interests of men, with the most holy Religion and laws of God!

But it is well for us, that in these confusions, and against these extremes, we
are sufficiently directed and forewarned -- not to believe every spirit; Joh.
4.1.
therefore we are sure there are Spirits, and that some are true, and many are
false, and all must be tried; and that they may be tried, we have given us from
God the Spirit, Cor. 12.^.10.
the gift of discerning Spirits, or distinguishing those glisterings among us,
which are not gold, which pretend the Commission or Inspiration of God, for the
impulse or impetus of lust; which make good and evil, true and false, to be but
empty names, or words that signify nothing, or nothing but the Will of the
Supreme Magistrate, and so necessarily infer this contradiction, that the same
things in several places are true and false, and our Lord Christ must have been
a false Prophet, ^^viathan, 250.
because condemned by the Roman Governor, and Mahomet a true Prophet because
allowed by the chief Sultan; which teach us that the Sovereign power (beyond
whatever has yet been arrogated by any Pope) may null the old, Ibid.
and make a new Canon of Scripture, or none at all.

Now for these, and a thousand more the like Spirits of error we may if we will
find a plain rule of trial in the word of truth; where we see the genuine
characteristick properties of the Spirit of God.

It is a Spirit of Truth; therefore, a good life with an erroneous judgment in
Essential and Fundamental points necessary for Faith or Practice, as in the
great doctrine of Obedience to Governors, which runs through the whole body of
the Gospel, if he allows or abets resistance in any case; or if he ascribes
infallibility to frail and sinful man; "or priviledgeth a Priest to do a
greater Miracle than ever Christ did, by Transubstantiating a piece of bread to
make and eat his Savior; he must needs be led by a Spirit of error.

It is a Spirit of Holiness; therefore, to be Orthodox and yet immoral, to have
good opinions with bad practices, to think right, and to do wrong; is to be led
by the unclean spirit.

It is a Spirit of Unity; therefore, to Reform by Schism, to dissolve the Bond
of Peace, wherein the Unity of the Spirit is to be preserved, to separate or
Absolve Subjects from their Obedience, to teach them to swear, to be forsworn,
or to lie for Gods sake, is to be led by the Spirit of division, whose name is
Legion.

It is a Spirit of meekness and order; therefore, to despise dominions, to
excommunicate Kings, or subvert Kingdoms, is to be led by the Spirit Abaddon or
Apollyon, (...), Rev. 9.11.
the Spirit of mischief or destruction always working in the children of
disobedience.

It is a Spirit of Sincerity, working in us simplicity and singleness of heart;
therefore to lift up the Left hand to God, and the Right against his
Vicegerent; to hate Idols, and love Sacrilege; to declaim against the Prelacy
of Conforming, and Vote up the Papacy of Nonconforming Ministers, is to be
acted by the Spirit of Hypocrisy, or the father of Lies.

It is a Spirit of Knowledge or understanding; therefore, to level the Canon of
Scripture with the Apocrypha, to make the Word of God truckle under Tradition;
to advance Jesus against Christ; or to propagate Religion by the Sword, is to
be led by the Spirit of Slumber, the God of this world that blinds the minds
of men.

Thus let us Try the Spirits, and by the fruits of Love, Joy, Peace, Gal.
5.22.19.
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness. etc. or of hatred, variance, wrath,
strife, seditions, heresies, etc. we shall easily know them.

Yet because Vice borders close upon Virtue, and is never without some color
or probability to set it off, we are not to make our last judgment upon the
Acts, till we be first acquainted with the habits of men: till we know the
general current of their lives, as well as the particular conduct of their
designs, and the means they use as well as the end they pretend to; and when
this is done, let the Forms of godliness be never so artificially drawn, the
fire of Zeal and the light of Sanctity never so well painted, let the Colors
be never so fine ground, and laid on with never so delicate a Pencil, we shall
see the difference between the Picture and the Life, and though the grapes
should be lively enough to deceive the Birds, the Boy will be dead enough to
betray the cheat.

The first Impostors that ever appeared in the Church of Christ (and such there
did appear even in the most Primitive and purest times) were brave fellows
indeed, such as had not our modern baffled threadbare canting forms, but span
new and fresh-napt signs of godliness and wonders too; such as might have
credited the softest credulity, to take up pity any where. Barchochaebus.
Apollonius. Sim. Magus.
One could vomit flames; (but may not the Preacher of Sedition vye with him?)
Another had the knack of Vbiquity, and could tell at Ephesus, what was done at
Rome (I doubt that is farther than from London to Edinburgh.) Another could fly
(but could not one of our Aerie Enthusiasts with the advantage of his light
(for he must mean levity of judgment) within him, do at least as much? I think
one might advisedly wager on this side whether for tower or stretch.) Yet these
would scarcely be good juglers at this day; it is plain they have been all
outdone both with and without the Metaphor. We have those who from their
Seditious sanguinary Principles, do naturally (sure that is as much as
literally) spit fire and blood together; yet can no more speak with tongues,
than they can vomit flames without a Metaphor, or more honestly pretend to
learning, than they can to flying; or to know what is done by others, than to
consider what they do themselves. They pretend as little to the gift of
obedience, as to that of Tongues or Healing, Kings and Bishops.
and are therefore probably the less pleased with those, who either exact the
one, or exercise the other.

Generally I say they do not so much as pretend to Learning; no, their
provident Father fitting their stocks to their trade, and their wisdom to their
generation, has furnished them with much industry and little wit, so little as
to lay that claim which they have quitted to Learning, to the gift of
Preaching, (to say nothing yet of the gift of Prayer till we see a little
farther, whether they understand what it means) wherein yet every body knows
they exceed in nothing more than noise, though we may not deny, that they
temper that excess with as great a defect of sense. But admitting that they
Preached eminently well (which many think it is plain they do not) I hope the
Heretic Nestorius went beyond them; and though they equaled him, yet if he,
or they, or an Angel from Heaven, should Preach another doctrine than what has
hitherto been delivered, to lead us into Rebellion or Schism, or Sacrilege, we
could give them no better entertainment than that of Anathema Maranatha.

Numa. Eumenes. Mahomet. Ilaricus.
If they pretend to immediate Revelations, for their comfort they are not alone,
we can bring them a Roman, a Greek, a Saracen, a Goth to bear them company. Or
supposing they had a sleight of hand (as in Subscriptions, and some such cases
must be acknowledged) yet Apollonius Tyanaeus could have put them down. If they
plead Prosperity or impunity in Sin as an Argument of Divine Approbation, we
say from the Word of God, that this is one of the wickedest ways of reasoning,
and we add for their instruction or encouragement, it is that very way wherein
the Schismatics of ROME have most delighted. Alas! how patiently did God
permit the disobedience of the first, and the murder of the second Adam? yea
and all the villainies of the world, however most contrary to the Precepts, are
yet executed by the permission of God. If Piety cease to be such, because
prosperous, or permitted, or not hindered by force (inconsistent with a free and
moral Agent) then the great Mogul, or the greater Bishop of Rome, should now be
as great Favorites of Heaven (and so I think they are) as ever our Regicides
or Usurpers were; and he that having robbed the Temple of Delphos, immediately
after escaped a shipwreck, had argued Logically well, in concluding as he did,
from that deliverance, that the gods had approved his Sacrilege.

Do they live strict and Religious lives, yet in Schism and Disobebience to the
Ordinances of God? (for such are humane Laws) we say it is impossible they
should do so, because 'twere a contradiction, and yet that though they did so,
it would not be argumentative, because we have heard from St. Jerome of the
abstinence and Scleragogy of Montanus, that his strictness was his disease,
Hieron. ad Marcel.
and from no better Spirit than his Spleen; and therefore they are not to be
blamed that cannot so readily and roundly Saint a Schismatic, because he is no
drunkard, swearer, sabbath-breaker, or adulterer, for that these though all
damning sins, are yet less intolerable than Envy, Malice, Schism, Sacrilege,
Hypocrisy, and Rebellion, or that most intoxicating sin of Spiritual pride,
which are so properly the Devils sins (as drunkenness and whoredom can never
be) that they are called devilish wherever they are found in men, and are in
St. Peter's judgment, 2 Pet. 2.9, 10.
the most damning.

Do they refuse our Assemblies because they hate them, and do they hate them
because our Worship is either merely Technical and Theatrical as the Atheist
drolls out his bolts, or plainly Idolatrous and Superstitious, as the
Schismatic shoots his arrows? But is it indeed, or can you think it is either
so, or so? Speak out ye sons of Anak or Leviathan, is our Liturgy such a
Pageantry of Worship? a knack or trade invented by Priests for filthy lucres
sake, and by them according to the privilege of Inventers monopoliz'd? This is
Gyant-like, a right faller on, Nephilim.
and faller off from God, he speaks congruously to himself big and high and
terrible; and if there be no God he speaks wisely, he is no fool. For what
business has he to do with that name, or what reason to take it into his mouth
(other than to spit it out in droll) whose being is not in his heart? What Is he
concerned in Liturgick or Eucharisticks that has nothing to pray to or for, no
God to praise or honor with the Sacrifice of his lips? But if there be a God,
then the fool turns back with triumph upon the man, Rephaim.
and the Babe upon the Giant, and the antiphrasis is utterly reverst, and he
languid and feeble, and faint and weak, without the Metonymy; see this
Infant-Gyant who is not now so much as that span long, which before he exceeded
by Six cubits! see this fierce, swift, bold, terrible and mighty Leviathan, an
impotent and fearful Minim! see yet a step lower, this living and roaring Lion,
Job 26.5.
a dead Carrion dog, degraded as low as (...) or inanimate, fallen down to a
dead thing. Yea, a ( Mappeleth, (...), cadaver) dead carcass, for such the
vulgar latin makes this Giant. And now the fool peeps again, not only the rash,
bold, furious, inconsiderate, but the very natural (indeed most unnatural)
fool. The Virgins that had no oil, were manifestly akin to this fool, by their
supine negligence and improvidence, yet not nearer sure than the half blood of
gross and woeful imprudence, not the whole of stark staring madness. Those fools
would have begged or borrowed what they had not; this fool will not so much as
need what he wants. He has, he will have, no Sacrifice for God, which even the
Heathen themselves have always made to be the due and necessary acknowledgment
of a Deity. But let us bray this fool no longer.

Our Liturgy not corrupted by the Missal.
Say Schismatic, what is our Liturgy? Oh! most abominable, filthy, noxious,
childish, confused, tedious, improper, literal, Book-service, etc. a most
blind, lame, yea a dead Sacrifice, etc. Hold a little, is it all this? yet,
methinks, if it be a Sacrifice of Praise to God, it matters not through what
hands it past e're it came to us. What can the Missal, (if it were the Alcoran)
of Rome concern us or defile it? We say of our Liturgy, just as we do of our
Religion, it is not New but Reformed. What ails you now? unless you love Schism
for it self, it should offend you no more than it troubles us that our Faith
and Worship are all of a piece.

No impediment to the Spirit of Prayer. Romans 8.26.
Nor can set and stinted Forms, as such, possibly in any degree quench or hinder
the Spirit of Prayer, for that as this is not tied to or with words, so neither
does it supply any defect in them. It helps our infirmities indeed, but not
with words, but with supplies that cannot be worded, with ((...)) sighs and
groans unutterable. It consists in those fervours of Soul that will put life
into any Form, not in forms of my own making or borrowing, as you lamentably
affirm, and so cheat the people, and (eadem opera) blaspheme the Holy Ghost.

You complain of ease, whilst you tell us a child might perform this Service,
for that is both our advantage and obligation, Not childish because a child can
read it.
Gods Service being not to be weighed by the labor of doing, but by its
relation to him for whom it is done, else we know a Butcher could have killed
and dressed a Lamb better than a Priest under the Law, and now the child that can
read the book is not therefore fit to offer the Sacrifice under the Gospel. He
can read -- Take, eat, etc. but may he therefore Administer, etc.

You could never be so much troubled with our confused Antiphona's, if your
Ears were not as tender as your Consciences, Antiphona's no Confusions
for I pray tell us, is it not a public Sacrifice, a joint Confession ((...))
which (for ought we know yet) must be made by Speech, and therefore we pray God
to open our lips, and you teach the people to shut them: Is this well done, or
is not that better?

Neither could you think it impertinent, if you considered it to be a public
Sacrifice of Praise, The Service not impertinent,
not only for Blessings immediately upon our selves, but upon others, or upon
us by the means or intervention of others. Might not you, may not we partake of
the Grace vouchsafed to the Blessed Virgin, in her Magnificat? or may we not
all with Simeon, in his Song, rejoice at the sight of that Salvation?

So it is much any man should think those Prayers too long, not tedious,
wherein we are begging for Eternity, or quarrel them for justling out
Preaching, which as they do not necessarily, so if they do it accidentally or
by surprise of some occasion, yet then, which do you think may better be
spared, the Prayers which are (a Sacrifice) to God and for his Honor, or the
Sermons which are to us and for our benefit.

But how is it that you call it a dead Sacrifice? what? not a dead Sacrifice.
does it want that life of affection which is necessary? Truly this must be a
fault, lay it where it may; but can the Forms be guilty? can we justly require
that in or of the Sacrifice, which only belongs to them that offer it? must the
Church create the affection, because she composed the Forms? If we come without
our hearts, is not the fault our own? can Repetition deaden Affection? or
cannot our sense of the same wants, or can words shifted and not the same keep
life in it? did the Jews ever complain of their Sacrifice (the Type of ours,)
because there was a Lamb in the Morning, a Lamb in the Evening, a Lamb every
day in the year? Mat. 26.4^ Luke 22.4^
did our Lord think you, want ability, or affection to pray, when he thrice
used the same words?

Nor lame.
How is it defective or lame in its parts, its Confessions, Petitions, or
Thanksgivings? Is not the end and use of it to be a Sacrifice of Praise, rather
than a storehouse for every duty, otherwise than to serve for that Sacrifice?
why do you not consider, that if particulars were named, all could not say
Amen? And when general words are used, all that are acquainted with their own
Souls can reflect upon particulars, and so make a private advantage of the
public service.

Nor blind.
How is it blind, or not edifying? Is it because it edifies us not in Faith or
Knowledge, as a Sermon does, or should? why then it seems it is to be blamed
because it is not a Sermon. But how then shall Sermons escape, because they are
not Prayers, nor a Sacrifice for the praise of God, as this is? And now I hope
well, that if this edifies, it will be enough to supersede the complaint.

Tell us therefore, do not Hymns and Anthems with Music too, edify the Praise
of God, even in Christian worship? disprove it, and continue an enemy, or grant
it, and become a friend to this Holy Service. Never be so bold hereafter as to
dare to say -- there is nothing but (porridge) Prayers, Ps. 69.30.71.20. Romans
15.8.
etc. Or if thou will, remember thou say also -- there is nothing but
Honoring or Praising God. Consider likewise thy obedience, is a Sacrifice of
righteousness, but it is not this Sacrifice of Praise; that is a metaphorical,
but this is a proper Sacrifice. For though that word [Sacrifice] imports
something to be slain or destroyed, yet that is but accidental to its notion,
(...).
and rather distinguishes the kind, than constitutes the nature of it, which
consists in offering something to God in acknowledgment of him, and which is as
properly done now by the fruit of our lips, as of our flocks or our fields
before. Therefore we rob God, if we deny him the honor of this Sacrifice,
which as it is distinct from all other acts of obedience, so is it of a special
intendment, and of a different obligation, though he has also from us the
honor of obedience, because this is only of consequence, as agreeing with the
nature and will of God. Say now again, is our Worship and Service Idolatrous,
or Superstitious?

Oh ye blessful Souls of Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Latimer, etc. are not we
followers of you, or were not you of Christ! Is our Superstition more or less
than yours? Tell us if it were not part of your Triumph, that you enjoyed those
very privileges which the present establishment affords us! It Is true, there
were some differences of judgment even among these: but not more I trow, nor
greater than were between St. Peter and St. Paul, nor of worse consequence
among themselves (however since perverted by Posterity) than theirs were. They
had not all the same mind in all things, but they had all no mind to
separation. They were men, but good men, sincere men, therefore differing and
therefore not divided. They had several opinions of some lesser circumstantial
things, but gave them all up (and at such a time as conscience must needs have
been most awake) to those greater and essential interests of peace and unity.
The most fearful among them did but slacken their steps thoughtfully, none of
them stood still restively, or stubbornly, or stayed till the Government should
come to them by Teleration, rather than they would go to it by Conformity. No,
no, they knew for all the prejudices of Foreign conversation, or domestic
Persecution, either of which might have been apt enough to drive them out of,
or beyond their pace, they knew well how Obedience was better than Sacrifice,
but knew nothing of our modern Gloss, which sacrifices obedience it self to the
Mammons of interest or humor.

How unlike were their peaceable Dissentings to our Seditious dissentions!
Those soft and tender Willows to our hard and sturdy (Ket's) Oaks of
Reformation! quite another thing in their causes and effects, their means and
ends, their extraction and conversation. Their differences were neither
begotten of Pride, nor born of Ignorance, but the lawful issue of godly
jealousy and humble fear; so born in honest wedlock, Christened by the Canon of
Scripture, attested by the Prophets and Apostles, proclaimed and certified to
us, as with Drum and Trumpet, by their Noble Army of Martyrs and
fellow soldiers. They were not menaged by peevish public Remonstrances, or
(the same thing in other words) prohibited Petitions, but by modest inquiries,
by private gentle discussions, by fraternal correptions or admonitions, and at
last sweetly concluded (and indeed necessarily from such Christian premises)
in most Evangelical complyances and condescensions.

There have been, there are, there will be differences in the judgments, till
there be none in the faces of men, Schism.
only let them be without offenses, however without that which has more than
all the rest, and is the Rock of offense, SCHISM. An offense with a witness,
having as much of the Devil for it, as of Christ against it: A difference as
Antichristian as Inhumane, not only of interests but of natures, making one man
a Wolf (in Plundering,) a Serpent (in Trapanning or Implotting,) and a Devil
(in accusing) to another. For my own part as I doubt not there are many, so I
am persuaded that I know some in the present Communion of the Church of
England, so abhorrent from any likeness or appearance of Superstition, that
they are always ready (in voto) to interpose their own lives between it and
their Consciences, who yet choose to incorporate themselves into this Established
body, as the aptest, the clearest, the surest evidence of that abhorrence.

This Clouds of Witnesses past away before our memories, only by the hearing of
the ear, but there is another which our eyes have seen, (though no bigger at
first than a man's hand, Arch-Bp. Laud.
or the dimensions of a single person, yet quickly spreading it self over the
surface, and darkning the Horizon of three Nations, with such a thick and
palpable darkness, as will never let us forget how long it was ere Sun or Stars
appeared.) A Martyr of the infelicity of the times he lived in; A Martyr
against the Devil (and his principal work) of Schism; and how then, or who
says, not a Martyr for the God of Unity? who wrote himself so Legibly a
Protestant, that even (that which we know runs fastest from truth) prejudice it
self, or any thing but gross or affected ignorance may read it; so that one
might with as much truth and reason deny him the name of his first Baptism
(William Laud) as with justice or good manners, that of his second, Protestant
Martyr, a Name so truly and eminently his own, that besides his Title by
purchase (as before) he has that of Royal donation, and that also from that
First CHARLES, THE PRINCE OF PROTESTANTS AND MARTYRS TOO; wherefore it may be
good counsel, or caution to him that thinks or speaks otherwise, to consider
well, whether he can reasonably suppose, there were any man then living, with
so great advantage to know, or ability to judge, the mind and cause of that
happy man, that unhappy Metropolitan, as was that incomparably most Judicious
Prince.

But to resume our buisiness of inquiry; does the Schismatic dislike our
Worship because he likes not our Discipline? Is he offended at that lenity and
longanimity which is used toward scandalous sinners? If this be it, then let
them first compare (as was noted before) those sins which the Devil never
commits, with those which are proper to him, and then religiously consider the
dreadful Emphasis of St. Peter's ((...)) chiefly or especially concerning those
that despise Government, of whom he tells us that they are especially reserved
by the Lord to the day of judgment, ^ Pet. 2.9, 10.
to be punished; and then though our Ministers do not (what they cannot
lawfully) shut the doors against such sinners till excommunicated, they will
either think with more Charity of our Communion or with less Arrogance of their
own, and separate from us, if at all, with the temper and language of that meek
Centurion (Domine non sum dignus) Lord I am not worthy, (...) 7.6. ^s 65.25.
etc. not of those Idolaters in the Prophet -- stand further off, etc. And then
how would such an excess of humility in them, be quickly matched with another of
Charity (with arms and hearts!) from us! what joy would there be in heaven,
what peace on earth, what harmony in both! How would the Atheist blush, the
Papist fret, and our Schismatic leer, and all the enemies of God and the King
be as that young man Absalom! Whereas on the contrary, if these brethren of
ours (Alas! our brethren! for such they profess frequently they are, and such
God knows we desire most passionately they should be) will still remain
inexorable by all the methods of reason or loving kindness; if they will
invincibly persist to maintain their separation, to deprave the doctrine,
disturb the discipline, and disown the Government of the Church; if they will
walk thus disorderly, in contempt of all authority and public order; we must
then, (whether we would or no, for Christ has made it our duty, Matt. 18.17. 2
These. 3.6. 2 Cor. 5.11.
and re-inforc't it upon us by St. Paul) we must then I say, deal with all such
as the Jews did with Heathens and Publicans, we must withdraw from them in
their disorders, and in case of irreclaimable contumacy, not only not
religiously, but not so much as civilly entertain them, or as St. John
expresses it, we must not receive them into our houses, or bid them God speed.
And indeed what reason can there be that we should eat or drink with them at
their or our own Table, who are therefore too unworthy, because they think
themselves too good, to eat or drink with us at the Lords Table! Or what
Charity can bid any man God Speed, in the way of Corah? or how can I affect his
Society, that hates my Religion and my God? How can I bear it when I see my
Savior so manifestly Crucified afresh; between the Heretic breaking the Unity
of the Church in point of Doctrine, by denying one or more of her Fundamental
Articles; and the Schismatic in point of Discipline, endeavoring to overthrow
her Government? How can I endure another downright Judas, to betray the whole
Cause of Christianity, with a complement of Religion, or a Kiss of Zeal?

Surely if we must withdraw from the Heretic (who if he keeps his error to
himself, Schism worse than Heresy.
may be no bodies foe but his own) then much more certainly from the
Schismatic as the more Scandalous, Mischievous and Impious of the two, as
necessarily offending against Peace and Charity together; And why.
because the Schismatic cannot possibly keep his Schism to himself, that being
public in its own nature, as being a positive separation from public Worship,
erecting Altar against Altar, and more than a bare negative suspension of
Communion, and by consequence an affront to the Governors, and a scorn to the
Government of the Church, by setting up a Conventicle prohibited by God and
man, against a Church established by the Laws of both. The Schismatic is an
actual divider in, and of the Church, and therefore worse by odds than any
other who is but passively divided, or cut off from her; as much worse as to
subvert the whole Legislative power, is worse than any violation of a
particular Law; or to make way for all the Heresies and Immoralities in the
world, is worse than any one of those can be.

The Schismatic must needs be so much worse than the Heretic, as a vicious
practice is worse than a false opinion; The Communion of Saints. The
Schismatic a Heretic too.
and as a Schismatic is for the most part ipso facto an Heretic too; for I
pray tell me does he not renounce the IXth Article of the Creed? does he not
disown (did I say) does he not despise and detest that great Fundamental and
essential to all Christian Religion, submission to every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, as well as our own? or tell me if this be not a most principal
and fundamental doctrine.

Gentlemen, I beseech you speak out, Is it not a part of our Obedience to God
himself? Is it not the aptest of all others to keep the Unity of the Spirit in
the bond of Peace, and is it not therefore that we find no Doctrine in the Holy
Scriptures, more earnestly or more affiduously, 1 Pet. 2.18.
more plainly or more expressly prescribed to us, than that of Uniform obedience
to all that are over us in authority, worst as well as best? and therefore tell
me again,

Is it not both a most foolish and a most nefarious pretense, that the Religion
or irreligion of our Governors can either widen or straiten our divine
obligation to strict obedience? Tell me,

Was there ever more incarnate devils than Nero or Tiberius, whom yet both
Christ and St. Paul obeyed themselves, and commanded others to obey?

Tell me, Is not our obedience to Magistrates due to that Authority which has
commanded us to pay it them? and therefore cannot be paid as due to the men as
men, or to the good as good, but reduplicatively to the Magistrates as such,
let them be otherwise what they will, so they be not Usurpers or command
contrary to God, and then does not the very exception of those cases confirm
the doctrine in all other? Tell me,

Are we not when the commands of God and the King are inconsistent, then to
give our whole active obedience to God, and to his Deputy our passive only? and
is not the Kings command otherwise the command of God too, and is not the same
Law mediately divine which is immediately humane, or are we more obliged by
strict precept to fear God than we are to honor the King; or more forbidden
the Worship of Idols than disobedience to lawful Authority, or is any man able
so much as in his conception to separate the sin of Schism from such
disobedience, or such disobedience from rebellion against the Law of Christ, or
a state of damnation from either of them? Tell me,

Does not St. Jude put all these together in his description of the Gnostics,
the first and worst Schismatics, Jude 4, 8, 12, 16, 19.
Heretics and Rebels in the Primitive Church, when he calls them Murmurers,
Complainers, walking after their own lusts, separating themselves (from what I
beseech you, ver. 6.
if not from the Church established) having not (yet questionless pretending to
have) the Spirit, whom he therefore parallels for their misery as well as sin,
with those that made a Schism as it were in Heaven, and separated from the
Church Triumphant, reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
Judgment of the great day. Tell me,

Are not those who do not hold fast the Profession of the Faith, but forsake
the assembling themselves together (at stated times and places by just
authority appointed) as the manner of some is, Heb. 10.23, 25.
are not they inferred to sin wilfully, and that therefore there remains
nothing for such, but a fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation?
Do we not find the Holy Penmen, thundering out the Terrors of the Lord against
this single sin more than all the rest? and why do we so, but because this sin
gives the greatest scandal to the enemies of Christ, and helps to justify them
in their highest prejudices to his Name and Gospel? Do we not find the
Schismatics singled out from the whole herd of scandalous and notorious
sinners to be marked and avoided as the worst of all, as most destitute of
Christian meekness, not consenting to wholesome words, but -- proud, knowing
nothing, doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes envy,
strife, etc. presumptuous, self-willed, despising Governments, etc.

Can any pride be more monstrous than to be proud of knowledge, and yet know
nothing? or can it be any other thing than such an exalted pride as this, that
can make men of low Parts, and little Learning, of ordinary Education and mean
Improvements, to separate from this Great and Admired Church of England, from
the solemn devotions of her Public Liturgy, contrived by the Wisdom, directed
by the Learning, embraced by the Piety, established by the Authority of such a
Nation? confirmed by at least 33 Acts of Parliament, and as many Convocations,
Signed and Sealed by the Sufferings of so many Confessors and Martyrs, and
since that Asserted against the wit and malice of all Opponents? Is not this
such an arrogance of pride as no Rhetoric can express, no Charity excuse, no
Humility not censure?

And yet this is not all, we are not at the height yet, for do they not tell us
plainly they could approve of many things even in the Liturgy it self, if they
were not imposed by Law? Good God! that ever men should make the reason why
they ought, the reason why they will not serve God decently and in order! that
ever men should choose to impose upon themselves, that they might not be
governed by others!

Tell us once again (for it is hard to believe any thing against the reason of
mankind) must Parliaments and Synods stoop and strike fail to you? must all
that is great or Sacred among us be exposed and marked out for the objects of
your contempt? will nothing please or content you, but the basest and most
unnatural submission of Antiquity and Authority to your Wills? Luciferian pride.
This is so high a flight and to such a pitch as none but the Son of the
morning can surmount, it towrs to such a lessening of Credibility that without
the help of a contrary to match it, it would hardly be believed by being (that
for which some other things must be believed) invisible. We could not so easily
believe their Pride to be so great (as to make some men (in a woeful sense)
little inferior to some Angels) but that we feel their Charity to be as
little. Uncharitableness.
For do they think any thing but evil of us or toward us? They cannot see
their own eyes nor the beams in them, but in the eye of a Conformist they can
presently spy the least mote, yea and stare it into a mountain. They are so
black jaundic't with malignity and prejudice, that they can see nothing (no by
no means nothing) but Popery or Paganism in all our service of God. Tell us
therefore, can you rationally deny that you esteem us as bad as any Pagans? or
can you excuse your selves in that separation if you judge not our Communion to
be as absolutely unlawful, as you judge your own to be absolutely necessary to
Salvation? Is not this your Charity? Gentlemen are you awake? De Vnitate Eccl.
do you hear St. Cyprian? macula ista nec sanguine abluitur, Martyrdom itself
is not sufficient to make amends for Schism. Are ye not frighted? How can the
Father speak truth if Schism be not exclusive of Christian Charity? or if their
Charity gives him the lie, I hope their Faith will be civiller to St. Paul, and
does not he plainly infer, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.
that whilst we live in Schism we have no Charity, our Alms are no better than
ostentation, and the yielding our selves to be burnt, but a mad kind of
Martyrdom, or rather but a foolish Sacrifice to humor and stomach; like that
of Clement and Ravilliac who dyed Martyrs to the Papacy, or those whom we read
of to have been called (Martyrs stultae Philosophiae,) Martyrs of vain
Philosophy, or that which may serve for all the rest, of our own English
Regicides, to their Fanaticism. They all dyed for the Deities they all adored.

Multiplicity of Sects.
As by this time we may justly doubt whether the abundance of Pride or want of
Charity be greater in these men, so considering the multiplying prolifick
nature of all evil, and of this above all, we are like to doubt on still,
whether they do not paramount themselves, and excel their Eminencies before
named in their exceeding plenty of divisions. How many are the Sects that have
been made by this devil Schism? were not all the calamities of England begun,
continued, and (if ever they be completed) must they not be finished in thee?
The Black box.
Here Is the Black box you talk on! a Box with a Vengeance! Pandora's Box! How
fast it is sealed up! hold, I think there is some Inscription upon the Seals --
Bull. P. Pi. 5. -- Sol. Le. and Cov. Nay then I am resolved I Will open it -- It
flies like Bottle Ale, what are these papers that are tumbled out -- Impeach.
of Straff. -- Impeach. of Arch B. L. -- Instruct. for Vxbr. Tr. -- Instructions
for Consults -- List of Kings Judges -- Reasons for Toleration --
Considerations concerning Elections, etc. Petitions against Proclamations. If
these be the top, what is in the bottom? but I Will put them in again, for ought I
know it may be as much as the Reputation of a Protestant is worth, but to look
upon them; well, it is true I see (that by a little allusion, Mr. Cowley
I may gratify my memory with a dear name) Schism; thou art a devil, if I may
call thee one,
For, by this Box, thy name is Legion.
Did not thou set up an Heteroclite Assembly against a Regular Convocation, a
vagrant Directory against a settled Liturgy? did not thou sell the Lands
first, and then the Head from the Crown? did not thou set up iniquity for
Law, and strength for an Hight Court of Justice? Was it not thou Schism! that
foundedst all Right in Dominion, and all Dominion in Grace! was not Leviathan,
or is not New Rome a spawn of thee thou cursed Dam of all the Blasphemies and
Heresies of all times! Did not thou beget that mungrel Toleration, and
expound Christian Liberty into that sense which we now all see, and (without
the preventing mercy of God and vigilance of our Governors) must feel too? and
by the warmth of these did thou not hatch those ugly monsters Ochlocracy and
Anarchy, and have thou not been brooding of these ever since the Restoration
of England to it self, or the King to England?

In which last respect as thou art every where black and blue by thy envious
and malignant nature, thou art yet uglier and more odious here by thy most
superlative ingratitude. Who can be that Viperous generation of more proper
name than they that undermine and conspire against those Laws and Legislators,
by and under which they have and hold the greatest earthly enjoyments, and this
whilst themselves (or the chiefest among them) confess us Protestants,
Indifferent things no cause for separation.
and can show no greater or other cause for their Animosities, than our
injoyning some indifferent things uncommanded in the Scripture, which is such a
cause as must equally engage them against all the Reformed Churches in Europe,
in which there must be some indifferent things, and so against themselves too.

The name of Jesus adorable.
The Bowing at the Name of Jesus is none of those things, and the offense they
take therefore is not given: for admitting what they object, that the practice
is neither warranted nor intended by the Apostle in that common Text, yet
certainly those mighty peculiar Emphases which we find put by the Spirit of
Truth upon that all-adored and salvifick name, must needs enforce it. Have the
Angels in their more exalted nature, have they knees for this hyperhypsistous
Immanuel, and can the Christian man have none for the same superexcelling and
most exalted Jesus? do they bow inquisitively, shall the mountains and rocks
bow literally, and can I not bow Religiously? must my understanding bow (or
break) to the Faith of the incarnation, and can my body (in this state of
Union) not bow at the Name, or (which is all one) at the mention or memory of
God incarnate.

Versus, etc. Typical.
And for the like reason, though bowing toward the Temple (Jerusalem) were
Typical then, yet bowing in the Temple or house of Prayer even by the practice
of the Antitype it self must be pious still; and that place as separated and
consecrated by Christ, so hallowed and esteemed by us. Arist.
The Philosopher can tell us that a lie is malum in se, a sin against the Law
of our Nature, therefore to make a lie (quod efficit tale) must be so and more;
and to violence or captivate a profitable truth can be little less; the good
which I do against my mind is so far hypocrisy, as the evil which I so do is
infirmity; and there is crimen falsi in both; when I bow my body to the person
I had rather stab, or kiss the hand that I wish cut off, does not my soul make
my body lie? so when my soul bows in Adoration of God, can it so exclude the
body in this state of conjunction, as either to deny the right or interdict the
use of its assistance? would not such exclusion be an injurious restraint and
oppression of that truth which I am always bound to own and assert by a
reasonable service of God, with my whole man, my soul and body together? We
grant it is the Loyalty of the soul that makes a true Christian subject, yet we
know this never is or can be unattended by the hand and knee too. Voluptas
animae anima voluptatis.
We grant that as the pleasure of the Soul is the soul of pleasure, so the
worship of the Soul or Spirit is the soul of worship, but then this soul is in
the body still and acts not but ecstatically without it, and it acts as
distinctly, as grossly bodily in any determinate position of the hand or eye, as
in the flex on of the back or knee, all are alike bodily worship, and equally
liable to exception, though their fortune has not been alike: if there be any
difference in the notoriety of the gestures, then we say, the more visible, (if
decent and Analogous) the more honorary; we think it impossible for any soul
seriously militant, to think it advisable to throw away his arms, or give them
up to his enemy, to give that bow or worship to any creature, which upon the
oath and fidelity of a soldier he must give to, and only to his Creator; he
must bow as spiritually and literally too as he must not bow; yea he must bow
as naturally and necessarily (whilst he is in the body) as he must not; he
cannot enter the house, or begin the work of Prayer, without bowing forth his
Domine non sum dignus, nor make any solemn religious address without the Soul
of a Christian, and the body of a man together; the negative precept both
directs and confirms the positive duty, and by being commanded not we are
instructed how to bow; look what share he knows his body must have in the
violation, he gives it the same in the performance of his duty, and is so well
persuaded of the reasonableness of this service, that, without doing open
violence to the express command by hacking out a piece (as some of our
Schismatics acquaintance have cut off the whole) and restively stopping at
(thou shall not bow) he cannot conceive the least colorable objection against
this, or in favor of the contrary practice, unless either it should be said
here (as we have heard before) that it must not be done because commanded,
which God forbid; or that it could be thought argumentative or not Sarcastical;
which I remember to have seen somewhere produced by a person of Honor as the
only Text, that can piece up the rent of that mutilate Communion in the Church
of Rome, viz. -- Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me, etc.

But it may be the pinch is not so much here, and they are more offended as
English men than as Christians, Where the pinch lies.
as abridged of those privileges which their interest in Magna Charta claims
for them, that they are not admitted to places of trust and office, etc. Truly
we might willingly endure the envy of this objection upon condition it were but
as true in Thesi as it would be absurd in Hypothesi. For, besides that we know
by sad and memorable experience, were Schismatics Legislators, they would
certainly enforce such a Conformity, as they will now neither comply with
themselves, nor forgive in others, they have made themselves even by their own
Principles incapable of being what they complain they are not; for if
indifferent things are not properly the matter of humane Laws, as humane is
contradistinct to divine, there is nothing in the world besides that can be so,
because all necessary things are already sufficiently commanded, and all
unlawful things as evidently forbidden in the Word of God, in which respect
they are altogether divine and in no wise humane Laws; so that there could be
but one Law (precisely humane) which the Schismatic Legislator could possibly
enact, The Schismatics Law.
viz. that every Christian should be a law unto himself, or the same in other
words, that every man's reason should be his guide, and every man's will should
be his Law, and consequently that all should be rulers as much as any.

May we not now appeal unto themselves whether they be not of all Recusants the
most unexcusable, more than those that are tossed about with every wind of
false doctrine, when not our Doctrines (true or false) but our bare Surplices
can skare them, or our Organs blow them out of the Church? whether it had not
been better for them never to have been the members of Christ, than being such
to out themselves off from his Body which is the Church? whether it were not
fitter, seeing common safety cannot always subsist without public peace, nor
public peace without compliance on one side or other, whether I say it were
not fitter, that the Inferiors, the fewer and the more ignorant, should yield,
to the Superiors, the many and the more learned? and this so much the rather,
if it be well considered that however Christians ought to serve one another in
love, yet obedience to inferiors is grievous and not without some excuse for
being so; whereas that of Superiors (as of Christ (who according to his humane
nature was a subject) to Caesar) is a most noble, natural and necessary duty,
as that which supports the whole Fabric of the Church and of all the Kingdoms
upon earth, and in Heaven too, that which is so equally essential to Policy and
Religion, that it is plainly impossible either for Saints to be Schismatics or
Rebels, or for such to be Saints without making our Faith, our Scriptures, our
Religion vain, without a downright welcome to Anarchy, and farewell to all
Society.

The contempt of Authority linked with an obstinate contumacious and seditious
humor, is so very a monster, that it makes an error of judgment, which might
otherwise have been venial in it self, a diabolical and damning quality. So
that if Schism were no such sin as it is, yet it were worth the parting with,
for the purchase of public peace, of which rightly improved, piety and
prosperity, strength and safety, are the genuine and precious fruits. It was
for this that our Lord himself complied in some things, both with Jews and
Gentiles* that he might gain both. It was for this that we find the like
complyances of St. Paul (of whom we should all be followers as he was of
Christ) yielding to circumcise Timothy, Act. 15.28, 29.
and refusing again to circumcise Titus. To gain the Jews he denied himself the
use of his Christian liberty, and resumed it again to gain the Gentiles. It was
for peace and to unite dissenters, that the Apostles made that conciliar
establishment of things indifferent by a Law whereby they induced a necessity a
part post upon things indifferent a part ante.

And this Apostolical practice as it plainly informs our judgments in the true
subject matter of humane Laws, and whereabout they are properly conversant, and
as plainly directs our practice of obedience in such cases, so will it never be
made to serve their purposes, who, by binding the whole force and weight of it
upon their Governors shoulders, so as they themselves may not touch it so much
as with one of their own fingers, would make it a ground of exception from the
general rule of submission, and a warrant to dispute at least, and (as it
constantly follows) to deny at last that obedience which they pretend according
to this practice should not have been commanded; as if the condescension and
indulgence of Governors were not to the ignorance or frowardness, to the
intellectual or moral infirmities of dissenters; as if the Jews had not been
culpable in their tenaciousness of the Law of Moses, when St. Paul purposely
stoopt to them and approved its observance by his own practice; as if the
bowels and forbearings of any injured and incensed Parent did not make it more
the child's duty to love and honor him, and should not make it more his shame
and grief to displease him, more his sin and guilt to disobey him; as if not
presently to take the forfeiture, were reasonably to avoid the debt, or cancel
the debtors obligation; or as if it were equally of duty, as it is of power in
the Prince to suspend the execution of a known Law, for some weighty reasons of
State, and upon the prospect of public benefit, and to tolerate a practice
against Law and without hope of any common good, and not without just
apprehensions of the greatest experience of the contrary, and therefore against
all the reason in the world, but that of his own courtesy and mere pity.

It Is true indeed when Kings are said to be Gods, we best understand how they
are such, when they are said also to be nursing Fathers, and therefore without
fear either of contradiction to sense, or of courtship against reason, we can
say they are humane Gods, their deity best asserted by their humanity, and both
by a joint supremacy of power and goodness, and we cannot choose but wonder at
the Anti-supremacy of Schism, that our ready obedience should not confess the
one as irresistible, as our rebellions have proved the other.

It Is as true, that there is no such mirror so clear and true to look in, no
such optic or perspicil to see with, as is the Crystal of the Word of God; a
glass of such virtue that it not only most perfectly discovers the object but
also disposes the medium, and directs the faculty; a glass that will never
suffer us to behold any thing with or through prejudice or base interest, or
without Christian charity and meekness; a glass that never shows us the spots
of others but by reflection upon our own; in this glass we can neither behold
the virtues or vices of our fellow subjects with envy, or without pity, nor the
blemishes or beauties of our Governors, without a reverence becoming both; a
reverence I say as being a mixed affection of fear and love, by which I fear the
power whilst I love not the fault of the person, and love the person whilst I
fear the evil, whether sin or punishment, of the fault. In this glass we see
what we must piously bewail, yet may not proudly censure in our Superiors; what
we must reprove with caution and without arrogance in our equals; and what we
must judge and condemn impartially, positively, absolutely and irrespectively
(to any though more scandalous sins of others) in our selves; St. Paul was the
greatest of sinners, with the greatest assurance of Salvation; and the Publican
was a sinner with more comfort, than the Pharisee was not a Publican.

In this glass the most absolute Sovereign Prince may best see himself in the
fullest proportion; he sees by and for whom he reigns absolutely, and without
whom he reigns not independently; he sees that his Government is arbitrary as
that is supreme and unquestionable by man, but not as any way unaccountable,
but as every way most strictly and most especially accountable to God, for he
sees him that is properly and originally King of Kings, under whose most
supreme and comprehensive Title, and by virtue of whom he sees himself
constituted and authorized, and accordingly to which he is to be directed,
limited and subordinate, and therefore by no means to entrench upon the
Prerogatives Royal of his Lord Paramount, and therefore not to govern by his
own Will, which is Gods peculiar, a rule to himself, and a Law to the Sons of
men, the root and source of all Government, which so spreads and runs it self
through the whole nature of man, that it makes Government not more divine in it
self than connatural to us, and as effective of our well-beings in Societies as
of our social and conjugal propensions, and therefore as old as Paternity it
self, or the First of the Firstborn, making every man naturally sociable,
(...). Supremum, medium, ultimum.
and actually disposed and tending to Societies, which therefore cannot
possibly consist without Government, nor that without order, nor this without
degrees of subordination; and therefore also because the foundations of
Government are thus laid in our very natures, there is nothing that can lay
nearer to these foundations, or be as we say, more fundamental or essential to
Government than our obedience to the Laws of men, and their conformity to the
Laws of God; he plainly sees and contemplates the Sovereignty of God, that all
power belongs unto him, that dominion and fear are with him, both in heaven
and in earth, and for ever in both, and thereby supples and tempers his
Prerogatives against all immoderate assumings to himself, or encroachments upon
his people; he can never measure himself by himself, whilst he compares himself
with his God; instead of that turgid Interrogation -- Is not this great Babel,
which I have built, etc. he makes this of most humble admiration -- Lord! what
is man! what shall I render to thy mercy, or answer to thy justice! how shall I
usurp thy right or pervert thy favor! how shall I discharge my trust and give
up my account with joy! In this contemplation the Prince mounts indeed, but
it is to a lessening of himself, and magnifying of his God.

And as the Prince so the subject is sufficiently instructed in the nature of
his obedience, and knows it to be the same which he performs to God for his own
sake, and to man for Gods sake, and therefore dares not but distinguish thus,
as he dares not otherwise between the person and office of the Governor, that
he pays not his obedience to the man as man (gentle or froward) but to the man
as Magistrate and only so.

Thus this Theme of Gods universal, absolute and everlasting power, will prove
a sufficient Amulet against all the charms of tyranny of all sorts, as well
that of injustice or oppression in the Governor, as that (the more mischievous
and less tolerable of the two) that of Usurpation and Rebellion in the
Subjects, who in Conscience of this truth, of their own accords cannot but
recognize their Prince, as Gods immediate Vicegerent, and highest Commissioner
amongst men, and that therefore no man or men in the most collective sense (for
that nothing less can by any means be inferred from the most important negative
interrogation who?) can say unto him what do thou? he sees him singulia and
omnibus major, but neither seeks nor hopes nor desires to find him universis
minor. He improves the Wise man's counsel of not cursing the King, no not in a
thought, into not so much as thinking disloyally; so far is he from writing
rebelliously -- To your Tents O Israel, etc. or from speaking and threatening
seditiously, that -- deliverance shall come another way.

He dares not pretend a kindness for the person, which he intends against the
Government of his Prince, or by a most abominable and flagitious superfaetation
hatch one plot under the heat of zeal against another.

He is willing as much as in him lies to have peace with all men, and to look
gently upon the errors of others, as rather to be of ignorance, and only
consequentially or indirectly such; whilst yet he observes many sorts of men
explicitly and professedly renouncing those erroneous opinions, which
notwithstanding they do virtually abet, and implicitly defend under the
patronage of some other they think less obvious or less obnoxious principles,
and whilst they declaim pathetically against the Treason acted upon the First,
and contrived against the Second Charles, and in the same heat of breath
against those Jesuitical doctrines of Excommunicating, Murdering or Deposing
Kings, are content in the mean time to send those Kings to the people for their
power, and as the peoples Stewards to give up their accounts of Government to
them also; so the Papist (that incorrigible because infallible Schismatic)
bears himself high upon the tiptoes and magistery of sense and reason, whilst
by his most beloved Transubstantiation he affronts both; so the Atheist whilst
he cannot deny a First and eternal cause, will not yet so much as conceive the
more evident existence of a Spirit; if these errors be no worse descended than
from ignorance or inadvertency, he hopes the bare naming of them sufficient for
their conviction, but if mixed with obstinacy or interest of a Party, he quits
them as impregnable against all the batteries of Reason or Religion; however
even against these he dares not magnify himself, but desires rather to be
humbled unto dust for them, and under the deepest sense of his own frailty, the
guilt and danger of sin, and the memory of that signal wrath which has been so
expressly revealed from Heaven against us the children of disobedience.

In this glass the Prince best sees and feels too how handsomely or easily his
Crown sits, if it be irradiated with the GLORIES of Piety and Sincerity, if
illustrated with the greater and more luminous resplendencies of Justice and
Mercy, (what a bald-crown'd head were that, that could not pardon?) and with
the lesser twinkling eyes, yet truly orient and genuine sparks of Temperance
and Affability; and with these bigger and lesser Luminaries, the Prince in
peace and prosperity, in safety and joy, in reputation and honor, shines
directly upon himself and more obliquely but not less beneficially on all his
Subjects; he scatters iniquity and conciliates Majesty with these eyes.

Yet as the natural eyesight is weakened if fixed over long, or too intently
upon the same object; so these Political eyes of Justice and Mercy, by looking
too hard and too wissly, or too long and too indulgently, may be dazzled into
rigorous severity or cruel pity; in which cases if it could be duty to put the
question, there might be reason enough to make it, whether the Prince had not
better borrow other men's eyes, than thus use his own, or were not more
inexcusable than if he had never looked in this glass, or whether the vicinity
of some glistering metals may not obscure or disadvantage the brightness of the
purest gold, or that it would not be a disparagement to the Royal virtue of
Clemency, if such a mistaken pity should be still mis-plac't, and find such a
noble unbeseeming shelter in the courtesy of the Princes nature, where it not
only gets protection from the pursuit of obloquy, where Christian loyalty
governs the very tongue; but works it self into possession too, and makes the
pitying, in the best Translation the most pityed, and in the vulgar, the most
pitiful Prince, or that it would not be an infelicity, if it were not a fault,
and if it did not sully his Robes, would not probably dusk the luster of his
Name, which the Prince cannot but discern in this glass, where he sees plainly
that the mercies of the wicked are cruel, and that the indulgences of the good
may be so too; for Charity being of an active disposition, and walking much
abroad would be very often affronted, either slighted by the ingratitude of
some, or justled, or perhaps assaulted by the perverseness of others, or
betrayed by her own goodness, if she were not sometimes attended and guarded by
severity.

Without this, how easily might she be stroakt and softened into a cruel and
dangerous impunity, by indulging (not the weaklings or fearful ones, but) the
stout and stubborn, the obstinate and malicious, the designing and incorrigible
offenders, such as corrupt themselves with goodness, and turn the flat of
indulgence into the edge of presumption, and at the next turn into the point of
direct enmity.

The Prince sees all this, and more than this, when he considers his Purple of
so pure a dye, that the smallest soil will spot it, and the least spot will
discolor it; his Crown of so fine a make, so eminent a site, such a
transparent splendor, that even a mote of imperfection may be seen in it, much
more would any cloud be notorious, which besides what it gathered of its own
from any noxious morbifick exhalations, would not fail of some malevolent
aspects to thicken it into the darkness and then spread it into the
inauspiciousness of some strange and prodigious Eclipse, Prognosticated by the
conjunction, caused by the inter-op-position, and harangued into the defection
of some great bodies. So much need and use has the Prince of this true glass to
see himself, when so many false ones are made by others to see him with.

Hitherto we have beheld the Prince viewing himself impartially, and looking
graciously upon all his Subjects that are or should be such, and they again
beholding their Prince in the same glass but not with the same eyes, some with
an eye of reverence, or religious fear and love, some with an eye of jealousy
or fear designed for hate, as that for destruction; and these because they look
not, like those, directly from God to the command and from that to the duty,
but asquint or across, from God obliquely or in pretense, but then most
directly to the Party or Interest, and from that cross again upon the
prescribed duty; we cannot see them sufficiently (who look so many several
ways) at one view.

Sometimes they amuse us with close and warm insinuations of fears and
jealousies, and so scatter the seeds of discontent; thus by a pretended Tyranny
they make way for Anarchy, and by fictitious for real Popery, the Devil and
shame together teaching them to color Schism with Zeal, and to suit their
mediums of suggestions or accusations with their ends of ruin and destruction.
Sometimes (like Tumblers) they see best with one of their eyes, their left eye
sharp-sighted enough, when their right eye is full of darkness; thus they
obtrude upon us worldly wisdom, which we see they have, for divine light which
we know they have not. Thus they teach humor and confidence instead of
Conscience, and act accordingly through thick and thin, they will boggle or stop
at nothing when the devil rides them, i. e. as they love to mistake it, when
conscience overacts them, then, show them if you can those impieties which they
dare not act to make them sure of their Election: In this carier they have done
such feats in our memory, so black and execrable, exploits so exactly
Theatrical and infernal, that their own Father might learn to act after them;
that charity it self could do them no greater kindness, than to make them (if
not penitently innocent) less nocent unavoidably, that so if they will not
choose the honor or comfort, they might be mercifully compelled to enjoy the
common benefits of obedience, so that however they will perish by other sins,
they might not be able to damn themselves by Rebellion.

Popish Schismatics.
Some of them that have traded longer than the rest and set up for wholesale,
have ingrost that most comprehensive falsehood Infallibility, as the surest
staple error to advance trade, and help off the rest; it is odds but some of
them heretofore were near choking (for I think they eat bones and all) with
their Transubstantiation, and this infallible crust was first prepared to cure
them, and ever since administered to all for prevention of the like danger;
surely a most sovereign remedy! for by keeping the gullet thus at stretch, and
the swallow wide enough open, it makes all safe. Pope Pius the IV. in Counc. of
Trent.
Since that they have been able to take down XII Articles more than ever the
Apostles took up, into their Creed prescribed by one of their infallible
Doctors, and prepared by his trusty Trojans, his Apothecaries of Trent, they
can swallow the whole 24 together, at one gulp without check or chewing; and
can we think now they should stick or strain at a Bolus of one man, the man
Jesus Christ? they are foully wronged if they be not now endeavoring to do as
much by St. George for England and his horse too.

Some of them look cross upon the whole Law of Moses, Antinomians.
as if our freedom from the rigor of that were our exemption from the bond of
all humane Laws, and licentiousness of life were the true Christian liberty, or
as if that liberty were not a manumission from the bondage and dominion of sin
and Satan, but from the yoke of Christ and the precepts of Christianity, and
from the not only Positive but Moral Law of Moses, which we know is the Law of
Nature and of Christ too; as if they were free to regulate the Laws by their
own humors, and not these by those, as if no errors of judgment, no not
blaspheming or denying God were to be corrected or restrained by Laws; as if it
were not the sin but the duty of the Magistrate when he bears the sword in
vain.

Some look upward with such bold and fixed staring upon the decrees of God as
such absolute irrespective and irreversible things, Predestinarians.
as do eternally determine both the end and the means, and necessitate both our
sins and our punishments, and therefore warrant us to live, as we were born,
without care; for that our vices cannot hurt us if Elect, nor our virtues help
us if Reprobate; for that either we cannot repent if we would, or that we must
repent do what we can; that whatever comes to pass was antecedently
unavoidable, and we thereby fully discharged of any farther care or solicitude,
concerning our actions or our ends, and may therefore, as our complexions
dispose us, go merrily or despairingly to hell, but go however; whereas would
they but consider themselves as bound in duty, not to think or speak any thing
unworthy of God, or any thing which they would be ashamed should be thought or
spoken of themselves, they could not but conceive and acknowledge, that God's
promises and threats are general and conditional; that his decrees are just,
and so inclusive of his dealing with all men according to their deeds, and
exclusive of any respect of persons, and therefore that justification does not
precede Repentance, nor repentance avail without amendment, that sin is not
forgiven before committed, or before repented, and that therefore repentance
must be in time, and justification which follows it (as well as pardon) must be
so too.

Some look down so brutishly upon one extreme, The Separatist and Debaucher or
Anti-hypocrite
that they never can advert to the other, one is so wholly intent upon his
jealousies of Tyranny and Popery, that he never sees or fears Rebellion and
disobedience, whilst another in avoidance of this Hypocrisy, rushes into a
worse extreme of Debauchery, and is so resolved an anti-hypocrite, that he will
not endure so much as a form of godliness, but rather than seem religious will
proclaim his sin as Sodom; rather than hypocritically abstain from the
appearance of evil, and not from the evil it self, as the other does, he will
abstain impudently both from good and from its appearance; and though a
Professor of Christianity, will vye with the effronteries of the most shameless
Heathens, in disclosing those pudendous enormities which he has done, and that
he may not be outdone, in boasting of more than he ever had the appetite, or
(if that yet) possibly the strength to perpetrate, thus he hates hypocrisy
worse than the other loves it, and by glorying in his impiety, not only
displeases, but as the more horrid Devil of the two, even despises God.

It would be endless to remark upon the numberless divisions and subdivisions
of Sectaries, yet all equally pretending to be, and (how ill soever or awry
they look) to be looked upon by us as our reformers, all equally dissenters
from, Reformers without, and Usurpers against authority, all equally admirers
of themselves and despisers of their Superiors. Now what a monster think we
were that Church like to be, whose formation or reformation were thus effected,
that were to be lickt into shape and feature by the poisonous slavering tongues
of all these! or what can we imagine would look liker the abomination of
desolation!

All this while the Holy, Humble, Sincere-hearted man, that trembles at the
word of God, and is afraid of his judgments, or in other words, the truly Loyal
and Christian subject, he looks directly with ease and pleasure into the
perfect Law of liberty, his magna charta indeed, where he finds his privilege
in his duty, and his liberty in his obedience; his fear is not taught him by
the Traditions or practices, the policies or prosperities of men. He has learnt
whom to fear, and for whom; the Lord for his own sake, and the King for the
Lord's sake; both or neither. He measures his whole Religion by his adequate
obedience to God and man; and his whole obedience by the Law of God, whether
bidding him (semper) obey his Rulers, etc. or forbidding him (ad semper) to
worship Idols, etc. Both are alike his duty, alike conducible to his Salvation,
alike (when transgrest) threatened with Damnation, and therefore reckons that he
must needs be subject, not only for fear of wrath or hope of profit, for fear
of hell or hope of Heaven, but for Conscience toward God and our selves; for
that this precept of obedience is not only consequentially good as every
positive Law is, but simply good, and so antecedently obliging as a part of the
Law of Nature, without any relation to the written Law, which here serves only
to make disobedience more unexcusable, and under a greater condemnation.
Wherefore he still reckons on, that no form of godliness can be more than so
without common honesty, no common honesty without giving all their dues,
nothing more due than what the subject owes to the Sovereign; whereupon he
concludes that dishonesty, as such, is ungodliness and disobedience, as
scandalous as drunkenness or adultery. Thus the good subject has reviewed
himself, but cannot go from the glass without a dutious filial reflection upon
his Prince; let us attend him in this posture also, and mark what he reports
from his own eyes.

He tells us he once saw in this glass, that (...), that exemplar and ornament
of Royalty, the First CHARLES of England, so like as only not equal to his
Prince and Savior; in his Solitudes a Prophet, in his Sufferings both King and
Priest, or according to that new name received at his second Baptism, the ROYAL
MARTYR: in the circumstances of his Apprehension, and Arraignment, in the
matter of his Charge and Defense, the manner of his Death and Burial, in the
glorious Resurrection of his Name and Memory, (a name embalmed with spices of
its own) in his living to do good and dying to do more, yea in dying expressly
to save his Peoples Liberties and Properties, he has so revived the history of
the Cross, that he can see Christ in this his Principal member Crucified again,
He can point to the Council, to the Soldiers, to the Judas, to the Pilate, to
the Golgotha, etc. He bids us remember we had, Alas that we had! such a Prince;
of Piety to that degree as was alone sufficient to add the excess to our
iniquity, and fascination to the Rebellion of his people; and were not Oblivion
enacted into duty, he could never forget -- Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, So
died that worst of Tyrants and last of Kings, that ingrain as engraven
Inscription of our Antiplastical Protector -- Exeo Martyr Populi, Behold I dye
the Martyr of the People, that innocent and Heroic expiration of the Royal
Sufferer. However he will be sure to remember to pray that -- Ne sit Martyr in
populum, his blood might not be a witness against these Nations, might not be
upon us and upon our children, may at last be the merciful sentence of the
supreme Avenger. Amen. Amen.


He now sees in the same glass, by a providence as full of mercy as wonder,
another CHARLES, a Second from the First, there is a specialty of mercy; and a
Second to that First, there is the wonder. Such a Second to such a First must
needs demonstrate the wisdom and goodness of God to be alike infinite. For what
but a most unparalled and stupendous clemency in such a Son, could ever have
qualified him to forgive (did I say) nay to forget, a like impiety against such
a Father! what but such a Miracle of Magnanimity or Christian patience in the
one, could have pardoned even to Oblivion the guilt of those who so eminently
were self-condemned by the Piety and Innocence of the other!

A Royal temper indeed! enough at once to put us out of doubt why, or how it is
said that Kings are gods, and into doubt again, whether there be not a better
medium of Government than Fear! whether the Tacit permittitur quod sine
ultione prohibetur. Tertul.
Fathers Assertion, that what is not congruously punished is tacitly allowed,
might not now be put to Problem in its own defense? And indeed were there as
much force as there is reason in goodness to oblige, the doubt were over, there
being nothing in the world that should so reasonably influence the minds of men
as the sense of kindness without the reason of merit, much more, against the
reason of our demerits. But the corruption of humane nature being such as
ordinarily nourishes pride in our selves and malignity against goodness in
others, it consequently joins enmity with ingratitude and perverseness to
disobedience, whence it proves so very hazardous an experiment of ruling, as is
thought worthy to be checked by a Proverb, of killing with kindness; and
therefore the experience of all times has made it out of question, that Laws
would be no more than idle ludicrous things, if they were not dignified and
asserted by their sanctions of rewards and punishments. However, if the
Subjects of such a Prince, would but give him the honor of his own mercy
(which can never be well done but with the utmost of a grateful obedience) no
good man would grutch them the benefit of the same: and if they should do so
ill as to preclude to themselves this; yet let them not do worse than so by
denying their Prince that. Can we now not acknowledge the kindness of that
Providence, which first gave us, then preserved for us, and afterward restored
to us such a Prince as this, and all these in such a manner; so signal and
above ordinary course, by a Star at his Birth, by his escape at Worcester, and
by his un-bloudy Restoration, when, as ill as we had used him, he was more
desired and wanted by the Nations than they could be by him?

We cannot for our hearts deny, or if we could that, yet we cannot for our
senses but confess those Testimonies God himself has thus given of his pity
and mercy toward us in the instance of this Monarch of mercy, and shall we
dare to pervert our apprehensions of this blessing into jealousies and fears
against him, instead of thankfulness to God for him, or make our experience of
Gods gracious Providence in this Succession, a ground for doubting or shifting
it in the next? God forbid.

Let us never hope to prosper by iniquity, who are sure we can never be
miserable without sin. We know we may and how we may be happy in Suffering,
with comfort and without guilt; yet neither so, nor so, when we suffer for our
own sakes and not for Gods, when we do against the command, that which is not
righteous, that we may not suffer, according to the command, for that which is.
For as he said, necesse est ut eam non ut vivam, so we all know our Obedience
is necessary, when our Security may not, and our resistance cannot be so.

He tells us now he will step a while from the glass, and make room for our
dissenting brethren to come and see, and then tell us plainly, whether what has
been here represented, be not so there; and as the worst he wishes to them is
that what he has seen or said might be beneficial; so the best he can hope for
them is that by their compliance with, (or rather than fail, their
condescension to) their Superious, they will make it so. This, as it is the
greatest Charity he can have for them; so is it the least as he says, that for
his own part he would use toward them. For that as long and as steddily as he
has been looking in this Glass, and among so many plain and evident rules of
Faith and Practice, as he has seen there, he cannot discern the least shadow
of ground or reason to justify the making, or excuse the maintaining their
Separation; (but much, very much, to aggravate and condemn both) And therefore
he warrantably concludes, that, abstractly from Pride or Ignorance, Interest or
Humor, there can be none. And therefore also he Conjures and Obtests his
brethren by the mercies of God; by the bowels of Christ; by the Indulgence of
the King, and the Love of their Country; by the Honor of Religion, and the
Bond of Nature; by the Reason of Law, and the Obligation of Conscience; by the
Guilt of their League, and the Debt of their Allegiance; by the Miseries of the
First, and the Mercies of the Second CHARLES; by the Truth of their Repentance
for the one, and Gratitude to the other; by the Grief and fear of their
acknowledged brethren, and the Rage and hope of the common enemy; by the Memory
of former, as the Fate of all future disobedience; by the dearest and most
prevailing names, of Christian-Catholick-Reformed-Protestant (and) Englishmen,
they would now give us the right hand of Fellowship, and both hands of help and
assistance, by an hearty compliance with, and submission to the most approved,
equal, comely, Primitive and Apostolic Established Government, of this
Confessedly True, Sound, Lawful, Reformed, Protestant CHVRCH of ENGLAND.

FINIS.
Henry Brome's Advertisement. 1680.
WHereas there are several Discourses and Pamphlets abroad in the World, that
pass for the Writings of Mr. Roger L'Estrange; wherein he never had any hand at
all; This is to Advertise the Reader, that he has lately Published these
following Pieces, (all but the Two last) and no other.

Toleration Discussed, in a Dialogue betwixt a Conformist and a Nonconformist,
and betwixt a Presbyterian and an Independent. Seneca's Morals Abstracted. The
Guide to Eternity. Tully's Offices, in English. Twenty Select Colloquies of
Erasmus in English. Tyranny and Popery Lording it over the Consciences and
Lives of the King and People. The Reformed Catholic. The History of the Plot
in Folio. The Freeborn Subject. The Case Put for the Duke of York. An Answer
to the Appeal. Seasonable Memorials. The Parallel, or The Growth of Knavery. A
Dialogue betwixt a Citizen and Bumpkin. A Dialogue betwixt a Citizen and
Bumpkin, the second Part. A Further Discovery of the Plot, with a Letter to Dr.
Titus Oats. The Gentleman Apothecary. Five Love Letters Translated. Discovery
on Discovery, in a second Letter to Dr. Titus Oats. The Committee, or, Popery
in Masquerade, curiously done in a Copper-Plate. The Way of Peace. The Arts and
Pernicious Designs of Rome.

