A Country Ministers REASONS For Taking the OATHS of ALLEGIANCE TO K. William
and Q. Mary.

In a Letter to one under Suspension, for refusing them.

Licensed,

November, 3. 1689. J. F.



LONDON, Printed for R. Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1690.

A Country Minister's Reasons for taking the Oaths of Allegiance to K. William
and Q. Mary; in a Letter to one under Suspension, for refusing them.
SHall I beg of you (My Dear Brother) to receive these lines with the same
affection and candor with which they are wrote, and to believe that I have no
other design in communicating my thoughts upon this Subject to you, than to do
service to you and the Church, and by endeavoring to convince you of your
error in refusing the new Oaths, to prevent the fatal consequences to both,
which will attend your Obstinate persisting in that Refuseal. And then I shall
hope that through the blessing of God, tho they come too late for your
Suspension, they may be soon enough to hinder your Deprivation: Which good
effects, if they shall have upon you, I shall not censure you for having
submitted to a Suspension; for I shall not be so unjust as to think you were
moved thereto by a pitiful Cowardice, or more wretched Laziness, as if you
either stayed to see the success of their Majesty's Arms, before you Embarked
in their Cause, or were glad of a pretense for six Months neglecting the Duties
of your calling; but shall rather Charitably hope that you waited till the last
necessity forced you to take the Oaths, to try, if happily in that time,
providence might either remove some bars out of the way, or convince you of
the unreasonableness of some scruples, which as yet hindered your doing it with
that full assurance and persuasion of mind which you desired.

There are several arguments and various Methods, by which those Reverend
Persons that have taken the Oaths, do justify their practice therein; but
this, however it be by some made an objection against the Lawfulness of them,
will not I hope pass with you for a reasonable one, unless you can believe a
proposition to be ever the less true because it is confirmed by twenty several
good Mediums.

As to the particular Method I have here made use of, I shall only tell you
thus much, that being I was to have to do and argue with my self, I resolved to
lay the state of the Question so low as to have no dispute with my self about
that, and accordingly have supposed their Majesty's to have no other Title to
the Throne but possession; but I would not have this Method of mine looked upon
as designed to thwart theirs who assert their Majesty's Right to the Crown, as
the ground of their Swearing Allegiance to them, but rather as a further
inforcement thereof, for if my Arguments, which proceed upon supposition of a
bare possession only, do prove of validity to justify the taking these Oaths
to them; theirs which are drawn from an Established right will conclude a
Fortiori. The reasons that prevailed with me, be pleased to take in the same
Method, that I laid them before my self.

And here first I freely confess to you, that when it was discoursed
beforehand, that there were new Oaths designed to be exacted from from their
Majesty's Subjects, and during the Debates concerning that matter in
Parliament, I did heartily wish that a general imposition of them, especially
upon the Clergy, might not have been consented to: Not but that I thought it
highly reasonable that their Majesty's, having Sworn to protect and Govern us
according to Law, should receive from us a satisfactory assurance, of a just
return of fidelity and obedience to them; but I was sadly apprehensive that
those ill consequences, which a little sagacity might easily discern, would,
through the weakness of some, the scrupulosity of others being improved and
abused, by the serpentine policy of a third sort; almost necessarily attend
this Method of giving their Majesty's Security, would be such, as could not be
compensated by the good effects it could have upon any sort: For, as for those
that were well affected to the present Government, and thought it such as they
ought to submit, and give Obedience to, they did not want to be tied to it by
such obligations: And for those who looked upon it as an Usurpation, which they
could not in Conscience be faithful to, they would either refuse these Oaths,
and so there would be an open Schism and Division among us: (Hoc Ithacus velit)
Or else if they did take them, it cannot be imagined they could be bound by
them, for they that will make no Conscience to take an Oath, which they Judge
Unlawful, will make as little when occasion serves to break it.

But all this notwithstanding, when once the wisdom of the Nation had resolved
that these Oaths should be imposed; and by the Concurrence of the Royal assent
it was Enacted into a Law, I then thought it my duty no longer to oppose my
private Sentiments to their determination, but rather sincerely to inquire how
far I might honestly and safely conform my practice to them.

And in this disquisition I was obliged to use the most serious and unbyassed
application to find out the Truth, by reason of those dismal consequences which
would be the effects of a mistaken practice either way: For if these Oaths were
unlawful, and contrary to others that I had formerly taken, if I should swallow
them, I should expose my self to the dreadful guilt of Perjury, to the hatred
of God and delastation of good Men: On the other side, if they proved to be
Lawful and not to thwart any former obligations; if I should refuse them I
should make my self liable to the Penalties and Sanctions, which that Law that
requires them, is forfeited with: Not only to a deprivation from that
comfortable subsistence, which providence has mercifully allotted me to
maintain and make provision for my Family with; (and he that without great and
weighty Reasons, wilfully puts himself out of a Capacity so to do, I think
falls under a severe censure of the Apostles: And I do also look upon the
blessings and comforts of this Life, to be Talents which God has entrusted us
with, and we must be responsable to him for, and such as (tho when they stand
in Competition with him and my duty, I must hate, in our Saviors Language, and
willingly bid adieu to yet) if when no necessity so requiring, I sacrifice to a
humor, and wilfully divest my self of, I shall suffer as a Fool, my glorying
will be in vain, and the best reward I can expect: Quis requipoit?) But also
which is of greater consideration, by my refusal I should be deprived of the
opportunity of doing God service in the station he had placed me in, I should
desert my Flock, and expose it for ought I know to the guidance of a Wolf in
Sheeps Clothing, I should make a Schism in the Church, and a Faction in the
State; I should be guilty of interpretatively calling good evil and evil good,
I should lay a stumbling block in my weak Brothers way, and should entitle my
self to the woes that belong to those that are guilty of such offenses.

I therefore resolved with the greatest diligence and impartiality, to search
for the best light and directions I could meet with, to conduct my practice in
this weighty affair. And next after my application to the Father of Lights and
great Judge of all our actions, I thought his Vicegerent whom he has
substituted as the next Censurer of our practices under him, Conscience I mean,
was that which I ought to have recourse to; and according as that, after the
best information had that I could meet with, should direct, so looked upon my
self obliged to practice, if to her it appeared that the Oaths were Lawful,
readily and cheerfully to take them, if unlawful quietly to submit to the
punishment of my refusal; and whether one or the other, not to censure those
that were otherwise minded, nor reflect upon such as should act differently
from me, but to follow the advice of St. Paul, that he that eats should not
despise him that eats not, nor he that eats not, judge him that eats.

And now having constituted Conscience my Judge in this matter; my next
business was to enquire what measures Conscience ought to govern and guide
herself by in this Disquisition: For Conscience is not that Arbitrary thing
that some take her to be; that passes sentance merely Pro arbritrio, and
Condemns or acquits without regard to that which is the proper measure of those
actions which fall under her cognizance: And for want of due advertency to this
many have run into very dangerous mistakes; and Fancy, and Humor, and
Prejudice, and Spleen, and Advantage, and Profit, and Stubbornness, and what
not, have been set up for Conscience. And in this particular case, interest
might have persuaded me to take the Oaths, and that might have past for
Conscience, on the other side pique or prejudice, fondness of, or unwillingness
to retract, or act contrary to a former, violently asserted, and unreasonably
stretched Opinion, groundless scruples, arising from the contrary practice of
some good Men, or such like might have prevailed upon me to refuse them, and
they might have gone for Conscience: And all through not attending to those
measures, which Conscience (which is nothing else but an act of the practical
understanding, passing sentence upon the Lawfulness, or unlawfulness of an
action done, or to be done) ought in giving judgment thereupon to proceed by.
And those measures are no other than the proper rules of those actions which
come under trial, according to the conformity or contrarity of which actions to
those rules they become either lawful or unlawful. Now Conscience it self must
not pretend to be the rule, she is the directer of my actions before they are
done, and the censurer of them afterward, but sure no more the rule of them,
than a Judge upon Bench is the Law: I was therefore to look further for the
rule of them.

In general I took it to be most certain, that the Law of God is so far the
rule of all actions that no action contrary thereto can be Lawful: But then
there being several actions to be performed by me, as I may be considered in
several capacities and relations, which the Law of God has made no particular
provision for, in such cases it seemed reasonable to me that the Laws which
concerned me in those relations, provided they were not repugnant to the Laws
of God but in subordination to them, should be the rule of those actions, which
Conscience in her judgment of them ought to govern her self by: And this I was
the more confirmed in, when I happily found the great Doctor Hammond, giving
much the same account of Conscience in his Treatise upon that Subject.

This then of taking the Oaths being a civil action, enjoined me as a Member of
this community, and subject of this Government, I had only these two things to
search into, for the information of my Conscience in this particular.

1. What the Laws of the Government I am a Subject of, injoin in this Case, and
2. Whether those Laws are not repugnant to some superior Law of God.
1. Touching the former of which inquiries, my studies having been directed
another way, I thought it necessary to apply my self to those whose business it
was to study and search into the Laws; and these with one Mouth told me, that
by the Constitution of our Government, a King de facto that was in possession
but had no right to the Throne, (and such at least I could not deny their
present Majesty's to be) was such as against whom Treason might be committed,
even whilst the King de Jure, the rightful King was living, but out of
Possession. That Treason could not be committed against the Rightful King out
of Possession; That if ever the Rightful King returned, he might Punish Treason
committed against the King de facto. That an Indictment for Treason against a
King de facto, should run contra naturalem Allegiantiam, etc.

And that they might not be suspected to be influenced by Interest, fear of
danger, or hope of advantage from the present Government, they showed me that
this was not only their opinion but of former Lawyers, who lived too long since
to have had any prospect of this Revolution, or hopes of gaining by writing in
favor of it; particularly of the great Lord Cook, than whom we have not had a
Commentator of greater Authority, or whose (...) would have gone further in
Point of Law. It appearing to me then from hence that Allegiance was due to a
King de facto (for otherwise how could Treason committed against him be said to
be contra Allegiantiam) I could make no scruple of promising, or when called to
it, Swearing to pay that Allegiance to him, provided those Laws which have made
an Allegiance due to him are not repugnant to some superior Law of God, and
that was the next thing I was to inquire into.

2. And as to this the result of my enquiry was, that God Almighty had
appointed Government in general, and by his Laws required Obedience and
subjection from the Governed to their Governors, and most especially had
enhanced the obligation of Obedience from Subjects to their Rulers, in the last
discovery of his will which he made in the Gospel. But to what sort of
Government, or what Governors, or in what particular instances we ought to be
subject, He has not as I can find declared. More plainly, He has no where told
us whether we should be Governed by one Man or more, whether the Person vested
with the Government should Rule Arbitrarily; Stet pro ratione voluntas: Or
whether he should be tied and bound by Laws; whether the Government should be
Successive or Elective, descend by Lineal Succession in one Family, or whether
others should have their turns, whether the Person entrusted with the
Government should enjoy it pro termino vitae, or be Chosen Annually, or after a
certain space of years, or when his Government shall determine so as the
subjects shall be free from their Subjection to him; in these and many other
such instances, in the Law of God there is altum Silentium and nothing
determined: The Wisdom of God foreseeing that no one particular form, or method
of Government would agree with all sorts of Ages, Persons and Places, has left
the decision of such particulars to the Laws and Statutes of the several
Nations and Kingdoms: From whence it follows that the Laws of Kingdoms,
determining these particulars, which the Laws of God take no Cognizance of;
cannot be said to be repugnant to any Law of God: And consequently the Laws of
our Nation deciding that the Government of one King determines when he is out,
and another has got Possession of it; so far that the Allegiance which was
owing to the former, shall be transferred to him in Possession, are not
repugnant to any superior Law of God.

And then the Laws of the Land, if not repugnant to the Laws of God, being the
measures which Conscience ought to govern her self by, in her Judgment of those
actions, which I am to perform, as a Member of this Nation; and this of taking
the Oaths being an action of that kind, I could not upon the whole matter but
conclude, not only that I might with a good Conscience take the Oaths of
Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary; but that I could not with a good
Conscience refuse them.

Nor could I apprehend that my former Oath to King James, could give me any
just scruple in this matter: For my Oath to him was not to his Person separate
from his Office, but vested with it (for otherwise in case of a spontaneous
resignation, I could not have been absolved from my Oath) when therefore these
two are Legally separated, the obligation of that Oath cease: Now our Laws,
(whose business I observed before it is to determine whether Death only, or a
certain term of years, or whatever else should put an end to the Office of a
King, so that the Subject should be free from his obligation to him) having
declared that a Kings being out of Possession, and his Throne being filled by
another, does so far put an end to his Office, that during the time, that he is
out of Possession and another in, he is in Legal Construction, and as to all
Allegiance that his Subjects owe him as Dead, as if he were naturally so: All
objection upon account of my former Oath easily vanished.

And as little did I stumble (tho I confess very much surprised) at what some
do mightily insist upon, as a bar to taking these Oaths, the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience as professed and taught in our Church: Particularly I was sorry
to find it urged in the last Declaration of the late Lord Bishop of Chichester,
as the ground of his refusing the Oaths; a Declaration which (if it were his)
being made at a time when his Distemper and near approaching Death, may well be
supposed to have clouded his faculties and parts, is supported with such
Incocnlusive reasons, and could serve to no good end or purpose in the World,
that out of respect to the Memory of that Worthy and Pious Prelate, I cannot
forbear wishing that the Editor had committed it to the Flames rather than the
Press: For supposing the Doctrine of Passive Obedience to be the Doctrine of
our Church, as I verily believe it is, and a very good Doctrine when truly
stated; I doubt not, but for all the Lawful Commands of my Prince, Lawful, I
mean, for him; such as he is empowered to command by that which is the measure
of his Authority, I must either actually perform them, or quickly submit to the
punishment of my nonperformance: But what is this to the point of the new
Oaths, or how can I owe or pay this Obedience to King James who is out of Place
to Command, and out of Power to Punish? Passive Obedience is not a suffering
for my King, but by my King, or by his Officers Commissioned under him; and
therefore it is absurd to talk of Passive Obedience to one that is out of
Possession, for it cannot be paid to, or Exercised under any but him that is
possessed of the Power. All therefore, as far as I could see, that Passive
Obedience had to do in this Case, was to oblige me, if upon other good grounds
I had been persuaded of the unlawfulness of the Oaths, submissively to have
born the punishment of my refusal, without disturbing the Government, or
censuring those that complied with it.

Your very Affect. etc.

FINIS.

