THE Covenant Interest AND PRIVILEGE OF BELIEVERS and their INFANTS Clearly
Demonstrated IN A LETTER TO A RELIGIOUS LADY.

By a Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, ^inted for, and sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1675.

^ADAM,
THe Proposition which I shall lay down, and prove to you out of the Sacred
Scriptures, is this, That the Covenant of Grace under the new Administration of
it, comprehends visible Believ^ and their Infants: Or thus, The Covenant
^endeth not only to the believing Parent, but (...) his, or her Infant seed
also. That we may ^vent mistakes, we must here distinguish be^ixt foedus
internum and externum: Or thus (...) may apprehend it; The Covenant of Grace ^y
be either strictly considered as an absolute ^mise of saving Grace, and so none
but the e^ are in Covenant with God: Or the Covenant ^y be considered more
largely, in respect of ^ernal Administration, or outward privi^ges; and so the
Covenant in a true Scripture^e, may be said visibly to comprehend and be^g to
many persons that shall not be infallibly ^d; visible Believers and their
Infants do ^s belong to the Covenant, or the Covenant be^gs to them: All that
are members of the vi^ Church of Christ, have a visible right and ^est in the
Covenant of Grace; the Covenant ^ongs to them in facie visibilis Ecclesiae. Now
^y are members of the visible Church of ^ist, who are not real members of the
mystical invisible body of Christ: Many are branches of Christ the Vine in
outward appearance, Joh. 15.2. who wither and are cut off, thus it was with
Judas, Simon Magus, Demas and those of whom the Apostle John speaks, They went
out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us: But they went out that they might be made
manifest that they were not all of us. ^ John 2.19. This is a point that some
Professors of the Gospel seem to startle at; namely That Infants should be
reckoned and reputed t^ have a visible interest in the Covenant of Grace and to
be members of the visible Church o^ Christ, and to receive the Seal of their
membe^ship in their Infancy: But there are other (and my self amongst them)
that look at the Covenant of Grace, as far more desirable an^ comfortable in
this respect; because it extend^ not only to Believers, but to their Infants.

For the better clearing and confirming t^ Covenant Interest of Believers
Infants, I shall pr^pound some serious Considerations.

First, Consider (I beseech you) that ev^ since God made a Covenant with his
people, I^fants were included and comprehended in t^ Covenant with their
Parents, and were repu^ and reckoned to belong to the Family and Kin^dom of
God, in opposition and contrad^stinction to the rest of the world, which is t^
Kingdom of Satan. For indeed, either the I^fants of the Godly do visibly belong
to t^ Kingdom of God, or they visibly belong to t^ Kingdom of Satan, there
being no other visib^ Kingdom besides these two, which they can ^elate unto: In
those Covenants which concern ^ivil affairs, it is an usual thing to include
chil^ren, though the children themselves do not ^ctually seal, or give their
actual consent to ^ch a Grant or Lease, together with their Pa^ents; where has
God at any time made a Covenant with any of his people, but that Co^enant did
also comprehend their children and ^osterity? The Lord made a Covenant with
Noah, Genesis 9. and that Covenant did also reach ^is Posterity; he made a
Covenant with Abra^am, Genesis 17. and that Covenant did also reach ^is Posterity;
he made a Covenant with Phine^s, Numb. 25. which did also reach his Poste^ity;
God made a Covenant with David, Psalm. ^9.28. and this also did extend to his
Posteri^y. Yea it is evident that the Parents owning ^e Covenant, was reckoned
not only as owning (...) for themselves, but also for their children; ^ough the
children themselves (whilst Infants) ^id not actually consent to the Covenant
in their ^wn persons.

Secondly, Consider further, that the Infants of ^elievers were once reckoned
and reputed to ^elong visibly to the Covenant and Church of ^od, and did
receive the Seal of their admission ^to the Church of God. (I speak not here
^ly or chiefly of a particular, visible Church, ^t of the universal, visible
Church:) The ^ost ingenious and judicious of our dissenting ^ethren will
acknowledge this, that Infants ^d once visibly belong to the Covenant and
King^om of God; well then, the Infants of Gods people were once visibly in
Covenant, and members of the Church of God: Now where do w^ find that this
foederal or Covenant Interest and Church Membership of Infants was ever
repealed, or made void by the constitution of God* It concerns those that
dissent from us to prov^ that it is made void; we have the Negative her^ let
our Brethren prove the Affirmative if the^ can; Namely, that the Species of
Infants is ca^ out of the Covenant and Church of God. Ce^tainly Infants are now
as capable of a visib^ Covenant Interest and Church Membership, (...) they
formerly were; and it is no privilege (...) a Believer to have his children
cast out of Go^ visible Family and Kingdom.

That I may confirm this to you, and silen^ the contrary objections; let us
observe these s^ or seven particulars. 1. If there had been su^ a repeal of the
Covenant Interest and Churc^membership of Believers Infants, now in t^ days of
the New Testament, doubtless it wou^ have been mentioned in the Scriptures of
t^ New Testament, seeing it is clearly held for^ in the Old Testament, that
Believers Infa^ were sometimes visibly in Covenant with Go^ and members of his
visible Church: I will b^ God to thee, and to thy Seed. Genesis 17.7. A^ God
entered into Covenant not only with t^ Parents, but with their little ones, as
plainly a^pears, Deuteronomy. 29.10.11.12. Where we find t^ children taken into
Covenant with their Parent^ Let not any pretend, that this was a priviled^
proper only to the Jews and their children und^ that paedagogical
Administration; for Infa^ were Church members long before Circumcision was
instituted, and they were so in the Wilderness when Circumcision was omitted;
yea, and this privilege of Church Membership, did not only belong to the
natural Jews and their children, but also to the Gentile Proselytes, who owned
the God of Israel, to them and their children. 2. If this privilege were
abrogated, and taken away from the Infants of Believers, ^urely God would have
bestowed as good or ^etter in the place of it: But where do we find ^n the Book
of God that he has done so? In^eed we find that some of the Branches, to wit,
^e Jews; they and their children were broken ^ff by unbelief from the visible
Church: Romans ^1.17. But it was not all the Jews: For as ^uching the believing
Jews and their children, ^ey were not broken off, but did still remain in ^e
Olive tree; nor do we find one word or syl^ble in the Scriptures, that makes
for the repeal ^d abrogation of the Covenant-right and Church Membership of
Believers children. 3. Christ came not to put Believers and their chil^ren in a
worse condition than they were before. ^e that would not accuse the woman taken
in ^dultery, but asked her where her accusers ^ere: John 8.10.11. Will he (who
is so com^ssionate and tenderhearted) cast all Infants ^t of his visible
Kingdom without accusation? ^oubtless it is a far worse condition to be out of
^e visible Church of God than in it: For or^narily (what God may do in an
extraordinary ^y I question not) there is no salvation to be had ^tin the
visible Church of Christ: This is the family of Christ; this is the house of
God: ^ Tim. 3.15. And the Lord is said to add to the Church such as should be
saved: Acts 2.47. And they that do not belong to Christ's visible Kingdom, are
said to be Aliens and Strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, and the
Covenants (...) promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. Ephesians.
2.12. 4. The Kingdoms of the world shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord an^ of
his Christ: Rev. 11.15. Which undoubtedly is meant of the visible Church of
Christ, in respect of visible Church Membership, Ordinance^ and Privileges; and
if so, how can we otherwi^ think, but that this Kingdom will include an^ take
in the Species of Infants, as members thereof? It is also prophesied Dan.
2.34.35. Tha^ the little stone cut out without hands (which (...) meant of the
visible Kingdom of Christ) thoug^ it be small at first, yet in the later days
it shall become a great Mountain, and fill the whole earth* which certainly
will comprehend the Infants (...) Believers: Yea, and when the Jews are
re-ingrafte^ into the Olive tree, their children shall be re-i^grafted with
them, and shall be as aforetime: Ro^ 11.24.25. Jer. 30.20. By what I have
alread^ said, it is evident that the Covenant interest an^ Church Membership of
Infants is not abrogate^* 5. If the children of Believers now should (...)
excluded from visible Church Membership an^ interest in the Covenant, they
would be in ^ worse condition than the very children of t^ Gentiles were before
the coming of Chri^* For in the times of the Old Testament, if a^ Gentile or
stranger did accept the Covenan^* and own the God of Israel, not only he, but
his children also were admitted members of the Church, and reckoned to belong
to the Covenant and Kingdom of God. But according to the opinion of our
dissenting Brethren, if now the Parent accept the Covenant, he himself indeed
shall be admitted, but his Infant Seed shall not be admitted to a visible
member-ship of the Church of Christ; so that we are in a worse case in this
respect, than the Gentile Proselytes were in the time of the Old Testament. 6.
The Lord has said Exodus 20. That he will show mercy to thousands of them that
love and obey him; which certainly extends to the children of the Faithful, so
far as to admit and entitle them to a visible Member-ship of his Church: Does
God take care of Oxen; are the very hairs of our head numbered by him, and will
he not (think you) visibly own, and bless the poor Infants of his people who
are so dear to him? 7. There are Gospel Prophecies and promises which relate to
the children and Seed of the godly: The Psalmist tells us, that the Seed of the
righteous are blessed. Psalm. 37.26. I will pour out my Spirit (says the Lord)
upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine Offspring, and they shall spring up
as among the Grass. Isaiah 44.3,4. The Lord speaking of his people in Gospel
times says, that he will make an everlasting Covenant with them, and their
Seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their Offspring among the people,
all that see them shall acknowledge them that they are the Seed which the Lord
has blessed. Isaiah. 61.8.9. And again Chapter 65.17,18,19,20. The The Lord
says, there shall be no more an Infant of days, nor an old man that has not
filled his days, for the child shall die an hundred years old, but the sinner
being an hundred years old shall be accursed, and verse 23. These are the seed
of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them. It is also
prophesied, Isai. 49.22. of the times of the Gospel, how God will lift up his
hand to the Gentiles, and set up his standard to the people, and they shall
bring their sons in their Arms, and their daughters shall be carried on their
shoulders. And is it not evident from these and the like Prophetical
expressions in the holy Scriptures, that there are external visible privileges
of the Covenant and Gospel of Christ belonging to the seed of the Godly, which
do not belong to others?

Thirdly, Let us consider, that whosoever denies the visible Church Membership
and Covenant Interest of Believers Infants, and holds that the Covenant of
Grace does not visibly belong to such Infants, leaves Parents without any
visible ground of hope touching the justification and salvation of their
Children that die in Infancy, I say visible ground of hope. As for Gods eternal
election, or the will of his purpose, this is a secret thing, and secret things
belong to God, but revealed things belong to us and our Children, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
If we hold not that the species of Infants do visibly belong to the Covenant
and Church of God: It will then follow that there is no visible ground of hope
concerning them: No man, woman, or child does or can appear to us to be a
member of the invisible Church and mystical body of Christ, unless it be
declared by God in his word, or else by the visible profession and conversation
of the party, that he or she belongs to the visible Church of Christ. In the
prosecution of this, three things may be noted, (1) That sound hope and charity
are regulated and guided by Judgment, they must be grounded upon the Rule of
Gods word, and our judgment must have some Scripture evidence to proceed on, or
else it is but rash and blind: Now where there is not so much as an outward
appearance or visibility of Church Membership, there is no evidence for us to
build upon, and consequently no right judgment or well grounded hope. If
therefore the Infants of Believers do not so much as visibly and externally
belong to the Covenant and Kingdom of God, then they are not visibly in a state
of Grace and Salvation; and so there is no visible ground of our hope touching
their salvation. (2) Our hope must rely on a word of promise, or else it is but
vain hope, it must have a word from God to bottom upon, as you may see in these
Scriptures, Romans 15.4.13. Ephesians. 2.12. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. 1 Timothy 1.1. Heb. 6.18,19. 1
Pet. 3.15. Romans 4.18.20. Now take away the visible Church Membership and
Covenant Interest of Believers Infants, and there is no promise in Gods word
for their Salvation; for we find not any promise for the salvation of those
persons that are without the visible Church of Christ, (3) If any shall object
that God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, Romans 9.18. And our Children may
be elected for ought we know and consequently saved: This is nothing to the
purpose, for still I demand what visible ground of hope you have in reference
to your Infants, if they die in their infancy more than wicked men have; thus
it may be said touching the children of Jews, Turks, Heathens, some of them may
belong to the Election of Grace, the Children of the most wicked men may be
elected for ought we know: But we speak now of a revealed declared interest in
the Covenant of Grace, nor is Gods favor to believing Parents themselves a
sufficient ground of Christian hope touching their Infants, but as it is
bottomed upon the Covenant and promise of God made with them and their seed,
Genesis 17.7.

Quest. But where have godly Parents visible ground of hope (may you say)
touching the salvation of their children that die in Infancy?

I answer, (1) God has assured us in his word that he will be merciful to the
seed of the godly, and that in opposition to the seed of the wicked on whom he
will visit the sins of their Fathers. That the seed of the Righteous are
blessed, that their children are the heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the
womb is his reward, Psalm. 127.3,4,5. Here is visible ground of Christian hope
in reference to our children, if they die in Infancy, or live to years of
discretion, unless they profanely reject the grace of the Covenant as Jshmael
and Esan did. And the like may be said of visible professors that are baptized
at years of discretion, for if they Apostatize from God (as many have done) the
Lord will cast them off and reject them. (2) we have also visible ground of
hope touching the salvation of our Infants from Christ's tender and loving
carriage toward Infants when he was upon earth. He took up Infants in his
Arms, embraced and blessed them, sharply rebuked his disciples for their
churlishness toward them, and declared that of such is the kingdom of Heaven,
Luk 18.15,16 O the tender compassions and bowels of our sweet Savior! He that
was an Infant himself, is the Head and Mediator of the Church, and has
sanctified the state and age of Infancy: Peter also tells us after the
ascension of Christ, that the promise is to us and to our Children, Acts.
2.38,39. And the Apostle Paul says that the children of a Believer are holy, 1
Cor. 7.14. And doubtless the new Testament administration (which we live under)
is as free, merciful, and gracious or rather more free and merciful in
reference to Believers and their Infants; than the administration of the old
Testament was, and is not here visible ground of hope? God is love it self, and
often compares his love to the love and pity of a tenderhearted Father or
Mother toward the Child, Numb. 11.12. Isai. 49.15. Psalm. 103.13. 1 Thessalonians. 2.7.
(3) We find that some Infants were sanctified in and from the womb, as Jeremiah
and John Baptist, and children are as capable of regeneration and salvation as
grown persons: We are as passive in our Regeneration or first Implantation into
Christ as a little child, and must receive the Kingdom of heaven as a little
child, we find also promises of salvation in Scripture made to Households, Acts.
16.34, etc. And Christ says to Zacheus, This day is salvation come to this
house forasmuch as thou art a Son of Abraham. Luke 19.9. And we are sure that
Infants are a good considerable part of the household. (4) The Apostle Paul
would not have Believers mourn excessively for their dead friends, as those
that are without hope., 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. Be it their children that die in Infancy
or any other: The Apostle speaks of the dead in General, and therefore it must
needs include the Species of Infants, Parents being more apt to grieve and
mourn for their children than for any other. And here Paul speaks of the hope
of their glorious Resurrection for whom they mourned: But now if our Infants do
not visibly belong to the Covenant and Church of God, we cannot have a well
grounded hope touching their salvation, but shall mourn for them as without
hope if they die in Infancy. (5) David comfort himself touching his dead
Child, 2. Sam. 12.23. that he should go to him though the child was not begot
in lawful Matrimony: Now the meaning is not that David should be buried with
the Child (for what ground of comfort does this afford) but that he should be
eternally happy with the child in glory: And doubtless the like or greater
ground of hope every faithful Parent has for his Children begotten in lawful
Matrimony who die in their Infancy. We should likewise remember that children
did appear and join with their Parents in standing Church ordinances, as solemn
fasting and prayer, etc. 2 Chronicles. 20.13. Deuteronomy. 29,10. The Children that sucked
the Breast were to be gathered to the solemn Fast, Joel. 2.16. Which does
further evince and prove the visible Church Membership and Covenant Interest of
believers Infants, and that there is strong ground of hope that God will bless
them and bless these Ordinances to them: And if it be granted by out Brethren,
that the children of the Godly do visibly belong to the Covenant and Church of
God, and that we have visible ground of hope concerning them there will be an
end of the controversy about Infant Baptism amongst judicious and sober
Christians; seeing Baptism (which is the seal of the Covenant and of
Church Membership) does belong to all them that are visibly in the Covenant and
Church of God: For, if they have visibly the grace of the Covenant which is the
greater, then they ought to have the visible seal of the Covenant which is the
lesser: I speak now of Baptism (which is the first seal of Regeneration,
wherein we are merely passive) for as touching the other Sacrament, it is
required that every man should examine himself before he partake of it, 1 Cor.
11.28. Though we say and can prove, that the Infants of Believers are
Church Members in respect of Gods Covenant and grant, and ought to receive the
seal of their admission; yet they are not such complete members in all
respects, as to capacitate them for ^ll Church ordinances and privileges
together ^ith their godly parents, till such time as they themselves profess
their faith in the Covenant and promises of God, and engage themselves to God
in their own persons when they come to riper ^ears. Thus much of the third
consideration.

The Fourth Consideration is this, That it is the ^uty and has been the
practice of believing pa^ents from time to time (as we find in Scripture) ^o
take hold on the Covenant and to exercise faith (...) the Covenant, not only
with reference to themselves but also with reference to their children; ey^g
the Covenant of Grace as comprehending both themselves and their Infant Seed:
And according^ they have improved and pleaded the Covenant ^ith God, when they
have made their addresses to him, this, godly parents have formerly done, and
this we ought to do still. For the proof and confirmation of this point take a
few instances out of Scripture. (1) We find David 2 Samuel 23.5. pleading Gods
Covenant made with him not only for himself, but for his house and children,
though my house (says he) be not so with God, yet he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, it being usual in Scripture when households are spoken of,
to intend the children (though they be not particularly mentioned) Genesis 30.30.
Genesis 45.11,18,19. Exodus 4.1 2 Samuel 27.3. Prove. 31.15. Luke 12.42. Yea the
children are chiefly intended by the household 1 Samuel 20.15. 2 Samuel 9.9 1 Kings.
17.12.13.15. Psalm* 127.1.3 Prove. 12.7. Isai. 31.2. Hos. 1.4. Hab. 2.9,10. 1 Timothy, 3,4,5, and 1 Timothy 5.4,8,14. compared with 2 Timothy 1.16. children being the
ordinary instruments to continue and uphold the house, as in natural and civil
so in religious and ecclesiastical respects: And hence they are builden of the
house both ways, as the hebrew radix signifies from which the word used for
sons and daughters is derived: And hence also we have that phrase of Gods
building the women houses, Exodus 1.21. And here in this instance of David that
godly man [where he says, although my house be not so with God yet etc.] he
exercises faith in the Covenant which was a gracious Covenant with respect
unto his house, and therefore it is said to be all his salvation and all his
desire not only touching himself but his house and children also: When he
reflected upon the great disorders and miscarriages which were amongst them. 2.
To go up far high^ (...) higher than David's time. Our great Grandmother Eve
also did thus eye and improve the gracious promise of God as made not only with
reference to Adam and her, but to their Infant-Church seed: Abel being slain
and Cain having rejected the grace of the promise; when her Infant Seth was
born she believed that God had for his cove^ant's sake looked graciously upon
her in that In^ant of hers, and she called his name Seth, for (says ^e) God
has appointed me another seed instead ^f Abel whom Cain slew, Genesis 4 25. This
she spoke ^f him not as a mere natural child (born according to the course of
nature) but as of a Covenant and Church-seed, and therefore she compares him ^o
Abel and not to Cain, and calls him by such a ^me as signified her faith
touching the Covenant^ate and interest of this Infant, nor did she there^ fail
of her faith and hope as appears verse. 26. ^. This was likewise the practice of
other parents ^embers of the Church of God: Lamech, when ^oah was born, looking
to the promise of God ^ve his Infant the name of Noah, Genesis 5.28.29. ^lieving
that that Child should be as it were a ^ot to the Church and people of God,
though the ^rrupt wicked world should be destroyed. 4. ^s for Abraham the
father of the faithful, there (...) no question to be made but that he
exercised ^th in Gods Covenant both for himself and his ^d, the covenant being
expressly renewed with (...) and his Infant Seed Genesis 17.7,8, etc. Which ^s an
everlasting gracious covenant: And this ^venant did comfort and support Abraham
in re^ence to his posterity and made him put up that ^ly wish and prayer
mentioned ver. 18. O that Ishmael might live in thy sight! But yet long before
Abraham was born, this was the practice of the servants of God, even in dark
times; when the Covenant and promises were not so clearly revealed, and much
more ought it to be our practice now.

5. It is further evident that the Saints of old did exercise faith, touching
the Foederal estate or Covenant Interest of their children, by comparing Psalm.
102.25,26,27,28. with Heb* 1.10,11,12. which referrs to Jesus Christ the Surety
and Mediator of the Covenant, in whom they pleaded with God, and expected a
Blessing from him for their children, and that by virtue of Gods Gracious
Covenant: Nor was it merely a temporal vanishing good to their children which
they looked for and expected, but tha^ their children might be established
before Go^ in the Spiritual Blessings of the Covenant, a^ you may see in that
Psalm 102. Verse 25, 26, 27 28. compared together. And there is the li^ ground
for the exercise of our Faith in the C^venant, touching our Infants now under
t^ New Testament Administration.

For the fuller satisfaction herein, I will l^ down these five Propositions.

Propos. 1. That children are so comprehend^ and involved in their Parents, by
the dispen^tion of God, that the Parents act is counted t^ childrens act, and
the Parents neglect, the neglect; as we may plainly see in the case of
C^cumcision; That Soul shall be cut ^ff that is (...) circumcised, for he has
broken my Covenant, sa^ the Lord: Genesis 17.14. And yet the Infant himself was
not capable of a personal neglect. And though our Savior required personal
Faith in grown ones, as to their own bodily cure; yet as for their children, it
was accepted when their Parents believed on their behalf: John 4.50,51. Mark 9.
v. 12. to 18. Matthew. 15 22. to 29. Not that the Parents Faith is meritorious;
only this we say, That upon a Believers accepting the Covenant for himself and
his Seed, there does result (in the sense formerly expressed) not only a
personal right to a man's self, but a parental right also to his children, so as
to render them capable of some privileges of the Covenant.

Propos. 2. That this is one part or branch of the Gospel of Christ (which is
to be preached in the extent and latitude of it:) Namely, that the Infants of
Believers are Confoederates in and with their Parents, being taken into one and
the same Covenant together with their Parents. What is the Gospel of Christ, (I
pray you) but good News, Glad Tidings, a Joyful Message? And is it not good
news that God has made a Gracious Covenant with us and our children? And that
God owns and has respect not only to us, but also to our little ones? As when
one conveys or makes over a House or a piece of Land to a man and the Heirs of
his Body; it is a far greater privilege, and more acceptable to the Grantee,
than if it were only made over to the man himself. And in this latitude and
extent the Gospel or Covenant of Grace was eyed and improved by the faithful
from the beginning of the world (as I have showed:) And so it shall be in the
purer times of the Gospel, toward the end of the world, when the power of
Antichrist is destroyed; and when all the Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of Christ: Rev. 11.15. When nations shall flow into the Church of
Christ; And the mountains of the Lords house shall be established in the top of
the mountains, and exalted above the hills. Isaiah 2.2,3. Parents then shall
not only offer up and dedicate themselves, but* their children to the Lord: And
shall not only plead the Covenant for themselves, but for their children also
before the Lord.

Propos. 3. This being the true Gospel (in the full latitude and extent of it)
our Blessed Savior did accordingly command his Disciples to preach and publish
it to the Nations: They must go and teach all nations, Baptizing them. Matthew.
28.19. Compared with Mark 16.15. Gal. 3.8,9. Romans 1.16,17. They were to open
and declare the whole Covenant in the largeness and extensiveness of it:
Namely, the Covenant that was made with Abraham, whereof this was the chief
branch, I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee: And this they were
to teach all nations; whereas before the Church was limited to one nation; now
their Commission was extended to all nations, teaching and baptizing them;
whoever in the Gentile nations shall take hold on the Covenant, they and their
children ought to be admitted members of the visible Church of Christ, and
baptized. In the times of the Old Testament only one nation of the Jews were
visibly the people of God, in Covenant with him; but now other nations are
taken in likewise according to that Gospel promise: Isaiah 19.23,24,25. And
indeed in every nation the children make a considerable part of the nation, and
are always included under every Administration to the nation; whether Promises
or Threatenings, Privileges or Burdens, Mercies or Judgments, unless they be
particularly excepted. Children were included and taken in with their Parents
under the former Administration, (as has been clearly demonstrated:) And there
is no Scripture which proves that the Infants of Believers are excepted or left
out in the New Administration of the Covenant; nay it appears from diverse Texts
of Scripture, that the Infants of Believers do visibly belong to the Kingdom,
School and Family of Christ. And whereas some of our dissenting Brethren
object, that it behoved the Lord to give a Precept for putting Infants into the
New Administration of the Covenant, if he had intended they should have been
included; it may be easily answered, that they always had a right to be reputed
as belonging to the visible Church and Kingdom of God, and therefore there
needs no new putting in by any new Grant, seeing there is no Bar made in
Scripture against their visible Church membership: Once they were in, and where
find we that ever they were put out, or excluded?

Propos. 4. As Christ commanded the Gospel, or New Covenant to be thus preached
(as extending to Believers and their Seed:) So it was accordingly preached and
held forth by the Apostles in their Ministry. The New Covenant being good news
and glad Tidings, not only to the Believer touching himself, but touching his
children also: As it was glad tidings to David, not only that God had promised
mercy to himself, but to his House also, for a great while to come. 2 Samuel
7.19. That the Gospel was thus preached by Christ and his Apostles does plainly
appear, when Zacheus was become a child of Abraham, (to wit, by Faith) the Lord
Jesus promised Salvation to him and his House: Luke 19.9. This day Salvation is
to this house: (So it may be rendered) And the Apostle Peter Acts 2.38.39.
Exhorts his hearers to repent and be baptized, and makes use of an Argument to
persuade them thereunto, taken from the benefit that should redound to their
Posterity, for the promise is to you and to your children: If the Jews that are
near, or the Gentiles that are afar off obey the call of God, and own the
Covenant in the new Administration thereof; then the promise is not only made
to them, but to their children also: And thus Paul and Silas did preach the
Gospel to the Jailer, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved
and thine house: Acts 16.31. And this is the same Gospel in substance which God
preached long before to Abraham, when he promised to be a God to him and his
Seed: This was that Covenant which was confirmed of God in Christ, long before
the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai: Gal. 3.16,17. Which Covenant (being so
confirmed) is no other than the Gospel of Christ, which is come upon the
Believing Gentiles; Gal. 3.13,14. Where the Apostle tells us that the Blessing
of Abraham (which extends to Believers and their Seed) is come upon the
Gentiles.

Propos. 5. It is therefore a sinful neglect, and undervaluing of the Grace and
Salvation, and great privileges held forth in the Covenant, when Christian
Parents do not believe the promises that are made not only to themselves, but
to their Seed: That Salvation which the Lord Jesus himself, and his Apostles
preached, and which those neglected. Heb. 2.3. It was not barely Salvation it
self, but the Covenant and Promise holding the same forth; for so we find Acts
28.28. That the Salvation to be preached to, and heard by the Gentiles, was the
Gospel Covenant and Promises, which contain and hold forth that Salvation: And
this is that Mercy, Riches and Salvation which is come upon the Gentiles. Romans
11.11,12,17,19,30. Gal. 3.14. So likewise Gods Salvation in Isaiah 51.6,8. Is
his Covenant or Promise, on which their Salvation does depend, as Calvin
observes upon the Text: So David speaking of the Covenant, in reference not
only to himself, but to his House, says, This is all my Salvation, and ^ll my
desire, though he make it not to grow: 2 ^am. 23.5. This Covenant contained all
his ^alvation, which you see referrs not only to ^im, but to his House; and it
has been the ^ivilege and practice of the Saints all along, ^us to plead and
improve the Covenant, which (...) the fourth Consideration that I have now done
^ith.

Fifthly, Consider I beseech you, that the Saints privileges under the new and
better administration of the Covenant are many ways augmented and enlarged of
what they were in the times of the old Testament; whereas the opinion of those
brethren who deny the Covenant Interest and Baptism of believers children does
exceedingly straiten and diminish the privileges of believers: It being a
great and comfortable privilege to us that not only we but our children do
belong to the visible church and kingdom of God, and have a visible right to
and interest in the Covenant of Grace (whatever is pretended to the contrary)
let these four things be diligently and impartially weighed by our brethren. 1.
Would it not have grieved the believing Jews exceedingly, to have had their
poor babes excluded from the outward priviledge^ and administration of the
Covenant since the coming of Christ, when they were sure that their children
had relation to and interest in the covenan^ and Church of God before the
coming of Christ* not only themselves in their own persons but their children
also were comprehended in the visibl^ administration of the Covenant: Truly in
thi^ case the believing Jews might well be offende^ (in a rational way) with
the new administration of the covenant. Suppose a man in his former gra^ or
conveyance had his children included, but no^ in a new grant they are left out
and excluded* will such a man be willing to give up his form^ grant and accept
of the new grant, or rather wi^ he not look upon it as a great infringement of
h^ privilege? It is just so here, if the Covenant no^ under the new
administration do not external^ belong to the Infants of believers (as it did
to t^ Infants of the Jews) it may well be looked on as a great infringement of
their privilege. 2. Whereas our dissenting brethren say that the Jews indeed
had this privilege, that their children were reckoned in the outward
administration of the Covenant as branches of the Olive, but the believing
Gentiles have not this privilege. Is not this to abridge and straiten the
privilege of Gentile believers, yea and of the believing Jews themselves (with
reference to their children) who take hold on Christ and the Govenant now under
the new administration thereof? But let any man produce if he can one text or
syllable out of the word of God, where the privileges of Believers under the
Gospel are straightened and cut short touching their Infants visible right to the
covenant and Church of God and the initiatory seal thereof: Once the children
of believers had this privilege, let it be showed when and where it was taken
away and abolished. 3. Such as go about to deprive believing Parents of so
great a share of their comfort (in reference to their poor babes) had need
produce clear testimony out of Gods word to convince and persuade them, because
next to the glory of God and the salvation of their own souls, their childrens
interest in the Covenant is one of the greatest benefits and privileges which
believers have from the Covenant of Grace, namely, to have their children
visibly to belong to Gods family and kingdom and not to Satan's, children being
a great treasure to their Parents and the salvation of their souls very dear
and precious to them. But 4. The Apostle Paul tells us plainly, that the
blessing of Abraham is come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.14.
Which shows that in this respect the privileges of believing Gentiles are not
lessened or abridged (now under the new Testament administration) what is this
blessing of Abraham but Gods gracious Covenant and promise that he will be a
God to us and to our seed? If this covenant and promise belong not now to
believers children in their Infancy, then saints under the New Testament do not
fully partake of the blessing of Abraham, then are they deprived of a great and
precious privilege which did belong to believers in the old Testament. If it be
said, this blessing comes upon believers children when the children themselves
believe, the same may be said of the children of Pagans, who when they actually
believe may as well claim the promise to belong to them as believers children
may when themselves do believe. And therefore certainly this blessing of
Abraham, this covenant blessing does include and not exclude the Infants of
believers, otherwise they had that advantage and privilege before the coming
of Christ which they have not since. And shall we think that the Lord Jesus who
is a propitiation for the sins of the world, and has broken down the partition
wall that was between Jews and Gentiles, who was so compassionate and
tenderhearted to all sorts of people, when he was upon earth, did come into
the world and die the cursed death of the cross that he might lessen and abate
our privileges and comforts and the grounds of our hope touching the
Covenant Interest and salvation of our poor Infants? far be it from us to
entertain such a thought.

Sixthly, Consider further, that the Jews themselves in the later days shall be
converted to Christ with ^ect unto, and by virtue of the Covenant, which was ^e
with their Fathers: Romans 11.25,26,27,28. ^ere the Apostle says, That when the
Fullness of the ^iles is come in, then shall all Israel be saved: and this ^ll
be in respect of Gods Grace and love, even his Co^nted Grace and Love with
their Fathers: If the ^dren of godly Parents be not in Covenant before they
^ally believe, (according to the opinion of our dis^ing Brethren) truly then,
there are two or three dif^ties in this eleventh Chapter to the Romans, which
^ot be answered nor cleared. The first Difficulty is (...), How God in the New
Testament should convert the ^erity of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob out of his love
(...) their Fathers, and with respect to his Gracious Cove^, made with their
Fathers; and yet no child is par^er of Grace by the Covenant of his Fathers,
till him^ does actually believe: How can this hang together* ^ot Conversion and
Faith here made a fruit and effect (...) Gods love, his convenanted love unto
their Fathers, and (...) the Fathers sake unto their Seed? Secondly, If God ^is
Covenant has no respect here to the natural Seed* (...) Branches, (as our
Brethren pretend) why then should (...) Apostle Paul call the Jews the natural
Branches of (...) good Olive tree, and make their Conversion much ^e kindly,
and as it were more easy and natural, than (...) Conversion of the Gentiles
was? Thirdly, if the ^trivance of foederal interest from believing Parents, to
^ir natural children (now under the New Testament) be ^yed and rejected, how
can the Apostles Argument here (...) answered; whereby he proves the Conversion
and ^iness of the Jews in future ages, from the holiness of ^ir godly Ancestors
in times past? If (says he) the ^ing away of the Jews was the reconciling of
the ^ld; what shall the receiving of them be, but life (...) the dead? Romans
11.15. That there shall be such ^ceiving of them, he proves from the Holiness,
which (...) the Institution of God) is derived from the First ^its to the whole
Lump; and by the Covenant of God, from the Root to the Branches: Verse 16. For
(sai^ he) If the first fruits be holy so is the whole lump, (...) if the root
be holy so are the branches: The force a^ strength of this argument depends
wholly on the Covena^ of grace and the continuation thereof from godly pare^ to
their natural children now in the days of the new T^stament; and this receiving
or taking in of the Jews (...) the latter days does take in their children also
by ve^ of Gods Covenant made with their godly ancestors, a^ accordingly it is
prophesied and promised, that the Je^ shall be converted and their children
also shall be as afo^ time. Jer. 30.20. And that in Ezekiel, chap, 37. ve^
20.21,25,27. is very remarkable, when the scatter^ tribes of Israel and Judah
shall become as the two sli^ joined in one (in ecclesiastical respects) the
Lord wi^ reference to that time, renews the old charter of Abr^hams Cevenant to
be a God to them: In which prom^ he includes their children, they being also
together w^ their Parents scattered among the heathen, and to be g^thered under
Christ as their Prince and Head, which g^thering and conversion of theirs,
shall be by virtue of t^ Covenant made with their fathers, so that the child^
belong to the Covenant and the Covenant belongs to the before they actually
believe.

Seventhly, Consider the great absurdities and evil co^sequences which must
needs follow from the denying (...) believers Infants visible right to the
Covenant of gra^ and their visible Church Membership. 1. It exclu^ them all
from the ordinary way and means of Salvation^ being neither in the visible
Church of Christ (out of whi^ ordinarily there is no salvation) nor in the
Covenant (...) grace so much as externally in respect of Gods visible
^pensation. In this case what ordinary means is left (...) their salvation? the
promises of God (we know) are man to the Church; and God has appointed and
ordered (...) spiritual good things to be conveyed to us and ours i^ Covenant
way and by virtue of the Covenant, 1 Samuel ^ 5. Ephesians. 3.8,9. Isai. 42 6. Isai.
49.6.7,8. Zach. ^ 11. Christ himself is the Mediator of the new Coven^ (...)
Testament Heb. 9.15. Heb. 12.24. If therefore Be^ers Infants have no visible
interest in this Covenant, (...) they have no visible interest in Christ as
Mediator, for (...) is Mediator of no other Covenant but this; the business
^ich he transacts as Mediator is to confirm this Covenant (...) and in the
behalf of all those for whom he is Mediator, (...). 9.24. Romans 15 8. Nor can
any partake of the spi^ of God and influence thereof, but by and from the
^enant of grace, 2 Pet. 1.4. Nor of a glorious re^ection and blessed estate but
by virtue of the Covenant, ^ll be their God, Luke 20 36.37,38. Heb. 11.16. ^cts
26.6.7. Now if this sort of persons (I mean the ^cies of Infants) be excluded
from a visible interest in (...) Covenant and promises, truly then there is no
visible (...) nor means left for their Salvation. 2. If only adult (...)
Gentiles who actually believe and are converted ^ade nigh by the blood of
Christ in respect of Cove^t and Ecclesiastical holiness, it will argue that
that sort (...) persons only were actually strangers before, and not (...) seed
with them, (whether individually or specifi^y considered) Ephesians. 2.11 12,13. Nay
this supposes (...) Christ took down the partition wall (as it stood) only
^een grown Jews and adult Gentiles, but as for the ^dren of believing Gentiles,
it argues that either there (...) no such partition wall betwixt them and the
Infants (...) the Jews* or that it remains untaken down to this day: (...) thus
to suppose, what is it else but a vain imagination ^rary to the word of God? 3.
To deny the Covenant-^st of believers Infants implies that there are two ^ct
Covenants of grace (besides the subservient Cove^ on mount Sinai) one Covenant
made with the faith-^d their seed of old, another with us (excluding our (...)
seed) and these two Covenants essentially different (...) from the other: But
this were absurd to imagine, ^ist being the substance of the Covenant of Grace
both ^er the old and new administration thereof. The new (...) of sealing the
Covenant by Baptism (when first insti^d) was precisely with respect to the
Jews, Gods peo^ old, Joh. 1.33. Matthew. 3.1. John. 4.1. compared with Matthew.
10.5.6. to show us that no other Coven^ in substance is now sealed by Baptism
than what was man formerly with Abraham and his posterity, Luke 1.5^
55,68.69,70,71,72,73. Acts. 2.38,39. Now if (...) was one and the same Covenant
in substance, it will t^ unavoidably follow, that either the Infants of the Je^
were not in Gods Covenant together with their pare^ (whereas it is evidently
proved that they were) or t^ their being in Covenant was merely ceremonial and
ty^cal and so is abolished. But grant that the way of seal^ the Covenant to
them was ceremonial, yet what cerem^ could there be in this great promise, I
will be a God (...) thee and to thy seed after thee in their generations?
Do^less this contains a principal substantial part of (...) Covenant it self:
Or else it will follow that the Infant^ believing Gentiles are now in Gods
Covenant and members of his visible Church, together with their Pare^ the
Covenant being still one and the same in substa^ 4. If the Infants of believers
now have no visible righ^ the Covenant and Church of God, will not God he^ be
made a respecter of persons, looking at the Jews (...) their children in the
times of the old Testament as be^ in Covenant with him, but not so regarding
the Infant^ the Covenanting believing Gentiles in the times of the (...)
Testament? And whereas he is said to be a God to all (...) families of his
people, Jer. 31.1. according to this ^nion he is not a God in Covenant to any
more than part^lar persons actually believing and professing their faith (...)
not so much as by outward ecclesiastical administration the children of his
people, which are the choicest part (...) p op of their families whereby the
Lord God buildet^ their families. 5. This will also abolish and take (...) that
distinction which all along has been observed in (...) throughout the holy
Scriptures, for by this mean^ (...) seed of the woman and the seed of the
serpent in the y^lings and branches thereof will be mingled and confo^ed
together. There will be no distinction of the S^ God and of men, of the seed of
Isaac and Ishmael i^ Infant part thereof, no Church distinction of chil^ clean
and unclean: which the blessed Apostle counts an absurd thing, 1 Cor. 7.14.
Else your children were unclean [ i. e. like the children of Pagans, and
infidels, in no better case than they] but now they are holy. All men's children
by nature are children of wrath one as well as another: And therefore if we
take away the distinction between Infants and Infants in respect of their
Covenant Interest and Church Membership, then they are mingled and confounded
together, I mean the Infants of Turks, Pagans and Christians one as well as
another, as having their actual standing in the visible kingdom of Satan.

Consider (I humbly beseech you in the bowels of Christ) what has been
seriously written unto you, and the Lord give you much of that wisdom which is
pure and peaceable easy to be entreated; and without partiality. I will now
condude this paper with two or three inferences or confectaries which may be
genuinely deduced from the foregoing considerations.

First, Hence we have cause greatly to admire the ri^hes of Gods grace in the
Covenant as extending not only ^o us but to our children also: O the tender
mercy and ^ompassion of God toward our little babes! O what ho^our has God
put upon his saints thus to entayl the visible ^dministration of his grace on
them and theirs! He has ^ot so dealt with Pagans and unbelievers, what
advantage ^ath visible believers and their Infants above others? much ^ery way,
to them are committed the Oracles of God, ^hey have visible right to and
interest in the Covenant and ^romises of God, Romans 3.1.2,3. As the
Infant-children ^f heathen and wicked men do visibly belong to the king^om of
Satan, so the Infant-children of the godly, do visibly ^elong to the kingdom of
Christ, Luke 18.16.

II. Let believers therefore duly and constantly plead and ^prove the Covenant
of grace in the new dispensation of it (...) only for themselves, but for their
little ones, for as the Covenant is held forth in scripture in this large and
com^rehensive manner, so accordingly we should plead it with God in the
exercise of our faith and prayers. And if Chri^ans would believe more and
dispute less. Idoubt not but it would contribute much to the silencing of this
and the controversies among the Saints: Lord, thou have made a g^cious Covenant
not only with me but with my poor bab^ remember thy promise and make it
effectual to their so^ let them not only partake of the outward administration,
(...) of the inward saving grace of the covenant, although (...) house be not
so with God as it ought to be yet Lord rem^ber thy gracious Covenant for me and
mine.

III. Christian parents should be hence encouraged to (...) vote their children
to the Lord and to educate and train t^ up in the fear and nurture of the Lord,
Ephesians. 6.4. seeing (...) are taken into Christ's school and family, and are owned
(...) him as members of his visible kingdom, O let not part suffer their
children to take Gods name in vain, to pro^ the Lords day, to abuse and revile
his servants: I know (s^ the Lord) that Abraham will command his children and
(...) household after him to keep the way of the Lord. Genesis 18.^ choose you this
day (says Joshua) whom ye will serve, but a^ me and mine house we will serve
the Lord, Jos. 24.15. (...) should be our resolution, and accordingly we should
te^ our children the fear of the Lord and instruct them conc^ing the nature,
properties, privileges, and duties of the ^venant of grace and the feals
thereof, Baptism and the L^ supper, as the Jews instructed their children
touching (...) institution, use and end of the passover. Exodus 13.14.

IV. and lastly, We should hence be admonished to ^ware of and avoid those
doctrines that straiten and cut s^ the Saints privileges under the new
Testament admini^tion and exclude and shut out our Infants from a visibl^
^terest in the covenant of grace, and so leave us witho^ any visible ground of
hope (from Gods revealed will i^ Scriptures) touching their salvation, if they
happen t^ in their Infancy, for what visible ground of hope can t^ be in
reference to them if they have no visible right t^ Covenant and promises of
God. But blessed be the nam^ the Lord who has not left us without visible
ground of (...) touching our poor Infants. Nor should we mourn for (...) (so
dying) as those mourn that are without hope.

FINIS.

