THE COUNTRY-MANS Physician. WHERE Is showed by a most plain and easy manner,
how those that live far from Cities, or Market Towns, and cannot have the
advice of Physicians, may be able of themselves, by the help of this Book, to
Cure most Diseases happening to the Body of Man. A Work very useful and
necessary for all that understand not the Learned Languages.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1680.

TO THE READER.
I Am not Ignorant, that there are several Practices of Physic, already
Published in the English Tongue: but truly they are almost all of them so
stuffed, either with hard terms of Art, and difficult Descriptions and
Definitions, or the Receipts, (the chief thing designed indeed for the Buyer)
all in the Latin Tongue; that I cannot at all perceive any, or very little
difference from their being continued in the Learned Languages they were
written in; so that they must necessarily be something of Scholars to
understand those Books, and so of little or no use to those that are none:
Whereupon taking the Premises into serious Consideration, I thought I should do
a very acceptable piece of Service to my dear Country-folks, that understand no
more than their Mother Tongue; if I should write a very plain method for them,
whereby they might be able by the help thereof to Counsel and Administer to
themselves, and their friends, and neighbors, fitting and pertinent Remedies
for all manner of Curable Diseases, when and where they cannot conveniently
have the advice of the Learned Physician or Chyrurgion, living perhaps remote
from any Market Town, or City where such commonly inhabit. For the Book it
self, I can say that, as the old Proverb is, good Wine needs no Bush; so I am
confident thou will find it will be able to commend it self, it being a choice
Collection of almost infallible experiments from the most Famous Printed
Authors, and curious Manuscripts; and I have (for the Reasons before specified)
made it so plain and easy, that any though no Scholars, nor at all versed in
the Learned Languages, cannot err in following these directions in this Book.

A TABLE OF THE DISEASES and CURES, Treated of in this BOOK.
CHAP. I. OF the Diseases of the Head, whether caused from Heat or Cold, where
likewise of the inveterate pain of the Head, Page 1. CHAP. II. Of the Diseases
and Pains of the Eyes; where of the Chataract. p. 2. CHAP. III. Of the Diseases
of the Nose, as stinking Ulcers thereof; where of the bleeding at the Nose. p.
13. CHAP. IV. Of the Diseases of the Ears, viz. Ulcers, Worms, noise in the
Ears, and Deafness; where also how to Cure the Pain in the Ears. p. 19. CHAP.
V. Of the Diseases of the Mouth, as the Ulcers thereof; where of a stinking
breath; of too much and too little spitting; likewise of the Diseases and Pains
of the Teeth, and of the Cure of the Quinsey. p. 22. CHAP. VI. Of the Diseases
of the Breast, as the Coughs shortness of Breath, Spitting of Blood, and of the
Ptysick. p. 27. CHAP. VII. Of the Diseases of the Side, as the Plurisie, and of
the Pains of the Side. p. 33. CHAP. VIII. Of the Diseases of the Heart, as the
feebleness thereof, and the beating of the Heart, and swooning away. p. 35.
CHAP. IX. Of the Diseases of the Stomach, and first of the weakness thereof,
whether from a hot or cold cause, of nauseating meats, and loss of taste, and
appetite; where of the Wind in the Stomach, whether before or after eating, and
of the Hiccop. Of staying Vomiting, whether from an hot or a cold cause, and of
provoking Vomit if there be occasion, and to comfort the Stomach, after
Vomiting, and lastly of the pains of the Stomach. p. 37. CHAP. X. Of the
Diseases of the Belly, and first of the Diseases of the Liver, whether from hot
or cold causes, viz. from Choler or Phlegm, etc. Where of its obstruction. 2.
Of the Spleen, of the Diseases; where of its obstruction likewise, and also of
the Cure of the three sorts of Jaundies; that is, yellow, green and Black. 3.
Of the Cholick and Iliac passions. 4. Of the pain in the Kidneys, and
difference between that and the Colic; as also of the Cure of their Gravel and
Stone, and likewise of the Cure of the Stone in the Bladder, and difficulty and
heat in voiding of Urine. 5. Of the Cure of the Three sorts of Fluxes of the
Belly, viz. Lientery, Diarrhaea, and Dissentery. 6. Of the Dropsy and Wind,
and Gripings of the Belly. 7. Of the both sorts of Hemorrhoids, viz. inward and
outward. p. 42. CHAP. XI. Of the Diseases belonging to Women, as of the
stopping and provoking their Monthly Courses, and of the Curing of the Fits of
the Mother, as also of the falling down of the Womb: Of their Barrenness
likewise, and of how to prevent miscarriage, and how to cause easy Delivery of
Women in Childbirth, and to ease their Pains after Travel; and lastly how to
cause plenty and scarcity of Milk in Women that give Suck. p. 52. CHAP. XII. Of
breeding of Worms and Teeth in Children. p. 59. CHAP. XIII. Of the Cure of
Fevers, whether continued Quotidian, Tertian, or Quartane. p. 61. CHAP. XIV.
Of the Cure of the Pestilence, and its Symptoms. p, 64. CHAP. XV. Of the Cure
of the Gout, whether in the Hands, or Feet, or Knees, or Hipps. p. 66. CHAP.
XVI. Of the Cure of outward pains in any part of the Body. p. 68. CHAP. XVII.
Of the Cure of bruises in any part of the Body. p. 70. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Cure
of Green Wounds and old Ulcers in any part of the Body. p. 71. CHAP. XIX. Of
the Cure of all sorts of swellings in any part of the Body, whether they be hot
or cold, hard or foft. p. 78. (...)
(...) by excessive heat or cold; and often from the infirmities of other
Members, in which is contained the Cause of the pain in the head; as the
Stomach, the Kidneys, Liver, Spleen, Womb, etc. Now the pain is greater in the
forehead than elsewhere when it proceeds from Blood; behind when from Phlegm;
when from Choler, the pain is most on the right side the head, and on the left
when from Melancholy, whereupon Medicines are to be employed to the purpose, by
opposing hot Remedies to the cold, as Phlegm and Melancholy, and cold to the hot
Causes; as Blood and Choler.

The manner to cure the pain from a hot Cause, is first to let Blood in the
Arm; then to apply Linen Clothes dipped in Plantain and Rose Water, and Vinegar,
or in the Juice of Lettice with Rose Water and Vinegar: Or Oil of Roses and
Poppies, and make a Pultis of Bole-Armenac white of Eggs a Roasted Apple and
Vineager, and apply it to the head and forehead and temples, and wash the head
with warm water wherein have been boiled, Sage Leaves, Roses and water
Lilly-Flowers; and wash the feet with the same, if he have no motion of the
rheum; or a Bag of Roses dipped in Rose Water: or Clothes dipped in the whites of
Eggs, very well beaten with Rose Water. Let them drink Cichory, Endive,
Purslain-waters, etc. mixed together, or one alone; or Barly-water with a little
Liquorice Boiled in it. And to the intent that your Remedies may be the more
Beneficial, you must keep the Belly loose by Glisters, or Suppositories, or
loosening Medicines, as Syrups of Violets and Roses of each half an ounce, or
so; or Cassia, Lenitive Electuary, or Diaprunes, or Catholicon, etc.

For a cold cause apply to the forehead and jaws, wild Time, or Vervain, or
Rue, steept or dipped in Vinegar and Honey of Roses; or Tobacco, or Mint; or
Watercresses, or rub the head with Asarabac-leaves, or the Juice of Melilot
mixed with Vinegar and Oil of Roses. To drink water wherein Betony has been
boiled; applying the Leaves to the Temples. To snuff up into the Nose the juice
of sow-Bread, or Gith steept in Vinegar, and Powder of Pellitory of the Wall to
make Sneeze: and make a Bag with hot Herbs and Flowers, as Melilot, Sage,
Betony, Rosemary; of white Snakeweed; the said Herbs and Flowers having been
Perfumed with the Vapors of Betony and Balm, put upon a Plate of Iron, or hot;
and cast thereon Vinegar and Rose Water: Perfume likewise the head with dry
things, as Roses and Mastich; or with Red-Roses and Salt, but it must be when
the spitting comes not; for then for (fear of stopping the breath) you must be
content to Perfume the head Clothes only, applying them hot to the head; and if
the pain ceases not by these Remedies then use hotter things, as Bags made of
Marjoram, Rue, Bays, Juniper Berries; or a fomentation of the decoction of the
said things; or else anoint the head with Oil of Camomile and Dill, one or both
together; or Oil of Rue, Spike, Castor, adding to them a little Pepper, or
Mustard Poudred; to draw up into the Nose, the Juice of Marjoram, or Fenel, is
an Excellent Remedy; After the Application of these Remedies before spoken of,
you must make a Cap of Taffaty doubled, lined with Cotton, which you shall
stuff with Flowers of Marjoram, Camomile, Red-Roses, Rosemary, Cinnamon, Nutmeg,
Cloves, etc. finely Poudred: and if there be a Catarrh, use Myrtle Berries,
Frank-incense, and the Gum of the Juniper Tree.

The Inveterate pain of the head is cured by Roasting a piece of the outer pill
of an Onion under the Cindres, and steeping it in Oil of Bays and Roses, and
put into the Ear where the pain of the Head is; Bleeding and Purging first; and
you must always keep a Temperate diet without which all is in vain. Eat no
windy nor salt Meats; be quiet in his mind, not Write, nor Read, but bear
patiently his pain.

CHAP. II. Of the Diseases of the Eyes.
FOr the Diseases of the Eyes you must purge the Brain, forasmuch as the
greater part of the inward Diseases proceed from the Brain, distilling its
superfluous and malignant Humors upon them, or the lower parts furnishing with
Causes, whereby the sight is diminished and the Eye pained; and this is the
Physicians business to discern the particular Humors that cause the Diseases;
and to evacuate them by proper Purgations, as Pills, Glysters, Potions, etc.
And for what concerns the outward means you must keep the Head dry and clean,
rubbing it well behind every morning, by that means diverting the Humors which
fall from the Brain upon the Eyes; it makes much likewise for the preservation
of the sight to keep the Feet dry, moderately hot, and not moist; it is likewise
good for the same purpose not to sleep in the day, nor hold the Head much down;
to be bound in the Belly is bad for the sight, wherefore you must keep it
soluble, you must shun the Wind, the Cold, Heat, too much looking upon the Sun,
and much Light, or great Fire; much Reading and Writing, Weeping, to Sleep or
Wake much. As to Eating and Drinking, you must Eat Meats of good nourishment,
not Windy, Salt, nor Spicy, little or no strong Drink. The use of Eyebright is
very good against all maladies of the Eyes, Boiled in Pottage, or Drink the
Powder, or Boil it in the Drink?

The Film or Cataract is Cured by the Powder of Sugar Candy, Tutty, white
Coperas, mixed equal parts and searc'd, and put into the Eye, Night and Morning;
the Powder alone of white Beans has the same Property. To this end serves
likewise a Water made of half an Ounce of Tutty, a quarter of an Ounce of Mace,
Poudred and Infused in white Wine and Rose Water of each half a Pint; putting
them in a Glass and let them stand in the Sun, in Summer, about a Month,
keeping it from Rain and Dew; shaking the Glass often.

Another for the same purpose; Take a couple of new laid Eggs, Roasted hard
under the Cinders, take away their shells, cut them in the middle and take away
the Yelk, and fill up the place with Sugar Candy and Tutty equal parts, then
joining them together with a thread, steep them in Rose Water, in a little
Vessel: when they have stood twenty four Hours, Strein and Press them through a
Linen Cloth; of which Liquor drop a few drops into the Eye Night and Morning.

The Distilled Water of these things following cures the Cataract likewise;
Plantain, and little and tender Pomegranate flowers, red Roses, sprigs of
Fenel, of each an handful, crumbs of white Bread, hot out of the Oven, one
Pound, mix them together, and steep them six hours in white Wine, then Distill
them.

To the same purpose Distill this Water.

Take of Fenel, Rue, Verben, Eyebright, Endive, Betony, red-Roses, Venus-hair,
equal parts, steeping them before twenty four Hours in white Wine, the Liver of
a Buck, three Ounces, Distill them thrice in Balneo Mariae; and the last Water
will be very proper for Cataracts, and all other Maladies of the Eye,
preserving the sight to Old Age.

Another very Excellent one. Take Snails and Distill them in Balneo Mariae,
washing them well first; and in eight Ounces of their Water infuse one of Tutty
prepared, Sugar Candy, white Dung of a Lizard, dried Bones, two Drams of each,
red Coral, Aloes, Sal Ammoniac, of each one Dram; being all well Poudred and
put into the Water, must be put into an Alimbec, and the Water that comes from
them serves Effectually as before, and also to clear the Eyes of all spots, and
Redness; preserving the sight so well and so long, that Ancient People have
seen as well as if they had been but 30.

This Unguent following is very good for the Eyes, Curing their inflammation
and Redness, staying the sharp Defluxions which make them Blear-eyed,
Anointing them Night and Morning.

Take half an Ounce of Tutty finely Poudred in a Bel-metal Mortar, then Grind
it on a Marble with Rose Water, as Painters do, then dry it in the Sun; then
Grind it again, with fresh Rose Water; do thus seven or eight times, then mix
it with the same weight of fresh Butter; and your Ointment is made.

Another singular Unguent for preservation of the Eyes is thus made.

Take two Ounces of fresh Porks Grease, steep it in Rose Water six Hours, then
wash it again twelve times in the best White Wind, for the space of five or six
Hours; then add to this Grease Tutty well prepared, and very finely Poudred one
Ounce, Lapis Haematites well washed, one scruple, Aloes well washed and Poudred
twelve Grains, Pearls Poudred three Grains, Incorporate them all well together
with Fenel Water, and make an Unguent, whereof put a little into the corners of
the Eyes.

The last Remedies to divert the importunate Humor from falling from the Brain
upon the Eyes, are Cauteries and Setons; which must be done by the Surgeon by
advise of the Physician, or you may try Blisters drawn behind the Neck, or
behind the Ear; make them with Leaven, Pigeons Dung, Spanish-flies, and Brandy,
mixed well together.

Now to Cure the pain of the Eyes and redness that follows come from a blow;
Apply a rotten Apple thereto; the Blood drawn from the Wing of a Pidgeon: Also
the Decoction of Fenel, Camomile, and Melilot made with Water and White Wind;
Applied with Linen Clothes. But above all other Remedies, Agrimony alone, as
has been Authorized by often Experience, rubbed between the Hands, and put
upon the Eye hurt; and roll it on, Cures it in a short time, though very red
with bruised Blood and the sight darkened, it brings it again: For want of the
Herb take the Water Distilled in the season of the year. To abate the redness
of the Eyes, the first time that you drink every Day, it must be a full Glass
of clear Water, and so continue till you be Well.

CHAP. III. Of the Diseases of the Nose.
THe Diseases of the Nose are diverse likewise, inward and outward, as for the
inward you must always remove the Cause, by the Advice of a Learned Physician;
and for the outward employ these Remedies following.

The ill scent of the Nose is Cured by washing it with a Decoction made of
White Wind, Ginger, Pennyroyal, Cloves, Calamus Aromaticus, of each equal
parts, and after put Powder of Pellitory into the Nose or drawing up the Nose
often, Wine wherein Nutmeg has been steeped four Hours; or Anointing the
Nostrills Night and Morning, with Oleum Nardinum; wherein have been Boiled
Clove-Gilliflowers, wood of Aloes, with a little Musk; or with this
Composition, or else to make Tents thereof, and put them in the Nose, to wit,
Ginger, dried Roses, wood of Aloes, of each two Ounces, Myrrh, Calamus
Aromaticus, of each one Dram, mix them well with good Wine, and reduce them to
a Paste; adding thereto six Grains of Musk, and make Pills of the bigness of a
Pea, dipping it in Oil of Nard when you use it.

The Nose being stopped by some Humor that hinders Breathing, is opened with
Juices of Beets and Marjoram incorporated in Oil of bitter Almonds, and drawn
up the Nose; also by the smoke of Tobacco only taken at Mouth, and make it go
out at the Nose.

To provoke sneezing, blow up the Nose, Powder of Pepper, Pellitory, and Orris
Roots, or mix the Pouders with some Liquor, and anoint the Nostrils therewith.

To stay the sneezing scratch the Soles of the Feet and Palms of the Hands; rub
the Eyes and Ears; smell to white Lilly, and Bath your hands in warm Water.

To Cure the Ulcers and Itchings of the Nose, take the Juice of Ivy, and sour
Pome-granates mixed together; also the Anointment made of Ceruss, Ashes of wake
Robin, and Honey of Roses. The Phlegm that runs from the Nose like Snot is
stayed by proper Remedies for the Cure of the Brain, whereby the Spring of such
Noisome Humors is dried. Employ then to this end Frictions, Perfumes, Caps, as
before; and beside, use some proper Syrup to correct the ill scent of the
Snot's abundance, and thinness; as Syrup of Poppies, Diacodium, etc. Also to
this purpose you must hold in your mouth little Pills made of Bole-Armenac,
Terra-Sigillata, Amber, Dragons Blood, Cloves and Musk.

The Blood flowing disorderly from the Nose is stopped by a Frontal made of the
Powder of Sanderac, made into Paste with the whites of Eggs, and applied with a
Linen Cloth; by the Juice of Onions, mixed with Vinegar, put into the Nostrils
with Cotton, by drinking Mint Water, by Anointing the forehead with an Ointment
made of Dragons Blood, Mastich, Frankincense, and whites of Eggs; by Camphor
mingled with the Seeds of dead Nettles, Juice of Plantain and House-Leek put
into the Nostrils, by Powder of red Coral, or Terra Sigillata drank; by Bathing
the palms of the Hands and soles of the Feet with Clothes dipped in Vinegar of
Roses, and Plantain water; by Bathing a man's Stones and a woman's Breast with
Fountain or Common water; this is of great efficacy according to experience:
You may stay the Bleeding at Nose also by putting to the nuque of the Neck a
Bag wherein is Toads Powder; which must be made of a great Toad, that is Bred
upon the Earth, not the Water; the which you must put in an Earthen Pot alive,
and put it into the Oven with Bread, and then Powder it. And the same Powder
will serve in the Bloody Flux, or Women's Fluxes, and to stay the Bleeding of
Wounds, applying it to the opposite of the hurt part. The like Virtue has the
Seed of Flixweed, Poudred and taken a Dram thereof, either in Wine, or with an
Egg, or Broth; it serves also to loosen the Belly, and to make great Bellyed
Women gayly bear their Burden. But contrariwise the Herb Millefoil put into
the Nose provokes Bleeding, it being sometimes necessary for discharge of the
Brain. But this by thrusting it in the Nose, the point foremost: for the
contrary happens if you put the Stem first in.

The Smelling corrupted, or almost lost, is regained by the often handling and
smelling of Mint, also a Perfume made of the Leaves of Southernwood, Rue,
Juniper, mingling Gith-seed therewith.

CHAP. IV. Of the Diseases of the Ears.
FOr the pain in the Ear, put into it some drops of Oil of Roses, and Vinegar,
or the juice of Henbane; besides it will be convenient to apply thereto a Bag
stuffed with Camomile, and Melilot Flowers: the juice of dwarf Elder and Rue is
very good; making the inward part of the Ear first clear from filth. The water
of Honey Distilled; Milk with a little Saffron. The like Virtue has the
Perfume of the Decoction of Camomile, Dill, and Stechas, made in Water wherein
has been put warm Vinegar, wherein burnt Nitre, and Sal-gemm have been
dissolved, put in the Ear with a Funnel.

The Ulcers of the Ear are Cured by Instilling Oil wherein have been boiled
white Leeks, and Earth Worms, to the Consumption of the third part, or by the
Oil of Eggs alone.

Against the Worms in the Ears the Milk of the Fig Tree and the figs alone are
very proper; also the juice of Capers, of Wormwood, Calamint, Centaury,
Germander, juice of the Peels of Walnuts, or the Bark of the Tree; alone or
together.

Against the noise in the Ears proceeding from wind or other Causes, it is good
to put into the Ear a tent dipped in Oil of Rue, Castor, or Spike, with juice of
Leeks; also in a Morning fasting, it is very healthful to receive the Vapor by a
Funnel putting into the Ear, water wherein has long boiled, Marjoram, wild
Mint, Sage, Camomile flowers, Aniseeds, and Fenelseeds, and a Coloquintida
Apple, and to the end the Vapor penetrate the further, let the Patient have
some hard thing between his Teeth, as Pease or Beans, chewing them with force;
the same will be good at Night going to Bed; and having received it put in the
Ear one drop of Oil of Coloquintida, then stop the Ear with Cotton dipped in the
said Oil, and lie down thereupon.

Deafness is cured by means of an Unguent made of two Ounces of Goose-grease
melted with a gentle fire, and two drams of Aloes Soccotrine in Powder
incorporated, applied with Cotton, putting it into the Ear; or the juice of
Radishes mixed with Oil of Roses; or with the fat of an Eel and Oil of bitter
Almonds, or the juice of an Onion, mixed with Honey, or by the Powder of Aloes
dissolved in white wine, Instilled warm into the Ear, and after make him sneeze
with some Powder of Tobacco, or by the fume of the wood of Oak which you may do
by lighting a stick at one end, and putting the other into the hollow of the
Ear, but you must have a branch of a tender one of one years growth, without
knots.

CHAP. V. Of the Diseases of the Mouth.
THe Ulcers of the Mouth are Cured by washing the Mouth with a Decoction of the
Herbs of Mouseear, Consound and Golden Rod; or Pomegranate flowers, Sumach,
Plantain, Agrimony and Roses, adding a little Alum toward the end, or with
Wine wherein have Boiled Aniseeds and Cloves; or with the Distilled water of
Scolopendrium; or with Treacle water, and the like quantity of Rose-Vineger,
and Brandy, wherein has been dissolved a little Bole-Armenac; or with Honey of
Roses, by rubbing the Ulcerate places of the Palate or the Tongue. The
Decoction of the Herb Speedwell, in Wine, gargariz'd dryes the Ulcers of the
Mouth, and wash therewith in fevers: And for a singular Remedy touch the Ulcer
with a drop of Oil of Vitriol.

The Super abundance of Spittle is corrected by using astringent and drying
Gargarisms, made by boiling Roses, Pomegranate flowers, Plantain and Alum in
Water and Wine; it is also good to Eat Bisquet, and dry Roasted meats, and
Mustard; to eat Cubebs and green Ginger: On the contrary to provoke Spitting;
chew Sage, or Mastick, or Tobacco, fasting or at other times.

For the Curing a Stinking Breath, from what Cause soever, wash the Mouth with
Vinegar of Squils, or a Decoction of Mint, Balm, Fenel and Aniseed; chew
Nutmeg, Cloves, Oris Root: hold in the Mouth a Pill made as follows;
Gum-dragon one Ounce, Dragons Blood two drams, steep them in Rose Water for two
days, then put them in a Marble Mortar with six drams of Sugar, three of
Cinnamon, five of Starch, a scruple of Musk; all dissolved in Rose Water, mixed
together with a Pestle; after it is dry make Pills to hold in the Mouth. To
take away the smell of Onions or Garlic, etc. chew Cloves, Aniseeds,
Fenelseeds, etc. or wash the Mouth with Rose Water, etc.

The Diseases of the Teeth spring from diverse causes, hot and cold; if from
cold do as follows, wash them with one of these Decoctions; Wormwood boiled
in strong Vinegar, the Leaves of Ivy in red Wine, with Lavender, Sage and
Marjoram; Cypress Leaves and Nuts, and Juniper Berries, Roses, Myrtle Leaves in
White Wind, Oil of Cloves, Sage etc. are good dipped in Lint or Cotton to put
into the Tooth if hollow. If the pain proceed from a hot cause, then apply the
Oil of Poppy, Mandrake, Henbane, or their Decoctions in Wine; or Henbane root
boiled in Rose Water and Vinegar; or hold Vinegar in your Mouth wherein has
been boiled Camphor. And from what cause soever the pain proceeds it will be
appeased by the Oil of Henbaneseed; made after this manner. Besprinkle
Henbaneseed with Brandy, then put it in a Glass Viol, which stop very well, and
make this boil in a Pot of water twenty four hours, then take off the Phiol,
and pour out the Seeds, while it is yet hot, put them in a Cloth, and strain
them with a Press, and so your Oil is made. Hold Milfoil-root between your
Teeth, or Pellitory, or Agrimony, or chew Mastick incorporated with new Wax.

To preserve the Teeth, wash your Mouth every Morning in fair water, if they be
loose rub them with this Powder, Composed of Myrrh, Cinnamon, Alum burnt, Pumice
stone burnt, all in equal parts apart; finely Poudred and mixed. Crumbs of Bread
with Salt, after Eating to rub with, and then wash them with fair water and a
little Vinegar, or red-Wine, Perles, both Corals, Ivory, Crystal, white Marble,
Alabaster, Cubebs, Hartshorn, Mastick, dried Bones, Tartar, white Copporas,
Sal-gemm, Crabs Eyes, Eggs-shels, Snails-shels, Oisters-shels, dried Roses,
Orris, Tamaris, Spikenard, Dragons-blood, Venice-hair, Pomegranate-flowers,
Sumach, etc. all Poudred apart, and mixed.

For the Quincey, it is good to gargle the Mouth with water of Speedwell
distilled in Balneo Mariae, or its Flower boiled in Vinegar and Honey, or Mint,
Sage, Rue, and Coriander, boiled in Cows or Sheeps Milk; or the Decoction of
Figs and Cinquefoil in Water, dissolves the Tumor, or the ashes of a Swallows
Nest burnt with the young ones, made into a Pultis, with Oil of Camomile and
sweet Almonds is excellent: Peach-Gum boiled in Vinegar, with a little Saffron,
or a Liniment made of Bores Teeth Poudred with Linseed Oil, or to drink a dram
of the Powder in Carduus Benedictus water: Here you must send for a Chyrurgion
and the first thing you do let Blood, it may be, more than once.

CHAP. VI. Of the Diseases of the Breast.
FIrst, when one speaks low and with pain, take at Night going to Bed two
Ounces of Wine wherein have boiled, Figs and Raisins, with Sugar, Cloves and
Cinnamon, and the Tablets of Diarios given Morning and Evening clears the Voice;
and Syrup of Iujubs. So does the decoction of Enula Campana, or Oximel wherein
Liquorice has been boiled. For a Sovereign Remedy is this Liquor taken at
Night going to Bed; put an Ounce of Powdered Sugar in a Porringer, and pour
thereon as much Brandy as will cover it, or a little more; put it upon the
Coals, then light your Brandy with a Paper, lighting as often as it goes out,
till it will take fire no more, then let the Patient take it all at once.

To Cure a Cough, the Remedies before are good, but especially these, boil in
water, Raisins and Figs, Hysop, Anise and Fenel-seed till the third part be
wasted, and of this give Night and Morning, two hours before meals 2 or 3
spoonfuls after eating a Tablet of Diaireos, or Diapenidion, or take Night and
Morning a spoonful of Sugar Candy Poudred, and as much of Diaireos, and a
quarter of an Ounce of Liquorice, and drink three Ounces of Hysop or Scabious
water after. Or Syrup of Liquorice and Hysop taken Night and Morning with
Ptisane, adding a few Anise and Fenelseeds, and Nettle Seeds; when the Cough
presses, it is good to take Teasels confected with Sugar, Conserve of Roses, and
taking often one or other, or Lohoc Sanans, or de Pino taken with a Liquorice
stick, swallowing them by little and little, or take two or three hours in the
Morning before Eating, the juice of Quinces, boiled half away with Honey or
Sugar, sweating after it, or an Ounce of this drink two or three hours before
Eating; take Cassia newly drawn, two Ounces and an half, Diacarthamus six
drams, new Penids and Diaireos simplex, of each half an Ounce, Conserve of
Violets three Ounces, sweet Almonds and Liquorice Powder, of each half an
Ounce, Syrup of Violets two Ounces; dissolve these in Pullit Broth; and you
must remember that you must Eat no sharp, or salt things, etc.

Against shortness of Breath called Asthma, these Remedies are good besides
those for the Cough; a Lohoc made of an Ounce of Raisins stoned, two great
Figs, one Date, dried Hysop, Venus hair, Liquorice, Fox Lungs prepared,
Scabious water of each one dram, Penids two Ounces, and Syrup of Liquorice as
much as will thicken it; the which take with a Liquorice stick, two or three
hours before or after meats. And as the Asthma surpasses the Cough in malice,
so you must be more observant in your diet; Eating not Sharp, or Salt, or
Spices, but Eating Barley boiled in Almond Milk and Sugar, Eating Pullets and
Pigeons, and roasted Fowls; Figgs and Raisins, Dates, Almonds.

Against Spitting Blood, give the Powder of red Coral in Distilled water of the
tops of Oak; or Terra sigillata, with Plantain or Knotgrass water. Ambar in the
Decoction of Consound. Hearts and Goats horn in one of the Waters.

For the Ptisick, let the sick drink every Morning four hours before Eating,
two or three quarts of Asses Milk, or red Cows, newly drawn, putting in each
time a Spoonful of Sugar of Roses in Powder. Taking often Conserve or Sugar of
Roses, or Diatragacanth, it is good to drink each Morning fasting, a good Glass
of this Distillation, of the Herb asshoof; the great Consound, Venus hair,
Hysop, equal parts with Snails discharged of their shells, and well washed. The
water if alone is as good, and for all lean and dry Bodies, use Tablets made of
two Ounces of Pimpernel in Powder and Sugar, every Morning, dissolved in three
Ounces of Pimpernel water. This Powder is very salutary, taken two drams in the
Morning, and two Spoonfuls of Syrup of Jujubs after it; or Coltsfoot water, or
Ptisane. Take three Drams and a half of each of the four cold seeds which are
Gourges, Citruls, Melons, Cucumers, and as much of Quince seeds, five drams of
white Pepper seeds, Juice of Liquorice, Hysop, Starch, Gum-Arabick,
Diatragacanth, of each one Dram and an half, Penids the weight of them all,
Powder all apart then mingle them.

CHAP. VII. Of the Diseases of the Sides.
THe most dangerous of all is the Pleurisy, and most difficult to Cure, for it
will soon kill if not soon cured. To know it, the Patient has a burning Fever,
a great Cough and short Breath, and a great pain in his side, by reason of
fiery Blood has inflamed the membrane that covers the Rib inwardly, which is
mighty sensible; now without delay let him be let Blood on the same side; and
give to drink a dram of Bores tooth prepared with some Pectoral Syrup, as
Violets, Coltsfoot, Hysop, etc. If he find no abatement and full of Blood,
Bleed again. Then give this, Take three Ounces of Carduus water, a Spoonful of
White Wind, six sperms of new laid Eggs, a dram of Bores-tooth, a scruple of
red Coral Poudred, give all together warm.

To open the Aposteme if there be occasion, take an Apple cut in two and the
Kernels taken out, fill it with Frankincense, or Mastich, tie it with a Thread,
Roast it under the Cinders, and give it to Eat, and to void the matter, Drink of
the decoction of red Poppies, or a dram Poudred; with Scabius, and Pimpernel
water, and Syrup of Hysop; if the Fever be not great, else Violets.

CHAP. VIII. Of the diseases of the Heart.
FOr these your Remedies must be according to the causes; the weakness of the
Heart coming from heat, give every Morning some Wine and water and Sugar, with
Troches of Camphire, one dram; or Diamargariton Frigidum; and Eat often
Conserve of Borage, Bugloss, Violets, alone, or with water of Wood Sorrel. If
the cause be cold, with sadness and fear, take every Morning, the Electuary
called Diamosch, one dram in good Wine, and keep his Breast warm; and once a
week take a dram of Venice Treacle, in Wine; or half a dram of Confectio
Alchermes, and to have Cloves and Mace and Nutmeg boiled in his drink and diet.
For the beating of the Heart, advise with the Physician about Bleeding and
Purging, if he have a Fever drink Syrup of Limons, Violets, Sorrel, with Rose
or Borage, or Buglosswater, or the Syrup with Purslainwater, etc. it is good to
smell often of Roses, Violets, and Rose Vinegar; if without Fever give
Aqua-Mirabilis, Caelestis, or so, or good Wine, let him smell to Benizon,
Storax, Musk, etc.

For Swounding, first of all throw cold water in the Face, tie the Legs, Arms
and Thighs very hard, and rub them hard, pull by the Hair; then give Wine to
drink, and hold Vinegar to his Nose. But if from the Womb, let her smell
stinking things, as Assa Faetida, Castor, Partridge Feathers burnt, etc. and
contrarily Perfumes below with Benzoin, Storax, Musk, Ambar, Civet, etc. but if
it come from loss of Blood, sweating, Flux, etc. then nothing like good Wine,
and comfortable nourishment as Gellies, etc.

CHAP. IX. Of the Diseases of the Stomach.
WEakness of the Stomach proceeds often from Phlegm descending from the Head like
Rheum, and being cold Digests not meat, but with great difficulty; to that the
first Remedy must be moderate abstinence, but if Pain press, you must Vomit,
with an Ounce of Crocus Metallorum, if a woman, and never above ten drams to a
man, and after drink Wine; or Hippocras, etc. and sometime Purge the Stomach
with Pilulae Hierae cum Agarico, or Stomachicae cum gummi, and taking two or
three Night and Morning; keep his Stomach warm with Clothes or Emplasters. If
from an hot cause, they will be dry, and little appetite, Headache, sour
Belchings and offers to Vomit, then give Syrup of Roses, Sorrel, etc. or
Quinces in Endive or Cichory water, etc.

The Disdaining of diet comes from too many Choleric or gross and clammy
Phlegmatic humors, always dry, sometimes Vomiting yellow Choler; first let
Blood, and Purge the Choler with Diaprunes, Catholicon, etc. then give two or
three spoonfuls in the Morning of the Decoction of Wormwood or Mint in white
Wine, etc.

The Windiness of the Stomach from the Mouth before eating comes from clammy
Phlegm, or waterish, to Purge with Extractum Rudij, two Scruples, and Pilulae
Stomach. cum gummi one, mixed, take three Pills at Night, and three in the
Morning, and you need not keep within doors if it be not extreme cold: then
take for three or four Mornings two Spoonfulls of Syrup of Wormwood or Mint
fasting.

The Windiness after eating comes from heat of the Stomach, and being weak
cannot digest the meats; for this take Annise, Fenel, Cummin and Carway seeds
Poudred with Sugar, or Aromaticum rosatum, Dianisum, or Diacyminum, fasting,
drinking a little Wine after, or two ounces of Wine wherein the seeds before
have been boiled; remembering always to keep the Stomach warm as before, eat no
raw fruits, or windy meats; and sleep not in the day time.

To Cure the Hiccup, hold the Breath as long as may be, sleep long, sneez,
spit, stir, tell them sad stories, and frighten them, it proceeds sometimes
from fullness, so they must be moderate in diet; But if it come from weakness of
the Stomach after long sickness, or flux of Blood or Belly, etc. you must
nourish carefully with Gellies, Eggs, etc.

The Stomach Vomits sometimes by the benefit of nature, easily, what offends
it; but when by its weakness, it causes violent motion, and the Patient is in
pain, as those that have a little and straight Stomach, long Neck and Breast,
or weak sight; you must then help nature by giving some warm water and Oil,
etc. put your fingers, or feathers dipped in Oil as low as you can; on the
contrary to stay excessive Vomiting, caused from an hot weak Stomach, drink
Syrup of Roses, Quinces, etc. with water well boiled and cold; if from cold
keep the Stomach warm as before, and let him Vomit with Crocus Metallorum, and
see before.

To comfort the Stomach after Vomiting give Syrup of Mint, etc. for all pains
in the Stomach from any cause, take half a pint of Rose water and a quartern of
Brandy, an Ounce of Cinnamon Poudred, with enough Sugar, let them steep six
hours in the Liquors, and give it to drink. Great pains of the Stomach have
been appeased by applying a great Cupping Glass upon the Navil, sticking on an
hour; and with hot bread dipped in Oil of Camomile applied to the pain. Drink an
hour before eating a glass of good Wine wherein has steeped two drams of
Diacyminum, or Dianysum, or Mastich in the decoction of Mints, with Aniseed, or
Cumin; or a little Castor in good Wine.

CHAP. X. Of the Diseases of the Belly.
THe humors which nourish the members of the Body are made by eating and
drinking, and digested by the natural heat of the Liver, aided by that of the
Heart; but is sometimes hindered to perform its Office through too much heat,
with much pain coming upon the superfluity of Blood and choleric humor, or
through diminishing of the natural heat, when phlegm which is cold, abounds. Red
Urine, quick Pulse, spittle sweeter than ordinary show Blood is the cause, if
choler it is yellower and clearer than usual; dry, and hotter than before, and
less appetite; if Phlegm, the Urine that is whitish and thick causes a heaviness
about the Liver, the face is pale. Now for the Remedies; from Blood let Blood
in the Arm, drink cool drinks, as Ptisan, etc. keep the Belly loose by
Clysters, or gentle Purges, and abstain from flesh, but eat meats boiled with
fenel and purslain, etc. Almond Milk, Pease roasted or sodden Apples, Prunes,
etc. if Choler cool also, take a week together an Ounce of Syrup of Endive or
Violets in Ptisan, Morning and Night, or of Endive, Cichory or Sorril water,
each an Ounce, then take half an Ounce of Cassiia new drawn, a dram of Rhubarb,
infused all Night in Whey or Endive water, or an Ounce of Syrup of Violets,
instead of Cassia; or a Bolus of half an Ounce of Cassia, as much Electuary of
the Juice of Roses, or a dram of Rhubarb; or dissolve it in Whey or Endive
water. After he may take every Morning two or three spoonfuls of this Iulep,
half a pint of Rose water, a quartern of Endive, five Ounces of Sugar, and to
cool more, two Ounces of Vinegar; who has the Liver cooled by Phlegm, must for
a week take fasting Oxymel compound with the Decoction of Parcely and Fenel,
then Purge with an Ounce of Diaphenicum, or Diacarthamum in the decoction of
the roots of Parcely and Fenel; he may drink strong Ale or Bear, or Wine, and
eat Spices; when the pain of the obstruction of the Liver comes from the
Stomach, it is cured by laxative medicines; and when it is accompanied with pain
of the Reins and Back by openers, as Syrup of Venus hair, etc. and decoctions
of Parcely and Fenel Roots. Often obstructions come to Women by reason of
stopping of their motnhs, then bleed them in the Arm first, after in the Foot
if need; and take for a week opening decoctions as before, with as much white
Wine, added.

The Spleen is the receptacle of Melancholy and clearer of the Blood making one
jocund, but if it be obstructed by too much melancholy, all the Body becomes
dry, it is known by a pain in the left side after eating, and a blackish color
of the face, and sadness; and cured by letting blood in the Arm and Haemeroid
Veins; and if the pain be accompanied with drought, and loss of taste, it shows
it proceeds from an hot cause, then besides bleeding give cool things as
before, or decoction or Syrup of Scholopendria and Endive; then Purge with half
an Ounce of the Juice of Roses, and three Ounces of the decoctions of the roots
of Capers and Scholopendria; with Cassia and Diassenna of each half an Ounce.

The Jaundies proceed from the Diseases of the Liver and Spleen, and as their
Diseases are diverse, so are the Jaundies, to wit, Yellow, Green, and Black, the
last from the Spleen, the other from the Liver. For the Yellow and Green, drink
in the Morning Syrup of Violets with House leek water, or Syrup of Endive with
Cichory water, then Purge Choler as before, in the Liver; let the ordinary
drink be Ptisan made with Barley, Liquorice and Prunes, or Tamarinds; Earth
worms washed and Poudred and given in white Wine, is good: also the waters or
decoction of Venushair, or Queen of the Medows; For the Black Jaundies, after
all as before, clap a large Cupping glass to the Spleen, often Night and
Morning.

The Colic is a Violent pain all over the Belly, for which first drink a good
draught of Scabious water with a little Treacle, then give a Clyster made of
Mallows, Mercury, Violet leaves, with Anise and Cassia, Honey and Salled Oil,
and this often, and a Purger of Choler as before; when it is caused of wind it
runs up and down, then give to drink Wine or Ale wherein Anise and Fenel and
Cumin Seeds have been boiled; or the water or decoction of Camomile, also the
Powder of old Acorns or Chestnuts in white Wine.

The pain of the Kidneys which comes from the Stone or Gravel is like the
Colic, in that in both is Vomiting, and binding in the Belly, and wind: but the
Colic begins in the lower part of the right side going to the higher part of
the left side of the belly, inclining more before than behind; but the Reins
begin contrary, and the pain is stronger before than after eating; the contrary
in the Colic: and it commonly comes suddenly but the reins by degrees, with a
pain of the back, and difficulty to make water: To cure which use opening
things to void the stone, if little; for there are no Medicines in the world to
break it; but first loosen the belly by an ounce of Cassia, and Clysters made
with Mallows and Marshmallows and Beets, giving Syrups and Decoctions thereof
also at mouth; Turpentine Pills taken with White Wind, or the Decoction of
Camomil flowers in wine and water.

Difficulty of Urine is cured by the same means; and Heat of Urine by a Bolus
of an ounce of Cassia, and a dram of Prunel and drinking cooling Emulsions of
the four cold Seeds and Almonds with Barley water: and note that in all these
distempers of the Reins, and almost in all other, the cure depends for the most
part chiefly upon a good order of Diet.

The Fluxes of the Belly are three, whereof the most dangerous is called
Lienteria, which is when meats are voided in the same sort they were taken at
mouth, with very little alteration, and without any stink; and Diarrhaea, when
there is a Flux of flegmy and waterish humors only: Lastly Dissenteria, when
blood is voided alone, or with excrements. For the first, you must quickly
consult the Physician; in the mean time, let only comfortable things be given,
with Syrup of Woormwood, Mugwort, with Honey of Roses, of each a spoonful, or
dissolved in Betony, Fenel, or Mugwort-water, or provoke vomiting by taking an
ounce of Oxymel of Squils, and as much Syrup of Wormwood, or two ounces of
Oxymel; then take Marmelad of Quinces before he eat, or Aromaticum Rosatum.

For the Diarrhaea note it is sometime beneficial to nature, when it is without
Fever, and quickly gone, and Bloody Flux not feared; so that you may let it
alone for three or four days; then if you shall spy a few drops of blood
threatening a Dissentery, or the Patient be feverish, then give astringent
Clysters made of Sage, Mint, Borage, etc. In the streining put some juice of
the Shepherds purse, or Bole-armenac, without any Sugar or Syrup, and in little
quantities.

For Dissentery in the beginning let blood in the arm, and give lenitive
Clysters made of milk wherein steel has been quenched; or with two or three
yelks of eggs; give three or four a day; then purge with a dram of Rubarb,
infused in Endive or Cychory-water strein'd, and putting thereto half a dram of
torrified Rubarb; then eat Marmalad of Quinces, Rice-milk, Sheeps and Calves
feet, and Red wine alone, or with Steel-water.

The Dropsy is a moist swelling beginning in the feet, then the legs and
thighs, then in the belly, and if neglected mounts to the heart: It is known by
pressing the part with your fingers, and if a mark remain it is the Dropsy,
else not: For cure you must purge first, for which nothing is better than
Jalap, a dram more or less in powder with White Wind; then drink White Wind
with Anniseeds poudred; eat biscuit and meats dry roasted, drink as little as may
be, forbearing all broths and fruits, and liquid meats; sleep as little as may
be, walk much, rise early.

For Gripes and Pains in the belly drink of the decoction of Mint, wormwood,
Camomile, Roots, Herbs and Flowers, in White Wind and water, or each alone.

Here note for a general rule, that if you boil any things in white or other
wine, you must infuse them first over hot coals, letting them boil a walm or
two first, and so stand, then boiling them very little again, strein them out;
for the wine loses its virtue by boiling.

Touching the Hemorrhoids, they are inward, or outward; flowing or not. For the
inward swelling apply a Cataplasm of the white bread and milk, with two yelks
of eggs, a little Safron, and Vnguentum Populeon: but above all other a Pultis
made of Verbaseum and Trifolium Hemorrhoidale, with fresh Butter, whether they
be inward or outward: If you will have them flow apply Horse-leeches; and if
they flow too much apply a Pultis of the white of an Egg and Bole-armenack, or
burnt Paper, or Tinder, or powder of red Coral a dram, in Plantan water or
Red-wine inwardly; or the decoction of Yarrow and Rest-beef.

CHAP. XI. Of the Diseases belonging to Women.
TO provoke Women's Courses drink a dram of yellow Ambar poudred fasting, in
White Wind: use moderate exercise; drink a dram of the powder of the root of
Dittany in the decoction of the herb, a dram of the Troches of Myrrh in
White Wind: These will do ordinarily, but if not, you must consult the learned
Physician: To stay their too much flowing, what I said in Bloody-fluxes may be
good here; or drink a dram of the troches of white Amber in Plantan-water and
Beer; You must not stir much, but sleep much; rub the arms and shoulders well;
apply Cupping-glasses to the dugs; eat little and often; keep the belly loose.

For the Fits of the Mother, rub and tie the thighs and legs well; let her
smell stinking things, Wool, Partridg feathers burnt, Assa soetida; but below
sweet perfumes of Civet, Roses and Musk, etc. Give her Mithridate to drink
dissolved in Wormwood-water or Peony-seeds poudred in White Wind.

For the Falling of the Womb, use contrary Remedies to cause it to remount to
its place, to wit sweet scents at nose, and stinking ones below for the Womb;
and so quite contrary in all the rest. Vomiting is here requisite; afterward
give powder of Hartshorn or Bay Leaves to drink in Red-wine. But because from
the Womb proceed most diseases in women, in any difficulty neglect not to
advise with the learned Physician; as likewise in case of

Barrenness of women in time of fertility, for conservation of Mankind under
the benediction of God; and forasmuch as their barrenness proceeds for the most
part from cold causes, we will begin with that, leaving the search of other
causes both of men and women to the Physician. After she has been well purged,
the Womb must be fomented and perfumed with the decoction of Mugwort, Wormwood,
Savin, etc. the day after take Electuar, Aaromatick, Nutmeg, and Sugar of each
one dram; or take night end morning in good wine a Tablet of the pouders of
Mugwort, roots of Bistort, Nutmeg, incorporated together with Sugar dissolved
in Balm-water.

The women accustomed to miscarry ought to use often the Conserves of Orange
and Sage-flowers, Marmelade of Quinces, Dates, etc. As soon as she perceives
the least suspicion of miscarrying, apply to her navil a hot loaf new out of
the oven out in the middle, dipped in Malaga wine, and sprinkled with powder of
Cloves and Nutmegs, and bind it close on; apply to the loins this Plaster,
Mastick two ounces, Labdanum three drams, Bistort root, Dragons blood,
Bole-armonack, Goatshorn burnt, of each half a dram, Terra sigillata one dram,
Frankincense, liquid Storax, Gum-arabick, of each one dram and half; Red Coral
two scruples, Wax washed in Rose Water, and Turpentine two ounces: beat all in
a Mortar with a hot Pestle, pouring on oil of Myrrh and Turpentine, stirring it
still with a hot Pestle till it be thick enough, then spread it upon leather,
and apply it to the reins and loins. You must take off the Plaster every day,
and wash the loins and reins with equal portions of Rose Water and White Wind,
and lay it on again.

The Time of Delivery being come, and it be with difficulty, give her presently
a drink made of two scruples of fine Cinnamon, Wood-cassia Bark, Troches of
Myrrh of each one scruple, round Birthwort root half a scruple, Confectio
Alchermes half a dram, syrup of Mugwort an ounce, Waters of Mugwort and
Motherwort of each two ounces; or the decoction of Mugwort, Rue, and Dittany;
or the juice of Parcely drawn with Vinegar or White Wind: Hypocras is good, or
the decoction of Hartshorn and Ivory: It is good to make her sneeze, with fine
powder of Pellitory of Spain, and Tobacco, Oris, etc.

For the Pains after Travel, the Oil of sweet Almonds is very good to prevent
them, and being come is cured by distilled water of Peach flowers; or this
powder in White Wind, roots of great Consound, Nutmeg and Ambar, finely
poudred, with a little Ambergris added.

Too much milk sometimes troubles them newly delivered, for which a Pultis of
the great Celendine, Rue, Mint, Fenel, boild in water and vinegar, will be
good: If the dugs be inflamed anoint them with oil of Poppies, or Henbane, and
the next day apply a Pultis made only of Bean meal and Vinegar, anointing the
dugs and parts about with an Ointment made of an ounce of Bole-armenac, Bistort
root as much, with oil of Roses and Myrrh, and Vinegar. This Pultis is very
proper, made of two small handfuls of dried Mint, one of Wormwood, boiled a
good while, then add Bean, Lupines, and Orobe meal of each one ounce, with oil
of Lillies. If the blood be clotted dissolve it by this Pultis; take four
ounces of Smallage, Oxymel simple two ounces, Red chices meal two ounces, as
much of Lupins: If it will not dissolve, and that the kernels of the dugs are
hard, and tend to ripen, take Marsh-mallow and white Lilly roots of each four
ounces, twenty figs, boil them till they be soft, then add fresh Porks grease,
or Butter enough for a Pultis.

Now if you would procure a great quantity of milk, boil Barley and a little
Fenel-seed in her broth, or Posset Drink.

CHAP. XII. Of breeding of Worms and Teeth in Children.
AS in the diseases of Women the Womb is for the most part concerned, so are
Worms in Children the greatest enemy; wherefore it is good in all their diseases
to add some Medicine contrary to the vermin: so that it is to use Children
betimes to take Medicines, to the end they may the more easily be cured of
their diseases; then you must not wait till the worms be grown, but prevent
them by giving them every new Moon some Wormseed in a Fig, or Honey, or
Treacle, or pap of an Apple; the Juice of Orange is good with its Rind poudred,
giving one or other apart with a spoonful of Salad-oil. Syrup of Limons kills
the worms; so does Hartshorn poudred mith Sugar; Mint poudred with Wine;
Corianderseed with the Juice of Limons or Pomegranates: but Rubarb is very
effectual given in fine powder in Scabious water; or to little Children a
scruple in Milk, or a little Honey of Roses. The great worms that are voided by
Children, dried and poudred are excellent to drive out the same, drank in milk,
wine or broth. Outward applications serve much to this effect; such are
Wormwood bruised and fried and applied to the stomach, and mole of the head.
Here note that Syrup of Cichory with Rubarb is not only excellent in this case,
but in all other diseases of Infants. Children are apt to vomit, for which let
them wear upon their stomach an Emplaster of Mastick thus made; spread some
Virgins wax upon leather, and in the middle make a hole, wherein put melted
Mastick.

For Teeth rub them with Butter and Honey, etc. if nothing will do, open the
gums with a Groat or Lancet.

CHAP. XIII. Of Fevers.
HItherto of Remedies for certain particular diseases; now for those proper
against Fevers that afflict the whole body. For the cure of a Continued Fever
let blood if you can presently, then eat very little, and drink Ptisan or small
Beer, giving cool Clysters, as you may see before; to abate great drought wash
his mouth with Vinegar and Rose Water, and chew Sorrel leaves, or drink the
juice.

The Quotidian Fever is combated with before the fit with the Juices of Betony
and Plantan mixed, or the decoction of Cinquefoil, Scolopendria, Middle bark of
Elder, Betony leaves, roots of Smallage, Parcely, Raddish, etc.

For the Tertian Fever the Proverb is found true, Ill luck is good for
something; two or three fits thereof being good to purge the body of
superfluous humors in the Spring, but more are prejudicial; and dangerous in
the Autum, for fear it turn to a Quartane: You may lose your Tertian Fever by
these Remedies, Take the Bark of a young Walnut-tree, that next to the wood;
bruise it in a Mortar, and steep it in White Wind eight or ten hours, strein it
and drink it often; this is for strong bodies. Likewise steep in White Wind,
Plantane, and Monks-Rubarb; give it when the fit's upon them. The juice of
Plantan, Purcelan, Pimpernel are good apart: And in all Fevers remember it is a
chief matter to let blood, and keep the body loose by gentle Purges or
Clysters, etc. as Catholicon, Lenitive Electuary, Diaprunes, etc.

For the Quartane Fever many things are given, but few to purpose; these
following are found good from experience; The seeds of Dwarf-Elder, one dram
finely poudred for weak bodies, a dram and a half for strong ones, and half a
dram for Children, steeped an hour in White Wind or Claret, and given when the
fit seises; or dried Nutmeg upon the hot pan and poudred, half a dram given
every morning; but on the Fit day in White Wind; or bind Pigeons cut in two to
the soles of the feet. In this Fever you must not drink water but wine, with
very little water or strong drink.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Pestilence.
IN time of such miserable calamity two things are to be done, to wit to
preserve ones self as much as may be from the disease, and to seek, under God,
for a cure, if possessed therewith. The most assured way of preservation is not
to communicate with the infected, but dwell in a sound place, the air cold and
dry, rather than moist and hot; and to remember the commands of our Ancestors,
cito, long, tarde; that is, to go quickly from the place infected, and to go a
long way to a healthful place, from whence to be slow in returning till all
danger be past: But if they must remain in an infected place, then to prevent,
if possible, the Disease; you must Bleed and Purge, and Sweat, and keep all
things sweet and clean, and good Diet; keep Fires by night if in Summer, and
all day in Winter; burn Frankincense and Benjoin, and Storax; never go out
fasting. Take Pill. Ruffi, 3 or 4 or 6 Pills going to Bed, for cure and
prevention; and Mitridates his Remedy composed only of one Figg and Walnuts,
and Rue six Leaves, and a little Salt beaten together: comfortable Wines, and
Waters, and Brandy are good, having a care there be not a great Fever; then
you must give Juice, or Syrrup of Lemmons with Barley-water, etc. in Bleeding,
you must have a care not to Let Women Blood in their last Month, or newly
Delivered, or weak and decrepid Folks, or those that have Swellings: In lieu of
Bleeding may be used Cupping-glasses to the Shoulders and Thighs; after
Bleeding give Cassia or Manna the next day: Now for outward applications you
must here use no repercussive Medicines: After Bleeding apply to the Bunch a
Pultis made of Figgs, Raisins stoned, and Leven beaten together with Oil of
Camomil, or Bread and Milk, and Lilly Roots boiled together, or Diachilum cum
Gummi, or Paracelsus Plaster, or Ammoniacum, or Galbanum, and open the
Aposteme before it be quite ripe; then dress it with Vnguentum Basilicum with
Tents from first to last.

CHAP. XV. Of the Gout.
FOr the Gout, whether in the Hands or Feet, or Knees, or Hips, the chief
remedy is to Let blood in a hot cause more than once if occasion be, and purge
gently as you have been taught before, if they be Feverish, and give Clysters,
and then cool drinks as in Fevers, then use Ointments to appease the pain; and
Cataplasms, and Plasters, and Oil of Roses and Lillies, and a Pultis of
Whitebread and Milk, and Oil of Roses; and to boil Hemlock and Henbane in Milk,
and make a Pultis with Whitebread and Vnguentum Populeon, Vnguentum Anodynum,
and bathe with Milk and warm Water, and apply Diapalma Plaster softened with
Oil of Lillies or Roses; and Emplastrum de Ranis; or if from a cold cause use
Paracelsus Plaster, and Oxycroceum, Diachylon cum gummi, cicuta, and Ointments
and Plasters of Tobacco are excellent in all Gouts and Sciatica's, so is Oil
of Exeter, and Oil of Spike and Turpentine.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Cure of outward pains in any part of the Body.
FOr pain o'th Members the Oil of Dwarf-elder is very proper, anointing the
place first therewith, if it be from a cold cause, and then apply hot
Emplaisters, as Paracelsus, etc. as before in the Gout. Also Brandy and fresh
Butter, or Porkgrease, never forgetting if the Patient have need to Let blood
in the Arm, more than once if there be occasion, and to purge gently two or three
times together; as you have been taught before sufficiently if you be
ingenious. The Oil of Elder-flowers, and Earth Worms mixed together are
excellent good, and this following; take Pitch and Rosin, new Wax, of each half
an Ounce, fresh Butter half a Pound; melt them gently over the Fire in an
Earthen Glazed Vessel, all but the Rozin, which is to be cast in, in small
pieces when the other have boiled a little, or begin to boil; then stir them
well with a Wooden stick to incorporate them; with this composition being warm
anoint your parts pained, and rub them as long as they can endure it, then lay
an Emplaister of the same thereon, and so roll it up, if it be in a place that
may be rouled; after it has lain on twenty four hours, take the Plaster off,
and anoint and rub it again, and lay it on again, and do so every twenty four
hours till they be well. The Ointment and Plaster of Tobacco has done great
good to many.

CHAP. XVII. Of Bruises in any part of the Body.
FOr Bruises, whether from blows, or falls, or any other cause, these remedies
following are very good: Lupine-meal boiled a little in Wine to the consistence
of a Pultis; Bean-meal boiled in Vinegar, Radishes beat with Honey takes away
the marks of the Bruise. The leaves of Consound mixed with Oil of
Saint-Johns-worth, dissolves the clotted Blood in any part of the Body that
comes from Bruises. This Oil following is excellent good for all Bruises, and
shrunk Sinews also. Take a young fat Fox, take off his Skin, then open him, and
take ou^ his Garbage, then boil him who^ in common Oil with Bay Berries, and
Sage-leaves, and Marsh-mallow-roots till the Flesh part from the Bones; and
after you have broke the Bones put them into the Vessel again, to boil the
Marrow out, and let them boil a little, then press all hard out and keep it in
Earthen Glazed Vessels for your use.

CHAP. XVIII. Of green Wounds and old Sores.
FOr Wounds from what cause soever you have several cheating Mountebanks that
go up and down the Country, promising you Infallible Cures by their Balsomes
forsooth. But if the Wound be of any moment, you will find them most commonly
deceive you, and so you have work made for the Surgeon, and that which
perhaps if at first artificially handled, might with ease have been Cured,
becomes it may be desperate, or difficult, with hazard of Life or Limb: So that
I thought good to give you this caution, and withal to give you the most
approved way of Curing green Wounds, and Ulcers, and old Sores.

First, Then if any one happen to be wounded, be sure to have in a readiness
always in the house, that most incomparable Balsom called by the name of
Linimentum Arcei, to be had at the Apothecaries, and if the wound be not
hallow, spread some of it upon Lint, and apply to the wound, and bind it up;
but if it be hollow, you must melt it in a Spoon, and pour it warm into the
wound, or dissolve some in Oil of Turpentine, and pour it in, or inject it in
with a Syringe, or you may make this Sovereign Balsome your self, thus.

Take Gum Elemi and Turpentine, of each an Ounce and a half, Rams Suet old and
tried two Ounces, old Hogs Fat tried one Ounce; the manner of making this
Liniment is this, dissolve the Gum in Sack, and let the Sack cimmer away gently
over the fire, then put in the Fats, and lastly the Turpentine.

Others make great esteem of Tobacco in the Cure of green Wounds and old Sores;
either boiling the Leaves, or Juice alone thereof in Wine and Oil, or by adding
Turpentine, Wax, and Gum, and Rosin; and so making Balsoms, and Unguents, and
Emplaisters thereof for the said use; as for example, take this Receipt from
the College of Physicians of London, of an Unguent of Tobacco.

Take two pound of the Leaves of Tobacco bruised, let them steep all night in
Red Wine, and in the morning boil them with a pound of Pork Grease till the
Wine be wasted; then strein it, and add to the streining half a pound of the
Juice of Tobacco, Rosin four Ounces; then boil them again to the wasting of the
moisture, and toward the end sprinkle in, of the roots of round Birthwort
poudered finely, two Ounces, and as much Wax as will suffice to make it of the
consistence of an Unguent. Or this way.

Take four pound of the Juice of Tobacco, and boil it in a Skillet or Glazed
Pipkin, with half a pound of Oyl-Olive till the Juice be wasted; then put
thereto of Rosin and Beeswax, of each half a pound; when they are melted and
mixed together, take them off the fire, and stir them continually with an Iron
Spathula, and adding thereto half a pound of Venice Turpentine, put them again
over the Coals, and stir them very well together; lastly take them off the
fire, and pour them into a Glazed Earthen Vessel, and let it stand till it be
cold, then stop it and cover it close, and keep it for the uses aforesaid; this
will last for many years.

Another Balsome of Tobacco.

Take the Leaves of Tobacco, as many as you can hold between your two Hands,
clean them well with a Linen Cloth Leaf by Leaf without washing them, beat
them in a Marble Mortar, with a Wooden Pestle, then strein the Juice through a
Linen Cloth, the which put into a Posnet or Glazed Pipkin, with Rosin and
Burgundy Pitch, of each a quarter of a pound, half a pound of Beeswax, as much
fresh Porks Grease: all these mixed together shall be put upon a gentle fire,
for about the space of an hour, skimming it always with a Scummer, or till it be
boild enough, which you will know by dropping a little upon a Board, and if it
be of the consistence of boiled Honey it is enough; then take it off the fire,
and add thereto four Ounces or half a pound of Venice Turpentine, then mix it
over the fire, and so pour it out as before. Or thus,

Take three Ounces of new Beeswax, and as much Rosin, melt them in a Posnet or
Pipkin, as before, over a Charcole-fire; when they begin to boil, throw in a
pound and a half of the Juice of Tobacco, boil them altogether over a gentle
fire, for five or six hours, in which time the moisture will be consumed, then
strain it through a strong Linen Cloth, and put it into the Pipkin again,
adding thereto half a pound of Turpentine, mix them over the fire, and so keep
them for your use as before: The simple Balsome of Tobacco may be made this way,

Take what quantity of Leaves of Tobacco you will, bruise them as before, and
put the Juice into a thick Glass Bottle, with as much Oil of Olives, and put
the Glass well stopped into Horse-dung, and deep covered for forty days, at the
end take it out, and you will find a Balsome swimming o'th top, the which pour
very gently off from the dreggs, and keep it in a Glass for your use.

These Compositions of Tobacco, are likewise good for Bruises and old Ulcers,
and cold Tumors, etc.

Another excellent Balsome: Put into a glazed Earthen Veffel, Brimstone finely
Poudred and Salted, pouring thereon as much Oil as will swim above the
Brimstone four fingers breadth; put them in the Sun and let them stand till they
be thick, by stirring them once or twice every day, then pour off the clearest
for your use.

Another excellent Ointment for green wounds: Take an Ounce of Oleum Petroleum,
half an Ounce of Venice Turpentine, and as much Oil of Olives, two drams of
Mastich; mix them all together, and boil them over a gentle fire, till they
come to the consistence of an Ointment or Balsome; and keep it in an Earthen
Glazed Vessel close stopped for your use.

CHAP. XIX. Of Swellings and Apostumes.
FOr any new Swelling, apply presently a Pultis made only of the Crumbs of
White-bread, boiled in Milk, and when it is boiled to the thickness of a
Pultis, add some Oil of Roses, or fresh Porks Grease, or fresh Butter thereto:
or Marsh-mallow and white Lilly-roots, and Figs boiled in Water with Oil, fresh
Butter, or Pork Grease as before, will break it if it must be broken. Also Bean
and Barly-meal boiled in Honey and Water, dissolves Swellings, and brings them
to Ripeness. The Leaves of wild Clary, steept in Vinegar, and applied with Honey
resolves Apostumes. If these do not you must Advise with the expert Surgeon,
and remember always to roll the part swelled with Linen Roulers.

Those kind of Apostumes we call Felons, may be ripened and softened by these
means following: Take Wheat Flour, and Pork Grease, Honey, and the Yelk of an
Egg, mix them hot over the fire, and apply it to the Felon. Or this, take
Beanmeal, Leven, Figgs, Raisons stoned, mix them together as before, and apply
it; or Plantan Leaves beaten in a Mortar with Oil of white Lillies, and applied
thereto; or Sheeps Dung steept and mixed with Vinegar.

To conclude this Chapter, I will give you the Receipt of a most excellent
Plaster of Tobacco, against all kinds of Cold and hard Swellings whatever, and
to heal old Ulcers.

Take half a Pound of the Juice of Tobacco, of the Juice of Wormwood three
Ounces, Oil of St. Johnsworts simple, Oil of Elder, of each an Ounce and a
half, of the Leaves of Wormwood, Consound, and Figwort of each one handful,
Whitewine a quarter of a Pint: Let the green herbs boil in the Juices, and Wine
and Oils in a Posnet, stirring them continually with a wooden Spathula to the
bottom, that they burn not to; but let them not boil till they be too thick and
no moisture left; then taking them and streining them hard with your hands or a
Press, dissolve in that Liquor you streined, four Ounces of Beeswax, and two
Ounces of Bucks Grease or Suet; then take it off the fire, and Incorporate
therein two Ounces of Venice Turpentine, Frankincense, Mastick and Myrrh, of
each one Ounce, finely Poudred apart, and so when it is cold enough, make it up
into rowls of plaster, to be spread upon leather when you have occasion to use
it.

CHAP. XX. Of Burnings and Scaldings.
FOr any kind of Burning or Scalding, whether directly by Fire or boiling
Water, or Oils, Pitch, Fats, or scalding Lead, or Gunpowder, etc. these
Remedies following you will find to be profitable, and proper for the purpose:
First of all you must see to take out the fire that is in the burnt part, as
well to advance the cure, as to prevent blisters and crusts which may follow,
without proper remedies, and indeed the marks of the burn that appear after the
cure. First then, as soon as it is burnt anoint it with Salad-oil and Water
beaten well together, and strew thereon Wheat Flour; and dip Linen clothes or
Flax Tow in the said Oil and Water, and lay them on; or Rose or common water
with the whites of Eggs beaten to water, and oil of Roses, or Lillies, or
Poppies; or for all use Snow-water if you have it; and indeed you should never
be without it. If notwithstanding all this through the malice of fire blisters
shall arise, you must then cut them with Cisers, and lay thereon fresh butter
boiled, oil of Roses and yelks of Eggs beaten together: The Vnguentum Basilicum
will cure them perfectly, or this Unguent following: Take half a pound of fresh
Butter well boiled and strein'd, Ceruse and Tutty, washed both in Plantan or
Rose Water, of each half an ounce, burnt Lead a quarter of an ounce, with four
yelks of Eggs, mix them all together to the form of an Unguent. A Pultis made
of the leaves of Bur-dock with the whites of Eggs cures burns; also Hen-dung
mixed well with honey of Roses, or oil of Roses: The decoction of Mallow leaves
and fresh Butter beaten a great while together, and applied in manner of a
Liniment, with a Colewort leaf, a little warm, is good to separate the burnt
crusts, if any: so are yelks of Eggs with oil of Violets mixed together. To
appease the pain coming from burns, imply this Unguent; Take old Bacon grease
melted in an earthen glazed Vessel, and pour it into Rose Water, then strein it
through a linen Cloth, then wash it five or six times in Plantan-water; to
four ounces of Lard so prepared add two yelks of Eggs, and make them into an
Ointment. The oil of the yelks of Eggs is singular to appease the pains; and
that the marks of the burn may not be seen after the cure, you must wash the
part often with Plantan water, with a little Alum dissolved therein. To remove
such Cicatrices likewise a Liniment made of the herb called Porks bread, beaten
with Housleek is very proper.

CHAP. XXI. Of a Scald-head.
THis is a loathsome disease, and requires skill to cure it well. Out of many
sound Experiments make use of these following: Take two handfuls of the herb
Celandine, four ounces of Bay salt, and as much quick Brimstone finely poudred;
beat the herb well in a stone or wooden Mortar, with a wooden Pestle; that done
boil them in sweet Oil altogether; then take them from the fire, and strein
them through a Linen Cloth, to extract their substance; wherewith anoint the
head of the Patient night and morning.

Another Remedy. After having washed the head with Beef Piss, and rubbing it
therewith till blood come almost, then lay on the powder of Hens-dung dried in
the Oven, and thereon an Emplaster made of the Soot of a Furnace mingled with
strong White Wind Vinegar.

Another is this. Take two ounces of common Turpentine well washed first in
common water, then in Fumitary water, fresh. Butter one ounce washed in
Rose Water, Bay Salt half an ounce, two Yelks of Eggs, the Juice of Limons and
Oil of Roses, of each one ounce, a scruple of Camphir, and mix them together,
and make an Ointment.

Another for the same is made of Roch-allum, Vitriol, and Verdigreese, and
quick Brimstone, Soot of a Furnace, of each three drams, Camphir two drams, Oil
of sweet Almonds, and Porks Marrow of each half an ounce; incorporate them well
together, and make them into an Unguent. Sometimes it happens that we search
for that a great way off which is nigh at hand; and that Medicines of a small
price do as much good as dear Drugs; or as we say in the English Proverb, Far
fought and dear bought is good for Ladies; as may be seen in this matter; for
Juniper Berries boiled in Vinegar and Honey, and applied in manner of a Pultis,
is excellent good. In Infants it is much more easy to cure the Scald-head,
than in those of riper years; and in these more easy than in old folks, the
time rendering it incurable; wherefore it is very convenient to distinguish
between age and age, and remedy and remedy, to go artificially to work; that is
to say, for the young use gentle remedies, and to others stronger.

Note here that in little children this Disease is commonly healthful, it
delivering them from the Falling, sickness and Convulsions, and other fearful
distempers, by purging them from the impure blood they contracted in their
Mothers womb.

The difficult sort of Scald-heads are distinguished into dry ones and moist
ones: For the dry one begin with this decoction: Take two handfuls of Fumitary,
Monks-rubarb, and roots of Mallows, flowers of Melilot and Camomile, of each
two small handfuls, Linseed, Beans and Lupines, of each a quarter of a pound;
boil them in Lee made of the ashes of a Vine-tree, or Fig Tree; bathe and wash
the head therewith twice a day, then anoint it with this Unguent following:
Take a pound of Lard, Fumitary, Monks-rubarb, and Ivy, one handful, slice them
very small; then add two ounces of oil of Bays, four ounces of oil of Mastick,
half an ounce of Turpentine, four ounces of the juice of Col^orts; beat all
these well together, and then let them steep twenty four hours, then let them
boil till the juice be consumed; then strein it, and anoint the head therewith,
laying on after a Colewort leaf.

For the moist Scald-head wash and bathe it with a decoction, as before,
wherein you have dissolved Roch-Allum; then anoint it with the Unguent called
Vnguentum de minio, to be had at the Apothecaries; then take Verdegreese, with
Alum, Honey, and Vinegar, of each two ounces, a dram of Arsenic, two of
Sublimate, all in powder; boil them together till they begin to be thick enough
for an Ointment, and you will find this a miraculous Ointment.

Here you must remember to cut the hair close, or shave it away first of all:
some apply a Cap of pitch to tear it up by the roots.

CHAP. XXII. For the Scabs and Itch in the hands.
FOr these in the hands the water of a Smiths Forge to wash and bathe the hands
well in is good; or Allum-water, or the juice of Limons alone, the brine of
salt Bacon, or brine of Pickle-herring, or Anchoves, the Lee made of Oak-ashes:
then anoint with Vnguentum Nicotianum, or Enulatum cum Mercurio, or flower of
Brimstone mixed with either of them: and so if the whole body, letting blood
first, and purging, use those Ointments to anoint withal, using a temperate
diet, and drinking as little strong drink as may be.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Tetters and Ring-worms.
THey are an unhandsom sight, and therefore to quit your self of them, note
that against them are employed diverse Remedies, according to the diversity of
the nature of them: those that are not rebellious may be cured with gentle and
mild remedies, but the rebellious and malignant with more difficulty, by
application of more violent and stronger remedies, as in the Chapter before.
For the not rebellious do thus; wash and bathe them in the decoction of Beans
and Wheat in Vinegar: or take a thin slice of Veal, Beef, or Mutton, lay it
upon the coals or Gridiron, then beat it with Vinegar and Mustard, and apply
this to the Tetter. Or take Frankincense, Oil of Roses and Vinegar, and make an
Ointment and anoint: Now if these will not do, being first applied to
rebellious ones, then apply your self to these following; First wash and bathe
them with a decoction of Lupines and Marsh-mallow roots, made in Vinegar to the
consumption of half; or with Plantan-water wherein has been infused white
Vitriol and burnt Alum. Or make an Unguent of two drams of Aloes dissolved in
distilled Vinegar. Oil of Wheat alone is excellent for this purpose; it is made
by putting Wheat between two hot irons and the Oil will drop out; or else thus;
Take some Wheat beaten and put it into a glass Vessel, and stop it close, and
put it into a Kettle of water upon the coals, to keep the water hot, and not to
make it boil, and so let stand three days together; at the end thereof take out
the powder and you will find it moist; the which put into a Linen Cloth, and
press the oil hard out.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Corns in the feet and toes.
THese often hinder people from going in ease; and so ought to be considered,
and to have remedies laid down for their help: for which are diverse used, but
these following may prove most effectual: some bathe and wash them first in a
Decoction of herbs, and then cut them with a sharp Penknife, or Razor, as far
as they can possibly go, then apply a Plaster of soft Wax red or green, having
been first steeped 24 hours in strong White Wind Vinegar; for the Cinabar and
Verdigreese, wherewith these Waxes are colored, will kill and take away the
roots of the Corns. The same will these remedies following do effectually,
sometimes one, sometimes another, according to their diverse properties; of
which you may choose which will be best for your purpose, and make use of them,
Galbanum and new wax mixed together; some take Lilly roots well boiled, and then
beaten with Porks marrow and apply it: some use only Emplastrum de ranis cum
mercurio.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Ruffness and Chops in the hands and lips.
THe Chops in the hands and lips coming from cold winds, or other causes inward
or outward, are cured by these Remedies following; having first washed them
with Barly-water, then anoint them with Vnguentum rosatum, or Pomatum at the
Apothecaries, or Capons Grease, or Oil of Wax is excellent, for it will cure
them in a short time.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Warts in any part of the body.
THe juice of Limons kill Warts in any part of the body; or the same juice
distilled, or distilled Vinegar; or the juice of the leaves and flowers of
white Mullein: Oil of Vitriol and Brimstone are infallible, but you must use
them warily: The juice of the stocks of Purselain and Housleek bruised in a
Mortar with Bay Salt, and the Warts rubbed therewith often, cures them in three
or four days.

FINIS.

