THE COUNTRY GENTLEMAN'S Vade Mecum: OR HIS COMPANION for the TOWN. In Eighteen
LETTERS, From a Gentleman in London, to his Friend in the COUNTRY, Wherein he
passionately disswades him against coming to London, and Represents to him the
Advantages of a Country Life, in Opposition to the Follies and Vices of the
Town. He discovers to him most of the Humors, Tricks and Cheats of the Town,
which as a Gentlemen and a Stranger he is most exposed to. And gives him some
general Advice and Instructions how he may best in his Absence dispose of his
Affairs in the Country, and manage himself with the most Security and
Satisfaction when he comes to London.

Foelix qui propriis aevum transegit in arvis,
Ipsa domus Puerum quem videt ipsa Senem;
Qui baculo nitens, in qua reptavit arena,
Vnius numerat Soecula longa casae:
Illum non vario traxit Fortuna tumultu,
Nec bibit ignotas mobilis hospes aquas.
CLAUD. de senec. Veronensi. LONDON, Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow in
Little-Britain, 1699.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Beaumont, Deputy Lieutenant and Justice of
the Peace for the County of Leicester.
My Lord,
THE short Experience I had of your Friendship and Candor, enclines me now to
believe you will not reject this Poor Companion, although he boldly attempts to
intrude himself upon your Honor's Protection. Indeed I am no great Friend to
the Common Vanity of Letters Dedicatory, and therefore in making my Court to
you, instead of troubling you with an impertinent Dinn of Compliments, I shall
only tell you the naked Cause that urged me to lay these Papers before you.

Sir, it is the general Character you bear of a true English Gentleman, One that
in all Respects, both by your Practice and President, are duly qualified to
vindicate and assert the Rights and Priveleges of a Country Life; and that it
is that has forced upon you the Patronage of these few Letters, which if you
think worth your Perusal and Owning (and truly that at present is the most
disturbing Consideration) you will soon find that the Country Gentleman has not
more Need of a City Companion, than the City Companion has of a Country Patron.

Well, my Lord, he humbly flies to you for Safeguard, and who so fit to shelter
and defend him as he that not only enjoys the Blessings of a well-ordered
Country Life, but withal knows, but hates and scorns, the Follies and Vices of
the Town.

Sir, I am afraid, considering what a Lewd World this Poor Companion is to
make his Progress in, if I should turn him out alone, some Bully, Sharper, etc.
would meet and use him rudely, which they dare not, so long as he continues
under the Shadow of your Protection; for once, then, Sir, be pleased to take
him into your Care, at least foster him for a Night or two, till you have
examined his Credentials, and then dispose of him as you shall think fit.

But, Sir, while I am thus importuning you for another I forget my self, who
perhaps may more want an Advocate to excuse the Boldness and Trouble of the
Dedication than the Book itself does a Patron, and some body to plead for the
Errors and Frailties of it. There Is nothing, that I know, but an extraordinary
Principle of Generosity can engage you, either to forgive the one or accept the
other, and that, at a venture, I will depend upon, who am,

My Lord, Your Honor's most obedient Servant Ed. S -- cy.

THE EPISTTLE TO THE READER.
THE giving Advice and Reproof, has been always justly reputed one of the most
Exalted Acts of Friendship that can pass between Man and Man, but then they are
so commonly mis-apply'd, or, what is as bad, misunderstood, that like a shot ill
aimed, they either mount too high and fly over, or descend too low and drop
short, and so never comes near the Mark they are first levelled at*

This is the common fate in most Cases, but then, when they are Intermixed too
with an Ungrateful Representation of Men and Things, they are still more
difficult: So that in such a Case, it is next to an Impossibility to recommend
'em with any tolerable Advantage or Success.

As for this Poor Vade Mecum, it is so small and trivial in it self, that it can
hardly justify even its Pretensions to an Epistle; but then considering what
kind of Persons it is to Encounter, 'twill be necessary, I think, to premise a
few things to prevent mis-constructions and mistakes.

The General Design, I presume, I need not mention; the Title has done that
before, i. e. that it is intended for, A Companion for Country Gentlemen and
Strangers, first to discover and expose, and then to Guard and Fortify 'em
against the Cheats, Vices and Follies of the Town.

That Is the Design of it indeed, and how far 'twill Answer that Design, must be
left entirely to the Judgment of the Reader only with this short Caution, that
if he pleases he may do the Author this Justice, to consider that he is Writing
Letters; and then if his Characters and Representations are a little more
abrupt and short than they might, or perhaps ought to be in other Cases; That Is
a very good Plea and Excuse for 'em.

For the Persons and Things that are here Exposed and Represented, I presume,
that no Gentleman that has lived in London any considerable time, but will
allow 'em to be true in the main; and that furnish's me with an Answer to an
unkind Reflection, which I perceive lies very ready to be past upon me, i. e.
That a Man must consequently be a very Vicious Person himself that is
Qualified, to give a general Description of the Cheats and Vices of a Lewd
Town; But why so I wonder, they may as well repute a Man to be a Good
Christian, because he has gathered up some general Notions and Texts of
Scripture, which he makes no other use of then to deceive the World, or prate
over at a Tavern, or an Alehouse.

The Case is the very same, and truly, I cannot conceive why a Person that has
Eyes and Ears, and a little understanding cannot have a Cursory Knowledge of
these matters, without being any other ways concerned than as an Observator; If
some Peoples Intellects are not so good as others, who can help it? In short,
this Reflection is so Dull and Ridiculous, that it is below an Answer. I Am
confident, there is none but the very Cheats and Jilts, and such sort of Rabble
will make any use of it, and let them e'n take it and make their most on it.

Well, but that I may not incur My Lords Herbert Censure, make my Porch too big
for my House, Let it be but allowed, that I have made any advances toward the
destruction or discovery of Vice, and but one tho the shortest step toward the
Support and Defense of Virtue, which I suppose, few will be so hardy or unjust
to deny, I have gained my Grand Point; and for the rest, I Humbly submit it to
the future success of this small Country Gentleman's Companion.

THE CONTENTS.
LETTER I. WHerein the Country Gentleman is passionately Cautioned against
coming to London, and then showed his mistake with regard to his City
Conversation.

II. In which the Diversions and Pleasures of a Country Life are vindicated and
asserted, to be much preferable to those of the Town upon many Accounts.

III. In which is Demonstrated, that the Country has in the general the same
opportunities of Education as the Town, and in some respect a great many more.

IIII. In which is a general Reflection upon the manners and humors of the
Town, together with a Description of the present State and Condition of it.

V. Wherein is a general disswasive against Idleness; with the Character of a
Sot.

VI. In which are the Characters of a Beau and a Gamester, with particular
Reflections upon the cause and consequence of Idleness:

VII. In which the Humors, Customs and Tricks of the Playhouse, are briefly
discovered and expos'ed.

VIII. Being a Continuation of the humors of the Playhouse, with some short
observations upon their constitution and manner of Government.

IX. In which the Humors, Tricks and Cheats of the Tennis-Courts, are briefly
exposed and detected.

X. Wherein the Humors, Tricks and Cheats of Bowling-Greens, are discovered,
together with an Account of their methods of Betting, etc.

XI. Wherein the Humors of the Groom Porter's, and the Cheats of Ornaries, and
other Gaming-houses, are Exposed; with the several ways of managing their False
Dice; and the Hazards and Mischiefs that are consequent to 'em.

XII. In which is Represented the Method, Odds and Managements of the Royal Oak
Lottery, the Nature of their Constitution and Establishment; together with a
short Account of the Evil Practices and Inconveniences of Lotteries in general.

XIII. In which the Humors and Tricks of Cockers and Cock-Matches, and the
Cheats of Horse-Races and Foot-Matches are exposed.

XIV. Wherein the Villainy of Guinea-Droppers, or Sweetners, is discovered, and
the Roguish Measures they take to trapan and impose upon Country Gentlemen and
Strangers.

XV. In which the Tricks of Bawds and Whores are detected, under the Respective
Characters of a Procurer, a Bawd and a Jilt; together with a short Description
of a Bawdy House, and the Art of Trapping.

XVI. In which are the Characters of a Bully, Setter, and Spunger, with some
general Observations and Reflections upon Gaming.

XVII. In which are particular Observations and Reflections upon several
distinct Occurrences of the Town.

XVIII. Wherein the Country Gentleman is directed in the disposal of his Estate
in his Absence, and in the management of himself in London.


THE Country Gentleman's COMPANION, etc.
LETTER I.
Wherein he first passionately cautions him against coming to Town, and then
shows him his Mistake in expecting better Conversation in London than he can
have in the Country.

IT IS but few Days (dear Sir) since I received the surprising News of your
Resolutions to exchange your Conntry for a City Life. I confess the Report at
first startled me, and indeed I would not believe it till I saw it solemnly
confirmed under your own Hand. Well, I find, to my great Astonishment it is
really so, and the weighty Reasons you give for it, are, That you must have
better Company Diversion and Education than your own Country can afford you.
But then Sir, is there no way but presently to Horse and to London? Is there no
room left for a second Thought? What, has this London Expedition enhauns'd 'em
all? Must your good old Hospitable Seat, that for so many Cenerations has been
the Sanctuary of an Honorable Family, be at last cruelly turned off and
forsaken, and left empty and void, and sacrificed to the Vices and Folly, or at
least to the Nonsense and Impertinence of a debauched City? For shame, consider
a little, and don't let this Wild Thought take too deep a root; and then I Will
engage to point you out a method whereby you shall not only improve your self
with regard to your Company and Education, but withal enjoy the dear
Opportunity of Liberty and Retirement, without being exposed to the
Interruptions and Disappointments that must consequently await you in this
scurvy Town.

But your Determinations are fixed it seems, and there is no removing 'em; to
Town you will come, let the Consequence be what it will. Well then, since I
cannot dissuade you from this giddy and hazzardous Adventure, I can however act
the other part of a Friend, and lay some honest Cautions and Admonitions before
you, by the Assistance of which you will be the better qualified to guard your
self against those Cheats and Villainies, which, as a Gentleman and a Stranger,
you are liable to be encountered with, before you can come to have any tolerable
Knowledge or Idea of the Town.

But, First, you say, that the main thing that brings you to London, is for the
sake of good Conversation: Let me tell you Sir, I speak it from long
Experience, you will soon find your self cheated in your Expectation. If it be
good Company you want, you must even seek it somewhere else, for here it is
hard, or rather not at all to be found. You may form what Chymerical Notions
you please to your self concerning the Men and Things of this Town; but, take
the Word of your Friend for it* you will quickly find your Mistake with a Witness.
Alas! this Town is grown so monstrously corrupt and degenerate, and so
strangely overrun with Vice and Folly, that there is little good to be expected
from the Society you will find in it. There are some few conversable Persons, I
confess, Persons of Sense and Honesty; but then they are so very few, and
withal so hard to be discerned and come at, especially by a Stranger, that how
you will do to pick 'em out, I cannot tell; for my own part, I solemnly declare to
you, That after twenty years Experience, the Expense of my Money, and the
irreparable Loss of my Time, I have but very few Persons in my whole Catalogue
that I dare recommend to you, or can depend upon my self for Friends and
Familiars.

No, no, Sir, if you will come hither, you must take Men and Things as they
are, and not expect to find 'em just as you would have 'em. If you will come here you
must sometimes expect to be encountered with the Apes and Peacocks of the Town,
those useless Creatures that we dignifie and distinguish by the modish Titles
of Fops and Beaux, and what is worse, be compelled to suffer your Ears to be
bored through and grated with an empty, tedious Din of their dull
Impertinencies, or else the squeamish Coxombs look awry and scornfully upon
you, and immediately repute you to be a proud, ill natured, unmannerly Country
Fellow.

Sometimes you must be forced to undergo the peevish Wranglings of contentious
Zealots; at other times be compelled to ruffle with the Insolence of Bullies
and Sharpers, or content your self to submit to the Infamous Characters of a
Cowar'd and to be born down, insulted and imposed upon, as often as those good
natured Sparks shall think fit either to make you their Property or Buffoon;
nay, what is still worse, you must be often forced to endure the fulsom Steam
of beastly Ribaldry, intermixed perhaps with the horrid sounds of Blasphemy and
Profaneness, or else the Gentleman Moralist (as he is pleased to call himself)
presently hisseth you out of his Company as a Pragmatick Usurper upon the
Freedom of Common Conversation. Sometimes you must be content to be cruciated
with base and false Innuendo's, and sly and injurious Insinuations. Anon be
plagued with the poisonous Breath of Backbiters, and the serpentine Hissings of
Hypocrites and Talebearers. In short, in this beloved City, for the dear sake
of which you seem so passionately resolved to quit your Retirement, your honest
Country Friends and Acquaintance, and what you ought to value most of all, the
Habitation of your Ancestors, you will meet with so many exalted Villainies and
Rogueries, and so many Cheats and Tricks of all sorts and sizes, that I know
not where or how to direct you to begin to form your new Conversation.

Here you will see some pretending Piety, to promote their own Ambition and
Interest; others extolling Charity and Union, purely to advance Division and
Revenge; and the generality crying out, and exclaiming for the Good of the
Public, that under that Veil they may conceal their treacherous and base Ends,
and have a larger Opportunity to propagate their own Advantage and Designs: and
these together with innumerable multitudes of Rogues and Whores, Pimps, Bawds,
and Cheats, make up the Grand part of the Conversation of this Town.

Now this is Blessed Company (is it not?) for a Man of Sense to be so fond of,
that for the sake of it, he will forgo the two best Properties of his Life, i. e.
his Liberty and Retirement, and leave his Estate at Six's and Sevens, or at
best to the Management of a few heedless Mercenary Servants, that it is ten to
one, either through Avarice or Negligence, betray or deceive him. Come, Sir, I
beseech you, consider again; look once more into the Nature of your Resolution:
I protest to you, it seems to me to be a kind of hasty Folly exalted into
Madness. What? Leave the endearing Sweets of a Country Life, for a little dull
Noise, and rude Justlings and Confusion. To tell you my short Thoughts of the
matter, if this wild Motion holds, I Am afraid I shall find your Name in Poor
Robin's Chronology the next New Year.

Believe me, Sir, the Country is so empty already, that a true Englishman
cannot look into it, without a great deal of just Pity and Concern. Is it not a
very ungrateful Spectacle, to see so many Noble Houses mouldring into ruin, and
dropping down for want of Inhabitants? and then to behold the prodigious Growth
and Increase of this unweildy City, and to observe what a strange multitude of
People there is jumbled together in it; who can reflect upon this, but must
necessarily believe, that the Head in a little time longer will grow so much
too big for the Body, that it must consequently tumble down at last, and ruin
the whole? This is a Misfortune, which I Am confident would well become the
Wisdom of the Nation to prevent; but it is foreign to my Design, and so I will
not insist upon it: besides I have troubled you long enough, and perhaps too
long already; and therefore will trouble you with no more now, but pursue my
Design from Post to Post, till I have either weaned you from the vicious
Inclination of coming to London; or at least detected, and exposed to you the
hazards and follies that attend upon it.

LETTER II.
Wherein he briefly shows that the Enjoyments and Diversions of a Country Life,
are infinitely preferable to those in Town upon many accounts.

SIR, in my former I briefly showed you what kind of Conversation you must
expect when you come to London; and by the way, I would not have you suspect,
that I have been any ways partial in my Relation, or that I intend to be so for
the future. You may depend upon it, you will find the Men and Things as I have
reported 'em, and in some cases worse. But let them be what they will, it seems
you will come to Town; you're cloyed with your honest Country Diversions, and
so are resolved to come up hither in quest of new and more agreeable Pleasures,
as well as better Society.

I must tell you that this is a worse Notion than your former; I must own,
indeed, there is some small matter to be said in point of Conversation, for
this of Pleasure there is nothing at all to be urged: it is a Notion perfectly
extravagant, and in the Judgment of all sober Men, stands condemned as a
foolish ridiculous Argument; and so will you too for making use of it. We have
some sort of Anticktricks used here, it is true, to deceive Men out of their
Time and Money, which perhaps may pass upon the foolish part of the World and
the Mob, under the Character of Pleasure; but alas! when you come to take off
the Vizard, and look into 'em in earnest, they are nothing else but pure Cheats
and Delusions. He that will justify the Reasonableness of an Adventure, must be
sure to prove the Prize at least to equal the worth of what he hazards for it;
and when you can do this, I shall be of your Mind, and allow you have done very
wisely, when you have exchanged your Country for a City Life; but then, in the
Interim, I conjure you not to stir, till you have cleared the Point. I Am
afraid, Sir, to tell you my Thoughts, you have a wrong Notion of Pleasure in
general, and falsely esteem that to be Pleasure and Diversion, which in truth is
nothing else but Vice or Folly. I hope you don't imagine there is any real
Pleasure in the Debaucheries or May-games of the Town, that is a dangerous
Principle indeed; and if you once suffer your self to be imposed upon by it,
you are in the ready road to utter Ruin and Destruction. Perhaps you may expect
mighty matters from the Playhouse too; why, indeed, that is the only Diversion
we have in Town, that can any ways pretend to a Singularity or Exception from
the Country; but there too (though it is the best way of passing away an idle
Hour, as I know of) you will be encountered whith such a variety of ridiculous
Scenes and Actions, that in the main you will hardly find it worth your trouble.
There you will find some clapping and stamping, others hissing and scoffing; and
perhaps both without any Reason: There you will see some a Cock-horse on the
Seats, damning and confounding the Play and Players, they know not why or for
what; others throwing about their Wigs, and almost blinding you with their
fulsom Powder, or tormenting you with the nauseous scents of their Perfumes and
Pulvilios; others prating with Orange-wenches, or bantering the Whores, and
what is more probable, the Whores bantering of them. In short, there is such a
strange Confusion and Jargon amongst 'em, and such a huddle of Men and things
jumbl'd together, that unless you can abstract the Good from the Bad, and
withal draw. Observations and Diversions from 'em both, I cannot tell what kind
of Pleasure or Satisfaction you can propose from thence. It Is the very same in
all the rest of our pretended Diversions, i. e. Bowling-green's, Cockpits,
Tennis-court's, Ordinary's, Ball's, Music, Entertainments, etc. though the
Recreations in themselves may most of 'em be innocent, and harmless enough; yet
they are generally so vitiated and corrupted, and the Pleasure that they
pretend to, is so interwoven with Danger, as well as Vexation of Spirit, that I
defy the greatest Master of the Town to make it appear that there is not more
Pain and Disappointment, than there is real Pleasure or Satisfaction, attending
upon the best of 'em. I dare say, if you could be persuaded to make a fair
Estimate, and compare the sickly, feeble Pleasures of this Town, with your own
Noble and Manly Recreations, you would find the latter turn the Scale, with a great
deal of overweight. Ours are all but wretched Counterfeits and Impostures, and
will hardly endure the Test of a Fruition. Indeed they may be something
grateful to us at first, but after we have repeated 'em once, or twice, they
grow flat and dull, and at last loathsome: We are here like so many Bees in a
Garden, humming and roving about from one Flower to another, foolishly
endeavoring to keep up our Course of Pleasure, by a continued succession and
circle of Varieties. I Am confident, Sir, if you had made so many Trials of all
this, as I have done, you would not suffer your self to be imposed upon by the
roving Dictates of a blind Imagination; or run the foolish risque of being
perpetually tossed to and fro, in the search of new Vanities, or else to be
contented to endure the tiresom Scenes of the old repeated Impostures. It Is no
matter for multiplying Words; besides I Am writing of Letters, which should be
drawn into as narrow a Compass as may be; or else there is enough to be said, to
show you that your Expectations from the Pleasures of the Town, are much bigger
than your Enjoyments can be; and that those in the Country, are much preferable
to them. Your Diversions in the Country, i. e. your Hawking, Hunting, Fishing,
Fowling, and the like, are Noble, Manly, and Generous, and do not cloy or
satiate their Possessors; but are still improving upon 'em, and are every Day
growing more grateful, and delightful; they are not spent or wasted by
Fruition, as ours are, but still the more they are enjoyed, the more they please
and gratify the Enjoyers. Besides, you would do well to consider the Expense
of the Pleasures of this Town: Yours are all free and open, and derived to you,
as it were, from the general grant of Nature; Ours mercenary and base, and not
to be come at, without a certain unavoidable charge and danger: besides all
this, all the Pleasures of this Town, may be all run through in the narrow
compass of two or three short Days, and when that is done, you do but run the
same foolish Round, tread the same Stage over and over again; and what can be
more ungrateful to an Ingenious Man, than to have his Senses perpetually grated
and imposed upon by the dull Repetition of the same thing? But here I Will leave
you; but first I charge you, in the Name of a Friend, to take this Matter home
again to Your self, and put it once more into the Balance, with your Reason
and Judgment.

LETTER III.
Wherein is demonstrated that the Country has, in the general, the same
Opportunity of Education as the Town; and in many things, a great deal more.

IN my two former, I gave you my hasty Thoughts concerning the Conversation and
Pleasures of the Town. In this I intend to trouble you only with my Opinion
concerning the Education you expect in it. Education, I confess, is a most
precious and estimable Treasure; a Mine that contains so many rich Veins, that
no Persons can be poor, that are in possession of it, unless they be such,
whose Sloth and Idleness will not suffer them to dig out the Ore. But, Sir, as
to your Point, the great Question is, what kind of Education it is that you
come to London to be improved in: You know I am sensible your Education has
been hitherto very Liberal and Genteel, and that you're already a tolerable
Master of most of the useful Qualifications, which are required in a Gentleman.
But supposing you were not, and if that there were some other Rudiments, which
you either wanted, or at least had a desire to be better instructed in; why, I
wonder may not there be as good Opportunities to improve 'em in the Country, as
in this Town. Indeed, if you have a Mind to learn to Fiddle and to Dance, and
show little Apish-tricks, or to be exact in the Rules of playing the Fool, or
the Pedant, here you may be equipt. I confess, if you have a Design to make
your self a good Proficient in the Arts of Whoring, and Drunkenness, or to
understand exactly the Methods of Debauchery and Profaneness, this is indeed
the Place of the World.

But then, for the Solid and Substantial parts of Education, such as are
Navigation, Architecture, Heraldry, Fortification, Limning, and the like, I Am
very confident, they may be acquired with far greater Freedom and Convenience
in the Country, than they can be at London; especially by a Gentleman of an
Estate, that has it in his power, to choose what kind of Tutors and Directors
he pleases.

No, Sir, you must even keep at Home, if you expect to improve your Education;
there you may enjoy the precious Opportunities of Quiet and Sedateness, which
you must not expect when you come hither: Here you must expect the quite
contrary, to be encountered with Noise and Nonsense, and to have your Thoughts
vitiated and disturbed with Wranglings, and Impertinence; which are the very
Bane and Canker of Study and Meditation: But in the Country, all things are
generally still and calm; there you have few Cares to bend and torment your
Mind, and fewer Dangers to fright or discompose you, there is no Hurryings and
Scramblings, nor Justlings, nor Countermining of one another; but all the busy
Actors are innocently and industriously marching on in their proper Stations,
and, as far almost as the Human Nature is capable of, hushed into perfect Rest
and Repose. And now, Sir, can you think of these things, and at the same time
retain your giddy Resolution to quit 'em all, for the sake of a noisie paultry
City.

I would not have you mistake me, I am not advising you to a sower
Philosophical Life, or shutting you up in a Cloister. I grant indeed, that the
Flute and Violin, that Dancing, Singing Fencing and the like, may be very
proper and innocent Qualifications for a young Gentleman to pass away an idle
Interval; but then, I would not have him, like Nero, prefer his Fiddle to his
Empire; or, like Domitian, spend his whole time in catching Flies: I confess,
if he could use them as all Bables and Trifles ought to be used, play with them
at his Leisure and then throw them by, there is no harm in them, but they are
rather an Accomplishment.

To make as short of the Matter as I can, there is but one thing within the
Compass of my Experience, in which this Town can any ways improve your
Education beyond the Country, and that is a small thing in Point of
Conversation. If you were so well weighed both in your Judgment and Principles,
that you might be turned loose to take a short view of the Town without any
Danger, I mean, if you could run through the different Societies and Humors of
it, without being infected or seduced by any of 'em, and withal could extract
from them too some good Morals and useful Observations; why then, if you did
make a Winter Trip to London for a Month or two, and stay no longer, then
indeed there would be no great matter of Harm or Hazard in it; but to leave
your Estate to the Management of Servants, and your House and Gardens to run
into Ruin and Disorder, and to come up hither, and spend your Time and Money,
purely under the Pretense of better Company, Diversion and Education than your
own Country can afford you, is such an unaccountable Mixture of Folly and
Madness, that 'twill at once render you the Pity, Scorn and Wonder of all that
know you. But here I Will leave you to retire into your self, and to reflect in
earnest upon the Nature and Consequence of what you are about.

LETTER IV.
In which is a general Reflection upon the present State and Condition of the
Town.

HAving made some General Observations and Reflections upon the three Things
which chiefly induce you to leave the Country and come to Town; and withal
having briefly told you my Thoughts concerning the Vanity of your Pretensions,
and in some Measure demonstrated to you, That you either have, or at least
might have as good Opportunity, both for Convensation, Pleasure, and Education
in the Country as you can have in London. I might have stopped there and left
the Acquital that these have received, at the Tribunal of Reason and Common
Experience, to have included all the rest: But Sir, that will not thoroughly
answer my present Design. I intend to expose the whole Town to you, as the
Spartans of old were wont to do their drunken Helots to their Children, to wean
them betimes from the vicious Inclination to Wine and Debauchery. I intend to
lead you from one Seat of Action to another, and give you a short View of most
of the Dangers, Tricks and Villainies which, as a Gentleman and a Stranger, you
will consequently be exposed to when you come to it. As to the Town it self,
It Is a kind of large Forest of Wild Beasts, where most of us range about at a
venture, and are equally Savage, and mutually destructive one of another. I
wish 'twere possible to give you a Distant View of the State and Manner of it.
I Am confident the Spectacle (if you were not really bewitched) would be so
horridly odious and ungrateful, that you would have small Lust to come at it,
notwithstanding the Fury of your present Inclinations. The first thing that
you would be encountered with would be the dismal Prospect of an universal Poverty,
and Crowds of miserable People, either wracked with the Agonies of their own
Guilt or Folly, or groaning under the intolerable Want of Bread, or mad or
infatuated by Oppression, or desperate by a too quick Sense of a continued
Infelicity; here you would see us all generally busied to trappan, undermine and
deceive one another, which we are forced to do to make good our mistaken
Pretense to a Life of Sensuality and Delight. If you cast your Eye upon the
Court, you would see but few there but Flatterers and Hypocrites, except it be some
nauseous useless Creatures that are only fixed there for Show, and indeed are
fit for nothing else. If you look into Westminster Hall among the Lawyers,
there you will be entertained with little else but hideous Complaints for Want of
Money and Business, and find 'em all so sower and ill natured that you can
hardly speak to any of 'em without endangering your Nose. Look among the
Religious pretenders and you will see them in the very same Condition, all
furiously hating, and uncharitably censuring one another, snapping, snarling,
grinning and biting, and almost every Party wishing all the rest damned, but
just those few that agree with them in their own Opinion and Judgment. Observe
the Shops, and you will see an Universal Discontent and Melancholy hanging in the
Faces of their respective Owners. You would see all these things, and many
other unpleasant and tormenting Objects. And what sensible Man then would not
be mightily rejoiced and satisfied that his better Fortune has removed him
from hence, out of the Noise and Participation of all these Evils and
Calamities, and be constantly alarmed, afraid and disturbed that some cross
and malicious Accident should force him hither?

Consider, I beseech you, what are the Advantages and Goods of this Town, that
can give you any just Reason to be so fond of it; or what Evils in the Country
that can render it so odious and obnoxious to you, and engage you to forsake it
in such a Hurry and Affright. Suppose you were now at some convenient Stand,
from whence you might take a full and deliberate View and Prospect of ^em both,
and were just making a Pause to survey and compare them one with another,
suppose that having viewed over all the Comforts and Enjoyments of a Country
Life, and the Blessings and Sweets of Retirement and Liberty, you were now
looking forward upon the Town, and that all in a View you saw the strange
Hurries and Impertinencies, the busy Scramblings and Underminings, and, what is
worse, the monstrous Villainies, Cheats and Impostures in it; suppose, I say,
that both these were in your View, i. e. the Content, Happiness, and Quiet of
the Country, and the Disturbance, Hazard and Noise of the City. In such a Case,
I hope I need not direct you to make your Election. Well, the Case is the very
same, and if true innocent Delight and Diversion be preferable to Debauchery
and Excess: If Liberty be better than Confinement, if a wholesome open Air be
better than contagious Smoke and Stink, and a quiet easy Life better than a
Life of Noise, Vexation and Disappointment, why then the Country is better than
the Town, and there is none but Madmen or Fools will venture to exchange the
one for the other, and, like the Dog in the Fable, relinquish their Substance
to catch at such a perfect Shadow.

And, now (...), who can sufficiently wonder at your Infatuation, that you
should object against the Dismission of so treacherous a Thought, such a
viperous Inclination, that certainly will gnaw and devour all your true
Happiness and Felicity. This is a Pitch certainly beyond the Common Degree of
Folly; there must be some Enchantment, some powerful Philtrum in it, that can
make you unhappily in love with any thing so much below your self, and, what is
worse, so very much deformed, and a Jilt beside. But I must not trouble you too
long at a time, and therefore, in short, if you will indeed render your self a
Competent Judge, whether a Country Life be a Pleasant or Dismal thing; enter
upon it anew, and endeavor to improve and make the most of the Advantages of
it, and then your own Experience will be your best and most Authentic Informer.

LETTER V.
Wherein is a General Disswasive against Idleness, together with the Character
of a Sot*

SIR, it were the Work of many Volumes rather than the Business of a few short
Letters to describe the distinct Advantages that are wrapped up in the
Comprehensive Felicity of a Country Life; but it seems the utmost I can say in
the Case is to no purpose, your Determinations are unalterably fixed for the
Town, so that I will not give you or my self any more impertinent Trouble upon
that Account, but rather turn the Current of my Discourse another Way; and
first, tell you my short and blunt Opinion of what it is that has inclined you
to this wild Resolution, and then pursue the grand Part of my Design, i. e. to
expose to you some of the most dangerous Cheats and Tricks of the Town, that,
as a Young Gentleman and a Stranger, you are most liable to be caught and
trapan'd by.

First then, to tell you my thoughts in short, I Am afraid your chief Argument
for leaving the Country will appear to be this, viz. that you have too much
time upon your hands, and to be rid of it you will venture to hazard your self,
your Estate, Health, Liberty, and Retirement, and all for Company, nay, what is
worse, take in the Assistance of toylsome and laborious Vice, and call it by
the false Name of Pleasure rather, than be idle. And, what! could the Country
afford you no Instruments for Relief in this Case? Had you no Books to divert
you, nor no Opportunities to come at any? Was there no Gentleman of Parts and
Learning, that you might exchange and deal your Thoughts with? Had you no
Gardens nor Walks, no Fishing nor Fowling, nor was there no other Diversion to
be found out to deliver you from this intolerable State of Idleness? That Is
hard indeed. I Am confident Leicestershire did not use to be so barren, I have
often heard your good old Father say, that you never wanted innocent Diversions
there, and that a Country Gentleman might make his passage through human Life
in that County, with as much Ease and Satisfaction, as in any part of the World
beside; but the Scene is altered now, it seems; your Father was a dull, old
phlegmatic Fellow, and only hugged himself in a little old-fashioned Country
Happiness, a little, good, honest, downright Housekeeping, etc. All which, in
these Latter Days, are grown the Scorn and Aversion of our new-fashion'd Gentry.

Indeed Sir, I must agree with you, that Idleness is a very dangerous thing,
and the fertile Seminary of almost all other Vices; but then I cannot grant
that London is a proper Place to remove you out of the reach of it. A Gentleman
here is in the main a Creature that is composed of nothing but Pleasure and
Idleness, that, like the Leviathan in the Deep, thinks he has little else to
do in the Town but to take his pastime in it. I Will give you a short Account how
some of our true-bred City Gentlemen manage their time, and then leave you to
make your own Inference.

In this Town we have three distinct Sorts of Idle Companions, which may be
properly differenced by the Respective Titles of Sots, Beaus, and Gamesters,
and perhaps it may not be much amiss if I trouble you with a short Character of
each of 'em, as far as it is consistent with my present Design. At worst, 'twill
either serve to divert or caution you, and if it does but one of 'em, I Am
satisfied.

The Character of a Sot.
A Sot is a kind of sluggish filthy Animal, that by a continued course of
Lewdness and Debauchery, has entirely razed out the goodly Impression Nature at
first made upon Him; and is degenerated in the strictest Sense, from a Man to a
Beast. He Is distinguishable from the rest of his Species, both by his Smell,
Garb, Shape, and Aspect; you may discern him by his dirty Hands and Face, his
foul Linen, sore Eyes, stinking Breath, and twenty other Badges of his
Character, which he constantly carrys about him. His Method of Living, is
generally thus: About Twelve or One, he commonly rises, and when he has
carelessly hung on his Equipage, he steers his Course directly for the Tavern;
and to quench the flames of his Last-night's Debauchery, calls first for a
Cooler of White Wind and Ale mixed together; and when he has taken a swinge or
two of that, he sends for the Master of the House: Faith, says he (with a kind
of Vanity) I was damnable drunk last Night, and my Stomach is a little uneasy
this Morning; I think we had best try what a Quart of Hock for a Whet will do:
By that time this is drunk, and perhaps another, and a Pipe or two of Tobacco
smoak't into the Bargain, in comes the Dinner; if he can eat a bit, so, but
it is ten to one whether he can or not; however he can drink as well as the best
of 'em, and therefore sits down with them for Company. Here the half Flask must
be called for in Course, and the good Mistress of the House's Health begun in a
Bumper, with so many other endearing Healths, that it is ten to one but he is
more than half sea's over, before the Cloth is removed. If he can get any body
to bear him Company, here he fixes till he is so thoroughly drunk, that a Posse of
Drawers and Porters are forced to be called in to lug him into a Chair, or
Coach, to carry him out of Harms-way, to his own Lodgings: But if he can
prevail with no body to do him the Favor to stay here, and be drunk with him,
then in a sort of hazy condition, he blunders to the Playhouse (the general
Place of Rendez-vous) where he sleeps, farts, and stinks for an Hour or two,
and so returns perhaps to his former Vomit. The Pi^ know him well enough, and
keep as far out of his reach as they can, especially the Beaus; for, if he
chance to fall foul upon one of them, he certainly ruins him for that Voyage,
or at least forces him, upon the ungrateful Inconveniency, to steer to the next
Barber's Shop, to new Rig and Mundifie. Perhaps some Antiquated Whore, that for
Company sake can drink and smoke a Pipe, and be drunk as well as he, for want
of a better Adventure, halls him to her, and lays him aboard; and if she can
but once decoy him to a Tavern, she ply's him so very warmly, that she soon
makes him quite up, then dexterously picks his Pocket, and so leaves him. And
this is the way a great many of these sort of Gentry in this Town pass away
their Lives till an Habitual Course of Sottishness and Debauchery, has either
made them insensible, or thrown them into a Fever, or some other dangerous
Distemper, which carries them off entirely; or at least brings the Gout, Stone,
Gravel, Strangury, or some such thing upon them, by which the whole Remainder
of their Lives is rendered bitter and uncomfortable.

But, Sir, I remember the Caution you gave me in your last, i. e. to make my
Letters as short as I could; and so I Will defer the Character of the other two
idle Companions till my next.

LETTER VI.
In which are the Characters of a Beau and a Gamester, together with some short
Reflections upon Idleness in general.

The Character of a Beau.
ABeau is a Creature of a Nature so different and disagreeable to the former,
that you would hardly take him to be of the same Species, and his time cut out to
quite contrary uses; some of it is spent in the idle pursuit of Modes and
Fashions, in contriving his Clothes, and putting them on with the most
Advantage; another part of his time is consumed in admiring Himself, or
projecting to be admired by others, and the rest in hearing of Flatteries, and
reflecting and ruminating upon them. The first three Hours of every Day, are
constantly dedicated to the setting his Wig and Cravat, rolling his Stockings,
redning his Lips, and painting his nauseous Phiz, and the like. When he thinks
he has managed himself in the best order as may be, perhaps he stalks
majestically to the Coffee-house, where he teizes somebody with an Hour's
Impertinence, drinks his dish of Tea, and is laughed at, and then, forsooth, he
must have a Chair called, to carry him to a Lady, that (it may be) does him
only the Honor after all, to let him diue with her Dogs and her Abigails; or
perhaps, if she be in a very good Humor, and wants a little Sport, will admit
him to the favor to play a Game at Cards with her, till she has won his Money,
and made him the common Buffoon to the Company, and then she dismisseth him
with a Jest: From hence, perhaps, he marches to another, and tells her a
thousand Stories, how kind my Lady -- was to him, what a plentiful Dinner they
had, and how earnestly she pressed him to stay longer with her; in short, it is
ten to one but his Company soon grows ungrateful there too. Ladies don't often
love such Fools, that are fit for nothing but to be stuck up in a Garden to
fright the Birds from the Fruit, which they can cut none of themselves; and so
to he rid of him, one of the Maids has the Sign* given her, to take him aside,
and tell him that her Mistress expects Visiters, and his Company will not be
convenient. From hence, it may be, he walks to the Playhouse, where his chief
Business is to observe the Ladies in the Boxes, and to expose himself to 'em:
when the Play is done, he places himself at one of the Doors of the House, and
stands ready to offer his Hand to help them severally into their Coaches; if
there be ever a One, that will take him home with her, well and good; if not,
by the help of a Link, he picks his way to the Groom Porter's, where he lolls
about for another hour or two, and then the business of the Day is done with
him. If there be any broken Intervals, which cannot be so well devoted to these
Set and Solemn Fopperies, those are commonly gleaned up by some other little
insignificant Trifles; so that the main of his whole Life, is nothing else but
one continued Scene of Folly and Impertinence.

The Character of a Gamester.
A Gamester is a sort of Composition of both these together, half Sot, half
Beau; and in his Nature and Constitution, worse than either* of them. Indeed I
want a Name for him; and if he be a professed Gamester, and has taken up the
Trade purely for a Livelihood, he is no more fit to be admitted into the Society
of Country Gentlemen, than a Mad Dog is to be turned loose into a Kennel of
Beagles; where if he sets his venomous Teeth into any of 'em, they consequently
run mad too, and so are fit for nothing but to be worm'd, or hanged, to prevent
the Infection of the rest of the Company. These, forsooth, range the Town in
the Garb, and under the Characters of Gentlemen; and indeed some of 'em are so
Originally, but then in their Practices they are not only a Reproach to their
Family, but to their Title too. It Is a worthy Employment for a Gentleman, is it
not? to make it his Business to find out Young Heirs of much Wealth, and little
Prudence, and to rook 'em at Play, or entangle 'em into Suretiship, or perhaps,
betray 'em into some mean and unequal Matches? This is their common Practice;
and when they have hit of such a One, they seize upon him with as much
eagerness, and observe him with the same joy, as a Vulture does the fall of a
Carcass: But I shall have other Opportunities to speak with them in their
proper Places; and therefore I Will wave them now. As to the Gentlemen that use
Gaming, as their ordinary* Method, to squander away their Time, their usual
Custom is this: To spend their Morning at the Tennis Court, their Afternoon at
the Bowling Green, their Evening at the Play House; from thence to their
Mistress; from her, to the Groom Porter's; from the Groom Porter's, to the
Tavern; and from thence, perhaps (if they don't commit some Outrages, that
oblidges the Watch to secure 'em from further Mischief) about four or five in
the Morning they get drunk to Bed. In short, Sir, a Gamester is a Composition
of almost all the Vices of the Town jumbl'd together; his ordinary Dialect is
Swearing and Cursing, and his Occupation solely depends upon Lying, Falsehood,
and Perjury. His Life's a perfect Lottery, and a Hazard-table; to day he is a
Squire, and so proud and insolent, no body can speak to him; to Morrow he is a
Beggar, and as meek as a Lamb; and but lend him a Guinea to set him up, you may
say or do what you will to him: To have done with him, his time is so equally
divided between Vice, Folly, and Impertinence, and commonly so taken up and
forestalled by his Designs and Projects, and which way to manage his Cheats and
Adventures, or at least he is so harrass'd and fatigued with his Losses and
Disappointments, that his whole Thoughts, and that together, are lost in the
hurry: And thus he lives an absolute Slave, and dies a perfect Wretch.

You see, Sir, how these sort of Sparks ply their time; and truly, most of your
Country Gentlemen, that come to London purely to spend their Money, and to see
Fashions, fall under one of these Denominations. Well, what can make Men,
Gentlemen especially (that are distinguished by several extraordinary
Advantages from the rest of their kind) suffer themselves to be imposed upon by
these kind of Follies, I know not: Idleness is certainly the grand Cause, and
according to that common Principle of Nature, they must be doing of Mischief,
when they can find out no other Employ. But then, has Virtue lost her
Prerogative? Is she grown in this last Age so old and deformed, that she has
quite lost all her Charms, and Endearments? No, no, my Friend; she is still the
same, as charming and as beautiful as ever: the World's grown worse it is true*
but Virtue never changes. If you would but actuate your own Reason, and
disinchant your self from this unlucky Resolution, you would soon find she would
propose a Method to you, both to delight and direct you in your Country Life, a
thousand times beyond any thing in the most gustful Sensualities, the City can
pretend to.

To sum up all, there is a kind of Justice, that oblidges a Gentleman to stay in
the Country, and live upon his Estate; this he should do, not only for the sake
of Charity and Hospitality, but likewise upon the Account of his poor
Neighbors and Tenants, to whose Sweat and Labor, a great part of the Profits
and Advantages of his Land is owing. They, I Am sure, should be encouraged,
supported, and assisted; but how can that be, when the the whole Profits must
be sent up to support the Grandeur, Equipage, and Extravagance of a lewd Town?
And it is some odds too, whether the Annual Rents will do the business, or no;
it is very often seen that such kind of Luxuries and inconsiderate Methods of
living, not only destroy the Crop, but the Soil likewise; prey upon the very
Heart and Vitals of an Estate; and many have stayed so long in Town, till they
have had nothing left to retire to in the Country. There Is much to be said to
prove this Town to be the Forge of Vanity, a Nursery of Vice, a Snare to the
Young, a Curse to the Old, and a perpetual Spring of new Temptations. But, Sir,
I said enough already, to let you see my Sentiments of the Matter. My next
business shall be to discover and expose to you several of the most Practick
and common Humors and Tricks of it; some of which you will certainly be
encountered with almost upon your first Arrival.

LETTER VII.
In which the Humors and Tricks of the Playhouse are exposed.

SIR, having finished the first Part of my Design, and, as I said, exposed the
Town to you, as the Spartans were wont* to do their Drunken Helots to their
Children. I come now to the second thing; i. e. first, to lay before you some
of the Humors, Tricks and Cheats of it, which, as a young Gentleman and a
Stranger, you are in most danger of; and secondly, to give you some general
Directions and Advice, how you may best guard your self against them. And
first, Sir, I will wait upon you to the Playhouse (for thither I Am confident
your Inclinations or Curiosity, or both together, will soon lead you) and bear
you Company according to the best of my Judgment through the Different
Accidents and Adventures which, as a Stranger, you must expect to be
encountered with as soon as you come there. In our Playhouses at London,
besides an Upper-Gallery for Footmen, Coachmen, Mendicants, etc. we have three
other different and distinct Classes; the first is called the Boxes, where
there is one peculiar to the King and Royal Family, and the rest for the
Persons of Quality, and for the Ladies and Gentlemen of the highest Rank,
unless some Fools that have more Wit than Money, or perhaps more Impudence than
both, crowd in among 'em. The second is called the Pit, where sit the Judges,
Wits and Censurers, or rather the Censurers without either Wit or Judgment.
These are the Bully-Judges that damn and sink the Play at a venture; it is no
matter whether it be good or bad, but it is a Play, and they are the Judges, and
so it must be damned, cursed, and censured in Course; in common with these sit
the Squires, Sharpers, Beaus, Bullies and Whores, and here and there an
extravagant Male and Female Cit. The third is distinguished by the Title of the
Middle Gallery, where the Citizens Wives and Daughters, together with the
Abigails, Serving-men, Journey-men and Apprentices commonly ^ake their Places;
and now and then some disponding Mistresses and superannuated Poets; into one
of these you must go, and truly, considering your Circumstances, I think the
Pit is the most proper. Well, when you come there, the Eyes of every Body are
presently upon you, especially of the Whores and Sharpers, who immediately give
out the Word, to try if any body knows you; and if they find you're a Stranger,
then a Lady in a Mask, alias Whore, which (as they express it) is a good
Tongue-Pad, is forthwith detatch'd to go and sound you, and in the mean time a
Cabal of Bullies and Sharpers are consulting which way you must be managed, and
passing their Judgments upon you. The Lady comes up to you with a kind of
formal Impudence, and fixes herself as near to you as she can, and then begins
some loose, impertinent Prate, to draw you into Discourse with her. If she
finds you a Man for their Turn, and a true Squire, with some sort of Subtle and
Insinuating Civility, she leaves you a little, to go and make her Report to her
Friends and Allies, that are earnestly waiting to know the Success of her
Negotiation, in another Part of the Pit; here some proper Measures are soon
resolved upon, and she is dispatched to you again with new Instructions, and
will be sure to stick to you till the End of the Play; and in all the
Interludes be constantly chattering to you, to screw herself as far as possible
into your Acquaintance, and familiarity. When the Play's over she certainly
marches out with you, and by the Way, perhaps does you the Favor to let you
have a Glimpse of her Painted Face, etc. if she sees you take no Notice of her,
and seem insensible of her Design, she comes to a close Parley with you, and
must needs know which way you go; be it which way it will, her way's the very
same; and so to avoid the trouble of calling another Coach, if you will set her
down, she will give you a Cast another Night; it is ten to one but this is agreed
to: and now she has got you by her self, she begins to Cajole and flatter you,
to commend some particular Part; your Shape, Mien, Carriage, Goodnature, and
Civility; but above all, the Kindness in taking her into your Coach; in
Consideration of which, if you will do her the Favor to go Home with her to her
Lodging, she will do her best to make you Amends: When you come there, the first
part of the Entertainment is, with her own Character, and Circumstances, which
she commonly makes use of, for an Introduction to enquire into yours; when she
has fully equipped her self with your whole State and Condition, if she finds
that you're worth her trouble, why, then she is so much captivated with your
Genteel Deportment, free Disposition and your Even Temper and Conversation,
that you must needs Dine with her to morrow, and thus the Train is laid that
will effectually blow you up and ruin you inevitably, if you give her a second
Opportunity to touch it with the fatal Coal. You are hardly gone out of her
Room, but in comes the rest of the Confederacy, a Set of Bullies, Sharpers and
Whores, and then the Tables are soon turned, and you that were but the last
Moment one of the most Accomplished Persons in the Universe, are now made the
grand Laughing Stock for the Night; your Dress must be anatomized, your Mien
and Dialect Buffoon'd and Ridiculed, in short, they conclude you fit for
nothing but a Cully, and that they resolve by some means or other to make of
you. But to return again to the Playhouse. If they find their Whore can do no
good with you, then they try another Expedient, an Ingenious Gentleman that is
born Westward of England makes up to you, and he, forsooth, must know what
Countryman you are, or what is a Clock by your Watch? or what Part of the Town
you lodge in, or where you Sup? These sort of Sparks are commonly well stocked,
I mean, with Confidence and Impertinence, and so don't stand much upon Forms
and Ceremonies with you; but, by his Soul, if you will go along with him to the
Tavern and drink an honest Gentleman's Health of your Country, which he either
knows, or at least has heard his Name* he can carry you to a Glass of the best
Wine in London; his Business with you is of the same Nature with the former; if
he can wheedle you thither, first to make you drunk, then to draw you in to
Gaming, and then by the help of his false Dice, and other tricks and slights of
Hand, the only Arts that he is Master of, he soon gets your Ready Money, takes
your Notes for more by which means he links you so fast to him* that without
the greatest Caution, you are insensibly ruined before you can disentangle your
self. But if this don't pass upon you neither; why then comes a third, and his
Business is to draw you into a Quarrel, or at least to try whether you will fight
or not upon Occasion; and if you will not do that, they naturally conclude that a
Coward and a Cully are convertible Terms, and so will be constantly teazing you
till they have gained their Point. His Way of proceeding with you, is either to
tread on your Toes, cough in your Face, ruffle, crowd or discompose you. But
after all, if he finds you resent his Behavior and grow rough with him upon
the Matter, he flies presently to his Grand Reserve, beg's your Pardon, and
sneaks off. When neither of these can do your Business, then comes up a Forlorn
Hope, a worthy Old Matron, deeply skilled in the famous Science of Procuration,
and she accosts you first with a Scripture Phrase or two perhaps; or if she
finds that don't so well agree with your Palate (for some of your Country
Gentlemen are not over-fond of Scripture neither) she changes her Dialect into
Bawdy, and so with a little of one and the other, and a Check under the Chin into
the Bargain, she whispers you in the Ear, and tells you in plain Terms, she
perceives* you're a young Country Gentleman, and if you have a mind to have a
Taste of the Town, she lives in Bow-Street in Covent Garden, and if you will come
and Sup with her, she can show you three or four Couple of the chocest
Strumpets (Ladies she calls 'em) about the Town. You see, Sir, how naturally
all these Beasts of Prey hunt a Country Squire, and if they can once blow him a
little that he becomes obnoxious to the Herd, they seldom lose the Scent till
they have set him up (as you Phrase it) brought him to a Bay, and then they
soon pull him down and mangle him as they will* but here we'll leave him, and
take Breath till the next Post.

LETTER VIII.
Being a Continuation of the Humors of the Playhouse, together with a few
short Reflections upon their Government.

WELL, Sir, to go on where I left off; If you can pass these Pikes, and come
safe off from the Whore, the Sharper, the Bully, and the Bawd, which I hope you
will do, by the Assistance of the Cautions I have given you; then you will be a
little at liberty to look about you, and make your Observations. The Stage, I
must needs own, was originally (till so many immoral Practices and
Irregularities broke in upon it) of admirable use and Design. 'Twas a kind of
Looking glass to the Nation, where a Man of Sense might form as true a Judgment
of the Humors and Inclinations of the Better sort of the Kingdom, as in any
part of the Town besides; how it has come to lose so much of its Beauty and
Ornament in these latter Years, is no great matter to our purpose. If you will
come there now, you must take it as Men do their Wives, For Better, or Worse;
it is already in a state of Declension, and for my part, I am not so much a
Friend to the Mob, or the Phanaticks either, to give my Vote for its utter
Extirpation. To go on then, if it be a New Play, the House is commonly very
full, especially if the Author be a new One too; upon such occasions, every
body that has any Inclination for the Playhouse, is willing to gratify his
Itch with a Novelty.

Though indeed I must confess, when I look into the Plays that were writ
formerly, and compare them with the generality that have been writ here a late,
in my poor Judgment, the Plots and Characters, and (what is more strange) the
Style too, is grown so profoundly dull and flat, that a Man must have a very
good Appetite, that can digest such intolerable trash, without a Surfeit. Well,
let it be what it will, provided it be stamped with a New Name, and a strange
Title, it certainly raises the Mob, calls together the Whores and Bawds, the
Squires, Beaus, Cits, Bullies, etc. that come all crowding in shoals, to hear
what this wondrous New Man can say, or do, to please 'em. The third Day, if by
the help of a good Prologue and Epilogue, good Acting, good Dancing, and
Singing, good Scenes, and the like, the Sickly half-got Brat can be kept alive
so long, is commonly the grand Day; then you may observe the general Humors of
the House. In one part of it you will see the Judges, and the Wits, with
abundance of Hangers-on, and Interlopers, censuring and mistaking the Scene, if
there be any, for the Nonsense; it is ten to one, if there be any Part above
the rest, but some of these pretending Goxcombs unluckily pitch upon that, for
their Subject to laugh at: the Reason of this is very plain, perhaps they may
know a little of the Merry Andrew Parts, the dull Jokes and Drolls, which at
best are but the Rubbidge and Lumber of the Play; but for the Flights and
Ecstasies, and the shining Parts of it, those are utterly out of their Element;
and so consequently they are forced to damn and censure 'em in course, because
they don't understand 'em; the poor Poet must be confounded and mauled, and,
what is worse, if there be e're a Phanatick that sets up for a Judge, if there is
but a few accidental Expressions, that don't exactly square with his Opinion,
and Inclination, the whole Play, upon the score of one single Character or
Paragraph, must be esteemed a Satyr against the Government, and have an Embargo
laid upon it, and the poor Author be doomed as an Enemy to the Public, to be
taken into Custody, and whipped, etc. This, within the compass of my own
Knowledge, has been the Fate of some of 'em; and indeed I have known One of the
best Tragedies that ever was writ, stopped upon such a Peque. In another part of
the House sit the Poet's Friends, which are resolved to carry him off, right or
wrong; it is no matter to them, whether the Play be well or ill done, they are
engaged either for Friendship, Interest, or else by a Natural Spirit of
Contradiction, to oppose the other Faction; and those you will observe stradling
upon the Seats, hollowing, clapping, and flouncing, and making such an
impertinent Clatter and Noise, and using so many insolent and indecent Actions,
that I advise you as a Friend, to keep as far from 'em as you can. But, what is
worse still, perhaps, in the very nick of all, comes in a drunken Lord, with a
Party of Low Country Warriors; or, what is more common, a Country Squire, that
has lately taken up the Noble Profession of Scowring and Revelling; and to show
their Parts and their Courage, raise a Quarrel, and put the whole House into a
Hurly-burly; then you will see fine Work, indeed; the Whores tumbling over the
Seats, and the poor Squires and Beaus tumbling after 'em in a horrible fright,
and disorder; the whole Pit's in Arms in a Minute, and every Man's Sword drawn,
to defend himself; so that if the Uproar be not instantly suppressed, it is great
odds but there is some body murdered. These Insurrections, I confess, don't
often happen, and it is well they do not; for if they should, they might even
play by themselves: for, who but a mad Man would run the risque of being
stabbed, or trod to Death, to gratify himself with an empty, insignificant
Curiosity? And, indeed, most of our Novel Farces have little else, but barely
that to recommend 'em.

But, Sir, if after all you will still go to the Playhouse (which I hope will
be very seldom, never when you have any Business of moment to divert you, or
call you off other ways) why then, if you will take a few short Instructions
along with you, I Am confident, if they do you no good, they can do you no harm,
at worst you will esteem 'em (I presume) a well intended Impertinence, and
that is the most pardonable Error of any thing of that kind. Well then, upon
the former Proviso, that you have two or three loose hours that are entirely
upon your Hands, and you're resolved to make use of the Play, to fill up the
idle Intervals; your best way is to fix your self in some advantageous part of
the Pit, where with the least Disturbance, and Interruption, you may not only
observe the Actions and Behavior of the Actors, but likewise hear every
Individual Part distinctly, by which means you may be able to understand the
Plot and Design of the Play, and to judge of the several Characters, and what
they drive at; for unless you do this, the best Play that ever was writ, can
seem nothing else but an empty Dim of Words, and a jumble of things stuck
together, without any manner of Order. It Is true, the greatest part of those
that frequent the Playhouse, come thither upon a quite different Errand;
perhaps to see the Passionate Love, or Hate of some great Queen or Lady,
represented; the Destruction of some Prince, or a Hero; or the Rape of a
Virgin; or, what is more usual, to hear the Singing, and see the Dancing, to
observe some of the little Drolling Humors and Scenes, and fine Clothes of the
Players: But, Sir, I hope you would not herd your self among such a Mob as
these? If this be all you propose to your Self from the Stage, you may even
save your Money, and march to Lincoln's Inn Fields, where a Mo^ntebank and his
Andrew, will divert you as well. No, no, Sir, the true Design of the Stage, is
utterly foreign to this; i. e. to expose and detect Rebellion and Faction, and
Vice in general; and to exalt and commend Loyalty, Honor and Virtue; and
truly, there is hardly any Play (if you take it right) that is acted at either of
the Houses in London, but makes some kind of advances toward one of these
Ends. It Is true, Players like the Money of a Fool, as well as they do of a Man
of Sense, and in some measure are as willing to please him with their Trifles
and Bables* as Divert and Instruct the other with their Encomiums, and Satyrs;
though by the way, I must tell 'em, they had best take care that by their Farces
and Drols, and their Jack Pudding tricks, they don't at last pull their Houses
upon their Heads; but it seems they are above Advice, and so I will not go out of
my Road, to trouble my Head with 'em; it is well there is more Fools than Men of
Sense, that are their Customers; if there were not, for all their Huffing,
their Shares might be soon drawn into a narrow compass. Well, Sir, to have done
with them, and the Subject too, if you please to observe what I have told you;
with this One thing more, i. e. never to Imbark your self upon any Pretense, or
Account whatsoever, in any of the Quarrels, Humors, Intrigues, or Factions of
the Stage, you may then pass away an hour or two at the Playhouse, once in a
Month, but no oftener, without any great matter of Hazard, and with some kind of
Advantage.

LETTER IX.
In which the Humors and Tricks of the Tennis Courts are exposed.

TENNIS is one of the most Manly and Active Diversions we have in England; and
heretofore was hardly used by any but the Young Nobility, and Gentlemen of the
Chief Rank: King Charles the Second, was a great Master and Judge of it, and
would very often divert himself with a Set or two in the Royal Court at the
Cockpit, with a great deal of Satisfaction.

This is a Game that depends purely upon Skill and Activity, and not to be
acquired without considerable Expense, and Practice; upon which Account indeed
it has had the Advantage of most of the rest, and abundance of Sharpers and
Cheats have been kept out of it, for want of Money to pay the Charge of the
Court, and other Expenses that are consequent to it. But this, however harmless
and inoffensive it was in its Original and Design, has of late incurred the
same fate with most of the Diversions of that Nature, and is strangely
degenerated from a Noble and Genteel Exercise, into a perfect Trade for Rooks
and Sharpers, who perceiving it would necessarily be a good Foundation for 'em
to get a base Livelihood by, have cunningly twisted themselves into the
Knowledge and Perfection of it. As to the Game it self, a Person that has never
seen it before can make but little on it, except it be any Curiosity or
Diversion to him to see three or four Persons furiously running after a few
little Balls, and laboriously bandying and tossing them about from one to
another; if this were all 'twere well enough, but then when he hears the Marker
calling Forty, Love, and a Chase, and sees them changing their Sides, and hears
the Players wrangling and swearing about the taking of Bisks and Faults, and
talking of Cuts and Twists, and Forces, etc. he presently concludes there must
be some wonderful Secret in all this* and so is resolved to satisfy himself a
little further. If he gets into the Dan, among the Gentry that come there to
bet, and has the misfortune to ask any Questions, or declare his Ignorance,
they presently give out the Word, That here is a Squire come; and then two or
three of the sharpest of the Gang, come up with him presently, in order to give
him some little Insight, and Directions into the Game, that they may prepare
him against an Opportunity to take him in; here they tell him, it is all even
and odd, a perfect Lottery, and that he may venture his Money on either side,
for it is all equal; and so indeed, in some Sets it is: For the Noblemen and
Gentlemen, that are acquainted with the Game, and play it upon the square, and
more for the Reputation of good Gamesters, than for Interest, commonly make
their Matches so very nicely, that the best Sharper and Judge among 'em can
hardly (before the Set's begun) tell which way to bet his Money; here, perhaps,
he wins half a Piece, or a Guinea, which inclines him to believe that this must
needs be a very Fair Game, that a Stranger can get Money at it at first Sight;
and truly, as long as this Match lasts, he is in no great danger; but then
against this is over, there is another Set ready to step into the Court, that
will be sure to do his Business. The Managers tell him it is all equal now too;
that Squire A. is a good Striker-out, but Squire B. is a better Back-hand; that
Mr. O. judges a Ball finely, but then Mr. D. plays for a Chase much better than
he; so that upon the whole, they conclude it a very good Match, and that he will
see these Gentlemen will make better Play than the former; here they offer him
his Choice, or to throw Cross and Pile, which side he will take; if he complys,
and they have taken him in as far as the thing will conveniently bear at once,
then the Sign is made to the Players, that they may manage their parts; when
this Set is over, which is commonly played with as much seeming Eagerness and
Fury, and withal with the greatest Equality that can be; why then, with some
little Sham-quarrels, and wranglings about adjusting the Odds, etc. they agree
upon another: Here they Attack the Stranger again; Come, Sir, you had the
misfortune to be on the wrong side last time, though 'twas a very hard Match, and
no body could tell who had the best of it, till the very Advantage-game; take
your choice, we don't covet to carry off your Money. And so they draw him on
from one set to another, and from little Bets to great Ones (till they have
stuck him, as they call it) and then, to keep up to their own Dialect, they
seldom part with him, till they have sent him away sweet and clean. I was a
tolerable Master of this Game my self, I studied it at Oxford, together with my
Logicks, and Ethics; and at last was arrived to that Perfection, that but few
Scholars in the Town durst encounter with me upon equal terms (I wish I could
have said the same with respect to the other) but for all my mighty parts in
the University, when I came to London, I soon found my Insufficiency; and that
I must be new Documentized before I must pretend to set up for my self: they
would now and then take me in with them, to keep a Back-hand, which was my
Masterpiece; but truly, I had soon enough of my Back-hand business: In short,
I perceived they only made a Property of me, as they do of all Strangers, and
so I knocked off in time; besides I quickly grew acquainted with their Humors
and Tricks, and saw that there was but few Matches made, but there was either a
Bribed Marker, or some Gentl'eman that had first lost his Estate, and then his
Honor, and so was forced to comply with the Sharpings and Tricks of the Town,
to get his Bread; or some Scoundrel that never had an Estate or Honor either,
but had acquired the Game by a diligent Attendance upon the Courts, crowded in
among them, and that there was hardly a Set played, but there was some sort of
Falsehood and Deceit practiced; I wisely disposed of my Raquets, and Inclination
together, and left them to manage their Matters by themselves. But supposing
for once that the Game was, as they would have the World believe, square and equal,
yet one of these Sparks that make it their Trade to hunt about from Court to
Court have such a vast Advantage of a Stranger that knows nothing of the
Business, that it is morally impossible but they must get his Money and impose
upon him at last.

There are several in Town that live purely upon the Tennis-Courts (and live
well too) if such a way of Living may be called living well, but then they have
such a perfect Idea and Notion of a Set, and so many Mysterious Methods to turn
and wind their Bets, and to bring themselves off when they have the worst, that
a Person must have a natural Sharpness of Temper and Genius, backed with a long
Practice and Experience, before he can be a tolerable Master of the Faculty.
But after all, if a Man could escape all their Tricks and Stratagems, which is
almost impossible for a Stranger if he engages with them; what Business, I
wonder, has a Country Gentleman at a Tennis-Court? Why, truly none as I know
of, unless it be to expose himself, if not to the Cheats, at least to the
Laughter and Ridicule of a Company of lazy, sharping Companions. Well Sir, if
you should chance to fall in among 'em, take this along with you, that they will
cheat you if they can; if they cannot draw you in to bet with 'em there, they will
attempt the enticing you into a Tavern or Gaming-Ordinary, or rather than fail,
into a Bawdy House; they have twenty little Arts which they make use of, and
abundance of Baits to throw before a Stranger, and if he stoops for any of 'em,
they will be sure to find out some means or other to make him pay dear for his
Enstalment into into his new Society. Indeed, for the Noblemen and Gentlemen
that love the Game, and only use it for a Breathing, that play a set or two,
once in a Week, to divert and and recreate themselves, they are above any base
Action, and if you could fall in with them, (though I think the thing is scarce
worth your Trouble) as there is no good, so there would be no great matter of
harm in it.

LETTER X.
In which the Humors, Tricks and Cheats of the Bowling-Greens are exposed.

BOwling is a Game for Diversion, Recreation and Exercise, as well as Tennis,
and was formerly a Game for few but Gentlemen, as that was; but as Men and
Things are generally grown worse and worse, so is this too, and strangely
degenerated from an innocent, inoffensive Diversion to be a perfect Trade, a
kind of set Calling and Occupation for Cheats and Sharpers. The Number of
Bowling. Greens that we have in and near this Town are unaccountable, and the
Number of Bowlers, Betters and Rooks that depend upon 'em, and live by 'em,
almost miraculous; How they all live I know not, but that they do live, get
Money, and spend high, is most certain. Well, but I Will show you some part of
their Art, and leave you to judge of the rest your self. If you please
therefore we'll make a short Trip to Marybone (for that is the chief place of
Rendezvous) the Bowling-Greens there having in these latter Years gained a kind
of Pre-eminence and Reputation above the rest, and thither most of the Noblemen
and Gentlemen about the Town, that affect that sort of Recreation, generally
resort; I have seen a hundred at a time at least following one Block, and the
greatest part of 'em, five to one, I Am confident, Rooks and Sharpers. When a
Match is made which they are commonly very nice in, but not so nice neither but
a subtle, old Better knows presently where the Odds lies; then the Sport
begins, here you will hear five, ten, twenty Pieces offered the Leader against
the Follower, or the Follower against the Leader sometimes upon the main End;
and very often you will see five or ten Pound betted upon a Single Bowl; they bet
nothing but Gold here so that a man must have a good Stock that pretends to
embark with 'em. But the Secret and Mystery of all is, how one of these professed
Betters manage the Point; let the Game go for them or against them, it is some
odds, but they turn a Penny, or at least bring themselves off Savers at the
winding up. I have heard one of them say, though he lost five Pieces by the
Bargain, yet by his cunning Contrivances and hedging, and his taking and laying
the Odds (which is the chiefest part in the Betting) he should be three Pound
Gainer in the Main. But, Sir, this is an Art that is not learnt on a sudden;
and truly, it is much below a Gentleman, unless he has some Notions of losing
his Estate first, and being reduced aftewards to the Extremity of turning Rook
for a Livelihood, to perplex himself about it. Marybone, as I told you, is the
chief Place about Town, but for all its greatness and pre-eminence, it lies
under shrewd suspicions of being guilty of sharping and crimping, as well as
the rest. Indeed, I believe the Noblemen and Gentleman, are above any thing so
exaltedly Base and Sordid; but for the Interlopers, I Am a little jealous when
they find there is a convenient Green, a great many Citizens, Fools, and
Strangers, that they have always a Match or two lying by them, to divert such
kind of Adventurers. I have observed my self very unequal Dealing among them;
and withal I must own was something surprised and dissatisfied, to see so many
Gentlemen, if not concerned, at least winking and conniving at it. Well, Sir,
in short, I Am very certain, 'twill be your best way never to come there at all,
and then you will be both out of the Danger, and the Temptation too; for unless
you are so much a Master of your self, as I know some are, only to divert your
self with walking about, and observing the Humors of the Company, you will be in
great hazard to be seduced into some sort of Gaming, which you may perhaps have
cause to repent as long as you live. There you may be equipt with Gaming of all
sorts; if you are for the famous Game with two Dice, properly distinguished by
the memorable title of Hazard; there the Groom Porter has a Gentleman in
ordinary, constantly in waiting: If you're for Back Gammon, Trick Track,
Picket, Cribidge, or for an honest upright Game at Whisk, there is Chapmen
enough for you: But, by the way, I Would have you take care of them, for it is ten
to one, if they can once bring you down (as they express it) if they suffer you
to rise again, without making a Penny of you. But, Sir. I would not keep you
too long here neither, if you will give your self the trouble to take a Turn with
me to a Bowling-Green or two on the other Side of the Water, there you will meet
with both Bowlers and Betters, that are very well worth your Observation. A
Gang of such unaccountable Creatures mixed and jumbl'd together, and such a
strange and horrid Din of Blasphemy and Swearing (too common indeed in most of
these kind of Assemblies) that I know not where to begin my dismal Account of
'em. Well Sir, to have done with them as fast as I can, their common Way of
Proceeding is this, there are generally five or six that ply at one of these
Greens, that are looked upon to be the Cocks or Chief Bowlers, and these always
keep together, unless they can draw in a Younker to make a Property of. Their
Way of making their Matches is by drawing the Dice as in most other Greens, and
the Method is well enough where the Gamesters are equal, but that is but a blind
neither which they have to impose upon the Persons that are Strangers, and
don't understand the Cheat; for let the Dice fall which way they will, their
Friends and Allies, the Betters, must give the Sign which Side must win, and
each of these has always his Familiar or two near him to direct him whether he
should bowl on or off, and for Six pence Advantage they will do either: Sometimes
it happens that they are forced to take in a Stranger for want of a fourth Man
to make up their Set, and then things are not quite so well for their purpose;
however to make the Matter as secure as they can, they all three bowl against
him, and none more earnestly than his own Partner; he must lead in Course and
then if he puts in a good Cast and leaves him best at the Block, if the Game be
in any Danger, he will be sure to be two or three turns over, and either rest him
off, or strike up the Adversary; and to blind the Stranger, will impudently
pretend to justify the thing, notwithstanding the Miscarriage, to be the
judgment of the Game; and if he could have struck the other out, which he
never designed, they had been up. In short, they manage the matter so, that
unless the Stranger be able to beat them all three, he must necessarily lose
his Money, and yet they carry on the Game so equally, and with so much seeming
Fairness and Policy, that it is almost impossible (unless a Man has some Idea
and Notion of the Persons beforehand) to find them out.

If they get a Stranger to engage with them Hand to Hand, let him be never so
exact and judicious a Bowler, they will find out some means or other to cheat him
out of his Game. Sometimes they will be crossing the Ground upon him; others will
be Bawling to him just upon the delivery of his Bowl, and teizing and
confounding him with impertinent Advice, to make him forget his Lengths; and
perhaps, one of the Gang will pretend to be betted on his side, and so amuse
him with giving him false Ground; or if none of these or such like tricks will
do, why then just as he is acquainted with the Running and Byasses of his Bowls,
there is a Gentleman come they pretend that owns them, and must have them, but
they will give him another Pair, that are of the same size and weight, and in all
respects as good, but only it is the Gentleman's Humor to Bowl with no other;
and these, perhaps, are either Back-byast, or pegg'd, or loaded, or have some
other trick used to them, that it is impossible to come dear the Mark with them
Sir, I could discover abundance of their little Rascally Cheats to you; but
it is neither worth your time to read them, nor mine to write them; you see in
the main, what a villainous Gang these are, and how careful a Gentleman ought to
be how he ventures himself among them; for besides these cheats and tricks upon
the Green, they have abundance of other dangerous Villainies consequent to them:
they have their Whores, and Setters, their Thieves, and their Pick-pockets;
their false Dice and Cards, and almost all other Engines for Mischief, ready
upon occasion. Indeed, even in the worst of these places, there is a great many
Honest Gentlemen come daily to Bowl; but what then? I cannot see the necessity
for a Gentleman to run a Risque where there is no occasion; if he will divert
himself with a Game at Bowls now and then, there is places enough about London,
where he may meet with Sober and Genteel Company, may pass an hour or two,
without being grated and tormented with the hideous noise of Cursing and
Swearing. The Game is a very innocent and healthful Recreation in it self, and
I think one of the best Diversions we have about Town (provided a Man has
nothing to do) to pass away a Summer's Evening. I hope you will not mistake me
in this, nor in any of the rest; I am not entirely advising you against the
Play house, Tennis Court, or Bowling Green, or any other innocent and harmless
Recreation. I know some Divertisement is so necessary, both for the Body and
Mind of a Man, that it is hardly possible for either of 'em, to be at Ease
without it: but that which I would reprehend, is the Excess and the Inordinacy
of them; the making that a set and formal Business and Trade, which should be
only used as a Diversion, and to fill up the idle Intervals; and withal to
discover to you the ill uses that are made of 'em, and the Dangers and Hazards
they expose a Man to, if he once suffers them to usurp his time, and get the
Mastership over him; this is solely my Design, and truly I cannot suspect that
my sincere Endeavors in this point should meet with any false Construction.

LETTER XI.
In which the Humors of the Groom Porter's, and the Tricks and Cheats of
Ordinaries, and other Gaming-houses are briefly exposed.

SIR, having showed you in my former, how some of our Town Gentry spend their
Day, and given you some Cautionary hints of some of their Barefaced Cheats and
Tricks, that are transacted in the sight of the Sun; I shall now carry you a
little further, and show you a few of their Works of Darkness; and how their
Nights as well as their Days, are sadly consumed and played away, in a
dangerous repetition of Gaming and Vice; and accordingly, if you please, we'll
first make a short step to the Groom Porter's.

The Groom Porter's has been always looked upon as the most Reputable and
Convenient Place in Town, for a Gentleman to venture into, that has a mind to
try whether his good Fortune will suffer him to keep his Estate himself, or
force him to commit it into the Hands of some body else to do it for him. There
is wholesale Business, I can assure you* several thousand Pounds bartered for
most nights, so that if Fortune should play the Jilt, as she often does in such
Cases, you may be readily unsquired in two or three hours; nay, if you will in
two or three Hands. The ordinary Game they play at there, is Hazard, and Hazard
indeed it is, and a very great one too, if you go in among 'em with two or
three hundred Pieces in your Pocket, whether you bring e're a one out with you
again. I have known an Honest Gentleman come thither in a new Coach, with a
pair of very fine Horses, that has found it so hazardous, that in a Night or
two afterward, he has been forced to hazard it Home in a Hackney. But they
say, All things there are very square, and honest, good Wine, good Attendance,
good Company, and all other suitable Conveniences to accommodate a Gentleman,
whilst he is comfortably playing away his Estate. All this may be, it is true,
and it may not be too; for by the way, I have seen a Spark, by the help of good
Fingers, and a little Dexterity of Hand, manage their Mathematics something
quirely upon occasion. Well, but we must not dive too far into their Secrets
neither, they would grow angry perhaps, if we should, and I would not incur their
Displeasure upon any Account: and yet I hope, Sir, I may give you a little
short Advice, as a Friend, without being very offensive to any of 'em; it is
only, That you never come within their Reach upon any Account, or Pretense what
ever; it is a dangerous infectious Place for a young Gentleman but to put his
Head into; and many a One by venturing a little too far, has caught such a
Contagion at once, that has made him droop a great while, and at last carried
him clear off. The old Proverb says, Forewarned Fore-arm'd; and truly it is as
good as any in the whole Catalogue. If a Man will plunge himself into Ruin,
and squander away his Estate, and reduce himself to the wretched Condition to
be forced to sneak after every little Coxcomb for a Supper, or for a Crown to
buy him a pair of Shoes, as I know several Gentlemen of good Families, and who
have had good Estates too, till they wisely consumed them in the study of these
sorts of Mathematics, at this time are; let him even take it for his pains.
But the Circumstances in their own Nature, are beyond Aggravation, and so I Will
leave them, and go and see what they are doing at the Ordinaries.

The Ordinaries are a kind of aming-houses, Inferior and Subservien G to the
Groom Porter's, and are either managed by one of his Domestics, or else
tolerated and allowed, by his particular License and Deputation; as most of the
other Games are; the Lotteries only excepted, that, I think, are included in
the Royal-Oak Patent. These Ordinaries are a Receptacle for all sorts of
Gamesters, and are indeed very convenient Nurseries, to drag up Youngsters, and
to qualify them against their Estates come into their Hands, to play them
decently away at the Groom Porter's: How such kind of Seminaries as these come
to be suffered, I know not; but this I know, it is a shame, and a disgrace to
the Kingdom, that there is not some Regulation or Stop put to 'em. These
Gentlemen pretend to be much upon the Mathematics too; and, that all things
are carried extraordinary fairly and squarely among them, as well as at the
Groom Porter's; but, by their Leave, I have seen their Mathematical Flats, and
Bar's; nay (for a need) Mathematical Fullams too; and abundance that will run
Mathematically high or low: these are a sort of false Dice, that are cut and
stained so exactly like the true, and withal marked with the same Mark, that
it is morally impossible for a Stranger, that does not suspect the Cheat, to
discover it; and these the Box-Keeper has commonly in a Readiness, when he has
the Sign given him, to put in; or if he has them not of his own, there is those
about him that never go without them. When they have got a Gentleman, which
they design to rook in among 'em; whilst some are sharping him out of his Money
within, others are tampering with his Servants without, to find out the
strength and manner of his Estate and Circumstances, and where he lodges, and
what Friends and Acquaintance he has in Town; and if they find that his Effects
will answer, and that he is a Person that may be ventured upon; as soon as they
perceive he has lost all his Stock, then one of the Gang, that is constantly
watching there for such Opportunities, takes him aside; Sir, says he, I believe
you're a very honest Gentleman; I am very sorry to see you have lost your Money,
and would not have a Civil Man by any means exposed, and therefore, if you
please, I have five or ten Pieces at your Service: If he will accept of the
Favor, then he tells him, the Custom in such Cases, as well here as at the
Groom Porter's, is to take nine for ten, and to allow him a Call upon a good
Hand. When this is lost too (as it always is in a little time) then they
conclude he is fixed; and so the Gentleman that has done him the Favor to cheat
him of his Money, will needs (under pretense of a great deal of formal Civility)
invite him to the Tavern, to take a Glass, and eat the Wing of a Fowl with him:
When they have decoyed him thither, the Person that did him the extraordinary
Friendship to lend him the ten Pieces, must be instantly sent for too, who in
the Interim has made up a new Purse, and is very ready to Credit him with the
other ten, till to Morrow Morning, if he has a mind to try his Luck; but he
will not advise him. Here the Box and Dice must be called for, and the honest
Drawer, that knows his Duty in such Cases, brings in the Box with a pair of
their own Dice, which they have conveyed into his Hand in the Interim, etc. And
now there is no room for Suspicion, but every thing is carried with the greatest
Frankness and Indifferency; and so at it they go, till the other ten Pieces are
gone after the rest, and what must be done then? This Worthy Friend has no more
Money about him; if he had, he might command it: And truly he thinks since they
have won the Gentleman's ready Money, that they can do no less than give him a
Cast or two upon Honor; with a great deal of seeming Uneasiness, and perhaps a
thousand perfidious Oaths and Execrations, that they never did the like before,
and upon Condition too, that the Gentleman will give his Note to pay it to
Morrow Morning, if he should happen to lose any thing, this is complied with:
And here begins the fatal Catastrophe; if they think that he has too much
regard for his Reputation, or too much Modesty to make use of the Statute for
his Defense, or perhaps (what is more prevalent with him than either) will be
unwilling that the Town should know he has been a Bubble, then they stick him
in earnest, so deep, it may be, that he must be forced to cut off a Limb of his
Estate to get out of their Clutches. Sir, we have too many sad Instances every
Day in View, to convince you of the truth of this, without enlarging upon it;
so that, I hope, from this hasty Caution I have given you, you will have enough
of these kind of Ordinaries; however, for your better Satisfaction, we'll step
thither again, and see what the rest of 'em are doing in the other parts of the
House: Why, there are some playing at Back Gammon, some at Trick Track, some at
Picket, some at Cribidge, and, perhaps, at a By-table in a Corner, four or five
harmless Fellows at Put, and All-foures; here is no Respect of Persons, here
come Apprentices, Journeymen, Footmen, Cobblers, or any body, provided they
bring Money in their Pockets, and come either to cheat, or to be cheated, Pro
hac vice, they have as extensive a Qualification to Swear, Blaspheme, and
Hector, as the most Renowned Sharper in the whole Gang. That each of these in
his respective Station is a Cheat, I suppose, you will take for granted; you may
as well be cheated at Cards, as at Dice, and at Back Gammon and Trick Track, as
at Hazard; the false Dice and Slights of Hand will serve for One, as well as
the other; there is no difference, as I know of, but only the former is a little
longer about the Business. But besides all this, if a Man could be secure to
guard Himself against their false Dice, and Slights of Hand, and was equal with
'em too in point of Judgment and Experience, what business has a Country
Gentleman, or indeed any Body else, to venture Himself among such a rude Herd
of wild Creatures? Well, I Am ashamed to think that any Gentleman should sink
himself so much below a Rational Creature, to be guilty of such Unaccountable
Folly; I must own I utterly lose my Pity, when I see one of these Wretches
shirking about in Rags (as there is enough of 'em about Town) that are Living
Monuments of their own Vicious Indiscretion; let 'em even keep their Rags,
their Poverty and Contempt, for me.

And truly I could almost wish every one in their Condition, that does not take
warning from 'em, but will violently plunge himself into the same Misfortune.

LETTER XII.
In which the Humors and Tricks of the Royal-Oak Lottery are exposed, together
with a short Account of the Practices of Lotteries in General.

I must own, Sir, I broke off from my Relation of the Ordinaries something
abruptly: Indeed the Prospect it self was so dismal and odious, and the
Accounts of the Men and Things that belong to 'em so troublesome and
ungrateful, that I was forced to leave 'em in an Affright and in Haste. A Sober
Man cannot look into 'em without Astonishment. I lose both my Reason and my
Charity when I think of 'em; but then how shall I do to contain my self whilst
I give you a Description of the Lotteries, which in all Respects are as bad,
and in some Measure a great deal worse than they?

And First, for the Royal-Oak Lottery, it is a Game indeed that is stamped with
a Noble Name and Superscription, but how well it answers that Honorable Title,
I leave you and all the World to judge. It Is pity, methinks, that such a
glorious Character, a Royal-Oak, which derived its Name from being a Shelter
and a Safeguard to Distressed Majesty, should be basely subverted and changed
to serve the Ends and propagate the Interest of a Scurvy Game, a Game that (if
the Common Proverb be true, which the Town passes upon it; and indeed I Am
inclined to believe it is) has Ruined more than the Fire of London; How it was
brought out of France, and how it came to be Established by a Royal Authority
in England, is nothing to my Purpose; it is here, it seems, and here it has been
a great many Years, the Managers have got Estates, and the Fools that have used
it have lost theirs; but all this is still foreign to my Matter, my Design is
only by Way of Caution to give you a short Account of the Practices and the
Ways and Means that they commonly use to raise Money from the Public. And this
I shall do with the utmost Brevity and Candor I am able. It would be too long
to trouble you with the whole Contrivance of the Game, and the several Odds and
secret Advantages which the Managers have above what they pretend to, or
perhaps what they know, and indeed I much question whether the original
Projector himself had a perfect Knowledge of all the consequent Profits of it.
In short, it is a cunning, intricate Contexture, and has so fair and so enticing
an Aspect, that many an honest Gentleman and Citizen has been seduced by it, to
the Loss of their whole Estates and Ruin of their Families.

The Odds which they say they have, is only two and thirty Chances against
seven and twenty, which they pretend were allowed 'em to discharge the Annual
Rents they are obliged by their Patent to pay to the King, and to discharge the
Ordinary Expenses of their Houses, Servants and Officers. Well, for once, we'll
suppose that their Advantage is no more than this, who, I wonder, but a Madman,
would go to play away his Money upon such a manifest Inequality? Your Old
Gamesters all allow it as a General Rule at Back-Gammon, that, however a
Younker, by Extremity of Luck, and Dint of Throwing may now and then get a Set
or two of 'em, yet if they continue the Match they will in the End be sure to
have all the Cargo; it is the very same in the other Respect, and several
Persons do very often win Money of 'em and carry it off, and so it is necessary
they should, for otherways the Worthy Constitution must dissolve in Course; and
indeed this is the main thing that draws in People to pursue it; but this is
but a perfect Bait, the next time they come, it is odds but they not only lose
their Interest but their Principal too. I think there was an honest Gentleman,
one that got some Money of 'em, and kept it too, but then he was forced to have
a Mathematical Ball made on purpose, and truly if he had made no worse use of
his Mathematical Dice than he did of his Mathematical Ball, I should not be
very much out of Conceit with his Mathematics. This Game has got a wonderful
repute lately among the Ladies, especially among the Citizens Ladies, who, they
say, that they might not lose time, do commonly two Businesses there at once,
i. e. first, make their Husbands Cuckolds, and then Beggars; whether they do
the first or not, I will not be positive, tho, by the way, considering what
company they meet there, there is shrewd Grounds for Suspicion; but for the
latter they do it effectually. I have seen, my self, an ordinary Citizen's Wife
lose her Seven or Eight Pieces in a Morning, and at the same time swear
solemnly she has had the same bad Fortune for a Month together successively.
How such Citizens Ladies, and indeed all other Ladies that frequent such sort
of Diversions ought to be managed, I think lies pretty ready, we have
Mad-houses about Town, and thither I Would have 'em all sent and kept under a
strict Diet and Discipline, till they had either absolutely forgot or solemnly
forsworn the Folly; and after that if they should relapse, let 'em be committed
to the Tuition of a Gentleman in a Blew Coat, and let him try if he can Whip it
out of 'em. What it is that bewitches both Men, Women, and even Children, to
follow this unhappy Game, I cannot guess; it is true, it is recommended to 'em
under the false pretense and Coverture of a great deal of Equality and
Advantage; but then if they would but turn themseves about and look backwards a
little, they must needs see their Mistake with a Witness. I can produce
hundreds that have lost their Estates, and been ruined by it; but let them
bring but one single Person that has pursued this Game for any considerable
time, that will own, or rather prove that he is a Winner in the main, and I Will
give up the Argument, and grant that whatever I, or any body else can say
against it, is utterly false, and groundless. I know, Sir, this cannot be done,
and it is Nonsense, and a Contradiction to imagine it; but still I am the more
at a loss to find out what it can be that seduces the World to follow it on,
notwithstanding the Strong, and Repeated Conviction of the Disadvantage and
Ruin that attends it. Nay, what is more admirable still, that Men of Sense
should be caught. I have known several that in most other things would have
past Muster well enough; by their Foolish Projects, and false Assurances, which
they had formed to themselves, how to win Money at this delusive Game, have
rambled from one Notion to another, and tried so many Experiments, that they
have projected themselves out of all that they have, and are forced now to hang
upon it, to try if they can pick up a Shilling now and then, at the best of the
Ley, or get a Mug of Ale, or the Dregs of a Bottle of Wine amongst 'em.

Well then, Sir, not to trouble you with too many of these kind of Reflections;
there were always Fools, and always will be; let a Man say what he will, there
are some People so bigoted to their Folly, and so fond of their own way, that
they will not be put out of it, though they know it leads 'em directly to Ruin
and Destruction. I hope you will not fall under this Character; you see the
Rock, and if you will voluntarily run upon it, and dash your self to pieces, I
have, however, discharged the Office of a Friend, in showing you where it lies*
and can do no more, except it be to lament a Misfortune, I could not prevent.

But now I think on it, I will not part with these Gentlemen, without taking my
Leave of 'em neither; there are still some memorable Qualifications amongst
'em, that I Am confident ought not to be past by, without some sort of Ceremony.
And first: These Gentlemen keep an open Table; that is true enough, and a Person
that has twenty or thirty pound in his Pocket to lose with 'em at Night, may
dine with 'em at any time; but withal I have seen a poor Gentleman that has
lost some thousands with 'em formerly, basely and disgracefully thrust out of
Doors, for but calling for a Glass of their Brandy: nay, and they pretend to be
very charitable to the Poor too; Secret Charity, I confess, is the most
meritorious, and I suppose, that is the way they communicate theirs, for I never
heard of any that they did in public.

But then, what kind of Poor are they, as they are thus beneficial to? Why,
doubtless, they must be the Poor of their own Making; and, by the by, if they
were forced to provide for their own poor, as all other Honest Corporations
are, they would be soon compelled to quit their Country-Houses, and return to their
respective Employments to get their Livelihoods, as well as the rest of their
Neighbors. Well, but (they say) they have one point of Civility, which every
body must allow to be very extraordinary, i. e. that when they have won a
Gentleman's or a Lady's Money, they will give 'em Half a Crown, or a Crown for a
Coach; that I must needs own to be a very high point of Civility indeed, and
who would not after such a Favor, come within a Night or two, and lose thirty
or forty Pound more, to make 'em Amends? And this they call a Paratto, or a
Parato, you may call it which you will* but it seems most Natural to me to be a
Parato; the English of which is, Prepare thou, that is, Go, and provide more
Money, and come hither again, and play it away; that is the true Intent of the
Business, I believe; and this they do too, to a poor Gamester, with so many
Curses, and so much Insolence, that none but a Despicable, Mean-spirited Wretch
will accept of it from 'em. Well, but, Sir, I must not spend all my Time and my
Paper about 'em: In short, I don't think 'em worth it. Besides, I have some
other of their Dependants, to make a short Visit to; and therefore, I Will leave
them to Reform and Repent, or, what I rather wish, to be Reformed, or Abolished.

Having done with this Grand Lottery, I suppose you expect I should say some
thing in course of all the rest: As for the Money Lotteries, that are now so
much in Vogue in Town, I declare I neither like, nor understand 'em, and
therefore will have nothing to do with 'em. If you can get a thousand Pound for
a Penny, or ten thousand Pound for twenty Shillings, I will own you have good
Luck; but I must tell you, that it is ten thousand Pound to a Penny, whether you
do or not. I believe a Man might find some matters in the Secrets of their
Managements, that might deserve a little Reflection, as well as the rest; but
since they say, and some People believe they have only ten per Cent, for all
their expense and Diligence, for my part I will not trouble my self to disprove
'em; even let 'em take it, and if they and the World are satisfied, I must own
I never had, nor never will have any cause to complain. But now, for these
little Sucking Lotteries, Plate Lotteries, I think they call 'em, they are but
poor Soundrel Cheats, that will pass upon none but the Country Fools, and Town
Mob. A few Bables, some false Dice, and a little Sham-plate behind a Glass,
sets up one of them; besides, they are only Feuditaries to the former, and
derive their Privilege from their Deputation. Indeed, a Man may, if he will,
go to one of them, and throw away four or five Pound, to get a Nutmeg-grater,
or a Tobacco-stopple, for a Curiosity; as I know those that have at a
Bartholomew Fair; but then I think Merry Andrew ought to be made acquainted
with it, 'twill serve him for a good Subject to divert the Rabble with. Indeed,
there is a late Invented Lottery, where there is nothing to be won but Money, nor
that neither, that deserves a short Observation. This, it seems, is to be
managed with ten Dice; and truly the Projecters have so carefully settled their
Prices, that none of those that are considerable, are reconcilable with the
Numbers upon the Dice; a Man may in the hazard of thirty or forty Shillings get
a Hit of Half a Crown, or so; but unless he has got the Art to reconcile
Impossibilities, he can never come at any of their twenty or thirty Pounds,
which they pretend to In short, all these are but Downright Cheats, and
Devices, to deceive Ignorant People out of their Money; and many a child has
been tempted to rob his Parents, and Apprentice his Master, upon the Account of
'em: I must confess, I think they are so much below a Gentleman, that he needs
not be cautioned against 'em; they are not only exaltedly Foolish, and
Ridiculous, but Scandalous too, and certainly, under those two Qualifications,
a Man must be either a perfect Madman, or an Idiot, that will concern himself
with 'em; a Man may indeed by such inconsiderate Actions as these, expose
himself to the Laughter and Scorn of the Town; but let him take this along with
him, when he has once done it, he will find it a little difficult to recover the
Loss of his Reputation. A Good Name may be lost in the Quest of Bables and
Trifles, as well as in the pursuit of deep and deliberate Follies. A Gentleman
may as well squander away his Estate and Reputation at a Nine-pin Yard, and a
Shovel-board Table, among Journeymen Shoomakers and Porters, as at the Groom
Porter's, amongst Gentlemen and Sharpers; there is no difference that I know of,
but only the One does his Business at once, and the other's a little longer
about it: They are equally dangerous and disgraceful, and both infinitely
beside the Practice and Character of a Gentleman.

LETTER XIII.
In which the Tricks of the Cock Pits, and the Cheats of Horse Races, and Foot
Matches are exposed.

PERHAPS, Sir, having discovered so many of the Cheats and Tricks of the Town
to you already, you may now think it high time to wind up my Account. I can
assure you, I have no Vanity in reporting these Matters, they are as odious and
unpleasant for me to write, as they can be for you to read: But still, Sir, I
remember my Promise, I told you I Would show you a little of most of the Follies
and Villainies of the Town, which as a Gentleman and a Stranger, you're most in
danger to be trapann'd, and imposed upon by, when you come at it. To proceed
then to the rest, for once I Will carry you to a Cock Match; and if you love that
Diversion, show you a Battle or two, that you may see how much our Sparks in
London, manage their matters beyond yours in the Country.

Cock-fighting, is an Ancient, Barbarous sort of Diversion, that for many Years
has been of high repute, even amongst the Nobility and chief Gentry of England:
It Is now indeed in state of Declension; the Gentlemen, perceiving the constant
Charge, Folly, and Inconvenience that depended upon it, have in a great
measure, wisely laid it down.

And the Sharpers, Rooks, and Scoundrels, together with few some Fools, have
taken it up; or else the Cruel Sport, for that is the best Title I can give it
(and I think the best it deserves) had been happily worn out, and lost, and
there had been an end on it. For my part, I cannot conceive where the great
Diversion in Cock-fighting lies: the Bear Garden and Cock Fit, are both alike
to me; and truly, in my Judgment, they are both Inhuman, and Unnatural, and
there is very little Satisfaction in either. But this is nothing to the purpose:
It passes under the Notion of a Harmless Recreation among the rest; the Rooks
and Sharpers get Money by it, and therefore we'll go and see a little how they
manage their point. Their first Business is to bribe themselves into
Acquaintance with the Feeders, and to learn every particular Cock's Marks,
Breed, Way of Fighting, etc. When they are thoroughly equipt with these, and
every thing else, that can possibly give 'em any Advantage in point of
Judgment, they make their Bets, but still their Eyes are constantly fixed upon
the Cock, that they may observe every Wound and Turn of a Battle; and truly
most of your Old Cockers, are so very sharp and quick-sighted in such Cases,
that they generally discover the nicest Advantage, and accordingly either take,
or lay the Odds, to bring themselves off; and so far it is fair enough, and
every Man is to be commended for making the most of his Business; and indeed,
it is impossible they should use their Talents any further in a fair Match than
this comes to, unless it be to swear you out of your Bets, when you have won
'em, and bring some of their Gang to give Judgment against you, as it is very
common amongst 'em. But all this is little to their Business, and if there was
nothing else in it but the Advantage they have in point of Judgment, they must
be quickly forced to find out some new Adventure, or prepare to fight Battles
of another Nature. Their Business generally comes on when the Grand Match is
over (unless the whole be one of their own making) then, perhaps, they have a
By-match or two, to divert the Company at Parting, which may bring in
something. Here they set down One of the Sharpest narrow-heel'd^st Cocks they
have, to One that they know is a perfect Slug; and it is ten to one too, to make
all things sure, but they crack his Beak, or thrust a Pin into the Roof of his
Mouth, or blunt the Points of his Gafles, or cramp him with a Hair about his
thigh; for in such cases they will be sure to make all things safe; but then the
force of their Designs depends chiefly upon the managing point, against their
Cock comes to be set down, in order to which one of the more Reputable sort of
Sharpers, offers large Bets upon the Cock that is to lose, and withal several
Sham-wagers are laid among themselves. This, says he, is a Brother to the Pile
that killed Squire G -- 's Dun; he came from Mr. R -- 's Hen, and my Lord -- C
-- 's Duckwing, that won the Famous Battle at New Market: And, perhaps, may be
a Sightly Cock, and a good Cock in Nature. By these, and such like Stratagems,
it is odds but there is several snapt; and to color the matter, when the
Business is over, they pretend that he received a Wound in the Body in the
Sparring-blows; and if he had not been accidentally disabled, he would have
certainly won the Battle, and they will fight one of the same Brood, with any
Cock of his Match in England, for a hundred Pound. Sir, I would not trouble you
too much with this kind of Stuff; you may judge from this short Draught, what
these Gentlemen would be at, their sole Business is flat Sharping, and Rooking;
and, if you will venture in amongst 'em, and hazard your Money; you may depend
upon it; if they find you a Stranger, they will have some Device, either by fair
means or foul, to cheat you before they part with you. But after all, what, I
wonder, can it be that should induce a Gentleman, to hazard himself, and his
Reputation among such a Gang of Varlets, as these are. I cannot imagine where
the Diversion, or Felicity can be, to see a Kennel of Deepmouth'd Ruffians
(standing round a Pair of Foolish Creatures) Hollowing, Cursing, and
Blaspheming, whilst they mangle one another to death? This is a very
unaccountable way of disposing of your self, indeed. Well, Sir, I will not
trouble you more about it; you see how Cases stand, and if you will plunge your
self into such manifest Inconveniences, you must even take it for your Pains,
and sit down by the Loss.

And next for Horse Raceing: Why, that is in the main a Cheat as bad, if not
worse than the former, and many an Honest Gentleman has been bubbl'd by it out
of his whole Estate. As to the great Matches between Noblemen and Gentlemen,
the Plate-matches, etc. that is all Country Business, and don't fall within the
compass of my Design; and I Am glad it does not, for truly if it had, I Am afraid
I should have been apt to say something that would not so well have suited with
their respective Characters. However, if you are for a Course, and will be
betting with 'em, you may take this among the rest, That unless you have a true
Knowledge of the Horse, and Riders, and especially of the Design of the Owners,
you may as well be taken in by a Jockey Knight, or Squire, as by an Hoastler,
or a Horse Courser; and what is worse, you must not complain neither; if you do,
you affront 'em, and then Wars will ensue. In brief, I think you have no great
Business among any of 'em. But since we are upon the Ramble, we'll make a short
trip to Barnsted Downs, or Hackney Marsh, and see what Company they have got
there: There, I Will warrant you, if you are for such sort of Sport, you will not
want Diversion. Well, I would not keep you long among 'em (for they are a
dangerous Society) and therefore you would do well to remember, that there is
not one Match in twenty run there, but what is a Cheat; the Heart of the Company
is made up of nothing, but Jockeys, Horse Coursers, Hoastlers, and Farriers,
with some extravagant Citizens, that are learning to gallop, and manage their
Racers, against they are forced to mount 'em upon another occasion. A General
Cit, that does not Ride above ten or eleven Stone, after he has wisely Raced
himself out of his Shop, makes as accomplished a Highway-man, as the best
Butcher, Coachman, or Hoastler of 'em all. But, Sir, I Am sure you will not like
this Company; beside you have enough of it in your own Country, and therefore
we'll leave 'em to manage their Cheats by themselves, and make the best of our
way to Hide Park, to try if we can have any better Diversion, at a Foot Match.

Foot Raceing, is just of the same Nature with the former, only with this
Difference, that they Rob a Foot, and the other a Horseback; the One's a
Highway-man, and the Other's a Pad. In short, the general Business of both is
to make Sham Matches, to draw in Strangers, and to impose upon 'em, by a few
rascally Cheats and Tricks: But they are grown so common, and well known in
Town, that there is few, but the very Rabble, take any Notice of 'em. I could
have entertained you with some of their Villainous Stratagems and Devices, but
that I think they are both below a Gentleman's Ear and Pen; they are only fit
for the correction of the Mob, and let them take 'em, and try, whether a
Horse-pond, or a House of Office, will work any thing toward their Reformation.

LETTER XIV.
In which the Villainies of Guinea Droppers, and Sweetners are exposed.

GVINEA Dropping, or Sweetning, is a Paultry little Cheat, that was recommended
to the World about thirty Years ago, by a Memorable Gentleman, that has since
had the Misfortune to be taken off, I mean, Hanged, for a Misdemeanour upon the
Highway. However, he left the Mystery behind him, which has ever since been
managed with pretty good Success, by some of the worthy Members of his Gang,
and is now improved to that high Perfection, that it is become a perfect
Occupation, and several Remarkable Persons live upon it. The General Places
where the Masters of this Art Rendezvous, is Lincoln's Inn Fields, and Covent
Garden, and in most other Public Places between Westminster Hall, and Temple
Bar; especially in the two former; and it is some odds if a Country Gentleman,
or a Stranger passes through either of 'em, but he is attackd by 'em. The Manner
of this Cheat, is thus, (as I had it from One of the Chief Masters of the
Faculty, that, it seems, has quitted the Business upon some Dislike.)

Says he, To make us a Complete Set, there must be three of us; One to
Personate a Merchant, the other a Country Gentleman, and the third a Tradesman.
When we have hit of our Cully, (and they have commonly a damnable Notion of a
Person for their Turn) One of our Gang marches directly before him, and another
follows close behind, till they come to a convenient Place, where the Mouth (as
they are pleased to term him) must needs observe; and then the Spark that is in
the Front, drops the Guinea: Faith, (says he, turning about to the Stranger) I
have found a Piece of Money here, I think it is a Guinea; and then if he that is
in the Rear perceives he is insensible of the Cheat, up he steps, and claims
Halfs. After a little Sham-squabble between the two Cheats, says the first, If
any body has any right to a Snack, it is this Gentleman, who saw me take it up:
But to prevent Disputes, Come, (says he) it is a lucky hit, we'll even go all
to the Tavern, and spend the odd Money, and then divide the Remainder fairly and
equally amongst us. The third still continues at a distance, to observe the
Success of their Management, and in what Tavern they house him, which is one
where they commonly have a through Acquaintance and Familiarity: when he is fixed,
then in comes he, in a mighty Hurry, and pretended Confusion, for the Loss of a
Bill, which he says he supposes he dropped just now, in the very Room where they
are drinking: And to color the Matter, One of the other two conveys a
Sham-bill under the Table, which he immediately takes up, and as a testimony of
his Joy for the Recovery of it, will needs call for his Pint. After they have
drank two or three Pints, and begin to grow a little warm, up starts one of
'em, and pretends to have discovered a Pack of Cards, which he has before
placed in some convenient part of the Room, for his purpose. Ha! says he,
here is a Pack of Cards; Come, Faith, I Will show you one of the prettiest Tricks,
that I was taught by a Dutchman the other Day, that ever I saw in my Life: And so
to possess their Cully of their Innocence, etc. they show several of the
ordinary Tricks upon the Cards. At last, he that is the most Dexterous, starts
the Grand Trick; which they call Preaching the Parson; how the Dogs came to
call it by that Name, know not; unless it be, that so many honest Clergymen,
above the rest, have been imposed upon by it. As to the Manner of their Trick,
'is no great matter, my Design is not to teach you Tricks, but how to avoid
'em: it is a Palm, and a Slip that they have, a sort of Deceptio Visus, which if
you have a Curiosity to see, there is enough in Town will equip you. If this
Cheat takes, then they have no need to try any other Expedients; but if this
don't pass upon you, then they will try you with false Dice, Rug and the Leather,
or twenty other Projects, that they have ready upon such Occasions. For, in
short, your Money they will have, before they part with you; or rather than
fail, knock you down, and rifle you, or pick your Pocket.

Sir, you have this Account of this piece of Roguery, in the very words, as
near as my Memory will serve me, as I had it from my worthy Informer (one of
the Masters of the Gang;) and truly I have been something the longer upon it,
that it may serve as a General Caution to you against Imbarking your self with
Strangers, upon any pretense whatever. For, give me leave to tell you, a
considerable part of the Mischiefs of this Town, are derived to us upon that
Account, and will be every Day more and more so, considering the present
posture of Men and things. This Town degenerates hourly; Honesty and Virtue,
are almost dwindled to nothing. Roguery, Folly and Vice, are constantly
increasing, and growing more Public and Insolent; so that if you will
notwithstanding venture to London, believe me, 'twill require your utmost Care
and Wisdom to guard your self against 'em.

LETTER XV.
In which the Tricks of Bawds and Jilts are exposed, together with some
Reflections upon the Art of Trapping.

SIR, I am now entering upon the last, and indeed the most unpleasant part of my
Relation, i. e. the Tricks of Bawds and Jilts, two Ranks of degenerated
Animals, so exactly Impious, so solemnly and deliberately Vicious, and
Scandalous* that their very Names, the very. Title of a Bawd, and a Whore, is
sufficient to fright a Sober Man, not only from their Embraces, and
Conversation, but even out of all manner of Lustful Thoughts and Inclinations.

In the first Rank I place the Bawd, or Procurer, you may call her what you
will; for though the latter has usurped a Name a little more Modish, and Decent
than the former, and perhaps may have a little more Business among the Quality
and Gentry, yet they are both Practitioners in the very same Arts and Sciences,
and constantly agree in the Main of their Occupation. There Is no Difference that
ever I heard between Jeany C -- and Moll -- Q -- or my Lady -- either, only in
point of Price: Jeany and my Lady will not equip you under a Guinea, perhaps; and
Moll will furnish you as well for Half a Crown; nay, rather than lose your
Custom, for a Shilling, and a Quartern of Rasberry.

In short, One helps to a Common Miss, and the other to a Common Whore; there is
no Odds but in the Name: And these are all Works of Darkness beside, and then
according to the old Proverb, Jone's as good as my Lady.

However, for Method sake, I Will take 'em to pieces, and show you a few of their
Tricks and Managements, under the respective Characters of a Procurer, Bawd,
and Jilt.

First then for the Procurer: Her chief Place of Rendezvous, is at the
Playhouse, that is the Change she never fails to be upon; and indeed is the
most proper Place for her to put off her Dammag'd Commodities. She seldom wants
Chapmen there, especially for her Maiden-heads, which she pretends is the only
part of her Merchandise.

You may easily discover where-abouts in the Pit she keeps her Office, by the
Concourse of Whores and Gallants, that are perpetually crowding about her,
either for Advice, or Assistance. If you should once be so unhappily Vicious,
to make use of her, she will lay so many Snares and Temptations to entangle and
betray you, that it is almost impossible for you afterward to escape her
Delusions.

Sometimes she will have the delicatest Woman in the World for you; at other
times a fine young Creature, of about fourteen, a perfect Pattern of Innocence,
and Modesty, and a pure Virgin; beside, she has one that sings like an Angel;
another than dances to a Miracle; a third that has an incomparable Shape and
Mien; and a fourth that is an Absolute Wit, and the only diverting Companion of
her whole Sex.

In short, she has 'em, or at least pretends she has 'em of all Sorts and
Prices, from a Guinea to five, and from five to a hundred; but let me tell you,
that if you deal with her for any of 'em, you have better Luck than most of
your Neighbors, that venture their Stocks upon such brittle Ware, if it don't
prove a dear Bargain at the making up your Account.

A Race Whore, or a Pad Strumpet, as they order their Business, will stand you
in five times as much in a Year's Keeping, as a Race Horse and a Pad together,
nay, than a whole Stable of Racers, Pads, and Hunters too. They must be kept
finely clothed, and nicely dressed, and have good Meat in their Bellies beside,
or else they will turn Jades immediately.

But perhaps you may like the Humor of Roveing better, than Keeping any of
these Cattle for your own Riding; hire a Hackney Whore, as your Citizens do
their Horses, for a Journey, and no more.

But then unless you can have 'em at the same Price too, fifteen Pence a side,
if you should have occasion to Ride often, you will find it very chargeable.

Which of these Methods is the better, I cannot direct you, I must confess I
abominato^^ both; but there is enough in Town that can; it is true, they are
generally forced to walk it now, or if they do mount (which is very seldom)
it is either upon a cast Hunter, or some poor Pad that has had the Farcy, or a
Fistula, or some Surfeit or other foul Distemper, that has made 'em only fit
for the Hounds, or at best for a Hackney.

However, they can inform you sufficiently, or else you may read it in their
Looks; their very Legs will direct that they have Rid hard in former times, and
withal give you a sad testimony, how dangerous such Journeys are, both in
regard to your Estate, Wealth, and Reputation.

In short, Sir, if one of these Belle Dame Sorceresses, should once bewitch you
into their Net, deside the Fulsomness of the Vice it self, and the hateful and,
loathsome Qualifications that are incorporated with it, she has so many Black
Arts, so many Infernal Stratagems and Devices linkt together, to keep you fast
in her Clutches, that it is almost impossible for you to disengage your self,
till she has had her End, and that commonly terminates in your Ruin.

It Is unaccountable indeed, when they hear of a Beautiful Woman, (in the first
place) what strange Contrivances and Devices, what Projects and Designs they
lay, that they may get into her Company, and corrupt her. The Deluding and
Ruining both Men and Women is their whole Business and Occupation; nay, not
only their own, but the Business of several Agents and Factors. A sort of
Mercenary Hell Hounds, which they turn out to hunt the Town, to try what Game
of either sort they can find; and if they chance to make their Set upon a
Country Gentleman, or a Stranger, be sure the Dog will never forsake the Haunt,
till his Mistress (if he ha'nt been disturbed and drawn at before) finds some
means or other, to entangle 'em in her Net.

And now for the Bawd: She Is a sort of Viperous Creature, that has all the bad
Properties of the former, with so many Additions of her own, that she is a
Monster, both without Parallel, and beyond Description. She Is the very Dregs
both of a Jilt and a Procurer; a Wretch, that having lost all Grace, Modesty,
or Humanity, has su'd out her Indentures in the Devil's Company, and bound her
self to deal in no other Commodities, but those that tend directly to propagate
his Interest.

These sort of Practitioners generally keep Seraglio's of their own, with the
Superscription of Chocolate, or Coffee over their Doors, which are constantly
guarded with three or four painted Harlots, that are always ready either by
Surprise or Assault, to make you their Prisoner.

If they can any ways get you into their Case (as they call it) and rather than
fail they will impudently hawl you to: why then in course, you must call for your
Half-pint of Rasberry; and so one of 'em begins a Beastly Health, to let you
know what Occupation they follow.

Before this is drunk, in steps the Governess, in a mighty Rage, that the
Gentleman is not showed into a better Room. Come, Sir, says she, and snatches
up the Candle (so that you must either go with her, or stay with those Vermin
in the Dark) follow me, and I Will light you up my self: When they have got you
there, then they conclude you're fixed, and so three or four Couple of her
Choice Whores are presently let loose, to live at Discretion upon you.

If they can by any Sort of vicious Lewdness entice you into Debauchery, the
next thing is, which of the Ladies you pitch upon, and the Terms. Mrs. Frances,
she is but just come out of the Country, and has not been upon Duty these four
Months, there is but little Difference between her and a Maidenhead, and she
cannot be afforded for less than ten Shillings, beside half a Crown for her
self. Mrs. Margaret's a good clean Woman, and very modest and innocent, a
pretty, harmless* Creature, three half Crowns is the Price, and she never went
under. Mrs. Betty, Mrs. Nancy, and sweet Mrs. Sukey, are all three sound and
active, but because Trading's dead, and Money's scarce, and you look like a
civil Gentleman, and because I Would encouage you to come again, you shall have one
of 'em for a Crown, and that is the lowest; but, for Moll and Kare, Joan,
Margery, Abigail, etc. you know the Fare I suppose, and though I say it my self,
there is never a Gentlewoman in the whole Trade can show a better Warehouse of
such sort of Goods than I can, nor afford a better Pennyworth.

With this kind of Prate the Old Mistress of Iniquity entertains her Guest,
whilst a Kennel of hungry Brutes are all the while yelping their fulsom
Ribaldry, swearing, cursing, and blaspheming, and ravenously swallowing and
devouring every thing they lay their Talons upon.

This is rare Company, is it not, for a Country Gentleman to run himself into?
Nay, besides all these, there is a strong Party of Rogues and Bullies below, if
you should not comply with their insolent Demands, or scruple to pay their
extravagant Reckoning, ready upon Occasion to hector and insult you, or rather
than fail, to strip and murder you.

To have done with 'em, I cannot suspect that you should ever give up so much
of your Reason, to hazard your self into such a Labirinth of mischief as this
is. No, no, Sir, I Am confident you never will. A Bawdyhouse! why, it is the very
Gate of Hell, an Inlet to Disgrace, Ruin and Contempt, and more to be avoided
by far than a Jaques or a Pesthouse, and in all Respects as Loathsome as the
one, and as Contagious as the other.

I come, in the next Place, to the Jilt, which is a sort of Creature, a little
more private and designing, but in the main as lewd and dissolute, and more
dangerous than ever a one of the former.

These forsooth would be counted Virtuous and Religious Whores; Misses they will
own themselves to be, but Whore's a Term a little too Rough to go down with
such nice Palates, the Name of a Miss relishes better with them; well, let 'em
be Misses then; but, for all their Missship, I passionately Caution you, never
to come near any of 'em; for if you do, you will find they can Ruin you as soon
as the best Procurer or Bawd of 'em all.

These Vermin play at high Games, nothing will serve some of them less than a
Settlement of two or three Hundred per Annum, a Coach, fine Lodgings, Plate,
China and other things suitable for a Whore of Rank, and upon these
Considerations she will be faithful to you, or at least she will promise you she
will; but this is only a Promise de facto neither; so long as your Estate
lasts, and you can maintain her in her Extravagance and Grandeur, but when that
fails, so does the Obligation too; she has the grand political Reasons ready as
well as the best Statesman of 'em all, and commonly makes the same Use of it.

She can Pray, Cant, shed a few Crocodiles Tears, or, rather than fail, sham a
Fit, as a token of the Passion and Tenderness she has for you; but then your
Back's no sonner turned, but she tells her Stallion you're a nasty, sickly,
feeble Fellow, and that as soon as she has persuaded you out of the Settlement
and the new Furniture, she will first affront you, and then leave you.

If she finds you are a Cully indeed, and will be often imposed upon by her,
then she has a thousand little, wheedling tricks and Artifices to decoy you.
Sometimes she is breeding, forsooth, and then ^ure you cannot be so barbarous to
your own Flesh and Blood, but you will take some Care of the young one;
besides, she wants Night-Gowns, and Damask for Clouts, and a thousand other
Necessaries for a Lying-in Woman.

There Is my Lord A -- s, and Sir John B -- s, and Colonel D -- s Misses lay
in, in as much State the other day as the best Lady in the Kingdom; nay, Mr. F
-- that is but an ordinary Citizen presented his Mistress with a new Bed and
the Furniture of a Room that cost him above a hundred and fifty Pound; and what
has she, I wonder, done that she should not deserve as much as the best of 'em?
Why sure she is as Handsome and as Young, and is as well descended, and has been
as well bred as any of 'em, and do you think that she will be put off with your
nasty, shabby forty or fifty Guinea's? No truly, she rather thinks, that as
Cases stand between you and her, you ought to cut off the Entail of your
Estate, and settle a good part of it upon her for her Life, and then let the
Child Heir it afterward; and perhaps all this too may be only Whore-craft, and
Pretenses, and so she must be forced (to bring her self off) to sham a
Miscarriage; and that your Cruelty, and Hard-heartedness in not settling your
Estate upon her, and answering her Demands, has been the cause of it; and will
at last force her to make her self away: Well, but if you loved her as well as
she loves you, you could not be so Barbarous to deny her any thing.

Besides, she has been no chargeable Mistress to you neither; she has been your
Drudge for at least these Seven Months, and ha'nt cost you fifteen hundred
Pound in the whole. If you had lived with some she knows in Town, so long, (but
she is an easy Fool) 'twould not stood you in a Penny less than three thousand.

Sir, their Tricks and Devices are numberless, and not to be paralelled by any
thing but their Ingratitude and Inhumanity; there indeed they exceed
themselves; nothing in Nature being so perfectly brutish and Cruel, as One of
these kind of Creatures; the very Moment you stop your Hand, they grow Rude,
and Insolent; and when they find they have entirely done your Business, and
turned you a grazing, who so ready as that very Siren that has spent your
Estate, to laugh at, revile, and scorn you; and you are not less her Buffoon
now, than you were her Property formerly.

To have done with her: A Jilt, is a Procurer, Bawd, and Whore Compounded
together. A Vermin so Ravenous, and Malicious, and withal so subtle and
Designing, so formally Chaste, and Hypocritically Virtuous; and yet so
Scandalously Common, and Impudently Lewd; so Proud, and yet so Mercenary, and
above all so Insolently Ill-natured, That in the short Title of a Jilt are
comprehended all the Vices, Follies, and Impertinencies of her whole Sex.

And last for their Art of Trapping. This is Mystery that they commonly manage
either by the Assistance of a Pregnant Whore. or by the help of some Letters,
or Papers, that they pick out of your Pocket, that gives them an Inlet into
your Affairs. The first is carried on by Procurers, Bawds and Jilts, and the
latter by Sharpers, Setters and Bullies.

If they are once so fortunate to get a Big-bellied Whore into their
Confederacy, then they carry her about in a kind of Triumph, among all their
Cullys and Novices; every one, forsooth, under the Notion of being the true
Father, must subscribe an Individual Maintenance for the Strumpet and the Brat;
or a Warrant must be got immediately, or the Masters of the Parish called in to
their Assistance, to force you to it. It Is no boot to contest it; for, if you
do, they will force the Woman to Swear it upon you, and the^ your Reputation's
lost; and withal you have the Charge of a Whore, and a Bastard entailed upon
you ad infinitum.

If they get your Papers, and Letters into their Clutches, those are their
Credentials, for their Sharpers, Setters, and Bullys to commence their
Villainies; in such Cases they pretend that the Harlot that rifled you, was an
honest Gentlewoman, and the Wife of a Person of Credit and Reputation; and you
must either make Satisfaction, and Compound the Business, or else they will
expose you first, and bring their Action against you afterward.

And what can a Man can do, when he has brought himself into such a Dilemma, by
his Folly? For my part, the Case is so very bad and desperate, I cannot direct
you in it: If you Compound with 'em now, you do but lay your self open to their
Mercy, and render your self a Bubble, and a Property for the future; or if you
resist 'em, why then you lose your Credit; they will be sure to be as good as
their Words in that point however, to misrepresent you, and abuse you in all
Companies, and upon all Occasions; so that this Business of Whoring,
especially, seems to have a Malevolent Influence, both upon your Estate, and
Reputation; nay, upon your Person too; and very rarely terminates without
destroying 'em all.

To conclude this loathsome Relation, you may learn from this rough Account
what kind of Creatures Procurers, Bawds, Jilts, Whores, and their Appendages,
i. e. Sharpers, Setters, and Bullies are.

And now what shall I say more, but advise you again; If you reguard your
Health, your Estate, or your Reputation, nay, what is yet more, if you regard
the Liberty and Quiet of your Life, to shun 'em all; and that will be one great
means to make your London Expedition a little the more Comfortable, and the
less exposed to Hazard, and Expense.

LETTER XVI.
In which the Humors of Bully's, Setters, and Hangers on are exposed; together
with Reflections upon Gaming in General

SIR, having in a long Letter, the last Post, entertained you with the Vicious
Tricks and Humors of the Female Prostitutes; I shall now change the Sex, and
expose to you some of the base Practices of the Male, as they fall in Order;
under the distinct Characters of Bullys, Setters, and Hangers-on.

And first for the Bully, which (if I take him right) is a kind of Lewd
Blustering Animal, that having rendered himself unfit (by a Complication of
Vicious and Degenerate Actions) for the Conversation and Society of Sober and
Rational Creatures, is forced to throw himself into the Company of Bawds and
Whores, and to live upon their Contribution and Subsistence.

I shall not enlarge much upon his Character, or Method of living, they are
both so generally known in Town and Country too, 'twould be at best an
Impertinence, to spend much time about him. As I told you before, his common
Rendezvous is among the Bawds and Whores; he eats their Bread, and fights their
Battles* Hectors and insults their Cullys, gathers their Contribution; and for
a need, can Pimp, Betray and Set, as well as the best of 'em.

You may discern him by his long Sword, his Insolent and Saucy Behavior; but
above all, by his Atheistical Dialect, Swearing, Cursing, and Ribaldry. If ever
you should be so unhappy to fall in with him, he consequently entertains you
with the dismal Relation of the Men he has Murdered, and the Women he has
Raped; the famous Battle he fought with such a Watch, or the bloody Rencounter
he had with a Detachment of Bailiffs, or some such Romantic Lies and
Forgeries; and if he can impose so far upon you, that he perceives you're
inclined to believe him, it is ten to one but he draws you into a Quarrel, or
some other Inconveniency; and then by a Cowardly Stratagem, brings himself off,
and basely deserts you to shift for your self.

I need not tell you, that a Bully's a Coward; the two Names are too
Convertible, to want an Explication; the whole Stress of his Valor and Prowess
depends solely upon his Insolence, Ignorance, and Oaths; and but ruffle him
once thoroughly, that he may perceive you know both his Trade and his Temper,
he will fawn upon you for ever afterward like a Spaniel, you may kick him, cuff
him, pinch him, or use him how you will; he has had the Misfortune to kill a
Man lately, he will tell you, and is under an Obligation at present not to fight;
but when his time's expired, woe be to you.

Well, Sir, I hope you will not think this a Conversable Creature; for, for all
his Cowardice and Ignorance, and for all he is an Animal so perfectly below the
Character of a Man, he can betray you into Gaming, into Quarrels, into a
Bawdy House, and into the Company of Rogues, Thieves, and Whores, as well as
the wittyest Sharper, or stoutest Spark of the Town.

The next Gentleman that falls in Order, is the Setter; his way of Recommending
himself is quite contrary, by slye Insinuations and Flatteries, by Hypocritical
Cringes, and Fawnings, and Smooth and Knavish Pretenses, and formal
Dissimulations: But notwithstanding his outside looks so fair and plausible,
take heed of him; there is a legion within him.

All the Cheats and Villainies in Nature is concentered in his Mind and
Thoughts; his very Soul is nothing but thick black, and Soot, and stands always
ready bent to prosecute the next Advantageous Mischief.

His ordinary Occupation is to attend the Motion of Young Heirs, to draw and
trapan 'em into Mean, and Unequal Matches, and so impose upon 'em Jilts and
Whores, under the Character of Heiresses and Virtuosa's; and this he does with
so much Dexterity, and so many subtle Arts, and crafty Stratagems, that it is
almost impossible, if you should be once so unfortunate to fall into his
Management, to escape out of it again, without being undone, for the remainder
of your Life.

Here in course the Entail of your Estate must be cut off, to make room for a
Settlement for the Harlot; and she must have a handsome Present made her too, of
four or five hundred Pound value: If you have no Money, they will procure it for
you, upon your Bond and Judgment, and a Friend or two withal, that shall stand
bound with you for the Payment, till you receive your Lady's Fortune; but then
you must do them the same Favor, only enter into a Bond and Judgment with one
of 'em, for a thousand Pound or so, for a Month; and that is a return of
Civility, which you cannot deny.

Here the whole Business of your Life is done in the compass of a Week, you're
Married to a Whore, your Estate is all disjoynted, and torn to pieces, and
perhaps seized upon by a Combination of Villains; and what is as great an
Aggravation as any thing else, you're become the Byword and Laughing stock of
your Friends and Acquaintance; and all this, this New Associate has done for
you, under the smooth Pretense and Hypocritical Coverture of singular Honesty
and Sincerity.

If this Business of a Wife don't pass upon you, he will try in the second place
if he can draw you into Sham-projects, and Chimaera's: He and his Friends have
a new Invented Engine upon the Stocks, by the help of which you may walk with
much Freedom and Ease, in the bottom of the Sea, as in your own Garden; and
withal they have Intelligence upon Oath of a Wreck, where there is several
Millions, and 'twill be all their own, in four or five Months at most; if you
don't like this, they have a Water Engine, that will discharge a thousand Tun
an hour, out of the deepest Mine; or, they have a Mine where there is a Rib of
Ore, of a prodigious bigness; and for a Sum of Money to carry on their Works,
you may be admitted into their Society, and be a Sharer in the whole, and cannot
fail to get a considerable Estate in a few Years.

Here you're entangl'd again, if you Embark your self with 'em; and not only
lose all the present Money you part with, but are in great hazard to be drawn
into future Bond and Obligations, and consequently ruined at last.

Sir, I should trouble you, and my self, too long, if I should proceed to
enumerate the respective Rogueries and Tricks of a Setter; and therefore I Will
leave him with this short Character.

His whole Life is a compendious History of deep and deliberate Villainy; his
only Business, nay, even his Diversion, consists solely in Betraying and
Trappanning; his Food and Sustenance depends entirely upon Lying, Falsehood and
Perjury; In a Word he has the Devil's Motto stamped upon him in large
Characters, and is perpetually ranging to seek whom he may devour.

I come, in the last place, to the Hangeron or Spunger; and this is commonly a
sort of sottish, lazy Creature, though naturally not so dangerous and mischievous
as the former, yet, as troublesome and impertinent, and indeed, a greater Clog
to a Man of Sense than either of 'em.

He has little to recommend him unless it be a few drunken Jests, or Scraps of
Poetry, or perhaps some broken Characters of Men and things, with a little of
the News and Humors of the Town; and by virtue of these mighty Qualifications
he fancies himself a Companion fit for the best Gentlemen in the Kingdom, and
will be sure, upon the smallest Invitation to crowd himself upon him if he
meets any Encouragement; and it is ten to one but by degrees he grows familiar,
and after that impudent, and at last intolerable.

In one Point, indeed, he is a perfect Philosopher, he carries all he has along
with him, and truly that is little enough too; his Furniture in general is so
wretched and scandalous, that you may as soon learn a Spunger by his Garb, etc.
as a Bully by his Cursing and Ribaldry, or a Setter by his Fawning and
Dissimulation. A Bawdy Song or two, a few drunken Healths, and about half a
Dozen dull Punds set him up; and with these he will be perpetually grating and
dinning your Ears till he has worn 'em as thread bare as his Coat, and after
all, must be forced to be laughed or kicked out of 'em before he will quit 'em
too.

As for Money, he never has any, nor never pretends to any, unless it be now
and then the Fragments of a Reckoning which he pinches from the Drawer, to
heel-piece his Shoes or recruit his Tobacco Box.

In short, these Hangers on are Drones in the strictest Sense and Definition,
and if you once suffer 'em to crawl into your Hive (to keep up to the Nature of
the Insect) they will be sure to besmear and disturb your Cell, Devour your
Honey, and in all Respects are as burdensome and pernicious to the Persons they
can fasten themselves upon, as Drones and Wasps are to Bees, etc.

This Town swarms with this Sort of Insects, and a Country Gentleman can hardly
set his Foot into it, but there are several of 'em come instantly humming and
buzzing about him. I have given you already my Notion of Idleness; and I tell
you again, in the Words of a great Man, that it is so scandalous and reproachful
that neither Heaven, Earth, nor Hell it self will own or patronize it.

How unreasonable then is it, I think I may say, how infamous and
unaccountable, to pick up such loose and profitless Creatures, and take 'em
into your Bosom, and make 'em your Companions. I am astonished when I see six
or seven of 'em stalking before a Country Gentleman, and crowding themselves
into all Company and Business along with him, sucking and spunging upon him,
and, in the literal Sense, eating him up alive. Sir, I hope you will not
misunderstand me, I am not dissuading you against Relieving and Supporting
distressed Gentlemen in their Necessities.

No, no, I would not have you defy the Example of that Liberality by whose
Effects you live, but then I would not have you neither abuse the Divine
Precedent, by fostering a sort of vicious, sluggish Creatures, that with great
Reason you ought to detest and reject, let 'em even sing their Requiems some
where else, for you may depend upon it, that a Cry of these Slow, Deep-mouthed
Dogs, although they don't run so swift, will stick as close to the Scent, and as
effectually hunt you to death, as a Kennel of the fleetest Hariots or sharpest
Fox-Hounds.

The last thing I proposed in this, was to make some short and general
Reflections upon Gaming; they must be short and general indeed, for I find I
have wasted so much of my Paper upon my three last scurvy Subjects, that I have
only Room left for a very few Lines.

That the Original Design of Play or Gaming was Diversion and Recreation, I
suppose we may take for granted; but since it has lost its native Property, and
basely degenerated into a mechanical Trade and Occupation.

I Am afraid, as Cases stand, we have two other Titles that will suit it much
better, i. e. Covetousness and Cheating; for what imaginable Cause can there be
assigned, but the flat Desire of Winning, that should induce Men to venture
what they have for what they have not; nay, that which they are afraid and
unwilling to lose for that which they are uncertain to gain.

This can be nothing but Covetousness; for if Covetousness was not the Grand
Mover, there could not be the least Grounds or Pretense for great and deep
Gaming; a Man may divert himself as well for a Shilling as for a Pound, and for
a Pound as for a Thousand; and if that were all, provided it were not used
immoderately, there would be no Harm in Gaming at all.

No, no, it is Covetousness, which though some of the more thinking Sort of
Gamesters are ashamed to own, take off the Disguise, and you see the Ugly Hag
dressed up in all her dismal Pomp of Wretchedness and Misery.

And then for Cheating; why, it is the Inseparable Qualification of a Gamester.
A Man has not only blind Chance to deal with (tho that be but a very leaky,
crazy Vessel for him to put to Sea in, upon such a dangerous Expedition) but
such a Combination of Deceit, and such a Chain of Tricks and Slights linked
together, that even good Fortune it self is not sufficient to guard and secure
him against 'em: So that a Gamester lies under a kind of Necessity to make
himself Master of the useful Art of Cheating, that he may be upon the Level
with the rest of his Fraternity.

And now, Sir, can there be any thing more sordidly mean and base, and more
exaltedly foolish, than for a Man to practice a Profession that does so
naturally entitle him to two of the worst Characters in the World, i. e. a
Miser and a Cheat.

To conclude, if, after all, a Man could arrive to the highest Perfection in
this paltry Science, Gaming and Cheating have commonly a Reflex'd Efficacy, and
deceive none more than those that use 'em. Besides all this, what should it be,
I wonder, that should incline a Gentleman of an Estate to take up such a
Scoundrel Occupation: He Would be very loath to be stigmatized with the exploded
Name of a Mechanic in other Cases; and where the mighty Reason lies, he should
submit to it in this, is a Mystery, I profess, beyond my unravelling.

Well Sir, let the Shipwrack'd Fortunes of Abundance of our young Adventurers
be a Caution to you, how extremely reproachful and hazardous it is to embark
your self in such a fatal Profession; a Profession, that at once exposes you to
the irrepairable Loss of your Time, the endangering your Estate, and to the
Forfeiture of your Reputation, and withal is so much below the Interest and
Character of a Gentleman.

LETTER XVII.
In which are particular Observations and Reflectious upon several distinct
Occurrences of the Town.

SIR, I have already led you through a dismal Wilderness, and briefly showed
you what a Herd of Wild Beasts and Monsters you must take your Range among, if
your Resolution for the Town continues; and now I think it is high Time to wind
up my Account. Indeed there are abundance of other dangerous Occurrences that
may well justify a severe Reprehension, but I shall only instance one or two
more, and leave the Conviction these have received at the Tribunals of Reason
and Experience to conclude the rest.

And first, for your Garb, you will find some of our City Gentry so ridiculously
Gaudy and Extravagant, that comparatively, a Ship may be rigged for the Indies
both as cheap and as easily; most of the Trades in the Commonwealth are some
way or other concerned in their Equipage, such a strange multiplying Faculty
has this sort of Vanity, that it has improved Nature's simple Necessity of a
Covering, the first Fig Leaves (as it is phras'd by that excelent Author of the
Gentleman's Calling) to such a Luxuriant Growth, that those Hercynean Oaks
which Mela tells such Wonders of, are but a sort of Pigmy Plants in comparison
of them.

But these are but a kind of Butterfly-Sparks, a few insignificant Insects that
flutter about Town for a Year or two, and are afterward forced to crawl into
Holes and Corners in a Dress perhaps no less contemptible, wretched, and
loathsome, than the former was gay, fulsom, and pedantick.

This is a Folly, indeed, that I cannot supect a Gentleman of your Sense can be
guilty of, and yet, vain and foolish as it is, I could quote you a considerable
Number that have been undone by it, that have laid out their whole Estate in a
few gaudy Trappings, that they may make a Figure (as they call it) have at last
figured it so long, till they have figured themselves into Rags or a Prison,
and rendered them the Contempt and Laughing-Stocks of the whole Town.

Next to these, we have another Rank of unthinking Creatures, a sort of
nicepalated Sparks, that nothing will go down with but Dainties and
Curiosities; tell 'em of good Beef Mutton, Veal, or any of our own Productions,
which doubtless are the best in the World, they will swear they are all Porters
Fare, and unless they are first adulterated with some studied Mixtures; and
forced from their native Property by some new and costly Sauces, they are far
too mean and common for their Tables.

These, in the strictest Sense, may be said to incurr the Vultures Fate, i. e.
to eat up themselves; and truly so it commonly falls out. I have known within
the Compass of my own Experience abundance of these Luxuriant Prodigals, that
have so long tantaliz'd themselves with their Delicious Morsels, that at length
they have wanted Food convenient for the Support of Nature.

Others we have, that affect the Reputation of making costly Treats and
Entertainments; a hundred pound is but a mean Sum to spend upon an Evenings
Collation for a Mistress or two, which perhaps do him the favor after all but
to laugh at him for his Prodigality.

I heard a Fool my self (that is now shirking about Town, and will be glad of
any body that will give him a Pot of Ale and a Roll and Cheese) bragging not
many Months before, That an Entertainment he made for three or four Ladies cost
him six score pounds. Such Wretches, I think, are below all kind of Pity. I
could almost grudge 'em even the Husks their Extravagance naturally confines
'em to, and wish 'em rather some Fate more remarkable, scandalous and durable,
that might not only nauseate but fright the rest of the World from their
Inadvertency.

There are several other things that I could mention to you that are no less
dangerous than ridiculous; but, Sir, I can never suspect you shonld so
evidently transplant your discerning Faculty from your Intellect to your Sense,
to suffer your self to be imposed upon by any of these sort of Follies.

I beseech you not to mistake me, I abhor all Sour^^ese or Singularity, and
heartily allow of a Decent Garb, and a Gentile, Friendly Entertainment upon
Occasion, they are equally Necessary and Commendable in a Gentleman. And
indeed, so long as they are kept within the true Rules of Sobriety and
Moderation, are very highly consistent, not only with his Character but his
Interest.

I could make a great many Just Reflections (if 'twere necessary) upon those
whose Vain and Lavish Humors have inclined 'em to squander away their Estates
in such Insignificant Trifles; but I Am sure a haughty, extravagant Mind must
feel Smart enough without any additional Aggravations; it must needs be a most
embittering Consideration, a Consideration that advances the Affliction, beyond
that of a more innocent Poverty, as much as the Pain of an envenomed Arrow
exceeds that of another.

Beside all the more remote Dangers and Inconveniences I have already
mentioned, there are still two other, which you are the most nearly concerned
to guard your self against; the first is against Innovations and Unsettledness
in your Religion; and the second against embarking your self in Cabals, and
Confederacis in Matters belonging to the State and Government.

We have Temptations and Tempters too, of all Sorts at London, great Numbers of
Persons that make it their Business to snap up Strangers, and watch all
Occasions to try if they can impose any of their Trumpery upon 'em.

Here the Papists, Presbyterians, Quakers, Independants, Anabaptists, etc. have
all their Party Men abroad to endeavor the Gaining Proselytes; and truly it is
great odds, but some of 'em attempt to seduce you: but then I Am confident you
are so thoroughly grounded in the Principles of your own Church and Religion,
that they can never make any Advances upon you: however a kind Caution can do
you no harm, if you should never have any occasion to make use of it.

Then for Caballing and Embarking your self with Parties and Factions, it is a
Dangerous bewitching thing, and so many Worthy Gentlemen have been ruined by
it, that I think it is utterly needless to descend into Particulars. I Am sure it
ought to be Matter of the saddest Reflection to all who have been any Way
involved in it. It being a most direful Account that they will at last have to
make, for being the Unhappy Authors of such miserable Disorders.

But, Sir, I will not spend more of your time in these (I hope) needless
Observations and Reflections; you will doubtless soon perceive from the
stupendous Fate of vast Multitudes; how you are to order your self in these
several Particulars, and to them I referr you for your full and ample
Satisfaction.

LETTER XVIII.
Wherein he first directs him in the disposal of his Estate in his Absence, and
gives him some general Cautions and Advice how to manage himself in Town.

SIR, Having drawn you a Rough Draught of the Men and Things of the Town, I
presume you will pardon it among the rest of my Impertinencies if by way of
Conclusion I trouble you once more with a few short and general Directions how
to dispose of your Estate in your Absence, and of your self when you come to
London: The former is as essentially necessary as the latter, and if you fail
in either, I can see nothing in the Reverse of your Expedition but flat Ruin
and Destruction.

As for the Disposal of your Estate it is the Grand Basis upon which all the
rest of your Affairs must move; so that unless you leave that both under a
faithful as well as a prudent Managery, let your Success in Town be what it
will, you will have but a bad Return for your Venture in the Winding up; but then
the Grand Query is, how this may be settled with the most Ease and Convenience
to your self, the least Trouble to your Friends and Servants, and the greatest
Satisfaction and Advantage to all your Tenants, Neighbors and Dependants.

In Order to which, I think, in the first place, it will be highly necessary
for you to be your own Auditor, to take a monthly Survey of your Respective
Accounts, and to balance your Expenses with your Receipts, and to square and
proportion 'em both according to the true Value and Nature of your Revenue.

It Is true some of our high-bred Gentry look upon this as a Reflection upon
their Character, and that the Oversight of their Estates is not only a Business
too burthensom but likewise too mean for 'em. What Reasons they can give for
it, I must confess, I Am a Stranger to.

Methinks it should be rather a Divertisment, and a proper and advantageous
Method for 'em to dispose of some of those spare Hours, whose Emptiness would
become their Load, and probably of no small Pain and Cost, and perhaps
Inconvenience too.

Next to this, your Business will be to procure an honest ingenious Man for a
Steward, a Person that will neither be tempted by Avarice or Interest, or
seduced by Necessity, to betray your Concerns or imbezle your Effects; he
should be neither sour in his Conversation, nor imperious in his Behavior,
not bitter nor pressing upon your Tenants, and yet watchful and sedulous to
keep 'em within the moderate Bounds of their Leases and Agreements, and withal,
careful to restrain 'em from running too far in Arrears, which commonly
terminates, not only in the Ruin of themselves, but in the manifest Loss and
Inconvenience of the Landlord.

A Steward should be a Person (if you can find such a one) that is remarkable
for the discreet Government of himself and his own Affairs, he ought to be a
tolerable Master of Accounts, and well skilled in the useful Art of Husbandry,
and in the manner of Country Dealing and Comerce, but above all, he should be
abstracted from all manner of Selfishness and mercenary Designs, and be acted
purely by true Principles of Love, Justice, and Gratitude.

Next to Him, a provident Housekeeper will be extremely requisite, and she,
indeed, should have most of the Qualifications of the Steward; she should be
discreet and faithful, affable, modest, meek and Compassionate; she should be
free from the little Vanities of Gossiping and Talebearing, too common to her
Sex.

Your House should be her only Empire, and the calm and peaceful Government of
it, her highest Ambition; she should have no Ends, nor, indeed, no Business of
her own, to disturb or take her off, but be constantly vigilant to observe and
restrain the Irregularities of the Family, and not more neither by her Advice
and Reproof, than by the President of her own Calmness, Decency and Moderatiou.

Besides these, you will want an industrious Gardener and a careful Groom, the
one to take Care of your Fruit and Flowers, and to preserve your Walks and
Arbors from running to Ruin and Disorder; and the other to manage and regulate
your Horses, etc.

Now, if you could thus equip your self, which, I confess, will be very
difficult for you to do, you would be however secure, that when you have tired your
self with the Follies and Vanities of the Town (which I believe, or, at least,
hope will be in a very little time) your Affairs in the Country are in a good
Posture, and thither you can return and rest your self, out of the Reach of the
Hurry and Impertinence of it.

And, now Sir, the next thing will be to manage your self with Advantage and
Security when you come to Town. I have showed you already the Rocks that you
are in most danger to Split upon, and the Vices, Follies and Dangers, which, as
a Gentleman and a Stranger, you are perpetually liable to be encountered with;
and because my present Design has made them my peculiar Province, I shall wave
all others, and only address my self to you for a Conclusion, in a passionate
Admonition and Request or two, which I presume you will either grant or pardon,
if not both.

And first, I prssionately advise and request you not to plunge your self into
the Society of Strangers. I have told you that before, and I must tell it you
again, and indeed I can never tell it you too often, that the Generality of the
Mischiefs of this Town are derived to us upon that Account.

Secondly, let me again admonish you not to take Men and Things upon Trust, but
first to weigh 'em soberly and deliberately, to bring 'em home to the Tribunal
of your own Reason, Conscience and Experience, before you pass your Judgment or
make your Option.

This Town is swayed purely by a Spirit of Falsehood and Contradiction, or
what is as bad, by Spite, Faction or Interest; so that if you take things
nakedly without comparing them with the natural Rules of Truth and Probability,
you lie open to be imposed upon by an endless Repetition of Falsehoods and
Impostures.

Mr. Cowler's Wish lies always before you; a few Friends, and a few Books, and
both true and well chose, are all you want, and indeed, your only proper and
acceptable Companions for this Town.

To sum up all, I hope you will not esteem it an uncivil Address, to put you in
mind of your Character, by your Birth, Education and by your Estate too; you
are a Gentleman, and then I think I need not tell you what it is that is your
most adorning Accomplishment: it is Virtue, Sir, and it is that and nothing else
can add a Luster to your Title. It Is that alone can refine and sublimate your
Pleasures, and give a long and glorious Splendor to your Quality.

London, January 10th. 1699. Farewell.
THE Country Gentleman's REPLY.
WHO can resist the Wounds from such a Dart?
Your Kindness, Sir, has pierced my very Heart,
First to advise, then gently to reprove,
Denotes your Friendship much, but more your Love.
But that which I admire above the rest,
Distance nor Time han't worn me from your breast.
Well, you have gained your Point, and I agree,
You scurvy Town is not a Place for me.
No Sir, ye've kindly taught me to be wise,
I loath it now, my Country Life I prize.
Beyond the Compass of my native Grange
I rarely, very rarely mean to range.
There I breath free, have all I wish, but you,
And, for a Mess, anotber Friend or two;
Had I but that, in Triumph I Would retire,
And leave your City-Toys for Boys and Fools t'admire.
Come then, my Friend, for you shall lead the Way,
Make haste, I grow impatient by your Stay.
We'll go together, and then you and I
Can teach each other how to live and die.
We'll take our Turns, till we at last improve
These dismal Vales into a pleasant Grove.
Come then, I dare you now to a Retreat,
Come, take your Share of my poor homely Seat;
It Is true, there is nothing there that I can boast,
Beside the friendly Welcome of your Host.
My House is plain, but it is convenient too,
Just fit to entertain another Friend and you.
My Orchards and my Gardens, these indeed,
Something I may, and yet not much exceed
My Park's too narrow to endure a Chase,
Once in a Season I can kill a brace;
I have a Pond or two, which from a Brook that is nigh,
I can overflow, or I can soon drain dry;
But then I Have one thing, Sir, which you will love,
A Little, Artless, Melancholy Grove;
There we may hear the Morning Lark rejoice,
And now and then the mournful Turtle's Voice.
I have, beside, a little Pack of Hounds,
Enough to hunt the Vermin from my Bounds.
Some other Trifles too I have, which I
Will either keep, or, if you please, throw by.
But that which for all Wants shall make amends,
We'll Live like Lovers, and we'll die like Friends.
Adieu.

FINIS.
Books printed for John Harris, at the Harrow, in Little-Britain.
THE General History of England, both Ecclesiastical and Civil; from the
earliest Accounts of Time, to the Rign of his Present Majesty, King William
III. taken from the most ancient Records, Manuscripts, and Printed Historians.
With Memorials of the most Eminent Persons in Church and State; as also the
Foundations of the most noted Monasteries, and both Universities. Vol. 1. By
James Tyrrel, Esquire; Price 20 s.

The Secret History of White Hall, from the Restoration of King Charles II.
down to the Abdication of the late King James. Writ at the Request of a Noble
Lord, and conveyed to him in Letters by -- late Secretary -- Interpreter to the
Marquis of Louvois, who by that means had the Perusal of all the Private
Minutes between England and France for many Years. The whole consisting of
Secret Memoirs, which have hithertolain concealed, as not being discoverable by
any other Hand. Published from the original Papers, by D. Jones, Gent. Price 5
s.

A Continuation of the Secret History of White Hall; from the Abdication of the
late King James, in 1688. to the Year 1696. Writ at the Request of a Noble
Lord, and conveyed to him in Letters by -- late Secretary Interpreter to the
Marquis of Louvois, who by that means had the Perusal of all the Private
Minutes between England and France for many Years. The whole consisting of
Secret Memoirs, which have hitherto lain concealed, as not being discoverable
by any other Hand. Published from the Original Papers: Together with the
tragical History of the Stuarts, from the first Rise of that Family, in the
year 1068, down to the Death of Her late Majesty, Queen Mary, of blessed
Memory. By D. Jones, Gent. Price 5 s.

Medicina Practica; or, Practical Physic. Showing the Method of Curing the
most Usual Diseases happening to human Bodies. As all sorts of Aches and Pains,
Apoplexies, Agues, Bleeding, Fluxes, Gripings, Wind, Shortness of Breath,
Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, Abortion, Want of Appetite, Loss of the Use
of Limbs, Cholick, or Belly-ach, Apostems, Thrushes, Quinsies, Deafness,
Bubo's, Cachexia, Stone in the Reins, and Stone in the Bladder: With the
Preparation of the Praecipiolum, or Universal Medicine of Paracelsus. To which
is added, the Philosophic Works of Hermes Trismegistus, Kalid Persicus, Geber
Arabs, Artefius Longaevus, Nicholas Flammel, Roger Bachon, and George Ripley.
All translated out of the best Latin Editions, into English; and carefully
Claused or divided into Chapters and Sections, for the more pleasant Reading*
and easier Understanding of those Authors. Togeter with a singular Comment upon
the first Book of Hermes, the most Ancient of Philosophers. The whole
completed in Three Books. By William Salmon, Professor of Physic. Price 5 s.

Panarithmologia; being a Mirror for Merchants, a Breviate for Bankers, a
Treasure for Tradesmen, a Mate for Mechanics, and a sure Guide for Purchasers,
Sellers or Mortgagers, Land-Leasers, Annuities, Rents, Pensions, etc. in
present Possession, or Reversion. And a Constant Concomitant, fitted for all
men's Occasions. In Three Parts. All performed by Tables ready cast up,; whereby
all Questions relating to any of the forementioned Particulars, are easily and
exactly resolved, without the Aid of Arithmetic, for the most part by
Inspection into the Table only* and (in any Case) by common Addition and
Substraction. All which Tables are made easy by Variety of Examples.
Calculated and Published by W. Leybourn. To which is added a necessary
Appendix, containing Heads of Daily Use to all Traders. Price 5 s.

An Account of the first Voyages and Discoveries made by the Spaniards in
America; containing the most Exact Relation hitherto published; of their
unparalled Cruelties on the Indians, in the Destruction of above Forty
Millions of People. With the Propositions offered to the King of Spain to
prevent the further Ruin of the West Indies. By Don Bartholomew de las Casas,
Bishop of Chiapa, who was an Eyewitness of their Cruelties. Illustrated with
Cuts. To which is added, The Art of Traveling, showing how a man may dispose
of his Travels to the best Advantage. Price 4 s.


