THE COUNTREY-MISER OR THE Unhappy Farmers DEAR MARKET.

Giving the true Account of the Rich Farmet near Emsted in Essex: Who with
several others of his Neighbor Farmers, coming to Emsted Market, where they
endeavored to hold up the Price of their Corn to an Extortionable Rate, to the
great Oppression, especially of the Poorer sort:

Missing of their Expectations, the Rich Farmer, in a great Passion, swore the
Devil should have all his Corn before he would take the honest price they
offered him.

Upon which, soon after the Devil came to him in the shape of a Country Chap,
and after some Discourse, agreed to give him his Extortionable Price, for
Thirty Load, paying Five Pounds in hand, the Corn to be delivered on a certain
day.

Of the Corn in one of the Farmers Barns being Eaten up and Spoiled by a
strange sort of Vermin.

In the mean time, the Farmer calling to Remembrance has Rash Wish, was
strangely troubled in mind; fearing he had Sold his Corn to the Devil; upon
which, by the Advice of his Neighbors, Mr. R. K. a Minister was sent for.
Also, of his safe Delivery from the hands of Satan by the special Advice and
Directions of the said Reverend Divine.

Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed for N. Jackson in the Strand, 1693.

A Full and True Account of a Farmar at Emsted, who Sold the Devil Thirty Load
of Wheat: Also of his safe Delivery from the Hands of Satan, by the Advice of a
Reverend Divine.
AMongst the many Remarkable Instances we have had of the Almighties
Displeasure, toward those who through there rash Expressions and
Protestations, have made themselves liable to Gods Vengence, who tollerates
Satan to become the powerful Instrument of making those persons the wicked
Examples oftentimes of their passionate and hasty Imprecations, as a warning to
others; How they become guilty of so dangerous a folly. And for a further
Demonstration of Gods peculiar notice of this particular Crime. I shall give
you a following Relation which is Justified for an Inevitable Truth, by many
Creditable Persons whose Reputable assertion of this matter, is sufficent to
establish a belief amongst all such who are not Obstinately Incredulous.

A Farmer living a small distance from the Town of Emsted (whose Name for his
Reputations sake we are desired to forbear mentioning) came about three weeks
ago with a Load of Wheat, to Emsted Market with full hopes of disposing of it,
to a more then Ordinary advantage, Corn being risen that week to an
Extraordinary Price; which other Farmers as well as himself having a knowledge
off, who being all equally greedy of their gain brought a more then usual
quantity to Market, which the Buyers observing prudently resolved to undermine
their purposed Ends, which the unreasonable Farmers to themselves had made by
biding an Indifferent Rate, hoping by that means they should lower their
Extravagant Price, and hinder them of that unreasonable Exaction which they
could not vindicate by pleading any manner of Necessity (God be thanked) that
and all other places in England, being Stored with a sufficient plenty.

A person with an Intention to buy, coming to one Farmer above the rest whose
Name we shall omit for the Reasons above mentioned, and asking him the Price of
this Corn he required an Extravagant Rate for it, at which the Buyer seemed to
be much surpised, and bid him a Reasonable Price, at which he expected it
might be afforded with an answerable profit. The Farmer in answer to this broke
out into great Indignation, saying, the Devil should have all the Corn he had,
before any of his Grain should he bought at so Ordinary a Rate, at which the
Chapman went away to try if he could mend himself in some other part of the
Market.

He had not been gone long, but another person came dressed up in a Rusty black
Garb, having the appearance of an old Miser, did ask him likewise the Price of
his Corn, the Farmer Immediately shows him a Sample of it, asking him the the
same Rate as he had done the other; the old Gentleman seemed to have great
liking toward the Corn and bid him within a very small matter of what he had
required of him, and further requested of him what quantity he had in all of
the same Corn by him, which he could Warrant to be full as good as that. The
Farmer answered about thirty Load, which he would engage upon his Word should
fall no ways short of that in goodness which he had already showed him. The old
Gentleman replying he had an occasion for such a Parcel declairing if they
could agree he would take it all off his hands, and give him five Prond carnest
for the whole Quantity before they parted.

The Farmer finding his Chapman had so great a likeing to his Corn, still
persisted in his Avaritious Inclinations and protested he would not bate any
thing of the Price he had already asked him; to which the Buyer replied he was
a very hard and unreasonable Dealer, but however since he saw his Grain was
good and fit for his purpose, rather then go without he would give him his
Price, and agree with him for the whole Quantity. Whereupon the Farmer was much
pleased at his meeting with so generous a Chapman, and desired to drink his
mornings draught with him, (to which they both agreed) and went to the Red-Lyon
where they drank two Tankards of Ale very amicably together, after which the
Chapman according to his Proposals gave him five Pound Earnest, and appointed a
day when the Corn should be got ready, and he would then pay him the rest of
his Money, and bring his Teems in Order to Clear the Barn, this being fully
agreed on by both Parties, they parted wishing one another much happiness till
their next meeting.

The Farmar for the present being well pleased with the thoughts of the
advantage, he proposed by so good a bargain quitted the Market, and returned
home with his Corn well satisfied till the next day taking the matter into his
more serious Consideration, began to wonder who this Person should be who had
given so generous a Price for his whole stock, wondering (...) before he had
never seen him in the Market; from these Considerations sprang a great many
doubts and jealousies which en^^^ased every moment till it brought him under
great dissatisfaction of mind, renewing in his memory the rash Inconsiderate
Expressions he had used in the Market, (viz.) that the Devil should have his
Corn before he would abate any thing of his Price. From whence he concluded it
was the Devil who had made this agreement with him, which dreadful
apprehensions brought him under great trouble and discontent. Insomuch that his
Neighbors took great notice of the Alteration it had caused in him, and began
strictly to examine into the Occasion of that great sorrow with which he seemed
to be afflicted, till at last their importunate inquiries prevailed with him to
declare the Reasons of his discomposure who was immediately advised to send for
a Parson from Emsted, a Gentleman Eminent for his Learning and Piety, and
consult with him what was most proper to be done in this matter, accordingly a
Messenger was dispatched, who returned with all expedition with the Parson, who
hearing the dangerous circumstances the Farmer by his unwary words had brought
himself under, advised him to be very careful in the punctual performance of
his Bargan; for that if he deviated one Title from his agreement, it would
certainly give the Devil power over him, whereupon great care was taken that
the Corn should be finely dressed and ordered, with the greatest nicety
Imaginable, and got in a Complete Readiness Exactly against the time, which the
Devil had appointed.

A person taking upon him (who was reported to be a Conjurer) to be ready in
the Barn to deliver the Corn to the Devil when he should come for it. During
which Intermin the Farmer was advised to keep his Bed, the Parson and some of
the most Pious of his Neighbors, offering up their Prayers with him to
Almighty God, to preserve and protect him from the power of Satan, with whom he
had contracted so dangerous a Bargain.

A little before the Devils appearance the Wind began to rise and Agitate it
self into a violent motion: the Sky became darkened on a sudden, and a lowering
Cloud began to make its progress toward the Farmers House, showing all the
dismal signs of Horror and Confusion; one part of it descending amongst some
Trees a little distance from the Barn, from whence was heard an amazing clap of
Thunder, and immediately was seen two Black Teems of Monstrous Cattle, drawing
two large Wagons toward the Barn; Hurrying on with great Expedition, attended
by Four ill shaped Drivers of a Gygantick Magnitude, and in the foremost Wagon
sat he that made the Bargain, who when he came to the Barn, demanded where was
the Farmer? the Conjuror replying, he was not to be spoke with, but that the
Corn was ready, upon which the Devil taking strict notice could not make any
manner of Objection; but with an angry Countenance laid down the Remainder of
his Money, took up his Corn, and hurried on his Wagons, as if the Devil drove
them.

Since this we hear, most of the Corn in another Barn (belonging to same
Farmar) has been eaten up or spoiled by a strange sort of Vermin.

Whoever doubts the Truth of what is here inserted, if they will trouble
themselves to enquire of any of the Emsted Carriers, they may receive from them
a Confirmation of this matter for their further satisfaction.

FINIS.
a man held in a chair by four other men while the devil watches from behind a
curtain


