The Counterfeit Jew.
IT would fill to much Paper to describe all the Lies, Forgeries, Hypocrisies,
Slights of this miserable wretch, who Writ himself Josephus Ben Israel. Hebr.
Mantu. which part so long as he Acted, he did it so handsomely, and with so
much exquisite hypocrisy, relating the Customs, Ceremonies, Genealogies of
the Jews, that he easily got beyond those who are Novices to those Depths of
Satan. He was of an accute wit, an excellent Linguist, (spoake most Languages,
and Hebrew perfectly) a ready Scholar, a great Travellar, and came from
Hambrough to Newcastle, calling himself Horseley. Before his discovery, he
could carry himself very smoothly, suit himself to any humor, company,
discourse very accurately, by his reddy subtle Wit and Tongue he could
transform himself easily into what shapes he pleased, and act any Part; he
could command his Eyes, his Countenance, his Tongue; could speak Orthodoxly,
Spiritually, Learnedly, Practically. Ask him why he called himself Horseley?
Why; he was a Jew, and feared to be known, in regard so many of their Nation
have suffered in England; and by their Talmud, in danger of Life, any thing is
allowed, but Idolatry and Murder. He was than in Judaisme, but now a
Christian. But why came he over into England? Why; He heard of the Fame of the
Christians of England above all others; He had seen Papists, Lutherans,
Calvenists, they were all full of Ceremonies and Traditions; He had conversed
with some Anabaptists in Germany, (and they told him of the English Christians)
but they held Freewill, and such points, and he desired to worship God in the
purest way, without mixtures of men's inventions, therefore he came to the
people of Hexham, and there (like a child of the Devil, full of all subtilty
and guile, extraordinary endued with power and art from Hell, abusing all the
Ordinances of God, and mocking him to his face) he made his Declaration and
Confession of Christ in the public Assembly before all the People, and
afterward went and was Baptized, so joining himself to that People there, but
did not receive the Lords Supper with them, somewhat in his Conscience
starlting at that; so to avoid it, he feigned on purpose indisposition,
discontents, as he confessed afterward, all this while using in his private
Devotion, his Popish Prayers to Saint Benedict, Crossings, etc.

Upon the twentieth Day, the fourth Month, he came to Newcastle, (being
thereunto formerly engaged) to clear himself of form particulars, (whereof
warning was given to some of the Magistrates) and the next day appeared with
some friends boldly before the Magistrates, and some Ministers, ready to
receive all charges, all which he put off with horrible impudent lying, till
one came, who partly knew him, and had lately received a Letter from his Mother
at Leith. This came close, and moved his Countenance; when he saw he was like
to the unmasked, he was strangely smitten with fear, and amazement, ready now
to confess any thing; and confessed he was Master Alexander Ramsey his Son,
a Scottish Gentleman, The Inquisition-house, one of the Devils highest Courts.
was a Papist, sent over by the Inquisition, (those bloody monsters of men
whose Hellish methods in murdering poor Protestants is most execrable, fit to
be abominated in all Common wealths. Turks and Heathens would blush at such
cruelties) who employed him (as a notable Mercurized spirit, an Ambassador
extraordinary of the Odi etenim seu claustra arebi, etc.
Devil, Dolis instructus, and Art Pelasga) to promote Divisions; and ordered
him to feign himself a Jew, with other instructions; and hearing that the Sect
of Anabaptists were a very praevailing Sect, his first business was to be
Baptized, and get the Testimonial of a Church; and so (after he had blown up
them with Notions about Free Will, etc. which he intended presently to broach)
to make his way through to the Army, where he thought he could do well enough.
An Errant of Hell all along in its methods. In his perplexed fits he would say,
Ah, I have a Head fit for any purpose; but what shall I do, I am afraid of the
Army; but notwithstanding all this, my heart is not moved more than a stone.
When he was told he had loving Parents, he professed, he cared nor if he never
saw their An unnatural Son is fittest for the Devils vvorst employment.
Faces. When asked, how he could so dissemble, and be Baptized? He said, He
laughed in his Sleeve to see how he gulled those men. He said, He durst never
read the Gospel much, for fear of dulling his spirit; Devotion was only for
Blockeheads, and dull A State-Iesuite must have no Genius, no fancy for
Devotion.
Souls. Being asked, What gift in Prayer he had, whether he could. Pray as the
Puritans? he said, If he had been put to that he had made mad work. But what
cannot Schollarship. Art, Hypocrisy counterfeit? At first he complained, he
found no remorse of spirit for any thing he had done, but a fear of despair;
but being afterward put in hope to live, he grew more composed, and said; The
consideration of the Blood of Christ did quiet his Conscience. He seems to
have a Conscience full of all sorts of guilt; one drop of the blood of Christ
will heal all, and make him repent. If not, some notorious spectacle of wrath
he will prove at one time or other.

Many snares and ginns, Providence has to catch such Vipers, such
Incendiaries, though they may long escape. Desperate Heretics, and seducers,
that practice only upon Churches, ought only to be cut off by the Spiritual
Sword of Excommunication, (if they be Members of Churches) and the Temporal
Sword does not at all reach them. True, such as are merely devout Papists,
ought not to be harmed or molested. But such as come to practice any ways upon
States, Armies, sent from any of the Seminaties or Colleges of Inquisition
beyond the Seas, with instructions from them to poison, pistol, stilletto (and
such as have any relation to the wicked, bloody Inquisition house, are fitted
for such purposes, being used to and hardened in blood and cruelties) and have
received the holy Oil and Benediction of the Pone, and his absolution for the
perpetrating of all horred murders, etc. pro propaganda fide; such Jesuits and
Jesuited Romanists (whose Principles are Murders, Poisons, etc) that come
over, and renouncing their Religion, take up another for State-designes only,
and creep in to get Testimonialls, that they may become Spies in Armies, and
work Divisions, merit to suffer as Traitors, Rebels, Incendiaries of the State.

Omitting those many inferences, that are, and will be made by the Vulgar from
this strange Discovery, as that, Ergo, all Anabaptists are Jesuits, will turn
Papists, etc. (a new Doctrine to me) though this Counterfeit confessed, that
only the Anabaptists or Swinkefeldians, (who hold Free Will indeed) were
Burnt, Persecuted in Germany at this time; whilst Lutherans, Calvenists only,
had tolleration, per Publicum bannum Imperatoris. What worse is Baptism,
Church-fellow-ship, etc. for a Judas, a Simon Magus, a notorious Hypocrite
abusing them? The Devil will make notable use of this, and possess the World,
that Sheep are Wolves, and fit to be destroyed, because Wolves appear in
Sheeps cloarning, one of his old fetches to raise up Persecution, at least
Tongue-Persecution, which has already too far pruvailed upon this occasion:
Brethren should not strive. Let us convert it to more holy uses, and see the
wonderful goodness of God, and his especial care over his poor People in
answering Prayers, and so soon discovering (as Simon Magus was) this miscreant,
taking this Fox (that intended to have spoiled the Vines that has tender
Grapes; and one trick was, to have blown up Churches with Notions above
Ordinances, if not that, then to try what Free Will could do, etc.) in his
own net, not suffering him to go any further. Churches as they have their
Commission immediately from Christ; so their Protection also: his Banners of
Love are over them, their Comforts, their Graces, their Privileges, their
Ordinances. All the Iudasses, Annaniasses, Simon Magusses, Alexanders,
Hermogenesses, Hymeneuses; all the poison of Heretics, Pesecution of
Magistrates, and Rulers were never able to do the least harm to the Churches
of Christ. They multiplied, flourished in despite of all the malice of Hell.
Never any design the Devil had upon them, but they gained by it; and shortly
Christ will tread Satan under the feet of his Churches; and the Devil.
Antichrist, Hypocrites shall pay for all the wrongs they have done Christ, his
Saints, his Ordinances. Think not somewhat is befallen, which has no
president in the Primitive Churches; thousands of glorious Hypocrites there
are, though its very rare to find one so gross, so desperately profane as
this Counterfeit, so every way resembling the Devil. Churches must look for
fiery Trials, not only from without, but from within; from Hypocrites,
Seducers in their own bosoms; but they shall lose nothing by all, even such
occurrences as these; they shall serve only to Polish them, provoke them to
more holiness, love, watchfulness, humility. Oh take heed of stumbling at the
stumbling-stone; Blessed are those that are not offended at Christ, his Truths,
his Ordinances in these days. We are like to see more of these things. Christ
has sore-told us. The Devil will suit himself into all shapes, appear in all
forms to undermine Christ; he is the Master Hypocrite, the Master Politician.
Quum pellis leonina non sufficit, vulpina est assumenda, Machi. What need had
we to beware of men (especially men of Parts, curious Wits, who can turn
themselves into any likeness, easily disguising themselves; we are apt to be
taken with Gifts and Parts) suspecting least we be deceived. Churches had need
be very wary, circumspect in these times, when looked upon as a prevailing
Party, a way to preferment, as Christianity was in Constantines Court. There
had need be trying, searching to purpose, ransacking men's hearts, turning them
over and over, before a cloze. Nimia cautela non nocet. sudden actings in
Churches are dangerous. He that suspects not, will be Qui cito credit facile
fallitu^
deceived; fear every man whom we do not thoroughly know: without much
wariness in these days, Churches will be filled with Hypocrites; and the most
glorious Churches will harbor the greatest deceivers. The World is full of
Melin ote^ fill in cord^
Deceivers. The Devil is mightily busy, extraordinary bestirrs himself in
these last and perilous days. He will raise up spirits on purpose, who shall
affront, disgrace, blaspheme the good ways of God; his Plots against the
Saints, the Churches; all the Ordinances thereof are exceeding deep, fairly
gilded over. He will soment jealousies, raise up slanders, back-bitings,
censurings, judgings, reproachings one another, to divide, to weaken, to
destroy. He can set Saints against Saints, Churches against Churches, put fire
to Churches and Commonwealths. He has variety of Instruments, Engines fit for
every work. The Devil and the Pope make use of no Fools, they are not for
their turn; they choose the most sublimated Wits, the choy cest pieces of Art
and Learning, men compounded of the nimblest spirits, full fraught with the
policy, audacity of the Devil, that have drunk in the very quintesscence of
Hell; who having lost all sense and seeling in their Consciences, in
Stew-houses, Inquisition-houses, are on purpose trained up to dare to do any
Illis felix seclus, pietas est.
wickedness, Poison Stab. Murder, etc. things that the thoughts of would
afright any spirit that is but commonly wicked, Cunning Artists, deceitfully
Workers, who are Ingeniosissime nequam, Ingenious Inventers of mischiefs;
Scelerum molitores egregii, free to act all wickedness, (for Jesuitis
Diaboloque quaelibet audendi conceditur aequa potestat) yet can transform
themselves into an Angel of Light. Alas, how easily are poor Lambs and Doves
often deceived before they be aware, by such Foxes, sawning Simons. Honest,
simple, well-meaning souls, (ignari scelerum tantorum, artisque Pelasgae) how
easily are they circumvented? Therefore Christ's command is to be Serpents as
well as Doves. Rare where both Graces meet, Amare and sapore. What need had
Saints to keep close to Jesus Christ, to Read, Study the blessed Word of God
much, to walk close in the order of the Gospel (as an Army with Banners) which
would be as a Wall of Fire and Brass against Deceivers. What little cause of
boasting in Ordinances, Privileges, when a Devil, a Witch may be under the
most precious Ordinances? Church Membership may be without true Saintship; men
may get into Churches, that shall be excluded Heaven at the last, with the five
Foolish Virgins, and carry Baptism and all Ordinances to Hell with them, whose
Flames of all others shall be the hottest there. Prize grace in every Saint,
and love him for his grace merely, not his Opinion, whatever it be. When Judas
is abroad, when the Devil is playing all his prankes, trudging up and down to
deceive; what need had Saints to VVatch and Pray, to watch one over another,
exhort one another, continually examining their own hearts, to find out the
sophistries, subtilties that are there; there may be seen the greatest Devils,
Jesuits, Impostures in the world acting their parts. The more we fear, suspect
our selves, others the safer from being deceived. Look round about us, within,
and without us, and we shall see the hypocrite acting every where, in Courts,
in Churches, in Glosets, in Pulpits, in Shops, no place free. Many
State-hypocrites, Church-hypocrites, must yet be unmasked in England. Blessed
are poor, humble sincere souls, such only will he able to endure this day of
the Lord, this day of burning that is upon England. Men of all forts, of all
Professions will be tried. None more Devill-like then an hypocrite: he has his
designs in all that he does, but so closely, cunningly laid, (as Vaux, a
Romish Emissary too, laid his Powder-barrels under the Parliament House) that
none can possibly discern him, till God himself discover him; he can varnish
over the greatest wickedness, with the greatest shows of godliness, cast
sand and dust in the eyes of all that come near him, and blind them. How many
such are hugged, kissed, embraced in the arms of Saints (as once it may be
Phlygellus, Alexander, Philetus, etc. was of holy Paul) who shall ere long be
turned into the blackest Devils in Hell. Oh, who can fadome hearts, who knows
those mysteries of Iniquity, exceeding all those wickednesses that are done in
the Cloisters of Monks, the Colleges of Jesuits, the Conclaves of Popes? A
singular piece of their wickedness was this counterfeit lew, (a select
Commissioner of Hell. In utrumque paratus, seu versare dolos sau certe
occumbere morti.) sent from the Inquisition, house to try his fidelity (in
order to Priesthood) by some notable attempt upon the State, Army, by Division,
Intelligence, poison, any way (to which his acting at Hexham was but the
Introduction) to propagate the Catholic ends; being empowered by the Popes
Indulgence, to do any thing, swear any thing, counterfeit any thing, put off,
put on any Religion, etc. Oh the blood of bodies, souls, that Man of sin, is
guilty of, (who rejoices so much to hear of any Martyr, as he calls him.
though he be a wicked Rogue, a Blasphemous wretch, suffer for the Catholic
cause) the Lord Jesus will judge him shortly. The strange discovery of this
counterfeit, did exceedingly take the hearts of all there present, and made
them fall down, and adore, and bless God in this great Providence. Greatly
would they have rejoiced to see any the least true compuction of spirit, such
as flows from sights of Christ, and sense of pardon. Pray that all those
Emissaries of Hell may be discovered every where: Prayer had a strange
influence upon the discovery of this Counterfeit; it will yet find out more of
those lying spirits of Devils, which come forth of the mouth of the Beast and
the false Prophet, (drunk with the blood of Saints and Martyrs of Jesus) who
notwithstanding all his glorious, splended Troop of Cardinals and Jesuits
(those Cardines Diaboli, those Engines of wickedness daily attending him) and
their boasting of the Conquest of Chinah, (the Atlas Romanae Ecclesia) shall be
tumbled down, and made to drink of the Cup of the wrath of the Lord. Let the
Pope use all his cunning to divide, distract, (as Balaam did) he shall not be
able to escape the Sword of the Lord, which is now drawn, and set to his
breast, and will assuredly enter into his bowels. Let him look from his high
Prinacle of worldly glory, and scorn the Army of England; mock and laugh at
the glorious providence of God among us (as the actings of a giddy-headed
people) curse all our proceedings; yet let him know, Christ is making great
preparations against him here in England, and whetting the Arrows of his
indignation, to destroy him and his Adherents. Christ is undermining all the
mountains of his Power and greatness upon which he sits. Babylon the great
shall fall, and not one stone left upon another of all her stately Structure,
(her Ecclesiastical pomp, and civil Power) which shall become a place of Iim
and Zim, the abomination of the Earth. In that day, the redeemed of the Lord
shall rejoice, the Saints shall sing, yea, even now we are begun to sing our
Hallelujahs, Rev. 19. The Saints of England (a Land of Victories, of
Ordinances, of all sorts of glories) have first begun to set the Tune of the
Songs of Zion, which shall be sung through all Nations, Great and marveilous
are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, oh King of
Saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name, for thou only
art holy. For all Nations shall come and Worship before thee, for thy Judgment
are made manifest, Rev. 15.

An Anabaptist can never be a Papist, nor a Papist an Anabaptist: He that holds
Infant Baptism (as a Papist must) is no Anabaptist. A Papist may take up
Baptism upon a State-designe, (as this Counterfeit) but he is a Papist still,
and holds Infant Baptism. They differ in all Points, Baptism, Supper,
Singing, Sabbath, Ministry, impossible to reconcile them.

23. June 1653.

