The Life of Monsr. Colbert.



THE LIFE Of the Famous John Baptist Colbert, LATE MINISTER and SECRETARY of
STATE TO LEWIS XIV. THE Present French King.

Done into English from a French Copy printed at Cologne this present Year 1695.

LONDON,Printed for R. Bentley, in Covent Garden; J. Tonson,at the Judge's-Head
in Fleet Street; H. Bonwick, at the Red-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard; W.
Freeman,at the Bible, against the Middle-Temple-Gatein Fleet Street; and S.
Manship, at the Ship in Cornhill, 1695.

THE Author's Preface.
WHatever may be said of the Performance, there can be no Objections made
against the Seasonableness of my present Undertaking: For if the Publication of
this little Work had been longer delayed, it would have been a hard Task for
the Author to have acquired the Reputation of an exact Historian; and every
Reader would have pretended a Right to dispute, or at least to suspect the
Truth of his Relation. It Is an obvious Remark, That the Memory of even the most
Public Transactions is of a very tender Constitution, and seldom or never
retains its Integrity, if care be not taken to preserve it, while it is fresh
and unfaded; in some measure resembling Summer Fruits that must be either
hastily gathered, or eaten corrupted, if I may be allowed to borrow the Thought
of a History of Emeric Count of Tekeli, p. 2.
Modern Historian. Besides the Vndistinctness, which is the common
Inconveniency of remote Views. They who undertake to write an Account of a
Man^s Life, after a long Series of Years has in a manner set him out of our
reach, are obliged to depend on the Credit of an uncertain Tradition, that
confounds real with imaginary Events, and not unfrequently suppresses the most
remarkable Actions of the Person, whose Memory it pretends to preserve. In the
midst of so much Confusion it is impossible to avoid Mistakes: For that which
bears the nearest resemblance to Truth is frequently observed to be only a
well-contriv'd Lie; and oftentimes a seeming Fable after a diligent Enquiry, is
found to be a certain Truth. The Life of great Persons is full of
Contradictions; and those Characters of em, and Judgments concerning their
Actions that are founded on the Idea they give of themselves on certain
occasions, rarely amount to more than false, or at best uncertain Conjectures.

On the other side, if I had published this History sooner, it might have been
suspected of Flattery. The Ministers of great Princes are no less terrible than
their Masters, and if ever an impartial Historian runs the hazard of an unjust
and rigorous Treatment, for a faithful Representation of the Management of
Affairs, it is when he attempts to unskreen the Designs of those who are the
present Dispensers of Rewards and Punishments. If M. Colbert's Life had
appeared while his Sons were actually possessed of the highest Posts in the
Government, the Reader might have justly suspected me of a Design to make my
Court to the Children, by writing a Panegyric on the Father. But the present
Posture of Affairs leaves no room for any suspicion of that Nature; and
therefore I expect to be believed when I protest that the only Motive which
engaged me in writing the History of that Great Minister, was my desire to
acquaint Posterity with the most memorable Actions of his Life. And as I began
the Work without the least curb upon my Sincerity, so in the prosecution of it
I have confined my self to a scrupulous Observance of the Truth: Nor have I
been less careful to expose his Faults, than to do Justice to his Perfections.

The Reader will easily perceive that I never take the liberty to wander from
my Subject. For he must not expect to find in this Treatise a continued History
of the Reign of Lewis XIV. but the Life of one of his Chief Ministers of State,
who sustained not the entire Burden of the Government, but was confined to the
Management of certain particular Affairs: And I have endeavored with all
possible Exactness, to trace him through the whole Course of his Life in the
discharge of his peculiar Employments, without taking notice of those general
Affairs that were not properly a part of his Province, any further than he had
a share in 'em.

I could not forbear adorning my Work with large and exact Descriptions of his
Majesty's principal Buildings, that were erected under the Inspection of this
Minister: For besides that Relations of this Nature are extremely agreeable to
the Curious and Ingenious part of Mankind, these admirable Works are so many
convincing Proofs of the Activity, Vigilance, and indefatigable Diligence of
him to whose Care they were committed. The Discharge of so important a Trust
might have been the entire and glorious Occupation of an ordinary Genius; but
it was the least part of M. Colbert's Task. For besides, he had the Management
of Naval Affairs, and of the King's Revenue, which he still found means to
increase by some new Expedient. He was also entrusted with the Care of
promoting Trade, and of improving ingenious Arts: And it is the duty of every
Frenchman to acknowledge that the Industry and Politeness of our Artizans is an
effect of the admirable Conduct of that Minister, and that he deprived our
Neighbors of the Servile Tribute which our wasteful Luxury paid to the Arts
that flourished among 'em.

But our Gratitude to M. Colbert must not betray us into a disingenuous
partiality: Neither ought we to be so dazzled with the pleasing view of the
shining part of his Life, as to forget or dissemble his Faults. For it is
certain that he never scrupled to commit any Act of Injustice that might serve
to enrich his Sovereign; and that notwithstanding his affected Probity, and
seeming Neglect of his own Interest, he omitted no Opportunity to fill his
Coffers by indirect Methods. This is the dark and blemished Reverse of his
Character; and the truth of these Assertions will appear evidently to the
attentive Peruser of the following Treatise.

To the History of M. Colbert I have added that of his Eldest Son, the Marquess
of Seignelay, who succeeded him in the Offices of Secretary of State, and of
Commander and Great Treasurer of His Majesty's Orders. At present there are
none of his Sons alive but James-Nicholas, Archbishop of Rohan, and Lewis,
Colonel of the Regiment of Champaign.

BOOKS lately Printed.
THE Present State of Persia: With a faithful Account of the Manners, Religion
and Government of that People. By Monsieur Sanson, a Missionary from the French
King. Adorned with Figures. Done into English.

The Present State of the Empire of Morocco: With a faithful Account of the
Manners, Religion and Government of that People. By Monsieur de S. Olon,
Ambassador there in the Year 1693. Adorned with Figures.

The Life of the Famous Cardinal-Duke of Richlieu, Principal Minister of State
to Lewis XIII. King of France and Navarre. in Two Volumes. 8vo.

Letters, written by a French Gentleman; giving a faithful and particular
Account of the Transactions of the Court of France, relating to the Public
Interest of Europe. With Historical and Political Reflections on the ancient
and present State of that Kingdom. By the Famous Monsieur Vassor.

The Roman History, from the Building of the City to the perfect Settlement of
the Empire by Augustus Caesar: Containing the Space of 727 Years. Designed as
well for the Understanding of the Roman Authors, as the Roman Affairs. By
Laurence Echard, A. M. of Christ-College in Cambridge.

A New Voyage to Italy: With a Description of the Chief Towns, Churches, Tombs,
Libraries, Palaces, Statues, and Antiquities of that Country. Together with
useful Instructions for those who shall travel thither. By Maximilian Misson,
Gent. Done into English, and adorned with Figures. In two Volumes. 8vo.

Now in the Press, and will be speedily Published.
A New Voyage to the Levant; Containing an Account of the most Remarkable
Curiosities in Germany, France, Italy, Malta and Turkey: With Historical
Observations relating to the present and ancient State of those Countries. By
the Sieur du Mont. Done into English, and adorned with Figures.

The Complete Horseman: Discovering the surest Marks of the Beauty, Goodness,
and Vices of Horses, and describing the Signs and Causes of their Diseases; and
the True Method both of their Preservation and Cure. With Reflections on the
Regular and Preposterous Use of Bleeding and Purging. Together with the Art of
Shooing, and a Description of several Kinds of Shoes, adapted to the various
Defects of Bad Feet, and for the Preservation of those that are good; and the
Best Method of Breeding Colts; with Directions to be observed in Backing 'em,
and Making their Mouths, etc. By the Sieur de Solleysell, one of the Heads of
the Royal Academy. at Paris. The Eighth Edition, Reviewed and methodically
Augmented; Done into English, and Adorned with Figures. Folio.

THE LIFE OF John Baptist Colbert, Minister, and Secretary of STATE.
THere is something so singular and surprising, both in the Quickness of
Monsieur Colbert's Advancement, and the Grandeur of his Fortune, that
After-Ages will hardly be induced to give Credit to that part of our Modern
History, if they be not informed by what Steps and Methods he raised himself to
so high a Degree of Power.

He was of a middle Stature, rather Lean than Fat; his Hair was black, and so
thin, that he was obliged to begin very soon to make use of a Cap. His Mien was
low and dejected; he had a gloomy Air, and stern Aspect. He spoke little, and
would never return a present Answer, till he had first received a particular
account in Writing of what was proposed to him. He managed Business with
unwearied Application, and a surprising Exactness: the Clearness of his
Judgment enabled him to expedite all sorts of Affairs speedily, and without
Confusion. He was of a slow Conception, but spoke judiciously of every thing,
after he had fully comprehended it. He was a Lover of Learning, though he never
applied himself to the Study of it. He was a great Pretender to Probity; but
though he endeavored to persuade the World that he neglected his own Interest,
and seemed resolved to owe his Riches merely to the King's Bounty, he scrupled
not to fill his Coffers by indirect Methods. He affected a great deal of
Moderation in the beginning of his Ministry; but as soon as he saw his Fortune
secured by great Offices and powerful Alliances, he gave a full Career to his
vast Designs, and spared nothing to advance his Glory, though he managed his
private Affairs with a great deal of Frugality. He sacrificed Honor,
Integrity, Gratitude, and every thing else to the Interests of his Ambition.
The Hardness and Inflexibility of his Temper was altogether insupportable. He
beheld without concern the Misery of an infinite number of Families, whom he
had ruined to enrich his Master's Treasury. But though he never employed his
Power for the good of others, it must be acknowledged that he never shed the
Blood of his Enemies. He was crafty and subtle: His outward Behavior was
modest, accompanied with a great deal of seeming Plainness and Simplicity. He
loved, and was acquainted with ingenious Arts: He slept little, and was sober.
Though he was naturally sour and morose, he knew how to act the part of a
Lover in the Company of those Ladies who had touched his Heart; but he always
treated 'em in public with his accustomed Gravity, that he might not be
thought capable of suffering himself to be governed by the fair Sex.

He was the Son of Nicholas Colbert Sieur de Vandieres, and of Mary Pussort;
and was born at Rheims in Champaigne, November 1625. His Grandfather was a
Wine-Merchant, and his Father at first followed the same Occupation; but
afterward he traded in Cloth, and last of all in Silk. Our future Minister was
very young when his Father sent him to Paris, to be instructed in the Arts of
Merchandising: From thence he went to Lions, but falling out with his Master,
returned to Paris, where he was first Clerk to a Notary, and then to Biterne,
Sabathier, Treasurer of the Money raised by the Sale of Offices, in the Quality
of a Commissary or Deputy. In the Year 1648. John Baptist Colbert, Lord of S.
Pouange, preferred him to the Service of Michael le Tellier, Secretary of
State, whose Sister he had married; and the Youth was quickly taken notice of
for his Diligence, and Exactness in executing all the Commissions that were
entrusted to his Care.

One day his Master sent him to Cardinal Mazarin with a Letter written by the
Queen Mother, and ordered him to bring back the Letter after that Minister had
seen it. Colbert arriving at Sedan, where the Cardinal then was, presented the
Queen's Letter to him, with another from le Tellier, to his Eminency; and
returning the next day for an Answer, he received only a sealed Packet; but not
seeing the Queen's Letter, he asked the Cardinal for it, who told him that all
was in the Packet, and bid him return to his Master. The wary Messenger not
satisfied with that Answer, broke up the Seal in the Cardinal's Presence, who
being surpised at his Boldness, chid him for his Sawciness, and snatched the
Packet out of his hand; Colbert, not in the least daunted with so rough a
Treatment, replied, That he believed his Eminency had entrusted the Care of
closing the Packet to one of his Secretaries, who, probably, had forgotten to
put in the Queen's Letter. The Cardinal pretending Business put him off till
the next Day, but at last, after several Delays and Denials, seeing him always
at the Closet-Door, he restored the Letter, which Colbert viewed very
attentively, to see whether it was the same he delivered; and went away without
seeming to take notice of the Cardinal's Anger, who asked him whether he
thought him capable of so much Baseness as to counterfeit a Paper. Some time
after the Cardinal returning to Court, and wanting one to write his Agenda, or
Memorandums, desired le Tellier to furnish him with a fit Person for that
Employment: and Colbert being presented to him, he had still some confused
Remembrance of him, and was desirous to know where he had seen him. Colbert was
afraid to put him in mind of Sedan, least the Remembrance of his Importunacy,
in demanding the Queen's Letter, should renew the Cardinal's Anger; but his
Eminency was so far from hating him for his Faithfulness to his late Master,
that he received him on condition, That he should serve him with like Zeal and
Fidelity.

Colbert applied himself wholly to the Advancement of his Master's Interests,
and gave him so many Marks of his Diligence and Skill, that after the Death of
Joubert his Eminency's Intendant, he was chosen to succeed in that Post. He
accommodated himself so dexterously to the Inclinations of that Minister, by
retrenching his superfluous Expenses, that he was entrusted with the Management
of that gainful Trade of selling Benefices and Governments. It was by his
Counsel that the Cardinal obliged the Governors of Frontier Places to maintain
their Garrisons with the Contributions they exacted; and his Eminency was
extremely pleased with that Advice. He was sent to Rome to negotiate the
Reconciliation of Cardinal de Rets, for which the Pope had showed some Concern,
and to persuade his Holiness to consent to the dis-incamerating of Castro,
according to the Treaty concluded with his Predecessor Urban VIII. At his
Return, to requite his good Services, he was made Secretary of the Queen's
Dispatches, which Office he afterward sold to Brisacier, Master of the Court
of Accounts, and bought that of President in the same Company, who happily for
him, but unhappily for themselves, would not receive him; for he became their
greatest Enemy, and deprived 'em of the profit of the Debets of Accounts, for
which he made a Bargain with Vilette, and afterward with others, to the great
Prejudice of the Chamber, though the King did not receive much Advantage by the
Alteration.

As Soon as he saw himself in Favor at Court, he began to think of a convenient
Match, and took to Wife Mary Charon, Daughter of James Charon, Sieur de Menars,
a Native of Blois, (who of a Cooper and Wine-Broker, was become Play Master of
the Infantry), and of Mary Begone his Wife. Charon had higher Designs, for he
looked upon his Daughter as one of the Richest Matches in Paris, by reason of
the great Legacies and Inheritances that would fall to her: but at last he
consented to this Proposal, that he might be exempted from a Tax with which he
was threatened. The great Respect which Colbert showed to his Wife did not
hinder him from gratifying in some measure his particular Inclinations, and
from yielding to the Charms of Frances de Godet, Widow of John Grave Sieur de
Launay, a Norman Lady, of a smooth and insinuating Temper, the usual Character
of those of her Country. She was of a graceful Stature, and Majestic Gate: Her
Face was round, her Complexion white and clear, her Hair light, and her Eyes
blue. Launay Grave a rich Partizan married her after the Death of his first
Wife, whose Servant she had been, and left her a great Estate. Colbert took
care to introduce his Mistress to the Queen and Cardinal Mazarin, with whom he
made her play very frequently; and she made use of those Privileges for the
Advantage of him who procured 'em to her; for being of a quick and piercing
Wit, she gave him notice of every thing she heard, that had any relation to his
Interests: nor was he ungrateful to one that had done him so considerable
Service; for he contrived a way to make her the Wife of Anthony de Brouille,
Marquess of Piene, Knight of the Orders, and Governor of Pignerol.

The Marchioness of Piene was not the only Person that touched the Heart of
Colbert: for besides her, he made Love to Ann Margaret Vanel, Wife of John
Coissier, Master of the Court of Accounts, a young Lady of a low Stature, but
extremely pretty, and adorned with all the Advantages of a gay Humor and
lively Wit. His frequent Visits, and Supping at her House were ascribed to his
intimate Friendship with her Father-in-law, who had been Receiver of the
Consignations with Betaut, and to the Lessons of Politics he usually took from
her Husband, who was perfectly well acquainted with all the Negotiations and
Intrigues of the Treaty of Munster, as having been Secretary to the Embassy
under Abel de Servien, whose Deputy he still was in the Super-Intendancy. But
our Statesman was soon weary of the Levity and Fickleness of that Lady, and
resigned his Pretensions to his Brother Edward Francis Colbert, whom he had
made Captain of the Guards, to Rousserau Cardinal Mazarin's Secretary, and to
the Commander of Gault, who had more time to bestow on their Amors. Ambition
was the predominant Passion of John Baptist Colbert, and though he had not yet
arrived to that eminent height of Grandeur, to which he afterward attained, he
had already advanced all his Brothers. For he had obtained the Intendancy of
Alsatia, with the Dignity of a President a Mortier in the Parliament of Paris,
for Charles Colbert, and the Bishopric of Lucon, with the Office of the King's
Library Keeper for his Brother Nicholas.

Mazarin at his Death recommended Colbert to his Majesty, as a fit Person to
regulate Affairs relating to the Finances which stood much in need of
Reformation: for Nicholas Fouquet, who was then Superintendant, had borrowed
such vast Sums, that he was above four Years behind-hand. He had raised Rents
on the Third Penny and a Half, which nevertheless yielded no more than the
Seventh Penny, because only two Quarters were paid, and even that was very much.
He had also erected Offices without Charge, and had delivered blank Patents,
which the Purchasers were to enjoy without supplying the Places, so that the
King was deprived of his Right to Surrenders. And besides there was a Third
Part remitted at each Bargain, which oppressed the People without the least
Advantage to the King. The Edicts were changed to Bills or Tickets, which were
afterward cut into so many Pieces, that 'twas impossible to know the Original:
and he paid so excessive Rates of Interest for the Loans he received, that the
Crown must have for ever remained unable to discharge the Sums, if a quick
Stop had not been put to these Disorders. The King resolved to entrust the
Regulation of his Revenue to Colbert, having already received some Marks of his
Frugality: for he remembered that he had saved him a considerable Sum of
Money, by changing the fine Silver Edgings that were fitted to the Ribbons with
which the Habits of the Hundred Switzers were adorned, to counterfeit Lace: And
therefore his Majesty made him Intendant of the Finances, together with
Breteuil, Marin, and Hervard; and erected a Chamber of Justice, composed of Six
Counselors of State, Six Masters of Requests, Four Counselors of the
Parliament of Paris, Two Counselors of the Great Council, Two Masters of the
Court of Accounts, Two Counselors of the Court of Aids, and a Counselor out
of each of the other Parliaments, to call to an account, and arraign such
Farmers as were guilty of Misdemeanors. The Chamber, for a Specimen of their
Justice, and for an Example and Terror to the rest of these Officers, caused
some of the meanest of 'em to be hanged: and these Executions made way for the
Imprisonment of the Superintendant, the Three Treasurers of the Exchequer, and
the richest Partisans or Farmers.

Before they proceeded to secure Fouquet, he was dexterously persuaded to
resign the Office of Attorney General of the Parliament of Paris, lest he
should claim the Privilege which that Dignity gave him of being tried by the
Chambers in a full Assembly. He was apprehended at Nantes on the Fifth of
September, 1661. whither the Court was removed to quiet some Disorders in
Bretaigne: Angers, where he was seized with a very dangerous Sickness. At the
same time the Papers which he brought along with him were secured, and the Seal
affixed to his Houses at Paris, S. Mande and Vaux, and to his Apartments at the
Louvre. His Papers that were seized at Nantes, with those of his Deputy
Pelisson, were examined for several days by Boucherat, Counselor of State,
Pellot, Master of Requests, and Colbert; and afterward transmitted to
Fontainbleau without taking an Inventory of 'em. The Seal was affixed on his
House at Paris by the Lieutenant-Civil, assisted by the King's Advocate of the
Chastelet, for the Interest of the Public, and in presence of the Prisoner's
domestic Servants. The same Ceremonies were not observed at Fontainbleau; and
because they mistrusted the Exactness of Poncet, who was one of the
Commissioners, they sent him to assist at the taking of the Inventory of S.
Mande. Barin de la Galissoniere was substituted in his Place, but d' Aligre,
Director of the Finances, and Colbert, managed the Affair alone, and proceeded
with so much Eagerness and Diligence, that they spent even Sundays and Holydays
in that Occupation. The greatest part of 'em were not subsign'd, and even they
carried the Bundles to his Majesty's Closet without marking their Numbers. As
for the Papers at S. Mande, Poncet had brought 'em to Fontainbleau; but after
he had acquainted the King, that, according to the Forms of Justice, they ought
to remain in the place where they were found, till the Person who owned 'em was
brought to an Account, his Majesty commanded 'em to be carried back to S.
Mande. The King had appointed the Lieutenant-Civil to affix the Seal to that
House; but Colbert suppressed a second Order, which gave that Commission to
Benard and l' Alleman, Masters of the Requests. By Virtue of this last Order,
the Seal was affixed on the 8th of the same Month of September, by those
Commissioners, in presence of Charles de la Noue and Jacob Bezemont, the
Prisoner's Servants. But Colbert suspecting 'em of Remissness and Neglect,
obtained a new Commission for Lauzon and la Fosse, Counselors of State, who
with Poncet were appointed to take the Inventory: after which, the first
Commissioners having owned and recognized their Seal, delivered up the Keys of
the Doors, Trunks and Cupboards, to those who were appointed to succeed 'em,
who affixed a new Seal, though their Power did not reach so far, and put the
Signet (which they ought to have kept) into the hands of Foucaut, Clerk to the
Commission, and Colbert's Creature, who by this means became Master of all the
Papers, since the Keys were entrusted to his Clerk. And therefore as soon as he
was informed that Foucaut was Master of all, leaving his Business at
Fontainbleau, he went immediately to S. Mande to be present at the taking of
the Inventory, though he had no Authority to go thither. The Reason that made him
so desirous to seize on these Papers, was not only to deprive Fouquet of what
might serve for his Defense, but also to secure himself against all Accusations
by suppressing those Papers which might have discovered his Guilt. For, during
the Life of Cardinal Mazarin, the Administration of three fourth Parts of the
Charge of Superintendant, and the Receipt and Disbursement of the best part of
the Money in the Kingdom, was managed in that Minister's Palace, and according
to his Orders, by Colbert, who, if his Bills had been inserted in the
Inventory, would have been obliged to give an account of all that was contained
in 'em.

The Papers found in the House at Vaux were put in two Trunks, before any
Inventory was taken of 'em, and delivered to Foucaut, with Orders to bring 'em
to the Castle of the Louvre: nor were they put in Order till three Months
after, when la Fosse and Poncet made a List of 'em with as little Regularity ^s
they had observed at S. Mande. In the mean ^^me, while the Commissioners were
employed ^n taking the Inventories, the Prisoner was ^emov'd from Angers to
Amboise, and from hence to Vincennes, about the end of December, ^661. Hitherto
he had been kept in Prison, though he could not be reputed a Criminal, because
he had not yet been proceeded against according to the Forms of Justice. They
began not to inform against him till in the Year 1662, by Virtue of an Order
dated March 3. and no Decree passed against him till the 17th of June. The
Order awarded that his Person should be secured, and committed during the
King's Pleasure to the Inner Tower in the Castle of Vincennes.

Fouquet was not only accused of Misdemeanour in the Management of the
Finances: they also laid to his Charge, That he had drawn up in Writing the
beginning of a Scheme, instructing his Friends and Relations what to do, in
case he should be apprehend^d; that he had fortified Belle Isle, and furnished
it with Cannon; that he had been possessed of the Government of Concarnau; and
had made several Persons by written Obligations, engage themselves to advance
his Interest. As for his Cheating the Public, or Embezling the Treasure of the
Kingdom, 'twas pretended that he had taken interest under the pretext of forged
Loans; that he had advanced Money which he ought not to have done, as being the
Disposer of it; that he had confounded the King's Money with his own, and
embezled it to his private Use; that he had acquired an Interest in the Farms,
and made Bargains under borrowed Names; tha^ he had purchased Rights and
Estates of the King at under Rates; that he had taken Pensions and
Gratifications from the Farmers and Purchasers to let 'em have a cheaper
Bargain^ of their Farms and Purchases; that he had revived several expired
Notes or Tickets bought at the Thirtieth Penny, and had made 'em pass at their
full Value; that he had renewed on certain Funds illegal Tickets, arising from
Orders granted to Farmers for the Re-imbursement of Treaties or Leases that
were made void; and that he had made Treaties or Agreements disadvantageous to
the King, and wasted 'em in idle Expenses. Colbert, who accused Fouquet for
taking Pensions of the Farmers, had himself received one of fifty thousand
Livres a Year from Claude Girardin, in Consideration of which, and of a hundred
thousand Livres paid to Cardinal Mazarin, (...) Lease of the Aids was adjudg'd
to Girardin for five hundred thousand Livres less than Forco^^ and his
Associates had paid for it, though there was no Pretext to dispossess 'em. To
conceal that Bribe, Colbert raised the Cardinal's Benefices a hundred thousand
Livres, which Girardin at the same time took to farm. Since Fouquet had no hand
in that Affair, there was no mention made of it at his Trial, though it was a
part of his Charge. It Is plain from what happened on occasion of the Woods of
Normandy, that Colbert was as much concerned as Fouquet in Treaties of that
Nature: For Berrier and Bechamel who farmed 'em, seeing an Action brought
against 'em in the Chamber of Justice, threatened, That if he did not put a
stop to the Prosecution, they would produce their Agreement of Partnership, in
which his Share alone equaled both theirs; after which the whole Business was
hushed up.

4th of March, 1662, Fouquet was examined the first time by Poncet, Master of
Requests, and Renaud Counselor in the Parliament of Paris, on Articles
resulting from the Informations that were brought against him, and others
alleged by Denis Talon, Advocate-General of the same Parliament, and
Attorney General of the Chamber. The Examination lasted above a Month, and they
proceeded no farther till June. Fouquet had all along refused to own the
Authority of the Chamber; and though the King's Council had by several Orders
confirmed its Jurisdiction, and commanded him to submit and give in his Answer
under pain of being proceeded against as Mute, he still persisted in his Plea,
declining the Authority of the Court. Yet his Process was appointed by an Order
of the Chamber, dated October 4. 1662. and referred to le Fevre d' Ormesson,
Master of Requests, and Cornier de Saint Helene, Counselor in the Parliament
of Rhoan.

Fouquet was brought from Vincennes on the 14th of November, 1664. to the
Chamber of Justice in the Arsenal, to be examined on the Criminals Seat; and
the examination continued till the 4th of December, when d' Ormesson began to
make his report, adjudging him to perpetual Banishment, and his Estate to be
forfeited to the King, paying a Fine of a hundred thousand Livres. Saint
Helene, who was also empowered to make the Report, voted for Death, adding,
That though the Evidence was strong enough to convict him of Peculate or of
Robbing and Embezelling the King's Treasure, which ought by the Law to be
punished with Hanging; yet he was of Opinion that the Prisoner should only be
beheaded. Saint Helene was followed, and his Judgment confirmed by Pussort,
Colbert's Uncle, and Counselor in the great Council; Feriol, Counselor in
the Parliament of Mets; Gisancourt, Counselor in the great Council; Noguets,
Counselor in the Parliament of Pau; Heraut, Counselor in the Parliament of
Bretaigne; and de la Toison, Counselor in the Parliament of Dijon.
Roquesante, Counselor in the Parliament of Provence, who voted next, was of
Ormesson's Opinion; as were also du Verdier, Counselor in the Parliament of
Bourdeaux; de la Baume, Counselor in the Parliament of Grenoble; Masenau,
Counselor in the Parliament of Toulouse; le Ferron, Counselor in the Court
of Aids; de Mousy, Master of the Court of Accounts; Catinat and Renard,
Counselors in the Parliament of Paris; Benard de Reze, Master of Requests;
and Philip de Pontchartrain, President in the Chamber of Accounts, Poncet and
Voisin gave Judgment of Death, as well as the Chancellor; but it was carried
for Banishment by four Voices; after which Sentence was given on the 20th of
December, 1664. according to d' Ormesson's Verdict.

The King being informed of the Nature of the Sentence, and considering that it
might be a thing of dangerous Consequence, to send a Person out of the Kingdom,
who was so particularly acquainted with the most important Affairs of the
State, changed the Punishment to perpetual Imprisonment, and ordered him to be
carried to Pignerol on the Frontiers of Piedmont, whither he began his Journey
two days after, under a Guard of a hundred Musketeers, and there ended his
Life in the Year 1680. Immediately after his Condemnation, his Mother and Wife
received Orders to retire to Montlucon in Bourbonnois, with his Brother
Fouquet, the King's first Gentleman of the Horse. His Son-in-law, the Marquess
of Charot, with his Wife, were ordered to Anceni in Bretaigne; and Bailly,
Advocate-General of the Great Council, was commanded to retire to his Abbey of
St. Thierry, because he pleaded for him with too much eagerness.

The Difference between the Tempers of Colbert and Fouquet, appears plainly by
their Carriage to the Author of the Burlesque Gazette, who besides a Pension of
two hundred Livres from Mademoiselle de Monpensier, had another of two hundred
Crowns allowed him by Fouquet. This Gazetteer after his unfortunate Benefactour
was apprehended, spoke advantageously of him in his Gazette, protesting that
though he would not meddle with Affairs of State, he could not forbear
expressing his Gratitude for the Obligations he had received. Colbert, knowing
that he had a Pension, took it from him; which Fouquet, who was then in the
Bastile, had no sooner heard, but he resolved to make up that Loss with
Advantage, though he was deprived of all his Estate, and in a Condition that
required vast Sums of Money to defray his necessary Charges. For Mademoiselle
de Scudery, at his desire, sent fifteen hundred Livres to Loret by a trusty
Messenger, who after he had discoursed with him for a considerable time, took
occasion to leave that Sum in a Purse without his Knowledge.

Bruant des Carrieres, Master of the Court of Accounts, and Fouquet's first
Deputy, made his escape out of the Kingdom, and retired to Liege as soon as his
Master was secured. But the Chamber indicted him for Contempt, and condemned him
to be hanged; after which his Office in the Court of Accounts was suppressed.
He had bought of Margaret Ranchin, Widow of Claude Vanel, a House in New-street
in the Little Fields, for 150000 Livres, in the Name of Joan de Chaumont, Widow
of Claude Girardin. This House stood very convenient for Colbert, who lived in
another contiguous to it, which he had purchased of Batru: and the Temptation
was so strong, that he used all his Art to make himself Master of the House,
without putting his hand in his Purse. At last he took advantage of several
Orders or Sentences of the Chamber of Justice, by which the Widow and Heirs of
Vanel were fined in 350000 Livres, and under that pretext procured Widow
Girardin to be assigned in a Declaration of Mortgage. But since these
Proceedings were of no greater Force in Law than the Judgment of the same
Chamber, by which a great Tax was already laid on Claude Girardin, the Son of
Joan Chaumont, Colbert taxed or assess'd the Inheritance of Claude Girardin,
the Father, at a hundred and twenty thousand Livres, though he had never been
concerned in the King's Affairs, nor had ever enjoyed any other Office than
that of Comptroller of the Sallaries of the Officers of the Parliament at
Rhoan, for which he was not at all liable to account. By Virtue of these
Sentences a Decree was obtained, no less irregular than the rest of the
Proceedings, and the House was adjudg'd to Colbert, against the Heirs both of
Vanel and Girardin, for a hundred and twenty thousand Livres, deducting the
Sums due to the King: but Colbert suspecting the Validity of his Title,
procured a Grant of it from his Majesty. During the Prosecution of Fouquet's
Deputies and Farmers, Bruant stayed at Liege, where he performed such
considerable Services to the State in 1672, that he obtained a Pardon, and
returned to Paris after Colbert's Death, thinking to be reinstated in the
Possession of his House: but he had only the Advantage of venting his Passion
in his Writings, for the Council would not meddle with what had been decreed by
the Chamber of Justice.

Paul Pelisson had the good Fortune to escape the Fate of his Fellow-Deputy:
For Colbert's Ambition to be thought Learned, and to acquire the Esteem of
those who were really so, prompted him not only to procure his Liberty, but to
take him into his own Service, after his late Master's Condemnation. Pelisson
was the younger Son of a Counselor in the Court of Judicature established by
the Edict of Castres: his Patrimony was inconsiderable, but his Learning and
Politeness supplied the Defects of his Fortune. His Elder Brother bought a
Counsellour's Place in the Supreme Court of Bresse, which was afterward united
to the Parliament of Mets: and our Cadet went to Paris with Isarn, Brother to
the Clerk of the abovementioned Court, instituted by the Edict. These two
Adventurers were intimate Friends, and there was a great Affinity between their
Tempers: they were both remarkable for Sweetness of Conversation, and could
write as well in Verse as in Prose. But there was not the same Resemblance
between their Faces; for the Smallpox had very much disfigured Pelisson's,
(whose Features were not very regular before,) by leaving Marks of its Fury on
his Forehead and Cheeks, and so distorting his Eyelids, that the White was
too much uncovered. On the contrary, Isarn was formed for Love, his Stature,
Complexion, Features, Hair (which was black, curled, and in great abundance),
and every thing else were graceful and agreeable. They addressed themselves
both together to Mademoiselle de Scudery, and endeavored to divert her with
the Productions of their Wit: Pelisson made Stanza's on a Linget that was her
Favorite; and Isarn wrote the Louis d' Or, a small Miscellany of Prose and
Verse. But at last she declared for the former, and preferred his Linget to the
other's Louis d' Or. She described in her Cyrus her Amors with Pelisson, under
the Names of Sappho and Phaon; and to show that her Passion was beyond the
Reach of Matter, and would never make her throw her self into the Sea after the
Example of that Learned Grecian Lady, she drew in her Clelia a Scheme of her
Love, which she called Tender Friendship. And even she could not forbear
discovering to Pelisson her Inclination toward him, in these Extemporary Verses.

Enfin, Acanthe, il se faut render,
Votre Esprit a charm le mien;
Je vous fais Citoyen de Tender,
Mais de grace n'en dites rien.
At last, Acanthus, I must yield,
Charmed by the Beauties of thy Wit;
But never let it be revealed,
That I to Tender thee admit.
This Union of Minds was so much taken notice of at Paris, and seemed so
pleasant an Adventure, that it was made the Subject of a Song, which grew very
common.

L'Amour met tous sous son Empire,
Et ce n'est pas une Chanson;
Sapho meme soupire
Pour le docte Pelisson?
What Man is he that dares defy
The universal Monarch, Love;
Who makes Platonic Sapho sigh,
The Learned Pelisson's Heart to move?
But that Learned Person had too great a Mind to be satisfied with such
Trifles. The French Academy had so great an Esteem for him, that they admitted
him into their Number, though there was no Place vacant. He wrote the History
of that Society, enriched with an Account of its Institution and Statutes, and
the Lives of its Members: The Subject he undertook is described with a great
deal of Exactness, and the Reader is sometimes diverted with a pleasant Mixture
of Praise and Satyr, as in the Account of Voiture. This Work was very much
esteemed, and raised the Reputation of its Author: Fouquet, who had read it,
received very favorably the Proposal which Mademoiselle de Scudery made him,
of making that Historian one of his Deputies; and from that time entrusted him
with the Care of Framing the Draughts of all the Letters of Importance, which
he was obliged to write. He placed an entire Confidence in him, and bestowed on
him a newly-erected Office in the Court of Accounts, Aids, and Finances at
Montpelier, where he was received in November 1659, when the Court passed that
way. He gave him a very signal Mark of his Affection, when, upon his bare
Recommendation, he protected de Mance, Farmer of the Gabels in Languedoc, with
so much Zeal and Eagerness against the whole Province, who had conspired that
Officer's Ruin. Nor was Pelisson an ungrateful Servant; for it is well known
with what Vigor and Eloquence he vindicated his Master from the Crimes that
were laid to his Charge. Colbert, who had seen the Collection of all those
Pieces, printed in Holland in Six Volumes, conceived so high an Esteem for the
Author, that he resolved not only to set him at Liberty, but to gain him
entirely, by bestowing Favors upon him: and Pelisson transferred all the
Fidelity with which he had served Fouquet, to his new Master. 'Twas he who
inspired that Minister with a Desire to be admitted into the French Academy,
into which he was received in the Place of Silhon, An. 1667. Colbert
entertained also in his Service des Chiens, another of Fouquet's Deputies, but
for a different Reason; for he thought he owed no less a Recompense to one that
had done him such acceptable Service, by furnishing him with Instructions
against his Master. But it is impossible to love a Traitor long, and Colbert
shortly after turned away that unfaithful Servant.

Notwithstanding my Resolution to observe the Order of Time with as much
Exactness as a Work of this Nature will admit, I thought fit to make an
uninterrupted Relation of the Fall and Disgrace of Fouquet and his Deputies; I
shall in the next place, give an Account of the new Regulation of the Finances,
and the Advancement of Colbert on the Ruins of that unfortunate Officer.

Immediately after Fouquet's Imprisonment, the Office of Superintendant was
suppressed, and a Council of the Finances established, of which the Marshall
de Villeroy was declared the Chief. Colbert claimed Admittance into that
Council, not only as Intendant, but also by Virtue of his Office of
Comptroller General, which he enjoyed alone, though it was formerly divided
between Bretenil and Marin* and the other three Intendants, with the two
Directors of the Finances, d' Aligre and Morangis, were also admitted into the
Council. Though Colbert had not the Name of Superintendant, he had all the
Power and Authority that ever was enjoyed by Fouquet, only with this
difference, that all his Orders were presented to the King for his Approbation.

They left off discharging the old Exchequer-Tickets, which passed Current in
Trade, at the Rate of the Tenth Penny, because the Farmers gave them in part of
Payment for their Taxes, after the full Pardon that was granted them on
Condition of discharging the Tickets by an Edict published in December, 1665,
and verified by the Parliament on the 21st, of the same Month; after which the
Price of these Tickets fell so low, that one of a hundred thousand Livres has
been sold for fifty Pistols. Colbert took that occasion to buy up a great
number of 'em, and by recovering their full Value, made himself Master of those
immense Sums, with which he purchased the Marquisates of Seignelay, and
Blainville, and the Baronies of Monetau, Chesny, Beaumont, and Sceaux, with
several other considerable Estates.

The new Rents which yielded excessive Incomes were suppressed, and the
Proprietors ordained to deliver up their Contracts to be discussed, to de Seve
Counselor of State, commissioned by the King for that Effect. The
Reimbursement was intended for the Payment of the Taxes of those that were
accountable, their Heirs, Deputies, and Partners: and for those who had never
been concerned with the King's Affairs, the Possession was laid upon the actual
Payment of the Finance, by which means the Proprietors recovered very little.
Nor was this all, for even those were taxed who in their Treaties had
transferred Reimbursements of Rents or other Rights and Duties held of the
King. And there was a particular Office erected in the House of Pussort,
Colbert's Uncle, for re-purchas'd Rents, in pursuance of an Edict dated January
1665, and verified or approved on the 14th of the same Month.

The Suppression of the Rents procured a great Number of Enemies to Colbert:
and even one day going to visit Chancellor Seguier, he was besieged in the
Court by the Tenants who held the Rents, some of whom had the Confidence to
threaten him. He seemed to hear their Reasons, but his Design was to learn the
Names of the Mutiniers: and at night he informed the King of what had happened,
who ordered 'em to be apprehended. He thought the Imprisonment of those who
were most forward, would have imposed Silence on the rest; but he was deceived,
for some one or other appeared every day to fright him. His Deputies, who were
more fearful than he, endeavored to dissuade him from proceeding in that
Affair, but could not prevail. It happened one Night, that Picon, his chief
Deputy, who had the Misfortune to love Wine too much, started out of his Sleep,
imagining that the Tenants held him by the Throat. The Noise he made alarmed
the whole House, and Colbert among the rest, who being informed of the Occasion
of the Disturbance, turned away the poor Drunkard next Morning; though, at the
Desire of some Persons whom he could not deny, and on the Assurance they gave
him that the Man was reformed, he received him again some Years after, and kept
him till his Death.

'Twas not thought sufficient to take the Reimbursements for the Payment of the
Taxations; but the Offices, Lands, Houses, and other immovable Goods belonging
to the Three Treasurers of the Exchequer, the two Monerots, Languet and Bansse
were seized and adjudg'd to the King's Use. Several Courtiers made advantage of
these Spoils: The House of Sevre de Monerot the Elder was given to the Duke of
Orleans, to be united to his Park at S. Cloud; his House at Paris to the Duke
of Luxemburg; and Monerot the Younger's House was bestowed on the Marshall de
Gramont. They did not content themselves with seizing the Estates of the actual
Possessours; but the same Judgment was awarded against Children, even though
they had renounced their Fathers Inheritance; and against Purchasers, who had
paid the Price of the Estates in Ready Money; nor could they prevent their
Ruin, by sheltering themselves under the Authority of the Decree, which clears
all Mortgages, and takes away all Encumbrances. The Sons-in-law of those who
had been concerned in these Affairs, not only lost all the Immovable or Real
Estates they had received in Dowry with their Wives, but were forced to pay the
Taxations that were imposed on their Fathers-in law, without the least Regard
to their Dignities; for Soldiers were quartered in the Houses of So called from
a certain Cap they usually wear.
Presidents a Mortier, merely because they had married the Daughters of
Farmers. Thus it is plain, that these Persons could no longer be called the
King's Tutors, who attempted to usurp the Sovereign Authority during the King's
Minority. The Offices of the Treasurers of the Exchequer were suppressed; and
Bartillac, who had been Treasurer to the Queen Mother, was made Keeper of the
Royal Treasure. These violent Proceedings interrupted the Trade of the Kingdom,
without bringing any considerable Sums into the King's Coffers, by reason of
the great Charge which the Prosecution of the Design required: and therefore
Colbert perceiving that he had made himself the Object of the public Hatred,
agreed with Twelve of the richest Farmers, who undertook the Affair on
Condition that they should be exempted from the Payment of their own Taxes;
like Soldiers, who save themselves from the Gallows by performing the Office of
Executioner upon their Companions. But in the midst of all those Troubles, the
Family of Launay Grave remained free from all manner of Prosecutions: and
Colbert, who still retained a Kindness for the Marchioness of Pienes, procured
all her Reimbursements to be given her; a Favor which she owed to his
delightful Remembrance of his old Amors.

Hitherto I have showed Colbert on the most disadvantageous side, but now I
must turn the Reverse of the Medal. France is obliged to this Minister for the
Establishment of her Trade with the East and West Indies: he considered that
the Dutch, who inhabit a barren Country void of all Conveniences, owe their
Power and Riches to their Trade; from whence he concluded, that the King, who
possessed in his own Dominions all that his Neighbors wanted, had a much
fairer Prospect of Success in such an Undertaking. He formed and brought
together two Companies, one for the East, and another for the West Indies, and
the King declared himself Protector of both, granting 'em great Privileges, and
obliging himself by Contract, to lend 'em Six Millions, without Interest. And
besides, to increase the Fund, his Majesty engaged the Judges and Merchants in
the same Design, who were taxed proportionably to their Estates. These
Companies have since settled Factories in the Principal Cities of the Indies,
and the King of Siam, who is one of the most powerful Princes of Asia, sent
Ambassadors to his Majesty in the Year 1686.

On the 8th of January, 1664. Colbert bought of Ratabon the Office of
Superintendant of the Buildings, and from that time forward applied himself
with so much Industry and Success to the Enlargement and Embellishment of the
Royal Houses, that they are at present so many Masterpieces of Architecture.
He began with the Palace of the Tuilleries, to which he joined the Garden that
was separated from it by the Street. He ordered a large Parterre or
Flower-Garden to be made before the Building, with three Basins, disposed after
the manner of a Triangle. By his Directions the Bird-house, Mademoiselle de
Guise's Lodgings, and all the other Houses as far as the Gate of Conference,
were beaten down, to make room for the Terrass that runs along the River, as
there is another opposite to this, toward the Manage of the Great Stables. A
large Alley was planted there with Indian Chesnut-Trees, with two small ones on
each side, reaching to Renard's Garden, which was taken in within the Enclosure
of the Tuilleries, where the Terrass is cut through the Middle, to leave the
Prospect of the This name is given to public places of Resort, (such as
Hide-Park) where Persons of Quality take the Air.
Course unobstructed, with a Passage to ascend thither on both sides, and a
large Basin or Vase of a Fountain in the midst of the Garden, that takes up the
greatest Part of it. On the right hand a Theater was erected on a Grass-plot,
for the Representation of Comedies, separated by a kind of Parterre, from an
Amphitheatre, which is capable of containing above a thousand Persons, who may
from thence conveniently behold the Shows that are presented on the Theater.
'Twould be an endless Labor to describe all the Curiosities that are to be
seen in the Tuilleries; such as the Labyrinth, the Orange-house, and the Marble
Statue that represents Time, treading on Envy and Falsehood.

In the Year 1665. Colbert sent to Rome for Cavalier Bernin, to frame the
Design of the Louvre, and procured him a Pension of two thousand Crowns. That
Illustrious Italian, whose excellent Skill extended equally to Sculpture and
Architecture, made the Bust or Half-Statue of the King, that adorns his
Majesty's Cabinet. That admirable Piece not only represents all the Features of
that great Monarch to the Life, but discovers that stately Mien which makes his
Enemies tremble at the Head of his Armies, without losing the least Grace of
that mild and sweet Air which charms his Subjects: And besides it seems to
express that vast and piercing Judgment which was never guilty of an Oversight,
and that Piety which excites him to leave nothing unattempted for the Defense
of Religion.

The same Minister repaired the Royal Houses of S. Germain en Lay,
Fontainbleau and Chambord. He caused four additional Buildings to be joined to
the first, which make that House a great deal more convenient than 'twas
formerly: and he made use of Sir S. Moreland an English Mathematician, to
embellish it with Water-Spouts of so extraordinary a height, that the chief of
'em is above 30. foot higher than the Dome that contains the Bell. As for
Versailles it may be said that he raised it from the ground, as it were by
Enchantment: 'Twas formerly a Dog-kennel, where Lewis XIII. kept his
Hunting-furniture; and at present it is a Palace worthy of the great Monarch
that lives in it. A long Avenue of four Rows of Trees leads to it, on the right
hand of which is the Castle of Clagny, which his Majesty built for the
Marchioness of Montespan.

It Is seated near the ancient Barony of Clagny, at the side of a little and
very old Building, the Beauty of which engaged the King in this vast and
chargeable Design. The Situation of this Castle is almost the same with that of
Versailles; the Body of the Building has no separate Parts, but consists of a
single Piece, with two double turning Wings, under which there are two other
single oblique Wings on the Forefront. The Court is 30. The Toise commonly
contains six Feet.
Toises broad, and 32. deep, without reckoning a Half Moon which encloses it
before, and increases its Largeness. You ascend to the lower Story by five
square Steps, which raise the Story between four and five Foot high. Here there
is a large Gallery 35. Toises long, and 25. Foot broad, composed of three
Halls, somewhat broader than the Spaces left between 'em. The History of Aeneas
is described in several Pictures on the Vault, and above the Cornice that
supports the Frames, there are some Complications of Figures in Basso relievo,
representing several Deities, the Elements, Seasons, and Parts of the Earth,
with their respective Qualities. The Vault of the great Hall in the middle,
which is higher than the rest, is born by four Tromps: At the End of the
Gallery you descend some Steps to an Orange-House paved with Marble, 24. Toises
long, and 25. broad. The Chapel is at the other Corner on the right hand; its
Ground-plot is round, and 30. Foot in Diameter. The great Staircase is in the
right wing at the Entry; it is of an unusual Structure, and the Stones are very
ingeniously disposed: it leads to a Porch joined to the great Hall that
separates two Apartments contiguous to two smaller ones; from whence in
Tribunes or railed Places, Mass may be heard in the Chapel. Mansard was the
Designer and Architect of this Building. The great Pavilion or Apartment in the
Middle, is covered with a Dome; the Ground-plot is square, and the rest of the
Castle is covered with parted Roofs or Timber-work, after the Fashion
introduced by Mansard.

The principal Ornaments of the Garden are a Wood of high Trees, several
Parterres interwoven with Box into various Figures, Bowling-Greens of several
Figures, Groves and Arbors of Lattice-Work embellished with Architecture. There
are also very fair Hedge-Rows of Myrtles, which are full enough to contain
Chests full of Orange Trees, and other Shrubs, which seem to grow out of the
Hedge-Rows, for the Chests are not seen. The Pond called de Clagny serves also
for a Canal in sight of the Castle. The Ornaments with which Colbert beautified
this House, are not at all comparable to those with which he embellished
Versailles.

The great Avenue terminates in a spacious Plot of Ground that contains 180.
Toises in Front, and two other Avenues, which end in the same Place, form a
kind of Figure resembling a Goose's Foot. Here are the Great and Little
Stables, where all the Officers have their Lodgings, and these Buildings are
separated from the Castle by the abovementioned void Place.

Each of the Stables consists of five Courts, the greatest of which is
narrowest at the bottom, being only enclosed before by a Rail 32. Toises in
Length, and the Pavilions or additional Buildings of 9. Toises, which flank the
Wings that are 37. Toises long, and return toward the Bottom of the Court,
ending in a Half Moon made by two Arches of a Circle, which join a large outer
Building in which is the Principal Gate. The two middle Courts are surrounded
with Buildings 20 Toises long, and 12. broad. On each side without is a little
Court for the Dung-hills, containing 20. Toises in Length, and 9. in Breadth,
enclosed before by a Partition Wall equal in Height to the first Story. These
Buildings are contrived so low, as not to obstruct the Sight of the Castle; for
the Level of the Tops answers within a little to the Marble Pavement of the
little Court. From the great Arch at the Bottom of the little Court, and in the
Middle of the outward Court, you enter into a large covered Manage 20 Toises
long, and 8 broad, at the sides of which are two Stables. Behind the Stable
there is a great Manage for Justs and Tournaments, before which is the
Dog-Kennel.

As for the little Stables, the Coach-Houses are under the Arches of the
Half Moon, at the Bottom of the Court: From the Gate of the Front-Building you
enter into the largest Stable between two Ranks of Horses, 25. in each; and at
the End there is a large Cop or Spherical Vault, containing 12. Toises in
Diameter, which separates the two other Stables. There is an Entrance into the
Dog-Kennel on each side, where there is a Garden railed in with Balisters, that
takes up all the Front of the Building. This Structure is composed of a Story
next the Ground, and another above that, without any apparent Roof. The great
Court is oblique, and the Passage to it lies through two other smaller Courts. A
Drawbridge leads into a large outward Court, more long than broad, surrounded
with Iron Rails, with two Apartments one on each side, to which you ascend by
two Stair-Cases of Brick very large and uncovered. Here the Cooks, the Officers
of the Buttery, Pantry, Fruitery, and several other of his Majesty's Servants
have their Lodgings. At the other End of the outward Court are two great Arched
Gates, one on each side, which open into the Town overagainst the Church and
Marketplace. From this Court you pass into another square Court, paved with
black and white Marble, with Fillets of another sort of white and red Marble:
in the Midst of this Court there is a Vase of white Marble, with a Groupe or
Complication of Figures of Brass, gilt. The Building consists of two Sides, and
two Wings, which look into the Garden: The Chapel is on the right hand toward
the King's Apartment, and all the Ministers are lodged below, on the two Sides.

The Staircase that leads to the King's Apartment is a Masterpiece of
Architecture. It Is 11. Toises long, and 5. broad, comprehending the lower
Steps, and those between the Stories or Resting-places. Three Arches in Front
open an Entry into a Porch 39 Foot broad and 13 deep, which below is adorned
with Compartments of Marble. On the upper part of the Stair and the Vault,
there are Ornaments and Trophies in Basso relievo; from hence you ascend by
three Steps, and three opposite Arches, to the first Landing-place or broad
Step, containing 15 Foot in Breadth, which is likewise overcast with
Compartments of Marble. Facing these Arches, there is a Staircase in Pannels
of eleven Steps of Marble: The broad, or Resting Place above is of eleven Steps
square. In the Thickness of the Wall there is a flat Nich, and in it a Marble
Vase supported by two Dolphins of Brass: two Tritons which are above bear a
double Scallop or Shell of Marble, adorned with a Head spouting Water into a
Panier or Basket full of Shells, which forms a Nape that falls into the Marble
Vase, and runs through another Head, and through the two Dolphins. The whole is of
Brass.

The Spaces between the Stories or Landing-places, are ten Foot broad, and
consist each of twenty Marble Steps. The Buttresses are of the same Matter,
supported by Balisters of Brass, cut into Flowers and gilt. The two
Resting-places are also overlaid with Compartments of Marble, and ten Foot
broad; on each of which are four Doors richly adorned with Sculpture, that lead
into the Apartments. On the same Resting-places there are Marble Columns and
Pilasters of the Ionic Order, with Bases and Chapitres of Brass, gilt. The Bust
of the King is placed against the Wall, and accompanied with several Ornaments
of the same Matter.

The four massive or solid Places at the sides of the four Doors of the
Apartments, between the Pilasters, are full of Ornaments and Figures on a
Ground of Gold, resembling Tapestry. In the four middle Spaces there are
several Pictures representing his Majesty's Conquests. In the Intervals between
the Massives and middle Spaces there are Galleries on each side of the same
Ionic Order, and after the same Model, Pillars on which are represented Persons
of several Nations, as if they were going into the Galleries. There are also
Galleries above the first Cornish, and two more in the length of the Faces
supported by Terms. On the Angles and at the End are large Sterns of Ships,
bearing four Trophies of Arms like to those of the four Parts of the World.
These Sterns are supported with Brackets in the Form of arched Buttresses,
fortified with Horns of Plenty, and Scallops of Brass, at the Sides of which
are Captives in Sculpture, and underneath Victory.

The Cieling is adorned with octangular Basso Relievo's full of Figures
suitable to the Subject; and the antique Pieces are covered with large
Curtains, the strings of which are held by Terms. In this Staircase they have
also found room to place all the Muses, the Arts of Painting and Sculpture,
Captives, the four parts of the World with their several Properties, all the
Kings Actions, Poesy, History, Fame, and Mercury. All these Ornaments
represent a Festival solemnized by the Deities of Parnassus, who are met
together to receive the King at his return from the War. It Is supposed that the
Painting is the Work of Genius's who appear in the Air adorning the Vault and
all the rest of this magnificent place with Festoons. His Majesty is placed in
the middle, to denote that the Festival is kept for him: and the People of all
Nations who seem to pass into the Galleries, being variously habited according
to the fashion of their several Countries, take a view of all these Wonders,
according to their respective Characters in their passage to see that great
Prince whose Reputation has charmed 'em. All the Pictures are by the hand of Le
Brun, and the Design of the Staircase by Mansard.

The Great Hall leads into the Gallery which is 40 Toises long, and 36 Foot
broad: here the History of the King is painted from the Peace of the Pyrenees
to that of Nimeghen, where all his Majesty's Actions are represented under
Allegorical Figures, by the hand of Le Brun. Eight Niches in the Gallery
contain the Antique Figures of Apollo, Venus of Savona, Diana of Ephesus, Venus
of Arles, Bacchus, Sleep, and two Senators. The three first were repaired by
Girardin, who also fitted Draperies of Brass gilt after the manner of Busts, to
twelve Heads of Porphyry that represent the Twelve Caesar's, and to four others
of Touchstone or Jett, which are the Heads of Illustrious Men. Colbert took
care not only of the Building of this Gallery, but of all its Ornaments and
Furniture; as Vessels, Boxes of Orange Trees, Cisterns, Rows of Stands for
Tapers, Silver Stands garnished with Branches and Candle-sticks of the same
Metal, Vessels of Porphyry placed above and under Tables full of precious
Stones, which are multiplied by the Glasses that surround the Place. And he
caused all those Pieces of Silver-Work to be wrought and carved with
inconceivable Care and Exactness.

From this Gallery, the Way to the King's Apartment, lies through the Hall of
Mars, which is full of Pictures, representing Battles and Sieges of Towns under
Allegorical Figures. The Apartment contains a long Row of Pieces, and in the
first Place the Throne, which is Silver, and eight Foot high. The Seat and Back
are supported by Children carrying Baskets of Flowers: and on the highest Part
of the Seat which forms the Back, stands Apollo holding his Lyre, and crowned
with Laurel. On each side are Justice and Strength sitting, and below two
Silver Stools with Cushions: at the two Angles are Stands for Tapers eight Foot
high; and four branched Candle-sticks supported by Silver Stands six Foot high
adorn the four Corners of the Room. The next Chamber is that of Mercury, then
those of Mars and Diana, and the Halls of Venus and Abundance. The last leads
into the Cabinet of Knacks or little Curiosities, so called because it is full
of 'em: it is of an octangular Figure, with Niches in the Angles; the Vault is
framed Dome-wise, and the Light is in the Middle. All the Work in this Cabinet
is of Sculpture, of which a great part is of Brass gilt: it is surrounded with
Glasses, and there are Degrees in the Niches before the Glasses. The rest of
the Cabinet is full of Brackets, which as well as the degrees in the Niches are
full of Curiosities; as Agats of all sorts, and framed into a thousand
different Figures; Crystals of great value for the Fashion in which they are
cut; little antique Figures of Brass, Figures of Gold covered with Jewels, and
a great number of curious works and precious Stones of several Figures. There
is a very fine Ship of Gold (for a device to cover the King's Meat) on the
Chimney, and a large and rich Chest of Drawers in the Middle, full of an
infinite number of ancient and modern Medals. There is also a Table eight Foot
and a half long, and two and a half broad; the Ground is of White Marble, on
which there is a Map of France, composed of inlaid Pieces of Marble, according
to the exactest and latest Astronomical Observations. Each Province is
distinguished by a Piece of Marble of a peculiar Color, and cut exactly
according to the irregular Figure, which the Frontiers of the Provinces make by
entering into one another. The Names of the Provinces are marked in Capital
Letters of Gold, and those of the Principal Towns in Italick Characters. The
most contrary Colors are placed next each other, to heighten their Luster:
thus the Isle of France is of a clear blue, Champaigne of red Porphyry,
Orleanois of Opal, and Beauce of a Fueille-mort Color. But the Curiousness of
the Workman appears particularly in the Intersections which the Earth makes
with the Sea, where all the Capes and Bays are observed with an unconceivable
Exactness; and in the Lakes and Rivers that are preserved out of the Ground of
the Table, notwithstanding the Smallness of the Lines which frequently exceed
not the breadth of a Thread near the beginning of the Rivers, and their winding
Course. In the Space of white Marble that denotes the Mediterranean, there is a
Mariner's Compass of different Pieces of Marble curiously wrought; and in the
other Space that stands for the Ocean, there are two Cartridges, in one of
which is written Carte de la France, with those words borrowed from Virgil,
which make a kind of Devise of which France is the Body: Has tibi exerit Arts:
The other Cartridge contains the Name of the Person who gave this Map to the
King. The Ocean is bounded on the North with the nearest Parts of the Coast of
England. The Border is composed of two Fillets of blue Marble (one of which is
accompanied with a Moulding or Edging) and one of black marked with the Degrees
of Longitude and Latitude by little oblong Squares of white Marble, preserved
out of the Ground of the Table.

Above the King's Apartment is that called the Marble Apartment, which is
furnished with Ornaments, and embellished with several Columns all of precious
Marble. At the End of this is the Cabinet of Baths, where nothing appears but
Gold, Marble, and very fine Pictures, with all the Ornaments and Conveniences
suitable to such a Place. The Dauphin's Apartment is on the left hand, opposite
to the King's, and composed of a like number of Chambers, which are all lined
and overcast with the same sorts of Marble, but variously joined and inlaid.
The Cabinet of Knacks, or little Curiosities, that belongs to this Apartment,
contains three Rooms and a Half-Room, and the Floor is inlaid. The Painting of
the Cieling is by Mignard; and there is such a prodigious number of Rarities in
this Place, that the astonished Spectatour can hardly forbear concluding, that
all the Kingdoms of the East were drained to adorn it. The Porch that fronts
the Middle of the little Court, leads into the Park; and passing under vaulted
Galleries you come to the great Terrass at the Entry of the Garden. And here it
was that Colbert displayed and even exhausted all the most pleasant and
magnificent Productions both of Nature and Art.

The vast Extent of this stately Edifice comprehending the Front and returning
Wing on that side alone which faces the Garden, contains above three hundred
Toises, and more than four hundred and twenty large crossbarr'd Windows, twenty
outer Buildings, with Columns surmounted with Figures, and over these, Trophies
intermixed with Vessels placed along the Balisters that surround the whole
Structure. The Figures that adorn the side which faces the Garden, are Apollo
and Diana, the four Seasons, and twelve Months of the Year; along the Gallery
there are twelve Figures of Rivers, and Nymphs of Fountains; the Nymph Echo,
Narcissus, Thetis, and Galataea, with Hebe and Ganymede in two Niches: on the
Front of the King's great Apartment, on that side where the Grotto was
formerly, which faces the Northern Parterre, are Pomona, Vertumnus, one of the
Nymphs Hesperides, the Nymph Amalthaea, Thalia, Momus, Terpsichore, Pan, Flora,
Zephyrus, Hyacinthus, Clitia, and (in two Niches) Music and Dancing. These
Figures are on the Wing that belongs to the Dauphin: and that called the
Prince's Wing is adorned with Deities and the Virtues, which are very numerous
by reason of the Length of that Wing, over against which there is another built
since the Death of Colbert.

The first Piece that salutes those who descend from the Terrass, is the Vase
of Latona, in the midst of which that Goddess is represented with her Children
Apollo and Diana: the Peasants metamorphos'd into Frogs are to be seen in
several Parts of the Vase, and the Borders of it are adorned with several
Figures of those Animals. In the Northern Parterre before the Terrass are two
Vases with Tritons and Sirens supporting rich Crowns, and spouting Water; and
at the End of it there is a long Alley that leads to the Canal, fenced on both
sides with Hedge-Rows, along which there are several Figures representing the
four Seasons, four Parts of the World, four Ages, four kinds of Poesy, four
Parts of Day and Night, and the four Elements. All these Figures were designed
by le Brun, and made after his Models.

There is another Alley, called the Water, or Cascade-Alley; in the middle of
which there is another formed by two Ranks of complicated Figures, representing
Cupids, young Boys and Girls, little Tritons, and Terms, which are half-body'd
Figures, without Arms: Some of these carry on their Heads great Shells, in form
of Basins, filled with Coral. and various kinds of Shells; and others bear
Baskets full of Flowers, and several sorts of Fruit. The Water that flows out
of these Baskets and Basins in form of a Nape or Table-Cloath, gave this Walk
the Name by which it is usually known. At the end of this Alley, you enter into
that of the Pyramide; the Fountain (so called) is composed of four Basins of
white Marble, one above another, and decreasing gradually, according to their
height. The first contains twelve Feet in Diameter, and a Top or Cover of one
Piece of Marble, being supported by four Tritons greater than the Life; and the
rest differ only in the bigness of the Figures and Vessels. The whole Work is
of white Marble, saving only the Pedestals, which are of colored Marble: The
Figures and Ornaments are of Brass; and altogether make a Water-work resembling
a Table-cloth, through which the Figures appear. The Water is received below in a
great square Basin, adorned with a Basso-relievo of eight or ten Nymphs bathing
themselves, who may be seen through the Water that covers 'em in the form of a
Table-cloth: And besides, there are other Basso-relievo's, representing Rivers,
Nymphs, and Children, all as big as the Life, and made by Girardon.

On both sides of the Great Alley there are Groves, enclosed with Lattice-Work,
which are distinguished by peculiar Names. The first that appears on the
Right Hand is the Triumphal-Arch, so called from the representation of one at
the bottom: It contains three Portico's, with seven Basins above 'em, out of
which arise as many Water-spouts that fall back into the same Basins, and from
thence into several others on both sides, forming diverse Napes, or Figures of a
Tablecloth: And in the midst of the Portico's three Water-Spouts arise out of
high Basins, and make the same sort of Waterworks. You ascend to the Portico's
by several Steps, which are also full of Water-Spouts that fall into a great
Basin below. On both sides of the Triumphal-Arch there are two Obelisks between
as many Scabelons or Pedestals fram^d like Stools, on which there are Basins
that spout forth Water. Returning from thence, you meet with two high Pyramids,
consisting of several Steps or Degrees, and throwing up Water in a square
Figure, which is divided into several Spouts. On both sides of these Pyramids
are two other Pedestals or Stools, with Basins and Water-Spouts: And besides,
there are two Obelisks, one on each side, between two Scabelons, with
Ornaments, Basins, and Water-Spouts, like the first.

The Fourth Front which faces the Triumphal-Arch is beautified with a great
number of Ornaments, though part of it is taken up with the Entrance into that
place: For on both sides there are Pedestals, with Basins, Cascades, and
Figures representing the Triumphs of France; and the part that remains empty is
filled with Water, which mounting up into those void Spaces, makes 'em appear
like so many Works of Crystal, enriched with many Ornaments, where Gold is not
spared. The whole was designed by le Nostre, Intendant of the Garden of the
Tuilleries.

In your passage from the Triumphal-Arch to the Theater of Water, you meet, in
the first place, with the Fountain of the Dragon, in the midst of which there
is a Dragon of Brass, that spouts Water from several parts of his Body; and
then with the Basin of Neptune, in which the Figure of that Deity is placed,
with all its Attributes or Properties. The Theater of Water derives its Name
from the various Figures represented by the Water-Spouts, of which it is full.
First you perceive three Alleys of Water, in form of a Goose-Paw, bordered with
a Trellis; they are on a rising Ground, and higher than the part where you
stand to view 'em. The middle Alley is divided on each side from the other two,
by a hollow place enclosed, and surrounded with a Trellis; and before these
Enclosures, there are two Basins containing other smaller and higher Basins,
disposed in such a manner, that the Water-Spouts which rise up from 'em, fall
down again, and filling all the Basins, makes Napes of Water all around. There
are like Works beyond the other two Alleys, so that each Alley has some of 'em
on both sides. The middle Alley is higher than the rest, containing Cascades
that make fourteen or fifteen Napes of Water one above another: And both the
Cascades and Waterworks are formed by a great number of Water-Spouts, which
running in five Rows along the whole Alley, divide it into six little Alleys.
At the end of it is a large Basin, which takes up the whole Front of the
Cascades, and receives their Water; and below that another Basin filled by six
great Water-Spouts. The other two Alleys have each two Rows of Water-Spouts,
which divide 'em into three Parts, or small Alleys. They are in a Basin which
is continued from one end of the Alleys to the other: And since their Situation
is sloping, by stopping the Course of the Water in several places, there are
Waterworks in form of a Table-Cloth, and Cascades formed along the Alleys that
accompany those of the middle Alley. Between the Trellises and the Water-Spouts
of all the Three Alleys, there are six Rows of small Trees, variously cut, and
representing several Figures: And since the Design of the Contrivers was to
imitate the Embellishments of Theaters; these Water-Spouts undergo five several
Changes; for they mount up straight at first, afterward they bend into crooked
Figures, and form Arbors on the Inside, and then behind, and at last they form
Circles before, which changing on a sudden, appear behind.

The Marsh of Water is an oblong Square, eight Toises broad, and twelve long:
In the middle there is a great Oak-Tree, encompassed with the Representations
of all the usual Productions of Fenny-Grounds; and the Banks are full of Reeds,
among which there are Swans in the Corners. All the Branches of the Oak, the
Herbs that surround it, with the Reeds and Swans casting forth Water together,
give the Spectator the pleasure of seeing a Million of Water-Spouts at the same
time, some higher, and others lower, which form as it were a Field of Water,
and washing the Plants, make their greenness appear more natural. About the
midst of the two Wings of the Marish, in two hollow places, there are two
Marble Tables raised on some Steps, and adorned with all the Furniture of a
Cupboard: But since the greatest part of these Ornaments have only Circles, or
other Pieces gilt, the use of 'em does not appear, 'till the Water begins to
play. The Situation of this Grove is low, and the rising Grounds that surround
it are adorned with Vessels of Porcelain, on several sorts of Pedestals before
the Trellises, which make a very fine and Pleasant sight.

In the same part of the Garden there are two Basins which are not enclosed;
one is called the Fountain of Ceres, and the other has its Name from Flora.
These Basins, with those of Bacchus and Saturn, which are on the other side,
are called the Fountains of the Four Seasons. Ceres with her Sickle appears in
the midst of a Hexagonal Basin, surrounded with Ears of Corn gilt. Flora is in
a leaning Posture, environed with eight large Water-Spouts, and several other
small ones, in form of a Heron's Tuft.

The Grove of the Mountain of Water, or of the Star, takes its Name from the
Five Walks that represent a Star, meeting near the principal Fountain. The
Water-Spouts that issue out of the Rock on both sides of the Alleys, fall into
a little Ditch in form of a Shower, in the midst of which is the principal
Fountain surrounded with a Trellis, adorned with Architecture and Pilasters:
And about it there are hollow parts, enclosed after the manner of Portico's,
and containing Barriers that keep the same Figure. The Top of the Trellises is
adorned with Vessels of several Figures, full of Flowers and green Herbs. The
Water-Spouts of the chief Basin are unequal, and form a kind of Mountain of
Water, from the top of which issues a large Water-Spout.

At the two ends of the Grove of Apollo's Baths, there are two square
Pavilions, equally rich and handsome, invented by Mansard, each of 'em
containing eight Pannels, between fourteen and fifteen Foot broad, and twenty
foot high. They are of white Marble, each being adorned with eight Columns of
colored Marble, and Pilasters cut out of the white Marble. The Ascents of the
little Pannels or Pieces in the Corners are full of Trophies of Brass,
representing the Arms used by several Nations: And there are also like Trophies
on the outside, between the Pilasters. The Domes are enriched with several
Metallic Ornaments, and end in a Vessel. Over Against the Entry of the Grove,
in the midst of the two sides, are the fine Marble Figures, made by Girardon,
representing the Sun with Thetis, and her Nymphs washing his Feet, pouring
Water upon him, and wiping him: And in the hollow parts of the sides, there are
complicated Figures of Tritons holding Apollo's Horses. This Grove is
surrounded with a Terrass, adorned with Balisters of Brass gilt: And the Arms
used in Battle by all the Nations of Europe are represented in eighty two
Basso-relievo's about the Terrass. In the middle of the Spot of Ground
environed by the Terrass, there is an octangular Basin, surrounded with
Balisters of Brass gilt, of a different Design from those of the Terrass: And
every one of the Pedestals that are scattered up and down in this Place, spouts
out Water, which makes a little Ditch about the Balisters, from whence the
Water spreading it is self, forms a Nape. There are also four large Pedestals
adorned with Marble Figures: On the first is the Break of Day, represented by a
young Man holding a Flambeau, with Clouds at his Feet, an Owl flying away, and
Zephyrus blowing. The Morning is on the Second, strewing Flowers, and alighting
from her Chariot: On the Third Arion is represented, invoking the Gods, and
mounted on a Dolphin: And on the Fourth Leucothoe, receiving Offerings from the
Mariners.

In the midst of a Grove, adorned with Trellis-Work, there is a large Basin,
containing Enceladus almost buried under the Rocks he had pil'd up to scale
Heaven. That which appears of him is four times bigger than the Life: He casts
out of his Mouth a Water-Spout twenty four Foot high, and bigger than a Man's
Arm; and an infinite number of smaller Streams gush forth among the Stones that
over-whelm him. Besides these, several large Water-Spouts arise out of twelve
Heaps of Stones that lie at some distance from the Giant, surrounding the Basin
and Arbors of Trellis-Work: And on a sloping Grass-Plot, there are diverse
little Basins of pieces of Rocks, in each of which there is a Water-Spout.

The Hall of Feasts, or of the Council, is more long than broad; it has a
Grass-Plot in the middle, surrounded with Gravel-Walks, at the four Corners of
which are round Basins, jutting out over a Ditch full of Water that environs
this Place. The Figure of the Borders of the Ditch is odd but pleasant; for it
comprehends in its Circumference above thirty Angles, stretching outward, and
as many bending inwards. Over Against the midst of each side, there is a Basin
without the Ditch, so that the Hall seems encompassed with Basins,
comprehending also those in the Corners: And besides the Water-Spouts in the
Basins, the Ditch is full of 'em. Every Spout both in the Ditch and Basins,
proceeds from a Combination of gilt Figures of Children in various Postures.
The Draw-Bridges by which you enter into the Hall, are removed, and drawn
underground by a sort of Spring, so that you may be imprisoned in it.

Between this Grove and the Colomnade, you meet on the outside with the
Fountains of Saturn and Bacchus, opposite to those of Ceres and Flora. Saturn
is in a round Basin, accompanied with several Children, carrying the old Man's
Properties, which cast forth many Water-Spouts. He holds a Stone presented to
him by his Wife, who makes him believe she was brought to Bed of it: This Basin
represents Winter. That of Bacchus, which denotes Autumn, is of an octangular
Figure, where that Deity appears, accompanied with several Satyrs, and
surrounded with all his Attributes; and all together cast forth several
Water-Spouts. Besides, there are four other Satyrs at an equal distance from
him; and every one of 'em spouts out Water.

The Colomnade (or Range of Pillars) is in the Place where the Springs were
formerly, on an Ascent which at present makes a part of that Grove. The
Enclosure is an exact Square, twenty one Toises and a half in Diameter,
environed with thirty two Columns of several kinds of Marble, of the Ionic
Order, twenty Inches about, and fourteen Foot high, comprehending the Attic
Bases, and the quadrangular Chapiters of white Marble. These Columns are
accompanied with their Pilasters, which stand by themselves, about two
Diameters and a half distant from the Columns behind, they are both crowned
with Entablatures, which are only Cornices architrav'd, turning on each Pillar,
and leaning in form of a Plat-band on the Pilasters. The Columns and Pilasters
are both placed on Marble Socles, somewhat higher than they are broad; and the
first are joined together by Arches, adorned with their Archivoltes, with Heads
in their Keys, representing the Rural and Marine Deities, as the Nymphs,
Naiads, Dryads, Hamadryads, Sylvans, etc. The whole is crowned with a
Corinthian Cornice, which turning into itself, makes a perfect Circle. Above
the Cornice is a Socle adorned with Gates in Bas-relief; and the Socle turning
round above each Column, bears a Vessel of white Marble, carved, and ending in
a Pineapple. The Triangular Tympans between the Arches are adorned with thirty
two Bas-reliefs of Children, among whom the Sports and Loves are represented.
The whole Machine is placed in a round Basin or Ditch that runs quite round,
and receives the Water that falls in form of a Table-cloth from thirty one
Water-Spouts, in a like number of Basins of white Marble, each placed on a Foot
adorned with three Corbels. The Entrance takes up the place of the thirty
second Basin, which stands before it in a Nich of Trellis-Work, at the meeting
of the two Walks that lead to the place. The Area in the middle is gravelled,
and shut up with five Steps distant about thirteen or fourteen foot from the
side of the Ditch; and that Interval forms another gravelled Walk. The whole
Structure is built of solid white Marble without Incrustation; the Wood that
surrounds it, and the Trellis-Work which adorn the Twigs of the Trees, make an
excellent Ground for the more distinct view of the Architecture; and this piece
which was only designed for Magnificence, is no less admired for the neatness
of the Work, than for the richness of the Matter.

The Water-Gallery is full of Antic Statues, that form its Wings, at the side
of which there are two Rows of Trees, so cut as not to obscure or hide the
Figures. The Statues at the two Ends are not at all bigger than the Life; and
the Trees are succeeded by two Rows of Water-Spouts. At each end of the Gallery
there is a great broad Basin, into which the Water falls back; and the Ends jut
out at the middle. One of the Basins contains three large Water-Spouts, and in
the other a small high-rais'd Basin, that forms a Water-Work in form of a
Table-Cloth.

The Royal Island is a large Canal, in the midst of which there is an Island
eight Foot deep, and one hundred and sixty foot long; and there is another less
Canal at the end of this. In the place called the Branched Candlestick, the
Figure of the Waterworks is exactly suitable to the Name.

The Hall of Balls is Hexagonal; four advanced Stairs of four Steps each, open
a Passage to it, and it is surrounded with a double Ditch full of Water of the
same Figure. The Banks of the Ditches are covered with Shells, and there are
several Vessels of Porcelain round the third Enclosure that encompasses the
Hall. Over Against the four Perrons, or advanced Stairs, there are two
Cascades, and as many Entries: There are also six Benches for Seats, and this
place is covered with a Trellis. Each of the Cascades consists of seventeen
Rows of Basins of Shell-Work, raised with seven Basins one above another; but
five of the Rows are composed of nine Basins. The tops of those that have no
Water-Spouts, are adorned with Vessels of Metal, four of which represent the
Bacchanalia on Sea and Land: These Representations are very suitable to the
designed use of the place; for the Dancing-Figures have so natural an Air, that
it is impossible to look on 'em without feeling some Motions of Joy. Under each
Cascade there are large Taper-Candlesticks for the Convenience of Illuminations
in the Evening, for the Glittering of the Water contributes very much to please
the Eye of the Spectatour. The Sides of the two Entries are adorned with
Hatch'd-Work, and on the top with Vessels.

The last, and one of the greatest of these Groves or little Woods, is the
Labyrinth: it contains thirty eight Fountains, contrived to represent a like
number of Aesop's Fables, and embellished with many Water-Spouts. Every
Fountain has a Basin, in which its proper Fable is represented by Metallic
Figures in Relief, with Characters declaring the Subject. The Ornaments which
resemble those of one of the Arches enclosed in the Hedge-Rows, are
half-cover'd and environed with Leaves and Reeds spouting Water. The greatest
part of 'em are of Tin or some other convenient Matter, as well as the Branches
through which the Water passes; and painted green with so natural a Verdure, that
they seem to be re-really what they represent, till the spurting of the Water
undeceives the Spectatour. The Name of this Place is a sufficient Indication
that it is full of Windings, and variously intermingl'd Walks, which are so
intricate, that those who are engaged in 'em cannot without some difficulty
avoid returning to the same Parts they had already visited.

The Orange-house is one of the finest Ornaments of Versailles: It was designed
by Mansard, and is so large and bold a Structure, that the World cannot produce
a more finished Work of that Kind. On the left hand it is exposed to the South,
and supports the Earth that encloses a large Parterre, which fronts the lateral
Face of the Castle, and that of the great Isle or Wing. This Building consists
of a large Gallery 80. Toises long, accompanied by two others turning inwards
of 60. Toises each: the Breadth of these Galleries on the North-side of the
Wall amounts to 38. Feet, and their Height to the Scutheon or Key, to seven
Toises. The Vault is divided into as many Parts as there are Cross-works by
Branches Ogiv'd or Semi-circular Arches, supported by little Buttresses that
jut out the length of a Foot: and the lateral Galleries communicate with that
at the End or Bottom of the Building, by two round Towers or Segments of a
Circle jutting outward, and of equal Breadth within to that of the Galleries.
On the Side next the great Isle, the Body of the Wall at the inward Angle is
adorned with two large Niches; and in the same place, at the other End, there
are two Arches with advanced Stairs that lead into a Hall or round Porch, which
is the principal Entry into the Orange-house from the Park. Besides those
Niches there is one in the Middle of the main Gallery over against the great
Door; it contains a Statue of the King on Foot of white Marble, which was
presented to his Majesty by the late Duke de la Feuillade, who had caused it to
be made with a Design to erect it in the Place of Victories, in the room of
that which is there at present. These Niches are large enough to contain
complicated Figures of Colosses, such as those of the Baths of Thetis and
Caracalla, where the Statues of Hercules and Flora stood. The largest Gallery
receives Light through thirteen Windows taken out of the Arches: the Inside is
not adorned either with Architecture or Sculpture, as the Rules of that kind of
Building require: its main Beauty consisting in the Artificial Contrivance of
the Vault. The outward Decoration consists only of Bossages of the Height of
one Module, or half the Diameter of the Columns which are of the Tuscan Order,
containing four Feet and two Inches in Diameter, and their Thickness being the
seventh part of their Height. There are but two outward or Front-Buildings, of
which that in the Middle consists of eight Columns coupl'd together, and the
other two of four Columns each: and there are also two Columns at the Royal
Door of the Hall or Entry; being of the same Order, but of a less Diameter.
These Columns are crowned with a regular Entablature, and the Front-Buildings
on the sides are contiguous to that part of the Level of the Terrass which
leans on the Vaults; so that by two large Pair of Stairs, each ten Toises
broad, you may descend to the lower Part of the Orange-house. The Steps are
interrupted by two Landing-Places; and there are low or creeping Arches under
'em to give light to the Vault. All this great Theater encloses a Parterre of
Compartments of Turf adorned with a Basin in the Middle: the Forepart of the
Parterre is railed in with Balisters on a sloping Wall, that makes one of the
Sides of a little Ditch or Canal full of Water; the Counterscarp is much lower
than the Wall, so that those who pass by on the Highway have a full and very
pleasant View of the Building. The principal Entries are equal in Breadth to
the Edges, and adorned with two great Jaums of a Wall, each of which is
beautified with two distinct Tuscan Columns coupl'd together, and crowned as
well as the Columns with a regular Entablature. The North part of the Jaums is
covered above with Bossages like to those of the Orange-house, and under the
Columns is a Socle of a Medley of Figures between the Jaums, and from the
hinder Part of 'em to the Foot of the Stairs. The Space between the Stairs and
the principal Gates is enclosed with an Iron Grate, so that you may go up to
the Parterre above, without entering into the Orange-house. These Grates are
kept firm by Stone Pillars on which are placed Vessels full of Flowers and
Fruits: the Gates are crowned with rich Iron-Work in two Divisions, with the
King's Arms; and all the Ornaments of the Locks are gilded. The Parterre is
divided into six large Squares with Compartments of Turf, separated by Gravel
of the same Height with the Walks: and in the midst of the Squares, next the
middle Gallery, there is a round Basin or Fountain bordered with Turf. In the
Cross-Walk that separates these four Pannels or Squares from the other two,
there is a great Complication of Figures of white Marble on a Pedestal, where
Fame is represented writing the History of the King. In her left hand she holds
his Majesty's Picture in Profile, in an Oval Medal, which she places on a Book
denoting History: She is represented by a great winged Figure, magnificently
apparelled, and seated on Trophies: she tramples on Envy, who tears a Heart,
and with her left hand pulls Fame by the Gown, to hinder her from Writing.
Among the Trophies there are Medals with the Portraictures of the greatest
Princes, such as Alexander, Caesar, and Trajan. This Mass of Figures stands by
it self, and is bounded on all sides, making a very fine and glorious Sight: it
was made at Rome by Dominico Guidi, of the Duchy of Urbin, one of the most
Famous Sculptors in Italy, and Disciple of Alexander Algondy, who was one of
the best Artists of his Age. In this Parterre the Orange Trees are placed, when
the Season of the Year permits.

The Kitchin-Garden is without the Limits of the Park that includes the
Orange-house, being situated on the Side next the great Wing of the Castle and
parallel to the Mall, from which it is separated by a large Basin of Water: it is
a quadrangular Enclosure a hundred and fifty seven Toises long, and a hundred
and thirty four broad, divided into thirty one little Gardens separated from
each other, and enclosed with Walls; which communicating together encompass a
large Garden, containing 100. Toises in Length, and 84. in Breadth, with a
round Fountain or Basin of Water in the Middle, of 20. Toises bordered with
Turf. The King enters into this Place by a Gate, called the Royal Gate in the
Walk parallel to the Mall. The Body of the Edifice almost to the corner of the
Wall of the Enclosure, consists of two Sides or distinct Structures, joined
together by two Galleries one above another, called the Figuerie, which is 25.
Toises long, and the Garden usually known by the Name of Meloniere, or
Melon-Garden, is also very large. All those Gardens are appointed for
Fruit Trees, and so artificially disposed, that each Row of Trees enjoys the
Warmth of the Sun agreebly to their peculiar Natures, some more and others
less, some at one time of the day, and some at another. Every Garden has also
the Convenience of a Fountain to furnish it with Water, and of a Terrass, under
which are vaulted Arbours that serve for Fruit-Houses in Winter. The Pond that
separates the Kitchin-Garden from the Mall, was dug by Switzers, from whom it
took the Name that still it bears: it is very large and ought rather to be
called a Lake or great Pond, than a Fountain or Basin of Water.

Colbert did not content himself with embellishing this Garden with all the
Curiosities that Europe could furnish; he took care also to replenish the
Menagerie or Vivarium with the rarest Animals that were to be found in the Four
Parts of the World. The great Canal leads to that Rural House on one side, and
to Trianon on the other: and though the former is designed only as a Lodge for
Animals, as its Name imports, it has the stately Aspect of a magnificent
Palace, and presents a lovely Prospect of four Pavilions and a Dome to the Eyes
of the Beholder. The Passage to it lies through a large Avenue or Walk of Trees,
and in the first Place brings you to a Court enclosed with Iron-Rails, from
whence you enter into another, at the opposite End of which there is an
octangular Dome, that forms a Hall of the same Figure, whither you ascend by a
few Steps to an Entry that leads into the Hall that is surrounded with several
Chambers. Beneath these there is a Grotto with a wheeling Water-Spout in the
Middle that besprinkles the whole Grotto; and the Floor is full of little
Holes, from whence there arises a Shower of Water. The Hall is environed with
an octogonal Court, surrounded with Iron Rails, in which you meet with seven
Iron Doors at a convenient distance from each other, that open into a like
number of Courts, some of which are appointed for Stables, some for
Sheep-Houses, and others contain Stalls for several sorts of Animals. In one of
these Courts there is a very fine Bird-House, for those Birds that must be kept
in Cages or Coops; and a Fish Pond in another for the use of Pelicans, and
several other sorts of Fowl that feed on Fishes. On the right hand in places
enclosed with Rails, such Animals are kept that they may be safely suffered to
range about; for they may easily pass between the Rails: Here are to be seen in
different Lodges, Ermins, Civet-Cats, Castors, Muscovia-Cats and Rats, and
Barbary Cats. The left side of the same Court is appointed for wild and
voracious Animals, such as Lions, Tygres, Leopards, Lynxes, Bears, and Wolves.
Such Beasts as are made use of for Labor are lodged in another Court, and next
to that are Mews for all sorts of Fowls.

Trianon is seated on the other side of the Canal. Before that fine and
pleasant House there is a Hollow or Bottom resembling a Half-Oval, with a Door
on each Side, and one at the End, opposite to the Entry, which leads into the
Principal Court, as those on each Side do into two other separate Courts, that
reach along the Oval. At the End of these two Courts, following the Oval, you
meet with two Doors that open into the Court, at the opposite End of which is
the Principal Apartment consisting only of one Story, and adorned on the
outside with so vast number of Vessels of several Figures representing
Porcelane, that nothing else appears to the Eye. The Inside also is painted in
Imitation of Porcelane; the Walls are all covered with Looking-Glasses, and the
Furniture is equally Rich and Genteel. The Sides of this Building are bordered
with two Square Pavilions, built and adorned after the same Fashion* And there
are two other Pavilions lower down, which terminate the forepart of the
Structure. This place was designed for a Magazine of all sorts of Flowers,
which are preserved here both in Winter and Summer. All the Basins either are,
or appear to be of Porcelain, and Water-Spouts arise out of the Urns. The
Flowers and Shrubs are kept in Pots of Procelain, or in Boxes that resemble it;
and there are long Walks of Orange Trees planted in the Ground, with Hedge-Rows
of Jasmins and Myrtles under a Gallery of Timber that remains open during the
Summer, but in Winter is covered with Dung, to preserve the Trees from the Cold.

But Colbert thought there were still some finishing Strokes wanting to
complete the Beauty of Versailles. There was no other Water but what was pumped
out of a Pond, and from thence distributed by Canals, to the places that
required its Moisture; nor was it free from the usual defects of stagnating
Water, Stench, and Muddiness. The Consideration of these Inconveniences made
Colbert undertake to bring Water from the River Eure to Versailles, by an
Aqueduct, which reaches from the Hill of Picardon to the Cisterns or Reservers
of Water. Five large Basins contain both the Water of that River, and that
which supplies the Machine of Marly: Four of 'em are oblong Squares, eighty
five Toises loing, and fifty four broad, with Pannels of eighteen Toises at the
outward Angles; and in the midst of these, there is a little Basin of ten
Toises in Diameter, called the Receptacle of Water, because it receives all the
Water, and distributes it to the great Basins at the Corners, which are
hollowed and framed into Arches of a Circle. These five Basins are separated by
Walks of eighteen Foot in breadth, and surrounded with another of eight Toises,
which reaches from the outward Brink of the Basins to the Glacis of the Earth
that is enclosed with a Wall. The great Basins are eighteen Foot deep, and
filled with Water to the height of twelve Feet; so that each of 'em contains
8000 Cubical Toises of Water, or 224000 Muids, amounting in all the four to
896000 Muids or Hogsheads of Water. To retain the Water, there is a Lay of Clay
eighteen Inches thick, both at the Bottom, and round the Edges of the Basins or
Reservers, supported by a Wall four Foot broad above, and five below, founded
on a Wooden Grate laid over the Clay with Platforms; it is called The Wall of
Douvre, and the Talus or Sloping is on the inside, by which it loses a Foot of
its breadth. The Aqueduct is 500 Toises long, and its greatest height amounts
to fourteen or fifteen. The Basis or Groundwork extends to fourteen Feet,
which are reduced to six on the top; and of that number the Canal takes up
three, in which breadth it contains 648 Inches of Water. The River Eure is
brought to Versailles from Pontgoin, seven Leagues from Chartres; the Canal
between Pontgoin and Berchere la Margot, containing 20000 Toises. This Canal is
brought along the Surface of the Earth according to its Level, and fifteen Foot
downwards: Its height rises or falls, according to the situation of the Ground;
and the Talus or Slopeness of the Banks is double of the depth. In the Bottom
or Valley of Berchere, where the Aqueduct of Mason's-Work begins, there is a
Bank or Aqueduct of Earth erected, which accompanies that of Stone-Work for the
Space of 3607 Toises. The Canal of this Earthen Aqueduct is fifteen Foot broad
at the bottom, and six, seven, or eight Foot broad at the top, the Talus being
double the height. The Sides or Banks are supported by a Causey nine Foot
broad, with a Talus double the height, to keep the Earth from falling. In the
Valley of Berchere, the height of the Earthen Bank amounts to 100 Feet, in
other parts to 70, 50, 40, and 20 Feet; and toward Maintenon, where it is
joined to the Stone-Aqueduct, its height rises to 79 Feet. The Stone Aqueduct
is 2960 Toises long, consisting of 242 Arches: The breadth of the Arches
amounts to forty Feet; their Piles are forty eight Foot long, and twenty four
broad, with Buttresses reaching eleven Feet in breadth, and six in Projecture,
or outbearing. In the deepest part there are three Arches one over another,
like those at Pont du Guard in Languedoc. Toward Berchere there are thirty
three single Arches, seventy one double, forty six treble; then seventy two
double, and in the last place twenty single, which rejoin the Earthen Aqueduct
coming from toward Versailles, at the height of sixty five Feet, which is
gradually diminished for the space of 6055 Toises, till it be reduced even with
the Terrasses, and from thence to Versailles it is brought along the Surface of
the Ground, as between Pontgoin and Berchere, for the space of 25000 Toises,
unless in some parts where there is a Stone Aqueduct hollowed in the Ground.
The greatest height of the Aqueduct in the Valley of Maintenon, through which the
Rivers of Eure and Gaillardon pass, and where the treble Arches are, amounts to
216 Feet and six Inches, to the Pavement of the upper Wreaths or Edges, without
reckoning the Foundations, which are fifteen or sixteen Foot deep, or the
Parapet of three Foot and six Inches. The height of the first or lower Arches
to the top of the Concavity of the Vault, amounts to seventy six Feet, and to
the Pavement of the second Arches eighty one Foot and six Inches. The Second
Arches are seventy Foot high to the top of the Concavity, and eighty five to
the Pavement of the Third, which are thirty Foot and three Inches high to the
Concavity of their Vault, and nine Foot nine Inches more to the upper Wreaths,
on which there are Parapets of three Feet and six Inches. The Canal is seven
Foot broad at the bottom, and widens by degrees till the breadth is increased
to seven Feet and seven Inches at the height of four Feet, where the sides
begin to bow inwards, after the manner of a Vault. On each side of the Canal
there is a Corridore three Foot, and a Parapet seventeen Inches broad: The
Piles of the Arches are perpendicular above the Ground on the inside, and both
the sides. Through the whole Aqueduct every Toise of Work has an Inch of Talus or
Sloping; but the Buttresses have more above the first or lower Arches; for on
each side, the Reclination or Narrowing amounts to about seven Feet, and to
almost six above the second Arches. There is a Door in the middle of each Pile,
both in the second and third Arches, for the convenience of passing along the
Aqueduct; the Doors in the second Arches are four Foot broad, and those in the
third three Foot six Inches broad, and seven Foot high.

After the Description of the Castle of Versailles, it will not be improper to
subjoin a short Account of the Church that Colbert caused to be new-built from
top to bottom of hewn Stone, in the Rue de Paris, facing Rue Daufine, which
leads to the Place or Square of the same Name. The Portal, comprehending the
two Towers, is nineteen Toises broad, embellished with four Columns of the
Doric Order in Front; over which are four other Columns of the Ionic Order,
crowned with a Fronton. The Towers are adorned with the last-nam'd Order, and
the whole with Sculpture; the length of the Church without the Walls amounts to
forty Toises, and within, from the greater Altar to the great Door, to thirty.
The Nave is thirty two Foot broad, and the Cross is seventeen Toises long. In
the midst of the Cross, there is a Cupola vaulted with Stone, six Foot and a
half high. The Lantern contains twenty Feet in Diameter, and leans on the
outside on a great Square of Stone-Work eight Toises broad. The height from the
Key of the Vault on the inside, amounts to nine Toises and a half; and from the
Cope or Cupola of the Lantern to the Pavement of the Church, there are in all
eighteen Toises. The inside is adorned with the Doric Order; and the great
Altar is enriched with forty Corinthian Columns of Marble, containing two Feet
in Diameter, and crowned with their Entablatures and Frontons; and besides, all
the Altars are garnished with Pictures, by the best Hands. At the side of the
Church Colbert caused a great Building to be erected, containing Lodgings for
the Fathers of the Mission who serve here. It runs parallel to the side of the
Church, reaching forty four Toises in length, and is contiguous to the Houses
in the Street. It encloses a low Court, thirteen Toises square, and the
thickness of the Building amounts to six Toises and two Feet. Below it includes
a great Corridore, forty three Toises in circumference, and twelve broad, with
five great Halls on the outside. The Refectory is at the Foot of the great
Staircase. The lowest and highest Story have each a great Corridore, and
contain above sixty Cells, and ten small Apartments of two Rooms. The whole
Building, including the Places or Rooms for the service of the House, contains
above one hundred and fifty Rooms, or distinct Places. Both the Church, and the
rest of the Edifice were designed by Mansard.

The Machine to raise Waters gave Colbert occasion to embellish Marly, whither
the King frequently retires from the Hurry of Affairs, attended only by those
who are capable of Diverting him, and by his necessary Servants. It Is seated in
the Park of Versailles, and enclosed with another distinct Park on the Road
that leads to St. Germain: At the end of the bottom where it stands, there is a
View opened to the Castle of St. Germain, and the places about it, which makes
one of the loveliest Prospects imaginable. The most considerable Charge of this
Building was occasioned by the draining and filling up of the Fenny-Grounds to
clear a space for the Garden, and to make so extraordinary a Ground-Plot as
that of the Situation of this House; for the Disposition of its Plan is wholly
singular. Passing along the Road of St. Germain, as soon as you come to Marly,
you enter into a round Court of fifty Toises, with Courts of Guard,
Coach-Houses, and Stables; and from thence you perceive the Castle at the end
of a long Avenue or Walk, of one hundred and fifteen Toises in length, and ten
in breadth, enclosed with Walls on each side, to keep in the Earth, and planted
with Trees. This Walk brings you to the outward Court. The Castle is a distinct
Building, separated from twelve other Pavilions, six on each side, as they also
are from one another. The greatest of these Pavilions is twenty one Toises
large in all its Dimensions, being a large and distinct Structure, with four
equal Faces: You ascend to it by round Steps bowed inwards on both Sides. The
Lower Story is magnificent, containing four Entries, which lead into a great
Octangular Hall, and separate four large Apartments, called The Four Seasons.
The Hall is the chief Room, consisting of eight Pannels, four great, and as
many small; it is eight Toises broad, and adorned with chanell'd Pilasters of
the Compound Order, with their Ornaments. The Doors of the four Entries are in
the large Pannels; and in each of the small ones there is a Statue of Marble,
placed on a jutting Pedestal. The Order is crowned with its Entablatures,
framed after an unusual manner with Corbels. Above is an Attic adorned with
half-body'd Statues of Women, sustained by Garlands of Flowers, and with their
Hands supporting over their Heads an Entablature consisting of an Architrav'd
Cornice. The Hall receives the Light through four Windows in the Attic, under
which, on the Compound Cornice in the inside, are four Balconies born by
Eagles. The Vault that begins above the Cornice of the Attic consists of eight
Pannels, which meet, and are united at a great round Moulding, cut by a rich
Wreath of Flowers, that serves for a Cornice, and a Spherical Vault. All the
Ornaments of the Hall are of A fine sort of Clay or Plaster.
Stuc, curiously wrought; and in the midst of the Vault there hangs a
prodigiously big Branch'd-Candlestick of Rock-Crystal, ten Foot high, and six
broad, adorned with several Rows of Branches, supported by a large double Eagle
of Crystal, and surrounded with eight other less Candlesticks, after the manner
of a Crown. The four Entries are longer than broad, with relation to their
depth, containing four Toises in one Dimension, and five and a half in the
other, and are embellished with Architecture, Sculpture, and Marble Busts. In
each Entry there are two great Tables of precious Marble, and two large
Pictures by Vander-Meulen, eight Foot long, and five Foot high, representing
the Sieges carried on, and Cities taken by His Majesty. Every one of these
great Apartments is composed of three Rooms, an Antichamber, Chamber, and
Closet; and the Upper Story to which you ascend by two Stair-cases, consists of
four Halls, one in the middle of every Face. They are sixteen Foot broad, and
serve for Anti-Chambers to eight of the twelve little Apartments, which consist
of two Rooms each. The Dome of the great Hall is surrounded with an Octangular
Terrass twelve Foot broad, and little Corridores of half that breadth. The
external Decoration consists in Pictures in Fresco, after the Italian manner,
being a great Corinthian Order of Marble Pilasters, having only the Cornice in
Relievo, to crown the Mass of the Building. On each Face a Fronton crowns the
Front-Building, without any apparent Projecture, but what it borrows from the
Shadows of the Painting. Between the Windows of the first Story that are even
with the Ground, there are Basso-relievo's, Trophies, and Devises: And the
Angles are adorned with cleft Stones; because if the Cieling were Angular, the
Projecture or jutting forth of the Bases and Chapiters would appear mutilated.
The whole Edifice is terminated with Balisters, and has no apparent Roof: All
the Sculptures, Bases, Chapiters, and Balisters are of Brass gilt; and the
Architecture is of Marble of several Colors. The other twelve Pavilions are
adorned after the same manner; and six of 'em are of the Ionic Order: Each
Pavilion contains two Apartments, one below, and another in the first Story;
every one of 'em has six Toises in Front, and they are thirty two Toises
distant from each other. Besides these thirteen Pavilions, there are two on the
right side of the Castle that faces the Paterre, in one of which is the Chapel,
embellished in the inside with Pilasters of the Corinthian Order; and in the
other, even with the Ground, is the Guard-Chamber, and above that the Officers
Lodgings. To these Pavilions they have since added two Wings, which being
joined to two Walls built in form of an Arch of a Circle, form an outward
Court, containing thirty five Toises in Diameter. At the foot of the Descent
from the Avenue on the other side, and over against these two Pavilions, there
are two others of the like Structure, which make one half of the Building, and
comprehend the Kitchens, and other Offices or Workhouses, being thirty Toises
in Front, and enclosing a Court for that use. These two Pavilions are adorned
on the outside like those that are opposite to 'em, and hide all that Building
which is appointed for the service of the Palace: They are joined together by a
Wall painted by Rousseau in Perspective, which surprises and charms the
Beholder. All these Pavilions, both the twelve of equal bigness, and those last
mentioned, communicate together by Trellis'd Arbours, fifteen Foot broad, which
form a Half Moon behind the Castle, and all the Arches of a Circle that compose
'em, end in Pavilions of Trellis-Work. The Garden is so intermixed with the
Building, that the Coaches never pass beyond the Grate between the two
Pavilions on the other side of the Descent. It Is to be observed, that the
Disposition of the Garden is as new as unusual, consisting of several Falls of
Terasses, supported by sloping Turfs, with Ever-green Trees, such as Firs,
Yews, etc. and you descend from one to another by Stone Steps of an
extraordinary bigness, and various Contrivance. The Parterres are enclosed with
Basins of diverse Figures, adorned with several Water-Spouts: The Basin behind
the Castle is most considerable; it is in form of a Half Moon, thirty eight
Toises broad, and its Water-Spout rises one hundred Foot high. The Basins of
the Parterre are in number seven; the first you meet with before the great
Descent of Steps, has Three Water-Spouts, and contains twenty Toises in one
Dimension, and forty in the other. The greatest containing five Water-Spouts,
is one hundred Toises long, and fifty broad; and the last consisting of Pannels
below, is seventy Toises long, and thirty two broad, adorned with three
Water-Spouts. The other four are round, of which two at the foot of the Castle
are smaller, each of 'em containing ten Toises in Diameter; but the Diameter of
those above contains sixteen Toises. Both the Terrasses and Pavilions run
sloping, though they are all placed level as well as the Basins: And it is
impossible to behold at a distance without an agreeable Surprise, that unusual
Scene of Buildings, Terrasses, and Basins, variously intermixed, without
Confusion, like curious Works appearing distinctly on an advantageous Ground.
The Park of this House is enclosed with a Wall, and divided by Cross-Walks,
some eight, and others six Toises broad, where you have sometimes the Prospect
of the Castle, and sometimes of the Iron Grates before its Entry: and that none
of the Advantages of the Situation might be lost, there are Groves of diverse
Figures contrived in the Wood. The Park-Pale encloses several large Ponds,
among which there are Three that have twelve Foot of Water; the greatest is in
the Middle, and its superficial Extent amounts to 18000. Toises of Water,
whereas the other two together make but 2000: and besides there are two other
larger Ponds, of a Regular Figure. The Surface of the Water in the first Pond
is higher than that of the last Basin of the Parterre by thirty three Toises:
and besides the Cross-ways for Coaches, there are Walks along the Walls of the
Enclosure, which open a Passage through all the Parts of the Garden. The
Convenience Colbert had to make advantageous Bargains with the Workmen that
were employed in building the Royal Houses, because they were obliged to
address themselves to him for Payment, gave him an Opportunity to make his
House of Sceaux a magnificent Palace. I will not trouble the Reader with a
particular Description of all its Beauties, but content my self with mentioning
the finest Parts of the Garden. After you have passed through several lovely
Walks fenced with Hedge-Rows, you come to the Pavilion of the Morning, so
called, either because the earliest Glimmerings of the Light are discovered
there sooner than in any other part, and that the Morning seems only to break
forth with a design to shine upon so beautiful a Place, or because that Goddess
is painted there by the hand of le Brun. This Pavilion has twelve Openings,
reckoning that of the Door; and, since it is somewhat raised, there are two
Stair-Cases opposite to one another, by which you ascend to it. Going from
thence to the Hall of Chesnut-Trees, you meet with a fine Pond or Canal, at the
Side of the Castle: there are five lovely Fountains in the Hall, four toward
the Corners, and one in the Middle; and somewhat lower there is a little Wood,
made after the fashion of a Labyrinth, and full of Water. Then you come to the
Water-Walk, which is adorned on both sides with Busts, placed on small
Pedestals like Stools, and Water-Spouts mounting as high as the Trellis. Each
Water-Spout appears between two Busts, and every Bust between two Water-Spouts.
On each Side of the Walk there is a little Ditch or Furrow, to receive the
Water that falls from so great a number of Spouts; and at each of the four
Corners there is a great Shell for the same use. Behind the Busts and
Water-Spouts there is a green Wall formed by large Trellisses; and, leaving
this beautiful Place, you enter into the Pavilion of the four Winds, where you
have a charming Prospect. From thence you pass to the Canal, and descending
somewhat lower, you meet with a Piece of Water, containing about six Acres,
which fronts a Cascade at the other End of the Garden. It Is on the Brow of a
Hillock, forming three Water-Walks, and adorned with several Vessels of Brass
between the Basins, out of which the Water-Spouts arise. It may be justly said
to be altogether natural, for it is filled with Running Water. Colbert did not
only design to make this Place a House of Pleasure; for he annexed a great
Revene to it, by transporting thither the Oxe-Market that was formerly kept at
Long-jumeau, to the Prejudice of Trade, which was diminished by that Alteration.

The Desire that Minister had to display in all Parts, the Grandeur and
Magnificence of his Master, made him also form several Designs, to increase the
Beauty and Convenience of the Capital City. He began the Course on Ramparts with
four Rows of Trees, reaching from the Gate of S. Honor to that of S. Anthony:
and on the other side of the River 'twas thought sufficient to make the Descent
of the Hill somewhat easier between the Gates of S. Marcel and S. Victor. He
ordered the Old Gates of S. Denis and S. Martin to be beaten down; and, instead
of these, Triumphal Arches to be erected in Memory of his Majesty's Conquest of
the greatest Part of the United Provinces, in 1672. He built the Key called
Pelletier's, or the New-Key, with a Parapet, from Our Lady's Gate, to the Greve
or Place of Execution, which it encompasses on the side next the Seine: and he
caused the Key to be lined with Stone, from the first Wicket of the Louvre,
near the Watering-Place for Horses to the End of the Old Course. The Streets
were also enlarged by his Orders, which gave Occasion to the President de
Fourcy to make two New ones, during the time of his Provostship or Mayoralty;
one of 'em reaching from S. Anthony's Street to the Bridge that leads to Our
Lady's Island, and the other continuing the Street des Provaires to Pont-Neuf.

The Public is obliged to the same Minister for the Establishment of the
Academy for Painting and Sculpture, in 1664. The King's Painters and Sculptors,
with some others of the most skilful Professors of those Arts, being
prosecuted at Law by the Master-Painters of Paris, joined together, and began
to form a Society, under the Name of the Royal Academy for Sculpture and
Painting. Their Design was to keep public Exercises to improve those ingenious
Arts, and to advance 'em to the highest Degree of Perfection. They put
themselves under the Protection of Cardinal Mazarin, and chose Chancellor
Seguier for their Vice-Protectour: after which they presented a Petition to the
King, containing an Account of all the Prosecutions that were set on foot
against 'em, to the great Prejudice of the Art of Painting and Sculpture, which
their Enemies designed to deprive of that Noble Liberty which is so natural to
it, and to make it subject to the Laws of a Mechanical and Servile Trade. This
Petition was favorably received, and by an Order of Council, bearing Date the
20th of January, 1648. all Persons were prohibited to disturb or molest the
Academy in its Exercises. The Society was, in its Infancy, composed of twenty
five Members; twelve Officers called Elders, who were obliged to attend
monthly, and give public Lessons; eleven Academicians, and two Syndics. The
twelve Elders were le Brun, Erard, Bourdon, de la Hyre, Sarrazin, Corneille,
Perrier, de Beaubrun, le Sueur, Just d' Egtimont, Vanostad, and Guillemin: The
eleven Academicians were du Garnier, Vanmol, Ferdinand, Boulogne, Montpecher,
Hans, Tertelin senior, Gerard Gosin, Pinage, Benard, and de Seve senior; and
the two Syndics, now called Ushers, were Bellot and l' Eveque. Not long after
the Promulgation of the Order of Council, 'twas thought convenient to regulate
the respective Duties of the Members of the Academy, and of the Students; and
in the February following, the Society drew up Thirteen Articles of Regulation,
which were approved and ratified by Letters Patent granted the same Month.
Five or six Years after 'twas found by Experience, that it was necessary for
the Advancement of the Academy, to make some Additions to the former Statutes;
and Twenty one New Articles were presented to the King, and ratified by Letters
Patents in January 1655. Since that time his Majesty perceiving with
Satifaction the Progress made by the Academy in the Design of their
Institution, granted 'em new Statutes much more ample than the first, supplying
the Omissions, and correcting the Faults that were observed in the former
Regulation. And these three Collections of Statutes, with the several Patents
in Confirmation of 'em, were registered in the Parliament, Chamber of Accounts,
and Court of Aids, notwithstanding all the Opposition of the Master-Painters.
After Cardinal Mazarin's death, in 1663, the Academy begged the Protection of
Chancellor Seguier, and made Colbert their Vice-Protector; at whose
solicitation they were finally established by a Patent, containing new
Privileges, in the Year 1664. They were first lodged in the Gallery of the
Royal College of the University; but afterward his Majesty granted 'em more
spacious Lodgings near the Tuilleries, and after that another more convenient
place, in the Gallery of the Louvre. From thence they were removed to the
Palace Brion, behind the Palace Royal; and after that House was annexed to the
Duke of Chartres's Lodgings, they were plac^d in the Old Louvre. There was also
a Fund settled by his Majesty in the Register of the Royal Buildings, to raise
a considerable Pension for the Officers of the Academy, and to defray the
Charges of Models, and other necessary Expenses of that Society. All Suits and
Causes relating to their Functions, Works, and Public Exercises, are to be
examined by the Council of State, and the Academy it self being assembled, is
declared Judge of all differences that may arise about the Arts of Painting and
Sculpture. He that presides in the Assemblies receives an Oath of those that
are deemed capable of being admitted Members of the Academy: And the
Deliberations agreed on in these Meetings, have the force of Statutes. The
Academy alone is empowered to lay down Models, issue out Advertisements, and
give public Lessons concerning the Arts of Painting and Sculpture, and what
relates to, or depends upon 'em. And that none may be admitted to profess these
Arts by any other way or Method, his Majesty prohibited all Persons whatsoever,
to assume the Title or Quality of his Painters, or Sculptors, till they were
received into the Academy; revoking and making void all Grants or Briefs that
might have been obtained for that purpose: So that all those who were in that
Post were obliged to enter into that Society, under pain of losing their
Places. Besides, the Academy may keep public Exercises in other Places of the
City, and erect Academical Schools in all the Cities of the Kingdom, by Virtue
of a Patent, and Order of Regulation, granted by his Majesty, in November 1676.
The same Monarch established an Academy at Rome, where a Model is kept, and
Pensions allowed to young Students, who travel thither to study these Arts,
after they have gained the Prize in the Academy; and that Society sends one of
its Rectors to preside there. Those who are possessed of the chief Places and
Offices in the Academy, to the number of forty, are exempted from all
Obligations whatsoever, to undertake the charge of Guardians or Curators, or to
keep Watch and Ward, and have a right to the great Committimus, or special
Privileges for that purpose. Those who are brought up in those Arts by any
Member of the Academy, though they have not sufficient Merit to be received into
that Society, are to be admitted to the Office and Dignity of a Master in any
place of the Kingdom, by Virtue of a Certificate from the Person by whom they
were educated, seen and approved by the Chancellor, and counter-sign'd by the
Secretary; and that Certificate has in all respects the Force of a Brief, or
Writ of Apprenticeship. And the Works of the Members of the Academy cannot be
molded or copied without their permission. The Officers that compose this
Society are, first, a Director, called by the first Statutes the Head, who may
be changed or continued every Year; and the Company may choose either one of
their own Members, or any other, whom they shall think fit to discharge that
Office: It was first possessed by Charmois, and in 1656 by Ratabon,
Superintendant of the Buildings. A Chancellor, whose Office is for Life; he
approves all Dispatches, and affixes the Seal, which has on one side, the Image
of the Protector, and on the other, the Arms of the Academy: This Office was
first executed by le Brun, who not only as Chancellor, but also as his
Majesty's Chief Painter, presided in all the Assemblies, and received the Oath.
Four Rectors, also for Life; and two Adjuncts, to supply the Places of those
that are absent: Their Office is to serve quarterly, and to meet at the Academy
with the Professor, who is in Waiting, to correct the Students, judge of those
who excel their Fellows, and deserve some Recompense, and to dispatch all other
Affairs. Twelve Professors, two of whom may be changed every Year by Lot; and
Eight Adjuncts: The Professors are obliged to serve by turns Monthly, and
during the time of Waiting, to give Daily Attendance at the Academy, to correct
the Students, order the Model and Postures for designing, and to take care of
other Affairs. There is also a Professor of Geometry, and another of Anatomy,
who read Lessons twice a Week. A Treasurer, who receives and distributes the
King's Pensions, and is entrusted with the principal Care of the Pictures,
Sculptures, Furniture, and Tools belonging to the Academy. Several Counselors,
who are divided into two Classes; the first consisting of those who have
already discharged the other Offices, and the second of Persons of Merit, who
for their Love and Knowledge of those Arts, are received into the Academy,
under the Title of Counselors, Lovers of Art; but can never rise to any higher
Post, because their Skill is confined to some part, and they do not profess the
Art in its full extent: All these Counselors have a Deliberative Voice in the
Meetings of the Society. The Secretary takes care of Affairs, keeps the
Registers, and counter-signs Dispatches. The Academy may also have two Ushers
to serve them on all Occasions, who are to enjoy the Privileges of that
Society, if they be either Painters or Sculptors. The Roman Academy that has
its Name from St. Luke, being informed of the erection of that of France, and
of the Merit of its Members, was desirous to entertain a Correspondence with
'em, both by way of Friendship, and for the Improvement of the Arts they
professed. And to engage the French to a Compliance with her desires, she made
the first Step by choosing le Brun for her Head two Years successively, though
that Dignity is never bestowed on any Person that lives out of Rome. This
Advance gave the King Occasion to grant Letters of Union of these two
Societies, in November 1676, which were afterward ratified by the Parliament.
The Academy receives none into its Body but those whose Merit has raised 'em
above the common Excellencies of Vulgar Artists: Those who profess the entire
Art, may aspire to the highest Offices in that Society; but they who are only
Masters of some particular Talents, and apply themselves wholly to Pictures,
Landskips, Flowers or Fruits, though they may be admitted into the Academy, can
never rise above the Degree of Counselors: And skilful Engravers are also
received on the same Conditions. The Order of their Reception is thus: Those
who apply themselves to Figures and History, are obliged to work a whole Month
after a Model, in presence of the Waiting-Professor: After which there is a
Subject prescribed to 'em, describing the King's Heroical Actions in
Allegorical Figures. The Piece being finished, is presented to the Academy, who
determine by plurality of Voices, whether the Design ought to be received: And
if the Candidate receive a favorable Sentence, he is ordered to draw a Picture
of a certain bigness, and that being examined and approved by the Majority of
Voices, he is sworn before the Chancellor, and admitted into the Academy. They
who pretend only to some particular Talent, present their Works as the others,
but are not obliged to draw from the Life. Colbert being made Protector of the
Academy, after the Death of Chancellor Seguier, thought fit that there should
be a Historiographer appointed, to collect all useful and curious Observations
that were made at the Conferrences, and persuaded his Majesty to create one,
with a Salary of 300 Livres. This Employment was bestowed on Guillet de St.
Georges, whom le Brun presented to that Minister; and he has since acquired a
great deal of Honor by the Works he has communicated to the Public; and among
others, by his Ancient and Modern Athens, his Dictionary of Arts, and his
History of Sultan Mahomet II. He was received on the thirty first of January,
1682, and made a very fine Discourse in Praise of the Academy, and its
Protector.

Before I finish this Account of the Academy, it will not be improper to
present the Reader with a Catalogue of the Works of le Brun, its first
Director. He painted the Battle and Triumph of Constantine, the Design of five
Pieces of Tapestry, representing a like number of the most glorious Actions of
Alexander, the Battle of Porus, the Family of Darius, the Battle of Arbella,
the Passage of the Granicum, and that Prince's Triumph; the Angel's Crucifix,
the King on Horseback at large, a Representation of the same Monarch granting
Peace, the Platfonds of Vaux le Vicomte, and of Sceaux, the Massacre of the
Innocents, the Fall of the Rebellious Angels, St. Stephen at Notre-dame, the
Presentation of the Virgin at the Temple, Christ in the Garden of Olivet, a
Crucifix, a Magdalen, the Descent of the Cross, St. Austin, St. Anthony, the
Twelve Apostles, the Martyrdom of the Jesuits in Japan, Christ in the Desert
served by Angels, the Cupola of Sceaux, St. Teresa, St. Charles, whose Picture
is in his Chapel; St. Mary Magdalen at the instant of her Conversion, the
Brazen Serpent at the House of the Recollects of Picpus, the Pentecost at St.
Sulpicius's, and the Sepulcher on the High Altar. There are four of his
Pictures at the Carmelites; a Presentation of the Virgin at the Capuchins
Church in St. James's Suburbs, and the Massacre of the Innocents, in the
possession of du Mets, formerly Treasurer of the Money raised by the Sale of
Offices. The President Lambert's Gallery, and that of Apollo in the Old Louvre,
were also painted by him. And there are some Pieces begun by him at
Rambouillet, in the Guard-Chamber of the Palace-Royal, at St. Germans en Lay,
and at the House of the United Farms, where Chancellor Seguier then lived.

The Learned World is also obliged to Colbert for the Erection of the Academy
of Sciences, that meets twice every Week in one of the Halls of the King's
Library in the Street Viviene, and had made so many curious and useful
Discoveries. On Wednesdays they treat of Natural Philosophy, and on Saturdays
of Astronomy, and other parts of the Mathematics. They have invented a Method
to determine the Longitude of Places, which has been tried in Denmark by his
Majesty's Order; at Cayene in America, and in several Parts of the World,
according to the Directions of the Astronomers. These Observations were made,
and are still carried on every Year by Picard, Richer, and de la Hyre, who are
Members of that Body. And during the Voyages that are undertaken on this
Occasion, Cassini remains still in the Observatory at Paris, to make like
Observations at the same time with the Travelers. They are all so just and
exact, that the Longitude may be certainly found out at any Distance, without
incurring an Error of above one hundred Toises, which bear no proportion to the
greatness of the Terraqueous Globe. When the Academy was founded, Carcavy,
Intendant of the King's Library, was made Moderator of it, who was succeeded by
the Abbot de Lanion, and he by Thevenot. The present Moderator is the Abbot le
Tellier, who presides in that Assembly, though he is very young. Huguens, one of
the Astronomers, discovered the Ring of Saturn, and one of that Planet's
Satellites, and has obliged the Public with a Treatise de Horologio
Oscillatorio, which we call a Pendulum: And it must be acknowledged, that it is
one of the most Learned and Ingenious Pieces extant on that Subject. Blondel,
Camp-Marechal, and formerly Teacher of Mathematics to the Dauphin, has
composed a Course of Architecture, with the Solutions of the four principal
Problems of that Science. Cassini, who was esteemed at Bologna the chief
Astronomer of his Age, has published several Treatises, and among the rest, one
concerning the Satellites of Jupiter, with their Ephemerides, the discovery of
two Satellites of Saturn, different from that of Huguens, a Planisphere, and a
Discourse of the Comet in 1680, and 1681. Picard wrote an Account of his Voyage
to Uraneburg, enriched with all the Celestial Observations he made in the same
place where Tycho Brahe contemplated the Heavens. La Hyre composed two
Treatises of Conics, containing an Explication of that hardest part of
Geometry, to which in 1679, he added new Elements of the Conic Sections,
Geometrical Places, and the Construction of Aequations. Roemer invented two
Machines with Wheels, the first representing in a moment the Motion of the
Planets, and their Aspects, for any Year or Day; and the second showing the Day
and Hour in which Eclipses either have happened, or shall happen. He left Paris
to return to the North, where he was born, the King of Denmark being desirous
to see him again. Mariotte wrote three Books concerning the Organ of Vision, a
Treatise of Libellation, another of the Collision of Bodies, an Essay of Logic,
a Treatise of Colors, and three small Discourses or Physical Essays, of the
Vegetation of Plants, the Nature of the Air, and of Heat and Cold. Duclos is
the Author of two Treatises, one of the Mineral Waters in France, and the other
of Salts. Perrault translated Vitruvius, and illustrated his Author with
learned Annotations, and an Explication of the Terms of Art; besides which he
published three Discourses, entitled, Physical Essays, of Noise, of Mechanics,
of Animals, and the Circulation of the Blood. Dodard drew a Scheme of Plants.
Bailly applied himself with extraordinary Success to the contriving of
Objective-Glasses for Telescopes, or large Prospective-Glasses; and among the
rest, he made one seventy Foot long, which is at present to be seen in the
Parisian Observatory. Du Verney labored to improve Anatomy; and Bourdelin has
made new Discoveries in Chemistry. The Abbot Gallois wrote the Journal des
Savans, from the 4th. of January 1666, to the 17th. of December 1674. Du Hamel
published, in the Year 1670, a Treatise in Two Volumes, De Corporum
Affectionibus; and another also in Two Volumes, De Corpore animato and de Mente
humana: And in 1682, he communicated to the Public a Work in five Volumes,
entitled, Philosophia vetus and nova ad usum Scholae accommodata. Besides
these Productions of some of the Members of the Academy, the Curious have been
obliged with the Anatomical part of the History of Animals, published in the
Name of the whole Society. And to make this Foundation more useful to the
Public, Colbert caused an Observatory to be erected at the end of St. James's
Suburbs, in the Year 1667.

The Observatory is situated in the highest place in the City toward the
South, that the Prospect of the Stars, and especially of the Planets which move
toward that part of the Heavens, might not be obstructed by the Vapors of the
River, or the Smoke that ascends from the Houses on the other side. It Is of a
square Figure, containing about fifteen Toises on each side, with two
Octangular Towers, at the Corners of the South Front, of seven Toises in
Diameter; and another square, and somewhat less Tower in the midst of the
opposite Face, where the Entry is: And all the three Towers are of the same
height with the rest of the Building. The Eastern Tower is open from the second
Story; and its two opposite Faces that front the South and North, are cleft or
divided, to make way for Telescopes of above fifty Foot in length, for the
convenience of observing the Passage of the Planets through the Meridian, and on
the North side to view the fixed Stars, at their coming to the Meridian, both
above and under the Pole, in order to the finding of the Latitude or Elevation
of the Pole above our Horizon. The Tower in the North Front is covered with
Flints by way of Platform, as is also the Body of the Edifice on the East
side: And the Platform of the Northern Tower is open in the middle, that those
who are employed in observing the Stars may be sheltered from the Wind. The
Building below comprehends two Stories vaulted with hewn Stone, the Walls being
nine foot thick, and sixty six Foot high, comprehending the Railed Gallery on
the Platform. The lower or half-Story of the whole Building, is on the South
side, backed with a Terrass raised more than twenty Foot high above the Field;
so that the first Story lies almost level with the Terrass, where there is a
Pole or Mast that carries a Telescope seventy Foot long, and a Tower of
Timber-Work one hundred and thirty Foot high. The Building rises ten Toises and
a half above the Ground, but reaches deeper under it, because of the Quarries
on which it is built: And at the bottom of these there are winding Stairs, that
seem to hang in the Air by the middle; where there is a void Place fourteen
Toises deep. These Stairs are directly under the middle of the Building; and
there are round Holes about three Foot in Diameter, both in the Vault of the
Ground-Floor, and in the Vaults of the two Stories, and also in the Platform.
The Centres of these four Holes are perpendicularly over the Center of the void
place, in the winding Stairs: So that all together make, as it were, one
continued Pit twenty four Toises and an half, or one hundred forty seven Foot
deep; which was designed, and has been made use of, for the Trial of several
Experiments; as to examine whether the Stars in the Zenith might be seen in the
Day from the bottom of this depth; to observe the Degrees of Acceleration in
the descent and fall of Bodies in the Air, and the Vibrations of Pendulums
under one hundred forty seven Feet in length, without danger of any Alteration
from the Motion of the Air; to make Observations with Barometers above eighty
Foot long, both with Mercury alone, and Water alone; and to try with Tin-Pipes
of the same length, what height of Water is required to break the Pipes, that
it may be known how strong those Pipes must be made, that are made use of for
the Conveyance of Water from a high place to another of like height. There
were also Chambers dug out of the Quarries, that it might be observed whether
Grains and Fruits could be preserved in 'em. Besides there have been Enquiries
made to discover the different Properties of the free and open Air, and that
which is enclosed underground; and a hundred Experiments have been tried both
with Thermometers and Hydrometers, to observe the various Effects that proceed
from the different Degrees of Moisture, Dryness, Heat, and Cold both in Winter
and Summer; which curious and instructive Improvements of natural Knowledge,
may with excellent Success be applied to the Advancement of Medicine. From the
lower Apartment you ascend to the first and second Story, and even to the
Platform of the whole Building, by a Staircase as large as it is bold and
beautiful; It Is adorned with rich Iron Balisters, and seems to hang in the Air,
having a void Place in the middle. Since the Faces of the Building look
directly to the Four Parts of the World, and the Windows of the second Story
are each eight Foot broad, and twenty six Foot high, the inquisitive Astronomer
has a full Prospect of the whole Heavens, and enjoys the double Convenience of
fixing his Instruments in the Walls, and of satisfying his Curiosity in a
covered Room, with Telescopes of fifteen or twenty Foot; for those Observations
that require Instruments of a greater Length must be made on the Terrass. In
this Edifice there is a Collection of all the Machines used by Artificers, and
the Warlike Engines of the Ancients; so that here a Man may in a little time be
sufficiently instructed, and fitted either to serve as an Engineer, or to teach
the Arts of Fortification and Navigation in an Academy. Here is also a
Burning-Glass, that melts Lead in an Instant, as soon as it is placed on its
Focus; a Planisphere, containing all the Stars that are visible above the
Horizon of Paris, and showing their Situation in the Heavens; and a Copper
Machine, composed of the Circles of the Sphere, carrying an Objective-Glass one
hundred and forty Foot distant from the Solar Focus, which by the Motion of a
Watch follows that of a Star, when it is only two or three Degrees elevated
above the Horizon: The Engine must be raised to the height of six or seven
Feet, till the Surface of the Glass be parallel to the Disk of the Star; then
retiring in a straight Line to the distance of one hundred and forty Foot,
place the Eye-Glass, so that the four Centres of the Star, of the Surface of
the Objective-Glass, of the Eye-Glass, and of the opening of the Ball of the
Eye be in one straight Line: If the Star be considerably elevated about the
Horizon, the Machine must be raised proportionably in the Air, by a Rope,
toward the Angles or Corners of the abovementioned wooden Tower, which is a
hundred and fifty Foot high, and stands before the South-Front of the
Observatory; but you must learn by several Trials, and a long continued Use, to
follow the Star with the Eye-Glass, so that the Eye may describe a Circle of
almost a hundred and forty one Foot of Rays, of which the Glass is the Center.
Here is also to be seen a large Astronomical Ring, that serves to find by the
Sun, the Hour and Minute, as well as the Declination of the Magnet,
Aequilibrium; and a very exact Figure of the Moon, with all the hollow and
rising Parts that are observed in its Surface. And besides, there is a Machine
for the Planets (framed according to Copernicus's System) which may be called a
Speaking Ephemeris, to find the Position of the Heavens at any time proposed,
whether past, present, or to come; the Longitude and Latitude of each Planet,
and consequently its true Place in the Heavens at any time whatsover, only by
turning a Handle, as in the above mentioned Machine. It shows also the
Swiftness and Slowness of each Planet, its Excentricity, and when it appears to
us to stand still or move backwards; for the Machine is so contrived, that it
must of necessity follow both the swift and slow Motion of every Planet, as it
approaches to its nearest, or retires to its greatest Distance from the Sun.
There is also a Pneumatical Engine for the Experiments of Vacuum; a Machine to
make Stuffs; one to wind a hundred Hanks of Thread at once, another to cleanse
Seaports, and a Catapulta of the Ancients. By what has been said the Reader
will be easily convinced of the Usefulness of the Observatory, and that the
Ingenious World is highly obliged to Colbert for employing his Interest with
the King, and his own Care and Industry for the Foundation and Erection of that
Edifice, according to the Directions of those great Men that are now lodged in
it.

But these are not the only Obligations France has to that Minister: Riquet, a
Native of Beziers, a Person of a happy Genius, and an admirably quick and
piercing Judgment; for 'twas he that found the Secret which had never before
entered into the Imagination of any Man. The several Offices he enjoyed in that
Part of the Country, gave him an opportunity to consider it with great Care and
Attention; and the exact Knowledge he had of it convinced him, that the way
that leads from Higher to Lower Languedoc was the only thing that rendered the
Design practicable; since on both sides there are Mountains of a prodigious
height, the Pyrenean Hills on one side, and on the other the Black Mountain,
neither of which could ever have been divided by the united Labors of the whole
Kingdom. He discovered also that there was only one place where the Water of
the Rivers that fall into the Ocean could be united to those that fall into the
Mediterranean. That place is called Naurouse, being a little Eminency or
Rising-ground, bounded with two Valleys, one of which runs sloping from West to
East, and is washed by a little River that falls into the Fresque, as that does
into the River Aude above Carcassone: And the Aude empties it self on one side,
by its natural Chanel, into the Lake of Vandres, that communicates with the
Mediterranean; Narbon, from whence it runs to the Sea. The other Valley that
descends from East to West, is crossed by the River Lers, which enters into the
Garonne below Toulouse. Now the Springs of these two little Rivers of Aude and
Lers, being at the Head of the two Valleys, about a quarter of a League distant
from each other; Riquet concluded that if they were Navigable, the Boats that
past along their Channels might be brought very near each other. All the
difficulty was to know whether a Basin or Pond could be dug on the Eminency of
Naurouse, and two Canals made to descend on one side to the Head of the Lers,
and on the other to the Source of the River Fresques, that falls into the Aude;
and supposing such a Pond could be made, whether it were possible to gather and
bring together a sufficient quantity of Water to fill the Canals, and make 'em
Navigable. To clear these Doubts, he visited all the neighboring Mountains,
examined the height of the Sources of several Rivers that arise among 'em, run
over all the Country, considered every part attentively, and measured the
Ground so often, and so exactly, that he was at last convinced of the Easiness
of the Attempt, to gather together the Water of the little Rivers of Alsau,
Bernasson, Lampy, Lampillon, Rieutort, and Sor, which fall from these Mountains
into the Plain of Revel, and the other Countries of Laurageois. And besides, he
concluded that by digging a Canal along the side of the Hills, the Water of the
Rivers might be conveyed down to the Hillock of Naurouse, which he considered
as the Point of Division from whence the Waters might be distributed on both
sides toward the Ocean and Mediterranean, to fill the Canals that might be
made for the convenience of Navigation. These Considerations having encouraged
him to undertake the Project, and convinced him of a possibility of Success; he
addressed himself to Colbert, with whom he prevailed to mention the Design to
the King. But that Minister being unwilling to engage his Majesty in an
unprofi^able Expense, proposed that there might be a Trial made with a little
Ditch, which was accordingly begun in the Black Mountain, above the Town of
Revel, and carried on so happily, that it brought the Water of the
abovementioned Rivers to Naurouse. So encouraging a Success of the first
Essay, gave a reasonable Hope, or rather Assurance of the happy Accomplishment
of the Main Design, which was undertaken and carried on with Vigor: And the
little Ditch was turned to a Canal of a convenient largeness and depth, for the
conveyance of a sufficient quantity of Water. It begins near the Forest of
Ramondins, a little above the Head of the Alsau, and descending to the little
Rivulets of Comberouge and Coudiere takes in the River of Bernasson, with
another Brook of the same name a little lower, after which it receives the
Rivers of Lampy and Lampillon, with the Brook Costere, and empties all these
Waters into the Sor above Campinase. The whole Course of the Canal is full of
Windings, and contains 10761 Toises in length. That the Water of those Rivers
might enter into the Canal, 'twas found necessary to to stop their wonted
Course with several Banks or Dams of well-cemented Earth, which were built of
so convenient a height, that when the Water rises too high, it may run over the
Banks, and fall into its natural Channels. Nor was it designed to leave the Beds
of those Rivers perfectly dry, after the Basins of Communication were furnished
with a sufficient Stock of Water; and therefore there were several Sluices made
in the Ditch, called in that Country Escampadous. The Sor having received so
considerable an Addition of Waters, carries 'em along with it for the space of
3449 Toises, to the Foot of the Mountain, where its Course is stopped by Banks
like to the former, to bring it into a new Canal; which, nevertheless, is only
a Continuation of the Ditch, and creeps along the Hillocks to Naurouse, for the
space of 19378 Toises. But least the Water of all those Rivulets should not be
sufficient to fill the Ditch, especially in the Summer when most of 'em are
dry, 'twas judged convenient to seek out a fit place in the Mountain to make so
considerable a Receptacle, that it might be in a readiness on all Occasions to
supply that defect. The place appointed for this purpose is a Valley, a quarter
of a League below the Town of Revel, called The Valley of S. Ferreol, from a
great Farm of the same name in the Neighborhood; and 'twas presumed that it
might be filled with the Water of the Audaut that runs through it, together with
that which proceeds from the Snow and Rains that happen very frequently in the
Mountain. The Valley is 760 Toises long, and 550 broad, being very narrow at
the Head, wide in the Middle, and contracted again at the End, by the
approaching Mountains that bound it on both sides; and to keep in the Water in
form of a Lake, the Mountains are joined by a Causey, which may be called a
Third Hill, by reason of its great thickness and height. Its breadth amounts to
sixty one Toises, and its Base is a solid body of Stone-Work, founded on the
Rock, and as it were mortais'd into it, having only one small opening or hole
vaulted above, and level with the Ground, to let out the Water. 'Twas thought
convenient to follow the Course of the Brook Audaut that runs through the Valley,
and to contrive the Passage on that side whither the Stream naturally tends, to
prevent the Ruins or Breaches in the Work, that might have been occasioned by
a violent alteration of its Course; and therefore the Passage was made nine
Foot broad, twelve Foot high, and ninety six Toises long, in a crooked Line. On
the Body of Stone-Work there is a thick Wall, reaching in a straight Line from
the Head to the Foot of the Dam, and exceeding by some Toises the height of the
vaulted Aqueduct. In the thickness of the Wall there is another Vault in form
of a Gallery, the Entry of which is toward the Foot of the Causey; and its
height as well as breadth is parallel to that of the former. The Gallery
growing insensibly narrow toward the bottom, contains but one Toise in
breadth, and a Toise and a half at the Head of the Work: It Is only sixty one
Toises long, because it runs in a straight Line; whereas the length of the
Aqueduct amounts to ninety four Toises. Above, or at the Head of the Causey, it
answers perpendicularly to the Orifice of the Aqueduct; and below it is on the
left side of its Mouth. Things being thus disposed, there were three
Cross-Walls built from one end of the Causey to the other, being founded on the
Stone-Work that makes the Basis of the Structure. They are not only interlac'd
with the Stone-Work of the Gallery, through which they pass in form of a Cross,
but are also inserted into the two Hillocks that surround the Valley. The first
Wall at the Head of the Causey is seven Toises high, eight or ten broad, and
twelve Foot thick at the end, being largest below, because of the slopeing. The
second being the highest of all the three, is one hundred and eighteen Toises
long, fifteen Foot thick, and sixteen Toises and two Foot high: It Is placed
almost in the midst of the Causey, at the distance of thirty three Toises from
the first; and the length of it may be extended to two hundred ninety nine
Toises and more. The third makes the Foot of the Causey, and is thirty one
Toises distant from the second: It Is eight Foot thick, and equal to the first
in height and breadth. Of the two abovementioned Vaults, the lower lets out
the Waters of the Magazine; and the other serves for an Entry to those who go
to open, or shut the Passage of the Water, by means of two Brazen Trap-Doors,
placed horizontally in a Tower called The Drum, which is joined to the first or
inward Wall; the Openings of the two Vaults being in the third or outward Wall.
As for the Basin or Pond of Naurouse, whether the Waters of the Black Mountain,
and of the Magazin of St. Ferreol, are brought by the Canal of Derivation; it is
called The Point of Division, because from thence the Water is distributed on
both sides, to the Canals that convey it to the two Seas. The Figure of this
Basin is an Octangular Oval, its greatest Diameter containg 200 Toises, and its
least 150: It Is lined with hewn Stone. It receives the Water of the Ditch by
one of its Angles, and distributes it by two Canals, that issue out of the two
other Angles. One of these Canals bends its Course toward the Ocean, and
reaching the Valley of Lers, falls into the Garonne: It has eighteen Sluices,
both double and single, which make twenty seven Bodies of Sluices in the space
of 28142 Toises, or fourteen French Leagues. The other Canal, which runs
toward the Mediterranean, to the Lake of Thun, contains forty six Sluices,
double, treble, quadruple, and octuple, in the length of 99443 Toises, or
almost fifty French Leagues. Besides these, there are two other Canals, one to
empty the Basin when it is too full, by discharging the superfluous Water into
the River Lers: The second which is not united to the Basin at its coming out
of the Ditch, to drain away the foul and muddy Water, that the Basin or Pond
receiving only pure and clean Water, may be freed from the usual
Inconveniences of other Ponds that are apt to be gorged with Mud, and must be
cleans'd and hollowed from time to time. The River Garonne contributed very
much to promote the designed Communication of the two Seas, by opening a free
and commodious Passage to the Ocean: But the same Convenience was not to be
found among the Rivers that fall into the Mediterranean, along the Coast of
Languedoc; for the Aude was not Navigable above Narbon, and besides it enters
into the Sea by the Lakes of Bays and Vandres, where the Road or Shore is so
shallow, that 'twas impossible to make a Haven. After an exact View of all the
Coast, there was no place found but Cape de Sete, of a sufficient depth for
Vessels of five or six hundred Tun; and therefore 'twas resolved to make a
Harbor there. Sete is a Promontory, Frontignan, famous for its Muscadine Wine.
The Sea is on one side of it, and on the other it has the Lakes of Thun,
Maguelone, and Peraut, bordered with the Plains of lower Languedoc; and on the
Right and Left Hand it is bounded with the Strand, between those Lakes and the
Sea. This Mountain thrusts a long Point into the Sea; and on the other side the
Sea advances into the Land, making a Bay, where the abovementioned Depth was
found. The Shore along the Strand is full of Sand, as are all the Coasts of
Languedoc about the Gulf of Leon; the Cape sinks deeper, and all around the
Depth amounts to twenty or twenty four Feet. Now these Lakes or Ponds have no
Water but what they receive by the Inlets or Passages, which the Sea makes when
it beats strongly against the Shore; and these Inlets that open a Communication
between the Lakes and the Sea, are changed according to the various alterations
of the Wind: So that there was only a Passage for small Vessels, by reason of
the Shallowness of most of the Lakes, Inlets, and parts of the Sea where they
enter: And therefore to accomplish the intended Communication of the Seas,
'twas necessary to make a fit Harbor for all sorts of Ships. In order to the
Execution of that Design, the Lake of Thun was chosen, as being the largest and
deepest of all those Lakes, and not far from the Cape of Sete: It Is of great
extent, and is twenty five or thirty Foot deep in several places: It Is equally
safe and commodious for sailing, and in case of necessity might serve for a
Harbor. For these reasons 'twas thought fit to bring the Canals that come from
Naurouse, and communicate with the Ocean, to the Lake on one side; and a Canal
was also dug between the other side and the Mediterranean. The last Canal is
two Toises deep, sixteen broad at the Surface, and eight at the Base, and about
eight hundred in length. The whole Work was begun in 1666, after Riquet had
undertaken to warrant the Success, and was finished before his Death, which
happened in the beginning of October 1680. though it was not brought to the
utmost degree of Perfection, till afterward, by the care of his Sons,
Bonrepos, Master of the Requests, and Caraman, Captain of the Guards; and his
two Sons-in-Law, Grammont, Baron of Lanta, and Lombre^il Treasurer of France at
Toulouse.

After so many and so useful Designs for the Public Good so happily
accomplished, Colbert thought he might justly aspire to some distinguishing
Marks of Honor; and in that Design, on the 27th. of August 1665, he purchased
the Office of Treasurer of the King's Orders, vacant by the Death of Nouveau,
Superintendant of the Post Office. The Order of St. Michael was instituted on
the first of August 1469, by King Lewis XI. the number of the Knights being
fixed to thirty six, though it was afterward increased to one hundred. All the
Knights of the Holy Ghost are made Knights of St. Michael some days before they
receive the Collar of their own Order. The Order of the Holy Ghost was
instituted at Paris, on the first Day of the Year 1579, by Henry III. in memory
of his having been advanced to the Crown of Poland, and afterward to that of
France, on the Festival of the Holy Ghost. The late King Lewis XIII. conferred
it on fifty Lords, in the Year 1633. There were seventy created in 1662, and
seventy four in 1669. The Badge of the Order is a Cross of Gold, fastened to a
blue Ribban four Fingers broad, and one embroidered with Silver, with the Holy
Ghost in the middle, on the Justaucor. The four Officers are the Chancellor,
Master of the Ceremonies, Great Treasurer, and Secretary, who wear the same
Badges that are used by the Knights, even after they have sold their Offices.

The liberty which the Sons of the Farmers of the King's Revenue had obtained
to possess Employments in the superior Courts, had raised the price of those
Offices so high, that the Trade was considerably decayed. The Office of
Counselor in the Court of Aids, was sold for 40000 Crowns, that of Counselor
in the Great Council for 50000, of Counselor in the Parliament for 70000, of
Master of the Court of Accounts for 80000, of Master of Requests for 100000,
and that of President a Mortier for 400000. The King by Colbert's advice,
published an Edict in December 1665, by which the Rates of these Offices were
fixed; that of President a Mortier at 400000 Livres, of President in the Chamber
of Accounts at 300000, of President in the Court of Aids at 200000, of Master
of Requests at 150000, (but was afterward increased to 200000) of Counselor
in the Parliament at 100000, of Counselor in the Great Council at 90000, of
Counselor in the Court of Aids at 80000 Livres, of President a Mortier in the
other Parliaments, and President in the Chambers of Accounts at 40000 Crowns,
of the Counselors at 20000 Crowns, except those of Rhoan, that were raised to
70000, and of Mets, who were reduced to 36000. These Regulations were not at
first attended with the desired Success; for the Purchasers eluded the Force
and Design of the Edict by private Bargains, which raised the Prizes very high
above the appointed Rates. And therefore Colbert perceiving that there was no
other way to moderate the Prizes of those Offices, resolved to lessen their
Jurisdiction. During the King's Minority, the Superior Courts were ambitious
of raising their Privileges, in imitation of the Parliament of England, that
claims a share in the Royal Authority. The King himself carried his Edicts to
the Parliament, and sent 'em to the Chamber of Accounts by his Uncle the Duke
of Orleans, and to the Court of Aids by the Prince of Conde. The Edicts were
ordered to be registered in the King's Presence, after which the Parliament
examined 'em, and agreed to 'em with several Limitations; by that means
assuming a kind of Sovereign Power, not much different from that of the Crown.
It Is true, the Parliament of Paris according to its Original Institution, had a
right to take Cognizance of all the Affairs of the Kingdom; and that Body being
composed of the Three Orders, represented the States General of France. At that
time the Authority of the Parliament was both useful and innocent: Nor could
the Power of the King be invaded by that Assembly, since they met only at a
certain time of the Year, and their Session was confined to Six Weeks. But
after Lewis Hutin had rendered the Parliament a perpetual and fixed Court, he
reduced its Authority to a Right of judging the Differences of Private Persons:
And this Abridgement of its Jurisdiction became still more necessary when Henry
II. exposed the Offices to Sale; for Merit was no longer a necessary
Qualification of the Members of that Assembly, and the Secrets of the State
could not be safely entrusted to young and unexperienced Persons. Besides, it is
certain that if the Power and Jurisdiction of the Sovereign Courts had not been
restrained within their ancient Bounds, France had not been at present a
Monarchical State, the Government would have been reduced to an Aristocracy,
and the King made a Doge of Venice. For it is only that unlimited Power he now
enjoys, that has enabled him to execute those great Designs which make his
Reign the Subject of our Admiration. The Abuses that crept into the
Administration of Affairs during the Regency, made the Government subject to
two Inconveniences, that would have infallibly ruined the best contrived
Projects: Secrecy and Diligence are two necessary Qualifications in all those
that are entrusted with the Management of great Attempts; neither of which
could have been expected, if the King had been obliged to take the Advice of
the Parliament. For what Method could have been taken to prevent the divulging
of those Deliberations that depended upon the Votes of so many Persons? nor had
it ever been in the King's Power to take Advantage of any favorable Juncture,
if he could not have dispatched his Orders without summoning a Meeting of the
Chambers. The Ease and Interest of the People on which these Innovations were
pretended to be grounded, was a mere frivolous pretext; and never were they so
miserably oppressed as in those unhappy Times. These were the convincing
Reasons that Colbert urged to his Majesty, and in compliance with which, that
Monarch laid aside the usual Custom of keeping his Seat of Justice in the
Parliament, and of sending the Princes with his Edicts to the Chamber of
Accounts, and the Court of Aids: And besides, he saved 100000 Livres which he
must have given to the Duke of Orleans, and 50000 to the Prince of Conde. All
the Edicts passed without dispute: And the Parliament was afterward humbl'd to
such a degree, that Colbert contented himself with sending the Edicts to that
Assembly by one of the Conmmissaries of his Nephew Desmarets: And by this means
the Rates of Offices in that Company fell so low, that they are now sold for
70000 Livres. About the same time a stop was put to the Prosecution of the
Farmers; and an Amnesty was granted 'em by an Edict in December 1665, on
condition they should pay the Sums at which they were assess'd.

But all these important Affairs of State could not make Colbert forget the
embellishment of Versailles. The Architecture was already brought to
perfection; there was nothing wanting to complete that vast Design but suitable
Furniture, and the Ornaments of the inside; and these he resolved to make the
Object of his next Care. He settled a Manufactory at the Gobelins, and
committed the Management of it to le Brun, as the only fit Person for such an
Employment: That place was already famous for dying of Scarlet, the Water of
the River of Gobelins being endu'd with a peculiar quality to brighten the
Color, and give it that shining Luster which dazzles the Eye of the Beholder.
There Colbert ordered Tapestry-Hangings to be made for the King's use, after le
Brun's Designs: And in the same place he employed Artists about Inlaid
Stone-Work, of such exquisite and costly contrivance, that a square Foot of it
amounted to above 1000 Crowns. Only precious Stones were made use of in this
Work, and some of 'em were cut so small, that 'twas almost impossible to
discern 'em before they were put in their proper Places. This kind of Work is
very tedious, by reason of the hardness of the Materials, and it requires
several Years to finish one Square. There he also caused those vast pieces of
Goldsmith's-Work to be made, that were since carried to Versailles; such as
Tables, Stands, Pitchers, Bathing-Tubs, Boxes for Orange Trees, and
Candlesticks, which were equally admirable for their Largeness, and the
Curiousness of the Sculpture. In the same place there was a Gondola built for
the Canal of Versailles, and all the Ornaments were wrought for the great
Gallery. The Pilasters, Cornices, and generally all the parts of the
Architecture, and the Body of the Work is of Lapis Lazuli, garnished with
Ornaments of Brass gilt, according to Mansard's Design. The great Pannels
between the Pilasters are full of large Looking-Glasses, the Junctures of which
are hid by Branches of Ornaments and Grotesque Figures, spread over the Glasses
with so artful a Negligence, that twenty of the largest of 'em seem to be only
one Piece.

Venice, made Colbert set up a Glass-House in the Fauxburg of St. Anthony,
which he committed to the inspection of Ranchin, Secretary of the Council of
Finances, Pecquot, Clerk of the Council of Casualties, and Poquelain. Thither
the rough and unwrought Glasses are brought from Normandy; and there they are
polished and sold. There also the Quicksilver is laid on those that are
designed for Looking-Glasses, which are less chargeable, and some of 'em much
larger than those that are brought from Venice, though they are not so fine. At
the same time he settled a Manufactory of French Point, to lessen the excessive
chargeableness of the Point of Venice and Genoa, the price of which was risen
so high, that one pair of (...) was sold for 7000 Livres. The Count of Marsan,
youngest Son of the Count of Harcourt, having sent to Brussels for Mademoiselle
du Mont his Nurse, with her four Daughters, Petronille, Manque, Lisbette, and
Janeton: She entreated that Prince, for a Reward of the Care she had taken of
him during his Infancy, to obtain a Privilege for her to set up a Manufactory
of French Point at Paris. The Count spoke to Colbert in her favor, who, liking
the Proposal, settled her in the Fauxburg of St. Anthony, and gave her one of
the King's Hundred Switzers to guard her Door. Immediately she applied her self
to the prosecution of her Project, and gathered together above two hundred
Young-Women, among whom were several Daughters of Persons of Quality, by whose
assistance she made such fine Work that the Venice-Point was generally
slighted. The Manufactory was afterward removed to St. Saviours-street, and at
last to Chaumont-House, near St. Denis's-Gate. Mademoiselle du Mont having
married her eldest Daughter to a Norman called Marsan, went to Portugal with
Manque and Lisbette, and left the charge of her Manufactory to Mademoiselle de
Marsan. But as all Modes and Fashions are subject to frequent changes in
France, People grew weary of this sort of Point, both because of the difficulty
of blanching it, (for they were forced to raise the Embroidery at each
Washing,) and because its thickness made it seem less becoming on the Face.
There was Spanish Point made with little Flowers, which being very fine, was
esteemed more graceful by the Ladies: And at last the Mechlin-Lace coming in
fashion, that Manufactory was entirely laid aside.

Colbert had no reason to doubt of his Master's Favor, he thought fit to
secure his Fortune by powerful Alliances. On the 2d. of February 1667, he
married his Daughter Joan Mary Teresa to Charles Honor d' Albert, Duke de
Chevreuse, Peer of France, Knight of the King's Orders, Count of Montfort,
Baron of Chars, Lord of Marigni, Maran, etc. and Captain-Lieutenant of his
Majesty's Light Horse. The Duke de Chevreuse is the Son of Lewis Charles
Albert, Duke de Luines, Marquess d' Albert, Count de Tours, Baron of
Rochecorbon and Samblancey, Knight of the King's Orders, and Colonel of the
Regiment of Auvergne, who after the death of his first Wife, Louise Mary
Seguier, the only Daughter of Lewis Seguier, Marquess d'O, which happened on
the 14th. of September 1651, took for his second Wife, in the Year 1661, Ann de
Rohan Daughter of Hercules de Rohan Duke of Montbason, and of Mary d' Avaugour
his second Wife. Charles Marquess d' Albert, Grandfather of the Duke de
Chevreuse, Favorite of Lewis XIII, and Constable of France, procured the
Baronies of Luines, Rochecorbon, and Samblancey to be erected into a Duchy and
Peerage by the Title of The Duchy of Luines.

The great Charge the King was obliged to maintain during the War against
Spain, had obliged him to alienate the greatest part of his Demaine: But
Colbert being desirous to clear his Majesty's Revenues, persuaded him to
reunite the alienated Crown Lands to the rest of his Demaine; which was put in
execution by Virtue of an Edict set forth in April 1667, on condition to
reimburse the Purchasers; but since most of 'em had been taxed, the King had
but little to pay. The same Minister undertook the Reformation of Justice; and
the ill success of that Design was, perhaps, owing either to the Unskilfulness
of Pussort, and the rest whom he employed in compiling the Code, or to their
Unwillingness to remove the Foundations of Wrangling, lest the Officers of the
Courts of Judicature should remain without Employment. To demonstrate the
Uselesness of the new Regulation it must be observed, that the Litigious
Wrangling of Lawyers proceeds from Four Causes; the various Degrees of Officers
or Courts of Justice, the Contests about their Jurisdiction, frivolous Suits
and Forms, and the confounding of Matter of Fact with Matter of Law, which
makes it impossible to refer every Particular to its proper Head. The first
Inconveniency might have been easily remedied, by bringing the Appeals from the
Sentences of the Judges of Signiories to the Presidial Courts, to which they
are subordinate, where the Cause should be finally judged without any further
Appeal; and by bringing the Appeals from the Royal Jurisdictions immediately to
the Parliament, without stopping at the Presidial Courts. And if it be
objected, That the Parties would by such a Regulation be engaged in long and
chargeable Voyages; it ought to be considered, that there lies always an Appeal
to the Parliament from the Sentence of the Presidial Courts, that have
condemned or approved the Judgment of their subordinate Royal Courts of
Justice. And besides the Jurisdiction or District of the Parliament of Paris,
which is certainly too wide, might be divided into several Parts, by creating
two other Parliaments, one at Lions, and another at Poictiers; as likewise
Lower Languedoc might be taken from the Parliament of Thoulouse, by erecting
another at Nimes.

The Contests between Courts concerning their Jurisdictions, are chiefly
occasioned either because the Court of Aids has a Right to cite before it, all
the Causes in which the King's Farmers are concerned, or by reason of the
Audiences erected in the Courts of Inquest; which, according to ancient Custom,
belong only to the Great Chamber, as that alone has a Registry of Enrollments;
for every Court reclaiming its Jurisdiction under Pretext of some incidental
Controversy, there are an infinite number of Disputes occasioned. And besides
these, Contests are frequently owing to the Opposition against Sentences or
Decrees obtained for want of Appearance, or of defending the Farmer at the
Great Chamber, though the Petitions were presented to one of the Chambers of
Inquest. The Code requires these Cases to be judged at the Bar, which is the
true way to make the Decision of the Incident or Bye-matter last longer than
the Judgment of the Main Suit, because the Advocates cannot be made to confer;
and there is always a Return in Law against the Sentences given according to
the Opinion of the Bar. The only way to redress these Inconveniences is, with
respect to the First, to restrain the Courts of Requests of the Palace, and
other ordinary Jurisdictions, from taking Cognizance of Matters belonging to
the Court of Aids; or else to hinder the Court of Aids from withdrawing a Cause
from the other Courts of which they are actually possessed. And the Second
might be easily remedied, by reducing the Courts of Inquest to their Primitive
State, and by ordering all Incidents to be judged in the Court called The
Chamber of the Council, and all Petitions to be carried thither; and either
joined, if they have a Relation to the main Suit, or judged on the Verbal
Relation of the Reporter, if they be conditional or include a Proviso. This
Regulation would also reddress another Abuse: for the Hearings at several
Courts of Inquest falling out in one day; and there being also an Audience at
the Court, called the Tournelle Civil, at the very same Hour, it is impossible
for the Advocates or Counselors at Law to be present in all those places at
once, and therefore they are forced to incur the Penalty for want of
Appearance, which might be prevented if there were no Audiences at the Courts
of Inquest, for then they would all remain at the Tournelle Civil. It Is true,
there are Hearings at the same Hour at the Courts of Requests, in the Palace
and in the Townhouse; but that Inconveniency might be also regulated, by
excluding the Advocates under Ten Years standing from the Superior Courts, and
by restraining the old Advocates from pleading before the subaltern or inferior
Courts.

If we consider the idle and unprofitable Pleadings or Forms, it will appear
that the Code ought to cut off the Contradictions, Rejoinders, Replications,
and all the New or Additional Proofs and Reviews, which only make way for the
Repetition of what had been urged a hundred times before. And besides there is
another great Abuse, concerning the Defaults for want of timely Defense; for
the Attorneys to gain time, demand in the general a Copy of all the Instruments
or Pleadings, without mentioning particularly which are necessary to 'em, and
after they have incurred the Default, they are received as Opponents, without
any previous Examination, whether their Exceptions are well or ill-grounded.
The only effectual way to redress this Abuse, is to ordain that the Cause shall
be judged only by those Pieces or Instruments of which Copies have been given,
with an Express Prohibition to make use of any others; and this being supposed,
if the Proctor or Attorney do not put in his Defense within the time limited by
the Regulation, that in that Case he may and shall be fined in his own Name;
and that it shall not be in the Judge's Power to moderate the Fine. And besides
the Attorneys ought to be restrained from withdrawing their Allegations, and
obliged to communicate 'em to the Reporter: for though the Regulation has made
'em liable to a Pecuniary Mulct, instead of Bodily Restraint, they never pay
any thing, though by this means they have gained a great deal of time.

The last Article is of greatest Importance, since it relates to the
Manifestation of the Truth, which the Advocates endeavor to disguise with
their Forms and Pleadings, so that it is almost impossible for the Judge to
discover it. For it is their constant Practice to spend the time allowed 'em in
several Audiences in the Pleading of one Cause, which is often referred, and in
the mean time the Claims are not dispatched; besides that, the Cause being put
off from Week to Week, it becomes a hard Task to remember what has been already
alleged. And therefore to prevent such an useless Waste of Time, the Plantiff
ought to present an Account of the Matter of Fact, which the Defendant should
return corrected. And if the two Proctors or Attorneys cannot come to an
Agreement concerning the Manner of Pleading, the Advocates should endeavor to
agree at the Bar; or if they cannot reconcile their Differences, they should
sign a Referment, which ought to be indors'd, and no Cause brought to Hearing,
till the Matter of Fact be unexceptionably clear, and only some Questions of
Law remain to be decided: Then he that pleads first should read the Account of
the Matter of Fact, and afterward allege his Reasons, to prove his Claim in
Law; expecting the Reply of the Opponent. Thus, only rare and nice Causes would
be pleaded, and the Audience being freed from the overwhelming Multitude of
Suits, would quickly dispatch all that came before 'em; nor would there be any
occasion for Rolls. Besides, the same Custom that is sometimes observed at the
Chastelet, ought to be be introduced into the Subaltern Courts: The Attorneys
should be obliged to regulate petty Affairs among themselves, and when they
cannot agree, to referr the Case to an old Practitioner, endorsing the
Referment, from whence an Appeal might be brought before the Tournelle Civil;
and since it is to be supposed that only important Cases would be pleaded, a
farther Appeal might be made to the Great Chamber.

I shall, in the next place, proceed to some particular Instances, and consider
the usual Practice with relation to Seizures, Arrests, Executions, and Decrees
or Orders for Sale of Goods. As for Seizures and Attachments, when a Man finds
himself unable to pay his Debts, he is reduced to Beggary, with the seized
Goods in his possession; and during the time that is spent in the Valuation, he
becomes insolvent, or the Sums that were seized are consumed by the charge of
the Distribution. This Abuse might be prevented, by ordaining that the Debtor
should immediately consign, as soon as the Goods are seized in his Possession;
and that the Distribution be made by an old Attorney, without any other charge
than six Deniers in the Livre. As for Executions, it is certain that the charge
of the Sale consumes the greatest part of what it amounts to; whereas it might
be enacted, that he who procures the Execution shall take the distrain'd Goods
at the price set upon 'em by the Sergeant, and that the Owner may claim and
recover 'em, before a Month be expired, if he can find one who will allow him a
greater Price. The case is still worse with respect to Decrees for Sale of
Goods, the charge of which amounts to excessive Sums: But this Grievance might
be also redressed, by granting to the Attacher the Enjoyment and Possession of
the seized Goods, who should be obliged to restore the Overplus of the Price,
(after the satisfaction of his own Claim) to be distributed among the
Opponents, on condition, that he may be cast by the same Opponents within a
Year, reimbursing the principal Sum, Interest, and Charge. I could add many
other Remarks on the Forms of Proceeding at Law, but I have already said as
much on that Subject as the succinctness of my intended History will allow.

About the same time Nicholas de la Regnie, then Master of Requests, and now
Counselor of State, was made Lieutenant of the Polity or Government of the
City of Paris, which would have certainly received great Advantages by this
new-created Office, if a larger Jurisdiction had been annexed to it; and if at
the same time some necessary Regulations had been made for the security of the
City and of Trade. It Is true, that new Magistrate has redressed several Abuses,
and in some measure suppressed the Insolency of Robbers, which was grown so
intolerable, that 'twas not safe to walk in the Night without a Guard. But the
City is not perfectly freed from that inconveniency; for the Watchmen are
either Robbers themselves, or in League with others that are so; and the
Commissaries of the Chastelet are too remiss in the performance of their Duty
in their respective Wards; either out of Carelessness, or for fear of hazarding
their Lives Nevertheless there might be several Ways found out to put an entire
stop to these Disorders. The First is, to oblige the Owners of Houses, or their
principal Tenants, when the Landlords do not live in their own Houses, to keep
their Doors locked after Nine a-clock at night in Winter, and Ten in Summer, so
that none can go out or come in without their knowledge; and to give notice to
the Lieutenant of the Polity of those who are wont to go abroad too frequently
in the Night, that he may proceed against 'em as he shall think fit. In the
second place, the Landlords or their chief Tenants, might be enjoined to seize
on all the Firearms that are in their Houses, and not to restore 'em to the
Owners, till they take Horse to go into the Country. Thirdly, all Persons
should be forbidden to go to the places whither the People resort to smoke
Tobacco, under pain of being sent to the Galleys; for those places are the
Rendezvous of Rogues and Disorderly Persons. The Fourth and surest way to
prevent these Abuses, would be to put the Government of the City into the hands
of the Citizens, who are most concerned, and would consequently be most
diligent in the preservation of its Peace and Security: And, for that effect,
'twou'd be expedient in all the Quarters or Wards of the City, to establish
Captains with their Officers, who might be changed every three Years. These
Captains might be obliged to keep Registers of all Persons in their respective
Wards, of their Age, Profession, and Estate; whether they are Boys or Girls; in
the state of Marriage or of Widowhood: So that no Person could come to live in
any part of the City without the knowledge and leave of the Captain of that
Ward, who might be enjoined not to grant a permission to that effect, till a
Certificate were produced from the Captain of the Ward, where the Newcomer had
his last abode, testifying that there were no Complaints against him all the
while he lived there, and showing the reason of his Removal. And if it be a
Stranger newly come to Town, he might be obliged to bring a Certificate to the
same purpose, from the Magistrates of the City where he lived. In the mean
time, since the Captain of the Ward could not be in justice obliged to undergo
so much trouble without some reward, there might be a moderate Fee appointed to
be given for every Certificate. And besides 'twou'd be convenient, in every
public place where Streets meet, to set up a Bell of a sufficient bigness to
be heard at the Captain's Lodging, and to ring an Alarm on occasion of any
Disorder or Tumult, whether by Night or by Day. And at the same time the
Citziens listed in the Company of the Ward might be obliged to take Arms, and
attend the Captain, who is to march with his Company to the Place where the
Alarm was rung, to quiet the Tumult, secure the Authors of it, and draw up an
Information to be signed by all the Assistants, and produced before the
Lieutenant Criminal, as a sufficient Evidence for passing Sentence against the
Rioteers. Besides, the Captain alone should be empowered to cause any Citizen
within the Bounds of his Ward, to be Arrested or Apprehended either for Debt or
Crimes, and to serve Executions on Moveable Goods; which would be a means to
prevent the Roguish Tricks of Sergeants, who are oftentimes wont to rob those
Houses whither they are sent to serve an Execution, or arrest a Prisoner. And,
finally, there might be a certain Day appointed in every Week, on which the
Lieutenant of the Polity should be informed of all Occurrences by the Captains
of the Wards, and give 'em such Instructions and Orders as he should judge fit
to be executed.

There is also another Abuse, no less intolerable than those already
mentioned, relating to Women that make a Trade of Debauchery; who are treated
either with too much Rigor or Indulgence on several Occasions: For the
Commissaries are bribed to connive at those infamous Practices; and if at any
time they seize and imprison lewd Women, they are commonly such as retain some
sense of Decency, whose Houses are best stored with Furniture, and their
Persons may be apprehended with less danger; while common Prostitutes are
suffered to live unmolested, secured by their Poverty, and their Guard of
Bullies. Nevertheless, it is certain that this Method is directly opposite to
that which ought to be observed; neither ought the Officers to content
themselves barely with dislodging those unhappy Creatures, since they only
remove to another Street, where they set up the same Trade as before. The care
of redressing those Abuses ought to be committed to the Captain of the Ward,
who being informed of the lewd Practices of those Whores, and of the Women that
procure 'em, should either banish 'em out of the City, or shut 'em up for ever
in the Hospital. This Regulation would be attended with two very advantageous
Consequences; for Paris would at once be freed from Debauchery, and dispeopl'd
of Ruffians, who are maintained by those Women. But those who make a
considerable Figure in the World, if they occasion no scandal in the
Neighborhood, and keep constant to one Man, ought not to be molested; and even
they who take a greater Liberty, and are not willing to be confined to one
Person, if they be rich, and receive none but civil Persons into their Houses,
should only be obliged to wear some Marks of Distinction, as at Rome. Thus they
might be ordered never to go abroad in Coaches or Chairs, and never to wear
Hoods, Coifs, Scarves or Gloves, that their Character and Occupation might be
known by their Dress; for that would be the most effectual Method to lessen
their Numbers insensibly.

The great Fines that are imposed on those who play at forbidden Games, have in
some measure produced the Effect for which they were designed; yet there are
still some Houses where Gaming is very frequent, and runs very high; and (which
is worse) there are professed Rooks, who live on what they get by cheating, and
are supported by their Confederate Hectors, with whom they share their
dishonest Gain. To suppress those Abuses, 'twou'd be convenient to limit the
Sums that are hazarded, so that none might lose above Ten Pistoles at any sort
of Game, condemning those that suffer higher Gaming in their Houses, to be
fined 1000 Crowns, and those who cheat at Play, to the Galleys; to be convicted
by the Complaints of the bubbl'd Losers, and the Testimony of the Spectators.
The Captain of the Ward might be empowered and ordered to make diligent Search
after those who are guilty of these Disorders, and to make his Enquiry the more
successful, the third part of the Fine might be given to the Informer; and
since there would be a Man out of each House, in the Company, 'twou'd be
impossible to conceal or disguise the Truth.

There cannot be a more pernicious Practice than the Usury of those who lend
Money on Pledges: But the care that is taken to punish Usurers, serves only to
increase the Abuse. For since they dare not drive their Trade openly, they make
use of He and She-Brokers, who bring the Pledges, and carry away the Money. Now
these Brokers are mere pilferring Vagabonds, who, having nothing to lose,
assume a Privilege to commit any Villainy. Thus they give but a part of the
Money to the Borrowers, and make 'em pay more than they received, when they are
desirous to redeem their Clothes, which are oftentimes utterly lost, because
it is impossible for 'em to discover whither the Brokers carried 'em. So that
'twere certainly better to tolerate the lending of Money on Pawns; for then
People would give their Clothes to responsible Persons, who would oblige
themselves to restore 'em.

There are also great Abuses committed in the retailing of Commodities, since
the Prizes are not fixed, as they are in other Countries. Now the Price of
Corn, and consequently that of Bread, might be regulated immediately after
Harvest. And there ought to be only two Prizes permitted to be taken for the
Wine sold in Taverns, that is, from Three to Four Sous for Tradesmen, and from
Six to Eight for the better sort of Citizens: Nor should these Vintners be
suffered to escape unpunished, who mingle Drugs with their Wine, that are
prejudicial to the Health of the Drinker. Besides, about Easter there ought to
be a Price set for the whole Year on the Meat in the Shambles, by the Pound;
and for the Provisions in the Market, it is an useless Precaution to restrain
the Cooks from buying till after Nine a-clock, for the Peasants will sell
nothing to private Persons till the Cooks are provided. To prevent these
Abuses, the Cooks should be ordered in the Morning to set a Price on each sort
of Fowl, and a Bill with the several Prizes hung up at each End of the Market:
and the the Country People should be obliged, under Pain of Forfeiting their
Panniers, to let Private Persons have their Goods for Two Pence more in the
Pound Weight; and for the better Execution of these Regulations, a Commissary
should be appointed to inspect the Sale of Provisions till Eleven a Clock. It Is
an astonishing Effect of Luxury, to give 50 Crowns for a Somewhat more than a
Pint.
Litron of Green Pease, as some Persons have actually done; and therefore
'twou'd be convenient to regulate the Prizes of Pulse and Fruit, at their first
coming into Season; and care should also be taken to hinder the Country People
from filling their Baskets with Leaves, and putting only so much Fruit, as
appears outwardly on the Top.

The Usurpation of Noble Titles was none of the least Abuses that crept into
the Kingdom, during the Troubles. 'Twas the usual Practice of those who were
scarce Gentlemen, to assume the Title of Counts and Marquisses; and the Sons of
Merchants had the Impudence to add a Coronet to their Coat of Arms, because
they were possessed of some Offices. These Rhodomontado's occasioned the Pun of
one of our Comical Poets;

Depuis que dans Paris on s' est emmarquise
On trouve a chaque pas un Marquis suppose.
In order to the redressing of this Abuse, Colbert ordered the Claims of those
counterfeit Nobles to be examined: and all those who pretended a Right to the
Privileges of the Nobility, were obliged to produced their Titles before the
Intendants of the respective Provinces. And besides, they who had in public
Deeds assumed the Title of Knight or Esquire, and were not able to prove their
Claim to those Honors, were not only made liable to the common Taxes, but were
forced to submit to an extraordinory Assessment.

Colbert applied himself to the Reformation of the State, but in the mean time
he neglected not the Advancement of his Family. The King had declared War
against Spain, in Pursuance of his Right to those Countries in the Netherlands
that were lapsed and devolved to the Queen; and had already made himself Master
of several Places, the Principal of which were Douay, Tournay, Lille, Courtray,
Oudenarde, and Charleroy, with all the Franche-Comte. Clement IX. who was
lately made Pope, had employed his Ministers to negotiate a Peace between the
two Crowns, and the Conferences were appointed to be held at Aix la Chapelle.
Colbert procured the Dignity of his Majesty's Plenipotentiary for his Brother
Charles, who arrived at that City with a Magnificent Equipage, and was shortly
after followed by the Baron de Bergeyk, sent in the same Quality by his
Catholic Majesty; Franciotti, the Pope's Nuncio, Sir William Temple, the
English Ambassador, and Beverning, Ambassador from the States General,
performing the Office of Mediators. The French maintained that by Right of
Devolution, which takes place and is in force in the Duchy of Brabant, the
Lordship of Mechlin, the Marquisate of the Holy Empire, the County of Aloste,
High Guelderland, of which Ruremond is the Capital City, the County of Namur,
the Duchy of Limburg, the Lordships of Dalem, Valquemburg or Fauquemont,
Roder-le-Duc, and other places beyond the Meuse, the County of Arlon, the
Duchy of Cambray, Franche-Comte and the Duchy of Luxemburg, the Daughters of
the first Marriage excluded the Males born in the second. To this Right the
Spaniards opposed the Queen's Renunciation by her Contract of Marriage, of her
Claim to the Inheritance of the Estates belonging to her Father and Mother,
pretending that her Renunciation was a Part of the Pyrenean Treaty. The French
would not allow of that Connection, affirming that they were two separate Acts,
and besides, that the Renunciation was void, as relating to an Inheritance that
was not yet fallen, and that she could not abrogate the local Custom of those
Provinces; especially since the Condition of the Renunciation was not
accomplished, the Dowry stipulated by the Contract not being paid: and 'twas
further alleged, that she never renounced the Inheritance of her Brother,
Prince Baltasar, who inherited the Dowry of Elizabeth of France his Mother.
Though all these Reasons were more than sufficient to assert the Queen's Right,
and though the King was able to maintain her Title by his Arms, he chose rather
to relinquish part of it for the Love of Peace. He offered to restore
Franche-Comte, that belonged to him both by Right of Succession and of
Conquest, and to content himself with the Places he had taken in Flanders.
Charles Colbert made the Spaniards and Mediators so sensible of the Reasons on
which the King his Master's Claim was founded, that the Baron de Bergeyk
received as a Favor the Offers of his most Christian Majesty. Thus the Treaty
was signed on the second of May, 1668. and the Brother of our Minister by so
successful a Negotiation, opened a way to a higher Preferment.

Colbert had no reason to complain of the Ingratitude of his Master: He was
made Secretary of State in the room of Guenegaud, and was entrusted with the
Management of Affairs relating to the Sea; nor were his Performances in that
Post unsuitable to the Confidence his Majesty reposed in him. For he was so
industrious to augment the Naval Forces, that the King may style himself Master
of the Sea; since in the time of Peace there is no Nation that dares refuse to
salute his Flags.

That Minister who made it his principal Care to enrich his Master, by
suppressing all the Rights and Offices that might be chargeable to him, began
with the Parisis, and the Rents upon the Entries, that were created on the
Third Penny and a half, and yielded Interest at the Seventh Penny, there being
only a Fund for two Quarters. The Duties on the Gabels of Languedoc, and the
Offices of the King's Advocate and Attorney, for the Garners and Chambers of
that Province, had the same Fate: and since he could easily exact the Taxes
imposed on those who had been concerned in public Business, out of the
Reimbursements that were due to 'em from the suppressed Rights, Rents and
Offices; he procured by the Edict that abrogated the Chamber of Justice, all
those that were taxed to be restored to their Lands or Immovable Estates, that
had been seized, and even ordered to be sold; contenting himself with retaining
their Reimbursements. But he excluded from receiving any Benefit by that Act of
Grace, the three Treasurers of the Exchequer, the Monerot's, Languet, Bance,
and the Heirs of Girardin, for the Reasons alleged in the Beginning of his
Life.

In the mean time, perceiving the King's Zeal for the Extirpation of Heresy,
he suppressed the Chamber instituted by the Edicts of Paris and Rhoan, though
they were not equally divided as those of Castres and Guien (which were
abrogated some Years before), but admitted only one Huguenot, Counselor,
every Year. It Is true, there was also one of that Persuasion in each of the
Courts of Inquest, but afterward as their Places became vacant, they were
supplied by Catholics. At the same time there was a Tournelle Civil erected,
to judge of all Causes under 1000 Crowns, to ease the Great Chamber and Courts
of Inquest, whither all the Suits were transferred, that were depending in the
Chamber of the Edict at the time of its Suppression. And besides, the Form of
the Court of Vacations was changed; for whereas formerly each President a
Mortier presided in it for the Space of a Week, and Affairs of small Importance
were determined there, by a definitive Sentence: two Presidents were appointed
every Year, one to preside in the others Absence, from the 9th of September to
S. Simon and Jude's Day, and its Jurisdiction was confined to Matters implying
a Condition or Proviso. These new Creations are of no great Importance, nor do
they afford Matter for Variety of Reflections: but 'twill not be improper to
insist somewhat longer on the Examination of the Criminal Code, the Regulation
of the Council, and the Orders for the Committimus or Special Letters of
Privilege.

The Criminal Code is as useless as the Civil: for Affairs of small Importance
are oftentimes kept longer in Agitation, than Prosecutions for the most
enormous Crimes; and the Judges neglect these Cases in which the Public is
most deeply concerned, especially if there be no private Person to carry on the
Pursuit at his proper Cost. These Abuses proceed from a twofold Cause: First,
the Lieutenant Criminal of the Chastelet is overcharged with Multiplicity of
Business; for I mention only that Officer, because in other Courts of Justice,
Affairs are dispatched with greater Expedition. Secondly, the Forms of
Proceeding are too long, both at the first hearing, and after an Appeal. Now to
enable the Lieutenant Criminal to use greater Expedition in the dispatching of
all sorts of Affairs, and not to neglect those that are not managed by a
private Person, I would appropriate to the Courts of Request in the Palace, the
Cognizance and Judgment of all Actions and Pursuits against Gentlemen; and to
restrain private Persons from entering their Accusations against Noble Persons
before the abovementioned Officer; I would have the Courts of Request in the
Palace abrogate and cancel all that is done at the Chastelet to the Prejudice
of their Jurisdiction; and if Gentlemen be not directly comprehended in the
Accusation, but involved in it by the Examination of others that are accused,
in that Case the Lieutenant Criminal should be obliged to remit the Process to
the Courts of Request, and in Case of Failure should be liable to be called in
question, and even interdicted by those Courts if they think fit. I would also
appropriate to the Provost of the Isle of France, and the Lieutenant of the
short Robe, the Cognizance of all Causes and Criminal Actions against Persons
that have no Habitation, in which number should be comprehended all Pages or
Valets de Chamber, Servants that wear Livery, and Vagabonds that have no other
Employment than to wander about the Streets, though they lodge not in a furnished
Room: One of these Officers might be appointed to judge and take Cognizance of
all Crimes committed in the Country, and the other, of those that are committed
in the City; with an express Prohibition to the Lieutenant Criminal, and
Commissaries of the Chastelet, to proceed against Persons of that Character.
And to oblige the King's Attorney and Lieutenant of the Short Robe not to
suffer those to go unpunished who are not charged by a private Person; I would
have all those that are condemned to undergo corporal Punishment by the
Lieutenant Criminal or Courts of Request, to be fined also in considerable
Sums; which should remain as a Fund in the Hands of the Receiver, never to be
diverted to any other Use, but only for the Payment of the Charges and Damages
of those who shall pursue these Vagabonds, who have nothing to lose, and can
make no Reparation: for private Persons would willingly become Prosecutors, if
they were sure to recover their Damages. As for the Forms of Proceeding,
'twou'd be convenient to abolish all Assignments or Appointments over, to be
heard on a Personal Summons, and from the Summons on an Order for Corporal
Seizure. If there be no cause to require a Warrant for Corporal Seizure,
'twou'd be sufficient to take out an Order of the Judge to cite the Person
accused to appear before him, on such a Day and Hour, there to be examined and
interrogated; and in case of Nonappearance, for the Profit of the Failure, the
Reparations awarded by a definitive Sentence might be adjudg'd to the King's
Attorney and the Accuser, without leaving room for an Appeal. But the Judges
ought to proceed with more Caution, in issuing out Orders of Corporal Seizure
against Gentlemen, and never to give any such Warrants but in case of Capital
Crimes: whereas, on the contrary, the Prosecution of Vagabonds should begin
with Seizure of their Bodies, which should be immediately followed with
Examination on the Complaint made against 'em, and that with Information.
Banishment is, in my Opinion, a Punishment that ought never to be inflicted on
those who have no Reputation or Sense of Honor; for to what purpose should a
Sentence be given against a Criminal who is neither afraid of its Execution,
nor will perform what it ordains. It Is plain then that 'twou'd be a great deal
better to order the Men into the King's Service, and the Women to be
imprisoned, or (for great Offenses) to be transported to the American Colonies:
and the best way to punish those that are rich, is to drain their Purses. As
for Prosecutions of Persons without a particular Description of the Party
accused, the Action ought never to be prepared for Hearing, nor proceed further
than a bare Information; for under that Disguise a Design may be carried on
against Persons of Quality, to charge 'em with Crimes of which they were never
guilty. And besides 'twou'd be highly convenient to regulate the Jurisdictions
of Courts and Officers of Justice, that there might be no Contests between 'em,
either by settling the Extent of their Authority, or by ordaining that every
Action should remain where 'twas first entered, till it be determined by a
definitive Sentence.

As for the Council, I would take away all Evocations or Removals of Causes
from one Court to another, and the Rules of Judges, which put the Parties to a
vast Charge, without deciding the Main Suit; and create for that Effect a Court
of Evocations, to sit at Lions or Poictiers, which should be composed of a
President a Mortier, and two Counselors of the Parliament of Paris, a
President and two Counselors of the Great Council, a President and two
Counselors of the Court of Aids, and two Counselors out of each Parliament
and Court of Aids in the Kingdom, to be taken, one from the Seniors, and
another from the Juniors, and changed yearly. This Court should judge all
Causes removed or transferred from any other Court whatsoever; and to avoid
troublesome Enquiries into contested Parentages, all the Officers of each
Company should be obliged to remit their Genealogies into the hands of the
Attorney General, containing 16. Quarters, of which a Book should be composed
and reprinted every Year, as the State of France, with all the Changes and
Alterations happening by Death, Marriage, or Sale of Office. Thus when a Cause
should happen to be transferred, the Book of the Genealogies of the Company,
where the Cause was in dependence, might be consulted for a Proof of the
controverted Parentage; and without further Trouble, Letters might be granted
under the Great Seal, importing a Referment to the Court of Evocations. As for
the Rules of Judges, as soon as a Conflict is formed, instead of taking out a
Writ in pursuance of a Judge's Rule, Letters of Referment would be dispatched
to the Court of Evocations. The same Court might also be empowered to judge of
Reviews or Appeals of Judgment; after the Council, upon a Petition communicated
to the Party, and his Answer, without any other Instruction, should conclude
that there was an Overture for a Repeal or Review. The Constitution of this
Court would be attended with one very considerable Advantage, as being composed
of Officers belonging to all the other Courts, so that they could not be
ignorant of the Customs and Manner of Proceeding in the Companies from whence
any Suit might happen to be transferred; which is the usual Inconveniency of
the Removal of a Cause to another Parliament or Court of Aids, though next to
that where the Cause was depending; since it is certain that the Parliament of
Paris is not better acquainted with the Customs and Manner of Proceeding in the
Parliament of Rhoan, than with those that are observed in the Parliament of
Thoulouse; and the same Remark is equally applicable to the rest. As for the
Reviews of Judgment, since they are remitted to the same Chamber, the Sentence
formerly given is very rarely annulled afterward.

It must be acknowledged that the New Regulation of Committimus's, or Special
Commissions in behalf of priviledg'd Persons to their proper Judges, has in a
very considerable measure taken care to prevent the abusing of that Privilege,
by depriving those who have a Right to it of the Power of making use of it for
small Sums, or of lending their Name to their Friends, since they are obliged
to signify and give notice of the Assignments they have obtained, a Year
before they can put in their Claims at the Courts of Requests either in the
Palace or Townhouse, for the Payment of what is made over to 'em. But it is no
less certain, that many important Additions might be made to that Regulation;
for though the Officers of the King and Princes, and other priviledg'd Persons
ought not to be diverted from giving personal Attendance, by going to manage
Lawsuits in Places remote from the Court, yet their Privileges are attended
with this Inconveniency, that many Persons are forced to relinquish their
undoubted Rights, merely to avoid a chargeable Journey to Paris. And therefore
there ought to be a middle way found out to save the Privileges of one Party,
and the Rights of the other. Thus the Intendants of the Place where such
Differences arise, might take cognizance of those Cases, and endeavor to
reconcile the contending Parties: but if the Agreement seem impracticable, the
same Officers might transmit to one of the Masters of Requests, the respective
Instructions and Claims of both Parties, with an Extract of 'em, and their own
Opinion at the end of it: And a Report of those Pieces might be made to the
Council without further Charge or other Writings, on which a Mandamus might be
issued out. In the mean time, since the Courts of Request in the Palace ought
not in Justice to be left without Employment, besides the Right of Judging in
Criminal Cases, in which Gentlemen are concerned, these Courts ought to have
the first Hearing of all Suits and Cases relating to Marriage, Separation,
Controversies about Estates, Reclaiming of Vows, Testaments, Substitutions or
Deputations, Deeds of Gift, and all other provisional Cases, whether the
Parties concerned have a Right to the Committimus or not. For it is not suitable
to the Dignity of these Courts, that consist of Members of Parliament to
determine Controversies concerning Heirs, Seizures, Repairing of Houses,
Conditions of Service, Servants Wages, and other petty Cases that ought not to
be removed out of the Chastelet. Besides since there are two of those Courts,
they might by Turns, and from Month to Month, take cognizance of Civil and
Criminal Cases: and 'twou'd be sufficient for the Courts of Request in the
Townhouse, to meddle only with those Cases which they are empowered to
determine Sovereignly, and without Appeal.

There were also Two Edicts published in 1669, one for the Controllment of
Warrants or Dispatches, and the other relating to the Fines that are to be
consigned for Appeals. The first is most certainly advantageous to the Public,
because it prevents Ante-dates, which were very frequent before; though at the
same time 'twou'd be no less convenient to hinder the counterfeiting of
Warrants, which might be easily done, by obliging the Sergeants to cause 'em to
be signed by those on whom they are served, or in case of Refusal, by any other
Persons, who might be called for that purpose, and the Refusers might be fined
on the Verbal Report of the Sergeant, attested by two Witnesses signing the
same with him. But the same Character cannot be given of the other Edict, which
augments the Charges of those who have the best Right; since they must advance
the Fine before the Appeal can be judged. And therefore to make this Edict
useful, it ought to be provided that the Sentence might be executed without
giving Bail, till the Appealer had consigned the Fine, which would be more
effectual if it were augmented: And besides 'twou'd be convenient to oblige the
Opponents to acquiesce in the Sentence, and the rest to consign before they be
admitted to oppone: for such a Regulation would lessen the Number of Judgments
on Default. The Parliament of Thoulouse resolving to hinder the Execution of
the Edict for the Controllment of Warrants, issued out an Order to oblige those
who were appointed to levy that Duty, to restore a Horse, that had been sold
for the Payment of the Fine awarded against Deficients. The first President was
not accessory to the passing of the Order; but Colbert gave him to understand
that 'twas expected the Parliament would cancel it, unless they were resolved
to draw a severe Punishment on the whole Body. The same Minister wrote also to
the Sollicitor-General, and to the Advocates-General, exhorting 'em to a more
diligent Performance of their Duties for the future. The Parliament endeavored
to ward the Blow, and proposed several other Expedients; by which they thought
to save their Honor, yet at last they were obliged to buy their Peace by
cancelling the Order. But they were not the only Objects of Colbert's Severity;
for the Lieutenant of the Polity met with a no less rigorous Treatment, for
endeavoring to oppose the Lease of the little Shops that belong to the King's
Domaine, under Pretext that it would occasion a Mutiny among the
Herring-Sellers: nevertheless the Lease passed, and the Lieutenant was forced
to truckle.

The main Design of that Minister in reforming the Manner of Proceeding at Law,
was to give the People more leisure to apply themselves to Trading; for the
Advancement of which he procured an Edict, containing 29 Articles, to be
registered the same Year, importing the Creation of a Company or Office, for
Ensuring the Adventurers of France in the City of Paris. Several Merchants had
found a way to avoid considerable Losses, by paying moderate Rates for Ensuring
their Vessels and Goods. And that all Traders might have the same Advantage, of
lessening the Hazards they run in the ordinary Course of their Trade, for their
further Encouragement to undertake and carry on considerable Adventures with
more Ease and Security; Colbert caused a Company for a General Ensuring-Office,
with Common Stock and Seals, to be incorporated and settled in St.
Martin's-Street, which being in the Middle of the City, was the most convenient
place for all Parties concerned. There a House was hired and Meetings held, to
treat of the Affairs of the Society, with a Permission to the Merchants,
Adventurers, and others of the Cities of Rohan, Nantes, St. Malo, Rochel and
other Places, who were already engaged in a like Project, to continue the same,
as before. The Edict requires, that there be a Principal Stock or Fund of
300000 Livres, and that the Company shall consist of Thirty Officers, Five of
'em to be elected by Plurality of Voices, to execute the Office of Directors
for a limited Time; Two of the Five to be removed six Months after their
Election, Three more after other six Months, and so every six Months
successively, a like Number being always chosen to succeed 'em; so that there
are still two or three Directors who cannot be continued for above two
successive Elections, and in that Number there must always be three Traders.
The Contract of the Society containing 43 Articles, was presented to the King
by the thirty Associates: whose Names are here inserted; de Lagni,
Director-General of Trade; Soulete Desvieus, le Fevre, Rousseau, le Javiel,
Matry, de Vitri la Ville, T. de Lile, Charles le Brun, Chauvin, Tardif,
Poquelin, Hebert, P. Chauvin, Cl. le Brun, Pasquier, Paignon, A. Pelletier,
Molliere, Barry, Cousinet, N. Soullet, Gaillart, de Loubert, Franchepin,
Herson, de la Rivoire, de Meur, and Ceberet.

Colbert was still mindful of his being a Parent of Children, as well as a
Minister of State.

On the 21th of January, 1671. he married his Daughter Henrietta to Paul de
Beauvilliers, Duke of S. Aignan, Peer of France, Knight of the King's Orders,
first Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, Governor and Lieutenant General
of the Town and Citadel of Havre de Grace, Camp-Master of the Regiment of S.
Aignan, Son of Francis de Beauvilliers, Count and afterward Duke of S. Aignan,
and of Antoinette de Servien, Daughter of Nicholas Servien, Counselor of
State, and of Mary Groulard. The Country of S. Aignan fell to the House of
Beauvilliers, by the Marriage of Emeri de Beauvilliers, Bailiff and Governor
of Berry, with Louise de Husson-Tonnere.

Colbert seemed to have made it a main part of his Care to ease Pleaders, by
abridging the tedious and wrangling Forms of Law, and preventing Abuses; but
the bringing in of Marked Paper and Parchment raised the Charge of Suits to so
prodigious a height, that it ruined most of those who were engaged in 'em. If
it had been only appointed to be used for writing the Instruments or Deeds of
Notaries, and Sentences, it might have been looked upon as an Invention to
prevent Ante-dates, since by reason of the frequent Alteration of the Marks,
'twou'd be hard to find immediately any Paper or Parchment that was in use at
the time of the false Date. But to what purpose should Petitions, Inventories,
and Replications be written on Marked Paper? And why should the Grievance be
made still more intolerable, by obliging Attorneys not to exceed a certain
Number of Lines in every Page, and even fixing the Number of Words that are to
be contained in each Line?

Colbert, who was desirous to obtain the Reversion of the Office of Secretary
of State for his Eldest Son, the Marquess de Seignelay, sent him abroad to
visit the principal Courts of Europe, under the Inspection of Isarn, who was
recommended to him by Pelisson. The Young Traveller took a View of Italy,
Germany, and England, and on his Father's Account was received every where with
extraordinary Respect. His Tutor Isarn, had the Misfortune to die in an Inn at
his Return to Paris; for the Door of his Chamber being double-lock'd, and the
Key carried away by the Marquess's Servants, he was suddenly taken ill, and
having in vain attempted to come forth, he fell down dead as he was
endeavoring to call out for Assistance.

Paris, because of the Contests that usually happened between the Chastelet and
the Judges of those Courts, about their Authority and Jurisdiction; and
besides, those Judges were apt to be corrupted, as knowing that they were only
to execute their Office, during the Life of their Masters. The Archbishop of
Paris had his Bailiff, and King's Attorney at Fort l' Eveque, the Abbot of S.
Germain in his Abbey, the Grand Prior of France at the Temple, and the Abbess
of Montmartre at Ville-Neuve. The Chastelet being over-crowded with Affairs
after the Suppression of these Courts, was divided into two Parts, their
Jurisdictions being separated by the River. The Lieutenant-Civil,
Lieutenant-Criminal, Lieutenant-Particular, and King's Attorney of the new
Chastelet, were to serve by turns from Year to Year in the in the Old; and
those of the Old to remove to their respective Places in the New. Peter
Girardin was made Lieutenant-Civil of the New, Antony le Ferron
Lieutenant-Criminal, Lewis de Vienne Lieutenant-Particular, Claude Robert
King's Attorney, James Brichard and Nicholas Meraut Advocates-General. The New
Chastelet sat at the Abbey of S. Germain, in the Hall of the Bailiwick, till
the Building began at the Old was finished: after which both Courts sitting in
one Place, the Advocates and Attorneys could with more Ease and Convenience go
from one Audience to plead at the other.

Colbert was busi'd in regulating the State at home, a War broke out between
France and the House of Austria, occasioned by several Actions of the Dutch, to
the Prejudice of the Kings of France and England. A League was concluded
between those two Monarchs by the Mediation of the Duchess of Orleans, and by
Virtue of the Treaty which they signed, the United Provinces were to be divided
between 'em. But the King of England growing jealous of his most Christian
Majesty's Victories, who in 40 Days conquered 4 Provinces, and took 40 Cities,
withdrew from the League, and became the Mediator of a Peace. The Conferences
were begun at Cologn, and interrupted by the carrying away of William Egon of
Furstemberg, Plenipotentiary of the Elector of that Name, the Marquess de Grana
having arrested him by the Emperor's Order. But the Treaty was again set on
foot by the Pope's Mediation, and all the Potentates concerned in the War sent
their Plenipotentiaries to Nimmegen, the Place appointed for the New
Conferences. Charles Colbert went thither for France, with the Marechal d'
Estrade, and the Count d' Avaux: and while he was at Nimmegen his Brother
procured for him the Office of President a Mortier in the Parliament of Paris,
vacant by the Resignation of Nicholas Potier, Lord of Novien, who was made
first President. At the same time John Baptist Colbert was made Minister of
State; and forgetting his Birth, and the Modesty he had till then affected,
assumed the Title of Grandeur. His Office of Counselor of State in Ordinary,
was given to Claude Pelletier, Counselor of State de Semestre, or for six
Months, and Bignon, formerly Advocate-General in the Parliament of Paris, was
made Counselor de Semestre. At the same time Colbert obtained the Reversion
of the Office of Secretary of State for his Eldest Son, the Marquess de
Seignelay, and that of the Superintendancy of the Buildings for his Younger
Brother, Julius Armand Colbert, Marquess of Ormoy.

This Marquess, who was no Enemy to Love, could not resist the Charms of
Mademoiselle de la Sale, a Young Lady of Quality, but of small Fortune, and the
Youngest of Three Sisters. She could not boast a regular Beauty, for her Mouth
was somewhat large, and her Complexion too ruddy, but she had the Advantage of
a fine Set of Teeth, and Sparkling Eyes; her Hair was of a lovely light
Ash Color; she sung prettily, danced with a becoming Grace, and her pleasant
Humor made her Conversation very agreeable. Her large Stature, and fine Shape
appeared with Advantage in the Habit of a Man, in which Dress the Marquess of
Ormoy made her often come to Versailles, and even gave her a Key to the Park,
that she might go there to wait for him. It happened one day, that she made use
of her Key to introduce her into that Place, when the King had given Orders to
suffer no Person whatsoever to enter. Bontemps, Governor of the Park,
perceiving her at a considerable distance, took her for a Man; and coming up to
her, asked her how she came thither. So unexpected a Salutation put her out of
Countenance, and not being able to conceal her Sex, she told him, that her
Mother having attempted to force her Inclinations in the Choice of a Husband,
she came to beg his Majesty's Protection: and the Governor assured her, that
he would do her all the Service he could, and speak to the King in her Favor.
Nor was he unmindful of his Promise, for he acquainted his Majesty with the
Adventure, whose Curiosity at the hearing of so rare an Accident, was so great,
that he went along with Bontemps into the Park to discourse with her. She
repeated to him the Story she had invented to conceal her Intrigue with the
Marquess, and he promised to enquire into the Matter, and to secure her from
any Violence that should be offered to her. In the mean time he told her that
'twas fit she should have some regard to the Decency of her Sex, and desired
her to go to Bontemps's House, who would furnish her with a more suitable
Dress, and after Dinner conduct her to a Convent, where she should be safe from
her Mother's Persecutions. In obedience to the King's Desire, the Governor
carried her home with him; where having changed her Habit, she was put into one
of his Majesty's Coaches, and conducted by two Soldiers of the Guard, to the
Monastery of Benedictin Nuns, at Argenteuil, where she lived two Years at the
King's Charge; who being afterward informed that the Relation she made him of
her Fortune was a mere contrived Story, ordered her to be set at Liberty; after
which she returned to her Mother. In the mean time, so long an Absence had
wrought such a perfect Cure on the Marquess, that he never thought of renewing
his Intrigue; and she repaired the Loss of that Lover with fresh Conquests.

Colbert's Sister made a better use of the Company and Example of the Bernardin
Nuns; for she was admitted into their Society at Port Royal, a Convent of the
same Order. Her own Piety and Modesty recommended her no less effectually than
her Brother's Interest to his Majesty, who made her Abbess of Lys, near Melun.
She received the Benediction at Port Royal from the Archbishop of Paris, in May
1667, and the whole Court assisted at the Ceremony.

Colbert had considerably augmented the number of the King's Vessels, his next
Care was to furnish 'em with Artillery. About six Years before, there was a
Manufactory of Iron-Guns set up in some Forges in Nivernois, those especially
that are next to the City of Nevers, and River of Loire: But the hope of
Success in that Undertaking was much abated, after 'twas discovered that the
Metal of the Mines in that Country was so little fit for such an Use, that the
cast Pieces were not able to abide the Trials which the King's Commissioners
required to be made of 'em, before they would receive 'em on Board. At last, in
1678, Dauphine undertook to correct the Fault of the Metal; and for the
accomplishment of their Promise, submitted to a Trial, which was performed by
Commissioner Du-Clos, with a great deal of Exactness and Rigor. All the Guns
that were made by the Strangers burst at the first Shot; and those that were
cast by the Native of Dauphine were thrice discharged without receiving any
Damage. But this Trial did not satisfy Du-Clos, who could hardly give credit
to his own Eyes; he appointed two other Days, when they were charged, and shot
off with the greatest Exactness imaginable, and the same Success as before: Yet
he still suspected the Event, till on the third Day he saw 'em bear the Shock
of twenty Discharges that were made one after another, without suffering the
Guns to cool. At last one and twenty of 'em were sent to Breast, to be put on
board the Ships, and were there tried by the Captains, with as much exactness
as if they had never been discharged before: For most of the other Guns that
were brought from Nivernois were so shattered and weakened by Du-Clos's Trial,
that they could not endure a second at Breast without bursting to pieces. Prior
Frantot was the Inventer of this Secret; he had four Brothers killed in the
King's Service, and was a Soldier himself, till several Wounds he received in
the Wars, obliged him to leave that Profession.

Nevers; and a Gentleman of his own Country brought thither a certain Powder,
being a Secret of his Invention, to refine and purify the Mines.

Nicholas Desmarets, the eldest Son of Mary Colbert, Sister of the Minister of
that Name, had for some time served his Uncle in the Quality of his Chief
Commissary, though he was already one of the Masters of Requests, and married to
the Daughter of Lewis Bechamel, Secretary to the Council. But Colbert resolved
to raise his Nephew's Fortune higher, and procured him the Office of Intendant
of the Finances, vacant by the Death of Claude Marin: And by the same
Minister's Interest, James Desmarets, the Intendant's Brother, was made Agent
of the French Clergy, with the Abbot of Bezons; a Preferment that is usually a
Step to a Bishopric. James Nicholas Colbert, the Minister's second Son,
Licentiate of the Sorbon, Abbot of Bec, and Prior of la Charity, was the same
Year received into the French Academy in the room of Esprit, Anthony Martin
Colbert, his third Son, who followed Arms, was admitted Knight of Malta very
young, though it is plain by the Account of his Descent in the beginning of this
Work, that he could produce but very slender Proofs of his Nobility; but his
Father's Grandeur supplied that Defect, and his Proofs were received without a
rigorous Examination. Some time after he obtained the Commandery of Boncourt,
and was afterward made Colonel of the Regiment of Champaign.

12th. of February 1679, Mary Ann Colbert, the Minister's youngest Daughter,
was married at St. Germain en Lay, to Lewis de Rochechouart, Duke of Mortemar,
and Peer of France, who had obtained a Right of Survivorship to the Office of
General of the Galleys, and was the Son of Lewis Victor de Rochechouart, Duke
of Vivone, Peer and Marshall of France, and Governor of Champaign and Brie,
and of Antoinette Louise de Mesmes, Daughter of Henry de Mesmes, Lord of
Roissy, second President in the Parliament of Paris, and of Mary de la
Vallee-Fossez, Marchioness of Everly. Abbot Colbert was received Doctor of the
Sorbonne, in the following April; and the Ceremony of giving him the Cap was
performed by Francis de Harlay de Chanvalon, Archbishop of Paris.

The Treaty of Nimmeghen having put an end to the War, Colbert gave Orders to
du Mets, Keeper of the Royal Treasury, to repay the Sums that were lent in
1674, by the Officers of the Civil Government to his Majesty, for supplying the
necessities of the State: and those who were unwilling to receive their
Reimbursements, had Rents assigned 'em. The Archbishop of Paris perceiving that
Colbert's Power, and Favor with his Master increased daily, took occasion to
oblige him in the Person of his Nephew, the Abbot Desmarets, on whom he
bestowed a Canonship of Notre-Dame, vacant by the Death of the Abbot Salo,
Counselor in the Parliament of Paris. Charles Colbert at his return from
Nimmeghen, took possession of his Office of President a Mortier in the
Parliament of Paris, in September 1679. The Marquess de Seignelay having had
only one Daughter (who died in her Infancy) of his first Wife Mary Margaret,
Marchioness of Alegre, was married a second time, on the sixth of the same
Month, to Catharin Teresa de Matignon, Daughter of Henry Count of Thorigny, his
Majesty's Lieutenant General in Normandy, and of Frances de Luthumieres. On the
11th. Colbert carried all the Company that were present at his Son's Marriage,
to Sceaux, and regaled 'em with a magnificent Treat. The Family of Matignon is
one of the most ancient Houses in Normandy; and the Count of Thorigny can
reckon five or six Knights of the Order among his Ancestors, since the time of
Marechal de Matignon, who was one of the greatest Men of his Age. His Mother
Eleonora of Orleans, was a Princess of the House of Longueville, and Daughter
of Mary or Margaret de Bourbon, Henry IV's Aunt. The Marquess de Seignelay,
after a short stay with his Bride, took Post for Marseilles, where he arrived
on the 25th. of the same Month; and having visited the Arsenal, took a Review
of eight Galleys that were ready to depart; after which he proceeded on his
Journey to Dauphine, stopping at Toulon, and some other Places where his
Presence was necessary; and having seen the abovementioned Guns of a new
Invention at St. Servais, above St. Marcellin, on the Banks of the Isere, he
returned to Paris by the way of Lions. During his abode at Toulon, he ordered
two Companies, of one hundred Men each, by the name of Soldiers, Guardians of
the Ships, to be levied under the command of the Captain of the Port, and of
the Chevalier de Levy, Aid-Major of his Majesty's Naval Forces. The last of
these Officers raised his Company of one hundred chosen Men, who had served in
the Marine, consisting of twenty five Sergeants, as many Corporals, and fifty
private Sentinels, all neatly clothed.

At the same time the President Colbert took Journey for Munich, to treat of
the Dauphin's Marriage with the Princess of Bavaria. As Soon as he had concluded
the Match, he sent an Account of his Negotiation to his Brother, who received
it before that which was directed to his Majesty came to the Hands of Pompone,
Secretary of State, who was gone into the Country, where he had ordered some
Buildings to be erected. Colbert went immediately to Compliment the King on the
happy success of the Treaty, who was extremely surpised that he had not the
first notice of it; and when Pompone came afterward to give him an Account of
it, his Majesty told him, that he might return home, since he was so full of
Business; and that in the mean time he would take care to put another into his
Place, who would be more diligent in the performance of his Duty. It Is thought
this Affair was concerted between the two Brothers, and that a Courier was
dispatched to Colbert before there was one sent to Pompone; to lay a Snare for
that Minister, that his Disgrace might be a step to the Advancement of the
President's Fortune. However, it is certain that Colbert obtained the vacant
Place for his Brother, and performed the Duties of it during his Absence. There
was no need of this new Accession to that vast Load of Business he was obliged
to sustain; for his Mind was so fatigued with such a multiplicity of Cares,
that, notwithstanding his accustomed Gravity, he chose rather to commit an
Action that was equally inconsistent with his Dignity, and the Rules of
Civility, than to bear the importunity of a Lady of great Quality, who was one
Day urging him to do her a Piece of Service which he judged to be
impracticable. The Lady perceiving his Inflexibility, threw her self at his
Feet in the Hall of Audience, in the presence of above one hundred Persons, and
bursting forth into Tears, cried out, I beg Your Grandeur, in the Name of God,
to grant me this Favor: And he kneeling down over against her, replied in the
same mournful Tone, I conjure You, Madam, in the Name of God, not to disturb me.

Francis de Roxel de Medavy de Grancey, Archbishop of Rouen, having demanded a
Coadjutor to assist him in the Government of his Diocese, Colbert obtained of
the King the Nomination to that Dignity for his Son, the Abbot. And while that
Prelate was expecting his Bulls from Rome, Mortemar, began his Travels to
Italy, with a resolution to visit all the Courts in that Country. He began
with that of Savoy, and from thence passing to Parma and Modena, he went to
Bologna, where he was received with great Marks of Honor by the Cardinal
Guastaldi, Legate of that place. Proceeding on his Journey, he visited the Great
Duke at Florence, and arriving at Rome, met with a very favorable Treatment
from Pope Innocent XI. in consideration of his Father, the Marshall Duke de
Vivone, who was Generalissimo of the Galleys of the the Holy See at Candy.

The Marquess de Seignelay, immediately after his return from Provence, began
another Journey to Rochefort, Bourdeaux, and Bayonne; and after he had given
some Orders concerning those places, he accompanied the King in his Progress to
the Coast of Picardy. His Majesty began with the Port of Ambleteuse, the
Situation of which he examined with the Marquess de Vauban, Marshall de Camp.
From thence he went to the Port of Wissan, two Leagues from Ambleteuse; and
after he had visited the Fort of Mulon, arrived at Calice, from whence he
returned to Versailles. Thus Colbert had the pleasure to see how well his
Relations employed their time, and with how much Care and Success they made
their Court; but his Joy was moderated by the News he received of the Death of
his Sister, the Abbess of St. Clare at Rheims, who was much lamented by all the
Nuns that were under her Government.

In the mean time the King persisted in his Resolution to extirpate Heresy,
and by Colbert's advice, established a Regulation concerning the Royal Farms or
Leases, ordaining that none but Catholics should be afterward admitted to
take either Farms, or Under-Farms; and that no Protestants should be employed
as Directors, Commissaries, or in any Office whatsoever, for the levying and
collecting of Money.

The Abbot Colbert having received his Bulls, was consecrated in the Church of
the Sorbonne, Titulary Archbishop of Carthage, by the Archbishop of Rohan,
assisted by the Bishops of Bayeux and Lizieux his Suffragans; after which he
set forward to take possession of his Coadjutorship of Rohan, accompanied by
the Coadjutor of Arles, the Bishop of Lizieux, and the Abbot of Grignan, named
to the Bishopric of Eureux, and arriving at Gaillon, was received with a great
deal of Magnificence by the Archbishop of Rohan, to whom that House belonged,
and there complimented by Lewis le Blanc, Intendant of the Generality of Rohan,
and Mascarany, Great-Master of the Waters and Forests. The next Day in the
Afternoon he departed with the Bishop of Lizieux, and arriving about five
a-clock at Port St. Oven, was attended by above thirty of his Canons, with
several Persons of Quality: Proceeding further, he was met by Claude Pelot,
first President of the Parliament, and several of the most considerable Members
of the other Companies, who made a Convoy or Cavalcade of above fifty Coaches,
to conduct him to his Archiepiscopal Palace, where he arrived on the 28th. of
September, 1680, and after he had given Audience to the Deputies of the
Chapter, went to St. Heibland, where he was received by the Curate of the
Parish. There he put off his Shoes and Stockings, and clothing himself with a
Rochet and Camail, marched barefoot toward the Cathedral, accompanied with the
Priors and Monks of the Abbey of St. Oven, all in Copes, the Ancient and
Reformed Monks having each their Prior. He found all the Way from that Parish
to Notre-Dame matted, and was received at the Gate by Bretel de Gremonville,
Dean of the Chapter, with all the Canons and Curates of the Chapel, in rich
Copes. After the Dean had presented the Holy Water, and given the Cross to the
Coadjutor to kiss it, the Prior of the Ancient Monks, addressing himself to the
whole Chapter, We give you, said he, our Archbishop alive, and you shall
restore him dead. The meaning of that Expression depends on the usual Custom of
exposing the Bodies of the dead Archbishops in State at this Monastery. That
Ceremony being finished, the Dean presenting his Church to him, asked his
Protection, and made him swear the usual Oath on the Gospels. Then the
Coadjutor put on his Shoes and Stockings at St. Peter's Altar, after he had
offered a Crown of Gold at the Altar of Vows. At last having been received into
the Chapter as a Canon, and into the Pontifical Chair in the Choir as
Archbishop, he heard Mass sung, and afterward treated the whole Chapter at
three Tables, which were served with equal Delicacy and Profusion.

That Prelate's Father having accompanied the King in his Journey to the
Netherlands, was attacked with a Fever, the Fits of which lasted fifteen Hours:
He was cured with the Peruvian Bark, prepared by an English Physician; and so
considerable a Success brought that Remedy into Vogue. About the same time the
Marquess de Torsy, Son of Charles Colbert, Secretary of State, defended Theses
dedicated to his Majesty, which he presented to the whole Royal Family, in
magnificent Boxes. There that Monarch was represented, giving Peace with one
hand to Europe, who was armed to denote Power, and accompanied with a Tiara and
Keys, to signify that it was the Christian part of Europe. Discord, and the
Fury of War, whom the King had vanquished, were under his Feet; and with his
other Hand he stopped the Course of Victory, who was inciting him to new
Conquests. Love and Peace held his Majesty's Thunder; and the latter was
followed by Abundance, Magnificence, and Tranquillity. Above the King was Glory
setting a Crown on his Head, and the Love of Immoratality holding another, and
just ready to Crown him. Behind Glory appeared Piety and Mildness, who was
busied in shutting the Temple of Janus. On the other side was Fame displaying
the Banner held by Victory, to expose the History of those Actions to be read
which she had already published with her Trumpet. Below, Philosophy was
represented by a venerable Woman, to whom Nature imparted all her Secrets:
Nature appeared under the Figure of another Woman, crowned with the Zodiac, and
accompanied with a Lion for the Symbol of Fire; Fruits and fruitful Animals,
representing Water; and a Vultur devouring a Bird, to signify the perpetual
Round of Things, which Nature re-produces by their Destruction. All these
Figures seem to be enlightened and discovered to the Spectator by a Flambeau,
held by the Love of Wisdom, who showed the King the Beauties of Philosophy, and
displayed her Mantle, the Folds of which were as so many Steps to ascend to the
Top or Perfection of Wisdom: And the same Love represented the Genius of him
who defended the Theses.

Colbert continued still to apply himself with a great deal of Industry and
Diligence to the management of Naval Affairs: And in pursuance of that Design,
he employed some Persons at Versailles, under the inspection of the Chevalier
de Tourville, now Marshall of France, to build a Frigate after a new
Contrivance, which resembl'd the English way of Building, but was thought to
exceed it, both with respect to the Materials, and the Frame of the Vessel, to
make her carry her Sails well, and render her Light, though she were loaded with
a great number of Guns. This Frigate being only thirty Foot in the Keel, could
nevertheless carry sixty Guns; and if that Design should be brought to
perfection, as it afterward was, 'twas resolved that she should serve as a
Model for the Future. This Undertaking was attended with extraordinary Success;
and Trade increased so fast, that in the Year 1681, the Town of St. Malo alone
set forth in one Month sixty five well-rigg'd Ships, the least of 'em being of
150 Tun, for the Fishery of Cods at Newfoundland, without reckoning those that
were employed in the Levant, Spanish, and West India Trade, besides ten that
were on the Stocks. St. Malo is a little Town in Bretaign; its Situation is
admirable, by reason of the Rock on which it is built; and the Inhabitants are
entrusted with the Guard of the City, as a Privilege due to their unshaken
Loyalty. The Advancement of Trade was not the only Object of Colbert's Care and
Application; for he made his Majesty's Arms as terrible at Sea, as they were
already at Land. To make the Reader sensible of the Truth of this Assertion,
'twill be sufficient to put him in mind of the Duke of Mortemar's Expedition
with his Majesty's Galleys in June 1681. No sooner did he appear before
Majorca, but the Pirates of that Island delivered all their French Prisoners,
according to the List drawn up by the Deputies of Marseilles, and gave Money
for those that could not be found. Then the General returning to Marseilles,
left the ten Galleys that were under his command, and immediately put to Sea
again with a like number of others. He gave Chase to the Pirates, and having
secured the Peace and Tranquillity of the Mediterranean, was returning from
Corsica to Marseilles, when before Leghorn he fell in with a Fleet of 9 Dutch
Merchant-Ships, from 25 to 40 Guns each, under the Convoy of two Men of War of
60 Guns, commanded by the Count of Stirum, Vice Admiral of Holland, who
refusing to salute the Reale, the Duke resolved to bring him to reason; and
having secured the Advantage of the Wind of all the Ships in the Road, he
ordered his Men to take breath (who had rowed all the way from Porto-Ferrato to
Leghorn) that they might be afterward in a condition to attack and burn the
Vessels, and drive 'em foul of each other. But the Execution of his Design was
prevented by the Arrival of the Captain of the Port in a Felucca from the City,
with advice that the Dutch were resolved to comply: And after several Messages,
'twas agreed that the Count of Stirum should salute the Reale with nine Guns,
and only be answered with two, which was accordingly executed.

The Terror of the King's Flags was not confined to the Mediterranean: The
Chevalier de Bethune, Captain of a Frigate called the Mutine, set sail from
Port-Lewis, on the 23d. of June, to rejoyn the Chevalier de Chateau-Regnaut,
and ranged the Coast to the Road of Cascais, about seven Leagues distant from
Lisbon, where he anchored July 1, and the next Day set sail again, on advice
that Captain Bart, Commander of two Dunkirk Frigates, had taken a Vessel
belonging to the Pirates of Salley; and that there was another of 16 Guns on
the Coast of Portugal. The Vessel which Bart forced ashore, was manned with 103
Moors, who escaped to Land, but were afterward delivered up to him by the
Orders of the Prince-Regent: The Nephew of the Governor of Salley, and some of
the most considerable Persons of that City, were found among the Prisoners; and
eighteen Christians were set at liberty. The Chevalier de Bethune being
informed of that Action, cruis'd on the Coast of Portugal till the fourth of
the same Month, when about ten a-clock in the Morning, he descried a Ship at
the height of 40 Degrees, five or six Leagues South-South-West of the
Berlingues. He chased her till eight at Night, when being too near the Shore,
he gave Orders to tack about for Sea-room: Next Morning about half an Hour
after four, he perceived the Pyrate sailing close by the Shore, in Chase of a
Portuguese Caravelle, whom she left when she saw the Mutine stand in after her,
and endeavored to escape; but finding that she could not otherwise avoid
fighting, she chose rather to run ashore about half an Hour after two a-clock
in the Afternoon. Before she took that Resolution, she fired ten or twelve
Shot, without reaching the Frigate; and then tacked toward the Shore, five
Leagues South (declining a little toward the West) of Montaign. As Soon as the
Vessel struck a-ground, all the Men leaped overboard except eighteen
Christians, whom they had taken and made Slaves. Immediately the Frigate cast
Anchor in seven Fathom Water, and Denoy, one of the Lieutenants, with six or
seven Soldiers of the Marine Guard, went in the Boat to see whether there were
any Turks in the Vessel; where they learned that there were 125 of 'em, and
that they had all made their escape. After the Boat went off from the Frigate,
the Baron des Adrets, Lieutenant, the Chevalier de Blenac, Ensign, and the
Chevalier de la Bar, with some Soldiers, manned the Pinnace, and stood away
to join Denoy, whom they found on board the Pyrate. Then they began to consider
whether the Vessel could be gotten off, but the Sea was so high, and she had
received so violent a Shock, that they quickly lost all hope of saving her.
Finding none but Christians in the Vessel, the Baron des Adrets, and the
Chevalier de Blenac, with some Soldiers of the Marine Guard, went ashore in
pursuit of the Turks, if perhaps they could meet with any of 'em straggling:
And in the mean time Denoy, and the Chevalier de la Bar endeavored to set
Fire to the Ship; but finding they could not compass their Design, the
Chevalier went back in the Pinnace with ten Frenchmen, to the Frigate, and
returned with the Master-Gunner to burn the Ship with artificial Fireworks;
but she was so over-set, that 'twas impossible to get on board; and immediately
after she was broken to pieces with so much Violence, that nothing but her
Flags could be saved. Denoy and six or seven more, who were with him in the
Vessel, leaped overboard, and got to the Shore; and the Chevalier de la Bar
finding that he could not approach so near as to take 'em in, returned with the
Pinnace to the Frigate. Two Days after, the Chevalier de la Bethune went to D.
Pedro, the Prince-Regent, now King of Portugal, to demand the Turks who had
thrown their Arms into the Sea, and made their escape ashore: His Request was
granted, and the Infidels were delivered to him. The Marquess du Queen,
Lieutenant General of his Majesty's Armies, chased some Tripolin Pirates into
the Port of Chio, where he Cannonaded 'em, and almost quite destroyed the
Fortress, because it fired some Guns at the Fleet under his Command. The
Pirates offered to buy their Peace at the rate of 300 French Slaves, to be
restored without Ransom, and were at last constrained to deliver 'em all to the
Marquess. 'Twas stipulated by the Treaty with the Divan of Tripoli, that all
the French that were to be found in their Squadron, or on board any Ship that
had come out of their Port that Year, should be set at liberty; that Captain
Courcillier's Ship which had been taken under French Colors, and was at that
time in the Port of Chio, with 16 Guns mounted, should be restored, with her
Men, Arms, and Ammunition; That the Ship called Europe, taken under the Colors
of Majorca, and then in the Port of Chio, should remain under the Authority and
Protection of the Captain Basha, till it should be decided whether she ought to
be reckoned a French Vessel; That no Tripolin Ships should search any Vessel
Trading under French Colors, nor injure or molest the Persons, Ships, or Goods
of those who should produce a Passport from the Admiral of France; That all
Strangers who should be found on board any Vessel bearing French Colors,
should remain free and unmolested, both with respect to their Persons and
Goods; and likewise Frenchmen who should happen to be embarked on Vessels under
strange Colors, though Enemies to that State; That neither French Slaves, nor
Prizes taken by the Enemies of that Kingdom, should be permitted to be sold in
the Ports of the Kingdom of Tripoli; that a French Consul should be settled
there; and that no Prize should be taken within ten Miles of the Coast of
France.

Colbert was not unmindful of James Desmarets de Vauburgh, Brother to the
Intendant and Abbot of that Name: for to recompense the care he took to ease
him in the Discharge of his Ministry, he bought for him one of the Places of
Master of Requests, vacant by the Death of Peter Forcoal. Desmarets was, by his
Uncle's Interest, admitted to the Exercise of that Office, though he was not
above 25 Years old, as he had already been received into the Parliament as the
Age of 22. He married afterward the Daughter of de Voisin, another Master of
Requests, who had successively executed the Offices of Intendant of Picardy,
Normandy, and Tourain. The Ceremony of the Marriage was performed in St.
Bennet's Church, and the Feast of the Wedding was kept in the House of Daniel
Voisin, the Bride's Uncle, who had been The Provost of the Merchants may be
called, in some sense, Mayor of Paris.
Provost of the Merchants. Vousy, the Intendant's Fourth Brother, was first
Lieutenant, then Captain of a Ship, and was now made Captain of the Guard.
There were two other Brothers, one of whom di'd in Candie, and the other
perished at Sea. And of the Three Sisters, Two are Nuns at Notre-Dame de
Soissons, and the other was married to Andrew Jubert de Bouville, Master of the
Requests, who was since made Intendant of Limosin; but by reason of his
indiscreet Zeal in the Defense of the Lieutenant General of Limoges, who was
accused of Bribery and Exaction, was suspected by the whole Province to have
shared the Booty with him whom he protected.

On the 16th. of December, 1681. the King came to Paris, and visited the
Orchard or Nursery of Fruit Trees for the Use of the Royal Houses; from whence
he went to the Louvre, where he saw his Cabinet of Pictures, and from thence to
his Library in the Street Vivienne, where the Coadjutor of Rohan showed him the
most curious Books, and the Cabinet of Ancient and Modern Medals, and engraved
Agats. His Majesty went also to the Academy of Sciences, the Chemical
Laboratory, and the Rolling-Press for Prints, and expressed a great deal of
Satisfaction at the Sight of so many Marks of Colbert's Diligence in ordering
all things that were committed to his Care. At the same the Marquess de
Seignelay went to Dunkirk to be present at the Trial of some newly-invented
Machines, the Success of which gave a fair Prospect of great Advantages in time
of War. The Frigate called Echole was set apart by his Order for the Instruction
of the young Officers of his Majesty's Ships and the Marine Guards, and
disarmed by the Chevaler le Bret of Flacourt, who had commanded her, and
cruis'd six Weeks on the Coast about Rochefort. And the same Officer was made
Captain of the Marine Guards on that side.

The Terror which the King's Galleys had spread over all the Mediterranean,
occasioned an Embassy to his Majesty from Mula Ismael, King of Morocco, and
Brother of Muley Axid, who was called King of Tafilet. That Country is of a
considerable Extent, being part of the ancient Numidia, at present called
Biledulgerit, and is situated between Fez and the Mediterranean. The
abovementioned King of Tafilet, who was one of the greatest Conquerours in
Afric, as he was one day managing his Horse, struck his Head against the Branch
of a Fig Tree, and received a mortal Blow, of which he died some days after;
though others say he was poisoned by one of his Concubines. But whatever was the
occasion of his Death, it is certain that when he felt it approaching, he
delivered his Sword as the Badge of Royalty to his Brother Mula Ismael, telling
him that his two Sons, (the Eldest of whom was but 4, and the other 3 Years
old) were incapable of sustaining the Weight of a Crown; and that he foresaw
that all the Countries he had conquered would revolt after his Death. Nor was
he mistaken in his Prediction; for the People took Arms; and Mula at the Head
of the Negro's and some other Troops, was obliged to re-conquer the Kingdoms of
Fez and Morocco, the Principalities of Tetuan, Salley, and Arcassa, and a Part
of the Kingdom of Sus. His Subjects are composed of several Nations, of which I
shall only name some of the most remarkable. The Cities are inhabited by the
Moors, who are the Posterity of the ancient Saracens. The Barbarians live in
houses conver'd with Stubble, on the vast Mountains of Atlas, which cross the
whole Country. The Alarbs or Arabs possess the Plains, and are divided into
Tribes: The Head or Oldest Man of a Family, is the Commander, and is called the
Checq or Captain. They pass their whole Life in Tents made of Wool and Goat's
Hair, and the Plains are strewn with their Adouards, which are a sort of
Hamlets, consisting of 40 or 50 Tents, set up together in a round Figure: and
some of the most numerous Tribes inhabit 50 Adouards. To all the Conquests I
have already mentioned, Mula Ismael added that of Mammora on the Ocean, which
he took from the Spaniards, and of Tangier, the Metropolis of Mauritania
Tingitana, which the English were forced to abandon. He is of the Race of
Mahomet surnamed Cherif, whose Name he bears in his Signet in the Arabic
Tongue, together with that of the Savior of the World, whom the Moors call
Cydy Nayssa, but only acknowledge that he was a great Prophet. In the same
Signet is the Name of GOD, and of Mahomet, the Author of their Religion: for
all other Coats of Arms are forbidden by their Law, which expressly prohibits
all sorts of Figures. They pretend to be the only Professors of the true
Mohammedan Religion, and affirm that 'twas begun by Christ, whom they make the
First of all the Moors, and the Inventer of their usual Habit. They wear
neither Gold, Silver, nor Silk, and are only clothed with a Piece of Stuff,
wrapped two or three times about their Body, and leaving their Arms and Legs
bare* They call this Garment a Hocque, and it ought always to be made of White
Stuff. Nor are they less Religious Observers of that Part of their Law which
contains Regulations about Meat, for they eat no Flesh but of such Beasts as
are killed by Persons of their own Sect. He who supplies the place of a
Butcher, presents the Animal with its Throat toward Mecca, saying, My God,
behold a Victim which I am going to sacrifice to thee, I pray thee that our
Eating of it may be for thy Glory, and then cuts its Throat. They perform their
Sala or Devotion, exactly five times every Day: first they wash their Feet and
Legs up to the Knees, and their Hands and Arms to the Elbows; then seating
themselves on the Ground, with their Face turned Eastward, they invoke their
Cydy Mahomet, and afterward Cydy Bellabec, (whom they interpret to be St.
Augustine) and several others. Among their Saints they reckon also Cydy Nayssa,
for so they call the Savior of the World, who, they believe was born of a
Virgin, and conceived by the Breath of GOD, but they cannot comprehend that
Breath to be the Holy Ghost, and consequently that there are Three Persons who
are One God. Mula Ismael perceiving that the Squadron of six Ships commanded by
the Chevalier de Chateau-Regnaut, had quite ruined the Trade of his Kingdom by
lying before his Ports, resolved to send an Ambassador to his Majesty; and
gave that Commission to Hagdi Mehemed Thummin, Governor of Tetuan, who
embarked on the Vessel commanded by la Bar in Chateau-Regnaut's Squadron, and
arrived at Breast, where he stayed for his Majesty's Orders, who was then at
Strasburg, and came afterward to Paris, by the way of Vannes, Nantes, Angers,
Saumur, Blois, and Orleans. His Wit was everywhere admired, and convinced
those who conversed with him, that he was Master of all that Politeness for
which the ancient Moors were famous. In every Town through which he passed, he
made a Queen and an Ambassadress: One day a Lady, whom he had honored with the
first of these Titles, seemed to be jealous, and complained, that She whom he
called Ambassadress engrossed all his Eloquence and Kindness: You are Queen,
replied he immediately, and my Duty is to admire you in Silence; after which he
continued his Discourse with the Ambassadress. Another Lady blaming the Custom
of his Country Men who take a great Number of Wives. If our Women were as
handsome as you, answered he, we would never marry more than one. After the
King had granted him Audience, Colbert de Croissy, Secretary of State, and the
Marquess of Seignelay were appointed to hear his Poposals. At last he concluded
a Treaty for Commerce, and left France, extremely pleased with the Country, and
charmed with his Majesty's Grandeur.

Colbert applied himself to the Advancement of some of his Relations; and he
was not less mindful of his Brother Edward-Francis. In the Year 1658, he
married him to Mary-Magdalen Bautru, Daughter to the Count of Serran,
Chancellor to Philip of France, Duke of Orleans, the King's Brother, and made
him buy the County of Maulevrier. He procured him to be made Captain-Lieutenant
of the Second Company of his Majesty's Musketeers, Marechal de Camp, and
afterward Lieutenant General; and at last obtained for him the Government of
Tournay, in May 1682. Tournay is a very strong Place, defended by a Castle,
which is said to have been built by the English: it is seated on the Scheld, and
is the Metropolis of a little Territory called Tournaisis. Besides the
Cathedral-Church of Notre-Dame, which is a very fine Structure; it contains Ten
Parishes, Two Abbeys, and several other Religious Houses. In the Year 1521. the
Emperor Charles V. took it from the French, who had seized it Three Years
before: It was again conquered by his Majesty in 1667. and yielded to him by
the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, as I intimated before. This City is very
ancient, and its Bishop is a Suffragan of the Archbishop of Cambray.

The Insolence of the Pirates of Algier, who would not be taught Wisdom by the
Example of those of Tripoli, provoked the King to send thither the Marquess du
Queen with his Squadron. He sailed from the Port of Thoulon, July 12. 1682. on
the 18th. he joined the Galleys that expected him at Yvica; and on the 23.
anchored before Algier, where the Galleys stopped a Bark they had taken by the
way, which was bound with Provisions for the City. The Marquess du Queen was
joined in the Road by some Men of War and Bomb-Vessels; so that the whole Fleet
consisted of 15 Galleys, 11 Men of War, 5 Bomb-Vessels, 2 Fireships, and 3
armed Barks, besides Tenders and other Vessels laden with Ammunition. The Coast
of Afric makes a crooked Line in this place, and forms the Bay of Algier; the
City is built on that part of the Shore that reaches from South to North, and
looks toward the East. Its Situation on the Brow of a Hill yields a very
pleasant Prospect to those who are at Sea; for they have a full view of all the
Houses which are roof'd with Terrasses and whited without. It Is defended with
strong Walls, and several irregular Works all of different Figures: besides,
there is a Castle in the highest part of the City, and on the Fortifications
which reach along the Shore there are above 50 Pieces of Cannon mounted. The
Harbor is overagainst the Middle of the City, and covered on the Side next the
Sea with a little Island fortified with several Works, and about 50 Pieces of
Cannon. At the North End of the Island is the Watchtower, furnished with 27
Piece of Cannon on three Batteries: On the North Sides the Harbor is covered
by a Mole that joins the Island to the City, and shut up with a Chain toward
the South. About 1000 Paces without the City on the North side, there is a
little Fort, called the Englishmens Fort, defended by 10 or 12 Pieces of
Cannon; and nearer the City is Fort Babalouet with 15 Pieces of Artillery. On
the South side of the City near the Shore, stands the Fort of Babassan, where
there are 10 or 12 great Guns; and there is also another Fort on the top of the
Hill called the Emperor's Fort, from Charles V. who encamped there at the time
of his unfortunate Expedition in 1541. Thus 'twas impossible for the French to
bombard Algier, without exposing themselves to the Fire of above 160 Pieces of
Cannon, 80 of which carried from 24 to 60 Pound Ball. All the Forces of the
State were in the City, and all the Vessels of the Pirates, except one Galley,
left the Sea as soon as the King's Ships appeared, and got into the Harbor,
where they were disarmed, and the Chain drawn up. Besides the Road is very
dangerous, and pestered with a great number of Rocks: The Currents that run
there almost perpetually, and the East, South-East, North, and North-West
Winds, which usually reign there, make it very unsafe for Ships. But the
Marquess du Queen was so far from being deterred from the Prosecution of his
Design by the discouraging Prospect of so many Difficulties, that he only
waited the Convenience of calm Weather to put it in execution. The Galleys were
to tow in the Ships and Bomb-Vessels within half Cannon-shot on the North side
of the City; and the greatest part of 'em were to draw up in a Line in Figure
of a Half Moon on the North-East, and the rest along the Shore to batter the
Englishmens Fort, and that of Babalouet, while the former played on the City.
On the 6th. of August the Weather was calm, and immediately the Marquess du
Queen gave Orders to prepare for the Cannonading of the City. But the Galleys
and Galliots had hardly weighed Anchor, when there arose such a fresh Gale,
that they were obliged to defer the Attempt: and on the 13th. there happened so
violent a Storm of Wind from the West-South-West, accompanied with Thunder,
that they could not without a great deal of Difficulty, get clear of the Shore.
The Marquess seeing the Weather so rough, the Season of the Year so far
advanced, and the Miseries with which the Galleys were threatened for want of
Water, sent 'em back to France on the 15th. and after their departure resolved
to make use of the Galliots to throw Bombs into the City. And that they might
stand in, and come off without danger, he commanded Forant, a Captain of a
Ship, to cause five Anchors to be let down on the North-East side of the City,
to which there were Cables fastened of 1500 Fathoms in length, their Ends being
distributed among the Vessels called the Vigilant, Valiant, Prudent, Laurel,
and Star, commanded by the Chevalier de Tourville, Lieutenant General of the
Navy, Captain Beaulieu, Lery, Commander of the Squadron, and the Captains,
Forant and Bellile. The first of these Officers was posted on the South, and
the last on the North; and the Cables were appointed for the Convenience of
sending in and bringing off the Galliots or Bomb-Vessels. While they were
executing these Orders, the Algerines fired above a hundred Cannon-shot, of
which the Ship called the Holy Ghost, received one in her Topmast, and the
Assure, two under Water, and one in her Sails. The 22th. in the Evening, the
Weather proving fair, with a perfect Calm, the Five Ships stood in to come to
an Anchor in their respective Posts, and the Five Bomb-Vessels approached the
Town till they were a-peak of their Anchors; the Cruel, commanded by Ponti, was
posted on the South, and after her in order, the Menacante, commanded by
Goetton, the Bombard by de Comb, on which Comarin, Captain of the Bombardiers,
was embarked; the Thunderer by du Herbier, and the Brulante, by Beaussier. When
all things were in a readiness, and the Bomb-Vessels were moored without the
least opposion from the Algerines, they threw some Bombs, to try the reach of
the Mortars. But 'twas found by Experience that they were at too great a
distance, since few of the Bombs reached the City; and therefore all the
Vessels came to an Anchor the same night in their usual Posts. Afterward Lery
and Bellile undertook to carry the Anchors nearer the Town; the first caused
the Anchor of the three first Bomb-Vessels to be dropped on the East side of
the Harbor, and the second that of the two last on the North-East; though during
the Execution of that Attempt, the Enemy made a continual Fire with Cannon and
Musket Shot. The 30th. in the Evening the Weather proving fair, the Marquess
de Villefons, du Chalard, the Chevaliere d' Air, and several Officers of the
Marine Guards, besides Volunteers, went on board the Bomb-Vessels which stood
in to their Posts, and were by the Marquess du Quene's Orders, supported by two
Armed Barks, ten Pinnaces, and the Prize which he had ordered to be armed. The
Bomb-Vessels being moored began to throw their Bombs with very good Success,
for in four hours they threw in 120, which almost all reached the City. In the
mean time the Enemy made a continual Fire with Musket Shot, for the space of
an hour, without doing the least Execution, because the Bomb-Vessels were at
too great a distance; and besides they fired 1000 or 1200 Cannon-shot, taking
their time to fire always when the Bombs were discharged, that the Flashing at
the Touchhole might serve 'em for a Mark to level at. About two hours before
Day they were haled off, and there was not one Man killed or wounded in the
whole Action. The Marquess du Queen was not long ignorant of the successful
Effects of the Bombs, for the Approach of the Fleet gave an opportunity to a
considerable Number of Slaves to make their Escape; and those who came off the
Day after the Action, among whom was an English Captain, whose Ransom was fixed
at 6000 Crowns, related that the Bombs had killed several Persons, and thrown
down a great Number of Houses; that one of the Bombs falling into the great
Mosque, where the People of the Town were at Prayers, killed above 100 Persons,
and ruined one side of the Building; that the Town was in a great
Consternation; that the Women and Children were sent away; that several Turks
and Moors were retired to the Fields, and that a considerable Party in the Town
had already declared for a Peace. The Night between the third and fourth of
September, the Bomb-Vessels stood into their former Posts without any
opposition, but they had scarce thrown two Bombs, when they begun to cry, A
Galley, A Galley; and the Alarm proving true, all things were put in a fit
Posture to receive the Enemy. The Galley followed by three Brigantines and some
Barks, advanced toward the nearest Bomb-Vessel called the Cruel, on board of
which were Renard and Landouillet, Commissioners of the Marine, and discharged
a Broadside of Cannon and Musket Shot against her, which killed only one
Soldier. In the mean time the Marquess de la Port had got into the Cruel, and
she gave the Galley so warm a Return with her Muskets and great Guns charged
with Small-shot, that she stood off to attack the second Bomb-Vessel called the
Menacante, where she thought to meet with less Resistance. Immediately
Beaulieu, Captain of the Valiant, who was ordered to support that Vessel, got
on board with Major Raymundis and the Chevalier de Comenge, leaving his Pindace
under the Command of his Lieutenant Isarn de Monclair. The Musket Shot on both
Sides lasted about a Quarter of an Hour, and the Patereroes and Cannons of the
Bomb-Vessel played with very good Success. Beaulieu himself levelled a Cannon
so exactly against the Galley, as she was closing with the Menacante to board
her, that he covered the whole Vessel with Small-shot consisting of broken
Pieces of Iron, killed and wounded a great number of her Men, and so shattered
her, that she bore away as fast as she could, without once tacking about. And
she was even in so great a Disorder, that if the Bomb-Vessels could have
followed her, she might have been easily taken. She had not yet entered the
Port, when the Bombs began to fly at the Town, which very much surpised the
Enemy, who concluded that their Galley had at least brought off two of the
Bomb-Vessels. They left off shooting till their Galley was got into the
Harbor; but as soon as they saw her safe, they began to shoot from their
Batteries, and fired five or six hundred Cannon-shot. This Night there were
almost eighty Bombs thrown into the City, with no less Success than before: In
the coming off, du Herbier received a Cannon-shot in his Poop, which burst one
of his Guns, killed six Men, and wounded two: but in the whole Action there
were only fourteen Men killed, besides some that were wounded. The next Day,
being the 4th. of September, the Algerines sent to the Admiral to desire a
Peace: The Missionary le Vacher was entrusted with that Commission, who before
the Rupture executed the Office of Consul of the French Nation in that City. He
delivered his Message from the Divan, who had ordered him to desire a
Cessation, and that some Person might be sent to treat of the Conditions of a
Peace: To which the Marquess du Queen made answer, That if they had any
Proposals to make, he would hear 'em on board his Ship, and that he was
resolved to continue the Bombarding, and all other acts of Hostility against
'em, 'till they grew tamer, and were willing to submit to reasonable
Conditions. Le Vacher added, that the Bombs had ruined above one hundred
Houses, and killed above seven hundred Men; that several others were buried
under the Ruins; and that the Shore was covered with dead Bodies, which were
ordered to be laid there by the Dey, Baba Hassan, least, if they were brought
into the City, the sight of 'em should cause an Insurrection. The same Day in
the Evening about seventy Bombs were thrown in, which were almost all levelled
at the Harbor with a design to burn the Ships. One of the Bombs sunk a Bark;
and another falling between two Vessels, broke off a part of their Keels. But
the Season of the Year being far advanced, the Marquess du Queen returned to
Toulon, leaving Lery with the Ships commanded by St. Aubin, Bellile, and
Bellefontaine, to cruise before Algiers, and curb the Insolency of the Pirates.
Nor did they alone disturb the Commerce of those Infidels; for a Vessel called
the Regle, which they had seized near Maromas, was retaken by Forant, Commander
of one of his Majesty's Ships. They had sold her to two Jews, who manned her
with Dutch Seamen, and sent her to Holland to be laden with Warlike
Ammunition, and other Furniture for Ships. In her Return she joined in Company
with a Fleet of thirty Dutch Merchant Ships under the Convoy of three Men of
War, and arrived in sight of Alicant about the beginning of November 1682.
Forant and S. Aubin, who were cruising in those parts, had notice of her
Arrival, and sent their Pinnaces to discover her with some Seamen of S. Malo,
who found her ridingat Anchor between the Forts of Alicant and the Fleet. The
Night between the 18 and 19th. of the same Month, they manned their two
Pinnaces, and sent 'em under the command of Pallieres and Saint Maure, with
Orders to seize on the Vessel; which they executed very happily, and without
Noise, and towed her out through a Fleet of above fifty Vessels of diverse
Nations. The Commanders of the Dutch Men of War sent to expostulate with
Forant, complaining that he had seized on a Ship that carried the Colors of
the Republic, and was under their protection: But he replied, that the Vessel
belonged to the Jews of Algiers; that she was bound thither, and had neither a
Protection, nor Bill of Lading. These Reasons were unanswerable, and the
Commanders permitted the Ship to be carried off.

Colbert, who neglected nothing that might tend to the promoting of Trade,
being informed that that there were very fine Horses in the Isles of Antilles,
communicated that Advice to Coulon, Master of an Academy in the Rue Ferou in
the Fauxbourg S. Germain, who in compliance with so advantageous a Proposal,
sent his Kinsmen, Pair, and du Cornet, two of his Majesty's Grooms, to the
Islands of Bonaire, Curassol, and Roubes, from whence they brought Horses of an
admirable Beauty, and surprising Fleetness. Gabaret, Commander of a Squadron,
was sent to the Antilles with three Ships, the Furious, Pearl, and Tempest,
under the command of the Chevalier d' Arbouville, d' Amblimont, and Machaut:
This Squadron sailed from the River Charante, on the 8th. of May 1682, and
anchored in the Road of Rochel, at the Point called Chef de Bois, from whence
they set sail on the 25th. for Martinico, where after forty Days sailing, they
arrived on the 5th. of July, and anchored at Fort-Royal, to salute the Marquess
of Blenac, General of the Isles. The Pearl sailing close by the Shore to get
the Advantage of the Wind, touched on certain Rocks, from which she got clear
by the help of her Anchors; but though she felt no damage at present, she was
afterward sensible of the ill Effects of that Accident. Next Day they weighed
Anchor, steering toward Fort S. Peter, where they arrived betimes. This is a
considerable Place with respect to its Inhabitants, but inferior in strength
to Fort-Royal. Martinico is the chief of all the American Islands that are
inhabited by the French: It Is all over Mountainous, and full of Wood, but
extremely fertile in Sugarcanes, from which the Inhabitants draw their
principal Revenue. It produces good Melons, and a most pleasant kind of Fruit
called Anana; besides several other sorts of Fruit, as Gogaves, Potato's,
Banana's, and Figs, which are different from those of France. The Squadron
sailed from hence on the 15th. of July, and arrived on the 17th. at Granada, an
Island Inhabited by the French and the Wild Natives, abounding with
Sugarcanes, Tobacco, and Tortoises, and defended by a Fort of no great
strength; from whence they continued their Course with a fore-wind to the
Lee-ward (for the Land stretches Westerly, and the Eastern Winds reign
perpetually in those Seas) and had so quick a Passage, that on the 24th. they
descried Cape de la Velle in New-Spain, and afterward discovered at a great
distance Mount St. Martha, called in that Country Sierra Neuada, or the Snowy
Hill, which is the highest Mountain in the World. It lies in the Torrid-Zone,
in the 303 Degree of Longitude, and 8 of Latitude, containing about thirty or
forty Leagues in circumference. It Is sixty Leagues from the Sea, and yet may be
distinctly perceived from Cape S. Tiberin in Dominico, at the distance of 150
Leagues. Its perpendicular height from the top to the level of the Sea, is
reckoned to amount to two Leagues, though Geographers affirm, that there is not a
Hill in the World half so high: But the Snow that covers its top,
notwithstanding the excessive heat of the Climate, is a convincing Proof of the
Truth of this Computation. Its Foot, and part of its Sides are inhabited by
People of a very low Stature, who may pass for the Pigmies mentioned by Pliny.
They never venture their little Bodies beyond the Confines of their own
Territory, nor entertain any correspondence with their Neighbors; for the
sight of a Man of ordinary Stature puts 'em to flight, and they run into their
Holes at his approach. During the excessive Heats, they leave their usual
Habitations, and live higher up in the Mountain; but as soon as the Weather
begins to grow Cold, they return to their former Abodes. They live on a sort of
Grain of which they make both Bread and Drink; and their Ouicou, or Drink is
also made of the Root of a Shrub, after they have pressed out the poisonous
Juice. Their Religion is only known to themselves, and never any Traveller
could hitherto discover its Nature. On the 26th. the Squadron rode an hour or
two before Cartagena, bringing the Ships to a Lee without Cannon-shot of the
Town, which is seated in a Peninsula, the Harbor being on one of the Sides.
It Is a City of indifferent bigness; and its Figure is as irregular as its
Fortifications: It Is commanded by a rising Ground, where there is a Fort
flanked with four Bastions lined with Earth. It stands in 300. Degrees of
Longitude, and 10 Degrees, 30 Minutes of North-Latitude. On the 29th. they set
sail to discover the Coast of Nombre di Dios, and the same Day anchored before
Portobelo. This is a little, but very famous City, and one of the most
considerable places of the Spanish Dominions in America, both for the Advantage
of its Harbor, and the convenience of its Situation: For it is but eighteen
Leagues distant from Panama, where all the Peruvian Riches are unladed, to be
afterward transported on Mules to Portobelo, where they are embarked for
Havana, and from thence carried to Spain. The Harbor is very large and fair,
and so clear of Sands or Rocks, that there is every where safe Anchorage for
Ships of the greatest Burden. When the French Squadron arrived, there was a
laden Ship in the Port ready to Sail, under the Convoy of a great Galeon, which
could not protect her from the Bucaniers, who took her in her Passage. It Is a
surprising Neglect of the Spaniards, that they take no care to fortify a place
of so great importance; for the Entry of the Harbor is defended only by a
paltry Fort of a very irregular Figure, nowhere flanked, and commanded by the
Hillock at the Foot of which it is built. The Town which is at the bottom of the
Bay, and appears not to those who are at Sea, till they come just before it,
has no Walls, and is only covered with two small Works on the abovementioned
Hillock. It Is altogether defenseless on the side next the Mountain, and on the
other two sides, by which it communicates with the Land. The side next the Sea
is only flanked with two small Bastions, containing about nine Foot in the
Flank; and at the end of the Bay there is a Redoubt about twelve Toises square.
I have nothing more to add to this succinct Description of Portobelo, but that
the Spaniards pretend it will be quickly fortified with a Citadel of six
Bastions, between two Rivers, half a Cannon-shot from the Forts. The Squadron
anchored near the Fort that defends the Entrance into the Harbor, where the
Spaniards keep always a Guard, which was doubled during the stay of the French.
Gabaret, to discover the Humors and Inclinations of the Spaniards, immediately
after his Arrival, sent Septeme, Major of the Squadron, who having spoken with
the Commander of the Fort at the Entry, was sent forwards to the Governor. As
he drew near to the City in his Boat, with his Colors displayed, he was met by
a Pinnace with Spanish Colors, which came to receive him: And having had
Audience of the Governor, he returned to give Gabaret an account of his
Negotiation. The Subject of that Conference, and of those that were afterward
managed by other Deputies, was never perfectly known: Only 'twas given out that
Septeme was sent to enquire after French Prisoners, and that he was told there
were none in the Town. Nevertheless, the same Night very late, there came a Man
swimming to D' Amblimont's Ship, which rode next the Shore; and that Officer
receiving him into his Boat, sent him immediately to Gabaret, whom he informed
that there were seventeen or eighteen Frenchmen in the Town, but said nothing
of their being Prisoners. Next Morning the Commander sent to discover the Truth
of what he had learned, and to demand the Frenchmen of the Governor, who
acknowledged that there were some of that Nation in the Town, who were not kept
Prisoners, but served for Wages; adding, that the Commander might, if he
pleased, carry 'em along with him; and accordingly those ragged, lean, and
disfigured Creatures were restored and distributed among the three Ships. This
Accident was not attended with the least disorder; for the Affair was
transacted on both sides in the most amicable manner imaginable; and their only
Contest seemed to be to outstrip each other in Civility. The Governor made
the first step, by sending a Present to Gabaret of two fat Oxen, Spanish Wine,
Sweetmeats, Oranges, and Citrons; and the French Officer in his turn presented
the Spaniard with a Case of Pistols, a Castor, and other things of that Nature.
The Deputies of the Squadron were regaled on Shore, and those that were sent to
the Commander were treated on board his Ship, where they drank several times to
the Health of the two Kings of France and Spain with the usual Ceremonies,
making a confused, but not unpleasant, Noise, by striking a Knife against a
Plate. The place where the French cast Anchor at their first coming into the
Harbor being somewhat incommodious, the Governor very civilly sent 'em a
Pilot to bring 'em farther in, to a place where they might Anchor more safely.
Two Armadilla's that were unrigg'd, began to put themselves in a posture of
Defense, as soon as the Squadron appeared, but resolved to stay in the Harbor.
On the Second of August the French left Portobelo, and were by contrary Winds
carried in sight of the Cattives, which are above fifty inhabited Islands. On
the 11th. they made the Isle of Rotan, in the Gulf of Honduras, which lies in
286 Degrees of Longitude, and 16 of Latitude, and is only inhabited by Pirates,
who land there for the convenience of Refreshment. Here the French found a
forsaken Ship, and concluded that her Men were either taken, killed, or
drowned, and that the Vessel was a Prize, taken by the Bucaneers from the
Spaniards. For besides a great number of Horse-Shooes that remained of her
Cargo, there were several Jars of Spanish Wine, and Letters in that Language,
by which it appeared that she set out in June, and consequently that she had
been taken not long before. The 13th. they discovered a small Pyrate cruising
about that part, and would have chased him, if the Booty could have made amends
for their trouble; for he would not come near the Squadron, though the usual
Signal by the firing of a Gun was made for him to approach. The Passage from
Portobelo to Rotan is dangerous, by reason of the Banks of Sand with which
those Seas are pestered; and the Water is so shallow, that the Pilots are
oftentimes puzzled to find the Chanel. The 25th. they made the Isle des Pans,
and the Capes of Las Corrientes, and Sant-Anton, at the Western end of the
Island of Cuba, and were obliged to wait several Days for a favorable Wind,
before they could double the last of those Capes. The 3d. of September they
past by Porto Cavano, in the same Island; and on the 6th. came before Havana,
which is the Metropolis of the Island, and the usual Residence of the
Captain General. The Spaniards have been very diligent in improving the
Fortifications of so considerable a Place: for its Harbor is the Rendezvous of
all the Galeons that bring the Silver from the Indies, and of all the Ships
that come from St. Martha, Cartagena, Nombre de Dios, Portobelo, Vera Cruz,
Campesche, and all the other Ports of Mexico. The 7th. they anchored at las
Matancas in the same Island, where they took notice of the Comet that appeared
in France, and was illustrated with several Observations: They perceived it
first in the Night between the 25th. and 26th. of August, its Head being
North-North-East, and its Tail South and by West. Here they stood into the Bay
to refresh themselves, and took in fresh Water, Wood, Flesh, Fish, and all
other necessary Provisions. The Bay is large, but not everywhere fit for
Anchorage; nor is that its only Inconveniency, for it is wholly destitute of
Inhabitants; but those Defects are in some measure supplied by the great
abundance of all sorts of Game, as Wild Oxen, Herons, Parrots, and a prodigious
Number of other Fowls that are sit to be eaten. Among other Animals, there are
certain Rats much larger and thicker than our Cats, that sit on Trees along the
Rivers, and are not scared at the sight of the Hunters. And for the Refreshment
of those whose Stomachs are disordered after a tedious Voyage, there is a sort
of Colewort that grows on the top of a very spongy Stem, from thirty to fifty
Foot high, and may be eaten several ways, as in Sallads, Broth or Pottage. The
Bay abounds with excellent Fishes, and those who take the Diversion of Fishing
in the Rivers that fall into it, may gather as much Cresses as they please,
which is like to that we have in Europe. And besides all those Marks of the
bounty of Nature that appear in this place; it yields store of Salt, and
produces several kinds of Fruits, among which there are Plums called Mourbin,
and two sorts of Grapes. This pleasant Country is, as I intimated before, a
part of the Island of Cuba, which, according to the Observations of
Geographers, contains 280 Leagues in length, and 40 in breadth, extending
between 289 and 300 Degrees of Longitude, and from the 20 to the 22d. Degree of
Latitude, its Northern side being 30 Leagues distant from the Tropic of Cancer.
On the 19th. the French set Sail from Matancas, standing in to the Frith of
Bahama, where the North Wind being imprisoned between the Coast of the
Main-Land, and that of the Islands, which bound the Straight on both sides,
breaks forth with so violent an impetuosity, that the Ships which are engaged
in this dangerous Passage, run the hazard of being dashed to pieces on one of
the opposite Shores: And besides, the agitation of the Sea by those Tempestuous
Winds, is increased by the Rapidity of the Currents, which are oftentimes fatal
to such small Vessels as those that composed this Squadron: Yet they had the
good fortune to escape the Danger of this Canal, which is 60 Leagues long, and
25 broad, between 24 and 27 Degrees of Latitude; and afterward sailed along
the Coast of Florida, to the height of the Bermudas, where they met with a fair
Wind for Martinico, which they discovered on the 24th. of October, and Anchored
the 26th. at Fort S. Peter. The 2d. of November, they set sail for Granada, to
bring the Governor of that Island, who was Gabaret's Brother, with his Wife,
to Martinico, where she was desirous to Lie in. In their Passage they descried
a small Skiff, and made toward it by Gabaret's Orders, who was extremely
surpised at the sight of four or five Wretches, that could hardly stir an Oar
to approach the Ship, being starved, and quite spent with Hunger, Thirst, ill
Weather, and the beating of the Waves. At last he received 'em on board, and
learnt that they were Englishmen of the Isle of Tabago, where they were so
cruelly used, that in a Fit of Despair, they resolved to commit themselves to
the less-dreaded fury of the Waves; and that their small stock of Provision was
consumed five Days before they were taken up. On the 5th. of December, Gabaret
arrived at S. Christopher, where he left the Englishmen; and the next Day
sailed for France, directing his Course to the Port of Breast, where he landed.

The favorable Treatment which Gabaret received from the Spaniards in America,
was a glorious Effect of his Master's Power: And the kind reception of the
French Ambassador at the Court of Morocco, is a convincing Proof of the Awe and
Respect with which that great Monarch inspires the most barbarous Nations. The
Count of S. Amand embarked on the Valiant, a Ship of 60 Guns, commanded by
Beaulieu, and came before Algier, where he was present at that memorable Action
I have already described. From thence he set sail for Tetuan, where he arrived
on the 2d. of October 1682, and sent some Persons ashore in his Pinnace, who
were informed by the Turks that were come to the Seaside, that for two Months
they had been daily expecting the Ambassador's Arrival, and that they had
Orders to entreat him not to Land, till they had heard from the Viceroy of the
Province, because they could not receive him according to his Dignity, during
the absence of that Alcayd. The 4th. Mehemed Thummin, who was formerly
Ambassador in France, came on board, with the Lieutenant-Governour, and the
Commander. They were saluted at their Entry with the firing of eleven Guns, and
conducted to the Council Chamger, where they were received by the Count of S.
Amand, accompanied with eight Officers of Ships, twelve of the Marine Guards,
and several Gentlemen. After they had all taken their Places, the Ambassador
began the Discourse with telling Mehemed Thummin, that at his return from the
Campaign in Chio, he had heard of his being in France, and was a Witness of the
Universal Acknowledgments that were paid to his Wit and Merit. Thummin replied,
that he was obliged for so flattering a Compliment to that Candor which is so
natural to the French Nation: And those mutual Returns of Civility were
continued for some time on both sides. Then the Ambassador took occasion to
Discourse of the King of Morocco's Greatness, of his Conquests, and of the
Titles of his Predecessors. The Moors were very attentive to what he said on
that Subject, extolling their Prince's Valor, to whom they always gave the
Title of Emperor. After they had been entertained with a Collation, the
Ambassador shut himself up with 'em, making use of la Croix for his
Interpreter, with whose performance he was very well satisfied. The Conference
lasted an Hour and a half, and 'twas so late before they came out, that the
Moors were forced to lie on board. They ordered a clean Table-Cloth to be
spread on the Boards, and stepping upon it with their bare Feet, began to pray,
crying often Alla, Alla, which signifies God; and kneeling thirty times in the
space of a quarter of an Hour. They sat upon their Heels, and from time to
time stretched themselves on their left Side; and after they had remained a
Moment in that Posture, they stroak'd their Forehead and Face with their
Right Hand, which is the Badge of their Religion, as the Sign of the Cross is
of Christianity. The next Day after Dinner, which was only a Banquet of Fruits,
they visited la Gallissoniere, who conducted 'em to the Shore, and at their
Landing were saluted with eleven Guns. At the same time a Bark appeared under
Algerine Colors, without a Skiff, standing into the Mouth of the River; she
was known to belong to Salley, and had taken a French Vessel laden with
Cod-Fish. The 6th. the Ambassador wrote to Mehemed, requiring Satisfaction for
the Injury done to his Nation; and was answered, that the Master of the Bark
was arrested, and that the Prize should be restored. The 7th. a Messenger was
dispatched to Tetuan, which is situated two Leagues from the Shore, for the
French Consul, who sent word that he could not come without the Governor's
Permission. The same Day Mehemed gave the Ambassador notice that he had
received an Answer from the Alcayd, who had desired him to carry his Son on
board, and therefore he entreated the Pinnace might be sent ashore next
Morning. His desire was granted, and the Pinnace waited upon him at the time
appointed; but he was forced to embark alone, for the Youth was afraid to
venture on the Sea, which happened at that time to be very rough. In the mean
time the Alcayd wrote to the Ambassador, to congratulate his Arrival, assuring
him that he would come with all possible haste to receive him, and that the
Emperor his Master had commanded him to treat him with the highest respect.
The 9th. several Boats came to the Ship to Land the Ambassador's Retinue; and
Mehemed went on board to compliment him in the Name of the Alcayd, who waited
on the Shore to receive him: But 'twas so late that the Ambassador thought fit
to put off his Landing till the next Day, assuring Mehemed (who resolved to lie
that Night on board) that at Sunrising he would give Orders to salute the
Alcayd with thirteen Guns, and a triple discharge of Musket Shot; and the same
Evening he sent two Officers to compliment him. Next Morning the promised
Salutation was performed; and after the Ambassador had heard Mass, and dined
with Mehemed, he embarked with all his Retinue, besides several Officers of the
Ship and Marine Guards, and Landed about nine aclock. He found the Shore lined
with 400 Musketeers, and was met by the Alcayd and his Son, at the Head of 200
Horse. At their Meeting, he told that Officer, that he was glad he had the good
Fortune to enter the Dominions of the Emperor of Morocco in a place that was
under his Government. The Alcayd replied, That he was welcome, He and all his
Company, and inquired concerning his Health. He was clothed in Yellow, with a
little Cowl or Hood of the same Color on his Head, and a Lance of the length
of a Pike in his Right Hand. One half of the Horsemen carried Lances, and the
other Firelocks, which they discharged, and were followed by a Volley from the
Infantry, Then the Squadron broke, and some of 'em galloped along the Shore,
turning and managing their Horses with a considerable Dexterity. At the same
time the Ambassador was conducted by Mehemed to the Alcayd's Tent, where there
was a large Table-Cloath spread on the Ground, with an Indian Cloth, and a
Coverlet over all, of the same largeness. As Soon as the Ambassador entered, he
sat down on the Coverlet, and Cushions were brought to the Alcayd: Then the
Ambassador rose up, saying, that Frenchmen were not accustomed to sit so low;
but the Alcayd, who knew his meaning, replied, that this Enterview was not to
be made a Precedent, and that he did not pretend to entertain him with all the
Ceremonies of a formal Reception; in the mean time he ordered two Cushions to
be laid one above another, and the Ambassador sat down upon 'em. After they
had discoursed a quarter of an Hour, the Collation was brought in, consisting
of March-panes, which were taken out of a Wicker-Basket, and laid upon a piece
of Spanish-Leather after the manner of a Table-Cloth, adorned with some
Ciphers: Then they presented Nuts and Raisins, with very white, but very bad,
Bread. All the Company drunk outof the same Pot or Dish, which was made of Wood
in form of a Porringer, and adorned on the outside with Silver-Gilt. The
Banquet ended, they mounted on Horseback, the Infantry marching in the Wings,
and the Horse in the Front, who, as often as they met with plain Fields,
divided themselves into two Squadrons, representing the Moorish way of fighting
with Lances. Some of the bravest of 'em broke out of their Ranks, and having
darted their Lances into the opposite Squadron, galloped back to their own,
with some of the other Party at their Heels. Then the whole Squadrons engaged
without observing any Order, and after they had fired, the Commander, who
marched in the Front, fell back to the Rear, galloping, and calling on his Men,
whom he rallied, and put into Order: And sometimes one of the Squadrons kept
their Ground, expecting the Assault of the Enemy. They engaged after the same
manner nine or ten times before they reached the Town, where the French arrived
about four a-clock, and the Ambassador was carried to a little and
ill-furnish'd, but not unpleasant, House, which they told him was the King's.
There is a Basin or Pond surrounded with Orange Trees before the Gate; and the
Garden is adorned with several Arbours of Fruit Trees. The Alcayd sent to
inform the King of the Ambassador's Arrival, and received an Answer on the 4th.
of November; but the bad Weather which lasted till the 14th. and the
Ambassador's Indisposition retarded his Journey for some time. Mehemed brought
the Horses that were prepared for him, magnifying the Care he had taken to
procure so great a number: And when he was ready to depart, the Alcayd came to
him on Horseback, and inquired whether he wanted any thing; after which he went
to the Alcayd's House, and thanked him for all his Civilities; and that Officer
not only returned a very obliging Answer, but offered the Ambassador three or
four Thousand Crowns, if he stood in need of such a Sum. Then the Company took
Horse, and the Musketeers who were at the Gate, saluted the Ambassador, as he
pass^d by, with a Volley of all their Muskets. The first Village they saw on
the Road is called Dezutburg, where the Lord of the Place accommodates all
Persons with Lodgings gratis, and has sometimes fed two hundred at one time.
They travell^d till the 14th. through a Mountainous and almost uninhabited
Country, where there is no Water, but great abundance of Partridges. The 14th.
they encamped near Alcaza, where the Ambassador was complimented by the Alcayd,
Brother to him of Tetuan. He wore a large Robe or Gown of black Velvet spangl'd
with Gold, and rode on a very fine Horse, who was of a large size for one of
Barbary, and magnificently harnass'd with red Velvet, adorned with little
Plates of Gold: Two Slaves held the Reins of his Bridle, and there was a great
deal of massy Gold on the Head-Stall and Throat-Band. He was accompanied with
his Son, who was mounted on a Horse of the same kind; and his Train consisted
of 100 Horse, and a like number of Foot. After some mutual Compliments he
retired, wheeling, and managing his Horse, he and all his Horsemen, as his
Brother and his Company did at Tetuan. The whole Journey to Salley was very
troublesome to the Ambassadour's Retinue; the Ways were generally hard to be
found, the Meat was bad, and they were forced to keep themselves always in a
Posture of Defense, both because of the Robbers, who came very near their Tents
in the Night, and the Lions with which that Country abounds. On the 20th. they
were met by Midy Aly Manino, Lieutenant of the Polity or Civil Government of
Salley, and Brother of the Alcayd of that City, where they arrived in the
Evening, and abode two days, their Tables being much better furnished than they
were upon the Road. The Ambassador, according to the usual Custom, received
many Compliments and Presents of Passara, Dates, and some Hens, and Sheep. The
Inhabitants of most of the Villages through which they passed, received 'em with
loud Acclamations of Joy, some of 'em showed their Dexterity in Leaping, and
Horse-Races were never omitted. They found neither Bridges nor Boats on the
Rivers, but were forced to pass 'em on Leathern Bags stuffed with Wind. Two
Days before they arrived in the Camp, they passed by a Place where there are
150 Wells or Pits, called in the Map, Centum Putei, which are of great use in a
Country wholly destitute of Water, but that which proceeds from Rain, and is
preserved in those Pits. The 9th. of December they passed by a paltry Fort,
where the Grand Vizier lay, having been lately wounded with a Musket Shot by a
certain Moor, who fled to Muly Hamet, King of Suz: and they observed a Guard of
150 Musketeers at the Gate. The 10th. the King sent four Horsemen for the
Ambassador, who immediately set forward, and arrived in the Camp on the Day of
the Great Festival of the Bayran, which the Moors were celebrating with many
Expressions of Joy, and Sacrifices of Camels and Sheep. As the French
approached the Place of Sacrifices they perceived four Men mounted on Mules
full of little Bells, who were stained with the Blood of Victims which they had
sacrificed before the King. All the Alcayds of the Kingdom are obliged to be
present at that Solemnity, and that Monarch sent to tell the Count of S. Amand,
that he might advance further and take a nearer View of the Ceremonies. As Soon
as he approached, the King retired unseen, and put himself at the Head of 2000
Horse, with whom he attacked a like Number of others: the Engagement lasted 3
Hours, and they fired their Muskets charged with Powder in one another Faces;
after which the King sent an Alcayd to compliment the Ambassador, and to
acquaint him that by reason of the Solemnity of the Festival he could not give
him Audience till the next Day. Then the Ambassador with his Train was carried
to a Place 50 Paces distant from the Camp, where he was attended next Morning
by an Alcayd, who conducted him to the Audience. All the Company took Horse,
and alighted when they drew near to the King's Tent, who when he perceived the
Ambassador at the distance of 10 Paces, said to him thrice, Cayba, which
signifies, You are welcome. Then all the Ambassadour's Attendants put on their
Hats; and the King surpised at their Boldness, broke forth into this
Expression, That the French were not Cowards like those of other Nations: after
which preventing the Ambassador he said, That he was glad to see him in good
Health; that the Country from whence he came was much more remote than
Constantinople; that he was resolved to execute the Treaty of Peace concluded
by his Ambassadors; and that the Mussulmans were always Religious Observers of
their Word. Then he entered into a Discourse concerning Religion, saying, There
was only One God, the Lord of all things; and the Ambassador answered, That
the Christians were of the same Opinion. The King replied, That what he said
was only in obedience to the Precepts of his Religion, which obliged him to
advise all Men to embrace the Mussulman Faith, which he believed was the best:
and the Ambassador answered, That he was extremely obliged to his Majesty for
his kind Intentions; but that he was resolved never to forsake that Religion in
which he was educated. Then the King, insisting still on that Subject, asked
the Reason, Why Christians believe that there is a God the Son: but the
Ambassador being persuaded that 'twou'd be in vain for him to return a Formal
Answer, replied, That he could not pretend to so much Skill in Divinity, as to
dispute with his Majesty about those Controversies. He had prepared a Harangue,
but the King always interrupted him with asking Questions, and at last told
him, That he was sensible of the Difference between the Emperor of France and
other Monarchs, who do not govern by their own Authority. The Ambassador
replied, That 'twas very reasonable that two so great Emperors, who agreed in
their Opinions, and observed the same Methods of Government, should be linked
together by the mutual Ties of a perfect Friendship. Then he presented his
Majesty's Letter, enclosed in a Case of Leather brought from the Levant,
embroidered with Gold and Silver, together with the Interpretation in Arabic
Characters. The King of Morocco received it smiling; and smelling the Case as
he opened it, after he had admired the Embroidery, he asked, whether they
dressed Leather with Amber-grise; and the Ambassador answered, That he was
wholly ignorant of those Matters. Then the King called two English Renegado's,
his Secretaries, and ordered 'em to read and interpret the French Letter, which
he heard with a great deal of Pleasure, expressing his Satisfaction by the
Motions of his Head, and spent some time in considering his Majesty's
Subscription, and the Seal which was in a distinct Paper, cut all around into
the Figure of a Sun, and enclosed in the Letter. After which he said, that he
knew very well that the King was descended in a right Line from Heraclius, and
that never any Emperor before him, had advanced the Glory of the French
Monarchy to so great a Height. The Ambassador answered, That he was not
ignorant of his Majesty's Royal Descent, and that from Aly, who married the
Daughter of the Prophet, all his Predecessors were the Offspring of Kings. The
King replied, That he was not of the Royal Family, but of the Race of the
Prophet, adding that he sent into France Agy-Aly Manino, who was of one of the
greatest Families in the West, without mentioning Agy Mehemed Thummin, who
passed for the Ambassador. The Count of S. Amand was informed, that in the King
of Morocco's Letter to his Majesty, the Name of Mehemed Thummin was put instead
of Aly Manino, by the Interest of his Patron, the Alcayd Timur, who is the most
powerful Subject in the Kingdom. The Ambassador in Answer to the King's last
Compliment assured his Majesty, that Mehemed Thummin was universally admired in
France for his Politeness, and Skill in the Management of State Affairs. Then
they brought some Dates that were newly gathered, and the King invited the
Ambassador to eat; and after they had done eating he mounted his Horse, telling
the Ambassador that he was going to run with Lances, and desiring him to keep
his Eye upon him. These Exercises lasted about two Hours, though it rained all
the while, after which he gave Orders to retire. Not long after the Presents
were brought to him, consisting of two Fusees very finely wrought, two Cases of
Pistols, two large Pendulums for a Closet, two dozen of Watches, twelve Pieces
of Gold Brocard, as many Pieces of very fine English Cloth, and some Bottles
embroidered with Gold, of the same Leather with the Letter Case, which was
brought from Constantinople. He admired above all a Cannon six Foot long, which
was not mounted; and, kissing the ground, said, He perceived by those Presents
that the French were Men; for they call all other Nations Gyon, that is, a
Nation less than Men. The Letter-Case was put into a Jubira or little Bag of
Mo-hair, and ordered to be safely preserved. The rest of the Day was spent in
Discourses concerning the Ratification of the Peace: and the Alcayd Aly, who
was appointed Commissioner for that Purpose, with Aly Manino and Mehemed
Thummin went to the Ambassador's Tent, and conferred with him till Two in the
Morning: But they were so far from coming to any Conclusion, that they tore all
that they had done, alleging that the Ambassador's Proposals did not tend to a
Peace. On the 12th. the Alcayd Aly with his two Associates returned to the
Tent, and after they had spent two Hours in a private Conference, took horse to
attend the King, and know his Pleasure. Three hours after Aly Manino brought
back word, that his Majesty was resolved to grant all that the Ambassador
should desire, and even more if it was possible. The next day the Alcayd Aly
returned with Aly Manino, and concluded the Treaty with the Ambassador, who,
two hours after, went to receive his Audience of Leave. He found the King on
Horseback, engaged in his usual Exercises, which lasted till Night, after
which his Majesty sent word to the Ambassador, that 'twas the Hour of Prayer,
and that he would speak with him at his coming out; and as soon as he came forth
he sent the Alcayd Lucas, who had been Ambassador in England, to acquaint him
that he had granted all his Proposals. The Ambassador replied, that he had
nothing more to desire of his Majesty, and that he esteemed himself too happy
in being an Eyewitness of so firm a Peace concluded between two such potent
Emperors: after which the Alcayd Lucas returned with that Answer to the King,
who ordered him to bring the Count of S. Amand before him. He found his Majesty
standing in the midst of his Camp, who received him in a very kind and friendly
Manner, and after the Ambassador had thanked him for the favorable Treatment
he had received in his Dominions, that Monarch charged him to salute the
Emperor of France in his Name, and to give him the Salutation of Peace, which
is esteemed a very eloquent Phrase in that Country to express a sincere
Affection, nor do they ever use it in speaking to Christians. The King of
Morocco is of a middle Stature, neither too great, nor too small; his Air is
courteous and inspires Respect, his Gate lofty, and his Mouth somewhat little;
he has black Hair, sparkling Eyes, and a Hawk-Nose. He had on his Head a red
Cap wrapped about with a Muslin Turbant, a Dara of a sort of very White Wool,
Which is a kind of Cloth.
with another about it of Yellow Damask. The Habit he wore consisted of a
Cafetan of Nut-colour'd Cloth, a wide and sleeveless Coat of Gold and Silk, and
under that a Haique of white Muslin girt round his Body like a Cloth, with a
Shirt of Mail to secure him against private Attempts, a Piece of Caution that
may be excused in one that has been three or four times in danger of
Assassination; a green Wast-Coat, and then a Shirt with Sleeves like those of a
Surplice. His Boots, or rather Buskins, were of red Leather plaited all over;
and his Spurrs of Iron gilt, with a Prick as long as a Bodkin. He had about 200
Horses who were not very beautiful, but they were of a large Size, and seemed
to be very good. His Army consisted of between 40 and 50000 Men, encamped (as
they fight) without any Order, on Mount Atlas. Sometimes he puts himself at the
Head of 10000 Horse to enure 'em to War, for they are only a sort of
undisciplined Militia. His usual Guard was then composed of 7000 Negro's, and
300 Renegado's clothed in Red and Green, besides 200 Pages both Moors and
Blacks, who are his Slaves. The Ambassador in his Return was conducted by
Bengaraya Son to the King of Talmenin, who provided much better Entertainment
for him on the Road, than Mehemed Thummin did in his Journey to the Court, though
he was treated with all possible Civility in France. It happened by the way,
that one of the Ambassador's Servants was slightly wounded by a Barbarian, with
a Fire-Lock charged with Hail-shot: Immediately Bengaraya, without speaking a
word, laid his Hand on his Horse, and drawing out his Scymitar, cut off the
Heads of three Men, without once enquiring who discharged the Piece, and asked
the Ambassador whether he would have him cut off Fifty Heads more, who replied
that he was more than satisfied with what he had done already: then, said he,
you must give me an Acquittance under your Hand, for, without that, if the King
should be informed that I have only cut off three Heads, he would certainly
take off mine. The Ambassador granted his Desire, and learned afterward that
the Bassa of Morocco, who commands under the King's Brother, passing by the
Place where the Accident happened, had caused 20 Barbarians to be beheaded, and
sent 50 more to Morocco, where they were kept Prisoners. In most Places the
Ambassador was received with extraordinary Respect, and even the Women came
forth to meet him shouting for Joy, though that Honor is by Custom appropriated
to the King. He arrived at Tetuan on the 19th. and the 22th. the Consul of
Salley, Aly Manino, Benachey, the Admiral Ben Joseph, and the Alcayd Lucas,
Keeper of the Seals, gave him the Letters directed to his Majesty, which were
sealed on the Outside. And after he had received Satisfaction for the Vessel
taken by the Salley-Bark, he went on board the Valiant, Toulon on the 14th. of
April 1683, with twenty French Slaves, whom the Emperor of Morocco sent for a
Present to his Majesty.

At the same time that Colbert neglected no Opportunities of displaying his
Master's Grandeur in foreign Countries, he applied himself with his usual
Diligence to the Regulation of Affairs at Home: He enjoined a rigorous
Execution of the Orders that exclude those who are not arrived at the Age
appointed by Law, or have Relations in the prohibited Degrees already in
Office, from being admitted into the Superior Courts: But when he perceived
how much the Offices of Judicature were disregarded since their Prices were
fixed, he thought fit, in some measure, to mitigate that Severity; and to
facilitate the filling up of those places, he persuaded the King to grant
Dispensations till the end of the Year 1686, at the rate of 1500 Livres for
each prohibited Relation, and as much for the defect of Age. The same Minister
being informed that the Money raised by the Duties granted to the Cities and
Corporations for the payment of their Debts, was diverted to other uses,
procured an Order of Council bearing Date the 13th. of March 1683, by which the
Mayors, Echevins, Consuls, and other Officers who had received those Sums,
were obliged to give an Account of 'em in three Months, before the Intendants
of their respective Generalities. Colbert obtained also the Publication of
another Edict, to restrain those that were possessed of Offices in Courts of
Judicature, from making use of their Authority to defraud their Creditors: And
the better to regulate the Distribution of the Valuation, 'twas ordained by the
same Edict, that Opponents to the Seal shall be preferred before all other
Creditors, though they be priviledg'd Persons, who have neglected that
Circumstance, and even before those who have obtained an actual Seizure of the
Benefits of the Offices; and that of those Opponents such as are priviledg'd
shall be first paid; that afterward the Mortgagees shall be ranked according
to the order of their respective Mortgages, and that the Overplus of the
Valuation shall be shared among the Creditors that have only Bills or Notes for
their Assurance. The same Edict ordains, that six Months after the seizure of
the Benefits of Offices in Superior Courts, and three Months in the Subaltern
Courts, the Creditors may obtain an Order, obliging the Titulary Possessor to
constitute an Attorney ad resignandum, in default of which, the Judgment
awarded shall have the force of a Warrant of Attorney; and that three Years
after the Declaration of a Judgment, if it be confirmed by a Sentence, or if
there be no Appeal made from it, the Officer shall remain absolutely prohibited
and incapacitated to discharge his Office.

Colbert being informed that the Pirates of Algiers continued still to disturb
his Majesty's Subjects in the prosecution of their Trade, resolved either to
destroy 'em irrecoverably, or to force 'em to beg a Peace: And in order to the
accomplishment of that Design, he sent his Son, the Marquess de Seignelay, to
Provence, to hasten the departure of the Fleet. Immediately after his Arrival
at Marseilles, he took a review of the Galleys, which he found in very good
order, especially the sixteen that were fitted out by his Majesty's Orders. He
visited also the Harbor, Magazins, and Hospital, and then went to Toulon, to
dispatch the Marquess du Queen on the designed Expedition, with the Galleys and
other Vessels of his Majesty's Navy. After the departure of the Fleet, the
Chevalier de Lery, by the way, took a Pyrate of Algiers, of eighteen Guns, and
one hundred and fifty Men, in which he found thirty Christian Slaves, whom he
set at liberty. And the Marquess d' Amfreville sunk a Bark belonging to the
same Pirates, and retook a Vessel laden with Marble, which they were sending to
Algiers. The News of this Expedition drove all the Pirates into their Harbor,
except two Caravells, two Barks, and another Vessel, that were sailed to
Constantinople. The Marquess du Queen set sail from Toulon, May 6th. 1683, with
six Men of War, having ordered the Galleys, Bomb-Vessels, Pinnaces, and other
Vessels, to meet at the Islands called Fromentieres, near Yvica. Some Days
after he met with a Storm, and was forced to spend some time in refitting his
Ships; after which he set sail on the 18th. and arrived on the 4th. of June at
the appointed Rendezvous, after he had scowr'd the Coast of Catalonia. He was
joined on the 9th. by the Bomb-Vessels and Pinnaces, and proceeded on his
intended Voyage without the Galleys, who were not yet come up. On the 18th. he
discovered the Road of Algiers, where he found the Marquess d' Amfreville, who
had lately retaken an English Ship from a Pyrate that pretended to belong to
Tetuan, but had a Commission from Algiers: And in the same place he was joined
by Septeme, Vilette, du Merre, and S. Mars-Colbert. He ordered his Ships to
Anchor as near the Port as they could, but without Cannonshot, and posted nine
of 'em at equal distances, in a crooked Line, resembling the Figure of the
Mole. These were the Fleuron, Firm, Siren, Prudent, Amiable, Vigilant, Laurel,
Seahorse, and Star, commanded by the Count d' Etrees, the Chevalier de
Tourville, the Count de Sepville, the Chevalier de Lery, Septeme, the Marquess
d' Amfreville, the Marquess du Queen the Son, Bellile, and the Commander des
Goutes. The seven first were ordered to carry each an Anchor, with middle-siz'd
Cables, having one end fastened to the Ship, within 600 Toises of the Mole, to
serve for the Towing of the Galleys to their respective Posts; and the
Seahorse and Star had orders to carry their Anchors for Towing nearer the Town
than the other seven, that advancing by the help of their Anchors, they might
lie on the Wings and Flank, and support the Bomb-Vessels, if they should be
attacked by the Enemy; for the Marquess du Queen had received Advice, that the
Algerines had prepared two armed Galleys, and other light Vessels for that
purpose; and besides, he ordered the Anchors to be cast nearer to each other
than the distances between the Men of War, that their Front being contracted,
they might be more easily supported by the Men of War posted on the Wings, and
that the Vessels might not be endangered by the changes of Wind and Tide. The
Bomb-Vessels were the Fulminant, Thunderer, Brulante, Bombard, Cruel,
Menacante, and Ardent, commanded by Chevigny, Piaudiere, la Motte d' Eran, de
Combs, de Poenti, Goestin, and du Quene-Monier. Besides the usual Complement
of the Galleys, the Marquess ordered ten Soldiers of the Marine Guard, ten
Granadiers, and as many chosen Soldiers to embark on each of 'em; and appointed
two Pinnaces or armed Boats to attend each Bomb-Vessel, and two Corpse de Guard
of those Boats to support the rest. The 21st. and 22d. were spent in taking up
the Posts, and other necessary Preparations. The 23d. the Captains of the Ships
carried in their Towing-Anchors; the Chevalier de Tourville carried the Anchor
of the Vessel that was to be posted next the North, and the Marquess d'
Amfreville the Anchor of that which was to be posted toward the South. The
Chevalier de Lery carried the middle Anchor; and those of the Intervals were
carried by the Commanders of the Ships to which the Cables were fastened. All
these Orders were executed without the least Opposition from the Enemy, who
imagined that the French made these Motions only to observe the Mole, and try
the reach of their Guns; for the Work was carried on with so much exactness,
that the Enemy saw neither the Anchors nor Cables. The rest of the Day was
spent in preparing the Bombs and Mortars; and in the Evening Raymondis, Major
of the Fleet, received Orders to appoint a Guard of Pinnaces to prevent the
Enemies from weighing the Anchors during the Night; but they kept close in the
Port. The 24th. no Attempt could be made, by reason of the bad Weather, which
continued also on the 25th, but at Night was succeeded by a perfect Calm; and
therefore the Marquess du Queen gave the Signal for the Bomb-Vessels to advance
in order; the Men of War took up their Posts on the Wings, and the Major sent
part of the armed Boats toward the Vessels on the North, and the rest toward
those on the South. Each Bomb-Vessel was accompanied with two Boats, and two
others were placed near the Entry of the Port, with two light Boats furnished
with Matches and Trains, which they were ordered to fire if the Enemy should
venture out of the Port, for a Signal to all the armed Boats on the Wings to
advance to the relief of the Galleys. The Bomb-Vessels did not begin to play
till one a-clock in the Morning, because the roughness of the Sea hinderd their
Approach: They continued firing two Hours, and threw ninety Bombs, which fell
(at least almost all of 'em) either in the Port, on the Mole, or in the City.
In the mean time the Chevaliers de Tourville, and de Lery, with the principal
Officers, went about in their Boats to give necessary Orders, with an
extraordinary Bravery and Diligence. As Soon as the Enemy saw the Mortars
planted, they played furiously with their Great Guns, and fired above 600 Shot.
They had kindled great Fires on the Mole, to discover the Bomb-Vessels and
Boats; and always when they perceived the Fire of the Mortars, they immediately
discharged all their Guns, but without doing any Execution. The Bombs made a
prodigious havoc, as the Slaves afterward related: Several armed Barks that
were in the Port were sunk in an instant. Some of the Bombs falling on the
Batteries, dismounted several Pieces of Cannon; and those which fell into the
City killed a great number of Persons. Several Houses were thrown down, and
many of the Inhabitants buried under the Ruins. After the Bomb-Vessels had
continued firing for two Hours with so great Success, the Marquess du Queen
thought fit to give the Signal of Retreat by firing two Guns, because there
arose a Land-Wind which would have endangered the Bomb-Vessels. The 27th. in
the Evening, perceiving the Sea to be calm, he commanded the Bomb-Vessels to
advance in the same Order as before; and they threw in about 120 Bombs with
extraordinary Success, while the Enemy made a continual fire with their Cannon.
The French lost only Choiseul d' Ambouville, Ensign of the Prudent, who was
killed, with two Soldiers in a Boat, by the same Shot. Some of the Enemy's
Bullets reached the Bomb-Vessels, and the Ardent, commanded by du Queen Monier,
which lay next the Mole, received several Shot without any damage, by reason of
the singlar Artifice with which she, as well as the rest, were contrived. At
last there arose so furious a Land-Wind, and the Sea grew so rough, that the
Bomb-Vessels were forced to retire to the Ships that supported 'em, because all
the Towing-Anchors were set a-drift by the Storm. The Bombs that were thrown
this Night did greater execution than before: For one of 'em falling upon the
Watchtower, and rolling downwards, disordered the Batteries, and killed
several Officers of the Artillery; and most of the rest fell either into the
City, or upon the Mole, which were very much shattered by 'em. As Soon as the
Galleys retired, there arose a Mutiny in the Town, and a great number of Women,
not able to support the cruelty of their Disasters, went in a desperate manner
to the Bassa, Dey, and principal Officers, some carrying their mangled
Children, and others the Arms and Heads of their Husbands and Relations that
were killed by the Bombs. The Soldiery were also accessory to the Mutiny, and
accused Baba-Hassan in a threatening manner, as the Author of the Breach with
France, and consequently of the Misery of Algiers: Their Commanders protested
they were and would always be ready to march against their Enemies, but added,
that they would not be thus killed in their Houses; and went boldly to the
Bassa's House, requiring him to inflict a due Punishment on Baba-Hassan, and
make a Peace with France. In compliance with their Desires, the Bassa, whose
Office does not entitle him to an absolute Authority in the City, called a
meeting of the Divan, on the 20th. early in the Morning, and after he had
prepared their Minds with a pathetic Declamation against Baba-Hassan, he
endeavored to convince 'em of the nenecessity of desiring a Peace from the
General of the French Fleet, adding, that if they refused to take that Course,
which was the only way to save the City from utter Destruction, he was resolved
to retire to Tunis, and write to the Grand Signior that Baba-Hassan had ruined
Algiers, and made it incapable of paying the usual Tribute to his Highness. The
Principal Members of the Divan and Military Officers were so moved by these
Remonstrances, that they agreed unanimously to follow his Advice: And in
pursuance of that Resolution, they deputed a particular Friend of Baba-Hassan,
whom they sent, with an Interpreter, in a Pinnace with a white Flag, and
obliged the Missionary le Vacher, to accompany him. They arrived about nine in
the Morning, at the Admiral's Vessel, who without suffering 'em to come on
board, ordered 'em to retire behind the Ship, where they might deliver their
Proposals, and receive an Answer from the Deck: But being informed by le
Vacher, of the Secret of the Message, he permitted the Deputy and his
Interpreter to come on board, and answered 'em in Writing, to prevent both
Mistakes and Misrepresentations; that he would not hearken to any Proposals of
Peace, till they had freely discharged and set at liberty all their French
Slaves, and even those of other Nations whom they had taken on board French
Ships. At last, after several Comings and Goings, 141 Slaves were brought on
board the Admiral, among whom was Beaujeu, a Captain of one of his Majesty's
Ships, who was taken in a small Vessel, and sold for 11200 Piasters; and the
Deputy who accompanied 'em, assured the Admiral, that there was Orders given to
gather together all the French Slaves, and those that were taken under the
Banner of France, and to restore 'em without delay. He demanded also (in
Baba-Hassan's Name) the liberty of the Reys, and other Algerines that were
taken by de Lery in his way to Algiers, but could not obtain a favorable
Answer. On the 30th. of June, and 1st. of July, he brought 276 Slaves more; and
after several earnest Solicitations, obtained the liberty of the Reys. The
remaining Slaves were also freed, and brought on board before the 5th. and
among the rest, four Women, one of Marseilles, and three of Messina. Thus his
Majesty humbl'd the Insolence of those haughty Pirates, who imagined themselves
to be secured from the danger of being attacked in their Port, after the
unsuccessful Attempt of the Emperor Charles V.

The Joy with which Colbert received the News of the happy Success of his
Majesty's Arms at Sea, and his desire to outstrip the Marquess of Louvois, who
for a long time had been the Object of his Jealousy, made him strive with so
much eagerness to discharge the Duties of so many several Offices, that at last
he sunk under that perpetual and insupportable Load of Cares, and the fatal
violence of his last Disease, occasioned by a Stone in the Kidneys, which put
an end to his Life on the 6th. of September 1683, at the Age of Sixty four
Years. He was assisted at his Death by Cornouaille, Vicar of St. Eustachius,
and that celebrated Preacher, Father Bourdaloue, the Jesuit: And the Ceremony
of his Interrment was performed in the Night, under a Guard of the Soldiers of
the Watch, to prevent the Fury of his implacable Enemies, the Inhabitants of
Paris.

His Children erected a stately Monument to his Memory, in the Church of St.
Eustachius, where his Bust of White Marble is to be seen, of very curious
Workmanship. His Death was made the Subject of many Verses, of which those that
follow are agreeable to the Account of his Birth, in the beginning of this
History:

Colbert's dead -- I Am sure he is dead;
I saw his breathless Body laid
On a Bed of mournful State,
With all the solemn Pomp of Fate.
I softly walked, and often stood,
And long the pleasing Object viewed.
Each Room Death's Sable Liv'ry wore,
And all the Marks of Sorrow bore;
Splendid Sorrow reigned over all;
Sorrow covered every Wall.
At last I spied a Fellow grinning,
And heard him whisper out his meaning:
Pray, Sir, what makes you look so sullen?
Do You grudge the waste of so much Woollen?
Could less be done, good Mr. Gaper,
In honor of old Dad the Draper?
The Manuscripts and most curious Pieces of that numerous Collection of Books
which he left, were taken out of Cardinal Mazarin's Library, who entrusted him
with the Administration of that part of his Goods: for he sent only the most
common Pieces to the College of the Four Nations, contrary to the Will of his
Benefactor, who left his Library for the Use and Instruction of the Students of
that College.

His Offices were divided after his Death: That of Comptroller General of the
Finances was given to Claude le Pelletier, Counselor of State, who had
formerly been Counselor in the Parliament, President of the Court of
Inquests, Provost of the Merchants, and was afterward made Counselor of
State in Ordinary: He had also been Tutor to the Children of John-Baptist
Gaston, Duke of Orleans, and acquired a great deal of Honor by his wise
Management of that Trust. He was an exact and judicious Person, and a good
Judge; but his unacquaintedness with the Affairs of the Finances made him so
slow in dispatching 'em, that no less skilful a Successor than Pontchartrain,
could have prevented the ill consequences of his Remissness. The Office of
Superintendant of the Buildings was bestowed on Michael-Francis le Tellier,
Marquess of Louvois, Minister and Secretary of State, with the Protectorship of
the Academy of Painting; though Julius-Armand Colbert, Marquess of Blainville,
Son of the Deceased, had obtained the Reversion of the Office of
Superintendant. So that of all his Places, only the Offices of Secretary of
State, and of Commander and Great Treasurer of his Majesty's Orders remained in
the Family, which were given to the Marquess of Seignelay, whose Character was
perfectly opposite to that of his Father. For the Son's Magnificence was as
remarkable as his Father's Frugality: His Table was sumptuous, and his
Furniture splendid and rich: He had a Closet set round with Looking-Glasses,
and another Wainscotted with Calamba-Wood, which was brought by his Orders from
Siam: He bought of Alvarez a Collection of Italian Pictures and Statues, to the
value of 300000 Livres, part of which he paid in Pass-ports, and in the Ships
that he lent him. He was Master of a great deal of Learning and Politeness; but
never any Man exceeded him in Vanity; and he was an immoderate lover of
Pleasures. He was twice Married, first with Mary Margaret, Marchioness of
Alegre, whose Fortune amounted to above 60000 Livres, Yearly Revenue, and after
her Death with Katharin Teresa de Matignen, Daughter of the Count de Thorigny,
his Majesty's Lieutenant General in Normandy, and of Frances de le Luthumiere.
The Marchioness of Alegre could not easily be persuaded to Marry a Husband of
so mean birth, but Colbert had gained the Marquesses d' Alegre and d' Urfe, the
Uncles and Guardians of that rich Heiress. In consideration of this Match, the
Bishopric of Limoges was bestowed on the Count de Sommerive, the Son of the
latter; and the Father obtained recommendatory Letters to the principal
Officers in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, where he had an important Suit
depending, against his Nephew the Count de Mailly, about the Inheritance of the
Duchess of Crouy. The Marchioness de Seignelay's Contempt of her Husband
occasioned frequent Quarrels between 'em; and the Marquess, who was naturally
of a haughty Temper, was once so transported with Fury, that he gave her a
Blow, which cost him a Drubbing that his Father bestowed on him, for the
Improvement of his Manners: But the Bastinadoe produced no other effect on him,
than the Indian Root, with which Boccace's Joseph attempted to cure his Wife of
her Sawciness. After that Lady's Death, the Duke of Bournonville offered his
Daughter, who was also very rich, to supply her place; but Colbert refused the
Match, knowing that the Duke (who was Fouquet's intimate Friend) hoped by that
means to be reinstated in the Government of Paris, which he enjoyed during
Cardinal Mazarin's Life.

The Marquess de Blainville having lost all hope of his Superintendantship,
resolved to depend on his Sword for the Advancement of his Fortune, and
contented himself at present with the mean Preferment of a Lieutenant's Place
in the Regiment of Picardy. Anthony Martin Colbert, though scarce a Gentleman,
was (as I hinted before) received Knight of Malta, during the Life of his
Father; and a Commander, to flatter both, said aloud at his coming out, that
the young Pretender had passed his Four Quarters. Moreri derives Colbert's
Pedigree from an ancient Scotch Family that settled in Champaign in the XIII.
Age, according to that Author's Opinion, which he grounds on the Epitaph of
Richard Colbert, at the Church of the Cordeliers at Rheims, accompanied with
the Arms of that Family: But that Proof is of no force, for the alleged
Inscription was placed there, when Colbert designed to procure the Honor of
the Maltese Knighthood for his Son, as appears by the Testimony of the old
Inhabitants of that City, who affirm that formerly there was no Engraving on
the Tomb. Giles Menage, a professed Wit, and one of Colbert's Pensioners,
attempted to squeeze some new Favors out of him by composing his Genealogy,
which he deduced from the ancient Kings of Scotland; but that Minister
perceiving the obvious grossness of the Flattery, instead of rewarding his
Zeal, deprived him of his Pension. A memorable Example for those designing
Panegyrists, who over-act their Parts, and injure their Patrons by strained and
fulsom Encomiums. The Chevalier Colbert was so fortunate in his new Dignity,
that he was made Grand Croix de Grace, and General of the Galleys of the Order:
But that Preferment served only to hasten his Disgrace, by discovering his
Unfitness for the suitable Discharge of so great a Trust: For with seven
Galleys that were under his command, he had not the Courage to attack three
Tripolin Vessels which he found becalmed; and his Cowardice would have
infallibly ruined him, if he had not been protected by the Authority of his
Brother, the Marquess de Seignelay. After that Disaster he left the
Sea-Service, and endeavoring to recover his Honor, lost his Life at the Head
of the Regiment of Champaign, of which he was Colonel. James Nicholas Colbert,
at present Archbishop of Rohan, though he had renounced the Fair Sex, by entering
into the Episcopal Order, could not forbear espousing the Quarrel of his old
Mistress, la Certain, and even carried his Complaisance so high, as to punish
the Inconstancy of her new Lover, Lully, who had forsaken her for the young
Brunet, by making the Marquess de Seignelay give him a severe Reprimand, and
causing him to be shut up in St. Lazarus's.

The difference that happened shortly after between the King and the Republic
of Genoa, gave the Marquess de Seignelay an opportunity of discovering the
Extent and Variety of his Abilities. His Majesty complained that the Genoese
entertained a closer Correspondence with the Count de Melgar, Governor of
Milan, than was consistent with the Neutrality they promised to observe between
the two Crowns; that they were fitting out four new Galleys to join those they
usually kept in his Catholic Majesty's Service, under the Command of the Duke
of Tursis; that they sent Powder and Bombs to the Algarins, for the burning of
his Majesty's Galleys in the Port of Marseilles; That they refused to grant a
Passage for the Transportation of the Salt, that by Virtue of an agreement with
the Duke of Mantua, was to be carried thither from France, and would not suffer
him to settle Magazins at Savona; and that they would not do Justice to the
Count de Fiesque, by restoring to him the Inheritance of the Count de Lavagne's
Estate. The Marquess de St. Olon, the French Resident at Genoa, represented all
those Injuries to the Senate, demanding Satisfaction in his Master's Name, and
at last declared, That if they persisted in their Resolution to launch four new
Galleys, his Majesty would interpret that as an Act of Hostility, and command
his Subjects to seize not only on these Vessels, but on all that belonged to
the Republic. But all his Remonstrances and Threatenings were slighted by the
Genoese, who would not be persuaded to give his Majesty any Satisfaction; and
therefore the Resident took his Audience of Leave, and the Marquess de
Seignelay was ordered to make necessary preparations for a Naval Expedition,
Genoese should constrain his Majesty to use 'em with the utmost Rigor.

As Soon as the Marquess received these Orders, he wrote to Bonrepos, Intendant
of the Marine, to put 'em in execution, without acquainting him with the
Design; and not long after set forward for Toulon, where he arrived on the
26th. of April 1684, and took a Review of the Ships and Galleys. On the 5th. of
May he embarked for the Isles of Hieres, where the General Rendezvous of the
Fleet was appointed; and set sail on the 12th. with fourteen Men of War, three
light Frigates, ten Galiots or Bomb-Vessels, two Fireships, eight Fly-Boats,
seventeen Tartans, end twenty Galleys. The Men of War were the Ardent, Ferme,
Valiant, Vigilant, Amiable, Parfait, Assure, Fortune, S. Jacques, Fleuron,
Aquilon, Indien, Capable, and Bizarre, commanded by the Marquess du Queen, and
the Chevalier de Tourville, Lieutenant-Generals; the Marquess d' Amfreville,
and the Chevalier de Lery, Commanders of a Squadron, S. Aubin, the Commander
des Goutes, Belle-Ile-Erard, the Chevalier du Mean, Septeme, the Marquess de la
Port, the Chevalier de Bellefontain, Forant, la Motte, and Chaumont. The three
light Frigates, the Vipere, Trompeuse, and Subtle, were commanded by Clarier,
Flote, and Pelerin. The Galleys were the Reale, Patron, Invincible, Forte,
Victoire, Reine, Valeur, Sirene, Grande, Belle, Francoise, Hardy, Amazone,
Galante, Ferme, Dauphine, Fleur-de-lis, Couronne, and Perle; under the Command
of the Duke de Mortemar, General of the Galleys; the Chevalier de Nouailles,
Lieutenant General; the Chevalier de Bethomas, the Chevalier de Breteuil, the
Chevalier de Janson, Montaulieu, le Sornier, Forville, Maubousquet, the Count
de Beuil, the Chevalier de Pens, the Chevalier de S. Herem, the Chevalier de
Rochechouart, Montfuron, the Chevalier du Cher, the Viscount de Lauzun, the
Chevalier de la Fare, the Count du Luc, Bourse Ville, and the Chevalier de
Tancour. The Fleet arrived before Genoa on the 17th. of May, and the ten
Bomb-Vessels which carried two Mortars each, were drawn up in a Line at the
distance of Cannon-Shot from the Walls, stretching from the Watchtower on the
Left, to the Fauxbourg de Bisagno on the Right. The Men of War made another
Line behind the Bomb-Vessels, at the distance of 200 Toises, with the Galleys
divided into two Squadrons. The Day after their Arrival, the Senate deputed six
of their Body to offer Proposals, by way of Excuse, to the Marquess de
Seignelay, which he rejected, because there was no mention made of giving
Satisfaction to his Majesty. And they were even so little inclinable to an
Accommodation, that after the Deputies were returned, they began to fire at the
French Fleet; which was a sufficient Provocation to oblige the Marquess de
Seignelay, to begin the Bombardment, with the Success of ruining several
Palaces, and other Buildings in the Prado. The 20th. some of the Bomb-Vessels
were ordered to stand in nearer the Harbor, to play upon those parts of the
City that had not yet received any Damage; and one of the Bombs that were
thrown in after that Motion, fell upon a Palace at a great distance, whither
several Ladies of Quality had retired; nor was the Havoc they made in the Port
less considerable, where several Barks were shattered to pieces. The French
Bombs would have quickly frighted the Genoese into a Compliance with his
Majesty's Desires, if they had not been animated by the Spaniards whom they had
received into the City. And therefore the Marquess de Seignelay seeing that
they persisted in their Obstinacy, resolved to make a Descent, in order to
destroy the fine Palaces in the Fauxbourg of S. Pietro d' Arena. To execute
this Design, 1500 Men were detached from the Men of War, and 2000 from the
Galleys, under the Command of the Duke de Mortemar, and the Chevalier de
Tourville: And at the same time a false Attack was made with 700 Men, toward
Bisagno, by the Marquess d' Amfreville, who executed his Commission with a
great deal of Vigor, though in the beginning of the Engagement he received a
Wound in the Thigh, which was very troublesome to him for a long time after.
They who were appointed to carry on the true Attack, in the first place made
themselves Masters of a Fort that might have cut off their Retreat, and
afterward drove the Enemy from House to House, possessing themselves of the
same Posts which they abandoned. And after they had almost wholly ruined that
Fauxbourg, they retired on board the Ships, having lost the Chevalier de Lery,
and four or five inferior Officers. The 29th. of the same Month, the Fleet set
sail, and arrived at Toulon on the first of June. The Pope offered his
Mediation for a Treaty of Peace, which was concluded on the 12th. of February
1685, Genoese submitted to, (and afterward punctually performed) these
Conditions; That the Doge, accompanied with four Senators, should come in
Person to give Satisfaction to his Majesty, and at their return, re-enter into
the Possession and Exercises of their Offices; That the Republic should
dismiss all the Spanish Troops, reduce the Galleys to their ancient Number,
restore or make good all that they had taken from the French, and pay 100000
Crowns to the Count de Fiesque. The Marquess de Seignelay was so pleased with
the happy Success of this Expedition, that 'twas almost the only Subject of his
Discourse; and he caused his Picture to be drawn, as he stood in the
Reale-Galley, with a General's Batoon in his Hand.

Siam. For that Prince being informed that his first Ambassadors to France were
unfortunately lost at Sea, made choice of two Officers of his Household to
undertake that Voyage in the French East India Company. And the Confidence he
reposed in the Apostolical Missionaries that were in his Dominions, made him
desire the Bishop of Metellopolis to appoint one of these Fathers to accompany
his Ambassadors in their Voyage to Siam. In compliance with so just a Desire,
that Prelate made choice of Vachet, an old Missionary of Cochin-China, who,
with the two Ambassadors, Okoane Pichey Vallite, and Khonne Pichise or Aiti,
six other Siamese, and an Interpreter of the same Nation, embarked on an
English Vessel January 13. 1684. which brought 'em to England, from whence they
passed to Calice, where they were received by the Marquess de Seignelay's
Order, and conducted to Paris at the King's Charge. Afterward the Marquess
sent two Coaches to bring 'em to the Audience he had granted 'em, and received
'em in his Closet. The Ambassadors at their Entry bowed thrice with their Faces
to the Ground, and their Hands joined and lifted up to the Crown of their Head,
after the Fashion of their Country: Then they sat down on a piece of Tapestry,
and having repeated the principal Articles of their Commission, regulated some
of the Articles with him; after which they had Audience of the Marquess de
Croissy, with whom they concluded the Treaty.

The Marquess de Seignelay, who succeeded his Father in the Management of
Affairs relating to Trade, procured an Order of Council, bearing date January
6, 1685, by which his Majesty not only confirms the License granted to the
Senega-Company to Trade on the Coast of Afric, from Cape-Blanc to the River of
Sierra-Leona; but expressly prohibits all other Persons whatsoever, to drive any
Trade or Traffic in those Parts, under the pain of forfeiting their Ships and
Commodities, and paying a Fine of 3000 Livres: Revoking, nevertheless, the
Privilege granted to the same Company, to engross the whole Trade of the Coast
of Guinea, to the Cape of Good Hope; and giving free leave and permission to
all his Majesty's Subjects to Trade on any part of the Coast between the Cape
and the River of Sierra-Leona. In February the Marquess de Blainville purchased
the Office of Great Master of the Ceremonies, of the Marquess de Rodes, and
took the usual Oath before Julius-Henry, then Duke d' Enguien, and now Prince
of Conde, Great Master of the King's Household.

About the same time the King called a Meeting of the Clergy at St. Germain en
Lay, to conclude on the most proper Methods for the utter extirpation of
Calvinism out of his Dominions. His Majesty sent Lewis Boucherat, at present
Chancellor of France, and Claude Pelletier, with the Marquess de Seignelay, to
communicate his Design to the Prelates and other Members of that Assembly; and
on the 14th. of July the Clergy sent Deputies to acquaint his Majesty with
their Resolutions, who were conducted to their Audience, by the Marquess. In
pursuance of that Advice, the King set forth an Edict, revoking and abrogating
the Edict of Nantes in School, that of Nimes in 1629, and all other Edicts and
Declarations granted in favor of those of the Reformed Religion. The principal
Traders of the City of Paris, professing that Religion, met according to the
Edict, in the Marquess de Seignelay's House, and in the presence of Achilles de
Harlay, then Attorney General, and now chief President in the Parliament of
Paris, and of Nicholas de la Reynie, Lieutenant of the Polity, promised to
embrace the Catholic Faith; and their Example was followed by a great number
of the Masters of the incorporated Companies of Tradesmen.

The King resolving to sup at the Marquess de Seignelay's House at Sceaux on
the 16th. of July, 1685. the Marquess prepared to Regale him with his usual
Magnificence. His Majesty arriving about half an hour after Six, was received
at his Coming out of his Coach by the Marquess, who conducted him to the
Garden, where he with the Dauphiness, and the Duchess of Orleans, took their
Seats in a large Chair with four Places, and as many Umbrella's, carried by
Men; and the rest of the Ladies of the Court took the Convenience of other
Chairs which they found there, the Princes and Lords attending his Majesty on
Foot. First they entered into the Pavilion of the Morning, where in a Corner
there were some of the most able Masters of Instrumental Music, who diverted
the Court with their Consorts for a Quarter of an Hour, after which they
continued their Walk. When his Majesty arrived at the Cascade he heard the
agreeable Noise of several Haut-Boys mixed with the Murmuring of the Water; the
Musicians walking behind the Hedge-Row, which kept them a long time from being
perceived, and the same Diversion was renewed in several Places of the Garden,
where the Flutes and Haut-Boys lay concealed in the Thickets; in the
Orange-House his Majesty was Regaled with a Consort of Music prepared for that
Occasion. The Seats were taken out of the Gallery that ends in the
Orange-House, and was separated from it by large Pilasters of Marble, leaning
on Facades to which five great Candlesticks were fastened, it being already
dark. The same Order was observed throughout, and at the End of the Place there
appeared two Benches or Stools, on each side along the Declivity of an
Amphitheatre, above which there was a Gallery; All these Parts were lighted by
an infinite number of little Lamps. The Fronts and Pilasters were adorned with
flat Pieces of Goldsmiths Work, and Candlesticks for Tapers; the rest of the
Orange-House was hung with Tapestry representing a Hunting Match, and the
twelve Months of the Year, and embellished with two Rows of Lamps from one end
to the other. The Consort being ended, his Majesty came forth at a great Door
in the Middle of the Orange-House, and saw on his Right Hand several Walks of
Orange Trees, adorned with a great number of Lights placed before the Boxes;
And after he had marched about 30 Paces in in one of those Walks, he discovered
a Table in a Green Arbor. The Table was four Foot and three Inches broad,
reaching quite round the Canal, but covered only in those places that were
under the Arbours on the Banks of the Canal, to the Angles on those parts of
the Flanks that were formed into an Amphitheatre, descending by three Degrees
toward the Water. The King took his Seat at the Table in the Midst of an
Arbor, at one of the Ends of the Canal, and the Dauphin was placed in the
opposite Arbor, so that there were 38 Foot of Water between 'em; the two sides
of the Table were adorned with a Wreath of Baskets and Vessels of Porcelane
full of Flowers, between the branched Candlesticks, and other Machines of
Goldsmiths-Work carrying 25 Tapers; besides which there were others somewhat
lower. The Machines of Light were all of a different Contrivance, representing
his Majesty's Actions under Allegorical Figures; and the other two Degrees were
adorned after the the same Manner. The Arbours at each End of the Canal, which
covered the two parts of the Table where his Majesty and the Dauphin sat, were
18 Foot high, being arched after the manner of a Porch, and so artificially
contrived, that the Cornices and other parts of the Architecture were easily
distinguished. The Plafond of the place where the King sat was encompassed
with a raised Work, but those of the two Wings were flat, and all the Portico's
were arched and adorned with his Majesty's Arms and Ciphers in the Middle.
Several Busts and Garlands of Flowers hung also in the Middle of the Arches,
and the King's Arbor was covered with the like Ornaments. All the Cornices
were bordered with 150 branched Candlesticks, bearing six Tapers each, with a
silver Basket full of Flowers between every two Candlesticks. All the Arches
were furnished with Damask Curtains, tied back to the Pilasters, to preserve
the Company from Rain, if there should be occasion; and over against the sides
of the Table there were two Cupboards of State, supported by great Arches, and
crowned with Arbours, containing 20 Foot in Front, and rising by three Degrees,
adorned with Multiplying-Glasses, besides several Curious Pieces of Gold and
Silver-Work, among which there was a great number of branched Candlesticks,
carrying several Tapers, and besides they were bordered with Boxes of
Orange Trees. The Entertainment consisted of five Courses of the rarest Kinds
of Meat and Fruit which could be procured in that Season. The King was served
by the Marquess de Seignelay, the Dauphiness by le Bailly Colbert, and the Duke
of Orleans by the Marquess de Blainville; and at the other end the Dauphin, and
Madam by the Marquess de Maulevrier, During the Repast, they were by turns
diverted with the Harmonious Sounds of Trumpets, Violins, Flutes, Hautboys, and
Kettle-Drums; and at the same time there were two Tables prepared in the
Castle, with twenty or thirty covered Places at each, for Persons of Quality
attending on the Court; and several others were placed in the Garden and Court
for the Officers, not forgetting even the Footmen.

Whilst the Marquess de Seignelay was displaying his Magnificence at Home, his
Brother-in-Law the Duke de Mortemar, gave illustrious Proofs of his Vigor and
Conduct in the Treaty which he concluded with the Pirates of Tripoli. He
arrived before that Place the 28th. of July, 1686, and sent such a peremptory
Letter to the Dey, that he assembled the Divan the same Day; where 'twas
resolved to grant all that the Duke demanded, excepting only the entire Payment
of the 60000 Crowns, being part of the Sum which they were obliged to pay by
the Treaty concluded in 1685: For they were not then able to advance so
considerable a Sum, by reason of their bad Harvest, and of the Civil War that
had harassed their Country since that time, and was just then terminated by the
Death of the Dey, whom the Moors endeavored to make Sovereign of the Country.
In the mean time they laded one of the King's Ships with ^orn; and since they
could not restore seven of the Frenchmen that were asked of 'em, whom they had
sold in several parts of the Levant, from whence they could not possibly bring
'em back, they delivered thirty Strangers instead of the twenty French Slaves
that were demanded of 'em, with eleven young Ship-Boys of Provence, whom they
had forced to renounce Christianity, which they had never before granted by any
Treaty whatsoever. The Duke de Mortemar at his Arrival, found five Venetian Men
of War and Fly-Boats that were come to Land the Garrison and Inhabitants of
Navarrens and Modon, which were surrenderd on Articles to the Generalissimo
Morosini. The Commander of this Squadron had retained some Women, under pretext
that they were willing to embrace the Christian Faith; and the Dey of Tripoli,
on the Complaints made to him by the Husbands and Relations of those Women,
had, by way of Reprizal, seized on the whole Crew of a Pinnace belonging to the
Venetians. But the Difference was accommodated by the Duke's Mediation, the
Women being restored to the Turks, and the Mariners of the Pinnace to the
Venetians. After which the Duke wrote to the Dey of Tunis, who sent in the
Vessel called the Granade* the rest of the Slaves that were taken under the
Banner of France. The next Year the Dey, Divan, and Soldiery of Tripoli sent to
France, Khelyt Aga the Bassa's Deputy, and Hector Aga, a Naval Officer, to
present to his Majesty, by way of Tribute, two Dromedaries, six of the finest
Horses in the Country, and some Ostriches. These Envoys arrived at Toulon on
the 3d. of May, 1687, where they were received by Vauvre, Intendant of the
Marine, and maintained at the King's Charge, with their eight Attentendants,
during the forty Days they remained in that Place, to repose themselves and
those Animals who had suffered very much in the Voyage. At last they set
forward by an Order from the Court, accompanied by de Magrie, a Marine Officer
in the Toulon Division, and Antonio Boyer, a Native of Malta, to perform the
Office of an Interpreter on the Road. On the 10th. of August they came to
Charenton, and de Magna went immediately to inform the Marquess de Seignelay of
their Arrival. The 22d. they were brought to Versailles, and introduced to his
Majesty's Presence by the Marquess. After they had made their Compliment in
Turkish, which was interpreted by Dipy, they presented the Animals to the King;
after which a Moor about eighteen Years old, of a very large Stature both for
height and thickness, mounted one of the Dromedaries, harnessed after the Mode
of the Country, and galloping about the Court, he raised himself with wonderful
agility on the Back of that Animal, and having made several whirling Turns,
fell back into his former Posture. Some Days after the Ambassadors went to see
the Marquess de Seignelay's House, where they were regaled by his Officers,
though they had received neither Orders for the Entertainment, nor so much as
Notice of their coming. At their departure the Marquess gave each of 'em in the
King's Name, a Gold Chain and Medal, with his Majesty's Picture.

In October 1689, the Marquess de Seignelay was made Minister of State; but he
did not long enjoy that Dignity, for he died the next Year, three Months after
the Dauphiness, as his Father deceased some Days after the Queen. His Death was
believed to be occasioned by his Debauches, and especially by the Excesses he
committed with Women. He was extremely in Love with one of his Mistresses, but
did not take care to raise her Fortune, though it was not suitable to her Birth.
When she was informed that there was no hope of his Recovery, and that he
suffered no Ladies to be brought into his Presence, she disguised her self in
the Habit of a Courier, and pretending that she had a Packet concerning some
important Affair to deliver to the Marquess. She was introduced into his
Chamber, where she discovered her self to him, and told him, that hearing he
was about to undertake a long Journey, she could not forbear bidding him adieu
before his departure; and withal, entreated him to remember her Condition. He
easily understood her meaning, but having more pressing Debts to pay, sent her
away with a Promise that he would think of her. The Abbot de Fenelon gave him
notice of his approaching Death; and he was so much the more surpised with so
unwelcom a Message, that two Days before he had spent eight Hours in doing
Business with his Commissaries. His Body being opened, there were found twelve
small and very hard Glands in his Breast, and the Rudiments of some others in
his Kindneys; his Lungs were found sticking to his Sides, all his Blood was
congealed, and his Stomach so hard, that they could not open it without some
difficulty. The Inventory of his Estate amounted to 1700000 Livres, and might
have been much greater, if his Expenses had been less extravagant. He left five
Boys, of whom the eldest, called the Marquess de Loure, being then about seven
or eight Years old, some time after obtained the Reversion of the Office of
Master of the Wardrobe, at present in the possession of the Marquess de la Sale.

Lewis Phelippeaux, Count of Pontchartrain, was made Minister and Secretary of
State, in room of the Marquess de Seignelay. He had already passed through the
Offices of Counselor in the Court of Requests in the Parliament of Paris,
Master of Requests, First President in the Parliament of Bretaign, and
Intendant of the Finances, and was then (as he is still) Comptroller General of
the Finances. The Marquess de Louvois had the Titles of Governor of the
Fortifications of Maritime places, and of the ancient Fortifications; Great
Master of the Races, and Director of the Cloth-Manufactory. And the Office of
Commander and Great Treasurer of the King's Orders, formerly in the possession
of the Marquess de Seigdelay, was given to his Uncle, the Marquess de Croissy,
Minister and Secretary of State. Of all Colbert's Sons, at present there are
only two remaining, James Nicholas, Archbishop of Rohan, and Lewis, formerly
Abbot of Bonport, and Prior of Nogent le Rotru, who after the Death of his
Brother Charles Count de Sceaux, who was killed in Flanders at the Head of the
Regiment of Champaign, left a Religious for a Military Life, and was made
Commander of the same Regiment which the Marquess de Blanville had commanded
before him.

The END.
THE TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
COlberts's Character Page 1 His Birth and Education 3 His Advancement to the
Service of le Tellier, Secretary of State ibid. An Instance of his Exactness
and Fidelity to his Master 4 Cardinal Mazarin receives him into his Service 5
His Marriage and Mistresses 6, 7 He is made Intendant of the Finances 9 An
Account of the Proceedings against Fouquet, Superintendant of the Finances 10,
etc. Fouquet's Kindness to the Burlesque Gazettier 18 Colbert's Avarice ibid.
Pelisson comes to Paris 20 His Amors with Mademoiselle de Scudery 21 He writes
the History of the French Academy 22 He serves Fouquet ibid. And afterward
Colbert 23 The Council of the Finances erected 24 The New Regulation of the
Finances Page 24 Colbert hated and affronted 26 His violent Proceedings against
the Officers and Farmers of the Revenue 27 He settles the East and West India
Companies 29 Enlarges and beautifies the Tuilleries ibid. A Description of the
King's Statue made by Cavalier Bernin 30 Colbert repairs S. Germain, and other
Royal Houses 31 The Castle of Clagny described ibid. An Account of Versailles
33, etc. -- of Trianon 63 -- of the Aqueduct of Versailles 64, etc. -- of a
Church built by Colbert 68 -- of Marly 70, etc. -- of Colbert's Palace at
Sceaux 76 Colbert's Care to adorn the City of Paris 78 The Academy of Painting
and Sculpture erected by his Interest 79 Of the Origin, Constitution, and
Progress of that Society 80, etc. A Catalogue of le Brun's Pieces 87 An Account
of the Academy of Sciences, with the Works and Inventions of its Members 88,
etc. A Description of the Parisian Observatory 91, etc. The uniting of the two
Seas undertaken 97 An exact Account of that Work 98, etc. Colbert purchases the
Office of Treasurer of the King's Orders 106 Of the Institution of the Orders
of S. Michael, and of the Holy Ghost 106, 107 The Prices of Offices regulated
108 The Authority of the Parliaments lessened Page 108, etc. Several fine
Pieces of Workmanship made by Colbert's Order for the Embellishment of
Versailles 111, 112 He sets up a Glass-House 112 And establishes a
Point-Manufactory 113 His Daughter married to the D. of Chevreuse 114 He
undertakes the Reformation of Courts of Justice, but without Success 115 The
Causes of the Litigious Wrangling of Lawyers, and other Inconveniences
relating to the Civil Code, with their proper Remedies 116, etc. Proposals
concerning the Government of the City of Paris, and the Redressing of several
Abuses that are usually committed there 123, etc. Of lewd Women 125, 126 Of
Gaming 127 Of Lending Money on Pledges 128 Of Regulating the Prices of Bread,
Wine, Flesh, etc. 128, 129 Colbert examines the Usurpation of Noble Titles 130
Of the Treaty at Aix la Chapelle 131, 132 Colbert made Secretary of State 133
Suppresses several Offices ibid. Excludes Protestants from the Courts of
Justice 134 Proposals for several New Regulations concerning Criminal Courts
135, etc. Reflections on two Edicts 142 Colbert's Severity to the Parliament of
Toulouse 143 He procures the Erection of an Ensuring-Office Page 144 Another of
his Daughters married to the Duke of S. Aignan 146 The Inconveniences of
Marked Paper ibid. Colbert sends his Son, the Marquess de Seignelay, to travel
147 He suppresses Private Courts of Justice ibid. Of the Treaty of Nimmeghen
149 Colbert made Minister of State ibid. An amorous Adventure of the Marquess
d' Ormoy Colbert 150, 151 Colbert's Sister made an Abbess 152 An Account of the
Casting of Great Guns for the Navy ibid. Colbert's Care to advance his Family
154 He marries his Youngest Daughter to the Duke de Mortemar ibid. The Marquess
de Seignelay twice married 156 Colbert's Brother negotiates and concludes the
Treaty of Marriage between the Dauphin and the Princess of Bavaria 157 And is
made Secretary of State 158 Colbert's Incivility to a Lady ibid. The Marquess
de Seignelay accompanies the King to Picardy 159 Colbert excludes Protestants
from the Royal Farms 160 His Son, the Abbot, made titulary Archbishop of
Carthage, and Coadjutor to the Archbp. of Roan ib. The Ceremonies of his
Reception at Rohan 161 Theses dedicated to his Majesty, and presented in
magnificent Boxes, adorned with Emblematical Figures 162 A Frigate built after a
New Model Page 163 Increase of Trade at S. Malo 164 The Duke of Mortemar's
Expedition with his Majesty's Galleys 165 The Chevalier de Bethune takes a
Pyrate of Salley 166 The Marquess du Queen chases some Vessels of Tripoli into
the Port of Chio 168 The Articles of the Treaty of Peace between the French and
the Divan of Tripoli 169 Colbert's Kindness to his Nephew Desmarets 170 Of
Colbert's Three Sisters ibid. The King views several Curiosities at Paris 171
The Marquess de Seignelay goes to Dunkirk ib. A brief Account of the present
King of Morocco's Accession to the Throne, his Wars and Conquests 172 The
various Customs and Habits of his Subjects 172, 173 Some of their Religious
Rites, with their Opinion concerning Christ 174 The King of Morocco sends an
Ambassador to France ibid. Some Instances of the Wit and Politeness of that
Envoy 175 Colbert promotes his Brother Edward Francis ib. A short Description
of Tournay 176 The Marquess du Quene's Expedition against Algier ibid. An
Account of the Fortifications of the Town and Port 177 An exact Relation of the
Bombarding of that City 178, etc. An Algerin Ship taken by the French Page 185
Fine Horses brought from the American Islands 186 Gabaret's Voyage to Martinico
ibid. A Description of that Island, and Granada 187 Of Mount S. Martha, the
highest Hill in the World ibid. Of the Nation of Pigmies that inhabit the
Skirts of the Mountain 188 Portobelo described 189 Description of Havana 193 Of
the Bay of las Matancas in the Island of Cuba 194 Of the Straight of Bahama 195
A desperate Action of 4 or 5 Englishmen 196 The French King sends the Count of
S. Amand Ambassador to the King of Morocco ibid. His Arrival and Reception at
Tetuan 197 He sets forwards to Alcazan 203 And arrives at Salley 204 Of the
Manner of Rejoicing, and Sacrifices of the Moors 205 A particular Relation of
the first Audience, and of the Discourse that passed between the King and the
Ambassador 206 An Account of the Presents 209 Of the Audience of Leave, and
the Conclusion of the Treaty 210 The King of Morocco's Person and Habit
described 210, 211 Of his Forces and Guard 211 An Instance of Moorish Severity
212 The Ambassador returns to Tetuan ibid. Colbert regulates some Abuses Page
213 And procures an Edict about the Payment of Debts 214 The Marquess du
Quene's second Expedition against Algiers, with a particular Account of the
Bombarding of that City 215, etc. The Algerines beg a Peace, and restore the
French Slaves 222 Colbert's Death and Burial 223 His Monument 224 Verses on
that Occasion ibid. His Library ibid. How his Offices were divided after his
Death 225 The Marquess de Seignelay's Character 226 His first and second
Marriage ibid. He beats his Wife 227 Of Colbert's pretended Descent from a
Scotch Family 228 The Preferment, Disgrace, and Death of one of his Sons, who
was made a Knight of Malta 228, 229 An Instance of the Archbishop of Rohan's
Affection to his Mistress 229 The Causes of the French King's quarreling with
the Republic of Genoa 229, 230 An Account of the Bombarding of that City ibid.
etc. The Conditions imposed on the Genoese 234 Of the Arrival and Negotiation
of the Ambassadors of Siam 235 The New Regulation of the African Trade 236 The
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes 237 The King is magnificently Regaled by the
Marquess de Seignelay Page 237, etc. The Duke de Mortemar compels the Tripolins
to restore their French Slaves 241, 242 An Embassy from Tripoli to France 243
The Marquess de Seignelay made Minister of State 244 His Death ibid. A Story of
one of his Mistresses ibid. Of the Dissection of his Body 245. Pontchartrain
made Minister of State ibid. The Marquess de Louvois's Offices 246 Of Colbert's
Children, who are alive at present ibid.
The END of the TABLE.

