THE DEPOSITION OF Mr. William Carstares, When he was Examined before the Lords
of Secret Committee, given in by him, and renewed upon Oath upon the 22. of
December 1684. in presence of the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council.
Edinburgh- Castle, September 8. 1684.
MR. William Carstares being Examined upon Oath, conform to the Condescension
given in by him, and on the Terms therein-mention'd, Depones, That about
November or December 1682. James Stuart, Brother to the Lord of Cultness,
wrote a Letter to him from Holland, importing, that if any considerable sum of
Money could be procured from England, that something of importance might be
done in Scotland: The which Letter, the Deponent had an inclination to inform
Shepard in Abb-Church-lane, Merchant in London of; but before he would do it,
he wrote to Mr. Stuart above-named, to know from him if he might do it; and Mr.
Stuart having consented, he Communicate the said Letter to Mr. Shepard, who
told the Deponent that he would Communicate the Contents of it to some persons
in England; but did at that time name no body, as the Deponent thinks: Some
time thereafter, Mr. Shepard told the Deponent, that he had Communicate the
Contents of the Letter abovenamed, to Colonel Sidney, and that Colonel Danvers
was present, and told the Deponent, that Colonel Sidney was averse from
employing the late Earl of Argile, or meddling with him, judging him a man too
much affected to the Royal Family, and inclined to the present
Church Government; yet Mr. Shepard being put upon it by the Deponent, still
urged, that one might be sent to the Earl of Argile; but as Mr. Shepard told
him, he was suspected upon the account of his urging so much; yet afterward he
pressed, without the Deponents knowledge, that the Deponent being to go to
Holland however, might have some Commission to the Earl of Argile, which he
having informed the Deponent of, the Deponent told him, that he himself would
not be concerned, but if they would send another, he would introduce him; but
nothing of this was done: upon which the Deponent went over, without any
Commission from any body, to Holland, never meeting with James Stuart
abovenamed: He was introduced to the Earl of Argile, with whom he had never
before conversed; and did there discourse what had past betwixt Mr. Shepard and
him; and particularly, about remitting of Money to the said Earl from England;
of which, the said Mr. Stuart had written to the Deponent, namely of 30000
pounds Sterling; and of the raising of 1000 Horse and Dragoons; and the
securing the Castle of Edinburgh, as a matter of the greatest importance: The
method of doing this was proposed by the Deponent, to be one hour, or thereby,
after the relieving of the Guards: But the Earl did not relish this
proposition, as dangerous; and that the Castles would fall of consequence,
after the work abroad was done. James Stuart was of the Deponents Opinion, for
seizing the Castle; because it would secure Edinburgh, the Magazines and Arms.
As to the 1000 Horse and Dragoons, my Lord Argite was of Opinion, that without
them nothing was to be done; and that if that number were raised in England to
the said Earl, he would come into Scotland with them; and that there being so
few Horse and Dragoons to meet them, he judged he might get the Country
without trouble, having such a standing Body for their Friends to Rendezvouze
to; and the said Earl said he could show the Deponent the convenient places for
Landing, if he understood; and as the Deponent remembers, where the Ships could
attend. The Deponent remembers not the Names of the places. The Deponent spoke
to the Lord Stairs, but cannot be positive that he named the Affair to him, but
found him shy: but the Earl of Argile told him, he thought Stairs might be
gained to them: And that the Earl of Lowdoun being a man of good Reason and
disobliged, would have great influence upon the Country, and recommended the
Deponent to Major Holms, with whom the Deponent had some acquaintance before,
and had brought over a Letter from him to the Earl of Argile; but the Deponent
had not then communicate any thing to the said Holms. James Stuart laid down a
way of correspondence by Ciphers and false Names, and sent them over to Holms,
and the Deponent, for their use (which Ciphers and Names are now in the hands
of His Majesty's Officers, as the Deponent supposes,) and did desire the
Deponent earnestly to propose the 30000 pound Sterling abovenamed to the Party
in England, and did not propose any less; for as the Earl told the Deponent, he
had particularly calculate the Expense for Arms, Ammunition, etc. But James
Stuart said, that if some less could be had, the Earl would content himself, if
better might not be, but the Earl always said that there was nothing to be done
without the body of Horse and Dragoons abovementioned; During the time of the
Deponent his abode in Holland, tho he had several Letters from Shepard, yet
there was no satisfactory account, till some time after the Deponent parted
from the Earl of Argile, and was making for a Ship at Rotterdam to transport
himself to England. James Stuart wrote to him that there was hopes of the
Money. The next day after the Deponent came to England, he met with Sir John
Cochran, who with Commissar Monro, and Jerviswood, was at London before he came
over; and depones, That be knows not the account of their coming, more than for
the perfecting the Transaction about Carolina: and having acquainted Sir John
Cochran with the Earls demands of the 30000 pound Sterling, and the 1000 Horse
and Dragoons, Sir John carried him to the Lord Russel, to whom the Deponent
proposed the Affair, but being an absolute Stranger to the Deponent, had no
return from him at that time; but afterward having met him accidently at Mr.
Shepards house, where he the Lord Russel had come to speak to Shepard about the
Money abovenamed, as Mr. Shepard told the Deponent. The Deponent (when they
were done speaking) desired to speak to the Lord Russel, which the Lord Russel
did, and having reiterate the former Proposition for the 30000 pound Sterling,
and the 1000 Horse and Dragoons, he the Lord Russel told the Deponent, they
could not get so much raised at the time, but if they had 10000 pound to begin,
that would draw People in, and when they were once in, they would soon be
brought to more; but as for the 1000 Horse and Dragoons, he could say nothing
at the present, for that behoved to be concerted upon the Borders. The Deponent
made the same proposal to Mr. Ferguson, who was much concerned in the Affair,
and zealous for the promoting of it. This Mr. Ferguson had in October or
November before, as the Deponent remembers in a Conversation with the Deponent
in Cheap Side, or the Street somewhere thereabout, said, that for the saving of
innocent Blood, it would be necessary to cut off a few, insinuating the King
and Duke, but cannot be positive whether he named them or not* To which the
Deponent said, that is work for our wild People in Scotland, my Conscience does
not serve me for such things; after which the Deponent had never any particular
discourse with Ferguson as to that matter; but as to the other Affair, Ferguson
told the Deponent that he was doing what he could to get it effectuate, as
particularly that he spoke to one Major Wildman who is not of the Deponent his
acquaintance. Ferguson blamed always Sidney, as driving designs of his own. The
Deponent met twice or thrice with the Lord Melvil, Sir John Cochran,
Jerviswood, Commissar Monro, the two Cessnocks, Montgomery of Langshaw, and one
Mr. Veatch, where they discoursed of Money to be sent to Argyle, in order to
the carrying on the Affair, and tho he cannot be positive the Affair was named,
yet it was understood by himself, and as he conceives by all present, to be for
rising in Arms, for rectifying the Government. Commissary Monro, Lord Melvil,
and the two Cessnocks were against meddling with the English, because they
judged them men that would talk, and would not do, but were more inclined to do
something by themselves, if it could be done. The Lord Melvil thought every
thing hazardous, and therefore the Deponent cannot say he was positive in any
thing, but was most inclined to have the Duke of Monmouth to head them in
Scotland, of which no particular method was laid down. Jerviswood, the
Deponent, and Mr. Veatch, were for taking the Money; at one of these Meetings
it was resolved, that Mr. Martin, late Clerk of the Justice Court, should be
sent to Scotland, to desire their Friends to hinder the Country from Rising, or
taking rash Resolutions upon the account of the Council, till they should see
how matters went in England. The said Martin did go at the Charges of the
Gentlemen of the Meeting, and was directed to the Lord of Polwart and
Torwoodlie, who sent back word, that it would not be found so easy a matter to
get the Gentry of Scotland to concur: But afterward in a Letter to Commissar
Monro, Polwart wrote that the Country was readier to concur than they had
imagined, or something to that purpose. The Deponent, as abovesaid, having
brought over a Key from Holland, to serve himself and Major Holms: he remembers
not that ever he had an exact Copy of it, but that sometimes the one, sometimes
the other kept it, and so it chanced to be in his custody when a Letter from
the Earl of Argile came to Major, Holms, intimating, that he would join with
the Duke of Monmouth, and follow his Measures, or obey his Directions: this Mr.
Veatch thought fit to communicate to the Duke of Monmouth, and for the
Understanding of it was brought to the Deponent, and he gave the Key to Mr.
Veatch, who as the Deponent was informed, was to give it and the Letter to Mr.
Ferguson, and he to show it to the Duke of Manmouth; but what was done in it
the Deponent knows not. The Deponent heard the Design of Killing the King and
Duke, from Mr. Shepard, who told the Deponent some were full upon it. The
Deponent heard that Aaron Smith was sent by those in England to call Sir John
Cochran, on the account of Carolina, but that he does not know Aaron Smith, nor
any more of that matter, not being concerned in it. Shepard named young Hamden
frequently as concerned in these Matters.

Signed at Edinburgh Castle, the 8th of September, 1684. and renewed the 18th
of the same Month. William Carstares. PERTH CANCEL. I. P. D.

Edinburgh Castle September 18. 1684.
MR. William Carstares being again Examined, adheres to his former Deposition,
in all the parts of it, and Depones he knows of no Correspondence betwixt
Scotland and England, except by Martin before-named; for those Gentlemen to
whom he was sent, were left to follow their own Methods. Veatch as the Deponent
remembers, stayed sometimes at Nicolson, Stablers House at London-Wall;
sometimes with one Widow Hardcastle in Morefields. The Deponent did Communicate
the Design on Foot to Doctor Owen, Mr. Gr^ffil, and Mr. Meed at Stepney, who
all concurred in the promoting of it, and were desirous it should take effect;
and to one Mr. Freth in the Temple, Councellor at Law, who said he would see
what he could do in reference to the Money, but there having gone a Report,
that there was no Money to be raised, he did nothing in it, nor does the
Deponent think him any more concerned in the Affair. Nelthrop frequently spoke
to the Deponent of the Money to be sent to Argile, whether it was got or not,
but the Deponent used no freedom with him in the Affair. Goodenough did
insinuate once, that the Lords were not inclined to the thing, and that before
they would see what they could do in the City. The Deponent saw Mr. Ferguson,
and Mr. Rumsay, lurking after the Plot broke out, before the Proclamation
having gone to Ferguson, in the back of Bishop gatestreet, at some new
Building, whether he was directed by Jerviswood, who was desirous to know how
things went. Rumsay was not of the Deponent his acquaintance before, but they
knew as little of the matter as the Deponent. This is what the Deponent
remembers, and if any thing come to his Memory, he is to deliver it in betwixt
and the first of October; And this is the Truth, as he shall Answer to God.

William Carstares.
PERTH CANCEL. I. P. D.
At Edinburgh, the 22 of December, 1684.
THese foregoing four Pages, Subscribed by Mr. William Carstares Deponent, and
by the Lord Chancellor, were acknowledged on Oath by the said Mr. William
Carstares, to be his true Depositions, and that the Subscriptions were his, in
presence of us Underscribers.

William Carstares. David Falconer. George Mekenzie.

PERTH CANCELLARIUS.QUENSBERRY.ATHOL.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty; And Reprinted at London by Tho. Newcomb, for Susanna Forester in
Kings-street Westminster. 1684.


