COUNSEL TO THE True English: OR, A WORD OF ADVICE TO THE JACOBITES.

By a True Member of the Church of England, as by Law Established.

In a Letter to a Friend.

Licensed, May 22. 1691.

LONDON, Printed for S. Manship, at the Black Bull in Cornhill, M DC XCI.

COUNSEL TO THE True English: OR A WORD OF ADVICE TO THE JACOBITES. In a Letter
to a Friend.
SIR,
YOU are pleased to desire my Opinion in reference to the Times, in answer
whereunto I am the freer to impart my sentiments, that (if true and just) they
may be improved to the reforming the erroneous Judgments of others; and if I
should in any circumstance be unhappily mistaken, your kind Information may
minister to my Conviction.

In plain terms, the Face of England is very Squalid and Uncomfortable, and
from her frequent Flushings, and from the many Contractions therein visible, it
is easy to guess some strange malignity has infected the Body, and that she
is thereby much out of order; sudden Startings, wild and extravagant Talking,
panick Fears and Consternations, secret Susurrations and Whisperings, are
infallible symptoms of an evil habit; and under these our Dear Mother at this
present Juncture sorely labors: All which are imputed to the late
Revolution, and as if so sudden a turn had brought upon her a Vertigo, many of
her Children are giddy, some stagger, and not a few are fallen from their best
Resolutions. It is my Opinion, That if this great Transaction were well
considered and understood, what was not prevented might be yet amended; it is
but common that strange things should raise admiration, but where an Ecstasy or
Distraction follows, the levity of Men's minds is blameable. The way I have
thought expedient to raise the lapsed and confirm the unstable, is to consider,
1. The Occasion requiring. 2. The Means introducing. 3. The Advantages
depending upon this Change. The former will show us our Ruin, Misery and
Desolation intended: In the next we may perceive Providence justly, gently and
seasonably assisting: And in the last (if we are wise) we may behold our
Honor, Peace and Happiness restored, and settled upon sure and lasting
Foundations.

1. The Occasion requiring and urging this Revolution.

It is too unpleasing a subject for the entertainment of any generous mind,
(nor shall my Pen describe the least Scene of our Misery with any such
intention) to reflect upon the person of a King, which all Nations acknowledge
as Sacred. The Mischances or Errors of Government, may with Moderation be
considered apart from the Person in whose Reign they happened, and truly at that
unhappy time (which ought never to be forgotten) Religion, the one thing
needful, was fallen below indifferent, and it was more commendable to profess
none than the true; Vast Treasures, Mountains of Wealth, and Rivers of humane
Blood have been sacrificed in defense of Protestantism, which now became an
unpardonable Crime to own, especially in such as stood Candidates for any
Promotion; and what by the means of the foregoing vitiousness and looseness,
together with the prevalency of Interest, many did so degenerate, that the
favor of the Prince weighed down both the Love and Dread of God; and his
Commission was of more force than Gods Commands: yet these were the happy days
which some nominal Protestants so heartily wish for again; it is no hard matter
to guess their Zeal for the Truth, from their fond adhering to its Adversary.

I would willingly ask those Irreligious Loyalists, what good, what comfort to
Mind or Body, they could reasonably promise themselves or posterity ( quatentis
Protestants) from a Government which had brought it self under the unhappy
necessity of introducing Popery; a Government which was obliged either to
suppress the most pleasing hopes of an unlimited Power, or else to set up
Idotry for its Support? This alone would quickly have been fatal to Realm; for
we cannot be ignorant how Jealous God is of his Honor, how severely he
punished Isreal's deviations from the True Worship; What Miseries, what Plagues,
what Shame, what Captivity did their Spiritual Fornication bring upon them* And
would not the same Means have produced the same Effects here as in Judea? How
could any of us have hoped for the longer continuance of the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ among us, who must (having embraced the Romish Superstition)
detract from, and impair his Merits, by admitting the Servants into
Co-partnership with the Master in the great Work of the Mediation; and so
deprive the Son of God of great part of his Honor to give it to the Children
of Men?

Have so many Laborious and Learned, Wise and Pious Volumes, by Gods Blessing
and Men's Travail, been wrote to defend and justify our Religion; and must
these without detection of the least Error, be condemned to Flames as False and
Erroneous? Have those Holy Fathers who offered up their Lives to Fire and Sword
(rather than comply with the unjust and impious Impositions of Rome) been
honored with the glorious name of Martyrs, and will their ungrateful Posterity
now profanely Curse that Title, and call them Heretics and Rebels to the
Spouse of Christ? Yet this we must have come to, had Heaven tolerated the
former Government longer. What has robbed Truth of its Beauty, and put so
charming a Vizard on Error, that our Arms are open for its Reception?

Why should Christians become weary of Gods Reigning over them by his Spirit of
Grace, and of a sudden choose to submit themselves to the wiles, lusts and
passions of sinful and miserably mistaken men? yet this they must do that will
call back the late Government

Tell me, you that are sick of this Revolution, with what kind of Arguments do
you justify to your selves, the false, blasphemous, and ungodly Doctrins of
Rome? What Arts, what Devices, can you think sufficient to persuade those Souls
which know themselves freed by the Blood of Christ, to serve him in
Righteousness and Holiness, to practice such a voluntary Humility as to subject
themselves in all their Concerns, as well Spiritual as Temporal, to the
Superstition and Idolatry, to the Pride and sinful Traditions of the Man of
Sin? Have you had your Bibles too long, and now grow weary of them; and so out
of Policy for your ease, would let in that Religion which must (in its own
defense) take them from you? Are you so angry with Prayers because Common, and
in your Mother Tongue, that you long for such as are strange and in an unknown
Tongue, such as the Priest alone (and sometimes not he neither) understands?
Have two Sacraments been thought too many and burdensome by some of you, and
will seven be lighter? But such of you as have a due Veneration for both, how
will you approve it when you shall see them Celebrated contrary to their
Primitive Institution? Instead of being used as Conduits of Grace, they are
made Instruments of Rebellion, Blood and Cruelty. You that are now ashamed to
acquaint your loving, your grave and pious Pastor, with the sins which gall and
trouble your Consciences, how will you like it, when compelled to confess all,
even the smallest infirmity, to a cunning Priest, who shall make Merchandise of
your Guilt, and Tyrannize over you from the knowledge of your weakness? Yet
thus must you have put your Heads under their Girdles, had not this happy
Revolution relieved you

You who think it much to join with the Public in an humble and penitent
Confession, and together with them receive the benefit of Absolution, how will
you take it to be sent on tedious Pilgrimages, leaving in the mean while your
dearest concerns a prey to their Will, who show you so little mercy? How will
you like of building Hospitals, while your own Houses are ready to drop upon
your Heads? Will it please you to give the Sweat of your Brows, and the hard
labor of your Hands, to fatten and pamper your Ghostly Father, and in the mean
while see your Children starve? and yet in this expectation they were come over
How will you like it to have those Wives (upon whom you fear the public
Examples are too prevalent) to be opportunely conversant with persons whose
Religion prohibits lawful, but tolerates unlawful enjoyments? Who declare a
Priest may not Marry, but yet may keep a Whore; and so they do wherever they
come.

How will it please you to see your Sons, which might have grown up as Plants,
the Strength and Ornament of their Country, seduced into Monasteries* Where
nursed up in Ignorance, Plenty and Idleness, they become fitted for all manner
of wickedness? How will you like it to see your Daughters cooped up in
Nunneries; than which Seraglio's have been more Chaste: where instead of being
like polished Corners of the Temple, shining in Knowledge, Grace and Virtue,
they serve as Pillars for the wanton Priests to hang the Trophies of their
Lusts upon?

You now have the Word in season and out of season; you have the Touchstone in
your hands to try the Spirits of the Prophets by, then you must expect but
little of this nature; peradventure a recital of some pretended Saints Life
taken out of the Legend: And as for the truth of all things, your short and
easy way must be without further examination, to believe as the Church
believes. Thus you must have pinned your Faith upon the Priests Sleeve, had the
Abdicated King continued.

Consider the horrid Cruelties of the Inquisition; peruse the Martyrologies;
call to mind the frequent and bloody Massacres made by this Religion. You that
are so fond to live under a Popish Government, hear what you must then expect!
And yet to all these things we were condemned. Was not this therefore occasion
sufficient to wish and pray for the time of our Redemption; to believe and
speak honorably of this Revolution? Yet have I not related the one half of
those insufferable Grievances in respect of Religion, under which we must have
lingered out a most miserable Life. He must be a Papist inwardly
(notwithstanding all his specious pretenses) who admires, speaks and wishes for
such an administration again.

Another occasion requiring and urging forward this Revolution, was the
Violation of our Laws.

Nothing more fully demonstrates the Wisdom, Piety and Justice of a Nation, nor
redounds more to the honor of a Prince, than the enacting and executing of
good and wholesome Laws: These are the Cement which preserves not only smaller
Bodies, but the Universe from dissolution: The Goods of Nature and Fortune, All
the Comforts of Life are no longer pleasant to their possessors, than the Laws
are had in Veneration. It is one of the greatest Plagues of War, that it drowns
the Voice of the Law: What then can we say in excuse for the late notorious
Violation of them? What could be expected less than an inundation of miseries,
when the Fence was demolished, and Men's Lusts and Passions ran so high?

To that pass were things brought, that those very Laws which gave the greatest
security to our Religion and Liberty, to our Lives and Fortunes, were upon
Repealing; and they lay under the Censure of Profane and Disloyal, who did not
with the greatest Industry seek and propose their Abolishing. That humane Laws
should be thus trampled on, was but a Natural Consequence to that boldness
offered the Divine.

Amongst the many Laws of England none more notable (or at least our dreadful
Circumstances did so represent it) than such as prohibit a standing Force to be
raised by the Prince, without the Consent and Concurrence of his Parliament:
And have not our Eyes seen this snapt as Love? Was not a Body of Men raised and
disciplined after such a manner, that they were much fitter to be the Agressors
than Defenders of their Country; to destroy, than guard the Peace and Liberty
of the Nation? If our Throats must be Cut, better by our Enemies than
Fellow Subjects.

Our Laws have made provision, not only for the Princes Royal Prerogative, but
likewise for Subjects just Right; yet how strangely was the later swallowed up
of the former, and the bare pleasure of the late King signified to the
All-complying Judges, was of power to disseise the Subject of his Birthright.
It Is as good to have nothing, as no Right to what we have.

The Laws of England prescribe due Limits to the Regal Power; but in our days,
as if the Throne had been sick of a Tympany, all Bounds and Measures grew so
uneasy, that the reasonable and modest way of Addressing, if it suited not
with the Designs of Court, was termed Disloyal; and so bad a Name was next door
to hanging. It is hard to bear Oppression; but most severe, not to be allowed
the liberty of declaring, and by honest and lawful means seek a redress.

They must be perversely ignorant of the Constitutions of England, who dare to
justify an unlimited Power, and Arbitrary Proceedings. These persons destroy
both the Nature and End of Government.

Self-preservation first induced the associating of private Persons and
Families, who agreed upon one common Interest, and upon a joint Defense,
against the Pride and Ambition of their encroaching Neighbors, who were too
potent for them single and divided; and this Mother-Wit was so well approved,
that in process of time it occasioned the Uniting and Incorporating of greater
Companies; which deliberately chose themselves by way of stipulation, a Chief,
expecting from him Defense and Protection, engaging to him Honor, Tribute and
Pre-eminence. It was not long since, that in the Title of the English Kings,
might have been read in room of Jure haereditario, electione populi, which I
suppose was erased, to make way for a strange gloss upon the Doctrins of
Passive Obedience and Non resistance.

They that pretend to absolute Monarchy, destroy as well the End as Original of
Power. For whereas the good of the governed is thereby chiefly intended, these
Men have nothing further in their eye, than gratifying the Will, Lust and
Pleasure of the person governing. This is a state so intolerable, that such as
plead most earnestly for it, did they wisely perpend the great variety of Men's
Humors, the many unlucky Contingencies to which Human Life lies obnoxious,
they would soon perceive the instability of their present favor, and conclude
themselves in danger of the greatest Slavery; but admit we should allow,
sufficient provision was made for themselves under such a Tyranny, yet what
have they (by crying up this Diana) done for their Posterity? What assurance
have they, that the Rod the Father has made, shall not scourge the Son? It is
Vanity in the highest degree, to promise our selves the enjoyment of our
Fathers, or our own Labor and Industry; when that the Laws themselves, which
are our only security, cannot keep Ahab out of Naboth's Vineyard when minded to
enter

The Leviathan is said to be made to take his pastime in the Sea; the Ocean is
large and deep, and fitted as it were for his Recreation; but to think or say,
that myriads of People, whole Countries and Kingdoms were by God created for
any single person to execute his Will and Pleasure on without control, I
conceive would much derogate from the Wisdom, Justice and Goodness of God,
especially when we consider such persons as they stand related to the Son of
God by their Christian Profession; they that are in love with absolute Power, I
persuade my self, a short change with a Subject of France would quickly cure
their madness.

It must be dismal to the tender heart of a Christian, to think how cheap the
Blood and Lives of Men grew, and what multitudes of Souls contrary to Law, were
sacrificed to the Idols of Popery and Arbitrary Power: Blessed be God, these
high places are pulled down, and none in their Wits can wish their Restoration.

The English Laws provide, that the good be rewarded, and the bad punished;
consequently inequality in dispensing Rewards and Punishments, must create
great confusion; yet have the honest and upright, the truly Religious and
Loyal, been Brow-beaten, discarded from Employments, burdened with Fines and
Imprisonments, branded with Ignominy and Shame, and not a few done to death,
while the Childrens Bread has been given to Dogs, while Villains and Varlets,
who have neither regarded God nor Man, Religion nor Honesty, farther than their
particular Interests, have been strangely exalted to the highest Favor and
Preferment, have been born out in their haughtiness, cruelty, impudence and
injustice.

My Discourse would extend too far, should I enumerate every particular Law
which lately felt the irresistible Force of Popery and Tyranny; as the bringing
in of the Pope's Nuncio, which is so palpable Treason, that upon the first
motion a wise Lord withdrew from Counsel, resolving to have no hand in an
Affair so directly contrary to the Laws, and of so fatal a Consequence to the
Good of his Country I might likewise insist in calling to Council a professed
Priest, and multitudes of the like Violations, but shall mention but one more,
viz.

The Law of Rights, whereby Provision is made that every individual Person
peacefully obtain and enjoy what ever of Right belongs to him; yet I believe
since the World stood, was not this Law less valued than lately; witness the
Suspending, Removing and Imprisoning diverse Honorable and Worthy Persons; but
above all, that notorious Attempt of imposing an Heir upon these Kingdoms, the
Prejudices hereby intended to the next Heir and Nation were numberless; not
only defrauding the rightful Heiress, but translating the Diadem out of the
Family; this was the ready way to involve these Kingdoms in Blood and War, to
extirpate our Religion, to confound all Foreign Alliance, to facilitate the
French Conquest, to enslave a Free People; and that this was so done, matter of
Fact does testify.

And seems it not strange to every sober and thinking Person, to hear some at
this day exclaiming, Why is not the Prince of Wales proved an Impostor? I
answer this Question with another, Why was not that care taken which the Law
required to vindicate and clear his Birth? But whosoever discreetly reflects upon
the management of this matter, will observe so much Providence in confounding
the Counsel of the Wise, and so much Confidence in themselves and Projects, as
spoiled the whole Contrivance, by their preposterous Boasting of Future Events;
the variety of times on which the supposed Conception was Fathered; and that in
Defiance to the Judgment of the ablest Physicians, who from the Infirmities of
the Queen had long before concluded a living Birth impossible; their pretended
Spirit of Prophecy declared them Liars, who asserted a Male issued, and
rejoiced for it publicly in some remote Countries of England, before the Queen
knew any thing of it: (But yet this mistake was pardonable in this regard, that
the Age of the Infant would allow it) The Diversity of places appointed for
this Royal Delivery; the next Heirs being not called; what were at Hand were
sent out of the way; the easy pains; the Convenience of the Room; the Religion
and Interest of the Midwife, and other Attendants; the drawn Curtains
intercepting the Few Nobles then in presence from hearing or beholding; and at
last, when to satisfy the Nation as was pretended, the best of their Strength,
the strongest of their Vouchers were called, some were Foreigners, some of
slender and mean Fortunes; not a Person, whose Religion, Interest or common
Conversation did not directly oppose all Credence: And after all these, is
there any necessity to make farther Trouble of a thing of nothing? So far did
it conduce to settle the Crown, to the successful carrying on of their Designs,
that had the thing been real, had the Queen truly conceived, had she gone her
time, had she had strength to bring forth, we should have had better
Attestants, neither Seath, Bath, nor Tower had kept any from seeing their
future hopes disappointed: But their Fear and Consciousness of the Evil
intended, advised against calling too many and too honest Witnesses to a
palpable Forgery. Why do Men now wonder to see the Crown, by the overruling
Providence of God, fallen from his Head, who in his Heart through a blind Zeal
intended to rob his Family thereof? Let such weigh well these things, that
desire so passionately a return of Times. What Safety, when the Laws are of no
Force? It is full as secure to dwell among Rogues and Villains, who hate all
Law; as among them whose Laws, though never so good are of no further efficacy
than the Will of one single Person gives way.

2. The means by which this Revolution was brought about, were great, just, and
moderate.

So great, we must principally attribute it to the Divine Providence; so just,
that no rational Objection can be made against it; some colorable Stories are
buz'd about, which are wholly inconsistent with Reason, the Law of Nature, or
those of the Kingdom; so moderate, that never was less Blood or Violence known
in working so signal a Deliverance.

The Providence of God was visible, in that, although the Kings of the Earth
stood up, and the Rulers took Counsel together for our utter overthrow, and
that their Projects were permitted so far to succeed, as might discover the
malicious Intentions of their Authors, and convince us that our Ruin was by
them concluded, yet were they blasted before they attained their desired
maturity: What could effect this? What could snatch a Prey out of the Jaws of
Destruction, but the powerful hand of Heaven? Providence was likewise seen in
that wonderful Christian Patience then exercised by the Subjects in general,
notwithstanding such manifest and important Provocations, as when an illegal
Army was constantly insulting over them, their Charters pulled and commanded
from them, when all hopes of Justice were excluded, when such Persons were put
into all places of Trust, whether Sacred, Civil, and Military, as had combined
to set up a Power, and introduce a Religion, which must inevitably and speedily
confound all: As none but God alone could bestow such a wonderful Patience, so
nothing but this Patience could have preserved them for a Revolution; for the
least Offense given, the Hereditary Title had changed to that of Conquest. When
all had been lost, as our Enemies desired and expected, this Patience did
suppress Choler, though not Fear; it kept the Tongue from reviling, though not
the Heart from trembling; the Hand quiet, tho the Ear was daily alarmed.

Such admirable Patience, such modest Submission would have turned the Heart of
any Father to the Children, had not the cruel Jesuit prepossessed it; and to
prevent all opportunities of doing Justice, and showing Mercy, successfully
advised against tolerating Addresses.

Man's Extremity is usually Heaven's Opportunity; and when among us all humane
Help failed, then did he that sits in Heaven, (and also rules in the
Kingdoms of Men) stand up to help these meek and oppressed Kingdoms: It was
from God that counsel came, (seeing the present Possessor inexorable) to apply
to the next Heir, who stood bound in Conscience to appear in Their Assistance,
who were both Christians, and part of his Inheritance; nor could he possibly
connive at their waste and ruin, unless resolved upon his own Dishonor and
Damage. To his R. H. therefore the Nobles and Gentry of each Degree and Quality
speed away their Humble Petition, such a large Description of so many various
and intolerable Sufferings as they were constrained to give, set his Heroic
Blood on fire. His own particular danger was not so much considered, as our
timely Preservation; and he resolutely and generously undertakes the just
Defense of the Forlorn, and them that had no Helper. Who doubts the Hand of the
Almighty in this blessed Revolution? Who else could incline the Dutch (a People
naturally jealous of their Liberty and Interest; a People highly disobliged by
Acts of Hostility and open Wars, by our unkind deserting them in their
necessity) to put forth the utmost of their Strength under the Princes Conduct
in order for our Relief? It was the Righteous God who would not suffer the Debt
contracted in the days of Q. Elizabeth to be longer unpaid.

Farther, When these were Landed, what became of the Courage of the Standing
Army? Who filled them with that Consternation, as to turn back in the day of
Battle? Did not their Guilty Consciences apprehend these Succors to be as the
Armies of the Living God, against whom it was in vain to make Resistance?

What more just Proposals could a Prince so highly concerned, after so great
Advantages obtained, offer. Than that all Matters might be accomodated by the
great Council of the Nation, a Parliament free from all manner of Corruption
and Prejudice? Father Peter's had Christened their cruel, bloody and unjust
doings by the Name of Doing God good Service. But now the Man, whose Eyes this
unexpected help had opened, saw how Religious soever Holy Mother Church might
style them, yet they were not justifiable; and therefore so dreaded the
Examination, that he judged it greater Prudence to Abdicate the Realm, than be
detected.

The Flock is in great Danger when the careless Shepherd deserts it, but in
greater when he angrily devotes it to the Ravenous Wolf: And that we were not a
Prey, the greatest Thanks are due to Heaven for sending us so seasonable a
Deliverance.

As for Moderation, What greater could be shown in every Transaction, than what
was at this time common? Especially if we regard how desperate our Case was;
neither the Person of the late K. J. nor any of his Attendants suffered the
least Violence, more than what the present Circumstances (of which they knew
the Authors) made necessary, or their own indiscreet stiffness pulled upon them.

When a blind Zeal and boundless Ambition shall change the Hearts of Princes,
so that they have no regard, no pity, no care or concern for the Safety and
Well-being of their People; these Transports render them incapable of
continuing their Government. This was once the Judgment of Crowned Heads, when
they were consulted in the Case of Portugal, whose King became so frenzical, as
to kill his Subjects in sport, and without due Process of Law. What greater
Madness can a Prince possibly be guilty of, Than to destroy and waste his
People, to rob them of their Ancient and Lawful Privileges, to bear that
mortal hatred to their Religion (though by Laws established) as to Sacrifice
the Professors to extinguish the Profession?

The Government of England is certaily Feodatory, and the Solemn Oaths taken by
our Kings at their Coronation, to Govern according to Law, has so much more
than a Ceremony, that from thence rises the Subjects Homage and Fealty. Who
knows not that one part of the Covenant being broken, all Obligations of
keeping the other ceases? No Reason to cry out, There is Treachery, O Ahaziah,
when he that exclaims is to himself the greatest Traitor.

This Revolution in the main depended upon the Divine Pity and Commiseration;
the outward Causes thereunto moving were, The Change of Religion, Violation of
Laws, Deserting the Throne, repairing to the professed Enemy of the State,
seeking and employing Foreign Force to enslave a Free People. Had not these
things been, K. J. might have now been at Whitehall, and have been Lord of all
true English Hearts and Affections: But what Heart can truly love, or Hand
fight for that Governor that they are sure will destroy them We have better
Eyes, and cannot like Mocks, adore that Light which will e're long consume us.

3. The Advantages attending this Revolution are both as great and as many as
either our Necessities require, or our Curiosity can invent? In short, Religion
(with which no worldly Consideration is worthy to stand in Competition) is by
secured to us and our posterity. The King that now Reigns, is not only flesh of
our flesh, and bone of our bone, and so our Natural Liege Lord; but of our
Religion also; and so he ought to be the more dear, as we are the more safe:
Our Laws are once more Sacred, our Privileges allowed, our Rights asserted;
and could we be so happy as to be reconciled to God by an hearty Repentance,
and an honest Reformation; could we unite and agree among our selves, we are
blessed with a King, who by his Prowess, Wisdom, Justice and Goodness, will make
us as Great, as Glorious, as Happy, and as Dreadful as ever.

Some there are (whose supposed numbers are not so dreadful as their practices
Hellish) which are industrious to persuade weak and unthinking persons into a
belief of glorious times to succeed the Restoration of the Abdicated King; and
by cunning and fair words they do beguile some unstable persons, and draw them
from their proper and safer Allegiance. I would beg the seduced, or they that
are in danger so to be, to consider the Vanity of these Proposals, by
reflecting on the persons who prefer them: Observe how they exult upon every
advantage of the French; and are never better pleased than in the danger of
their Native Country: It is plain, they are of a servile Nature, and fitted for
the Yoke; and the case properly in their esteem, is not so much whether King W.
or J. shall be King, as that the King of France may become our Master: Pitiful
spirited Wretches, that sell their Liberty, their Country, for a little Gold,
to a Monstrous Tyrant!

It is notoriously known how disaffected the Subject is in general, to all
thoughts of a voluntary recalling a King, whose Ambition, Wrath and Cruelty,
have been so dreadful: When re-invested with Power, what shall prevent a sharp
Revenge? If our Metropolis was sacrificed in Flames to gratify the Pride and
Envy of aspiring Rome, nothing less than enslaving the Land, a Confiscation of
Estates, and a general Victim of poor Protestants, can atone the Wrath which
now is incensed. Which of all the Advocates for so desperate a Cause, dare say
the late King's Zeal for Popery is abated, that his Thirst for an unlimited
Power is asswag'd, that he has weaned himself from the influence of Jesuitical
Counsels, that Justice and Equity, Truth and Mercy, that the good Honor and
Welfare of the Realm, is any more his delight than ever? so short, if any
Voyage, rarely makes such an happy alteration, especially on them who Travel
where they see no Presidents to rectify their former misapprehensions.

Since therefore so little hope of a return is to be expected from the abused
Affection of his People; by what other means can he force his re-entry, except
the French assistance? And it is probable, Lewis will with great Gallantry
plead this Cause, till such time as he shall see opportunity to set up his own;
but should we suppose that Generosity in that extravagantly ambitious King,
that he would but clear the way unto the Throne, and then draw off; yet must we
believe, so great a Charge shall be demanded, as the whol^ Wealth of the
Kingdom cannot answer: Sure it were better Policy for us to unite, aid and
assist him with a moiety, who will preserve the rest, by keeping such Enemies
out, and cherishing and protecting us within our dear and native Country.

It is sufficient to make the Jolliest Heart to bleed, to forethink such
troubles as must naturally follow, should some wicked men's hopes be completed:
Our Religion must truckle to Popery; our Liberty must be exchanged into
Slavery; our Rights and Privileges into Courtesy; our Law must be Nero's
Will; our Country and Trade must be a prey to Foreigners; our Wives the subject
of their Lust, our Children dashed against the Stones; humane Blood must wash
the Streets, and cleanse the Land; and if Cruelty shall be weary before a
thorough depopulation, the surviving will serve for Drudges and
Laughing-Stocks: Nor let any flatter themselves of greater security, in that
they have been bred Sons of Rome, or that they have lately conformed to that
Religion. The fear of a Relapse shall sentence the last, and want of Zeal and
action in the Cause, shall be the formers Doom: besides, to support a sinking
Cause, to animate Cruelty and Barbarism, all the Estates, Lands and Livings of
this Realm, are devoted as an Oblation to the Church, or a Reward to the
Soldier. High time is it therefore for all English Men to consider, while they
have Hands and Hearts, Power and Strength, courageously to Assert and Defend
the Justice of this Revolution, and in all thankfulness to God, and Loyalty to
their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, to unite and strengthen themselves
against the common Enemy. They are incited by the Royal Example; they are
encouraged by their own good and safety; they are compelled to it, for Hannibal
is now at the Gates.

FINIS.

