THE French Spy: OR, THE MEMOIRS OF JOHN BAPTIST De La Fontaine, Lord of Savoy
and Fontenai, late Brigadier and Surveyor of the French King's Army, now a
Prisoner in the Bastile.

CONTAINING Many secret Transactions relating both to England and France.

Translated from the French Original, Printed at Cologn in the Year 1699.

LONDON: Printed for R. Basset, at the Mitre, over against Chancery Lane in
Fleet Street. 1700.

TO The Honorable Sir Charles Duncomb Knight. SHERIFF OF London and Middlesex.
SIR,
I Here present to You a Gentleman very considerable in his Extraction, but
unfortunate under his present Circumstances; who, after having, in vain, sought
for Relief among his Countrymen, whom he served to the prejudice both of his
Honor and Estate, has now taken a Resolution to try his Fortune once more in
England. The Character wherewith You have been lately dignified by the
Metropolis of this Kingdom, is an ample Testimony of what share this Noble City
bears in Your happy Success in weathering the late Storm raised against You,
and Your Splendid Appearance in this Station, (beyond what was ever pretended
to by any of Your Predecessors) but above all, Your Noble Mind in Relieving
those in Distress, as it sufficiently justifies their choice, so it entitles
You in a most peculiar manner to the Protection of a Gentleman, groaning under
the weight of Affliction. True Generosity is like a large River, which sending
forth its Branches into the circumjacent Countries, renders them Fruitful and
pleasant.

It Is true, Virtue is its own Reward, and a Man truly Virtuous, will scarce
ever make the Popular Applause, the Standard of his Actions, but it is also
undeniable, that there are certain Virtues, such as Succouring the Unfortunate,
Relieving those in Distress, and affording seasonable Food to such as labor
under heavy Afflictions, which as they tend to the general Benefit of Mankind;
so they ought not to be bereaved of their due Praises, but to be made
Conspicuous in their best Luster, to excite in others a most commendable
Emulation of doing Good. Of this we have seen the happy Effects in Your own
Person, Your Bounty and Charity toward so many Prisoners in Distress, has had
so powerful an Influence upon others, as to serve them for an encouragement to
follow Your Noble Example. This happy Influence is so far from being confined
within the Bounds of this Nation, that it has extended its Effects to our
neighboring Kingdoms and States. The Worthy Magistrates of Dublin are amongst
the number of those, who being stirred up by Your generous Example, have
endeavored to follow Your Footsteps in Releasing a good Number of Prisoners
of that City; and who knows but it may have some good Effect upon the miserable
in France^, since the Fame thereof has passed thither, has penetrated the Walls
of the Bastile, and reached the Ears of those under the closest Confinement
there.

It is this, SIR, which has encouraged our Gentleman in Distress, to Court Your
Patronage, in hopes, that Your favorable Acceptance of what he offers to Your
Protection, may at least prove a seasonable Comfort to him in the Extremity of
his Afflictions, since by his ill Destiny, by the Remoteness of the Place, but
above all, by the severity of those for whom he had Sacrificed all, he is
bereaved of that Relief which he might reasonably expect from the more happy
Constitution of our Government, and from the Generosity of such a Patron as
Your Self, I cannot but promise my self a favorable acceptance from Your
Generosity, which has been so universal, as not to be comprehended within the
narrow compass of an Epistle, which obliges me to Acquiesce with an entire
confidence in Your Protection which next to a hearty wish for Your everlasting
Prosperity, is the most fervent Desire, and highest Ambition of him who
Subscribes himself,

Honored SIR, Your most Humble Servant, M. D.

THE PREFACE.
SINCE the first Publishing of this Treatise, it has been no small dispute
amongst those who pretend to be the most competent Judges of a matter of this
nature, whether the Author's intention had been to give us a true History, or a
piece participating both of the nature of a Novel and a History; especially,
since the Bookseller of Cologn, unto whom the Copy was first transmitted, has
either not thought fit, or not been able to give any satisfactory Account upon
this head. The best way I can propose to the Reader for the deciding of this
Question, will be, to have recourse to the Book it self, and to endeavor to
inform his own Judgment concerning the most remarkable head it contains, of
which many are of such a nature, as cannot be long concealed to the World,
there being so many living Witnesses in England, Germany, France and Holland,
who are unquestionable Judges, either of the Falsity or Truth of those matters.

Thus much is agreed on all hands, that his Relation is sincere in what relates
to his own Affairs, even to his Personal Infirmities, of which he gives a most
particular Account without the least disguise; but some of the Wiser sort have
made this Observation, that his Judgment is often misguided by Passion, or
fondness of entering upon digressions, when he speaks of others, though Persons
of an eminent Rank, an instance of which may be given in some certain Passages
relating to the late D. of Sh...... which are of such a nature, as to be
contradictory to what the greatest part of Europe was convinced of in relation
to his constant Zeal for the Protestant Religion he always professed from his
Infancy.

It Is agreed of by most, that if the Relation he gives us in the Quality of a
Spy, be genuine, (as by its Character it seems to be so) nothing could be more
natural, or proficious; for never any Spy in the World before him, took so much
pains to unmask himself, and to represent his Profession in its true, natural,
ugly shape, and the Reward that commonly is bestowed upon those who follow this
Trade. Upon this occasion I cannot forbear to take notice how, within these few
Years, foreign Generals have been represented upon the Stage in a neighboring
Nations (where they pretend to a particular privilege of ridiculing all the
World besides themselves) giving a Crown-piece to a Spy for his secret
services. I am apt to believe, the Author of these Memoirs would have been well
satisfied, if they had given him no worse Reward, for having sacrificed both
his Honor and Estate for their Interest: A convincing instance, that some
Princes stand oftentimes more indebted to their propitious Stars, than to the
Rewards they bestow upon those that serve them. Some who pretend to be
acquainted withour Author's Person, have this Observation, that being of very
low Stature, very hard favored in his Physiognomy, very lean, and besides
this, disfigured by a wound in his Face, they cannot conceive what should make
the Ladies so fond of his Person, as to be Debauched by, or Married to a Person
that made such an indifferent Figure; or Princes to be so taken with him, as to
bestow these Preferments upon an unknown Person. This might be easiely
answered, if it be granted that his Deserts and agreeable Conversation did make
amends for the defects of his Body; but that some among the Critics have
observed more indiscretion in his Writings than they believe to be consistent
with such a Character, unless it be alleged in his behalf, that the
irksomeness of so long an Imprisonment might cause a change in his Temper.

But without insisting any further upon this point, even the nicest Critics
cannot refuse to acknowledge, that these Memoirs are full of agreeable and most
pleasing turns, that great variety of Accidents so naturally and lively
represented; his Actions in the quality of a Spy, and his Discoveris of what
daily passes in the Bastile, are such as must needs both delight and instruct
the Reader, For the rest, as his Style is more Natural than Learned, so what it
wants in exactness, it makes up in its perspecuity, and genuine purity, and if
he had been more careful in assigning the exact times of some things contained
in this Relation, it would have been free from all obscurity, which seems to
remain in some few passages, to those who will not take the pains to compare
them in all their Circumstances.

THE MEMOIRS OF JOHN BAPTIST De La Fontaine, Knight. LORD OF Savoy and Fontenay
BRIGADIER and SURVEYOUR General in the French King's Army. LIB. I.
MY Extraction is much more considerable than my Estate, being descended from
the Race of Artus Duke of Britany, who had a Natural Son by a certain young
Lady of the House of Fougere. He took upon him the Name of Fontaine, being the
same that belonged to his Mother. My Coat of Arms is an undeniable proof of my
Noble Extraction, being the entire Arms of Britany, with a Bar cross the Gules,
Charged with two Golden Beasants. There are several Branches of this Family,
some of whom are still remaining in Britany; the rest have settled themselves
in Maine, Anjou, Tourain and Piccardy, and we acknowledge for the Head of our
Family the Marquess of Savilly.

My Father, who had but a very slender Estate, Married a Widow of a certain
Gentleman of the Province of Anjou, where he likewise settled himself. He had in
all four Children by her, the two eldest of which died very young. I was born
on the 24th of June, in the Year 1636, and brought up under the Tuition of my
Mother, whom I lost when I was scarce seven Years of Age. The first Rudiments
of Latin I was taught by a Priest, who was our Chaplain; and when I was ten
Year old, I entered the third Form at Alenson; I afterward was Instructed in
Rhetoric and the Logic: But before I could go through the Course of Natural
Philosophy, I began to give my self over to all manner of Debaucheries; so that
being sent back to my Father, who liv^d in the Service of the late Duke of
Orleans, he committed me to the care of a Curate of a certain Parish, which was
his Lordship.

This Curate happened to have a Niece in the same House with him, who being
about four or five Years older than I, we played the Fool together so long,
till she was brought to Bed of a lusty Child.

Being thereby obliged to leave her Unkle's House, I returned to my Father, who
was so far from chiding me, that he used to laugh at it: This served me for no
small Encouragement to continue my former Debauched course of Life; so true it
is, that young People ought to be checked in the first beginning, I being then
but 16 Years old. But it was not long before I began to be weary of living at
my Father's House, which made me take a resolution to go and try my Fortune in
the City of Paris, where I had a Kinswoman Married to a Person, who made at
that time a very considerable Figure there.

This was Mounsieur de Bordeaux, Intendant of the Finances, a vast Rich Man,
and one who Improved his Fortune every Day: He was all in all with Mounsieur de
la Vicuville, Sur-intendant of the Finances, who by reason of his great Age,
left the whole Management of Affairs to his Conduct. I was very kindly received
by Mounsieur de Bordeaux, who would needs have me lodge in his House, and gave
me every Day fresh marks of his Friendship; so that he offered to lay down half
the Money for the Purchase of a Counsellor's Place in the Parliament, believing
my Father to be in a Condition to supply the rest, which he declined, by reason
of his Incapacity to furnish such a Sum. I resolved therefore to enter my self
as a Cadee in the Regiment of the Guards, in the Company of Pradelles. I lived
thus very handsomely, being furnished with Money by Mounsieur Bordeaux, who, as
he was very well known to the King, and well considered by the Cardinal
Mazarin, then chief Minister of State, so he introduced me to them both.

This Regiment was sometime after Commanded to Reinforce the Siege of Estampes,
where I was wounded above the Groin: Mounsieur de Bordeaux his Son, being at
that time Intendant of the Army, and lodged in the same Castle where the King's
Quarters were; I was carried to his Quarters, and he was so obliging, as to
send Mounsieur Bontems his Gentleman to enquire after the present state of my
Health. It was a considerable time before this Wound could be cured; and the
Army being in the mean while obliged to Decamp, I obtained a Pass from the
Enemy, in order to be conveyed to Paris.

The young Mounsieur de Bordeaux, was sometime before Married to a young Lady,
who being not above 12 Years old, lived in the same House with his Father. I
was also carried thither, which proved a great obstacle to my recovery: For she
used frequently to visit me, with some other Ladies, her Companions, among whom
there was one I had a most particular respect for above the rest, and as she
used often to sit down near me, she would infallably have occasioned the loss
of my Life, if it had continued thus much longer; but the Chyrurgeon having
guest at the matter, forbid any Woman to be admitted into my Chamber for the
future.

After I was recovered of my Wound, the King, who at that time, in some
measure, saw Tranquillity restored in his Dominions, which for a considerable
time had been harrassed by Intestine Broils, did to satisfy his Warlike
Inclinations, order a Fort to be Erected in the Gardens of the Thuellerie,
where several mock Attacks were made under the Conduct of Mounsieur de
Puissigny. As I was Employed among the rest of the Guards, that used to be
Exercised in this Place, in the King's presence, so I had several times the
honor to speak to him, and he promised me an Ensigns place in the Guards,
which however I never obtained; the Cardinal, who sold every thing, disposing
of all the Vacancies for Money: The old Mounsieur de Bordeaux was not well
satisfied with it, because he would willingly have purchased one for Money, if
he had known that he would have accepted of any upon my account.

In the mean while Monsieur de Bordeaux's Daughter-in-Law, being Courted by so
many Suitors in her Husbands absence, (who was gone in the Quality of an Envoy
Extraordinary from France into England) found her self under an obligation to
retire for some time to Neuville, whither I was sent along with her, by the old
Mounsieur de Bordeaux. Here they had a very fine Seat, which cost them above
25000 l. Sterling, being not above 10 Leagues from Paris; we used to pass our
time very pleasantly together, being both of an Age, most inclinable to
Pleasure; though for Six Months together we scarce saw any body, but such as
belonged to the Family; and her Father-in-law who was not ignorant of the
frailty of the Fair Sex, had allowed her no more than four or five Female
Companions. At last one Pecourt, a Dancing Master, happening to come from Paris
with some young Gentlemen to pay us a Visit, the old Gentleman, who was
appointed by his Son to have a watchful Eye upon all her Actions, was so much
displeased at it, that he ordered her immediately to return to Paris.

It was not long after that I was engaged in a quarrel with one St. Lewis, on
the account of Mr. Bordeaux, of whom he spoke Ill in my presence; upon which we
both sides drew our Swords, and I did run him through the Body. Mounsieur de
Bordeaux expressing more kindness to me than ever upon this account, took care
to have me secretly conveyed to Neuville, because the Wounds of St. Lewis were
supposed to be mortal.

Though by the ill success of the late Battle, fought by the Prince of Conde near
St. Anthony, the Flames of the Civil War were in some measure suppressed, yet
there were some remainders, which nothing but time could entirely extinguish.
Among other Inconveniences, the Flat Country was exposed to the depredations of
the Soldiers, so that the Inhabitants were forced to transport their most
precious Movables into places of Safety.

Some of these living near Neuville, having sent their best Effects to that
place, a certain Company of Stragglers, had laid a design to surprise and
pillage the Place in the following manner: They sent in the Evening some of
their Gang, to desire a safe retreat with their Carts and Goods, pretending
they came from Montfort Lamauri, which is not far distant from thence, in hopes
that their request would be granted without any difficulty; they had laid some
of their Gang in an Ambush, who as soon as the Carts should be entered the
Gates, and pass the Bridge, should surprise the Castle. But I being present at
that time, gave them for Answer, that I could not let down the Drawbridge at
that time of the Night; that as for their Persons they should be admitted into
the Gates immediately, but that their Carts must keep without till it was broad
day. In the mean while daylight began to appear, and they having again desired
admittance into the Castle, I ordered that four or five of them at a time
should pass over a little Drawbridge; whereupon those that were in Ambush
perceiving some hurry among the Carts, and verily believing that the great
Drawbridge was let down, all on a sudden advanced toward the Castle: which
being perceived at a distance, by a Sentinel from his Watch House, placed there
for that purpose, he cried out that they should draw up the Bridge, we being in
great danger of being surprised; which being done accordingly, those that were
entered before were made Prisoners, and put in a Dungeon; the others were so
welcomed by our Guns, that they were glad to retire. I immediately dispatched a
Messenger to Monsieur de Bordeaux, to let him know what was passed, and what
was to be done with the Prisoners, who sent me word that I should set them at
liberty, being unwilling to throw away his Money to prosecute them: His
Indulgence was not very pleasing to me, who would rather have seen them
rewarded with a Halter.

In the mean while, St. Lewis being recovered of his Wounds, I returned to
Paris, where I met with a most kind reception from Mounsieur de Bordeaux. It
was much about the same time the Cardinal made a Proposition to him that in
case he would advance him Four Millions of Livers, he would make him
Sur-Intendant, in conjunction with Monsieur De Vicuville, who by reason of his
great Age and Infirmities, was forced to commit the management of the Finances
to Monsieur de Bordeaux, who was very glad of such an advantageous offer. For
which reason he took up what Money he could among his Acquaintance and he had
already raised the greatest part of the Sum* when the sudden death of Monsieur
Vicuville wrought a great change in the Business.

For the Cardinal who stood in need of Money, sent to Monsieur de Bordeaux, to
know whether he was ready to perform his promise; who having answered that he
wanted some part of it, the Cardinal made the same Offer to the Sieurs Servien
and Fouquet, who being ready to furnish the demanded Sum, were made
Sur-Intendants in the room of Monsieur de Bordeaux, who thereby lost much of
his Credit, and was forced to rest satisfied with his place of Intendant, which
could not be taken from him.

This Disgrace, of which the Son bore his share, as being not for the future to
be furnished with such large supplies of Money as before, was increased by
another, which happened much about the same time in his Lady's Family. For her
Father, who had the Reputation of one of the Richest Bankers, and who was
Receiver General of the Finances at Orleans, came to fail, being forced to
shelter himself in the Palace of Guise against his Creditors. His Son-in-law,
who before was not very fond of his Wife, became after this disappointment more
averse to her than ever; being sensible that both his Honor and Interest must
needs suffer considerably, by his Father-in-law being become a Bankrupt. For,
besides that he was thereby deprived of all hopes of any farther Advantage
after his Death, which had been his chief motive to Marry his Daughter, he lost
besides this part of her Portion which he had left in his Hands.

I for my part, bore also my share in their Affliction, though in a different
way. For one of the Officers employed under Monsieur de Bordeaux the Elder, put
it into his head, that I was in Love with his Daughter-in-law; whereupon,
without any further consideration, he resolved to send me to his Son in
England. But for fear I should make any difficulty to consent to it, he
insinuated into my Father, that the Cardinal was very angry with me, because I
had let fall some words, complaining that he had not been mindful of the King's
promise to me. My Father being over persuaded by him, ordered me to get every
thing ready to go along with him into England, where he was to buy some Horses
for the Cardinal, Monsieur de Bordeaux having recommended him to his Eminency,
as one the best skilled in Horses of any Man living; which indeed was no more
than the Truth, there being scarce any body who excelled him in this point. To
be short, our Journey proved very unfortunate: We came to Calais just after the
Packet-boat was sailed for England, so that we were under a necessity to lay
hold of the next convenience of a Vessel bound for London, Thus by the
Intrigues of a mischievous Tongue, I saw my self disappointed of the hopes of
making my Fortune near the King.

But as one ill fortune seldom comes alone, we were not long after in most
eminent danger of having been Shipwrack'd; For the Wind blowing very hard from
the South-West, we were drove even upon the Sands in sight of Pettem on the
Dutch Coast. Having refreshed our selves a little on shore, we returned on
board; and being got clear by the help of the Tide, we were soon after, by a
most violent Tempest, forced upon the Coast of Norway. The Tempest was so
terrible, that for four or five Days together, we were not able to distinguish
Day from Night, till the fury of the Storm being somewhat abated, the Seamen
descried at a great distance the City of Bergen, the Capital of the Kingdom of
Norway. The Ship having suffered considerable Damage in the late Tempest, it
was resolved to take the Harbor; which being done, the Ship was fain to be
laid up, in order to be Refitted. The great Frost, which happened in a few days
after, and which rendered that Port unpassable, made us take up our Quarters
there for the whole Winter, and we lodged at the House of a French Merchant,
living in that City.

As he had good Correspondence in France, we took this opportunity to let our
Friends there know what was befallen us; and he being informed by some of his
Correspendents of my Fathers Quality, was very desirous to marry me to his only
Daughter. This Merchant passing for a vast Rich Man in this Country; my Father,
who hoped to have found a means to make my Fortune, did give ear to his
Proposition; and the Daughter showed much more inclination to me, than to any
of that Country, but I had not the same favorable Sentiments for her Person;
her whole disposition appearing to me, as savage as the Country she Inhabited;
it being impossible to give you a true Idea of the unpoliteness of the
Inhabitants of that Country; for most of them run away at the very sight of a
Stranger, and to me they appeared, at a distance, more like Bears than Men. My
Father did all he could to move this squeamishness of mine, telling me, that a
Man of Fortune must pass by abundance of those Matters to meliorate his
Condition; but to little purpose. Nevertheless, I should questionless have
found it a hard task to have got rid of my intended Spouse, if her Father had
proved as rich as we at first Imagined. But when my Father began to sound the
bottom, and what Portion he intended to give his Daughter, we found that there
was not much ready Cash, his Riches consisting chiefly in his Book Debts, and
some Lands in Norway. In the mean while, my Father was gone so far as to be
almost past retreating; the only pretext he had left to gain time was, that he
was unwilling to conclude the Matter without the advice of his Relations. Thus
the business protracting, and the Spring coming on, we got on board again, in
order to pursue our Voyage.

Thus I saw my self delivered from a Country, where I was afraid I should have
ended my Days among the Bears; for, to speak Truth, I could see nothing else
there but these Beasts and Sorcerers. The last are so common in that Country,
as with us the shooe-makers or any other Artificers. They sell Wind to the
Masters of Ships, just as they are ready to set sail; and that not in private,
as forbidden Commodities used to be disposed of in other places, but in
Public; no otherwise, than as if they sold you one of the Products of their
Country. Our Master of the Ship purchased some as well as the rest, which
indeed, could not but surprise me to a high degree, to see those People so void
of all fear of offending God Almighty, as to put their Confidence in, and to
sacrifice to the Devil.

Being at last safely arrived at Gravesend, we got ashore, making the best of
our way to London upon some Hackney-Horses, which our Host there had provided
for us.

The first thing we did, was to visit Monsieur De Bordeaux, who received us
very kindly, and would needs have us stay with him in his House. For being a
great Gallant, he used to pay frequent Visits to the Ladies; so that for five
or six Months together, I did little else but spend my time in visiting with
him. I had a most peculiar Genius for the English Tongue, which in a Years
time, I knew as well as if I had been a Native of that Kingdom.

Mounsieur de Bordeaux had at that time a Mistress, a Knight's Lady, whose
Husband having conceived some Jealousy at their Conversation, had left her,
and, as it was given out, was gone to Rome, to visit all the Cities of Italy,
to satisfy his Curiosity, which had been always bent to Traveling. But about
three Months after my arrival, as Monsieur de Bordeaux and I were coming one
day from visiting this Lady, a Musquetoon was discharged at our Coach, the
Bullets of which passed from before, where the Coachman's Seat is, through the
Coach where the Footmen are commonly placed, without doing any harm, but to
wound the Coachman: Monsieur de Bordeaux and I having not received the least
Hurt, and the Footmen also having escaped the danger, because they had, to
their good Fortune, just a Moment before left the Coach, and were walking by.
There was no body that could give the least account of the Author of this
intended Murder; some suspected the same to proceed from a certain Person, who
bore the Character of an Envoy of the Prince of Conde in London; others gave
out, that this Lady's Husband being returned out of Italy, intended to bestow
this upon us as a Recompense, for the Pains we had taken to dignifie him with
Horns; the last indeed, seemed to be the most probable.

In the mean while I did nothing but lose time, without the least prospect of
Advancement in this Country, when a sudden Accident happened which proved to my
advantage. For one Crible, who was come out of France with Monsieur de
Bordeaux, in the Quality of Secretary, stabbed his Butler with a Knife, and was
forced to fly the Country to avoid punishment.

Monsieur de Bordeaux, after he had for some time resided in England, in the
Quality of an Envoy Extraordinary from France, was of late dignified with the
Title of an Ambassador, and had obtained the Place of Secretary of the Embassy
for this Crible. His Excellency, after having given Advice to the French Court
of what had happened with Crible, obtained the Place for me, of which
accordingly I took possession.

Being but very young, the Envoy of the Prince of Conde, did propose to himself
to improve it to his Advantage; for which reasons, knowing that I used
sometimes to visit Madam S^ladon, Wife to the chief Physician of the King of
England, engaged her to invite us together to Dinner at her House, hoping by
this means to insinuate himself into an intimacy with me: But I soon perceiving
his design, I gave immediate notice of it to Monsieur de Bordeaux, who taught
me my Lesson so well, that the said Envoy believing me as simple indeed as I
appeared, did not stick to ask me, what had passed in the last Audience
Monsieur de Bordeaux had of ^^omwel; Whether there was not any Proposition
made, concerning an Alliance betwixt France and England? and whether his
Excellency had not required any Succor against the Spaniards? Whether I did
not know upon what Errand Monsieur de Bass was sent into England by the
Cardinal, and whether these several private Audiences he had had of the
Protector, were not suspicious to Monsieur de Bordeaux? As I had been well
instructed in all points, I answered him with so much appearance of a real
Innocence, that he remained fully persuaded, he had gained his end; and I took
most particular care, to remove all suspicion he might have conceived of the
good Correspondence betwixt France and the Protector.

It Is true, he was as yet unresolved at that time, as to the desired Succors;
being, not without reason, afraid, that the English Nation, who bare an old
Grudge to the French, which is not easily removed, would not look upon it with
a very good eye. For which reason it was that Monsieur de Bordeaux was forced
to make his Applications to Lambert and Harrison, his intimate Friends, who
being brought over to our side by a good round Sum of Money, persuaded the
Protector to conclude a Defensive League with France.

By virtue of this Treaty he obliged himself to assist us with thirty Men of
War in case of necessity, and to join 6000 English Foot with the French Troops.
This League was brought to perfection, some time after the arrival of Monsieur
de Bass in London. He came under pretense of Complimenting the Protector, but
it is certain that he had some secret Instructions, which I was never able to
learn. A certain mark of his being sent upon a more important Errand than a
bare Compliment, was, that soon after he changed his Quality of appearing as a
Gentleman of his Eminency, as he did at first, into that of an Envoy
Extraordinary of France, with Orders to Monsieur de Bordeaux, not to transact
any thing of moment without his Advice. This Monsieur de Bass used to have
p^^^ate Interviews with Colonel Gerard, younger Brother to my Lord Brandon
Gerard. The Colonel walking one day in the Exchange in the Strand, which, in
the Winter time, is the common Walk, as well for idle Women, as other sort of
People, he met Don Pantaleon de la, Brother to the Portugueze Ambassador, with
several Portugueze Gentlemen in his Company. As the Portuguezes are no less
Proud than the English, there arose a Dispute who should give way to one
another, as they met, every one endeavoring to take place of the other; so
that the Portuguezes pushing the English a side, made them give way to them.
Colonel Gerard drew his Sword to taken satisfaction for the affront, and an
English Gentleman, who was in his Company, was slain in the fray, before they
could be parted. Colonel Gerard hereupon challenged the next day Don Pantaleon,
who did not appear at the appointed place, being prevented by his Brother the
Ambassador, who had got notice of the Quarrel. But Colonel Gerard being not
satisfied, thus threatened Don Pantaleon, in the presence of some, whom he knew
would tell it to the Portugueze, who made answer, that notwithstanding all
this, they might take an opportunity to meet again upon the Exchange, if the
Colonel were so angry as he would make people believe, and that he should be
sure to see him there. And he was indeed as good as his Word; for he appeared
there with an old Officer, and near six score other persons, some of which were
provided with hand Granado's, to serve them in case of extremity. They had also
placed Eight Men at each door of the Exchange, who were to take care, That if
Colonel Gerard should come with a greater number of Men than they had with
them, they should shut the Gates upon them. Colonel Gerard being soon
advertised, that Pantaleon was come to the Exchange, with a great number of his
Followers, he sent to his Friends, unto whom notice was given before hand, to
be ready upon all Occasions, who conducted him to the Exchange, being near
equal in number to the Portugueses, where a smart Skirmish ensued betwixt these
two Parties, which made such a terrible noise in the Exchange, and circumjacent
Streets, that the populace thinking an Enemy to be at hand, flocked together to
the assistance of their Countrymen, who were like to come to the worse,
several of their Companions being slain by the Portugeses, which made the rest
retire as fast as they could from the Exchange. But the Populace coming to
rescue their Countrymen the Gates were shut against them, which put them into
such a fury that they were attempting to force the Gates; Don Pantaleon, and
his Followers, seeing themselves in distress had recourse to their Granado's by
the means of which they dispersed the enraged Multitude, and gave Opportunity
to Don Panteleon, and the other Portugeses, to escape their Hands. But scarc^
were they come as far as Charing Cross, when they met the Protector's Guards,
who being sent to Seiz^ Pantaleon, and his adherents, they were forced to
retire without effecting it, by the Hand Granado'^ sent among them by the
Portugueses.

Cromwell sent one to demand Pantaleon from the Ambassador, who refusing to
deliver him, up wa^ soon after closely besieged in his House; and seeing
himself overpowered, was forced to deliver Don Pantaleon, who, with some other
Portuguese Gentlemen, belonging to the Ambassadour's Retinue, were sent all
together to Newgate. The Ambassador made heavy Complaints to Cromwell,
alleging that the Law of Nations was violated, by the detaining of these
Prisoners; but finding him unmovable to these Reasons, he changed his Tune,
endeavoring by Prayers and Intercessions to save his Brother's Life. But
Cromwell refused to hearken to them also, as well as to the Complaints made by
all the other Ambassadors, who spoke to him much in the same terms as the
Portuguese had done before. He alleged for a reason, that there were certain
cases, in which the Law of Nations ought not to take place; that this being one
of that nature, he would see Justice done; which Answer was looked upon as a
Sentence which would prove fatal to Pantaleon. There was a certain Lady, Sister
to the Lord Mohun, who had an extraordinary kindness for him; and being
admitted to see him in Prison, told him, that there was but one way left to
save his Life: He asked which way that could be: She told him, that they must
change their Clothes. Don Pantaleon having accepted the generous offer of this
Lady, went out of the Prison undiscovered by the Turn-Keys, and so to the House
of a Lady of Pleasure, with whom he used to divert himself sometimes before.

Comwel had no sooner notice given him of his Escape, and that he was not at
his Brother's House, but he put out a Proclamation for the apprehending of Don
Pantaleon, promising a considerable Reward to such as should discover him. This
had the desired effect; for this Strumpet being enticed by the hopes of the
Reward, delivered him up immediately after; when he was committed to the Tower
of London. The King of Portugal demanded Don Pantaleon to be delivered into his
Hands, as being joined in Commission with his Brother the Ambassador; But
Cromwell persisted in his Resolution, notwithstanding all the Remonstrances made
to him on his behalf.

On the other hand, Colonel Gerard being accused of having been engaged in a
Conspiracy against Cromwell, to favor the Designs of King Charles II. was also
taken and committed to the Tower, where Pantaleon was before him; they were
both condemned to Death at the same time, and accordingly had both their Heads
cut off upon the same Scaffold.

Monsieur de Bordeaux improved this Juncture to his advantage, to rid his Hands
of Monsieur de Bass, knowing him to be suspected by the Protector, as being
concerned in the same Plot with Colonel Gerard. For which reason the Protector
sent to the Cardinal, that he had given such cause of suspicion, as that he
could not suffer him any longer near his Person; and the Cardinal judging it
not convenient at that time to fall out with the Protector, had him recalled
immediately.

I used about that time to visit the Daughters of the Earl of Clare, who were
so obliging as to invite me to go with them into the Country, to a House of a
Lady of Quality's, their Relation, where an Accident befell us which had almost
cost us all our Lives: For a sudden Fire happening to break out in the House
where we were, we had much a do to save our selves from being buried in the
Ruins of the House, which was just ready to fall as we came away; it being an
old House, which in a little time was all burnt to the ground. Whilst the Fire
lasted, the young Ladies were very sollicitous to comfort the Lady of the House
for her loss, who appeared as little concerned at it, as if she had not had the
least share in it; for she returned them the same Answer that was made by Job
to his Comforters: God has Given it, God has taken it. And this her resignation
to God's Pleasure, did not remain long unrewarded: For, as they were busy in
removing the Rubbish, and rebuilding the Foundations of a new House, a
considerable Treasure was found; supposed to be buried there in the times of
the Civil Wars, betwixt the two Houses of York and Lancaster, by which she was
doubly repaid for the loss of her House.

After our Return to London, I used frequently to visit the young Ladies of
Clare, they being the best humored Women in the World, where there was also a
great resort of the best Company in Town. Among the rest, there was a certain
young Lady of Quality, extremely fair and well shaped, who coming to visit them
one time, I fell extremely in Love with; and the young Ladies of Clare, who
were more her Friends than mine, having soon perceived it, did all they could
to increase my Passion, by telling me a thousand things to her advantage, nay
they did not stick to exceed the bounds of Truth in her behalf, for they
persuaded me she was very Rich, when in effect she was not so.

There being rather more freedom allowed in Conversation with the English
Ladies than in France it self, I did not stick to make Love to her that very
Day, and conducted her home, where I stayed with, her for above an Hour. She
was under the Tuition of one of her Aunts, who was lately come out Country,
where she lived with the Father of this young Lady, to take a little Diversion
in Town. I asked leave of her Aunt (as I had done of the young Lady before) to
come and pay her a Visit now and then, whilst they stayed in Town, which was
easily granted, knowing me to be a near Relation of the French Ambassadors.
Some of my Companions having soon discovered that I used to make frequent
Visits there; and being curious to know the reason, as soon as they got sight
of the Lady, which was one of the handsomest in all England, were not long
before they guessed at the true cause of it. They could not forbear to talk of
it to Monsieur de Bordeaux, and by the descriptions they had given him of her
Beauty, had made him as amorous as my self, though he had cunning enough to
dissemble it, pretending that what respect he showed, was only upon my account.
He would often tell me, that a Man must take Opportunity by the Foretop, that
this was the time to make me for ever; that his advice was, I should feast my
Mistress bravely, it being a Custom among the English so to do; that he would
be ready to assist me in pushing it forward, and that his Purse should be at my
Service. I gladly accepted his offers, and meeting with an opportunity some
days after, I invited both the Aunt and the Neice to an Entertainment, which
they accepted of without much difficulty, it being the Custom of the English
Ladies, not to be too difficult in such a case as this. I waited on them at the
appointed time, in one of the Ambassadour's Coaches and carried them to a House
at some small distance from the Town, in the Road to Hide Park; where a good
Dinner being got ready for us by his Excellencies Cooks* we were very merry
together. About five or six a Clock toward Evening* the Ambassador, who had
recommended this House to me, which he sometimes made use of upon the like
occasions* passed, as it were accidentally by in his Coach, it being agreed
among us, that he should call upon me there, as he was coming back from Hide
Park. To be short, he acted the Innocent so naturally, that having stopped his
Coach, under pretense to ask, whether they had not seen one of his Coaches pass
by that way; I looked out of the Window, under pretense to see who it was that
asked after his Coach; and having told them with some sort of a surprise, that
the Ambassador was there, they showed not the least aversion to his coming up
Stairs, as believing it to be a mere accident. He set himself at the Table next
to my Mistress, and fell most desperately in Love with her. After some
indifferent Discourses, he made his application to her Aunt, desiring leave to
come and visit her; which she excused, because a Person of his Character could
not be admitted to Visit her, without giving occasion of sinister
Interpretations to the World; notwithstanding which he persisted in his
Entreaties, but to no purpose. However he stayed with us till 10 a Clock at
night, being become so amorous at the first sight of her, that he had not the
power to stir. But parting time being come at last, he was forced to leave them
to my conduct. I continued to visit this young Lady for three Months together,
my Love increasing from day to day, and her Aunt gave us all the Liberty
imaginable, I having declared to her that I intended to Marry her Neice: As the
young Lady encouraged my Passion, so in a little while after I was so far
overcome with her Beauty, that I proposed to Marry her privately, which she
readily consented to, without considering that I was under Age. The main
business was where to find a Priest who would venture to couple us together;
and not knowing where to find a better, I persuaded the Ambassadour's Cook, for
once to serve for a Priest. Accordingly I pot him in a Priests Habit; and my
Mistress being a Protestant, and consequently ignorant of the Ceremonies of our
Church, could not judge whether he did his Office well or not. When I reflect
at this time upon the heinousness of the Fault I then committed, I am convinced
that I ought not to grumble at my present Sufferings; being sensible, that this
Crime alone (if I had committed no others in all my Life) deserves the most
severe punishment that can be imagined.

Thus imposing upon this Lady, I indeed imposed upon my self. We lived
afterward together like Man and Wife, which being soon perceived by her Aunt,
she acquainted her Relations with it. These being resolved to see us
effectually Married, two of her Brothers, with two more of her Kinsmen came one
morning to invite me to Dinner: I who did not suspect their design, accepted of
it without reluctance, and so they carried me to the House of a Justice of
Peace (which in France is called a Commissary) the Aunt and Neice being there
present as Guests invited to the Feast; the Justice of Peace, who was their
Friend, after he had saluted us very civilly, told the eldest Brother of the
Lady, that he would let them see his House; so up Stairs they went, and my Wife
taking me by the Hand followed them. No sooner were we come into the Closet of
the Justice, but addressing himself to me, he told me that he wished me much
Joy to so fair a Bride, and whether I would not make her my Wife? I, without
guessing in the least at his meaning, answered him, that I was not worthy to
pretend to that Honor; upon which he immediately asked her, whether she were
willing to accept of me for her Husband, unto which she having answered Yes, he
took his Pen and Ink, and did what further belonged to his Office. Then it was
first, that my Eyes began to be opened, being now convinced that I was caught
in the Trap; and that I might not have the least occasion to doubt it, he made
me sign the Declaration I had made; which being likewise done by her, all her
Relations present set their Names under ours as Witnesses, as I suppose, of
what had been transacted. We were afterward Entertained with a magnificent
Dinner, where our Health was merrily drank about. From thence we returned to
her Aunt, where we were welcome again with a very handsome Supper; which being
over, we were both conducted into a Chamber, where there was a very good Bed,
made ready for our Diversion.

The next day was spent likewise in Feasting, and the third day after we went
into the Country, to my Spouse's Father's House, about Ten Miles distant from
London. I was presented to him as his Son-in-Law, having Married his Daughter
before a Justice of Peace, which gave me no further reason to doubt, but that
we had been Married according to the Custom of the Country. After I had spent
three weeks there, I returned alone to London, and gave an account to Monsieur
de Bordeaux of what had happened to me, with an intention to go again into the
Country in two or three days, till such time that my Father, who was expected
suddenly from France, should come to Town. In the mean while, I had engaged
Monsieur de Bordeaux to use all his Interest with my Father, to give his
approbation to the Marriage, which he promised me to do; but as he continued
still in his amorous designs upon this Fair One, so he persuaded me rather to
let her come to London, than to live with her in the Country. I told him that I
could not live in London, being destitute of a House and Furniture; to which he
answered, that as long as I had good Friends, I could not want these things,
and immediately ordered his Steward to pay me 4000 Livers to furnish me a
House, which he took for me hard by his own. He lent me likewise a Coach with
six Horses; to fetch my Spouse to Town, which I did accordingly: and the next
day after we were come to our new House, his Excellency paid us a Visit, and
presented her with a very fine Nightrail, of which I had not the least
suspicion, it being the Custom in England, for Persons who make a considerable
Figure in the World, to show their Magnificence upon such like Occasions. Thus
he continued his Visits for some time; but coming one day home from White Hall,
my Spouse desired me to tell the Ambassador, that he might discontinue his
Visits for the future, adding that she needed not tell me the reason, which I
might easily guess at without an Interpreter. The Truth is, I soon understood
her meaning, but did not think it proper for me to pass this Complement upon
him: I told her therefore, that it would look better for her Father to
undertake this Task, under pretense, that a Person of his Quality could not
make so frequent Visits to a young Married Woman, without giving occasion to
the World to censure her behavior; that this reason being so plausible,
Monsieur de Bordeaux could not in the least take it amiss; whereas if it should
come from me, he would not take it in good part.

Whilst Matters stood thus, my Father returned from France, and being
advertised of his coming, and unwilling to let him find us together, I sent her
to her Father's House, whilst my own was extremely surpised, to understand
from Monsieur de Bordeaux's own Mouth that I was Married, the more, because he
soon understood, that she had but a very slender Portion. Monsieur de Bordeaux
did all he could to appease his Anger; and having then already laid the design,
he intended to put in execution hereafter, he told my Father, that he would
advise him to have a meeting with his Daughter-in-Law's Father, that possibly a
means might be found out to bring them to an Accommodation, and that he might
be prevailed upon to give her such a Portion, as he had no reason to be
dissatisfied with. The Interview was appointed at the Aunts, where my Father
told them in plain terms, that the Marriage was null, by reason of my Minority;
and that if they would have the Marriage take effect, they must give a good
Portion to my pretended Wife; that I being a Man of Fortune without an Estate,
unless they could give such a Portion, as was sufficient to maintain us both,
there was no likelihood of our cohabiting together. The Lady's Father answered,
that he would not disable himself before his Death; that his Daughter had about
1200 Pounds left her by a Grandfather, which if it would content them he was
ready to pay it, if not, he must take care of himself.

But this did not satisfy my Father, who demanded 40000 Livers. Monsieur de
Bordeaux willing to lay hold of this opportunity to oblige my Spouse, sent her
word by a certain Woman, the Wife of an Apostate, who used to manage his Love
Intrigues, that she should not be concerned at his Demands, that His Excellency
was ready to make up the Sum, in hopes she would not prove ungrateful to him.
I soon got notice of what had been proposed upon this account; and being now no
longer in doubt concerning his good Intentions toward me, I was extremely
puzzled, in what manner I should behave my self toward him. The first thing I
did was to fall foul upon the Messenger of Love; at which Mounsieur de Bordeaux
being so much startled, he advised my Father to take me with him back into
France. For, said he, as soon as his Father-in-Law perceives you are in earnest
to send him away, he will stretch hard to draw him back again; and he will
scarce run the hazard of seeing his Family dishonored, for want of an
additional Portion. My Father was so credulous as to follow his advice; and I
had no sooner abandoned my post, but he took possession of it; though it must be
confessed, that an unlucky accident which happened about that time in the
Family, did contribute not a little toward the obtaining his end.

My Wife had an elder Sister, who had made a worse bargain of it than she,
being Debauched by a Married Man; who meeting one day her eldest Brother, he
was so much exasperated at the sight of him, that he killed him in the Street.
He was taken and committed to Prison; which Monsieur de Bordeaux had no sooner
notice of, but he sent word underhand to her Father, that if he would make his
applications to him, he would see to obtain his Pardon. Accordingly both the
Father and Daughter came to sue for his Favor, which he promised them; and
having thereby got the opportunity of having several private meetings with my
Spouse, he at last got her to comply with his desires. It was not long before
they threw away their Masks, her Father not daring to oppose it, by reason he
was forced to rely on him for his Sons pardon; which made them act so
barefaced, that the whole Town took notice of it, especially, when a young
Daughter, begot betwixt them, discovered the whole Intrigue to the World.
Notwithstanding all which, my pretty Spouse had confidence enough to ply me
with Letters almost every Post, but was very careful to conceal the matter from
me. But so soon as I had notice given me of it, by some of my Acquaintance I
left in that Country, I civilly desired her not to trouble me any more for the
future, because I hated her as much now, as I did love her before.

At my arrival in Paris, I must confess, I was received with all the marks of
kindness by the old Monsieur de Bordeaux, though in a little while after, he
could not forbear to give me now and then a smart touch upon my late Marriage.
Nay, once he told me very freely for my Comfort, that when one went about to
Marry in such a fashion as I had done, one ought to suppose, to provide a Wife
both for ones Friends and ones self. On the other hand, my pretty Spouse
furnished me with another Matrimonial Comfort; for being vexed at the last
Answer I had sent her, she took an opportunity to be revenged upon me, by
divulging a Secret I had trusted her with.

You must know that I had often told her, that I was sent into England for no
other reason, but because they had conceived a Jealousy against me, as if I
was fallen in love with the young Madam de Bordeaux: She had cunning enough to
turn these words to my disadvantage with the Ambassador, unto whom she
insinuated that she had all the reason in the World to believe, that this
suspicion had not been altogether groundless, and that it would be absolutely
for his Interest, to take effectual care that I should not be admitted for the
future to see her. Pursuant to this advice, the Ambassador writ to his Father,
who had no sooner received the Letter, but he told his Daughter-in-Law, that
her Husband had ordered I should pay her no more Visits for the future. He told
me not a word of it, but I found him more reserved than ordinary, and from that
time on, sought for all possible means to remove me from Paris, knowing that
absence is the most effectual remedy against Love. He often talked with me of
it, taking for his pretense the War that was then begun, and soon after
recommended me to the Marquess de Genlis Pizy, who commanded a Regiment of
Horse, and took me along with him, being very willing to oblige Monsieur de
Bordeaux, I served as a Volunteer in the Campaign of 1655. I was at the Seige
of Landrecy, at the Seige of St. Guilain and Conde, which were forced to
surrender; but we were obliged to raise the Seige from before Capelle.

After my return out of the Campaign, I met still with a more cold reception
than before, from Monsieur de Bordeaux, which made me take a resolution to go
into the Country. Not far from my Father's, there lived a certain Gentleman,
whose Name was Blesserie. who having a good Pack of Hounds, we often used to go
out together a Hare hunting. Coming one Morning early to his House, I went into
his Lady's Chamber to expect his return from a Neighboring Village. His Wife
being still in Bed, as I entered the Chamber* the Door, which had a Spring-Lo^k
happened to clap close behind me. It was not long before the Gentleman came
home, who finding us thus locked up together, began to conceive a Jealousy
against me, which I could plainly read in his Countenance. He asked me
nevertheless, whether I would go a Hunting with him, which we did, but with
some reluctance on my side, being perhaps as uneasy all the while as himself,
because I was not ignorant, that Jealousy prompts Men to all the
Extravagancies in the World. After we were returned from hunting, each to his
respective home, I resolved to be more spering in my Visits, in hopes thereby
to cure him of his Jealousy; though I can declare it that I never gave him any
real occasion, as having not the least intention against his Honor* and though I
never took the opportunity to try her Virtue, I believe her to be a very
Virtuous Woman, at least, she had the reputation as such in the Country.

At last a certain Gentleman, a near Kinsman of mine, who had been smitten with
her, willing to improve this opportunity to insinuate himself into this Jealous
Man's Favor, whispered it in his Ears, as if he had gathered something more
than should be from my own Discourse, encouraging him at the same time to
revenge the Affront, and offering his Service, as an unfeigned Testimony of his
Affection toward him. The jealous Husband being inveigl'd by these
Insinuations, they challenged me to fight with them. And notwithstanding the
severe prohibition against Duels, they rather challenged me to an Engagement,
than a single Combat; for they sent me word that I must look out for some of my
Friends to be my Seconds, there being three on their side resolved to stand and
fall by one another. I gave answer to those who brought the Challenge, that I
would not accept of the Challenge, but that if they attacked me first they
might look to it.

The jealous Husband was so much exasperated at this Answer, that pursuant to
the advice of his evil Counselors, he took a resolution to assassinate me. I
was advertised of their design, which made me be always upon my guard, and when
I went abroad a Hunting, I had at least two Friends along with me. One day as I
was riding thus along with them, I saw several Horsemen making up toward me,
which made me tell them, that it was I they aimed at. One of them seeing the
unequality of our Number left me immediately, but the other seemed as if he
would stand by me, and followed me closely, toward an Enclosure, which I was
endeavoring to get into before they could come up close with me. Here it was
we resolved to stand the brunt; but those who pursued me being come within
Musket shot of us, cried out to him who was with me, that they had no Quarrel
against him, that his best way would be to retire from thence, else they would
spare him as little as me.

There needed no more to make him leave me in the lurch, as the other had done
before; and though I did not know where to turn my self in this extremity. yet I
put on the best Countenance I could; when one of the Assassins fired at me, and
wounded me in Hip, I fell immediately sprawling upon the Ground, and they
believing I was killed outright, rid away full speed.

In the mean while one of my Companions, he that left me first of all, had made
the best of his way to a Neighboring Town, where having given the Alarm, the
Inhabitants who came to my assistance, did carry me to my Father's House, where
I was six Months before I could be cured of my Wounds.

There was scarce any body who believed I could escape with Life; and I being
of the same opinion my self, desired my Father to recall my Sister out of a
Nunnery, where she had been Eleven Years, without the least hopes of being
prevailed upon to embrace the Religious Life, which my Father had often
endeavored to persuade her to, and was just then upon the point of having
forced her to it, according to the Custom of some Parents, who are not able to
give Portions to their Daughters, or else will not part with their Money, for
fear of impoverishing the Family. You may imagine that this was joyful News for
her, flattering herself, that by my Death she should forever be freed from what
she dreaded most.

But contrary to the opinion of all, I was cured once more, though for a whole
Year together I was so weak, as not to be able to mount on Horseback, which was
the reason that in two Campaigns I did not appear in the Field. I afterward
obtained a Commission of a Cornet, in the Marquess de Lamberts Company, in the
great Royal Regiment, for which I stood indebted to the Courtesy of Monsieur
de Bordeaux: Whilst I was Employed in the Army, my Father prosecuted those who
attempted to Assassinate me, so vigorously, that being out-lawed they were
forced to fly the Country.

I told you before, that pursuant to a Treaty betwixt France and Cromwell, the
last was to furnish us with Six Thousand Foot, and Thirty Men of War; These
were to be employed against Dunkirk, under condition, that the place, after it
was taken, should be surrendered to the English. So soon as the King had
received Intelligence that the English Fleet was put to Sea, and that these
6000 Men were joined our Forces, Dunkirk was besieged in the Month of May, in
the Year 1658. The Spaniards advanced with an Army to relieve the Place. The
Marshal de Hoquincourt, who had quitted the King's Party, came with a Body to
view our Lines, and Engaged our main Guard, where he was killed in the
Engagement. Monsieur de Turenne observing that the Enemy were resolved to
Attack us in our Lines, drew out his Forces to make Head against them. The
Battle was fought with great obstinacy for some time on both sides; but the
Spanish Horse beginning first to give way, were so warmly plied by ours, that
they were forced to abandon the Foot. Four of their Regiments seeing themselves
enclosed on all sides, threw down their Arms without striking a stroke, and
cried out for Quarter. The rest discouraged by their Example, durst not stand
it out much longer; so that in the pursuit we killed a great number of them,
and got abundance of Prisoners. In the pursuit I was wounded by a Musquetoon:
The Ball went into the left Cheek about an inch under the Eye, and passed
through the Head, coming out again near the Ear on the same side. I was carried
to Monsieur de Sangoin, Son-in-Law to Monsieur de Bordeaux, who was then Master
of the King's Household, from whom I received very singular Marks of his
Affection: Whilst I lay under cure, Dunkirk surrendered to the King, and
Turenne made some other Conquests in these parts. The Spaniards seeing their
Affairs to be in a declining condition, were willing to make Peace now, which
they had refused before. So I was disbanded, and returned to Paris, where I
found I had other Fish to fry.

You must know, that my English Spouse had all this while continued her amorous
Intrigues with Monsieur de Bordeaux. But the face of Affairs was much changed
of late in England; for after the Death of Cromwell, his Son Richard finding
his Shoulders too weak to bear the Burden his Father had born with so much
Resolution; he was scarce invested with the same Dignity, but he laid it down
of his own accord, and resigned his place to the true Heir of the Crown, who
was Acknowledged and Proclaimed by the People their King; Mounsieur de Bordeaux
had Orders sent him to Compliment the King upon his Restoration to the Throne;
but he refused to admit him into his presence, as having born the Character of
Ambassador under the Usurpation of his mortal Enemy. Being therefore recalled
by the King he returned to France, and was soon after followed by my Spouse.

He was no sooner come to Paris, but he told my Father, that I must take my
Wife again, her Parents having been prevailed upon to allow her the desired
Sum for her Portion, and for fear they should retract, he had made them to
deposite the Money in his Hands. My Father answered, that he believed I would
not do it, and that if I were to ask him his Opinion, he would not advise me to
it. This Answer was not very pleasing to Monsieur de Bordeaux, who told my
Father, that whether I would, or not, it must be done; that he himself had
given him his Word, that he would give his Consent to the Match, provided she
had a Portion of 40000 Livers paid down; That thereupon he had Treated with
them upon these Conditions, and that now his Honor lay at stake. My Father
replied, That those Reasons would scarce be strong enough to induce me to
comply with what he desired. Thus they parted, not without some hard Words on
both sides; nevertheless Monsieur de Bordeaux desired him to bring me to him
the next day, that he might talk with me himself. But I refused to go, which
made him alter his measures, and engaged Monsieur Sangoin to invite me to
Dinner. He knew that I had a great Deference for Monsieur de Sangoin, and that
I could not refuse him, what I would have refused to any body else. He was
there present at my coming, showing not the least concern, by which stratagem
he hoped to surprise me the sooner. I no sooner saw him, but I readily guessed
that his aim was at me; and it was not long before they both began to engage
with me, in discourse concerning this business. They told me, that I did not
consider my own good Fortune: That I could scarce ever hope to meet with so
fair and rich a Wife; and so much accomplished as this. I told them, that
perhaps this might be, but that if I could not meet with all these rare
Qualifications, I would endeavor at least to have one, that might be more
virtuous; after they had told me many more such like things, Monsieur de
Sangoin taking me aside, told me, That I was very unwise thus to insist upon a
fantastical notion; that it would be much more for my advantage to advance my
Fortune than to be so opiniatre against my own Interest. He said if it was more
money I wanted, he would take care I should have it, which would make me easy
all at once. I gave him for an Answer, That it was not Money that could tempt
me, and that whoever would take the pains to trouble me any further about it,
would only lose their labor.

Monsieur de Sangoin, having told my Answer to Monsieur de Bordeaux, he once
more told me at parting, That he saw plainly I had forgot what both his Father
and he had done for me; That it would be best for me not to slight the Offer he
had made me: That it was still in their power to do me good Service, and that
it would be better for me, to take is into serious consideration, before it was
too late. He sent also for my Father, unto whom I had given an Account of what
had past at this interview. He asked him, whether I had considered the matter
and whether I had not altered my resolution. My Father Answered him No, and I
had conceived such a hatred against this Creature, That the only way to put me
in an ill humor, was to Name her; that since the last Interview I had neither
Eat nor Drunk, and if I continued thus much longer, there would be more
occasion to consult about my Burial, than a Marriage.

At last Monsieur de Bordeaux, began to change his tune, and told my Father,
That it I would not do what I ought to do by fair Means, he would find a way to
make me do it: That he would not for the future acknowledge me for his Kinsman;
and that he would prove as severe an Enemy, as he had been a Friend to me: That he
had some Interest in the Parliament, which he would make use of to bring me to
reason, and to make me sensible who was in the Right, and who in the Wrong.

Thus having Declared open War against me, he sent me a Summons in the Name of
my English Spouse, to show cause why the said Marriage should not stand good,
and accordingly to pay her a Yearly Pension of 2000 Livers per Annum. for her
Subsistence, till the matter should be decided by Law; for which my Father
should stand engaged, as well as my self; to such a point of Extravagancy this
Man was hurried on by his boundless Passion. To confess the Truth I did not
very well like the matter, not knowing what to think of it, if God had not
interposed betwixt us; for my Father had but few Friends in Comparison of
Monsieur de Bordeaux, and this would not have been the first case, where
Interest has prevailed above Justice.

It happened that at the Public entry of the Queen, which was made in the
month of August, in the Year 1660. There was a Throne Erected for the Queen to
Mount upon, without St. Anthony's Gate; Monsieur Colbert, who was at that time
no more than Secretary to the Cardinal Mazarin, placed himself behind the Chair
of State of her Majesty; Monsieur de Bordeaux, who was Chancellor to the Queen
told him, That the place belonged to him. But Monsieur Colbert, who relied upon
the Authority of the Cardinal, refusing to give him the place, some hard Words
passed betwixt them. Monsieur de Bordeaux, made his Complaints to the Cardinal,
who justified Monsieur Colbert in what he had done; Monsieur de Bordeaux being
naturally of a very haughty temper, took the thing so much to heart, that he
returned home and took his Bed, where he died in two days after.

Thus I saw my self freed from a potent Adversary; but that unfortunate Woman,
whom he had taken into his protection against all Justice and Reason, was
thereby reduced to a more deplorable condition than can be expressed. For you
must know, that she had trusted him with all her Portion, of which she never
saw a Groat again. Not, but that in his last Will, he acknowledged to have
received the said Sum, and besides this left her a Legacy of 24000 Livers. But
his Executors did manage the matter so, that there appeared to be more Debts,
than means to satisfy them withal, which was a just punishment from God for
her Miscarriages. She had besides this, the misfortune to lose her cause
against me, the Marriage was declared void, and as I have understood since, was
reduced to a most miserable condition; a remarkable Instance, that those who
leave the path of Virtue, meet commonly with condign punishment for their
Crimes in this World.

I continued for some time longer in Paris, though I was not very easy there;
for I committed a certain Misdemeanour, for which I must give a severe account
to God, though the thing was not premeditated, but happened accidentally. I used
often to converse with a young Gentleman, whose Father being an Attorney, had
taken a resolution to quit his Employment, and to live at his ease in the
Country.

He had just left the Inns of Court, with his Son and Clerk, in order to retire
into the Country, when I met them upon the Road in a very melancholy posture,
which soon might be discovered in my Countenance, having neither Money, nor
knowing were to get any: The Attorney asked me what was the matter with me, and
why I appeared so melancholy? I told him, without making the least reflection
upon what I was going to say, that I was about looking for a Chapman, for a
good Benefice that was in my disposal. He asked me immediately what Benefice it
was, and told me, that he himself had for a good while been looking out for
such a thing, and if it did fit him, he was as likely as any body to deal with
me for it, and that I might as well dispose of it to him as to another. He
thereupon gave me his Hand, as a token of his Sincerity; and his Son, who
observed what pains his Father took to ensnare himself, tipp'd the wink upon
me, to give me to understand that I should go on with the Intrigue. Then we
began to come to the particulars. I told him that this Benefice was a Priory of
1500 Livers yearly Revenue, of which I had the Presentation, as being Heir to
one of my Unkles, whose it had been before; that it was Situate in Normandy, in
one of the fairest parts of the Country. This made the old Fellow's Mouth
water. He would needs have me Dine with him, and we did let the Glass go
briskly round to the Health of the Benefice, with which he was already more in
Love, than ever he had been with any of his Mistrisses. He thought it therefore
high time to come to the main point, and told me, that if we could agree about
the price, he would send his Clerk to take a view of it.

His Clerk was as errand a Rakehell as the Son, and they both once more tipp'd
the wink upon me, to strike up the Bargain: So that being resolved to sell him
a Pennyworth, we agreed for 200 Lowis d'or's, and he immediately sent his Clerk
to make an exact Inquiry into the matter. The Clerk made him believe as if he
was going his Journey, but never stirred out the Town, where in the mean while
we spent the Money he had allowed him for his Expenses. When he thought it time
to appear again, he told the Attorney, that indeed he had not been so far as
the place where the Priory was, having by good chance met with the Person who
Farmed the Revenues of it, that they had Supped and Lodged in the same Inn, by
whom he had been informed concerning every particular, which he found agreeable
to what he had heard me declare before; which had made him think it unnecessary
to go farther, knowing that he would be eager to know the truth of the matter,
to consummate the Bargain.

The Attorney being overjoyed at this welcome News, sent immediately for a
Barber to be shaved, resigned his Chambers and Business to his Son, and showed
me the draught of the Assignment I was to make to him; which being done, he
paid me down the 200 Lewis d'ors, as a consideration for the Purchase. His Son,
the Clerk and I lived very merrily together upon the old Fellow's Money, till
most part of it was spent; but as soon as I understood he had made all the
necessary preparations to take possession of his Priory, I thought it high time
to get away into the Country. I believe the old Spark looked very blank, when
he found that he had purchased what was no where to be seen. How his Son and
Clerk did come off with him, I am not able to tell, having never heard a word
mension'd of it since; because some weighty Reasons obliged me soon after to
leave France, which I did not see again for many Years after.

THE MEMOIRS OF JOHN BAPTIST De La Fontaine, Knight. LORD OF Savoy and Fontenay,
BRIGADIER and SURVEYOUR General in the French King's Army. LIB. II.
THE first Welcome I met with in the Country was, that my Father, who by the
Insinuations of my Sister, was extremely exasperated against me, turned me out
of Doors. I did whatever I could to appease his Anger, but finding all means
ineffectual, I had recourse to a Kinsman of ours, whose Name was Courtilloles,
whom I desired to interceed for me. He was a Gentleman of near 1000 Pounds per
Annum, which as it makes a Man very acceptable to his Friends in these days, so
my Father, as well upon that Score, as for his other good Qualifications sake,
had a particular respect for him. But whatever Persuasions and Intercessions he
could make use of in my behalf, my Father was so prepossessed by my Sister,
that he would scarce suffer to hear it mentioned in his presence, for me to
come and see him. But Monsieur Courtilloles received me very kindly into his
House, and his good Company allayed in some measure the trouble I was in for my
Father's unkindness.

But that which was my greatest comfort of all was, that it was not long,
before I fell in Love with Monsieur de Courtilloles Lady's Woman. She was
somewhat related to them, which made her much more respected by them, than your
Fanflaps generally used to be. But this was the least of my consideration; she
was a very handsome and well deserving Person, and very Virtuous, though this last
Qualification pleased me the least of all at first: For as I had hitherto met
but with very few that were so, so I thought her to be like the greatest part
of her Sex; but finding my self deceived in my opinion, I both loved and
esteemed her the more. She told me, that if I expected any returns of Love from
her, the only means to obtain them would be to Marry: But I was not so much
beyond my self, as not to consider, that one with nothing would not serve my
turn. I was not so ill bred as to tell her so positively; but being resolved to
break off with her, I laid hold of this pretext, that my Estate was not
sufficient to maintain a Wife withal. Her Answer was, that my Love was not so
hot as I pretended, since I could so well consider of the matter. This touched
me to the quick, and nothing in the World is more frail than a Lover, I was
ensnared deeper than ever.

But there happened something which had almost set me at Liberty, when I least
expected it. A Curate of a Neighboring Parish belonging to Monsieur de
Courtilloles his Lordship, had a Brother a Widower, who had scraped together an
Estate of about 150 Pounds per Annum, and was desperately in Love with this
young Gentlewoman, whose Name was Launay. This being looked upon as an
advantageous Match for one that had nothing, the Curate had no sooner spoke of
it to Madam de Curtilloles, but she told him, that his Brother might be assured
he should meet with a good Reception. And believing that the Gentlewoman, who
otherwise had cunning enough, would not refuse so advantageous an offer, she
told her what answer she had given to the Curate, unto which she carelessly
replied, that she would not Marry a Scoundrel, if he had a Thousand Pounds a
Year.

Madam de Curtilloles did what she could to persuade her that she was in the
wrong to slight him, there being nothing more comfortable than a good Estate;
and that a Gentlewoman without a Portion, was in a worse condition than one of
a meaner Rank; but all these Considerations made so little Impression upon Mrs
Launay, that she would not so much as see her Suitor, though he was come a good
many Miles, on purpose to declare his Love to her. Madam de Curtilloles
addressed her self to me, telling me, that she believed her Woman to have some
deference for me, and that if I could persuade her to accept of the Match, she
would look upon it as a particular Obligation. But she happened to choose the
worst Match-maker she could have pitched upon in this case; for as her denial
had raised my Love to the highest pitch, I was so far from persuading her to
follow her Mistrisses Counsel, that on the contrary I told her, that she could
oblige me no better than to leave the House, if they persisted to force this
Match upon her; which she promised me to do, and was as good as her word. For,
perceiving that her Mistress had smelt the Rat, concerning our Intrigue, and
upon that score was more urgent with her than before; she went to an Unkle's
House of hers, by the Mothers side, who was Curate of a Town, about seven or
eight Leagues distant from thence. I followed her immediately, and being now in
love over Head and Ears, I married her with the consent of her Uncle; whom, for
fear he should make any opposition, I had put upon by forged Certificates
concerning my Age; and thus we soon met with a Neighboring Curate, who without
much examining the matter, coupl'd us together. This being over, it was the
advice of her Uncle, that I should absent my self for a little while, to see
how my Father would digest the matter. Accordingly I went to a Relation of
mine, by my Mothers side, whose Name was Savonnieres. He was a Man of Pleasure,
which made me pass my time very merrily there, most of our time being spent, in
visiting some times one, sometimes another Person of Quality. One time as we
paid a Visit to the Marquess du Bellai at Giseux, we found him much out of
Humor, by reason of a difference betwixt the Duke de Brissac and him, near
whom he had a very fine Seat, called Thouarsai. The Quarrel first arise about
the Privilege of Hunting, and the Duke de Brissac had used some of his
Game-keepers very scurvily. Whereupon the Marquess desired Savonnieres, who was
his Cousin German, to go and carry a Challenge from him to the Duke de Brissac.
But Savonnieres told him, that he knowing him to be his near Kinsman, he would
certainly avoid seeing him; and that therefore it would do much better if I,
who was not in the least known to him, did undertake the thing.

The Marquess being well satisfied with his Answer, we all three together
mounted our Horses, and so to his Seat of Thouarsai we went, from whence I was
sent the next morning to the Duke of Brissac. As soon as I saw him, I told him
that being a Gentleman of this Country, I was come to pay my respects to him;
upon which he bid me Welcome; and it was not long before I had the opportunity
to speak to him alone, and to tell him, that in effect I was not come to him
upon a Compliment, but that the Marquess de Bellai, expected to meet him with
Sword in hand; That he had one Gentleman more besides my self with him, who
were to be his Seconds, and that therefore he might appear there with the like
number. The Duke de Brissec asked me if I knew who he was, and how I durst talk
to him at that rate. I told him that I was not Ignorant that he was a Duke and
Peer of France; but that at the same time it was my opinion, that his Quality
could not exempt him from giving satisfaction to a Gentleman of that Quality,
as he was, unto whom the Injury was done by him. I told him further, that the
Princes of the Blood, whose Quality was Superior to his, did not think it below
themselves to give satisfaction upon such like occasions, and that I supposed,
he needed not be ashamed to follow their example. He was extremely angry at
these Words, and whether he really thought he was in the right, or whether for
want of Courage he began to talk very big, and told me, that if he should Treat
me according to my Deserts, he would have me thrown out of the Windows; but
that he would Pardon me for this time in respect of my Youth. He spoke these
Words very loud, so that perceiving his Servants to come about him, I thought
best to get on Horseback again, which I did, and gave the Marquess de Bellai
an account of the ill success of my Commission.

The Marquess being Vehemently Exasperated at the slighting answer of the Duke,
did vent part of his Anger upon two of his Game-keepers, who unfortunately met
him in a little while after; for they were soundly Bastinado'd by us, and to
give them to understand, that it was not done but premeditately, we told them
that they should be sure to tell their Master, who they were, that had handled
them thus. The Duke made his Complaints to the Marshals of France, supposing to
receive a more Ample satisfaction from their hands; than if he had Summoned us
in any of the Inferior Courts. The Marquess de Bellai and Monsieur Savonnieres
were accordingly Summoned up to Paris, to answer the Complaint made against
them, and strict Orders were sent to both Parties to abstain from all manner of
Violence in the mean while. I for my part escaped without any further trouble,
as being unknown both to the Duke and the Game-keepers. But before the Term
appointed in the Summons was expired, Monsieur Savonnieres, returned to
Angiers, near which place he dwells. There lived at that time a Gentleman of
the Family of Beautru, of Five Hundred Pounds a Year in that City, who having
but one only Daughter Savonnieres, who did not know that I had entangled my
self before, did propose me as a fit match for her; and the better to compass
his purpose, he told her Father many Advantageous things both of my Estate and
Person: But some People having told the Gentleman that my Fathers Estate was in
no wise answerable to what Monsieur Savonineres pretended it was, this match
came to nothing; though soon after his Daughter made a very bad bargain of it;
for both he and she were caught in the Trap by a Stranger, who managed his
matters so dexterously, that I cannot forbear to give a short account of it
here.

This unknown person who went under the name of the Baron de Casenavre made a
great Figure at Angiers, keeping three Servants, a Valet du Chamber, and two
Footmen. He was Originally from Bearn, and as they are at Angiers well used to
strangers, (it being an University) so no body was over curious to enquire
either into his Extraction or Estate; supposing either of them to be suitable
to his way of Living, which gave him the opportunity to be admitted into all
the Ladies Company whom he used frequently to Visit, and among the rest the
Daughter of Monsieur de Beautru, upon whom he had a design, as being the
Richest of them all. He was a very handsome young Fellow, so that the young Lady
showed so much Inclination for him, that he soon gained his end. To be short,
she proved with Child, and when he thought himself sure of it, he went to the
Provost-Marshal of the City, whom he had made his Friend on purpose to serve
him upon occasion; and told him, that being forced to depart immediately he
thought he should have committed a gross Error, if he had not first bid him
farewell, and given him thanks for the many Courtesies he had received from him.

The Provost wondering what could make him take so sudden a Resolution, asked
him, What could be the meaning of it, since he had not mentioned the least
thing of it the day before when he saw him; and how was it possible for him to
part so suddenly with his Mistress, for whom he had hitherto showed so much
Passion? The Baron desired him, not to insist upon that Subject, because he
could not say what he ought of it. This having raised a more than ordinary
Curiosity in the Provost, he urged the matter so home to the Baron, that he
judging it now to be the nick of time to speak, he told him, that if he would
promise him secrecy, he would disclose the whole matter to him. The Provost
having engaged his Word, the Baron told him, that the reason of his leaving
Angiers was, because he had loved the Person, they spoke of, too much; that he
loved her as much as ever he did, and that he was sure he should never cease to
love her whilst he lived: But that he had a Mother alive, without whose consent
he durst not Marry: That she was likewise bent to Match him with a Lady of
Quality, and that therefore he was sorely afraid she would never consent he
should Marry this young Lady; That she being big with Child he saw himself
under a necessity to depart without taking his leave from any body for fear of
worse Consequences: That his Resolution was, if by any means possible he could
obtain his Mothers consent to Marry her, he did protest to him upon his Honor,
he would return immediately, he being not of the same opinion with his Mother,
but that a young Lady of indifferent Quality, whom he loved was to be preferred
before one he did not love, though of the highest Rank.

After some little time, which was spent in such like discourses, having taken
his farewell, the Provost got himself dressed immediately, and away he went to
the young Lady's Fathers House, whom he found asleep; but being awakened, he
gave him the whole recital of the Matter. The Father much surpised, desired
the Provost to keep his Emissaries ready to mount on Horseback; however,
before they sent them abroad, they thought it most advisable to make a strict
enquiry, whether his Daughter was really with Child; for, says he, without
that, I should not be so forward to Marry my Daughter to a Stranger, but rather
near home. Thus they went into the young Ladies Chamber, whom they roused out
of her sleep, and the Provost, by the Father's Order, told her, that the Baron
de Casenavre was returned all on a sudden to his own Country, without an
intention to come any more to Angiers; That if therefore she was sensible that
something more than ordinary had passed betwixt them, she would do well to let
her Father know before it was too late.

There needed no more to make the poor Lady to confess the whole Truth, she
burst out immediately into Tears, and throwing her self at her Father's Feet,
she Conjured him to forgive her this Fault, into which she was drawn by her
Credulity; that the Baron had promised to Marry her, and that if it were true
that he would never return, she had no other way left her but to retire into a
Nunnery. This was the Signal for the Provost to pursue the Baron, who being
overtaken at about Two Leagues, from the Town, seemed as if he were extremely
surpised to see him come after him, with his Men at his Heels. He clapped his
hands to his Pistols, upbraiding the Provost with Treachery in divulging his
Secret, but being surrounded and seized, he told them, that he hoped to meet
him one time or another, when he had not ten to one against him, and that he
would endeavor to be even with him. Thus they returned to the City, and scarce
had they been a quarter of an hour at the Provost's House, but his Mistresses
Father appeared, and asked the Baron, whether he would deal handsomely with his
Daughter, or else they must find a way to make him; That there was but two
ways, either to go to Prison or else to Marry his Daughter. The Baron who was
resolved to act his Part to the utmost in this Comedy, answered, That he loved
his Daughter to that degree, as to wish for nothing so much as to make her his
Spouse, and that he would engage his Honor never to marry any other but her;
but that the only thing he desired was, to send one along with him to procure
the Consent of his Mother, or that at least they would delay the matter so
long, till he could Write to, and have an Answer from her.

The young Ladies Father, who was afraid that this delay might prove dangerous
to his Daughter's Honor, if the thing should take vent, told him he could
consent to neither, that when the thing was done he did not question his
Mother's approbation, because his Daughter was likely to be Heiress to at least
ten Thousand Pounds, and that such Portions were but seldom to be met with at
Bern. The Baron who desired no more than this, having at last given his
consent, the Marriage was consummated immediately to the satisfaction of both
Parties. But the Baron having both before and since his Marriage made great
brags of his Estate, his Father-in-law was mighty desirous to go with him into
his own Country; so that he was once more forced to put all the wit he had to
work to dissuade him from that Journey: He told him therefore, that it would
not do well for them both to leave his Wife alone, who perhaps might be brought
to bed in the mean while; and that it would be the much better way, to send his
Brother along with him to Bearn.

This Brother, you must know, was a good Fellow, who loved his Cup better than
his Business, he being a Counselor at Angiers. The Baron's Father-in-law being
prevailed upon to let his Brother go with his Sonin-law, they both set forward
together, and lived very, merrily upon the Road. A little after their Arrival
at Bern, (which was about a League distant from the pretended Seat of the
Baron) there came two Gentlemen who bid them welcome to Town, and showed
abundance of Respect to the Baron. From thence they Conducted him and the
Counselor to a very handsome Seat, which passed for his own, where there was an
Ancient Matron to receive them, who embraced him as her Son, and all the
Servants paid him the same Respect as their young Master. The Table-Cloath
being laid, they made good Cheer, and the Counselor got so Drunk, that they
were forced to lay him in Bed. In the mean while the Baron had leisure given
him to instruct them more fully in every thing he had writ to them before. He
told them that he had Married a young Lady of a great Fortune; that the Person
whom they had seen was her Uncle, who was come on purpose to take an Account of
his Family and Estate; That it would be no difficult matter for them to make
him believe what they pleased, for Provided they plied him well with Wine, he
would not trouble himself much further; That the only thing they had to manage
was, that whenever he should talk to his pretended Mother, concerning his late
Marriage, she must seem very averse to it, till by the Intercession of a Friend
of his she should be prevailed upon to give her approbation after some time.

Matters being thus concerted betwixt them, they found out a Cunning Fellow,
who should wait on the Counselor at his Levy, as if he came to pay him a Visit
as a Stranger. This Spark Acted his part so well, that as soon as the
Counselor happened but to mention the Baron's Name, he began to extol him to
the Sky, but above all things spoke Wonders of his vast Estate, so that the
Uncle, who was pretty hot headed as yet, was wonderfully proud of his Nephew.
At that very moment the Baron entered the Counsellor's Chamber, where to
Breakfast they went, and drinking good large Bumpers, they set the Counselor
in again for that day. They continued the same Course for three Weeks together,
whilst they stayed in the House; so that the Uncle had no opportunity to speak
to any body, but who was taught his Lesson before. The conclusion of the Play
was, that the Baron speaking to his Mother concerning his late Match, she acted
her part so dexterously, that this served as the chiefest confirmation to the
Counselor, of the opinion he had conceived before, of his Nephew's Quality and
Estate. For to complete the whole, she told him, that since he had been pleased
to marry himself without her consent, she could not prevent what was done; but
that to make him sensible of his Error, she was resolved to give him nothing
till after her Death, which she should never have thought on, if he had asked
her consent before his Marriage.

The Baron appeared much afflicted at it, and could not forbear to utter his
Complaints to his Uncle, who was fain to comfort him; telling him, that his
Mother being very Ancient, he needed not fear, but that he would e're long be
Master of the whole Estate. They left Bearn a few days after, the Baron
pretending it was impossible for him to stay longer from his Spouse: When they
returned to Angiers, they were joyfully received by the whole Family, who had
already had an Account of every thing by the Counsellor's Letters; which he
afterward confirmed to them by word of Mouth, as believing the whole to be
nothing but truth. The whole City and Adjacent Country rung of the great Match
of Monsieur de Beautru's Daughter. Her Father died soon after, and some said it
was for Joy. But as things will come out one time or other, it was at last
discovered; that this Baron was only a younger Brother, who had no other
Fortune but his Sword, and that his Estate and Riches were only in imagination.
The Uncle was jecr'd wherever he came, to have been thus imposed upon; but he
did not much matter their Words, as long as he had his full share of good Wine.
This may serve as an Instance that Marriages with Strangers are to be avoided,
there being scarce one in a hundred that succeeds well. Not but that the Baron
was a very honest Gentleman as to his Person, but as for his Estate he had
nothing to brag of.

Monsieur Savonnieres being by this time to make his appearance before the
Marshals of France at Paris, I was fain to look out for fresh Quarters, because
my Father would not be reconciled to me as yet. I met with very good ones, at a
Gentleman's House near Chateaugontier; and being gone abroad one day a hunting
with two of his Sons, the eldest of which was much of my Age, we saw at some
distance a Messenger in a Forest, conducting two Prisoners to Paris, one of
whom was a young Man of about two and twenty, the other a young Woman of about
eighteen Years of Age. We made all the haste we could to come up with them, to
see them, and to know their Crime. We asked the young Woman, who was very
genteel, what was the matter with her and the young Man? She answered us with
tears in her Eyes, that he was her Brother, that they were both condemned to
Death, and that they had deserved it. They would give us no further account,
but one of the Provost's Men told us, that they had lain together, which was
the occasion of their present Calamity. We pitied them extremely, and having
taken a resolution to save them, we told the Provost's Men, that if they did
not immediately take off their Fetters and Chains, we would treat them very
scurvily, and told them that we were strong enough, because we had at some
little distance, three Servants more with two Fuzee's. But they looking upon
this only as a Rhodomontado, told us, that if we did meddle with them, it would
be to our cost, which we mattered but little; and cocking our Pistols at them,
bid the Messenger to unlock the Padlock of the Chains, which were fastened to
their Feet, and went under the Horses Bellies. He told us, that not he, but one
of the Provost's Men had the Keys of them; and having showed us the Person, we
commanded him to unlock them. He refused to comply, which made one of the
Gentlemen knock him down with the But end of his Fuzee, the rest seeing us in
earnest betook themselves to their Heels, so that he was forced to unlock the
Chains, and we delivered the two Prisoners, whom we conducted to these two
Gentlemen's Father's House, who was very angry with us, as fearing that this
might prove the occasion of great trouble to us.

But the Mother, who was moved with Compassion to them as well as we, got the
young Woman in the Night time conveyed to Fontrevaure, where she had a Sister
that was a Nun; and the young Fellow she sent to a neighboring Gentleman, who
was listing of Soldiers, and might have the opportunity to convey him to a
place of Safety.

We were so fortunate as to hear no more of the Business; the Judges after they
had examined the Provost's Men, being not very forward to prosecute the matter
any further, out of Compassion to the two Condemned Persons. However, I thought
it the surest way for me, not to stay much longer in this place, for fear of a
bad Issue; and therefore went to a Gentleman's House, whose Name was Naze, and
lived betwixt Lude and Samur. One day a Friend of his called Noyer coming to
see him, and understanding that I was one who had nothing to lose, he pitched
upon me as a fit Instrument to assist him, in carrying away a certain young
Widow, whom he pretended to be in Love with. There were two other Gentlemen,
whose Names were St. Bonnets, that were to be concerned in this matter, and the
Marquess de Courcelles, Brother-in-law to the Marshal de Villeroy, offered us
his House for a safe retreat, and lent his Coach, for the more commodious
carrying off of the Lady. We went accordingly to her own House, and as she was
coming down Stairs with one of us who had given her a Visit, we took her up and
hurried her into the Coach. Monsieur de Noyer begged her pardon for this
Outrage, the fault of which he laid upon the excess of his Love; that he should
never have had boldness enough to make such an attempt, if he had not been
informed that her Relations were urging her every day to prefer one Turpin
before him, who indeed had a better Estate, but was not by far of so good a
Family, neither had he the same respect for her Person: Thus we carried her to
the Castle of Courcelles, where they stayed fourteen Days, during which time
they constantly Eat, Drank and Bedded together.

In the mean while Turpin had taken out Warrants against them, in the Name of
her nearest Relations, and the Provost of Man was sent with his Followers to
take us up, but durst not venture to come into the Castle of Courcelles,
knowing our Company to be too strong for him there. The Widow was so cunning,
as to persuade Monsieur du Noyer, with whom she lived very lovingly in all
outward appeara(...) that if he would, but let her go to her Relatio(...) would
soon put a stop to all these Proceedings, by declaring that what had been done,
was transacted with her own consent. Monsieur de Courcelles and his Lady, who
had seen her Caress Monsieur du Noyer to the highest degree, and who had heard
her say frequently, that she was overjoyed the thing had happened thus, not
imagining any deceit in the matter* were of opinion to consent to her going.
But she was no sooner got out of our Clutches, but the first time she talked
with Turpin, she told him, that if he held still his resolution of marrying
her, she would stand to every thing he had done. Turpin swore that he had no
other Intention; upon which, in lieu of performing her promise to us, she was
the first that made her Complaints both against Noyer, and all the rest who had
been aiding him in the matter: She sent also several Provosts with Warrants
after us, in the Country to take us; so that thinking it our best way to seek
for refuge elsewhere, and knowing that Monsieur de Courcelles had likewise been
Summoned to appear upon the same account, we left his House. Monsieur du Noyer
parted from us, and absconded in some Friends House, till he found means to
accommodate the matter under hand with Turpin, who had now Married the Widow.

Turpin having acquitted Noyer for a Sum of Money, he pretended the like from
each of us, but as that did not agree with our present Circumstances, so we
resolved not to part, but to make head against the Provosts and their
Followers. There was one among our Company who owed a spite to the Provost of
Ferte Besnard, who was the chief Man that had undertaken the Business; and
being resolved to be revenged upon him at any rate, he found means to give the
Provost to understand, that he with only one more were in an Inn, in the Town
called Marolles en Beauce, whereas, in lieu of two there were a dozen of us.
The Provost not suspecting the matter, entered the Inn with four more of his
Followers, leaving four or five more at the Out Gates, for fear we should make
an escape, and he was very careful to lock the Doors, through which he entered,
behind him, and thus put his Neck himself in the Noose. We soon disarmed him,
the very sight of so many of us, having robbed him of all his Senses.

It was his ill Fortune to fall into the Hands of a Company of young hair
brained Fellows, and who besides that bore him a grudge, so that those four of
his Followers that entered the Room with him, had their Ears cut off: But the
Provost himself did not escape so well, for we would not part with him till we
had made him a true Eunuch. It happened just, that we had a Surgeon in our
Company, who was fain to abscond, because he had killed his Brother-in-Law, and
it was he who gave the main stroke to rob the poor Fellow of his Manhood; but
did it however with so much dexterity, that the Provost escaped with Life; and
I understood that he was yet living, about five or six Years ago.

But being sensible, that we must expect to be most severely prosecuted, the
two St. Bonnets resolved to take us along with them into their Castle, which
being very strong, we might be in a Capacity to defend us, against those that
should attempt to take us; and a good number of such as were under the same
Circumstances as we, flocked to us every day, to shelter themselves from
Justice. But it was not long before we saw our selves besieged by the
Vice-Bailiff of Chartres assisted by the Neighboring Provosts and their
Followers. But we fired so briskly upon them, that having killed some of their
Men, they withdrew without the reach of our Fuzees, thinking to force us to a
Surrender by Famine; but as we had foreseen this Design, so we had made good
Provisions of all Necessaries, both for our Defense and Subsistence.

Seeing therefore, there was but little likelihood for them to succeed in their
Enterprise, they dispersed, intending to surprise us by some Stratagem or
other. We began to consult what was best to be done, and it being carried by
the Majority that we should not separate, this being the way to be taken one
after another; the next thing we had to consider was, how to get Subsistence.
The last Siege had been continued for six Weeks, in which time we had consumed
most of our Provisions; which convinced us, that if they should give us such
another Visit, we should want both Provisions and Ammunition. Several
Expedients were proposed; but the best we could pitch upon was, to put the
Neighboring Country under Contribution, as it is commonly done in time of War.
This being agreed upon by all, we made a Roll of all such Places, as were to
pay us contribution; nay we sent the same Day some Parties abroad in the
Country to Levy them; and I laid hold of this opportunity to get rid of this
Company, foreseeing that nothing but Destruction could attend such a Rash and
Treasonable Attempt. But I was very careful in disguising my Intention; for I
told them, that I intended only to see my Father, to provide my self with some
Necessaries.

After I had left the Castle and this Company of Banditti's, I hid my self in
the day time in the Woods, and traveled only in the Night, till I thought my
self out of danger. But there is no security for those who are pursued by a bad
Conscience, which made me resolve to leave the Kingdom, or at least retire to
some remote Garrison, where I might live in hopes to escape that punishment I
had deserved. With this Intention I came to my Father's House, to bid him
farewell; but not finding him at home, I told my Sister, that it would be a
great while before I should see her again, desiring her to let me have a little
Money and a few Shirts, but she was so hard hearted as to refuse me both; thus
I parted much dissatisfied with her, being convinced that she is a very
ill-natured Creature. I met afterward with the Marquess de Grancey, (who since
died Commander in Chief of a Squadron of Ships) who had some knowledge of me,
having seen me with one of the Captains in his Regiment, who is a Kinsman of
mine. I desired he would take me along with him, pretending some business at
Thionville, where his Regiment lay in Garrison, which he did accordingly.

But before I go further to tell you what became of me afterward, I cannot
pass by in silence the destiny of that Company I had left, and how far I am
indebted to God's Mercy, for having put it into my thoughts* to leave these
Desperadoes. The Exactions and Tyranny's they exercised, by their Parties sent
abroad from the Castle, in the very heart of the King's Dominions, and in the
very sight of Paris, having soon reached the King's Ears; and a thing of this
nature being looked upon as insufferable, a Detachment of the Guards was sent,
with some of the Grand Musketeers to reduce this Rebellious Crew. I don't know
whether they had foreseen the Storm, but certain it is, they appeared not in
the least discouraged at it. Despair was now to supply what they wanted in
Courage; thus they defended themselves to a miracle, refusing to hearken to a
Surrender. But after they had valiantly defended themselves for a considerable
time, they were sensible they could not resist the Assault, which* they
expected to be given every Moment. Seeing themselves reduced to this extremity,
they laid a Barrel of Gunpowder under one part of the Castle, and as they
retired from Chamber to Chamber, they were pursued by the most forward of the
Guards, when watching their opportunity, they set Fire to the Barrel of Powder,
and so blew both themselves and their Enemies up into the Air. A Sister of
Monsieur de St. Bonnets was among them, the Love she bore to the Chevalier de
Nossay, whom she was to have been Married to, having blinded her to that
degree, as to choose the same Fate with her intended Spouse.

I was in the mean* while at Thionville, but in a very desperate Condition, the
late Peace taking away from me all hopes of making my Fortune in this Place, as
by my late actions I was debarred from returning to my own Country. But God
Almighty, to whose Mercy I owed every thing before, and who, as it seems, had
preserved me for something better, sent to Thionville the Prince of Courland,
who happened to pass that way as he was returning from Italy into his own
Country. He was not above twenty Years of Age, and having seen me several times
at the Marquess de Grancey's, who was then Governor of Thionville, he took
such liking to me, that he resolved to take me along with him into Courland.
His Father was alive, who being a Prince that managed his Revenue with a great
deal of Prudence was very Rich in Money, which he improved by Traffic. A War
being at that time kindled betwixt the Emperor and the Turks, he had made a
Treaty with the Emperor to furnish him with 4000 Men. He put his Son at the
Head of these Troops, so that this young Prince, who had before made me his
Gentleman of the Horse, bestowed besides this upon me a Commission of Ensign of
his Guards. We joined the Emperor's Forces about the middle of the Campaign, in
the Year 1664. When also the French Auxiliaries arrived in the Camp, being the
day before the Battle fought near St. Godard.

The Turks were encamped on the other side of the River ^aab, near a little
City called St. Godard, their Design-being to pass that River; which made the
Imperialists Advance as near as they could to observe their Motion. The French
were Posted in the left Wing, under the Command of the Duke de la Fevillade,
the French General, the Count de Coligni being at the same time so much
afflicted with the Gout, that he was forced to stay behind in a Village. There
was no great Prospect of any sudden Action, there being not the least
probability that the Turks would Attempt to pass the River in sight of an Army
not much Inferior in Number to theirs. But the Grand-Vizier having caused his
Cannon to(...) planted upon the very banks of the River, the L(...) de la
Fevillade took this opportunity to give some Proof of his Valor and Conduct in
the absence of his General. He ordered two Hundred French Horse to swim over
the River, with express Orders to their Commander, to Nail up the Cannon of a
Battery, which galled his Soldiers, which was bravely executed before the
Turks were able to prevent it.

The Infidels having been convinced by this Action, that they could not expect
any great success on that side where the French were Posted, resolved to lay a
Bridge over the River near the German Quarter, on which they were at work all
that night; knowing that the Imperialists had been extremely fatigued all the
Campaign, they did not question but to surprise them; which succeeded so well,
that twelve Thousand passed the River before the Imperialists had any notice of
it: So that being Charged furiously by the Turks they were brought into
Confusion. The Duke de la Fevillade was no sooner advertised of what had
happened upon the Right Wing, but he marched straight to their Relief, and at
the same time Commanded a Detachment to ruin their Bridge, to prevent the rest
from passing the River that way.

This Detachment, which was in no small danger of having been overpowered by
the Enemy was seconded so seasonably by fresh Forces, that notwithstanding the
vigorous Resistance made by the Enemy, they broke the Bridge. The swiftness of
the Current did indeed contribute much to the executing of their Design* for as
soon as they had broke down some part of it* the rest was carried away by the
violence of the Stream. The Turks being now without any hopes of being
seconded, he Charged them at his ease, and the Imperialists had thereby leisure
given them to rally, so that these 12000 Turks were no longer able to stand the
brunt, but betook themselves to Flight; the most of them were drowned, as they
were endeavoring to re-pass the River, very few of them that were on this side
escaping with their Lives.

This Victory proved the occasion of the following Peace betwixt these two
Empires. The most were of opinion, that it would be for the Emperor's Interest
to pursue his Victory; but it seems he had conceived such a Jealousy, at the
bravery the French showed in that Days Action, that setting aside all other
Considerations, he thought it best to send them forthwith back, which induced
him to conclude a Truce with the Turks for a good many Years. The Prince of
Courland was likewise Discharged with his Troops* but they were not disbanded
by their Prince; partly because the Muscovites were in motion upon the
Frontiers, and partly because there was great appearance of a Rupture, betwixt
Holland and the Bishop of Munster; and the Duke of Courland, (the Father of
him, who brought me along with him out of France) did wisely consider, that he
might treat about these Troops, with either of these two Parties, in case he
should have no occasion for them himself.

Knowing my self a Stranger in this Country, I thought it to be my Interest to
look about for some Friend, whose Authority might be able to support me in a
Court, where, as well as in all others* Strangers are not looked upon with a
good Eye, if they are preferred before the Natives: It was upon this account I
made my Addresses to the Governor of the young Prince, whose Name was
Vanaubin, and, who besides this, was President of the Council. He was a Person
of great Integrity, and very obliging; and I must own, that I met with a very
kind Reception from him. He had two very handsome Daughters, who learned to
Dance from a French Master, who came every day to their House. The Prince had a
Niece, whose Name was Princess Sophia Emilia; she used often to come and see
these two young Ladies, with whom she frequently passed her time in Dancing.
The Dancing Master having told her once, that he saw a certain Frenchman go
into Vanaubin's House, who Danced very well; the Princess was no sooner
Informed, that it was the Cornet belonging to her Cousins Guards, but she sent
me word, that I should come to wait on her. Vanaubin seeing one of her Servants
speak to me, asked what he wanted with me; and having told him, without the
least reserve, what Errand he came upon, he was the first who advised me to go
immediately, because perhaps the Princess Sophia had a mind to Dance with me.
And it proved just as he told me, for she so much delighted in Dancing, that as
often as she went to Monsieur Vanaubin's Daughters, she would be sure to let me
know, that I might not fail to be there.

In the mean while, the Muscovites began to give every day more and more
Umbrage to this Court; which made Vanaubin, (who had heard me say, that one of
the Chief Ministers of the Czar was my Countryman) advise the Duke to send me
into Muscovy. My Commission was to endeavor to prevent an Invasion from the
Muscovites, by the assistance of this Minister. He was a Frenchman by Birth,
his Name was Desjardins, being Cousin German to Mademoiselle Desjardins, who
has made her self known in France, by several of her pieces of Gallantry. He
very favorably received my Proposition, and a Truce was concluded betwixt
these two States for two Years* during which time, the Differences about the
Limits, might be brought to a fair Accommodation, it being impossible to be
done at present, because the Czar was somewhat crazed at that time.

After my return from Muscovy, the Duke showed himself so extremely well
satisfied with my Negotiation, that he dispatched me forthwith into Holland, to
offer to the States General, who were Engaged in a War with the Bishop of
Munster, the same 4000 Men, that were not long before returned out of Hungary.
They did not think fit to accept of them, being in hopes of a considerable
Succor from his Most Christian Majesty, who soon after sent them some Forces,
under the Command of Lieutenant General de Pondelles. I had Orders sent me, to
offer them likewise to the Bishop of Munster, in my return from Holland; but
the Bishop foreseeing, that by the powerful Assistance of France, he would soon
be obliged to make Peace with the Dutch, and knowing besides that they were not
offered to him, till after they had been refused by them, he gave us many
thanks for our kind offers. This Journey proving thus fruitless, I returned
into Courland, where in a little while after there happened an Accident, which
obliged me to leave that Country.

The Count de Ossane was fallen in Love with the before mentioned Princess
Sophia, whom he desired in Marriage. The Duke her Uncle did not disapprove of
the Match, but she could not love the Count, and did not stick to show her
aversion to him to all the World. She would sometimes make me take particular
notice of his odd Behavior. One Day the Count perceiving that we talked
together concerning him, he stayed till I had left the Princess, and then asked
me what it was she had told me. I answered, that we had talked nothing, but
about indifferent Matters. I soon observed that this Answer, was in no wise
satisfactory to him, for I heard him grumble as he went away from me, and the
next Morning he came very boldly into my Chamber. He was no sooner entered, but
he Bolted the Door after him; and told me, that he should not have stayed so
long to tell me his Mind, if last Night, when he spoke to me, there had not
been so many present to overhear him; That I was the occasion he met with so
ill a Reception from the Princess, and that he would make me repent it. After
this short Compliment he drew his Sword, and so did I to defend my self* seeing
that all what I could say in my Justification would not take place with him. He
was so overcome by his Passion, that he run Headlong upon my Sword: Some that
were in a Chamber under mine, being surpised at the Noise we made, came
running up Stairs, and forcing the Door, prevented any further Mischief.

The Difference there was betwixt us, especially in this Court, was looked upon
to be so great, that right or wrong I must come to the worse, he being
considered as one, who might be one Day the Duke's Nephew, whereas I was only a
poor Stranger, come there to seek my Fortune. And though it was sufficiently
manifest, that he had been the occasion of his own Misfortune. The Duke was so
much exasperated against me, that he would not so much as permit his Son to
speak in my behalf. He forbid me also to appear at Court any more, which the
Prince, who had a kindness for me, took so much to Heart, that he went to the
Count, and notwithstanding his Wounds* used very rough Language to him. His
Wound proved of no great consequence, but was soon cured, when he went to
Denmark* without taking leave from any Body; being not able to digest the
Affront, he pretended to have received from the young Prince, who had sided
with me against him. Besides, that he could no longer endure to be slighted by
a Princess, whom he intended to have made his Spouse.

As for my part, I received Orders from the young Prince, to stay for his
coming at Dantzick, where he promised to meet me in three Weeks time. He
intended to go with me from thence to the Court of the Marquess of
Brandenburgh, and to recommend me to that Prince. He came to Dantzick according
to his Promise, and we traveled from thence to Berlin, where the Elector was
pleased to make me immediately, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Horse,
belonging to the Electoral Prince his Son. This was a new raised Regiment,
which with some others, was to be sent into Holland. We were Employed in the
Sieges of Lockum and Dodecum, which were took from the Bishop of Munster, who
after having declared War to the States, had taken these Places in the Province
of Over-Yssel.

These two Sieges being carried on in the Winter Season, we were more pest^r'd
with the Snow, than with the carrying on of our Trenches. From thence our
Regiment was sent to Garrison in the Province of Gu^ldres; and I used
frequently to go to Arnheim, to see some Officers belonging to the French
Regiment of Estrades. I got into very good Acquaintance there, and among the
rest, was very well known to Monsieur de Gent Vice Admiral of Holland, who at
that time Courted Madam de Arnheim, whose Ancestors had been Sovereigns of the
City of that Name. On the Day of his Marriage there was a Ball at his House,
and some French Soldiers being refused Entrance, and guessing the reason of
this refusal, to have been their Soldier Dress, drew Lots among themselves,
which of them was to get in, to be revenged of them for the Affront given.
Accordingly, he whose Lot it was to undertake the Business, dressed himself in
a Gold-lac'd Coat, and being admitted into the House, he was no sooner entered
the Appartment where the rest of the Company was, but he pulled down his
Breeches, and showed his Posteriors to the whole Assembly. There was scarce any
body there, but who was for throwing him downrights out of the Window, but de
Gent would not consent to it, telling them, that some allowance ought to be
given to his Youth, and that perhaps he was much in Drink, that when he should
be Sober again, he would be ready to cut his own Throat for his Misdemeanour.

Thus by the Prudent Conduct of de Gent, this Matter would questionless have
passed over well enough, if Monsiieur d'Estrades the French Ambassador had not
been informed of the Matter. He wrote to the King about it, who ordered that
the Soldier should be made an Example, to deter others from such like
Undertakings. De Gent understanding that the Soldier was to be Tried by a
Court-Marshal, was so generous as to Interceed for him, with the French
Ambassador, who answered that his Hands were tied up, he having received
express Orders from the King, to have him Condemned to Die. He being
accordingly Sentenced to Death by a Court-Marshal, de Gent had much ado to get
a Reprieve for him, till such time he might see, whether he could obtain his
Pardon from the King. For which purpose, he writ to the Dutch Ambassador then
residing in France, who requested his Majesty to grant a Pardon to this
Soldier, adding that de Gent would have waited on His Majesty himself, if his
Station would have allowed him to go so far out of his own Country. The King
having at last granted his Pardon, he told the Dutch Ambassador, that the
Soldier owed his Life to de Gent, because he should scarce have granted what he
had done, to any body besides him.

The Bishop of Munster finding himself under a necessity to make Peace with the
Hollanders, by reason of the French Succors sent to their assistance, which
consisted in 6000 Men, chosen Troops, the same were now sent back into France;
but the Brandenburgh Forces, who pursuant to a Treaty made for that purpose,
were to be entertained both in time of Peace and War, remained in Holland. Our
Regiment was put in Garrison at Hertogenbush, a place Situate in Brabant, where
at that time, the Prince of Tarente, Eldest Son to the Duke of Treno^ville was
Governor. The Princess of Tarente had two Ladies of Honor, who were both very
handsome, and greatly admired by all the Officers, especially, because they had
a very clear Reputation, a thing more to be valued than Beauty. They had
nevertheless each of them their Gallants, but Madam..... had the most, her
languishing Looks being, besides a thousand other good Qualities, enough to
Charm all the World. As for Mrs. la Motthe her Companion, she was more lively
and brisk; and they lived as lovingly together, as if they had been own
Sisters. I had a most particular respect for Mrs......, which being taken
notice of by the Princess, she proposed a Match betwixt us two; and I for my
part would have been the readiest Man in the World to accept the offer, if I
had been in a Condition to raise her Fortune: But, besides that I had nothing
to trust to but my Place, and a small pittance of Money I had got whilst I was
in Courland; that which was the greatest obstacle to me, was the difference of
Religion, she being a Calvinist and I a Catholic; and being, according to the
Rules of my Religion, induced to believe that she could not be saved, I could
not impetrate from my self to Marry a Person, whom I must look upon as lost to
all Eternity, unless God would be pleased to take her into his peculiar Mercy.
The Princess of Tarente, who was likewise a Calvinist, did leave no Stone
unturned to bring me over to her Religion, making use of all the Perswasives
that could be upon such like an occasion; and employed several of my particular
Friends, in whom she knew I had a great confidence, to back her endeavors; but
I happily escaped all these Snares, though at the same time I was caught in
these of Mrs...... for I must confess, that I loved her to the highest degree,
but could not resolve to comply with what the Princess would have me do; Though
it be true at the same time, that Mrs de Launay, whom I had espoused in France,
was also in some measure the occasion of it, notwithstanding that I looked upon
that Marriage as invalid.

About that time the Duke of..... happening to pass through Hertogenbush in his
return from Italy, paid a Visit to the Prince and Princess of Tarente. He no
sooner saw Mrs..... but he fell as desperately in Love with her, as my self had
done before. Being now guided by his Passion, he stayed much longer than he
intended at first, and used often to visit these two Ladies in her Chamber,
where he would have stayed all day long, if Decency would have permitted him so
to do. At last he discovered his Passion to Mrs..... making all the
Protestations Imaginable, that his Love was not like that of many other Persons
of his Rank, but that he had so high an esteem for her Person and Merits, that
if she would rely upon his Honor he would Marry her, notwithstanding the
great inequality of their Condition: That all that he desired of her for the
present was, that she would confide so far in his Word and Honor, as to come
to him at....... where he would Marry her, before he would ask any Favor of
her: That if she would give him her Word so to do, he would send a Coach with
Six Horses to the Hague, which was to conduct her from thence into his Country;
but that he desired her, not to speak a word of it to the Princess of Tarente,
being unwilling she should know any thing of the Matter.

This Precaution, together with the Duke's Quality, created some Jealousy in
Mrs..... for fear she should be drawn into an Error, of which she might have
occasion to repent for ever after. She applied her self therefore to her
Confident Mrs. la Motthe, who advised her not to let slip so fair an
opportunity of raising her Fortune, being persuaded that the Duke was a Person
of more Honor, than to break his Word. The Princess de Tarente, would almost
every day ask both of them, what made the Duke be so often in their Chamber,
but did not in the least think of what passed there. In the mean while Mrs.....
was in a great perplexity what to resolve upon; judging that she could not,
without the greatest hazard to her Reputation, go to meet a Prince in his own
Country: She set before her Eyes, that in case he should happen to break his
word with her, she should be the general Discourse of all Europe, which needs
must impair her Reputation. But Mrs. la Motthe at last made her surmount all
these Scruples, so that she gave her word to the Duke to comply with his
Requests; who told her at parting, that each Moment she tarried here, was so
much time lost to complete his satisfaction. It was therefore agreed upon, that
the Duke was to send a Coach with Six Horses for her, and that as soon as she
had received News of their safe arrival, she was to go with Mrs. de la Motthe
to the Hague, under pretense of buying some Cloths: The Duke sent accordingly a
Letter from..... appointing the day when the Coach should be at the Hague; the
Letter being addressed to me, by the two young Ladies appointment, who also
made choice of me to conduct them thither.

I had no sooner received the Letter, but streightways I went to Mrs..... to
deliver it to her, who thereupon desired leave from the Princess, to go with
Mrs. de la Motthe to the Hague, to buy themselves some Necessaries: The
Princess having granted their Request, they were met at the Hague by the Duke's
Coach, attended by his Gentleman of the Horse and four Horsemen. After they had
taken Coach, I returned immediately to Hertogenbush, but said not a word to any
body of what I knew. No sooner where they arrived at..... but the Duke
performed his promise to Mrs...... whom he Married on the left Hand, as it is
usually done among Princes, and other Persons of an Eminent Rank, when they
Marry below their Quality. After he had Married her, he settled upon her the
Country of H..... by which Name she was known for a considerable time after.
But by he^ prudent Conduct, she got such an ascendant over the Duke and the
whole Country, that since he has actually Married her on the right Hand, so
that now she is Duchess of..... one of the most considerable Princesses of the
whole Empire. The States of the Country having in respect to her Person receded
from their Ancient Custom; and her Children will be Legal Heirs to their
Fathers Dominions. Mrs. de la Motthe had likewise her share in the good fortune
of this Lady, the Duke having Married her to a Scotch Colonel, upon whom he has
heaped many Favors. Thus they left the Princess of Tarente, who was extremely
surpised to understand what good Fortune was befaln them.

The good understanding which had hitherto been cultivated betwixt France and
the States General, began to abate by degrees, the last being grown jealous of
the Kings Power: For not long after he had assisted them against the Bishop of
Munster, he was entered Flanders, where meeting with no opposition from the
Spaniards, he had made several Conquests, which made the Dutch look upon them
with a Jealous Eye, for fear if he should make himself Master of the Spanish
Neitherlands, the next turn would be theirs. Seeing therefore themselves under
a necessity, for weighty Reasons of State to counterbalance the growing power
of this Monarch, they entered into an Alliance with England and Sweden, in order
to oblige him to make Peace with the Spaniards. The King who all that time was
not arrived to that pitch of Greatness he has appeared in since, was fain to be
contented with what Conquests he had made, rather than to engage himself in a
War, the Issue of which might perhaps have proved of dangerous consequence.

A Peace being thus concluded upon less advantageous Terms for France than if
they had not intermedled in the business, they resolved also to send home all
the rest of the Auxiliaries, that were remaining as yet in their Service; not
but that they were obliged, by virtue of a Treaty made with the Elector of
Brandenburgh, to keep these Troops in Pay, but Flattering themselves that they
should scarce have any occasion for them for a considerable time after: they
found means to make the said Elector take them again. Orders were sent us
accordingly, to get every thing ready for our March into Brandenburgh; but
before I left Holland there happened a very pleasant adventure to me, of which
I will give you an Account.

A certain French Lord, called the Count de Caravas, of the Family of the Dukes
of Rovanez, was Married in Holland to Madam Riperda, a young Lady of Quality in
the Province of Over-Yssel, and carried her into France, where Monsieur de
Riperda her Brother, came to see them. He soon fell in love with Madam de
Caravas his Brother in Law's Sister, who knowing him to be an Advantageous
Match, by reason of his great Estate, received his Addresses, without much
reluctance. There was only one Obstacle which did puzzle them for some time,
which was, that he was not of Age, and that his Father being alive, his whole
dependence was on him. But flattering themselves that in respect of her
Quality, and the near Alliance that was already betwixt the two Families, the
Father would be prevailed upon to give his consent, they were Married together.
The young Riperda returned not long after into Holland, where he Married
another at Hertogenbush, as if he had not left a Wife in France. This last
being an Actress by Profession, his Parents were so exasperated at it, that
they found means to send her away to the Indies.

Madam de Caravas, who had notice given her of the infidelity of her Husband,
and that he slighted her upon all occasions, nor would acknowledge her for his
Wife, resolved to go into Holland; and happened to arrive at the Hague much
about the same time that the young Riperda and I were diverting our selves
there. She had disguised her self in Men's Habit, as well as her Waiting
Gentlewoman, because they would not be known by any body. The first thing she
did was to send her Gentlewoman, who had all the appearance of a Gentleman to
Riperda, who told him, that he was sent by a certain Kinsman of Madam de
Caravas, that he was not Ignorant of her Quality, and could not but be sensible
of the Injury he had done her, to revenge which, he was resolved to meet him
with his Sword in hand. He answered this pretended Gentleman, that he need not
stay for an answer, but that he might tell Madam de Caravas her Kinsman, that
he should hear from him in two hours time at farthest. His design was to apply
himself to my Lord Webbenum his Uncle, who being President of the States, he
did not question by his Authority to have both these Challengers taken up.

It happened so that I came to see him within a Minute after, and seeing him
extremely discomposed, I managed him so long, till at last he told me the whole
Truth, and what his design was, for which I gave him a severe Rebuke; I told
him that this was the way to lose himself for ever in the opinion of all the
World, who would take him for a rank Coward if he should refuse to give
Satisfaction to these Gentlemen, who had Traveled 200 Leagues on purpose to
call him to an account. He pretended to give way to my persuasions, and sent me
to let them know that he would meet them at such an hour on the Seaside near
Shevelingen: But in Lieu of performing his Promise, he persisted in his former
design to have them Seized there; when I found what his design was, I went
straight ways to the place of appointment to give them notice of what was
likely to befall them, where I found them before me, but not in a condition to
Fight: For my Lord Webbenum had taken care to have them secured, which put them
upon the necessity of discovering their Sex and Quality, so they were set at
Liberty* but the same Webbenum procured an order from the States, enjoining
them to leave the Country. Madam de Caravas retired to Vianen a small
Soveraignity near Vtrecht independent in some measure from the Province of
Holland. From thence she writ a Letter to Monsieur de Estrade the French
Ambassador, complaining of the Affront put upon her, and desiring his
protection. Monsieur de Estrade, having made his Complaint to the States, she
had leave given her to return to the Hague. She sent a Summons to Riperda, to
show Cause, why her Marriage should not stand good; but having to deal with a
very Potent Adversary in a Country where she was a Stranger, she lost the Cause.

In a little while after I returned into the Country of Brandenburgh with all
the Troops of his Electoral Highness, that had been in the States service,
which amounted to about 4000 Men. I had my Quarters assigned me at Altenoe,
where one Frankenstein a Colonel of Horse, and a Gentleman of a very good
Extraction, whose Father had been Governor of the same place before him; He
had a younger Brother, who was Captain in the same Regiment and one Sister, who
lived in a kind of a Nunnery, such as they have among the Lutherans, which was
called Hegenhurst. She was not above fifteen Years old, and very handsome,
besides that she had a considerable Portion.

Not long after my arrival, I went to Berlin to appear at Court and pay my
respects to his Electoral Highness; who, as well as the Electoress, having
asked me where I was Quartered at present, I told her at Altenoe. The
Electoress had no sooner heard me speak these words, but she said to the
Elector, we must have him married with Mrs. Frankenstein; and then turning
toward me, she asked whether I knew her? I told her, I did not, but that I had
heard much of her. The Elector had given me several Proofs of his favorable
inclinations toward me, and being as it seems, willing to engage me for ever
in his Service, he spoke to me again at another time, concerning this Match,
and had the goodness to give me a Letter of Recommendation to the Abbess,
requiring her to let me visit the young Lady, and to assist me in my design; it
being his intention I should Marry the Lady. After my return from Berlin, I
went accordingly to visit her, and having found her in a good disposition, we
agreed among our selves upon the Match, for I desired her from the beginning
not to speak of it to any Body living, for fear her Brothers should endeavor
to obstruct our design.

We consummated the Match in a few days after, which being soon come to the
knowledge of her Brothers, who happened at that time to be in the Country of
Cleves, they returned with all speed to Altenoe, and threatened no less than
Death to me; neither did their Malice end in Threats, for they endeavored by
all means possible to make me hated by my Spouse, in hopes that when they had
executed their design; which was to take her away from me, she might be the
sooner disposed to consent to a dissolution of the Marriage.

This will perhaps appear somewhat strange to most People, it being scarce to
be imagined, how they could pitch upon such a resolution, since their Sisters
Honor must needs suffer by it. But besides that, Self-interest made them blind
to all other considerations, it is to be observed that in those Parts, if a
young Lady happens to have a mischance, she is not looked upon much the worse
for such a miscarriage; they being not so Nice in that point as we are, and
provided she prove Virtuous afterward the Husband never takes notice of what
is past.

I for my part, did make no great account upon what I heard told concerning the
Threatening Language of my Brothers-in-law, all the Answer I gave to those that
spoke of it to me, was, that if they did assault me, I did not question to make
my party good with them. This being told them again, they were more exasperated
against me than ever; so that having got notice that I was one time gone
abroad, the youngest Brother, who was the most violent against me, pitched upon
this as the most seasonable opportunity to enter my House, believing that the
Servants would not dare to oppose him. But my Gentleman, to whom I had given
express Orders to let neither of the two Brothers, nor any of their
acquaintance come into the House; seeing that, they opened the door to him, and
that he was making the best of his way to his Sister's Chamber, drew his Sword
to oppose him, crying out aloud to the rest of the Servants to come to his
assistance, their Master's Honor lying now at stake. My Brother-in-law was
almost Drunk when he entered the House, so that being hurried on by the violence
of his Passion, and the hot fumes of the Wine, he run himself upon my
Gentleman's Sword, and fell immediately upon the Ground, wallowing in his own
Blood. He had brought about seven or eight Troopers and Servants along with
him, who seeing him in this condition, took him up, and carried him to the next
Surgeon, who provided him a Bed, he being so Weak as not to be sent without
great danger to his own House.

The People who had always a particular kindness for that Family, surrounded my
House, and forcing the Doors laid hold on my Gentleman, whom they abused, beat,
and carried to Prison. My Brother-in-law dying within two days after, my
Gentleman was accused of Murder, which put me hard to it; for I looked upon it
as Barbarous to see my Servant Die having been Faithful to me, and on the other
hand, I was unwilling to disoblige my Spouse, who had engaged me not to
solicit his pardon. I pitched therefore upon a Medium, so as to avoid
displeasing her, and at the same time to preserve a Person whose Misfortune
proceeded only from having been too Faithful to me. I found means to get a Copy
of what had been Deposed against him, which I sent to the Marquess de Beauveau
Depence, who was my intimate Friend, and in great Esteem with the Elector. I
begged of him to speak to the Elector in my behalf, and to represent to him,
that I had Espoused my Wife upon his Recommendation, and that if my Servant
must suffer Death for having defended his Master's Honor, I could not expect
for the future to live in security my self. The Elector being informed exactly
of what had passed, discoursed the matter with Monsieur Fuchs President of his
Council, who being of the same Opinion with the Elector, that my Servant's
Misfortune had happened rather by a Mischance than any intended Malice; he sent
Orders to the Prison-keeper to let him go, before Sentence could pass against
him. Monsieur Depence ordered me at the same time to send him forthwith back
into France, without letting him as much as enter my House: This being his
Electoral Highnesses express Command, who had Pardoned him upon this Condition.
Accordingly I furnished him with what was necessary for his Journey, and gave
him besides this, a good Gratuity for the Service he had done me; but in lieu
of returning into France where he was born, he went to Brussels where he had a
Brother living who was Married in that place.

The late Monsieur Frankenstein, my Father-in-law, had, after the Death of my
Wife's Mother, Married a young Lady of Quality out of Denmark, who was a Cousin
German of his first Wife, but much handsomer than she, at least as I have heard
it said, for I never saw my Mother-in-law. She had got such an ascendant over
my Father-in-law, that he endowed her with all that he could, nay even with
more than he ought to have done; for he presented her with Jewels, Pearls, and
other such like things to a great value, which had been my Mother-in-laws; and
which she with his consent had left by her last Will to my Spouse. This last
Lady had been so cunning as to alter most of them, so as scarce to be known
again, hoping to defraud my Wife of them by this means; but some few Years
before I was Married to my Spouse, my Father-in-Law happened to die, whilst to
her Misfortune, she was just absent, and in Denmark; having left her Jewels and
a good Sum of Gold, which she had picked up since her Marriage, in a Cabinet.
The Eldest of my Wife's Brothers, who knew of the matter, and was much
dissatisfied at my Father's over-easiness, had not Charity enough to give her
notice of his sickness; but did not send her the least word till after he was
Dead, and whilst she was upon her Journey out of Denmark he laid hold of all
what she had hoarded up in the Cabinet, which at her return she found empty.
This occasioned a Lawsuit betwixt them, but wanting evidence to prove the
Matter against him, she was advised to let the Matter remain* in suspense.

My Brother-in-law being of a weak Constitution and Consumptive besides, he
resolved never to Marry, knowing that Marrying would be the readiest way to
hasten him to his Grave; yet he could not escape his destiny, for it was not
long after my Marriage, before he took his bed, and finding his Malady increase
past remedy, he was desirous to be reconciled to his Sister. She being sent
for, and come to his Bedside, he expressed his sorrow for what was past, and
at the same time delivered to her all the Jewels, and other precious Movables
he found in the Cabinet; telling her, that she need not scruple to receive
them, they having always belonged to the Family. He died in a few days after,
and my Mother-in-law renewed the Lawsuit against me, but being as destitute of
Witnesses, as she had been before, she let it drop once more.

After the death of my Wife's Brother, many put in for the Governor's place,
vacant by his death; and the Electoral Prince made use of his Interest for the
Count de Zolestine, who was his Favorite; for my part, I had not the least
thoughts of it, considering that what little Service I had done to His
Electoral Highness, could not in the least raise me to the pretension of such a
place as this. But as his Highness had showed me very evident marks of his
Favor upon several occasions before, so at this time he gave me the most
convincing proof of his goodness, beyond whatever I could have expected from
him; For he asked me in the presence of the whole Court, what was the reason
that I was the only person that did not put in for the Governors place which
had been in the Hands both of my Brother and Father-in-law, since, as being
their Heir, I had a more just pretense than others. I made a profound
Reverence, and at the same time told his Highness, That I had not the
Confidence to pretend to so great a Favor, thinking my self already Rewarded
beyond what I deserved, by what Favors he had been pleased to bestow upon me
before; but that I would lay hold of all opportunities to endeavor to show my
self not altogether unworthy of them. His Electoral Highness answered me, That
I ought to be no loser for my Modesty's sake, which deserving a proportionable
Reward, he would bestow the Government upon me; That I should continue to serve
him well, which would be an inducement to him, to heap upon me more Favors
than he had done before. This good Fortune, which came much beyond my
expectation, proved however the occasion that I was ever after looked upon with
a very ill Eye by the Electoral Prince, though against all Reason, as is apparent
from what I have said just now. However, before I proceed in the recital of my
Adventures, and what Reasons induced me to avoid his Anger, which I was afraid
one time or other might produce very ill consequences on my side; I judge it
not amiss to insert some passages relating to public Affairs, there being a
strict connection betwixt those Matters I am to relate in these Memoirs, and
them, by which it may appear, in what manner I conducted my Affairs in these
Junctures.

THE MEMOIRS OF JOHN BAPTIST De La Fontaine, Knight. LORD OF Savoy and Fontenay,
BRIGADIER and SURVEYOUR General in the French King's Army. LIB. III.
LEWIS the Great having for very weighty Reasons of State, taken a Resolution
to humble the Pride of the Dutch, entered into an Alliance with the King of
England, and some other Princes Bordering upon the Lower Rhine, to declare War
against them. There was not one of all the Neighboring Princes, but what was
very glad of this opportunity; and the Elector of Brandenburgh himself would
questionless have entered into this Alliance, if Reasons of State had not
over-ballanc'd his Inclinations, for he had indeed more Weighty matters of
Complaint against them than the other Princes, for they exercised a Sovereign
Jurisdiction in the most considerable Places of the Duchy of Cleves, whereas
by Contract, they were only to Garrison them for their own security: But
considering that they had already Enemies enough to humble them, it was not his
Interest to see them quite destroyed. He was also sufficiently convinced, that
when they saw themselves entangled in so burthensom a War, they would be under
a necessity of making their Applications to him; and that in that Juncture, it
would be more suitable to his Interest, to prevent than to promote their
Destruction. He knew that if he should engage in a War, without taking all the
necessary precautions, he might chance to be Attack d either by Poland or
Sweden; the first of which watched all opportunities to recover the Ducal
Prussia, the last to Conquer the remaining part of Pomerania. It was these
considerations were so prevailing with the Elector, that when the Dutch
solicited for Succors, he proposed such hard Conditions to them, that they did
not think fit to accept of them. For the Elector pretended no less than the
Restitution of all those places in the Duchy of Cleves, and the Dutch
flattering themselves with hopes to prevent the irruption of the French, (who
were not as then yet entered the Dutch Territories) by making their submission
to the King; or else to come to an Accommodation with the English, they would
not buy his Assistance at so dear a Rate, and thus the Treaty broke off. In the
mean while the Elector foreseeing that the Alliance betwixt France and England
was laid upon such a Basis and cemented by the common Interest of these two
Kings, that the same would not be easily dissolved, he sent his Minister to the
Imperial Court, to make exact observations, how the designs of France were
relished by the Emperor, and if he found that he began to be Jealous of this
French Irruption, to declare to his Imperial Majesty, that his Master was ready
to join his Forces with the Imperialists, to prevent the designs of the French.

The prodigious success which attended his most Christian Majesty's Arms, did
increase this Jealousy; for in six Weeks time, the Hollanders saw themselves
reduced to so low an ebb of Fortune, that all their passed Glory did appear no
otherwise than the Sun in an Eclipse. For the King had in the two Months of
June and July, in the Year 1672, taken from them above Forty strong Places,
some of which had held out formerly a great while, against very formidable
Armies. In the number of those, were those Places in the Duchy of Cleves,
belonging to the Elector of Brandenburgh; and as he would rather see them in
the Dutch than in the French hands, he showed more forwardness now to hearken
to the Propositions made to him by the Dutch, to march to their Relief.

The Emperor who took the French Conquests as much to heart as the Hollanders
themselves, did also join his Interest with theirs, the sooner to prevail upon
the Elector to come to their assistance. He promised that as soon as the
Elector's Troops were on their March, those of the Empire should be ready to
join them, by which means they hoped to coop up the French, their Army not
being very numerous upon the Rhine at that time, because they had dispersed
most of their Troops in the new Conquests. If the advice of the Prince of Conde
had taken place, who foresaw that this stupendous success would certainly
alarm those who were jealous of the French Power; most of these Places were to
have been dismantl'd, the Garrisons of which would have been sufficient to
bring two or three good Armies into the Field, which would have proved the only
means to keep the Neighboring Princes in awe, and to prevent their declaring
against France. But his advice being overrul'd by those of a contrary
Sentiment, this emboldned the Elector to take up Arms against the King, and a
Treaty was concluded betwixt him* the Emperor and Hollanders to succor one
another. The Elector's Army consisted of about 25000 Men, but for the most part
new Levies, not one half of them being old Troops. The Emperor's Forces were no
less numerous, and Commanded by Montecuculi, a General of great Reputation, and
who was grown old in the Exercise of the Art of War. In the Elector's Army
nothing was more talked of, than how they would swallow up the French Army,
which indeed was not then above ten or twelve Thousand strong, their Forces
being dispersed in so many Garrisons. Thus flushed with hopes of conquering all
before us, we marched as to an undoubted Victory. We entered Westphalia; that
part which belonged to the Bishop of Munster, who stood then in alliance with
France, and had no Forces in those parts to dispute our passage. The Elector
who Commanded in Person, took care to have an exact Discipline observed there,
being in hopes of bringing the said Bishop over to the Emperor's Party, whose
Subject he was. From thence we marched into the Elector of Cologne's
Territories, where we lived at discretion, pillaging where ever we came; This
Prince being supposed so firmly linked to the Interest of France, that nothing
but the total desolation of his Country, could separate him from it. We
besieged Werle, and as we were carrying on our approaches, Intelligence was
given us, that the Marshal de Turenne had passed the Rhine with 1^ or 14000
Men, all chosen Troops, to give us Battle.

The great renown of this General struck such a Terror among us, that though we
were at least as strong again, yet we raised the Siege, not without some
precipitation. Turenne marched after us, and the Elector drew back into the
Country of March, not believing that Turenne would follow him so far. In the
mean while he dispatched Messenger after Messenger to Montecuculi, to know the
reason why he did not come to join him. But some intestine Commotions in
Hungary, where a Conspiracy had been lately discovered against the Emperor, had
been the occasion that this General advanced but very slowly; and though he had
begun his March toward the Rhine, he did not march at any great distance from
Vienna. Turenne, who must pass the River Weser, before he could enter the
Country of March, took the Towns of Hamme, Zoest and Alset, situate upon the
said River; and having left in each of them a good Garrison, he passed the said
River, and marched toward us. We Entrenched our selves near the Banks of the
River Lip, unwilling to hazard a Battle, which gave him the opportunity to
make himself Master of Bielfeldt, Ravensburgh and Lipstadt, where he passed the
River Lip, driving us before him like a Herd of Sheep, as far as to the
utmost Frontiers of the Country of March.

From hence the Elector sent Monsieur de Beauveau Depence to Turenne, offering
to lay down his Arms, under condition that the King should withdraw his Troops
from his Territories, and restore to him the places belonging to him in the
Duchy of Cleves; that for the rest he would stand Neuter during this War, and
would renounce the Treaty made betwixt him and the Dutch. The King accepted
these Propositions* after his Troops had almost ruined the Country, where they
had taken up their Winter Quarters. I passed that Winter at Altenoe, where I
was seized with a most violent Fever, so that my Life being despaired of* I
prepared my self for Death, by receiving the Sacraments; but it pleased God to
dispose otherwise of me, and I was restored to Health, before the beginning of
the next following Campaign.

I was extremely rejoiced at the Peace made with the Elector, which delivered
me from that reluctance which I always found in my self to serve against my
King: For though I had married a Native of Germany, and had my Estate and a
considerable Employment there, yet what I did was against my Inclination.
Neither my two Children born there, neither the prospect I had of advancing my
Fortune, to a much higher degree than I could reasonably propose to my self in
France, were motives strong enough to hinder me from wishing frequently to
return into my own Country: And not to dissemble the truth, I had done it long
before, if the consideration of the ill state of my Affairs there, which had
made me leave France, had not retarded my resolution.

But my Joy did not last long. The Elector having been once more Entreated by
the Emperor to join his Forces with him, the troubles in Hungary being now
appeased, broke the Treaty so lately made with our King; and several others of
the German Princes, declared at the same time against him; so that if England
and the Elector of Bavaria had done like the rest, the Confederacy against
France, would have been the same it has been of late. Of all the Princes that
were entered into a League with our King, there was none that remained
steadfast, except the Elector of Cologn, and that not very long, being forced by
the Enemy, who surrounded him on all sides, to do like the rest. The Elector
Palatin, notwithstanding he was Father-in-law to the Duke of Orleans, was one
of the first who left the French Party, whose example the Bishop of Munster
followed, but rather out of necessity than by his own Inclinations. But neither
the conjunction of these Forces with those of the Emperor's, nor the Spaniards
declaring at the same time against France, was half so much surprising to the
King, as the Peace made between the King of England and the Dutch, in the Year
1674.

Thus Lewis the Great saw himself under an absolute necessity to carry on a War
alone, against so many Princes entered into a confederacy against him. The
Elector of Brandenburgh took a review of his Troops, which consisted of ^0000
Men, comprehending the new Levies. The Confederates had projected great
designs, as being persuaded that the King would not be able to cope with them
all; Some were for entering France, others for retaking all the places they had
lost many Years before. Among the rest was the Duke of Lorrain, who having by
his ill Conduct lost his Dominions, flattered himself now, with hopes to be put
in possession of them again. Upon this consideration it was he embraced the
Confederate side, who indeed, knowing him to be a Person, who in all his Life
time, had never made any account of his Word, did trust him no further than
they needs must.

Our Army advanced toward the Rhine, and I was detached before the Elector's
arrival, with 500 Men, to maintain my self in..... in case I should be attacked
there; it being feared, that whilst we were near the Rhine, the French might
attempt another irruption into the Country of March, where this place is
situate. And it really happened so: For the Marquess de Renet besieged the
Place, and I was forced to surrender, after seventeen days opening of the
Trenches. I was sorely afraid to be discovered to be a Frenchman, but hearing
me speak good High Dutch as I marched out of the Place, and knowing nothing to
the Contrary, I was safely conducted to Crinburgh, pursuant to the Capitulation.

This Campaign was so far from answering the expectation of the Confederates,
that nothing but Ruin and Destruction attended them: Turenne, who before was
become famous for his great Actions, did in this Campaign deservedly acquire
the Title of the greatest Captain in Europe, having upon this occasion given
most evident demonstrations to the World, what a good Conduct, founded upon a
long Experience is able to effect. For it was he that had a true foresight of
what was likely to happen on that side, and it was he that prevented the King
from quitting Alsace, as it had been resolved in a Cabinet Council, held at
Versailles. He found means to beat the Allies one after another, who were under
a necessity of dividing their Forces, for want of good Magazines.

In the mean while, the Flame of the War which was first kindled in Holland,
began to spread over several other Countries, the King of Sweden having
declared in favor of France against the Confederates. Sweden had been for a
considerable time in the Interest of France; and the reason why they did not
declare sooner for our side was, because the King had pitched upon that Crown,
to mediate a Peace betwixt him and the Confederates; and Plenipotentiaries were
sent for that purpose to Cologne, the Place appointed for the Treaty. But the
Allies still flattering themselves, that France was not in a condition to hold
out long against their joint Forces, sought only for Means to break off this
Treaty, which they had set on foot with an intention only to gain time, the
better to take their Measures against us. For this purpose they took an
opportunity to seize upon Prince William of Furstenburgh at Cologne,
Plenipotentiary of the Archbishop of Cologne, whom they carried to Bonn, and
from thence further into Germany, where he was kept in Prison, and treated in a
manner so little suitable to his Quality, that he was forced to wear one of his
Shirts all to pieces, before they would let him have another.

The King of Sweden made heavy Complaints against it, looking upon it as a
violation of the Laws of Nations, and an Affront put upon him as Mediator; but
the Emperor refusing to give the resir'd satisfaction, he declared for France.
Wrangel, who Commanded the Swedish Army, advanced thereupon to the Frontiers of
Brandenburgh, which made the Elector to withdraw his Forces from the Rhine, and
to advance with all possible speed, at the Head of us, to the Banks of the
River The, to dispute the Passage to the Swedish Army. But having passed the
River before he took Floz and...... Places Situate upon the utmost Frontiers of
the Brandenburgh Territories, he made himself afterward Master of the two
Forts of Ribnitz and Locknitz, and might have extended his Conquests into the
very heart of the Country, if he had been sensible in what a consternation his
March had put the Brandenburgh Army. But whether the Elector had found means to
corrupt him with Money, or whether a pannick fear seized upon the Swedes, they
marched back all on a sudden, and repassed the The, without attempting any
thing further.

The Elector, who feared, not without reason, that alone he should scarce be
sufficient to cope with the Swedes, entered into an Alliance with the King of
Denmark, and the House of Brunswick Lunenburgh, except the Duke of Hanouer, who
would not join with them, but rather declared for the other side. The General
Rasfeld who then Commanded the Brandenburgh Forces, Besieged Locknitz, and
Wrangel, being resolved to Relieve it, cost what it would, passed the The at
Wollin, and advanced with his Army betwixt a great Bog and Forest, which
extended from Wollin to Locknitz. Rasfeld having received timely intelligence
of his March, left as many Troops before Locknitz, as were sufficient to guard
the Trenches; with the rest he marched against the Swedes, who retreated at the
first Charge. Some of them got to Wollin, the rest fled into the Woods, where
they could not easily be pursued, by reason of the thickness of it, which would
have endangered those that pursued them. The Brandenburghers took about 1500
Prisoners, and killed 800, with the loss of about half the Number on their
side; but the Swedes did not carry off one Prisoner. Wrangel happening to die
not long after, and the Command of the Swedish Army being given to the General
Sharenbergh, he took a resolution to besiege Enfield, to signalize himself by
this Enterprise. All this happened in the Campaign of 1675.

The Elector of Brandenburgh, who was at that time at the Hague, to confer with
the rest of the Confederate Princes, had no sooner received the News of the
Victory obtained by General Rasfeld, but he hastn'd with all possible speed, to
put himself at the Head of his Army. The River of Lingn^ was betwixt us and the
Enemy, and they could not Besiege Enfield before they had passed that River, so
that we directed our March thither to dispute their Passage. The Elector having
received Intelligence, that they had seized upon some Boats, and the
Ferry-Boat, betwixt Enclin and Enfield, in order to lay a Bridge over the said
River, and that they had already begun to pass it, ordered us to hasten our
March, in hopes we might come time enough to prevent them. As we approached the
Bank of the River, we found about 4000 of the Enemy, who being already passed
the River, were charged so briskly, that few of them escaped our Hands.

Thus the War being carried on with more Heat than ever, the Elector sent me
back to Altenoe, fearing lest the Enemy should have a Design upon that place,
and his foresight was not ill grounded; for I was closely Besieged in the next
Campaign. As this Seige was not unexpected to me, so I had often solicited at
Court to provide the place with all necessaries, which however I could not
obtain. This made me take a resolution to seize upon all that I found in the
Circumjacent places, which I judged necessary to make a Vigorous Defense.
Coningsmark, who then Commanded the Swedes, in lieu of Sharenbergh, came to
view the place, of which I gave immediate notice to the Elector, who sent me a
considerable Re-inforcement; but 500 only got into the place, the rest being
forced to retire. Coningsmark, had no sooner finished his Lines of
Circumvallation, but he Attacked the Fort Ravent, which he took by Composition.
After this he carried on his Attack against another Fort, called the
Bridge-Fort, which he also took. I took care to send Orders to the Garrison,
not to hold it out to the last extremity, but they not obeying my Commands,
were all made Prisoners of War; and the Swedes finding among them a Sergeant
and four common Soldiers, who had Deserted, they Hanged them in sight of their
Army. They then carried on their Trenches toward the Bridge-Gate, and threw in
a great quantity of Bombs, which Consumed our Magazine of Forage, which was
laid up in a place which formerly had been a Church, belonging to the
Recollects, whom my Father-in-law had Chased from thence, whilst he was
Governor of the place. I was hardly put to it to provide for our Horses, which
made me take all what I could meet with of Forage in the Inns or Private
Houses: This and the fear of the Bombs, which had already ruined many Houses,
proved the occasion of a Tumult among the Inhabitants, of whom I was fain to
Imprison some, to keep the rest in awe. I took care to inform the Elector at
Court of what had passed, who sent me word, that I should Defend my self to the
last, they being resolved to Relieve me in good time. Accordingly the Elector
Marched to our Relief; of which Coningsmark had no sooner notice, but he raised
the Seige, after twelve days opening the Trenches. But before he Marched off,
he Dismantled the two Forts which he had taken; and the Elector who had notice
given him of the raising of the Siege, returned to Berlin, the rest of the
Campaign being spent without any considerable Action. After the Campaign was
over, I made my Appearance at Court to receive some Instructions from his
Electoral Highness; and to give him an Account concerning what had passed
during the Siege of Altenoe. I was not forgetful to represent to him, That the
Catholics had shown the greatest Zeal for his Service in the Defense of the
Place; whereas the others had been very remiss in their Duties. I told him,
that if he would be pleased to Annul what had been done by my Father-in-law
when he was Governor of the Place, and would Restore the Recollects the Church
that was taken from them, this would be a means to increase their Affection
toward him, and to engage them for ever in his Interest. My persuasions proved
so successful, that the Elector did not only grant what I had desired, but also
restored to them the great Church, which my Fatherin-law had taken from them
and given it to the Lutherans.

I was extremely well satisfied with what I had done in behalf of the
Catholics there, but what rejoiced me infinitely more, was, that my Spouse did
assure me, she found in her self a great inclination to be Converted to our
Faith. She was Educated in the same Religion her Father professed, who was the
second of that Family, since they turned Heretics; her Grandfather and the
whole Family having been always good Catholics, till my Wifes Grandfather
changed his Religion. This happy Inclination I could attribute to nothing else
but a peculiar Mercy from God; not but that I had often discoursed her upon
this Subject, but it was a considerable time ago, having of late desisted from
it, because I found her not in the least disposed to hearken to my Advice in
this point. But her intended Conversion was likely to have proved almost Fatal
to us both, because I mistook my choice in the Person to whose care I committed
the management of it. For, I pitched upon a Jacobin Friar, who instead of being
a Man of Virtue and Piety, as I thought him to have been, was for teaching my
Spouse quite another Lesson than what I intended he should do. She told me how
he had managed his Business with her, which made me under hand give notice of
his Misbehaviour to his Superior, without mentioning a word of it further,
either to himself or any body else, for fear of bringing a Scandal upon our
Religion. But my Spouse took the thing quite otherwise, for imagining that all
the rest would prove like him, I found her quite averse to pursue her former
good Inclinations. I had much ado to perswad(...) her, that the misbehaviour of
a particular Person ought not to stain the Reputation of all others of the same
Religion; That there had been a Judas among the Apostles themselves, and that
therefore the rest had been never the less Holy and Acceptable to God.

This may serve as a warning to those, who are entrusted with the care of
sending abroad Missionaries or other Persons for the Conversion of Heretics,
to be sure to choose such as are of an untainted Life; because the least
Tresspass in them is apt to produce great Scandal, especially if it be of the
same Nature with this. At last my Wife being overcome by my persuasions, and
the Instructions of a Religious Person, of a far different Temper from the
Jacobin Friar, she renounced Lutheranism, and was reconciled to that Church,
which her Grandfather had abandoned.

We were now busy in the Blockade of Stetin, all the Avenues of which were
closely guarded by our Troops; notwithstanding which, the Swedes found means to
throw a Re-inforcement of 600 Men into the place, being guided by a Peasant,
who Conducted them cross the Marshes, through ways which were at another time
quite Impassible. But notwithstanding this, the Garrison diminished considerably
every day, partly by Famine, partly by their frequent Sallies. The Swedes
therefore made a second Attempt to throw in another Re-inforcement into the
place; but the Elector's Troops being better upon their guard, since the first
Relief, most of them were made Prisoners before they could enter the Town: The
Guide as ill Fortune would have it, was among these last, who had a Halter for
his Reward. Our Elector kept also a Correspondence in the place, by which means
he hoped to make himself Master of it, without being obliged to employ his
whole Force against it. The Chief of this Conspiracy was a certain Brazier, of
which there are a great many in that Town. It was agreed he should set the
Magazine of Ammunition on Fire, which he did accordingly, together with one of
the best Mills belonging to the Town, but being discovered, he with two more of
his Accomplices were hanged for their pains.

The Besieged who were very strong within and headed by a Governor who
perfectly well understood his Trade, made frequent Sallies upon us, in one of
which they made themselves Masters of the Fort of Almea, where there was a
Garrison of 600 Men, who were all made Prisoners of War. Coningsmark advanced
likewise to the relief of the Place, but finding it impossible to raise the
Blockade, he directed his March toward Altenoe; and the Elector fearing lest
he should attempt a second time the Siege of that place, sent me thither with a
reinforcement of 600 Men. Coningsmark advanced toward the Town, by the way of
the Bank, which leads along the River up to the two Forts, which he had built
in the last Siege, without attempting any thing further; his Business being
only to consume the Forage on that side, as he did afterward for two Leagues
round. For in two Months and more, whilst he encamped thereabouts, he did
nothing but ruin and burn the Country, scarce leaving one Stone upon another; I
being not in a posture to prevent it. My Wife's Estate was involved among the
rest in this Ruin, the Revenue of which, was settled by her Brother upon her
Mother-in-law as a Jointure, which she had enjoyed quietly till now; but there
being but little likelihood she should draw any thing of Moment from thence for
some Years after, she sued me for her Jointure, under pretense, that this being
fallen away to nothing, I was obliged to assign her another Revenue in lieu of
it* and that it was in her power to choose which part she pleased of my
Brother-in-laws Estate.

In the mean while Provisions beginning to grow scarce in Stetin, the besieged
saw themselves reduced to the utmost extremity. The Swedes made several
attempts from without to open themselves a Passage into the Town, whilst the
Besieged endeavored to facilitate the Enterprise by a vigorous Sally upon our
Trenches* which had been opened now against the place, the Elector having
charged the Blockade, which seemed too tedious to him, into a formal Siege. But
though some of these Sallies were made with success enough, and they seemed
resolute to defend the place to the last, their Necessity increased more and
more every day; so that having taken a resolution to represent their miserable
condition to Coningsmark, a certain Cornet undertook the business. He came into
our Camp, under pretense of having deserted the Swedes, but there being several
Troopers more of the same Regiment with him, who pretended to be deserters at
the same time, this created some suspicion in the Elector; who thereupon
threatened the Cornet to hang him forthwith, if he did not discover the whole
truth of the matter. The fear of death extorted from him this Confession, to
wit, That the Besieged were reduced to such a deplorable Condition, as was
impossible to be expressed. The Elector, who almost began to despair of
Success, by reason of the approaching Winter, and who was upon the point of
raising the Siege; being now encouraged by this deposition to continue it, did
make it his chiefest care, to prevent Coningsmark from sending any relief into
the Place; and the Swedish General being not in a condition to force his
Passage, with that small body of Troops he had with him, the City of Stetin,
which would scarce have been taken by force, was necessitated to capitulate for
want of Provisions.

The Law Suit I had with my Mother-in-law was extremely vexatious to me, the
more, because I was advised, that in all likelihood it would go against me,
which made me more desirous than ever, to return into France. I had also notice
given me, that she intended to attach a Sum of 100000 Livers, which belonged
to my Wife, and was in the Bank of Dantzick, which made me take them from
thence, and so transfer them to the Bank of Amsteldam, till such time I should
meet with an opportunity to put my Design in execution, which was, not to stay
much longer in Germany. The chief reason, which made me first take this
resolution was, that the Electoral Prince continued still to look upon me with
a very ill Eye; and I was informed by credible Persons, that he had let fall
certain words, which gave me sufficiently to understand, that in case the
Elector should happen to die, I should certainly have all my Places taken away
from me.

So soon as the Peace was made, I pretended to have received News of my
Father's Death, which made me ask leave of the Elector, to take a Journey into
France. I had prevailed with my wife to go along with me; but it was near six
Months before I could get leave from the Elector; so that I did not set out
from Altenoe, till toward the end of August, in the Year 1679. I took my
Children (being five in all, two Boys and three Girls) along with me* and
because no body should guess at my real Intention, I told my Acquaintance that
I had a mind to have them Educated in France* the Sons in some College or
other, and the Daughters in a Nunnery. I took the way of Amsteldam, where I
drew my Money out of the Bank, which I put into the Hands of Mr. Gerard, Mr.
Gueverdin and Mr. Poelhoven, who gave me Bills of Exchange to the full value of
it, upon Mr. Gouteure and Mr. Amonet in Paris. I showed my Wife all what was
curious in Holland, and from thence pursued my Journey to Paris, by the way of
Antwerp and Brussels, which I had a Mind she should also see.

Whilst I was at Amsteldam, I paid a Visit to Mr. Ramp, one of the greatest
Merchants of that City, with whom I was familiarly acquainted at that time,
when our Regiment was in the Dutch Service. The first foundation of our
Friendship was laid at Zwoll, where I happened to be Instrumental in a certain
case, which was mighty pleasing both to his Father and him. They were both very
Zealous Catholics, and by chance both at Zwoll, when this thing happened, of
which I will give you the truest account I am able.

You must know that in the Province of Over-Yssel, the Exercise of the
Catholic Religion is not so freely allowed of, as in the Province of Holland.
One Day when a certain Priest was saying Mass in a place, where the Sehout
(which is one of the chief Magistrates of the City) pretended it was not
allowable so to do, without special leave from the Magistracy, he caused the
Priest to be taken away from the Altar, and without the least respect to his
Character and Sacerdotal Habit, carried him away Prisoner, and seized upon the
holy Vessel wherein the Host was. I happened not to be in Town when this was
done, being then at the Hague; but being after my return informed of the
matter, it touched me to the very heart. I told the French Officers there in
Garrison, how they were able to brook such an Affront, given both to God and
their King, and that if they would follow me, we would soon deliver the Priest,
and make the Sehout restore us the Holy Vessel with the Host, and let him know
how he should meddle with such like things for the future. They having soon
consented to my Proposition, we went to the Sehout's House, which we entered
without asking leave, and gave him such a Compliment, as did not much please
him. We told him in short, that we would cut his Throat, if he did not give us
satisfaction immediately; that he had committed a gross Error, which would
never be approved of by the States General, whose intention was not that the
Auxiliary Troops should be debarred from the free Exercise of their Religion;
for I pretended to be one of them. He answered us, that he knew what he had
done, tho* perhaps we did not; that the Priest, whom he had made a Prisoner was
a Native of that Country, and consequently subject to their Laws; that if he
had been a French Man, there might be some color for what we did; but as he
was not, he could not but wonder, that we should intermeddle in a Business,
which did not belong to us; it being undeniable, that there were at least ten
Inhabitants to one Soldier present at that time, when he disturbed this Priest
in saying Mass, which made it evident, that this was a politic concern, which
had not the least relation to the Auxiliary Troops. But we told him, we were
not to be put off with Words; and began to use such Expressions, and to ruffle
him, that he began to be afraid of his Life in good earnest, unless he gave us
immediate satisfaction.

In the mean while, it being rumored about the City, that the Sehout's House
was forced by some Officers, who threatened to murder him, we saw the House on
a sudden surrounded by the Populace, who were gathered into several Bands,
according to their different Religions, so that the whole City was in an
uproar; and the Garrison, who were all Catholics, betook themselves to their
Arms, with an intention to disperse that Party that should declare against us.
The Sehout perceiving himself now in most imminent danger of his Life, began to
be more pliable, and soon after discharged the Priest out of Prison, unto whom
he restored the Holy Vessel with the Hosts, unto which we paid our Devotions.
We desired the Priest to look whether all the Hosts were entire in the Vessel,
that if there wanted any, the Sehout should pay with his Life for his
Sacrilege. The Priest looking into the Box, told us, that they were all there;
though it be uncertain whether it was really so, or whether he told us so to
appease our Anger, and to save the Life of the Magistrate. The Matter being
thus far composed to our satisfaction, we writ immediately to Monsieur
d'Estrades, to give him notice of what had passed; he received this Letter
before the Sehout could inform the States of what had happened to him; for
being Masters of the Gates, we did not let any body pass without leave. The
French Ambassador, after he had perused our Letter, commended our Zeal, and
made his Complaints to the States, about the Violence offered by the Sehout, to
the Auxiliary Troops of his Majesty. He told them that he was under an
obligation to let the King his Master know* how the matter was transacted,
unless they gave him immediate satisfaction; that he knew the King to be so
pious a Prince, as not to suffer such a thing to be put upon him, let it cost
what it would. The States, who at that time stood in need of his Majesty's
favor, who had so lately assisted them against the Bishop of Munster, desired
him not to write to the King, assuring him, that they would take such Measures,
as should be satisfactory to him. Accordingly they deposed the Sehout, without
giving him leave to justify himself, and declared him incapable of serving the
Republic for the future.

This was the occasion of my acquaintance with Mr. Ramp, who, as he was a Man
of singular Piety, so he showed as much satisfaction for the success of this
Business as my self. As I was going to visit him at his Country House, where he
happened to be at that time. I passed through Pardam, one of the largest and
best Towns in North-Holland. A few days before my arrival there, they had taken
some Coiners, among whom there was a Frenchman* An Inhabitant of the Town, who
was likewise a Native of France, gave me an account of the matter, and told me
among the rest, how the poor Frenchman had complained to him, that this was the
first time he had committed this Crime, since he had been in this Country,
which was near five Years; to which he had been droven by absolute necessity.
That he was born a Gentleman, and had been forced to leave France, because he
had fought a Duel. That he showed a great inclination to turn Catholic, but
says he, I am afraid the fear of his approaching Destiny, will scarce give him
time to think much of that. The advantageous Account he gave me of this
unfortunate poor Fellow, moved me with Compassion, which made me take up my
Lodgings, in the same Inn, where he was detained Prisoner. I made his Waiter
pretty Drunk, which gave me the opportunity to talk to him, without being
perceived by them, and to ask him, whether there was no way left to save
himself. He told me, that if he had some Ropes, he believed he could do it as
he went to the Necessary House, because his Waiter used always to remain
without; that the only danger he had to surmount was, that the House of Office
was built over a Canal, and that he could not swim. I answered him in two
words, he should take Courage, that he should hear from me by tomorrow, and I
would endeavor to save his Life.

I left him thus, and went with all speed to Mr. Ramp's House. The first thing
I did there, was to speak to Mr. Ramp about this unfortunate Person, how he was
in a fair way of turning Catholic, if we could consider of any way to save his
Life. He was very well pleased with what I had proposed to him; he provided
some Ropes to be given him, and a Boat, which should preserve him from being
drowned. Every thing being got in readiness, we went from his House to Pardam,
where I went to see the Prisoner, gave him the Ropes, and instructed him
further in every thing relating to his Escape. He had made them believe,
pursuant to my Instructions, that he was seized with a Vomiting and Looseness
that day, which as he pretended, continued some part of the Night; the better
to deceive his Waiter, that he might not wonder at his long stay in the House
of Office. The appointed Hour being come, and finding the Boat ready to receive
him in the Canal under the Hole, he let himself down by the Rope. Those
appointed by Mr. Ramp for the management of the Business, conducted him in the
Boat to a place of safety, where he disguised himself in Women's Clothes, the
better to secure his passage into France, whither he intended to go. He made at
the same time a full abjuration of his Religion, in the presence of a Priest of
Mr. Ramp's Acquaintance, who assisted him with some Money, to defray the
Charges of his Journey.

But this was not the only Adventure that happened to me in this Country; for
before I left it, I met with another, which made me tarry some days longer than
I intended. Before I left Germany, I bought six fine Coach Mares, from Count
Anthony of Oldenburgh, which cost me 1000 Crowns. As I passed by the Tothuis at
Rotterdam to go to Antwerp, one of these Coach Mares, which was with the rest
put on board a Vessel, being frightn'd by the noise of the Sails, threw her
self into the Water; I was vexed to the Heart, not so much for the loss of my
Money, as that the whole Set would be spoiled; which made me engage two of the
Seamen to follow with their Boat, promising each of them a Reward of a Lewis
d'or, provided they could save her. Two of the Ships Crew undertook the Task,
and took the Mare, but in lieu of bringing her to me* they put her ashore in
some place, which was out of our sight; and then returned to the Ship,
pretending they had seen her drowned before their Eyes, before they were able
to come near enough to save her. I did not in the least mistrust them; and
being come at Night into the Inn on the other side of the Water, (the River
being about half a League over there) we went to Supper, in company with an
unknown Person, who seemed to be a Man of Fashion. Finding both me and my
Spouse much discomposed, he asked us the reason of it; and I frankly told him,
that it was the loss of my Coach Mare that troubled me. He asked me what kind
of Mare she was, and what Harness she had? Having given him as exact a
description as I could of both, he told me, I need not vex my self any further,
for he was sure she was not drowned, as they had made me believe, and that he
would put me in a way to have her again; that he had seen her with two Seamen,
who would have sold her to him: The next thing I asked him was, what kind of
Fellows these Seamen were he spoke of, whom he described to me so exactly, and
with so many Circumstances, that I did not in the least question but they were
the same, whom I had sent after the Mare. Then I discovered to him what my
thoughts were concerning the matter, and advised with him, what way I had best
to take to recover my Mare; we were both of the same opinion, to go to the
Judges of Rotterdam, and to desire that Justice might be done me upon this
Account. Accordingly we crossed the Water next Morning early, and meeting with
the two Seamen there, I told them, to avoid all suspicion of their being
discovered, that I was come over the Water only to look for some Papers I had
left at my Lodgings. I went to an Acquaintance of Mr. Gueverdin's, living at
Rotterdam, to whom I had Letters of recommendation from the said Merchant.

Having given him an exact Account of the whole matter, he went with me to a
Magistrate of that City, to desire him to grant us a Warrant for the
Apprehending of these Rogues; but he refused to do it, alleging that it was
against their Custom to grant a Warrant without hearing first the Evidences*
Mr. Gueverdin's Friend represented to him that such a delay would prove
dangerous and chargeable to me, and that being a Stranger, they might in that
respect dispense with these Formalities: That I was ready to give caution for
all Damages and Expenses, in case I was found in the wrong of it. But this not
being prevailing enough with the Judge, my Friend advised me to go straight
ways with him to the Hague, and to make our Applications to one of the Judges
of a Superior Court, whom he knew very well, and who would perhaps not be so
scrupulous as the other; with this resolution we went into the Shuit which was
to carry us to Delft, where we found a Fellow smoking Tobacco. The Master of
the Shuit, told him, that if he would smoke he must do it without, not in the
place where the Company sat; but the Fellow ridiculing the Master of the Shuit,
he told him again that he should not smoke any more there, it being contrary to
their Orders, and if he would not believe him, he would show them to him
immediately. With that he went to his Trunk, and brought forth the Printed
Orders* at which the other laughed, looked just at them, and so threw them into
the Water. In the mean while the Women made a great noise, telling the Master
that they were choked up with the smoke of the Tobacco, which made the Master
snatch the Pipe out of his Mouth, which he threw into the Canal, telling him,
that such Fellows who would not be ruil'd, must be thus served. The smoaker to
revenge himself, took a Knife out of his Pocket, and cut the Face of the
Servant belonging to the Shuit, who had taken his Masters part; This occasioned
a great disorder in the Shuit, which was with much ado appeased by the
intercession of the Company. The wound at the same time happened not to prove
dangerous, which made the Master appear careless in the matter; but he was no
sooner come to Delft, but he made his Complaints against the Fellow, who was
seized immediately, and we being obliged to appear as Witnesses, it was some
time before we could take Boat again for the Hague. I had not been many Hours
there, when I happened to meet with the same Person with whom I had supped the
night before, and who had given me the first account of my Mare. He went with
us before the Judge, who without any further exception granted us the Warrant,
which the Judge of Rotterdam had refused us. As we passed through Delft in our
return from the Hague, we were informed that the Magistrates of that City had
taken a short, but just way of proceeding with the Fellow, who cut the Servants
Cheek; whom they had Condemned to the Rasphuis, (a place where Vagabonds are
employed in all manner of slavish work) which with them is looked upon, as a
punishment equivalent to that of the Galleys in other Countries.

After our return to Rotterdam, Mr. Gueverden's Friend soon procured me a
sufficient number of the Shuits Attendance, who marched along with us to the
Tolhuis, where they seized the two Seamen, who were much surprised at this
unexpected Compliment, especially when they saw me come in immediately after. I
upbraided them with their Knavery, and what troubles they had put me to, so
they gave me my Mare again, thinking to be acquitted thus of all Accounts, but
I brought them in an afterreckoning, which they were forced to pay to the full
at the Rasphuis; This may serve as an instance how exactly and impartially
Justice is Administered in that Country, and of what consequence it would be to
us, if we would tread in their Footsteps, this being the only means to prevent
many of these Rogueries which are committed every day among us.

After I came to Antwerp, I met with another Adventure, though of a different
nature from this. Some Hollanders, among whom indeed you may meet with as great
Sharpers and Rogues as any are in France, had kept close to me in my Journey,
having got intelligence at Amsterdam, by what means I know not, that I had good
store of ready cash about me. One of them who had followed me at a little
distance, seeing me engaged in discourse with a Friend of mine* whom I met
accidentally in the Street, made up with my Wife, as she was going along a
little before me* and accosted her very civilly, pretending that he had a great
respect for me; and being dressed in a Grave Burghers Habit my Spouse did
suppose him to be one of my acquaintance. After I had overtaken her, the Dutch
man who was still talking with her, seemed to be surpised, and looking very
steadfast upon me, told me, that he found himself under a mistake; that he had
really taken me for a certain person whose name he told me, which had made him
take the Liberty to speak to my Spouse. His civil Behavior and Discourse
engaged me to give him a very obliging Answer, whilst we were walking along
together in the Street; and perceiving that we took our way toward the Castle
of Antwerp, he said he believed we intended to take a view of it, and that he
should be very glad to take the opportunity of our good Company to do the same.
As I naturally have a kindness for the Hollanders, they being commonly a frank
and easy tempered people, so I returned the Complement, telling him that we
would take it for an Honor; and asked him at the same time, what place he was
born in, and where he lodged at Antwerp.

He told me that he was a Native of Amsterdam, and it happend that he named he
same Inn for his Lodgings, where we had taken up ours. As we were walking along
we had variety of other discourse, and among the rest he told us with a very
frank Air, which seemed to be natural to him, that he had been for a
considerable time under the Hatches, but that not long ago a Brother of his who
had got together a considerable Estate in the East Indies, did happen to die,
who left him wherewithal to live for the future like a Gentleman. After we had
taken a view of the Castle, he pretended so much Ignorance as not to be able to
find out the Inn again, for which purpose he feigned to ask the way to it from
a person who met us, unless, as he said, I knew the way better than he. I told
him that I believed I could find out the Street where the Inn was we were to
lodge, and since he had taken his Lodgings up there as well as we, he need but
follow us. All this Affected simplicity was contrived on purpose to disguise
himself the better, in order to catch me with more ease in the snare. Thus we
went on to our Inn, where we had not been long before Supper-time came; so my
Wife and I came down out of our Chamber, into a very near Parlour where we
found the Cloth ready laid, and to Supper we went in company with our Host, a
Priest, this Dutchman, and another of his Countrymen. The Priest went up into
his Chamber immediately after Supper, and the two Hollanders stayed below in
the Parlour with us* soon after one asked the other, whether he had a mind to
play a Game at Berlan, whom the other answered, Done, and so to Cards they
went, after they had asked me, whether I had a mind to play. I told them no,
but that I would look on. So they began to play at small Game. He, who had met
us in the Street appeared to be a great Bubble, for he showed his Cards so
plainly, that he who played with him might see them as easily as my self who sat
by. In a quarter of an hour or there abouts, the Game began to rise very high,
both of them drawing abundance of Gold out of their Purses* and he who accosted
us in the street had at least a Thousand Ducates in sight before him, and as
much Bubble as he appeared to be, did win all the money from the other, except
about a Dozen or Fourteen Ducates. I happened then to sit near the loser, for
whom I showed some Compassion, just when the other dealt him three Knaves and
turned up the fourth. I pass, said he, who had the Knaves in his hand; and he,
who dealt, bidding upon the Game, the other laid four Ducates more; I hold you
as much Gold as you have before you, answered the other again; Done said the
other, and I think I have got you now; you are under a mistake, replied he who
had dealt the Cards; I am only sorry that there is no more Money upon the
Board. I answered him, he might be glad there was no more, for he had certatnly
lost the Game; upon which he told me, that I was mistaken, and if I would lay
him ten Ducates of it, he would soon convince me to the contrary. I said, Done, and
each of us having staked our ten Ducates, he showed his Cards, and that he had
three Kings; but the other at the same time discovering his three Knaves, he
was forced to confess that he had lost. After they had dealt two or three times
more, they invited me to make one with them, to give satisfaction to the other
for what he lost to me; but as I was never a lover of Cards, or indeed of any
other Game, I told them I would not play, but that before we parted, some
opportunity or other would offer to hold him again, which I would be sure to
do, to give him a fair chance for the recovery of his Money. He made me no
answer at all, seeming to be very indifferent in the matter; and I had the good
Fortune to win about fourteen Ducates more of him, the other near whom I sat,
giving me the signal when he had good Cards, in hopes to draw me in for a good
round Sum, by the gain of them.

I stayed with them till it was pretty late, when I left them at play and to
Bed I went. I had told them before in what Inn I was to be at Brussels, so they
followed me thither, and took up their Quarters in the same Inn, knowing that I
was to stay for some time at Brussels, they did not speak the least word of
Gaming the first day, but the next they began their old trade, and did all what
they could to entice me to play, or at least to lay my Money with them. But
having business of much greater consequence to do at Brussels, I had no time to
spend much with them. When they found me getting every thing in readiness to
pursue my Journey to Paris, they brought two more of their Gang along with them
into the Inn; and after some indifferent Discourse, one of them asked me,
whether I was suddenly to leave Brussels? Unto which I having made answer, In a
day or two at farthest; they told me in a sort of a threatening way, That it was
not fair to deal thus with honest Gentlemen; that when a Man had won another
Money, he was obliged to give him satisfaction; and to part with a Gentleman,
without giving him a fair chance to recover his Money, looked more like a
Sharper than a Gentleman. This Compliment gave me to understand, in what
Company I had been all this while, which indeed, I had not the least suspicion
of before; so that considering with my self, that in point of prudence* I ought
not to engage with four Pick-pockets at once, I very civilly answered them,
That I was sorry I should be busy all that day long, but that at night after
Supper, I would be ready to do what they thought convenient. They were so weak
as to believe me to be in earnest, and so left me. But the first thing I did,
was to pay a Visit to the Marquess de Ville, who was then Governor of
Brussels, and my Acquaintance. I gave him an exact relation in what manner I
had been likely to have been dealt withal by these Fellows, desiring his
assistance. He told me, I must have them taken up, and if I pleased he would
send me some of his Guards. It was then agreed betwixt us, that eight of them,
should one after another, at several Intervals come to enquire for me at the
Inn, whom I should take care to hide behind the Hangings, and in some Closets,
that were in a certain Antichamber next to my Lodging Room, where they might
over hear us, and at a Signal given, be ready to seize them. This being done
accordingly, when Supper-time drew near, I told the Hostess, that my Wife being
somewhat indisposed to night, we intended to Sup in our Bedchamber; and the
four Sharpers were no sooner advertised of it, but they came up boldly to me,
and began to tell me in very gross Terms, that they saw I took this for a
pretext not to perform my promise, and other such like Expressions. Those of
the Guards, who heard every word they said, sallied thereupon forth out of
their Ambush, seized them all four, and so carried them to Prison. Next day
they made their applications to me, In hopes that they might be discharged with
asking my Pardon; but the Marquess de Ville would have them punished, which
indeed he did; for they were forced to pay a good Fine, and return all what
they had got out of several Persons, to the right Owners.

Thus being rid of my Company, I pursued my Journey to Paris. As I passed
through Peronne, the Farmers of the Customs, or rather their Emissaries stopped
my Coach, pretending that I had some prohibited Commodities there. I declared
to them I had none; but they answered me positively, they knew the contrary;
and since I was not in an Humor to make a sincere Confession, they would take
care to find them out themselves: So they would have made me alight, till they
could search all over the Coach, which I refused to do, telling them, they
might go along with me to the Inn, where they should search as long as they
pleased. But these Brutes not being satisfied with this, I began to be a little
rough with them, which made the Receiver (or Surveyor) come forth out of his
Office, and having understood what was the occasion of our Difference, he
ordered them to follow me to the Inn, and to do their Duty there. After we were
come to the Inn, they searched us all over one after another, not excepting the
Child it self, which they made the Maid unswath below in the Yard.

I was not able to brook so much rudeness, without giving them some harsh
words; and I ordered my Wife's Chambermaid, who always tended that Child, (my
Wife being, according to the Custom of the German Ladies, Nurse herself) to
carry them up Stairs, and to open before their Faces, a Basket with Linen and
other things belonging to the Child, this being the only thing they had not
seen as yet. Two of the Custom-house Officers, went accordingly up Stairs after
her; where, when the Maid had opened the Basket, one of them more eager than
the other in the performance of his Office, put his Hand into the Basket, and
as ill chance would have it, happened to light upon a shitten Clout, which made
him draw back his Hand as fast as he could, but so bedaub'd and tainted with so
odoriferous a Smell, that his Companion could not forbear to burst out into
laughter. The other being vexed to the Soul to see himself thus ridiculed,
clapped his Hand into his Companion's Face, which put him into such a Fury, that
he drew his Sword and run him through the Body, so that he fell instantly dead
upon the Floor. The Chambermaid seeing what passed betwixt them, was so
frightn'd at it, that she threw the Child on the Bed, and before she could get
out of the Room fell into a Swoon, which gave opportunity to him, who had
committed the Murder, to escape undiscovered.

Whilst this happened above Stairs, I was in the Stable, to see that my Horses
were well ordered after their Journey; my Wife being conducted by one of the
Servants belonging to the Inn, into a Parlour below. Two other Custom-House
Officers, had in the mean while been taken up with searching all Corners of my
Coach, where they would needs find out some Points and Hair; because they had
some days before, received certain Information from Brussels, that a good
quantity of these Goods had been hid betwixt the roof of a Coach, drawn by Six
Gray Horses, in order to be secretly conveyed into France. My Coach and color
of the Horses agreeing in all respects with what had been told them, they were
fully persuaded that this must be the Coach, which made them be so eager in
their Search.

At the same time my Spouse began to enquire what was become of the little
Child, whether it was carried up Stairs, and whether they had lighted a Fire
for it; and the Servant of the House having told her, she believed it was above
in a Chamber, but that no Fire was made for it as yet; she bid her take a
Faggot, and show her the Room where the Child was. I leave it to every body to
judge, how great must be their surprise, when they saw the Custom-House Officer
lying upon the Floor, and wallowing in his own Blood, and the Chambermaid in a
Swoon. My Spouse, who thought no otherwise than that she was dead, called to me
out of the Window, whilst the Servant cried out Murder, being so much
frightened, that she scarce knew what she did or said.

The Master of the House being alarmed at these Outcries, ordered the Gates of
the Inn to be shut up, till such time he could send for the Civil Officers. For
my part I was put into the greatest consternation that could be, fearing, not
without reason, that I might fall under the suspicion of having Murdered the
Fellow, because I had used some hard expressions before. It was not long before
the Civil Officers, at the Head of whom was the Surveyour of the Custom-House,
appeared in the Inn, who laid hold of me, and would have carried me to Prison,
if the Judge would have consented to it: He examined both me and the Hostler,
who declared* that ever since I came into the Inn* I had been in the Stables,
near my Horses, and that I had not been above Stairs at all. The next who were
examined, were my Wife and my eldest Son, who was then about nine Years of Age;
but as they were quite ignorant of the matter, they could not give the least
satisfaction to the Questions proposed to them by the Judge. The Chamber Maid
was the only Person who could give a full account of the whole, who by this
time was recovered from her Swoon, by the application of proper Remedies; but
the difficulty was, that she not understanding a word of French, and all the
rest nothing of the German Language, they were as much at a stand as before. I
then proposed to the Judge to let me see her, and that I would explain to him
word by word what she should declare concerning the matter. The Judge willingly
agreed to what I had proposed, with this alteration only* that I should set
down in writing both the questions I should ask her, and her Answers.
Accordingly the Chambermaid having given me an exact Relation of the whole
matter, as I have related it before, both the Judge and I were fully satisfied
how the thing had happened; but being obliged by his Office not to pass over
any Formalities required by the Law in such a Case, I and my Family were
confined close Prisoners in the* Inn for three Days. In the mean while he sent
to Cambray for one who understood the German Tongue, and was to serve as an
Interpreter of the Depositions to be made by my Spouse's Chambermaid, by my
Coachman, Postilion, and Footman, who were likewise all three Germans. The
Judge was so favorable as to recommend me to a Counselor himself, who told
me, that I should not trouble my self any further, being assured that the
Surveyor of the Custom-House, should be forced to repay me all my Expenses.

So soon as the Interpreter was Arrived from Cambray, the Judge proceeded in
the further examination of the before mentioned Witnesses; but the Surveyor had
in the mean while been so overhasty in the Prosecution of the business that he
had given advice of it immediately to the Farmer General, before the matter had
been thoroughly unravelled; he had also taken Copy's of my Bills of Exchange
which the Judge had caused to be laid by in the Master of the Rolls Office. The
Farmer General believing there was something to be got for them, sent him full
power to prosecute me to the utmost, and attached the said Bills in the hands
of the Bankers at Paris, upon whom they were drawn. But it was not long before
the Surveyor had occasion enough to repent himself of having acted with so much
precipitation. For having understood that the Chambermaid persisted in
Accusing one of his Officers of the Murder, and that he had never appeared
since, he dispatched another Messenger to Paris, to give a more ample and true
account of the matter, which was not so pleasing to them as the first. He sent
in quest of the Fellow, who was at last found to have saved himself in the
Spanish Territories. This being a convincing Proof of his Guilt and my
Innocence, the Surveyor now began to consider which way to draw his head out of
the Snare he was caught in by his own Imprudence, the more because the Head
Farmers being informed of his rash procedures, had not only sent him a severe
Reprimand, but also had recalled their full Power to prosecute me. This made
him cry Peccavi, offering to lay down the Cudgels, and to reimburse me all my
Charges. My Lawyer advised me not to accept of it unless he would also allow
for Damages and Interest; but considering the Troubles that always attend
Lawsuits, especially in a Strange place; I accepted his offer, under condition
that I should by due Course of Law be discharged from the said Accusation,
which being done accordingly, I had all my Charges paid me by the Surveyor, and
so left this City.

These Adventures and disappointments had however so strong an Influence over
my Spouse that she began to be much discontented, and to repent that she had
left her Native Country, which was considerably augmented by another
Misfortune, which touched us both more sensibly than any before. For my Eldest
Son, who hitherto had been as healthy a Child as ever was seen, was whilst we
were at Antwerp, seized with a strange kind of Distemper, the like scarce ever
had been heard of before, of which he lingered for near six Months together, to
wit, till the next following Christmas, when he died. The beginning of it
happened thus; As he was walking with me one day along the Streets, he did run
all on a sudden away from me, as fast as his heels could carry him, till at
last he ran with such a violence against one that met him accidentally, that he
was thrown down without any Sense or Motion. We endeavored by all means
possible to recover him out of his sleep, but to no purpose, so that we were
forced to have him carried to one of the next Houses, where being laid upon a
Bed, he awakened after two Hours and recovered all his Senses, but had not the
least remembrance left of what had passed. This distemper continued upon him
till his death, and that without the least alteration; so that if the River had
been in his way, he would infallibly have thrown himself into it, and sometimes
it would return once in eight, sometimes once in fourteen days. Whilst I was at
Paris I consulted some of the Faculty there concerning the nature of his
Distemper, and what remedies might be applied against it. I had at the first
beginning consulted likewise some of the Physicians at Antwerp, who told me,
that they believed it to be a kind of an Epilepsie; but the Physicians of Paris
were of another Opinion, assuring me that those of Antwerp had been mistaken in
their judgment: notwithstanding which they were so puzzled about it themselves,
that they could never agree positively either concerning the nature of the
Distemper, or its proper Remedies. In the mean while I was forced to keep
always one near him to watch all his Motions, for fear of some sinister
accident, and thus I continued to do as long as he lived.

If it be permitted to us Mortals to dive into the hidden causes of God's
Judgments, who sometimes Afflicts the Innocent with the Guilty, though justly,
and without giving us the least occasion of grumbling against his Divine
Providence; I am of opinion, that this as well as several other Afflictions
which befell me about the same time, did proceed from an Error I had committed
against his Majesty.

You must know then, that when I bought the beforementioned Set of six Coach
Mares from Count Anthony of Oldenburgh, he was so sincere to tell me, just when
we were striking up the bargain, that if I was of a scrupulous Conscience, I
ought to take notice that among the six Mares there was one which perhaps I
would not care to meddle with, because that she was dressed frequently by an
Hobgoblin, and that there were some People, who looked upon these Horses to be
very unfortunate to the Owners. But I having taken a particular fancy to the
Mare, and being not very Religious at that time, I laughed at it, and took the
Mare without any further consideration, thinking the Count had been in jest
with me. However I was soon undeceived as to the last, for though the Grooms
never touched her, she appeared always more slick and better dressed than any
of the rest. And I can affirm it for Truth, that for fifteen or sixteen Months
together, whilst she was in my Possession, it happened every five and Twentieth
day of the Month that the Hobgoblin took off her Shoes of all her four Feet,
as well as any Smith could have done, and dressed her all over to the greatest
nicety, unless it were her Tail which he left untouched.

My Spouse was persuading me almost every day to part with this Mare, but being
the finest of the whole Set, I could not resolve upon it for a Considerable
time; till at last, finding that she would not go in the Coach if she saw the
Mare among the rest. I matched her with one of the others, and so gave her in
keeping to a certain Innkeeper of Samur at the Sign of the
Three-Black-Moors-Heads, with orders to sell them for me, with the next
opportunity. The Master's name of this Inn was Giteau, where abundance of
Persons of Quality lodged; when I told him what I knew concerning the
Hobgoblin, he looked upon it as a Rhodomantado, his real opinion being that I
parted with them for no other reason, but because they had some remarkable
defect, which I intended to hide under this pretext. But as he kept them two
whole Months in his custody, so he was an Eyewitness of what I had told him
before. At last they were Sold to the Marquess de la Tremblaie Robin, a
Gentleman of the Province of Anjou, who paid me a Hundred Lewis d'or's for
them. Ever since he has had them the Hobgoblin has never failed to attend the
Mare in the same manner as he did before, and I believe the Gentleman keeps
them both to this day, at least he had not parted with them the last Year,
which was the Year 1694. They were then Eighteen Years old, and he told me
sincerely, that notwithstanding their age, he would not part with them for two
of the best Coach Horses in the whole Province.

I was willing to give you an account of so extraordinary a thing, before I
proceeded any further in giving you a Relation of what happened to me after my
arrival in Paris, till I settled at Samur. For besides that I shall soon pursue
the Thread of my former Relation; I was of opinion I ought not to pass by in
silence so extraordinary an Adventure, which as it often makes a great noise in
the World, yet are the Learned so divided about it in their opinions, that many
believe nothing at all of it. It was I say, partly upon this Score, that I was
willing to relate what I have been an Eyewitness of in this kind to convince
some incredulous People, but especially the Atheists of this Truth; That there
are Spirits. For, what else but a Spirit could do such a thing? And that
consequently there is a God, with whose permission these things are done, as
being the Supreme Ruler of these Spirits.

But to return where we left off before. I told you that the Head Farmers had
attached my Bills of Exchange, so that when I came to demand the payment of
from my Bankers at Paris, they told me they could not safely pay them till the
attachment were taken off, which I had neglected to take care of, before I left
Samur. Thus I found my self under a necessity of making my Application to the
Farmers General, and was fain to attend several times at their Office before I
could obtain a Discharge for these Bills, which could not be done but at a full
Meeting; which detained me several days longer at Paris than at first I
intended. But a new accident, which happened to my Spouse's Chambermaid,
proved the occasion of a new delay in my Journey, when I was just ready to
leave the City. I lodged in an Inn in St. Denys-street, at the sign of the Iron
Cross; and fearing that my Wife's Chambermaid, who understood not one word of
French, might mistake her way, if she should go abroad without a Guide, I
desired the Cook-maid of the Inn, one Sunday, to go with her to Mass, and to
reconduct her home: But the Cook-maid, instead of being careful in what she had
promised to do, left the Chambermaid in St. James's Church in the
Butchers-street, making only a sign to her, that she should expect her return
there. The Chambermaid, who understood her meaning, stayed for her accordingly
in the Church, without the least uneasiness; but hearing the Clock strike nine,
and being afraid to be chid by her Mistress, if she should stay longer,
ventured to try to find the way home alone, though she did not know which way to
turn; she asked several People the way to the Iron Cross, but not understanding
what she meant, no body could direct her.

A Woman who had observed her at some distance, approached her at last, making
a sign to follow her, in order as she believed, to conduct her to the Inn. With
this intention she followed her pretended Guide, whom she saw knock at a Door,
at the sign of the Scissors, but seeing this was not the place she looked for,
she kept at some distance from the House. The Woman perceiving she was afraid
to venture into the House, made her a sign to stay a little, till she could
come again; and so up one pair of Stairs she went, and returned immediately
with a Dutch Woman which lodged in her House. This Dutch Woman asked the
Chambermaid what Country-woman she was, and what she wanted? desiring her to
come just up Stairs, and to tarry a moment, till such time, that the Woman who
had conducted her hither, could dispatch some little necessary Business, when
she would be ready to show her the Inn she inquired after. They had much ado to
understand one another, there being a remarkable difference betwixt the German
and Dutch Tongues. However, as there are many words which have a great relation
to one another in both, and the main difference consists in the pronunciation;
our Chambermaid could easily guess at their meaning, and was at last prevailed
upon to go with them up Stairs. The first thing they did after they had got her
in, was to conduct her into a handsome Appartment backwards, where they
entertained her with a good Breakfast; besides which, they plied her so warmly
with Strong Water and other sorts of Liquors, which soon seized the Brains,
that the Gentlewoman began to forget whither she was bound; and thus continuing
to let the Cup go about briskly, according to the German fashion, it was not
long before she found her self to stand in need of some Repose, to disperse the
Vapors arising from the Strong-Liquors she had taken.

The Chambermaid was beholding for this good Cheer, not so much to the good
inclinations of her new Landlady, as to her own Beauty; for it seems her
Profession was to debauch young Wenches, and to dispose of them to such as
would pay her a good round Sum. Accordingly this young Woman was no sooner
laid in Bed, but away she went to a certain Abbot, who was a good Customer of
hers, (whom, out of a motive of Charity, I will forbear to name at this time)
whom she told, that she had a rare Purchase for him, a delicate handsome young
Woman, who would fit his Appetite. She told him without question, by what
chance she was fallen into her Hands, and that he ought to make use of his good
Fortune, which did not present at all times. But whatever her Persuasions may
have been, they were so prevailing upon the Monsieur L'Abbe, that he was at the
House as soon as herself. They found a handsome Dinner prepared for them, and
the whole Company dined together, who all drank briskly to the German, the
better to dispose her to take the Bait they intended to give her. The Abbot was
indeed very careful on his side, not to give the least suspicion of his design;
nevertheless the Chambermaid, whether she mistrusted her Landlady, or that she
was ashamed to drink so much again, could not be prevailed upon to drink to any
excess. After Dinner was over, the Woman of the House, the Dutch Woman and the
Abbot went out of the Room: But it was not long before the last returned alone,
and made his Addresses to the fair German, whom at last he attempted to Ravish.

It is a very hard matter for me to tell you the whole truth of what passed
there; for though the Chamber Maid herself upon examination, stood it out to the
last, that he had not debauched her; there were others who affirmed the
contrary; and the Dutch Woman declared in her Depositions, that she had not
only lain with the Abbot, but with two others afterward, the Landlady having
disposed of her Maidenhead three several times. In the mean while, we were in a
peck of troubles about the long stay of our Maid; all the answer we could get
from the Cook-Maid, who was to have been her Guide, being, that she did not
find her in St. James's Church in the Butcher's Street, where she had made her
a sign to stay for her return. Thus we continued for six days together, without
hearing one word of her, which made us give her over for lost. To confess the
truth, I for my part, could not think her to be altogether so innocent as she
would make herself; because the next following Saturday after she was lost, the
Hostler of our Inn happened to pass by the House, where she was lying in the
Window; she called out pretty loud to him in our German Tone, Munsour, Munsour,
which made him look up that way, from whence he had perceived the Voice to
come, but could see nothing but her Forehead, because her Landlady perceiving
her to call to somebody, caught her about the Middle, and snatched her away
from the Window.

Nevertheless, this proved the real occasion of her discovery; for the Hostler
was no sooner come back to the Inn, but he told my Coachman what he had heard
and seen, and that he believed it was the voice of my Spouse's Chambermaid.
The Coachman having related to me what he had heard from the Hostler, I
inquired of him the name of the Street, and what Sign it was at; which I was no
sooner informed of, but I sent abroad a certain Person, to spy out what sort
of People they were that lived at the House he had told me, being willing to
have a more certain foundation to go upon than the Hostler's word, before I
would make any noise of the matter. It is to be observed, that this Woman did
not keep a public Bawdy House, as innumerable others do at Paris; but she
carried on her Trade with a great deal of cunning and secrecy, and her
Reputation was so well established among her Neighborhood, that there was not
one who would give her an ill word, all that we were able to learn being no
more than this: That there Lodged a young Dutch Woman at her House; That
indeed, some few Men were seen sometimes to go thither, but that they went for
her Husband's Relations; for she had one who carried himself so handsomely in
all outward appearance among his Neighbors, that both he and she lived in very
good Reputation.

But, as ill Fortune would have it, a Cobbler kept his Stall just over against
the House, who indeed gave them a very good Character, as well as the rest, but
withal told our Spy, that there was a certain foreign Woman in the House,
whose Shoes he had mended within two days before; and being asked what kind of
Woman she was, he gave such, an exact description of her, that when I heard of
it, I did not any further question, but that it was the same Person we wanted.
I had before consulted with Mr. de Gouteux, one of the Bankers, upon whom I had
a Bill of Exchange, concerning what was best to be done in the matter, and it
was he, who had recommended me the Person, who served us as a Spy to discover
them. I gave him therefore an account of what reason we had to suspect this
House, and he agreeing with me in the same opinion, he went the next morning
with me to a Commissary, who was of his Acquaintance, to go along with me to
search the House. We came thither about nine a Clock, and going up streightways
the first pair of Stairs, we knocked at the Door; but in lieu of opening the
Doors, they told us through the Keyhole, that the Mistress of the House was
gone abroad, and had double locked the Doors.

Because we would enter the House without causing any suspicion, the Commissary
had ordered his Clerk to carry his Gown, which he did not put on till we were
upon the Stairs; so that we got up without being perceived by any body. The
Woman of the House returning in the mean while, and finding every thing quiet
about the House, (which else seldom happens upon such like occasions) did not
in the least mistrust the matter, and so straight up Stairs she came to the
very Chamber Door; but so soon as she cast her Eyes upon us, she changed
color, without being able to speak one word. The Commissary looking upon it as
a certain mark of guilt, asked her without any further words for the Key. At
the same time the German and Dutch Woman hearing the noise without, spoke to
one another, so as to be overheard by us; nevertheless, being still in some
uncertainty, whether this was the Voice of her I looked for, or not, I called
her by her Name, and asked her in the German Tongue, whether it was she or not.
She answered me immediately ja Her, which is as much as, Yes, Master; so that
the thing being now beyond all question, the Commissary gave the signal to his
Clerk, to fetch his Emissaries, who lay concealed in a neighboring Alley. The
Woman at first refused to deliver the Key, under pretense that she had forgot
it, in the place from whence she came last, offering at the same time to go and
fetch it. But seeing the Emissaries appear, and that the Commissary ordered his
Clerk to go and fetch a Lock-smith to pick the Lock, she threw her self at his
Feet and delivered the Key.

After we were entered the Room, the Commissary examined the Chambermaid, the
Dutch Woman, a young Wench of about fifteen Years of Age, and the Woman of the
House, each of them separately, having before ordered his Followers to take
care, they should not speak to one another. I supplied the place of an
Interpreter to my Wife's Chambermaid, from whom, and what was deposed by the
rest, I learned the whole matter, as I have related it just now. They were all
carried to Prison except my Wife's Chambermaid; and the Commissary would
likewise have seized upon the Furniture of the House, which indeed was none of
the worst, if the Landlord, under pretense of some Rent due to him, had not
prevented it; so a Guard was set in the House, as it is usual upon such like
occasions.

After our Chambermaid was got with us in the Inn again, and had given us an
exact account of the whole matter, Mr. Gouteux, whose advise I took in every
thing before, was of opinion to lay an Action against the Abbot, whom he knew
to be very Rich, and that he would rather part with some Money, than expose
himself in a Law Suit of this nature. His advice being looked upon as very
feiseable, we resolved to follow it, and thus I entered my Action against him
in the Chamber-Maid's Name* He was so alarmed at it, that he immediately
engaged one Mr. Van Gangel, another Banker of Paris, to speak with Mr. Gouteux
to interceed with me, not to proceed any further against him. Mr. Van Gangel
offered likewise a small Present, in hopes the Chambermaid would take it in
lieu of Satisfaction; but I would not let her accept his Offer. After several
Interviews, I was at last prevailed upon to accept of a hundred Lewis dor's for
her use, whereas, if we had stood it out to the last, I believe we might have
had a much greater Sum.

Before this last Adventure happened to us, I went to pay a Visit to Madam
Sanguin (whom I have mentioned before) to know from her whether my Father were
as yet living, and what was become of my Sister. I went thither in my Coach,
and I may say it without Vanity, that there are not two finer Coach Horses in
all Paris, than those two I had at that time in the Coach. Her Porter had lived
with the old Mr. de Bordeaux, and had seen me there a thousand times;
nevertheless, when my Footman told him my Name, he did not in the least think
it was I, being prepossessed with the opinion, that I was no more among the
living. I called to him my self to come nearer to the Coach, which when he had
done, and heard me speak, he was in the greatest surprise in the World, to find
it was my self, having forgot my Physiognomy by reason of my long absence, though
the Wound which I had received in the Face at the Battle of Dunkirk, made me
very remarkable.

But Madam Sanguin herself was more surpised than her Porter, and told my
Footman who spoke to her, that it could not be, because I had been dead many
Years ago; and when I approached her, I found her as much amazed, as if my
Ghost had appeared to her. She asked me three or four times, whether it were
possible that it was I, and whether it was I indeed? After I had given her
reiterated assurances that it was I indeed, she then told me, that it was not
my long absence alone, but something more real, which had occasioned her
surprise to see me alive. She then told me, how my Sister having taken a
resolution to Marry, did not only give it out, that about two Years after my
departure out of France, I had been beheaded at Metz for Coining, but that
also, to confirm the truth of it, she had produced a Certificate signed by four
Soldiers, who pretending to have belonged to the same Company, had testified
the whole truth of the matter, which she had caused to be Registered in due
form.

I having formerly had so many proofs of the malicious inclinations of my
Sister, was not much surpised at what Madam Sanguin told me: and I desired her
at the same time, to give me a further account of what was become of her since.
She answered me, that soon after, she had got such an ascendant over my Father,
who was very old, that she persuaded him to sell his Estate, which he had
actually done to one Mr. Barriar, who paid him 28000 Livers for it; that she
had put the greatest part of it out upon Bonds, under her Name, and the rest
she had brought up with her to Paris, in hopes to catch some body or other;
that she had played the part of a Lady of Quality there so long, till all her
ready Money being spent, she had been forced to dispose of all her Bonds,
except one of 14000 Livers, due to her from the Baron d'Aunais, a Gentleman of
Normandy, near Alenson; that she had endeavored to dispose of that likewise,
but could not meet with a Purchaser, because the Baron's Affairs were looked
upon to be but in an ill posture. That the Baron died soon after, and leaving
more Debts than Effects to pay them, she had lost her 14000 Livers; that my
Father, who had lived of late near Alenson, had spent what was remaining by
degrees, and had left so little now, as to be reduced to a degree of Poverty.

These were very unwelcome Tidings to me; and to add to my Affliction, I was
also informed that my Brother by the Mother's side, had consumed his Estate of
about 300 pounds per Annum, which made me alter my resolution of settling my
self in that Country. Madam Sanguin having given me a relation of the present
condition of my Family, she was very desirous to understand from my own Mouth,
what Fortune had attended me, since my departure out of France. I told her
among other things, in what manner I had made my Fortune in Germany, at which
she appeared extremely well satisfied, and paid a Visit to my Spouse the next
day I took then a resolution to make the Province of Languedock the Seat of my
Fortune, after I had taken a turn to Bordeaux, whither I was obliged to go
first, to look after a Debt, due to me from a Person, unto whom I had lent a
Sum of Money, whilst I was in the Brandenburgh Service. I did take my way over
Orleans; and coming to Loudun, the Weather and Ways began to be so bad, (the
Season being far advanced) that I was forced to resolve to tarry there all the
Winter.

From Loudun to Thevars is no more than five Leagues, whither I went to wait on
the Princess of Tarente, who was retired thither after the death of her Spouse:
She did me the Honor to invite me to Dinner, and hearing me speak of settling
my self in Languedock, she did all she could could to engage me to stay there
abouts. She told me in the most obliging manner in the World, that if I would
resolve to buy an Estate of the dependence of the Duke de Tremoville her Son,
she would take care it should be made so easy to me, that I should have all
the reason in the World to be satisfied with it. There were also several other
honest Gentlemen of my Acquaintance at Loudun, who most earnestly desired me to
live among them, and my Wife seemed to be very well pleased with this Country,
all which together, was a sufficient inducement to me, to go and take a view of
a very fine new Seat, not above two Leagues distant from Loudun, built by
Monsieur de la Grilliere Counselor of State, not long before his death. In his
Life time there had belonged a considerable Estate to it, which being after his
death divided betwixt his Heirs, each had disposed of his share to several
Purchasers; so that nothing was left of it entire now, and undespos'd of, but
that part which fell to his share, who was now owner of the House. I was
mightily taken with the Beauty and Uniformity of the Building, which in all its
parts was equivalent to a Castle, and might well have deserved that Name, if
according to the Custom of the Country, this Name could be given to any Edifice
that has no Towers.

All that was now left belonging to the House, consisted only in two Farms, a
Mill, some Marshy Grounds, and two Closes of Vineyards, which perhaps might
yield about Thirty Pipes of Wine per Annum. I purchased this Estate first, and
afterward rejoined to it some other parcels of Land, which had been sold from
it before; as likewise several adjacent Fields, which were conveniently
situated, to make the whole the more entire.

THE MEMOIRS OF JOHN BAPTIST De La Fontaine, Knight. LIB. IV.
AFter I had settled my self near Loudun, I went to see my Father and Sister,
who at that time lived at Falaise. Finding them in a very low condition, so as
to stand in need of my assistance, I offered them my House, which they readily
accepted of. My Wife gave them a very kind Entertainment, and my Sister lived
with us so quietly for the first six Months, that I begun to conceive great
hopes, she had of late changed her former ill inclinations. But it seems, she
was not able to hold out longer, for in a little while after, she began to
attempt to act the Mistress of the House, which so much displeased my Spouse,
that she took an opportunity to complain of it to me. I therefore desired my
Sister to alter her Measures, and to consider, that as I owed every thing to my
Spouse, so I ought to take care, that she might not be displeased in her own
House. This was a very unpleasing Lesson to my Sister, though I spoke it with all
the fairness and moderation imaginable, which made her persuade my Father, to
require a Yearly Pension from me. The old Gentleman grown frail, by reason of
his great Age, consented to her request, and signed a Bill to be preferred
against me, in which he demanded a Yearly Allowance of 500 Crowns.

Having soon got notice of their design, I spoke to my Father about it, which
made him burst out into Tears like a Child. I could not but be moved with
Compassion, which made me say no more of it for that time; but I took the next
opportunity to persuade him, that our best way would be to send my Sister into
a Nunnery, which he consented to. She had played her part so ill, that being
ashamed to see the Face of any body thereabouts, she was glad to be gone. But
in lieu of going into a Monastery, she took her way directly to Malicorne,
where at that time lived Mrs. Launai, of whom I have spoken before. She did
tell her, that knowing how much she always had loved me, she was sure she could
not bring her a more welcome News, than that I was not only revived, but was
also come lately into France, with a Wife and five Children. That I had Married
a great Fortune in Germany, and had now bought my self a very fine Estate, in
the Province of Anjou.

The Gentlewoman was so Amazed at the recital she made her, that for a
considerable time she remained without Sense or Motion. It is to be observed
that not long before I left France, my Father had summoned her into Court, to
prove that our Marriage being Illegal ought to be declared void: His Proof was
founded upon my Minority, and the false Certificates I had made use of, and
knowing that the same Plea of my Minority had carried the cause against my
English Spouse, of which I have given you the History before, he did not
question but the same would also stand good against this. Mrs. de Launai put in
her Answer, in which she showed that she was a Minor as well as my self, when
we were Married, and that having been always of an unblemished Reputation,
there was not the least Reason for me to be ashamed of the Match. But
notwithstanding what was offered in her behalf, the Judge of the Memmers,
before whom the Cause was pleaded, did by his Decree Annul the said Marriage.
Mrs. Launai, appealed from this Court to the Parliament; but whilst she was
proceeding with all imaginable vigor against me, the news of my supposed
Death, confirmed by the Certificate forged by my Sister, as I have told you
before, proved the occasion, that this matter remained undecided.

Mrs. de Launai afterward Married a Lawyer, whose Name was Besnard, with whom
she lived very contentedly at that time, when my Sister disturbed her Repose;
Besnard having married her for a Widow, had since had two Children by her. He
was no sooner informed of the matter, but he resolved to act the part of a good
Lawyer, that is, he was resolved to get as much Money out of me as he could. I
cannot be positive, whether my Sister was engaged in this part of the Cabal, for
she has always stiffly denied it to me.

But whether she was or not, Mrs. Launai took a Journey to Samur, from whence
she writ me a Letter, in which she called me her unfaithful Husband, and that I
lived in Adultery with another Woman. I was extremely vexed at this Letter,
foreseeing that this Business, would prove the occasion of great discontents in
my Family, especially to my Spouse. I judged it therefore most convenient, to
go and see Mrs. Besnard at Samur; after I had with a great deal of Patience
born all her Reproaches, I offered her a good Present, to prevent any
disturbance, which I feared would arise from thence in my Family, but she
refusing to hearken to what I proposed, I returned to my own home. I had scarce
been there an hour when she came boldly into the House, with all the assurance
that could be; and told my Spouse, that she being my true Wife, it would be
best for her to pack up her Baggage, and to carry away her Bastards along with
her; that she would make her know who was Mistress of the House, and that she
should not lie there as much as one Night longer.

Besnard, her Husband, on the other hand, acted his part likewise to the life,
pretending that he would not receive his Wife into his House. Whilst I was thus
beset on all sides, not knowing which way to turn my self first, a certain
Person living at Loudun, whom I knew no more than by sight, came to see me. He
told me, that being a Relation of Mrs. Launai, and my Friend, he would
endeavor to bring the matter to an Accommodation betwixt us; That it was a
thing granted, that I ought not to have Married, as long as an Appeal was
lodged against me, and that consequently my last Marriage must be invalid, till
such time I had obtained a Decree from the Parliament; that every thing that
depended on the Judgment of Mankind, ought to be looked upon as uncertain; that
perhaps the Parliament might confirm the Decree of the Judge of Memmers,
perhaps not; that the shortest and surest way would be for me, to come to a
Composition with Mrs. Besnard, by which means I might obtain a Decree suitable
to my purpose. I did at first not in the least relish this Proposition, as
being of opinion, that my case was so clear in it self, as not to stand in need
of Mrs. Besnard's consent to carry it against her: But my Spouse would not rest
satisfied, till I had accepted of his Mediation, so that rather than disoblige
her, I consented to pay Mrs. Besnard 2000 Livers, provided she would procure me
a Decree, to declare our former Marriage invalid, which was done accordingly.

My Sister was all this while at Malicorne, and had got a good Gratuity from
Mrs. Besnard, for her good Counsel, which, with what Money I had given her when
she left my House, she afterward spent at Alenson. Being thus again in
distress, she writ to Madam de Marle, who had known her before, when her
Husband was Intendant of the Generality, offering her Service as a Governess to
her Daughters. They were very ready to accept of her offer, and desired her to
come forthwith to them into Auvergne, Monsieur de Marle being at that time
Intendant of that Province.

Just before her arrival, Madam de Marle happened to die, which made Monsieur
de Marle to be very glad of her Company, supposing she might in some measure,
repair to his Daughters the loss of their Mother: And to speak truth, matters
went on pretty smoothly at first; but it was not long, before she gave them
some proofs of her malicious Temper, which was never in its proper Element,
unless when she could set People together by the Ears. This made her send word
to Madam de Bragelone, Sister to Monsieur de Marle, that he was in Love with a
Chambermaid, and that unless he might be prevailed upon by her persuasions, he
would certainly Marry her; she desired her above all things not to divulge the
Secret, which otherwise would take away from her all the opportunity for the
future, of giving her further information of what passed in the Family.

Madam de Bragelone being much surpised at so odd a piece of News, writ a
Letter about it to her Brother, who could not imagine from whence she had it,
but had not in the least suspected my Sister, if by her own imprudence she had
not betrayed herself, having advised his Daughters to throw themselves at their
Father's Feet, to beg of him to turn the said Chambermaid out of Doors. This
was enough for Monsieur de Marle to guess, who 'twas had procured his Sisters
Letter to him; so that, to rid his hands of such a Spy, he sent his Daughters
and their Governess to a Neighboring Nunnery.

But she pursued the same trade after she was in the Nunnery, where she
constantly embroiled the Nuns among themselves, and sometimes the Abbess with
the Nuns; so that being quite tired out with her, they desired Monsieur de
Marle to deliver them from so restless a Spirit, or else they must beg him to
take his Daughters home again. Monsieur de Marle, who had pardoned her first
Trespass, thought it best to lay hold of this opportunity, to rid his Hands of
her for ever.

Thus she came once more to Samur, from whence she writ a Letter to my Father,
giving an account unto what condition she was reduced. He showed me the Letter,
and assured me in her behalf, that she was heartily sorry for her former
Miscarriages, and that if I would once more receive her into my House, he would
engage his Honor, she should behave herself so for the future, as that we
should not have the least reason to repent of it. The respect I bore to my
Father was so powerful over me, that I could not refuse his Request; though it
was not long, before I had sufficient occasion to repent of it.

I told you before, that my Brother by the Mother's side had consumed all his
Estate; he had a great many Children, and among the rest a very handsome
Daughter, whom I had taken into my House. My unlucky Sister had been so
malicious, as to whisper into my Spouse's Ears, that I had a more than ordinary
kindness for this young Woman, which occasioned a secret grudge betwixt us,
before my Wife disclosed to me the real cause of it; which I soon removed by
putting the young Woman into a Nunnery.

About the same time there fell a slender Inheritance to my Sister and me, of
about 3000 Livers each; and considering with my self, that she who had spent so
much Money already, would soon dispatch also this small Pittance: I proposed to
my Father a way to prevent it, by attaching it for his use; he having several
Bonds and other Deeds in his Hands, by which she acknowledged to have received
the greatest part of the Money, which he sold his Estate for. These Deeds I
told him, were a sufficient proof against her, to entitle him to an Attachment
of this late Inheritance. My Father agreed with me in opinion, and resolving to
put my advice in Execution, he went to his Trunk to look for these Papers, but
could not find them. He charged his Servant with them, but he denied it
utterly. At last I began to threaten him severely, telling him, that I would
send him to the Lieutenant (or Judge) Criminal, to extort a Confession from
him. This put him into such a fear, that throwing himself at our Feet, he
ingenuously confessed, how my Sister had enticed him to take away a little
Trunk of my Father's, in which were all his Writings, and secretly to convey it
at night into her Chamber, which he had done accordingly, together with the
Key, which according to her directions he had taken out of my Father's Pocket;
that he had seen my Sister open the Trunk, who took out of it a certain Deed,
which, after she had perused it well, she threw into the Fire; that la Rose was
likewise present when this was done, who also did read the Deed, before it was
burnt.

This la Rose was an old Servant of my Father's, who had lived with him above
Forty Years; he lived now at Alenson, and came frequently to see his old Master
in my House. He had always been a great Favorite of my Sisters, and she had
been God-Mother to one of his Children. He happened to be just then at our
House, when my Father's Servant made the beforementioned Confession; so we
sent for him up Stairs, and being confronted with one another, he could not
contradict what the other had told; so made an ingenuous Confession of the
whole matter. Then it was we made our Complaints to the Judge Criminal, to take
cognizance of the matter, who Examined both the Servants, and the next day gave
Judgment against my Sister, and the Servant who had carried the Trunk to her
Chamber. We went afterward to a Counselor, who assured us that the proofs
made before that Judge, were more than sufficient to entitle my Father to a
legal Attachment of all the Goods and Effects, which could be proved to belong
in any wise to my Sister.

But it was not long, before I had both my Hands full of other matters, which
were of much more consequence to me. My Spouse's Mother-in-law, who hitherto
had been always of opinion, that I would return into Germany, having got notice
that I had purchased an Estate, and was settled in France, writ to the Danish
Ambassador, then residing at Paris, desiring him to make as narrow enquiry as
possibly he could, whether I had not sold some of the Jewels and other precious
Movables, which she had formerly laid to my Brother-in-laws Charge; for which
purpose she had enclosed a Memorandum, describing their Qualities, Weights, and
other such like Circumstances, which she judged might be most proper for the
discovery of what she intended to know. The Ambassador, who was her Kinsman,
sent this Memorandum to all the Goldsmiths of Paris; but being deceived in his
expectation there, he procured Letters from the Consistory of Charenton to
those of Loudun, wherein they promised in his Name, the Sum of 10000 Livers,
as a Reward to such Person or Persons, as should be able to make a discovery of
them. But I had taken such sure measures as to this point, that all the pains
they took proved labor in vain.

Nevertheless, as this was a business of such a nature, that no body could
penetrate into the true meaning of it, without my own Interpretation; this gave
occasion of various Discourses to inquisitive Persons, who Romanc'd upon it
according to their different Opinions and Inclinations. But there was one
Story, which passed for the most current and truest, being founded, as it was
reported, upon the relation of a certain Merchant, whose Name was Guicherit,
who being a Native of Loudun, was since settled at Amsterdam.

He used sometimes to come to Paris, to buy some French Commodities; and was
from thence lately come to Loudun, to see his Brothers and other Relations, who
lived in that City. After his return into Holland, it began to be noised about,
that his chief Errand at Loudun, had been to make an enquiry after me, to take
notice of my Person, of which he had taken an exact description, according to a
Picture he had brought along with him for that purpose. It was reported, that
whilst I was in Holland, destitute of Friends and Money, I used to exercise
several Trades, and especially went for a Perukemaker and a Jeweller; that I
used to stick at nothing to get Money. That whilst I was at Amsterdam, I had
been a kind of a Broker in Jewels, under a Burgo-Master of Hoorn, called John
Wyntges, one of the Directors of the East India Company, who had great store of
these precious Commodities, which made me frequently to travel betwixt Hoorn
and Amsterdam. That I had made Love to one of the Domestics of the said
Burgo-Master, who had neither Wife nor Children; that at last I had Married
this Woman, who was born at Alcmar, and the Daughter of one Vinioles a
Waterman; that this was the same I had brought along with me into France, and
who lived with me then at Loudun.

That for the rest, it was not altogether improbable, but that I might have
been Married in Germany, because, besides several other Circumstances, I had
been once overheard to say, that my elded Son, who died as I told you before,
was by a first Wife.

It was alleged, that besides what had been related concerning my Wife's
Extraction, it was no difficult matter to find out by her whole Behavior, that
she was no Person of any Quality; because she had been seen in a Jacket,
sometimes of Plush, sometimes of Stuff, such as the ordinary People wear in
Holland. That after we had taken possession of our Seat near Loudun, my Wife
finding fault with the Glass Windows, which were not very bright, had mounted
upon a Ladder herself, and washed them with a Brush as they do in Holland. That
a great many People had seen her rub the Window Glasses, being mounted on the
top of the Ladder. which had at least Thirty Steps, and consequently might be
seen at a good distance above the Wall belonging to the House. That this had
made a great noise among the Neighborhood, who did not know what to make of
it, till Guicherit had unravel'd the matter, and told them that it was the
custom of Holland. That no body could take her for a Person of Quality, her
whole Behavior having no resemblance to it, unless it were that she never
combed herself, but had always her Hair done up by a Servant. But Guicherit had
likewise unfolded this Riddle, by telling them, that in Holland even the
meanest Servants scarce ever dressed their own Hair, but that every where there
were certain Women, who made it their livelihood to do it for them.

It was further added, that her mean deportment, was not only taken notice of
by the Citizens Wives of Loudun, or the Country Gentlewomen, who lived near
her, but likewise by many Ladies of great Quality; as for Instance, by the
Ladies of the House of Chatre, and many others, who had lived for a
considerable time at Court, and had been very conversant in the Duchess of
Longueville's Family; who, as they were unquestionable Judges of such a point
as this, so it was certain, that they were of the same opinion with the
Neighboring Gentry, and had declared that there were a thousand Circumstances
to be observed in her Carriage, which had not the least Affinity with those
belonging to a Person of a noble Birth, whether German or French.

Thus they would by all means make my Wife a Servant of the Burgo-Master
Wyntges. And to make up the Story, it was related with a great deal of
confidence, that after I had Married her, I had the good fortune, by many good
Offices, and the readiness I always showed to the Burgo-Master, to be
serviceable to him upon all occasions, to get such an ascendant over him after
some Years were passed, that he trusted me with the whole management of his
Affairs. That at last the Burgo-Master having undertaken a Journey, and left us
absolute Masters of his House in his absence, we had taken that opportunity to
seize upon all his Jewels and Gold, and so to retire first into Flanders, and
from thence into France; it being the easiest thing in the World, to convey any
thing secretly out of Holland, by reason of the convenience of the Carriage, if
there is no mistrust in the case.

That which confirmed them in this opinion was, as they said, that a Servant of
mine, whom I had brought along with me out of Holland, had told to some of his
Acquaintance at Loudun, that in my Journey I was sorely afraid of being
pursued, which was the reason I never took the great Road, as I was coming into
France; and that he had observed even in Flanders, that I had caused some
Countrymen to cut down several Trees, which hindered my passage through some by
Roads.

It was further reported, that the Burgo-Master Wyntges did ever since make a
most exact enquiry after me, and was at last by chance given to understand,
that there was a certain Merchant at Amsterdam, whose Name was Guicherit, and
who could tell him some Tidings of me. That my sudden arrival and Settlement
near Loudun, together with the repute of my vast Riches both in Jewels and
Money, having made me be looked upon by the People, no otherwise than if I had
been possessed of all the Treasures of Croesus; and that the noise of these
Riches, being at last come to the Ears of some belonging to Guicherit's Family,
they had first canvass'd the matter among themselves, and at last imparted the
whole to Guicherit at Amsterdam.

It was likewise related that the Burgo-Master having got some scent of the
matter, he found out Guicherit, and having inquired of him what he wanted to
know concerning my present condition, he had prevailed with him to undertake
this Journey to Loudun* after he had first engaged him to write to his Brother,
who was then one of the Consistory of Loudun, and is now a Refugee in Holland.

Those that were the contrivers of this Story, had likewise framed several
Circumstances to make it pass the more current; and as a Story never loses by
telling, so every body did add to it, what he found most suitable to his own
guess or opinion. I verily believe, that if it were possible for me to know,
but half what was laid to my charge, and the various Discourses that were had
upon that Subject, and how I acted my part in Holland, I say, it would
questionless furnish me with matter sufficient, for a good large old fashioned
Romance.

But after all these malicious Reflections and Threats, the whole matter came
to nothing, and my Adversaries were Eyewitness of my living among them
undisturbed. For Guicherit, upon whose return they had founded all their Hopes,
never came afterward to Loudun, and no body ever attempted to make any enquiry
after my Affairs, since the Memorandum sent by the Danish Ambassador. They
began then to look at one another, not knowing what to make of it; and if they
had not been prepossessed with a strong prejudice against me, it had been easy
for them to judge, that all these Discourses were founded upon false
suppositions. But as a malicious Tongue is so far from retracting, that it
rather heaps Calumnies upon Calumnies, so they contrived a way to unriddle the
matter after their own Head. For it was not long before it was rumored about,
that soon after Guicherit was returned to Amsterdam, the Burgo-Master Wyntges
happened to die at Hoorn; and that his Estate being divided among several
Heirs, they were so well satisfied with that vast Treasure he had left among
them, that they did not think fit to make up a Purse among them to prosecute me
at so great a distance, and that neither of them had thought it worth his while
to do it upon his own particular account.

Thus I escaped the whole danger, by being made a Country talk for some time,
which indeed I little valued at that time; though afterward, I was at several
times made sensible of the ill effects of it; These Titles of Vagabond and
Sharper, which they had been pleased to bestow upon me, having made very odd
Impressions upon a great many People, who at least believed some part of what
they heard so generally reported.

It was questionless this, which encouraged the Head Keeper of the Duke of
Tremoville, to write me a Rhodomontado Letter, under pretense that I had hunted
in his Master's Lordship. This was true in effect, but it was done with the
Duke's consent, who knew I would not abuse his Favor, and that a considerable
time ago, I had belonged to and been conversant in his Family; which had made
him write to me, that I might Hunt in his Jurisdiction, when, where, and as
often as I pleased. I took particular care not to give him the least reason of
Complaint; but whether it was, that his Headkeeper looked upon me as an
inconsiderable Fellow, by reason of these beforementioned Discourses, or
whether he was set on by a neighboring Gentleman with whom I had a Law Suit,
and who was a particular Acquaintance of his; he writ to me in such haughty
terms, as if he had been the Duke himself, and I one of his under-Keepers. I
answered him, that I found he had copied this Letter after one of those his
Master used to write to him, and many other smart Reflections: He being a
Gentleman by Birth, found himself so much affronted at it, that he made his
Complaints to the Marshals of France, who sent me a Summons to appear before
them at Paris. But the thing having reached the Duke de Tremoville's Ear, and
being unwilling to have him exposed before the Marshals of France, he chid him
in my presence, telling him, that he had forced this Reply from me by his own
Impertinency, and after he had perused the Letter he had writ to me, he told
him, that he ought not to have writ such a Letter to the worst Gentleman of the
whole Province. So having commanded him to ask my pardon, the matter was
composed betwixt our selves.

In the mean while I began to grow weary of the Country, which made me
undertake a Journey to Paris, where I paid a Visit to Monsieur Sanguin,
desiring him to make use of his Interest in my behalf, to obtain a Commission
in the Army, which had always been my profession. It was at that time strongly
discoursed at Court, that four new Companies were to be established, which were
to belong to the Ordnance, to wit, one of Germans, one of Poles, one of Swedes
and one of Hussars; but this Project being laid aside for that time, my Journey
proved fruitless. Nevertheless, we did not live without hopes to see the War
soon re-kindled, because the Spaniards refused to give satisfaction to our
King, concerning his pretensions upon Alost. Several Conferences were held upon
this account at Courtray, whither both Kings had sent their Deputies to treat
about it, and compose the difference in an amicable way. Lewis the Great, had
also proposed to leave it to the Arbitration of his Britannick Majesty, but the
Spaniards did not think fit to accept of it. This made the King to order his
Troops, to enter in an Hostile manner the Spanish Territories, which proved
very troublesome to the Spaniards; notwithstanding which, the Prince of Orange,
who had his particular design, did, by the great Influence he had upon that
Court, dissuade them from giving us due satisfaction. Thus it came to an open
Rupture by the Seige of Luxemburgh.

Whilst the French were busied in making their Lines of Circumvallation, the
Prince of Chirnay, who was then Governor of the Place, thinking himself in a
condition to defend the place against us; caused his Music to play upon the
Walls for a Bravado, to show how little he valued our Approach. But it was not
long before he found his mistake, for he was attacked with such vigor, that he
was glad to come to a capitulation. The Dutch, who were earnestly pressed by
the Prince of Orange, to relieve the Place, finding themselves either not in a
condition to undertake it- or being not disposed at that time to follow his
advice, remained only Spectators of the Conquest of this place, without
meddling in the least in the matter.

The Spaniards were not alone extremely sensible of the loss of this place, but
the Emperor bore as great a share in it as any; finding that our King thereby,
had considerably extended his Conquests upon the Rhine, considering especially,
that he had made himself Master of Strasburgh before, as being a dependence on
Alsace. But the War, in which the Emperor was at that time engaged against the
Turks, not leaving the least room for the Imperial Court to flatter themselves,
with hopes to act with any success, at the same time upon the Rhine; it was
resolved at the Diet of the Empire, to accept of the Twenty Years Truce,
offered by his most Christian Majesty.

Not long after my return home from Paris, my Father died, in the 89th Year of
his Age. Just before his Death, he recommended my Sister to my Care, and
desired me to pardon all what was passed, and to take the same care of her, as
if she never had committed any thing against me. I promised him to do what he
desired, and it has not been my fault, that she has not reaped the Fruits of my
Promise since. Whilst he lay sick, I sent for a Physician living at
Montreville, who refused to come, asking my Servant, What I meant by sending to
him? whether I intended to play the Fool with him? it being well known, that I
understood more in Physic, than all the Country Doctors thereabouts; and upon
this occasion, I cannot forbear to tell you how it came to pass, that I
acquired the Reputation of a famous Physician.

One time being at Tours, to look after a Law Suit I was engaged in at that
time against my Sister, a certain young Woman, one of the most confiderable of
the whole City, being Sister to the Chanter (or chief manager of the Music) in
the Cathedral there, had a Swelling, which all the Physicians there did not
know what to make of. Some were of opinion it was a species of the King's Evil,
and that it must be laid open. Her Parents were very unwilling to consent to
the opening of it, because it was just upon the Knee, and consequently might
prove of dangerous consequence, by reason of the conjunction of many Nerves
near that place. Hearing by chance somebody talk of it one day, I had the
curiosity to go and see her, because I had made my observations in Germany,
that they used frequently to cure swellings upon the Knee by simple
Fomentations. I no sooner cast my Eyes upon the Swelling, but I found that it
was one of the same kind, which made me tell them, that if they would trust to
my skill, I did not question but to cure her. Her Parents having given their
consent, I got my Remedy prepared, and applied it to the Tumor. She found some
relief the same day, after the first application; and to be short, the Remedy
succeeded so well, and its effect was so quick and stupendous, that it was not
long before she could walk abroad again.

This Cure being performed upon a Person of note at Tours, I got such a
Reputation by it, that I was looked upon there, as one of the most skilful
Physicians of the Country. The best of all was, that one of the Physicians of
the City happened to be seized with a violent Cholick, proceeding from the
Gravel in the Kidneys, and after he had tried all his own Remedies, sent one of
his Acquaintance to me, to desire my Advice. I went to see him, and finding
what was the true cause of his Distemper, I gave him a certain Remedy, which I
had formerly seen prepared at Berlin, which I ordered him to take, as they
commonly do in Germany. The Composition was made of Vitriol, about half the
bigness of a large Pea, of a certain dose of Crystal mineral, and half an
ounce of Black Radish Seeds, the outward Rind of which is black, but the inside
as white as a Turnip. This I infused in White Wind, and so gave it to the
Patient. This was the whole foundation of my Doctorship. But this Remedy, as
simple as it appears, succeeded as well as the former, which made me to be
cried up all over the City of Tours, for one of the most able Physicians they
had seen a great while; so that I verily believe, if I had been put to it, I
might have got a very good livelihood by the practice of Physic there: So true
it is, that outward appearances are very deceitful, and that a slender accident
sometimes proves of great consequence. For the Nuns of Beaumont sent one to
Compliment me immediately after, who told me, that being fully persuaded of my
extraordinary ability in Physic, they hoped I would come and pay them a Visit,
but I civilly excused it.

It was much about this time, that the destruction of the Protestant Religion
in France, was warmly debated at Court: The King, who at present saw all his
Dominions enjoy the fruits of Peace and Tranquillity, without the least fear of
being disturbed in it for the future, being resolved to lay hold of this
juncture, to give the finishing stroke to the Hugonot Party. The King had for a
considerable time before, given them such evident marks of his Displeasure and
aversion to them, that there were very few in France, who did not foresee their
Ruin, except themselves. The King's aversion to them, was so generally known
and taken notice of all over the Kingdom, that many of the Roman Catholics
made it their business to affront the Protestants upon the least occasion,
either out of a preposterous Zeal, or to curry favor with the Intendants of
the Provinces, who encouraged them under hand, pursuant to the Orders they had
received from Court, to favor as much as possibly could be done, those who
should show themselves Zealots, and Instrumental in the destruction of a
Religion, which was looked upon as directly opposite to the Interest of the
State.

Upon this occasion, I cannot but relate what was done on this account, by a
certain Priest in our Neighborhood, who professed himself always a great
Zealot against the Protestants, and by his Divices was likely to have proved
the ruin of a great many People. I had about that time a Servant, a very
simple and foolish Fellow, who after he went from me, lived in the same Quality
with one of the Bailiffs of the Marshalsea of Loudun, whose Name was Cesvet
Besnard. This Fellow happened to have an amorous Intrigue with his Master's
Daughter; (which I think I may say without injustice to truth) One day as he
went to Confession to the Carmelite Friars, whose Monastery was not far from
the Bailiffs House, he happened to pitch upon a Confessor, who being an
acquaintance of his Masters, did exaggerate his Crime to the highest degree;
and among other things told him, that besides God's Vengeance which he had
drawn upon him, it was no less than Death by the Law, for a Servant to kiss his
Master's Daughter. These words made so strong an Impression upon this simple
Fellow, that believing himself every moment in danger of being hanged, he told
to another Servant of mine, as likewise to his Father, that it was high time
for him to go away at such a distance, as that no body might hear any further
tidings of him, being sensible that he had deserved Death, and living in
continual fear lest God should deservedly punish him for his Crime.

The Carmelite Friar his Confessor, having got notice in what manner his words
had wrought upon the simplicity of this poor Wretch, and willing to oblige his
Neighbor Cesvet, by removing from his Daughter an Object, which in all
likelihood would bring her in time to shame and confusion, persuaded the Fellow
to go to Gardelupe, in quality of a Servant to the Carmelite Friars there. This
poor Wretch, who had nothing to trust to, and being a Peasants Son, and
accustomed to all manner of hardship, soon accepted his offer; and being by the
Carmelite furnished with all things necessary for his Voyage, and embarked in a
good Bottom, went to Gardelupe, without giving notice to any body whither he
was to go.

In the mean while, the words he had spoke to my Servant and his Father, were
canvass'd about, and going from one to another, at last came to the knowledge
of this my neighboring Priest, of whom I spoke just now. His Name was d'Arsac
Prior of Ternai, he had a Nephew a Gentleman of that Country, of whom I shall
have occasion to say something anon. This Priest considering with himself, what
Crime it could be that had made the Fellow utter these words, concluded at
last, that it could be no less than a Sacrilege, to expiate which he had been
sent to Rome, to receive his absolution there; what confirmed him in this
conjecture was, that he had understood, this Fellow had been a Servant to a
certain Hugonot, whose Name was Chateigneraie. Being strongly possessed with
this Fancy, he concluded further, that this simple Wretch had taken out of his
Mouth the Consecrated Host, he had received at Christmas Eve, which he had
carried to his Master, who with some other Hugonots, had (as he imagined) made
some strange use of it. The worst of all was, that this Priest did not relate
this, as being the Product of his own Brains, but as if it had been told him
thus by others. He at last consulted about the matter with the Father Jesuits
of Loudun, who having related the matter to the Curate of the Parish, a
turbulent Spirit, and a declared Enemy of the Protestants, he gave information
of it before a Judge.

The Servant having received Intelligence (questionless by the means of the
Carmelites) how his Master la Chateigneraie was accused of a Crime, of which he
was altogether innocent, and that he was in danger of his Life, writ two
Letters from Gardelupe, one to his Father, the other to the Curate of the
Parish of Arsai, who was his Godfather, in which he declared that his Master
la Chateigneraie was absolutely innocent, and what Crime had been committed,
was betwixt him and the Bailiffs Daughter. His Father sent the Letter to the
owner of the Farm, in which he lived, in the Town of Renton, who being a
Hugonot, carried it to Madam Bourgneuf, who was a Catholic and Lady of the
Manor there.

Cesvet and his Kindred having understood out of this Letter, that this poor
Fellow was at Gardelupe, joined their Interest with all the Zealous Catholics
of that City, to obtain an Order for the bringing over of him from that Island,
in hopes to improve his simplicity to their advantage, and either by Threats or
Persuasions to make him change his tune, when they had him in Prison.

Thus was this unfortunate Wretch re-conducted into France, with the first
Vessel that came from thence, his Arms and Le^s Fettered, and had a Dungeon an
gn'd him for his Lodgings. The Judges of Loudun, upon the bare deposition of
the Prior, examined him concerning what was laid to his charge.

Being confronted with the Priest, he confessed that before his departure he
had spoke these Words, I have related before, but denied positively, that it
had been upon that account, as it was interpreted by the Prior, and upon whose
Evidence he stood accused. The Judges urged him to declare without
equivocation, what it was that had induced him to express himself in these
Terms; to which he answered, that the same hdd been occasioned by some
Expressions, which his Father Confessor had used to him upon another Subject,
which had terrified him to that degree, as to have spoken the said Words. The
Judges then sent for the Father Confessor, to know whether he had confessed the
truth, as to that point, but he excused himself, and would not discover what
had been confessed to him.

But Mrs. Cesvet the Bailiff's Wife, began to be very uneasy about her
Daughter, for fear of a further discovery of the matter, which made her advise
with one Mrs. Chapelet her Sister-in-law, what was, best to be done in this
exigency, to save her Daughter's Reputation. The result of the matter was, that
they should endeavor to suborn false Witnesses, to swear Sacrilege against the
poor Fellow, which they did accordingly, having procured three Women, who for
twelve Bushels of Wheat (to be given to each as a Reward) undertook to charge
him with the Sacrilege. Their Evidence, together with the Circumstances and
Words, made use of by this unfortunate Fellow, at parting with my Servant, were
more than sufficient to do his business; for which reason also, his old Master
la Chateigneraie was summoned to appear, which he did accordingly, and declared
that their Accusations were utterly false, as indeed they were.

But this would have availed him but little, it being certain that this poor
Wretch must have inevitably been lost, and many more Protestants, but
especially la Chateigneraie would have been involved in great troubles, if
among these three Women, that had been suborned to depose against the poor
Fellow, one being touched with remorse of Conscience, and detesting so foul a
Fact, had not retracted her promise, and refused to join with the others. But
though the other two persisted steadfastly in their devilish Resolution, yet it
pleased God to bring to light their black designs; they disagreeing, nay
contradicting one another in their Depositions, upon a strict Examination made
by the Judges. For, being examined separately, the Judges, among other
Questions asked the first, in what place she had heard the Prisoner give them
an account of having committed this Sacrilege; she answered, that it was in one
Mr. Besnard's (who was Uncle to the Bailiff) Warren, which according to the
Dialect of that Country, implies as much, as a Close enclosed with a Wall, as
he was weeding of Wheat: But the other, upon Examination declared, that he told
it them in the open Field, which fronts the Gates of the House.

The Judge Criminal and the King's Solicitor, who were both Persons of
Integrity, and of a far different stamp from most of the other Officers of
Justice, belonging to Loudun; but especially the King's Solicitor, being
convinced of the foulness of the thing, were resolved to try all means to
discover the truth, though with the hazard of incurring the displeasure of the
Court, in not obeying their Orders without exception.

They managed the matter with so much prudence and dexterity, that at last they
brought both these perfidious Women to a sincere Confession, how matters had
been transacted betwixt them. But the Bailiff and his Kindred, together with
many of the Zealots of the City, did not only grumble heavily against this
proceeding of the Judges, but being sensible that it was at this juncture
looked upon at Court as an unpardonable Crime, to contravene the late
Ordinances, under what pretense soever, they made heavy Complaints against them
at Court.

An Order was thereupon sent to Monsieur de Baville Intendant of Poictou, to
Summon the Judges before him, and to give an account of their Proceedings. The
Intendant obeyed his Orders* and sent his Summons to these Judges, who appeared
before him at his Sent, called la Motthe de Beaussai, in the Bailliage of
Loudun; where they gave him such ample satisfaction concerning their
Proceedings in this case* that he was fully convinced, they had acted nothing,
but what in Justice they were obliged to do.

Notwithstanding all this, and the discovery made of the subo(...)ion of the
Witnesses, this poor wretch was by the ^ajority of Voices of the Judges of the
Bailliage of Loudun sentenced, first to be put upon the Rack, and afterward to
be burnt alive. He made his appeal from their Sentence, and accordingly was
carried to Paris. I had been several times to see this unfortunate Creature in
Prison, and all his Words and whole Behavior appeared to me, so full of
natural simplicity, that if I had had no other reason to acquit him in my
Conscience, this alone, would have been a strong motive to me of his Innocence.
It was upon this score, I writ to Monsieur Berault, a famous Counselor at
Paris, to desire him to inform the Judges punctually, in what manner his Trial
had been carried on at Loudun.

But God, who protects Innocence, did ^t that very juncture, give us a most
signal Instance of his Justice, in punishing my Servant for the Crime he had
committed, in accusing this poor Fellow, on the account of what he had spoke to
him, they having not the least relation to what he was charged withal by his
Adversaries. For, before this miserable Wretch was condemned to Death, my
Servant grew furiously mad, to that degree, that no body durst come near him.
In his lucid Intervals he would frequently declare, that God had dealt justly
with him, because he had fasly accused an innocent person. But, as these
Intervals were in a manner but momentaneous, and that on the other hand, his
mad Fits returned without any remarkable Intermissions, no real account could
be made of what be said.

One day he got, unperceived by any body, out of his Lodging Room, where I kept
him out of Charity, in hopes he might recover his Senses, and stripped himself
quite naked in the open Field.

A Lad of about eighteen Years of Age, who happened to see him, did run
immediately after him, which the Madman perceiving, he hid himself behind a
Tree; but the Lad coming up pretty near to him, first played the fool with him,
and afterward pelted him with Stones: This put the Mad-Fellow into such a
fury, that he came out from behind the Tree, where he had hid himself, laid
hold of the young Lad, and after he had thrown him down upon the ground,
knocked his Brains out with a Flint-stone, which he had found accidentally;
after he had killed him, he gnawed his Face, just as if it had been done by
some voracious Creature.

Some Peasants happening to pass by that way seized him, and carried him
Prisoner to Berry, a place under the Jurisdiction of the Duke de Tremoville.
But it being known that he was a Madman, he was not tried for his Life, but the
Judges discharged him after a Months Imprisonment.

After his discharge he came again to my House, where I took care to have him
closely guarded, for fear of such another misfortune, till I could send to his
Parents to take him home. The place where he was kept was Barricado'd with Iron
Bars, but he found means to break through them; and as he was just getting out,
a Countryman, who lived in one of my Farms saw him; but being afraid to be
served as the Lad was before, he called my Warrenner to his assistance. The
Madman made up to them both, which the Warrener being aware of, he wounded him
with his Fuzee of which he died six days after. The loss of Blood occasioned by
his Wound, having restored him to his right Senses before his death, he
received the Holy Sacrament, and at the same time declared, that he had falsely
accused that unfortunate Fellow, who was then in Prison; and these his last
dying Words were put in writing, and sent to Paris for his Justification.

At last the Parliament being fully convinced of the Innocence of this poor
Wretch, not so much by the Confession of this Mad Fellow, as by several other
undeniable proofs, he was acquitted, and the two Perjured Women Sentenced to be
Whipped, and branded with the Flower-de-luce; a slight Punishment, bearing but a
slender proportion to the hainousness of their Crime, according to the Lex
Talionis. Nevertheless they thought themselves very hardly dealt withal,
considering they had stood it out to the last extremity, being inveigled by the
fair Promises made them by the Zealous Party. Thus they had flattered
themselves with hopes to escape Punishment, by their powerful Intercession; but
when they found themselves deceived in their vain hopes, and that they were
carried to the place where they were publicly Whipped, and forced besides this
to do public Penance in St. Peter's Church, they began to lament their
Condition, and to make most bitter Exclamations against those who had hired
them to commit such a Villainy; they made, I say, bitter Invectives against
Mrs. Cesvet the Bailiffs Wife, and her Sister-in-Law Mrs. Chapelet, who with
several others had been instrumental in bringing them to Shame and Confusion by
their false Promises. As for Mrs. Cesvet, and Mrs. Chapelet, they retired into
a Monastery, where they continued for some Years after, till at last they began
by degrees to appear abroad again.

But notwithstanding all this, the Prior of Ternai could not rest satisfied,
but would needs write a Letter directed to the King himself, in which he
pretended to show, that Justice had not been impartially administered in a Case,
which in a most peculiar manner, concerned no less than the Glory of God: He
remonstrates to the King, That the Heretics being encouraged by this Impunity,
would for the future, not stick at any thing, with a thousand such like
Insinuations. The King thereupon dispatched his Orders a second time to
Monsieur de Baville; who, as I told you before, was Intendant of Poictou, to
consult with the Chief Justice of Poictiers, and to examine the whole Matter in
all its Circumstances. But Monsieur de Baville, with all the pains he took, was
not able to find out any thing more than what had been done before, unless it
were to discover the extravagant Zeal and Malice of the Prior of Ternai.

This Account I was willing to give you of the preposterous Zeal of this Priest
having interrupted in some measure, my Relation of the King's Design against
the Hugonots, it will now be time to reassume the said Theme.

It is therefore to be observed, That some of the most quick-sighted among the
Protestants, who foresaw that the Thunderclap was likely to strike among them,
did propose several Assemblies to be held, to consult of Ways and Means to
prevent the Storms which they believed would prove fatal to them: For which
purpose they called together their Synods at Thouars in Poictou, and at Sorges
in Anjou. In the Synod of Sorges, there were two Protestant Ministers, one of
Bauge, the other of Painperdu, who having either a further insight into their
present Condition than the rest, or being less prepossest with vain Opinions
than some of their Brethren, did propose to consult about some means, how to
unite themselves with the Catholics, seeing they could not find any sufficient
reason, why the same might not be effected at this time, and why the same
should be opposed by some of their Brethren.

They alleged, for the confirmation of this their Opinion, That indeed in
former Times, the Catholics had been represented to the World as Idolaters,
because the true Tenets of their Religion were either not rightly understood by
some, or disguised by others: But that the Case was quite altered now, since
the Bishop of Meaux had obliged the Christian World with the true Pourtraiture
of the Catholic Religion; That indeed it was objected by some, that he had
been very careful in disguising the real Sentiments of the Church of Rome; but
this Objection favored more of Obstinacy and Prejudice, than real Truth; and
would meet scarce with any Encouragement among People of Sense, considering
that if the Thing were as they pretended, the Church of Rome would be the first
that would contradict his Opinion, whereas the Approbation this Treatise had
met with from the Conclave, and the whole College of Cardinals, was a
convincing Proof, that the Bishop had asserted nothing but what is altogether
conformable to the Doctrine received in the Romish Church. That those, who
after such authentic Proofs would pretend to contradict it, did do nothing but
to show not only their Obstinacy, but rather an unaccountable Aversion toward
an Union among them. That they conjured their Brethren to weigh duly and
maturely all and every Circumstance of the matter which might lead them into
the Path to procure Peace and Tranquillity to their Churches, which could not be
obtained, unless they would at this juncture be pleased to take a Resolution
suitable to their Prudence and Charitable Inclinations.

But all the Protestant Ministers assembled in this Synod, were so far from
giving a favorable Ear to their Reasons and Exhortations, that they exclaimed
against their Counsel, as proceeding from a depraved Mind, and from the
consideration of their temporal Interest, either to preserve themselves, or
perhaps to increase their Revenues.

But these two Ministers finding them absolutely bent to their own Destruction,
did, without any regard to these Calumnies, make Abjuration of the Protestant
Religion, at the conclusion of the Synod, and were joyfully received into the
Bosom of the Church, having by their Moderation, and Charitable Advice,
deservedly acquired the Esteem and good Will both of the Court and Clergy. But
the worst was, that there were but few among the Protestants there, who would
follow their Footsteps.

The King provoked to the highest degree by their Obstinacy, did publicly
revoke the Edict of Nants, and Quartered his Dragoons upon all such as refused
to obey his Commands.

The Protestants at Loudun used frequently to assemble in private, to encourage
one another rather to suffer any thing than to renounce their Religion. There
were two noted Counselors among them, whose Names were Festes and Montaut,
they being two Elders of this Congregation, and considered as Leading Men by
reason of their great Learning and Riches; these began one Day to speak in very
ambiguous Terms to the Assembly, and to insinuate such things, that the rest,
who for the most part, were influenced by their Counsel, did not know what to
make of it. But those, who had resolved to stand immovable in their first
Principles, were not so simple, but that they soon guessed at their Meaning.

They did not now in the least question, but that in the last Visits these two
Counselors had made to Monsieur de Nointel Intendant of Touraine, who had sent
for them, it had been agreed betwixt them which side they were to take. And
they were not mistaken in their guess; for no sooner did the King's Dragoons
appear at Loudun, but Fester sent for the Priests who were appointed to receive
the Abjurations of the Protestants, to his House, where all the Protestant
Families of any Note were assembled, all which were at once reconciled to the
Catholic Church, except three Families, who were forced not long after to take
up their Lodgings in the Hospital; for the Dragoons were Quartered upon them to
consume all their Substance, and did not leave their Houses, as long as they
had a Morsel left for their Sustenance.

The Happiness of a most profound Peace which the Kingdom enjoyed at that time
under the Protection of the most Glorious Prince of the Universe, who had
carried the Terror of his Arms all over Europe, was a sufficient inducement to
the King to promise himself (as I told you before) Success in every thing he
should undertake for the future; and it must be confessed, that the happy
Progress he made, did justify the Goodness of his Intentions, God was pleased
to bless his Designs with success, as tending to the increase of his Glory, and
this so powerful Party, which under his Majesty's Predecessors Reigns had
almost brought this great Monarchy to the very brink of Destruction, was forced
tamely to submit to his Commands, without the least Opposition.

Nevertheless this was not the only thing which took up the King's care at that
time, he was too wise to let slip the least Opportunity which seemed to have
any relation to the Interest of his Crown, as well in respect of the Catholics
as the Protestants; and it was upon this Score, That he made use of his
Authority and Interest, to have such a Coadjutor chosen to the Archbishop of
Cologne, as, he knew, to be addicted to his Interest. The Situation of this
Electorate, did in some measure oblige the King to take this seasonable
Precaution, because it bordered upon the Dutch Territories, who were very
jealous of the King's present Prosperity. The Glorious Conquests of his Majesty
were also an Eyefore to the Emperor, who a few Years before, had been put to
the utmost hazard of losing his Crown, if Fortune had not declared at the very
critical juncture against the Turks.

The stupendous Success with which his Arms had been Crowned since on that
side, gave him no small hopes, that after the Conquest of Hungary, he might
promise himself the same success on the Rhine, if he could by some means or
other break the Truce concluded with his most Christian Majesty. Our King, who
was resolved not to let slip this opportunity to thwart the Designs both of the
Emperor and the Dutch, and to secure to himself the Lower Rhine, in case of a
rupture with them, left Instructions to bring this Matter to a good Issue.

The Cardinal of Furstembergh, chief Minister of the Elector of Cologne, and
Canon of the Cathedral of that Name, who owed every thing to his Majesty, was
pitched upon by the King as a fit Subject to fill up this Archiepiscopal Chair,
whenever it should become vacant. The Elector himself had made a Postulation of
a Coadjutor, to the Chapter of Cologne, and most of its Members were either in
the King's or Cardinal's Interest. The Chapter was assembled, before the
Imperial Party could make their Cabals to disappoint our Design, so that of
five and twenty Canons, of which this Chapter is composed, there were no more
than five, who did not give their Voice for the Cardinal. This was no small
Vexation both to the Emperor and Dutch, who were most nearly concerned in it;
but there being no other way left for them to redress themselves, the Emperor
made his Applications to the then Pope Innocent XI. whom he earnestly entreated
not to approve of the said Election, for fear, as it was insinuated by his
Agents, all Europe might thereby be involved in great Troubles.

Pope Innocent XI. was a very Pious Person, but he was also a Man, and
consequently subject to some Frailties; and he did not stick at this time to
make use of this juncture, to mortify his Majesty, with whom he had had some
difference of late. The Business of the Franchises of the Quarters of
Ambassadors, stuck among the rest, so close in his Stomach, that he would not
grant his Bull to the Cardinal.

The Elector of Cologne happened to Die not long after, and our King, who had
certain Intelligence that the Emperor and the Dutch, by the help of their
Money, had made a strong Party in that Chapter, advised the Cardinal of
Furstemburgh to stand by his first Election as Coadjutor of the late Archbishop
and that whatever he did, he should, if possibly he could not let it come to a
New Election. The Cardinal sent this Answer to the King, That he had not the
least reason to fear a New Election, being sure, that he should at least have
as many Voices as he had before, and perhaps more, whereas, if he should oppose
this new Election, and enter his Protest against the meeting of the Chapter,
this might perhaps prove a means to abalienate the Minds of many of the
Capitulars from his Interest, and that consequently it must be feared, they
might make use of the same pretext, as the Emperor and his Faction had already
done; to wit, that his former Election to the Coadjutorship was void, because
the same had not been confirmed in the Archbishop's life time.

These reasons were at last approved of by the King, who supposing, that he who
was upon the spot, could give a better and nearer guess at the matter, than
those who were at a distance, yielded to his persuasions. Thus the Chapter of
Cologne assembled, in order to proceed to the Election of a new Archbishop.

Some of the Canons, who under hand had disposed of their Voices to the Emperor
and Hollanders, broke their word with the Cardinal, and gave their Suffrages to
Prince Joseph Clement, Brother to the present Elector of Bavaria; so that the
Cardinal, in lieu of Seventeen Voices, which he had at his first Election, had
now no more than. Fourteen, Prince Joseph had Nine, and the Count de Requ^en
One.

It is to be observed, that to put any Election of this nature beyond all
contest, it is requisite to have two thirds of the Voices of the whole Chapter;
so that the Cardinal in this last Election, fell short by two: Thus the
Cardinal saw himself in a much worse condition than he would have been, if
according to our King's advice, he had adhered to his first Election.

The Pope, who had already in the former Election, made use of his Authority in
opposition to the Cardinal, did in this last, not in the least alter his
opinion; and confirmed the Election of Prince Joseph Clement of Bavaria. But,
notwithstanding this Confirmation, the business now in question was, how he
should put himself in possession of the said Electorate, almost all the places
of strength being in the hands of the Cardinal of Furstenburgh, who pretended
to be legally chosen Archbishop and Elector of Cologne.

But the late Elector was, besides (...)e Archbishopric of Cologne, also
Prince and Bishop of Liege The Cardinal had for a considerable time before,
made his Court to that Chapter, he being a Canon, as well of the Cathedral of
Liege, as of that of Cologne; but he had many and great Enemies among them; not
that he had contributed any thing to it in his own Person, but this aversion
was founded upon some reasons of State.

The ill success the Cardinal of Furstenburgh had met with, in the last
Election at Cologne, seemed to be but an ill Omen of what was to happen in
this; but the King, to further as much as possible could be, his Interest by
his Authority, sent Monsieur Asfelt to Liege as his Envoy.

This Asfelt was a Person of a more than ordinary Wit, and of so pleasing a
Conversation, that he was looked upon as the fittest Man to influence the
Capitulars of Liege, who loved extremely to be flattered. But there were such
weighty Reasons (as they believed) against the Election of the Cardinal, and
the contrary Party had known how to improve them so well to his disadvantage,
that they could in no wise be prevailed upon, to comply with our King's
desires, though there were many of the Canons at the same time, who, very
unwilling to disoblige the King in any thing, offered to give their Voices to
the Cardinal of Bouillon. But Monsieur d'Asfelt, according to his Orders
received from Court, answered them, that the King had pitched upon the Cardinal
of Furstenburgh, as the only fit Subject to be recommended by him to the
Chapter of Liege, and that therefore, whomsoever they should choose else, could
not be acceptable to his Majesty at this time; and that therefore, if they
would preserve the honor of his Favor to themselves, they ought to be very
cautious, what measures to take in this Conjuncture.

The Emperor on the other hand sent to Liege the Prince Lewis, Grand Master of
the Teutonick Order, Son of the Elector Palatine, and Brother to the present
Empress, He was likewise a Canon of the Cathedral of Liege, and brought along
with him Letters of Recommendation from his Imperial Majesty to the Chapter.

It is to be known that the Chapter of Liege, is composed of more than three
times the number of Capitulars, than that of Cologne, Persons of diverse Nations
and Degrees being admitted into it; so that one of the meanest rank has as good
a pretension to be a Capitular of Liege, as any of the first Quality. They were
at that time divided into three several Factions. One was for the Cardinal of
Furstenburgh, another for Prince Lewis of Niewburgh, Master of the Teutonick
Order; the third Faction, which was the strongest of all, declared against
both, but more especially against the Election of the Cardinal of Furstenburgh,
because, as it was alleged, he had about his Person, such as would dispose of
every thing for Money. The main exception they made against the Master of the
Teutonick Order was, that he being a Prince, who had but a slender Estate of
his own, would consequently, to support his Grandeur, be forced to load the
People with heavy Taxes. There were also not a few among the Canons, who
pretending to have a more than ordinary insight into the future State of
Affairs, and considering how narrowly the Interest of this Prince was linked to
that of the Emperor's, by reason of their near Affinity, did not without reason
fear, that he might entangle their State in continual Broils and Troubles with
France, which was not only their Neighbor, but even in the possession of two
Cities belonging to the said Bishopric, to wit, Bouillon and Dinant.

These Reasons, with some other weighty Considerations, which had made very
deep Impressions upon the Minds of most of the Capitulars, made them by degrees
turn their Eyes upon the great Dean of the Chapter, a person very far advanced
in Years, without the least Ambition, and for the rest, one, who had scarce any
necessary qualifications, for the Governing of a State. Neither did he in the
least dream of any such thing, the whole Business of his Life, for these
several Years last past, having been to spend his time in Pious Exercises; and
he was so far from aspiring to the Princely Dignity, toward the latter end of
his Days, that he did all what in him lay, to dissuade his Brethren from it.
But the Sub-Dean of the Chapter, whose Name was de Mean, a Man who had an equal
share of Piety and Wit, and who was the Head of that Party, gave them such
convincing Reasons to persist in their Resolution, that whatever Monsieur
Asfelt could do they stood immovable.

The King had no sooner been advertised of it, but it was agreed to consent to
the Cardinal of Bouillon's being Elected to that Bishopric; but it happened so
unfortunately, that the Messenger who carried the Dispatches and a Letter to
the Chapter, did not arrive at Liege till the Day of the Election, and what was
worse than all the rest, not till after the Chapter was Assembled. The
Messenger therefore being come to the Gate where the Assembly was held, and
sending up word that he had a Letter to deliver to the Chapter from our King,
it was taken into consideration what was best to be done in this case.

It is to be observed, that whilst each Faction were strengthening their Party
at Liege, some out of an indiscreet Zeal for the Cardinal had threatened, that
our King would carry Fire and Sword into the Bishopric of Liege, if they did
not elect Cardinal Furstenburgh for their Bishop. Their Threats had appeared to
some of the Capitulars like sure presages, of what they feared might happen
hereafter; when they understood that a considerable Body of French Troops was
advancing toward the City.

The Chapter imagining that this Letter was sent by the King to give them
notice, and to forewarn them of his Intentions, judged it most convenient,
either not to receive the Letter at all, or at least not to open it till after
the Election was over. This being done accordingly, there were many of the
Canons, who heartily repented of their Resolution, when they saw that they
might have had for their Prince and Bishop, the Cardinal de Bouillon, who was
extremely beloved at Liege, and under whose Government they might, besides
this, have reaped this advantage, to have been always assured of his Majesty's
powerful Protection, which they stood so much in need of.

At the same time one la Salle, a Frenchman by birth, but a Creature of the
Cardinal of Furstenburgh, was Governor of the Citadel of Liege. The new
Prince offered to continue him in his Post, which he refused to accept of, but
chose rather to follow the Cardinal's Fortune, who was now making all the
necessary preparations, to defend himself and his Right upon the Bishopric of
Cologne by force of Arms. For, though his Holiness being prepossessed with
prejudice and passion, had excluded him from his pretensions upon this
Archbishopric, our King, who was resolved to maintain the Cardinal in his
Right, did not think fit, he should rest satisfied with this determination of
the Pope. For which reason, he sent a considerable number of his Troops to his
assistance, most of which were put in Garrisons in the places of Strength in
his possession, who were also provided with able French Governors and
Commanders. Thus the War began to be rekindl'd upon the Rhine at the same time,
when on another side, vast preparations were making for a descent in England,
which produced that famous Revolution, which soon after happened in that
Kingdom.

It is to be observed, that the Prince of Orange finding the English Nation
extremely dissatify'd with their King, not only as he was a Catholic, but
because they were sensible, he endeavored to settle that Religion there, in
opposition to the established Religion and the Laws of the Kingdom; and willing
to improve this opportunity, made a descent upon the English Coast, with a good
Army, where he was received with open Arms. For not only many of the Ministers
and others, belonging to his Britannick Majesty's Court, but also most of the
chief Officers of his Army life his Party* and sided with the Prince. The King
himself f(...)t l^st into his ^ands, who was put under a Guard, but in such a
manner, that he might make his escape whenever he pleased. The reason of which
seemed to be that the Prince had taken a resolution to prepare his way to the
Throne. without making use of any violent means, and that he believed the
King's presence might prove an obstacle to his Intentions. Thus this Monarch
made his escape out of England and came into France, where the Queen his Spouse
was arrived before him, with the Prince of Wales, under the Conduct of the
Count de Lausun. This young Prince, who was then but a sucking Child, had ever
since he came out of his Mother's Womb, been an Instance of the frailty of all
humane Affairs, and that we are born to sufferings in this World. For, it had
been given out by some that he was a suppositious Child, by others, that he was
indeed the Queen's Son, but begotten by a Priest.

The Prince of Orange, who had laid the Foundation of this Revolution, ever
since the time he found the King of England bent, upon the establishing of the
Catholic Religion in that Kingdom, had engaged in his Quarrel several Princes
and States, who being jealous of the Glory of France, and the prosperity of our
King's Arms, were willing to favor a design, which they knew would embroil the
Kingdom of England.

After the Prince had succeeded in his design, even beyond the Expectation of
those who had sided with him all the Protestant States in Europe acknowledged
him for King of Great Britain; and though it might have been reasonably
expected, that the Interest of the Catholic Religion, which then lay at Stake,
should have been prevailing enough with the Emperor and Spain, to prefer it
before the Jealousy they had conceived at the greatness of France, yet they
followed in this point without delay, the footsteps of the Protestant Princes.

This was like the Alarm to our King, who having ordered his Troops to besiege
Philipsburgh, and some other Places in the Palatinate, this proved the occasion
of the late War betwixt France and the Confederates, who though of very different
Sentiments, both in point of Religion and States Interest, entered into a
League, to carry on the War against, and obstruct the growing greatness of our
King: The Imperialists were so successful, as to make themselves Masters of the
whole Electorate of Cologne the next following Campaign, and besides this,
besieged the City of Mayence, the Capital of the Archbishopric, which bears
that Name, under the Conduct of the Duke of Lorrain the Imperial General. The
Dauphin had, toward the latter end of the last Year, made himself Master of
this place without any resistance, after he had taken Philipsburgh; but it cost
the Imperial Army a Siege of six Weeks, besides a great many of their best Men,
before they could bring the French Garrison to a Capitulation? and it was
generally believed, that they would have been forced to raise the Siege, if the
place had been sufficiently provided with every thing, requisite for a long and
vigorous defense.

I told you before upon what account it was, I did not think fit to serve at
the Siege of Luxenburgh, but the case being altered since, and finding there
was probability enough, that the War, which was likely to spread over the
greatest part of Europe, would not come to a sudden period, I once more left
the Country, and no sooner appeared at Court, but I offered my Service to the
Marquess de Louvois, being introduced to him by the Marquess de Livri. This
Gentleman told the Chief Minister, in what Quality I had served in Germany; and
I had brought my Commissions along with me, which stood me in good stead. For
the Marquess de Louvois desired to see them, and after he had perused them, he
told me, the King intended to make me a Leiutenant Colonel over a German
Regiment. But it was not very long before he changed his resolution; for, the
very next time I came to pay my respects to this Minister of State, he told me,
that the King's intention was to send me into Ireland, and that instead of a
Lieutenant Colonel's Commission, I should be made Brigadeer of Horse.

Two Kinsmen of mine, whose Names were Vignol and Forest, had much about the
same time taken Service in the King's Army, and the Regiments they served in
were then in France; but understanding that I was to go into Ireland, they had
so much kindness for me, as to desire likewise to be employed in that Kingdom.
I did all I could to dissuade them from it; I represented to them, that there
was but little likelihood of any considerable advantage in the Irish Service,
at so great a distance from home; but all in vain, for they were resolved I
should owe them this Obligation, that they had sacrificed their Interest to our
Friendship. The Marquess de Louvois having granted their Request, the first had
a Captain's Commission bestowed upon him, the Second of a Lieutenant, both of
Horse.

Thus we set out all three together from Paris, and I appointed them a certain
day, when without fail, they were to be at Samur; because I had received
positive Orders from the Chief Minister, not to carry above twice four and
twenty Hours at my own home, and to proceed from thence forthwith in my Journey
to Nants, where I should meet with many more Officers, who had served in the
King's Army in Catalonia, and were now ordered, as well as my self, to embark
with all possible speed for Ireland.

I met my two Kinsmen at the appointed day and place, and we embarked
immediately in a Vessel at Samur, which carried us in two days to Nants.

The Duke de Chauness to whom I paid a Visit, told me, That those Officers who
came lately out of Catalonia were gone two Days before to Pimboouf, from whence
they intended to go forward with the first fair Wind to Breast* where Monsieur
de Chateau Renault lay ready to set Still with a good Fleet; and that we must
not neglect a Minutes time, if we intended to take the opportunity of this
Fleet, to be transported into Ireland. We followed his Advice as much as
possibly we could, and embarked the next Morning early, in hopes to meet with
these Catalonia^^ Officers still at Pimboouf; but they had not carried there at
all, but had immediately after their arrival, hired another Vessel to carry
them forthwith to Breast, for fear they should lose the advantage of the Wind,
which blew very fair for them. And the Sequel proved that they had been much in
the right, for within four and twenty Hours after, the Wind chopped about, and
continued contrary to us for twelve Days together; all which time we were
forced to spend in vain, and with a great deal of impatience; at last the Wind
turned on our side, and you may believe we would not lose a Minute, so with a
fair Gale we sailed for Breast; but were no sooner arrived there, but that to
our great Surprise we understood, that the Fleet commanded by Monsieur de
Chateau Renault had set Sail for Ireland the very Night before, our arrival
there.

This Fleet had on Board above two Hundred French Officers, besides a great
quantity of Provision and Ammunition, all which was intended to support the War
in Ireland. The Earl of Tyrconnel, who was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland for the
King of Great Britain, at the time of the great Revolution in England, had not
sided with his Enemies, as most of the English and Scotch had done; but behaved
himself like a faithful Subject, and by his Conduct preserved the Kingdom of
Ireland in his Master's Obedience, not without hopes this might prove a means
for him to recover his other two Kingdoms. For this purpose, as soon as he got
intelligence of what had happened in England, he had given Commissions to most
of the Catholic Gentlemen of the Country, to raise Men for their King's
Service; and those who were sensible, that their Ruin depended on that of
their Royal Master. showed a great deal of Zeal, to give him the utmost of
their Assistance.

A great Number of the Inhabitants of that Kingdom, who were Protestants,
foreseeing that the War was likely to be carried on with extraordinary
Animosity in that Kingdom, and fearing, not without reason, that the Irish
would take this opportunity to take satisfaction from them for a great many
Affronts and Damages received from the Protestants, whilst they were the
strongest Party, retired in time into England with their Effects: But those who
had their Estates in Land, were forced to stay behind, and promised to be
faithful to the King.

Most of these last lived in the North of Ireland about Londonderry and
Iniskilling, which were as yet in the Hands of the Protestants; but the Earl of
Tyrconnel, who did put but a slender confidence in their Faith, ordered some
Catholic Regiments thither, to keep a watchful Eye over them. But the
implacable hatred which has always been most conspicuous in that Kingdom,
betwixt the Catholics and the Protestants, began soon to break out into great
Disorders. To remedy which, my Lord Montjoy an Irish Protestant Lord, whose
Estate lay thereabouts, did all he could to persuade the Earl of Tyrconnel,
that he had taken wrong Measures, thus to discover to all the World, the
Diffidence he had of the Protestant Party, and that it would be much safer for
him to leave the Defense of these two Places to the Protestants alone, than to
two Parties which would be always thwarting one another, being of so contrary a
Principle, tho at the same time it was certain, that he underhand fomented
these Divisions among them. Nevertheless the Earl of Tyrconnel followed his
Advice, but no sooner had he withdrawn the Catholic Troops from thence, but
the Protestants thereabouts revolted unanimously against the King of Great
Britain.

The Earl gave immediate notice of it to his Master in France, and positively
told him in his Letter, That his Presence was absolutely necessary in Ireland.
He sent word also, That he shrewdly suspected the Lord Montjoy's Conduct,
especially since his two Sons were gone over with their Regiment to the Enemy
and that his Opinion was, it would not be long before he would follow in
Person, unless he were prevented. His Advice was to send for him into France,
under pretense that the King would consult with him concerning some Matters of
great Moment relating to that Kingdom, and to secure him there. It was also
contrived, that the Earl of Tyrconnel should give my Lord Montjoy Letters to
the King of Great Britain, in which he should recommend his Conduct and Zeal
for the King's Interest, the better to disguise their design against him,
which, notwithstanding all the fair Contents of these Recommendatory Letters,
was to be put in execution immediately after his Arrival in France.

The King of England did communicate Tyrconnel's Letter and Advice to our King,
who was of Opinion that he ought to follow the Earls Counsel, and appear in
Person in Ireland, promising him powerful assistance both of Men and Money,
besides all other Necessaries for the carrying on of this Enterprise.

Accordingly, my Lord Montjoy being sent for, came to St. Germains freighted
with sham Letters of Recommendation from the Earl of Tyrconnel to the King of
England; with whom he had a long Conference; and it was observed that the King
managed the matter so well on his side, that my Lord did not in the least
mistrust, what was likely to befall him. But very few days were passed, before
he was undeceived in the matter, for no sooner had his Britanick Majesty had a
full account from his own Mouth, concerning the true State of the Kingdom of
Ireland, which was the only thing he wanted to know at that time, but he caused
him to be secured and carried to the Bastile; where at first he had liberty
granted him to walk in the Court, but afterward was confined to a Room under
Lock and Key, because the Prince of Orange (King William III.) had confined
Hamilton to a close Prison.

The King of England took along with him for Ireland Monsieur Rose, an
experienced Officer, who was to Command his Army there; and our King furnished
him, with several other Officers of Note, they being most of all wanted in
Ireland.

It is somewhat strange to relate, but nevertheless very true, that though there
were many among the Irish who had served before, yet were they generally such
Novices in the Art of War, that it was a rarity to find one among them, who was
capable of Commanding a Company of Foot. The Count de Avaux was chosen by our
King, to attend his Britanniok Majesty, as his Ambassador Extraordinary, and
they arrived safely at Dublin, where the Earl of Tyrconnel gave the King an
account by word of Mouth, concerning those Matters he had imparted to him
before in Writing.

The English Council of his Britannick Majesty, who was infected with that
Natural Hatred the English, as it may be said, suck with their Mother's Milk,
against the Irish, could not without a secret Envy, brook the Praises and
Honors the Earl of Tyrconnel bestowed upon the Irish for their Loyalty. It was
for this reason they represented to the King, that the Earl had overdone the
Business, that there needed not above half that Number he had put in Arms, they
wanting both Money and Magazines for their Subsistence; and that in case they
were not disbanded, they would be forced to disband themselves. Tyrconnel did
oppose it as much as he could, alleging that the Irish Troops, being
accustomed to live hardy, would stand the King in little; that by degrees they
might be made serviceable; and that upon all occasions they would be ready to
be Commanded, where ever the King should think fit; but his Advice, though much
the better of the two, was overruled by the others.

The next thing that came in debate was, for the King to appear in Person
before Londonderry; the place being provided with a strong Garrison, resolved
to defend it to the last extremity: General Rose was against it, and gave very
convincing Reasons for his Opinion; He told them, that it was a great piece of
Imprudence, so rust^ly to expose the Reputation of his Britannick Majesty in
the first Enterprise, that it would be much the securer way to have a little
patience, till they were supplied with Arms and Ammunition from France, there
being not above 4000 then, who were duly provided with Arms; and that if they
appeared in that posture before the Town, they would be only laughed at by the
Rebels. But all his persuasions were in vain; and my Lord Melfort gave him for
Answer, that this Rabble would for the most part disperse, as soon as they did
but hear, that his Britannick Majesty was upon the March against them; and that
the rest would come half ways, to lay the Keys of their Gates at his Feet.

Princes are as inclinable to be led away by flattery as other People, and it
was this, that made the King of England yield to their pernicious Counsel.
Accordingly the Army directed its March toward Strabane, where they passed the
River in sight of the Rebels, who were advanced that way, to endeavor to
dispute our Passage. But they retiring into the Town, we followed them as
carelessly, as if we had been Marching to an undoubted Conquest, so despisable
they appeared to the English Council: But in lieu of laying the Keys of their
Gates at His Majesty's Feet, as they had foolishly persuaded themselves, they
were infinitely surpised, when we were saluted with the great Cannon from the
City. General Rose asked then my Lord Melfort what was to be done now, we
wanting great Artillery to return the Salute: But we were too far Engaged to
Retire, without exposing the King's Reputation; wherefore, it was resolved to
block up the Place, till a more convenient opportunity; and the Besieged in the
mean while made strong Entrenchments, to hinder our approach, in case of a
formal Siege.

The Prince of Orange (King William III.) having notice given him of what
passed in Ireland, and that Monsieur de Chateau-Renault was expected there with
a strong Convoy, ordered a Fleet to be equipped to intercept his Passage. This
Fleet put to Sea, directing its Course toward Kingsale, which was in danger of
having been surpised by them, if the Governor of the place had not prevented
it by his Conduct. Thus the Enemies Fleet stood off of Kingsale, expecting the
coming of Monsieur de Chateau-Renault, whom they intended to attack, as he was
going into that Port, whither they knew he was bound; and it failed but little,
but that he had fallen into their Hands, being ignorant that the Enemies Fleet
was at Sea; if he had not been forewarned at about Ten Leagues distance from
the Port, by some Signals made from the Shore, that the Enemy was near the
Port, which made him change his Course, and to put in into Bantry-Bay. The
English having soon got notice of it, attacked him in the Bay, before we had
quite unloaden our Ships; but Monsieur de Chateau-Renault being well prepared
for their Reception, and having the advantage of the Wind, made them retire;
and if he had not been under a necessity of protecting his Transport Ships,
which were not as yet all in safety, he might have pursued them with some
advantage. He judged it therefore most expedient, to rest satisfied with what
he had done; though some at Court, who looked with an envious Eye upon his Glory,
did take this opportunity to censure this Action, some attributing it to his
want of Experience, some to his want of Fidelity; but they were forced to draw
in their Pipes when he appeared at Court in Person, and gave the King all
imaginable Demonstrations of his great Conduct in this Engagement.

Whilst these things were transacting in Ireland, I spent my time at Breast with
a great deal of dissatisfaction. I addressed my self to the Marshal de Estres,
desiring him to order me a Vessel to transport me to Ireland. Within three Days
after, there came above a Hundred Officers more to Breast, who being likewise
designed for that Kingdom, the Marshal writ about it to the Marquess de
Signelai, but received no answer, so that we were forced to wait with Patience,
till further Orders from Court. I then took a resolution to go to Camaret,
because I found my self not very well at Breast, and my Physicians advised me to
change the Air.

Being therefore fully resolved to go thither, I spoke of it to some of the
rest of the Officers, who being also of opinion, that perhaps we might meet
with a Vessel there, that would carry us to Ireland, were willing to go along
with me thither.

As I am very apt to forecast Matters, and that I was afraid we should have but
a very dull time of it there, if we should be forced to wait for an opportunity
of being Transported into Ireland: I happened to meet with one whom I had known
in Paris, and who was lately come to Breast about the King's Business; I asked
him what Diversion there was at Camaret, for knowing that his Business
sometimes called him that way, I was sure he could give me an account of the
Place. He told me, it was my own fault, if I could not pass my time pleasantly
at Camaret, there being a certain Lady there, whose Husband was a Man of great
Business, who did nothing else but seek how to divert herself; but that however
he would advise me, to have a care not to fall in Love with her, for he
believed her not to be of that stamp. I was overjoyed to meet with so much
encouragement, which made me embark with the rest of the Officers, that were to
be of our Company, forthwith to Camaret.

I had scarce set a Foot a shore, when the Lady, whose Name was Madam......
sent a Footman, to desire us in her and her Husband's Name, to come the same
Evening to take a Supper with them.

You may believe we had more Wit and good Breeding, than to refuse so
favorable an Offer in a place, where we were afraid before, we should have
been killed with Melancholy; to be short, we were very handsomely entertained at
Supper, which being done, she desired four of us (of which I was one) to take
up our Lodgings at her House.

This Lady was a great Coquette, pleasing enough in her Conversation; and as I
am one of those, who are easily caught in the snare, I fell in Love with her
the very first time I saw her. As my intention was not to tarry long in this
place, so I thought it best to make quick work of it, and so declared my
Passion to her the next day. She appeared so little startled at my declaration
of Love, that I was in good hopes we should soon come to a Capitulation, but
though I plied her very hard for eight days together (as long as I stayed in the
House) yet I could not bring her to my Bow, which made me remember what my
Friend had told me concerning her at Breast; and I began to be sensible, that
she was one of those Fantastical Creatures, who rather love to be Admired and
Courted, than to be Kissed.

However, I flattered my self, that her refusal might in a great measure,
proceed from the little acquaintance we had as yet, in hopes, that after my
return out of Ireland, I might have the same opportunity to see her again, and
renew the Siege at better leisure; and she was so generous as to tell me at
parting, that she should never forget me.

To confess the truth, I was not very forward to leave a place, where I had a
Mistress in whom I delighted so much; but there happening just at that time to
come a small Vessel to Camaret, the Master of which offered, to transport us
into Ireland, for threescore Pistols, I writ to the Marshal de Estrees to
furnish us with a Pass, without which, the Master durst not venture to go. The
Marshal refused to send us a Pass, either because he would not do it without
Express Orders from Monsieur de Segnelai, or because he feared, that if we
should be taken by the Enemy, he might be called to an account for it. Thus the
Bargain came to nothing, but to prevent the like inconveniency for the future,
I writ about it in the Name of all the rest, to the Marquess de Louvois.

Whilst we lived in expectation of an answer, there happened an odd Accident to
one of my familiar Acquaintance, who then Commanded a Batallion of the Regiment
of la Fere, which turned at last to his great advantage. There was at that time
an Encampment of two Thousand Men, in the enclosures called la Brousaille,
about half a League from Breast; and as he marched with his Batalion through
Morlaix, in his way to the Camp, four Soldiers of his own Company being got
Drunk, and understanding that the Maid of the House, where they were Quartered,
would now and then take up with a good Fellow, were also for trying their
Fortune with her. But whether the Maid was not in the humor at that time, or
that she was afraid of them, she would not receive their Courtship, so that
without more ado they ravished her. But this was not all, for they set fire to
the Houses, and so away they went. Complaints were made of this Outrage to
their Captain, who being sensible it was a Crime of so high a nature as would
not pass unpunished, he surrendered them to the Provost. But unwilling to part
with these four Soldiers, whom he knew to be the best in the whole Company, and
considering that it was excess of Drink that had drawn them into this
Misdemeanour, he was contriving how to save their Lives.

Accordingly he prevailed so far upon the Provost, that he promised him no
farther proceedings should be made against them, till he had spoke with, and
tried whether they could come to an accommodation with the Parties concerned.
The Wench, who was not so nice of her Reputation, but that she believed it
might be repaired by a little Money, accepted of a Present, and denied what she
had declared concerning the Rape before. The House being no more than a
miserable Cottage, was likewise paid for to the Owners, so that there being
neither Accusers nor Witnesses against the Soldiers, and the Provost being
likewise their Friend,, they were Discharged and sent back to their Captain, at
the Camp of Broussaille.

However, the Matter could not be carried on with so much secrecy, but that the
Criminal Judges of Morlaix had got some scent of the Matter. They could not
relish very well, that the Provost should carry off the Booty alone, without
their having a share in it, which made them make their Applications to Monsieur
de Pommerevil, Intendant of that Province. This Monsieur de Pommerevil, being a
Person whose natural Disposition tends to severity, did look upon this Crime as
of so heinous a Nature, as ought not to pass unpunished, without impairing
God's Justice; which made him hasten to Breast, where the first thing he did,
was to Summon my Friend to appear before him. For you must know, that the
Officers belonging to this Body of 12000 Men, had their Quarters assigned them
at Breast, and were only upon Duty in the Camp, in their several turns.

This Captain, who was a Man of Sense, had been so cunning, as to take, before
he left Morlaix, a Certificate from the Magistracy, of the good deportment of
his Soldiers, during their stay there; as also a Copy of the Information
exhibited against these Four Soldiers, after the accommodation of the Business
with the Parties concerned, upon which they had been discharged by the Provost.
Nay, he did more than this; for, as soon as they were put into the Provost's
Hands, he writ to the Marquess de Louvois, and gave him an Account, how he had
caused four of his Soldiers, accused of a Rape and other enormous Crimes, to be
committed to Prison, but, that upon a more strict Information, they had been
found not guilty of what was laid to their Charge. The Intendant sent one
Hoqueton, to summon the Captain to appear before him; but the Captain relying
upon his Interest with the Marquess de Louvois, sent the Intendant Word, that
he was a little out of Order at present, and could not stir abroad; besides,
that he did not remember any business he had with the Intendant, but if he had
any with him, he desired him to come to him.

This was an unexpected Complement to Monsieur de Pommerevil, who did not
imagine that my Friend durst have made thus bold with him; but he who knew the
Marshal de Estrees to be upon the spot, did put no great value upon the
Intendant's Displeasure: Monsieur de Pommerevil, who was no less sensible of
the Marshal's Prerogative, did think it most advisable to make his
Applications to him; which he did accordingly, and required that these Four
Soldiers might be taken into Custody again: The Marshal who was resolved not to
lose an Inch of his Authority, told him, that he would send for the Captain,
who should deliver up the Four Soldiers into his Hands; which being done
accordingly, the Intendant committed them for the present to the Gaol of Breast,
till he could have them conveyed to Morlaix, where he intended to have them
severely punished. In the mean while my Friend writ without delay to the
Marquess de Louvois, to Inform him of what had passed; but before they could
receive an Answer from that Minister, he put another Affront upon the
Intendant, which he relished worse than the first, and would have made him feel
the effects of his Anger, if the Marshal de Estrees had not been so near at
Hand.

You must know, the Intendant sent to my Friend, to let him have some Soldiers
with an under Officer, to Conduct the beforementioned Prisoners to Morlaix; but
he sent him word, that he did not stand under his Command, neither would obey
his Orders; that his Soldiers were to serve the King, and not him; with this he
went to the Marshal, unto whom he gave an account of the Matter, and how the
Intendant would have put upon him, as well as upon the Authority of the
Marshal, whose Orders he was ready to Obey, if he thought fit he should detach
a Party for that purpose. The Marshal told him, that he had done what he ought
to do, in having refused these Men, and that he ordered him to do it again, if
he did give him another such like occasion. Monsieur de Pommereville finding
the Captain backed by the Marshal, was forced to rest satisfied, and the
Captain gained the good will of all the Officers of the Army, for his boldness,
to dare to make head alone, against the Intendant of the Province, Within a few
days after, Monsieur de Pommereville received an Answer from the Marquess de
Louvois, upon his Letter writ upon that Subject to the said Minister, which was
no small addition to his Vexation: For, the Captain had been so vigilant, as by
his reiterated Letters, to represent to the said Minister, that the Intendant
acted in this point, more out of a motive of Envy and Passion, than love of
Justice, (the Soldiers having been discharged by due course of Law before)
which made the Marquess de Louvois order the Intendant not to meddle any
further in the matter.

I received, much about the same time, Orders from the said Minister, to Embark
with all the rest of the Officers, who were ready to go for Ireland, in the
first Vessel I could meet with. At the same time Monsieur de Gerse (who was
likewise to go for Ireland) was expected at Breast, which made several of the
Officers that were with me at Camaret leave us, and return to Breast, imagining
(and not without reason) that by reason of his near relation to the Marquess de
Segnelay, he would be provided with a good Convoy to facilitate his Passage
thither. If I had been as wise as I ought to have been, I should have done as
they did; but considering that Monsieur de Gerse was not come as yet to Breast,
and that it would cost me a great deal of Money there, to expect his coming;
what with Covetousness, and what with Love, I was not so careful as I ought to
have been of my own safety. There were also several Officers who, though Love had
not the least share in their Resolution, for fear of spending their Money at
Breast resolved to take the same Course as I did.

THE MEMOIRS OF JOHN BAPTIST De La Fontaine, Knight. LIB. V.
THE Master of the Vessel, who, as I told you before, was to have Transported
us from Camaret into Ireland, being disappointed of his Bargain for want of a
Pass, had left this Port, which made us take a Resolution to go to Croisil,
where as we were certainly informed, we could not miss of a Vessel fit for our
purpose, which indeed proved true; for, we were no sooner arrived there, but we
met with one, which was lately come from Ireland, and having taken in her Cargo
of Salt, was just ready to set Sail again for that Kingdom. Thus we Embarked;
but at our going out of that Port, (the Entrance of which is very difficult) we
were in great danger of being lost; there being a very dangerous Rock, upon
which many Vessels split in pieces, and we were in the utmost hazard to have
run upon it, by the neglect of our Pilot, who was drunk. As good Fortune would
have it, it was low Tide, and no Wind stirring, so that with the next high
Tide, we got clear of that dangerous Rock. This Sinister Accident seemed to be
an ill Omen of what befell us hereafter; for the very first Night we were by a
most furious Tempest, driven near the Coast of Bell-Isle, where we cast Anchor,
and being sheltered from the Wind, remained there two Days. The Storm being
somewhat abated we set sail again, but were the same Night overtaken again by
another Tempest, which lasted whole twelve Days, during which time, having been
tossed up and down along the Coast, we were at last forced among the Rocks in
Conquet Road.

My Advice was to make the Port of Camaret, where we might buy us some fresh
Provisions, the greatest part of what we had taken along with us, being
consumed already; so that if we should happen to meet with another
disappointment by reason of the Winds or otherwise, we might be in great danger
of want of Victuals. But the other Officers, who had been before with me at
Camaret, and had a suspicion, that I had a more than ordinary Kindness for
Madam..... whom I spoke of before, imagining that this Advice of mine
proceeded, rather from the great inclination I had to see her, than from any
consideration of our necessity, were against it; and their Surliness proved the
occasion of that Misfortune, which befell us not long after: For, if we had made
that Port, we should questionless have been advertised, that the English and
Dutch Fleets were come to the height of the Westsand, to Attack Monsieur de
Tourville in his return from the Mediterranean. They were also to prevent the
Squadron designed for Ireland, from coming out of Breast, and they were at that
time much concerned at Court, which way those that were intended for that
Service, should avoid meeting with them.

But which way soever the rest escaped their Hands, our Vessel, it seems, could
not avoid her destiny. For the next Morning early, we found our selves in sight
of the whole Fleet of the Enemy, who had no sooner descried us, but they sent
Seven or Eight Ships in pursuit of our Vessel, and four more, of which there
escaped but one, the rest all fell into their Hands. The Greenwich, a Man of
War of Sixty Guns took us, and the Captain ordered us immediately to be carried
on board of his Ship. They were so civil as not to strip us, but they took all
the Money we had, and what else belonged to us. After the Captain had perused
my Commission, and found what Post I served in, he ordered me to Dine with him
at his Table; which gave me so much encouragement, as to desire him to let me
have my Quilt; he answered me, the Quilt was as yet in the Ship in which we had
been taken, and that all what was in his power to do for me at the present was,
to send me on board of it again, to take the Convenience of it there. I
returned him thanks, and he did me the favor, to give leave to three more of
our Officers to go along with me, when we were come into the Ship, we found
that they had taken all the French Seamen out of her, and had put English in
their places.

This Vessel being very heavy laden, could not keep up with the Fleet, but was
in the Morning at break of Day, about a Mile distant from the rest. One Captain
Newburgh, who Commanded a stout Dutch Man of War, happened to be nearest to
her, and not knowing her to be a Prize, was in hopes of making her his; with
this intention he came up with us, early in the Morning, and having sent a
Sloop on board, they examined the Seamen from whence the Vessel came, and
whither bound; the Seamen called a Sergeant, who was to guard the Ship, to give
an account of the matter, which he did accordingly; but because he had no
Orders in Writing, and they would not take his Word, Captain Newburgh made
himself Master of the Ship. He sent however soon after to the Captain of the
Greenwich, to know whether she were his Prize, and being given to understand
that she was so, he immediately took his Seamen out of her again. In three
Hours after, the Earl of Torrington, Admiral of the English Fleet, unto whom
they had shown my Commission, did send for me, and several others of the French
Officers, that had been taken with me, on board his Ship, where we were
extremely civilly received, and invited to Dine with the Admiral. This Lord had
been in great esteem with the King of England, and had had a considerable Place
in his Court; but the King being resolved afterward not to entertain any but
Catholics in his Court, he sent for him, and told him, that he must either
quit his Place, or change his Religion. The Admiral choosing the first, retired
into Holland, where he was very Instrumental in laying the Foundation of that
great Revolution, which since happened in England.

Whilst we sat at Table, our Discourse run upon several different Subjects, but
among the rest upon the Misfortune which had so lately befal'n the King of
England; Upon which, Mr. Greenville, who was Captain of a Man of War, was so
bold as to say, That, if King James had turned my Lord Torrington out the
Doors, he had been even with him since, for he had turned him out of three
Kingdoms.

Before Dinner was over, Advice was brought to my Lord Torrington, that they
had just then taken one of the French King's Friggots, called the Wanton,
carrying 36 Guns. She was Commanded by one Picard, a Gentleman of Fortune, who
had defended himself with incredible Bravery, from three a Clock in the
Morning, till one in the Afternoon, against Eight of the Enemies Ships. There
was not one there, but what applauded his Courage; and the English, who
otherwise are the most jealous People in the World, and were Eyewitnesses of
our Action, could not forbear to give him all the Praises due to his Merits.

My Lord Berkley, then Rear-Admiral of the English Dined with us at the same
time. He had been in France some Years before, and I became acquainted with him
at Poictiers, where we happened to Lodge in the same Inn, as did likewise Mr.
Greenville. Understanding that they Intended in a few Days to go to Paris. I
desired them, that in their way, they would call at my House in the Country,
which they did, and stayed with me a whole Week, during which time, I
entertained them, as well as my Circumstances would permit. They no sooner saw
me, but knew me again, and after they had paid me all the imaginable
Civilities, Mr. Greenville was pleased to tell me, let come of it what would,
he must have me on board with him, which being as soon granted as asked, we
went not long after together on board his Ship; where I had not been many
Hours, but he began to entertain me concerning the Affairs of the Kingdom of
England, and to use many Persuasions to bring me over to his side. He knew that
I had served for a considerable time among the Enemies of France, which
doubtless gave him the more Encouragement to believe, that it would be no
difficult matter, to persuade me to accept of his Proposals. I answered him,
that when I considered those extraordinary marks of his Friendship he had
honored me with, both when he was in France some Years ago, and now again
within these few Hours, I had all the reason in the World to persuade my self,
that he was my real Friend; but that, considering what Advice he was pleased to
give me at this time, I could not but be afraid, I had flattered my self too
soon. That if he would take my word, I could assure him, that I was not likely
to be what he would have me, and that he did me wrong, if he entertained any
other thought of me. He answered me, that if he had not been my Friend, he
should scarce have made me such an Offer; that France was not in a condition to
withstand so many Enemies, as had declared War against it; and that it was but
Prudence for me to engage my self on the strongest side. I told him again, that
he did not consider very well what he said, as to this Point; that France was
more powerful than all those Enemies, that were Engaged in a League against it;
but this being not the matter in dispute betwixt us, I would take it for
granted to be so, I was a Subject of the French King, I had my Estate, Wife and
Children in that Kingdom, all which were such strong ties, as indispensably
obliged me to spend my last drop of Blood in his Service. He answered me, as to
what concerned my Estate, the Prince of Orange, (unto whom he gave the Title of
King of England) had* Generosity enough, to give me double Recompense for the
loss of it; and for my Wife and Children, I need not fear, there being means
enough to have them conveyed into England, when ever I thought fit to have them
there with me.

Here we broke off our Discourse for this time, but the next Day my Lord B.....
came to Dine with him on board his Ship, when they began to reassume the said
Theme, and both joined in their Persuasions to bring me over to their Party. I
then pretended to listen to their Advice, the only Objection I made, being
about my Estate in France, which I could not resolve to leave behind: My reason
why I thus plied the Hypocrite was, because I did not question, but that by
this means I should be able by degrees, to dive into their Designs, and
consequently, to do a most signal piece of Service to our King. My Lord B.....
then spoke to me upon this Subject, much to the same purpose as Captain
Greenville had done the day before, to wit, that I need not in the least
question, but that the Prince of Orange, (King William III.) would bestow upon
me such marks of his Favor, as would give me not the least occasion to think
of what I had lost in France. Afterward, he Invited us against next day, to
Dine with him on board his Ship, where they began to repeat their former
Instances, with many other Reasons, which they believed might induce me to
embrace their Advice. At last I feigned to be overcome by their Persuasions,
and told them, that provided the Prince (King William III.) should think fit,
to give me such a reception as they had promised me, I would enter into his
Service.

My Lord T..... was no sooner advised of their supposed Success, but he ordered
I should come on board him the same Day. We Dined there all together, and after
Dinner he took us three aside, and told me in their presence, that what these
Gentlemen had told me concerning the Prince of Orange, (King William III.) he
would engage his Honor upon; that I my self would be charmed with his generous
deportment, as soon as I should but see him; that he was the Darling of the
English Nation, as well as of others, being generally beloved by all; that the
most convincing proof could be given of it was, that he had opened his way to
the Throne, without any effusion of Blood, and that the People of England had
positively demanded him for their King; that, as by degrees he should see
himself established in the Throne, he would give every Day more glorious proofs
of his Liberality to his Friends, because he would be in a better condition to
do it. I pretended to be overcome by his Arguments, and to yield to all that he
told me; so that being as much deceived in me as the rest, did give notice of
it to the Prince of Orange, (King William III.)

Whilst this was in agitation betwixt us, my Lord Torrington received
Intelligence, that the Count de Tourville was with the French Mediterranean
Squadron arrived in the Road of Bell-Isle, which made him take up his Station
betwixt Bell-Isle and Breast, to prevent the French Fleet from entering Breast
Harbor. But the Count de Tourville took the opportunity of a favorable Wind
to gain a certain Point betwixt the French shore and the Rocks, where the Enemy
could not come near enough to attack him. Neither did he tarry long there, for
the Wind which had carried him thither happened to chop about to another
corner, so that the Confederate Fleet durst not venture to stay longer
thereabouts; and whilst the Enemies Fleet was in disorder, in changing their
Course, the same Wind which proved contrary to them, carried him safely into
the Harbor.

The King was no sooner advertised of the Count de Tourville's safe arrival at
Breast, and consequently saw himself delivered from the fear he was in for this
Squadron, but he sent his Orders to the Marshal d'Estrees to put to Sea, and
the Marshal de Segnelay went in Person on board the Fleet, to encourage every
body to the better performance of their Duty. The Enemies retreated thereupon
toward the Irish Coast, where Captain Greenville told me one Day, as we were
drinking pretty smartly together; that I need not trouble my self much about my
Estate, because, if I could have but a little patience, I should see the Prince
of Orange, (King William III.) Master, not only of that Province, but perhaps
of all France. That the Province of Poictou was upon the point of revolting,
that there were above 30000 Protestants in that Province, ready to join with
the English, when ever they should think fit to make a descent thereabouts; and
that it was not to be doubted, but the Protestants in the other Provinces would
follow their Example, which would put the French King so to it, that he would
be glad to come to a Composition.

I made him believe this was very welcome News to me, to make him the more
open-hearted, and that he might not hide the least thing from me, he knew
concerning this intended Descent, of which I was resolved to send word into
France, as soon as I could possibly dive into the bottom of the Design, and
meet with a safe opportunity to have my Letters conveyed to the King.

In two or three Days after, I began to be much out of order, the Sea not
agreeing with me very well; and it was not long after, that I fell into a
Fever, which made me desire my Lord Torrington, who had ordered all my Equipage
(as much as could be found of it) to be restored to me, to give me leave to go
on shore. The Admiral having granted my Request, Captain Greenville desired I
might be sent to Plymouth, (of which Place his Father was Governor) though
else we were much nearer to Falmouth. He writ likewise a Letter to the Deputy
Governor, whose Name was Fleming, wherein he desired him, not to let me want
any thing I had occasion for, and that he would be ready to re-imburse him,
what he should lay out upon that account, if I did not do it my self. But I had
no occasion for any of his Money, because it happened so fortunately for me,
that I met with a certain French Gentleman there, who being a Refugee, had a
Son, who was a Prisoner in France. He was as glad as I, to meet with this
opportunity to transmit some Money to his Son, so that he gave me immediately
Twenty Pistols, which he desired should be made good to his Son in France, and
he was so generous as to tell me, that if I had occasion for any more, I should
have it, nay, all what he had in the World should be at my Service, if I would
be pleased to accept of it.

They had at that same time put the Lieutenant of the Wanton Friggot, and all
the Seamen taken in her ashore at Plymouth, where we were all together sent to
Prison; but I had scarce been there half an Hour, before the Deputy Governor,
unto whom I had sent Captain Greenville's Letter, came to fetch me out. I
desired him to do the same Favor to this Lieutenant, which he being ready to
grant, we were conducted into the Citadel of Plymouth, where we met with a
French Privateer, called Bruss, and a Lieutenant of the Chevalier de Fourbin,
who were likewise Prisoners of War. The last of these two had been taken
together with his Captain, in a Friggot of Twenty Four Guns; and John du Bart
(who as well as his Brother have made themselves Famous since, by the many
Prizes they have taken from the Enemy) Commanded another at the same time of
Thirty Six Guns; they were both taken by an English Man of War of Seventy Guns,
and carried ^o Plymouth, where upon their Parole of Honor, they had the
liberty of the Town granted them for some time. But at last, under pretense
that they had made themselves suspected, they had a Guard of ^our Soldiers put
upon them, to keep a watchful Eye upon all their Actions. This happened very
fortunately for them, for being thereby discharged from their Word, they now
began to contrive how to save themselves by Flight.

John du Bart, who was always very quick at a contrivance, got by some means or
other into an intimate acquaintance with an English Seaman there, with whom he
prevailed at last so far, that he promised to furnish them with a Sloop, and so
much Provision, as should be sufficient to carry them to France, which should
be ready at an Hours warning. Every thing being got in readiness, and the Day
appointed to put their Design in Execution being come, they made the Four
Sentinels that were their Guards very Drunk, so that they could neither sit nor
stand; they made use of this opportunity to cut their Sheets in pieces, which
served them instead of Ropes, by which they let themselves down through the
Chamber Windows, where they Lodged. John du Bart himself supplied the place of
a Pilot, and brought the Sloop safe into St. Malo's, from whence they went to
Versailles, to solicit the exchange of their Lieutenant and Ships Crew, who
remained Prisoners at Plymouth.

The Name of the Lieutenant of the Chevalier Fourbin was de Vaux, a very honest
Gentleman, being Son to a Gentleman, who was then in the Service of the
Princess of Conti, the King's Daughter. The Lieutenant told me one Day, that
his Captain had sent him word, that it would not be long before they should be
exchanged; which made me resolve to sound his Inclinations, whether he would
oblige me in taking along with him a Letter of great Consequence into France.
He told me, that he was very ready to serve me in any thing, but that he was
afraid, he might be narrowly searched at his departure, and if any thing of
this nature should be found about him, it might turn to his great detriment.
When I found him unresolved what best to do, I told him, that the Letter I was
going to send, concerned our King's Service. He then answered me with a great
deal of eagerness, that provided it was so, there should be no danger so great,
unto which he would not willingly expose himself; but that he must ask my
pardon, if he desired first to be fully satisfied as to that point. Considering
with my self, that I had not the least reason in the World to suspect a Person,
who had declared himself with so much Zeal for his Majesty's Interest, I gave
him a short account of what had happened to me, whilst I was in the Enemies
Fleet, and what I had understood concerning their Designs, and what
Correspondence they had with the Protestants in Poictou. I told him, that the
Letter I intended to commit to his care, contained nothing but what related to
this Subject, of which I intended to give Advice to the Marquess de Louvois,
but that I intended to write the Direction to the Marquess de Livri a Kinsman
of mine, who was afterward to deliver it to the Chief Minister. He answered me
then, without the least hesitation, that I should get the Letter ready, and
that he would discharge his trust to the utmost of his power. In a few Days
after, Orders being come from Court for his exchange, he embarked at Plymouth,
with several others who were likewise exchanged at the same time, and got
safely into France. But in lieu of delivering my Letter to the Marquess de
Livri, according to my direction, he gave it to his Father, who thereby got an
opportunity to present it to the King in Person.

Not long after this, the Prince of Orange, who, sometime before had been
declared King by the English Parliament, sent for me to London. I had my
Charges defrayed in my Journey, and as I came to Chester, I met with some
French Officers there, who came to see me, and they were so generous as to
offer me their Purses, if I pleased to accept of it, though they had never seen
me before. Their Generosity and several Discourses we had together, made me
look upon them as very honest Gentlemen, and I found that they had still a true
French Heart, which made me reflect what a pity it was, that their blind Zeal
for their Religion, should rob their Native Country, of the Service they might
else have been able to do for their King in this War. But being not in any want
of Money, I returned them thanks for their Civilities, and pursued my Journey
to Salisbury. I thought I should have been torn to pieces by the Rabble there,
and I verily believe, I should scarce have escaped their Hands, if I had not
been protected by him who was my Conductor: For no sooner had it been noised
about among the Mobb, that I was a French Officer, who was taken as I was going
to Ireland, but they came in a tumultuous manner to the Inn where I was, and
began to be very outrageous; neither could they be appeased or persuaded to
disperse, before a Constable was sent for, who showed them his Staff, as a mark
of his Authority.

After I came to London, I was surrendered to my Lord L..... 's Hands, who took
my Parole of Honor, and told me, that if I wanted any Money he had some at my
Service; and that I might take my Lodgings where I liked best; that his Father
would have offered me his House, but for fear of giving suspicion, I had better
take a Private Lodging somewhere else. I then took up my Quarters at a French
Ordinary in the Pall Mall, not far from St. James's, and my Lord L..... came
the next Morning to fetch me out, and introduce me to the Earl of S.... After I
had been there a little while, he asked me, whether I would give my Parole of
Honor to him, which I readily consented to, and so he discharged my Lord
L..... from his engagement for my Person. This first Interview being taken up
with Compliments only, I returned to my Lodgings, without having had the
opportunity to enter upon any other Discourse with him at that time.

The next Day after, my Lord introduced me to the Marshal of Shomburgh, who was
then General of the English Forces. He was a Native of Germany, and had
formerly been Captain of the Guards to the Prince of Orange's (King William
III.) Father, from whence he went into the French Service, where he made
himself very Famous by his Glorious Actions, especially in the last War betwixt
the Spaniards and Portuguese. There being at that time a strict Alliance
betwixt France and that Kingdom, they solicited his Majesty for some Succors
against the Spaniards, after the conclusion of the Pyrencan Treaty. The
occasion of this War, was no less than a Contest about the Crown of Portugal,
which the King of Spain pretended to belong to him. But by the Conduct of the
Marshal de Schombergh, the Spaniards were at last forced to resign their
Pretensions to that Crown.

After so glorious a Period of this War on the Portuguese side, Schombergh
returned into France, where he Married Mademoiselle de Aucourt of the Province
of Picardy, for his second Wife. The King gave them very considerable Presents,
notwithstanding they were both Protestants. He likewise put him at the Head of
his Armies, which was looked upon as a peculiar Favor, considering, that
besides his being a Protestant, he was also a Foreigner. Thus he commanded the
French Army in Catalonia, in the Year 1673* and was made Marshal of France,
after he had by his great Conduct saved the King's Army, which was, by the ill
management of Monsieur le Bret, upon the point of having fallen a Sacrifice to
the Enemy, and retook also the Castle of Bellegarde. In the next following
Year, the raising of the Siege of Maestricht, which was vigorously attacked by
the Prince of Orange, was performed under his Conduct; and he had at several
times since, given such undeniable proofs of his Valor and Experience in
Military Affairs, that he was looked upon as one of the greatest Generals in
Europe: But after the Revocation of the Edict of Nants by our King, he found
himself under an indispensible necessity, either to change his Religion, or
else to leave the Kingdom.

Our King did all that in him lay to keep him in his Service, and the Marshal,
who had not long before bought himself a very fine Estate near Paris, which
cost him 100000 Crowns, showed no great inclination to part with it so soon,
which made many believe, he would at last comply with the King's desires;
especially when they considered, that he being a Person of great Natural Parts,
could not but be convinced by this time, of the Vanity of those ridiculous
Insinuations (as many others of the Heretics had been of late) invented by
their Ministers, to impose upon the Credulity of their Auditors; to wit, That
the Catholics are Idolaters. Nay there were some at that time, who pretended
that when he Commanded the King's Army in Catalonia, he was upon the point of
having changed his Religion, but that his Lady, who had a great ascendant over
him, had dissuaded him from it.

Thus it was supposed, that the Marshal Schombergh would not have let things
come to the last extremity, if an unlucky Accident had not happened, in which,
as he believed his Honor to be concerned, so he chose rather to lose all, than
to abate the least of his Pretensions in that point.

You must know, that Monsieur du Quesne, who Commanded the King's Fleet, was a
Protestant as well as he, and no less Zealous, which made him beg of our King,
to permit him to end his Days in the same Religion he was Educated in, and had
always professed. He being a Person, who was in extraordinary esteem with his
Majesty, and who, to confess the Truth, could not well be spared at that time,
the King granted his Request. The Marshall de Schombergh, who thought he had
deserved as well of his Majesty in the Land Service, as the other had at Sea,
begged of His Majesty, that he would be pleased to give him the same Marks of
his Favor, as he had done to Monsieur du Quesne, which the King refusing to
do, he left France with his Sons, who were very brave Gentlemen. From thence he
went into England, to offer his Service to his Britannick Majesty: But he being
no less zealous for the Catholic Religion than our King, he returned him
thanks for his offer. After this, he went to the Elector of Brandenburgh's
Court, where he met with a much more favorable Reception. For the Elector did
not only pay him all imaginable Respect, but also heaped upon him Favors upon
Favors.

The Marshal, who had all the reason in the World to be satisfied with the kind
Reception he met with in the Court of Brandenburgh, which soon comforted him
for the Denial he had met with in England (which, he was sensible, was chiefly
upon the account of his Religion) did however not continue long in that Court.

For the Prince of Orange, who had then already laid the foundation of those
great Designs, which he put afterward in Execution with such incredible
Success, did invite him to his Court, with an intention to make use of his
Service, in convenient time and place. After his arrival, the Dutch strove to
outvie the Elector of Brandenburgh himself, in paying their Respects to the
Marshal; For, it is to be observed, that the States of Holland, had always
showed a more than ordinary esteem for his Person, and many Years before, when
the States stood in Alliance with France, (during the Princes Minority) they
had made particular Applications to his Majesty, to give permission to the said
Marshal, to Command their Forces as General.

The Marshal de Schombergh was no sooner arrived at the Hague, but he waited on
the Prince of Orange, who endeavored to engage him into his Service, by great
promises of Reward, which indeed he has fulfilled since, without the least
diminution; for he not only Created him Duke and Peer of England, immediately
after he was Crowned King of England, but also allowed him a suitable Pension,
and afterward gave him an Estate of some Thousand Pounds per Annum.

It is easy to be imagined, that the Marshal, who was come with no other
Intention than to serve the Prince of Orange, did without much difficulty
accept of these advantageous Offers made to him, and assured the Prince of the
utmost of his Service and Fidelity, by which means he was admitted into the
very Secrets of that Enterprise, in which he bore so considerable a share not
long after.

There were many, who looked upon it (and not altogether without reason) as a
blemish to his great Reputation, to bear Arms against his King, to whom he
stood indebted for his whole Fortune; For it was upon his Majesty's
Recommendation, that the King of Portugal had made him Grandee of that Kingdom,
and had bestowed upon him the Earldom of Mertolo; besides the many Favors he
had received from his Majesty's own Hands. But on the other hand it ought to be
considered, that he was no Native of France, but a Foreigner, and it could not
but stick very close to his Stomach, to see the King refuse him that, which he
had granted to Monsieur du Quesne, who was his natural born Subject; and it was
questionless, upon the score of this Difference, that he thought himself under
less Obligation than another. For the rest, it is observable, that he did not
lay down his Marshals-Staff of France, neither resigned the Yearly Pension,
which our King was pleased to allot him, till after he had been an Eyewitness
himself, with what a general Applause the Prince of Orange was received in
England, which gave him sufficient hopes of pushing his Fortune there at least
to the same degree, with that he had left behind: Neither did he find himself
mistaken in his account; for, though he had left the Service of a Potent
Prince, yet he had this comfort, that he was considerably advanced, both in
Dignity and Estate.

I went, the next day after I had been with the Earl of S..... to wait on him
in St. James's, where his Lodgings were, being the same that had formerly
belonged to King James, when he was Duke of York. I was again Introduced by my
Lord L... and he took me alone with him into his Closet, the better to
discourse with me concerning the French Affairs, and the present condition of
that Kingdom; for, the Pr... having given him an account of my Engagement to my
Lord T....., he looked upon me no otherwise than one of his own Party, and who
had devoted himself and all his Service to that Prince.

The Subject we most insisted upon, was about the Province of Poictou; and he
asked me in what Condition the Protestants were thereabouts at that time?
Whether it were true what had been reported to them, that they were more
numerous in that Province than the Catholics? and whether the latter were also
discontented, and whether consequently there might be any probability they
would join with the Protestants, in case of a Descent to be made by the
English? I answered frankly as to this point, that he was misinformed, as to
what concerned the Catholics, being sure, there were at least Twenty
Catholics to One Protestant in that Province; and as to their being
discontented, there was not much to be relied upon that bottom, because he knew
as well as my self, that though the French would give a great deal of liberty to
their Tongues, yet they were nevertheless, the most affectionate People in the
World for their King's Service.

After several other such like Discourse, relating for the most part to the
Protestant Interest in France, he was pleased to tell me, that he was overjoyed
to understand I had taken a Resolution to serve the Prince, and that he would
do all that lay in his power, to show upon all occasions, how highly he valued
both my Person and Service; that he was to go the next Day to Hampton Court, to
wait on the Pr..., and that he desired me not to fail to be there, because he
intended to introduce me to him. I was there at the very Hour he had appointed,
and after a little stay, the Pr... being told that I was there, he ordered the
Duke of S..... to conduct me by a private pair of back Stairs into his Closet,
without being taken notice of by any Body. To be short, I was introduced to
him, I Discoursed with him, and acted my part so to the Life, that he was
persuaded as well as the rest had been before, that I had devoted my self
entirely to his Service. Our Discourse did run much upon the same strain, as
that with the Duke of S..... concerning the present State of Affairs in France,
concerning which, after I had told him what I thought best for my purpose, he
answered me, That he would make good my Lord T.....'s Promise to me; and that
he would take care I should not be a loser, by having engaged in his Service;
for which purpose he would make me a Lieutenant General, and that I should
serve under the Duke of S..... whom he intended shortly to send with an Army
into Ireland: That he would order the Earl of S..... to get forthwith my
Commission ready, and would order me some Money out of his Treasury to defray
my Charges, and equip my self according to my Quality. I had been admitted to
kiss his Hand, as I was first introduced into his Presence, and he gave it me
to kiss again, as I was going away, and all the while I discoursed with him, he
caressed me in such a manner, as if I had been the only Man that could do him
the most Service. I stayed two Days longer at H... because the Pr... happened
at the same time to take a review of those Troops that were to be sent into
Ireland. Among the rest there were two French Regiments there, one of Horse,
the other of Foot, which had been raised by the Duke of S.... and were both
called by his Name. There were also several other French Regiments there,
designed for the Irish Service, who were much valued by the Duke, and I believe
they might amount in all to about four Thousand Men.

If one may give credit to what was reported at that time, there were not a few
of the English, who were of Opinion, That it would be best not to concern
themselves any further with Ireland, believing, that they would find it a hard
Task to recover it from the late King of Great Britain. But the Pr.. having
convinced them by undeniable Reasons, that England must never expect to be at
quiet, till they had drawn that Thorn out of their Foot, it was resolved to
send a Fleet to their Assistance.

This Resolution was imparted to the Inhabitants of Londonderry, who were
reduced to great Extremities; for being blocked up on all sides, before they
could have the opportunity of providing the place with sufficient Provisions,
they had by this time consumed the greatest part of what they had been able to
bring into the place in haste; and they were come to so slender an Allowance,
that what was left, was divided among them every Day by Weight and Measure.

The whole Management of this Relief of Londonderry, was committed to the
Management of Major General Kirk, who had some Forces, and seventeen Ships of
all sorts allotted him for this Enterprise. King James having received
Intelligence that his Fleet was ready to set Sail for the River of Londonderry,
he ordered General Rose to reinforce the Blockade of the place with five
Thousand Men.

He was to pass in his way thither by the Fort of From, where there was a
Garrison of King James's, this being a Pass betwixt Dublin and Londonderry.

The Garrison of Iniskilling being encouraged by the late News of Major General
Kirk's Approach, resolved to Attack this Fort, not only to prevent the March of
General Rose, but likewise to intercept the Convoys which must go that way to
Hamilton's Camp.

The Eldest Son of my Lord Blare, who was then scarce Twenty Years of Age,
commanded in the Fort; the Garrison of which consisted only of two Companies of
Dragoons, notwithstanding which, he defended himself two Days against four
Thousand Men, who Attacked him vigorously, but in vain; For General Rose having
thereby time given him to advance to the Relief of the place, the Enemies, upon
notice of it, retired from before it.

From thence General Rose marched to Hamilton's Quarters, and after he had
taken a view of the whole Place, and all the Avenues leading to it, it was
agreed, that the best thing they could do at present for their Royal Master's
Service, was to take care, that no Relief might be thrown into the Place. He
told Hamilton, that his Opinion was, Major General Kirk would try his utmost to
relieve it by the way of the River.

They had made themselves Masters of the Fort of Culmore the Year before, which
lying at the Entrance of the River of Londonderry, it commands one side, and
they erected a Battery on the opposite Shore to hinder the approach of the
Enemies Fleet. All along on both sides of the River several Entrenchments were
made, for the convenience of the Infantry, who were to ply them as they passed
by, with small Shot. But looking upon all this as not sufficient to stop the
Enemies Passage, it was resolved to make a strong S^accado, or Boom, cross the
River, to stop the Ships which otherwise might perhaps by the Advantage of a
strong side, endeavor to get into the Town; But the Engineers who were
employed in perfecting it were so little skilled in what they had undertaken,
that the Piles which were ramm'd into the bottom of the River, were carried
away twice, by the violence of the Tide and Current, the third time it was
attempted with somewhat better Success; but could only be secured at both ends
with Wooden Piles; the want of which was secured in the middle part of it by
strong Ropes, which Defect stood the Enemy in great stead, as they advanced
with their Ships to the Relief of the Place.

In the mean while those within were driven to the utmost Extremity,
notwithstanding which, his late Britannick Majesty's Council, who looked upon
it as much more Glorious to take it by force, than to reduce it by Famine, sent
Orders to Hamilton, to open the Trenches before it. He obeyed these Orders, but
the Attack was carried on against that part of the Town where it was of most
difficult Access. This was occasioned by the Obstinacy of the Chief Engineer,
who being no great Conjurer in his Art, yet would not hearken to the Advice of
the rest.

The Besieged made frequent Sallies with so much Bravery and Conduct, that no
more could have been expected from a well Disciplined Garrison.

In one of these Sallies they killed Monsieur Pusignan a French Marshal du
Camp, an experienced and brave Officer; And the same Fate attended Monsieur de
Monmont in another Sally. He was a Person who had an equal share of Courage and
Conduct, and who had formerly been Captain of the Guards to our King, and
served in the Quality of a Lieutenant General under King James. He might have
been saved, if the Irish Troops, who were appointed to serve him, had done
their Duty; but instead of coming to his Relief, at the Signal given (as was
agreed betwixt them) they did not stir from their Post.

General Rose had met with a great deal of Vexation since his coming into this
Country, but the loss of these two brave Officers, was a great addition to his
former Disappointments. He therefore gave an Account to the late King of
England, how Matters went in the Camp, desiring him to take his Advice into due
Consideration, by which means he might be made sensible that he was not served
as he ought to be. And to give General Rose his due, he spoke nothing more than
was true in effect; for the Irish were generally very negligent in their Duty,
which furnished the Enemy with many a fair Opportunity to fall upon them with
great success; and those who had the supreme Administration of Affairs under
King James, acted so disorderly in every thing, that one would have imagined no
otherwise, but that they did it on purpose, to make us miscarry in the Siege.
Sometimes they had Powder, and sometimes none, and if they had Powder, perhaps
they wanted Matches; if they had Matches, they wanted Powder; and thus it was
with all other things in proportion.

To make up the Matter, Hamilton Attacked a Mill, which the Besieged had
Fortified at some distance from the Town, on which he made use of more Horse
than Foot, though it be evident, that the last were much more useful for that
Enterprise, than the first; which was the reason he was forced to retire with
the loss of a great many of his Men.

Whilst things stood thus in the Camp, the Governor of Londonderry died,
partly of the incredible Fatigue he underwent daily, partly as it was supposed,
for Vexation, to see the Inhabitants reduced to the highest degree of Misery.

A certain Minister of the English Church, who had signalized himself Walker.
during the Siege, being put in his place, did acquit himself with a great deal
of Honor in this Station. He made frequent Sallies upon the Besiegers, and
among the rest galled them extremely from an Entrenchment which his Predecessor
had caused to be made upon that side where it looks toward the Sea.

Those who worked in the Trenches, finding themselves continually annoyed by
the Fire of the Besieged, Hamilton ordered it to be Attacked. The Management of
it was committed to the Conduct of the Marquess de Angleurs, a French Officer,
who had formerly been likewise a Captain of the King's Guards, and served in
this Expedition in the Quality of a Marshal du Camp. He marched in Person at
the Head of several brave French Officers, sustained by some Irish Troops, and
was dangerously wounded; notwithstanding which, he would not quit his Post, but
continued to give the necessary Orders, till they were Masters of the
Entrenchment.

But this stood the Besiegers in no great stead, the Besieged being of an
Invincible Courage: By this time Major General Kirk was come to the Entrance of
the River, and being sensible, that these brave Fellows, who were not to be
Conquered, by the Sword, Dagger, or Fatigues, must at last buckle to Famine, if
they were not speedily relieved, he contrived a Stratagem to draw General Rose
from thence another way. He ordered three Thousand Men to Land at about Ten
Miles distance from the Mouth of the River, who having strongly Entrenched
themselves in a small Island, were to be joined by 5000 Iniskilling Men, with a
design to fall upon General Rose, whilst Major General Kirk, should endeavor
to open his Passage by the way of the River, and to force the Boom. General
Rose who gave a shrewd guess at their design, thought it most advisable, to
endeavor to engage these three Thousand Men, before they could be joined by
those of Iniskilling. The Siege was left to the Management of Hamilton, with
Orders to take all imaginable precaution against the Enemies relieving the
place, by the way of the River. The Fort of Culmore was provided with a good
Artillery, and so were all the other Posts I mentioned before. But a favorable
Gale arising, Major General Kirk took this opportunity to enter the River with
two of his best Ships, having also the Advantage of a high Afternoons Tide, and
as if Fate had conspired against us, to render his Enterprise successful, these
two Ships passed without the least concern on their side, betwixt the Fire of
the Fort of Culmore, and that of the great Battery upon the opposite Shore; and
after that out-braved the Smallshot of the Infantry, which was posted behind
the Intrenchments on both sides of the River, without receiving any more
damage, than if they had passed unmolested, and had not been fired at by the
Besiegers.

Thus they came safely to the Boom, where one of the Ships broke the Cables
that were joined on both sides of the Wooden Piles; which being done, there was
nothing left to obstruct their Passage to Londonderry, which they reached soon
after.

It was the most surprising thing in the World to see this Place relieved in
such a manner, and that by Daylight, without the loss of one single Man on the
Enemies side. There were some who would not forbear to say, that there was
something in it that was past finding out; or, else that it must be looked upon
as a peculiar piece of God's Judgments, which are hidden from us Mortals by his
All-wise Providence; but however it was, this happy Success hastened the Prince
of Orange's (King William III.) Resolution to Transport an Army unto Ireland
under the Conduct of the Duke of Schomberg. Though it must also be confessed,
That the Minister, who had been Governor of Londonderry, and who after the
Place was relieved, was come to London, and had given the Prince (King William
III.) an exact Account of the true State of Affairs in that Kingdom, did by his
Encouragement, prove a great Instrument in forwarding the intended March of the
said Troops. He was very well rewarded for what Service he had done during the
Siege, not only by several marks of a most particular esteem, which the Prince
(King William III.) was pleased to honor him with at that time, but he
received likewise a Reward of several Thousand Pounds Sterling.

But this Digression had almost made me forgetful of my own Condition, for I
found my self thus far entangled in the Business I had undertaken, that I was
strangely puzzled to find out a way to disengage me from it.

Whilst I was pondring upon this Point, not knowing what Course best to take,
God Almighty's Providence furnished me unexpectedly with an Opportunity, which
set my Heart at ease.

One day as I went with the Lord L..... to wait on the Earl of S...... I met
there accidentally with two French Men, who formerly had been Protestant
Ministers in Poictou, and had just then delivered a Memorandum to the said
Earl, containing some Proposals much to the same purpose as had been told me
before by Captain Granville, and the D. of S..... with this difference only,
that they were more special in the Matter, and had inserted the Names of many
Gentlemen in Poictou, who, as they pretended, had engaged among themselves in
that Province to take up Arms, if they could meet with a favorable juncture.

The E. of S..... imagining that I could not but know all the Nobility of that
Country, desired me to come into his Closet, where he told these two Ministers,
That they might Talk before me with all imaginable freedom, there being not the
least reason for them to suspect me, because he knew me to be a Person, who
might do them considerable Service in the Matter in hand.

After they had received this Assurance from the Earls own Mouth, they began to
explain the whole Matter at length, without disguising any thing of what was
contained in their Memorandum. Nay, they did not stick to Name to me five or
six of the Nobility of the Province of Poictou, whom I was sure, I knew much
better than they possibly could do. They took a great deal of pains to persuade
us that these alone would bring five or six Thousand Men into the Field at the
first Beat of Drum, and that the rest of the Protestants thereabouts would
follow their Example; (because these two Sparks supposed them to be as Zealous
as themselves.) They added, That the Protestants throughout the Kingdom, were
only waiting for a favorable opportunity, to free themselves from those
Tyrannies, which, they said, were daily exercised upon them; and that the least
Revolt in one Province, would be the Signal to all the rest to shake off that
Yoke, which like a heavy Burden quite oppressed them. They told us, there
needed no more than to furnish them with Arms and Ammunition, which done they
would soon give sufficient Encouragement to the English to put them under a
Head, fit to Command a good Army; there being not the least question, but that
they would be daily joined by a considerable number of brave Officers and
Soldiers; nay, even by many of the Catholics themselves, who were quite
exhausted by the heavy Taxes laid upon them, and consequently grown quite weary
of the present French Government.

I let them run on in their Discourse, without contradicting them in the least,
but rather seemed to side with them. Though at the same time I knew that nothing
was more false, than what they would make us believe concerning the Catholics,
nay even in respect of most of the Protestants themselves, who had any thing to
lose, whom I knew not to be so well disposed, as they pretended, to hazard
their Estates.

I am well convinced, that there were a great Number among them, who wished
with all their Hearts to see their Religion reestablished in France; but if
they should be supposed to be so very Zealous as these Ministers would have
made 'em, they might as many others have done, have left France, and not have
preferred their Estates before their Religion; whereas those who went away, left
every thing they had for their Religions sake. I looked upon it as a thing
which sufficiently explained it self, and which appeared so visible to me, that
I wondered how any unbiased Person could not discern it, that those who had
showed themselves such great Admirers of Riches, would scarce endanger their
Estates upon the same score, unless it were upon some remarkable Revolution.
Their Arguments, and several other Discourses we had together at that time,
made me make this Observation to my self, That Ministers of the Church, make
but very indifferent Ministers of State; but my Business being at this time to
dive to the bottom of their Design, I was so far from contradicting them, that
I told neither them nor the E. of S.... one Word of what I thought.

After these two French Ministers were gone, I stayed for some time longer with
the E. who reassumed the former Discourse, and at last came to what concerned
me in particular. He delivered to me my Commission of Lieutenant General,
pursuant to the Orders he had received from the Pr. and told me, That he would
take effectual care to get a Warrant for the receiving of the Money.

After I returned to my Lodging, I began afresh to ruminate upon my present
Circumstances; and considering my present Condition, I did not see how I could
avoid to confide my self to some Body or other; though according to the Rules of
Prudence, I was sensible I ought to trust no Body with the Secret but my self.

There happened just at that time to Lodge a certain French Man at the same
Ordinary where I lodged, who had been a considerable time in London: His
Brother who had lived there before him, had sent for him out of France, to
assist him in managing his Business, which for the most part was the Barbados
Trade. But his Brother happening to die just at the beginning of this last
Revolution in England, he stayed behind, till such time he could draw off all
his Effects: He was then just making every thing ready for his Journey into
France, for which purpose he had obtained a Pass from the Prince of Orange,
(King William III.) I had always looked upon him as a very Honest Gentleman,
and had found him very affectionate for our King's Service, and a true
Catholic; all which induced me to ask him the same Question I had asked before
of the Chevalier de Fourbin's Lieutenant; to wit, Whether he would oblige me so
far as to carry a Letter from me to the Marquess de Louvois in France. I told
him that I remembered to have heard him say several times, that he had Business
of great consequence with that Minister, which if it were so, I durst engage
this would be a means for him to have a very favorable Audience. He told me,
that he would do it with all his Heart, and to the utmost of his power; so that
I resolved to give Intelligence to this Minister, of all what had passed, and
how I was likely to be sent shortly into Ireland, with the Marshal de
Schombergh, desiring to receive his Commands, whether after I came into Ireland
I should take the first opportunity to go over to his Britannick Majesty's
Camp. But just the same Night as I was going to write this Letter, a Thought
came into my Head, which made me delay Writing for that time, till I might have
the opportunity to try whether my Project would succeed or not.

I told you before that the English Court were buoyed up with strong hopes by
some of the French Protestants, that their Brethren in the Province of Poictou,
had formed a strong Party there, to favor a Descent from England.

I judged therefore I might make good use of this to my advantage, i^ I could
insinuate to them, That considering my present Circumstances I should be able
to do them much greater Service in that Country if they would be pleased to
dispatch me thither, than if I were employed in the Irish Service.

If I succeeded in this Project, I was sure to be sent back into France,
without the least danger on my side, where I did not question to meet with all
imaginable encouragement as a Recompense for the Service I had done our King,
in making my self Master of a Secret, which they scarce would have been able to
discover in time without my assistance. After I had ruminated upon the Matter
all that Night and part of the next Morning, the first thing I did, was to try
how this Proposition would relish with the E. of S.... and my Lord L..... with
whom I used to Dine almost every Day.

I gave them a short Account of what I had heard the two French Ministers
propose to the E. of S... and took this opportunity to enlarge further upon
that Subject, and what Service I believed I was able to do in the Province of
Poictou. They answered immediately, that I need not question in the least but
that I should meet with sufficient Encouragement from the English Court in this
design, that they would advise me to speak about it to the E. of S... and they
would go along with me to him to back this Project, which they looked upon as
of the greatest consequence to the State, and the most prejudicial that could
be thought of to the Enemy. I told them again, that if they had a mind the
thing should answer expectation, they must be very careful not to let it take
vent; and therefore desired them not to Communicate this Secret to any body
Living, not even to the D... of S...... himself; because said I, he has a
particular fancy for me to go along with him to Ireland. And as to the last, I
spoke indeed no more than the Truth. For whether it was that he wanted good
Horse Officers, or whether he really had conceived a better opinion of my
ability than of some others; he would frequently tell me, that he relied much
upon the good service I was likely to do him, in disciplining several Regiments
of new raised Troops, which were to go over with him shortly into Ireland. I
had no other reason in the World, but to believe what he said was spoken with a
Sincere intention to oblige me; whereas I am certain it vexed me as often as I
heard him say so; I having not the least inclination at that time, to serve
against the King my Master; what I had done formerly, was owing to an absolute
necessity, and the ill Circumstances of my Affairs in France; which had forced
me from thence, to seek for refuge in another place.

The Earl of P..... and my Lord L...... having promised secrecy, I went the
next day to wait on the Earl of S.....; and as I had spent the greatest part of
that night in ruminating all the Circumstances of the matter, I was to propose
to him, I told him, that the longer I considered of what these Ministers had
offered the other day, the more feasible it appeared to me; and that this had
induced me to take a Resolution to do all the Service I was capable of to
encourage the Design: That I had many Friends and Relations in that Province,
and that I was of Opinion, if the English Court thought fit to make use of my
Service thereabouts, I could influence the Arrier-Ban, who were extremely
harrassed and dissatisfied with being forced to Guard the Seacoasts every
Summer; and that I did not question, by my Persuasions, to bring them over, to
join with us in case of a Descent; considering especially, that many among them
were Protestants, who would lend me a helping hand to persuade the rest. I
assured him further, that there was scarce any thing which would be able to
work more effectually upon their Inclinations, than when they understood that
they were to be headed by one of their own Country, who is Friends and Relations
were known to them; that by this means the intended Descent might be made
easy, and consequently a happy issue be expected from this Diversion.

The E. of S..... finding what I said to carry with it a great deal of
probability, gave me for answer, that I had done very well to speak to him
about it; that he would tell it the King, and that if he approved of it, I
should be sent no where else.

Accordingly he proposed the matter that very day to the Prince, who liking my
Proposals as well as the rest had done, ordered the E. to bring me to him the
next day, in the same place he had talked with me before.

I went the next morning, about Nine a Clock, with the E. of S..... to
Hampton Court, where I represented the Business with so much appearance of
great Advantages to the Prince, that he ordered the E. of S..... immediately to
give me another Commission in French in lieu of the former, which was in
English; that when I should come into Poictou, those who were ready there to
join with the English might be convinced by their own Eyes, that I had been
appointed to Command them; which would make them put the more confidence in
what I should propose, and the more willing to follow my Orders.

I took this opportunity to ask a favor of the Prince, which was* That he
would be pleased to discharge my two Kinsmen, Vignol and Forest, who were made
Prisoners at the same time, when I was taken, from their Imprisonment, which he
had the goodness to grant me without delay.

Being now assured of my sudden return into France, I writ a Letter to the
Marquis de Louvois, which I committed to the Care of the French Merchant I
mentioned before: but this Letter contained a quite different Account from what
I had writ before, and what I intended to have confirmed in the next, the Scene
being much altered since that time.

It is impossible for me to express, with what impatience I waited every day,
in hopes to receive my Dispatches in order to my return into France; for to
speak the truth, I began to be much tired here, where every thing seemed to
conspire to make my stay burdensome to my self. Among others, I found this
inconveniency, that there was scarce a place to hear Mass in, unless it were at
the Queen Dowagers Palace; and the common People were so much exasperated
against the Catholics, that one could not go thither without being pointed at,
and sometimes they would not let you pass by without bestowing some Nickname
or other upon you. It Is true, the Spanish Ambassador had also Mass said at his
House; but besides, that the French were not very kindly looked upon there, the
Room was scarce big enough to hold 20 People at once: Not that this Ambassador
had less Pride in him than the Spaniards commonly have, but it had been his
Misfortune to succeed in his Embassy to one who had run so much in Debt, that
he was Arrested; so that there were few who would venture to Let his Successor
a House, which was the reason he had been fain to take such a one as he could
meet with first.

At the same time, all the Ambassadors then in England, being extremely
dissatisfied to see the Law of Nations violated in the Person of their Brother,
the beforementioned Ambassador, unanimously complained of it to the Prince of
Orange; but especially he who was in Custody, made a heavy noise about the
matter, and that not altogether without Reason; for besides this Affront put
upon his Character, he had another matter of Complaint, which served for the
most specious pretense that could be.

It is therefore to be observed, That after the Prince of Orange's Landing, as
he was marching up toward London, the King his Father-in-Law thought fit to
leave the City in order to follow his Queen, who was gone before into France.
The London Rabble laying hold of this Confusion, pillaged the said Spanish
Ambassador's House, who (whether truly or falsely it matters not) pretended that
he had lost more by this sinister Accident, than would have over-pay'd his
Debts. The Prince (King William III.) not knowing what better Expedient to
pitch upon, to give Satisfaction to the Ambassadors, than to pay the Money,
discharged his Debts, and so appeased the matter. Nevertheless, most of the
Foreign Nations looked upon this Attempt as so heinous, that they spoke of the
English in very disrespectful Terms. And not to disguise the Truth, It is not
only to Foreign Ambassadors they have sometimes been wanting in that respect,
which is acknowledged to be due to their Character by all civilized Nations,
but there are also not wanting Examples, when they have done the same to their
own King; for, not long after the Restoration of King Charles II. a certain
Brewer was so insolent, as to Attach his Coach for some Money due to him.

This may serve as one instance of what I told you just now, but what I am
going to tell you will put it beyond all Exception.

Monsieur de Barillon the French Ambassador to Charles II. King of Great
Britain, talking one day with a certain Lord in the King's Presence, Sir F.
C..... s, (who was made a Lord afterward) joined with them in their Discourse,
but had not spoke above three or four words in French, when he began to
continue his Discourse in English. Monsieur de Barillon did not understand
English, which made him ask him what he said; who pretending he could not talk
in French, went on in his Native Tongue; Monsieur de Barillon asked him a
second time, what he said; upon which, the other without any further
Compliment, gave him the most sensible Answer of all, which was a good Box on
the Ear. The French Ambassador went the same moment to make his Complaint to
King Charles II. who sat not far off upon a Chair of State; who ordered
C.......s to be seized immediately, and to be carried to the Tower, which is
the Prison-Royal of England, as in France the Bastile.

The King of England, who abominated this Brutality, being resolved to make him
an Example of his Justice, granted a Commission for his Trial; And as the Fact
was of so odious a Nature, and of the greatest Consequence, he charged them to
punish him to the utmost Severity the Law would allow of. Monsieur de Barillon
was not so Revengeful, as to desire his Death, but on the contrary, made his
Applications to the King, whom he desired to Pardon C..... s. But this Prince
persisted immovable in his Resolution, to have him severely punished.
Nevertheless, the Ambassador redoubled his Prayers to the King, to obtain his
Pardon; who answered him very honorably* That if he did show himself so
Generous as to forgive an Injury done him by a Person who had affronted him in
the highest Degree, he ought not to be debarred from showing his Justice in
punishing a Fact which could not be pardoned without drawing after it very
pernicious Consequences. The French Ambassador finding all his hopes lost of
obtaining a Pardon from the King of Great Britain, had recourse to our King, of
whom he begged to intercede with King Charles II. to Pardon C.... s. Our
Monarch, who would not be outdone in point of Generosity by his Ambassador,
writ in his behalf to the King of Great Britain; who unwilling to deny any
thing to so great an Intercessor, pardoned C..... s under this Condition
however, That he should ask the Ambassador's Pardon upon his Knees, and
afterward go in Person into France, to give his humble Thanks to our King, for
having, by his powerful Intercession, obtained his Pardon.

Before I reassume the Thread of our History, I cannot forbear to give you
another instance of the same Nature, which happened much about the same time
when I was in London.

The Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of that City, to show their respect for
the Prince and Princess of Orange, (King William and Queen Mary) had both their
Pictures set up in the Great-Hall called the Guild Hall, among several other
Pictures of the Kings and Queens of England: But whether some mischievous
Person, who envied them that place, and had hid himself in the Hall, was
resolved to put an Affront upon them; or whether it was done by Connivance of
the Porter, who opens and shuts the Doors, both these Pictures were found the
next day Cut and Defaced. All those who were wellwishers to the present
Government in England, showed a great Concern at this Insolence, and a good Sum
of Money was offered as a Reward to such as could discover the Author of it,
but without any effect, the Person who did it being not discovered to this day.

Whilst I was Prisoner at Plymouth, the Marquess de Louvois, had offered to
have me Exchanged for one Latone, who having been a Commander in one of the
West India Islands, belonging to the English, was taken by one of our
Privateers in his return home.

But, after the King had showed him my Letter, which I had sent by the
Lieutenant of the Chevalier de Fourbin, and whose Father had delivered it to
the King, he did not so much press my Exchange as he had done before; being
sensible that my stay in England, and the part I acted there, would be an
infallible means to dive into the bottom of the Enemy's designs.

Not long after I had seen the Pr.... the second time, an unknown Person came
to see me at my Lodgings, and taking his opportunity to speak to me without
being over heard by any body; he told me, That the Marquess de Louvois had sent
over from France, a Messenger, to impart to me some business of great
Consequence; and to let me know that he had received my Letter, which was
addressed to the Marquess de Louvois; that his Orders were to continue to Act
the Hypocrite with the Enemy, in the same manner as I had done hitherto; and
that I should take all the opportunities to let him know how squares went in
England as often as I could do it without danger.

All these Circumstances, which I was sure this stranger could not have but
from very good Hands, were convincing reasons to me, not to suspect his
Fidelity. I therefore made use of the same Messenger, that was Iately come from
France, unto whom I delivered an answer in Writing to the Marquess de Louvois;
in which I gave him much the same Accounts I had done before, in my Letter,
which I sent by the before mentioned French Merchant.

It was much about the same time, that a certain person of the first Rank in
England (as I was sufficiently convinced afterward) came to me Incognito, and
told me, that understanding I was shortly to return into France, and knowing me
to be a French Officer of Note, he believed he might trust me with a Secret,
which was of the utmost consequence. He further told me; That though most of the
persons of Quality of that Kingdom, had abandoned his Britannick Majesty, and
had sided with the Prince of Orange, (K. William III.) all the Temptations in
the World should never be prevailing enough with him to follow their example;
he being resolved to be Loyal to his King as long as he lived.

He said he was very Ambitious to Write a Letter to the King my Master, by whom
he had the Honor to be known; and that he was come to pay me this visit on
purpose to ask me whether I would be willing to undertake the Delivery of the
said Letter.

I did not imagine any otherwise than that this was some Spy or other, sent
either by the Pr.... or by the E. of S...... to try whether I was the same
person they believed me to be; which made me in lieu of answering him according
to his expectation, entertain him with a great deal of indifferency; nay, so
coldly, that I believe he was vexed to the Soul, he had discovered himself so
Far.

But seeing himself engaged, past retreating, he thought it his best way to
make an absolute discovery of the whole matter to me; he then told me, that his
Life was in my hands; because he being known to be a declared Enemy of the
Prince of Orange, (K. William III.) it would certainly cost him his Head if it
should be known that he kept any Correspondence with France: That he would tell
me his Name, and what his Design was, for the advantage of his Prince, in hopes
that his Quality and Loyalty, together with the Generous confidence he had put
in me, would be a sufficient inducement for me to use him as a Gentleman, ought
to do: He then told me his Name, and if I could mention it here without
prejudice, it would be apparent that I spoke nothing but the Truth, when I said
he was one of the most considerable Persons in the whole Kingdom.

His Name, and the Reputation he had so deservedly gained by his Loyalty to his
Royal Master, inspired me with so much respect for his Person, that I began to
speak with more freedom than before; yet so, as to be very cautious, not to
engage my self in any thing that might be prejudicial to my present design,
till I should be fully convinced that he was the same Person he pretended to
be. To be convinced of it, I desired him to call upon me again the next day, at
a certain appointed hour, where I took care to hide, in my Chamber, a certain
French Gentleman, whom I knew I could trust, and that he had often seen and
spoke with the Person, whose Name I desired to be satisfied in. My resolution
was, that if I had found I had been trapp'd, to carry my self his Letter to the
E. of S... to clear my self of all suspicion; but he having told me nothing but
what I found very true, I had no further occasion to make use of this, or any
other precaution.

I saw him several times more before I left England, and he having received
Intelligence that the Marquess de Louvois, begun to be very urgent to have me
Exchanged (being impatient to have an account of the State of Affairs in
England, from my own mouth,) he came to see me one Evening, and carried me to a
certain place where Colonel Grimes lay Absconded. After he had enlarged much
upon the Colonels Loyalty, he at last desired me to let him go over with me
into France, under the protection of my pass; which was for me, and four of my
Attendance; which I might easily do, I having only three Servants, viz. one
Valet du Chamber, and two Footmen.

The Colonel, when he thought he might safely appear before me, came out and
desired the same thing of me, which I promised them to do. But the Colonel
meeting with an intimate Friend of his, who had likewise obtained a Pass for
one single Person, and having not the opportunity to make present use of it for
himself, had desired him to give it to him, imagining that by this means he
might go over with more security than if he went in my Company. His reason was,
that I being a Stranger, both I and my Servants would in all likelihood be more
narrowly examined; whereas he being a Native, his Pass would carry him off
without much Difficulty: But it happened quite contrary to his Expectation;
though he had disguised himself, it is true, when he came to Dover, he was so fool
hardy, as to appear in the publick-streets, so that he was discovered and put
in prison.

The Colonel having as I told you, changed his Resolution, I did almost believe
that the beforementioned person of Quality, had likewise altered his Mind; for
though, as often as I saw him, he always told me, he would be sure to bring me
the Letters, nevertheless he did not come with them; so that if I had not known
the Officer, who had told me who he was, to be a Man of Honor; I might easily
have suspected his Integrity; but as I knew this Officer to be a very honest
Gentleman, who would scorn to tell me an untruth, I thought I had all the
reason in the World to rely upon his Word; without any further precaution, of
which you may be convinced by the follow Relation.

He had formerly been a Captain of Foot in the French Service; but had been
forced to fly that Kingdom by reason of a Duel he had fought with another
Officer, and to look for Refuge in England, where he had obtained a Commission
under his Britannick Majesty.

But this King being, after the Arrival of the Prince of Orange, forced to
leave the Kingdom; and the Earl of Feversham having after this misfortune
Disbanded all his Forces, he was at present out of Employment, and reduced to
that Extremity, that he scarce knew how to subsist any longer. There were
several other French Officers at the same time in England, who having been
forced to leave France upon several accounts, and durst not return thither;
were in the same Condition, except those that were Protestants, who altogether
took Service under the Prince of Orange (K. William III.) and were well
received by him. But the Catholics, besides that they could not expect so much
favor at his hands, as the others, were unwilling to serve a Prince, whom they
must expect to fight for against their natural Sovereign.

This Officer, of whom I spoke before, was altogether of this Opinion, and had
always made it his business to encourage the rest (who were about forty two in
number) to persist in this generous Resolution, at least till such time they
might have an opportunity to try, whether they could not be employed in their
own Country again. He used to tell them, that the greatest part of Europe being
upon the point of declaring against the^ King, they ought not to despair, but
that his Majesty might perhaps be pleased to pardon what was pa^s'd, to deserve
which they could do nothing better than to give him this proof of their
Fidelity. They (...) to his advice, sold their Horses and Equipages* which they
spent in hopes of hearing some good News from France, whither they had writ
privately to their Friends and Relations: But these either had not received
their Letters, or else did not know how to make their Applications at Court, to
obtain their Pardon, so that they received no Answer. Being reduced to this
extremity, this Officer was sent to me in the name of all the rest, and after
he had represented to me the present ill posture of their Affairs, he told me,
that being informed that I was very suddenly to return into France, they
desired me to speak in their behalf to the Marquess de Louvois, and that if in
some time after they had no favorable Answer, necessity, which had no Law,
would enforce them to look out for another Master, who would provide for them.

I highly commended their Resolution in general, and his in particular. I told
him that, to convince him of my readiness to serve them, I would not only give
them bare Promises, but also something more solid and effectual; that since I
saw that their case was so urgent, as to admit of no delay, I would assist them
with what Money I could possibly spare; and that I was heartily sorry I was not
at present in a capacity to do more, and therefore they must take my good Will
for the Dead. That I would give to each of them fifty Livers, which I hoped
might serve them so long, till I could obtain a favorable Answer for them from
Court. I desired them, what ever they did, to keep their own Council, for fear
if it should take vent, they might else rob themselves of the benefit of their
expected Pardon, by their own Indiscretion; it was absolutely necessary for me
to give them this Precaution, for if it had been known in the least at the
English Court what I had done for them, I should in all probability have lost
the advantage of doing Service to our King for the future, whom I was resolved
to oblige as well after my return into France, as I had done whilst I was in
England. This made me once resolve to give the whole Sum I intended to bestow
upon them to this Officer, for him to distribute it among the rest, by which
means I thought to avoid the inconveniency of being known and taken notice of
by so many; but considering his present Circumstances, I began to be afraid,
that such a Sum might tempt him to something he would not easily be guilty of
upon another Account, I appointed them all a Meeting, where I gave to every one
his Share. I had not so much Money by me as was requisite when I made this
Promise, but a certain Merchant, whose Name was Launai, who formerly knew me
very well, being a Factor for a Merchant of Loudun, whose Name was Moret, was
very ready to supply me with it. After I had given them the Money, I desired
each of them to make a memorandum what reason had made him leave France, in
what Quality he had served there, and since in England under His Britannick
Majesty. All these memorandums I desired 'em to leave with the before mentioned
Officer, who came frequently to see me, and was to deliver 'em to me before my
departure. The Officer took effectual Care to get me all these memorandums, but
finding that the Pr.... was not so forward as I had expected to dispatch me
into France, I sent one of my Servants thither to carry and deliver them to the
Marquess de Louvois, with several other Letters; I took the opportunity of the
Pass of a French Gentleman of my Acquaintance, who took him along with him as
his Servant. I sent word to the Minister, That I had not received as yet any
Orders to go into Poictou, but that I believed it would not be long before I
should receive my last Dispatches, and that therefore if he would send me his
Commands, I would be ready to receive them at Calais.

My Servant was so successful in his Journey, that he passed unmolested, and
delivered my Letters to the Marquis de Louvois, in which, among other things, I
gave him an Account of what I had done for these French Officers, with an
Intention to be Serviceable to his Majesty; and I was so fortunate, that not
one of all the Letters I gave him miscarried, and Fortune continued to smile
upon me for some time longer; for at last I received Orders from the Earl of
S.... to begin my Journey. He made me at the same time a Present of two hundred
Guineas from the Pr.... and told me, that this was not intended as a Present,
but only to defray the Charges of my Journey for the present, because all my
Money had been taken from me at the time when I was taken at Sea.

About two Days before my Departure, a certain French Protestant, whose Name
was Christian, and who was sent as a Spy into England by the Marquess de
Louvois, came to desire me to take a Niece of his along with me into France. He
told me, that since I had but three Servants, and my Pass expressed four, she
might pass very well for one, for provided, I had no more than my number, no
notice would be taken whether they were Men or Women; I was not very fond to
accept of what he proposed to me; being afraid that this young Woman might
prove more troublesome to me than all the rest, and that consequently, I might
repent of it at leisure, when it was too late. I was not ignorant that most of
our Refugees in England, were an odd sort of People, and that it was the safest
way to have little or nothing to do with them. Christian began to perceive
where the Shoe pinched, and guessing at the reason of it, showed me a Letter
written by the Marquess de Louvois's own Hand, asking me whether I knew it.

I had no sooner cast my Eye upon it, but I told him, Since he had showed me so
fair a Pledge, I would not only take care of his Niece, but of any thing else
he should desire me that might be for his Service. He desired me to take a
Supper with him the next Night, which I did; and after we had drunk a merry
Cup, I observed him ogling his Niece, which made me shrewdly suspect there was
more Familiarity betwixt them than there is commonly betwixt an Uncle and a
Niece. He was so vain as to talk likewise to me concerning what Business he was
employed in by the Marquess de Louvois; which was also a shrewd guess to me,
that he was not extraordinarily Qualified for such an Employment, and that it
could not be long before he would be betrayed; as in effect it happened not
long after; for he was taken up, and Committed to Prison by the Prince of
Orange's (King William's) Orders.

THE MEMOIRS OF JOHN BAPTIST De La Fontaine, Knight. LIB. VI.
HAving thus far settled my Business in England, and every thing being got
ready for my Journey into France, I left London, and took the Niece of
Christian along with me: Before my Departure, it was agreed upon betwixt the
Earl of S.... and me, that I was to receive further Instructions from the
Pr.... by his means, that I was to send him word from time to time of what News
of moment there was in France, and he was to do the like to me from England. It
was so agreed betwixt us how to direct our Letters, so as that they might pass
securely without the least Suspicion.

The Earl of L.... who was all along of our Cabal, was also privy to this, and
the Earl of S.... ordered me to direct all my Letters I was to send to him, to
a certain Gentleman of my Lord L... Acquaintance and Recommendation; I left
also my Commission with him, not for fear of any danger on my side, but because
I could appear the more close, and prudent in my whole Conduct I told them,
that it was my constant Opinion People could not be too careful in matters of
this nature; because, if a Man had taken his Measures well, and the same were
thwarted or spoiled by some si^ister Accident that could not be foreseen by
Humane Prudence, he had however, this Comfort, that is was by Mischance, and
not through his own Neglect. That I considered, if perhaps I should be narrowly
searched, either at Dover, or else at my first coming into France, it must turn
to our great Prejudice if any thing should be found about me which might give
the Enemy an infight into what we designed, and ought to keep concealed, is
that it would be much the safer way to send my Papers after me by the Master of
the Packet-Boat, who might deliver them into my own Hands, if I were still at
Dover, and if I were not, I would take care to send word from Calais, where
they should direct my Letters as safely as to my self.

I got very well to Calais, nothing of moment happening to me in this Journey;
I was no sooner got out of the Packet-Boat, but those that kept Guard near the
Port took my Name, and the Sign of the I^^ where I was to Lodge, in writing. My
design was to go further to pay a visit to Monsieur de Laubanie, then Commander
in chief at Calais; but whilst I was Dressing my self, he sent one of his
Servants to me, who brought me a Letter from the Marquess de Louvois, directed
to me, which had been enclosed to the said Monsieur de Laubanie, with express
Orders to deliver it to me, immediately after my Arrival there. This was an
Answer to the several Letters I had sent him out of England. He told me that
his Most Christian Majesty had been pleased to Approve of what I had done, in
respect of the beforementioned Officers; that he had had the Goodness to Pardon
them all their past Offenses; that I should order them to repair altogether to
Ireland, with all possible speed, where they should meet with further Orders
from the King, with the Count d'Avaux his Majesty's Ambassador; as to what
concerned my self, I should make what have I could to come to Court; where His
Majesty would take care my money I had laid out upon these Officers account,
should be repaid me; and if I wanted Convenience for the Directions of my
Letters from England to Calais, there was a certain person, who had an
Employment in the Kings Farms there, unto whom, he said, he had sent his
Commands to do every thing as I should think fit to direct him: That I needed
not to make the least scruple of his Fidelity, his recommendation being a
sufficient warrant to me upon that account.

This Person was a Kinsman of Monsieur de Courchamp, Farmer General, and this
Monsieur de Courchamp had given him his place. Being fully satisfied in his
fidelity after the Recommendation from the Marquess de Louvois, I writ to my
Lord L.... to let him know, that it was to this Person they should address my
Papers, and other Dispatches they were to send me, as knowing him to be a
Person in whom I could put as much confidence as in my own self: That I had met
with him by a lucky chance at Calais, and that as long as he staid there, I
needed not in the least trouble my self for any other Direction, but could rest
satisfied, and rely upon his Conduct.

Having thus far ordered every thing according to wish, I set out on my Journey
to Paris. As I came to Boulogne, the Guards that kept the Gates asked me, who I
was, from whence I came, and where I was to lodge. I gave them a satisfactory
Answer to all, yet so as not to discover my self. But the Duke de Aumont, who
was then Governor of that City, and of the whole district of Boulogne, being
informed that I was come lately out of England, and curious to hear what News I
brought from thence, sent to me the Major of the Town, to desire me to come and
pay him a Visit: His House was in the Lower Town, and as I came to wait on him,
one of his Footmen told me, that I might go up to see the Duke, without having
my Name sent in to him, which made me go straight ways into his Closet, where I
found him standing upon a Stool, to look among his Books (of which he had a
good number there) for one which he wanted at that time. I no sooner opened the
Door, but he turning his Head toward me, and perceiving an unknown person
ready to enter his Closet, asked me briskly, Who are you? I answered him, I was
the person he had just now sent for; unto which he replied with a haughty look,
so that if I had not sent for you, I suppose you would scarce have given
yourself the trouble to have come without it.

Though he was a Person of very Eminent Quality, and bore a very high Rank in the
Kingdom, yet, as a Gentleman is not obliged to take an Affront from any body,
be he never so great a Person, I began to look upon him with such a
Countenance, as might easily give him to understand that I did not take it in
good part, and told him, that possibly I should not have come without his
express Orders; that my Business (which was the occasion of my present Journey)
was so earnest and pressing, as that I had no great reason to trifle away my
time; and that he would oblige me very much, if he would be pleased to tell me,
in a few Words, what it was he had to command me at this time. He was so
enraged at this Answer of mine, that he told me, though my business were never so
urgent, he commanded me not to stir out of my Inn till further Orders from him.
I was forced to obey, and so was returning to my Inn extremely ill satisfied
with the ill Treatment I had so undeservedly received at his hands, and I took
a resolution to write that very night a very smart Letter about it to the
Marquess de Louvois, though indeed I did not expect any great redress from him;
for, besides, that these great Persons are always supported by their powerful
Interest at Court against any private Person, the Duke d'Aumont's first Spouse
had been the Marquess de Louvois own Sister; the chief account I made of it
was, that I might the sooner have an Answer from that Minister, which would
release me from my Confinement, if the Governor should persist in his
resolution.

As I was going from his House I happened to meet the Major, whom he had sent
to me before, and understanding from him that he was just then going to wait on
the Duke, I told him, in what manner I had been entertained by him, and how he
had confined me to my Inn; I told him further, that though I knew the Duke to be
a Person who had a great Interest at Court, yet I was strangely mistaken if his
Conduct would be approved of there: That I would have him to know, that I was
one of the King's Brigadeers, and that perhaps he might not consider of what
consequence the Business I was to manage might be to his Majesty; and, to
convince him, that I did not make use of this as a vain pretense, to make my
self appear otherwise than in reality I was, I showed him the Superscription of
the Packet, which had been enclosed for me, with Monsieur de Laubanie, then
Commander in Chief at Calais.

When he came to the Duke, he gave him an account of what I had told him, and
how dissatisfied I was with his ill entertainment, the Duke then began to make
serious Reflections upon what he had done, and in half an hour after came in
person to my Inn, under pretense as if he passed that way by chance, and
meeting with me in one of the Rooms below stairs, told me, That he was sorry
things had happened thus, because I did not tell him who I was: That he had
taken me for a Foreigner, and the strict Orders he had received from Court, to
keep a watchful Eye upon any of them that should pass that way, had been the
occasion of the ill Reception he had given me. He desired me to forget what was
passed, and to drink a reconciling Glass with him, which he asked me to take
with him the same night at his House at Supper. He told me, that it being
already past Three-a-Clock in the Afternoon, I could not go far the same night,
and that to make me recover what time I should lose to day, he would have the
Gates opened for me on purpose the next morning, as early as I pleased.

This sudden change made me forget the ill Treatment I had received before; and
I answered his Civilities in very obliging Terms; telling him, that I would not
fail to pay him that respect I knew was due to him, and would come to Sup with
him that night; his reply was, that he desired me to come pretty early, that he
might have the more leisure to talk with me, concerning what News I could give
him from England. I went according to my promise, and we spent the greatest
part of our time in discoursing upon the English Affairs, and the present
Condition of that Court; of which I gave him the best Account I was able to do,
yet so as to be careful not to let him know the least thing of the Secret I had
to manage for the King's Service.

The next morning I continued my Journey to Paris; where we were no sooner
arrived, but I began to try what metal Monsieur Christian's Niece was made of.
I must confess it, to my shame, considering I was a person who should have had
more sense at that time, being especially a Married Man, and having many
Children of my own: But, however it was, what I had observed, betwixt her
pretended Uncle and her, that Night I Supped with them at London, raised my
passion to that Degree, that I could not forbear to attack a Fort, which I did
believe would not endure a long Siege; and indeed I found my self not much
mistaken in my guess, for she was so good natured, as to hang out the white
Flag at the first Summons, and soon after surrendered at Discretion.

After we began to be more Familiar together, I checked her one day concerning
her amorous intrigue with her Uncle; she would fain at first have denied the
whole, but finding that I would not be satisfied thus, she at last confessed
what Familiarity had been betwixt them: but at the same time told me that he
was none of her Uncle, nay, not so much as the least of Kin to her; and that
she had only passed, for his Niece in England, because the Neighborhood should
take the less notice of their living together; that Christian was born in
Paris, and she in Angiers, that he was a Protestant and she a Cathalick; but
that to make her amends for the loss of her maidenhead, he had brought her
over to his Religion.

Finding her in a good vein to answer me every thing I asked her, I began to
examine her, what business did bring her at this time to Paris, and whether she
knew the Contents of those Letters she brought along with her for the Marquess
de Louvois? She told me that her Business was at Court, where she was to wait
on the Marquess de Louvois, in hopes to meet with a suitable encouragement to
the Service she was going to do his Majesty; by discovering to him the
infidelity of a certain Swiss, whose Name was Prancourt, who being employed as
a Spy by the Marquess de Louvois in England, did under that notion betray him
to the Enemy. That she had such convincing proof of what she offered, as was
past all contradiction, because it was of his own Hand writing.

She then told me, by what accident she happened to come by the secret: It
seems this Prancourt was an intimate acquaintance of Monsieur Christian, and
happened to come one Evening (about a fort-night before she left England) to
see and take a merry Cup with him, as they used frequently to do. After the
Glass had gone several times about, Prancourt desired her, as she passed
accidentally through the room where they were, to carry a Letter, which he gave
her, to the Post House, because he did not care to stir at this time, which she
promised him to do very carefully; but in lieu of delivering it to the Post,
thought fit to keep it, being curious to see the contents of it, which
convinced her that he betrayed the Marquess de Louvois.

For this Letter being directed to an Uncle of his, who was one of the chief
Magistrates in one of the Cities belonging to the Swiss Cantons, he gave him
notice that the Prince of Orange (K. William III.) had granted him a Commission
to levy a Regiment of Swiss, at the intercession of my Lord M.... his Wife's
Uncle. He desired him to engage as many Soldiers as he could in the Service,
besides several Officers, whom he named to him. She further told me, that among
other pretty Tricks, her pretended Uncle Christian had taught her, how to open
and close up again the Seals of Letters, without being perceived by any body,
and that she had made use of this Art to close up Prancourt's Letter so
artificially again, that the Marquess de Louvois could not suspect the opening
of it, and that therefore she hoped for the greater Reward from his hands. She
confessed, that she had not said one Word of it to Monsieur Christian, who, she
feared, if he had known it, would have made his own advantage of it, and would
have endeavored, by this Discovery, to regain the favor of that Minister,
which she believed he had pretty well forfeited of late, because he had for
some time past not received his usual Allowance from him. That she had improved
this opportunity to compass her own Design, under pretense that she would go
into France, to solicit the payment of the Money due to him from Court; which
he had agreed to, and charged her with another Message, to be delivered by her
to the Marquess de Louvois, to wit, that he had prevailed with one of the
Clerks under the E. of S...., to give him timely Intelligence of any thing of
moment, for a good consideration; she added however, that she would not
positively affirm it for truth, knowing him to be a Person full of vain
Conceits, and who would often imagine things quite different from what they
really were; besides, that this might be perhaps invented by him, to ingratiate
himself at Court, to hasten the payment of his Money.

When I seriously Reflected, what a trick this Young Wench was going to put,
both upon Prancourt and her pretended Uncle, I could not but be sensible how
little confidence I ought to put in her; besides that I always looked upon it
as a general maxim for a Man of Sense not to rely upon such light Gossips:
Nevertheless as it is one of the greatest defects of Mankind, seldom to be
forewarned by the misfortunes of others; so I was very near to have been
caught in the same Snare as Prancourt was, the consequences of which would
have proved as pernicious to me, if I had been as Treacherous as he; of which I
shall have occasion to say more anon.

After I came to Versailles, I waited immediately on the Marquess de Louvois,
who did not see any body that Morning, so I went to the Princess de Conti's
Apartments (one of the Kings Daughters) to see whether I could hear any tidings
of the before mentioned Lieutenant of the Chevalier de Fourbin. I found his
Father at home, whom I told, that I had been acquainted with his Son in
England; where we had been both Prisoners at the same time; which made him ask
me, whether my Name was not Fontenai? I having told him it was so; and that I
was the same person he meant; he asked me how long it was since my arrival
there, and whether I had been to see any body at Court? I answered him, That I
did not come to Versailles till last Night, and had not seen any body yet; that
indeed I had been that morning to wait on the Marquess de Louvois, but no body
being admitted to see him then, I intended to wait on him again after Dinner.

He then told me, That since I had not seen him yet, it would be best for me
not to do it now, till I had paid my respects to the King; who, said he, has
given me Express Orders so soon as I should know of your coming, either by my
Son, or otherwise to conduct you to Monsieur de la Vienne, one of the Four
Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber, whom he has commanded to present you to
him at the very Minute he sees you.

Accordingly he presented me to Monsieur de la Vienne, who Conducted me into
the King's Closet, there to expect his return from Mass. It was not long before
the King returned, who being told by Monsieur de la Vienne, that I was in his
Closet, he entered alone.

The first thing he asked me was, what News I brought from England, and whether
I had any thing more to add to what I had Writ before to the Marquess de
Louvois. After I had given His Majesty an exact account of every thing that had
happened to me in England, since my last Letter to the Marquess de Louvois; I
told him likewise, that I had brought a Letter from thence Directed to him, and
another to the Queen of England.

For you must know, That the Person of Quality I spoke of before, who came to
see me Incognito at my Lodgings in London, and whom I believed to have altered
his Resolution of sending his Letters with me, because I had heard no more of
him before my departure out of London, had only made use of this Precaution for
his greater security sake. For I was no sooner come to Gravesend, but he sent
these Letters, and several others to some of his Friends in the English Court
at St. Germain, by a trusty Friend of his, enclosed in a Letter directed to my
self, in which he recommended them to my most particular care. Our King asked
me, from whom these Letters were, and what I had done with them? I told him,
that the Letters came from my Lord...... and that I had left them in my
Portmanteau, with an intention to deliver them to the Marquess de Louvois, not
knowing that I was to have the Honor to see His Majesty in person.

After I had given the King a Circumstantial relation of all matters of moment,
which happened during my stay in England, he ordered me to give a full relation
of it likewise to the Marquess de Louvois, who was to Signify to me his further
pleasure^ I went the same day after Dinner to wait on the Marquess de Louvois
again, who espying me among the rest in his Antichamber, as he was going from
Dinner into his Closet, came to Whisper me in the Ear, that he was not at
leisure at present, but that I should come again at Night about 8 a Clock, when
he would be very glad to talk with me.

Thus I went my ways, and returning at the appointed hour, he told me, that I
must come again the next morning at six a Clock: Accordingly I came, and being
admitted into his Closet, I stayed with him there for above an hour; for after
I had given him a full account of the whole matter, he made me Write two
Letters in his presence, one to the E. of S..... the other to my Lord L...... I
sent them Word of my safe arrival in Paris, and that I expected only the last
Orders from the Pr.... to put our design in Execution. I gave likewise those
Letters which my L...... had sent after me to Gravesend, to this Minister, who
kept only that directed to his Majesty, and returned the rest to me, telling
me, that I ought to deliver those Letters of my L.... to the Queen of England,
and to those other Gentlemen they were directed to.

He gave me at the same time, a strict caution not to mention the least thing
of my Transactions in England, either to that Princess or any body else. Just
as I was going to take my leave, I told him, that I had brought over with me
from England, a Niece of Monsieur Christian, who pretended to have business of
the utmost consequence, to Communicate to him; that she having desired me to
ask him leave to wait on him; I should be glad to know what Answer he was
pleased to give.

I took also this Opportunity to speak with him concerning My Lord L.... 's
Business; I told him that the said Lord had desired me to intercede with him
concerning some Papers, and other things belonging to him, which as he
pretended were taken from him, notwithstanding he had a Pass from his Majesty
for their safe Conduct; that he had given me a Memorial, containing the whole
State of the Case, and his Reasons; and that if he thought fit, to order
Restitution to be made of them, in consideration, that thereby a more firm
Correspondence might be settled betwixt him and me, which would much redound to
his Majesty's Service, I would leave this Memorial with him. He answered me as
to these two points; That after my return from the English Court at St.
Germains, I should introduce Christian's Niece to him, and that then also I
should deliver him the said Memorial.

To speak the whole truth of the matter, My Lord L.... s pretensions were not
so well founded as he flatterred himself; and if it had not been for such a
favorable Juncture as this, they would scarce have passed for sufficient for
him to have obtained his Request. He had been Ambassador at the Imperial Court
at Vienna, and the Emperor had dignified him with the Title of an Earl, which
made him go by the same Title in England, where else the eldest Son of an Earl
cannot pretend to it till after his Father's Death. He had afterward been sent
Ambassador into Spain, and as he was returning home from thence, had taken his
way through France, being provided with his Majesty's Pass, both for himself
and his Equipage, which last, he caused to be Embarked in a Vessel bound to
Plymouth, where it safely arrived not long after. But Plymouth being near
fourscore French Leagues distant from London, he had ordered the same Equipage
which he brought from Spain, to be embarked again on board another Vessel, for
the cheaper and more convenient Transportation to London, which being met at
Sea by a French Privateer, was taken and carried into Dunkirk.

My Lord, nevertheless, claimed the said Goods, by virtue of the same Pass, but
all his Addresses made to the Marquess de Segnelay upon this account, had
proved fruitless hitherto; that which was the worst at present, was, that it
being some time ago, when the said Prize was taken, and was sold since, there
was but little probability for him to recover what he had lost. But the
Marquess de Louvois, who judged not without good reason, that this Obligation
done to my Lord, by my Intercession, would serve to promote the King's Service,
interposed his Authority, and sent strict Orders to the Admiralty of Dunkirk,
to take effectual care that all those things belonging to my Lord's Equipage,
or otherwise as were disposed of, might be brought forth. He Wrote also to
Monsieur de Laubanie at Calais, to assist them in the recovery of these things;
and dispatched Monsieur de Courchamp himself thither, to see his Orders put in
Execution. By this means, my Lord had the Satisfaction to recover most of his
Equipage, there being but very little missing; but what was most pleasing to
him, was, That all his Papers were restored to him without the least
Diminution, among which was the Emperors Patent, by which he had Invested him
with the Dignity of an Earl.

Whilst these things were Transacting at Dunkirk, I took a turn to the English
Court at St. Germain, where I delivered to the Queen of Great Britain that
Letter directed to her from my Lord..... as I did likewise the other Letters
belonging to several Gentlemen of that Court. I found this Princess extremely
afflicted at the News she had lately received from Scotland, of the Death of my
Lord Dundee. He was the only Person of Quality in that Kingdom, who to testify
his Loyalty to King James, had taken up Arms for him, and had made his party
good against the Enemy, as long as he lived, giving many excellent Proofs of
his Bravery, and there were not a few who were of Opinion, that if he had been
timely supplied with Men and Money, with Ammunition and Provision as Ireland
was, he would have acted with better Success there, and might perhaps have
carried the terror of his Arms to the very Borders of England, it being
certain, that with these few Men he had under his Command, who had no other
Strong-hold but the Mountains he frequently entered the Plains, and sometimes
gave the Alarm to the City of Edinburgh it self; but being slain in one of
these Engagements, his loss was Bewailed by the whole Court of St. Germain, who
looked upon him as one of the most Faithful Subjects of their Royal Master.

The first thing I did after my return from St. Germains, was, to introduce
Monsieur Christian's Niece to the Marquess de Louvois, according to the Orders
he had given me the last time I saw him. He discoursed her in private, and as
far as I could find by the Sequel of the Matter, he laid no great stress upon
what they told him concerning the Clerk of the Earl of S..... For he asked me
immediately after, what Opinion I had of this Christian, telling me at the same
time, that he was not at all satisfied with his Management. I answered him very
frankly, That I had but a very indifferent Opinion of his capacity, as well as
himself; because I found him very defective in point of Prudence and Conduct,
the necessary requisites in a Person who undertakes such a Task as he had done;
that besides this, there was nothing extraordinary, or taking in his whole
Person, and that a Man need not Talk with him above once or twice to find out
his blind sight* But though the Marquess de Louvois made no great Reflections
upon what Advice had been given him, concerning the Clerk, he showed much more
eagerness to unfold the Riddle, in respect of Prancourt. For which purpose, he
took the Letter she gave him, which he unsealed neatly, and after he had
Perused it, and closed it up again, so as not to be perceived by any Body, sent
it forward to the place whither it was directed, not questioning but that this
Discovery might stand him in good stead for his Majesty's Service, as indeed it
happened soon after.

For his Kinsman, unto whom the Letter was directed, sent a full answer to the
same, which being to go by the way of Paris to England, and to be addressed to
a Hostess, called la Perle, who lived at an Inn in the Suburbs of St. Germain,
in the Butchersstreet, at the Sign of the City of Hamburgh, this Minister
ordered the Postmaster of Paris, that as soon as such a Letter should come to
his Hands, to deliver it to no Body but himself.

By this contrivance he made himself master of the whole Secret, carried on
betwixt the Uncle and the Nephew, which was to raise a Regiment of Swiss for
the Prince of Orange (King William III's.) Service. The same Letter was
afterward Sealed up again. and dispatched to Prancourt in England, together,
with a Bill of Exchange; which he had no sooner received, but he came to Paris,
and not having the least mistrust of his being discovered, but rather expecting
an augmentation of his Sallary, for some late Services, went to wait on the
Marquess de Louvois.

But as he was going from that Minister, he was, to his no small surprise,
taken up by one of the Grand Provost's Attendance, who put him into a Coach,
and carried him to the Bastile. He has continued there a Prisoner ever since,
and I believe he will not get easily out, unless it should be by the conclusion
of a Peace, if he lives till that time.

The Marquess de Louvois ordered fifty Pistols to be given to Christian's
Niece; a slender Recompense for so considerable a piece of Service; considering
especially, that he knew no otherwise, but that she had undertaken this Journey
at her own cost and charge, though indeed I defrayed all the Expenses. For my
part, I was not so well rewarded as she; for though this Minister could not be
ignorant that I had been stripped of all what I had by me when I was taken at
Sea, he made me not the least Retaliation, imagining perhaps, as I suppose,
that the two hundred Guineas I had from the Earl of S.... were a sufficient
Recompense for what I had lost. All that I could obtain, was to have the Money
repaid me, which I had given to the abovementioned French Officers, before I
left England; the Banker who had lent me that Money upon my Word, having drawn
a Bill of Exchange upon me, since to the full value of it; nay, I was forced to
put him twice in mind of it, and to tell him, under what necessity I was of
answering the said Bill of Exchange.

Thus I had as little reason to be satisfied with them* as Christians Niece,
and she and I for the better conveniency's sake, Lodged together in the same
House, for which I ought to ask pardon from God Almighty. Notwithstanding all
this, I appeared every day at Court, in hopes of being employed some where or
other. One day the Marquess de Louvois told me, that my Lord L..... had sent my
Commission and other Papers according to the direction I had appointed him at
Calais, which Courchamp had sent to him, together with a Letter from the said
Lord, to me. There was among them another Commission from the Pr..... by virtue
of which I was constituted Governor of the first place, that should be taken
in Poictou, or in any part of France, after their landing. He delivered them
all together into my own hands; and at the same time made me write again two
Letters in his presence, to the same two English Lords, I had Writ to before.

They were both dated in Paris, as were likewise the two former, and contained
in substance, that, being fallen ill two days after my arrival in this City, I
could not immediately pursue my intended Journey into Poictou, that
nevertheless being not unmindful of what I had to do, I had met with several
Gentlemen of that Province, whom I had found as great Favorers to our design,
as I could wish for, and did not question but that their concurrence would be
of greater consequence to us in that Country. I told them further, that being
on the mending hand now, I did not question, but to be able to give them before
long a more complete account of the matter, to their entire satisfaction.

I gave likewise an Account to my Lord L..... what success I had met with in
his Affairs, in the same manner as I have related it just now; having not Writ
to him before upon that Subject, because I was very cautious of Writing any
thing to them without their Knowledge, nay, even without the positive Orders of
the Marquess de Louvois. I did not send these Letters to the Post House at
Versailles, but took the Copy of them along with me to Paris, where I tarried
two days, whilst the King and Court were at Marli. After I had Writ them over,
I enclosed them in one Packet, with an intention to carry them the same Night
to the Post House. But Monsieur Christian's pretended Niece, happening to see
them lie upon the Table, told me she would save me that labor, and carry them
for me, she being also to send a Letter to her Uncle.

Knowing how she had served Prancourt, I ought sooner to have thrown them into
the Fire, than trusted her with them; but having not the least suspicion, that
she would serve me the same trick. I told her, without the least hesitating
upon the matter, That, if she pleased she might, but desired her withal to make
haste back again. But she played me the same P^anck as she had done to the
Swiss before; for in lieu of carrying the Packet to the Post House, she kept
it, and taking the next opportunity, whilst I was gone into the City, unsealed
the Letters, and after she had seen the Contents of them resolved to present
them to the Marquess de Louvois: In the mean time we continued our former
familiarity, and she caressed me to the highest degree, the better to dissemble
her design against me; a convincing instance of the deceitfulness of such light
Creatures! She had the cunning to desire me, to take her along with me the
first time I should have occasion to go to Versailles, under pretense that she
intended to deliver a Petition to the Marquess de Louvois, in order to obtain
some further Gratification. I was so far from suspecting her intention, that I
freely carried her thither, when she took this opportunity to deliver these
Letters into this Ministers own hands, not questioning, but that by this second
piece of Service, she had made her Fortune for ever.

But if she had found her self deceived in her first hopes about Prancourt's
Letter, she had this as an additional Affliction for her pains, that she was
not rewarded with the value of a Penny for this.

I for my part met with so cold a Reception from the Marquess de Louvois the
next time I saw him, that I don't at all question, but this mistake turned to
my great detriment ever after. And to speak Truth, what Opinion can a Wise
Minister have, o^ what Confidence can he put in a Person, who could be guilty
of so gross an Oversight. I did what possibly I could to dissemble my
Resentment against this Treacherous Wench whilst I was in his presence, but he
soon perceived the different Passions which struggled within me, and I verily
believe he guessed at the whole Matter, and what Familiarity there used to be
betwixt us; for he forbid me expressly not to mention one word of it to her;
for, says he, if you do so, she will be sure you must have it from me; and when
she perceives that I let you go unpunished, what other Construction can she
make of the whole, (unless she be quite a Fool) but that these Letters were
written by you with my consent. He told me further, that he was unresolved what
he had best to do in the matter, whether he ought not to have me taken up, for
fear she should else guess at the Intrigue, when she found me to come off thus
unpunished, after what she had convinced him of against me. That I had put him,
by this Imprudence of mine, to a great Nonplus, and that I deserved to be
severely Chastized for it.

I cannot deny but that if he had sent me to the Bastile, I should have looked
upon it as a Chastizement I had very well deserved at his Hands, at this time,
when his words had made so deep an impression upon my mind, that I durst not
look up into his Face; and if it had not been for his express Commands, it
would have been impossible for me to have kept my self within the bounds of
Moderation, in respect of this Treacherous Wretch. But being full of Shame and
Confusion, I could say no more, than to beg him to forgive me this Fault; and
though I always had a natural aversion to Hypocrisy; yet I mastered my Passion
so far, as not to gave the least Suspicion of it to the young Wench. Nay,
though I hated her ever after to the highest degree, I would not send her away
immediately, but resolved to take another opportunity to rid my Hands of her,
for fear she should guess at the occasion of it.

Whilst I was at Paris, I had presented to the Marquess de Louvois a Memorial,
containing the Names of all those Gentlemen, who, according to what had been
related by the abovementioned two French Protestant Ministers, were ready to
do, and hazard every thing for the Re-establishment of the Protestant Religion.
The same Memorial likewise showed that the principal Design of the Enemy, was
at that time, upon Port Lowis, in Britany, which they believed to be but ill
provided; and where, by reason of the small Garrison, they judged they might
most conveniently make a Descent, provided, no remarkable Alteration should be
made thereabouts in the mean while.

It must be confessed, that they had very well taken their Measures, for
besides that there was a very weak Garrison in the Place, the Coast thereabouts
was so high, and the Water in many places so deep, that they might have made a
Descent with a great deal of ease. Both the King and the Marquess de Louvois,
were extremely netled at this piece of News; for though it was in their power
to provide the place with a better Garrison, it was beyond their Art to alter
the Situation of the Coast, which was very proper for a Descent; for there is a
Bay about two or three English Miles distant from the Town, where there is five
and thirty foot of Water, and where consequently the biggest Ships may approach
the Shore, without much danger. There were at that time no Forts thereabouts,
though I don't question, but some have been Erected there since. There was no
other Defense at that time but a Body of the Militia, who were not in a
Capacity to have made any Resistance by themselves, and the Garrison being not
strong enough to second them; it must of necessity follow, that in case the
Enemy had without delay put their Design in Execution, they might not only have
Landed here, but also have burnt all the Ships, which lay at Anchor in another
Bay behind the Fort; there being nothing that could prevent their Marching
thither by Land. They might have at the same time set fire to the
East-India-House, which is not five English Miles distant from Port-Lowis, and
without any Defense, unless they had judged it more for their purpose to have
carried off these precious Commodities in their Vessels.

I must confess, I was none of the King's Cabinet Council at that time, neither
ought I to pretend to dive into the Secret of the greatest Prince who has for
many years swayed the Scepter of France, and of so Wise and Politic a Minister
as the Marquess de Louvois; nevertheless, I am almost persuaded that I am not
much out of the way when I shall tell you that it was debated in Council
whether it was not convenient to take up those Gentlemen, whose Names were
inserted in the Memorial I had presented to the Marquess de Louvois, which
might serve as a Signal to the Enemy, that their Design had been discovered, or
whether it would be more proper to dissemble the Matter for some time longer,
till they might receive better Information concerning them. For as great a
Politician a^ this Minister was, he could not forbear to let slip some words,
from whence I might easily conclude* that both his Majesty and he were
extremely puzzled about it. Neither do I believe my self to be in the wrong,
when I shall further tell you, that there was a third Proposition made in the
Council; to wit, whether it would not be most proper for me to be seized, by
which means they might avoid to call so many Gentlemen to an account, against
whom, they had as yet, no positive Proof of favoring the Enemy's Design; that
so by the making a Sacrifice of one unfortunate Person, they might save a great
deal of trouble to the State, and at the same time give the Enemy to
understand, that their Mine had taken Vent.

It is beyond all Question, that they believing me entirely devoted to their
Service, could not have supposed otherwise, but that their whole design had
been discovered, and questionless, would have laid aside this Enterprise; being
bereaved of all the likelihood they had of succeeding in it, by this supposed
discovery.

But whether the King whose goodness, and Justice are the most ample Subject of
Admiration, to all the World, would not make use of either of these extremes,
without first trying other means, or whether the Marquess de Louvois had some
other design in his Head (as I am apt to believe, by what I know since) he
asked me not long after, whether I understood the whole Art of Fortifications?
I answered him, That indeed I had some insight into it, but not so as to
pretend to be a Complete Engineer; I made him this Answer, which I had pitched
upon, as the most suitable to the Design which I supposed he had against me; to
wit, to make me a Sacrifice to save many others; or else out of a piece of
Policy, to divert me from making any further account, upon what I might
reasonably pretend to have deserved at his hands, for the Service I had done.
He told me, that he intended to send me to Visit Port-Lowis and some other
Maritine places on that Coast; and that since I was not so well Ver^ed in the
matter, as that he could rely absolutely upon my skill, he would join another
in Commission with me, who might supply that defect; that in my return from
thence, it would be time enough for me to go into Poictou, to sound the
inclinations of these Gentlemen, whom I had heard mention made of in England,
and that he would send me his further Orders thither, to let me know, how I
should behave my self to encompass our design.

I was in the greatest uncertainty that could be, to guess at his design; for
it seemed to me, that to bestow so public an Employment on me in sight of all
the Protestants thereabouts, amongst whom I was afterward to act the part of
an Emissary from the Pr... would be but a slender inducement for them to trust
me with their Lives and Estates. Perhaps this Minister intended to make use of
me as an Evidence, against such of them as he believed really guilty, and had a
mind to take off, or perhaps this was a State's Trick to spoil my Credit among
them, for fear that if I should find them disposed to a Revolt in the Province
of Poictou, I might be prevailed upon to change Party, and side in good earnest
with the Prince of Orange, (K. William III.) in hopes to make my Fortune under
him; for which reason also one Monsieur de Vaux was to be joined with me in
Commission, who was to keep a watchful eye over all my Actions.

This Monsieur de Vaux had formerly served the King, but it was a great while
since; so that there was but little probability that the Marquess de Louvois
should have pitched upon this Person for such an Employment, and preferred him
before others then actually in the King's Service, and who besides that were
his Creatures, if there had not been some mystery in the bottom. He was styled
in* his Commission Surveyor General, a Title to which, morally speaking, he
could not in the least pretend, considering that he had never born a Commission
above the degree of a Captain of Foot, and that a considerable time ago.
Nevertheless to give him his due, he was a very genteel Person, well versed in
the Military Art, and who besides that had another good Qualification, which to
me is preferable to all the rest, that is, he was a very pious Man; and he used
frequently to discourse to me upon that point, so that it was my own fault if I
did not follow his good Counsel.

The Marquess de Louvois, when he first spoke to me about him, had given me a
very different Character of him, from what I found him to be; for he told me,
that he did not rely much upon his ability, but what he did was merely upon the
recommendation of the Princess of Conti, unto whom he could not deny such a
favor. But whoever knows the true Character of this Minister, cannot but be
sensible that it is his constant Maxim, to prefer the King's Service before all
the Recommendations in the World; so that the more I ponder the matter, the
more I am persuaded there was some mystery in it.

But however it be, I received Orders from the Marquess de Louvois to prepare
for my immediate departure; and he told me in person, that he would not have me
tarry at all at Paris, and no more than three days at my own house in the
Country; because the King's present Service required more than ordinary
dispatch. I took this opportunity to rid my hands of my female Companion, of
whom I have spoken before, and told Monsieur de Vaux that he must be ready by
the next morning early. He told me, it was impossible for him so to do* he
having neither Horses nor Money; and desired me therefore to allow him only two
days to provide himself with both, and to dispatch some other Business of
consequence, after which he would without delay go along with me. Considering
that the Marquess de Louvois was not likely to be informed, whether we tarried
a day longer or not I thought I could not very well refuse him so reasonable a
request, not imagining that ever it would come to his knowledge: But whether
this Minister had taken particular care to be informed of what I did, and how
strict I would be in observing his Orders, or whether Monsieur de Vaux himself
had given him notice, how complaisant I had been to him I cannot tell; but
certain it is, that the very next day after he writ me a very severe Letter
about it.

Thus I was forced to get immediately on Horseback, and I agreed with Monsieur
de Vaux to stay two days for him at Samur, to expect his coming there; and
that, if he did not come by that time, I intended to proceed alone in my
Journey, without as much as calling at my own Home. Yet being very desirous to
see my Family, I sent word to my Spouse to come and meet me at Samur, with our
Children, at a prefixed time, where I might enjoy them for a little while,
without losing any opportunity of proceeding in my Journey. Accordingly my
Spouse* with our whole Family* met me at the appointed Time and Place, and
informed me, how one, whose Name was des Isles Montaut, had put her under a
great perplexity, having told her, whilst I was a prisoner in England, that I
had engaged my self in the Service of the Prince of Orange (K. William III.)
and that if she had followed his Advice, she must have made a strange piece of
Work of it, which both she and I might have repented of since.

This des Isles Montaut was a Counselor of Loudun, a Man of no Estate, but of
a considerable share of Wit, if designing and tricking may be called by that
name. By this means he had got together above Fifty thousand Crowns, which he
had squeezed out of the Widows and Orphans, and was therefore but in a very
slender Repute, as to his Honesty, all over that Province. As Charity is almost
banished from the Race of Mankind, and that most People take much more pains to
divulge the Defects of their Neighbors than to hide them. I had his Character
told me, the very first time I came to Loudun. But trusting more to my own
skill than to others, I was so inveigled by the outward appearance of his
modest and civil Behavior, (he being a great master in the Art of
Dissimulation) that I took all what I had heard of him for malicious
inventions. He was one of the first who showed the most eagerness to persuade
me to settle in that Country, and took a great deal of pains to find out an
Estate fit for my purpose, he being the person who made the Bargain for the
Estate I am now possessed of, of which I had a very good pennyworth. For such
was his feigned honesty, that the Person from whom I was to buy the Estate,
having promised him fifty Pistoles if the Bargain succeeded, he told me of it
before we agreed about the Purchase.

After I was put into possession of the Estate, he offered himself to be my
Seneshal, or Chief Judge, of that Precinct belonging to my Jurisdiction, which
I easily granted him, he having not given me the least occasion hitherto to
change the good Opinion I had conceived before of his Honesty. I told him
however, as I was going to invest him with it, that if I should have consulted
the common Vogue of the People, I ought not to have put him in this place; nay,
I ought not to have admitted him to come into my House; and that therefore I
desired him so to behave himself in it, both in respect to my self, and others,
whose Business he was to manage, that he might give, by his fair dealing, the
Lie to all his Adversaries. He answered me in such a manner, as did not a
little increase in me the good Opinion I had conceived of him before, inspite
of the ill reputation he had amongst the People; For he told me, that he was
not in the least surprised at the malicious Aspersions his Enemies did put upon
him, since he knew that our Savior himself could not escape the censure of his
Adversaries: and that he only begged of me to suspend my Judgment, and not to
condemn him before I was convinced by his future Behavior, of the truth of
what they had laid to his Charge.

By these Insinuations he at last got such an ascendant over me, that I
entirely confided in his honesty, and scarce ever did any thing without taking
first his advice. Then it was he began to play his parts, for he persuaded me
to purchase several Farms, which were not far from my Seat; but in lieu of
letting me have a Pennyworth, as he pretended they were, he made me purchase
them at an excessive rate; for he used to make his Bargain before hand with
those that were to sell, that in case he could get them such a Sum, he was to
have such a share for himself; by which means he got above ten Thousand Livres
of my Money.

But he served me a worse Trick than all this; for he persuaded me to put out a
Sum of thirty three thousand Livres to a certain Merchant of Samur, whose Name
was du Montiere, from whom he had a very considerable Reward for his pains. I
was so confident of this des Isles's Honesty, who told me that it was more safe
in his Hands than in my own, and that I might always have it at command, as I
should meet with any Purchase for my purpose, that I let him have it without
paying any Interest for it. But this Merchant happening to die some time after,
I lost seven thousand Livres by him, which he had of mine left in his Hands, I
should never have done, if I should go about to give you an Account of the
various Artifices this Counselor made use of to catch me in the Trap, which
indeed he might do with a great deal of ease; considering I had left the whole
Management of my Affairs to his Conduct. But at last he so grossly abused the
Confidence I had put in him, that the Veil which hitherto had been before my
Eyes, being removed, I began plainly to perceive how he had dealt with me, and
therefore I called him to an Account for his Miscarriages.

I will relate but one more of his cheating Tricks, which may serve as a pattern
for all the rest. About fifteen Years ago he procured me the Purchase of a Farm
near my House, which belonged to a Protestant Gentleman of that Country; he
himself drew the Deeds betwixt me and the Seller, who besides this, engaged
himself in a Bond to surrender the said Farm to me free from all Encumbrances
on his behalf, which also this Lawyer signed as a Witness. Notwithstanding all
which, about six years after, (something less, or more) when he understood that
I was a Prisoner in the Bastile, (of which I shall have occasion to say more
hereafter) I was entangled in a very troublesome Law Suit upon his account,
under pretense, that he had lent some Money upon the Estate. The Duke de
Mazarine, to whom I owe many and great Obligations, has since interposed his
Authority, and proposed that it might be left to his Arbitration: But not to
insist any longer upon his Treacherous Dealings, I will return where I left off
before, and put you in mind, that it was this prefidious Wretch, who having got
some notice, by what means, I know not, that I had been taken and carried a
Prisoner into England, made my Spouse the above mentioned Complement. He began
to talk to her at so extravagant a rate, that though she was a Native of
Germany, (who among us are not looked upon as the quickest) yet had foresight
enough to take care that she might have a Witness to what he said; she happened
then to be at Montrevil Bellai, a small City in our Neighborhood, where I used
constantly to pass the greatest part of the Winter, in a House of my own, which
I have there to this Day. She pretended to this tricking Councellor, that being
obliged by some sudden Accident, to leave him for a Moment, she begged his
Excuse, but took this Opportunity to send immediately to another Lawyer of our
Acquaintance in that City, whose Name being Esquinurin, she desired him to come
to her immediately, upon some Business of very great Consequence.

Esquinurin being come accordingly, she had only so much time as to tell him
that he should go into a Closet she showed him, which being parted only by a
single Wainscoat from the Room where the other Councellor was, she desired him
to take particular notice of what he should hear. Then she returned into the
Room where she had left him, and after having once more begged his Excuse, she
sent my eldest Daughter out of the Room, who had Entertained him the mean while
she was absent. She then began a fresh to enter upon the same Discourse, and
the Councellor also continued to sing his old Tune, to wit, That without all
question, the King would seize upon our Estate, as soon as he had notice that I
had engaged my self in the Prince of Orange's (King William III.) Service. That
he knew but one way to avoid this Misfortune, which threatened our entire Ruin;
which was to sell it, as soon as possibly could be done; that he would pretend
to be the Purchaser, but underhand, give her a Deed of Trust, in which he
would declare the same for our use, thereby to exclude his Heirs, in case he
should happen to die in the mean while, from any Legal Pretension to the
Succession. He told her, that after this was done, she might with her whole
Family go over into England, where he would be as Serviceable to her in her
absence, as if she were present in France. He advised her also, that this being
to be looked upon as an occasion presented to her by God's peculiar Providence,
to reconcile her self to that Church she was born and educated in, and which
she had abandoned since, she ought to make use of it at this time; which if she
should neglect to do, she must expect to be called to a severe Account about
it, by God Almighty.

He could not have given me a greater Advantage over him than this, at such a
Juncture, when to persuade a Person to change her Religion, and to leave the
Kingdom with her Family, is looked upon in France, as one of the worst Crimes
that can be committed. I wrote therefore a Letter upon his account to the
Marquess de Louvois, to desire him by some means or other to deliver me and the
whole Province from a Person, who by his Intrigues, had almost brought me to
the brink of ruin.

This Minister was pleased to espouse my Cause, and after I had sent him a
Memorandum, containing many Grievances, both in respect of my self, and other
Gentlemen of that Country, against this Councellor, he dispatched his Orders to
Monsieur de Ribere, then Intendant of the Province of Poictou, to make a strict
Examination concerning his Behavior, and if he found him guilty of what was
laid to his Charge, to have him made an Example to others.

Next Day I continued my Journey to Port Lowis, for Monsieur de Vaux was by
this time come to Samur, according to his Promise. As we passed through Nantes,
I went to see a certain Merchant there, unto whom I used sometimes to sell my
Wines; he told me among other things, that he had understood that whilst I was
lately in London, I had got into very good Acquaintance there, and that if any
of my Friends had Interest enough at that Court to procure a Pass for a certain
Quantity of French Wines and Brandies to be Imported there, he would not only
buy all the Wines I had by me, at a very good Price; but also besides this,
make me a Present of a thousand Pistoles.

I must confess, such a Wind-fall as this, would have been very welcome to me
at that time; for besides that, a thousand Pistols don't come amiss to any
Body, especially in these hard Times; I had all the Wines in my Cellar, which
were made since the beginning of this War, because the Trade with Holland,
whither the Wines of our Country used to be most Transported, was quite
interrupted; which had reduced many Gentlemen in the Country to a Starving
Condition, who, though they had great plenty of Wines in their Cellars, yet
were not able to raise any Money upon them to supply their present occasions.

I told the Merchant, that I would try what I could do, and at the same time
writ a Letter to the Marquess de Louvois.

I acquainted him with what had been proposed to me by the Merchant at Nantes,
and that considering the present Circumstances of my Affairs, he could not put
a greater Obligation upon me at this time, than to give me leave to take this
occasion of getting a Present of a thousand Pistols, and at the same time to
rid my Hands of a great store of Wines I had by me.

He sent me a very obliging Answer, even beyond what I desired, or expected;
for he told me, that he would gratify me in this point of getting a thousand
Pistoles; and that for that purpose, he would send me a Pass from the French
Court, without which, no Vessel durst stir out of the Port at this time. He
further advised me, to endeavor to make the Merchant allow me a more
considerable Reward for so extraordinary a Favor, a thousand Pistols being not
an Equivalent to what he was likely to get by the Bargain.

After I had received this Letter, I thought my self as good as secure of the
Money, not questioning in the least, but that my Interest was so great in the
English Court, (where I knew they would be very glad to oblige me in a thing
that stood them in nothing) as to obtain there what I desired. I sent therefore
word to the Merchant, that he might rely upon it; who thinking himself now sure
of the Bargain, bought up great Quantities of Wine for that purpose, and
offered to lay down ready Money for the three hundred Pipes, which I told him I
had in my Cellar; but I would not accept of it, till I had procured him the
Pass. Not but that such a Sum would have come very seasonably to me, at a time
when I was in great want of Money; But though I had said no more than what was
actually true, when I had told him, I had three hundred Pipes of Wine in my
Cellar, nevertheless, it was at that time not altogether at my own disposal.
For you must know, that some of my Vine-yards being let to a Farmer, great part
of it belonged to him, but he owed me three years Rent, and was not in a
Condition to pay me, because he could not sell his Wines, which made me look
upon the Wines as good as my own.

The better to keep my Promise with the Merchant, I writ to my Wife, to desire
her to take the said Wines in part of Payment at a current Price, and to take
the Vine-yards into her own hands, the Farmer being very-willing to be
discharged of them. She very readily did what I desired, because I had given
her an Account of what prospect I had to dispose of my Wines at a good
Advantage, and to get a good Sum of Money besides.

It is a natural defect to all Mankind to be apt to flatter themselves in those
Matters which appear agreeable to their own Sentiments, or Interest; this made
me build Castles in the Air, and to live in hopes that I might meet several
times with the same Opportunity of getting a round Sum of Money hereafter. But
I was soon convinced of the vanity of my hopes; for the Marquess de Louvois, to
whom I had sent since that time a Letter directed to the Lord L..... in
England, in which, I desired him to procure me a Pass from the English Court,
by which means, I might rid my hands of most of my Effects in France, which
otherwise, (in case our design should succeed) I was in danger of losing; I say
the Marquess de Louvois in lieu of sending me the Lord L.... s Answer, which
was according to my desire, (as I was convinced afterward, to wit, ofter my
return from our Journey,) sent me word that he had weighed the Matter since,
and upon more mature Deliberation, found it not convenient to be done.

This Letter was no less vexatious than surprising to me, and put me to the
greatest Nonplus that could be imagined. For, besides that, nothing touches one
more narrowly than to be disappointed in the hopes of a thing which one thought
to be possessed of already; I had now many Vine-yards and great stores of Wines
lying upon my hands, of which I could in all likelihood not make the least
Profit; on the other hand, I had by my Credulity, occasioned to the Merchant of
Nantes considerable Damages, who relying upon my Word, had bought up such a
vast quantity Wines, as considering the present circumstances of Affairs, could
not but be a great Charge to him. I was so startled at this ill Success, that I
did not know where to turn my self first, and what Excuses to make to a Man, to
whom I had given my absolute promise, as looking upon the thing as infallible,
after the kind answer I had received from the Marquess de Louvois.

I was just at Port Lowis when I received this dismal News; and I must confess,
had it not been for Monsieur de Vaux, my fellow Commissioner, who did me all
the good Offices he could, I should have been apt to do something or other I
might have repented of hereafter. He gave me at that time most particular
proofs of his Charitable Inclinations and Piety; but the last Night before we
came to Port Lowis, there happened an Accident to us, which made me believe
that those Devout and Zealous Gentlemen don't care to look Death in the Face
any more than other People.

This happened in a certain Inn, not above three French Leagues from
Port-Lowis; in so miserable a place that it afforded nothing but a few Eggs for
our Supper, and at our first Entrance into the Inn, you might see Misery
painted in such lively Colors in the very Hostesses Face, that without going
to a Conjurer, it was easy for us to guess what Entertainment we were likely
to meet with in such a By-place as this; to be short, when we enquired what we
could have for Supper, the Answer was, That they were but very ill provided to
entertain many Gentlemen.

So we were forced to be contented with a few herbs, miserably dressed, and a
new laid Egg each of us. After Supper we went up Stairs into a nasty Hole,
which they called a Bedchamber, and our Servants went to Supper with the
Hostess, who fried them some sorry Pan-cakes with Bacon.

Whilst they were at Supper together, the Host came home as Drunk as a Lord,
and the first thing he did, was to fall about his Wife's Ears, whom he called
Whore, and other such like pretty names; a convincing Instance, that a Drunken
Man does not stick at any thing; as will appear by the Sequel of our Relation.

Our Servants seeing the drunken Fellow make such a havoc in the House, got
away as fast as they could into the Stables, and after they had Dressed their
Horses, came up stairs, without telling us any thing of what had passed below.

So to Bed we went, and our Servants did the like in the same Room with ours,
being divided only from us by a slender Partition. We were just fallen asleep,
when the same drunken Fellow got up Stairs knocking at our Door like a Madman,
Cursing and Swearing he would be revenged upon us for the Affront we had put
upon him, or that he would die in the Attempt.

Monsieur de Vaux being first awakened by the noise he made, and finding me
fast asleep, began to pull me by the Arm, and to tell me that we were certainly
got into an Inn where they used to cut Peoples Throats, and that he was afraid
we should not escape their Hands. He made our Servants rise at the same time,
who then told us what Game he had played before below Stairs, and that they
looked upon him as a desperate mad Fellow, who would stick at nothing. But
Monsieur de Vaux, who was so prepossessed with Fear, that he could not be
persuaded that this was the effect of his Drunkenness, told me plainly, he
believed, he only came to pick a Quarrel with us, to take that Opportunity to
cut our Throats, and whether I had a mind to be Murdered in my Bed like a
Woman, and whether I had not better prepare for a vigorous Defense. The truth
is, I had hitherto not given my self the trouble to stir, believing that it was
only the fumes of the hot Liquors, which had disturbed the Fellows Brains,
which would soon pass over; and that therefore we need not trouble our selves
much about it.

Whilst we were thus arguing the point, I heard a great noise upon the Stairs,
because, as it seems, the Woman of the House had called in some of the
Neighbors to endeavor to get him down Stairs. But Monsieur de Vaux, whose
fear increased with the noise, begun to be angry with me in good earnest,
because I was not as fearful as he. To please him, I got at last out of the
Bed, and whilst he and our Servants were as busy as could be in Charging and
Cocking their Pistols, no otherwise than if they were to have Engaged a
Squadron of Horse, I went to listen at the Door, where I soon understood what
was the occasion of the noise upon the Stairs. I then began to laugh at his
fearfulness; but let me do what I could, it was impossible for me to persuade
him out of it; for though all was quiet in the Inn immediately after, he could
not be prevailed upon to go to Bed himself, neither would he let the Servants
go to sleep all that Night.

The Host, after he had recovered his Senses the next Morning, was so much
ashamed of what he had done, that he durst not appear to us, but sent his Wife
to beg our Pardon for his last Nights miscarriage, and I had the Satisfaction
to laugh at Monsieur de Vaux all the way till we came to Port-Lowis. Our Orders
were addressed to the Duke of Mazarine, who was both Governor and Lord of the
Place. But about two days before our arrival, he had been commanded by the King
to leave it, and to retire to his Principality of Mayenne. He was beholding for
this removal, to Monsieur de Beaureguard, Deputy Governor of the Place, who
from being a Domestic to the Duke de la Meilleraie, was become his Favorite,
and was obliged to him for his whole Fortune, and now had paid thus his
Acknowledgement to the Duke, his Son, under pretense that his Bigottry would
prove prejudicial to the King's Service.

He had sent several Letters to Council, in which he had acquainted them, that
this Godly Man, (as he called the Duke) had presented all the Officers of the
Garrison, each with a small Golden Cross, under Condition that they should wear
it in the same place as the Knights of Malta do, and had engaged them to agree,
That as often as any one of them should miss to wear it so, he should be
obliged to pay a Crown every time to the Poor; That those Officers who, more
out of Complaisance to the Duke than any other Motive, had accepted of them,
having missed to wear them sometimes, he had not only made them pay a Crown a
piece for every time, but also had looked frowningly upon them, when they came
to pay their Respects to him.

He had further told them, that the best Pass a Man could have to be admitted
to the Duke's Table, was this Golden Cross, and that let an Officer be never so
well qualified for the King's Service, yet if he did not wear this Badge of
Piety, (which he preferred before all other Qualifications) he would meet but
with a cold Reception at his hands. He had informed the Court also, that the
Duke had commanded all the Officers of that Garrison, under pain of an Arrest,
to be at home by ten a Clock at Night, whereby he had deprived them of many
innocent Divertisements, such as Balls, and other such like Assemblies, which
are allowable by the general Consent of the Nation. That he had put an Officer
under an Arrest because he had seen him whilst he was at Mass, talking: more
familiarly with a young Woman than he believed was consistent with what respect
ought to be paid to the Holy Sacrament, and the place where they were at that
time.

Thus Monsieur de Beauregard had put a wrong Interpretation upon the Duke's
Actions, which tended to no more than to make his Officers pious and good Men,
just as if Piety and Valor were inconsistent with one another; and that a
Person truly Pious could not be truly Brave. But however it be, this Gentleman,
who pretended to be so Zealous for the King's Service when he was to observe
the Actions of others, did not prove so, (at least in my Opinion) when he
preferred his own Diversions before it; for when we came to Port Lewis, he was
absent from his Post; for he had taken a Journey of Pleasure to Breast, in
Company of Madam Sybret and her Husband, who was Director General of the French
East India Company, and who besides that, had several other great Employments,
which made him to be looked upon at Court as a very considerable Person.

The Major, who then Commanded in Chief in the Place, was a Person of so
indifferent an Aspect, and whose Character we found suitable to his Aspect,
that neither Monsieur de Vaux nor I would communicate our Business to him. All
we did, was to tell him, that we were sent thither by the King upon some
Business of Consequence, and that as soon as Monsieur Beauregard should return
from Breast, we would show him our Commissions, and what Orders we had from
Court; we should scarce have vouchsafed to tell him so much, if we had not been
obliged so to do, for fear of being looked upon as Suspicious Persons, it being
not permitted to any Body to stay in a Garrison without giving an Account of
himself. After he had understood what Business had brought us thither, he
dispatched immediately a Messenger to Monsieur de Beauregard.

You must know, that so soon as I had received the King's Orders to go to Port
Lewis, I sent word of it to Madam..... I mean to the Lady at Camaret, of whom I
made mention before, when I gave you an Account of my intended Voyage to
Ireland. I had vanity enough to flatter my self, that she would not only take
it as a kindness to hear from me, but also might be prevailed upon to take a
Journey to Port Lewis, about that time I intended to be there, because she had
both a Brother-in law, and a Niece living near that place. For before I left
Camaret, she told me one day, that if I should happen to come back out of
Ireland sooner than I expected, and did not meet with her at Camaret, I might
be sure she was no where else but at Port Lewis; meaning the East-India-House
there, which is about a French League distant from the Town, where both her
Brother-in-law and Niece lived at that time. I knew also that she had not seen
them for a considerable time before, and that she might make this a fair
pretense for her Journey, which her Husband could not well deny to her, I am
sensible that it had been my Duty to wait on her at Camaret, considering the
great Obligations I had to her, as I told you before; but the mischief was,
that I durst not venture at it, for fear of incurring the Displeasure of the
Marquess de Louvois, who having given me so severe a check about my staying but
one day in Paris beyond his Orders, I did not think fit to run the hazard of
his Displeasure a second time, by going so far out of my way; for I had all the
reason in the World to be afraid that Monsieur de Vaux, who had no dependence
on me, might send word to Court, that I neglected the King's Service to follow
my pleasure, if I should be four or five days absent from the Place whither the
King's Commission called me; and I could not have spent less time in this
Journey, considering that I had twenty five Leagues of Britanny to Travel to
Camaret, which are equivalent to fifty French Leagues as they are about Paris.

All Mankind are apt to flatter themselves with the hopes of what they desire
most; so it was with me; for I did not question but to meet with her before
long, at the East-India-House near Port Lewis. But I found my self once more
disappointed in my fond hopes; for when I came thither to enquire after her, I
could not hear the least Tidings of her. I made this enquiry under pretense of
giving a Visit to Monsieur Sybret, one of the Directors of the
East-India-Company, who had been before to pay a Visit to Monsieur de Vaux at
Port Lewis, they being very old Friends together. He Treated us very
Magnificently, but I for my part being much Discomposed in my Mind, because I
had been disappointed in my Expectation of hearing some News of the Person I so
much admired, I did not relish it so well as I should have done at another
time; we had also the Honor to see Madam Sybret, who being a Native of the
Indies, gave us a very Honorable reception. Here it was I had at last some
satisfaction to understand that it had not been Madam...... fault that she did
not come to Port Lewis, her Husband having refused to give his consent to this
Journey.

This News was told me by her Niece, a Young Lady of a charming Conversation.
Among other things we discoursed upon, I took this opportunity to give her to
understand, that I was not altogether a Stranger to the match that was then in
Agitation betwixt her, and one Monsieur de Bar; and though she was but very
young then, she answered me with a great deal of reservedness, telling me only
upon that Subject, that she was ready to follow the advice of her Aunt. This
match was Consummated not long after, and she lives very happily.

I could not forbear to extol her extraordinary behavior before Madam Sybret,
and to enlarge upon the advantageous Match she was likely to make; unto which
Madam Sybret answered, That perhaps I might be mistaken in my guess, supposing
it should succeed, that it was her opinion, that when a young Woman Married an
Old Man, she was likely to meet with so slender a share of satisfaction, that
all the Riches in the World, could scarce make an amends for such an
unhappiness.

We returned to Port Lewis, before Monsieur de Beauregard was come back from
Breast; and in the mean while were informed, of what ill Offices he had done to
the Duke of Mazarin at Court.

I must confess, if he had been under my Command, I should not have given him a
very favorable reception for being absent from a place of such Consequence,
and which was so much exposed to danger at that time; besides, that the whole
Garrison consisted of no more, than Four Hundred Men, a great many of whom were
also Sick; and among them all, there was scarce one who could Discharge a
Musket, they being all new Levies, composed most of Boys the fewest among them
being of a fit Age to bear Arms.

Whilst we stayed for Monsieur de Beauregard's coming to Town, we were informed
that one of the Captains of a Company of that Garrison had been Cashiered by
the Malice of the Commissary, with whom he had had a Quarrel; nay, that he was
actually under an Arrest, till such time as he should produce a certain number
of Soldiers to complete the Company, of which he had been Captain: This Captain
being told of our arrival there, and that Monsieur de Vaux and I were sent by
the King as Surveyors of the Army, he sent one of his Friends to desire me to
do him all the good Offices I could with the Marquess de Louvois; his Friend
gave me an Account, how he had been brought into this misfortune, merely by the
Malice of the Commissary, who had Cashiered six of his Soldiers, under pretense
that they were not Old enough for Service, to take this opportunity to send
Word to Court, that his Company had not been Complete: That notwithstanding
this, the same Six Soldiers were gone over to Bell-Isle, where they had Listed
themselves under another Captain; and that the said Commissary, when he took a
review of that Company, had let them pass Muster without the least
Contradiction.

He told me, that if I would but be pleased to reflect seriously upon the
matter, it would be easy for me to judge, what had induced him to treat him so
unjustly; he desired me further to inform my self in the matter, whilst I was
upon the spot, and according as I found it, to represent his case at Court,
which he would look upon as a most infinite obligation, which he would be ready
to acknowledge upon all occasions.

I sent him Word, That I would do it with all my Heart, but that my advice was,
he should make his applications to Monsieur de Beauregard, because he standing
under his immediate Command, and the thing being done there, his Testimony
would avail him more in this case than mine, which perhaps might be looked upon
as partial. I told him at the same time that I would not have him think in the
least, as if I had offered this Advice, because I was unwilling to serve him;
and that to convince him on the contrary, of my good intentions, I would
undertake to speak my self (if he thought fit) about it to Monsieur de
Beauregard, to try whether I could persuade him to join his Interest with mine,
for his good. But his Friend Answered me, that they did not think it for their
purpose to make use of Monsieur de Beauregard, having some occasion to fear,
that he was more a Friend of the Commissary's than his, and that therefore he
desired me not to mention any thing of it to him, for fear if it should come to
the Commissary's Ears, he should Casheir these six Soldiers at the next Muster,
which would turn to his Friends prejudice, considering that the main advantage
he had against him was, that had let the same Soldiers pass Muster in another
Company whom he had Casheir'd in his. I told him that I would follow his
Directions, and do him what Service possibly I could.

Accordingly Monsieur de Vaux and I went some days after to Bell Isle, where
among others we took a review of this Company; and according to the best
information I could get, I found that the Captains Friend had told me nothing
but what was very true; and If ound these 6 Soldiers very fit for Service; for
though they were somewhat young, yet they were strong body'd fellows, and such
as might hereafter pass for chosen Men; they were also of a good seize, and in
short, such as that I am sure the King had above Thirty Thousand worse, in
every respect, among his Troops.

Being therefore fully convinced of the injustice done to the Captain by the
Commissary, I drew up the true State of the case in Writing, which being Signed
likewise by Monsieur de Vaux, I sent it to the Marquess de Louvois.

But being obliged, pursuant to our Orders from Court, to leave Port Lewis in
some days after, and to pursue our Journey into Poictou, I cannot tell what
course this Minister was pleased to take with the Commissary, and whether this
Captain, who had been so unjustly dealt withal by him, had any redress against
him or not.

THE MEMOIRS OF JOHN BAPTIST De La Fontaine, Knight. LIB. VII.
SO soon as Monsieur de Beauregard Deputy Governor of Port Lewis, had notice
of our arrival there, he returned with all imaginable speed to his Government:
After we had showed him our Orders, he gave us a Pilot to sound the Coast, from
the mouth of the River, which Exonerates it self into the Sea about Two Leagues
on this side of Port Lewis, as far as to Quimperlei.

We found five several places where an Enemy might make a descent, without
reckoning the Bay near Quimperlei: The Entrance also of this River was so deep,
that Ships of great burden might go up a considerable way without danger. We
set down in Writing, how we had found matters as well upon the Coast, as also
what was wanting on the Fortifications of Port Lewis; which, after our return
to Paris, we sent to Court to the Marquess de Louvois, to let him see that we
had acquitted our selves as we ought to do of our Commission. Whilst we were
viewing the Coast, Monsieur de Beauregard had received a Packet of Letters for
me, from the Marquess de Louvois; which he delivered to me, and among the rest
there was a Letter directed to me from the French Officers I told you I left
behind me in England; in which they acquainted me, that pursuant to the Orders
received from the Marquess de Louvois, through my hands, they had endeavored
by all possible means to get into Ireland, but had found all the Passages
leading to that Kingdom, so narrowly guarded, that they had been forced to
return to London, for fear of being discovered; and that they desired me to
send them further Instructions, what they were to do next; and they being
destitute again of Money, I could put no greater an Obligation upon them, than
if I would send them another supply, to enable them to obey those Orders I
should send them from Court.

When I saw the Marquess de Louvois, he asked me, what was best to be done in
this case, and remembering that at the same time, when I gave him first an
account of my Transactions in England, he had asked me by what means I had
procured the Money, I then gave to these Officers, and that I had told him by
my own Credit, which I had with a Banker in London; (whose Name I told him
also) he Commanded me to Write to the said Banker, and to Order him, upon sight
of my Letter, to pay the Sum of Four Thousand One Hundred Livers to the Sieur
du Mesnil, the same Officer who was first sent to me by the others, and had
introduced them into my acquaintance; he ordered me also, to Write a Letter at
the same time to Monsieur du Mesnil, that immediately after the receipt of this
Money, he should divide it share and share a like among all these Officers, (he
being to be comprehended in their number) and that they should all take the
first opportunity to return to Paris, where they should address themselves to
one Jalet, Steward to the Duke of Luxemburgh, by whom they might be informed,
where I was, and where they might hear of me.

These Four Thousand One Hundred Livers, were to be divided equally betwixt
Forty One Officers, at the rate of One Hundred Livers a piece; for though there
were Forty Three in all, yet the Marquess de Louvois had thought fit to except
Two of them, to whom the King would not extend his Gracious Pardon, their Crime
being of so high a Nature, as not to be left unpunished, I charged him to be
very punctual in observing my Directions, that I might not hereafter meet with
Reproaches instead of Thanks, for having interceeded in their behalf.

It is to be observed, That those two Officers, who were excluded from being
partakers of the Kings mercy, had made themselves very notorious; their
misdemeanour having made a great Noise not only in Paris, but all over the
Kingdom, some Years before. For they had had the boldness to break one of the
chains of Paris, to rescue one of their Brothers, who being fastened with it,
fled with the other two to England.

The Marquess de Louvois Commanded me at the same time, to Write two Letters
more, to the Earl of S....... and my Lord L...... to give them to understand,
that I had found the Fortifications of Port Lewis, in the same condition, as
had been represented to them, whilst I was in England; and that a descent might
easily be made thereabouts, which questionless would make them masters of that
Port, and the East India House near it: That I was just ready to go into
Poictou, where I did not question but to meet with at least as much
Encouragement as here, of which they should be sure to receive speedy
Intelligence as soon as I was able to give them a true Account of the matter.

Afterward Monsieur de Vaux and I, were again ordered by the Marquess de
Louvois to return to Bell-Isle, to take a Review there of some new raised
Troops, which were lately sent thither, and to take also another View of the
Fortifications there, in order to give him a more particular Account of them
than we had done before.

Accordingly, after we had done our Business at Port Lewis, we Traveled along
the Coast about eight French Leagues below the Port, from whence it is not
above four French Leagues over to that Island; we got there a Chalop, which
carried us first to the Latitude of the two little Islands called the
Cardinals. These two Islands (if they may deserve that name) are of a very
slender* compass, about half a League distant from one another; they are
surrounded on all sides with very high Rocks, who may be discovered at a
considerable distance at Sea; and being of a Purple color, they have given the
name of Cardinals to these Islands.

Two Privateers, the one a Dutchman from Flushing, and the other a Frenchman
from St. Maloes, had sheltered themselves among these Rocks unknown to one
another, in hopes of meeting with some Prize or other, this being a great Road
for Ships, and where they may be soon surprised by Privateers, who come out
upon them unawares from among the Rocks.

The Flushing Privateer no sooner discry'd our Chalop, and supposing by our
fine Scarlet Cloaks, that there were some Passengers of Quality in it, he made
the best of his way toward us. But whilst he was Chasing his Prize, which he
looked upon already as good as his own, considering the little Resistance we
were able to make, out starts the St. Malo Privateer from among the Rocks,
which made him think it high time to look to himself instead of Attacking us.
They were both near equal in strength, and if we could have foreseen which of
them would have the better, we might have staid where we were, to be Spectators
of the Engagement; but for fear Fortune should declare against our side, we
resolved to change our Course, and to make the best of our way toward the
French Coast, because we found that the Wind was more favorable to carry us
thither than to Bell-Isle. Besides, Monsieur de Vaux had a Relapse of the same
fearful Fit that seized him before in the Inn; and to confess the truth, I my
self was not very fond of running the hazard to fall once more into the Enemies
hands.

In the mean while these two Privateers began to exchange their Broad-sides
very briskly, but the St. Malo Privateer, who was much better Manned than the
Dutchman, finding that if he could Board him, he should fight him with a
double Advantage, did all what he could to lay close on Board him, which he at
last effected in spite of all the endeavors of his Enemy to the contrary.
After they came to a close Engagement, the St. Malo Privateer soon got the
better of the other, and in less than an Hour, made himself Master of the
Vessel.

We could see exactly the whole Engagement, though we were at a considerable
distance, which made us once more change our Course, and Steer for the Coast of
Bell-Isle, whither we were bound. After we had executed our Orders there, we
went to Rochel, where we were likewise to view the Fortifications, we there
received new Instructions to discharge the Militia which was in Garrison there;
which being done accordingly, we continued our Journey into Poictou, in order
to visit the Protestant Gentry of that Province.

Monsieur de..... a Gentleman of Quality, and of a considerable Estate, being
one of the number of those, who was looked upon by the English as one of their
Party, I had his Name among the rest in my Memorandum: We went to pay him a
Visit, but it just happened that his Lady lay dangerously ill, almost past all
hopes of recovery; so that we were disappointed in our expectation of seeing
him in Person: for he sent us word by one of his Servants, that his House was
at our Service, but that he hoped we would excuse him, if at this time, when he
was quite overwhelmed with Grief, he was not in a condition to keep us company,
and to entertain us in the same manner as he should have been ready to do at
another time. This made us take a Resolution not to tarry in the House at such
an unseasonable Juncture. From thence we went to another Gentleman's House,
whose name being Monsieur...... was looked upon as one of the greatest Zealots
in the whole Province for his Religion. After we had discoursed with him for
sometime, we were fully convinced he was so great a Biggot, that had it been in
his power, he would have been one of the most forward in re-establishing his
Religion in spite of the King's Edict to the contrary. I showed him my
Commission (which I own was beyond what I deserved) and he looking upon it as a
pledge of my Integrity, introduced me to several other Gentlemen of the Country
that were his Friends, and of the same Religion.

I soon perceived that they were all agreed in the main point of their
Opinions; but all that I could get out of them, was, that they were not in a
Condition to undertake any thing of moment by themselves; but all they could
do, was to offer their Vows and Prayers for the Success of the Prince of
Orange's, (King William III.) Arms.

We were fully convinced by this, that there was no set Party against the
Government, in that Province, as the two French Ministers in England had
endeavored to persuade us; though at the same time it was easy to be seen,
that it was rather for want of power, than for want of good will.

Monsieur de...... and several others, all Gentlemen of very good Quality in
that Province, spoke altogether to the same purpose, as the rest had done; of
which I gave an exact Account to the Marquess de Louvois, who sent me word,
that after I had visited in the same manner some other Gentlemen's Houses
thereabouts, I might expect his further Instructions at my own Seat, because I
had desired leave to Divert my self there for some days. But as they agreed all
in the same Opinion, so their Discourse was altogether to the same purpose, and
with all the Art I had, I could not get any thing more out of them, but what I
had heard the other say before. But to be plain in the matter, I began to
relent extremely at the present unfortunate Circumstances of my Affairs, which
put me under a necessity of acting a part so little suitable to my Inclination,
which I have represented to you here without disguise, in its natural Shape.

I could not but consider with my self unto what Danger I exposed these
Gentlemen, who, though they were not actually engaged in any Design against the
State; yet had told me enough to forfeit their Lives, if the Court should take
any Advantage against them. I began to reflect seriously, that by this Action I
must incur the hatred of so many Gentlemen of Quality, if one time or other,
they should get the least notice that under pretense of Visiting them, I was
come to Trapan them at their own Houses. I was so far overtaken with these
Considerations, that I could not forbear to say something of it to Monsieur de
Vaux, which I believe did me no great kindness afterward.

After we had taken our round among the Protestant Gentry, we came at last to
my own House, where I entertained Monsieur de Vaux as well as possibly I could;
and he on the other hand, showed a great deal of Friendship for me, and as a
mark of his kind Inclinations to me and my Family, would needs be Godfather to
one of my Children, who was then to be Baptized. But it is a very difficult
Task to search the bottom of the Heart of Mankind, and nothing is more frequent
in this World than to mistake those for our Friends, who are sometimes the
worst of our Enemies; so it happened betwixt us; for he did not only deal very
unkindly with me, as I shall have occasion to show anon, but I had all the
reason to believe that he was sent along with me on purpose to be a Spy over
all my Transactions. Nay, I shrewdly suspected, that he had done me some ill
Offices before I left Paris; and I verily believe, had it not been for that, I
had been sentalone to the Seacoast, and into Poictou.

But however it be, one day whilst he was at my House, a certain young Man came
to see him, and Talked with him in private. I remembering to have seen the young
Fellow, asked him who he was. He answered me, that he had formerly belonged to
the Intendant of the Princess of Conti, the King's Daughter, and that they
having lived and contracted a familiar Acquaintance together in the same House,
he was come to pay him a Visit as he passed by this way, being told that he was
at my House; we happened just then to be at Montreville, where this young
Gentleman's Brother was one of the Receivers of the King's Taxes; which induced
me the more to rely upon Monsieur de Vaux's word, without making any further
enquiry into the matter, as indeed, I found afterward, I ought to have done;
for I might easily have Conjectured, that if he told me the truth, he needed
not have taken so much pains to talk with him in private, and to use so much
caution, for fear of being overheard.

The next Morning he told me that he would go to Samur, to see whether we had
any News there from Court. He had no sooner left me, but it came into my Head,
that there was something more than ordinary in this Journey. I considered with
my self, whether I had best to send one of my Servants after him; but fearing
lest he might be discovered by him, or that the Fellow might not have wit
enough to manage the matter as he ought to do, and that consequently I might
have a wrong account of what I wanted, to know, I resolved to expect his
return, and to sift his Servant, who was but indifferently satisfied with his
Master. I pitched also upon another Expedient, which was to employ my Valet de
Chamber in the Business, who I knew, might pump Monsieur de Vaux's Servant,
without my appearing in it. Pursuant to this resolution, I instructed my Valet
how to behave himself in the matter; and no sooner was Monsieur de Vaux
returned from Samur, but he got his Servant to the Tavern, where after they had
drunk a Bottle or two, they began to discourse concerning Monsieur de Vaux's
last Journey to Samur; my Valet by degrees asked him, what Business he might
have there, where he Lodged, and how long he staid there. His Servant without
mincing the matter, told him, That as soon as they came to Samur, they alighted
at the Horn-Inn, where his Master met another Gentleman, who Dined with him;
they Discoursed much about me, and that he was sure the other was none of my
Friend, because he had told such things of me, as I would not very well relish
if I should hear of it. My Servant finding him so forward, and willing to
improve it to further his Design, answered, That he did not wonder at it, for I
was a Man of a strange Temper, and, who had behaved my self so, as scarce to
have one Friend left in the whole Province; that he intended not to stay with
me much longer, but as soon as he could meet with a better Master would bid me
farewell.

They then set the Glass about, which together with what he had heard my
Servant say, made the other as open hearted as could be desired. For de Vaux's
Servant, after he had drunk two or three Bumpers more, was so free as to tell
mine, that he did not wonder I lived in so fine a Seat, for if he had the same
Opportunity of Purloining two hundred thousand Livres in Holland, he would live
in a better than this.

My Servant replied, that this was not the first time he had heard something
like this, but the thing being only whispered about, he could never get to the
bottom of it, and that therefore he desired him to give him a Circumstantial
Account of what he had heard. The other then told him that the Gentleman, and
his Master had talked of nothing else all Dinnertime; and that he had also
said something of Pearls and Jewels, which I had got the same way; but that,
being not near enough to understand every Word that passed betwixt them, he
could not be positive whether these Jewels were comprehended in these 200000
Livres, or not; but thus much he had heard them declare positively, that 10000
Livres had been offered as a Reward to any Body who should discover any of
these Goods. My Servant continued to act the part of a Hypocrite so lively,
that the other believing him to be real, did not refuse to answer him to any
question he asked, as imagining that it was very welcome News to him. Upon
which, my Servant further asked him, what kind of a Person he was that spoke
these words; of whom he gave him the best Description he could, and told him
that Monsieur de Vaux, his Master had accosted the other as if they had been
very old Acquaintance, and that they parted from one another with all the
expressions of a mutual kindness.

I must confess, that when I understood how Matters had been carried on by de
Vaux against me, I could scarce contain my self within the bounds of
Moderation; for what could be more base, than to treat thus a Friend from whom
he had received many Obligations; and it was evident to me beyond all
contradiction, that their meeting at Samur had been appointed on purpose, and
that the young Fellow whom I saw in my House, and talked with him in private,
had been sent to make the said Appointment; which could not but be very
surprising to me, considering I never had given him the least occasion to deal
thus treacherously with me, but on the contrary, had been ready to oblige him
in all manner of ways.

I was not a little puzzled how to find out the Peron, his Servant had
described to mine; for according to his description, there were two several
Persons, who being both mine Enemies, did both resemble so near to it, that
indeed I shrewdly guessed it must be one of the two, but could not tell upon
which of them to fix, for fear I might be mistaken in my guess. One of them I
have had occasion to mention before, to wit, the Councellor des Isles, and as
for the other, I think I need not be very scrupulous to name him, it being
sufficiently known among our Neighborhood in the Country, that we have been at
variance together for some time past, which makes me believe, that with a safe
Conscience I might well mistrust him, that upon an occasion he would not stick
to do me an Injury: His Name was Ternai, which he had borrowed from his Estate,
which lay about half a French League from my Seat, the true Name of his Family
being d'Arsac. He was a Nephew of the Prior of Ternai, whom I have mentioned
before. His Great Grandfather had been Steward of the Duke of Tremoville, one
of the Ancestors of the Duke of Tremoville now living.

So much for his Extraction, which bearing but a slender proportion with the
Title of a Marquess, which he has taken up of late; this proved the first
occasion of our Quarrel, because I used now and then to laugh at it, and so did
almost all the Gentlemen of that Province, as well as I. But that which I
believe made him bear a particular grudge to me, was, That I discovered in some
of the Deeds belonging to my Estate, that he was only styled Monsieur d'Arsac,
Lord of the Manner of Faie, without as much as giving him the Title of Esquire.
His Estate called Ternai, may be worth about One Hundred and Fifty Pounds
Sterling per Annum, at the most, and was purchased by this pretended Marquess
his Grandfather, for Fourteen Thousand Livers; yet so, that he did not pay one
Farthing of ready Money for it; this being given him as an Equivalent for the
Death of his Father; who, as I told you before, was Steward to one of the
Ancestors of the present Duke of Tremoville. He was Murdered by some of the
Marquess de Beauveau his Servants, and it being proved that the fact had been
committed upon their Masters Command; and the Duke of Tremoville siding with
the Heirs of his Domestic, and backing their cause by his Authority, the said
Marquess de Beauveau was by virtue of a Judgment obtained against him, to pay
the said Sum for Damages, Costs, and Interest, which he being either unwilling
or unable to do, the Heirs of the Deceased got into possession of this Estate.

It Is true, the Father of this Marquess de Ternai was a Captain of Horse, and
married Mademoiselle de Palluau, Sister to the Count de Palluau, Major General
of the Light Horse, and who afterward was Marshal of France, under the name of
Clerambaut; whether this gives him any Title to what his Son pretends to be, to
wit, Marquess of Ternai, I am not able to tell.

But however it may be, the Marquess and I lived very Friendly together, for
some time after I had bought my Seat, and we used frequently to meet like good
Neighbors, and as honest Gentlemen do in the Country; till Interest, which
divides all the World, set us at variance, when I did not in the least expect
it; for he brought an Action against me under pretense that some part of my
Estate was dependant on his; but the Duke de Tremoville siding with me, took up
the Cudgels, and entered an Appeal to the Parliament of Paris. The Marquess de
Ternai fearing, not without reason, that his Sword would scarce be long enough
to measure it with the Duke's, thought it best to let the business drop for
that time.

But it was not long before he gave me a new cause of Displeasure; for which I
was fain to call him to an Account at Law. For he would not only Fish in my
River, but even in the very Ponds and Ditches belonging to my House, which I
believe he did merely out of spite, because I refused to lend him some Money,
of which he stood much in need at that time, to carry on a Law Suit against the
Marquess de Clerambaut, about an Inheritance of the Bishop of Poictiers, who
had disinherited him.

When I seriously reflected that I had no other Enemies but this Marquess and
the Councellor des Isles, in the whole Province of Poictou, I could not but fix
the Matter upon one of these two; and it was not long before I had sufficient
reason to lay it altogether at the Door of the Marquess de Ternai; for
happening one day to speak of him before Monsieur de Vaux, he unawares let slip
some Words, which gave me the first hint of him; for he told me, that I had but
a bad Neighbor of him; that he was none of my Friend, and that he believed if
it should fall in his way to do me an ill turn, he would not fail to do it. I
replied coldly, that I was well enough satisfied of it, and so turned our
Discourse another way, for fear of saying any thing that might give him an
intimation that I was not ignorant of what had lately passed betwixt them at
Samur; which might perhaps have raised my Passion to that pitch as to have
proved the occasion of a fatal Quarrel; whereas it has always been with me a
Fundamental Principle which ought to be Religiously observed by every Body, not
to violate the Law of Hospitality.

From what I have told you, it is no difficult matter to judge, that these
malicious Insinuations of the Marquess de Ternai had chiefly their Off spring
from what I told you before, concerning my Spouse's Mother-in-law, who had set
some at work to make an enquiry after my Affairs at Loudun; but of all the
rest, nothing went so near me as Monsieur de Vaux's odd behavior, which was
such, as to be past all Excuse. But if he gave me sufficient occasion of
Complaint at this time, he furnished me with another not long after, as I shall
relate to you anon, when I shall give you an Account of what happened to me
after our return to Paris, pursuant to the Orders sent us for that purpose by
the Marquess de Louvois.

Accordingly, we left my House in the Country, and Traveled to Tours, where
Monsieur de Vaux took a place in the Stage-Coach, because he was troubled with
the Stone in his Kidneys, so as not to be able to Travel on Horseback. At
another time I should have had so much Complaisance, as not to let him go
alone, but to have born him Company my self in the Coach; but as Dissembling is
not my Talent, I was glad to take this Opprotunity by the Fore-lock, to part
from him; my Excuse was, that a Stage-Coach was as troublesome to me, as a
Horse could be to him. Thus we took our leave of one another, till our next
meeting at Paris, because I being on Horse-baek, was likely to Travel much
faster than the Coach could do. I laid that Night at Blois, and the next at
Orleans. The next following day, early in the morning I set forward from
Orleans, in Company of another Gentleman, whom I had met accidentally in the
Inn where I Lodged; and we were forced to Travel without any Attendance,
because we had left my Servant, who was fallen ill, behind us. As we were
Traveling in a Forest, which is about two French Leagues on this side of
Orleans, we perceived two Fellows with their Fusees to come out of the Wood, as
if they intended to cross the Road at some little distance before us. They
pretended to be Hunters, and to confirm us in this belief, asked us whether we
had not seen the Hounds pass by that way; but I did not like their looks, which
made me endeavor to turn my Horse out of the Road, but several heaps of Paving
Stone lying in my way on both sides, my Horse was in danger of stumbling, and
whilst I put the Spurs to his side to make him go on the bolder, two more
Fellows started behind us out of the Wood. At the same time, those two that
were before us, perceiving what my Intention was, cried out to me, Stand, or
you are a dead Man. I had not seen the other that were behind us, which made me
prepare my self for a vigorous defense, thinking it a shame for us to be Robbed
by two Rogues; so with my Pistol in hand I was advancing toward them, but as I
clapped Spurs to my Horse, he happened to slip upon these Stones, so that I
fell under him; one of these Rogues seeing me in this Posture, let fly at me,
but by good Fortune missed me, giving only a slight Wound to my Horse in the
Breast, because the Ball happened to hit upon a little Brass Plate which was
upon the Harness, which stifled the force of the Ball. Whilst I was
endeavoring to get from under my Horse, the Foot-pads laid hold on me, and
Disarmed me without any great trouble, because my Fellow Traveller did not make
the least-Resistance; they searched me all-over, and took all my Money, my
Companion run the same Fortune; whilst they were searching me, I happened to
know one of them, who lived not above two French Leagues from my House in the
Country; as far as I could guess, he did not know me at first, but a little
after he put his Handkerchief in his Mouth, which made me imagine that he began
to remember who I was, and did this not to be discovered by me.

The other three Rogues were of the same Opinion, when they saw him do thus,
which made them ask him, whether he knew one of us two? This Question was like
a Thunderclap to me, being sensible that our Lives depended absolutely on his
Answer, it being beyond all question, that they would have killed us, to secure
themselves from being betrayed. When we saw our selves in this dismal
Condition, expecting every moment nothing less than present Death from the
hands of these desperate Rogues, God Almighty sent us a sudden and unexpected
Relief, by which we were delivered from that imminent danger that threatened our
immediate Destruction.

Six Sweedish Gentlemen, who were Traveling on Horseback to Orleans, appeared
all on a sudden at some distance from us, upon the same Road; but perceiving
what they were going to do with us, they clapped the Spurs to their Horses, and
came up toward us in a full gallop; the Foot-pads no sooner perceived them,
but trusting more to their Heels than their Fusees, soon left us to save their
own lives. Whilst they were making the best of their way into the Woods, one of
these Foreign Gentlemen discharged his Pistol at one of the Rogues, and wounded
him. Notwithstanding which, he got into the Wood, but the Blood that issued
from his Wound being a certain mark for us to pursue him, we followed the track
for some time, till we lost it, and with it the hopes of taking him. Thus we
all resolved to pursue our Journey, and after my fellow Sufferer and I had
given a thousand Thanks to our Deliverers, who had snatched us out of the very
Jaws of Death, we pursued our Journey, and they continued theirs to Orleans,
where they talked of this Adventure to several they met with.

The same Rogue who had been Wounded by one of these Gentlemen, had absconded
himself in one of the neighboring Villages, from whence he sent to Orleans for
a Surgeon to dress his Wounds. As Ill fortune would have it these Strangers
happened to come to the same Surgeon to be Shaved, to whom they told their
Adventure upon the Road, and how they had shot one of these four Thieves. The
Surgeon soon suspecting, that perhaps he who had sent for him, might be the
same Person that had been Wounded by one of these Gentlemen, gave notice of it
to a Justice of Peace, who sent some Myrmidons abroad to seize him. They
followed the Surgeon at some distance, till they saw him enter the House,
when they came in not long after and took the Rogue, whilst the Surgeon was
dressing his Wound. They went also in pursuit of the rest, but he who was taken
refusing to make the least discovery of them, they escaped for that time; it
being very probable, that when they understood what was become of their
Companion, they left that part of the Country, and exercised their Trade in
some more remote parts of France. He who know me at that time, had however the
Impudence to come to his own home some time after, but did not think fit to
tarry there long, for fear, as I suppose, I should take him up, which I should
not have foreborn, in Order to have him punished according to his deserts.

In the mean while I was but under very ill circumstances, neither my fellow
Traveller nor I having any money left us; but by good chance, these Rogues had
not found out my Watch, which I sent to pawn, rather than to stay for Monsieur
de Vaux's coming, who would else have furnished me with what I wanted; so I got
at last to Paris, where I gave an account to the Marquess de Louvois of the
success of our Journey. He Commanded me at the same time not to wait on him for
the future, any where else but at Mendon, where I was with him at that time,
for fear that some of the Enemy's Spies might know me, and take notice of the
frequent Audiences I had of him. Monsieur de Vaux coming some days after me to
Paris, waited also on the Minister to whom he likewise a Relation how we had
found matters in those places, we were sent to visit; but could not forbear to
rehearse some of those passages he had heard at Samur.

The Marquess de Louvois gave me a hint of it the first time I saw him; for he
asked me whether there had been any contest betwixt us two, in our last
Journey, and whether I believed him to be my Friend? I replied that for my
part, I had been very obliging to him in all respects; but that he had made me
but a slender return, because as I was credibly informed, he had taken a
Journey to Samur, on purpose to meet a certain person, whom he knew to be my
Enemy, and with whom he had scarce any acquaintance before; I told him further,
that, as I could not attribute this forwardness of his to any thing else, but
to his eagerness of harkening to the insinuations of my Enemies, so I had ever
since made great account of his Friendship, though at the same time I had been
very careful in hiding my just resentment against him, because I was willing to
Sacrifice my own passion to his Majesty's Service, and the Laws of Hospitality,
which must have been impaired, if I should have gone about to let him feel the
effects of my just resentment. I took this opportunity to give him a succinct,
but true account of the whole matter, which had proved the occasion of those
various reports raised against me; as imagining that by discovering the whole
truth to this Minister, I might in a great measure prevent the ill
consequences, which Monsieur de Vaux's discourses would have brought upon me,
if they had made a real impression upon his mind.

I took also the Liberty to put him in mind upon this occasion, what I had Writ
to him before, concerning my Knavish Councellor Des Isles, who was a continual
Plague to me. He told me that he would Write again about him to the Intendant
of Poictiers, to search into the bottom of this business; and he did not fail
of his promise in that point, for not long after, the said Intendant, who had
hitherto, and would willingly for the future have sheltred him under his
Protection, was obliged to send him to Prison.

The Marquess de Louvois himself was the person, who sent me word of it, in
some days after, and at the same time Commanded me to Write again into England,
but in a far different style, from what I had Writ before, pursuant to his
Orders. For whereas in my last Letters sent into England, I had given them an
Account, that in all places where I had been, I had found every thing disposed
to favor the design and success of the Prince of Orange (K. William III.) I
was now to alter my tune, and to tell them, that what had been reported to them
concerning the Province of Poictou, were nothing but empty Fancies, and
imaginary Notions; that I was not a little afraid I had laid my self too open
before some Gentlemen of that Province, who, though they had the reputation of
being great well wishers to the English, yet had always showed so much
reservedness in any Conpany, that I could not give the least assurance of their
good Inclinations to the English Court. I was ordered further to let them
understand, That the Gentlemen of the Province of Poictou, were so far from
entering into a Cabal in favor of the English, that they were altogether
jealous of one another; and that the true reason of this mistrustfulness, did
not proceed from thence, because it had been industriously spread among them;
That the French Court had brought over some of their own party, to their
Interest, by the force of that most irresistible Charm, Gold; who being to act
as Spies, and to found their inclinations, this had had the desired effect to
sow the Seeds of jealousy among them, no body knowing whom to trust, or not:
And that therefore, if they persisted in their resolution to make a descent
upon France; the wisest course they could take, would be, to bring along with
them such a Force, as would be sufficient to maintain their Ground, without the
imaginary assistance of these Gentlemen.

These Letters which were dictated to me by the Marquess de Louvois (as all the
rest had been before) being sealed up in my presence with the same Seal I
always made use of, when I Writ into England: he ordered me to return forth
with to Paris, and for the future not to come to Mendon, unless I was sent for.
What most surprised me, was, that he did not mention the least Syllable of
those Four Thousand One Hundred Livers, which according to his Commands, I had
Ordered my Banker at London to pay these French indigent Officers; because I
knew he had had a Letter of advice from the said Banker, that they had been
paid according to Directions; for though the Bankers Letter was Directed to me,
the Postmaster had been so Officious, as to Deliver it into this Ministers own
hands: But the worst of all was, that these Officers, pursuant to those Orders
received from Court by my hands, did come not long after to Paris, where having
made their applications to Monsieur Jalet, the Duke of Luxemburgh's Steward,
(pursuant to my own Direction) he sent them to me.

When I saw my self Surrounded with so many Gentlemen, who all relied upon my
assistance, I was under the greatest irresolution that could be, what course
best to take; considering the strict Orders I had received from this Minister
not to appear at Court at Mendon. The only means I had left, was to put Pen to
Paper, and to give an account of it to him, who sent me word, that I should
come along with them the next day, to his Country Seat, at nine a Clock in the
Forenoon. Accordingly we made our appearance the next day at the appointed hour
and place; and the Marquess de Louvois took the pains to talk with every one in
particular, and he asked each of them, in what station he had been before he
left France, what had been the occasion of his flight, and in what Quality he
had served in the King of England's Troops; after which he Ordered them to
follow what instructions they should receive from me.

He took me aside at the same time, and told me that I must take care to see
them Lodged in some Inns near to my Lodgings, and to agree with the Innkeepers
for their Subsistence as cheap as could be done; adding, that it would be for a
little time only, to wit, till he should have time to consider what was further
to be done with them. I replied, that my Purse was not in a condition at this
time, to bear the Charges of so many Gentlemen; unto which he answered, that he
would take care of them in a very little time, and that I should not be long
troubled with them.

But whilst these Officers were disposed in these Inns, my Banker in London
drew a Bill of Exchange upon me, of four thousand one hundred Livres, which he
had paid to them by my Order, in England. I gave immediate notice of it to the
Marquess de Louvois, and desired him to enable me to discharge this Debt, which
he promised me to do forthwith; but the time of the Payment being just
expiring, without hearing any thing further from this Minister, I was put to a
great Nonplus. He happened just then to come to Paris, so that I took this
opportunity to wait on him there, and to put him in mind of the Bill of
Exchange, which was payable within two days after. He gave me for Answer, that
he had forgot to perfom what he had promised me, but that he was going to
Versailles the next day, and immediately after his return from thence, would
take effectual care of the payment of the said Sum. But either he did forget it
again* or else he had no mind to think of it, (the last of which seems most
probable to me) for the day of payment came, and I had not one Shilling from
him to pay the Bill.

This disappointment was followed by another; for if this Minister had failed
in his promise concerning the payment of the Money, he was as careless in
performing it, in relation to those French Officers, which he had promised to
take off of my Hands in a short time, and were not in a capacity to subsist
without my Assistance. I had no Sur-plus of Money to supply their wants, and
the Inn-keeper^ where they Lodged, began to be very backward to take my Word
any further than they had done already, considering that I had no settled
Habitation either in or near the City of Paris. This made m^strain my Credit
with my Land-lady, who being an old rich Maid, I prevailed with her so far, as
to engage her Word both for them and me to the Innkeepers.

Thus they were pretty quiet for some time, but Monsieur de Ville, a Banker of
Paris, unto whom I was to pay the Bill of Exchange, having Protested for want
of due payment, the said Bill; I carried a Copy of it, together with two
Letters, lately sent me from England, to the said Marquess de Louvois. These
two Letters being brought to me directly from the Post House, without being
first sent to the Marquess de Louvois, (as they always used to be done before)
I began to suspect that this was intended for a Trap to catch me in, to wit, to
try whether I would either be so ill advised, as to open them without him, or
perhaps keep them by me without communicating them to him. For besides that, I
began to be jealous of the Effects of those malicious Suggestions, which
Monsieur de Vaux had insinuated into this Minister, I had great reason to
believe, that at this time more than ever, he had taken a resolution to
Sacrifice me for the public Interest, considering, (as I told you before) that
he judged it more advisable, to let me fall as a Sacrifice to the State, than
to punish a great many of the Protestants, whom he knew to be ill affected to
the present Government in France.

But whether I were mistaken in my guess or not, I was resolved not to give him
the least occasion of this nature, and so carried those Letters to him, Sealed
up as they were delivered to me from the Post House. After he had perused them,
he gave them to me, and told me that it was time now to put a stop to our
further Correspondence with England, and that I should not write any more,
either to the Earl of S..... or my Lord L..... who had sent me these in answer
to my last Letters I writ by this Minister's direction. They contained in
substance, That they were not a little surprised at the Advice I had given them
in my last, because they were assured from very good hands, and such as were
beyond all question, that the Protestants in the Province of Poictou, were
ready to hazard every thing for the recovery of the liberty of their
Consciences, and to free themselves from that Bondage they groaned under at
this time; that therefore they would have me not be discouraged, or misled by
these ill grounded Suppositions which were the only obstacle that could in all
likelihood, prove prejudicial to so great and well laid a Design.

My Lord L..... sent me also Word about the Pass I had desired of him, for the
Importation of some Wines, and told me, that he could not but wonder I had not
mentioned any thing of it since, desiring me at the same time, to let him know
where the fault lay, being well assured on their side, that every Body was very
ready to gratify me in this, as well as in any other matter which might tend
to my Advantage.

As to what I had demonstrated to him concerning the protest of my Bill, and
the trouble I was in about these French indigent Officers, I could get no other
satisfaction but what he had given me several times before, to wit, That he had
forgot it, but would take care of it without any further delay. If I had not
been beyond my right Wits, and made serious Reflections upon a matter of such
Consequence to me, as I ought to have done, I might without consulting the
Stars, have dived into the bottom of the whole business, or at least have given
a shrewd guess at his design, and its true Origin. But it seems it is a natural
defect in Mankind, not to make use of the same foresight in our own Affairs, as
we do in others, which made me not to be in the least aware of the Snare that
was intended for me, till I was caught in it, past retreating.

This made me be so careless, as freely to persuade my self, that it was that
great weight and multiplicity of business, which continually Harrass'd this
Ministers thoughts, which had made him forgetful of mine; in hopes of which I
returned to Paris, living in expectation of the issue of his fair promises.

In the mean while Mr. de Ville, who I told you had protested the Bill of
Exchange, had given an Account of it to my Banker in London, who had sent him
word, to talk with me again concerning the Payment of it, and that in case I
were not as yet in a Capacity to satisfy the Contents of it, to propose this
as an expedient to me; that if my Spouse would accept the said Bill, he would
be willing to give me further time for the payment of it. My old Land-lady, who
had got some scent of the matter, and who began also to be tired, to be fed
with nothing but bare promises, began also to think it time to look about her,
and therefore resolved to make use of the same Expedient the Banker had done.
But being not willing at that time to fall out with me herself, she set the
Innkeepers, where those Officers lodged, at work, who made me the same
Proposition. I must confess I could not blame them for what they did, it having
been always a constant principle with me, to pay every body what I owed him, to
the utmost of my power, and living besides that, in full expectation to see in
a few days the Effects of the Marquess de Louvois's Promises, I desired my
Spouse to engage her Word for their further Security, which she willingly did.

There happened in the mean while several other Disturbances amongst these
Officers, which put me to no small vexation and trouble. Among the rest, one of
those Officers, whose Name was Money, and had been Quartermaster in the
Company of Gend'arms belonging to the Dauphin, he formerly lost a good Sum of
Money at play, belonging to the said Company, which had been the occasion of
his leaving France; This Officer I say, relying upon my Word I had given him,
as well as all the rest, in the Name of the Marquess de Louvois, that they
might safely return into France, appeared publicly at Versailles, where he was
seen and known by some of his former Acquaintance, his business having made a
great noise thereabouts some Years before. As there are seldom wanting, such as
endeavor to curry Favor at the expense of others; so there was one who went
instantly to Monsieur de Povange, to tell him, that he had been seen at
Versailles, and that he had even had the boldness to appear at Court. Monsieur
de Povange, who did not dream in the least, that he was returned by express
Orders from the Marquess de Louvois; much less, that he had been admitted into
his presence since, got immediately a Warrant drawn, which he presented to the
Marquess de Barbesieux, who being as ignorant as he, of what concerned this
Officer's return, Signed it without any further delay. The Warrant being given
to a certain Officer, whose Name was Desgrees, whose business it is to be
employed in such matters, he watched him in his return from Versailles, and
after he had taken him, carried him to Vincennes, where he was committed to the
same Prison, which is the ordinary place appointed for Criminals. For it is to
be observed, that Monsieur de Povange intended to Prosecute him with the utmost
rigor the Law would allow of, to make him an Example to others. And
accordingly, sent Orders to Monsieur de la Reyne, to draw up an Indictment
against him; but because his Examination was delayed for some time, neither I
nor any of the other Officers, had the least notice of what had happened, and
hearing no News of him the next day, we were extremely surprised at it. It Is
true, I began to suspect something of what befell him, being sensible that he
would not have left us thus, and that since he was so lately come out* of
England, with an intention to serve our King, he would not so soon change his
mind.

When he was taken, he told Desgrees, that he had best have a care what he did,
because he was come over from England not only with the Marquess de Louvois's
Consent, but by his express Orders. But Desgrees, who knew he had a sufficient
Warrant for what he had done, did not trouble his Head much about what he said,
neither did he think it worth his while to give notice of it to the Marquess de
Louvois, though he had promised the Prisoner that he would; he did indeed give
an Account of it to Monsieur de la Reyne, who being as careless in the business
as the other, was not over hasty to come to a Legal Examination of the whole
matter.

Thus a whole Week passed away, which his fellow Officers, who heard no tidings
of him all this while, spent in a great deal of inquietude; the more, because
they discovered that one Loisillon a Bailiff, had laid a Trap to Arrest another
of their Companions, whose Adversary was a Person of great Authority, and one
of the chief Managers of Criminal Affairs. It Is true, his Cause was not of such
ill Consequence as the others; the whole business being no more than an
Execution against him, by virtue of a pretended Marriage contracted with a
certain young Woman, who, with the assistance of her Mother and the said Judge,
intended to have catched him in the Snare. The whole was of little Moment at
first, and would have proved of as little Consequence, if this Officer, whose
Name was Semele, had rightly understood how to manage the Law Suit; but he
being negligent in the business, the Judge, who favored his Adversary, had
made a chargeable Law Suit of it, and at last got Judgment to pay Costs,
Damages, and Interest against him. They also obtained an Execution against his
Estate, lying near de Laigle, and would certainly have got into Possession of
it, if his Mother had not found means to prevent them, and to send her Son into
England; but it being rumored about among some of his old Acquaintance, that
he was returned with the rest of those before mentioned Officers, to Paris, the
Judge issued his Warrant for Loistillon to take him, and to carry him to Prison

It happened very luckily for Semele, that the Business of Money had been done
some time before, which had such an influence upon all the rest of these
Officers, that they unanimously resolved for their better security sake, not to
go at any considerable distance from their Inns, but to pass their time away
with visiting one another at their Lodgings. Nay, they were so cautious, as not
to stir abroad, unless when there was a good Company of them together,
notwithstanding their Inns were very near to one another. Loisillon, who had
kept a watchful Eye upon them for some time, soon began to take notice of their
Behavior, and knowing that they were at least Forty strong, besides as many
Servants, the worst of whom was able to coap with any of his Followers, thought
it his best way, not to try them by open force, but to surprise Semele by some
Stratagem or other. For this purpose, he got one of his Myrmidons to take
Lodgings in the same Inn, where he knew this Semele lay, whom he intended to
trapan. This Fellow, you must know, was of a very goodly Aspect, having not the
least resemblance in his Garb and all outward appearance to a Bailiff's
Follower; but the worst was, that his Conversation was in nowise answerable to
his Appearance, which made him soon be suspected by those who thought it their
best way to be always upon their Guard. This Semele especially, at whom he
aimed, being a very shrewd young Fellow, not easily to be caught in the Trap,
and not insensible that he had to do with a very potent Adversary, who would be
ready upon all occasions to serve him a bad turn, was more jealous of him than
all the rest; the more, when he observed that he showed more Complaisance for
him than the others, even to a degree of Flattery, by giving his particular
Approbation to every thing he said or did. All his Addresses were made chiefly
to him; sometimes he would propose to treat him with an Opera, sometimes with a
Play, sometimes he would find out some other Diversions to pass his time away.
Semele, who was as through paced in the Art of Dissimulation as the Bailiff's
Fellow could possibly be, pretended to give Ear to what he said, with an
intention to sound him to the bottom; but withal, told him that he used not to
accept of such Treats from People, but if he had a mind they should go to Play
together, they would play a Game at Cards who should pay for the other. The
Fellow was very willing to accept his Proposition, and lost his Game on purpose
to have the Opportunity to carry this Semele, and two of his Fellow Officers,
who had played with them at Semele's request, to see a Play. The rest of the
Officers, who smelt the Rat, offered to play with him likewise upon the same
lay; but the Setter, whose Business was not to go in so great a Company,
refused to play with any more of them.

The next day he offered to carry those three who had played with him, to the
Play, but they pretending to be more willing to delay it to another Day, he
urged them so much that Day, that some of the Officers took a resolution among
themselves to throw him without more a-do out of the Window; there were some
who were not altogether so hotheaded as the rest, thought it more advisable
not to come to such an extremity, at least, not till such time they were fully
convinced of the whole truth; for this purpose, they got one of their Servants,
whom they knew to be a pickled Rogue, to follow this Setter at some distance,
and to observe all his Motions. This young Fellow acquitted himself so well of
his Commission, and watched all his steps so narrowly, that he observed him to
talk with several others of this Bailiff's Followers in the Streets, as he went
along, and at last saw him go into Loisillon's House. They needed no more to
'be fully satisfied of what they were in some doubt of hitherto, and so took an
unanimous resolution to treat him with a Play, in which he was to act the chief
part. After his return to the Inn, they did not fail to give him a Reception
suitable to their Resolution; for first, he had such a sound Basting bestowed
upon him, that he had never met with such an Entertainment before in all his
life time; but this was not all, for they took him, and laid him upon his back
in a Bed, where they tied his Hands and Feet to the four Bed-posts; being in
this posture, one Pulled down his Breeches, whilst another stood by with a
great sharp Knife in his hand ready to emasculate him, unless he would make a
sincere Confession, who had set him at work, and upon whom he had had a Design.
The poor Fellow, who was very glad he could preserve his Stones by telling the
truth, confessed the whole matter, and so was discharged for this time.

I did not very well know what to think of it, which made me send a Letter to
the Marquess de Louvois, to desire leave to come and wait on him, not daring to
venture to go without his permission after the command he had laid upon me, not
to appear at Court, either at Versailles or Meudon. When I had the honor to
see him, I gave him a Relation of what had happened with the Bailiff's
Follower, and told him likewise, that none of us having heard any News from
Monsieur Money, and the Officers imagining no less than that he had been
betrayed and enclosed in some Prison or other, they were so alarmed at it, that
they were upon the point of taking a resolution to disperse, and leave France
for their own Security sake, unless he would be pleased to give them some
assurance of his Protection. He promised to take care of their Safety, which he
did accordingly, by granting them a Protection under his Hand and Seal. He told
me further, that it was true that Money had been taken up, and carried Prisoner
to the Prison of Vincennes, by virtue of a Warrant Signed by his own Son, but
that Monsieur de li R^^ne, who had had him under Examination, had no sooner
given him notice of what misfortune had happened to him by a mistake; but he
had given Orders for his Release immediately; and that he was sure I would meet
with him at his Inn, after my return to Paris. He commanded me to tell all
these French Officers there, to be ready at an hours warning, to go into
Ireland with the Count of Lausun, who was to command in that Kingdom, as
General, instead of Monsieur de Rose, who had hitherto served there in the same
Quality, but had made very pressing Instances at Court to be forthwith recalled
from the Irish Service.

I took once more this opportunity to put this Minister in mind of the payment
of the Bill of Exchange, and also of the Money due to the Inns, where these
Officers had been provided with all Necessaries all this while. I did not
forbear to represent my case as miserable to him as possibly I could; I told
him how the Banker, unto whom I was to pay the said Bill of Exchange, had taken
a Warrant out against me, so that I was every day in danger of seeing my self
hurried to Prison; that to gain some time, I had also brought my Wife in the
lurch, who being engaged for the payment of the Debt, was now in the same
danger as my self; so that instead of meliorating my Condition, I had made it
worse, neither of us daring now to stir abroad, unless when guarded by a good
Company of Friends; for fear of being carried to Prison. But whatever I could
say or do, I could get no other answer from him, than what I had had so many
times before; the only additional Comfort he gave me, was, that he would speak
to the King about it; and that for* fear he should forget it, I should be sure
to write to him after my return to Paris, and to represent the trouble and
vexation I lay under, for want of the payment of this Money, and that it was
impossible for me to hold out any longer, unless he would be pleased to send me
speedy relief.

I am fully persuaded, there will scarce be any body that reads these Memoirs,
but what will agree with me in Opinion, that there must be some Mystery in this
Business; for what probability can there be else, to suppose, that considering
the flourishing condition the King's Treasury was in at that time, and since,
so great a Minister as he, should suffer himself thus to be Dunn'd for so
inconsiderable a Sum, especially if it be considered, that there could not be a
more just Debt than this, which I had contracted by his Majesty's Order, and
for his Service. But besides that, the King himself cannot be altogether
insensible of it, (without whose Approbation, I suppose, the Marquess de
Louvois would scarce have ventured to recall these Officers out of England) all
these Officers themselves are unquestionable Witnesses on my side, as well as
Monsieur Jalet, the Duke of Luxemburgh's Steward, and the Innkeepers where
they were Lodged; as for instance, the Master of the Inn at the Sign of the
Flower-de-Luce, in the Bear-street; the Master of the Inn at the Iron Cross in
St. Martin's* and the Master of the Inn at the Sign of the Tortoise, near the
Chatelet. The best Construction I can make of the whole, is, that this Minister
did use me thus, with no other intent than to ^ire out my Patience, and make me
do something or other in my Passion which might furnish him with a (...)ir
pretext to sent me to Prison; not being willing to let the World* or my self
understand that it was upon the score of the public Interest that he was
sending me to those Lodgings, he was preparing for my Reception* There is no
question, but that this had been his Design for a considerable time before,
which he though(...) fit to put in Execution at this critical Juncture* when he
was sufficiently instructed by what he had understood out of the two last
Letters from England, written by the Earl of S...... and my Lord L..... that
they were fully satisfied of the good Intentions of the Gentlemen in Poictou,
and that they would take up Arms as soon as they should make a Descent upon the
French Coast; I say, he being sensible of this, did not think he could pitch
upon a better Expedient to divert them from undertaking this Enterprise, than
if, by sending me to the Bastile* he gave them to understand, that their whole
Design had been discovered. He did not question* but that they would soon be
informed by their Spies of what had happened to me, by which means, he proposed
to save the French Court the trouble of Imprisoning a great many Protestant
Gentlemen of that Province, who were supposed to be well Wishers to the Enemies
Design; which he feared might make so great a noise in the Kingdom, as to prove
the Forerunner of some other Commotions, which might be attended with fatal
Consequences; being resolved, as I told you before, to prevent this danger by
my Imprisonment, he spoke to me very coldly, when I came to wait on him the
next time at Meudon, though I am sure I took all imaginable care to represent
my Case to him with the utmost respect, all what I told him, amounting only to
this; that it was now near two Months since he had delayed me from one time to
another, without giving me any real satisfaction, according to his reiterated
Promises.

Whilst I was discoursing with the Marquess de Louvois, a certain Person of
Quality came to interrupt me in my Complaints, which I found were not at all
unpleasing to this Minister, who, as I believe, did suppose, that by giving me
a blunt answer, I would be provoked to such a degree, as might furnish him with
a fair opportunity to put his Design in execution against me, under that
pretense. But at that time he was forced to leave me to my self, being obliged
to go to Court, and I as soon as I had seen him in his Coach, returned directly
to Paris, whither my Businesses called me. Not long after, I received more
Letters from England, in which, both the Earl of S..... and my Lord L..... did
acquaint me, that they were in the greatest Surprise in the World, because they
had received no Letters from me, for some time before; they told me, that every
thing was ready on their side for a Descent upon the French Coast; and that
therefore they would have me not be discouraged, if hitherto I had not met with
all the Success I expected in the Province of Poictou; for though they were not
upon the Spot, as I was, yet they had unquestionable Assurance, that a great
Number of the Inhabitants of that Province, would be at their devotion,
whenever they should see them set footing on the French Shore. I carried these
Letters, before I opened them, to the Marquess de Louvois, who was just then
come back to Meudon, and after he had perused them, told me the Contents as I
have related them; and that he would carry them forth with to the King at
Versailles; he ordered me at the same time to attend him the next following
Friday at Paris, where I should receive His Majesty's Commands, whether I
should answer them or not, or what other Measures the King would be pleased to
have me take. I began my old Tune again, and to talk to him about the Money
concerns, which lay so heavy upon me at that time; but no sooner had I begun,
but he interrupted me, telling me, that I needed not give my self any further
trouble about that matter, because it should be done that very day. I was so
well acquainted with these Expressions, which I had heard him repeat to me so
often, that I did not much rely upon it, persisting nevertheless unmovable in
my former Resolution, to arm my self with Patience against any Event that might
befall me.

According to this Ministers appointment, I came to wait on him the next
following Friday. He had showed the before mentioned Letters which had been
sent to me out of England, to our King, and if I am not extremely mistaken in
my guess, had represented to him, that it was now high time to make me a
Prisoner in the Bastile, this being the most proper Expedient they could pitch
upon, to oblige the Enemy to lay aside their Enterprise of making a Descent
upon the French Coast, that unless they did so, they must at least send twelve
Thousand Men for the defense of those Ports, who might be employed better in
another place; or else they must fill up all the Prisons there abouts with many
of the Protestant Nobility, and others of the chief Inhabitants of the Country;
neither do I much question, but that the King over-perswaded by his Reasons,
did at last give Ear to his Counsel.

For I was no sooner entered his Closet, but the first thing he asked me
abruptly, was, whether I had not sent any Letters into England since that time
he gave me his Express Orders to the contrary. I answered him, I had not, of
which, if he pleased, he might be convinced by the Contents of those last
Letters I had delivered to him, in which they complained of my neglect in not
writing to them. He seemed in all outward appearance, to be satisfied with what
I had offered in answer to his question, and again told me, that it was the
King's absolute Pleasure, I should send no more Letters into England. After he
had done with this Subject, I began the old Song, and put him in mind, that the
last time I had had the Honor to wait on him at Meudon, he had made me a
positive promise to deliver me that very day from those Troubles I lay under on
account of the Bill of Exchange, and the Debts due to the Innkeepers, where
the French Officers were Lodged; scarce had I uttered these words, when
interrupting me with a stern Look, he gave me no other Answer, but this; You
are very hasty indeed; I am apt to believe you are afraid the King is ready to
break.

I must confess, an answer so unexpected, did raise in me some motions which I
was not able to hide with all the art I had; nevertheless, I answered him
without the least transgressing the bounds of respect due to his high Station;
that nothing did grieve me more at this time, than to see my self reduced under
such hard Circumstances, as to be forced to be so urgent with him, assuring
him, that nothing but an unavoidable Necessity could oblige me to it. I told
him further, that if I durst be so bold, as to desire him to put himself for
once in my place, I did not question, but he would be sensible, that I was less
urgent than he would be himself if he were under the same ill Circumstances;
for as the case now stood, I durst scarce stir out of Doors, or if I did, I
could not go three steps without looking backward to see whether there were not
a Bailiff at my Heels to drag me to Prison; that if with all the precaution I
could make use of against their Attempts upon my Person, I had had the good
Fortune hitherto escape theirs hands; this did not deliver me from the
importunities of my Creditors, who ha(...)ed my Lodgings every day, and
sometimes had ^o closely besieged me, that I durst not be seen, and that the
Farewell I commonly had from them as they went away, was to hear my self
proclaimed in the Streets in such a Style, as was insupportable to any honest
Gentleman, who had the least value for his Reputation. He gave me no other
Answer but some sharp, biting words, which touched me so nearly, that not being
able to brook any longer with Patience such an affront, which I was sensible I
had so little deserved at his Hands, I replied to him yet in very respectful
Terms: That if he knew that his Majesty had no present occasion to employ these
Officers, I desired him to oblige me thus far, as to tell me so, that I might
find out a way ^orid my hands of them, whom I was no longer able to maintain
upon my own Credit; and that if his Majesty was likewise no longer satisfied
with my Services, I was ready to retire to my Country Seat. I am overjoyed,
replied he, to find out at last your good Intentions, and you may be sure, I
will let the King know of it. And thus he turned his Back to me. I did what I
could to appease his Anger, and to convince him* that considering my present
Condition, I had said nothing, for which I could be justly blamed, but he gave
me no other answer, but that he would take ca^^ the King should be informed of
my good Intentions.

I left him thus, (being almost reduced to Despair without replying so much as
one Word, for fear of Exasperating him further, being still in hopes that when
he had time to recollect himself a little and to reflect seriously upon what he
had done, i(...) would be impossible but he must be sensible of h(...) Error,
and that he would make me a full amend* for what was passed, the next time I
should see him* How blind is Mankind in his own Concerns? fo(...) to confess
the truth, I was still so bewitched, as not to perceive that I was intended to
be made an unfortunate Victim, which was to be Sacrificed for the Interest of
the State. I think this Night was the worst and the longest that ever I knew in
my life, it being impossible that any Man living could be distracted with more
various Agitations of mind than I was at that time. I had this additional
Affliction, that several of my Friends, who perceived me to be in so odd an
Humor, were very inquisitive to know the real cause of my present Afflictions,
which indeed was such, that it had disinabled me to give them a rational Answer.

The next Morning one of these French Officers, lately come from England, by my
Orders, happened to pay me a Visit in my Bedchamber, when they were just
bringing up the Paris Gazette, Published that same Morning. As I had but little
curiosity to look after News at that time, I threw it upon the Table, and the
Officer took it up, and after he had perused some few Paragraphs in it* told
me, that two Gentlemen of the Province of Poictou, had been taken up, for
keeping Correspondence with the Prince of Orange, (King William III.) This
unexpected News raised me all on a sudden outof that Lethargy that had seized
my Spirits for want of Rest, which made me immediately ask the Officer, where
it was that he had read this News? Then he pointing with his Finger upon the
Paragraph, I found that it was Monsieur..... and Monsieur..... who had been
confined upon that account. That which made me immediately suspect the matter,
and that their Names were not inserted in this Gazette without some particular
design, was, because I was too well acquainted with the nature of our Paris
Gazette, where seldom any thing of this kind is put in, without particular
Order from Court.

This was an Item strong enough for me to guess (...)t* that their Names had
been put in with no other (...)tention, than to give the Enemy to understand,
that their Design was discovered; for, as our King commonly reads the Foreign
Gazettes; so the French Court did not question, but that Foreign Princes, and
other Persons of Quality do the same with ours.

THE MEMOIRS OF JOHN BAPTIST De La Fontaine, Knight. LIB. VIII.
I Was as yet in my Bed, ruminating upon th(...) Fatality that attended me,
when the before mentioned Officer came into my Chamber and showed me this
Paragraph in the Gazette* I had scarce done with it, and was just giving (...)
into his Hands, when I saw Desgrees, (the same Messenger, who as I told you,
had Trapan'd Monsieur Money, as he was coming from Versailles) come into my
Chamber; he had left his Attendance at the Door, neither had I ever seen him,
as far as I remember, but his Mein, which has no resemblance to that of a
Gentleman, but rather to what he is, made me immediately suspect the worse. He
was so forward, as to give me no leisure to make many Reflections upon the
matter, or to ask him what business he had in my Lodgings; he saved me, I say
this trouble; for he had no sooner set one Foot into the Room, but he accosted
me with this Compliment, that he was sorry it was his Lot to bring me the
ill-news, that he was sent to take me into Custody by the King's special
Command, and that therefore he must desire me to dress my self with all speed.
I give every body leave to judge how surprising this Message must be to me,
which struck me with such an Amazement, that I was not able to hide it from
those that were near us.

Desgrees seeing me in this condition, did what he could to comfort me,
assuring me, that he believed my Business would not be of so much consequence,
as I might be apt to imagine; because the Marquess de Louvois, had given him
positive Orders to treat me like a Gentleman; and that the King had granted
permission to me, to write to my Wife, and order my Domestic Affairs as I
should think convenient. But these Sugar-plums had but a slender relish with me
at this time, when I little expected to be thus Rewarded for the great Services
I had done; however, I began to dress my self, but with so much Perplexity, and
in such a Confusion, that I did scarce know my self what I was going about to
do; and I asked for some Pens, Ink and Paper, which being brought up to me, I
asked Desgrees whither he was to carry me, and what was the reason of my
Confinement? But he refusing to give me any satisfactory Answer to either, I
writ to my Spouse, and acquainted her with my present unhappy Condition; I
desired her to come forthwith to Court, and to hear from the Marquess de
Louvois's own Mouth, unto what place I was Confined, and the true reason of my
Imprisonment.

Whilst I was busy in Dressing my self, in comes a Commissary, (Justice of the
Peace) into my Chamber, who happend to be just the same Person, by whose
assistance I delivered my Spouse's Chambermaid out of the clutches of a Bawd
in Paris.

It was near ten Years ago since that time, and though he had not seen me above
twice or thrice i(...) all his lifetime, yet he immediately knew me again. He
made an Inventory of all my Pape(...), which Desgrees put all together in his
Coat-pock(...), and desiring me to go along with him in the Coat that stood
ready to receive us at the Door, he carried me streightways to the Bastile.

It happened that Monsieur de Baisenaux, the Governor, was not at home at that
time; and the place of Deputy Governor, being also vacant, he who had the
Supreme Management of Affairs in the Governor's absence, was indeed a Creature
of his* but durst not do any thing of moment without his particular Order.

So I was fain to stay a considerable while in a large Room belonging to the
Governor, till they could give him notice that he had a new Gue(...) brought
to his Castle; he being then gone abroad to see his Son.

After his return home, la Nove, (which was the Name of him that Officiated in
his absence) gave him an account of my Name and Condition, (as he had
understood it from the Messenger) whereupon the Governor ordered me to be
lodged in the Tower of the Chapel, up three pair of Stairs. There was at that
time another Prisoner in the same Chamber, whose Name was Voile, a Man of
Fortune nay, even of a very mean Extraction. He had been Comptroller of the
King's Plate-Office, b(...) which means he and one of his Brothers, (who had
been one of Monsieur Colbert's Clerks) had gathered vast Riches. The Furniture
of this Room was answerable to his great Estate; being hung with very good
Tapestry Hangings, with a fine Damask Bed, Silk Chairs, and all the other
things proportionable. In this Room I was quartered with my Servant, and kept
under Lock and Key. For you must know that the Prisoners in the Bastile, are of
two different kinds: For some are kept enclosed betwixt four Brick Walls, from
whence they don't get sight of any body living, unless it be the Doorkeeper of
the Prison, whom they call the Key Bearer. They are not permitted as much as to
go and hear Mass, though they be never so Zealous Catholics, unless it be at
the four grand Feasts of the Year; nay, some are so closely Confined, that they
have not that liberty granted them.

I did observe at my first coming into the Bastile, that the Governor used
sometimes to give them a visit, and so did some of the other Officers; but this
being looked upon as too great a Favor, it is out of date now. These are the
greatest part of those who have the misfortune to be Prisoners in the Bastile;
the rest, much fewer in number, have the liberty of the Court to walk in, and
are kept under Lock and Key only at certain Hours.

The Governor was a Friend of this Voile, or at lest pretended to be such, for
scarce a day past, but he either came in person to pay him a visit, or at least
sent his Dequty la Nove to do it in his Name. They would both manage him as
they thought it best for their purpose, all their Visits being to no other end
than to bring him either good or bad News, in relation to his Business,
according as they were directed to do; for they did not dare to make one step
without particular Orders from Court, or at least, these are my Thoughts of it,
which I have founded upon those Observations, I have had occasion to make,
during my Imprisonment there.

I am well convinced that Baisenaux the Governor, is too much a Politician, to
act the part of a Friend with any Prisoner under his Custody, which is a
convincing Argument to me, that all his Caresses are made to them for no other
end than to enveigle them into what the Ministers of State would have done.
This Voile was accused of Bribery, and other Mismanagements in his Office, and
the Governor and his Deputy, employed most of their Visits in making him
sensible of what Punishment he had deserved, which could not be bought off but
with a considerable Sum of Money. To tell the truth, they had need to make use
of all their best Rhetoric to persuade him to it; for he loved Money so well,
that he would sooner have lost a Limb than parted with any of it, and nothing
but the dread of a severe Punishment could have squeezed his Gold from him.

After these Preparatives administered to him by the Governor and his Deputy,
Monsieur de la Reyne came sometime after, to give a thorough Purgation; for he
had him for four Hours together, under a strict Examination, which agreed so
ill with his present Constitution, that when he came up to our Chamber again,
he looked no otherwise than if he was ready to sink into the Ground. I asked
him, what was the reason I observed so sudden a Change in his Countenance, and
what made him look so dejected? He answered me no more than this, that rather
than to appear once more in the same condition before Monsieur de la Reyne, he
would give all what he was worth in the whole World.

This Answer seemed to intimate that he had been soundly frightened by him, and
I was of Opinion that he had threatened him with no less than the Rope. But
whilst I was a little pausing upon the matter, the Odoriferous Smell which I
began to perceive to issue from his Breeches, was a convincing proof to me that
I had not been much mistaken in my guess; for he had put him into such a
condition by his dreadful Discourse, that his Valet was fain to do him the same
Office as Nurses are used to do to the young Babes.

It was no easy task to forbear laughing at such an Adventure as this; and for
my part, I was forced almost to bite my Lips through, to keep my self from it,
for fear he should perceive me: But both his and my Servant were such unlucky
Rogues, that they laughed in one another Faces in his presence, which made him
Swear heartily at his own, and to make his Complaints against mine to me. The
consequence of the matter was, that the Words of Monsieur de la Reyne, who had
had such a powerful influence upon his Posteriors, (the scent of which had
questionless, also reached the Examiner's Nostrils) together with the
persuasions of the Governor of the Bastile, bad got a no less powerful
Ascendant over de Voile's Inclinations; for contrary to his natural
Constitution, which was not to part with a Farthing, he was willing enough to
purchase his Liberty at such a rate as they were pleased to set upon it. Thus I
lost my Chamber-fellow; but this was not the worst; for in a few days after he
had been discharged out of Prison, an Upholsterer came up into my Lodging-Room,
who took down the Tapestry-Hangings, and removed all the rest of the Furniture,
which had made the Room appear hitherto pretty tolerable to me. But after these
Ornaments were removed, I observed a strange Catastrophe in every thing; for
now every thing there beginning to appear in its natural Colors, I found that
they had Quartered me in the same Room where formerly they used to put the
Criminals upon the Rack. The Turn Key could not disown it himself, but if he
had, there were thick Iron-Rings at a certain distance from one another fastened
to the Walls, on which they used to tie the Ropes, by which they used to hang
these unfortunate Wretches; which were plain demonstrations to me, that I was
not mistaken in my Opinion.

Thus I was fain to spend my time in this dismal place without any Company; the
only comfort I had, was, that my Window looked into the Garden of the Bastile,
where there was a very agreeable Prospect, and I used to spend many an hour at
that Window to refresh my self in some measure, when I was almost spent with
those doleful Reflections that had overwhelmed me with Grief; among those, the
absence of my Spouse was none of the least, and I frequently sent a longing
sight for her coming, in hopes, that some way or other, she might prove
instrumental in delivering me from this close Confinement, which I could
attribute to nothing else, but a certain Fatality that attended me at that time.

One day as I was thus looking out at my Window, I saw the Lieutenant of the
Guards of the Bastile, whose Name was Garenne, and who was a Kinsman of the
Governor, to enter the Garden with Monsieur la Nove, and a certain Prisoner,
who had the liberty to walk in the Garden of the Bastile once a Week. They were
followed by one of their Attendance, with two Bottles of Wine in one hand, and
a Dish covered with a Napkin, and some cold Victuals in the other. They fell to
drinking briskly about, and were very merry together; an unpleasing sight to
those that were coup'd up at the same time betwixt four Walls, and were fain to
be Spectators, but not Partakers of their Pastime, from the Windows that looked
into the Garden. They continued at this Sport till it began to be dusky, and
Garenne sent his Servant back to have the Bottles filled again; whilst this
Fellow was gone to obey his Master's Orders, the Prisoner, who was an English
man, called Sewel, pretended to be pressed to step aside, and so went at some
distance from the other two toward that part of the Garden which faces the
Wood-Yards, where he fastened a Rope to the Wall, and so got over it
undiscovered by the rest.

When the Servant came back with the Bottles, he found Garenne looking after
the Prisoner; at which he could scarce forbear laughing, because he knew him to
be so Purblind, that he could at the best, not see above a yards length from
him. After they had searched all the places round the Garden, they found at
last the Rope, which being a sufficient sign to them, which way the Prisoner
had taken; they cried out for help, because one of the Prisoners had made his
escape. They put the whole Bastile in alarm, by their crying out as they passed
through the Garden and the Castle, and sent instantly all their Myrmidons
abroad, to search in all Corners about the Bastile, but in vain; for the Bird
was fled past recovery. Garenne likewise bid them farewell, being afraid of
Monsieur de Baisenaux, and as the Turn-key told me, he was fled into Gascoin,
where he would scarce be secure, because Orders were come from Court to make
search after him all over the Kingdom, and to take him wherever he could be
met with.

But notwithstanding all these dreadful pretenses, this Prisoner, who was a
very sensible Fellow, got safely into England, without being discovered by any;
which indeed was no hard task for him to do, considering that the whole matter,
as I have related it just now, was nothing else but a Grimace contrived betwixt
him and the Governor, by Order from Court. For it is to be observed, that this
Stratagem had been made use of by King James, to persuade the Prince of Orange,
(King William III.) that this Prisoner, after his escape out of the Bastile,
where he had been put at his Request) had taken such an aversion to his Party,
that to revenge himself for the affront put upon him, he would be ready to
embrace the Prince's (King William III.) (...)de and do him considerable
Service. By this means they hoped he might insinuate into his Favor, and meet
with an opportunity to give King James an Account of several matters of great
conquence. But as Ill Fortune would have it, Sewell ^as no sooner sent a
Prisoner to the Bastile, but (...)e of King James's Cabinet* Council, who was
in (...)e Interest of the Prince of Orange (King William III.) had found means
to give a full Account of the whole Design, to the English Court, and how he
was to make his Escape from thence, in order to serve as a Spy in England; so
that instead of Preferment, Sewell was immediately after his arrival in that
Kingdom, clapped up in Prison, where he did not meet with the same convenience to
make his Escape as he had done in the Bastile.

News of his Imprisonment in England, being brought soon after to St. Germains,
where King James kept his Court since his Arrival in France* the same was soon
communicated to the King, and spread all over Versailles; and Monsieur de
Baisenaux, Governor of the Bastile, having likewise got notice of it, Garenne
instead of going into Gascoin, went no further than Paris, and all this while
absconded at the Governor's Son's House, where he passed histime very
pleasantly, and laughed at the foolishness of those in the Bastile. But
notwithstanding this Intrigue was carried on with all the Secrecy imaginable*
we got scent of the matter at last, for though it seems as if People who are
under close Confinement and consequently are debarred from all Conversation,
were put beyond all possbility of being informed of what passes abroad, it is
nevertheless certain, that few things of moment happened, but what came one
time or other to o(...) knowledge. For it is to be observed, that if one of the
Prisoners hears any News, he certainly Communicates it to the others, either by
Writing upon piece of a Board, or what other means they c(...) contrive best;
which confirms the old Proverb That Necessity is the Mother of Invention. For
there is no shift so hard which they don't make use of (...) keep a
Correspondence with one another* they ma(...) holes through the Walls, from one
Chamber (...) the other* nay* even from one Tower to the oath(...) in which they
spare no pains, because these Wa(...) are sometimes nine or ten Foot thick, and
it is ve(...) difficult to get any Instrument fit for such a p(...)pose; but
Necessity, and their Industry supplies these Defects, and makes them surmount
all Obstacles. I made use for a considerable time of an Invention of my own.
For I bred up, whist I(...)as in Prison, a Spaniel-Puppy-Bitch which being a
very loving Creature, used always* after it was six Months old, to follow the
Turn Key, (who had taken a particular Fancy to it) from one Tower to another; I
made use of a small Collar, which being hid under her Neck-Hair, I could put a
small Letter under it, without being perceived by any body. I first gave notice
of this Contrivance to a certain German, one of our fellow Prisoners, who found
means to communicate it to the rest, and so we kept up our Correspondence
together for two whole Years, before it was discovered.

In the mean time I got another Chamber-fellow, whose Name was Villeroy, a
Native of Lorrain of the City of Vaucouleurs, who had been an Officer in the
Swiss Regiment of Surlauben. I asked him upon what account he had been sent to
the Bastile? (where he remains Prisoner to this Day.) If it be true what he
says, his only Crime was to have been so fortunate, as to be beloved by a
certain Lady of Quality, whose Husband having conceived some Jealousy at him,
prevailed with the Marquess de Louvois, to send him to Prison. I must confess,
he was a very handsome Fellow, and if it be so as he pretends, this Lady is not
the first of the fair Sex who has been Captivated by a handsome outside. But
however it be, they had taken him up under this pretext, that he being a Native
of Lorrain, had been employed by the late Duke Charles of Lorrain, to raise a
Regiment for his Service. It was true, he had been raising some new Levies, but
they were raised for the Count de Tesse, unto whom the King had given a
Commission to raise a new Regiment of Foot, of which this Prisoner was to have
been Major.

At that time both he and I were as yet of Opinion, that the English Man (
Sewell) had made a real escape, the Mystery of it being not as then come to our
knowledge, which made us enter into a Consultation, whether it might not be
possible for us to do the same thing like it, for our Deliverance. At last we
agreed upon the matter; and I found means with some Instruments I had privately
conveyed to me, to loosen the Bricks round about the Window, where the Iron
Grates were fastened; so Artificially, that I could put them again into their
places, without being perceived by the Turn-key* unless he had looked very near
upon them: The desire of Liberty did so quicken my hands, that it was not long
before I had almost Compassed my Labor, there being not above one days Work
left to accomplish it; the only thing we wanted now, was how to get Ropes to
let our selves down from the Tower, which was pretty high. I had taken notice
of some old Ropes, that used to lie in a great Room, through which one must pass
into ours, which was indeed, always kept locked up by the Turn-key, but we had
some time leave given us, whilst he was in our Chamber, to go into it, to ease
our selves, or upon some other occasion.

It is to be observed, That these Ropes belonged to the Lady Curton, Daughter
to the Governor of the Bastile, and were made use of, to draw up the Hay into
the Hay-loft, for the use of her Horses, when she resided at Paris: Her
Servants had left them in this Room, together with some odd House hold Goods,
as they were going into the Country of Auvergne, where the Marquess her
Husband, had a very good Estate. I spoke of it to Villeroy, and he, and I, and
my Servant, (who was a very crafty Rogue) had another Consultation how to
convey these Ropes into our Chamber, without being perceived by the Turn-key;
my Valet undertook the Task, and the better to encompass it, he put on the same
Night he intend to go about it, an Old Night Gown, which I had given him
before. As soon as he heard the Turn-key rattle his Keys near our Chamber, he
threw himself upon the Bed, pretending he was not very well; and after the
Turnkey was come in, he feigned himself so weak, as scarce to be able to crawl
into the next Room, where he pretended to look into an Old Wardrobe he had,
but by this means got sight of the Ropes; their bulk did a little surprise him
at first, but after the Turnkey was gone, he told us, he would not desist till
he had conveyed them to us, provided we would take care to entertain the
Turn-key the next day, for some time, which we promised to do.

Pursuant to our agreement, we diverted him the next day a considerable time,
with variety of Discourse, which gave my Valet the opportunity to encompass his
part of the design, so that all we had to do now, was to save our selves
through the Window by the help of these Ropes.

But before I would make my escape, I had a mind to bid farewell to the Duke de
la Force, who being a Prisoner in another Tower, not far distant from ours; we
had kept a continual Correspondence together, ever since I was a Prisoner in
the Bastile, by the help of a hole which reached quite through the Wall. I was
not very willing his Servants should be Witnesses of what I had to Communicate
to him; which made me Write a Letter, in which I gave him an account of my
design, and conveyed it to him by the help of an Engine, which reached from one
side of the hole to the other.

He had no sooner read the Letter, and paused a little upon the matter, but he
sent me an Answer by the same Engine, in which he told me, that he could not
believe otherwise, but that my case must be much worse than it had been
represented to him, by me, for without that, he could scarce imagine how I
could pitch upon such an expedient as this, to obtain my Liberty. That I would
do very well to take it once more into serious Consideration; for, besides that
I was to put my Life in most Eminent danger, by letting my self down by a Rope
from the Tower; which was near Fourscore Foot high, if I happened to succeed in
this, I ought to consider that there would be no safety for me in France
hereafter; that therefore, if I knew my self guilty* he would not dissuade me
from attempting it, but if not, he could not advise me in the least to it. That
if nevertheless I persisted in my resolution to venture at all, he wished me a
happy Success, but that his advise was, to consider once more of it before I
put it in execution. His Reasons had so powerful an influence over me that I
began really to ponder again the matter with all the seriousness imaginable,
and after I had maturely weighed all the Circumstances, and dangerous
Consequences that were likely to attend it* I resolved to hearken to his
Counsel; this made me tell Villeroy, that if he thought fit, he might save
himself alone, and that I would not hinder his escape, but for my part, I had
altered my mind. Both he and my Servant were much dissatisfied at it, and
looked upon me with very ^our Countenances for a considerable time after, being
quite tired out with the irksomness of a close Confinement. However, the
Officer did not think fit to attempt his escape without me.

Sometime after I was carried to the Bastile, my Sister came to Paris, at the
request of my Spouse, who being much indisposed at that time, could not
possibly come her self. She went to Court, where addressing her self to the
Marquess de Louvois, he told her, that he could not grant me my liberty, but
that she might have leave to see me. The first time she came to me, she gave me
an account of my Domestic Affairs, but above all the rest, how my Spouse was
quite overwhelmed with Grief, which had reduced her to a very low condition,
her Trouble being much augmented, since she had read in the Paris Gazette, that
I was accused of keeping Correspondence with the Enemy. For it is to be
observed, that I had been put in the Gazette in the same Rank with the other
two Gentlemen of Poictou, whom I mentioned before, though it was evident to the
Court, that what I had done, was of a quite different nature from what was laid
to their charge. But considering this Expedient had been pitched upon to give
the Enemy to understand by our Imprisonment; that their Correspondence in
Poictou was discovered, the Court did not think fit to make any difference
betwixt us, as being most suitable to what they proposed to themselves, and it
was questionless upon this account, that the Marquess de Louvois had ordered us
to be put in the Gazette, without making the least difference betwixt the
guilty and innocent.

The answer I gave to my Sister, was, that I could give her no greater and more
convincing Proof of my innocence, than her being admitted to see me at her
first Request, which was never granted to such as are guilty of any capital
Crime; besides that, I had not been under Examination, and what is more, I
never have been Examined all this while since I am a Prisoner in the Bastile,
an evident proof that I was only pitched upon to serve for an unfortunate
Victim, to be Sacrificed for the Interest of the State. This may, perhaps, seem
strange to some who are unacquainted with the present State of Affairs in
France; but I can assure you that I am not the only Person under these unhappy
Circumstances; I say I am not the only Person who have been thrown into this
dismal Prison to serve a State's turn upon an occasion* there being to my own
certain knowledge, above thirty more, who are not guilty of any thing else but
to be so unfortunate, as to have been selected among many others, to satisfy
the Politic ends of the Court, and have for many years Languished in this
Prison, where, in all likelihood they will die Martyrs of State.

As often as my Sister came to see me, she used commonly to pay a Visit to
Monsieur de Baisenaux, the Governor of the Bastile; it must be confessed, that
he is a Person of excellent Natural Parts at all times, which, whenever his
Interest is concerned, he knows how to improve to his utmost advantage. My
Sister was always looked upon as one who was not easily to be trapp'd,
notwithstanding which he would manage her so dexterously, (...) she could not
forbear to tell him all what she knew. Thus she gave him an Account how she had
been at Versailles, to solicit my Liberty, but had met b(...) with very
slender encouragement, and that indeed she began almost to despair of it,
unless I could make some very strong Interest; she further told him, how she
was to go back into the Country to give an account of it to my Spouse, the best
Expedient she knew, being for her to come up to Court with all possible speed,
to throw her self at his Majesty's Feet, and declare to him my Innocence; that
perhaps the King might be moved with Compassion toward a Lady who lived in a
strange Country, and had a great Family to provide for; for it is to be
observed, that I had at that time eight Children living, to wit, two Sons and
si(...) Daughters; and it was no small increase of my Affliction, that I saw my
self reduced to such a miserable condition, as not to be able to assist them*
but above all the rest, nothing troubled me more, than the continual fear I was
in* that considering they lived in a Province where there were great numbers of
Heretics, my Spouse might be prevailed upon by them, to return to her former
Error, and that if such a thing should come to pass, she would unquestionably
influence her Children to tread in her footsteps.

Monsieur de Baisenaux, who knew well enough that they had nothing of moment
against me, was afraid that if my Spouse should come to Court, she might obtain
my Enlargement; for he had nine Livres per Diem, allowed him for me and my
Servant, and he paid no more than about four Shillings and six Pence a day to
those who provided our Victuals; by which means he has heaped up vast
Treasures, he being reputed to be worth two Millions of Livres; and has always
lived in grea(...) State. Besides that to each of his two Daughters, he has
given a Portion of a Hundred Thousand Crowns when they were Married, and has
settled an Estate of thirty thousand Livres per Annum, upon his Son. All these
vast Riches he has squeezed out of the poor Prisoners under his Custody; for
you must know, that though indeed he was a Gentleman by Extraction, a Native of
Gascoin, yet he was not born to an Estate, and was not looked upon as a Man of
any considerable Fortune when he was made Keeper of the Bastile.

This Person I say, whose Maxim it is, to make use of all means possible to
keep in his Hands as long as he can, those who have the misfortune to come once
under his Clutches; having understood from my Sister, what means she proposed
for my Releasement, acted the Hypocrite so to the life, that even the most
quick sighted might have been deceived by it. For he told her, that knowing me
to be rather unfortunate than guilty, he could not but have a great Compassion
for me; and that therefore he would give her the best Advice he was capable of,
being better acquainted with the Court than she. He then told her further, that
if my Spouse should come up to Court, and throw her self at his Majesty's Feet,
he would certainly send her back to the Marquess de Louvois; and that for this
reason it was his Opinion, that she must delay this resolution for some time
longer, for fear of Exasperating the said Minister, who was already very ill
satisfied with me, because I had not spoke to him in such respectful Terms as
he expected I should have done. He advised her that she should give me an
Account of what he had said to her, before I writ to my Spouse, and that she
should assure me in his behalf, of his good Inclinations toward me, and that
he should be overjoyed to do me any Service, which he hoped might be in his
power in time, if I would trust him with the Management of it; and that he
would not fail to give me timely notice, whenever he thought it seasonable for
my Spouse to come to Town.

My Sister gave me a full Account of what he had told her, and I who did not
know him so well at that time, as I have had sufficient occasion to do since,
found so much probability in what he had offered, that I sent my Sister to him,
to give him all imaginable Thanks for the good Advice he had been pleased to
give me, and to assure him, that I should always be ready to acknowledge it,
and would follow it in particular at this time. When he found that he had
brought me thus to his Bow, he came along with my Sister to pay me a Visit, and
after some indifferent Discourse* betwixt us, he took me aside, (being
unwilling that my Chamber-fellow should over-hear us) and gave me the same
Reasons and Assurances he had given to my Sister before; he told me that he was
ready to do me what Service he could, but, that looking upon this Juncture as
unseasonable for her appearance at Court in my behalf, he would order some Pen,
Ink and Paper to be given me, which I might make use of to write to my Spouse,
who, if she should come up to Paris at this time, must only spend her Money
there to no purpose. It is to be observed, that those who are close Prisoners
in the Bastile, are not allowed the use of Pen, Ink or Paper, unless it be upon
a particular occasion, either by special Order from Court, or when they have a
mind to trapan them, as I was not ignorant of it; so this Obligation I believed
I received from the Governor to allow me to write to my Spouse, made me look
upon him at that time, no otherwise than the best of my Friends. Pursuant to
his directions, I writ to my Spouse to forbear coming to Paris at present, but
that she should give a strict charge to my Sister, to follow Monsieur de
Baisenaux's directions in every thing. I used frequently to tell her the same
thing, so that both she and I were led by the Nose by the Governor so long,
till tired out of all patience, our Eyes were opened by chance, God whose
Providence is above the reach of all Humane Wit, having at last been pleased to
make this treacherous Person the Instrument of the discovery of his ill
Intentions.

In the mean while, my Wife was pretty well recovered of her late Illness, and
was just packing up her Baggage to take Coach for Paris the next day, when she
received my Letter; this made her put off her Journey for that time, till she
might have a further Opportunity of receiving Instructions from me; but an
unexpected Accident obliged her to change her Resolution when she least thought
of it.

You must know therefore, that the Banker and the Innkeepers, unto whom I had
passed my word for the payment of the Money due to them from the French
Officers, I have so often mentioned before, seeing me detained in Prison, and
despairing of all other means to come by their Money, Sued both me and my
Land-Lady, (who was Bound with me) to an Execution, and the Banker got into
actual Possession of my Seat in the Country. My Spouse seeing her self reduced
to these ill Circumstances, did not think fit to tarry any longer in the
Country, but made all the have she could to come to Paris, where she took up
her Lodgings in the same House where I had Lodged before my Imprisonment.

But she had scarce been there two days, when she met with new matter of
Affliction. For the beforementioned Innkeepers seized upon the said
Land-lady's Household Goods, and other Movables; she went straight ways to the
Marquess de Louvois, who indeed gave her many fair promises; but such as served
rather to augment than to relieve her in her present miserable Condition. To be
short, he either considered that if he should give her the Money, she desired
for the payment of this Debt, it might be Interpreted to his disadvantage, and
be looked upon as if his Anger against me was rather feigned than real, or else
he thought it not worth his while to make serious Reflections upon the
misfortune of others; for he was as negligent in performing his Promises to
her, as he had been to me before; though at the same time, it must be
confessed, that he was not so in respect of the King's Service. For knowing
that the King had occasion for these Officers, he took care to have them sent
to Breast, where they were to Embark with Monsieur de Lausun, in order to be
Transported to Ireland.

My Spouse, who was as nearly touched with the present unfortunate condition of
our Land-lady, as with her own, as knowing that it was upon my account she
under-went all these Vexations, took a Resolution to go without losing any
further time, to Court, and to wait on the Marquess de Louvois. The first thing
she did, was to beg leave of him, for her self and some of our Children which
she had brought along with her, to see me in Prison; the next was, to represent
to him the Case of our Land-Lady, and last of all, her own miserable Fortune*
She threw her self at his Feet, her Face being all overbedewed with Tears,
which so far moved him to Compassion, that he lifted her up from the Ground
with his own Hands, and told her, That she should not thus afflict her self
beyond all measure, that he would do what in him lay, and would dispatch his
Warrant immediately, for her to have leave to see her Husband; that he would
likewise speak to the King, to obtain a Supersedeas, in order to stop all
further Proceedings against her Person or Estate. This was all she was able to
obtain for that time; and she thought it best, not to urge my Enlargement, but
to expect a more seasonable Opportunity for it. The Warrant to the Governor of
the Bastile, to allow my Spouse free access to me, was dispatched immediately,
but the Supersedeas, was not issued till a considerable time after; so that our
Land-lady was forced to pay the Innkeepers all their Money, unless she would
have let them sell all her Furniture almost for nothing, it being the Custom,
not to allow above eight days betwixt the Seizure and Sale of any moveable
Goods. However, this old Maiden, what with Coveteousness, and what with the
Resentment of the Affront, fell very ill, and died in a few days after.

My Spouse had no sooner notice that she had got leave to come and see me, but
she went to the Bastile, to address her self to the Governor, who had so much
Complaisance, as to Conduct her himself into my Chamber. He was not a little
surpised at first, to see her there, after the Letter I had writ so lately to
her, but after he had sounded her a little, and thereby had been informed what
it was that had brought her so unexpectedly to Paris, as likewise, that she had
not as yet spoken to the Marquess de Louvois about my Enlargement, he began to
be in a little better Humor, not questioning* in the least, but that she would
take the same Bait, and be as easily imposed upon as my Sister and I had been
before. For which purpose, he began to make use to her of the same Arguments,
wherewith he had inveigled us before; which indeed had thus far the same effect
upon her, as they had upon us, that she was entirely persuaded of his Honesty
and good Inclinations toward us. But as Women are commonly very impatient,
especially when it touches so near, as the concerns of a Husband, so she was
not so much overcome by his Persuasions, but that she believed, she ought to
leave no Stone unturned for the recovery of my Liberty. With this Resolution
she went again to Court, where she missed not the least Opportunity to speak to
the Marquess de Louvois, and to press him with Tears in her Eyes, to give me my
Liberty; but with all the tender and passionate Expressions, she could not move
him to give her a positive answer, though he would sometimes let fall some
Words, which gave her some hopes; for he would frequently tell her, that she
needed not fear any thing upon my Account.

After this my Spouse returned to Paris, and coming again to see me in the
Bastile, Monsieur de Baisenaux, did again Conduct her in person up Stairs, into
my Chamber, but withal told us, That he had all the reason in the World to be
dissatisfied at her, because she had showed so little deference for him, and
his good intentions to us, as to have made her Applications to the Minister of
State in my behalf, when she knew that it had been always his Advice not to do
it as yet; but to expect a more seasonable time. My Spouse gave me an Account,
that, as far as she could guess, she did not find the Marquess de Louvois so
much incensed against me; but that however, it was her opinion* that I must not
expect to be received again into the King's Service, after I had had the
misfortune of being a Prisoner in the Bastile. I replied, that I must endeavor
to make the best of my present ill Circumstances, provided I was but at
liberty; and that if the Court should hereafter not think fit to employ me,
this was no argument that I had forfeited all my Reputation; because I did not
question I had some Friends left still in the world, who would put no less
value upon them, though the Court did refuse me. Upon this Mounsieur de Baisenaux
interrupting me, I understand your meaning, says he, Sir, that in case you are
not employed in France, you will go to serve Abroad. I answered him, that he
did put a very sinister interpretation upon what I had said; which, if rightly
taken, did imply nothing less, than what he was pleased to infer from thence;
that I desired him to put a more favorable construction upon my Words, since
my intention was far different from what he believed; and that therefore it
would be inhuman to heap Afflictions upon Afflictions, and to add to the misery
of a Person, who was sufficiently unfortunate before.

He gave me for answer, that I would have done very well to have considered
what I said before I spoke, but that it was too late now for me to retract my
words, or to imagine, that by putting what interpretation I pleased upon them,
to persuade him out of what he had heard me say before. He told me further,
that he could not but confess, that it was no easy matter for a Person who
lies under an unjust Prosecution, to keep his tongue within due bounds: That he
himself was a Man subject to Passion, as well as others, and was consequently
not insensible of the different Agitations which possess our Minds, when we
think our selves injured to the highest degree.

I am apt to believe, that this last part of his discourse was made with no
other intention, than to entice me to utter my self with the more freedom in
his Presence, not questioning but that I might let slip some words, which he
intended to lay hold on to my disadvantage, and to keep me the longer in
Prison. But his first Words which he had let fall unawares, were a sufficient
Warning to me, not to trust him any further; and though he took a great deal of
Pains to excuse them as well as he could, yet all his Eloquence was not
prevailing enough to make me alter my Opinion, or to judge otherwise, but that
he would be glad of any Opportunity to curry favor with the Marquess de
Louvois; though I must freely confess, that at that time I did not imagine that it
was upon the score of Self-interest, as it proved afterward. For it was not
many days after, when my Spouse being again admitted to Speak to the said
Minister, he asked her, Whether she did not hear me make frequent mention of my
Friends? Unto which she replied, That I was destitute of Friends, or at least
of such Friends, as to put any confidence in them; that the only reliance I had
was upon my innocence, and upon his Protection. He answered her coldly, that
she either did not deal sincerely with him, or else that I did not make her
Privy to all my Concerns: That he had it from good hands, I had more and better
Friends than she imagined, and that considering the Condition I was in at
present, this could not but be an extraordinary comfort to me, which ought to
abate much of my Affliction.

After I had a little leisure to ponder upon what my Spouse had told me, I had
no great occasion to consult the Stars to guess from whence this Discourse
came, the very Expressions made use of by the Minister, being more than
sufficient to tell me, that Mounsieur de Baisenaux had been acting his part
there. I could not forbear the very first time I saw him, to give him to
understand that I was not insensible of his sinister Intentions, and I gave a
secret Caution to my Spouse, to be very careful, for the future, not to Speak
any thing of moment in his Presence; and for fear she might perhaps mistake my
true meaning, I writ a Letter to her, which I conveyed to the Duke de la Force,
who being sometimes visited by the Marchioness of Courteaumer, his Daughter,
had opportunity enough of sending it to her. For it is to be observed, that
though my Spouse had obtained Leave to see me in Prison, yet this being not
granted but in the presence of one of the Officers belonging to the Bastile, I
had no opportunity of speaking much to her in private; there was also another
inconveniency, which was, that though she had been for a considerable time in
France, she was so ill versed in the French Tongue, that she frequently mistook
one thing for another. To be sho(...) in the matter, the Warrant, by virtue of
which she was admitted to see me, was very different from what had been allowed
to my Sister, who had liberty to see me without being obliged to admit of any
Witnesses of our Discourse: But the Warrant granted for my Spouse's admission
was thus limited, as told you before; at least, if I may believe what Monsieur
de Baisenaux told me; for, it is not unlikely, but that both the Warrants might
be alike and that Monsieur de Baisenaux made only use of this Protect to have
the opportunity of keeping (...) watchful Eye upon our Conversation, for fear
we should concert Measures for my enlargement.

I don't assert this upon a bare Presumption, b(...) upon such strong
Probabilities, as will scarce admi(...) of any other construction. For, when I
consider that for several times together, when I Spouse at first came to see
me, Mounsieur de Baisenaux would always take care to conduct her up himself
into my Chamber, which he seldom or never do(...) to the other Prisoners; I
have all the reason in the world to suspect, that he took this opportunity to
be present at our Conversation, under pretext of waiting on her, not so much
pursuant to the Contents of his Warrant, as to observe his own Interest; and it
cannot but appear highly improbable to me, that the Marquess de Louvois should
have granted more to my Sister than to my Wife, the first of which being,
pursuant to his Warrant, permitted to see me without any Witnesses.

It may perhaps be objected, that if this had been Monsieur de Baisneaux's
intention, he might under the same pretext of Conducting my Sister up stairs,
have prevented our Conversation in private; but to this I answer, that I have
all the reason in the world to imagine, that Monsieur de Baisenaux, who is a
Man of great Sense, did soon discover with what indifferency my Sister acted in
my behalf, her aversion to me having been always such, as it was impossible not
to be perceived by a quick-sighted Person; and it was questionless this, that
encouraged him to talk with her, to try whether he could bring her over to his
Interest, which he effected at last to so good a purpose, that she did not make
one step in my Business without his particular Directions. Their Correspondence
was not carried on so privately, but that even Mounsieur de Garenne took notice
of it; for as they were talking one day about me, and my present unfortunate
Circumstances, in the presence of my Sister, he did not stick to tell her that,
if he had such a Sister as she, he would certainly throw her in the fire.

Thus much I am sure, that she did often endeavor to insinuate into my Spouse,
That it would be (...)uch better both for her, and my whole Family, (...)o let
me lie in Prison, than to get me out; because, (...)s she said, I would
certainly go over to the Enemy, and that in such a case my Estate would be
sei(...)ed upon by the King, and she be in danger of be(...)g reduced to the
greatest Extremity in the World (...) a foreign Country. She used frequently to
tell her, that in the place where I was then (meaning (...)e Bastile) I stood
her in nothing, and that I wanted for nothing; That the safest way was, not to
change when one was well, for fear she might repent of it at leisure, for
having been so over hasty.

My Wife gave me an Account of her whole Behavior, which could not but be a
great additio(...) to my present Misfortune, considering that my o(...) Sister,
who ought to have been a comfort to me i(...) my Affliction, did all what in
her lay to aggrav(...) my pain. Baisemaux was so taken with her, th(...) he
could not forbear to tell me, every time he conducted my Spouse up to my
Chamber, that he never saw a young Woman in his life that had so much Wit as
she; and indeed I did not wonder (...) these Expressions of his kindness, it
being certai(...) that she could not have hit his Temper better, (...)
insinuate herself into his Favor, than by agreei(...) with him in this point,
that it was best for me to continue a Prisoner in the Bastile; and this had so
powerful an influence upon the Governor, that (...) was extremely pleased with
her Conversation, a(...) used frequently to carry her abroad in his Coach (...)
a Country House of his near Vincennes. He also her at work to bring about a
Match betwixt t(...) Marquess de Necantour, (who owed a good Sum Money to him)
and one of Monsieur de Mar(...) Daughters, with whom she had lived formerly;
t(...) Match was at last concluded by her Mediati(...) which was infinitely
pleasing to Monsieur de Baisenaux, who by this means, got all the Money d(...)
to him, from the Marquess.

Their good Correspondence increasing by t(...) means more and more, Baisenaux
advised my (...)ster to go and wait on the Marquess de Lou(...) which she did
accordingly, and told him, that best thing in the World he could do for my
W(...) and Family, was to let me remain a Prisoner in (...) Bastile, because
she was fully convinced, that soon as I was got out, I would take Service
am(...) the Enemies of France. She spoke much to the f(...) purpose sometime
after to the Duke de la Force, (...) having lately obtained his Liberty, had
given me word to make use of all his Interest for my deliverance out of Prison.
She thus played her pranks so long, till she became odious to all that knew
her, and there were few of my Acquaintance, but wherever they met her were
for affronting her, and spoke to her much in the same manner, as I told you
before, Monsieur de Garenne had done. At last she was also endeavoring to let
the Marquess and Marchioness of Netancour (who entertained her with a great
deal of kindness) feel the effects of her malicious Temper; for after the pains
she had taken to bring the Match to a conclusion, she was for sowing the Seeds
of Discord among them; but having missed her aim, she re(...)ired into a
Monastery near Tours, where, as I suppose, Monsieur de Baisenaux pays for her
Board, and furnishes her with other Necessaries; though she always has denied
it stoutly to me, and told me positively, that Madam Burgelone, and her Sister
Madam Netancour, did maintain her; but when I rightly consider the matter, this
does not appear very probable to me, who know, that Madam de Netancour cannot
endure her since the last prank she intended to play her, and that Madam de
Burgelone, does not live in such an Affluence of Fortune, as to bestow a yearly
Allowance upon her. This makes me verily believe, that it is no other Person
but Monsieur de Baisenaux, who thinks he owes her some Recompense for the pains
she has taken in persuading the Marquess de Louvois not to discharge me out of
Prison. In the mean while, my Spouse being (...)rged by her Domestic Concerns
in the Country, was forced to leave me for some time, and to return to our
Estate, without being able to obtain any further Favor from this Minister, but
the beforementioned Supersedeas, to put a stop to all the proceedings against
my Estate.

Before we parted, she gave me an Account, how the Councellor des Isles had
been Condemned to a perpetual Banishment; but had found means to buy it off for
a good Sum of Money, by the Intercession of Father Board, who being a Man of
great Virtue and Piety, and believing the Conversion of this Councellor (who
was a Hugonot before) to be real, without the least Hypocrisy, did make use of
his Interest to have his Banishment redeemed by a good Fine. If this good
Father had been but acquainted with what Advice he gave once to my Spouse, he
would scarce have had so good an Opinion of his sincere Intentions. But the
powerful Intercessions of this Father Board, and a good Sum of Money, (of which
des Isles was not sparing upon this occasion) have not only procured his
Pardon, but also given so much Encouragement to this Villain, that he has
purchased the place of the King's Advocate in the Bailiage of Loudun. I am not
able to give you an Account whether he has been put in possession of it or not,
because I have been informed since by Credible Persons, that the head Bailiff,
and the other Officers of Justice belonging to the said Bailiage, made all the
Opposition they could against his being received into that place, as looking
upon it as a signal Affront to them, to have one of their Fraternity, who has
been forced to redee(...) himself from the Hands of Justice.

THE MEMOIRS OF JOHN BAPTIST De La Fontaine, Knight. LIB. IX.
THE continual Vexation occasioned by the consideration of my present
unfortunate Circumstances, and of the Injustice done me; and the little
Inclination I found in my self to make an entire Resignation of my Person to
God's pleasure, by whose assistance alone, we are enabled to bear the weight of
so heavy a Burden, as the Affliction of such an unfortunate Lodging must needs
be to a Man of my Temper; this continual Vexation I say, had such an influence
upon my Constitution, as that first of all, I lost my Appetite, and soon after
was seized with the Yellow Jaundice. This occasioned sometime after a Dropsical
Swelling, which so increased by degrees, as that in sometime after, I was
swelled to such a bigness, as scarceto be able to go through the Door, though
naturally I am very slender and lean. In this condition I was fain to have
recourse to a Physician, and a certain old Doctor was sent to visit me, one,
who had lately been put in the place of Dr. Aliot, a Man as skillful in his
Art, as this was Ignorant; but Aliot being a Person of honest Principles, and
of a great deal of good Nature, would sometimes intercede with the Marquess de
Louvois, in behalf of some Prisoners, which being directly contrary to the
Interest of the Governor, he found means to out him of his Place.

This Physician was of Opinion, that I could not escape with Life, which made
the others ask me, whether I would not have a Father Confessor to come to me.
But finding my self in such a Confusion, as not to be likely to improve much by
his Advice, I delayed sending for him, for a whole Week. I spent most of this
time in ruminating upon my Misfortune, and how unjustly I was Prosecuted by the
Marquess de Louvois, which raised my passion at last to that pitch, that one
day, when my Physician came to visit me, I Summoned the said Marquess to appear
before the Tribunal of God, at the time of my Death, there to give an account
of the Injustice he had done me. Having done this, I found my self somewhat
more at ease, as believing I had done one of the finest things in the World; so
blind is Mankind, when God pleases to withdraw the light of his Grace from us.
At last my Distemper increasing every day, I thought it best to send for a
Father Confessor; but was not a little surpised at his words, when he told me,
that considering my present Condition, he ought not to impart me Absolution;
and that therefore I must resolve to retract what I had done lately against the
Marquess of Louvois, by citing him before God's Tribunal; because it was God's
Will that we should forgive our Enemies* if we expect a Pardon for our Sins
from him; and that unless I would follow his Advice, and that from the very
bottom of my Heart, in this point, I must not rely in the least upon God
Almighty's Mercy. I was so much exasperated against the Marquess, or rather, to
speak truth, my mind was yet so far remote from those Holy Motions which bring
us to the true knowledge of God's Will, that let him say what he would, I was
resolved to run the risque of it, and so I told him in plain Terms, that it was
impossible for me to do it. He was not sparing in his Exhortations and
Arguments, in hopes to bring me to a better Temper, but finding all his Labor
lost, he went away without giving me Absolution. But God, whose Providence is
beyond the reach of Men, was not willing to cast off a lost Sheep, but as I
have great reason to believe since, sent me this Affliction to recall me from my
former Miscarriages, and restored me to Health, contrary to the Opinion of my
Physician, and Monsieur de Baisenaux himself, who did not believe any
otherwise, but that by my Death, (which he expected every day,) he should lose
the advantage of the Pension which the King allowed him for my Maintenance.

Whilst I was recovering and gathered more and more strength every day, I spent
most of my time, in making serious Reflections upon my past Illness, and how to
fortify my Mind for the future against such violent Resolutions, but with no
great Success. About that time the Battle of Fi^urus was fought in Flanders,
where it pleased God Almighty to bless the King's Arms with Victory. A great
number of the Enemies being taken Prisoners, they were brought to Vincennes,
and to make room for them, those Prisoners that had been there before, were
removed to other Places, to make room for those. They were dispersed in several
Prisons thereabouts, and among the rest, there were so many of them sent to the
Bastile, that there was not a Tower there but what was full of Prisoners; and
consequently, I had three more Chamber-Fellows lodged in my Room, which was
very large. One of them was a Councellor, whose Name was Mallet, a very rich
Man; his Crime was, that there had been several Meetings of the Protestants at
his House, where they used to Preach, and serve God, persuant to the Rules of
the Protestant Religion, after he had made Abjuration of the same. The second
was called Dourlans, he was born in the City of Beauvais, and was sent to
Prison, because he was accused of being accessory to a Crime committed by a
certain Canon of that City, which brought him to a fatal end, of which I shall
have occasion to say more hereafter. The third, whose Name was Ras, was a
Native of Roan in Normandy, and by his Profession, a Physician. His Crime was
rather of a more heinous nature than that for which the Canon suffered, but he
had the good Fortune, to come off at a cheaper rate. He was accused of having
made a compact with the Devil, by which means he had Debauched several Women,
and committed many other enormous Crimes of that nature, too many to be
mentioned here. Upon Examination, he could not deny before the Judge, (which he
also owned to me in private) that he had made several Women miscarry. He also
Forged, or caused to be Forged, certain Letters Patents of the Royal Chancery,
by virtue of which, he was qualified to exercise the Profession of a Chemical
Physician; the Practice of Chemistry being not allowed to any body, but such as
have obtained a Grant for it from the King. There were three more who had been
Accomplices in all his Crimes, except in that of Forging the Letters Patents.
One was a Lieutenant of a Ship, the other two were called Mire and Suart, who
had paid with their Lives for it. But this Physician made good the old Proverb,
that The Gallows are built not so much for those that are most Guilty, as for
those that are most Unfortunate. For he having a Cousin who was Gentleman of
the Horse to the Marquess de Louvois, his Interest prevailed so far in his
behalf, that he was not Executed with the rest, though they both at their
Trial, and at their Execution, did constantly aver that he was the chief
Contriver of most of those Villainies, and an Accomplice in all they had
committed, and for which they suffered. But notwithstanding their Accusation,
and several other Proofs against him, he had the good luck to escape, and was
sent from the ordinary Prison to the Bastile, which is always looked upon as a
good Omen in such a case, toward the obtaining of a Pardon; and it happens
frequently, that after they have let them undergo a sufficient Penance by some
years Imprisonment, they are afterward set at Liberty.

He staid within the same Chamber for some time, and had a severe falling out
with Mallet before his removal, occasioned by the Roguery of my Valet du
Chamber, who being an arch Wag, had almost made Mallet run Distracted. Nay, he
acted his part so to the life, and carried his Roguish Pranks on to that
height, that he put the whole Bastile in an uproar, not excepting the Governor
himself. I must own this Fellow was the only Comfort I had left me in this
dismal Prison, because he would now and then play some of his mad pranks, which
made me often laugh, when else I had no great Inclination to it. Not but that
he sometimes had also his Melancholy Fits, as all Prisoners have at one time or
other, without exception. But his facetious Temper had such an Ascendant over
them, that for the most part, he was as merry and brisk as if he had been at a
Wedding, or any other pleasant Pastime. Villeroy was a Person much of the same
Temper, which made him frequently divert himself with my Valet, and they were
become so familiar together, that he used to play him several little Tricks. My
Valet being resolved once for all to be even with him, and having heard him
talk often of a certain Mistress of his, whom he respected much, and from whom
he had some Letters, which he preserved with a great deal of care, found means
however, to get one of them, and was so industrious in Counterfeiting her Hand,
that you would have sworn it was the same, with no other purpose, than to put
his Roguery upon Villeroy.

Whilst he was only watching an Opportunity to put his design in Execution,
Villeroy, whose Thoughts were much taken up with his Mistress, fell one Night a
raving in his Sleep about her, whom he dreamed to be dead, and told us his
Dream (which was the occasion of his being thus disturbed in his Sleep) the
next day my arch Rogue was near enough to understand every word he said, but
for fear of being suspected, he pretended to be busy about something or other,
as if he did not mind our Discourse. The next following Night he fastened a
small Cord to the lower end of the Quilt of his Bed, and watched the
Opportunity when he found Villeroy to be awake, and so gently, and by degrees
pulled the said Quilt from Villeroy. Villeroy finding himself uncovered, rose
up in Bed to see what could be the matter, but not perceiving any thing, he was
pulling the Quilt up again* but whilst he held at one end, my Servant took care
to draw it backwards at the same time, which together with the Dream he had had
sometime before, put* him into such a fright, that he began to cry out aloud,
and to call to me and my Servant for help. You must know, that my Valet had
given me to understand beforehand, what prank he intended to play him, and it
was accordingly agreed among us, that when Villeroy should call out for help,
he should be the first that should answer him. Pursuant to this Agreement, he
asked him what was the matter, and what he would have with him? And I feigning
my self to be half asleep, asked him immediately after, what he wanted?
Villeroy perceiving that we were both in Bed, was ten times more afrighted than
before; for being sensible that Mallet Dourlans and Ras, our three
Chamber-Fellows, who had been there not above three days, would scarce dare to
be so bold as to pretend to put a trick upon him, and that they slept all three
so heartily, that he could plainly hear them snore, he could not but imagine it
was some Spirit or other; so that without any further Hesitation upon the
matter, he frankly told us* how his Quilt had been drawn from him several
times. He then rehearsed to us his Dream about his Mistriss's Death, adding,
that he was now convinced, it was too too true, it being no body else but her,
that did now come to Torment him.

Ras continued all this while fast asleep, so that you might hear him snore all
over the Room, but Dourlans and Mallet being awakened in the mean while, and
hearing Villeroy tell his Story with so much earnestness, Mallet told him, he
had best not not trouble his Head with such fantastical Notions, because the
Dead never used to rise out of their Graves; and that it was nothing but the
strength of his Imagination, which, whilst he was half a sleep, made him fancy
such strange things. Villeroy answered him, that he was one who never had given
much credit to Visions, but that he was sure, what he had told them just now,
was nothing but truth, being sensible that he was not asleep when the Quilt was
pulled away from him, for several times together, because his Eyes were as
open, and he as broad awake, as he was at this moment now he spoke with them.
Dourlans, was a very Religious Fellow, and therefore took Villeroy's part,
telling Mallet, that it was a certain sign, he was an incorrigible Heretic,
which made him talk at that extravagant rate* because that all those of his
Persuasion did not believe a Purgatory, but that whatever they might pretend
to, he was sure there was one, and that the Dead would sometimes appear again
among us. I thought it the best way to join with Villeroy and Dourlans, and so
gave my Judgment on their side. But my unlucky Valet, who was resolved not to
spoil the sport, went further than all the rest; for he had a Story ready at
hand, which he related to us in a very grave tone, and which he avowed to have
happened to his own Mother, to convince us, that there was certainly such a
thing as Apparitions. Mallet however persisted in his former Opinion against
it, and furnished us with such variety of Arguments to prove the vanity of
ours, that we spent the greatest part of the Night in arguing the case among
us, except Ras, who did not stir, though we talked very loud all the while.

Being tired, at last we all went to Bed again. About Two hours before
daylight, my Valet took this Opportunity to unloose the String wherewith he
had pulled the Quilt, and so to sleep he went, as if he had had no Finger in
the Pie. The next Morning we were no sooner got out of Bed, but we begun to
reassume the former Theme, and to argue upon what it could be that had happened
to Villeroy the last Night. Ras was the only Person who said little to the
matter, because he knew nothing of it, which made us ask him, how it could be
possible for him to sleep all the while when we made such a noise and clamor
enough to have put the whole Bastile in an Alarm; which he answered only with a
smile. Toward Evening, Villeroy being sorely afraid of another visit from his
Ghost, desired me by all means to let my Valet put his Bed close to the Feet of
his. This was Nuts for this unlucky Bastard, who being now so near to him, had
the better opportunity to Torment him in the same manner, at his own leisure.
And poor Villeroy, who had his Head and his Heart full of his Spirit, did talk
of nothing else every day, but how he was tormented every Night. Mallet
persisted immovable in his Opinion, that it was nothing but a Fancy, and we
contradicted him as often. At last my Valet being resolved to strike the Nail
up to the head, and to try how far it would go, told us one day very seriously,
that he remembered very well, that when his Mother was afflicted with a Spirit
in the same manner as Villeroy was now, advice was given her by a very Learned
Person, to lay a piece of fine white Paper upon the Table, which she having
done accordingly, she had found the next Morning something writ upon the said
Paper, by which the Spirit gave her instructions how to behave her self, and
what she was to do, to deliver her self from the Spirit that Tormented her.

Mallet went on in his old Tune, and said it was an Old Woman's story; but
Villeroy liked it so well, that he resolved to try it the very next Night.
Accordingly, he took half a Sheet of fine white Paper, neatly cut, (of which my
Wife had brought us some Quires) this he laid upon the Table, just before he
was going to bed, at which Mallet could not forbear to laugh heartily. My
Valet, who observed every thing that passed, took the first opportunity, as
soon as we were all gone to Bed, to take away that half Sheet of Paper, and in
lieu of it, laid another of the same Bigness, Substance, and Fineness, which he
had taken out of my Parcel (which was the very same Paper) upon which he had
beforehand Written* these following Words; Repent, Repent of your Sins
committed in such and such a place, and let Prayers be offered for me to God
Almighty.

This he did as soon as the Candle was put out, and so to bed he went, where he
lay watching till Villeroy was fallen asleep. Then he began to play his old Game
with pulling the Quilt, and tormenting the poor Gentlemen to that degree, that
being awakened he cried out for a Candle. My Valet did at first as if he did
not hear him; but being forced to rise by his repeated exclamations, fell a
grumbling, because he made him rise at that time of the Night.

The Candle was no sooner Lighted, but Villeroy got out of the Bed, and in a
trembling Posture went toward the Table, to see whether there was any News
from his supposed dead Mistress. As soon as he perceived the Writing, he called
to me to be an Eye Witness, of what he thought could be no less than a Miracle.
It was pleasant enough to see him tremble at the very sight of it, and quake
for fear as he took it up, and his surprise was past expressing, when he read
the Contents of it.

Mallet continued all this while in the same humor, and would not as much as
have risen out of his Bed, to be a spectator of the Miracle, if Dourlans, Ras,
Villeroy, and I had not constrained him to it; for we told him, that, if he
would not rise upon his own accord, we would draw his Bed from under him, and
lay him upon the ground. As he looked upon the Writing, we did not observe the
least change in his Countenance, which made us believe that he did not put the
least faith in it. Dourlans and Villeroy were so far prepossessed with an
Opinion of this miracle, that they cursed him bitterly, but I, and my Servant,
had not so much reason to be angry with him; and as for Ras, he showed so much
indifferency in the matter, that it was no easy matter to guess at his
Thoughts. We were so curious, as to compare the Handwriting of this Paper with
several Letters which Villeroy kept by him, in remembrance of his dearly
beloved Mistress, and the one was so like the other, that there was not any
body there who could find out the least difference. I was so malicious, as to
put them in mind, that they should also compare the Paper with the rest that
Villeroy had, to see whether it were exactly the same, which being done
accordingly, was found likewise to be the very same, and well it might be so,
for my Spouse had given both him and me of the same Paper.

It is easy to be imagined, that the nightime was the most proper to cover
such a Deceit, which perhaps might not have passed so well by day as by
Candlelight. My roguish Valet being sensible of this, and sorely afraid lest
he should be discovered the next day, found means to take this Paper out of
Villeroy's pocket, after he was gone to Bed again. This furnished new matter of
Surprise the next morning, for when Villeroy was going to read it over again,
and found it not, he was more and more confirmed in his former Opinion. Mallet
took this opportunity to upbraid Dourlans and me with too much credulity,
telling us, in plain Terms, that Villeroy played the fool with us, and that the
better to impose upon us, he had chosen the Nighttime, as more suitable to his
purpose, because he knew that daylight would soon have discovered the Deceit.
Villeroy was so horribly mad at him, that we had all enough to do to keep him
from falling foul upon him, and continued so steadfast in his Opinion, that he
resolved to perform every thing to the greatest nicety, what his supposed
deceased Mistress had commanded him in her Paper: He sent Money to his
Confessor to say Masses for her Soul; and did not neglect the least thing that
is usually done upon such like Occasions. My Valet thinking it now high time to
leave him at rest, began to play his pranks with Mallet.

You must know that we were allowed Needle and Thread, to mend our Clothes, and
other things. He took four doubled Threads, which he twisted in the Nature of a
Pack-thread, and by the help of a large Needle, fastened to the lower end of his
Quilt, whilst the other was a Sleep. This Thread being about Twelve or Fourteen
Yards long, he took both ends of it in his hands, and so pulled the Quilt from
him, who finding himself uncovered, pulled it up again, to cover himself: The
Valet was very careful to give way as often as he found Mallet to draw the
Quilt upwards, but was as nimble in pulling of it backwards, as soon as he
found the other to let go his hold, which made the other stark Mad.

At first he imagined, that the thing happened by accident, or by his turning
in Bed, but being at last convinced to the contrary, by the frequent
Repetitions of the same Game, he did not know what to make of it, and at last
began to imagine that some body or other played the fool with him, in the same
manner as he believed had been done with Villeroy. This made him get out of
Bed, and he searched all round it to see whether he could find out the trick,
but my Servant was too quick for him, for so soon as he heard him get out of
Bed, he let go one end of the Thread, and so drew it out of the Quilt by the
other end, so that Mallet was fain to go to Bed again without being able to
Discover the Truth of the matter. I happened to be awake whilst he was thus
searching about, and had enough to do to keep my self from bursting out into
laughter, without saying one word, because I supposed, he would have spoken to
me first: But I am apt to believe, he was ashamed to own his concern, for fear
we should laugh at him now, as he had laughed at us before; and so to Bed he
went again, without saying one word, or taking one Minutes rest more that night.

The next morning he took Villeroy and me into one corner of the Room, and
without mentioning the least what had happened to him the last night, he told
us, that since he had more seriously weighed the matter, he was of opinion,
that it was that develish fellow Ras, who had thus tormented Villeroy, who
being a Magician, had questionless called the Devil to his Aid, to make
disturbance in our Chamber; he added further, that if we would follow his
advice, we ought altogether to Petition the Governor Monsieur Baisenaux, to
remove him from ours into another Room. But Villeroy being prepossessed with an
opinion, that it was his beloved Mistresses Spirit, and not the Devil, that had
thus tormented him, did make no great account of what he proposed to us; and I
for my part, did not say much to the matter it being sufficient for me, to
understand, that his last Nights adventure began to make him uneasy.

But though he met with no great Encouragement on our side, yet he was resolved
to let the Governor know of it* for which reason he spoke to the Turn Key*
desiring him to give notice of it to Monsieur Baisenaux. It is to be observed,
that the Governor had been several times to see us whilst poor Villeroy was
thus Tormented by my unlucky Rogue; but as he was a Person not over Credulous,
and that he had but an indifferent Opinion of Villeroy's parts, he had been
careless in the matter; but when he heard Millet touch upon the same String, he
did not know what to make of it; for knowing Mallet to be a Man of Sense, and
who was not easily to be imposed upon; besides that, he was a Hugonot, who
seldom make any great account of things of this nature, and yet hearing him to
complain of a Spirit, he began to reflect* more seriously upon it, than if
another had talked to him of Spirits* Monsieur Baisenaux the next time he came
to pay us a Visit, addressed himself with a smile to Mallet, and asked him in
his Country Tone, (for being a Native of Gascoin, he had not yet lost his
Country Tone, though he had been many years at Court, and in Paris) whether he
were afraid of Spirits as well as the rest? Mallet was ashamed to be thus hit
to the quick by the Governor, and not knowing what Answer to make, he fell at
last upon poor Ras, and told him, it was that Devilish Fellow, who had the Evil
Spirits at his Command, and had brought them among them on purpose to torment
them; though it be certain, that poor Ras had not the least share in it; for he
was since his Imprisonment, much altered from what he had been before; God
Almighty having showed him so much Mercy as to make him truly Repenting of his
former ill Courses; and he told me very seriously one day, that he was so
sensible at that time of the hainousness of his Crimes, that he wished he had
Suffered with the rest, to make an Aton^ment for them, his Life being only a
Burden to him now, when he considered, how he had offended God, and made
himself unworthy of his Mercy. Considering his present Condition, he had no
other Plea against what he was Accused of by Mallet, but this, that he knew
himself to be a great Sinner, yet he hoped not to continue so all his
Lifetime, which he would frequently repeat with Tears in his Eyes, both to us
and the Governor.

Monsieur Baisenaux having thoroughly Examined all the Circumstances of the
matter, did at last agree with Mallet and Villeroy* that it must proceed from a
Supernatural Cause. But as those of Gascoin are natural mistrustfuly, and that
he thought it would* b(...) great shame to him, if he should be imposed upon by
his Prisoners in such a point as this, he resolved to proceed with all the
Caution imaginable. For which purpose, he ordered one of the Turn-Keys, whose
Name was St. John, to lie in the same Chamber with us. This Turn-Key being the
Governor's Countryman, of whose ability he had a more than ordinary Conceit,
he thought it next to an impossibility, to have a Trick put upon him. But my
unlucky Rogue made a Fool of him as well as of the rest; for he played the same
Game with him that he had done with Mallet, which put the Turn-Key into such a
Fright, that he was glad to get out of the Chamber, and gave an Account to the
Governor, that all what they had told him, was no more than what was really
true; so that the whole being now put beyond all question, it was the chief
Entertainment of the whole Bastile, where you could hear them talk for sometime
of nothing else, but of the Spirits that haunted our Chamber.

Among the rest* it came also to the Duke de la Force's Ears, who writ me a
Letter on purpose to know the whole matter. I confirmed him in his Opinion, as
I had done several others before as imagining it to be no point of Honor, to
impose upon a Man's Credulity in a thing of this nature. Monsieur de Harowis,
Treasurer of the States of Britainy, who was also at that time a Prisoner in
the Bastile, and Dined every day with the Duke de la Force, told the Story to
his Son, who had got leave to see him. He being a Councellor of the Parliament,
told it further to his Brethren, so that it was spread all over Paris, where it
passed current, as a thing unquestionable.

Nevertheless my Valet would not part thus with Mallet, but was a continual
plague to him; sometimes he would draw open the Curtains of his Bed, sometimes
pull his Quilt, sometimes play him some other mischievous Tricks, so that the
poor Gentleman being almost out of his Wits, and imagining no otherwise, but
that Ras was the sole Cause of it, he would bestow many bitter Curses upon him.
He was at last so vehemently Exasperated against him, that he would no longer
Eat or Drink with him, and he sent word to the Governor, that unless he did
remove him into another Chamber, no good would come of it; we did what we could
to cure him of this Fancy, but in vain; so that Monsieur Baisenaux was forced
to put Ras into another Room.

My Valet would then have put a period to his Roguery, the better to persuade
Mallet, that Ras had been the only occasion of what had happened to him
hitherto; but I would needs make him go on for some time longer, being willing
to save in some measure, this poor Fellow's Reputation, which was afresh
(though falsely) impaired by my Servant's means. Thus he was resolved to put an
Epilogue to the Play, which, in outward appearance was very bloody, and which
put Mallet into such a Consternation, that he did not know which way to turn
himself next.

You must know then, that this Servant of mine had been formerly an Actor upon
the Stage, by which means he had learned so many unlucky Tricks, and among the
rest, had a certain Powder by him, which being mixed with fair Water only, made
it look like Blood; a thing much in use among those who act Drolls. Of this he
mixed a certain quantity with a Bottle of fair Water, and as he was making
Mallet's Bed, (which he was used to do everyday) he found means to spill this
Bottle with the Bloody Water in it. Mallet, as he was lying down, finding his
Sheets all wet, called for a Candle to see what the matter was; you may guess
how great was his Surprise, when he saw them all over bloody, for by the color
he supposed it was such. He called us all to him to be Eye Witnesses of what
had happened to him, the fault of which he again laid at Ras's Door; so that in
lieu of succeeding in my Design, which was to Justify Ras, Mallet conceived a
worse Opinion of him than ever, so true it is, that the Success is not always
answerable to our Intentions.

But it is now time to return to what I promised you before* viz. To give you
an Account of the Business of the Canon before mentioned. His Father was a
noted Man in the City of Beauvais, as being the eldest Judge of the Court of
Judicature there; and his Son, the Canon, had lived for some years in good
Reputation, till at last being fallen in Love with a young Lady of the same
City, and their Amorous Intrigues discovered, and come to the Ears of some of
the rest of the Capitulars, they took a Resolution to call him to an Account
about it. They had carried on their matters so indiscreetly, that it being
noised all about the Town, he was sensible he should not be able to abide a
Trial, and therefore judged it most for his purpose, to sell his Canonship;
considering especially, that his Brethren had already taken this Opportunity to
put him out of his Employment of being Solicitor of the Chapter; which made
him take a fatal resolution to be revenged at any rate upon some of the Canons
whom he knew to be most his Enemies: He writ a Letter in Ciphers contrived as
if written by him who was the Head of these Canons* this he carried to
Dourlans, who used to engross all his Writings, whilst he was Solicitor of the
Chapter, and desired him to write it in fair Characters, because it was to be
sent to a Relation of the Marquess de Louvois, who was sent upon some secret
Errand into Germany. Dourlans, who indeed knew that the Marquess de Louvois had
such a Gentleman (who was his Relation) belonging to him, and that he was sent
abroad, did without further informing himself in the matter what the Canon
desired of him.

The Letter writ in Ciphers was directed to a certain Booksellor in the
Netherlands, who, as he told Dourlans, knew his Hand, and was further to
dispatch these Letters, according to direction. They contained in substance,
That the Person, whose Name was underwritten, desired the said Bookseller to
send him, and three or four more of his Friends (whom he named) each some
Treatises, writ in Defense of Jansenism, and to direct them to a certain
Bookseller at Beauvais, (whose Name he also sent him) promising, that he would
disperse a great many of these Copies, because this Sect was far from being
suppressed in France; though they labored under very violent Persecutions;
(adding withal, that those who adhered still to it, could not but heartily wish
and sigh after the same happiness which the Inhabitants of the Netherlands
enjoyed under a Prince, who suffered no Persecution in those Provinces, whereas
in France many Devout and Religious Persons were Banished their Native Country,
and reduced to the utmost Extremity, for no other reason, but because they
could not consent to what was against their real Opinion.

This Canon's design was to carry this Letter to the Cardinal de Fourbin,
Bishop of Beauvais, by which means he did not question to revenge himself upon
those Canons, who had acted against him, by having them Banished the Kingdom;
not questioning, but that if thereby they could but become suspected of being
Favorers of the Jansenists, they would undergo the same fate which two others
of their Fraternity, one of whom had been Banished to Loches, the other to
Q^impercorentin, because they were only suspected of adhering to that Sect.

The better to cover his design, he writ also another Letter, which he sent to
the Post, directed to one of his Friends, but in two hours came to fetch it
back, under pretense that he had forgot to insert something which was of the
greatest Consequence to him. After he had done this, he went to wait on the
Cardinal de Fourbin, whom he told, that having occasion to go to the Post House
in Person, to fetch back a Letter of his which he had sent thither before,
because he had forgot something which must needs be put in before it was sent
to his Friend, and looking among the Letters, he had met with one which being
Sealed up with the Seal of the Chapter, he could not forbear to put it in his
Pocket* though at the same time he felt a secret Check of Conscience within
himself, as being sensible that we ought to put a more charitable Construction
upon our Neighbors Actions; but that as the thing happened, he had no reason
now to repent of his curiosity; for that after he had broke it open, he had
found it written in Ciphers, which he looking upon as an evident mark that
there was some Mystery in it, he had thought it his Duty to bring it to him, as
knowing, that the Cognizance of those matters belonging to the Chapter, was
within the Limits of his Jurisdiction. Then he presented to him the before
mentioned Letter, without the cover, which he had torn to pieces, for fear the
Character of the Hand might perhaps have been known to some of the Cardinal's
People. The Cardinal asked him immediately what was become of the Cover,
because he had a mind to see the Direction; but he readily answered him, that
having forgot to leave it upon his Table at Home, he supposed some body or
other had taken it up for waste Paper; but that he had taken particular notice
of the Superscription, which was directed to a certain Person, (whom he named)
Bookseller at Brussels; and that indeed this had been the chief Motive which
induced him to lay hold of the Letter.

But before I go further, I will tell you in two Words how he got clear of the
Accusation of Incontinency; for before he contrived this Letter, he found out a
certain Person of his Acquaintance, who in consideration of a good Sum of
Money, Married the young Woman who was his Mistress, and declared himself to be
father of the Child; thus thinking himself free from all further Prosecution,
he got again into the possession of his Canonship, and exercised his Function,
as if no body had any'thing to say against him.

But to return to the Cardinal de Fourbin; he carried this Letter to the King,
who, after its being Decypher'd, ordered the Canons and the Bookseller of
Beauvais to be taken up, and to be carried to Prison at Vincennes, and that
Monsieur de la Reyne should Examine them, and prepare Matters for their Trial.
Our Canon, their Enemy, when he saw their Life to be in danger, began to repent
of what he had done, not imagining it would come to that; but as God would have
it, he had been so careless, as to insert some Matters which amounted to no
less than a Capital Crime. After Monsieur de la Reyne had Examined the
Prisoners, he was soon convinced of their innocence, and having made his Report
accordingly to his Majesty; he asked the Cardinal de Fourbin, how he could be
so overseen as to be thus imposed upon? The Cardinal being then obliged to give
the King an exact Account how it happened, his Majesty was sufficiently
sensible that they were innocent, and ordered the Canon who had thus falsely
accused them, to be taken into Custody. But he who did not like the Business,
did not think fit to stay long at Beauvais, but was gone to Paris, to dispose
once more of his Canonship to the same Person he had sold it to before, with an
intention, so soon as he had got the Money, to retire to Geneva, and to turn
Heretic; this being the Reward the Devil commonly bestows upon those who are
guided by him, especially if they are Persons who have devoted themselves to
God, and are consequently obliged to show good Examples to others.

The Cardinal de Fourbin being informed, that he was not at Beauvais, had
search made after him all over Paris, where he was at last found out, that very
day as he was going to leave it, in order to go to Geneva. From thence he was
sent to Prison to Vincennes, where Monsieur de la Reyne would have confronted
him with the other Canons, whom he had accused, but he saved him the pains, by
an ingenuous Confession of the whole matter, and so cleared the Canons from
what he had laid to their charge. But he accused one Heron, who had formerly
been Register of the Chapter, but had been put out of his Employment, as being
suspected by the Canons, that it was by his advice that this Canon had got his
Mistress a Husband, and that the same was of his finding out.

This Heron, I say, he accused of having been the first Contriver and Adviser
of what he had done, and that he had recommended Dourlans to him as a fit
Person to write that Letter, which was the cause of his present Misfortune.

A Warrant being upon this Deposition granted to take Heron and Dourlans into
Custody, neither of them thought fit to abscond. For Dourlans was accused of
nothing but writing the Letter, the Contents of which were unknown to him; and
Heron, whether he was guilty or not, I will not determine, but certain it is,
he thought it best not to fly for it, being sure, that he had enough to except
against the Canon's Testimony. At the same time the Imprisoned Canons were set
at liberty, and the Cardinal de Fourbin came in Person to fetch them out, in
his own Coach, to make some amends for the Affront he had put upon them by his
over Credulity, and to take off the stain which had been put upon their
Reputation, and would not have been easy to have been taken off, if God by his
peculiar Providence had not protected their Innocence, and made their Accuser
clearthem of their supposed Crime. Their surprise was great, when they met all
four together, because each of them being taken in Custody without the
knowledge of the other, they were not in the least sensible before that time of
one another's Imprisonment.

The Cardinal gave them an ample Account of the whole Contrivance of the
matter, and so took them home along with him to Supper.

The Canon who was guilty of the Misdemeanour, being confronted with Heron,
persisted in his former Deposition, viz. That what he had done in this case,
was done by the advice of Heron. But Heron alleged in his Defense, That the
Canon's Accusation proceeded from a premeditated Malice, because he had refused
to lend him a Sum of Money a few days before he was taken up, which made him
now endeavor to revenge himself against him by this means. To corroborate what
he said, he produced a Letter written by the said Canon upon that account, and
he positively declared, that upon his refusal, he had told him, that he would
make him repent of it. The Canon being likewise confronted with Dourlans, he
spoke no more than what was true, and what he had declared before, which
amounted to no more than that he had writ a Letter in Ciphers, which he did not
understand.

Whilst they were busy in searching into the bottom of this Business, the
Canon's Father made his Applications to some of his Friends, whom he knew to
have great Interest with the Marquess de Louvois, to put a stop to the
Proceedings against his Son, which thus hung in suspense till after the Death
of this Minister. But whether it was that his Friends had not the same Interest
with those who succeeded the Marquess de Louvois, or whether it was at the
solicitation of Dourlans's Wife, the better to clear her Husband, certain it
is, that some time after, this business after it had lain dormant for some
time, was revived all on a sudden, and Monsieur de la Reyne received positive
Orders from the King's own Mouth to bring it to a Trial.

The Judges being met at the Bastile, were at the greatest Nonplus that could
be, how to behave themselves in respect of Heron, who stood upon his Innocence,
whilst the other persisted in his Accusation against him. The best expedient
they could pitch upon, was to put the Canon to the Rack, which being to be put
in execution in our Chamber, we were put so long into another; but the Canon
remaining immovable in his former Depositions against Heron, we all looked
upon him as a lost Man, though at the sametime, we were much at a loss, what
could be the reason of so rigorous a Proceeding for a Crime, which in our
apprehension, was not Capital. But however it was, the Canon was Sentenced to
Death by these Judges. It is to be observed here, that they have a different
way of Condemning the Criminals in the Bastile, from what is done in the
Parliamentary or any other Courts of Justice; for the Criminals never know
their Sentence here, till they are ready to be led to Execution.

The Canon being thus ignorant of his approaching Destiny, Dined as heartily as
if he had a great while to live, and by his Appetite one would scarce have
guessed him to have been upon the Rack but the Night before, when one Berte,
(who is Major of the Bastile) came to tell him, that he was wanted without, in
the same manner as if he was to appear before his Judges, or to meet with some
of his Friends without. He was going to put on his Surtute, which was of a fine
Brussels Camblet, lined with black Velvet; but Berte knowing what way he was to
take, and thinking it more convenient for the Turn-key than for the Hangman,
told him, that he need not trouble himself about that, because he would soon
come back again. From thence he conducted him straight ways to the Chapel of
the Bastile, where the condemned Criminals commonly hear the last Mass, and was
met there by his Confessor, the Recorder, and the Hangman. The first thing the
Recorder did, was to read his Sentence to him, which done, the Confessor began
to do his Office, and to endeavor to prepare him* for Death; the Hangman
standing by all this while, but unknown as such to the Prisoner; it being also
a Custom, which is always observed in the Bastile, that the Hangman never lays
Hands on the condemned Criminal till he is going from the Chapel to the place
of Execution.

If it be true, what several Officers belonging to the Bastile told us, the
Father Confessor had received private Instructions to try all means with him,
to persuade him to clear Heron, who had six Children, and very good Friends,
who did all what they could to save him. This, and the hopes of a Pardon, for
which his Father made very powerful Solicitation with the King, made them stay
in the Chapel till half an hour before Night. Nay, the Canons themselves, whom
he had so falsely accused, came from Beauvais to Paris, to throw themselves at
his Majesty's Feet, in hopes of obtaining his Pardon, but were answered as well
as the Father by the King, that his Crime was too black to deserve a Pardon.
Thus the last hour approaching, and there being no further hopes of a Pardon,
he was delivered up to the Hangman, who conducted him to the place of
Execution, where after he had made an ingenuous Confession of his Crime, and
likewise cleared Heron from what he had accused him of before, he was Hanged on
a Gibbet. Heron being thus cleared from what had been laid to his charge, would
questionless have been quite discharged from his Imprisonment at the same time
as Dourlans was, if the Canon's Father, who was raving mad, because of the
Tragical Exit of his Son, which in some measure he imputed to Heron, had not
obtained a new Warrant, by virtue of which, he was to be transferred to the
Prison of Beauvais, where he was to be Tried upon an Information of Extortion
exhibited against him. How he came off, or whether he was as fortunate in
getting out of the Prison of Beauvais, as he was in getting out of the Bastile,
I am not able to give you an account, it having been my misfortune to remain a
Prisoner in the Bastile ever since that time.

After Dourlans was discharged, I had but two Chamber-Fellows left me, to wit,
Villeroy and Mallet; and Mallet did likewise not stay long after with us, being
ordered to be sent from thence to the Prison of Guise. He did leave no Stone
unturned to procure his Liberty, offering to make a second Abjuration of his
Religion, by which means he knew several had obtained their Liberty; but the
Court rejected his Offers, and sent him word, that whether he did or did not,
it would avail him but little, since he had done it once already. Accordingly
he was conducted to Guise, and what is become of him since, I have never been
able to learn.

But it was not long before they provided Villeroy and me another
Chamber-fellow, who is Name was Chapelier de Villefort, who had been a prisoner
in the Bastile for above Fifteen Years. He was a relation of Madam le Tellier,
Mother to the Marquess de Louvois, and a near Kinsman of Monsieur d'Aligre Lord
High Chancellor of France; and it was happy for him, he was, for if it had not
been for his great relations, who by their powerful intercession had saved him
from the Gallows, he could not have been so long lived in the Bastile, where he
had been put with no other intention, than to protect him from the Prosecution
of the Parliament, which had been affronted by him in the highest degree.

Some time before he was Committed to the Bastile, he used almost as frequently
to appear in Women's Apparel as in Man's Habit; this custom and some Features of
his Face, which had a great resemblance to that of a Woman, made him pass for
such among a great many, who were not in the least apprehensive of his
Disguise. The Marquess de Rotelin, one of his particular Friends, and his daily
Companion in most of his Debaucheries, was acquainted with a certain Country
Gentleman, who being blessed with a much greater share of Riches and Quality,
than of Wit, he pitched upon him as a fit object to make some sport withal.
For this purpose he entered into a Cabal with the Abbot d'Etrangues, Son of the
Governor of Macon, whom he knew to be likewise of this Country Gentleman's
intimate acquaintance, and it was agreed among them, to help him to a Spouse.
Accordingly Villefort told him, that he was acquainted with a Young handsome
and rich Widow, and of very good Quality, to whom he would recommend him.

They made the Country Gentleman's mouth water to that degree, at so dainty a
bit, that he hugged and kissed them, begging them to assist him in procuring him
a free access to this Lady. They both told him, That they should be very ready
to serve him, but that he could not expect to be admitted to a person of her
Quality, unless he first put himself in an Equipage suitable to his
pretensions, so the Country Spark bought himself a new Chariot with fine Horses
and Liveries, answerable in all respects to his Quality, and intentions of
Courting a great Fortune, and thus Equipped, he was introduced to the fair
Widow, who now had changed her right Name (being Chapelier de Villefort) into
that of the Countess of Meru. He had scarce made three or four Visits to her,
but he found himself in Love over head and Ears, and thinking himself secure of
her Estate, by what Rotelin and d'Etrangues had assured him upon that point, he
began to push the matter forward, and to urge this pretended Countess to
declare her self, whether he might flatter himself, that his Services were
acceptable to her.

This Masculine Countess, who knew how to act the part of a cunning Lady to the
Life, told him at last with a blush, that she being resolved never to dispose
of her Person, without the approbation of two of her intimate Friends, (whom
she Named to him) he must make his applications to them, as well as to her
self, and that if he could so far Prevail upon them, as to gain their consent,
it would be the only way to obtain hers. These were Madam Bossuet, Wife of
Monsieur Bossuet, Master of Requests; and the Marshal de la Ferte, his Lady,
who had been made Partners in the contrivance, that they might have their share
in the sport they intended to make with our Country Suitor; who seeing himself
thus under a necessity to make his Addresses to these Ladies, they acted their
part so prettily, That they not only made him their chief Diversion, but also
at last found means to easy his Pocket of a good Sum of Money; for some time
after they told him, that they had not been wanting to make all the
intercessions they could in his behalf, which they believed might in time have
a considerable Influence upon his Mistress, but that the best way to make sure
of her, would be to apply himself likewise to the Countess de Montperoux;
because they were sensible that this Lady had such an ascendant over the
Countess de Meru, his adored Lady, That she relied entirely upon all what she
said or Proposed; and that they verily believed, that if she should tell her at
Noon day, it was Midnight, she would certainly believe it.

The Country Gentleman being overjoyed, that he carried his point so far, as
to have gained the good will of these two Ladies; did not question, but by
their Assistance, to prevail also upon the third; but found himself somewhat
mistaken in his guess; for she received him with so much indifferency, that he
began to be quite in despair of the success of his Amor.

His next Applications were made to his Friend Rotelin, and the Abbot
d'Etrangues, whom he gave an ample Relation of his ill success with the
Countess de Montperoux: These began to raise his drooping hopes by telling him,
that most Ladies being naturally of a cold Constitution, it was not to be
wondered at, if they treated Strangers at first with indifferency, but that when
a Man once could gain upon them, they proved afterward the best Friends; that
he must not be thus repulsed, but must endeavor to continue his Applications
so long, till he might find her in a more pliable Temper.

Encouraged by their Advice, he makes his addresses again to the Countess of
Montperoux, who received them with more coldness than before, and at last told
him, that she wondered how he could flatter himself so far, as to imagine, that
she would advice her Friend the Countess de Meru, to Marry a person, who would
infallibly carry her into the Country the next day after her wedding. Our Lover
being put beyond all hopes by this fatal answer, addressed himself, once more
to Madam de la Ferte, and Madam de la Bossuet, who, pursuant to what had been
concerted betwixt them before, told him, That they would not have him be quite
dismayed at her answer; that they perhaps might be able, to assist him still
with their advice, which they hoped would stand him in good stead; and that the
only way to gain the assistance of the Countess de Montperoux, would be to
engage her into his Interest by a good present, because they knew her to be in
a condition, not to refuse an offer of that kind. And to confess the Truth, the
said Countess was reduced to so low a condition at that time, that she had
scarce any thing to maintain her Family, but what she was obliged for to the
benevolence of some Ladies of Quality of her acquaintance; so that our Country
Suitor, at the persuasions of these Ladies, was no readier to offer it, than
she was to accept it with both Hands.

The Country Gentleman was immediately after, made sensible, that the Charms of
his Gold had had a much more powerful influence upon the Countess de
Montperoux, than all his Cringes; for she quickly changed her Note, promising
him to make use of all her Interest with the Countess de Meru, to make him
happy, so that the young Lover finding a much easier access to his Mistress
than before, did press her every day, to consummate the Marriage. She seemed at
last to be overcome by his pressing Instances, and the Articles of Marriage
being drawn by Counselors chosen on both sides, the same were Signed by all
parties concerned. Whilst our Country Lover was thus flattering himself with
hopes of his approaching happiness, the Countess de Meru, found every day some
excuse or other for the delaying of the Marriage, and in the end to rid her
self once for all of his importunities, sent him word by Monsieur Rotelin, and
Etrangues, that she had been informed by credible persons, that he was much
Indebted, and that therefore it would be high time for her to look about her,
before she went on further in the business.

This Answer was like a Thunderclap to the poor Lover, who after he had
recovered himself a little, told them, that it was too late now to form such
Pretenses, and that she ought to have made better enquiry concerning his
Condition before things were gone so far; that she must excuse him, if he took
care of himself, so as not to be made a Laughing Stock of the Town. That if
nothing else would do, he must have recourse to Justice; but that he being
unwilling to expose her, he would have her not to let things come to an
extremity; that therefore he desired them to discourse the point seriously with
her, and to persuade her to a Compliance as they were her Friends; and that if
they did not bring him a favorable Answer, she must expect to be Summoned to
answer it before a Court of Justice.

After a few days, they returned our Country Squire for an Answer, that
notwithstanding all their endeavors, there was no hopes left for him, which
made him Summon her before the Episcopal Court, where she lost the Cause,
Judgment being given against her, to pay Costs, Damages and Interest. But she
entering her Appeal to the Parliament, the Cause was again pleaded in full
Court, and after a long hearing, Judgment deferred till another time, the
further Examination of the whole matter being left to a certain Councellor, who
within a limited time was to make his Report to the Court. This Councellor,
though none of the youngest, yet was soon ensnared in the same Trap in which
the Country Squire had been caught before; so that when this supposed Countess
came to solicit her Business, he told her the very first time, that she need
not much fear her Cause; and after three or four Visits more, began to lay the
matter more open to her, and to tell her, that he would engage to carry the
Cause for her, provided she would make him a suitable return. She played the
Cards so dexterously, that the old Councellor, as cunning as he was, served her
for a Pastime in the same manner as the Country Gentleman had done before.

But after she had thus sufficiently diverted her self, and her Friends with
the Follies of these two Sparks, she thought it at last high time to lay by the
Title and Person of a Countess, and to quit her House, in order to seek for a
more convenient Lodging in some other part of the Town. Rotelin and Etrangues,
were the first who brought the Country Squire the News, that his Countess was
become invisible, and that they believed that his Prosecution had frightened her
to that degree, as to have obliged her to remove from her House. The Country
Gentleman uncertain what course to take, run straight ways toward the House
where she lived, in hopes to hear something or other of her among the
Neighborhood, but all he could learn, was, that this Countess de Meru had not
lived long enough there to be known by them, and that one Monsieur Chapelier de
Villefort had formerly kept the House, but they did not know that ever he had a
Wife. He then enquired whether they could not tell where Monsieur de Chapelier
lived now, in hopes to hear some News of his Mistress by him; but being
answered that Monsieur Chapelier was supposed to be gone into the Country, (as
it had been given out on purpose) but whither, they could not tell; he began to
despair of hearing any Tidings from her by this means. But being resolved not
to stop here, his next expedient was to visit all the Nunneries of Paris, to
see whether his Mistress ^ad not sheltered herself among them. Among the rest,
he happened to come to that of the Abbey called In the Wood, (au Bois) where
having enquired after the Countess de Meru, they bestowed such Titles upon him,
as did not a little surprise him.

You must know, that a certain Lady who had had an Intrigue with this pretended
Countess of Meru, whilst she yet appeared in the shape of a true Man, had been
forced to shelter herself in this Nunnery, because her Husband, who had got
some scent of it, was become jealous of her; after which it was agreed betwixt
her and Chapelier, that he should assume the Title and Dress of the Countess de
Meru, and so enter herself to Board in the same Nunnery where she was.

The Lady Abbess, and the rest of the Sisters belonging to this Nunnery, were a
long time before they had the least Suspicion of any Intrigue, or of his being
a Man, and might have continued so for a great while after, if the thing had
not been unfortunately discovered by a young Girl of eight years old. This Girl
was the Daughter of the same Lady, who had sought for Protection in the
Nunnery, and as she had formerly often seen Chapelier de Villefort with her
Mother, knew him, notwithstanding his Disguise, at first sight, and though her
Mother did all what she could to persuade her to the contrary, and sometimes
would whip her severely, would sometimes call him by his right Name, which
happening one time in the presence of a Nun belonging to that Nunnery, the
whole Intrigue was discovered.

All the Nuns being exasperated at the Person who had put so gross a Trick upon
them, were resolved to be revenged upon this pretended Countess, and so to work
they went, and after they had stripped her to the middle, gave her such a
flogging Entertainment, that she had reason to remember it for a considerable
time after.

Our Country Squire asking the Maid that takes care of the turning Box of the
Nunnery whether there were not such a one as the Countess de Meru in the
Nunnery, had in lieu of an answer, such Titles bestowed upon him, as raised his
curiosity to know the reason of it. But the Maid, who believed that he played
upon her, would give him no further Satisfaction, and the more earnest he was
in his enquiring, the more averse she appeared to give him an answer suitable
to his Expectation; so that he was forced to leave her without receiving any
more Satisfaction, than that the Name of the Countess de Meru was well known in
that Nunnery. Being under this perplexity, he resolved to advise with his
Councellor, unto whom he gave an Account of what had happened to him in that
Nunnery. As good luck would have it, the Councellor's Wife had some
Acquaintance in this Nunnery, and she promised to use her utmost endeavors to
find out this Secret about the Countess de Meru.

Accordingly she went the next day to pay a Visit to some of her intimate
Acquaintance there, who were so kind as to tell her the whole Story about this
pretended Countess, and what had been the occasion the Country Gentleman had
met with so odd an Entertainment from the Maid. The Councellor gave an Account
of it to his Client, who being vexed to the Soul to be thus bubbled of his
Money, and to be made a May Game in to the bargain, was resolved to revenge
himself upon Rotelin and Etrangues. But not being able to demand the desired
Satisfaction from the last, because he had since chosen a Religious Profession,
(though formerly he belonged to the Guard of the Grand Musketeers) he resolved
to let Rotelin feel the effects of his Indignation, knowing him to be a Person
who pretended to the Sword. Accordingly he sent him a Challenge, but Rotelin,
who was at that time to be Married to a Marshal of France's Daughter, refused
not only to give him Satisfaction, but also ridiculed him wherever he met
him, and threatened to provide him his Quarters in the Fort, called the
Bishop's-Fort, which put the Country Squire into such a fright, that he thought
it his best way not to meddle any further with him, but to turn all his anger
upon Chapelier.

Pursuant to this Intention he went to the Councellor who had been appointed by
the Parliament to make a Report of his Case, unto whom he gave an Account in
what manner he had been served, desiring him to procure him a Warrant for the
Apprehending of Chapelier. This Councellor, who (though unknow to our
Gentleman) was his Brother in Affliction, and consequently very glad of this
Opportunity to revenge himself for the Affront put upon him, did not only grant
his Request, but also represented the business in so heinous a manner to the
Parliament, that they granted their Warrant for the Apprehending of Chapelier.
But he had got no sooner scent of it, but he retired to a certain Abbey
belonging to the Chevalier de Meme, who was his intimate Friend.

In the mean while, the Councellor who was to make the Report of this Case to
the Parliament, was not idle on his side, but made all the enquiry he could,
concerning his whole Life and Behavior, which proved to be such, as to render
him deservedly odious before God and Men. The Parliament thereupon made their
Addresses to his Majesty, to prevent Chapelier's obtaining a Pardon by the
powerful Intercession of Monsieur de Tellier, and at the same time sent their
Spies abroad, to find him out wherever he might be hid. Monsieur de Tellier
being sensible that if he should fall into the Hands of the Parliament, he
would scarce escape with Life, interceeded so far with his Majesty, that in
consideration of his near Relation to Monsieur de Tellier's Lady, a Warrant was
granted to commit him to the Bastile, where he might be protected against the
power of the Parliament.

Monsieur la Nove acted all this while as Deputy Governor of the Bastile, yet
so as to depend absolutely on Monsieur de Baisenaux; so that Monsieur de Nove
considering, that he began to grow very old, and that if another should succeed
him, he would be sure to put one of his own Creatures in his Place, he desired
Monsieur de Baisenaux, to procure him the King's Commission by his Interest at
Court. The Governor, who was not willing that he should depend on any body but
himself, was not very backward in promising what he never intended to perform;
which made la Nove, who was not unacquainted with his Politics, resolve not to
trouble him any further, but to make use of his own Interest at Court.
Accordingly he got it represented to the King, how that the present Governor
was grown very old, and consequently not in a condition to be so careful of all
the Prisoners as he had been formerly, when he was younger; and that many of
the Prisoners had made their escapes of late years, because those Officers who
acted under him, and had their Dependence upon him, were not in a Capacity to
execute their Orders, and to be obeyed in the same manner, as they would be, if
they had their Commissions from the King. He further assured the Court, that he
being by long Experience acquainted with the whole management of the Bastile,
he would be obliged to answer for the escape of any Prisoner from thence, if
the King would be pleased to grant him his Commission.

Monsieur de Louvois, unto whom he had made his Application, liked his
Proposition so well, that he spoke to the King about it, without mentioning one
word of it to Monsieur de Baisenaux, though his Son had Married Mrs. Vitacerf, a
Niece of the Marquess de Louvois; for it is to be observed, that the Governor,
who was as Politic as any of his Countrymen, (who are accounted to be
generally very cunning) made it always his Maxim to Ally himself by Marriage to
the Ministers of State, of whose Protection, he was sensible how much he stood
often in need, considering the frequent abuses he put upon the Prisoners.

After the Death of Monsieur Colbert, unto whose Nephew he had Married one of
his Daughters, he insinuated himself into the favor of the Marquess de
Louvois, by a Marriage of his Son with his Niece; and I dare say, he is
heartily sorry that he has not another Son or Daughter to dispose of, to engage
himself by this means into an Alliance with Monsieur de Pontchartrain, whom he
knows to be a very quick sighted Minister, and consequently dreads him above
all the rest.

But the King, though he did not disapprove Monsieur de Nove's Proposition, yet
considering that he had better bestow a place of so much profit upon some good
Officer who had deserved it better by his former Services, than upon one who
scarce ever had looked further than the Bastile, and had officiated more in the
Quality of a Keeper or Turn-Key, than in that of a Soldier, pitched upon one
Monsieur de Joncas, Exempt of the Lifeguard, who was put in Monsieur la Nove's
place; and because I shall have occasion to mention him hereafter, it may not
be amiss to give you his true Character. He is a very Honest and Obliging
Person, and who having been all his Lifetime in the King's Service, has a good
share of Experience, and consequently, is sensible of other Men's Misfortunes;
for which reason, he is always ready to oblige the Prisoners in any thing that
is not inconsistent with the King's Service.

He had no sooner taken possession of his Place, but he visited all the
Prisoners, unto whom he gave all the imaginable proofs of his Generous and
Obliging Behavior; though at the same time, he was very careful in viewing all
the Grates and other Places of the Prison, by which they might make their
escape.

It was not long before the Governor and he fell quite to pieces, because he
did not think fit to give the least encouragement to his Avarice and other
Miscarriages, which are such, as scarce to be comprehended, much less to be
described; and of which I have given you some general Idea before. Monsieur de
Baisenaux was extremely dissatisfied at this new Deputy Governor, because in
his Visits he made to the Prisoners, he would make an enquiry, upon what
account they were put in Prison, and if he found them to have been sufficiently
Chastised by a long Imprisonment, he would intercede for them with the
Ministers at Court. He could also not digest it very well, that this
Deputy Governor should go into the Kitchen to see what Victuals were dressed
for the Prisoners, and that he should find fault with them. For it is to be
observed, that of late we were worse Treated than if we had Dined at the worst
Six-penny Ordinary in Town; which, whether it proceeded from an Abatement of
the King's Allowance since the Ministry of Monsieur de Pontchartrain, or from
the Avaritiousness of the Governor, I am not able to determine.

Monsieur Joncas did no more in this case than what belonged to his Office, and
what was absolutely necessary for the case of the Prisoners; yet the Governor's
Interest so far prevailed with the Minister of State, as to obtain an Order,
that Joncas should not for the future intermeddle with what belonged to the
Prisoners; but especially not with their Diet. After this* Joncas continued his
ordinary Civilities, by visiting the Prisoners, but did not mention one word
more of interceeding for them at Court, which made most of us imagine, that
Monsieur Baisenaux and he understood one another very well now, but we were
soon after undeceived by the Turn key, who told us how matters stood betwixt
them. For the rest, he was a Man who acted in his Station with all the Honesty
and Care imaginable, which encouraged Chapelier (who always Courted him at a
high rate) to tell him one time, that he had something of great moment to
impart to him, concerning me, which he had learned from my Servant; but that it
would be absolutely requisite for the King's Service, to act with all the
precaution imaginable in the matter; and that therefore since he had no
opportunity to talk with him of it in my presence, it would be very convenient
(if he thought fit) to give me leave to walk upon the Tarrass the next time my
Sister should come to see me, which would furnish him with an opportunity to
give an Account at large of what he knew of me.

THE MEMOIRS OF JOHN BAPTIST De La Fontaine, Knight. LIB. X.
MOnsieur de Joncas had heard something before of my being made a Prisoner in
the Bastile, on the account of keeping a secret Correspondence with the Prince
of Orange, which made him embrace Chapelier's Offers with a great deal of
Satisfaction, not questioning but that by this means he should be able to make
a full discovery of the whole matter. To encourage him in this discovery, he
told him, that if he could tell him any thing which might conduce to his
Majesty's Service, this would be an infallible means not only to obtain his
Liberty after so long an Imprisonment, but also to be reconciled to his
Relations, among whom, was the Marquess de Louvois. Chapelier needed no further
Encouragement than this, which made him flatter the Deputy Governor with what
wonders he could tell him, and the next thing he did, was, to bring over
Villeroy to his side, which he found no very hard task to do, by promising him
Golden Mountains, and that he should be a Sharer in his good Fortune. Thus they
took the next Opportunity when my Sister came to see me, and whilst we were
busy in talking upon the Terrass, they engaged my Valet absolutely in their
Plot against me, who indeed was more than half brought over to their side
before, by Chapelier. For this Fellow being quite tired out with the
irksomeness of a long Imprisonment, which he thought, would scarce end till
with my Life, and having been an Eye witness of some things which passed whilst
I was in England, he took a Resolution to procure his Liberty, though with the
loss of his Master, whom he looked upon as lost before. The promise made him by
Chapelier, to raise his Fortune, had such a powerful Influence upon this
Fellow, that being now resolved to overcome all that lay in his way, he told
them all what he knew, and some things he knew not. Joncas having by this means
understood, how I had been admitted to the Pr... at H....... and what
particular access I had had to my Lord S...... and my Lord L...... and that I
had received several Letters from them since my return into France; that I had
been in Poictou, where I had spent several Months in Conversing with the
Protestant Gentry; when Joncas, I say, understood all these particulars, he did
not question, but that by communicating them to the Marquess de Louvois, he
should do a piece of Service to the King, which would turn to his great
Advantage.

But as he was a Man of great Prudence, so he thought it most convenient to
speak first with my Servant in Person, before he communicated the matter to the
Marquess. For which purpose he ordered him to be taken from me, under pretense,
that he did not serve me as he ought to do; for you must know, that ever since
he had been engaged in this Intrigue against me, he had carried himself very
sawcily to me. I am apt to imagine, that Joncas did not remove this Servant
without the Knowledge and Consent of the Governor; but this I am sure of, that
he did not impart the least of the secret of this discovery to him, it being
not his Intention that he should share with him the honor and advantage of it.
But however it was, my Valet was so far from being set at Liberty, that on the
contrary, he was more closely Confined than before; for, as they supposed to
have got such a material Evidence against me, so they were very careful in
preserving, what they judged of the utmost Consequence to them. Monsieur Joncas
then came every day to him, and took all his Depositions against me in writing,
which containing four large Pages, he made my Servant sign with his own Hand.

The next thing he had to do, was to wait on the Marquess de Louvois, whom he
told, that having a Secret of the greatest Consequence to impart to him, he
desired he might talk in private with him. The Minister of State having
appointed Joncas a certain time, when he should be at leisure to hear him, he
did not fail to be there at the prefixed Hour, when he presented to the
Marquess de Louvois the beforementioned Memorandum, of which he received, and
perused some part, but finding that it related only to what he knew better
before, he returned it to him, without taking the pains of reading it quite
through. But nothing vexed Joncas so much, as that the Minister ordered him to
deliver it to Monsieur de Baisenaux, the Governor of the Bastile; for as
Joncas had carried on this Intrigue without the knowledge of the Governor, so
he was sensible that this would serve to augment the Misunderstanding that was
betwixt them before. He asked the Minister of State before he took his leave of
him, what Orders he would be pleased to give concerning my Valet, unto whom he
had promised a Reward? Unto which he answered, That the Governor might do with
him what he pleased; so that he having no more to say, he returned much
dissatisfied at the Reception he had met with from the Minister of State, which
was quite different from what he had promised to himself for the pains he had
taken to serve the King. That which increased his vexation, was, that after his
return to the Bastile, Monsieur de Baisenaux gave him but a very indifferent
Entertainment when he delivered to him the Memorandum, which had been procured
without his knowledge; for he no sooner had told him what had passed at the
Minister of State's, and what Orders he had been pleased to give, but the
Governor asked him; whether he had been taught thus in the Guards? and whether
it were a Custom there for the Subalterns to manage Matters of Moment without
the knowledge of their Captains? Joncas was fain to take this smart Reprimand,
without saying one word, being sensible that he had not acted as he ought to
have done, in a Matter which he supposed to be of so much Consequence. Monsieur
Baisenaux gave my Valet his Liberty, and he had a Recompense of thirty Crowns
besides; as the Turn key told me; but whether the Governor himself, or the
Deputy Governor had bestowed this Present upon him, I was not able to learn;
But thus much I know, that when he came to see my Sister, she did not only give
him a very kind Reception, (though I had told her before how he had served me)
but also got him a place in the same Nunnery where she Boarded; of which I had
a full Account from my Spouse, who at the same time writ me word in what
Condition my Domestic Affairs were at home, which was such, as proved a new
addition to my Affliction; for my Spouse had all her Lands in her own hands,
and for the last three years had scarce been able to sell any thing of their
Product; so that being disabled to undertake a Journey to Paris, I was
consequently bereaved of the assistance she might otherwise have been able to
give me in soliciting for my Releasement at Court.

In the mean while the Marquis de Louvois died suddenly, which almost put me
into Despair; especially when I considered, that he being the only Person, who
besides the King, knew the true state of my Case, his Successor might perhaps
cause me to be prosecuted with the utmost rigor of the Law, which at the best
would have amounted to a perpetual Imprisonment. Thus, not knowing what course
best to take, I sent to my Spouse to come to Paris, which she would willingly
have complied with, but that for want of Money she could not undertake such a
Journey; so that I had no other remedy left me but Patience. The next following
Year happening to prove very bad for the Fruits of the Earth, occasioned such
an excessive Dearth, that every thing was raised to four times the Price it
bore before that time: This was however a good hit for me, for my Spouse had
good store of Wheat and Wines, which she Sold at so high a Rate, that she saved
a good Portion out of it for our Eldest Daughter.

A certain Gentleman living near Tours, (whose Name was Leugny) was fallen in
Love with this Daughter of mine, and as he was a Man of a very good Estate, my
Spouse thought she could do no better than to forward the Match, though she was
sensible that the Gentleman's Mother did not approve of it; as believing, that
when it was past Remedy, she would be prevailed upon to be reconciled to her
Son, which indeed was also my Opinion; in which however, both my Spouse and my
self have found our selves mistaken hitherto; for notwithstanding that my
Son-in-Law's Uncle, who is Dean of our Lady's Church, and who likewise opposed
this Match at first, has since given his Consent, she persists in her former
Resolution.

Some time after the Nuptials, my new Son-in-Law having some Business of
Consequence to transact at Paris, took his Wife along with him; and knowing
that I had leave to be visited by my Family, they addressed themselves to
Monsieur de Baisenaux, in order to be admitted to see me: But the Governor,
who knew that my Son-in-Law's Uncle had a great many Friends at Court, and
feared not without reason, that he might make use of his Interest to obtain my
Liberty, took my Daughter aside, and told her in private, that he was sorry to
tell her that I was grown Distracted, a thing which frequently happened to
those unfortunate Persons, who are forced to spend their days in the Bastile;
that he had taken care to put me into the Hands of an able Physician, a Man of
approved Experience in such Cases as this, by whose assistance he hoped, I
might be restored to my Senses in time; but that as the case now stood, he
would not Advise her to see me; partly because my ill Behavior might make some
strange impression or other upon her Husband, partly because it might prove
prejudicial to my Recovery; there being no question, but that the sight of her
would recall to my Memory all the unfortunate Circumstances that attend so long
an Imprisonment, and consequently would occasion such a violent agitation in my
Blood and Spirits, as would not be easy to be appeased by the Art of Men.

These Persuasions of Monsieur de Baisenaux, had such an influence upon my
Daughter and Son-in-Law, that they thought it best not to see me. On the other
hand, my own Sister, (who, as I believe had been set on by the Governor) did
publish the same all over the Country where I lived; nay, she had one day the
impudence to tell it to my Spouse her self; and to increase her Affliction, to
assure her, that I had been carried from the Bastile to the Mad-House: Her
Impudence did not stop here, for being some time after come with my Spouse to
Paris, she went with her to the public Mad-House, and in her hearing, asked
the Porter, Whether about such and such a time there had not been brought a
Madman thither, whose Name was Fontenay.

My Daughter returning thus without seeing me into the Country, my Spouse
bestowed all her time in managing our House-Affairs to the best Advantage: I
had left her a Coach with six Horses, and a suitable Equipage, which in that
Country, where every thing is very cheap, does not put one to any great
Expenses; however, as soon as she had notice of my Imprisonment, she disposed
of the Coach and Horses, and put off all her Servants, except a small Chariot,
and one Chambermaid; so that, what with her good Management, and what with the
Advantage of the Products of our Grounds, which continued to Sell at a very
dear Rate, she laid up a good Sum of Money. The first thing she did was to pay
off a Debt of Four thousand Livres, which I had borrowed of the Count de
Serrant just before I left France in order to my being transported into
Ireland. The rest she laid aside for the use of two other Daughters, the eldest
of which was but two years younger than she that was Married lately, and the
other was also near 17 years of Age. Thus God Almighty was pleased to dispose.
Matters for the Advantage of our Family, it being unquestionable, that if I had
been at liberty, I should scarce have Husbanded matters so well.

Though Chapelier and Villeroy, my two Chamber-Fellows, had found themselves
mistaken in their hopes, of obtaining their Liberty by the Treachery of my
Servant; nevertheless, the first of these two, had the good fortune to be
delivered not long after from his long Imprisonment; for one day, as we were
talking together, and when he least expected it, the Turn-Key came in, and told
him, that he should dress himself, and take all that he had along with him;
which he did accordingly, and was transferred from the Bastile to another
Prison, in order to his Discharge, which he obtained in a little while after.
Thus Villeroy and I remained only in the Room, and I had this for an additional
Affliction, that in two whole years I heard not the least News from my Family,
notwithstanding I sent several Letters to my Spouse, and (as I was sufficiently
convinced since) she was very careful never to miss answering them But the
Governor, through whose Hands all our Letters must of necessity pass,
understanding that I desired my Spouse to come to Paris, and what Directions I
gave her, to solicit my Releasement, was resolved to prevent it, by keeping
both her and my Letters in his Hands. I could not for my life guess at the
meaning of it, sometimes I fansied she might be Dead, sometimes that it might
be the Governors Fault, as indeed it was; and yet, I could not but imagine,
that if it were so, my Spouse might for all this come to Paris, and be
satisfied in the matter her self; and when I ruminated upon this point, I
thought I could scarce forgive her for such a neglect. Sometimes I would be
contriving how to find out a way to discover the Truth, but all in vain, the
Governor having taken effectual care to prevent it; But as necessity is the
Mother of Invention, and that nothing sharpens a Man's Wits more than the hopes
of putting an end to ones Misery, so at last I pitched upon a way which
succeeded according to my Expectation. I threw out through the Grates, a Letter
wrapped up in a Paper, in which I begged of such as should happen to take it up,
to deliver the Letter according to Direction, for which they should receive a
reward of a Crown-piece, if they would accept of it; but if the Person should
be above the receiving such a Reward, that God would infallibly recompense the
care they took for an unfortunate Prisoner. In the Letter (directed to a
particular Friend of mine) I had desired them to write to my Spouse, if she
were still alive, and if not, to my Children, to give them to understand, that
I had heard nothing of them these two years, at which I was most extremely
surprised, as not knowing what could be the reason of it, since they had leave
from Court to write to me, and to receive Letters from me; That for my part, I
had sent so many to them, that it was the greatest wonder to me in the World
that I had received no Answer upon any of them; That they might easily imagine,
that this neglect of theirs could not but be a signal addition to my Misery;
but that however I did flatter my self, that there was something more than
ordinary in it, and therefore I desired some of them to come forthwith to
Paris, and to endeavor to see me.

I took the opportunity of the Evening, when it was just dusky, and so threw
this Letter into the Road which leads to St. Anthony's Gate, and it was taken
up, as I suppose, the next morning early, and carried safely to the place
whither it was directed. By this means my Spouse was informed how matters
stood, and soon after I had the good fortune to send to her several other
Letters, by the assistance of one of my Fellow Prisoners in the Bastile, who
having obtained leave to see his Family. I conveyed my Letters to him through a
hole I had made for that purpose. My Wife happening at that time to be very
ill, and consequently being not in a condition to undertake the Journey, she
prevailed upon my eldest Daughter and her Husband to come to Paris. Accordingly
she addressed her self to the Governor of the Bastile, who began to rehearse
the old Story to her, and to tell her, that she would act a very imprudent part
to see me in that Condition I was in then, and that though her Husband were never
so fond of her, it could not but be a great dissatisfaction to him to see his
Father-in-Law act the Madman, which in process of time might turn to her
Disadvantage.

My Daughter answered the Governor, That she had all the reason in the World to
be surprised at what he told her, because she had seen lately several of my
Letters written to her Mother, which did not contain the least thing that had
any resemblance to what: might be supposed to come from a mad-Man's hands. The
Governor stood amazed when he heard her say, that they had received Letters
from me, which made him ask her several times, whether she was certain that
these Letters had been of my own hand Writing; for as he kept me under Lock and
Key, and did not believe that I could have any Pen, Ink, or Paper without his
permission, he was extremely puzzled to find out how this came to pass. But
finding my Daughter very positive in what she had told him before, and being a
Man of an extraordinary presence of Mind, and who knows how to disentangle
himself upon any Emergency, (of which I shall give you several instances, in a
peculiar Treatise, I intend, if God be pleased to spare my Life, of the
Bastile.) He being, as I told you before, a Man of a great Presence of Mind
upon any Emergency; he answered my Daughter, That he had indeed observed me to
have certain lucid Intervals, and that possibly it might be, that I had written
those Letters when my Frenzy had left me. To be short, These and such like
Persuasions had so strong an influence upon my Daughter, that she thought it
best not to see me; and so both her Husband and she returned into the Country,
with a full Confirmation of the dismal News my Spouse had received before of my
pretended Madness.

My Servant, who at that time lived in the same Monastery where my Sister was,
was the only Person in the World who could have convinced them of the untruth
of the matter; but, besides that he had not parted very fairly from me, my
Sister took care to set him more and more against me; so that in lieu of
undeceiving my Family, he did what he could to spread it about the Country,
that the thing was really so, as the Governor had told my Daughter. Thus
having for a considerable time lived in expectation of an Answer to my several
Letters, (but in vain) I studied several ways to write to them again, and to
give them to understand how much surprised I was at their silence, and to see
me thus neglected by my nearest Friends. My Spouse, who has a good Natural
Understanding, finding that there was not the least tincture of Extravagancy in
all these Letters, could not forbear to take our Eldest Daughter to Task, and
to ask her, What could be the meaning of it? My Daughter being prepossessed
with what she had heard the Governor of the Bastile say, concerning my
Distemper, answered her, That it must be, that I had writ these Letters in my
lucid Intervals, which indeed did give the Physicians no small hopes of my
Recovery, provided I were not disturbed by the sight of any of my Family. My
Spouse being thus again overcome by these apparent Reasons, I found my self
destitute of all human Aid, which put me upon a desperate Resolution, to take
the next opportunity, when our Turn-Key should come to bring us our Supper, to
Lock him up in the Chamber with Villeroy, (who had given his Consent) in the
mean while to try my fortune, whether I could not find out a convenience of
conveying another Letter to my Spouse.

You must know, that among others, the Marquis de Crussol, was at that time
Prisoner in the Bastile; but knowing him to have the liberty of the Court, I
flattered my self that by his assistance I might have a Letter sent to my
Spouse; for not having received the least Answer upon all those I had writ
before, I could not but imagine, that they had miscarried. I did, I say,
flatter my self, that the Marquess de Crussol, being a Person of Quality, his
Inclinations would be answerable to his Extraction, and that consequently he
would be glad to put an Obligation upon another Gentleman his Fellow-Prisoner,
in a case which might be done without the least trouble on his side, because
all those who are Prisoners at large in the Bastile, have the liberty of
sending their Servants abroad, when and where they please, and of seeing their
Friends without Control.

I did put my design in Execution without much difficulty, and so straight I
went to the Marquis de Crussol his Chamber, which I was not unacquainted with,
because I could look to it by the means of a hole I had made on one side of
mine, from whence I used to see him look frequently out of his Window. After I
had paid him the usual respect, I told him what my Request was, which he
promised me generously to do; but I soon found to my Cost, that there is a vast
difference betwixt promising and performing; for instead of keeping his Word
with me, he gave both my Letter, and another of my Chamber-Fellows, Villeroy,
(which he had desired me to deliver to him at the same time) to the Governor
Monsieur de Baisenaux. I did not think it my best way to tarry long with the
Marquess de Crussol, for fear the Turn-Key should make a noise at our
Chamber Door, for, I had taken care to nail a Board on the inside of our
Window, to prevent his calling for help from thence. But, as I was returning to
our Chamber, I met with Monsieur Joncas, so that looking upon this as the most
seasonable opportunity that could happen, to make an excuse for what I had done
to the Turn-Key, (which is looked upon as a considerable Crime there) I began
to make heavy Complaints against him; but all what I could say upon this point
stood me but in little stead; for the Governor Monsieur de Baisenaux, who soon
guessed at the true meaning of it, would not let me come off unpunished, and
therefore removed me out of my Chamber, which was a pretty good one, to a much
worse Lodging, which by reason of its Dampness, occasioned a Rheumatism, which
took away the use of my Limbs all over one side of my Body. Notwithstanding
which, the Governor did not take the least care to appoint me a more
convenient Lodging, till the Physician of the Bastile put him into a fright,
that in all likelihood I had not long to live. This was the same Physician I
had occasion to speak of before, and I must confess, that if my present
Circumstances had not been such, as to leave me not the least room for Mirth, I
could have laughed heartily at his Ignorance. For you must know, that being
almost Blind, he laid hold of my Arm above the Elbow in order to feel my Pulse,
instead of taking hold of my Hand, and very seriously told Monsieur Joncas, who
was come along with him, that my Pulse was very weak, but he perceived no signs
of a Fever; which made Joncas Smile, and I could not forbear telling him, that
I thought the King might very well save the Money he gave him; for besides that
I knew him by Experience to be no great Conjurer in his Profession, and
consequently expected no great matter from him, he had made me a Compliment
when he visited me first of all, which was not at all pleasing to me. For being
a Creature of the Governor's, he very gravely told me, that the Chamber I was
in now, was a very handsome Lodging, and that Monsieur de Baisenaux could not
have pitched upon a more convenient one for me in the whole Bastile; though at
the same time he knew that the Chamber he had seen me in before, was much more
handsome and healthful. Thus, though I made pressing instances to be removed
from thence, I could not obtain that Favor, and saw my self under a necessity
to continue there during the whole time my Distemper lasted, which was above
six weeks; and to mend the matter, I had no body allott'd me to attend me in
lieu of my Servant, who had left me some time before, and I have all the reason
in the World to believe, that for these four Years last past, the Governor has
received an Allowance for him from the King, though I have not been in the
least the better for it. After six Weeks were expired, I began to be able to
stir my self a little again, but in so weak a condition, that the Turn-key was
forced to Dress and Undress me every day, the use of all my Limbs having been
taken away from me. My Food was suitable to my Attendance, for I had nothing
more but my ordinary Allowance, and it happening just in Lenttime, my chief
Nourishment was Pease, and now and then a small piece of a Carp.

Thus I continued for two Months longer in a state of reconvalescency, and was
scarce well recovered, when two days before the Feast of St. John, I was
suddenly, as I was sitting at Table, seized with an Apoplexy. I had forgot to
tell you before, that ever since I had been removed out of my first Chamber,
Villeroy had been separated from me; so that during the whole time of my last
Sickness, I was left destitute of all Company, unless when I saw the Turn-key.
This proved the more unfortunate to me, for I happened to be quite alone when I
was seized with this Apoplexy, and as I fell from my Chair with the Head upon
the Ground, a dangerous Contusion ensued, which I was not sensible of at first,
but proved very troublesome in its consequence. It was not long before the
Turn-key coming up in order to take away the Table-Cloath, he found me lying
upon the Floor without sense or motion. But this worthy Pillar of the Bastile
was so little moved at the sight of it, that without giving himself any further
trouble he left me as I was, and went about his business, as if it had not been
worth his while to trouble himself about a matter of so little moment; and all
the excuse he made, when he was called in question about it afterward, was,
that he thought I had been troubled with the Falling Sickness.

Villeroy, who had his Lodgings in a Chamber just under mine, and who used to
talk with me sometimes through a hole which he had made in the Cieling did call
to me aloud, but finding me to give him no answer, began to suspect some
sinister Accident had befallen me. This made him call to one of the Soldiers,
who stand Sentinels all about the Bastile, to prevent the Escape of any
Prisoners, or their having any Correspondence together through the Windows,
Villeroy, I say, desired one of these Sentinels to give notice to some of the
Officers belonging to the Bastile, that they must with all speed come to my
Chamber.

They came accordingly, and seeing me in the same Condition, as I told you
before, sent forthwith a Messenger to fetch the Apothecary belonging to the
Bastile; but as he dwelt above half a Leagre from thence, so it was a whole
Hour before he came to administer his Remedies, such as they were; for I
believe most People will easily grant me, that the Advice of an Apothecary in
so nice a case as this, is not much to be relied on.

I will however give him thus far his due, that he was a tolerable good Master
of his Art, and in this respect I was more obliged to them than if they had
sent for the Surgeon of the Prison, who had learned his Trade and served his
Apprenticeship no where but in the Governor's House, whose Domestic Servant he
actually is to this Day, and has obtained this Employment (for which he has an
Annual Sallery of four hundred Livres Yearly) by his Master's Interest, who
thus pays him his Wages out of the King's Purse.

But to return to our purpose; the Apothecary being come, applied all the
Remedies he could possibly divise, and did torment me for several Hours before
there appeared the least sign of Life in me. In the mean while Monsieur de
Baisenaux, the Governor of the Bastile, was also come into the Room, and
Villeroy hearing his Tongue among the rest that stood about me, cried out aloud
to me, that I should Cite him before the Tribunal of God, because he was the
Person who made it his business to continue all the Prisoners in the miserable
State they were in, for his filthy Lucre sake. It is to be observed, That the
Governor had been very Instrumental in preventing the Releasement of Villeroy;
which had been promised him by the Minister of State, at the Intercession of
the Marquess de Lavardin, who having sent notice of it to the Prisoner, by
Monsieur Joncas, the Deputy Governor, he was so imprudent, as to discover it to
the Turn-key who attended him in his Chamber, and the Turn-key having soon
given notice of it to the Governor, he waited on the Minister of State
immediately, and by his Intrigues overturned all that had been done by the
Marquess de Lavardin in the Prisoner's behalf. Villeroy would frequently ask
Monsieur Joncas, when he should be so fortunate as to be made sensible of the
effects of those Promises made to him? Who at last gave him for an Answer, by
Order from the Marquess de Lavardin; that if he had had a mind to get out of
Prison, he ought to have been more careful of his Tongue; and that if he
continued there longer than he expected, he must impute it to his own
Mismanagement.

But the Governor hearing him to talk at such an extravagant rate, sent word to
him instantly by one of his Turn-keys, that if he said one word more, he would
provide him his Quarters in the Dungeon. Villeroy, who but lately had been an
Eye witness of what had happened of this kind upon much less occasions than
this, had so much wit for this time, as to hold his Tongue. And to confess the
truth, it was high time for him to choose the safest way; for it was not long
before, that a Nephew of the Marquess de Castanaga, Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands, had been served such a Trick by the Governor of the Bastile; of
which I would have given you a more ample Account in this Treatise, if I did
not intend to reserve it for the Treatise of the Bastile, which I hope to
publish before long.

Being at last returned a little to my senses by the help of Bleeding, and some
other proper Remedies, Monsieur de Baisenaux, who despaired of my Life, sent
for the Almoner belonging to the Prison, unto whom I made my Confession as well
as I was able to do, I having not then recovered the use of my Tongue; and for
four Hours after, whilst the Almoner staid with me, I continued so ill, that he
expected no less than my Death every moment. After that, I began to recover all
my Senses, and consequently to be sensible of what I had not felt before; but
especially the Contusion occasioned by my fall, began to be very painful, and
at last came to a Suppuration, which issued through the Ears. The Apothecary,
who continued his Visits, looked upon it as a good sign, and assured me, that
he was certain, this would not a little contribute to the recovery of my
Health; and the Success was in some measure answerable to his Prognostication,
if that may be termed a state of Health, when a Distemper appears under a
different shape; for I was seized with a Palsy all over the right side of my
Body. Being advised to the use of the Baths, I desired the Governor of the
Bastile to intercede in my behalf with the Marquess de Barbesieux to grant me
leave to go to the Bath, and I offered sufficient Bail for my return at an
appointed time; nay, there was one of my Kinsmen who offered to be bound for
me, Body for Body, till my return from the Bath. But whether the Governor of
the Bastile did not think fit to propose it to the Minister of State, or
whether the Court would not hearken to his Intercession, I am not able to
judge; because I never received the least answer. I had then nothing left me
but patience to arm my self against the tediousness of so long an Imprisonment,
in which I am afraid, I am likely to finish my days. A very odd Recompense for
the many faithful Services I have partly done, and partly endeavored to do to
the State. The consideration of such a Fatality would be sufficient to put me
quite into Despair, if God Almighty had not been so Merciful to me as to
comfort me without intermission, by the Reflections I make upon what our
Savior, who was without all blemish, beyond what can be conceived by us
Mortals, has suffered for me; and that consequently, I who have committed so
many Sins, ought patiently to submit to those Chastizements God has been
pleased to lay upon me.

Not long before I found my self strong enough to get out of Bed, the Governor
of the Bastile had so much Humanity left, as to send me a Letter which my
Spouse had writ to me, in which she desired my Consent to a Marriage betwixt my
second Daughter and a certain Gentleman whose Name was la Brosse. I am apt to
believe this Complaisance proceeded not so much from any generous Inclination
toward me, or from the consideration of my present Condition, as from the fear
he had of disobliging the Duke de Mazarin, who not only encouraged this Match,
but also offered to give her an additional Portion of six Thousand Livres;
there wanted nothing toward bringing this Match to a conclusion, but my
Approbation in Writing, which they desired me to send with all possible speed,
and at the same time to inform them concerning the present state of my Health,
and whether I was desirous that my Spouse should come to Paris after the
Consummation of the Marriage.

The Gentleman who delivered this Letter to me, brought a Public Notary along
with him to testify my Handwriting, and he told me at the same time, that
Monsieur de Baisenaux had given leave that I might write to my Spouse, under
Condition that I should not mention any thing to her but what related to the
proposed Marriage; and that, if I inserted any thing else, he would neither
send my Letter, nor my Approbation. I leave it to any Bodies Jugdment, how
welcome a Complement this must needs be to one in that Condition I was then;
but knowing my self at the disposal of a barbarous Wretch, necessity did oblige
me to observe his Orders with the greatest exactness that could be, I took
however this Opportunity to write her a long Letter, in which I enlarged my
self upon the many Inconveniences which attend a Match, if every thing be not
pondred in all its Circumstances before its Conclusion; admonishing them to be
careful to act with all imaginable Circumspection in a thing of so nice a
nature. My Spouse having received this Letter, read it over several times, and
the oftener she perused it, the more she was convinced that this did not in the
least savor of any Indisposition of my Brains. She was indeed much surpised I
should not make the least mention of the present state of my Health, neither of
her coming to Paris; but by making serious Reflections upon the whole, she at
last hit upon the truth of the matter, and if she was not fully convinced of
it, she at least shrewdly Conjectured, that there must be some Mystery in the
bottom, which she would endeavor to discover by her coming to Paris,
immediately after the Consummation of her Daughters Marriage.

There happened also another thing, which quickened her departure. For the
Intendant of the Province of Poictou, had, according to Orders received from
Court, sent some Officers to take possession of my House in the Country, for
the payment of a Debt, which, as it was pretended, was owing from me to the
King. But my Spouse went to wait on him, and having given him to understand,
that I was a Prisoner in the Bastile, and upon what account, (which was
confirmed by the principal Inhabitants of Loudun) he withdrew his Myrmidons. My
Spouse much surprised at this Accident, of which the Intendant could not give
her a satisfactory Account, made all the haste she could to come to Paris, with
an intention to speak with me before she went to present herself before
Monsieur de Pontchatrain. The Governor of the Bastile was amazed to see her
there, after all the Pains he had taken to prevent her coming to Paris; she
told him the reason which had obliged her to come to Town, which he knew to be
no more than what was really true, because Monsieur Pontchartrain had told him,
that he had been these twelve Months looking for me, and that if he had known I
was in the Bastile, he might have saved himself that trouble.

He then told my Spouse, that he would advise her to act with a great deal of
Precaution in this Point; that I had been very ill of late, and being just now
upon my recovery, the sight of her might prove very prejudicial to my Health.
He had not Impudence enough to tell her in plain terms, that I was out of my
Senses, but being sensible that she had heard of it before; nay, that my Sister
had carried her the last time she was in Paris, to the Mad-House, to enquire
after me; he only gave her some hints of what he would have her take for Truth.
But my Spouse being resolved not to be kept any further in suspense by these,
and many other suchlike Reasons, he pretended to allege to her, told him
positively, that she would and must see me, as long as she had got leave from
Court; and that if he refused her admittance, she knew where to apply herself
for Redress.

Monsieur Baisenaux finding her so resolute, did not think it his best way to
give her a flat denial; but told her, that the Warrant she had obtained from
the Marquess de Louvois, was of no force since his Death, and that therefore
she must now apply herself to Monsieur de Pontchartrain, whose business it was
now to take Cognizance of me, as she might easily guess by what had lately
happened at her House. He offered at the same time to make use of all his
Interest with the said Minister, and to speak to him the very next opportunity
to obtain a Warrant for her.

But my Spouse being resolved not to rely upon his promise, went the next day
to wait on Monsieur de Pontchartrain, who was then at Paris, desiring his
Protection; he gave her for answer, that the only way to get me released out of
Prison, would be to engage me to give satisfaction to the King, for some words
I was accountable for to the Court. That in the mean while she should have
leave to see me, and that he would dispatch his Warrant for that purpose
immediately; Monsieur de Baisenaux, Governor of the Bastile, happened to be in
the Room at the same time, though at some distance from the Minister, who
having got sight of him, sent one of his Servants to let him know that he
wanted to speak with him. He asked him in my Spouse's Presence, whether she
might see her Husband without any Hazard or Inconveniency; Monsieur de
Baisenaux not thinking it for his purpose to contradict the Minister of State,
for fear of Exasperating my Spouse, answered, That he knew of no Inconvenicy;
and so having received Orders from his own Mouth to let her see and speak with
me. He conducted her in Person up to my Chamber, in hopes that his presence
might at least retard a discovery, which he knew must needstend to his
Confusion.

I had been some time before removed out of that Chamber where I had lain ill
so long, and was since lodged in another in the Tower of the Treasury, which
was much more wholesome for its Situation than the former. I had a
Chamber-Fellow there, who was an Englishman, and had served in the Quality of
a Captain of Foot under King James, but being fallen under Suspicion of keeping
Correspondence with the Enemy, was Committed to the Bastile; this being the
second time, for he had been there once before upon the same account. Here it
was my Spouse came to see me, and the sight of her did so much amaze me, that
what with the surprise, and the consideration of finding my self thus neglected
by her, I gave her but a cold Reception, which so startled the poor Creature,
that she was ready to Swoun away.

This was the first step toward the discovery so much feared by the Governor,
who did all what in him lay to prevent it, by interrupting us in our Discourse;
but no sooner did my Spouse hear me reproach her with want of Duty and Care,
but she disclosed the whole Mystery in the Governor's presence. If I was
surpised at the sight of her, I stood quite amazed at the recital she made me
of his Treachery, which was of so heinous a nature, that nothing could be
beyond it; and I am almost convinced, that if his Majesty were rightly informed
of it, he would according to his Justice, make the Governor pay for it with no
less than the loss of his Place.

My Spouse, who could not forbear crying when I reproached her with her want of
Love, was all overwhelmed with Grief, when she saw me in the condition I was
in, Lame and Helpless, not being able to stir one of my Hands and Legs. After
many Tears, Sighs and Sobbs, she at last told me concerning the Seizure of the
Intendant of Poictou, and what Monsieur de Pontchartrain had told her about my
being accountable for Words to the King; protesting, That if nothing else was
in the way to obtain my Liberty, she would set all at stake, to deliver me out
of Prison. She desired me, to satisfy her thus far, as to let her know, what
account it was I had with the Court about words against the King that she might
be able to give a satisfactory Answer to Monsieur de Pontchartrain, at her next
Audience. I told her that this Discourse was a Riddle to me, which I did not
know how to unfold; being sure that I had not the least Concerns with the Court
upon account of words, or any thing like it. That she was sensible herself,
that my Business had always been Soldiery, that I had left France very young,
and had lived Abroad twenty Years, that she was an Eye witness of what I had
done ever since; and that therefore, she needed but to consult her own
Conscience, to tell the Minister of State what she was sure of by her own
knowledge, as well as my self.

The Governor of the Bastile, who is obliged to give frequent Attendance to
this Minister, by reason of his Employment, took once the opportunity to give
him to understand, what I had declared upon that Head, which having induced
Monsieur de Pontchartrain to make a more narrow enquiry into the matter, he
found that it was not I, who was accountable to the King, but one Fontenai, who
having been a Commissioner of the Navy, was accused of Malversation in his
Office, he having been employed to buy a considerable quantity of Wood for the
King's use, to be employed in the building of some Men of War.

My Spouse coming sometime after to wait on the Minister of State, he told her
that the Intendant had been mistaken in Seizing upon my Estate; and she
entreating him to order my Releasement, he answered, That it did not belong to
him, but that she must make her Application to the Marquess de Barbesieux.

Accordingly she desired Audience of the said Marquess, and represented to him
(in hopes to move him to Compassion) that one half of my Body being seized with
a Palsy, she begged of him to take pity upon her and me, and to grant me my
Liberty. But whether the Governor of the Bastile had by his malicious
Insinuations gained his point against me, as well with the Son, as with the
Father, the Marquess de Louvois, or whether it was that the misery of others
made not any considerable impression upon this young Minister of State, he gave
her this unexpected answer; That it was his Opinion, she needed not be so much
concerned at my Imprisonment, and that in lieu of looking upon it as a
Misfortune on her side, she might rather wish that in lieu of one side of my
Body, both were seized with the Palsy.

I will give every body leave to judge, what were my Thoughts when my Spouse
gave me an Account of this Entertainment; and I must freely confess, that being
satisfied in my own Conscience of my Innocence, and how little I had deserved
such a harsh Treatment, I was upon the point of laying Violent Hands upon my
self (as many others have done in this unfortunate Prison, of which, more in my
Treatise of the Bastile) but that God Almighty was pleased to assist me with
his Mercy in a most peculiar manner against these Temptations. My Spouse, who
as you may imagine, was not able to hear such an answer without shedding a
Torrent of Tears, could not contain herself from bursting out into Tears
afresh, when she gave me an Account of it: so that though I was the Person that
stood most of all in need of Comfort, I was forced to be her Comforter.

I have been credibly informed since by one of the Officers belonging to the
Bastile, that this harsh Treatment (was not owing so much to the Insinuations
of the Governor of the Bastile, or to the carelessness of this young Minister
of State, as to the maliciousness of Chapelier, (whom I have mentioned before)
who after his Releasement out of Prison, had, as it seems, told his Kinsman,
the Marquess de Barbesieux, that I had spoken slightingly of his Family, a
thing which never in the least entered my Thoughts.

Finding my self thus bereaved of all Humane Assistance, I turned all my
Thoughts to God, unto whose entire disposal I submitted both my self and
Family; I spent much of my time in endeavoring to bring over my Spouse to the
same Resignation, in representing to her, that considering every thing God had
been pleased: through his Mercy to order every thing for the best, in order to
draw me from the love of the World, unto which I had formerly resigned most of
my affections; nay, that he had been pleased to order matters for the best, in
respect of our Family, which in all likelihood, would scarce have been in so
good a Condition, if he had not laid this Affliction upon me; that two of our
Daughters were Married already, and that I did not doubt, God would find means
for her to dispose of the rest of her Children without my Assistance. She
earnestly desired me to give her leave to throw herself at His Majesty's Feet,
to implore His Mercy in my behalf, which I did consent to, merely not to
disoblige her, and to give some satisfaction to the rest of my Family, though
at the same time, I was of Opinion, that this would rather do me harm than
good, being sensible that the King always gives such Petitions as are presented
to him, to his Ministers of State; and these Ministers, who look upon it as a
Diminution of their Authority, if Businesses do not pass through their Hands,
do commonly oppose themselves to those Petitions. This is so general a Maxim at
the French Court, that you shall scarce ever see a true bred Courtier speak to
the King in private, unless they first have Communicated their Business to the
Ministers of State.

I remember very well, that the Cardinal of Fustenburgh himself, some years
ago, when the King had most occasion of his Interest, durst never attempt to
speak to his Majesty of any Business of Moment, before he had consulted about
it with the Marquess de Louvois, of whom he was, as it may be said, to ask
permission beforehand.

The Sequel of the Business was a convincing Argument that I had not been
mistaken in my guess; for my Spouse's Petition was delivered to the Marquess de
Barbesieux, and, as I was fully convinced, what Entertainment she would meet
with, if she came to him for an Answer, I would not put her to the trouble of
it. The Governor of the Bastile being not ignorant how her Affairs went at
Court, and understanding that she had taken a Resolution to throw herself a
second time at His Majesty's Feet to beg his Mercy, in order to my Relief,
without being forced to have recourse to the Ministers of State, he advised her
by all means, not to do it; for he was not a little afraid, lest his Majesty,
according to his wonted Bounty, should grant to a distressed Foreigner, what he
would not do upon any other consideration; especially, if he might be prevailed
upon to peruse her Petition. This advice he seconded by another, which had not
the least color of truth; but which, as malicious as it is, is altogether
suitable to the honesty of a Man of his Character, as I have had sufficient
occasion to show before. He was pleased to tell her, that he could not but
admire, she should give herself so much trouble to release me, which he looked
upon as the direct way to reduce her and her Family to the last extremity,
which she could not be insensible of, if she would but take the pains to make
serious Reflections upon what was past; that she ought to remember how by my
ill Conduct I had entangled my Estate, and that I would never be at rest till I
had spent all, if I was set at Liberty; and that therefore his advice was, that
it would be better both for herself and her Family to leave me where I was,
where I stood her in nothing, and that at the same time he would take effectual
care I should be as well used as if I were his own Brother.

My Spouse was so extremely exasperated at his Impudence, that she had much to
do to forbear flying in his Face, and gave him such a Reprimand as gave him to
understand that she was resolved to do all what belonged to a Dutiful Wife to
do upon such an Emergency as this, notwithstanding all his Pretenses, and the
next time she saw me, she gave me a very ample Account of what had passed
betwixt them, notwithstanding one of his Officers was present at the same time.

To conclude the whole, after she had taken many a troublesome Journey to
Versailles, in order to solicit my Releasement with the King, and the
Ministers of State, finding all her pains lost, and that she was as far from
the Mark as ever, and Harvest time drawing near, she was forced to return into
the Country, without the least hopes of ever obtaining my Liberty. For this
reason it is, that I thought my self obliged to publish these Memoirs, to
satisfy the World, that if I happen to die in Prison, it is not on the Account
of any Crimes I have been guilty of against Mankind; for as to those committed
against God Almighty, I confess, they are such as deserve a much greater
Punishment at his Hands.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE.
A
AN Abbot commits a Rape upon a German Woman. Page 108. Is accused of the same,
and makes up the Matter with her. p. 111. Altenoe Besieged by Coningsmark. p.
80. Is Valiantly Defended by the Roman Catholic Inhabitants. p. 81. Is
threatened with a second Siege. p. 84. The Ambassador of Portugal Besieged in
his House in London. p. 14. The Spanish Ambassador's House Pillaged by the Mob
in London. p. 196. The Danish Ambassador in Paris, makes enquiry after some
Jewels in the possession of Monsieur de la Fontaine. p. 122. The Apothecary of
the Bastile. p. 359. Almoner of the Bastile. p. 361. Artus, Duke of Britany. p.
1 Monsieur d'Asfeld sent to Liege. p. 146. The Count d'Avaux sent as French
Ambassador to King James in Ireland. p. 156. Duke d'Aumont, Governor of
Bologne. p. 210, 212.
B.
THE Lord of B... p. 168. Baisenaux, Governor of the Bastile, his Birth, Riches
and Artifices. p. 298, 299, 300. A Banker of London draws his Bill of Exchange
upon Monsieur de la Fontaine. p. 267. The Marquess de Barbesieux. p. 367. His
Answer. p. 368 Mrs. de la Bar, her Amors with the Baron de Casenavre. p. 39,
40. Mr. de la Bar a Councellor of Angiers, a good drunken Companion. p. 42.
Is Bubbled by the Baron of Casenavre. p. 43, 44. Monsieur Barillon the French
Ambassador in England, is struck by an English Gentleman. p. 197. John du Bart
taken by the English. p. 173. Monsieur de Bass sent to London, p. 11. Is
declared Envoy Extraordinary for France. p. 12. Is recalled. p. 15. Battle of
Dunkirk. p. 27. Battle of St. Godard. p. 52, 53. Prince Joseph Clement of
Bavaria Elected Archbishop of Cologn. p. 145. Is Confirmed by the Pope. Ibid.
Barille Intendant of Poictou, receives Orders from Court to examine the
procedures of the Judges in a Case of Sacrilege. p. 136 Monsieur Blesserie is
jealous of Monsieur de la Fontaine. p. 24, 25. Monsieur Bordeaux the elder,
Intendant of the Finances. p. 3. Monsieur Bourdeaux, his Son. Ibid. Is sent
Envoy Entraordinary into England. p. 4. Was likely to be shot in his Coach. p.
10. Is declared French Ambassador Extraordinary in England. p. 11. Prevails
with Lambert and Harrison, by the means of a good Bribe. p. 12. He makes Love
to Monsieur de la Fontaine's Lady. p. 20. makes use of a Bawd to procure her
Consent. p. 22. Obtains a Pardon for her Brother. Ibid. K. Charles II. refuses
to admit him to his Audience. p. 28. Is recalled. Ibid. His Difference with
Monsieur Colbert. p. 30. His Death. p. 31. Madam de Bordeaux retires into the
Country to avoid the Courtship of the Gallants. p. 4. Returns to Paris. p. 5.
Her Father Bankrupt. p. 7. The Cardinal de Bouillon, the French King consents
but too late, to his being Elected Bishop of Liege. p. 148. Elector of
Brandenburgh declares against France. p. 74. Enters Westphalia, and the
Electorate of Cologn. Ibid. Concludes a Treaty with France to stand Neuter. p.
75. Breaks it. p. 76. Is present at the Conference betwixt the Allies at the
Hague, and Defeats the Swedes. p. 79. Bailiffs their Ears cut off. p. 48. Some
of them killed p. 49.
C.
THE Camp of Broussaille. p. 160. Madam Caravas challenges Riperda in disguise.
p. 63. Is secured. p. 64. Loses her Lawsuit against Riperda. Ibid. The Baron
of Casenavre Marries Mrs. la Bar at Angiers. p. 42. Bernard Cesuet, Bailiff
of Loudun his Daughter has an Intrigue with his Servant. p. 132. His Wife
suborns a false Witness. p. 135. A Canon of Beauvais debauches a young Maid. p.
326. Enters upon a design against some other Canons. p. 327. Is carried to the
Prison of Vincennes. p. 329. Is put to the Rack. p. 331. And Executed. p. 333.
The Canons of Liege, are composed of Persons of diverse Nations and Degrees. p.
146. Chapelier de Villefort, used to dress himself in Woman's Apparel. p. 334.
Gets under that disguise into a Monastery. p. 340. Is discovered, and scourged.
Ibid. Is committed to the Bastile. p. 347, Is set at Liberty. p. 352. The Count
de Chateau-Renault commands a Squadron of Ships to conduct some Forces into
Ireland. p. 153. He puts into Bantry-Bay. p. 158. Where he Engages the English
Fleet. Ibid The Surgeon of the Bastile a Servant to the Governor p. 360.
Christian, a French Protestant, a French Spy in England. p. 205, 206, 214.
Treaty of Peace at Cologn. p. 78. Custom-House Officers of Peronne search
Monsieur de la Fontaine's Baggage, p. 98. One of them kills his Fellow Officer.
p. 99. A Father Confessor could not prevail upon Monsieur de la Fontaine to
forgive his Enemies. p. 313. Coningsmark General of the Sweedish Army, Besieges
Altenoe. p. 80. Raises the Siege. p. 81. Endeavors to Relieve Stetin, but in
vain. p. 83. Ravages about Altenoe. p. 84. A Grave Councellor of the Parliament
of Paris makes Love to the supposed Countess of Meru. p. 338. The Coast about
Port-Lowis sounded. p. 251, 248, 249. The Prince of Courland marches with his
Troops to the assistance of the Emperor. p. 51. Returns from that Expedition.
p. 53. Crible stabs one with a Knife. p. 11. A Cook serves for a Priest to
Marry Monsieur de la Fontaine. p. 18. The Marquess de Crussol. p. 356, 357. A
French Coiner committed Prisoner at Sardam. p. 89. Is released by some Roman
Catholics. p. 90. He turns Catholic. Ibid. A Country Gentleman falls in Love
with Chapelier disguised in Woman's Apparel. p. 335. Is contracted to her in
Marriage. p. 337. Deliberations at the French Court about the Imprisoning of
some French Protestant Gentlemen. p. 226. Des Isles Montalt, a famous
Councellor at Loudun. p. 230, 265. Dearth in France. p. 350, 352. A Dog a
Letter Carrier in the Bastile. p. 293. Desgrees a noted Messenger at the French
Court. p. 284, 285. The Dean of the Chapter of Liege Elected Bishop. p. 147,
148. Dourlans a Prisoner in the Bastile. p. 314, 326. Is set at Liberty. p.
333. Dragoons quartered upon the Protestants at Loudun. p. 141.
E.
THE Al bot d'Etrangues. p. 334, 335. The Marshal d'Estrees. p. 162
F.
TWO False Evidences betrayed by a third. p. 135. they confess their Crime. p.
136 The Duke de la Fevillade. p. 51. his conduct at the Battle of St. Godard.
p. 52 Monsieur de la Fontaine (John Baptist) his Birth. p. 1. his Arms. p. 2.
he got a young Wench with Child when he was scarce 16 years old. Ibid. serves
as a Cadee in the French Guards. p. 3. is wounded. Ibid. fights with one St.
Lewis. p. 5. is suspected of being in Love with Madam de Bordeaux. p. 7. is
droven by a Tempest upon the Coast of Norway. p. 8. is likely to be Married at
Bergen in Norway. p. 9. comes to London. p. 10. is made Secretary to the French
Ambassador in London. p. 11. is married by the Ambassador's Cook, p. 18. and
afterward by a Justice of Peace. p. 19. returns into France. p. 23. is wounded
in the Hip. p. 26. obtains a Cornet's Commission. Ibid. is wounded in the
Cheek. p. 27. he sells a pretended Benefice to a certain Lawyer. p. 32, 33.
Marries one Mrs. Launoy. p. 37. challenges the Duke de Brissack p. 38. is made
Gentleman of the Horse, and Ensign of the Guards to the Prince of Courland. p.
51. is sent into Muscovy. p. 54. is obliged to leave the Court of Courland. p.
56. he is made a Lieutenant Colonel by the Elector of Brandenburgh. p. 57. is
married to Mrs. Franckestein. p. 65. is made Governor of Altenoe. p. 70. is
taken into Custody at Peronne. p. 100. is discharged. p. 102. he settles
himself near Loudun. p. 114. is taken for a Physician at Tours. p. 130. is made
Brigadier by the French King to serve in Ireland. p. 151. Embarks at Crosil. p.
165. is taken by the Enemy. p. 167. Corresponds with the Marquess de Louvois.
p. 175. is conducted to London. p. 176. Introduced to the Duke of S... p. 180.
he engages to debauch the French Arrierban. p. 193. sends sends Advice to
France. p. 195. arrives safely at Calais. p. 208. is harshly treated at Bologn.
p. 209, 210. becomes very familiar with Christian's Niec^. p. 211, 212. comes
to Paris. Ibid. is introduced to the French King. p. 216. and to the Marquess
de Louvois. p. 217. he is sent to Port Lowis. p. 227. is ordered to write into
England. p. 250, 260. is sent into Poictou. p. 152. returns to Paris, and gives
an Account of his late Transactions to that Minister of State. p. 165, 166. he
is carried Prisoner to the Bastile. p. 286. falls ill of a Dropsy. p. 312. is
reported to be mad. p. 350. is seized with a Rheumatism, p. 357. Madam de la
Fontain is solicited by a Jacobin Friar. p. 82. renounces Lutheranism, and
turns Catholic. p. 83 waits on Monsieur de Pontchartrain, and obtains leave to
see her Husband. p. 365. meets with a cold Reception from him. p. 366. The Duke
de la Force a Prisoner in the Bastile. p. 295. Monsieur de Fouquet made
Super-Intendant of the Finances. p. 7. Fourbin, Captain of a Frigate is taken by
the English. p. 173. makes his escape. p. 174 The Cardinal de Fourbin. p. 327,
328, 329. Franckenstein, eldest Brother to Madam de la Fontaine, a Colonel of
Horse. p. 65. he gets his Mothers Jewels into his Possession. p. 68. gives them
upon his Deathbed to his Sister. p. 69. Franckenstein the younger Brother, a
Captain. p. 65. his death. p. 67. The Cardinal of Fustemburgh is violently
carried away from Cologn. p. 78. is made Coadjutor of Cologn. p. 143.
G.
GArenne, one of the Officers of the Bastile. p. 290, 292. Gent Lieutenant
Admiral of Holland. p. 57. His Prudence. p. 58 Some French Gentlemen
Desperadoes, fortify themselves in a certain Castle. p. 49. blow themselves up
into the Air. p. 51. Some Gentlemen in Poictou taken into Custody. p. 283.
Colonel Gerard fights with the Portuguese Ambassador's Brother. p. 13. is taken
and Beheaded. p. 15. Colonel Graham taken at Dover. p. 201. Granville, a
Captain of an English Man of War. p. 168
H.
HAmilton is repulsed at the attacking of a Mill. p. 186. Heron, Register of
the Chapter of Beauvais. p. 330. is sent to the Bastile. Ibid. is discharged.
p. 333. The French Hugonots fall was forseen by all but themselves. p. 131. the
Catholics were encouraged to insult them. p. 132
I.
JAnsenists, Canons of Beauvais banished. p. 327 James II. King of England
endeavors to establish the Catholic Religion in opposition to the Laws. p.
149. makes his escape into France. p. 150. he goes for Ireland. p. 155 John
Baptist de la Fontaine, see Fontaine. The Intendant of Tourain seizes upon
Monfieur de la Fontaine's Estate. p. 364 Joncas, an Exempt of the Guards, made
Deputy-Lieutenant of the Bastile. p. 344
K.
MAjor General Kirk. p. 183. relieves Londonderry. p. 187.
L.
THE Marquess* de Lavardin. p. 260. Monsieur de Laubanie, Governor of Calais.
p. 208 Mrs. Launoy Courted by Monsieur de la Fontaine. p. 35 she refuses a good
match upon his Account. p. 36 she is married to him p. 37. the said Marriage
declared null. p. 117. she is married to another Person. Ibid. she makes an
Agreement with Monsieur de la Fontaine. p. 118 The Count de Lausun conducts the
Queen of England, and Prince of Wales, into France. p. 150 Mr. Leugny marries
Monsieur de la Fontaine's eldest Daughter. p. 350. comes to Paris to see her
Father. p. 351. returns without seeing him. p. 352 Lewis XIV. King of France,
sends 6000 Men to assist the Dutch. p. 58. is obliged to make Peace with the
Spaniards. p. 62. declares War against the Dutch. p. 71. sends his Troops into
Germany, and attacks Philipsburgh. p. 150. receives Monsieur de la Fontaine
very favorably. p. 216 Londonderry besieged, and in distress for provisions.
p. 184. they defend themselves bravely. p. 185. Death of their Governor. p.
186. is relieved. p. 187 Prince Lewis Great-Master of the Teutonick Order,
presents himself at Liege. p. 146 The Marquess de Louvois dictates certain
Letters to Monsieur de la Fontaine to be sent into England. p. 250, 265.
resolves to sacrifice him to the Interest of the State. p. 278
M.
MAyence besieged and taken by the Duke of Lorain. p. 151 Malet a Protestant
Councellor, a Prisoner in the Bastile. p. 313, 317, 320 The Duke of Mazarin, a
devout Person. p. 240. he gives a Dowry to Monsieur de la Fontaine's Daughter.
p. 362 Maux Sub-dean of Liege. p. 147. My Lord Melfort. p. 157 The Countess of
Meru in disguise. p. 340 Minister, a Protestant Minister defends Londonderry.
p. 186 Some Ministers of Poictou propose ^ rising in that Province. p. 188
Monmont a French Officer of note killed. p. 185 My Lord Montjoy committed to
the Bastile. p. 155 The Countess of Montperoux. p. 336, 337 Insolence of a
Musqueteer. p. 57. is condemned to death, and pardoned. p. 58 The Bishop of
Munster quits the French Party. p. 76
N.
A Nephew of the Marquess de Castanaga thrown into the Dungeon. p. 361
Niccoburgh, a Captain of a Dutch Man of War. p. 167 Norway full of Bears and
Sorcerers. p. 9
O.
FRench Protestant Officers enter into the service of the Prince of Orange. p.
202 The Roman Catholic Officers refuse that service. Ibid. they are not able
to get into Ireland. p. 249. are ordered to return into France. p. 250. they
come to Paris. p. 267. The Prince of Orange makes a Descent upon England. p.
149. puts a Guard upon King James. Ibid. his prodigious Success. p. 150. made
King of England. p. 171. The Count de Ossane in Love with the Princess of
Courland. p. 55. he fights with, and is wounded by Monsieur de la Fontaine. p.
56. he leaves that Court. Ibid.
P.
THE Elector Palatine quits the French Party. p. 76 Don Pantaleon, de la fights
with Colonel Gerard. p. 13. escapes out of Prison by the assistance of Madam
Mohun. p. 14. is delivered up into Custody. p. 15. is Beheaded. Ibid. Picard, a
Captain of a French* Frigate, is taken after a brave resistance. p. 168 Port
Lowis. p. 243. The East-India-House near it. p. 243 Prancourt, a Swiss, and a
French Spy in England, deceives the French Court. p. 220. is Imprisoned in the
Bastile. p. 221 The Prince of Wales taken for a Supposititious Child even
before his Birth. p. 150 Some Prisoners delivered by force. p. 45. Prisoners
made at the Battle of Fleurus, are conducted to Vincennes. p. 313 The
Protestants retire out of Ireland into England. p. 154 Pusignon a French
Officer of note killed in Ireland p. 185
Q.
MOnsieur de Quesne commands the French Flee^. p. 178 the King grants him the
free exercise of his Religion. Ibid.
R.
RAS a Physician and pretended Magician, a Prisoner in the Bastile. p. 314
Rasfeld the Brandenburgh General besieges Locknits. p. 79. obtains a Victory.
Ibid. Recollects, their Church restored to them at Altenoe. p. 81 Riperda
marries Mrs. Caravas. p. 63 Rochelle its Fortifications. p. 252 Rose, an old
Servant of Monsieur de la Fontaine's Father. p. 121 Rose Commander in chief of
the French Troops in Ireland. p. 155, 184, 185
S.
SAlisbury animosity of the Mobb against the French p. 176 La Salle Governor of
the Citadel of Liege. p. 149 The Marshal de Schombergh General of the English
Forces. p. 177. formerly General in Portugal. p. 177 made Count de Mertola. p.
180. General of the French Army in Catalonia. p. 177. is made Marshal of France
Ibid: raises the Siege of Maestricht. Ibid. he leaves France on the account of
his Religion* p. 178. retires to the Court of Brandenburgh. p. 179. from thence
to Holland. ibid. is made Duke and Peer of England. p. 180 The Shout of Zwoll
takes up a Priest whilst he was saying Mass in a private place. p. 87. is
threatened by the French Soldiers in Garrison there. ibid. the rising of the Mob
about his House: p. 88: he is deposed: p. 89 Mock-Sieges in the Thuelleries. p.
4 Soldiers Ravish a young Wench, and set Fire to the House: p. 161 Sewell an
Englishman, a Prisoner in the Bastile. p. 290 makes his Escape. p. 291 Stetin
blocked up. p. 83. is besieged. p. 84: is forced to surrender. p. 85
T.
THE Earl of Tyrconnel: p. 153, 154 The Earl of Torrington Admiral of England:
p: 168: he chooses rather to quit his Places at Court than to change his
Religion: ibid: The Count de Tourville Vice Admiral of France, enters Breast: p:
171 Treaty betwixt France and Cromwell. p. 12 A Treatise of the Bastile promised
to be published. p. 361 The Marshal de Turenne. p. 74. he pursues the Elector
of Brandenburgh. p. 75. a great General: p. 77
V.
ONE English Vessel fights and takes two French Frigates at once. p. 173 A Valet
du Chamber of Monsieur de la Fontaine plays several Pranks in the Bastile. p.
315. he betrays his Master p. 347. gets out of the Bastile. p. 349: he pretends
that his Master is mad. p. 355 Monsieur de Vaux joint Surveyer with Monsieur de
la Fontaine. p: 228 Monsieur de la Vienne first Groom of the King's
Bedchamber. p: 215, 216 The Marquess de Ville Governor of Brussels. p. 97
Villeroy, a Lorrain Officer Imprisoned in the Bastile: p. 293. he fancies
himself to be tormented by a Spirit. p: 316, 317, 318 Monsieur Voile Controler
of the Mint sent to the Bastile. p. 286. he is released by means of a good Sum
of Money. p. 289
W.
MOnsieur de Webbenum one of the States General p: 64 Wrangel, the Sweedish
General takes several Places from the Elector of Brandenburgh. p. 78. he loses
a Battle. p. 79. his death. ibid.
Z.
ZWoll, Mutiny of the Roman Catholics of that City: p. 87, 88

