AN EXACT ABRIDGEMENT OF THE RECORDS IN THE TOWER of LONDON, From the reign of
King Edward the Second, unto King Richard the Third, of all the Parliaments
holden in each Kings reign, and the several Acts in every Parliament: Together
with the Names and Titles of all the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons, summoned to every of the said Parliaments. COLLECTED By Sir ROBERT
COTTON Knight and Baronet. Revised, rectified in sundry mistakes, and supplied
with a Preface, Marginal Notes, Several Omissions, and Exact Tables, both of
the Special Matters, Great Officers Speakers, Nobles, and other Persons therein
contained. By WILLIAM PRYNNE Esquire, a Bencher of Lincolns Inn.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake Stationer, at the Crown in Fleetstreet,
between the two Temple Gates, 1657.

The Preface to the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER,
HAving already published to the World, a In the 3. First Parts of my
Seasonable, Legal, Historical Vindication, and Chronological Collection of the
Good old Fundamental Liberties, Rights, Laws, etc. of all English Freemen.
Chronological Epitome, or Summary Collection of all the extant Parliamentary
Councils, Synods, and public State-Assemblies held within the Realm of Great
Britain, upon several Occasions, from the Britons first arival in it under King
Brute, (as our old Historians generally assert) till the Coronation of King
William the Norman, Anno Dom. 1066. (containing the space of 2390 years, or
thereabouts, after the computation of the Col. 725.
Chronicle of Bromton, and Marianus Scotus, Florentius Wigorniensis, Mat.
Westminster.
others;) And having likewise an intention (if God shall vouchsafe me life,
health, liberty, opportunity and encouragements) to collect and publish, an
Exact Chronological History of all the Great Councils, Synods, Parliaments,
State Assemblies, and the several Consultations, Debates, Acts, Edicts, Laws,
Statutes, Ordinances, Judgments, Petitions, Proceedings in them, and Writs of
Summons to them, extant either in Histories or Records, and all other useful
Records, from the crowning of K. William the first, Anno 1066. till the end of
the reign of K. Charles, 1648. A most necessary, profitable, useful Work, (never
yet undertaken by any to my knowledge) tending much to the Honor of our
English Nation, the Dignity of our Parliaments and Great Councils, the
advancement of our Laws, and Learning; the information, instruction of the
present times, and future ages, in our Parliamentary and State affairs of
greatest concernment; the enabling Members of Parliament both to know,
discharge their Duties, and maintain their ancient Privileges, Jurisdictions,
better than in former times; the preservation of our usefullest Parliamentary
Rolls, Journals, and other Records from Suppression, Embezlement, Oblivion, and
to rectify sundry Gross mistakes both in our printed Statutes, Law Books, and
Vulgar Historians: The completing of which vast undertaking requiring more
toylsom Study, Cost, expense, and time, than yet I can bestow thereon: I
thereupon apprehended, that I could not (in the Interim) perform a more
profitable Service to my Country, conducing toward the furtherance of that
great Undertaking, than (at the earnest importunity of the Stationer, and some
special Friends) to contribute my best directions, assistance toward the
printing and publishing of this Exact Abridgement of the Parliamentary Records
in the Tower of London, from the reign of King Edward 2. unto King Richard the
3. collected (as is generally voiced, believed) by that most eminent
industrious Collector of our best, rarest English Antiquities, Manuscripts,
Leger-books, Records of all sorts, Sir ROBERT COTTON, whose famous Name and
Memory alone, are sufficient to add more praise and luster to this
Abridgement, than any Panegyrical Epistle I am able to prefix thereto.

This Exact Abridgement being licensed for the Press, before the Stationer
brought it me to peruse, I thereupon diligently read over the Copy, (belonging
formerly to a person of quality, curiously bound up, gilt, and written in a
very fair hand;) wherein I corrected several verbal mistakes of the Clerk in
the Transcribing, and comparing it with another Transcript of mine own,
supplied some blank spaces in it, together with the Abridgements of the whole
Parliaments of 21 E. 3. and 4. and 16. Rich. 2. the explanation of the Charter
of the Stanneries in the Parliament of 50 E. 3. the Abridgment of the beginning
of the 1. Parliament of 5 R. 2. to numb. 14. with the end of 15 R. 2. n. 36.
etc. (wholly omitted in the Stationers Copy) without any alteration (except in
the Clerks misprisions) in, or addition to the Text it self, to avoid the
Censure of being an over-officious Critic in another deceased honorable
persons Posthumus Work.

After which perusal of the Copy, finding neither Notes of direction in the
Margin, nor Tables in the end of this Abridgement, to direct the Reader readily
to find out the principal things, or Names of persons therein comprised; I
thereupon supplied these defects, with such Marginal Notes, and Tables thereto
annexed, as might render it most useful to the Buyers: comprizing the
Principal matters therein contained, together with the Names of the Nobles, and
other persons mentioned therein, in Alphabetical Tables, with the names of the
Admirals, Chancellors, Constables, Marshals, Judges, Protectors, Privy Seals,
Speakers of Parliament, Stewards of the Kings House, and other Great Officers
mentioned in it, in a Chronological Order; with the years, Sections, Pages
wherein they are recorded. Which additional Supplements will render it much
more useful and beneficial to the Reader upon all occasions, than it would
have been without them.

The Subject matter of this Exact Abridgement consisting wholly of Records or
Rolls of Parliament, and the principal matters of greatest public and private
concernment in Peace or War, debated, adjudged, transacted in this supremest
Court of the Realm, both for Judicature and Consultation, with the Names of all
the Nobility summoned to, or created in our Parliaments, (never formerly
published in print, and generally unknown to most Judges, Lawyers, Historians,
Gentlemen, Bookmen of all Professions) will sufficiently blazon and proclaim
its Eminency, Utility, Excellency, Complacency, and Desirableness to every
intelligent Reader, beyond all other late publications, and uncertain Reports
of private Persons or Cases lately published, or any Histories yet set forth,
without any other Proemial Encomiums; yea the manifold discoveries it makes of
the Variances of sundry printed Statutes from the Parliament Records both in
form and substance, and of diverse bastard Statutes put in print, never extant
on Record (which Sir Edward Cook has gleaned out of this Abridgement, and
inserted into his 4 Institutes p. 50, 51, 52. though he there assumes the first
discovery and honor of it to himself alone) will undeniably demonstrate, how
worthy it is the most serious perusal of the greatest, as well as meanest
Professors of the Law; who commonly take all printed Statutes, and Reverend Sir
Edward Cooks often mistaken Records, for undoubted Oracles, without comparing
them with the original Records themselves, out of overmuch laziness or
credulity.

If any supercilious persons shall disdain or slight it, because it is but an
Abridgement, and so not comparable to the Records themselves at large; or
object out of Sir Edward Cooks Reports and Institutes (who often forgot this
lesson himself inculcates,) Satius, et tutius est petere fontes, quam sectari
rivulos.

I answer, That though the Parliament Rolls and Journals themselves at large,
are far more authentic, useful, beneficial, satisfactory and desirable, than
any Epitome of them (were they published in print) in sundry respects,
comprizing many material things, Commissions, Circumstances, etc. in them,
which Abridgements must necessarily omit, or but briefly touch, to make them
Abbreviations; yet Exact Abridgements of them are of very good use, and in some
regards, which I shall but touch, to be preferred before the Records at large.

1. Abridgements comprise in one small volume, the marrow, quintessence, and
most remarkable useful materials comprised in many large Records, and
Voluminous Tomes; as one precious Jewel or small piece of Gold contains within
it the value of many pieces and pounds of Iron, Brass, Tinn, Silver; and one
sheet in a small Pica letter, the substance of many sheets set in Capitals.

2. They omit and pare away all superfluities, Impertinences, matters,
circumstances of less moment, wherewith the Records and Voluminous Authors
abridged, are some times over-stuffed.

3. They are more portable from place to place than the Records and Volumes
they abridge; and more ready at hand upon all occasions.

4. They are of far lower price than the Records and Volumes abridged in
them, which every Scholars, Students purse will not reach to purchase, though
he has stock enough to buy their Epitomes. The Transcripts of the Records at
large here abridged, will hardly be purchased for 200 l. when as this
Abridgement of them will not cost above 20 s. printed. You may buy Brooks
Abridgement of the Year-books for 30 or 40 s. whereas the Year-books it
abridgeth will cost near as many pounds.

5. They are very Sir Henry Wotton his Aphorisms of Education, p. 305.
helpful to memory, and of very good private use to those Noblemen, Country
Gentlemen and others, who have no spare time to read much, and show a short
course to those who are desirous to know a little, but not to understand
overmuch, making their Studies only their Recreation, not their Occupation.

6. They are read over with more ease, speed, delight, less labor and
fastidiousness, than the Records and Volumes they abridge: You may read over
the substance of more Parliamentary Records in this Abridgement in your Studyes
in one week, than you can read at large in the Tower of London in one whole
year, without taking pains to repair thither to the Originals, which few can
read in the hands, and fewer understand in the Languages they are written,
being for the most part bastard Law-French.

7. Abridgements have been reputed so necessary, useful in all Arts, Sciences;
as Divinity, Philosophy, Physic, Surgery, History; See Summa Raymundi,
Summa Angelica, Summa Rosella, Hostiensis Summa: and others.
Canon, Civil and Common Law, that we meet with almost infinite Epitomies,
Summaries, Sums, Abridgements, Manuals, Breviaries of the best and chiefest
Authors, or Materials in every of them, both in ancient and modern times. To
confine my self only to my own profession of the Common Law. The several
Abridgements of Statham; of Sir Anthony Fitzherbert, and Sir Robert Brook (two
reverend learned Judges) of the Year-books at large under several Titles
heretofore; of Mr. Thomas Ash his Table General to the Common Law of England
(naught else but an Epitome thereof under heads.) The Abridgement of the Book
of Assizes, printed by Richard Tottle, Anno 1555. The several late Abridgements
of Dyers, Plowdens, and Sir Edward Cooks Reports; and of our Statutes at large,
by Mr. Justice Rastall, Poulton, Dalton, the Author of the Complete Justice,
Mr. Wingate and others (much magnified by all the Professors of the Law, and
Country Justices of Peace, yea, made use of more than the Books and Statutes
at large abridged by them) are a sufficient argument of the Utility,
Convenience, and Necessariness of Abridgements. And if these Abridgements of
our printed Statutes and Law Books at large, (common in every shop and private
Study) be so useful, grateful, necessary; how far more useful, excellent,
necessary, desirable, delightful must this Exact Abridgement be, of our rarest
Parliament Records and Rolls, never yet published to the world in print, and
mere strangers unto most Judges, Justices, Lawyers, Statesmen, Parliament Men,
Historians, Scholars themselves, as well as to ordinary Plebeians, and rendering
the substance of those excellent Records in English, which are for the most
part enrolled in the French or Latin tongue, which few can readily read or
understand?

Yet though Exact Abridgements of Laws, Lawbooks, Statutes, Histories, Records,
and other voluminous Authors be very useful and necessary in the General, and
this more useful, necessary, than any other in particular that I know of, the
records themselves being yet unprinted, unknown to most men, which this Epitome
in a good measure will now acquaint them with; I shall crave leave to give the
Readers some few Cautions touching all sorts of Abridgements, in the gross; and
this in individuo.

1. Let all Professors of the Law and other Studies, beware lest through
sloathfulness, ease or negligence, they more study and make use of Abridgements
in their professions, than of the original Law Books, Statutes, Authors
abridged by the^ to their hands; See Sir Henry Wottons Aphorisms of Education,
p. 305.
lest they divert them to close and shallow Cisterns, whose leisure might serve
(as they should principally endeavor) to be well acquainted with the deep and
open original springs, Authors, and Records themselves epitomized in and by
them, whose Abridgements will only enable them to know but a little, and that
superficially, at second hand, but not thoroughly instruct them to understand
much.

2ly, When they have any special occasions to make public use for themselves,
their Clients, or others, of any Statutes, Law Books, Records, in this or any
other Abridgment, let them be sure to resort to the Originals themselves, and
not rely upon the Abridgements alone, to prevent Mistakes, Errors, yea the loss
of their Reputations, if their Abridgements should misguide them. For, as the
original Records and Authors abridged, are far more authentic than the
Abridgements: so they are commonly more full and satisfactory, (containing
sundry reasons, circumstances, and sometimes matters both of Fact and Law, which
the Abridgements omit, curtal, and perchance mistake;) and are best for use:
Abridgements being much like Spirits, and the hottest extractions, which must
be mixed with cooling waters, out of which they were first extracted, to allay
their heat, when taken; Or like silver exchanged into gold for the lighter
carriage, which must be changed again into silver, when used. It is dangerous
taking any thing upon trust from Abridgements, or others Reports alone in
matters of public or private concernment. This was the Oversight of that great
Ornament of our Law, Sir Edward Cook, who by trusting to other men's
Abridgements and Notes of Records, (which himself had no vacancy to examine)
was often seduced by them, and has thereby seduced others, by their mistakes
and misrecitals published in his printed Books; of which I have here and My
Plea for the Lords: and Demurrers to the Jews Remitter, etc.
elsewhere given the Readers some particular instances, to rectify both his
and their mistakes, without the least intention to detract any thing from his
Venerable due worth and memory.

3ly, Though this Abridgement be very exactly done by so learned and eminent an
Antiquary whose Name it bears, yet through the carelessness of the Clerks who
transcribed it, I find here and there some mistakes in the Number roll, and
some omissions of material Words, Clauses, yea of the whole Parliament Rolls of
Ed. 2.46 E. 3. with some 20 H. 6.
two or three Rolls more yet extant (not abridged in any Copy I have seen)
which the publishing or perusal of the Parliament rolls at large will easily
supply; I being unwilling to add any Appendix of mine own to this deceased
Authors surviving industry. Besides, in one particular of moment, I find both a
mistranslation of the French, and a mistaken Inference grounded on it by the
Compiler of this Abridgement; of which I thought necessary to give the Reader
special Notice, to rectify his mistake, which has seduced many, especially
being since seconded therein by 4 Institutes, p. 4.
Sir Edw. Cook. In the Here p. 11, 12.
Abridgement of the Parliament Roll of 6 E. 3. n. 5, 6. whereas it is
translated, The Bishops and Proctors of the Clergy went by themselves to
consult therein. And THE LORDS AND COMMONS BY THEMSELVES. The LORDS AND COMMONS
RETURN, etc. The word there translated Commons, is in the Roll and French,
GRANTZ, with a dash, or GRANDEES, in both places^ and should be thus rendered in
English. The Lords, Barons, and other GREAT MEN, (not Commons) by themselves.
And the said Earls, Barons, et autres Grantz, AND OTHER GREAT MEN, (not
Commons) by the mouth of Sir Henry Beaumont, etc. The Knights of Shires, and
Commons being twice together distinguished from the Earls, Barons, and Great
men, in this very Number-Roll; which I shall transcribe, to clear this mistake,
and the inference grounded thereon^ Et les ditz Countz, Barons, et auters
Grantz per eux mesmes: Les quex Countz, Barons, et auters Grantz puis
revindrent et respondient touz au Roy par la bouch de Beaumond, etc. Les quels
chooses issint ordainiez per le ditz Countz, Barons et auters Grantz, luez
devant nostre Seiur le Roy, et les Prelates, Chivalers des Countees, et les
Gentz de Comune (here put in contradistinction to the Earls, Lords and Great
men, and not present with them at their private debates, but severed from them
as well as the Bishops and Clergy, and present only when they made their report
to the King, Prelates, Knights, Commons, and whole Parliament assembled
together upon this occasion in one place) fueront plaisantz a eux touz; et per
nostre Seiur le Roy, Prelates, Countz, Barons et auters Grantz, et auxint per
les Chivalers des Countees et GENTZ DES COMUNE (here again distinguished from
the Lords and Great men) fueront pleinment assentuz and accordez, etc. Now mark
the inference thence made by the Abridger, n. 10. Here p. 1^
By the 5. and 6. Titles before may appear, THAT AT THIS TIME THE LORDS AND
COMMONS WERE OF ONE HOUSE, and that then there was no Speaker for the Commons.
That the Commons had then no Speaker, I conceive is an undoubted truth, since
we find not any Speaker they had mentioned in the Rolls, before the Parliaments
of 51 E. 3. n. 89. and 1 R. 2. n. 16, 17. But, that the Lords and Commons were
then of one House, and sat and consulted together, is a See my Levellers
Levelled p. 18, 19.
clear mistake, directly contrary to this very record, whereon it is grounded,
which expressly resolves; That the Earls, Barons, and Great m^n went by
themselves to consult, as well as the Bishops and Clergy; and that the Knights
and Commons went not with them to consult, but were called together to hear
their report made by Sir Henry Beaumont, to which they all gave their assents.

Sir Edward Cook in his 4. Institutes, c. 1. p. 4^ has propagated this
mistake, and thus backed it with some additions of his own. CERTAIN IT IS, THAT
AT THE FIRST BOTH HOUSES (of Lords and Commons) SAT TOGETHER: as it appears
by Modus tenendi Parliamentum: vide Rot. Parliamenti, 5 E. 3. n. 3. and in
other places of the same Roll: and in 6 E. 3. in diverse places it appears,
THAT THE LORDS AND COMMONS SAT TOGETHER: But under the favor of this Reverend
Judge, as this Modus tenendi Par^iamentum, (he so much magnifies and insists
on) is a mere Spurious Forgery and Imposture, full of gross errors,
absurdities, not antienter than King Rich: the 2. reign (some part of it being
taken out of 11 R. 2:) and no such ancient Record in the Confessors,
Conquerors, or Henry the 2. reigns, nor of such venerable Authority, or
Antiquity, as Sir Edw. (by many confident averrments, without any color of
truth) affirms it to be, in his 4 Institutes, p. 12.349 and 1 Instit. f. 69
110. 2 Instit. p. 7.8. Epistle to his 9th Report.
elsewhere; as Mr. Seldom manifests in his Titles of Honor, part 2. p. 613,
685, 691, 738. to 745: and I have further evidenced in My Levellers Levelled;
and third Part of A Seasonable, Legal, and Historical Vindication, etc. of the
good old Fundamental Liberties, Rights, Laws of England, p. 314. and the very
Treatise it self will evidence to any person who is but meanly versed in
Antiquities or Parliamentary Records. So, the Roll of 5 E. 3. n. 3. proves no
such thing, That both Houses then sat together, but the contrary; that the
Lords and Commons sat and consulted apart by themselves, and that certain
Lords (as a special Committee only, not Lords House,) then treated, consulted
with them, but no otherwise. And the Roll of 6 E. 3. proves expressly, that the
Commons sat not together as one House with the Lords, but apart from them; To
put this out of all further controversy, Here p. 13.
Parl. 2.6 E: 3. n. 3. is express: That the Bishops by themselves, THE LORDS BY
THEMSELVES, AND THE COMMONS BY THEMSELVES, consulted and advised the King,
touching the War with Scotland: The like you may read in 13 E. 3. n. 4, to
10.13 E. 3. Parl. 2. n. 5, 6, 7, 8.14 E. 3. n. 6.7.17 E. 3. n. 9, 10, 11.18 E.
3. n. 10, 11.20 E. 3. n. 10, 11.21 E. 3. n. 4, 5.25 E. 3. n. 6, 7.36 E. 3. n.
6, 7.40 E. 3. n. 8.42 E. 3. n. 7.4^ E. 3. n. 5, 6.50 E. 3. n. 3, 8, 11, 12.
etc. 51 E. 3. n. 18. and sundry other records throughout the reign of King
Edward the 3d, and in other Parliaments since: Wherefore I wonder much at this
gross confident mistake in Sir Edward Cook, against so many express Records;
and that in his very Treatise touching Parliaments; which is full of other
mistakes.

To instance in other particulars for the Readers information, Sir Edward Cook
in his 4 Institutes, c. 1. p. 23. has 5 or 6 gross mistakes together, touching
the Judicature in Parliament, which I have at large demonstrated, refuted in my
Plea for the Lords, long since. Particularly, he there asserts, Rot. Parl. 1 H.
4.79. is no Act of Parliament, but an Ordinance: when as you may see by this
Abridgement of of it, that it is neither an Act nor Ordinance, but only the
Kings Answer by the Archbishops mouth to the Commons prayer. That the Commons
were only Petitioners, and THAT ALL JUDGMENTS APPERTAIN UNTO THE KING AND
LORDS, unless it were in Statutes, etc. After which he subjoyns, Rot. Parl. 2.
H. 5. n. 13. Error assigned, that the Lords gave judgment without petition or
assent of the Commons; when as there is no such Error therein assigned; and the
judgment there alleged to be erroneous, was confirmed by the Lords, as you may
read in this Page 539.
Abridgement, and more fully in my Plea for the Lords. To pretermit many more
of his Mistakes, in his very Chapter of Parliaments, which this Abridgement
will both discover and rectify, I shall touch but upon one more. In his 4.
Instit. p. 10. he has this passage: Walsingham says, that in Anno Domini
1404. which was Anno 6 H. 4 in the writs of the Summons of Parliament there was
added by the King a Commandment in the Writ, THAT NO LAWYER SHOULD BE RETURNED
KNIGHT OR BURGESS. ( But the Historian was deceived, FOR THERE IS NO SUCH
CLAUSE IN THOSE WRITS, but it was wrought by the Kings Letters by pretext of an
Ordinance in the Lords House in 46 E. 3.) In which passage there are three
mistakes together, 1. A misrecital of Thomas of Walsinghams words, That no
Lawyer or Apprentice should be elected Knight of the Shire; without any mention
of Burgesses, Hist. Angliae, p. 414
Direxit ergo Rex, (writes he) BREVIA Vicecomitibus; NE QUOSQUAM PRO
COMITATIBUS ELIGERENT QUOVISMODO MILITES, QUI IN JURE REGNI VEL DOCTI FUISSENT,
VEL APPRENTICII: Sed tales omnino mitterentur ad hoc negotium quos conslat
ignorare cujusque Iuris methodum. FACTUMqUE EST ITA. Whence he styles it in his
Margin, PARLIAMENTUM INDOCTORUM. To which he subjoyns in his Anno 1404. p. 164.
Ypodigma Neustriae, this observation; In hoc Parliamento concessa fuit Regi
taxa insolita et incolis tricabilis et valde gravis. Cujus modum praesentibus
inseruissem, nisi Concessores ipsi and Authors dicti Tallagii in perpetuum
latere posteros maluissent. Nempe sub ea tantum condition concedebatur, ne
traheretur posterius in exemplum, nec servarentur ejus evident^ae in the
sauraria Regia, nec in Scaccario, sed Scripturae vel recordationes ejusdem
proti^nus post datum compotum cremarentur, nec emitterentur Brevia seu
Commissiones contra Collectores vel Inquisitores hujus negotii, de melius
inquirendo. A good president for the burning, abolishing of all late records of
illegal excessive Taxes, Excises, imposed and levied on the English Nation for
so many years together without intermission. 2ly, A charging of Walsingham (who
lived in those times, and knew them better than Sir Edward Cook) with a direct
mistake and untruth; That there is no such clause in the writs then issued, as
he recites; when as it is most apparent by the writs themselves remaining on
Record in the Tower in the Clause Roll of 5 H. 4. pars 2. m. 4 Dorso, (which I
have perused with mine own eyes, for my own and others satisfaction) and by
diverse Notes and Transcripts thereof which I have seen in Manuscripts, that
there was this clause inserted into all the writs of Summons then issued, (to
exclude the Sheriffs themselves, with all Apprentices and Men of the Law, from
being elected Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses.) Nolumus autem quod tu, seu
aliquis alius Vicecomes regni nostri, aut APPRENTICIUS, SIVE ALIQUIS ALIUS HOMO
AD LEGEM ALIQUALITER SIT ELECTUS.) Et habeas ibi nomina praedictorum Militum,
Civium, Burgensium, and hoc Breve. Test Rege apud Lichefield 25 die Augusti;
on which day the writs of Summon both to the Archbishops, Bishops, and Temporal
Lords, bear date, all entered together in the same Roll. I wonder therefore,
upon what ground or misinformation Sir Edward Cook could so confidently averr
the contrary, and tax this Historian for a mistake, in this wherein he was most
right, and himself alone so palpably mistaken; whose confidence made me of his
opinion, till I sifted out the truth by a more diligent search of the Record it
self; not mentioned in this Abridgement. 3ly, In averring, that this was
wrought by the Kings Letters, by pretext of an Ordinance of the Lords House in
46 E. 3. when that he styles, an Ordinance of that the Lords House, was an
Ordinance, or Act of Parliament ( Ordinances and Acts of Parliament being both
one and the same; as ^ have In my Irenarchus Redivivus, p. 27. to 74.
elsewhere unanswerably proved, against In His 4 Institut^ p. 25.
Sir Edward Cooks new mistaken Doctrine) made by the whole Parliament, not
Lords House alone, excluding all Practicing Lawyers, and all Sheriffs from
being elected Knights of Shires, or receiving wages for their Service in that
Parliament, for the reasons therein mentioned; which Ordinance I shall here
insert at large out of the Parliament Roll of 46 E. 3. number. 13. Auxi un
Ordenance fait en mesme la Parliament fuit luez, en manner come ensuet. Pur ceo
que Gentz de Ley que pursuont diverses busoignes en les Courts le Roy pur
singuleres persons oue queux ils sont procurent, et font mettre pleuseurs
Petitions en Parlementz en nom des Commons, que riens lour touch, mes s^lement
les singulers persons, ou queuz ils font de moiez. Auxi Viscontz, que sont
Communes Ministres au people, et devient demurrer sur lour Office pur droit
fair a chuny, sont nomez, et ont este devant ces heures et retornez e^
Parlementz Chivalers des Countees per mesmes les Viscontz; Est accord et
assenta en cest Parliament, que desormes NULL HOME DE LEY PURSUONT BUSOIGNES EN
LA COURT LE ROY, ne Viscount pur le temps que il est Viscount, SOIENT
RETOURNEZ, NE ACCEPTEZ CHIVALERS DES COUNTEES; ne que ces qui sont GENTZ DE LEY
et Viscountz ore retournez au Parliament EIENT GAGEZ.

Number. 14. Mes vo^t le Roy, que Chivalers et SERJAUNTZ des meulz Vaues du paiis
soi^z retornez desore Chivalers en Parliamentz, et quils sount estuz en plein
Count.

An Ordinance most fit to be put in actual execution against such practicing
Lawyers, who make su^e to be elected Parliament Members, only, or principally
to get Clyents, Practice, and Prae-audience of others at the Bar, and to
promote their Clients or Friends causes in the House, rather than diligently to
discharge their public Duties faithfully in the Parliament, according to their
trusts; as too many have done of later ages, as well as when this Ordinance was
first enacted.

In the reading of this Abridgement, I shall advise the Reader; First, to
distinguish between the Parliament Rolls abbreviated and the Abridgers
Observations on them here and there, which are no part of the Record it self:
Such are all his Observations concerning the Agreement of, or Disagreement and
Variance of our printed Statutes from the Records, and the like; which cause
the Numbers, Titles in this Abridgement, many times to exceed the Numbers,
Titles, and Membranaes in the Rolls themselves, and some times to differ from
them in the number.

2ly, I shall desire him to take Notice for his better information touching
Parliamentary records; That the Writs of Summons to our Parliaments for the
Nobility, Clergy, Knights, Citizens, Burgesses, (with the Writs for Knights and
Burgesses wages) are not extant in the Parliament, or Statute-Rolls, but for
the most part, they are entered in the Dorse of the Clause Rolls, and sometimes
(though rarely) on the Dorse of the Patent Rolls, kept in the Tower of London;
where all who please may peruse them at their leisure; they sometimes differing
one from another in form, as well as in the names of the persons summoned; and
sometimes in material Clauses, though 4 Institutes c. 1. p. 10.
Sir Edward Cook asserts the contrary; as is most evident by the writs of Rot.
Claus. 6 Johan. dors. 3. claus. 38. H. 3. dors. 13. claus. 45 H. 3. m. 19.
dors. claus. 48 H. 3. dors. 5, 6. claus. 49 H. 3. dors. 11. claus. 34 E. 1.
dors. 10, and 5. claus. 4 E. 3. m. 17, 18. dors. claus. 6 E. 3. pars 2. m. 13.
dors. and m. 4. dorso, and m. 36. claus. 45 E. 3. m. 29. claus. 11 R. 2. dors.
13. claus. 5 H. 4. pars 2. m. 4. dorso. and sundry others.

3ly, That there are far more Writs of Summons to Parliaments extant in those
Rolls, than there are Statute or Parl. Rolls; There being no Records at all in
the Tower (except some few ancient Charters, or Exemplifications of them)
antienter than the first year of King John, all the rest from William the First
his reign, till then, (except some few in the Exchequer, not relating to
Parliaments) being utterly lost. The first Parliament Rolls yet remaining, are
those of 5, 8, 9, and 19. of King Edward the 2. The Statute Roll of H. 3. Edw.
1. and Edw. 2. containing some Statutes made in their reigns; a Parchment Book
of some Pleas in Parliament, during the reigns of King Edward the 1. and 2. and
a few Bundles of Petitions in the Parliaments of 6 E. 1. and 1, 2, 3, and 4. E.
3. none of which are here Abridged. Only I find in the Clause, Patent, Charter,
and Fine Rolls of King John, Henry 3, Edward 1, and 2. some writs of Summons,
and some m^morials of Acts, Ordinances made, and Aids, Subsidies, Disms,
Quindisms, Customs granted in Parliaments held during their reigns, the Rolls
whereof are perished and quite lost, either through the Negligence of the
Record-keepers, or the Injury, Iniquity of the times, during the Civil wars
between the King and Barons, in the reigns of King John, and Henry the 3. and
betwixt the two houses of Lancaster and York for the Title to the Crown;
(wherein (it is very probable) the preva^^ing Kings parties, by their
instruments, embezelled, suppressed such Parliamentary Records and Proceedings,
as made most against their Interests, Power, Prerogatives, Titles;) or through
the Default of our Kings Great Officers and Atturneys, who sending for the
Parliament Rolls out of the Tower upon special occasions, never returned them
again, for reasons best known to themselves; By means whereof, these Parliament
Rolls being no where to be found, their defects must be supplied only out of
such Fragments and Memorials of them as are extant in our other Records, and
ancient Historians, (especially in Matthew Paris, Matthew Westminster, William
of Malmsbury, Henry Archdeacon of Huntingdon, Roger de Hoveden, Simeon
Dunelmensis, the Chronicle of Bromton, Radulphus de Diceto, Ranulphus
Cistrensis, and Thomas of Walsingham;) who give us some account of their
Proceedings and Transactions, which else had been utterly buried in oblivion,
as well as their Rolls, wher^n they were at large recorded, as is evident by
the Parliament Rolls yet extant, exactly relating all the Parl. Acts,
Judgments, Proceedings, as you may discern by this Abridgement; But more
clearly by the Rolls at large, made up and engrossed by the Clerk of the
Parliament, with the assistance or supervising of the Lords, Judges, and
Commons too, when there was occasion.

4ly, I shall recommend unto you these general Observations touching our
Parliaments and their proceedings, in former ages, which I shall desire the
Readers more carefully to observe in their perusal of this Abridgement for
their better satisfaction.

1. That it was the Common Custom in former ages, the first day of every
Parliament by special Proclamation, to See 6 E. 3. n. 1, 2, 3, etc. 13 E. 3.
Part. 2. n. 2. 14 E. 3. n. 1. 15 E. 3. n. 2. 17 E. 3. n. 3. 18 E. 3. n. 3. 20
E. 3. n. 5. etc.
inhibit the wearing of any Arms or weapons, under severe penalties, within
such Cities and places where the Parliament sat, to prevent all disturbances,
quarrels, intimidations, over-awings of the Members by Fear or Force. A
practice now fit to be revived, after so many late armed Guards, Forces, not
only over-awing, disturbing, enforcing, but dissolving Parliaments, and
secluding, securing their Members at their pleasure.

2. That our Parliaments, were always See 6 E. 3. n. 1. 13 E. 3. Parl. 2. n.
4^ 14 E. 3. n. 4. 17 E. 3. n. 2. and sundry others. See the Table.
usually adjourned and put off till some further day, when any considerable
Number of the Lords or Commons were absent, or not come, appearing at the first
day of Summons, and the Declaration of the Causes of summoning the Parliament,
adjourned till all the Members were come, and the Parliaments full.

3. That the Lords some times, and the Commons were all frequently 18 E. 3. n.
1, 2, 7. 5 R. 2. n. 1. 8. Parl. 2. 5 R. 2. n. 2. 6 R. 2. n. 2. 7 R. 2. n. 2. 20
R. 2. n. 8. 2 H. 4. n. 1. 4 H. 4. n. 1. 9 H. 4. n. 1. 13. H. 4. n. 1. 11 H. 6.
n. 1.
called by Name the first day of the Parliaments sitting; and all of them
admitted, yea commanded to sit in, and attend the Parliament; and such as were
absent without just cause, both blamed and fined.

4. That in all former ages, no Acts were made, Judgments pronounced, Ayds or
Subsidies granted, nor ought else debated or conlcuded, but only in full
Parliament, when all or most of the Members were personally present, and none
forcibly secluded or suspended, but only by sen^ence of the Houses themselves.
See the Table Full Parliament.

5. That 9 H. 6. n. 57. 23 H. 6. n. 41. 31 H. 6. n. 26, 27, 28. 14 E. 4. n. 55.
17 E. 4. n. 36.
No Members of Parliament could be arrested, imprisoned or taken in execution
for Debt, or any other occasion sitting the Parliament, but only for Treason,
Felony, or Breach of the Peace: and if any were arrested or taken in execution
against their privileges, they were, upon complaint, released to attend the
public service of their Country in Parliament.

6. That our Kings themselves did usually by their Chancellors or Chief
Justices, when they declared the Causes of summoning every Parliament to the 3.
Estates, most commonly grant and declare of their own accords, See the Table
Title, ^^berties, Privileges, Parliament, Great Charter, Forest.
That all Estates should enjoy their Privileges, belonging to them as Members;
and likewise, That the Church, with all Corporations, and other persons
whatsoever, should enjoy their ancient Liberties, Rights, Customs and
Franchises, which was one chief end of summoning Parliaments: and the Great
Charter of their Liberties, of the Forest, and all other good Laws, and
Statutes due observation, and to have the violations of them redressed,
punished.

7. That Matters See the Table, Tit. Peace, Truce, War, Parliament.
of War, Peace, Leagues, Defense against Enemies both by Land and Sea, were
constantly propounded to, debated, consulted, concluded of in and by our
Parliaments, yea one chief cause of their Convention; and not ordered by our
Kings and Privy Council, without the Parliaments consent.

8. That See the Titles, Aid, Subsidy, Customs, Tonnage and Poundage.
No Subsidies, Aids, Tonnage, Poundage, Impositions, or new Customs whatsoever
lawfully might or could be granted, imposed or levied on the Subjects, but only
in and by their Free Grants and Consents in Parliament, upon urgent
necessities, on such conditions, cautions, limitations, and for such ends,
uses, purposes, in such moderate proportions, as our Parliaments thought fit to
limit and prescribe. And that all Customs, Impositions, New Taxes, Extortions,
not thus granted, imposed by Parliament, were constantly complained of,
punished, redressed by the next ensuing Parliaments.

9. That our Kings usually returned the Lords and Commons 38 E. 3. n. 18. 42 E.
3. n. 8. 20. 1 R. 2. n. 137. 31 H. 6. n. 20. 12 E. 4. n. ^1. See the Table.
special thanks for their Aids, Subsidies, though in Cases of public Defense,
for their own and the Kingdoms safety; and likewise gratified them with the
Grants of general Pardons, the answer of all their just Petitions, Relief of
their common Grievances, Confirmations of their Liberties, and enacting of
wholesome New necessary Laws.

10. That the first thing the Lords and Commons usually See the Table Tit.
Petitions, Great Charter, Liberties, etc.
Petitioned for, and our Kings, Parliaments enacted in every Session, was the
Confirmation of the Great Charter, the Charter of the Forest, with other good
Laws, and public Liberties, and for redress of all Grievances, Imprisonments,
and restraints repugnant thereunto, which they still obtained.

12. That our Parliaments in former ages, have been very careful, to resume
all the lands and revenues aliened from the Crown, and to reunite them
thereunto, for the better support of our Kings, defraying the public expenses
of the Kingdom, and the easing of the Subjects from Subsidies and Taxes, as 1
R. 2. n^ 48. 1 H. 4. n. 100. 6 H. 4. n. 14, 15. 8 H. 4. n. 29. 52.1 H. 5. c. 9.
28 H. 6. n. 54. 29 H. 6. n. 17. 31 H. 6. c. 7. 35 H. 6. n. 47. 4 E. 4. n. 39,
40. 7 E. 4. n. 8. 8 E. 4. n. 26. 13 E. 4. n. 6. and other Records here
evidence. Neither is this a practice peculiar unto England, both in these
Parliaments, and Mat. Paris, p. 306, 308. Speed, p. 597. Daniel, p. 78, 89,
80.123. Grafton, p. 401. 1 H. 5. c. 3. 10 R. 2. c. 1. 31 H. 6. c. 7.
in former ages, but Universal through the world; Bodin de Republ. l. 6. c. 2.
p. 651, 652.
All Monarchs and States having held it for a general and universal Law; That
the public Revenues should be holy, sacred, and inalienable, either by
Contract or prescription; to the end that Princes should not be forced to
overcharge their Subjects with Imposts, or to seek any unlawful means to
forfeit their goods to supply their necessities: most Kings and Princes being
for this reason specially sworn, and taking an Oath when they come to the
Crown, in no ways to sell or make away the Revenues or Lands of the Crown; and
more particularly the Kings of France, Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 21^.
Lambardi Archaion.
England, Spain, Poland, Hungary. The which is also observed in Popular and
Aristocratical estates, as in Venice, the Cantons of the Swissers, the Senate
of Lucern, even in later times, and at this very day; and in Athens and Rome it
self in ancient times; where Themistocles, and Cato the Censor, caused all the
public Revenues to be seized on, which through tract of time, and sufferance
of Magistrates, had been sold unto, or usurped by private men; saying in their
Orations, That mortal men could never prescribe against the immortal God, nor
private men against the Common weal. Upon which grounds, the Parliaments of
France, Poland, and other Realms, have frequently resumed the Crown Lands and
Revenues sold^ or given away to Princes of the blood, Nobles and private
persons; such Sales and Gifts being merely void in Law, and destructive to the
public: as you may read at large in John Bodin his Commonwealth, l. 6. cap.
2. Dr. Crakenthorps Defense of Constantine, p. 169. to 172. The second Part of
my Sovereign Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms, p. 12. to 16. and the several
Authors there cited to this purpose.

All which particulars (of late years discontinued, and almost quite abandoned)
are now fit to be revived in all succeeding Parliaments.

12. It is observable, that our Parliaments now and then, either out of hatred,
envy, passion, or compliance with some potent ambitious popular swaying Lords
and Grandees, have most unjustly, illegally See 4 E. 3. n. 1. to 7. 28 E. 3. n.
7. to 16. 50 E. 3. n. 16. to 37. 51 E. 3. n. 89. to the end, 21 R. 2. n. 55, to
67. the Parl. of 11, and 21 R. 2. 1 H. 4.38, and 39 H. 6.1, 3, 4, and 7 E. 4. 1
R. 2. n. 41, 42, 43, 47. 7 R. 2. n. 15. to 26. 10 R. 2.7.21. 28 H. 6. n. 1,
etc. 39 H. 6. c. 1.
condemned, executed, banished, fined, sentenced, oppressed sundry Innocent,
and some well deserved persons, without just cause, trial, or due conviction of
any real Crimes; whose Sentences thereupon have been justly questioned, damned,
reversed in succeeding Parliaments, not only out of Grace and Favor, but
Justice and common Equity; of which you may find sundry presidents in this
Abridgement.

13. That all such Parliaments and ambitious self-seekers in them, who under a
pretense of public Reformation, Liberty, the peoples ease or welfare, have (by
indirect surmises, policies, practices, force, and new devices) most usurped
upon the Lawful Prerogatives of their Kings, or the Persons, Lives, Offices,
Estates of such Nobles, Great Officers and other persons of a contrary party
whom they most dreaded, maligned; and which have imposed See 20 R. 3. n. 13.23.
21 R. 2. n. 37. to 44^ 51, 52, 89, 90.
New Oaths or Engagements on the Members, to secure, perpetuate and make
irrevocable their own Acts, Judgments, and unrighteous proceedings; have
always proved most abortive, successeless, pernicious to themselves and the
activest Instruments in them; the Parliaments themselves being commonly totally
repealed, nulled, and the Grandees in them suppressed, impeached, condemned,
destroyed as Traitors and Enemies to the public, in the very next succeeding
Parliaments, or not long after; witness the Parliaments of 15 E. 3.11 and 21 R.
2.38 and 39 H. 6. 1 H. 4. 1 E. 4. and 1 R. 3. and some others here abridged, 15
E. 3. Stat. 2. 17 E. 3. rot. Parl. n. 23. 21 R. 2. c. 2. 1 H. 4. c. 3. 33 H. 6.
c. 1. 17 E. 4. c. 7. 1 H. 4. n. 70.113. 1 H. 7. c. 6.

14. That Kings created and set up merely by Parliaments, and their own power
in them, without any true hereditary Title, have seldom answered the Lords and
Commons expectations in the preservation of their just Laws, Liberties, and See
1 H. 4. n. 79.101, 116, 136. 2 H. 4. n. 23.
answers to their Petitions; yea themselves at last branded for Tyrants,
Traitors, Murderers, Usurpers, their posterities impeached of High Treason, and
Disinherited of the Crown by succeeding Parliaments and King, as you may here
read at large in the Parliaments of King Henry 4. 1 H. 5. m. 8. 39 H. 6. 1 and
3 E. 4. 1 Rich. the 3d. and 1 H. 7. c. 6.

From these 3. last Observations, we may discern, that as Parliaments are the
best of all Courts, Councils when duly summoned, convened, constituted,
ordered, and kept within their legal Bounds^ so they become the greatest
Mischiefs, Grievances to the Kingdom, when like the Ocean they overflow their
banks, or degenerate and become (through Sedition, Faction, malice, fear, or
infatuation by divine Justice) promoters of corrupt, sinister ends, or
accomplishers of the private designs and ambitious Interests of particular
Persons, under the disguise of public Reformamation, Liberty, Safety,
Settlement: according to that of Isay 19.13, 14, 15. The counsel of the wise
Counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish: The Princes of Zoan are become fools,
the Princes of Noph are deceived, they have also seduced Egypt, even they that
are the stay of the Tribes thereof: The Lord has mingled a spirit of
Perverseness in the midst thereof; and they have caused Egypt to err in every
work thereof, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit; Neither shall there be
any work for Egypt which the head or tail, branch or rush may do.

So as we may justly conclude with that of Psalm. 118 8, 9. It is better to
trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in man: It is better to trust in the
Lord, than to put confidence in Princes, yea, or Parliaments. Wherefore, Psalm.
146.3.
Put not your trust in Princes (in Parliaments,) nor in any son of man, in whom
there is no help; yea, Isay 2.22.
Cease ye from man whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be
accounted of: For although usually in a way of ordinary providence, Prove.
11.14. 2, 4, 6.
In the multitude of Counselors there is safety; yet God many times in
justice, Job. 12.17.
Leads the greatest Counselors (yea Parliaments themselves) away spoiled,
and makes the Judges fools: so that Isay 8, 9, 10.
though they associate themselves together, they shall be broken in pieces; and
though they take Counsel together, yet it shall come to naught, when God is not
with, but against them; whereof we have seen many late sad domestic
experiments, to wean us from Deifying, Idolizing of, or overmuch confiding in,
or depending upon Parliaments; which have been so subject to Errors,
Deviations, Abortions in former and later times.

Touching the Original of electing and sending Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
to our Parliaments, it is very obscure and dubious. Sir Robert Cotton (the
Author of this Abridgment,) Cottoni Posthuma London, 1651. p. 345, 346, etc.

Ranulphus Glanvil, De Legibus and Consuetud, Regni Angliae, Prologue, and l.
13, c. 32.


In his brief Discourse concerning the Power of the Peers in Parliament, in
point of Judicature, affirms and proves; That the Generale Placitum,
Universalis Synodus, Magnum and Commune Concilium of the Realm, now styled a
Parliament, was held Ceram Episcopis and Magnatibus suis; Or Coram Episcopis
and Principibus Regni in praesentia Regis; This Great Court or Council
consisting of the King and Barons, ruled all affairs of State, and controlled
all Inferior Courts, Causes being referred and transferred out of the County
and other Courts unto it, propter aliquam dubitation^m quae emergit, cum
Comitatus nescit dijudicare, as Glanvil (in King Henry the seconds reign)
informs us, and lib. 1. cap. 2.
Bracton, Fol. 141.
Britton, with Westminster. 2. c. 24. Cooks 2 Instit. p. 408. 14 E. 3. c. 5.
sundry Statutes, and Claus. 48 H. 3. m. 3. Cl. 14 E. 3. dors. 15. 21 E. 3. n.
60. 25 E. 3. n. 31. Here p. 30. 2 R. 2. Parl. 2. n. 63. 2 E. 3. f. 7, 8. 39 E.
3. f. 21. a. 40 E. 3.34. Cook 8. Report. f. 158. 4 Instit. f. 67.
Records of later date; with the ancient presidents of Ethelwold Bishop of
Wilton his suit against Leoftine, and Q Edgin against Goda in the time of King
Ethelred^ the suit between the Bishop of Winton and Durham in the time of St.
Edward; and one in the 10. year of the Conqueror evidence. The power of the
Peers in this Courtt, and of certain Officers (as the Steward, Constable, and
Marshal, fixed upon Families in fee for many ages) was so transcendent, that it
seemed to be set to bound in the execution of Princes wills, and grew fearful
to Monarchy. Hereupon King Henry 3. when the daring Earl of Leicester was slain
at the battle of Anno 49 H. 3.
Evesham, by the dear experience himself had made at the Parliament at Oxford
in the 40. year of his reign, and the memory of the many streights his Father
was driven unto, especially at Runny-mead near Stanes, wisely began to lessen
the strength and power of his great Council, weakening that hand of power which
they carried in the Parliaments, by commanding the service of many Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses to that Council. NOW BEGAN (says he) THE FREQUENT
SENDING OF WRITS TO THE COMMONS: THEIR ASSENTS not only used in Money, Charge,
and making Laws, ( For before ALL ORDINANCES PASSED BY THE KING and PEERS) but
THEIR CONSENTS IN JUDGMENTS OF ALL NATURES, WHETHER CIVIL OR CRIMINAL. For
proof whereof he produces some succeeding presidents out of records:

When Eimerus.
Adomar that proud Prelat of Winchester, the Kings half Brother, had grieved
the State with his daring power, he was exiled by the joint consent of the
King, the Lords and Commons: and this appears expressly by the Answer to the
Letter sent by Pope Alexander the 4th, expostulating a Revocation of him from
Banishment, because he was a Churchman, and so not subject to Lay Censures. In
this the Answer is; Liber Sancti Albani, f. 207. Anno 44 H. 3.
Si Dominus Rex et regni Majores hoc vellent, COMMUNITAS TAMEN IPSIUS INGRESSUM
IN ANGLIAM JAM NULLATENUS SUSTINERENT. The Peers subjoyn this answer, with
their names; and Petrus de Montford, VICE TOTIUS COMMUNITATIS, as SPEAKER, or
PROLOCUTOR OF THE COMMONS; For by this style Sir Io. Tiptoff Prolocutor,
affirms Charta Orig. sub sigillo, Anno 8 H. 4. apud Rob. Cotton.
under his Arms the Deed of entail of the Crown by King Hen. 4. in the 8. year
of his reign, for ALL THE COMMONS.

By which passage and president it is apparent; that in Sir Robert Cottons
Judgment, the Commons were not usually summoned to our Parliaments by writs,
Mat. Westminster. Anno 1260. pars 2. p. 303. Hen. de Knyghton, De event. Angl. l. 2.
c. 15. Mat. Paris, p. 958.
till after 40 of King H. 3. and that purposely, to curb and lessen the power
of the Lords in Parliament. This President he cites of Bishop Adomar out of the
Leiger book of St. Albans, falls in 44 H. 3. full 5 years before the Earl of
Leicester was slain, in which year Adomar died at Paris, as he was posting from
Rome into England to recover his Bishopric; Pope Alexander also dyed the same
year 1260. in which I read there was a Parliament held, but no mention of any
Commons in it, neither is there in our Records any Writ of Summons for electing
Knights or Burgesses to repair to it in this year. Only I find there was a
great difference then begun between King Henry and his Magnates and Barons,
about the Ordinances made in the Parliament at Oxford, which the King refused
to observe, contrary to his Oath, from which he gained an absolution from the
Pope I likewise read in Page 959. Edit. Tig:
William Rishanger his Continuation of Matthew Paris, that this (44.) year,
Magnates, the Nobles (not Commons) sent quatuor Milites satis facundos qui
Epistolam Sigillis suis firmatam Papae and Cardinalibus exhi^erent; containing
many grievous accusations against this Bishop elect of Winton, to hinder his
promotion, and return into England; which Letter was sent from them, sitting
rather in a Military Council at Oxford, than in a true and real Parliament:
where Simon de Montsord Earl of Leicester, Richard de Clare Earl of Gloucester,
MULTIQUE NOBILES IPSIS ADHAERENTES CONVENERUNT OXONIIS, See Claus. 45 H. 3. m.
13.19 dorso. Writs to diverse Lords, Quod venirent ad instans Parliamentum cum
equis and armis, etc. Claus. 47 H. 3. m. 7. Seld^ns Titles of Hon^ur, p. 716.
EQUIS and ARMIS SUFFICIENTER INSTRUCTI; finaliter statuentes in animo, aut
mori pro pace patriae, aut pacis eliminare a patria turbatores; as Rishanger
relates: Praeceperuntque omnibus qui eisdem servitium militare debuerant,
quatenus cum insis venirent parati, veluti ad corpora sua contra hostiles
insultus defensu^i. Quod et fecerunt, palliantes talem adventum, eo quod in
Walliam contra hosts Regis viderentur collectis viribus prof^cturi, as Page
940.
Matthew Paris himself records. Neither was this Letter signed and sealed by
Peter de Montsord, as Speaker or Proctor to the Commonalty of England then
assembled or represented by their Knights or Burgesses^ in the Commons House of
Parliament, or distinguished from the Lords and Barons, like that Deed of
intayl by Sir John Tiptoft their Speaker in 8 H. 4. as Sir Robert Cotton
imports, and others would thence infer, which I shall irrefragably evidence:
1. By the beginning, close and subscription of this very Letter, printed in the
Londini 1639. p. 215, 216.
Additamenta of Matthew Paris. It begins thus, Sanctissimo Patri in Christo,
Alexandro etc. COMMUNITAS COMITUM, PROCERUM, MAGNATUM, ALIORUMQUE REGNI
ANGLIAE, cum subjectione debita, pedum oscula beatorum. And it is thus jointly
subscribed and sealed by 6. Earls, and 5. other Great men: Et Nos R. de Clare,
Gloverniae and Herefordiae^ S. de Monteforti Legriae, R. Bigod Mariscallus
Angliae, H. de Bohun, Herefordiae, and Essexiae, W. Albemarle, J. de Placito
Warwici, Comites, H. Bigod Justiciarius Angliae, P. de Subaudia, J. Filius
Galfridi, Jacobus de Audel, and Petrus de Monteforti, VI^E TOTIUS COMMUNITATIS
praesentibus Literis, SIGILLA NOSTRA APPOSUIMUS IN TESTIMONIUM PRAEDI^TORUM:
The Whole COMMUNITY therefore in whose behalf or stead they signed and sealed
this Letter, was only the Communitas Comitum, Procerum, Magnatum, aliorumque
Regni Angliae, or Whole Baronage of England, mentioned in the beginning of it,
in whole names alone it was written; not the mere Commons house, or Commonalty
of England, either in or out of Parliament, as contradistinct from the Lords.
And these 11. Earls, Barons and Great men, jointly signed and sealed it, Vice
totius Communitatis, as joint Proctors to this whole Community of the Baronage
of England, not ten of them as Proxies to the Earls, Nobles, and Great men, and
Peter de Montfort (the 11.) as Speaker, or Proctor to the Commons in or out of
Parliament, as is erroniously surmised. 2ly. It is most evident by the words of
Edit. Tigur. 1589. p. 947. Londini, 1639. p. 978.
Mat. Paris, (who places this Letter in Anno 1458. or 41 H. 3. whereas Sir
Robert Cotton, and Rishanger referr it to Anno 1260. or 44 H. 3) Destinantur
Nuncii solennes ad Dominum Papam ex part Regni, ET TOTIUS ANGLIAE
UNIVERSITATE, etc. Causam autem Itineris eorum et SCRIPTUM A BARNAGIO
TRANSCRIPTUM audire qui cupit, in libro Additamentorum invenire praevalebit.
Which, compared with his Page 945, 948, 940. Edit. Tigur.
Istud detestabile factum Romano erat Pontifici PER BARONS significatum, in
this very Letter: his Magnates and Nobiles terrae, etc. And his, Tale iniit
Consilium UNIVERSITAS BARNAGII, will undeniably manifest, That the Barons, and
Universality of the Baronage only, not the mere Commons of England, writ and
sent this Letter, and were the tota Communitas mentioned and intended in it, in
whose behalf these 11 Earls and Grandees subscribed and sealed it; not the
UNIVERSITAS REGNI POPULARIS, ETSI NON NOBILES, whom Page 9^1.
Mat. Paris distinguishes from them by this very expression in the same year,
and upon the same occasion, who Pictavienses obsiderent, et Castra eorum
funditus dissiparent. Wherefore neither the signing nor sealing of this Letter
by them, Vice totius Communitatis: nor this Clause in it: Etsi Dominus Rex et
Magnates hoc vellent, COMMUNITAS tamen ipsius ingressum in Angliam nullatenus
sustinerent (meant only of the Vulgar Rabble, or Uiversitas Regni popularis, as
Mat. Paris styles them, who were much enraged against him,) being the same in
substance with that phrase in King Henry the first his Letter unto Pope
Paschal, not in, but out of Parliament, Chron. Iul: Bromton, col. 999. D^.
Usher, De Success. and S^at. Ecclesiae, p. 187. Sir John Davis Reports p. 90.
Cooks 2 Instit. p. 97, 98.
Et si ego (quod absit) in tanta me dejectione pon^rem, Optimates vero, et
TOTUS ANGLIAE POPULUS ID NULLO MODO PATERETUR) can be any convincing, or
probable evidence at all, that this Bishop elect of Winchester, was then
judicially banished by the joint consent of the King, Nobles and Commons in
Parliament (as is suggested) he being Mat. Paris, p. 943, 959.
forced to fly thence, through fear of their arms alone, not banished by their
judicial sentence; as they thus expressly inform the Pope in another Letter sent
to him with the former, to inhibit his return; Mat. Paris, Auctorum
Addi^tament. p. 222.
Maxim CUM IPSE A REGNO EXPULSUS NON EXTITERIT, SED SPONTE CESSERIT, non ausus
exhibitionem Iustitiae, quae singulis secundum Iuramenta Regis and Procerum
debebatur, expectare. Much less is it any proof that the Commons in that age,
had a Voice and consent in Parliament Judgments of all Natures: (since they
never had it in succeeding ages, unless it were by way of Bill, as the whole
Commons House acknowledged in the Parliament of 1 H. 4. n. 79. and I have
manifested at large in my Plea for the Lords;) no more than that they had then
a Speaker or House of Commons, which is clear by subsequent Parliaments in this
Abridgement, they had not till many years after 44 H. 3. and after the Parl. of
6 E. 3. 3ly, This will most evidently appear, by the Barons Letter sent to King
Henry the third, to Jews, Mat. Paris, p. 962, 963.
Anno Dom. 1264. (the 48 year of his reign) from their Camp. Barons and alii
fideles sui, etc. subscribed only by the Earl of Leicester and Gilbert de
Clare; ad Petitionem aliorum: And by the Letter of Richard King of Romans,
Prince Edward the Kings eldest son; caeterique Barons omnes and Milites,
praedicto Regi Angliae constanter adhaerentes fide sincera and opibus, sent to
the Barons in answer thereunto: thus subscribed, Rex Alemanniae, and Edwardus
filius Regis, nomine suo and aliorum Regi adhaerentium. Omnes nos contenti
sumus praedictorum Dominorum sigillis. In both which Letters, the two Earls,
and the King of Romans, and Prince Edward, jointly signed and sealed in the
Name of all the Barons, Knights, and others of either party, and not one of
them as a Proctor or Speaker to the Commons, and the other as Proxy to the
Barons and Lords: both Letters being writ from their Camp, not Parliament; and
neither of them relating to the Commons House, or Judicature in Parliament,
just like this Letter concerning Bishop Adomar; Therefore no inference can be
thence deduced, to prove the Commons had either any House, Speaker, or
Judicature in the Parliaments of 42, or 44 of Henry the third.

The first express writ I find of any Knights of Counties by name summoned to
our Parliaments as Members, is that of Claus. 49 H. 3. dors. 10, 11. requiring
Sheriffs, to summon 2. Knights out of every County to the Pa^liament, which was
presently after the battle of Evesham the same year the Earl of Leicester was
slain, the Barons totally routed by Pr. Edward, and King Henry rescued out of
their hands; when Sir Robert Cotton affirms (and that See Cambdens B^itanni^,
p. 120. ^^ldens ^i^les of H^n^ur, p. 712^ 713, 721.
most truly, as I conjecture) THESE WRITS BEGAN. The writs of See Mr. S^ld^ns
Title^ of Ho^^^, part 2. p. 710.
Rot. Claus. 15. Joh. pars 2. m. 7. dorso. Patents 8 H. 3. pars 3. m. 4. Dors
and Claus. 38 H 3. dors. 13. (which seem somewhat like a Summons of Knights to
Pa^liament) being conceived by some upon good grounds, not to be a direct
summons of any Commoners or Knights of Shir^s to Parliament, as Members, but in
another kind; when as we find S^e Cl^us. 6 I^h^n. dors 3. Pa^. 6 Jo^. dors. 5.
Claus. 24. H. 3. dors. 13. Cl^us. 26 H. ^. dors. 13 Claus. 38 H 3. dors. 13.
Claus. 47 H. 3. dors. 7. Pa^. 48 H. 6. pars 1. dors. 6. S^ldens Ti^les of
Hon^r. p. 7^7, 7^^ 716, 717, 721.
Writs of Summons to Parliament directed to Bishops and the Temporal Lords and
Barons, before 49 H. 3. without any such Writs for ^n^ghts or Burgesses.

In what place the Commons usually assembled at first, is uncertain, but most
likely it was in the Chapter House of of the Abbot of Westminster, as is clear
by 50 E. 3. n. 8. and other records: How unable and unwilling the Commons were
at first, of themselves to advise in ma^ters of Peace or War, 5 E. 3. n. 5.6.
15 E. 3. n. 17.21 E. 3. n. 5. 47 E. 3. n. ^. 50 E. 3. n. 9. 51 E. 3. ^. 18. 1
R. 2. n. 12. 2 R. 2. ^. 23. 5 R. 2. n. 14.16. 6 R. 2. ^. 15. Parl. ^. 6 R. 2.
^. R. 7 R. 2. Parl. 2. 1.11, 12. 17 R. 2. ^. 17.20 R^ 2. ^^ 9.
referring themselves usually herein to the King and Lords alone, and desiring
a special Committee of Lords to advise and direct them in most things else; and
how they got a Speaker and House of their own at last (in the dotage of King
Edward the 3. and nonage of Richa^d the 2.) and then proceeded by degrees to
meddle with the greatest affairs of the State, Court, and Crown, being set on
by some ambitious Lords, to promote their designs thereby, you may observe
throughout this Abridgement, of which the Table will render you a more
particular account. What use the Lords made of the Commons, and their Speakers,
to curb the King, and his greatest Officers, Minions, Favorites, you may here
read at large in the Parliaments of 50 E. 3. of 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 11, R. 2. 1 H.
4.28, 33, See 39 H. 6. c. 1. 17 E. 4. c. 17.
38, and 39 H. 6. And how King Rich. 2. made use of them to suppress his
Domineering Lords, and King Edward the 4. used them as his Instruments to curb,
suppress both King Hen. the 6. and the Lords that were opposite to him you may
observe in the Parliaments of 21 R. 2 33, and 39 H. 6. and 1 Ed. 4. especially
n. 38, 39. in his Speech there made unto the Commons; By whose assistance he
was restored to the Crown, and soon after to all the Lands and Revenues
alienated from it, by Acts of Resumption; Whereupon he promised the Commons in
Parliament with his own mouth, 7 E. 4. n. 7, 8.
To live of his own, without charging them; Grastons Chronicle, p. 757. Hall,
f. 4.
and left off all gathering of money and Impositions on them, as the only thing
which withdraws the hearts of the English from their Prince; receiving only
Tonnage and Poundage; and but 4 E. 4. n. 24. 12 E. 4. c. 3.
some 3. or 4. Disms and Quindisms of small value, (which they 3 E. 4. n. 3.
11. 12 E. 4. n. 8. 4^. 14 E. 4. n. 7. 48. E. 4. 22 E. 4. n. 8.
freely granted him toward his wars,) during all his 23 years reign. A
president worthy present and future imitation, for the oppressed peoples ease,
especially after so many years uncessant heavy Taxes of all sorts extorted
from them, rather for private ends, than the public Interest and Welfare of
the Kingdom. What other particulars of Note touching the Commons, Lords, or
Parliament affairs occurr in this Abridgement, the Table will more punctually
inform the Reader.

I shall only further observe, that in all the Parliaments of King Ed. 3. R. 2.
H. 4, 5, 6. Ed. 4 and R. 3. here abridged, the Commons House never claimed, nor
exercised any such Jurisdiction, as has been usurped by it of late years, in
some particulars of moment. 1. They never presumed, nor pretended to make,
print or publish any Act, Ordinance, Order whatsoever, relating to the people,
Kingdom, or own Members, without the Kings and Lords precedent approbation and
concurrence. 2. They never attempted to impose any Tax, Tallage, Charge,
Impost, Excise, or Duty whatsoever on the people, 34 E. 1. c. 1. 14 E. 3. c. 1.
21 E. 3. n. 16.31, 44, 51 E. 3. n. 25.
without the Lords and Kings assent. 3. They never adventured to appoint any
special Committees or Sub Committees to hear, examine, determine any particular
business or complaint, before, and without any Report thereof to the whole
House of Commons, nor without the privity and assent of the House of Lords, by
way of transmission or impeachment to their Superior Authority and Judicature;
An intolerable Grievance of puny times. 4. They never attached, fined,
imprisoned, or censured any Person by their own authority, without the Lords,
as they have done hundreds of late years. 5. They never presumed to seclude or
secure any of their own Members, nor yet finally to judge of the Legality, or
Illegality of their Elections, nor of the breach of their Privileges, by
imprisonment or otherwise, of which the Sea ^^ompton^ Jurisdiction of Co^r^s,
f. 8, 9, 10, 11. Cooks 4. Inst^t. p. 10^ 11.
King and Lords were anciently sole Judges, as is evident by 16 R. 2. n. 6. 12
R. 2. n. 23. 1 H. 4. n. 79. 4 H. 4. n. 19, 20. 5 H. 4. n. 71.78. etc. 5. 8 H.
4. 13. Brook Parl. 11. 8 H. 6. n. 57. 23 H. 6. n. 41. 31 H. 6. n. 36, 27, 28.
14 E. 4. n. 55. 17 E. 4. n. 36. with other Presidents cited in my Plea for the
Lords. 6. They were See Cooks 4 Instit. p. 10, 11. 1 H 4. n. 79.
always Petitioners to the King, Lords, for public Laws, Grievances, and
private Persons; but very seldom petitioned unto, upon any occasion, as you may
observe throughout this Abridgment: some of the first Petitions to them, being
those of the Upholsters, and Merchant Adventurers of London, whereon Acts were
made, mentioned in the printed Statutes of 11 H. 7. c. 19. 12 H. 7. ^. 6. since
the Parliaments here abbreviated. 7. Though they had the free Election of their
Speakers granted them, yet they always of course presented their Speakers to
the King and Lords, at their appointed time; who had power to allow of them,
and their excuses, or to disallow and discharge them when elected; yea to
enjoin them to elect, present another Speaker, when the former through sickness,
imprisonment, or other impediment, was disabled or discharged; as is evident by
1 H. 4. n. 62, 63, 64, 1 H. 5. n. 9, 10, 11.15. H. 6. n. 10.27, 28 H. 6. n. 6,
7. 32 H. 6. n. 6.25, 26, 27, 28, 29. and Cooks 4 Instit. p. 8. 8. They always
stood bareheaded, when they repaired to the Lords House upon the first day of
the Parliament, Conferences, Passing of Bills, Messages, or any other Occasions,
when as the Lords sat covered; 8 R. 2. n. 2. which custom continued so long
as the Lords House sat, even till 1648. 9. They See my Plea for the Lords.
never did nor could of right administer an Oath to Witnesses, or others,
examined by the whole House or Committees, as the Lords House usually did; 7 R.
2. n. 14. Plac. Coron. 1 H. 4. n. 10. They had no Vote, Judicature in Writs of
Error brought in Parliam. returnable Cooks 4 Institut. p. 21, 22, 23.
only before, and tried in and by the Lords House alone; nor yet in Criminal
Causes upon Impeachments, wherein the Lords alone were Judges, in cases both of
Peers and Commoners; as I have proved at large in my Plea for the Lords, Which
the Commons themselves acknowledged, 1 H. 7. n. 79. and you may here observe
throughout this Abridgement.

To close up this Preface, I dare affirm, that the several Treatises of our
English Parliaments, formerly published by De Repub^l. 2. c. 1, 2.
Sir Tho. Smith, His Order and Usage how to keep a Parliament.
John Vowel, Description of England, c. 8. Chronicle of Ireland, p: 101.
Hotinshed, In their Abridgments, Title, Parliament.
Statham, Fitzherbert, Brook, Jurisdiction of Courts, cap. 1.
Mr. Richard Crompton, Britannia, p. 173.
Mr Cambden, His Interpreter, Tit. Parliament.
Doctor Cowel, Guide unto Tongues. Word, Parliament.
Minshew, and Pref^ce to the 9 Reports. 2 Institutes, s. 109, 110, 4 Instit. c.
1.
Sir Edward Cook, with his much magnified Spurious Antiquity of Modus tenendi
Parliamentum, will not all of them put together, give the Reader half so much
certain knowledge, such infallible Evidence touching the Constitution,
Jurisdiction, Privileges, Proceedings, Debates, Resolutions, Customs, Orders,
Ends, affairs of our English Parliaments, Lords, or Commons houses, as this
Abridgement alone: formerly locked up in Private Cabinets, but now made Bo^^^m
quo Communius eo melius: Gul. Xylandri Praesat. in Plutarchi Moralia.
Common for the public good. The publication whereof, will not only restore
Luke 11.52.
that Key of Knowledge, which some self-seeking Monopolists of our Records
would have taken away; but likewise unlock the Tower doors, and lay open the
long closed Parliament Rolls there kept, in some good measure, to all
Noblemens, Gentlemen's, Parliament-mens, Lawyers, Scholars sights, who are
desirous to peruse them. Whose kind acceptance of my Endeavors to make them
not only public, but profitable, will be some Encouragement for me to proceed
in other Publications of this nature; and to live and die, as I desire,

A faithful, indefatigable Servant to my Country in all good Offices, William
Prynne.
From my Study in Lincolns Inn, March 10. 1656. 7.
ORDINANCES PER LES Prelates, Countes, and Barons, F^ats a Londr^s ove L'
assent du Roy^ Edwardi Secundi Anno Quinto.
CAP. 31. Que Parliament serra tenus: Parliament.
1. on. 2. foits per An. 7. Agrees per Ministers le Roy: Cap. 44. des persons
que seront Assigns en Parliament de Oier and Terminer.
BReve quod nativi Episcopi Cestr. qui Parliamento interfuit, Expenses of
Knights in Parliaments
non contribuant ad expensas Militum.

Aliud Breve ibidem, Clergy and their tenants.
quod Clerici de Cancellaria beneficiati non contribuant ad expensas Parliament
de Clero. existent. in Parliamento. Clerks of Chancery.
In quo nota haec verba maxim, tum expensis praedictis propter absentiam
illorum qui dictis Parliamentis, etc. non interfuerint praestentur.

Qui Clericus de Cancellaria nostra est, and qui in Parliamento nostro apud
Westminster. ultimo tento in obsequio nostro, and communinitate populi Regni nostri
praesens fuit.

Aliud Breve ibidem, Ancient Demesne.
quod homines de antiqu^ Dominico non contribuant expensis militum etc. per
Parliamentum.

Breve de expensis militum non levandis super tenentes Episcopi London apud
Fulham. Fulham.


Writ of summons to the Archbishop.
EDwardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
venerabili in Christo Patri W. eadem gratia Can^uar. Archiepiscopo totius
Angliae Primati: Salutem. Quia super diversis arduis Negotiis Nos, and statum
Regni nostri specialiter tangentibus, Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum a die
Paschae prox. futur. in tres Septimanas tenere, and vobiscum, and cum caeteris
Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus dicti Regni habere proponimus,
colliquium, and tractatum: Vobis mandamus, in side, and dilectione quibus nobis
tenimini firmiter injungentes, quod dictis die and loco, omnibus aliis
praetermissis, personaliter in^ersitis ibidem nobiscum, and cum caeteris
Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus, supra dictis negotiis tractare,
vestrumque consilium impensari. Praemunientes, Priorem, and Capellanum
Ecclesiae vestrae Cantuar. Archidiacon. totumque Clerum vestrae Dioces. quod
iidem Prior, and Archidiacon. in propriis personis suis, and dictum Capellanum
per ann: Idemque Clerus per duos Procuratores idoneos, plenam and sufficientem
potestatem ab ipsis Capellano and Clero habentes, una vobiscum intersitis modis
omnibus, tunc and ibidem, ad faciendum, and consentiendum hiis quae tunc and
ibidem de communi Consilio favente Deo) ordinari cont^gerit super negotiis
antedictis. Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. Test me^pso apud Derby 14 die Martii,
Anno regni nostri 15.

Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo subscript^ mutatis competen. mutandis, viz. Willielmo Archiepiscopo
Eborum, etc.
A Writ of Summons to the Lords Temporal.
REx Edwardo Comiti Cestriae silio suo carissimo salutem. Super diversis and
arduis negotiis Nos, and statum Regni nostri specialiter tangentibus,
Parliamentum nostrum apud Eborum a die Paschae prox. futur. in tres Septimanas
tenere, and nobiscum, and cum caeteris Prelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus
dicti Regni habere proponimus colloquium, and tractatum. Vobis mandamus in
fide, and dilectione quibus Nobis tenimini firmiter injungentes, quod dictis
die and loco, omnibus aliis praetermissis personaliter intersitis ibidem
nobiscum, and cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus super dictis
negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri, and hoc nullatenus
omittatis. Test Rege apud Darby, 14. die Martii.

Per ipsum Regem.

Eodem modo scriptum; subscriptis, viz.
THomae Com. Norf. Marshall. Angl. fratri Regis. David de Strabelgi Com.
Athol. Edwardo Com. Kanc. fratri Regis. Johan. de Brittania Com. Richmond.
Adomaro de Valentia Com. Pembrochiae. Edw. Com. Arundel. Johanni de Warren Com.
Surr. Roberto de Umfravil Com. Angos Hugoni de le Despencer, sen. Hugoni de le
Despencer, jun. Henry de Lanc. Thomae de Wake. Fulconi filio Warini. Fulgoni de
Strange. Petro Corbet. Johanni de Gray. Johanni de Hastings. Johanni de
Claveringes. Willielmo de Latymer. Willielmo de Grandissono. Johanni de Bello
campo de Somerset. Johanni de Sr. John's de Basinges. Williel. la Zouch. Rico.
de Gray. Henrico de Percy. Johanni Bottort. Johanni de Cromwell. Rado de Camois.
Roberto de Monte albo. Antho. de Lucie. Thomae de Furnival, sen. Thomae de
Furnival, jun. Johan. de St. John de Langehan. Johanni de Seagrave. Willielm.
de Roos de Hamalike. Rado de Greystock. Johanni de Somery. Willielmo de
Brewosa. Johanni Peache. Rodol. de Monte Hemertii. Roberto de Insula. Rado
Basset de Drayton. Hugoni de Courtney. Johanni de Charlton. Petro de malo lacu.
Rado de Georges. Andreo de Hamloe. Willielm. de Boteler de Wemme. Henrico de
Bello Monte. Henrico filio Hugonis. Rado. de Nevell. Willielmo Martino Henrico
Huse. Thomae fill. Bernardi. Willielmo de Farrariis. Johanni de Thorpe. Hugo de
Nevill. Nico. Nevill. Ingeramo de Grymes. Johanni de Sancto Amando. Roberto
fill. Walteri. Henrico Tregor. Willielmo de Secomaneo. Pho. de Columber.
Edwardo Deynecourt. Hugo Ponitz. Henrico de Cobham: Johanni Marmion. Willielmo
de Effingham. Roberto de Morley. Rico. Playtiae. Marmaduco Twenge. Thomae de
Archedekene. Rado de Dacre. Johanni de Mohun. Roberto de Scales. Rogero Banent.
Gilberto Peche. Maritio de Buin.
A Writ of Summons to the Prince of Wales and Temporal Lords.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
Edwardo Principi Walliae, and Com. Cestriae, filio suo charissimo, salutem. Cum
nuper volentes pro quibusdam negotiis regnum nostrum Angliae, nec non
stabilimenta terrae nostrae Scotiae specialiter tangentibus, Ordinavimus die
Martis in Quindena Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis prox. futur. apud
Westminster. teneri quoddam Parliamentum nostrum, and vobiscum, and cum caeteris
Magnatibus and Proceribus ejusdem regni super negotiis illis tractatum habere
and colloquium speciale; Vobis mandaverimus quod ad praedict. diem and locum
personaliter interessetis, nobiscum super dictis negotiis tractaturi,
vestrumque consilium impensuri; ad quam diem propter aliqua impedimenta ultima
postmodum emergentia ibidem commode interesse non possumus, quod nos tedet:
Vobis mandamus quod die Dominica prox. post festum S. Matthaei Apostoli prox.
futur. ibid. personaliter intersitis, nobiscum super dictis negotiis tractatur.
Et hoc nullatenus omittatis. Test meipso apud Spaldinge, 22 die Januarii, Anno
regni nostri 33.

Consimiles Literae directae subscriptis, viz.
Rogero de Bigot, Com. Norff. and Marescal. Angl. Rod. de Mons. herme Com.
Glouc. and Hereff. Humfrid. de Bohun, Com. Heart. and Essex. Guido de Bell. Campo
Com. War. Thom. Com. Lanc. Rob. de Vere Com. Oxon. Gilberto de Umfravill, Com.
de Angos. Henrico de Lanc. Adamaro de Valen. Johanni de Ferrariis. Henrico de
Piercie. Hugo de le Despencer. Roberto fill. Walteri. Roberto de Crendon.
Willielm. de Morley. Ely Dawbennie. Edm. Bar Staff. Rad. fill. Wf. Baroni de
Knovil. Thom. de la Roth. Theobaldo de Verdon sen. Johanni de Greystock.
Theobaldo de Verdon jun. Willielmo Tutchett. Ader de Estlye. Henrico Huse.
Sertoni de Hansladron.
A Writ of Summons to the Archbishop of Cant.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae;
Venerabili in Christo Patri, S. eadem gratia Archiepiscopo Cant. totius Angliae
Primati, salutem. Quia pro quibusdam etc. Parliament. nostrum apud Westminster. die
Dominica prox. ante festum Conversionis S. Pauli prox. futur. vestrumque
consilium impensuri; and hoc sicut nos, and honorem nostrum, and bonum regni,
ac commune commodum ejusdem regni diligitis, nullatenus omittatis, premunient.
Prior. and Capituli etc. ad faciena. and consentiend. hiis quae tunc de communi
Consilio (favente Deo) ordinari contigerint super negotiis ante dictis. Et quia
propter arduitatem negotiorum praedict. celeriorem expeditionem corund. volumus
primo die Parliamenti personaliter interesse; Nolumus, nec intendimus vos, aut
aliquem alium ad dictu^^ Parliamentum summonitum, qui eodem primo die
personaliter interessitis, habere aliquas excusationes, nec excusationem a
vobis admittere aliqualem. Test meipso apud Westminster, 20 die Novembris, Anno
regni nostri 34.

Per ipsum Regem and Consilium.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Archiepiscopo Eborum Angliae Primati, ac singulis
Episcopis per Angliam, viz. M. Ep. London. W. Winton. R. Ep. Sarum, etc.

REX dilecto and fideli suo Edwardo Principi Walliae filio suo charissimo
salutem. A Writ to the Prince of Wales.
Quia pro quibusdam ardius and urgentibus negotiis, nos, ac statum, and bonum
regimen Regni nostri concernentibus Parliamentum nostrum, etc. (ut ante.) Et
hoc sicut nos, and honorem nostrum, etc. nullatenus omittatis. Test ut ult.
ante dict.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur subscriptis sub eodem dat.
Henrico Duc. Lanc. Humfrid. de Bohun Com. Hereff. and Essex. Tho. de Bello
Campo, Com. War. Ric. Com. Arundel. Rad. Com. Staff. Hugon. de Courtney, Com.
de Devon. Gilberto de Umfravil, Com. de Angos. Roberto de Hufford Com. Suff.
Tho. Com. Cant. Will. Com. Sarum. Lionel Com. Ulton. Johanni Com. Rich. Johanni
de Mowbrey. Edw. de le Despencer. Henrico de Percie. Rad. de Nevell. Rad.
Basset de Draiton.
Anno Quarto Ed. 3. Summonitio Parliamenti.
REX etc. Thom. Com. Norff. and Marescallo Angliae etc. apud Westminster. die Lunae
prox. post festum S. Catharinae, etc. Writ of Summons.
Test apud Leicest. per Reg. 23 Octobr.

Consimiles Literae diriguntur subscripti^.
Johanni Com. Cumbriae, fratri Regis. Henrico de Lanc. Com. Lanc. Johanni de
Warren Com. Sur. Johanni de Britannia Com. Richm. Roberto Vere Com. Oxon.
Johanni de Bohun, Com. Hereff. and Essex. Tho. de Bello Campo Com. War. David
de Strabelgi, Com. Attieth. Henrico de Percie. Roberto de Clifford. Willielmo
Ros de Hamelake. Willielmo de Lattimer. Henrico filio de Hugonis. Johanni
Petche. Johanni de Mowbray. Rado de Nevil. Anth. de Lacie. Williel. la Zouch de
Mortuo mari. Williel. la Zouch de Harringworth. Randolfo de Dacre. Richardo de
Damoroy. Roberto de Morley. Hugoni de Courtney. Johanni de Bello campo de
Somerset. Johanni de Cromwell. Johanni de S. John. Fulkoni de Strange. Simoni
Ward. Johanni de Haverington. Johanni de Claveringe. Henrico de Cobham. Rogero
de Gray. Henrico de Gray. Stephano de Cobham. Richardo de Gray. Thomae
Bardolfe. Rado. Basset de Draiton. Rado. de Camoys. Humfrido de Ponnitz.
Henrico Dandle. Phil. Darcye. Willielmo de Eymr. Roberto de Isle. Johanni de
Marmion. Philippo de Columber. Tho. de Furnivall sen. Tho. de Furnivall jun.
Johanni de Mohun. Jacobo de Andley. Johanni Matrevers, jun. Willielmo Blunt.
Bartho. de Burghershe. Henrico de Ferrariis. Johanni le Strange. Johanni le
Sherleton. Bartho. de Burghershe, Custodi Quinque Portuum.
Anno Quarto Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the Monday
next after the Feast of S. Catherine, in the Fourth year of King Edward the
Third.
Roger Mortimer, Roger de Mortimer attainted of Treason in Parliament, and
executed. Barons Judges in Parliament. Earl-Marshal.
are particularly repeated; a great part whereof cannot be read, for that the
Roll is mouldred: But in the end it appears, that the King charged the Lords
and Peers, who, as Judges of the Land, by the Kings assent adjudged, That the
said Roger as a Traitor should be drawn and hanged. Whereupon the Earl-Marshal,
by commandment, with the aid of the Mayor and Sheriffs of London, and Constable
of the Tower, executed him the Thursday next after the first day of the same
Parliament.

Simon Bereford Knight, Simon Bereford attainted of Treason, and executed.
as of Council with the said Roger; whom the Marshal executed the Monday next
after Saint Thomas the Apostle.

John Mantrevers Knight, John Matravers attainted of Treason.
as being guilty of the death of Edmund Earl of Kent, Edmund Earl of Kent.
to be executed, if the said John could be found; and that Proclamation should
be made, Proclamation. Prescription.
that whosoever could bring the said John alive, should have a thousand Marks for a
reward; and who could bring his head, five hundred Marks.

Bogo de Bayons, Bogo de Bayons John Devarel attainted.
and John Devarel, for the cause aforesaid, and large rewards promised for
their apprehension.

Thomas of Gourney, and William of Ogle, Treason. Thomas Gurney William Ogle,
for murdering E. 2.
for murdering of King Edward the Second, with large promises for their
apprehension.

Peers Judges in Parliament, Peers.
That hereafter no Peers should be driven to give Judgment on any others then
on their Peers.

William Archbishop of York, Stephen Bishop of London, William Abbot of Lugdon,
William la Zouch, and many others who were agreed with Edmund Earl of Kent for
the delivery of King Edward the ^econd, Impeachment discharged. Earl of Kent.
Restitution.
and therefore impeached, should be acquitted, and restored to all their lands
and goods.

Insurrection.

Restitution.


That all such persons whose lands were seized into the Kings hands, by reason
of the road made by the Earl of Lancaster to Bedford, Earl of Lancaster
or by reason of the Attempt made by the Earl of Kent, Earl of Kent.
shall be restored thereunto with the mean profits; saving that if they have
any lands of the Kings gift, the same be of the like condition as others who
have lands of his gift.

Lancaster, Pardon.
and all others who were in his company in the attempt aforesaid, all Fines and
Ransoms.

London complains, Mayor of London.
for that the Citizens were threatened by such as were of the Earls company
aforesaid, and now pardoned. Whereupon after pardoning of them, Menaces.

Revenge.

Pardon.


the King wills that no party do seek revenge, upon pain of imprisonment.

Edmund the eldest son of ^dmund late Earl of Kent, Earl of Kent.
and Margaret Countess of Ken^, by their several Petitions require, That the
Record made against the said Earl, Petition to reverse a Judgment in Parliament
for Error.
may for the Errors therein be revoked. The cause of the same Earls death
seems to have been, for that the said Earl sought to del^v^r King Edward the
Second, his brother, upon report to him made by Roger Mortimer Earl of March,
and others before condemned that the said King Edward was living, Treason.
whereas he was long before dead; for which the said Earl by Parliament at
Winchester was condemned and excuted.

Edmund the son to the blood and lands of the said Earl his father, Restitution.
whereof he died seized in Fee, with dower to the Countess, Dower.
saving to the King the keeping and wardship of the same during the non^ge of
the said son. Wardship.


Kent, Indemnity.
should be impeached therefore, other then the said Earl of March, and Sir
Simon Bereford, John Mautravers, Bayones, and John Bevervile.

Richard de Arundel, the eldest son of the late Earl of Arundel, Earl of
Arundel.
prays that he may be restored to blood, Restitution.

Error.


lands and goods, considering that the said Edward was put to death, being not
tried by his Peers, Trial by Peers
according to the Law, and great Charter. Mag. Charta.
But for that the said Attainder was confirmed by Parliament, Attainder.

Parliament.


the said Richard amendeth his Petition, Petition.
and prays in such wise to be restored of the Kings mere grace. He was
accordingly restored, together with the Castle of Arundel, which was given to
Edmund late Earl of Kent, the said Richard yielding the usual rents, and saving
to the King all such lands as were given to the said Earl of Arundel by King
Edward the Second.

William of Montacute against the Earl of March and his great Favorers, Will.
Montacute. Reward of good service.
the King gives to the said William in general tail One thousand pounds
yearly; Grant of the King.




and for One thousand marks thereof, the Castle, Town, and Manor of Denbigh,
Denbigh.
and the Counties of Roes, Rewniock, Keirm, with the Commerotte of Dinmall,
with the appurtenances in Wales, late Roger Earl of March's, and the Castle of
the Shrewsbury, Shrewsbury-Castle.
with the Custom of Aile and appurtenances in Dorset.

The King for the like consideration granted to Sir Edward Bohun Four hundred
marks yearly in general tail; Tail.

Edward Bohun.


to Sir Robert Ufford Three hundred marks yearly in special tail; Sir Robert
Vfford.
and to Sir John Nevil of Hornby Two hundred marks in special tail. Sir John
Nevil.


Sir Tho. Berkly. Treason for murdering a deposed King.
In a Plea of the Crown holden before the King in this Parliament, Thomas of
Berkley Knight, was arraigned for the death of King Edward the Second, for that
the said King was committed to the keeping of the said Thomas, and John
Mautravers, at the Castle of the said Thomas at Berkley in Glouc. where he was
murdered. Tried in Parliament by a Jury.


The said Thomas says, That at the time of the death of the said King, he lay
sick at Beudley without the said Castle, and was not consenting thereunto; he
thereupon did put himself in trial of Twelve Knights there named, who found the
said Thomas not guilty, or that he fled or withdrew himself thereupon, but that
he placed under him Thomas of Gornay, and William of Ogle, who murdered the
said King Edward the Second.

Sir Eubal le Strange.

Baron and Feme.


Sir Eubal le Strange, and Alice his wife, late the wife of Thomas late Earl of
Lancaster, show, How upon the death of the said Earl, all the hereditaments of
the said Alice there named were seized into the Kings hands, until the said
Alice was enforced to release the same; whereof some part of the same were
granted to her during her life, the remainder to Sir Hugh le Dispencer the
younger: Of all which they pray restitution. Restitution.

Duresse.


The King gives unto them in Fee heriditaments parcel of the same to the
yearly value of Twelve hundred marks, so as the said Eubal and Alice do release
to the King all their right in the residue. Release.


It is to be noted, That the said Alice was the sole daughter and heir of Henry
de Lassey late Earl of Lincoln. Sed non patet in Recordo.

William la Zouch of Mortimer, William la Zouch.

Baron and Feme.

Restitution.

Duresse.


and Elinor his wife, pray to be restored to their lands in Glamorgan and
Morganow in Wales, the Manor of Hawley in the County of Warwick, and the Manor
of Tewksbury in Glouc. being the inheritance of the said Elinor, the which they
by the extort means of the late Earl of March were enforced to pass the same to
the King by Fine. Fine.
In consideration of Ten thousand pounds, the King restores them to their
former estate.

John Clavering is restored to the profits of the Manor of Massingham John
Clavering.

Restitution.


and Aswel-Thorp in Norff. as in the right of the Heir of Robert Thorp, who
held the same of him by Knights service, and other Lands in Fee-farm of the
King, of the Escheat of Normand, and not of any Tenure in Capite. Tenure.


Comb of the King by Knights service by Escheat, and not in chief, by Rent of
Eleven pounds three shillings four pence, and Fifteen shillings yearly Escuage.
Escuage.


John Sherlton and Sir Geoffry de la Pool, Sir John Sherlton, Sir G. de la Pool.
the King enjoineth them to keep the Peace duly. Peace.


It is enacted, That all Sheriffs shall be removed, Sheriffs.
and other therein placed; and that general Commissions be awarded to enquire
of the oppressions of Sheriffs, Commissions.

Oppressions, Escheators.


Escheators, and Coroners. Cor^ners.


Arundel and Sir John Carleton as before in the 20. for that debate was between
them, Earl of Arundel, Sir John Carleton

Peace.


because the same John was at the apprehension of the said Earls Father.

Justice not to be delayed.
neither for the Great Seal, Great Seal.
Letter, or other Commandment. Royal command.


Item, It is enacted, That Sir William Montacute, Sir William Montacute. Royal
command, Indemnity, Murders, Felonies.
and all others with him at the apprehension of the Earl of Ma^ch and others in
Not. being done by the Kings commandment, shall be acquitted thereof, and all
other Murders and Felonies there done.

It is also enacted, That one Recognisance of Two thousand pounds, Recognisance
vacated.
which the Bishop of Winchester stood bound to pay to King Edward the Second,
should be void.

Anno Quinto Edwardi Tertii. In the same Roll are contained the Remembrances
Westminster, the morrow after S. Michael, in the Fifth year of King Edward the
Third.
Winchester being Chancellor, Chancellor.

Causes of Parliament.


shows that the Parliament was called to treat of affairs touching the Land
of Guienne, Guien.
and for Peace, Peace.
and other issue to be had between the King and the French, France.
and for the affairs of Ireland, Ireland.
and for the Kings expedition thither. Kings voyage.


French Treaty.
or Marriage, Marriage.
according to the offer of the French. The Commons think the way of marriage to
be the best; Commons advice.
after which certain Lords there named are appointed to Lords Committee.


Ireland.
Touching the affairs with Ireland, it is fully accorded, That the King shall
pass thither in person, Kings voyage thither.
and that in the mean time a power be sent thither, Forces sent thither.
and commandment given, that all such as have any Lands there do repair thither
for defense of the same. All who have lands there to repair thither.


Feats of Arms prohibited.
until the King and his Council do otherwise appoint. King and his Council.


It is accorded, that such learned in the law, as shall be sent as Justices, or
otherwise to serve in Ireland, Lawyers and Justices sent into Ireland.
shall have no excuse.

Records searched Ireland.


E^ball le Strange, and eleven other Mainprisors to bring forth the body of
Hugh, Mainprisors in Parliament.
the son of Hugh le Despencer the younger, Hugh le Dispencer.
to answer in this Parliament, who brought him forth accordingly, and show the
Kings pardon to him made, Pardon allowed.
whereof they pray allowance, and discharge of themselves; which was granted.

Isabel the Kings mother shall have yearly Four thousand pounds, Queen Isabels
Dower.
in rents or lands.

Estates in Parliament.
That none of them shall retain, sustain, or avow any Felon, Felon.
or other common breaker of the Law. Breaker of the Law.


Purveyance.
but for the King, Queen, and their children, and that by good warrant and
ready payment. Ready Payment.


Thomas de Ferrers, Office.

Tho. de Ferrers.


and other his brothers, of the Parsonage of Marlston in the County of
Leicester. Marlston Parsonage.


Crowland, Abbot of Crowland.
and Sir Thomas Wake of Liddle, Sir Tho. Wake.
between whom debate had been, to keep the Peace. Peace.


The like Commandment was given to Sir William d^ la Zouch of Ashby, Sir Will.
de la Z^uch
and to Sir John Gray of Rotherfield. Sir John Gray.

Peace.




London shall be in Council attendant upon the King, Bishop of London.

Kings Council.


with others of the Council.

Edward the son of the late Earl of March; Petition for Grace Earl of March.
the King asked what they would have done, since King Edward the Second was
murdered by the procurement of the said Earl^ Treason.
they answer, for certain Lands intailed; Tail.
the Kings answer was, That the same should be done at his pleasure.

Estate, the King discharges Sir Thomas Berkley, Sir Tho. Berkley.
and his Mainprisors, Mainprisors discharged.
and day given to him to appear at the next Parliament. Parliament.




Sir Henry Piercy.
Whereas Sr Henry Piercy for the yearly Fee of 500 Marks stood bound to serve
the King with a certain number of men, as well in Peace, Service in War and
Peace.
as in War. The King in release of the same Fee, Release.
grants to the said Earl in Fee the Castle of Workworth in Northumberland,
Workworth Castle.
and the Manor of Rochbury. Rochbury.


In the backside of the lame Roll.

Robert of Benhall Knight, Sir Robert Benhall.
William of Clapton, Will. and John Clapton.
and John of Clapton, being convicted before the Justices of Assize in Norfolk
and Suffolk, of certain riots, Rioters fined in Parliament.
with sundry Knights and Esquires their sureties appeared in full Parliament,
and were severally fined, and further bound with sureties to their good
behavior. Sureties for good behavior.


Sundry Merchants of Brabant were arrested by the English Merchants for Wools,
Merchants Reprisal.
taken up to the use of the Duke of Brabant; Duke of Brabant.
at which Dukes request the King requires that all the English Me^chants do
appear before the Council, Wools.

Council.


and abide further Order therein.

Anno Sexto Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the Monday
next after the Feast of S. Gregory, in the Sixth year of King Edward the Third.
King and Council.
and after proclaimed in Westminster and London, Proclamation.
and more was not this day, for the Archbishop of Canterbury, and others were
not come.

London, Weapons, Arms, Games, prohibited.
Westminster, or the Suburbs of the same.

The second was, That no games, or other plays of men, women, or children,
should be used in Westminster, to the disturbance of the Parliament.
Parliaments disturbance. Causes of Parliament.


After that the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, Chancellor
of England, Chancellor.
by way of Oration shows, how the French King went to take a voyage to the
Holy Land, Voyage to the Holy Land.
and desired the Kings Company, which caused the King to call the same
Parliament.

That being said, Sir Ieffery le Scroop in the presence of the King, by his
commandment, declared, That the same was called as well to redress the breach
of the Laws and Peace, Breach of Laws and Peace.
as for the Kings going to the Holy Land.

The Bishops answered, Bishops and Clergies answer.
That it did not properly appertain to them to council in matters of peace, and
to prescribe for the punishment of evils, and therefore they and the Proctors
of the Clergy went by themselves to consult therein, Consult by themselves.

The Earls and great men by themselves.


and the Lords and the The Record is, Les di^z Countz Barons and Grauntz, per
eux mesme^: Great men^ not Common.
Commons by themselves.

The Lords and the Grantz.

Great Men see ^ E. 3. n 3.


Commons return, and by the mouth of Sir Henry Beomont, think it best to treat
of matters of Peace, Peace.
namely, that certain Justices should be appointed in every County, Justices of
Peace.
and of their power to determine, that in every shire certain Officers with the
Constables be appointed for apprehending of the evil, Constables.

Malefactors apprehended.


and levying of Hu^ and Cry. Hu^ and Cry.
And it was by the King, Bishops, Lords, and Commons enacted and agreed, that a
sentence of Excommunication, Excommuni^cation.
should be published in every Church throughout the Realm.

Peace-breakers.
2. To excommunicate all such as should defend, receive, or be privy
Obligations.
and such like instruments thereupon made, be utterly void, so far as lies in
the Bishop, and all others, or
Lords and Commons but one H^use.
By the fifth and sixth titles before, it may appear that at this time, the Lords
and Commons were of The Record warrants no such thing, but the cont^ary; and so
does 6 ^. 3 n 3 next ensuing.
one House, and that then there was no Speaker for the Commons.

Touching the Kings Voyage to the Holy Land, Voyage to the Holy Land deferred.
it was thought too timely, and therefore deferred for three years.

French Treaty, Marriage. Parliaments advice.
and alliance by Marriage: The King by Sir Ieffery le Scroop shows, How the
French King declares to the Kings Ambassador, that so as the King would come
over in person, he should find great friendship Of whom requi^ing advice
therein, Answer was made, That for those respect^ they agreed thereunto,
deferring the Kings expedition into Ireland, Ireland.
for one year, so as aid might be sent in the mean time.

The Saturday next after the beginning of the Parliament, Parliament dissolved.
the same was dissolved.

Sir John Gray. Sir Will. de la Zouch.

Breach of Peace.


Touching the debate between Sir John Gray of Rotherfield and Sir William de la
Zouch, which was heard before the King and his Council, King and his Council.
in whose presence there fell great wo^ds between them, so as the said John
drew his knife upon him in the Kings presence, for the which they were both
commanded to prison, Imprisonment.
and being after brought forth to their answers, the said William was
delivered, and the said John recommitted to prison during the Kings pleasure.

Anno Sexto Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the morrow E.
3.
THe Bishop of Winchester Chancellor of England declares, Chancellor.
That the Parliament was called touching French affairs, Causes of Parliament.
and the Kings expedition thither for repressing his Enemies. French affa^rs
and expedi^ion.


At this day were proclaimed the Articles contained in the last Parliament,
Proclamation against weapons and Plays.
1.2.3.

Parliament adjourned.
at what time considering the news from the North, they doubted the Scots
arrival: Sc^ts.
Wherefore^ the Bishops by themselves, The Bishops, Lords and Com^ons several a
v^^es, Irish voyage ^efer^ed^ M^n and m^^ies th^ther.
the Lords by themselves, and the Knights by themselves, advised the King to
stay his journey into Ireland, and to send thither a new supply of men and
money; to stay within the Realm, and with an armed power to go toward the
North, there to lie ready for the Scot. Scots.


Toward which Exploit, They granted to the King one Disme, Aid, Disme, and one
Fifteen g^anted toward the Wars.
and one Fifteen, to be levied of the Laity, so as the King will live of his
own without grieving of his Subjects with outrageous prizes or such like.
Whereupon, The King revoked the new Commissions for rea^ing of Tallages; and
promises from henceforth to remise the same according to the old rate.

Anno Sexto Edwardi Tertii. The Remembrances of the Parliament summoned at
York, the Friday next before the Feast of S. Michael, in the Sixth year of
Edward the Third, Mense Decembris.
MEmorandum, That the Parliament began before the King came to York. Parliament.


York, but remained not far from thence, looking for the coming of such as were
warned thereto. Wherefore at this day the Parliament was adjourned till Monday
after, Parliament adjourned.
and from Monday until Tuesday then ensuing.

Ieffery le Scroop Knight, Sir Ieffery le Scroop.
by the K^n^s commandment, showed the Kings approach thither, which was uttered
in the last Parliament. And for that he understood that Edward Bayliol had
proclaimed himself King of Scotland, Bali^l King of Scots.
he required Council of the whole Estate, viz. Whether it were better for him
to assail Scotland, Parliaments advice required t^uching Scotland.
or to claim the Demesne of the same? or else by making himself party, to take
the advantage, and thereby to enjoy the services as other his Ancestors had?

Parliament adjourned for absence of M^mbers.
the Assembly require the continuance of the Parliament until the Utas of S.
Hilary then next ensuing, at York, which was granted, and new Summons
e^pecially awarded to ev^ry person with especial charge to attend, New Summons.
so as the aff^irs between the King and the Realm might not be delayed, for the
debate betwixt the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, Attendance required
Archbishops difference about ca^rying their C^^s^ers.
for their supreme bearing of their Crosses.

York, Clergies default and absence.
the Bishops of Lincoln and Carlisle, and the Abbots of York and Selby.

Archbishop of Canterbury and his Clergies absence.
The Archbishop of Canterbury came not, nor any other of his Province; and all
for bearing of the Cross. Whereby the same was not only loss of the opportunity
to Scotland, but also an importable charge to the whole Estate by a new
Reassembly.

Parliament reassembled.
The Reassembly of the Parliament adjourned unto York, unto the Uta's of S.
Hilary, 6. E^ 3.
England.

Petitions.
Receivers of Petitions for Gascoyne, Gascoyne, Ireland, Wales, Islands foreign.
Ireland, Wales, and the Foreign Isles.

Tryers of Petitions for England.

Tryers of Petitions for Gascoyne, etc. as above.



Proclamtions against Weapons and Plays.
and Marshal, and by the Mayor and Bailiffs at York.

York, in the presence of the King in full Parliament, to see the Peace kept in
the same City and Suburbs thereof, Peace to be kept.
and to arrest them that did the contrary.

Godfrey le Scroop, Sir Godfrey le Scroop.
in the presence of the King, declares to the whole Estates the Circumstances
of the two last Assemblies, and how the Bishop of Winchester and others were
appointed to consult on certain causes.

Committees report and advise.
The Saturday after, the Bishop of Winchester and other Committees declared, how
he and they had consulted on the whole matter; but for that the same greatly
imported, they were not therein fully resolved; whereupon they wish the King to
take advice of the Pope, Pope.
and of the French King, French King.
for his better proceeding therein.

And further, That the King would appoint Wardens of the Marches of the North.
Wardens of the North.


Whereupon the Commons had license to depart, Commons licensed to depart before
the Lords. Parliament dissolved.
and the Lords commanded to attend unto the next day, at which time the
Parliament was dissolved.

Anno Octavo Edwardi Tertii. Petitions and Acts moved at the Parliament holden
at York, the next before S. Peter in Cathedra, 8. E. 3.
Great Charter. Forest.
and other Statutes should be observed, Statutes explaind
and that such Statutes as be obscure by good advice shall be made plain.

Justice of the Peace.

Lawyer, Outlawry.


who shall be chief; that all offenses before them be sued to the Outlawry, and
that the Justice do yearly extract their doings before the King. Extracts.


The King will be advised, only they shall yearly extract their proceedings
into the Treasury^ Resp.

Treasury.




Pardon, Parliament.
but only by Parliament.

The Statutes made shall be observed. Resp.


Justices of Peace Fees.

Resp.




The King will provide therefore.

Sheriffs to continue but one year.
according to the Statute of Lincoln, and Woodstock.

The Statutes therefore made shall stand, and the Chancellor, Resp.

Chancellor.


and others, who are appointed to make choice of Sheriffs, Sheriffs elected.
shall name able men, who shall continue one year, or longer, according to
their demeanor.

Justices.
and of the other, Justices of Assize, and the Peace in every County shall
determine of false Jurors, False Jurors.

Maintenance.


and Maintainers, and that the King by his Letters Patents has charged all
Archbishops meekly to pronounce in every Parish Excommunication against all
such offenders. Excommunication.


Writs.

Chancery.

Fees.

Great Charter.


according to the great Charter.

Nulli vendemus justiciam.
Such as be of course shall be so, and such as be of grace the King will
command the Chancellor to be therein gracious. Resp.


Bigamy trial Court Christian.


That remedy may be had against oppressions of the Clergy for probates of
Wills, Probate of Wills.




and Citations for trifles.

The King will herein do his best, and charge the Bishops to do the like.

Resp.
That the Justices of Assize, Justices of Assize.
after their Assize taken, shall not depart before they have made delivery of
their Gaol, Gaol delivery.
on pain to lose their Fees.

It is enacted, If any delivery be taken before any other Justices then before
such Justices as are appointed thereto, Justices.
Gaol delivery.
contrary to the Statutes of Northampton, that the same may be void.

Infant.

Averment.

Statute.

Recognisance.

Resp.


That every Infant acknowledging any Statute or Recognisance, may at his full
age aver his Nonage.

There is a better Law then by Averment.

Deliverance.
without any Fine to the Forrester who accompteth them Forfeits; Forresters.
and that Coroners may execute their office there.

Coroners.

Forfei^ure.


The Coroners shall execute their office there, and Wardens of Forests shall be
commanded to keep their Officers from extorting. Resp.

Extortion.




Yarmouth and Little Yarmouth. Yarmouth.


The Judgments therefore made between them shall stand.

Resp.
That remedy may be had for the true making of Woollen clothes according to the
Assize. Woollen Cloth.


Resp.
The King will provide for the execution of the Statute.

Money exported.
That no money be carried forth out o^ the Realm.

Resp.
The King will therefore provide.

Purveyance.


John, Pardon of debts.
and Henry the Third, for which Process came daily out of the Exchequer.
Exchequer.


The King will provide answer the next Parliament.

Resp.
That remedy may be had against Sheriffs and their Officers for gathering of
Green wax. Sheriffs.

Green-wax.

Resp.




The Statutes therefore shall stand.

On the backside of the same Roll.
Staple revoked.
and that all Merchants-strangers may freely buy any Staple-wares, Merchants.
paying the due Custom. Customs.


Justices.
Sundry Justices in sundry Counties appointed to enquire of the Felonies of
Bennet of Normandy. Enquiry.

Felony.




Kings Bench.
It is enacted, The Kings Bench shall stay in Warwickshire after Easter next;
for that Sir Ieffery le Scroop Chief Justice is busy in the Kings weighty
affairs, Sir Ieffery le Scroop Chief Justice.
whose place to supply Sir Richard Willoughby is appointed, Sir Rich. Willoughby
and Sir William Shareshall is assigned with him one of the Justices of the
Bench. Sir Will. Sharshal.


Anno Decimo tertio Edwardi Tertii. The Remembrances of the Parliament holden
at Westminster, in Quindena of S. Michael, Ann. 13 Edw. 3.
E. 3. tit. 4. Proclamation.


Causes of Parliament; Peace, Marches defense.
viz. First for the observation of the Peace. Secondly for the defense of the
Marches toward Scotland. Thirdly for the keeping of the Sea. Sea guarded.


Canterbury, who with the Bishop of Duresme, and Sir Michael de la Pool, came
from the King beyond the Seas in message to the whole Estates, King^
messengers, Kings affairs, Relief.
declared the things there achieved, and the hazard of his own person and
whole power thereby, wanting necessary things out of England.

Huntington, Kings Army and affairs.
and to Merchants at Perch, it was declared, how the King remained about S.
Quintins, accompanied with Fifteen thousand armed men, and a great number more.

It was also declared how the King and others about him, Kings debts.
for the furnishing of him, and the procuring of his Allies for this
enterprise, stood bound in Three hundred thousand pounds, the which with his
honor he ought to pay before his departure. Kings Honor.
So as the end was, He needed Aid. Aid.


Whereupon the Duke of Cornwall, Duke of Cornwall Guardian of England.
Guardian of England, and other Lords, granted to the King aid as follows.
Aid by the Lords, Commission.
For the money he wanted, the Archbishop of Canterbury by the Kings
Letters Patent had Commission to grant certain things to the Lords and Commons.

Tenths granted by the Lords.
except of their bound Tenants; the tenth fleece of Wool, and the tenth Lamb
of their own store, to be paid in two years: And would that the great Maltolt
revoked Wool.
wrong set upon Wool be revoked, and that this Grant turn not into a Custom.

Wards, Prochein-amy.


Collusion, Wardship.


The Commons will not consent to a new Devise, without conference with their
Countries.
That they knew and tendered the Kings estate, and were ready to aid the same;
only in this new Devise they durst not agree without further conference with
their Countries; and so praying respite until another time, they promise to
travel to their Countries.

Commons answer.
in form following.

Peace, Justices.
it would much help, if good Justices were appointed in every County. If such
as be let to Main-prise do put in good Sureties, Sureties.
as Esquires or Gentlemen, and that no pardons were granted but by Parliament.
Pardon only by Parliament.


Seas guarded, Cinque ports, Sea coasts.
the Cinque Ports, or other Haven Towns, who are discharged of all other
contributions, should do the same aid for the Sea coasts; That such as have
Lands thereby be bound to keep thereupon.

North, Marches guarded.

Commons demand.


as is next before, Viz. the keeping of the Seacoasts.

The Demands of the Commons.
General pardon, Aid le Roy.
escapes, trespass for the Forest, and otherwise, all aids to make the Kings
son a Knight, or to marry his daughter.

Purveyors, Present pay.
That all Purveyors as well with Commission as without, shall be arrested if
they make not present pay.

Pardon of old Debts,
A Pardon of old debts, and duties until the Kings Coronation.

That all Customs of Wools and Lead, Customs of Wools, Lead, Common assent,
Parliament, Resistance, Moneys.
may be taken as it has been, and not as lately enhaunsed, with Common assent,
and that if it be, resistance may be made.

And further that knowledge may be had how these may be assured.

For to help the want of money,
Bullion, Mint.


Navy.
it was enacted, That the Navy of the whole Realm should remain in some certain
place, without any scattering by any private men, until further order be taken.

Archbish. of Cant.
It was agreed that the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Nobles by their
Letters should require the Archbishop of York, Archbish. of York.
and his Clergy, to contribute for the defense of the North, as they had done.

Array.


Holdernes shall be arrayed, Holdernesse, Array.
and grant aid for keeping of the North-marches, and other exploits there, as
well as others of the County of York, albeit they be appointed by Commission to
keep the same.

William Wallingford, Commissions, Purveyance.
and all other Commissioners for purveyance for the King, be utterly void.

Ports, Coin not to be transported.


Richmond, Earl of Richmond, Lord Clifford, Lord Ros Lord Moubray, Sir William
Daubeny, Residence, North marches defense.
the Lord Clifford, the Lord Ros of Wake, the Lord Moubray, and Sir William
Daubeny, are to be commanded by Writ to repair toward their lands, for the
defense of the North-Marches, or being unable, that they then send power
thither to the Lords, there.

Writs of Summons,
That the Writs to summon the next Parliament, may charge every Sheriff for his
County to return two Knights girded with swords. Knights gladiis cincti.


That every Archbishop do before the next Parliament, Archbish^ps Certificate.
certify all Benefices in every Aliens hands, Benefices.




of the value thereof, and of the residence thereof.

Canterbury, Writs for the Convocation.
and the other of York, against Hillary ensuing.

It is also to be remembered to summon the Parliament, New Parliament summoned.
against the Utaves of S. Hillary then ensuing.

Anno Decimo tertio Edwardi Tertii. The Remembrances of the Parliament holden
at Westminster, in the Octaves of S. Hillary, 13 E. 3.
Cornwall, Duke of Cornwall. Guardian of England.
Guardian of England, was busied about the Kings weighty affairs, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Dean of York, the Kings Treasurer, Richard de
Willoughby, John de Ston. and John de S. Pool, four, three, or two of them by
the Kings Letters Patents were appointed to begin, Commissioners to begin the
Parliament.
and continue the Parliament for, Proclamation for the Commissioners to begin
and continue the Parliament.
and in the Name of the King, and Guardian, and so do all things which the said
Guardian should do, until his coming.

tit. 2. were proclaimed.

Commission.
Edwardus, etc. Ending Test Edw. Duce Cornubiae, and Com. Cestr. filio nostro
charissimo Gardiano de Angl.

Monday next after the Octaves aforesaid; Parliament adj^urned from day to day
for absence of diverse Members.
during which time, Merchants, Merchants.
Owners of Ships, and Mariners did attend. Mariners.


Causes of Parliament, Kings aid, Sea guarded, Marches defense, Commons request
Viz. for the aid to the King, keeping of the Sea, and defense of the
North-marches, whereunto the Commons required respit until Saturday the
nineteenth of February.

Commons aid upon condition, Lords answer, Kings pleasure.
thirty thousand sacks of Wool, upon condition expressed in a pair of
Indentures: the Lords promise to send to the King to know his pleasure.

Lords aid granted.
or of their Peers, as hold by a Barony, Barony, Tenths.
should give the tenth of their grain, wool, and lamb, and of all their own
Demesnes.

Commons aid conditional.
twenty five hundred sacks of Wool, so as if the King liked the conditions
aforesaid, the same should run in part of payment; if not, they would freely
give to the King.

Merchants.
The Merchants of England had day until Monday the first week of Lent.

Mariners, Cinque Ports, Ships, Charges.
The Mariners of the five Ports promised to make ready their ships before
middle Lent, Viz. One and twenty of their own, and nine of the Thames, and to
bear half the charges, the other half the Council promised to bear of their own
good will; Councels promise.
but not of duty.

Mariners Ships, Charges, Clerks.
The Mariners of the West appoint to set forth ninety ships of an hundred Tun
burden and above, and to bear the whole charges if they could. Two Clerks are
appointed to have the charges, the one for the West, the other for the Cinque
Ports.

Ships, Portsmouth, Dartsmouth.
All Ships of Portsmouth, and from thence toward the West of the Burden of one
hundred Tuns, and above, shall ride at Dartsmouth, whose Admiral shall be the
Earl of Arundel. Admiral Earl Arundel.


Thames, being of that Burden, shall ride at Winchelsey, Winchelsey.
whose Admiral shall be the Earl of Huntington; Admiral, Earl of Huntingdon.
all which Ships shall be ready by next Lent.

Admiral.

Ships stayed.


Commandment is given to the Admiral to stay all other Ships which may pass the
Seas, and to warn them to go into safe Harbors.

Proclamation, Pardons, Seacoasts.
General Proclamations to be made, That all persons having Charters of Pardons,
to resort to the Seacoasts for the Kings service, upon pain to forfeit the
same.

Sir Rich. Talbot. Southampton, Garrison, Wages, Soldiers, Advance-money.
Sir Richard Talbot is appointed to keep the Town of Southampton, which he had
undertaken; who for the same shall have twenty Men at Arms, and a hundred
Archers at the Kings wages, and more if need require. All which Soldiers shall
receive beforehand a months pay, and the said Richard a hundred pounds by way
of reward.

Fortification, Charges levied, Contribution.
The said Richard is appointed to see the same Town fortified according to a
pair of Indentures, and to levy the Charges of the Neighbors there bordering
by, and more (if need be) to levy of the Inhabitants.

Bp. of Winchester.
The Bishop of Winchester, the Prior of S. Swithins, Prior of S. Swithin
and the Abbot of Hide, Abbot of Hide.
are appointed with all their power to keep at their Manors next to
Southampton, Residence, Assistance.
and to be ready at the call of the same Richard.

Pinaces.
That two Pinaces, the one of Welbrook, the other of Roger Normandes, to attend
the pleasure of the said Richard in the Port aforesaid.

Southampton do attend to defend the same, Inhabitants residence, Forfeiture.
and not depart on pain to lose all.

Stephen Butterley and William of Weston, Sergeants at Arms, Sergeants at Arms,
Timber, Boards, Indenture.
do provide sufficient Timber-boards and other Necessaries for the same Town by
Indenture. Provisions, Indenture.


Richard by Indenture.

Richard have the like power in all things, Governors power
as the Earl of Warwick had at such time as he was Guardian there.

Southampton have a Writ of attendance on the said Richard for victuals and
other necessaries. Victuals, Purveyance, Sheriff.


Barwick, Edinburgh.
Touching Barwick and Edinburgh, William of Snoringe and John at Fennes
Merchants of Lyn, Merchants, Provisions, Grain, Ra^^s.
Robert of Bayons and Henry le Smith Merchants of Barton upon Humber, do
undertake at a certain price, and by a certain day to deliver Ten thousand
Quarters of all kind of Grain at the Town of Barwick, and in the Road of Lighe;
Every Quarter of Wheat and Malt at Nine shillings; Oats, Beans and Pease at
Five shillings. A caution, that under color of the same they should not serve
the Kings enemies. Kings enemies.


Sir Thomas Rooksby has taken upon him the keeping of the Castle of Edinburgh
and Strivling, Sir Tho. Rooksby^ Edinburgh Cast^e, Sterling.
until Midsomer then next ensuing.

Barwick are made, Provisions.

Barwick.


the greatest whereof is allotted to the Castle.

Touching the Isle of Wight.
Isle of Wight. Aid, Respite.


That none of the same Isle shall be dispensed with to be absent therefrom,
neither be warned of any Assise or Inquest, during the Wars. Residence,
Protection, Wars.


Provisions.
Grain, Coals, and other Necessaries for the Castle of Carisbrook in Wight.
Carisbrook Castle.


John de Longford Constable of the same Castle; Kings Butler, Wine, Sir John de
Longford.
and William of Kenenwich is commanded to provide the rest.

John de Ferrers Captain of Iersey, Sir John de Ferrers Iersey, Deputy,
Provisions.
has appointed to send thither a sufficient Deputy, to whom certain things are
appointed for the defense of the same.

Commandment is given to the Bailiffs to seize the goods of William Pain,
Bailiff of Iersey.




a late Jurate there who revolted to the Enemy, and to choose another.

It is enacted, That the temporalities of the Provost of Wells be restored to
the Provost now to hold his former estate. Provost of Wells, Temporalties
restored.


On the backside of the same Roll.
York, Array.
Nottingham, Derby, Lancaster, and Cumberland, by particular rate, being in the
whole of Men and Arms, Seven thousand four hundred; of Archers on horseback,
Two hundred; and of Halberters, Two thousand.

York, Soldiers.
Nottingham and Derby, shall go at the costs of the Country unto Newcastle upon
Tine; Array, March out of the Counties.
only they of Westmerland, Cumberland, and Lancaster, to Carlisle only: And
the Captains and others being together, Captains, Free Quarter on the Enemy.
shall lie and forage upon Scotland, and not upon the Marches of England.

Clerk, Wages.
by the oversight of the Lords Percy and Nevil.

Nobles, Knights, Merchants, Moneys returned.
and to talk with the Merchants for Shifts, and return of money for these
exploits.

Berwick.
For that Richard Talbot is discharged for the keeping of Berwick, It is agreed,
That Sir Walter Clark shall keep the same till Easter ensuing.

Array.
Sir Thomas de Wake, Sir William Ros, Sir Tho. Ughtred, Sir William de la Pool,
and Sir Michael de VVath, are appointed to set for the Array of Soldiers for
the County of York.

Array:
Sir Nicholas de Cantelow, and Sir Richard de Willoughby, Sir Thomas le
Longvillers, for the Counties of Nottingham and Derby.

Henry Heydock, and Robert de Radcliff for the County of Lanc.

Array.
Sir Anthony Lucy, Sir Pierce Tilliol, and Sir Hugh Delowthrey, and Robert
Parvynge for Westmerland, Array.
and Cumberland.

Piercy, and Nevill, Sir Robert Dacres, Sir John de Fenwick, and Sir Thomas de
Helprescotes, for Northumberland, who may appoint Captains, Array.

Captains.


and them displace on cause reasonable.

Wastes.
An Act to survey all Wastes done by any persons to the possessions of any
religious Houses, being in the hands of Aliens with the Circumstances. Aliens.


Prior of S. Dennis.
Writs of respits to be made for the Prior at S. Dennyses next South^ for the
Parsonages of Rye and Sandwich, for payment of their Dismes. Dismes respited.


Array.
The like for the Prior of Brumcester for the setting forth of one man at Arms,
and two Archers.

Anno Decimo quarto Edwardi Tertii. Westminster, the Wednesday next after
Midlent, in the reign of King Edw. 3. the 14th. and of France the first.
Proclamation.
OPen Proclamation was made in Westminster Hall, as in the last Parliament, tit.
3.

Clerk of the Parliament.
Sir Thomas of Drayton is made Clerk of the Parliament.

Ireland, Receivers of Petitions.
England, Gascoyn, VVales^ and Flanders.

Parliament adjourned.


Causes of Parliament.
that the King might be aided with a great sum, Aid.
the which lay him upon, and therefore the Commons are willed to give answer on
Monday ensuing. Commons answer.


Aid granted conditionally.
wool, and lamb for two years to be levied, and of all Townsmen the ninth of
their goods, of such as dwelled in Forests and Wastes, a Fifteenth, on
condition the King would grant their Petitions contained in a Schedule. Commons
Petitions.


The Petitions be these, Viz.
Sundry Bishops, Lords, and Commons, were appointed daily to sit until they
had reduced the aforesaid grant in form of a Statute. Committees, Statute,


Statute,
agreed upon by the King, and the whole Estates, which begins, To the honor
of God.

Exemplification, Great Seal,
beginning, Know ye that where our Bishops, Earls, etc.

France, Kings style, Arms, France, Indemnity.
and had changed his Arms, whereby the Subjects were not longer bound to obey
him as King of France, the Kings Letters Patents of Indemnity were granted,
Indemnity.
beginning Edwardus, etc. Know ye that where some people intend, etc.

Brabant, Duke of Brabant.
for great sums of money, wherein they stood bound for the King, if the Duke of
Cornwall married not with the daughter of the said Duke, Duke of Cornwall,
which was granted, and all which Letters Patents were enrolled in the
Chancery. Letters Patents, Enrolment.


Clergies Petitions, Statute.
and began Edwardus etc. and enrolled, as above.

Flanders. Committees, Flanders,


Bruxels. Committee, Merchants, Exchange.


Some to confer with the Merchants of England. Merchants, Prior Aliens.




Committees, Defense.


Gascoign. Gascoign


Island, Seacoasts.
and Seacoasts.

Peace, Covenants, King.
and performance of Covenants between the Duke of Brabant, it shall be debated
in the presence of the King.

Money, Commons.
the same shall be moved to the Commons.

William de la Pool, Accounts.
John Chernels, and Paul de Monteflore, and others, who had received money,
wools, and other goods to the Kings use.

William to account, Account, Sureties,
who found sureties, the Earl of Derby, and the Lord Wake.

John Chernels found Sureties to account, Account, Sureties.
the same Earl, and Sir John Montgomery.

Piercy Dyme, and other Merchants of Bard, found sureties the Earl of
Huntingdon. Sureties,


William of VVelchborn found sureties, Sureties.
Sir John Sturmey, and Sir John Charvels.

Paul de Monteflore found sureties, Sureties.
Sir John de Hareshal, Sir John Darcy, Sir Reynold of Cobham, and Sir John
Stradling.

Wednesday in Easter week then ensuing. Parliament prorogued.


Petitions.


Bishops, Customs, Common assent.
at the request of the King, promise that they will never dissent from the
Kings promise made for the Customs of Wool, but by common assent of Parliament.

Robert de Watford of the Opposer in the Exchequer. Commission repealed,
Opposer, Exchequer.


Dennis next Southampton, Respite of Tenths and Fifteens.
and of Southwick, for paying their Tenths and Fifteens.

Robert de Popham to be Sheriff of Southampton at the Kings will. Sheriff.


Peace.


Iuliers, the King makes him Earl of Cambridge, Alien.

Earl of Cambridge created.


and gives him in Fee a Thousand pounds yearly, until the King provide for him
so much of Hereditaments.

Duke of Cornwall Custos Angliae, Council.
It is enacted, That the Duke of Cornwall in the Kings absence shall be Keeper of
England; and that the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earls of Lancaster,
Warwick, and of Huntington shall attend on him, calling to them such Justices
and others as they shall think fit for good ordinance.

Barton and Lyn for their Purvey of Corn. Merchants, Purveyance,


Merchants called to Parliament by Writ.
Such Merchants Denizens as by Writ were to appear, are comman^^ed to attend the
day after the Ascension.

Robert Iorce, Pardons.
William de Glaston, Pierce Tilial, and Simon de Rug^y, of all Debts.

Thomas of Brookhall for thirty two Tons of Powder. Pardon, Powder.


Angos, the Lord Piercy, Sir John Greygrave, Sir Ralph de Nevil, and Sir
Anthony de Lucy, at their own costs particularly set forth to Scotland in the
whole two hundred and ten Men at Arms, Array, Soldiers, Scotland.
and two hundred and twenty Archers.

Mowbray shall have the keeping of Barwick with one hundred and twenty Men at
Arms, Barwick, Soldiers, Array.
one hundred Halberters, and two hundred Archers; of whom the said Lord shall
^ind eighty Men at Arms, twenty Halberters, and forty Archers, and the King the
rest.

Array, Soldiers, Roxsborough-Castle.
Sir William Felton sets forth sixty Men at Arms, fifty Halberters, and fifty
Archers to ride with the Lords into the Marches; and toward the keeping of the
Castle of Roxborough, whereof he is Keeper, he finds thirty six men at Arms,
and forty Halberters.

King of Scots. Archbishop of York, Vacancie.
The King of Scots charge himself to find twenty Men at Arms; and for the
maintenance of his Estate, he shall during the vacation of the Archbishop of
York, have the keeping of the Manor of Heklisham, and Three hundred pounds
yearly of the Desms within the Diocese of York.

Array, Soldiers.
The Lord Ros, Sir Ralph Bolmer, Sir John of Willoughby, Sir Henry of Fitzhugh,
etc. Adam de Well, do set forth Five hundred and fifty men.

Mowbray shall have One hundred pounds impressed to help to set himself forth.
Impressed money.


Mowbray of Justiceship of length, Commission, Justiceship.
and a Writ to Sir Richard Talbot to deliver to him Rule, and Remembr^nces
touching the same.

Thomas de Rogeby charge himself with one certain number in Peace, with
another in War, for the keeping of the Castles of Edin^urgh and Sterling.
Array, Garrison, Edinburgh, Sterling.


John Burden Parson of Rodebury to the Chamberlain of Berwick at the Kings
pleasure, Berwick, Chamberlain, Fees, Victualler:
the yearly Fee of One hundred marks; and that Robert de ^urchal, who was both
Chamberla^n and Victu^ller, and had One hundred marks fee, should have only
Fifty marks fee.

Array, North-marches.


England into Scotland. Victuals exported, Scotland.


Angos, Commission, Array, Rebels, Marshal-Law, Pardons, Peace, Truce.
the Lord Piercy, and Sir Ralph Nevil, or two of them, to set forth the Arrays
of Yorkshire, Nottingham, Derby, and Northumberland; to punish all Rebels and
disobedient, to determine all trespasses done in Northumberland and the Kings
land in Scotland, to receive any person to the peace or pardon, and to take
truce.

Wake, Martial Law.
Sir Percy Tilial, and Sir Anthony de Lucy, whereof the said Anthony be one for
the West-marches.

Cornwall shall be Keeper of England in the Kings absence, Duke of Cornwall
Custos Angliae.
and the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Earl of Hungtingdon to be chief
Counselors of the Realm. Counselors of State.


Lincoln shall go to the King to be his Councellor. Councellor of State.


Southampton and Sandwich for the Kings Navy. Victuals, Navy.


Anno Decimo quarto Edwardi Tertii. Summonitio ad Parliamentum.
REX etc. Henrico Com. Lanc. etc. apud Westminster. die Mercurii post Festum
translationis S. Thomae Martyris, Writ of Summons
etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. 30 die Maii.

Johan. de Warrenia Com. Sarum^ Hugoni de Courtney Com. Devon. Willielmo de
Bohun Com. Northampton. Willielmo de Clynton Com. Huntington. Hugoni de Audley
Com. Glouc. Gilberto de Umfravil Com. Angos. Laurence de Hastings Com.
Pembrochiae. Thom. Wake de Liddle. Willielmo de Ros de Hamelake. Johanni de
Mowbray. Hen. Fitz Hugh. Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth. Johanni Bardolf.
Johanni de Bello Campo de Somerset. Nicolao de Cantelupo. Rado de Staff:
Johanni de Seagrave. Tho. de Berkley. Anthon. de Lucy. Gilberto Talbot. Johanni
de Harrington. Henrico Gray. Rogero Gray. Rado Basset de Drayton. Hugoni de
Poyns. Pho. de Columbariis. Rogero de Claudes. Johanni Nevil de Essex. Nico. de
Nevil. Roberto de Insula. Jacobo de Audley. Johanni le Strange. Hugoni le
Despencer. Petro de malo lacu le Quint. Rado de Bevill. Rico. Talbot. Johanni
de Willoughby. Johanni de Charlton sen. Ado de Well. Willielmo Ayncourt.
Willielmo de Kerdeston. Johan. de Sutton in Holderness. Johan. de Fawconbridge.
Roberto de Morley. Johanni de Lawborne. Henrico Hussy. Johanni de Gray de
Rotherfield. Johan. fill. Rico. de Gray de Codemore. Johanni de Tibetot.
Roberto. Fitz pain, and Rico Piercy. Willlielmo de Clinton Com. Hunt. Custodi
Quinque Portuum.
Anno Decimo quarto Edwardi Tertii. DE Consilio summon: cum consilio in
propinquis partibus propter alacritatem.
REx I. Archiepiscopo Cant. etc. apud Westminster. die Lunae post festum Sancti
Michaelis, etc. Test apud Westminster. 14 Septembris.

Consimiles literae conscriptae.
Rico Episc. London Rico. Episc. Bath, and Wells. Johanni Episcopo Eliensi.
Rico. Episcopo Sar. Abbi de Waltham sancti Crucis Abbati Westminst. Johanni de
Warrenia Com. Sarum. Rico. Com. Arundel. Humf. de Bohun Com. Heref. Willielmo
de Clinton, Com. Huntington. Laurenc. de Hastings, Com. Pembrochiae. Rad.
Basset de Drayton. Tho. Wake de Lullell. Barthol. de Bourchew. Rogero de Gray.
Hen. de Gray. Hugo le Despencer. Johanni de Gray de Rotherfield. Johanni de
Stonore. Henrico Hussy. Willielmo de Shareshall. Jacobo de Woodstock. Richardo
Talbot, etc.
The Parliament holden at Westminster, the Wednesday Thomas the Martyr, Anno 14
E. 3.
Causes of Parliament.
First, to consult what was best for the King and his Allies to do to the Enemy
being on the Sea; Enemies, Peace, Defense, Sea guarded, Subsidy.
To provide for the common peace of the Land, for the defense of the
North-Marches, for the keeping of the Sea; And how the King might be answered
for the last Subsidy granted.

Westminster Hall, Proclamation.
of the Articles in the last Parliament, tit. 2.

Victory, Aid.
and how for the performance of the same he was to be aided with money; And day
given until Saturday then ensuing to answer.

Aid granted.
viz. The Ninth of their Corn, Wool and Lamb, and many Devises made for the
due answering of the same.

Arundel, and Sir William Trussel from the King with Letters of Credit under
the Privy Seal, Privy Seal, Kings Letters, Victory, Aid of money.
directed to the Lords and Commons; purporting his great Victory, and no less
necessity to have indelayed pay of money: Which Letters are at large.

John's day, Victory.
in the Water of Swine, in the Port there.

Tournay with an hundred men, and that Sir Robert de Artons carried him at S.
Havers with five men.

Aid, Kings Honor.
and requires further credit in the Bearers.

Moneys advanced. Woolls.
every sack to be sold five marks under the price made at Not. so as the King
should be answered for every of the sacks of the best sort six pounds, for
others five pounds^ and for the worst four marks, over and above forty
shillings Custom for every sack, Custom.
whereof present return should be made to the King.

Subsidy to secure Debts, Letters Patent.
An order taken, that the Subsidy of the next year should be employed for the
payment of these Woolls, and to be confirmed by the Kings Letters Patent.

Victuals.
Provision is appointed to be made for the King, two parts at Sandwich, and the
third at Southampton; of Wheat two thousand Quarters, of Beans and Pease five
hundred Quarters, of Bacon eight hundred, of Ale two hundred Tuns, of Cheese
forty Ways, of Wine an hundred Tuns.

Ambrose de Bewburgh is appointed for the Purvey at Sandwich, Sir John de
Waterhall at Southampton.

Kings Butler.
Four thousand four hundred pounds is assigned to the Kings Butler out of the
Aid of Essex and Oxon.

King of Scots.
The King of Scots shall have as in the last Parliament, tit. 4, 5. who with
forty men at arms is appointed to serve at Carlisle.

Certain by the advice of the Earl of Angos and of the Lord Piercy shall be
appointed to set forth the Arrays of Yorkshire, Array.
Nottingham and Derby, to Newcastle upon Tine, and so to the Marches.

Parsons, Tenths.
Such Parsons of Churches as pay their Tenths, shall pay no Ninth.

Sheriff.
The Sheriff of Southampton is appointed to repair to the Constable of the
Castle of Carisbrook and Wight, Carisbrook-Castle, Isle of Wight, Array.
and there to muster the men of the same Isle, and to choose a Keeper of the
same until further order.

Others to make enquiry of the like on this side Trent.

Sheriffs, Commissioners.
A Writ of Warrant to be directed to the Sheriff of York, to deliver the body of
the Earl of Norfolk to the Bishop of Duresm, the Lord Piercy, and Sir Ralph
Nevil; They to do further according to their Commission.

Priors Aliens, Exoneration, Tenths.
That Prior-Aliens and others who have their Possessions in Farm of the King,
shall pay no Ninths.

A Writ to gather no Ninths of any Religious person who pays his Desme, and
was not summoned to the Parliament until Michaelmas next.

Hospitals.
That such Hospitals as have not heretofore been taxed, shall pay no Ninths.

Sheriffs, Merchants, Council, Wools, Customers.
Every Sheriff by Writ shall cause some certain Merchants of every City and Town
within their Bailiwick to appear before the Council at a day; and proclaim that
no person buy any Wools before the King be served, whereunto all Customers
shall have an eye.

Subsidy respited, Isle of Wight.
That the gathering of the Ninths for the Isle of Wight be stayed until
Michaelmas.

Woolls.
It is enacted, That twenty thousand Sacks of Wool granted to the King, shall
be taken in whose hands the same may be found, or Agreement to be made
therefore of the two payments of the Ninths.

Henry Gould le Better, Thomas Gray, William of Lancaster, and John of
Luttrington take Fifteen hundred Sacks of Wool within the County of York,
Woolls, Customs
to pay for every Sack 4 l. 10 s. over and above 40 s. Custom within three
weeks.

Hardolf of Barto Merchant of Hull, and Thomas Thurwit Merchant of Beverley,
Merchants, Woolls, Customs.
took One thousand Sacks of Wool, Five hundred of Nottingham at 4 l. 13 s. 4
d. the Sack; and Five hundred at Derby, at 3 l. 3 s. 4 d. the Sack, over and
above 40 s. Custom to pay as next before.

Thomas of Loveshed, William de Mallerstrange, and William of Banbridge^
Merchants of York, do take Four hundred Sacks of Cumberland and Westmerland, at
four marks every sack, to pay over and above the Custom as aforesaid.

Walter de le Prist of Melt. Bonbray, and Hugh Coskhead Merchants of Barto upon
Humber, have Five hundred sacks of Leicester for eight marks the sack, One
hundred sacks of Rutland for 4 l. 10 s. the sack, over etc. to pay as before.

Thomas Colls, Richard Weston, Adam de la Hone, and John Retoun, have of Salop
Four hundred sacks at 6 l. 6 s. 4 d. One hundred sacks of Stuff, at 5 l. 6 s. 8
d. the sack, etc. over and above as before.

Sheriff^, Merchants.
That there wanted Merchants to buy any more Ware.

Bard and Permich, Merchants, Subsidies, Kings debts discharged.
upon payment of the Ninths in sundry Countries there named, appoint to pay to
sundry of the Kings Creditors beyond the Seas, the sum of 28695 l. 15 s. 2 d.
and that certain of the Kings jewels lying in gage therefore should be
delivered. Kings Jewels redeemed.

Security.


Sir William de la Pool appointed to pay to the King before Michaelmas Three
hundred marks beyond the Seas, so as he might have his Competent of Wool, or
else the first Ninths granted in Suffolk.

Remembrances for the King to keep promise.
Sea guarded, Navy, Iersey and Gernsey.
and to purvey for the Navy, and to defend the Isles of Iersey and Gernsey.

That Anthony Bath do deliver the Kings Jewels. Kings Jewels, Customs assigned,
Woolls, Queens Debts.


Touching assignment made to Conrade Clipping and Goddeck de Renley, for the
Customs of England.

That Five hundred sacks of Wool in Gloucester, be assigned to Queen Philip
for the payment of her Debts.

William Trussel, Lords Letter to the King.
containing the Grant of their Ninths, and their policy of Wool for the
present shift. The Postscript requires the King to buy at Sluice, and other
Ports of Zealand; for the greatest store of Wools were conveyed by stealth.

Council.
to the effect of their Letters.

A special and rare Cause, both for Law and power of Parliament. The cause is
very long, but the abridgement here contains the whole matter in Law, as
follows:
Sir John Stantens Case.
Sir John Stanton, and Anne his wife, by Fine give unto Thomas de Cranthorn,
certain lands in Helleston: the same Thomas thereby reverted them back to the
same John, and Anne his wife to the heirs of Anne. After which, Sir Ieffery
Stanton brought his Formedon en le descender, against the said John and Anne
for the Premises; wherein after Essoins, and other delays used by the said
John, the same Anne upon prayer was received, and vouched to warrant the said
John; Fine.

Receipt, Voucher, Counter-plea.


the which voucher Sir Ieffery counterpleaded: Anne verifieth and says, If the
Court shall rule her to answer further, she was ready; upon which Counter-plea
they demurred in Law in the Common Pleas; upon which Demurrer, for that the
said Sir Ieffery could not get the Judges to proceed in judgment, he in the
last Parliament by his Petition, Petition: Procedendo ad judicium, granted by
the Parliament.
prays the examination of the matter, and to have judgment.

After which the House of Parliament do cause the Kings Writ under the great
Seal containing the whole matter, and transcript of the same to be sent to the
Justices of the Common Pleas, willing them thereby, that if the matter so
stood, that then they should without delay proceed to judgment.

After this an Alias in the nature aforesaid, or else to signify the cause,
was directed to the Justices as aforesaid, who yet did nothing; upon which
matter, the same Sir Ieffery by another Petition requires that the Judges may
be commanded to proceed to judgment, Petition.
or else they may come into the House with the whole Record, so as in the
Parliament judgment may be given on the one party. Parliament.


Clerk of the Parliament.
Whereupon the whole House commanded Sir Thomas of Drayton Clerk of the
Parliament, to go to Sir John Stoner, and other of his companions of the Common
Pleas, and to require them, according to the Plea pleaded, to proceed to
judgment; and if they could not so do for difficulty, Procedendo ad judicium.

A Cause adjourned for difficulty, out of the Common Pleas into the Parliament,
and there adjudged.


that then they should at a day come into the House, and bring with them the
whole Process and Record.

The Justices at the day came into the Parliament House with the Record
aforesaid, where in the presence of all the Lords, Justices, and others of the
Kings Council learned, it was agreed; that the said Sir Ieffery being a
stranger to the Fine, Fine.
might well aver that Thomas had nothing therein, and that Anne could not vouch
John her husband, nor be received to the averment aforesaid, Averment.

Voucher.

Baron and Feme.

Averment.


notwithstanding her Protestation in the Court, etc. wherefore it was agreed
that the said Ieffery should recover. And thereupon a Writ under the great Seal
was sent to the said Justices to give judgment accordingly. Writ to the
Justices.


Anno Decimo quinto Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the
Monday in Easter week 15 Edw. 3.
Thomas Drayton shall be Clerk of the Parliament. Clerk of Parliament.


Westminster Hall. Proclamation.


England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, Scotland, Gascoin, and of the Isles.



For that sundry of the Lords and Commons were not come, Adjournment by reason
of sundry Members absence.
the Parliament was continued from day to day until Thursday ensuing.

The same day the cause of the Parliament was declared to be, Causes of
Parliament.

Subsidy.




how the King might be answered of the grant of the ninth, which was to him
given in consideration that he should pass in person against the enemy Philip
de Valois, Enemies.

French King.

Guyen.


who had taken away part of the Duchy of Guienne, much part of which grant was
kept from the King by evil Officers. Ill Officers


Another cause how more plenty of money might be had, Money.
and whether Florences were to be current with the Sterling.

Declaration was also made that such as found themselves grieved with the King,
Grievances redressed.
or his Officers, should upon complaint find remedy.

Adjournment.
the Parliament was continued from day to day on this point, that the Nobles of
this Land, should not be put to answer but in open Parliament by their Peers;
Peers tried only by Peers in Parliament.

Committees.


whereupon are named four Bishops, four Earls, and four Barons to draw the Plot.

Chancellor.

Treasurer.


and such like Officers, and that all Estates may enjoy their liberties.
Liberties.


Edwards Chamber commonly called, Painted chamber.
The Chamber de pinct. before whom, all the Lords and Commons, the Archbishop
of Canterbury humbled himself, Archbishops submission.
and required his favor, which he granted. After which the Archbishop desired
that where he was defamed through the Realm, that he might be arraigned in open
Parliament before his Peers: Trial by Peers.
The King made answer, That he would attend to the common affairs, Public
affairs before private.
and after hear others.

The Articles of the Commons. Commons.

Magna Charta.
so as such persons as are neither appealed, indicted, or followed at the suit
of the party, and yet have their goods, and lands, and possessions taken from
them, may be restored thereto again. Restitution:


Officers oaths^ Laws observed, Great Charter.
That the Chancellor and other Officers there named shall upon their entries
into their offices be always sworn to observe the Laws of the Land, and points
of the great Charter.

Old debts pardoned.
That every man for debts due to the Kings Ancestors may have therefore Charters
of pardon of course out of the Chancery.

Accomp^s of all public Receipts. Inrollment.
That certain by Commission may hear the accounts of all such as received wool,
aid, or other money for the King, and that the same may be enrolled in the
Chancery.

Ordinance abused repealed.
That the Ordinances made at Northampton, That men of ev^l life and name should
be attached, whereby sundry honest men by color thereof have been arrested,
may be repealed.

Commissions rev^ked, Fines outrageous
That many Commissions whereby sundry men have been fined by the Commissioners
outragiously, may be revoked, and new granted to others.

Chancellor and other Officers elected, and sworn in Parliament.
That the Chancellor, and all other Officers there named, may be chosen in open
Parliament; they also there openly sworn to observe all Laws as aforesaid.

Aid granted upon condition.
otherwise they think themselves not bound to pay any; where if the King should
grant those things in the Petitions, Petitions granted.
they will then make him reasonable answer.

Committee of Lords.
They also pray, that till the Wednesday then ensuing their Articles may be
committed to certain Bishops, Earls, Barons, and other wise men there named, by
them to be amended; the which the King granted.

The Articles of the Clergy.
Clergy.
The same day the Archbishop of Canterbury and other Bishops exhibited to the
King certain Petitions, viz.

Imprisonment without due Process.
First they show how sundry Clerks were imprisoned by the Kings Officers,
without due Process.

Churches liberties, Mag. Charta, Oath.
and all liberties granted to any estate may be kept; and that the Great
Charter may be newly proclaimed, and by oath confirmed.

Imprisonment, Great Charter.
may be delivered.

Capias without any Writ to the Bishop, Writ to the Bishop, Capias.
and so upon a Condemnation against a Clerk causes the same to be levied
without any Writ to the Bishop, against the privilege of the Church.

Religious houses. Officers force and extortion.
That sundry of the Kings Officers and others have entered into diverse Religious
houses and Parsonages, and by force taken away their goods; and further upon
oaths extorted upon those persons, have enquired of things within their houses,
Inquisition.
and them so found have carried away.

Spiritual Court, Usurers, Corporal pain, Probate of Wills, Marriage.
That the Justices have punished Usurers, and impeached the Officers of the
Church for taking money for Corporal pain, Probate of W^lls, solemnizing of
Marriage.

Subsidy unevenly levied.
the Ninth of their Corn, Wool and Lamb, where they ought to pay their Tenths.

Kings answer advised upon.
the which because the Clergy liked not, they desired a Copy of the same to
deliberate thereupon, which was granted. In the end the Answer was as follows.

The Answer to the Clergy.
Attachment.


Magna Charta, Churches liberties.
which being exemplified under the Great Seal, he thinks may suffice, and
that there needs no other swearing thereto, Oath.
considering that within the Realm there are already too many forsworn.
Perjury.


Northampton Imprisonment,


Process.
and neither would the King that any man should enter into the Churches Fee
against their liberties. Churches liberties.


Fraud,
but if Laymen to defraud the King do bring their goods thither, the King
thinks himself to be wronged.

Usurers.
and the Ordinaries of living Usurers. And touching money for pains pecuniary,
Money for pains Pecuniary, Probate of Wills, Marriage,
Probate of Wills, solemnity of Marriage, and such like, the King would not his
Officers to have any Cognizance.

Subsidy, Tenths.
viz. of such as hold by a Barony, Barony.
or use to be summoned to the Parliament. But if any of the Church have
appropriated any possessions heretofore not taxed, that then they pay the Ninth
by the equity of the Statute.

Kings Answer.
in manner following:

Great Charter
or any other good Law, that he shall answer in Parliament, Parliament,
or else where he ought to answer according to the Law.



To the first, He will as in the Answer to the Lords. To the second for the
Oath of his Officers, Officers oath,
He would the same. To the third for pardoning of Debts. Pardon.
He grants. To the fourth he grants, so as the Treasurer and Chief Baron
may Treasurer, Chief Baron.
Northampton. Statute revoked.
To the sixth, the King wills the same be done in the presence of Officers
election, Lords assent, Oath.
and that such Officer shall be sworn at the next Parliament, according to the
Petition.
Parliament, Offices resumed,
the King shall reassume into his hands all such Offices, so as the said
Officers shall answer unto all objections.

Statutes^
Hereupon at the request of the whole Estate these Articles were Statutes as on
the back of the Roll does appear, the which Statutes, with the conditions,
Great Officers,
were after read before the King, the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of both
Benches, Steward of the Kings Chamber, and others, all who were sworn upon the
Cross of Canterbury to perform the same; Oath,
only the Chancellor, Treasurer, and certain of the Justices refused the same
Oath as repugnant to their former Oath, Oath refused,
and Laws of the Realm. The which Statutes, and Conditions together with the
Commissions for the enquiry of oppressions were exemplified under the great
Seal, Oppressions, Exemplifications. Great Seal.
and delivered to the Lords and Commons.

The Saturday in the week of Pentecost, the Articles ensuing were agreed upon.
Duresme, and Sarum, the Earls of Northampton, Arundel, Warwick, and Salisbury
shall hear the answer of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop, Committers,
Parliament.
the same to be debated of in the next Parliament.

Wools transportation denied, Forfeiture,
Because the King should before Michaelmas next transport twenty thousand sacks
of Wool: It was provided that no man before that time should pass over any
Wool on pain of treble loss, life, and member.

Wars, Aliens.
That the King during the wars of France may charge religious Aliens.

Chester, Sir Robert Wake, Sir Robert of Sodington, by such as have knowledge
of every County, may apportion Wool granted to the King, Wools, Assesment,
Apportiament.
according to the Assesment of the Fifteenth, late made in every County, who
did so.

Wools, Enrolment, Commissions.
the which rates were delivered into the Chancery by Roll entered, and thereupon
Commissions made for the gathering of the same.

Canterbury, Archbishop.
do remain with Sir William of Keldesbye, Keeper of the Privy Seal. Privy Seal.


In the back of these Rolls are contained the Statutes, Conditions, and
Commissions before specified, being the effect of the whole Parliament. Great
Seal,
and other Liberties, cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Peers.
cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

Impeachment. Oath.
and for the oath of the Kings Officers, agrees with the Record.

The Print, touching the choice of the Kings Officers, Officers election,
and their answers to all men's Objections, cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Usury.
cap. 5. agrees with the Record.

Court Christian,
cap. 6. agrees with the Record.

Revocation.
mentioned by one Statute in the Print, there is no mention made in this
Record. See 17 E. 3. tit. 23.

The seven Chapters touching the discharge of twenty thousand sacks of Wool now
granted, Wool,
and for the due levying of the ninths of Corn, Lamb, and Wool do for every
Chapter agree with the Record, according to the titles in the Margent.

Here follows the Commissions mentioned before.

They are contained under Six Titles, the effect whereof is, That all
Commissions out of what Court soever with all fines, Commissions revoked.
and process upon the same, except such as concern the Kings Officers, as
carrying of Wool, and other Merchandise over the Sea, uncustomed, or such as
are against the Kings defense, and peace, and without warrant of the Law, and
therefore to be revoked.

Anno decimo Septimo Edwardi Tertii. Rex, Writ of Sum^mons.
etc. Henrico Com. Lanc. etc. apud Westminster. die Lunae post Quindena Paschae:
Test Rege apud Westminster. 24. die Februarii.
Similes literae subscript.
IOhanni de Warrena Com. Surr. Hugoni de Courtney Com. Devon. Willielm. de
Bohun Com. Northampton. Willielmo de Clinton Com. Hunt. Hugoni de Audeley Com.
Glouc. Gilberto de Umfravil Com. de Angos. Laur. de Hastings Com. Pembrok.
Henry de Lanc. Com. Darby. Thom. de Bello campo Com. War. Willielmo de
Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Johanni de Vere Com. Oxon. Roberto de Ufford Comiti.
Suff. Nicolo de Cantilupo. Rado. de Staff. Johanni de Seagrave. Johanni
Fitzwater. Thom. de Berkley. Anthony de Lucye. Reginaldo de Gray. Rogero de
Gray. Hugoni de Ponitz. Rogero de Chandos. Johanni de Nevil. Johanni de
Harrington. Jacobo dn Audley. Johanni de Strange. Hugoni le Despencer. Petro de
Malolacu quint. Rad. de Nevil. Ric. de Talbot. Johan. de Willoughby. Johan. de
Charleton sen. Ade de Velle. Willielmo de Finecourt. Willielmo de Perdeston.
Johan. de Sutton de Holdernes. Johan. de Fawconbridge. Roberto de Morley.
Johan. de Labourn. Henrico de Hussy. Johan. de Gray de Rotherfield. Johan.
filio Richardo de Gray de Codenore. Johan. de Tibetot. Roberto Fitzpain.
Henrico de Percie. Tho. Wake de Ridehall. Johan. de Mowbray. Henrico Fitzhugh.
Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth. Johanni Bardolfe: Johanni de Bello campo de
Somerset. Willielmo de Clinton Com. Huntington, Custod. Quinq. Port.
Anno Decimo septimo Edwardi Tertii. Westminster, in the Quindena of Easter, in
the Seventeenth year of King Edward the Third.
Clerk of Parliament.
FIrst it is agreed, that Sir Thomas of Drayton shall be Clerk of the Parliament.

King.
The Monday after, the King came into Saint Edwards Chamber, Painted Chamber
Parliament adjourned, because some Lords and Commons were not come.
commonly called the Chamber de Pinct, accompanied with sundry Bishops and
Lords there named: And for that sundry of the Lords and Commons were not come,
the cause of the Parliament was not then disclosed, but deferred until the
next day.

Proclamation against wearing Arms.
for forbearing to wear Armor or weapons in London or Westminster, during etc.

Petitions.
Another Proclamation for such as would exhibit any Petition, and a day given
therefore.

England, Ireland, Scotland, Gascoin, Wales, and the Foreign Isles.



The Wednesday being the last of April, the Chancellor in the presence of the
King and Lords, Chancellor.
declares the cause of the Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
as follows.

Britain between the King and his Adversary of France. Truce with France Kings
Est^^e.


Secondly, Touching the Estate of the King, and for good governance: Good
Government,
And for that Sir Barthol. de Burghurst was with the King at the said Truce
taking, Truce.
the Chancellor willed him to declare the same.

Bartholmew began to recount the Kings passages over, with the whole exploits
achieved by the King in recovery of a great part of Britain, Kings expl^i^^
related
even to the City and gates of Vanes, against which he laid siege; and to which
place the Pope sent to him two Cardinals in most earnest wise to entreat a
Peace, Pope and Cardinals. Truce.
or at least a Truce. And how the King made answer; So that the same might be
to him honorable, and profitable for his Allies, he was contented to have the
same taken before the Pope as before a friend, and no Judge; Pope no Judge.
otherwise he would pursue his quarrel.

War and Peace by the Parliaments advice.
so without the same he would conclude no Peace. Where it rested to hear their
advices, Advice.
whether it were best for the King to take his offer, and to send certain
Ambassadors to Rome instructed for this title, Ambassadors.
or no?

The first day of May, the Lords by themselves, Lords and Commons several
advice.
and the Commons likewise made answer, That it was good to pursue the Peace,
Peace.
and to send Ambassadors to Rome as before.

Oppressions, Justice.
so as Justice might be executed to every Subject.

Commons answer Justices elected in Parliament, Oath, Commissions.
That the best was, that approved Justices should be chosen in this Parliament
for every County, and that upon their oath in the same to execute all Laws, and
Commissions to be made accordingly.

Justices of Peace, Commons.
which are enacted.

Lombards and other Merchants strangers should be taxed where they dwelt,
Lombards, Merchants-strangers.

Tax.


as other Merchants Denizens.

Flanders lost the third part of the value, upon conference of Merchants and
others of good advice, Merchants, Gold, Florens, Silver, Moneys.
the Coin o^ Gold called Florines were appointed to be fined, and to be current
according the Sterling; and all other strange Gold forbidden to be current, and
restraint also of Silver to be carried forth, other then for Noblemens Plate
passing over.

Silver, Mon^y, Flemings.
and allay, to be current among the Subjects, and not to be carried over upon
pain of death. And if the Flemmings shall coin their Silver accordingly, that
the same be current amongst Merchants.

Wool.
shall bring in for every sack carried forth, four nobles in Bullion, Bullion.
and so all Merchandise, according to the rate of a sack.

Money.
the prizes of Wool for three years are inhanced, Wool, Customs.
the buyers under to forfeit the same, and the King to have forty shillings
Custom for every sack, over the old Custom.

Customs, Pardon, License, Wool.
nor license any man to buy any Wool, contrary to the Statute aforesaid.



Aliens.




That such as were fined before any Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Fines,
Justices of Oyer and Terminer.
and will not stand thereto, may stand to the Common Law, Common Law.
whereupon if he be not found guilty, then this fine so seized, shall be rated
on them who seized the same.

Supersedas be granted to such as will crave the same, Supersedeas, Felony,
Peace.
until the next Parliament, for all Offenses that touch not felonies, nor the
peace, except such as are contained in the Answer to the eleventh Petition
ensuing.

Canterbury, Archbishops arraignment cancelled in Parliament,
remaining with Sir William Kildesbie, at the Parliament holden Anno 15.
Edwardi Tertii, be cancelled and annulled; whereupon Commandment was given to
Sir John de Ufford to bring them into the Parliament, there to be cancelled.

Westminster, the 15 of Edw. the third, shall be utterly repealed, Statutes
repealed as contrary to the Laws and Kings Prerogative.
and lose the name of a Statute, as contrary to the Laws, and the Kings
Prerogative: And for that the Articles there made are reasonable, It is agreed,
That such Articles, and others agreed in this Parliament, Statute.

Justices advice.


shall be made in a Statute by the advice of the Justices.

Customers, Controllers, Searchers, Farms, Forfeitute.
It is agreed, That such Customers, Controllers, and Searchers in Fee, for term
of life, or for years, as have let the same to farm, shall forfeit the same,
their Offices; and that from henceforth no such Office be granted, but at the
Kings pleasure.

Foreign Birth Aliens.
PUr ceo que avaunt ses heures grand doubt and difficulty, out estre enter les
Grandees de cest Roialme and les Commons, ausi bien gentes de le comune and
antres, si les Enfants que soint nees in parts, ^nstre le mere devient poit
heretage leures apres le deces de leurs ancestors in Angliterre, pur cause que
certain ley na pas estre sur ceo ordeyne se in arrere oy fuit demand per le
Archevesque de Canter. a touts les Prelates, and gentes present in ce
Parliament, King and his Isshe
si les Enfants nostre Seiur le Roy que soint nees en parts, etc. en la ley
serioint in heritors en Angliterre. Lex quex Prelates, et gentes chescun per
lui examines; deveroit leurs respons d'une accord; Que ilnad null manner de
doubt que les Enfantes nostre Sieur le Roy quelque part que ils soit nees, par
de ca la merr on par de la, poit inheritage de lour Ancestors: mes quant aux
enfantes de auters il est que advise ales aux dits Prelates and Grands and auxi
gents de ley illonques, Peers, Lawyers,
presents, que qui diverse doubts teils acts si debates on impeachments soint
mises en lour heritages ils conviendront molt apensor a at que certain ley sur
ceo soit ordeyne, et cest materie antre foits fuit recite in le presens nostre
Seiur' le Roy, and per eux touts vniment accord and assenter Come de South, que
des enfantes que nostre Sieur le Roy iluy ad doubt ne difficulte que ils ne
sorront inherits de quel part que ils soit nees; and en droit des autres
enfants accord and in cest Parliament, que ils soit nees en le service le
Roy-mes pur ceo que le Parliament, Kings service.
and ore de parter, and cest besoigne demand grand avisement and bon
deliberation, conent el se purra meux fair and plus suerment per oustre tout
mainere de impeachment cy, est accord, que le fesans de le Statute in ce case
de remain, tanque l'au prochin Parliament, Parliament.
issent que oustre que temps chescun pense com serra en ley Purra estre
ordeyne; and sur ceosont les Justices and autres Sages Charges per le Roy and
per les Graunds. Petitions of the Commons, with the Kings Answers.
Church, Great Charter, Forest.
and that the Great Charter, and Charter of the Forest be observed.

That the Statutes heretofore made, Statutes observed.
may be observed.

Answ.


Statute revoked, Law, Prerogative.
may not stand, for that the same was against the Law, and the Kings
Prerogative.



That Customs of Wool may be at a Mark according to the old order, Customs,
Wools, Merchants grant.
and the Forty shillings revoked, seeing the same was the Grant of the
Merchants, Answ.
which binds not the Commons.

Answ.


Purveyors.




It is enacted, That the party indicted may challenge his Indictor. Indictment,
Challenge.


Marshalsey.
and that the Officers there do not pass the Verge.

That the Chancellor and Treasurer may be Peers of the Realm, Chancellor,
Treasurer, Peers, Stranger,
and no Stranger appointed thereunto, Answ.
neither that they attend any other Office.

Kings prerogative^


That no mean man, Answ.
but the best of every County may be appointed to take Accounts of such as owe
to the King. Acounts,


Kings Prerogative


That the Outlaws upon the 21 Title of this Parliament, Outlaries reversed
may be reversed.

The King grants, excepting all Accomptants, Answ.

Accountants, Customs, Forfeiture, Conspirators, R^otors, False money.


and Transporters of Wool uncustomed, the forfeiture of Customs therefore, of
Conspirators, Rioters, and bringers in of old false money.

Crown Lands, Kings Council.


The King will do herein according to advice of Council.

Answ.
That remedy may be had against such, as remaining in Prisons, Prisoners,
Appealers.
do for the lucre of the Gaolers appeal sundry men of good name in foreign
Countries.

Justices of Assiz^.
The Justices of Assize shall do them right.

Answ.
That no Common Fine of any Country be from henceforth made, Fines.
but that every man may be particularly punished.

Answ.
The King wills the same.

Fines excessive, Leets.
That the excessive Fines set on the Kings Subjects by such as have Leets, may
be redressed.

Answ.
The King would the same.

Weights and Measures.
It is enacted, That good examination and correction be had in Towns
enfranchised touching Weights and Measures, so that the Statute may be duly
observed.

Measures, Alnage, Flemmings.
It is enacted, That Commissioners shall be made of Measures, Alnage and
Weights, except of the Alnage whereof the King has granted certain liberties
to the Flemings; wherein if any default be, the same shall be amended.

Justices Fees.


Sheriffs not to be Justices,
but men of good learning and name.

Delay, Assize, Necessity, Nobles.
but in case of necessity by the assent of the Nobles; neither will otherwise
hereafter, which if he do, the same to be void.

Fines pardoned.
or in common, shall be free therefore for ever.

Answ.
That the Kings Debtors in the Exchequer, Kings Debtors, Exchequer.
may rebate the same Kings debts, for debts due to them.



That all Justices of the Peace yearly at Michaelmas certify their Extracts
into the Exchequer, Justices of Peace. Extracts, Exchequer.

Answ.


as Justices of Assize do, according to the Statute made at York in the eighth
year of Edward the Second, Tit.

The Statute shall be kept.

Westminster may be declared, what ways a Tenant in tail may alien. Tail,
Alienation.

Answ.




The Law therein heretofore shall stand.

Non-Claims Fines.
surrendered, do bar no man of his Action.

Executor of Executor.
and that the Administrator may have the like. Administrator.


Answ.




The case of the Executor is against the Law; and to the Administrator the
Bishop shall have the action, since he is to answer.

Court Christian, Tithe wood.
That no man be impleaded in Court Christian for Tenths of Wood or Underwood,
Answ.
but in places accustomed.



Parceners.

Joyn-tenants:


It is enacted, That Parceners and Jointenants, against whom Recoveries were had
upon any Action ancestrial on Summons and Severance, Recovery, Summons and
Severance.
may, and shall have their Writs, without naming the others who recovered.

Wool, Weights.
and that twenty six Stone make a Sack.

Sheriffs.
and that all Sheriffs be removed out of their Offices the day after All Souls,
and that others be therein placed by the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Justices
and Barons of the Exchequer.

Laws, Free.
and denied to no man; the which are now so dear, as no man can well follow
them.

Let Ordinaries,
declaration done by Ordinaries, by taking upon them cognizance of the Temporal
Laws, Usurpation.




be redressed.

They shall answer to the Law. Answ.


Farthings M^ney.
and that they may be good Sterling, and not utterly revoked.

Let the good money be as heretofore, until other order. Answ.


On the backside of the Roll,
Are contained sundry Articles of Advice given by the Merchants of the Staple
to the whole Parliament, Merchants advice to the Parliament. Staple.
containing in effect these heretofore named: To abate the prices of the
Florines, Florines, Custom.
to raise Forty shillings Custom in every Sack of Wool, and to establish the
Staple rather in England then beyond the Seas; and there you may see the
strange practice for abusing the Staple.

Rome, Commons, Provisors.

Rome, Strangers.


whereby strangers were enabled within this Realm to enjoy Ecclesiastical
dignities, and showed diverse inconveniences ensuing thereby, namely the decay
of Hospitality, the transporting of the Treasure to nourish the Kings mortal
enemies, the discovering of the secrets of the Realm, and the disinabling and
impoverishing the Clerks within this Realm. They also show how the Pope had in
most covert wise granted to two new Cardinals sundry Livings within this Realm;
Pope

Cardinals, Commouns resolution.


and namely to Cardinal Parrigots above ten thousand marks yearly tax. They
therefore require the King and Nobles to find some remedy, for that they
neither could nor would any longer bear those strange oppressions, Oppressions.
or else to help them to expel out of this Realm the Popes power by force.

The King understanding of these mischiefs, Answ.
wills, that between the Lords and Commons some remedy may be had whereto he
might, etc.

Carlisle in the 25 year of Edward the First, upon the like complaint, thereby
forbidding that any thing should be attempted or brought into the Realm, which
should tend to the blemishment of the Kings Prerogative, Provisors, Kings
Prerogative, Lords and Commons.
or in prejudice of his Lords and Commons. And so at this time, the Act called
The Act of Provision, was made by common consent, which generally forbids
the bringing in of any Bull, Bulls, Rome.
or such trinkets from the Court of Rome, or the using, allowing or enjoying of
any such Bull, Process, Instruments, or such Ware, as thereby at large does
appear.

Anno decimo Octavo Edwardi Tertii. Rex, etc. Henrico Comiti Lanc. etc. apud
Westminster. die Lunae post Octabis Sanctae Trinitatis etc. and Test Rege apud
Westminster. 20 Aprilis, etc.
IOhanni de Warrenna Com. Sarum. Hugoni de Courtney Com. Devon. Willielmo Bohun
Com. Northampton. Willielmo de Clinton Com. Huntington. Hugoni de Audeley Com.
Glouc. Gilberto de Umfravil Com. de Anigos. Laur. de Hastings Com. Pembrok.
Henrico de Lanc. Com. Derbie. Thom. de Bello campo Com. War. Johanni de Vere
Com. Oxoniae. Roberto de Ufford Comiti. Suff. Ricardo Com. Arundel. Rado. Baron
de Stafford. Nicolao de Cantilopo. Johanni de Seagrave. Johanni filio Walteri.
Thom. de Berkley. Thomae de Lucye. Gilberto Talbott. Reginaldo de Gray. Rogero
de Gray. Rogero de Chandos. Johanni de Nevil de Essex. Johanni de Harrington.
Jacobo de Audley. Johanni de Strange. Hugoni le Despencer. Petro de Malolacu
quint. Rado de Nevill. Ricardo Talbott. Johanni de Willoughby. Johanni de
Charleton sen. Adamo de Well. Willielmo Deinecourt. Willielmo de Chardeston.
Johan. de Sutton de Holde^nes. Johanni de Fawconbridge. Roberto de Morley.
Johanni de Leybourn. Henrico Hussy. Johan. de Gray de Rotherfield. Johan.
filio Richardi de Gray de Codenore. Johanni de Tibetot. Henrico de Percie. Tho.
Wake de Lyde. Johanni Mowbray. Henrico Fitzhugh. Willielmo la Zouch de
Harringworth. Johanni Bardolfe. Thomae Ugh^red. Rado. de Palmer. Roberto de
Clifford. Bartholo. de Bourcheire.
Anno xviii. Edwardi Tertii: Secunda pars pro Auro and Moneta proclam. etc.

Anno Decimo octavo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the
Monday next after the Utaves of Trinity: Anno 18. Edwardi Tertii.
King present, Painted Chamber Chancellor,
being then assembled in St. Edwards Chamber, commonly called the Chamber de
pinct, the Chancellor of England by the Kings commandment declared, how sundry
things at the last Parliament were left to be done at this. Parliament,
And that the Archbishop of Canterbury had against the said time called a
Convocation of his Clergy, Convocation, Absence of Members punished
at which Parliament and Convocation sundry of all Estates were absent, etc.
whereat the King did no less muse, then he was thereat offended: wherefore he
charged the Archbishop for his part, to punish the defaults of the Clergy, and
he would do the like touching the Parliament. Hereupon Proclamation was made,
Proclamation,
as in the last Parliament, Tit. 3.

England, Petitions.
Gascoyn, Wales, Ireland, Britain, Scotland, and the foreign Isles, and other
places beyond the Seas.



Thomas de Drayton is appointed to be Clerk of the Parliament. Clerk of
Parliament,


Lords House called.




that such as made default might abide the Kings Order.

Chancellor, Full Parliament.
in the presence of the King, and of his Son the Prince of Wales, declared the
cause of the same Parliament, Causes of Parliament, Truce.
Viz. the Articles of the Truce, and the breaches of the same particularly.

Parliaments advice.
and to show their opinion of them by Monday next ensuing.

John; at the which day, every of the Lords and Commons by themselves, Lords
and Commons several advice, Wars to be ended by Battle or Peace, War, Pope.
with one assent required the King to end the same war, either by battle, or by
honorable peace. And if the King shall attempt war eftsoons, that he do not
stay the same, at the letters, or requests of the Pope or of any whomsoever,
but to end the same by dint of Sword.

Royal Assent, Aid granted, Dismes, Quindesms.
the Clergy of Canterbury granted unto the King a Desme Triennial: And the
Commons granted unto the King two Fifteens of Counties, and two Desmes of
Cities, and of Towns in form following.

That the same should be levied in such wise, as the last was: That the Commons
Petitions be granted, Commons petitions, Wars, Lords assent.

Quindesms granted upon condition.


and that the same may be only employed upon the wars, with the assent of the
Lords.

Edward de Bayliffe may lie on the North-Marches; Defense, Royal expedition
and for that the King should pass over the Seas in person to end this
quarrel, they grant to the King a third fifteen. Royal Assent.


Answ.
To all which Conditions the King agreed.


Commissions recalled.
The Print for ceasing of Commissions of the new enquiries, cap. 2. agrees with
the Record.

Justices of Peace.
The Print touching making Justices of Peace, cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

Wools.
The Print for sorting and buying of Wools, cap. 3. agrees, with the Record.

Weights and Measures.
The Print touching weights, and measures, cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Exigents.
The Print touching exigents in trespasses, cap. 5. agrees with the Record.

Money
The Print touching new Money, and the Mint, Mint.
cap. 6. agrees with the Record.

Purveyors.
The Print touching Purveyors, Steward, Marshal.
and the Steward, and Marshal agrees with the Record.

Clergies Petitions
in number seven; whereto the King answered, and the same comprised in a
Statute, in effect following.


cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

The Print that no Prelate be impeached of any crime before the Justices,
Prelates,
Justices.
cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Bigamy,
cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

Mortmain,
The Print touching the purchasing of Lands in Mortmain, agrees with the Record.

Purveyance, Church.
The Print for not purveying in the Fees of the Church, cap. 4. agrees as
before.

Prohibition,
The Print touching prohibition, cap. 7. agrees with the Record.

Justices, Process Ecclesiastical.
The Print touching the Temporal Justices shall not enquire of process made by
Ecclesiastical Officers, cap. 6. agrees with the Record.

Sciri facias for Tithes, Tithes
cap. 7. agrees with the Record.

Exemplification.
The which Statute at the request of the Bishops and Clergy was exemplified
under the great Seal, and to them delivered.

Provisors.
tit. 60. And for that no punishment was provided therefore, that such as incur
the breach of the same by receipt, procuring, or Council, in stay of any
temporal judgment, shall lie in perpetual prison, Imprisonment perpetual.
or be fore-judged the land. And that all Justices of the Assizes,
Jail-delivery, and Oyer and Terminer may determine the same.

Provisoes.


That if any Archbishop, or other person religious, or other do not present
within four months, some able Clerk to any dignity, whereof any person has
obtained from Rome any provision, Provisors, Presentment, Bishop.
but surceased the same, that then the King may present some able Clerk.

Bishop elect.
that then such Clerk shall not enter nor enjoy his Temporalities without the
Kings special license.

Aliens, Enemies.
as remain in such Countries of his enemies, and employ the profits thereof to
the defense of the Realm.

Rome, Bulls, Rome.




and to bring them forthwith before the Council to answer thereto.

York which is to be recovered by Judgment in the Kings Court, Deanery of York,
Provisors, Enemies.
may be bestowed upon some able man within the Realm, who will maintain the
same against him who holds the same by provision from Rome, being the Common
Enemy to the King, and to the Realm, and that the mean profits may be employed
upon the defense of the Realm. Defense of the Realm.


Petitions, Statutes made.
Answer was made in form following.

It is agreed by the King, Earls, Barons, Justices, and other wife men of the
Realm, That the Petitions aforesaid be made in sufficient form of Law.
According to the Petitions aforesaid, certain Process made against Sir William
de la Pool, and Reynold at Conduite, out of the Exchequer, is revoked as
erroneous; Erroneous Process.
and that they shall be charged a new to account for moneys received for the
Kings Wool, Re-account, Wool, Acquittance.
notwithstanding any Letter of Acquittance to them made.



The Petitions of the Clerks of the Chancery; Clerks of the Chancery, L.
Chancellor, L. Keeper, Chancery.
That where the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper for the time being ought to have
the Cognizance of all Pleas of Trespasses done by the said Clerks, or other
Servants, where the Chancery shall remain; yet notwithstanding the Sheriffs of
London had attached one Gilbert of Chrishull, a Clerk of the said Chancery, in
London, at the suit of Killingbury a Draper, upon a Bill of Trespass; which
Gilbert brought a Supersedeas of Privilege to the said Sheriffs, Supersedeas,
Privilege.
which they would not allow, but drew him so find Sureties. Sureties.


The Clerks pray remedy therefore, and maintenance of their liberties.

Parliament, Chancery, London, Attachment, Sheriff, Privilege.
and reciting the contempt for neglecting the Process, conclude; that Writs be
sent to the Mayor of London to attach the Sheriffs, and others who were parties
and maintainers of the quarrel, by their bodies, to appear before the King in
the Chancery at a day certain, to answer as well to the Contempts of the
Process, as to the breach of the liberty, and damage of tha party.

Nottingham, it is enacted, That as w^ll the Gaol of Nottingham, Nottingham,
Gaols.
which the King has granted to Sir John Brocas during his life, as all other
Gaols in the like case should be annexed to the Sheriffwick of every County,
Sheriffwicks.
according to an Act made Anno 14 Edwardi Tertii.

Gold and Silver-Maces, Kings Sergeants.
but only the Kings Sergeants, but that they carry Maces of Copper only, and of
no other metal.

Answ.

London, Maces.


The same shall be so, except of the Sergeants of the City of London, who may
carry their Maces of silver within the liberty of London, before the Mayor in
the presence of the King.

On the backside of the Roll,
Supersedeas.
The form of the Writ of Supersedeas for staying of Exigents, in this Parliament
before agreed.

Supersedes for staying to proceed further in certain new Commissions before
expressed.

Supersedeas.
The form of Supersedes for staying of Commissions for the Assise of Weights and
Measures, Weights and Measures.
before mentioned.

Commission, Exchequer, Account.
The form of a Commission to the Barons of the Exchequer, to call such
Commissioners to account, as were appointed upon the Assise of Weights and
Measures.

Proclamation, Wool.


Gold.
the sum being under Twenty shillings.

A Declaration made against such persons, against whom Exigents should pass.
Exigents.


Of the Oaths of Justices, Oaths.
and of the Clerks of the Chancery, expressed in the Print, there is no mention
made in the Record.

Anno Vicesimo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the Monday
next after the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, in the Twentieth Year of King
Edward the Third.
Lionel (the Kings son) Lord Keeper of England, Lord Keeper. of England.
that Proclamation should be made against wearing of Armor and Games in
Westminster, Proclamation against Weapons and Games.
as in the last Parliament, Tit. 2.



Petitions.
Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, Scotland, Gascoin, and
other Foreign Isles and Parts.



Clerk of the Parliament.
Sir Thomas Drayton is appointed Clerk of the Parliament.

Parliament adjourned for absence of diverse Lords and Commons.
For that sundry of the Lords and Commons were not at this day come, the
Parliament was continued until Tuesday. On which Tuesday, for that knowledge
was given that Sir Bartholmew de Burghurst, Sir John Darcy Lord Chamberlain,
Mr. John Thoresby Clerk of the Privy Seal, and Mr. John Charlton were arrived,
and come Messengers from the King at Callis, Ki^gs (...).
and that they meant to be at the Parliament the Wednesday next, the Parliament
continued until Wednesday.

Causes (...) Parliam^n^,
the like here might be established for the safety of the King, Kings safety,
Peace, False money,
the common peace of the whole Realm, and for the avoiding of false money, by
which the whole Realm was damnified; after which, they showed the Kings Letters
Patents of credit, Letters of credit.
the same being expressed by word, and dated before Callice.

Bartholomew, for, and in the name of himself, and of his Colleagues in the
presence of the Keeper of England, Lord Keeper,
and of the whole estate, declared the good success of the King since his
arrival at Hoges in Normandy, Kings Victor^es,
as in surprising of many Towns and Castles of War, as well at Cane, as
elsewhere, and aso of the victory at Orestlie, where the power of France was
discomfited. And further how the King was come before Callice, Callis.
from whence he meant not to depart, until by the help of God he gained the
same, after which, he would pursue the enemies without return, until the wars
were ended. War, Normandy,
He further shows, an Order between the Duke, and Nobles of Normandy.

The Ordinance of Normandy, Normandy, Englands invasion.
containing the effect following. That the Duke of Normandy should pass as
Chieftain, with other Nobles of the same into England, with forty thousand men
at Arms, Knights, Esquires, and men of good estate, and forty thousand footmen.
An Order for bearing of their charges, for keeping of the Sea, and for the Duke
to remain with his power in England ten weeks.

England be by the same voyage conquered, that then the said conquest shall
altogether be to the name and honor of the said Duke, Duke of Normandy.
and all that which the King of England has shall remain to the said Duke,
Englands Conquest.
Knights, and Lords. And all the same which belongs to the Nobles, and
secular persons of England, shall be bestowed upon the Churches, Noblemen, and
famous Towns of Normandy. And of the Revenues of the Church of England, Church
revenues,
the French King shall yearly have twenty thousand pounds, saving the Popes
rights: Popes right, Scots,
And that surrender be made to the Scots, of whatsoever has at any time been
taken from them.

Parliaments adv^ce, Aid required, C^mmons,
The Commons require respite until Thursday then ensuing.

The same Thursday the Commons by a Schedule declare the sundry particular
former aids, Former ^ids, Impositions against Law, Customs, A^rays, Purveyo^s,
Two (...).
the Imposition of forty shillings custom of Wool, extorted of them against
Law, besides the arraying of men, and common taking of Purveyors;
notwithstanding they grant to the King two fifteens in two years, that then the
latter fifteen do also cease.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Statutes observed Arrays,
That all the Acts of Parliament before made may be observed, so as they pass
forth no Commissions for arraying of men.

Answ.
The first point the King grants; of the rest he will be advised.

Arrays, Fines,
That such as were fined for not arraying of men, may therefore be discharged.
Answ.




Array, Supersedeas, Seacoasts guarded.
That all within six miles of the Sea, may have a Supersedeas for arraying of
men.

That such as keep the Seacoasts, shall have a Supersedeas.

Answ.
It is enacted, That the Coining in all places shall be open as heretofore.
Coining.


False money, Treason.
It is enacted, That the Bringer of False money into the Realm shall lose life
and member; And that the Justices of Assise and of the Peace shall enquire of
the same.

Kings Receivers, Gold, Changers.
and that the Changers thereof be not without Parliament.

The first is granted, the second respited.

Answ.
That the Forty shillings Subsidy of every Sack of Wool may cease. Subsidy on
Wools.




Answ.
The payment be made for the last taking up of victuals. Purveyance,




Justices of Peace, Felonies,
and that they may determine all Felonies. Answ.


The first point is granted: For the second, the King will appoint learned
Justices.

Answ.
That the keeping of the Sea may from henceforth be at the Kings charge. Sea
guarded,


Answ.
It shall be kept as heretofore it has been.

Sheriffs.
and that none of those Offices be granted for life, or in Fee.

Westminster, Purveyors,
may be taken as Thieves; and that Justices of Assise and Peace may enquire of
the same. Answ.




Quindesms.
That the Fifteens in Towns and ancient Demesns be levied as in the bodies of
Counties, without increase.

Answ.
The same shall be levied according to accustomed use.

Justices Oath,
That all Justices of Enquires be sworn as Justices of the Bench; and that the
Chief of them have power to swear the rest. Answ.


Such Justices shall be sworn as appertains; so as they shall take nothing
but meat and drink, and that of small value, and the Chief shall swear all the
rest.

That the Fifteens beyond Trent be employed only upon the defense of the North.
Quindesmies, Defense.


The King will foresee the defense aforesaid. Answ.


Alien Enemies.
and remaining now in Newgate, may be judged during the Parliament.

They shall remain there till further order. Answ:


Pardon.
since the Kings last passage. Answ.




It is enacted, That Lumbards, Lumbards, Merchants, Gold.
and other Merchants shall receive gold for their ware, without any other
compact, or pain of Fine, or imprisonment.

Michaelmas, Alien Monks, Scholars, Parliament, Kings Prerogative
and that their livings be disposed to young English Scholars.

The persons being spiritual cannot be tried by Parliament, their livings being
in the Kings hands, Answ.
and without him cannot be disposed.

Aliens, Cardinals.
and others, during their lives.

The King takes the profits, Answ.
and the Council has sent their Petition to the King.

Aliens Enemies.
they being in their own Countries Shoomakers, Tailors, or Chamberlains to
Cardinals, Cardinals, Scholars,
may depart before Michaelmas, and their livings, disposed to poor English
Scholars.

As Tit. 3.

France, Answ.
Cardinals,
to entreat of war, or peace.

The same is granted as reasonable. Answ.


That Aliens buying provisions, Aliens.




or provisors do avoid the Realm, as before, or to be out of the Law.

The Statute heretofore made shall be observed, and the King shall signify to
the Pope thereof. Answ.


Canterbury may be restrained, Provisors.
and such as shall pursue therefore to be out of the Law.

The Lords think the same but reasonable, Lords.

Answ.


and it is further commanded, that no such be from henceforth received.

Alien Enemies Forfeiture.
that the same vessel be forfeited and the body of the bringers at the Kings
pleasure.

Alien, Farms, Imprisonment perpetual, Kings profit.
nor buy any of their goods, nor be of their Council, on pain of perpetual
imprisonment.

These are against the Kings profit, who lacks such profits of the Farmers.
Answ.


Moneys transported, Pope.
or send any money to the Pope, nor to any Bishop, or other Alien for what duty
whatsoever.

Aliens Friars, Secrets.
Order shall be taken with every General of all houses of Friars, that they
shall so look to all Friars Aliens, as that they shall not disclose the secrets
of the Realm.

Where the Commons request was, that those Friars should depart the Realm never
to return.

Pensions, Proxies.
That the pension of seven shillings which Raymond Pilegrin receives yearly of
every house of Religion within the Realm may cease.

Answ.

Kings Council.


The same Raymond is the Kings liegeman born in Gascoin, and is sworn to be of
the Kings Council, who by his procuracy receives the same.

Alien-Enemy, Pension.
That the yearly Pension of two thousand pound paid to the Abbot of Cluny the
Kings enemy may cease for ever. Abbot of Cluny.


The same is paid there.

Answ.
It is enacted, that no person do bring into the Realm to any Bishop, or other,
any Bull, Bull, Rome, Alien.
or other Letters from Rome, or from any Alien, unless he show the same to the
Chancellor, Chancellor, Warden of the Cinque Ports.
or Warden of the Cinque Ports on loss of all that he has.

Presentment to Churches.
so as if the Parson had continued therein for three years, that he should not
be put out, may stand.

Answ.
The King will be advised.

Dismes, Quindismes.
It is enacted that all religious persons for lands purchased since the
twentieth of Edw. 3. and paying no Desmie therefore amongst the Clergy shall
pay fifteens.

Letters to the Parliament.
After this Mr. John Charlton, one of the Messengers aforesaid brought Letters
from the Bishop of Durham, from the Earls of Northampton, Arundel, Warwick,
Oxon, and Suffolk, and from Sir Hugh le Dispencer, Lord of Glamorgan, directed
to the whole estate of Parliament, and purporting, that where the King at his
arrival at Hoges in Normandy had made his eldest son the Prince of Wales a
Knight, Prince of Wales, Aid to make the Prince a Knight.
whereby he ought to have aid of the Realm, as appertains, Viz. forty
shillings for every Knights Fee, whereunto they all granted, and took Order for
the speedy levying of the same.

Commons.
It is ordered in full Parliament at the request of the Commons that the
Benefices of all Aliens should be seized into the Kings hand, Alien^ Benefices,
Bishops Certificate, Convocation, Chancery.
and he to take the profit of the same, and that all Bishops should before the
next Convocation certify into the Chancery the Names of all Aliens, their
Benefices and values.

Aliens.
Tit. 42^

Anno Vicesimo primo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the
morrow after S. Hilary, in the 21 year of the Reign of King Edw. 3. of England,
and of France the 8th.
Proclamation, Arms defended, Statutes of Northampton, Earls, Barons, Lords.
That no person shall use or bear any Arms within London, and the Suburbs, or
in any place between the said City and Palace of Westminster, nor in no other
part of the Palace by Land or by Water, except such of the Kings people, as he
shall appoint to keep the Kings peace, and the Kings Ministers; according to
the Statute of Northampton; yet Earls and Barons may wear their swords, except
in the Kings presence, and place of Council.

England and Scotland. Receivers of Petitions.


Receivers of Petitions for the Clergy.

Triers of Petitions,


Because diverse Lords were not come, the Parliament was continued from day to
day thrice, Adjournment of Parliament because diverse Lords were not come.
( Viz.) until Thursday following; at which time William de Thorp in presence
of the King, Will. de Thorpe.
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commons declared that the Parliament was called
for two causes; Causes of the Parliament.
the first, Concerning the War which the King had undertaken by the consent of
the Lords and Commons against his enemies of France. War by consent of the
Lords and Commons.


England may be kept. Peace of England kept.
Whereupon the King willed the Commons to consult together, Commons to consult
together.
and that within four days they should give answer to the King and his
Council, Speedy answer, King and his Council.
what they think therein.

The fourth day the Commons declare, That they are not able to Council any
thing touching the point of the war; Commons unable to give council touching
War.
wherefore they desire in that behalf to be excused; and that the King will
thereof advise with his Nobles and Council, Nobles and Council to advise
thereof, Commons assent to their determination.

Petitions.


and what shall be so amongst them determined, they, the Commons will assent
unto, confirm, and establish.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Laws to be kept.
for which purpose they desire, That no great person do maintain no Traitors,
Felons, Robbers, Trespassers against the peace, Barretors, Maintainers,
Confederators, Embracers of business, Conspirators, Champtors, and the like, by
which falsities the Peace is disturbed, Peace disturbed.
and the Laws frustrated, and that certain Ordinances be made for punishment of
such Offenders. Great men male-factors, Maintenance of the Barretors,
Ordinances.


Barons and Justices Fees increased, Oath of Justices.
Justices, Ministers, and Officers, and that they may be sworn to take nothing.

Touching the first point, the King will call the great persons to him, and
will move this Article to them, and with their advice will ordain such remedy
as shall be pleasing to God and man. Touching the second, the King will advise
what other Ministers shall be fit to take the Oath, Oath.
and will do what shall be needful.

Petitions of the Commons to be answered and endorsed before them in Parliament.
That all these Petitions which be for the common profit may be answered in
Parliament before the Commons, so as they may know the Endorsment and have
remedy according to the Ordinance of Parliament. Ordinance.


That whereas the Scots, Scots.

Devastation by War.




by Covin with Philip de Val^is, in the Kings absence, did enter the Realm of
England with all their host, burning and destroying the Land, and feloniously
committing robberies, murders, etc. And whereas in a Battle at Durham, diverse
of them were slain, and some of their Chieftains, as David de Brays, William
Douglas, and others, were by force there taken, and are in the Kings power;
that he will be pleased so to take order with them by his Council, that he and
his people be not in little danger, and that they may give surety for their
good behavior. Sureties for good behavior.


Answ.

Lords advice.


The King by advice de ses Grantz, will provide so as shall be best.

Bruges in Flanders, Staple for Wools, Bruges, Free trade.
has used to be free, so as all Merchants might there freely buy merchandise,
and carry the same from thence whither they lift by Land or Sea, and now the
same freedom is restrained so as none can freely buy and carry from thence
according to the ancient usage with them of Flanders and Brabant: And they of
Brabant cannot bring their Wools bought in the Staple out of the Town of
Bruges, without sureties that the Wools shall be uttered in the Country of
Brabant, Monopoly, Sureties.
or that they bring Letters from the Town of Bruges without sureties in what
Town of Brabant those Wools shall be uttered; whereby the price of Wool is
much abased. Price of Wool abated, Monopoly, Cloth,
Also the three good Towns of Flanders, Gant, Bruges, Ipre, will not suffer the
small Towns which were wont to buy great quantities of Wools to make Cloth, but
do destroy their Instruments, to the abasement likewise of the price of Wools.
Also the payment of Gold is at so high a price in those parts, Gold.
that a man shall lose in Exchange the third penny, Exchange.
and more; for which matters it may please the Parliament to provide remedy.

Answ.




The King will, that the Ordinance of the Staple shall be viewed; and that
Thomas Melchburn, with whom the Patent touching that Ordinance does remain, be
called to bring the same with him; and that some Merchants of the Country, who
best understand this matter, and the King by advice of his Council will provide
remedy.

Custos Regni.

Council.


Whereas in a Council holden by Lionel the Kings son, the Guardian of England,
it was in the 21 year of the King ordered without the Commons, Imposition
without the Commons consent.
That for keeping the Realm, and safe conduct of ships, Safe Conduct, Sea,
Ships.
should be taken upon every sack of Wool passing the seas, two shillings; upon
every Tun of Wine, Tonnage and Poundage.
two shillings; upon every pound Desavoires brought back into the Realm, six
pence; and this charge to continue until Michaelmas next coming, which charge
is yet demanded; that the King will be pleased that the same charge may be let
fall, and to write his Letters to the Collectors thereof, that it cease.

Answ.
are laid down, except Two shillings upon the Sack, which is to endure until
Easter next: Impositions,
And forasmuch as these Charges were ordained for safe Conduct of Merchandises
into the Realm, Safe conduct,
and forth to Foreign parts, upon which Conduct the King has spent much, which
before Michaelmas cannot woll be levied; it seems that the levying of it for
so small a time to come should not be grievous.

That where the Plaintiff in Writs of debt, or trespass does record, he may
have execution of the Land, Execution upon Lands in Treasons and debt Relation.
which the Defendant had the day of the Writ purchased.

This cannot be done without a Statute, upon which the King will advise with
his Council, Kings Council, Comm^n Law alterable only by Statute.
and will do that which he shall think best for his people.

Anno primo of the King, it is contained that none of the Lords Counselors, or
Ministers shall maintain any plea, Maintenance, Pain certain, Intendment of Law.
or quarrel depending in Court or elsewhere within the Realm; in which Statute
no pain is in certain ordained for the Offenders, that in such case certain
pain may by Parliament be proved.

Fine and ransom.
according the quantity of the trespass.

That whereas some Justices have lately adjudged matters before them to be
Treason, Treason, Accroachment of Royal pow^^.
and accroachment of royal power, that it may be be declared in this
Parliament what incroachment of royal power shall be, whereby the Lords shall
lose the profit of forfeiture of their Tenants, Incertainty, Treason declared,
Forfeiture for Treason, Clergy,
and the party arraigned the benefit of Clergy.

In case where such Judgments are given, the points of such Treason and
accroachment are given or declared by the same judgment.

King and his Council, Commons charges, Commissions of Array.
that for the great charges which the Commons did bear yearly, as by
Fifteenths, Ninths, and Wools, Commissions should not go out of the Chancery,
as for hobeleries, archeries, taking o^ victuals, Victuals, Pu^ve^ance, Array,
Charges without Parliament^ not to be levied.
nor Commissions to extend the Lands, dez certeniz getz, beyond the sum of a
certain value, nor to levy other charges upon the people, if the same were not
granted in Parliament; which Ordinances are holden for nothing, Ordinances
contemned.
whereby the people are wholly impoverished; wherefore they prayed the King to
be pleased to take pity of his people, and to affirm, and hold those
Ordinances made to his people in Parliament: And that if such Commissions go
forth of the Chancery without assent of Parliament, Commissions illegal,
such as find themselves grieved, Supersedeas,
may have Writs to ^urcease, according to the said Ordinance, and that the
people be not bound to obey such Commissions.

If any such imposition be made, Answ:

Impositi^ns nec^ssi^y.


the same was made upon great necessity, and with the assent of the Prelates,
Counts, Barons, and auters grauntz, and some of the Commons then present;
notwithstanding the King will not that such undue Impositions be drawn into
consequence, Lords and some Commons assent to Impositions.
but will that the Ordinances in this Petition mentioned be well kept. And as
touching the taking of Victuals, saving the Kings prerogative, Purveyance,
Prerogative, Agreement.
his will is, That agreement be made with such, of whom the same are, and shall
be taken.

Franchises, Common Law, Oppression.
that almost all the Land is infranchised to the great arereisement and
estenysement of the Common Law, and to the great oppression of the people, Answ.
That the King will restrain such grants hereafter.



Law,
That Letters granted at the request dez gentz, and others de sautz le large
nostre le Roy, be not hereafter granted; that yet the Law be done according to
the Statute.

Answ.
The King is pleased that the Statute of Northampton shall be kept.

Bursborns does daily increase by reason of the Justices of Assize appointed to
try, False money.

Justices of Assize.


find out, and determine such falsity, come so late, and keep Assize so short,
that they cannot try, Treason,
find out, and determine the said falsity; That the King will provide remedy
therefore, and that the offenders may be drawn and hanged, as falsifiers of
money, as in the last Parliament was ordained; and that such Ordinance may
hold, Ordinance,
as well for time past, as time to come; and that the King will gant no pardon
for such falsifying and Treason; No pardon,
and if any be granted, that the same may be disallowed before the Justices.
Pardon disallowed.


Answ.
The King is pleased that Gentz de la terre, which Justices, Justices of Oyer
and Terminer.
and others to them called, shall be assigned to enquire, hear, and determine
the points contained in the Petition, and to do therein right^ and to keep the
Peace in the Countries where they shall be assigned, Peace,
and que les guerres inquisitionse facent de temps pass and de temps pius. And
it is not meant that such Charter shall be granted hereafter le greement; and
if any have in time past been granted, the Justices before they shall be
granted may advise with the King before they allow thereof. Justices, Pardons,


Taxes, Subsidies, Collectors of Taxes,
in aid of his business in diverse business, for levying whereof, three or four
of the best in every County have by good Council been assigned, who have done
the same in good manner according to their Commissions, and have their accounts
fully in the Exchequer, Accounts in Exchequer.
according to Law; and afterward evil Berrectors have suggested to the Court,
Berrectors,
and have caused some of the Collectors to come again into the Exchequer, to
receive the accounts before given and allowed, not fuffering them to acquit
themselves, Delay,
nor to take issue according to Law; but do there keep them from day to day,
Vexation,
and from Term to Term, and do restrain them by Mainprise contrary to Law, not
suffering them to make Attorneys, Atturnies,
as the Statute wills, that all men may make Attorneys in all cases where
there is appeal; Appeal,
wherefore the Commons pray that such accusers be not heard in Court to accuse,
Accusers,
and keep men without due Information or Indictment, Indictment.
and that they may make Attorneys in such cases.

If Account be given in which by Information of good and lawful persons
concealment, Answ.

Concealment,


or other default or recitation is; It is reason that it shall be recited; And
the Lords will that hanging such retainment, they may make Attorneys so,
Attorneys.
as the Attorney be answerable to the Lords, and all others that complain, to
the end that if such concealment or other default be found, the Atturnies
Client may have the penalty anciently used. Penalty.


Wapentakes, Recoverers in Hundreds, County etc. Distresses, Execution, Delay.
Hundreds, Court Barons, in debts, covenant, and other actions there pleadable,
the Bailiffs of those Courts do fount distress de Chatull de viss. in lien of
Execution, according to the usage of the County which so remain ofttimes very
long before greement be made with the Plaintiff; that if gree' be not made with
the plaintiff within fifteen days after judgment, the Bailiffs of such
Courts, by the Oath of three or four des mientz homes de la ville ou lezecution
serra, in the presence of the plaintiff shall apprize the goods so taken by
force of the judgment, Sale of Goods in Execution.
to the very value; and sell them; and if they cannot find such as will buy,
then to deliver the same to the Recoverer at that value.

Let the ancient Law be held until it please the King by his Council otherwise
to ordain. Answ.

Old Law, King and his Council.




King and Council.
that the men and horses of the Kings household should not be harbinged in any
part of the County, Horses of the King.
but by Bill of the Marshal of the house; Purveyance, Marshal, Free Quarter,
Constables.
and that they should deliver those Bills to the Constables of Towns, and
should be harblnged by them, and that the Constables should cause them to have
such sustenance for themselves and their horses as shall be meet, and should
cause their victuals to be prised by men of the same Towns sworn, and that
they before their departure thence should pay the parties of whom their
victuals were taken. Appraisment.

Payment before departure.


And also it was assented, that the horses and harness might be arrested until
they did pay for their victuals. Arrest of horses and harness till payment.
But now they go from Town to Town, and harbinge themselves without any
Constable, and take men's goods without payment or apprising: And if perhaps
they bring Bills to the Constable, Bills,
therein is no mention made for how many horses, or for how long: So as they
charge the Country at their own pleasure, and depart without making payment.
Certainty.
That in every Bill mention be made for how many horses Livery shall be made,
and that no horse have more then one Garson: The Bill to be delivered to the
Constable, Constables, Sworn men, Payment, Delay.
and he to make the price by men sworn of the Town; so as the parties make
payment from day to day for such victuals according to the price without other
delays, according to the Statute.

The King is pleased, Answ.
that this Article and every point in it comprised be kept in all points
according to the form of the Statute.

Attaint in Debt.
and in all other Writs, and Bills, where the Demands or the Damages do amount
unto Forty shillings, Damages.
as well in Enquest past, as to pass.

Answ.

Old Law.


The ancient Laws shall remain, until the King be better advised.

tam pro Domino Rege, quam pro seipsis; whereas the whole Principal and Damages
recovered does go to themselves, Informers, Damages, Attaint, Error.
and not to the King; in which case a man cannot have an Attaint, or a Writ of
Error: That in such case Writs of Attaint may be granted, as well for Enquests
past and Judgments given, as for Enquests to pass, and Judgment to be given.
Answ.


Error, Attaint.
Touching Writs of Error, let them be granted: And as for Writs of Attaint, the
same was never ordained.

Scire facias,
That a Writ of Scire facias may lie in case of garnishment which issues out of
a Judgment, or of a Recognisance, as well of debt as of damages, as in case
touching Land, and in every other case where garnishment lies, Garnishment.
where the thing whereof Execution is demanded amounts to Forty shillings, as
well of Execution awarded, Execution.
as to be awarded.

Answ.

Old Law.


Let the ancient Law be kept, until the King shall be pleased otherwise to
ordain.

Judgment in the Exchequer, Error, Kings Bench.
That Judgments given in the Exchequer may be redressed and reversed, if therein
be Error, in the Kings Bench, as well as Error given in the Common Pleas; and
not before themselves that gave the same; for it is not likely that a man will
have a good conceit against his own opinion.

Answ.

Error in the Exchequer-chamber.


The King is pleased, that when any man complains of Error given in the
Exchequer, the Chancellor and Treasurer, and two Justices, shall be assigned by
Commission to cause the Record to be brought before them in the Exchequer, and
the Process of the Plea wherein Error is supposed, and the same to correct as
shall appertain.

Merchants, Monopoly, Tin.
The Merchants of Cities and Boroughs, and the Commonalty of the Land, show that
the Merchants are disturbed to buy and sell the Commodities of the Land; as Tin
of Cornwall may now be bought by no Merchant, Cornwall, Tidman.
but by one stranger, Tidman of Limberghe, who buyeth all and sends over the
Sea: And pray that no such Merchandise be sold in gross, but to the Commonalty
of Merchants.

Answ.
That is a profit belonging to the Prince, Prince.
and every Lord may make his profit of his own.

Accusation,

Answ.

Suggestion.

Kings Council, Fines, Adjournet ou^ler le mere, Grievances.


where they are often enforced to make Fines, or to lay down great sums of
money, or otherwise adjournez outre le mere, as has been heretofore often
done, but that such grievances be not afterward done.

The King is pleased, that hereafter such things be not done against reason.
Answ.


Free-trade, Wool, Customs.
paying the ancient Custom of half a mark; which thing was ordained by the
Kings Charter.

That Subsidy was granted for a time yet enduring; Answ.

Subsidy, Advise with the Kings Council.


within which time the King will advise with his Council, what shall be best to
be done therein for the good of the people.

Sheriff, Escheator, Annuals and sufficient.
and they not to remain longer then one year, may be kept.

The King is pleased that the Statute shall be kept; Answ.
but when a good Sheriff is found, Sheriff^ new sworn.
his Commission shall be renewed, and he newly sworn.

Custom, Imposition, Cloth.
viz. upon every Cloth carried forth by English Merchants 14 d. and by
strangers 21 d. and upon every Worsted cloth 1 d. and of strangers 1 d. ob. and
of every Lit. 10 d. and of strangers 15 d. may be taken away. Answ.


The King, King, Prelates, Earls and Great men deny the taking away of the new
Custom for Cloth, Negative voice
Prelates, Counts, and autres Grantz will that this Custom shall stand; for it
is good reason that such a profit be taken of Clothes wrought within the Realm
and carried forth, as of Wools out of the Land, rateable the Cloth as the Sack.

Winchester, Statutes of Winchester.
and other Statutes made by the King and his Progenitors be kept, and that the
people be not grieved contrary to these Statutes.

The King is pleased that the Statute of Winchester and the other be kept. Answ.


Aviners of the King, Queen and Prince severally, do come yearly and assess
Towns severally at Ten Quarters of Oats, Purveyors, Oats, Prerogative, Queen,
Prince, Payment, Tallages,
more or less, at their pleasure, and the same do cause to be carried away
without paying for the same; That such Tallages and Purveyance may be taken
away. Answ.


The King has and will forbid it, and that no man take contrary to such
prohibition, saving to him, the Queen his Companion, Prerogative, Queen, Kings
children.
and their Children, their rightful takings.

England, viz. Thames, Thames, Tese, Ouse, Trent, Rivers, Navigation, Nuisance,
Goors, Mills,
Tese, Ouse, and Trent, were wont from Antiquity to be open and free for every
Ship to pass with Merchandises, and now of late daily the said Rivers are
stopped and turned aside by Goors, Mills, Piles, and Pales, erected by every
Lord against his own Land, so as Ships cannot pass without danger; That
Justices may be assigned in every County to enquire of this business, Justices
assigned, Oppression.
and to remove the oppression.

The King is pleased, Answ.
that such and so many Commissions shall be granted as reasonably shall be
needful; Commission.
and that every man shall be heard, that will complain for himself and the King.

Indictment, Felony, Exigent, Forfeiture, Flight, Foreign County.
and does render himself at the Exigent, although he be afterward acquitted of
the F^lony, yet his Chattels are forfeited without enquiry whether he did fly
or withdraw himself: Forasmuch as a man may be indicted in a foreign Country,
being ignorant of it; That therefore no man hereafter lose his Chattels, but
where it is found by Verdict that he withdrew himself.

Let the ancient Law be kept, Answ.

Old Law, Kings Council.


until the King by advice of his Council shall otherwise ordain.

Crown lands and Franchises, Advowsons not to be severed from it.
be given or severed from the Crown.

The King will advise with his Council that nothing shall be done in such case,
Answ.

Kings Council, Kings honor.


but to the honor of him and his Realm.

Horses of King, Queen and Prince.
the Queen, and the Prince do wander into diverse parts, doing much hurt and
damage to the people, by taking of Hay, Oats, etc. contrary to Ordinances
already made, That the King will ordain, that those Horses may abide in some
certain place of the County where they are, and that purveyance may be made for
them in convenient time of the year by the Depu^ies, Free quarter, Purveyance,
Hay, Oats, Ordinances,
as may be agreed between them and the owners of these goods; and that enquiry
may be of all the ill behavior of those takers before this time, and that by
Commissions the Plaintiff or parties grieved in this kind, Commissions.
as well of wrongs heretofore done, or hereafter to be done, may be heard and
determined.

Answ.

Ordinances, Kings profit Peoples ease.


The King is pleased that the Ordinances already made shall be kept, and that
purveyances may be made for his best profit and ease of the people.

Free trade, Wools, Custom,
and other Merchandise, certain Merchants that have of the King the Custom and
Subsidy, for a certain sum yearly, by color of a bargain or purchase, which
they have made of the Kings Wools, Monopoly, Imposition.

Extortion,


will suffer no man to pass over Wools, but only their proper Wools, except
they pay two Marks for a sack of Wool above the Custom and Subsidy, to the
great damage of the people, and ab^sement of the price of Wools, whereof they
desire remedy, and that the Merchants may answer in this Parliament, Merchants,
Oppression, Parliament.
for such their outrage done to the people.

Answ.
Let the Merchants be called into the Parliament, and Answer.

Merchants, Wools seized, Allowance by Parliament, Customs,
That whereas Wools were taken at Dordraghe to the Kings use, for which by
Parliament, allowance was made to the Merchants for their debts out of the
Subsidy and Custom granted to the King, Viz. twenty shillings for every sack
carried over Sea: And whereas a great part of the rich Merchants are satisfied
of the Subsidy and Custom aforesaid, Rich Merchants satisfied when the poor
are le^t in arrear,
and the poor Merchants yet behind of that which to them belongs, by reason
that the rich Merchants have sued to the King that they and no other puissent a
chatre les dits debts des poures merchants, and to take allowance of the King,
and pay little to the poor Merchants, Buying poor Merchants debts,
but at their own will, so as the rich Merchants are satisfied, and the poor
undone. That therefore the King will pay them part of their debts, Defalcation
of debts due by the King.
or make to them assignment of part thereof, and they will lose to the King the
other part of their said debt, or that the King will make to them such
allowance, as he made to the rich Merchants.

The King is pleased, that the poor Merchants that are not satisfied shall show
to the Treasurer their Obligations and Patents, Answ.

Poor Merchants Treasurer.


whereof the Treasurer shall inform the King, and he by advice will take Order,
that gree be made unto them as soon as he well may.

Edw. 1. lately granted to the people Purlieu, Purlieu, Forests bounds,
through all the Forest of England, and granted to every man that would his
Charter containing the bounds of the Forests, according to such Purlieu: And
afterward Edw. ^. confirmed the same by his Charter, which has so continued,
until of late the Kings Ministers have and do daily afforrest that which was
dis-afforrested, Afforresting, Dis-afforresting, Ministers of the Forest.
and put into regard, that which was out of regard, contrary to the Purlieus
and the Charters of the said King; also that the Ministers do summon m^an folk
of foreign places, to Indict people at their pleasure, Indictment,
and make them travel from place to place, Oppression,
and threaten them until they make Indictments at their appointment and desire.
Vexation,
And these Ministers purpose to afforrest Towns near Forests, where are no
wild Beasts, and do often grieve the people, by the often coming of
Forresters, without profit to the King. And whereas a Forest is in diverse
Counties, the Kings Ministers take folk of the one, and the other County, and
by force make men of one County to indict men of another County, Forrreign
Indictment, Grievances, Remedies fail, Chancery.
of matters whereof they are ignorant; of which grievances a man can have no
Writ, nor other remedy in the Chancery, whereof they pray remedy. Answ.


The King is pleased, That the Charter of the Forests be kept in all points;
Charter of the Forest, Purlieus, Forests, Grievance, Chancery.
As touching Purlieus, if any man will complain let him show his grievance, and
thereupon he shall have a Writ in the Chancery, and right shall be done him.

Ireland, Inquiry, Ireland, Kings revenues there, Wars, Fraud, Forfeiture of
Offices.
Come toutz ses ancestors avoint ad de bien, and de la come pur maintenance sa
guerre; Seeing he has more in Ireland then any of his Ancestors had, and if
default be found in the Ministers, that such other be put in their places,
which will answer the King of the reasonable profit thereof,

The King is pleased that it shall be so.

Whereas many upon an Inquest of Office found for the King, Answ.
Inquest of Office.
are put Outing possession, Chancery, Speedy Justice, Restitu^ion.
and cannot afterward upon great suit be ended in the Chancery to have their
right discussed, even to the disherison of diverse, That remedy may be provided,
so as without delay the right may be discussed, and the party restored to his
Land, if his right be found.

Let the same Law be kept, Answ.

Common Law,


as heretofore was done, and if any man find himself grieved, let him show
himself, specially his case, and he shall have right:

Treason does forfeit all his lands to the King, Forfei^ure for Treason, Tenure
Lands declared, Grant le Roy,
of whomsoever the same be holden, that where the King does grant away those
lands without saying, To hold of himself; the Law may be declared in certain,
Whether the Donee shall hold of the King, or of the former lord? And where the
King gives those lands to hold of himself, le quell le Chartre est repellable
eant regard a les seruises on nemy. Charter repealed,


The King is pleased, that in such case it shall be as it has been in the
times of his Progenitors of the Ancestors des gentz de la terre; Answ.

Ancient Law,


and if Declaration be hereof to be made, the same shall be by good advice
among other Articles whereof new Law is required. New Laws,


Commissions of Enquiry, Array, Exchequer, Oppression.
Whereas Commissions went forth to enquire of all such as have in lands Five
pounds, Ten pounds, Twenty pounds, Forty pounds, and above, unto One hundred
marks; which Enquests were with much diligence per milts Gentz des Countees
thereunto sworn, and returned into the Chancery; whereupon went forth Writs
out of the Exchequer to levy of some the double, of some treble, that by good
Enqu^sts was found, for Archers, Hoblers, and men of war, contrary to Law;
Impositions against Law, Fines, Oppression.
and also Writs went forth to levy of some small Towns, which are neither
Cities nor Boroughs, Twenty marks, Twenty pounds at pleasure, without any
manner of Process: The Commons thereof pray remedy, De si Come nostre Sieur le
Roy, ad promise de sun bon grace de fair droit as jouiz geeva que plendre se
voudront.

Answ^

Impositions, Necessity.


If any such Imposition have been made, the same was upon great necessity, and
with the assent of the Counts, Barons, Consent of the Earls, Barons, Great men,
and some of the Commons, not sufficient to make a Tax legal.
and autres Grantz, and some of the Commons then present: Nevertheless the King
will not that such Imposition be unduly drawn in consequence.

Common Pleas and King's Bench; Two great Seals.
for every of which Judicial Writs the Commons pay seven pence, Writs Judicial,
Writs O^iginal, Seals, Fees, Extortion, Small Seal.
and for Originals six pence; That he will ordain a Small Seal for Judicial
Writs, so as men may pay but Three pence for a Seal of a Judicial Writ, to the
great ease of the people; and then will more Writs be purchased to the Kings
great advantage: Great Fees.
For now the suit is so hard and dear, that the mean sort are not able to
pursue their rights. Answ.


Poor men to have Writs gratis.

Ancient Fees not to be altered.


Unto poor men shall be given for Gods lake; and it is reason that such as are
able, do pay as in former times has been used.

Waste unpunishable, Frank-marriage.
though they have no child between them, whereby often happens great damage
and disherison to him in the Reversion; That a Writ of Waste in such case may
lie.

Answ.

New Laws required.


Let this remain among other Articles, whereof new Law is required.

Writs of Possession, Devise of land.
in case where they are not ^evised, as of other Lands; and in case such Lands
be devised, there to be saved to the Tenants their Answers. Answ.


New Law.
Let this remain among other Articles, whereof new Law is required.

Tithes of Underwood, Prela^es Constitution, Custom, Prescription.
That the Archbishop of Canterbury and the other Prelates have of late made a
Constitution, to give Tithes of Underwood only sold, where heretofore no such
Tithes were paid. And further, that now the Churchmen, by force of the said
Constitution, do take and demand Tithes as well of Great wood as of Underwood
sold, Great wood.
contrary to that which has been used time out of mind. Wherefore as well of
one point as of the other they pray remedy.

Answ.

Tithes of Underwood.


The Archbishop of Canterbury and the other Bishops have answered, That such
Tithes are not demanded by force of the said Constitution, but only of
Underwood.

Aids ma^ntenance of Wars, Merchants, Confederacy.
to the intent the same should be wholly to his profit; diverse Merchants by
confederacy amongst themselv^s have colourably and covertly by way of Usury
bargained with the King, Usury, Deceit, Imposi^ions, Woolls, Rich and poor
M^rchants, Brocage debts bought at undervalues.
and have imposed upon these goods great sums, viz. upon every Sack of Wool
Twenty three shillings four pence de pardonne en le Bargain ou pluis sont tenus
de prendre a very value les biens le ^oy on dapestera lui lour deniers que touz
les auters poures de sa Come de les donor. Also in their payments they have
allowance of Bills gained by Brocages of Debts due by the King ou ils achatent
a liver ascune 12 d. ascune per 2 s. where there is more reason the King should
have that advantage then they. Also after their bargain, at their suit, there
has been stay and forbidding that no English Wool may pass over Sea, whereby
the King has lost his Subsidy and Custom too, Monopoly, Customs,
as much as they made chi^vesance; by reason of which stay the Commons could
not sell their Wools to pay their Fifteens and other charges. And further, some
of the Collectors and their Deputies in gathering the said Wools have used
great extorcion upon the people by false Weights. C^llectors, Ex^^rtion, False
Weights, Parliament, Examination of Grievances in Parliament, by persons
assigned by the Commons.
Wherefore they pray the particulars may be examined in Parliament in presence
of some persons to be assigned by the Commons; to the end that the goods of the
people taken for the Kings use may reasonably and wholly be turned to his
profit, Kings pr^fit.

Collusion.


so as the parties accused may not be excused against the King by fained and
colorable Answer, Answ.
as between Merchant and Merchant.

The King will appoint some of the Sages of his Council to hear and determine
the things contained in this Article: Council of the King to examine and
determine grievances.
And if any of the Commons can inform the King for his profit of any thing
contained in this Article, Commons information.
let him set it down in certain; Certainty, Justices to enquire of false money.
and the Justices appointed to enquire of false money, shall have power to
enquire of the Processes of such Ministers.

Kings Council, P^pes usurpation, Provisions, Church-liberties, Kings
disherison, Patrons, Strangers, Cardinals.
which heretofore were never seen, and are against the Liberties of the Church,
and to the disherison of the King and other Lords that are Patrons, and
blemishment of the Religious persons of England, when these promotions shall be
collated on strangers not fit, and perhaps are Cardinals.

The King will advise with his Council, Answ.

Council le Roy.


what in this case shall be best to be done.

Probate of Wills, Official, Extortion, Vexation, Delays.
they now make men come to places uncertain, and being come, they cannot have
the Probate of Wills: Sans fair raunceon meintenant ala quinte on party des
biens continues al testament.

The King will speak with the Archbishop and other Prelates, Answ.

Prelates.


that such wrong may be redressed.

Bastard eigne and mulier.
and the Bastard demands Land as Heir, Ne unque soit de son assent; And he
pleads that he is a Bastard: And upon a Writ to the Court Christian, he is
certified a mulier; that this Certificate turn none to prejudice, Certificate
of the Ordinary, Privie^,
but him that was party to the plea, upon which the Certificate was made, New
Certificate.
and his heirs, but if the Demandant and his heirs bring any other Writ against
any other Tenant, and of other Land, then he to be received to plead, that he
is a Bastard; and that he have a Writ to the Bishop, notwithstanding such
former Certificate.

Answ.

New Law.


Let this remain among other Articles whereof new Law is required.

cuilleurs des gentz, Murders, Robberies, Felonies, Pardons, Law contemned,
Malefactors encouraged.
robberies, manslaughters, and other Felonies are done and committed without
number, and so favored by pardons, and procuring deliverance, that the
mis-doers and maintainers have no care of fear of Law, That the King will
ordain such remedy by Statute, that such mis-doers and maintainers by no such
means as aforesaid, may be comforted and imboldned.

Answ.
Touching pardons hereafter to be granted, Pardons, Council le Roy Allowance.
the King will advise with his Council, so to do, That no such Charter shall be
granted, unless it be for the honor and profit of him and his people; and
touching pardons granted heretofore, he will advise with his Council of such
allowance as shall be thereof made.

Extortions.

Grievances, Collectors of Wools, Taxes, False weights, Fraud, Acquittance Roy.


Whereas diverse extortions and grievances are done to the people by the
Collectors of the Wools, and by the Taxors of other taxes and tillages, and
their Deputies, en seque perla piere de leine perienten ascune party 16 ou 18
l ou meins ousta le verroye poys, and si argent soit done per leine meins de
quatre so^tz per la piere ne voillent receiver ne acquitainces fair a null
ville meins que 6 ou 7c. and auters greevances de receipts des deniers and autre
chooses plus in autre manner que ne fust gentz. They therefore pray remedy. Answ.


Justices of Peace, False Moneys.
There shall be assigned gaurdeins de la pees, and to enquire for false money,
and of the matters contained in this Article, who shall do right therein.

That the Statute concerning Statute Merchants for payment of debts may be
kept, Statute Merchants, Execution, Subtily.
and execution thereupon done as has been used; so as Execution nor Process
upon such Statutes be not done by subtilty of any person in other sort. Answ.


Process usual,


Error, County Palatine, False record, Averment against a Record prayed,
Chester, Durham.
That where a man will sue to reverse a Judgment given before Justices in any
franchise Royal, as Chester, or Durham, and the Justices do record the pleas
pleaded before them, otherwise then they were pleaded, the party plaintiff may
be received to aver per pais the truth against the Record. Answ.


Old Law,
The Ancient Law before time used, in this case shall remain.

Purveyers, Victuals, Present payment.
That payment be made for Victuals taken up in diverse Counties by the Kings
Commissions to the use of him, and his children, and that hereafter no such
Commissions go forth without present payment, to them of whom victuals shall be
taken.

Answ.

Sheriffs payment.


The King is pleased that payment be made savez a luy ses droictrels prices; and
as touching purveyances already made, That the Sheriffs out of the Issues of
their Bailywick shall pay such of whom such victuals were taken. Sheriffs,
Payment,


Merchants robbed, Enemies, Safe conduct, Imposition by the King, Peers,
Prelates, by Merchants assent, Safe conduct to be made good by the undertakers,
by the Kings enemies of France; It was ordained by the King, Peers, and
Prelates, and by the assent of the said Merchants, That all that would pass
with Wools to the Staple, should pay twelve pence upon every Sack for safe
Conduct; and certain Merchants undertook for the same, and safely to conduct
the Merchants unto the Staple, and yet have not, nor will not perform that
Conduct, and yet took the said twelve pence on a Sack, whereby many Merchants
have lost their lives, Wools, and other Merchandise; That they which undertake
the Conduct^ may be made come into this present Parliament to make gree to the
Merchants, who by their default have lost their goods, Damages for default of
the safe guarders, Parliament.
and to answer to the King that which they took of the Merchants, as abovesaid.

Let persons and places be assigned for hearing plaints of all which will
complain of the said Merchants, Answ.
to the end right and reason may be fully done to the Plaintiffs.

Monstres le Come d' Engl. que les gentz. de Samense are assessed to all Taxes
and Tallages, Taxes, Ships taken, lost in the Kings service.
and yet their Ships are taken, and many of them lost in the Kings service^
Sanz null. regard as di^z gentz fair, so as by long continuance of such
grievances, la navye esta pote destructe per nui tour la terra, Destruction,
Navy destroyed,
that the King will ordain thereof remedy.

The King will be advised. Answ.


Judgment delayed for difficulty of Law, Speedy justice.
that the King will ordain, That judgment may be given without longer stay.

The Justices before whom such Pleas are hanging shall give judgment as soon as
well they may; Answ.

Justices, Difficulty, Parliament, Ordinance,


and if they cannot so do, then the tenor of such Record, and the process of
such Pleas shall come into the Parliament, and there shall be determined,
according to the Ordinance made in that behalf.

gageing of Wines, Gaging of Wines, Guyen.
in the Dutch of Guyen, taking for the Fee of gag^ing one penny sterling, Fee,
Extortion.
or the value thereof in other money; and they which ought to use the Office of
gaging these Wines, refuse to gage any Tunnel of Wine, and yet do wrong^ully
take the said Fee of a penny for every Tunnel, whereby the Tun does not bear
his right measure, so as Lords and others do lose of that which they ought to
have, D^ceit,
the fifth or sixth part of every Tun. That therefore the King and his Council
will give such commandment to the Governors of the said Duchy, King and his
Council.
that no Tunnel of what part soever it be, within Franchise or without, be
shipped over sea, before it be gaged by the Verge according to the standard of
England, and the defect marked in the head of the head of the Tunnel, upon pain
to forfeit the said Wine to the King; Forfeiture.
and also that the gager lose his Office, Office forfei^ed for negligence.
if he do not that which thereunto appertains.

Let the Office of gager be performed per de ceo, upon the pains ordained; and
that will work the effect through the whole business.

Murders, Robberies, Felonies. Pardons, Maintenance, Law contemned, Malefactors
emboldened.
Whereas diverse Murders, Emblers de gentz, Robberies, Manslaughters, Ravishment
of Women, Felonies, and other misdeeds are committed and maintained within the
Realm without number, and so favored by Charters of Pardon and procuring of
deliverance, that the misdoers and maintainers care not for the Law, nor stand
in fear, to the great destruction of the people; That remedy may be ordained by
Statute, that such misdoers and maintainers may not be comforted nor imboldened
by any the means aforesaid.

Answ.
Touching Pardons to be hereafter granted, Pardons, Council le Roy.
the King will advise with his Council so to do, that no such Charter shall
pass but to the honor and profit of him and his people: And for Charters before
this time granted, he will advise with his Council what allowance thereof shall
be made.

Aliens, Provision, Rome.
Whereas in the Parliament holden lau dis and septisme of the King, it was
ordained, That no Alien should by Provision from Rome, take any Benefice; and
thereupon the King by his Letters wrote to the Pope concerning that matter,
Letters to the Pope by the King, Lords and Commons, Seals, Proctors, Cardinals,
Delegates, Notaries, Proclamation, Forfeiture, Bulls, Imprisonment, Council.
and the assent of Parliament, and justified the same; les Grantz and Commons,
wrote also another Letter under the Seals des diiz Grantz, and of the Commons
of Cities and Boroughs; And certain appointed through England de Pendre, the
Proctors of Cardinals, other Aliens Subdelegates and their Notaries: And also
Cries and defense was made throughout England, that no person upon pain of
forfeiture should bring into the Realm Bulls, or Process concerning such
Provisoes; and if any should, that they should be taken and brought before the
Council to answer such their contempt; and afterward in the next Parliament it
was assented by the King and his said Commonalty, That if any person of any
condition whatsoever, Provisor, Procurator, Notary, Promoter, or other
whatsoever should pursue in the Court at Rome, Suit at Rome, or in Court
Christian, to reverse Judgments in the Kings Courts. Imprisonment perpetual,
Outlawry, Abjuration, Provisor.
or elsewhere in Court Christian, to reverse Judgment given in the Kings Courts,
that he should be taken by his body, and brought to answer it; and if he were
attaint, that he should forejure the Realm, or be committed to perpe^ual
prison: That if he could not be found, then to be by due Process outlawed,
which then was ordained by a Statute perpetually to endure, as by a Bill of
that Parliament appears. Yet nevertheless Cardinals and other Aliens have and
do daily accept Benefices within this Realm by provision by their Procurators,
Cardinals, Aliens.
being Englishmen, and do take as well Benefices merely appurtenant to the
Demesne of the King, and of other Lay-Patrons, as of Religious persons in
despite of the King. A des ditz Grantz and de tout le Commune. And thereupon
they and others do pursue and follow diverse Process in the Court of Rome and
other Courts Christian, Contempt, Court of Rome, Court Christian, Judgment in
the Kings Courts,
there to annull and reverse Judgments given in the Kings Court, to the
prejudice and disherison of the King and Commonalty, and contrary to the cries
and defense surditz. Whereupon the Commons pray the King to have regard of the
said Letters so sent to the Court of Rome, Commons.
and to the relief and maintenance of holy Church, and of Divine service here
in England, and of the damage, destauction, and disherison of the Church and
his Crown, Church, Crown.
and des Gentz and Comminaltie: And by the Sages, Justices, Justices.
Sergeants and others to ordain such punishment as well against Provisors,
Sergeants, Punishment.
Aliens, Aliens.
their Executors, Notaries, and others their Procurators, as against the
Impugnors of the Judgment aforesaid, as before has been: And that the same be
reduced into a Statute perpetually to endure, Statute perpetual, W^its of cause,
as often has been desired; And that such and so many Writs as should be
needful be thereupon granted of course; so as that which shall be herein
ordained by Parliament, be kept undisturbed for any singular profit.

It seems to the Council good to be done, Answ.

Council, Lords, Commons advice


if it please the King by assent de Grantz to command the Commons being then
before him in Parliament, to advise him what they think best to be done in this
case. Wherein the Commons did declare their advice to the King and Grantz by a
Bill in form following, viz.

De avisera sur sa lot les plusors Aliens, Aliens, Provisors, Pope.
il semble que bon est, que nostre Sieur le Roy maunde ses Lettres au seint
piere la Pape, monstrant and movant, que il doit voler and ordeiner tiels
ministres and beneficers en seint Egleise fair que poient levez profit fair
quant al amendment and salvation des alms des lour parocheines and subgitz
des queux ils out les cures, Instruction of the people, Residence, Relief of
the poor^
mais les provenders aliens ne connisent, n'entendant le putoys ne le lange
d'engleterre, ne la com. d'engleterre loure; pur quoy ils ne poient ne savant
valor, ne aider ne counceller les subgits per predications, confessions, ne
autre manner entendable, quiles defaults poient estre causes universeles de
perte and damnation des alms des Christians, and ausint er la ou benificers de
seints Eglises curetes doient de commune ley fair residence, and despender les
biens de seint Eglise enter lour pour parochiens les provisers aliens tout le
profit emportent saunz residency, amendemen^, ou profit fair a loure
benifices; queux mischiefs and deffauts suesdits, le dit seint piere que est
Sovereign governeur de seint Eglise en terre, Novelties, Incroachment,
Prer^gative. C^own.
aver and doit aver le regard, sil please nostre dit Sieur le Roy cestes
mischiefs and autres queux les Sages luy informerent au dit St. Piere maunder,
et monstrer per ses lettres, come avaunt ses heures ad fait, and effectualment
oue diligence pursuer per Sages que luy purrent enformer des novels
accrochments contra son droit Royal, and est assaye de amendment, and saunz
peril de alme ou conscience, and pleasance a la commune per protestation, King.
C^uncel.
sil semble a nostre dit treshonor seiur le Roy and son Council, que ore ne
soit derogatorie ne prejudicial a sa Royal dignite, ne a droit sa corone, and
autrement nemy. John Matravers shows, John Matravers 4 E. 3. n. 3. in
Parliament.
That in a Parliament holden whilst he was in the Kings service, by information
of his Adversaries in his absence, a Judgment passed against him not indicted
nor attainted, Judgment without Indictment.
nor called to answer: Attainder or calling to Answer, reversed for Error.
In which Judgment he alleges to be diverse Errors dangerous, Error in and by
Parliament.
a^ touts les gentz d'Engleterre, in time to come. Also that he by the Kings
commandment did show the Errors before his great Council at Westminster, Great
Council, Protection, King, Peers, Judges of Errors in Parliament,
which Erors of the said Judgment were pronounced, the Petitioner being
present by the Kings protection. Now he prays, That the Judgment that was so
given against him, may in full Parliament be viewed and examined before the
King, the Peers; and the Errors therein showed by the Council of the
petitioner, and that if the Judgment be erroneous, it may be reversed, and he
restored to the Law; Commons in Parliament, Restitution, Law of the Realm Oath,
Compurgators, Banishment,
and after the Judgment reversed, the Petitioner will be ready to answer all
men according to the Laws of the Realm; also he will acquit himself by his Oath
with one hundred Knights, That he was not guilty of that for which he was
banished; and if his Oath be not due, He will, that the Archbishop, Bishops,
and all the Priests of England do excommunicate him: Excommunication, Battle.
And yet if any man will say it against him, he will defend himself by his
body, against all men except the Kings blood, that it may please the King to
end the same matters.

Petition, Villenage, Trial against Law.
that where villianage is alleged against the Demandant or Plaintiff, the same
should be tried by the County, where the party alleging the exception does
lay the birth of the Defendant or Plaintiff to have been^ which Petition is
against the law and usage, to the great mischief of the Commons, Common Law.
as appears by the pleading at the Assizes, and other pleadings which are to
be pleaded and determined in the Counties where the demand is, Law or County,
or trespasses done, que duissent purtant estre trop delays a disheritance de
la dit come, and that which worse is; If the Petition should be granted every
man would allege this exception against his adversary, and would choose a
County at his pleasure, whereby any freeman might by such means be made
servile. For by such exception alleged by un grant de la terre against a mean
person, the same should be tried in a foreign County where his greatne^s is,
Foreign County,
and where the mean man nor his Ancestors never came; therefore the King will
have regard to these and other mischiefs if the Petition should proceed, Kings
duty, Law of the land,
and to the good laws, and customs of the land, and them to maintain without
regard to the Petition of any single person against the Law of the land.
Commons good, Private Petition,


Lionel the Kings son, and Elizabeth his wife do hold the County of Hulnester
in Ireland, Ireland, Descent of lands in Ireland to enemies prayed to be
prevented and remedied by the Parliament in England, Parceners, War.
in right and heritage of the said Elizabeth, and forasmuch as if the said
Elizabeth should dye without Issue, the said County is to descend unto diverse
Persons, whereof some are enemies to the King, which Parceners would enter into
the said heritage, and would move war against the King, as well in Ireland, as
elsewhere; that against this evil and danger, the King in this Parliament will
provide remedy by the advice of the Prelates, Counts, and Barons, and others of
his Council.

John Wettenham and Walter de Cheriton Merchants, desire, that whereas the
Commons have complained against them by diverse Bills in Parliament^ Commons
impeachment and complaint, Merchants, Extortions, Grievances.
Viz. that they have done diverse extortions, grievances, and prejudices to the
King and Commons. Forasmuch as they have employed their pains and diligence to
serve the King, Kings service, Council of the King, Purgation, Answer to
complaints.
and have therein suffered many mischiefs, that the King will command the said
Merchants to come before the Council to answer whatsoever shall be objected,
and to declare their estate; so as other Merchants hereafter may not doubt to
deal with the King in Cheevances, nor no other businesses, as occasion shall
require.

Kings game, Forest, Punishment.
when the same do escape out of the Forests, but only the Lords of the Woods,
and of the Soil where such game are found, and that some certain punishments be
ordered for them which shall do otherwise.

Peace, Justices of Peace, Lawyers, Commissions, Commons advise concerning the
Peace.
To which was answered, that in every County six persons, of whom two to be des
pluis grantz, and two Knights, and two men of Law, and so more or less, as
need shall be, and they to have power and Commission out of the Chancery, to
hear and determine the keeping of the Peace; Et que counts traylebastoneries ne
courgent, Traylebastons, Arbitrary Projects mischief.
as heretofore was assented by Parliament, for they were the destruction of the
people to small or no amendment of the Law or Peace, nor punishment of Felons
or Trespassers. Wherefore because the Commons have so long continued together
to their great costs and mischief, Commons long continuing together to their
great cost, desire dismission.
they desire answer of this Bill, and lour deliverance.

Anno Vicesimo secundo Edwardi Tertii. Rex, etc. Henrico Com. Lanc. etc. apud
Westminster. die Lunae post mediam Dominicam Quadragesimae. Test Rege apud
Westmonast. 14 die Februarii.
Consimiles Literae subscriptae,
WIllielmo Bohun, Comiti Northampton. Henrico Bohun Com. Hereff. and Essex.
Humfrido de Courtney, Com. Devon. Willielmo de Clinton Com. Huntington. Ricardo
Com. Arundel. Thomae de Bello campo, Com. War. Johanni de Vere Com. Oxoniae.
Gilberto de Humfravil Com. de Anegos. Roberto de Ufford Com. Suff. Laurentio de
Hastings Com. Pembroke. Johanni de Mowbray. Henrico Fitzhugh. Barthol. de
Burghurst seniori. Henrico Piercie. Rado. Baroni de Stafford. Ricardo Talbot de
Morley. Waltero de Mamcy. Thomae de Berkeley. Johanni de Seagrave. Thomae de
Lucie. Johanni Harrington. Petro de malo lacu le Quint. Rado. Bulmer. Reginaldo
de Cobham. Reginaldo de Gray. Rogero de Gray. Rogero de Chandos. Johanni de
Charleton. Johanni de Willoughby. Henrico Hussy. Willielmo la Zouch de
Harringworth. Johanni Bardolfe. Nicolao de Cantilupo. Johanni de Fauconbridge.
Thomae Wake de Ridall de Bradston. Thomae de Bugworth.
Anno Vicesimo secundo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster the
Monday next after the week in the midst of Lent. Anno 22. Edwardi Tertii.
Parliament ad^journed because sundry Lords not me.
and from thence Wednesday; at the which day Sir William de Thorpe the Lord
Chief Justice, in the presence of the King and Lords, Chief Justices.
by the Kings commandment declared, That the Parliament was called for Two
Causes. Causes of Parliament.


Callice, Truce, Pope,
the King had accordingly sent Messengers to the Pope, and looked for return of
Answer before the last Parliament, which now was not come; for that also, as
sundry points of the Truce touching the King, and his Allies were not
performed. And further, For that sundry of the French prepared a puissant Army
to invade this Realm. Frenchmens, Invasion,


Peace.
wherefore the whole Estates were willed to consult in what wise it might be
releived for the attaining of his attempt. The Lords and Commons took great
advice from day to day; Lords and Commons advice.
and in the end answered in effect following.

Commons oppressions, Aid reasonable, Array, Purveyance Guarding the Seas,
Subsidy, Impost without Law.
as the reasonable aid being pardoned in 14. E. 3. whereof every Fine was forty
shillings, the setting forth of men, the taking of victuals not paid for, for
the keeping of the Seas. The Subsidy of Wool amounting to Threescore thousand
pounds yearly, and yet without Law; the lending of twenty sacks of Wool,
Loans, Wools.

Quinesmes.


the restraint of passing over of Wool. Notwithstanding they Grant to the King
three Fifteens in three years, so as the Subsidy of Wool might cease, so as
David le Bruce, William Douglas, and other Chieftains in Scotland be not
delivered for ransom, Scots Ransom.
or faith; so as if the Wats do cease within three years, that then their Grant
might cease; so as all other their Petitions ensuing be granted, Petitions
gran^ed, Conditions, Enrolled.
and these their conditions enrolled and exemplified.

Petitions of the Commons with their Answer. Petitions.

Collectors of Woolls account:
and that all Acquittances to any such made be repealed.

This was answered it the last Parliament, Answ.
and therefore commandment to execute the same.

Maintenance, Nobles, Thief.
That commandment be given to the Nobles in no wise to maintain a common Robber
or Theif; that two Knights in every Shire-town, and two learned in the Law,
Lawyer, Justices, False money, Fees,
be appointed Justices to determine all offenses, and to enquire of false
money, they to have some Fee.

Answ.
The same was answered in the last Parliament.

Petitions answered.
That all Petitions in this present Parliament may be presently answered.

Answ.
After Easter the same shall be answered.

Wool, Loan, Impost, Customs.
and other Merchandises may freely pass without any Loans or other Subsides,
over the due Customs.

Answ.
The passage shall be free, saving to the King his due.

Eyres, Forest, Peace, Kings pleasure.
or other enquires, other then of peace be kept during the Wars.

The King is to do his pleasure therein.

Answ:
That none of the Nobles, nor other Captains of Scotland, being the Kings
prisoners be in any wise delivered. Scots prisoners.


Answ.
The King will do more if need shall be.

Trent, Aids, Scottish Wars.
may be employed on the Wars in Scotland.

Answ.
That no Appeals be received of any Felonies done in any other Counties then
where the Appeals were taken. Appeal, Felony, New Law.


The King is not advised to make such new Laws.

Answ.
That redress may be had for that the men of Bridges in Flunders have forbid all
Merchants strangers to buy any staple Ware here. Bridges, Staple, Flemish
Ambass^dor.


The King will talk with the Flemish Ambassador, and further to the good of the
towns there.

Answ.
That all enquires of Nineths granted may cease. Inquiries, Aids granted.




That the Order made that all Merchants for every Sack of Wool should bring in
two marks of Bullion, Answ.
Wool, Bullion, Repeal.
may be repealed, for that carrying Flanders.

The King will learn the truth of the Ambassador here.

Answ.
It is agreed that the Customers at Easter next stay the receipt of two
shillings of every Sack of Wool. Custom, Woolls.


Accomptant, Issues, Process.


Answ.
The Process shall be first a Venire fac. then a Distringas, and after a Writ out
of the Chancery to the Treasurer and Barons.

Common Law, Navy.
That the Common Law may stand to the Bill of the Navy exhibited in the last
Parliament. Answ.




Answ.
The like motion for three years, as before tit. 9.

Subjects ease.




It seems good for the ease of the Subjects if great necessity do not
otherwise cause.

Marshal, Bail, Peace.
That the Marshal letting to Bail, or at large any person committed to him for
the peace do answer damages. Answ.




Non claim,
That no man be barred by non claim.

Answ.
A Law cannot so suddenly be made.

Jurors, Verdict, Assize, Law Kept.
and great assize may say the verity of the fact as in assize of Novel
Disseisin.

The Law shall be kept as heretofore. Answ.


Purveyors.
do take by Indenture.

The Laws heretofore made do suffice. Answ.


Parliament members.

Assessor, Receiver, Kings Prerogative.




The King wlll appoint such men as he shall like.

Answ.
Error, Exchequer.


This was answered in the last Parliament. Answ.


Forresters, Purlieus, Extortions, Great Charter, Perambulation.
and for extortions. A request that the great Charter may be kept, and that all
men may enjoy the purlieus according to the perambulation made in the time of
King Edward the first.

The King would the Charter to be kept, and such as will complain in the right
of their purlieus may have Writs out of the Chancery. Answ.

Writs, Chancery.




Surry, and other Countries showed, that they could not upon suit have such
Writs. Writs.


Writs, Right.
so as right be had to the King, to the Subjects.

Petitions, Kings and Lords answer to them, Bill, Statutes.
whereunto the King and Lords had agreed, may be kept, and not altered by any
new colored Bill or practice.

The King by the assent of the Lords made answer then, that Laws and process
heretofore used could not be altered, Answ.

Law altered.


without making of new Statutes, New Statutes.
which as yet they could not attend but shortly would.

On the Backside of the same Roll.
Norwich, Norwice, Worsted Weavers Alnage, Revocation.
and the Merchants of the same pray, that such Letters Pattents as the King had
granted to Robert Poley one of his Valects of assay, and one of the Alnage of
Worsted in Norwich, and elsewhere in Norfolk, during the life of the said
Robert, might be revoked, and that they might have the same; whereto was
answered as follows,

Common profit.


Anno Vicesimo quinto Edwardi Tertii. Rex etc. dilecto and fideli suo Henrico
Com. Lanc. salutem, Writs of Summons.
etc. apud Westmonasterium, in Octabis Purificationis beatae Mariae Virginis.
Test Rege apud Westmonast. 25 die Novembris. 24. E. 3.
Consimiles Literae sabscriptae,
EDwardo Principi Walliae, Duci Cornubiae, and Com. Cestriae. Willielmo de
Bohun, Com. Northumberland. Hugoni de Bohun, Com. Hereff. and Essex. Hugoni de
Courtney Com. Devon. Williel. Clinton Com. Huntington Ricardo Com. Arundel.
Thomae de bello Campo Com. Oxoniae. Gilberto Humfravil Com. de Anegos. Roberto
de Ufford Com. Suff. Willielmo de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Johanni de Mowbray.
Henrico de Piercie. Willielmo de Roos de Hamalack. Rado de Nevill. Rado Baroni
de Stafford. Ricardo Talbot. Roberto Morley. Waltero de Manny. Johanni de
Seagrave. Thomae de Berkly. Thomae de Lucie. Petro de malo lacu le Quint.
Reginaldo de Cobham. Henrico Fitzhugh. Reginaldo de Gray seniori. Rogero de
Gray. Johanni Willoughbie de Ersby. Rogero Chandos. Johanni de Cherlton.
Walter. la Zouch de Harringworth Johanni Bardolf. Willielmo D^ynecourt. Johanni
Tibitot. Johanni Fitzwalter. ^^l^ero de ^aw^onbridge. Willielmo Baroni de
Greystock. Willielmo de Dacre. Thomae de Musgrave. Thomae de Furnival. Thomae
Bradeston. Roberto Fitzpain. Johanni de Gray de Rotherfield. Johanni de
Codenore. Johanni Darcy de Knayth. Johanni de Insula de Ruber monte Rogero de
Mortuo mari de Wigmore. Roberto de Colvill. Berthol. de Burgherst seniori.
Guidoni de Bian. Johanni de Bello campo de War. Ricardo Lovel. Nicholao
Burnell. Edwardo de Monteacuto. Thomae Ughtred. Rober^o de Scales. Hen^ico le
Scro^pe. Joha^ni de Cobham. Micha^li de Poyntz.
Bartholm. de Burcheir Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Vicesimo quinto Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster the
Monday in the Utaves of the Purification of our Lady in the xxv. year of Edward
the Third.
Thursday, Parliament adjourned for the absence of sundry Lords.
and from Thursday to Friday then ensuing, at which day Sir Lionel the Kings
son with sundry Nobles did assemble in the Chamber de Pint, Pain^ed Chamber
Parliament holden by Commission.
where the Kings Commission was read, the which authorized the said Lionel in
his absence to begin, and proceed therein until the Kings coming.

Commission read.
to be, for that the King in passing toward the parts beyond the Seas, Kings
absence.
could not be there, the which was openly read before the Commons. Commons.


Lords absence,


Receivers of Petitions for England, Petitious.
Gascoyne, Scotland, Ireland, Britain, and other foreign Isles and places.

viz.) First, Causes of Parliament, Parliament,
for that the King had summoned a Parliament in the 22, etc. the which he could
not end by reason of the great pestilence, nor keep any since by the
continuance of the same plague, Plague.
and by Affairs touching War, War, Peace, Laborers, Treasure.
and for that the peace was not kept, and that Laborers would not do their
service, and for that the Treasure of the Realm was also conveyed away, was the
Parliament called, of all which points the whole State were willed to consult.
Consultation.


William Shareshall Knight, the Chief Justice to the King, Chief Justice,
Commons.
willed the Commons to weigh, and well to provide therefore.

This last, and next title above does approve, that the printed Statute
entitled to be made in 23 Edw. 3. could in no wise then be made, and so
mistaken.

Tryers of Petitions for England, Petitions,
Wales, Ireland, Gascoyne, Britain, and other forain Isles and places.

Winchester, then Chancellor, Chancellor, Clerk of Parliament, Parliament Roll.
to John of Codington Clerk of the Parliament, in the Kings behalf, to be
entered into the Roll of the same Parliament.

Richard E. of Arundel by his petition prays, Earl of Arundel, Restitution.
that his restitution granted in 4 E. 3. may be by this Parliament better
declared and confirmed.

The King wills that this petition may be by the wise men examined, Answ.
and a restitution accordingly to be made, Restitution,
and confirmed.

E. 3. tit. 13. touching this Earl is recited, and this thereunto adjoined,
viz. that it is by the King and whole State agreed, that the said restitution
be confirmed, and that the same shall be of such force and effect, that John
now Earl of Kent, Earl of Kent,
nor his Heirs, shall not challenge, nor have against the said Richard E. of
Arundel in any Court of England, Earl of Arundel,
or in Wales, by Writ, or otherwise by any petition in Parliament, any of the
possessions of the said John or Edmond his Father, or Edmond his eldest Brother
ever had to the said Castle of Arundel, Arundel Castle.
or of any part, etc. So as the said Richard by this restitution shall have the
like estate as he should have had by descent of inheritance as well to all
other hereditaments whereof the said Edmond Earl of Arundel his Father died
seized in England, or in Wales, as of the said Castle.

Will. Thorp by his late Chief Justice, Sir William Thorp, Parliam^nt.

Peers Judges,


and caused the same openly to be read before the Nobles of the Parliament, to
hear every of their advises: all whom affirmed the Judgment to be rightly
given, considering that he had against his Oath received Bribes, Oath, Bribes.
and therefore it was agreed by the whole Parliament, that if the like case
should hereafter happen, the King might take to him such Nobles as he should
best think, Kings and Nobles
and therein do according to his pleasure.

Petitions of the Commons with their Answer.
Great Charter, Statutes, Purveyance released.
and other Statutes be observed, and the King in consideration of the great
dearth of Corn, releaseth the half of his provision appointed to be taken up by
the Purveyors.

That remedy may be had against Laborers. Laborers.


Answ.


Popes, Brocage, First Fruits.
by which Broakage and means the Pope receives the first fruits of all
Ecclesiastical dignities, a more destruction to the Realm, then all the wars.

Answ.
The Answer does appear in a Statute hereafter made therefore.

Rome pursue to undo any Judgment given in the Kings Court, Rome, Judgment
reversed.
as if he enforced to undo the Laws of the Realm. Laws of the Realm.


There is a sufficient remedy provided by Law.

Answ.
That the Statute made for the peace may be kept. Peace.




Magna Charta, Freehold, Legal Process.
or of any thing that touches life, Answ.
member, or fine by opposite before the Council, but by due process of Law.

Touching Freehold the King agrees, and of the rest will be advised.

Answ.
Merchants. Necessity, Money.


The King will be advised.

Answ.
Fines, Laborers. Poor.


The surplusage thereof shall be employed, as hereafter may appear.

Steward, Marshal, Process.
and Marshal and their Deputies do make no other Process then was used in the
time of King Edward the Second, Answ.
and limited by the Statute therefore provided.

The King would the Statute to be kept, Answ.
and the Complaint to be heard.

Purveyance.


The Statute shall be observed. Answ.


Merchants, Convoys.


The King will be advised. Answ


Tonnage and Poundage. Tonnage and Poundage.


That the Subsidy of Wool, Subsidy, Wools.
viz. of every Sack may cease.

The same was granted to the King for a time yet enduring. Answ.


Sheriffs, Coroners, Escheators.
Escheators, and Coroners may have sufficient in their Counties.

The Statutes made shall be kept.

That remedy may be had against Sheriffs, Answ.
Sheriffs, Kings Debts.
not paying the Kings duties.



That every Judgment in the Common Pleas may pass under the Seal of the Chief
Justice as in cases of Eyer, Answ.
Common Pleas, Great Seal.




so as the charges of the Great Seal may cease.

The motion seems unreasonable.

That no pardon be granted to any Murderer, Answ.
Pardon, Murder, Felony, Kings oath.
or Felon, but where the King may save his oath.



That the Statute of Edw. 3. tit, 20. may be observed.

The Answer is in an Act made hereafter therefore. Answ.

Westminster made against the destruction of Salmons may be kept, Answ.
Salmons, Mills.
and that all Mills set on Rivers be

Fines, Chancery.


Answ:


That no Purveyor of Timber do take away trees about any man's house, Purveyor,
Timber

Answ.


and that exceptions thereof be in all their Commissions.



That no Writ de Excommunicato capiendo before a Scire facias be directed to
cause the party to answer. Excommunicato capiendo.

Answ.






That the party may answer to the cause after Letters of Excommunication.
Excommunication.


Answ.


That the Merchants may be paid their Loans in every Sack of Wool. Merchants,
Loans,

Answ.




Walter of Chirton the Kings Farmer of his Customs has not yet accounted.
Customs, Account.


Oyer and Terminer shall cease, Justices of Oyer, Fines
and take the Fines of the parties in their presence, and by their own accord.

No pardon shall be granted to bringers in of false money. Pardon, False money.


Oppressors of Ordinaries,
and their Officers.

Answ.
The Laws of the Land and of the Church shall be observed.

Imposts, Customs, Woolfells.
A complaint for taking of forty six shillings eight pence Custom for every
three hundred Wool Fells where the old Custom was three shillings four pence
for every hundred.

Answ.
The old Custom recieved ought not to be withdrawn.

Standard, Measures.


If there be not, there shall be.

Answ.
That no Statute be altered for any private cause. Statutes altered.




A motion touching the Alnage, Alnage.
and measure of Cloth, answered by a special Statute made thereof in this year.
Answ.


cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Aliens.
The Print touching the measure and content of Woollen Clothes Cap. 1. agrees
with the Record. Measure.


Merchant strangers.
Cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

Forestalling.
Cap. 3. agrees with the Record.

Mills.
Cap. 4. agrees with the Record,

Statutes.
It is to be noted, that the next four Statutes above in the print were noted to
be made at the Utaves of St. Hillary in the 25. where the same was nothing so,
as may appear.

Provisions.
Along Statute, called the Statute of Provisions, being an Act against the Popes
tyrannous oppressions, and detestable enormities, agrees with the print, Cap,
1, and 2.

Laborers.
The print touching Laborers, Cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

On the Backside of the Roll.
Proclamation, Armor.
forbidding the wearing of Armor, and Plays or Games, in or about Westminster
according to the 20. Edw. 3. tit. 1.

Proclamation, Cloth.


Anno Vicesimo quinto Edwardi Tertii. Rex etc. Edwardo Principi Walliae Duci
Cornubiae, Writs of Summons.
and Com. Cestriae, apud Westmonasterium, die Veneris in Fest. Sancti Hillarii.
Test Rege apud Westminster 19. die Novembris.
HEnrico Duci Lanc. Johanni Com. Kanc. Willielmo de Bohun Com. Hereff. and
Essex. Hugoni de Courtney Com. Devon. Willielmo de Clinton Com. Huntington.
Ricardo Com. Arundel. Thomae de Bello Campo Com. Warwick. Johanni de Vere Com.
Oxoniae Gilberto de Humfravil Com. Anegos Roberto de Ufford Com. Suff.
Willielmo de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Johanni de Mowbray Henrico de Piercie.
Willielmo de Roos de Hamalake. Rado de Nevill. Ricardo Talbot. Roberto Morley.
Waltero de Manney. Johanni de Segrave. Willielmo de Huntingfield Thomae de
Berkley Thomae de Lucie. Petro de Malo lacu le Quint Reginaldo de Cobham.
Henrico Fitzhugh. Reginaldo de Gray Seniori. Rogero de Gray. Johanni de
Willoughbie. Rogero de Candos. Johanni de Charleton. Williel. la Zouch de
Harringworth^ Johanni Bardoff Juniori. Johanni Bardolf. Willielmo Deynecourt.
Nich. de Cantilupo. Johanni Talbott. Johanni Fitzwalter. Waltero de
Falconbridge. Willielmo Baroni de Greystock. Willielmo de Dacre. Thomae de
Musgrave. Thomae de Furnivall. Thomae de Bradeston. Roberto Fitzpayne. Johanni
de Gray de Rotherfeild. Johanni de Gray de Codnore. Johanni Darcy de Gnayth.
Johanni de Insula de Rubeo monte. Ric. de Mortuo mari de Wigmore. Roberto de
Colvill. Barthol. de Burgherst Seniori. Guidoni de Bryan. Richardo de Sancto
Mauro. Jacobo de Andelia. Nicho. Burnell. Edwardo de Monteacuto. Thomae
Ughtred. Roberto de Scales. Henrico de Scroop. Johanni de Cobham. Michaeli de
Poyntz. Johan. de Bello Campo. de Summers. Johanni Matravers.
Consimiles Litterae dirigantur Bartholomeo de Burgherst Constabulario Castri
Dover, and custodi quinque Portuum and ad mittend. Baron. pro Portubus dicto
Parliamento.

Anno Vicesimo quinto Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster the
Friday the Feast of Saint Hillary in the 25. year of Edward the Third.
Parliament misdated.
THis Parliament should seem to be before the last, considering that King Edward
the third begun to Reign the second day of January, and the Feast of Saint
Hillary was next, and before the Utaves of the purification of our Lady, at
which time the Parliament next before was holden, which cannot be but the last
Parliament was truly placed, and this as much displaced.

That the last Parliament was truly placed, it appeared by the same Parliament,
tit. 4. and the note following. Besides all this, the title following requires
that the fines of the Statutes of Laborers made at the last Parliament, etc.
which Statute was made in very deed at the last Parliament, and not in this.
Further to sundry persons, viz. tit. 21, 30, 43, 44, and 46. answer was made
there were answers in the last Parliament, and so there were.

Now to the Parliament, it seems that this Parliament could not be holden at
this time, and that for two causes. First, for that Hillary was before the
Purification, and so this Parliament could not be holden.

Another is in the 54, 55, and 56. following, the pardon of Sir John Montravers
is confirmed, which showed in full Parliament bears dare the 8 of February,
^6 Edward the Third, so it seems this Parliament was holden rather in 27 E. 3.

Parliament adjourned because sundry Lords not come.
On Friday the King being accompanied with sundry Lords assembled in the Chamber
de ^int, where Sir William Shareshall, the Kings Chief Justice made
Declaration, that the King adjourned the Parliament till the Monday ensuing,
for that sundry of the Lords were not come.

England, Ireland, Wales, Gascoyne, Scotland, and other forain Isles, and
places.



Clerk of the Parliament, Proclamation against Arms and Games,
Sir John of Codington Clerk of the Parliament is commanded to cause
Proclamation to be made against wearing of Armor, and unlawful Games in the
last Parliament, tit. 58.

William Shareshall Chief Justice, Chief Justice, Cause of the Parliament.
in the presence of the Kings, Lords and Commons declared the cause of the
Parliament, viz.

P^ace, Kings Title to France.
another for the Kings title to France, by the death of Charles the Kings Uncle,
after whose death Philip de Valois, Son of the Uncle of the said Charles had
usurped the same Kingdom; how the King for recovery of the same had by the
assent of the Parliament reared War, War.
and taken sundry Truces with Philip, Truce broken.
all which were broken; and how John the Son of the said Philip had broken the
Truce in Britane and Gascoyne, Parliaments advice required.
of all which matter the King wills the whole State to deliberate, and to
give answer.

William willed the Commons for shortning of time, Commons, Committee,
Conference with the Lords.
to commit the same to some certain number of themselves for speedy
conferences, and growing to an end with the Lords.

Bartholmew Burgherst the Kings Chamberlain, in the presence of the King,
Lords, and Commons declares the untruth of the French by particular breaking
of the Truce; The French breach of Truce.
after which the same Sir William wills the Commons to bring in their
Petitions. Commons petitions.


Petitions of the Commons with their Answer.
Quindismes.
cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Justices of Peace.


Answ.


Purveyors, Variance.
Cap. 1. by implication agrees with the Record, and not otherwise.

Sheriffs.


Answ.


Loans.
and none hereafter made.

The King grants. Answ.


Indictors, Inquest.


Imprisonment, Suggestion.
nor presentment, cap. 4. agrees with the Record:

Executors,
cap. 5. agrees with the Record.

Purveyors, Timber.
according to the last Parliament, tit. 30. to fell no man's trees growing about
his house, cap. 6. agrees with the Record.

Forestallers.
cap. 7. agrees with the Record.

Arms, Soldiers.
cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

cap. 9. agrees with the Record.

North Marches, Defense of the North Marches.
if he shall depart the Realm.

The King so means. Answ.


Measures.
cap. 10. agrees with the Record.

Commons House Collectors.
be any Collector of the aid granted.

Answ.
The demand is not reasonable.

Reasonable aid, Va^iance.
cap. 11. by implication, agrees with the Record, and not otherwise.

Purveyors.


The same shall be with opportunity.

Answ:
It is Enacted, that the Act made in the last Parliament, cap. 45. shall take
effect as well on the river of Thames, Thames,
or elsewhere.

Lumbards, Merchant strangers.
The print touching the banquerouting of Lumbards, and other Merchant strangers,
cap. 13. agrees with the Record.

Money embased.
cap. 13. agrees with the Record.

Process, Felony.
cap. 13. agrees with the Record.

Marshalsey.
That none of the Kings servants do implead any man in the Marshalsey.

Answ.
The King will not the same request.

Heirs, Assets.
That no Heir do answer to the King other then a common person, viz. he having
Assets, or value to descend in Fee.

Answ.
The King thinks the same nothing reasonable^

Mercants, Weights.
That no Merchant be impeached of overplus of weight after that the Kings
Officer sworn have weighed the same.

Answ.
The Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer shall weigh every man's complaint.

Tyth-wood.
That the Clergy do demand no tithe of great wood.

Answ.
The King will be advised.

Exchange of gold and silver.
cap. 12. agrees with the Record.

Sheriffs accounts.
which hold by liberty granted.

Answ.
The Treasurer and Barons shall allow what reason is.

Fines for Writs, Chancery.
That no Fine be paid for Writs out of the Chancery.

The Chancellor shall therein respect the state of the person.

Answ.
The print for taking of sheep, Sheep.
cap. 15. agrees with the Record.

non-tenure of Parcel not to abate the whole Writ, Non tenure.
cap. 16. agrees with the Record.

Provisors.


Answ.
The King will have the same newly read and amended where need shall be, and do
thereafter.

Alnager.
It is Enacted that the Alnager shall not intermeddle with whole woollen
Clothes, according to the Statute of the last Parliament.

Outlary.
The print that process of Outlary shall lie in debt, detinue and reple^ agrees
with the Record.

Loans.
The like motion as in the last Parliament tit. 33. the answer was the same, and
was then reasonably answered.

Sheriffs, Feefarms.
That the Sheriffs of Buckingham and Bedford may be discharged of all Fines of
such Fee-farms as they cannot levy.

Answ.
The Treasurer and Barons shall consider of the same.

Villenage.
The print touching exception of Villenage, cap. 18. agrees with the Record.

Protections.
cap. 18. agrees with the Record.

Plate, Mint,
cap. 20. agrees with the Record.

That all men do contribute to the Desmes, Desmes and Quinne^^e.




and Fifteens, notwithstanding any Charter to the contrary, also that all Lords
as well as the mean do the same.

All men shall enjoy their Charters. Answ.


Prisage, Wines.
cap. 12. agrees with the Record.

Rome, Provisor^.
cap. 22. agrees with the Record.

John Montrevers Knight, Sir John Montravers Pardon.
by his Petition requires the confirmation of the Kings pardon to him granted.

Purgation.
and for his faithful service done in Flanders.

Pardon confirmed in Parliament.


Petitions of the Clergy with their Answers.
Clergy.
containing in the whole nine Chapters, agrees with the Record.

tit. and under the fourth Chapter in print make complaint, for that one
Haukenstine Henby a Knight, being a Clerk, had Judgment given against him at
Lincoln to be hanged, drawn and quartered, for that he had taken and kept in
prison one of the Kings Subjects until he had made fine of ^0 l. Treason,
Imprisonment, Duress, Fines.


For a Judgment given against a Priest at Nottingham, Priest, Murder, Monks
hanged.
for killing of his Master Sir Thomas of Cibethorp, a Clerk of the Chancery, a
Justice of the King; And further for hanging certain Monks at Comb.

Circumspecte agatis be kept in all points. Circumspecte agatis.


The Ordinance shall be seen, Answ.

Ordinance,


and in what points the same is not kept, reason shall be showed.

Canterbury, Ordinary, Presentment, Admission, Inhibition, Archbishop,
until the same be undone by a dismission.

In such cases a Writ in the nature of a Dismission shall be sent out of the
Chancery to the Archbishop.

Court Christian. Answ.
Purveyors.

Church.




The King has granted, that who will sue therefore may have a Writ in the
Chancery. Answ.


The Roll of Ordinances, taken at Westminster in the Great Council Matthew the
Apostle in the 27. of Edward the Third. Ordinances, Great Council.

Westminster Hall, Proclamation, Adjournment,
that all Estates warned thereto might take their ease from Wednesday until
Friday then ensuing.

William Shareshal, the Kings Chief Justice showed that the Assembly was
called, Chief Justice, Causes of Parliament.
for that the Staple should be removed from beyond the Seas, Staple.
and appointed in the Realm.

Statute of the Staple, Staple.
containing in the whole 28. Chapters, agrees with the Record.

October, Sir Bartholmew Burgherst the Kings Chamberla^n, Chamberlain, Wars
with France, Pope.
in the presence of the King, Lords, and Commons, shows how the King had
attempted, and pursued War against the French, without charging of the Commons.
And to end the same, he had made great means to the Pope, the which, for that
the same could not be ended, he requires the Commons to grant him the Subsidy
of Wool, Subsidy required and granted by the Commons. Woolls.
who thereupon by whole assent granted the same to him for three years.


Provisors.
The print against Provisors that sue to the Court of Rome, cap. 1. agrees with
the Record.

Alnag.
That the King will revoke the Office of the Alnage, and take three pence of
every cloth.

Answ.
Let the Commons talk with the Chancellor and Treasurer, to the end good
recompense may be made for the said Alnage.

Subsidies, Wars
That the Subsides and other aids granted may be employed only in the Wars.

Answ.
It pleases the King.

Justices of Peace. Victuallers.
The print that Justices of peace should enquire of Victuallers, cap. 3. agrees
with the Record.

Money, Sterling.


Answ.
It was answered in the last Parliament.

Worcester, Staple, Canterbury.
Nottingham, Hull, St. Buttolphs, Stamford, Lyn, Ipswich, and Canterbury.

Answ.
At Canterbury, only one to be in the honor of St. Thomas.

Wines, Variance from the Record.
Note the Statute of Wines, in the print Book cap. 5, 6, 7, and 8. are not in
the Roll, neither in the printed Calender for the lines of holding the
Parliament.

Woolls.
That the Lords and Commons may by Easter following, appoint out three sort of
Woolls which then shall begin.

Answ.
The King will be advised.

Fines outrageous, Commissioner.
That the outrageous Fines taken by Sir John Molins, and such other
Commissioners, may be remedied.

Answ.
Upon complaint redress shall be had.

Pardons,
The print that all suggestions shall be put into Pardons, cap. 2. agrees with
the Record.

Staple.
It is enacted, that all the Articles of the Staple shall be proclaimed
throughout the Realm, and confirmed at the next Parliament.

Anno Vicesimo septimo Edwardi Tertii. Rex Edwardo Principi Walliae, Writs of
Summons.
etc. apud Westmonasterium die Lunae post Festum Sancti Matthaei, etc.
Colloquium habere, etc. Test Rege apud Westmonast. 15 die July, An. 27. E. 3.
HEnrico Duci Lancastriae. Willielmo de Bohun, Comiti Northampton. Humfrido de
Bohun Com. Hereff. and Essex. Hugoni de Courtney, Com. Devon Willielmo de
Clinton Com. Huntington. Ricardo Com. Arundel. Thomae de Bello campo, Com.
War. Johanni de Vere Com. Oxoniae. Gilberto de Humfravil Com. de Anegos.
Roberto de Ufford Com. Suff. Willielmo de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Rado. Com.
Stafford. Johanni de Mowbray. Henrico de Piercie. Rado de Nevil. Ricardo de
Talbot. Roberto de Morley. Waltero de Mamcy. Willielmo de Huntingfield. Thomae
de Berkeley. Thomae de Lucie. Petro de Malo lacu le Quint. Reginaldo de Cobham.
Reginaldo de Gray. Johanni de Willoughby de Eresbie. Rogero de Chandos. Johanni
de Charlton. Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth. Johanni Bardolfe. Willielmo
Deynecourt. Johanni Tibetott. Johanni Fitzwater, Waltero Fawconbridge.
Willielmo Baroni de Graystock. Willielmo de Dacre. Thomae Musgrave. Thomae de
Bradeston. Johanni de Gray de Rotherfield. Johanni Gray de Codonere. Johanni
Darcy de Knayth. Rogero de Mare mortuo de Wigmore. Roberto de Colvel. Barthol.
de Burghurst seniori. Guidoni de Brian. Nicolao de Sancto Mauro. Galfrido de
Say. Michaeli de Pointz. Johanni de Bello Campo Com. Somerset. Jacobo de
Audley. Edwardo de Monteacuto. Thomae de Brewes. Thomae de Holland: Thomae de
Ughtred. Henrico de Scroop. Johanni de Cobham.
Anno Vicesimo octavo Edwardi Tertii. Rex etc. Edwardo Principi Walliae Duci
Cornubiae, and Com. Cestriae, etc: apud Westmonasterium, die Lunae post Festum
Sancti Martini, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. 15. die Martii.
Consimiles Literae Subscript.
HEnrico Duci Lanc. Humfrido de Bohun Com. Hereff. and Essex. Willielmo de
Bohun Com. Northampton. Roberto de Ufford Com. Suff. Thomae de Bello Campo Com.
Warwick. Willielmo de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Ricardo Com. Arundel. Rado Com.
Stafford. Humfrey de Courtney Com. Devon. Willielmo de Clinton Com. Huntington.
Johanni de Vere Com. Oxoniae Gilberto de Humfravil Com. de Anegos Johanni de
Mowbray Henrico de Piercie. Thomae de Holland. Rado de Nevill. Rogero de Mortuo
mari. Waltero de Manney. Barthol. de Burgherst Seniori. Willielmo de Ferraris.
Johanni de Insula de Rubeo Monte Ricardo Talbot. Johanni de Gray de Codenore.
Roberto de Morley. Willielmo de Huntingfield Thomae de Berkley Thomae de Lucie.
Petro de Malo lacu. Reginaldo de Cobham. Reginaldo de Gray Seniori. Johanni de
Willoughbie de Eresby. Rogero de Candos. Johanni de Charleton. Williel. la
Zouch de Harringworthi Johanni Bardolf. Willielmo Deynecourt. Nich. de
Cantilupo. Johanni Tibitott. Johanni Fitzwalter. Waltero de Falconbridge.
Willielmo Baroni de Graystock. Willielmo de Dacre. Johanni de Musgrave. Johanni
de Furnivall. Thomae de ^radeston. Johanni de Gray de Rotherfeild. Johanni
Darcy de Knayth. Roberto de Colvill. Guidoni de ^ryan. Richardo de Sancto
Mauro. Nicho. Burnell. Edwardo de Monteacuto. Thomae Ughtred. Roberto de
Scales. Henrico de Scroop. Johanni de Cobham. Michaeli de Poyntz. Johanni de
Bello Campo. Com. de Somer. Johanni de Bello Campo. de War. Barthol. de
Burgherst, Custodi Quinque Portuum.
Anno Vicesimo octavo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster the
Monday after Saint Mark the Evangelist in the 28. year of Edward the Third.
William Shareshal Chief Justice to the King in the Chamber de Pinct made open
Proclamation before the King, Chief Justices, Causes of Parliament.
Lords and Commons, that the Parliament was called for three causes, First, for
the establishing of the Staple within the Realm, Staple, Ordinances.
and confirmation of the Ordinances made at the last great Council.

Peace with France.
for that by War he saw his Subjects greatly wasted. Wars mischief.


Petitions, Enormities redressed.
and redress of enormities, all which without Parliament could not be ended.
Parliament.


Receivers of Petitions for England.

Gascoyne, Petitions,
Ireland, Wales, and other forain Isles and places.

Gascoyn, etc. as above.

England, as above.

Roger of Wigmore, Cousin and Heir of Roger of Mortimer late Earl of March,
requires by his petition the attainture of the said Earl, made in the 4 Edw.
3. tit 1. may be examined, and for manifest errors be reversed, Erroneous
Judgment in Parliament reversed.




whereupon the Record was brought before Edward Prince of Wales, Lords and
Commons. The Commons have voice in reversing a Judgment given by the Lords
(that is when by Bill, as here)


All the Articles, Articles of impeachment.
circumstances and Judgments of the same Earl, had in the 4. E. 3. tit. 1. and
which there cannot be read, are contained at large.

Counselors condemned for good advise through malice and power
wherefore he deserved commendations for others altogether untrue surmises, as
the half blind may see, and for other some being true, yet of no moment, may
teach Counselors to see themselves, and thereby know that their well-doing not
being well taken does purchase death, where the Princes wrath supplieth equity.

The Lords and Judges of the Parliament, Lords Judges in Parliament, P^ers.




by the authority of the King for the objections laid against the said Earl,
adjudged him to be drawn, and hanged, which was there done with post speed.

Judgment against Magna Charta, c. 2, revoked.
for errors in all points of the same, viz. for as much as the said Earl was
put to death without any accusation, or being brought to Judgment or Answer.

Roger restored to the blood, Restitution^
and to all the Hereditaments of the said Earl.

The Judgment of the Lords made in 4 E. 3. tit. 1. was so strange as they
having Conscientias mill testes, knew themselves so gauled thereby, as in
sundry Parliaments after they sought by all means to have an Act, that no Peer
should be put to death but by open answer by his Peers in full Parliament,
P^ers judged by Peers.

Open Answer.


but long they labored in vain, but at last they obtained, as before it does
appear.

Earl of Arundel, Attainder, Restitution.
Richard Earl of Arundel by petition shows, How at the Parliament holden at
Candlemas in the 1 E. 3. nothing was done touching the attainder of Edmond the
Earl of Arundel his Father, albeit he was thereupon put to death, he prays
now that he may be taken as Heir to his Father.



Judgment against Magna Charta, c. 29^ without due process and trial reversed,
as erroneous. Restitution,
Upon the view of which Record, the said Richard alleges, that therein is
nothing contained wherefore the said Earl should be put to death without
Judgment, or due process of Law: after which the whole Estates adjudged the
said Earl unjustly put to death, they undo the said process, and restore the
said Earl to all benefits of the Law.

Westminster touching the Staple be confirmed to continue for ever. Ordinances,
Staple.


Petitions of the Commons with their Answers.
Justices of Peace.
that upon the displacing of any of them, others be placed at the nomination of
the Knights of the same County; that they sit four times at the least every
year; that none be displaced without the Kings special commandment or testimony
of their fellows.

Fines, Laborers, Poor.
That the surplusage of the Fines of the Statute of Laborers may be entirely
distributed amongst the poor of the whole County, and not to poor Towns only.

Answ.
It shall be parted among the poor Towns only.

Estreat, Old Law.
That the Writ of Estreat may lie in every action, where the party shall recover
damages of Estreats after the Writ purchased.

Answ.
The old Law shall be continued.

Woolls.
The Print touching the show of Woolls, cap. 14. agrees with the Record.

Wards, Old Law.
That remedy may be had in such cases where the King receives the profits of
the Wards Lands, as well of Socage, as otherwise, where no part of the same is
holden of him.

Answ.
The Law heretofore used shall continue.

Outlawry.
The print that none be outlawed without due process of Law, cap. 3. agrees
with the Record.

Contribution, Knights wages.


Answ.
As heretofore, so the same shall be.

Purveyances. Present pay.
and of greater within one quarter of a year, and that Purveyance be made
without malice; the print cap. 1, and 12. agrees with it.

It is good to make payment accordingly to the first point, Answ.
and to redress the second.

Callice. Sheriff.

Purveyances.




The demand is reasonable. Answ.


Errors. L^ndon.
and misprisions, in the City of London, cap. 10. agrees with the Record.

Oyer and Terminer, Attaint, Lords, Law not to be altered.
may bring his attaint, hanging his suit against the other.

The Lords will not alter the order of the Law.

The print touching the confirmation of all Statutes not repealed, Answ.
Statutes confirmed.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Marchers of Wales do suffer no distresses to be made on any English man coming
into Wales for any other man's debts, Marches of Wales, Distress.
if he be no debtor, trespassor, or Surety.

Old L^w.


That no Inquest upon Conspiracy, Answ.
Inquest returned, Conspiracy, Maintenance, Sheriffs, Jury.
Confederacy, Maintenance, or Evidences.
and that no man speak with the Jury after they depart therefrom. It is enacted.

Escheators.
cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Iron.
cap. 5. agrees with the Record.

Money finer.


With opportunity the King means the same. Answ.


Purveyors, Privy Seal, Council, Common Law.
being arrested for any misdemeanor, shall have any privy Seal to cause such as
arrested him to come before the Council to answer the King, but have his remedy
at the Common Law.

Forfeiture, Kings widows, Old Law.
but not of such as hold jointly with their Husbands.

The old Law shall stand. Answ.


Appeal, Common Law.
may abate the other.

The Common Law therein used shall continue. Answ.


London, Weights and Measures, London.
so as all Counties do accordingly conform themselves.



Coroners, Coroners election
agrees with the Record.

That the Writs of the Chancery may be at reasonable prices, Writs, Fines,
Chancery.
and that the Clerks of the Crown, and others for Commissions, Commissions.
Clerks of the Crown.
and such like, do content themselves with the Kings allowance.

Answ.
As heretofore the same shall be.

Fines for Writs.
That Fines for Writs may be reasonably made in every of the Kings Courts.

Answ.
The Chancellor shall do as heretofore. Chancellor.


Sheriffs,
cap. 7. agrees with the Record.

Trent require, that the Justices of the one Bench, Justices Circuits.
or the other, may yearly come twice amongst them, for taking cognizance of
fines, Fines, Letters of Attorney.
and Letters of Attorney of the unable.

The King will be advised.

Answ.
The Print touching Attaint given, Attaint.
not having respect to the quantity of damages, cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

Laborers.


Answ.
The Statute made shall be observed.

England. Staple.


The same shall so continue until the next Parliament, Parliament.
and not to be altered without the assent of the Parliament. Answ.


Staples,
cap. 30. agrees with the Record.

cap. 15. agrees with the Record.

Sheriffs Inquests.
The Print touching Sheriffs, using to take Inquests for the indicting of any,
cap. 9. agrees with the Record.

Staple.
That Merchants strangers require that the Ordinances of the Staple may be
speedily executed.

Answ.
The King wills the same.

Merchants, Free Trade, Customs.
might sell the same to any person whatsoever, and of the same to make
exchange, or to buy Wares, paying the Customs therefore, is confirmed to
continue.

Customers.

Merchants, Oaths.


That the Customers do dispatch all such Merchants coming in with their Wares;
and that those Merchants for prices of their Wares may be credited upon their
Letters and Oaths.

Merchant strangers.
It is enacted, that some of the Kings Council may be appointed to be Governor
to such Merchant strangers.

Answ.

Chancellor, Treasurer.


The Chancellor or Treasurer shall supply the same, when he may attend; if not,
some learned Justices shall be appointed therefore.

Bartholmew Burgherst, the Kings Chamberlain declared to the whole House,
Chamberlain, Peace with France.
that there was a Treaty of Peace between the King and the French, and a good
hope of a final concord; wherefore he demanded of the Commons whether they
would agree; Commons advice and assent demanded concerning peace.
all of them wholly therein submitted themselves to the order of the King, They
submit themselves wholly to the King and Lords O^der.
and of his Nobles: whereupon Sir Mich. of Northumberland, Keeper of the Kings
privy Seal commanded sir John of Swinley the Notary Papal, to make thereof
public Instrument.

Anno Vicesimo nono Edwardi Tertii. Rex etc. Edwardo Principi Walliae, Summons
of Parliament.
Duci Cornubiae, and Com. Cestriae, filio suo primogenito, etc. apud
Westmonasterium, in crastino die Sancti Martini. Test Rege apud Westmonast. 20
die Septembris.
Consimiles Literae sabscriptae,
HEnrico Duci Lancastriae, Humfrido de Bohun, Com. Hereff. and Essex. Willielmo
de Bohun, Com Northumberland. Ricardo Com. Arundel. Rogero de Mortuo ma^i Com.
Marchiae. Rado Com. Stafford. Hugoni de Courtney Com. Devon. Gilberto Humfravil
Com. de Anegos. Johanni de Mowbray. Henrico de Piercie. Rado de Nevill. Waltero
de Manny. Johanni de Gray de Codenore. Guidoni de Brian. Thomae Ughtred.
Johanni de Cobham. Johanni de Bello campo, Com. War. Ricardo Talbot. Roberto
Morley. Willielmo de Huntingfield. Thomae de Lucie. Petro de Malo lacu.
Reginaldo de Gray seniori. Reginaldo de Gray de Ru^hin. Johanni de Willoughbie
de Ersby. Rogero Chandos. Johanni de Cherlton. Willielmo la Zouch de
Harringworth. Nicholao de Sancto Mauro. Roberto de Scales. Michaeli de
Poynings. Rogero de Strange. Johanni Bardolfe. Willielmo Deynecourt. Johanni
Tibitot. Johanni Fitzwalter. Waltero de Fawconbridge. Willielmo Baroni de
Greystock. Willielmo de Dacre. Thomae de Musgrave. Thomae de Furnival. Thomae
Bradeston. Johanni de Gray de Rotherfield. Roberto de Colvill. Nicholao
Burnell. Henrico le Scroope. Johanni de Bello Campo de Somerset. Johanni
Deyncourt.
Rogero de Mortuo Mari, Com. Marchiae, Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Vicesimo nono Edwardi Tertii, The Parliament holden at Westminster, the
day after Saint Martin the Bishop, in Winter, in the 29. Year of Edward the
Third.
Parliament adjourned.

Painted Chamber.


THe Parliament for certain causes was adjourned until Monday next after the
Feast of Saint Edmond the Martyr then ensuing.

England, Ireland, Wales, Gascoin, the Isles, and other Foreign places.

Petitions.
Tryers of Petitions for England, etc. as above.

Parliament adjourned for absence of diverse Lords.
The Monday aforesaid, for that sundry of the Lords were not come, the
Parliament was continued until Wednesday ensuing; at which time Sir William
Shareshall the Kings Chief Justice, Chief Justice.

Causes of Parliament.


in the presence of the King, Lords and Commons, declared the Kings pleasure
was, that Sir William de Manny should make declaration to the same Assembly,
for that he had the most knowledge therein.

Peace treated with France, Ambassadors, Rome.
After which Sir William began to declare, how that the King had treated of a
Peace with the French; and how for the accomplishment thereof he had sent the
Duke of Lancaster and others as Ambassadors to Rome, where by means of the
French, things could not take good success.

King of Navar,
How that during the said Dukes abode at Rome, the King of Navar had complained
to the same Duke of sundry damages done to him by the French; and by oath
affirmed how he would most willingly enter into League with the King; League
with England against France, Iersey.
and for assurance of the same, would with as great a power as he could enforce
himself to meet the King at Iersey.

Thames toward Iersey, and being put back by contrary winds, with great hazard
arrived at Portsmouth, where he abode until he heard news how the same King of
Navar had revolted from his purpose, Navars revolt,
and was become French.

French Forces.
Whereupon the King being advertised that the French made himself strong toward
Callice with a great Army, and thinking there to have some present Battle
offered, addressed himself thither, being accompanied with his own Army, and
with certain of his Allies whom he found there, viz. Sir Henry of Flanders, and
Sir Frank of Vanhall, and many other Germans.

Enemies,
How the King on all All Souls day last before marched toward his Enemy, and
proffered to him Battle, which his Enemy by all means refused; Battle refused,
whereby the King wasting and spoiling the Country, and seeing his own Army for
want to languish, returned to Callice, where he made honorable peace, Peace,
Parliament.
and now returned into the Realm to Parliament.

William Shareshall willed the Commons to weigh the great travel of the King
for their defense, Chief Justice, Commons, Kings travel and expense.
and of his readiness to encounter with the Scots, Scots, Victory, Peace
deferred.
who had taken the Town of Berwick, as news then came to the King; and to
advise how he might atchieve victory of them; of his long deferred Peace with
the French, and to the Kings honor, and their ease.

Lords and Commons conference, Aids granted, Subsidy conditional on Wools,
Impositions.
had granted to the King for six years the Subsidy of Wool; so as during the
same time no other Aid or Impositions be laid upon the Commons.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Great Charter, Forest.
and the Charter of the Forest, in all points shall be kept.

Staples.
shall be observed.

Receipt.
where Tenant for term of life shall go about to lose or sell.

Sheriffs.
shall be observed.

Aids to make the Kings son a knight Exchequer.
the Exchequer demands the same as well of mesne Lords, Answ.
as of the Tenants in demesne, against reason; wherefore they pray remedy.



Purveyors.


H. 3. his time, which was before the Statute of Prerogative, be not seized
into the Kings hands by Escheators. Escheators, Seizure.


Let this be more particularly declared unto the King. Answ:


That the Justices of Peace may determine Weights and Measures. Justices of
Peace, Weights and Measures.
Answ.


Sheriffs, Coroners.
Coroner, or such like be from henceforth a Justice.

It is enacted, That no Sheriff, Sheriff, Constable, Jailer, Imprisonment.
Constable of any Castle or Gaol, be any Commissioner where men are to be
imprisoned.

Confederacy, Judges.
considering that the Judges judge rashly thereof.

Answ.
but in case where the Statute speaks expressly, upon the point contained in
the same Statute.

That the Justices of Jail-deliver, Justices of Jail-deliver, Exigen^, Old
Law.
on an Indictment of the Coroner coming before them, may award the Exigent.

Answ.


That such persons of the far North-Countries, Northern Counties, Appeal, Nisi
prius.
as upon Appeals join in an Issue on good or evil, may try the same by Nisi
prius, considering that the Jury will not appear in the Kings Bench. Jurors,
Kings Bench.


The Old Law used shall be kept. Answ.

Old Law,




Fraudulent Conveyances.


The Statute therefore made shall be observed.

Answ.
Such as be indicted before the Justices of the Peace, Indictment, Attorneys,
shall make Attorneys have the hearing of their Presentiments, and Answer
thereunto.

Tit. 30^

Inquest returned,
That Writs of Attaints may be had of Verdicts given in the Exchequer,
Exchequer, Attaint, Old Law.
as of Verdicts given in other Courts.

The old Law shall be observed. Answ.


Anno ^ricesimo sexto Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster in
Quindena Sancti Michaelis, Anno 36 Edwardi Tertii.
Parliament adjourned because sundry Lords not come.
AT this day for that sundry of the Lords were not come, in the presence of the
King and Lords, the Parliament was adjourned unto another day.

Chief Justice, Causes of the Parliament, Churches Reformation, Peace,
Scotland, Wools,
At which day Sir Henry de Green, the Kings chief Justice, in the presence of
the King, Lords, and Commons, declared the causes of the Parliament, ( Viz.)
for redress of matters touching the Church, for observation of the Peace, for
the affairs of Scotland, and for the enhansing of the prices of Wool.

Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Petitions,
Receivers of Petitions for Aquitain, and other foreign Countries, and of the
Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Aquitaine, etc. as above.

Peace and War by the Parliaments adv^ce.
The Wednesday after the King made Declaration how his Ambassadors, and David le
Bruce of Scotland had treated of peace. Lords, Scotland, War advised,
The Lords made answer thereunto, that they durst not advise the King to leave
a thing so hurtful unto the Crown, for any offer of Peace.

Callis, Lords advice, Merchants, C^llis, Commons advice respi^ed, Conference
with Merchants, Magna Charta, and Statutes,
thought it good to have the same done. But the Commons referred their answer
until conference with the Merchants.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Purveyors, Penalty for negligences, Omission out of the printed Statute,
or Buyers, cap. 2.3, 4, 5, 6. agrees with the Record; only there is left out
of the print, a pain on the Steward, Treasurer, Comptroller, and other Officers
of the Household at the Kings will, for not executing of the Statute.

Kings Carriages,
and that in the Summer, and other times convenient, as in August.

London, Wines engrossed, Inquests foreign,
and other Port Towns, may be enquired by foreign Inquests.

The Statute made therefore shall be observed. Answ.


Imprisonment without due Process,


The grieved upon Complaint shall be heard.

That Mainprize may be duly made to all persons, Answ.
Mainpri^e, Fines.
and Fines to be duly rated according to the trespass.



That Wools, Answ.
Wools, Weights.
and other Merchandises, be weighed according to the late Statute.

Priests wages,
cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

Offenders,
cap. 9. agrees with the Record.

Parliament annually.
cap. 10. agrees with the Record.

Subsidy of Wools pardoned,
cap. 11. agrees with the Record.

Gold and silver,




The pr^nt for the Session of the peace, Answ.
Peace.
cap. 12. agrees with the Record.

Justices of Peace Fees,
and that they may enquire as well within Liberties as without.

Answ.


Debt, Exchequer.
after payment made and his Tallie had out.

The Chancellor, Treasurer, and others shall take Order therein. Answ.


Petitions answered,
wherein the Lords endorse Coram Rege, may be answered by the King before this
Parliament be ended. Answ.




cap. unico agrees with the Record. Pardon,


The print touching Waste done by the Escheators, Waste Escheators,
agrees with the Record.

Laborers Fines,
Cap. 14. agrees with the Record, but not fully; which note.

Petitions answered, Subsidy granted.
The thirteenth day of November, being the last day of the Parliament, after the
Petitions answered, the Lords and Commons granted to the King for three years
the Subsidy of Woolls, Wooll-sells, and Skins.

Lionel created Duke of Clarence in Parliament.
After this, the Chancellor declared how that the King intended to advance to
honor such of his sons as were of full age: Namely, that his son Lionel then
being in Ireland, should have the name of the Duke of Clarence, to him and to
his heirs males of his body lawfully begotten; And that his son John should in
like manner be Duke of Lancaster, Duke of Lancaster. Earl of Cambridge.
and that his son Edmond should be Earl of Cambridge in Fee.

John created Duke of Lancaster^ Charter.
After which, the King in full Parliament did girt his son John with a sword,
and set on his head a Cap of fur, and upon the same a Circlet of gold and
pearls, and named him Duke of Lancaster, and thereof gave to him a Charter.

Edmond Earl of Cambridge created in Parliament. Charter:
In like manner the King girded his son Edmond with a sword, and named him Earl
of Cambridge, and thereof gave to him a Charter.

Pleading^ in English.
Cap. 15. agrees with the Record: Only where the Print is, That all such Pleas
should be enrolled in Latin, the Record does nothing warrant the same.

Staple, Conusance.
The Print touching such Actions whereof the Mayor and Constables of the Staple
shall have Cognizance, Cap. 7. agrees with the Record.

Anno Tricesimo septimo Edwardi Tertii. Rex etc. Carissimo filio suo Johanni
Duci Lancastriae, etc. apud Westmonasterium, in Octabis Sancti Michaelis. Test
Rege apud Westmonast. primo die Junii.
EDmondo Com. Cantabrigiae. Ricardo Com. Arundel. Humfrido de Bohun Com.
Hereff. and Essex. Willielmo de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Hugoni de Courtney Com.
Devon. Roberto de Ufford Com. Suff. Rado de Stafford. Thomae de Vere Com.
Oxoniae Gilberto Humfravil Com. de Anegos. Henrico de Piercie. Rado de Nevill.
Johanni de Mowbray de Axholm. Henrico de Bello Campo. Johanni de Audley de
Heligh. Johanni de Charleton de Poys. Waltero de Manney. Mauritio de Berkley.
Rogero de Clifford. Guidoni de Bryan. Rado de Basset. Johanni Bardolf de
Wirmsley. Willielmo Deynecourt. Johanni Talbott. Thomae de Roos. Thomae de
Furnival. Petro de Malo lacu. Johanni Gray de Codenore. Reginaldo Gray de
Ruthine. Thomae de Lucie. Willielmo de Say. Nicho. de Poynings. Barthol. de
Burgherst. Gilberto Talbot. Roberto de Colvill. Thomae de Ughtred. Johanni de
Willoughbie. Thomae de Musgrave. Rogero de la War. Nicho. Burnell. Johanni de
Huntingfield. Johanni de Kirton. Ranulpho de Dacre. Johanni de Widhurst.
Johanni Northwood. Roberto de Holland. Willielmo la Zouch. Rogero de Bello
Campo. Johanni de Strivelin. Johanni de Mohun de Dunster.
Roberto de Herle Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Tricesimo septimo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster,
the Friday in the Octaves of S. Michael, in the 37. Year of Edward the Third.
Chief Justice, Parliament adjourned, because sundry Lords and Commons not yet
come.
FOr that sundry of both Houses were not the same day come, Sir Henry Green the
Kings Chief Justice, in the presence of the King, Lords and Commons, continued
the Parliament until Friday ensuing.

Ely then Chancellor, Chancellor, Causes of the Parliament, Subjects
grieveances, Churches liberties infringed, Petitions.
in the presence of the Lords and Commons, made declaration of the calling of
the same Parliament, viz. For that the King being desirous to know the grief of
his Subjects, and namely of Outrages done against the liberties of the Church,
and for redressing enormities by exhibiting Petitions.

Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Aquitain, Petitions.
and other Foreign places, and the Isles.

England, as above.

Aquitain, as above.

M^rchants-aliens, Transportation of Woollen clothes, Cheese, Sheep, Malt,
Beer, inhibited.
On Wednesday after, commandment was given, That no man should transport Woollen
clothes, Butter, Cheese, Sheep, Malt, or Beer: But that the Merchants of Almain
might carry Worsteds and Straight clothes; And that the Merchants of Gascoin
might carry Woollen clothes, to the value of the Wines brought in.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Commons thanks to the King.
They give the King most humble thanks for his great goodness to them showed,
and uttered by his own mouth in the last Parliament.

They pray, Clergy to pray for the peace and good g^vernment o^ the Land, etc.
Kings good will to the Commons.
That the King will require the Archbishop and all other of the Clergy to pray
for his Estate, for the peace and good government of the Land, and for the
continuance of the Kings good will toward the Commons.

Answ.
The same prays the King.

Statutes confirmed.
The Print for the confirmation of all Statutes not repealed, Cap. 1. agrees
with the Record.

Ordinances, Customs of Woolls.
That the Ordinance for the Custom of Wools made at the first Parliament, may
continue.

Answ.
They cannot be remedied without great deliberation.

Silver coin, Gold.
and that Gold be paid to Merchants for Wares.

Answ.
With opportunity the same shall be done.

Exchange.


Answ.


That the Coyners do coin the half of Silver into Halfpence and Farthings, for
the use of the poor. Money, Poor, Coiners, Half pence and Farthings.


The same is so appointed.

That remedy may be had against Merchants, Answ.
Merchants hostlers. Regrators, Forestallers.
Hostlers, Regrators, Forestallers of Wates, Fish, Wine, and Corn.

Blackney, Ordinance, Fish, Merchants, Corn, Meal, and Victuals not to be
transported.
shall be kept: For the execution whereof, William of Wickingham and John de
Barry are appointed. And order to be made against Merchants for carrying forth
of Corn, Meal, and such other Victuals.

Proclam^tion.
and now newly is made to the contrary.

A remedy to be found against Wears, Answ.
Weers, Nusances.
and such other Engines on Rivers, to the annoyance of Boats.



That Nisi prius may be taken in every plea in what Court soever, Answ.
Nisi prius, King party, King^ Attorney^ Venire facias.
where the King is party; And that if the Kings Attorney do not pursue Venire
facias for the Jury, that then the Justices may grant the same.

Upon complaint showed, the Chancellor or Keeper of the Privy Seal shall take
order. Answ.


Commons House.

Justices of Peace nominated by the Commons.


and that they be not displaced for any surmises.

That the Commons House name able men, and the King will choose at his
pleasure. Answ.


Identitate nominis, Identitate nominis: Variance.
Cap. 10. agrees with the Record, until the Record has name and addition,
which the print wants.

Poultry, prices.
agrees with the Record.

Exchequer.
Cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Grocers.
Cap. 5. agrees with the Record; only the print wants this word, Uti.

Artificers, Apparel,
Cap. 6. agrees with the Record.

Cap. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 14 15. agrees with the Record.

Pestilence, Alienation without license.
to sundry persons for term of life, may accordingly continue the same until
the people be more populous.

The King will be advised. Answ.


Wines.
Cap. 16. agrees with the Record; only where the print has Couchers, the
Record has English Courchers; which note.

Price of W^nes, Testimonial.
do bring Testimonial under chief Officers hands of the prices of the same; So
as the Justice of the peace at their arrival may set the assize of the same.
Justices of Assize.


Answ.
The Statute therefore shall stand.

Villenage.
The print touching exception of Villenage Cap. 17. agrees with the Record.

Sugges^^ons.
The print touching suggestions Cap. 18. agrees with the Record.

November, Parliament prorogued, Chancellor, Appar^el,
at which day the Chancellor in the presence of the King, Lords, and Commons
showed, how the King meant to execute the Statute of Apparel, and therefore
charged every estate to further the same; After which he demanded of the whole
estates, whether they would have such things as they agreed on to be by way of
Ordinance, Ordinan^e, Statute, Am^ndment, Kings thanks, Parliament dissolved.
or of Statute? who answered, by way of Ordinance for that they might amend the
same at their pleasure, and so the same was: And so the King having given
thanks to all the estates for their pains taken, licenced them to depart.

Silver vessels, Hawks, Statutes printed not in the Record.
It is to be remembered that of the seven Chapters in print touching silver
vessels, and of the nineteenth for finding of Hawks, there is no mention made
in the Record.

Anno Tricesimo octavo Edwardi Tertii. Rex etc. Carissimo ^ilio suo Johanni
Duci Lancastriae etc. apud Westmonasterium, in Octabis Sancti Hilarii etc.
Test Rege apud Westmonasterium, 4 die Decembris, etc.
EDmondo Com. Cantabrigiae. Ricardo Com. Arundel. Humfrido de Bohun, Com.
Hereff. and Essex. Willielmo de Monte acuto, Com. Sarum. Hugo. de Courtney,
Com. Devon. Roberto de Ufford Com. Suff. Rado. Com. Staff. Thomae de Vere Com.
Oxon. Gilberto de Umfravil, Com. de Anegos. Henrico de Piercie. Rado. de
Nevill. Johanni de Mowbray de Auxholm. Henrico de Bello Campo. Jacobo de Audley
de Heleigh. Johanni de Cherleton de Powys. Waltero de Manny. Mauritio de
Berkley. Rogero de Clifford. Guidoni de Briae. Rado de Basset. Edwardo le
Dispencer. Johanni de Gray de Rotherfield. Johanni Tibetot. Thomae de Roos.
Thomae de Furnivall. Petro de Malo lacu. Johanni de Gray de Codenore. Reginaldo
Gray de Ruthin. Thomae de Lucie. Willielmo de Say^ Michaeli Poynings. Barthol.
de Burgherst. Gilberto Talbot. Roberto de Colvill. Thomae de Ughtred. Johanni
de Willoughby. Thomae de Musgrave. Willielmo de Ufford. Nicholao Burnell.
Johanni de Huntingfield. Willielmo de Scales. Ranulpho Dacre. Johanni de
Northwood. Roberto de Holland. Willielmo la Zouch. Rogero de Bello Campo.
Johanni de Strivelin. Johanni de Bohun de Dunster. Willielmo de Morley.
Rado. Spigurnell, Custodi Quinq. Portuum.

Anno Tricesimo Octavo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster, in
the Octaves of S. Hillary, in the xxxviii. year of Edward the third.
Westminster Hall, that all such as were summoned to the Parliament might for
that day depart, Parliament adjourned, Proclamation, Painted Chamber.
and return the next morning into the Chamber de pinct there to hear the Kings
pleasure.

Simon Bishop of Ely, Chancellor of England, Chancellor, Causes of Parliament,
Justice, Kings good will to his Subjects.
declared the cause of the Parliament, taking for his Theme the saying of the
Kingly Prophet, Vera justitia, and faithful judgment do adorn the Kings seat;
upon which he discourses of such noble prowess, as the King by Gods power
achieved in his youth, and makes rehearsal of the assured good will, and
ready helps of the Kings Subjects to have furthered the same, by the which as
the King gave unto them hearty thanks, Kings thanks.
so did he promise by all means to seek the common peace, Common Peace, Good
Laws.
and tranquillity by the observation of all good Laws, and by the amending of
such of them as were faulty, Amendment of faulty Laws,
and by making new where need did require.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Aquitane, and other foreign Countries, and Isles.

Tryers of Petitions for England, as above.

Tryers of Petitions for Aquitane, as above.

Kings Declaration, Popes citations, and Usurpations.
how daily citations and false suggestions were made to the Pope, for matters
determinable in his Court within the Realm, Kings Courts, Provisors, Ancient
Laws, Prerogative, Treasure exported, Ecclesiastical livings, Divine Service,
Alms, Hospitality.
and for procuring provision for Ecclesiastical dignities, to the great
defacing of the ancient Laws, to the spoiling of his Crown, to the daily
conveying away of the treasure, to the wasting of Ecclesiastical livings, to
the withdrawing of Divine Service, Alms, hospitality, and other acceptable
works, and to the daily increase of all mischiefs; wherefore no person etc. and
by his own mouth the King requires, according to the old Statute heretofore,
to provide due remedy.

Parliament,
named in the Statute of Confirmation, Ann. 38. as a saving of the liberties of
the bodies of Prelates, Liberties,
and Lords of the Realm.

Provisors, Variance in the Record.
cap. 1, 2, 3, 4. only in the Record are more biting words. A Mystery not to be
known of all men.

That no victuals, Transportation of Victuals, and Corn prohibited, Scotland,
Protection, Scots.
or corn be carried from the North Marches into Scotland, nor that any
protection, or passport be granted to any Scot to pass through the Realm.

The King will provide therefore. Answ.


Fines of the Chancery.


The King would them to be reasonable for the case of the people. Answ.

Peoples case,




England, Staple,
cap. 7. agrees with the Record.

Callis, and all other unreasonable Impositions may cease. Impositions to cease.


The King would all unreasonable Impositions to cease. Answ.


Ships forfeited.

Customs cancelled.


cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

Gascoin, Wines,
cap. 10. and 11. agrees with the Record.

Suggestions,
cap. 9. agrees with the Record.

Jurors, Embracers, Maintainers.
Embracers, and Maintainers, cap. 12. agrees with the Record.

Melcomb, Staple, Melcomb, Jews, Customs, Customers, Lynne,
and another at Ipswich, and that all Merchants, and others for their ease may
ship Wools at Jews, where the Customers of Chichester shall take the Custom,
and the Customers at Yarmouth do the like for Lynne.

February after that the King in the presence of the Lords and Commons had
given his assent to all the abovesaid Premises, Royal assent, Kings thanks,
Parliament dismissed.
he gave thanks to the whole Estate, and so licensed them to take their ease.

Anno Quadragesimo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the
Monday next after the Invention of the Cross in Anno Quadragesimo Edwardi
Tertii.
Chancellor, Painted Chamber, Causes of Parliament.
THe Bishop of Ely then Chancellor in the Chamber de pinct. in the presence of
the Lords and Commons declared the cause of the Parliament in effect following.

Gascoin, Prince, Gascoign, Ireland, Government of England,
and how he had sent the Duke of Clarence his son into Ireland to stay the
same, and how that his chief care was now in what wise he might best govern the
Realm of England.

Receivers of petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Petitions.
Receivers of petitions for Aquitane, and other foreign places and Isles.

England, as above.

Aquitane, as above.

Chancellor, Causes of Parliament.
The next day after the Chancellor in the presence of the Lords and Commons,
declared how the day before they generally understood the cause of the same
Assembly, and now they should more especially; Viz. How the King understood
that the Pope, Popes claim of Tribute, King John's Homage to Rome, for England,
and Ireland, Popes citation of the King to Rome.
for the hom^ge that King John did to the Sea of Rome, for the Realm of England
and Ireland, and for the tribute by him granted, meant by process to cite the
King to Rome, to answer thereto: wherein the King required their advice, what
was best for him to do, if any such thing were attempted.

The Bishops by themselves, required respite of an answer until the next day,
Advice required, Bishops, Lords, Commons.
so did the Lords and Commons, every one of them by themselves.

The same next day the whole Estate came together, and by common consent
enacted in effect following; Viz. Forasmuch as neither King John, nor any other
King, could bring his Realm and Kingdom in such thraldom and subjection, Kings
cannot subject the Kingdom to the Pope, or any other, but by common assent of
Parliament.
but by common assent of Parliament, the which was not done: And therefore that
which he did was against his Oath at his Coronation, Kings Oath^
besides many other causes. If therefore the Pope should attempt any thing
against the King by process, Popes usurpation unanimously resisted.
or other matters in deed, that the King with all his Subjects should with all
their force and power resist the same.

Oxford and Cambridge, Universities, Oxford, Cambridge, Friars, Complaint in
Parliament.
and Friars of the four Orders Mendicants in the said Universities, made long
complaint one against the other to the King in Parliament, and in the end
submitted themselves to the Kings Order.

Parliament, Universities, Degrees.
took order, That as well the Chancellor and Scholars, as the the ^riars of
those Orders in the said Universities, should in all Graces and other
School-Exercises use each other in friendly wise, without any rumor as before.
And that none of those Orders should receive any Scholar into their said
Orders, being under the age of eighteen years.

Bulls.

Rome.


nor procure any Bull or any other Process from Rome against the said
Universities, or proceed therein.

King and his Council.


May: The Chancellor then declared, Chancellor, Kings son in Law to be created
an Earl.
how the King had married the Lady Isabel his daughter to the Lord Cowcy, who
had fair living in England and elsewhere; and that it were for the honor of the
King to create him an Earl, which all the Lords thought good; Lords assent.
but for that the King was not determined of what name, there was no more
therein done.

Thomas Ludlow, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Chief Baron, Parliament, Aestate
probanda, Livery ouster le maine, Age.
showed to the whole Estate, how William the son and heir of William Stevens,
who held diversely of the King in chief, as of the Crown, had by Writ of Aetate
probanda sued out Livery out of the Kings hands whereas the said William the
son for long time should be within age, as by a long Schedule may appear.

William the son, adjudged him to be within age; and therefore took order, that
all his hereditaments so sued out of the Kings hands should be eftsoons
reseised into the Kings hands until his full age; Inspection in Parliament,
Reseisure, Infa^ra Charters, Recognisances, Statutes, Writings vacated.
and that all Obligations, Charters, Statutes, Recognisances, and all other
Writings made by the said William the son should be void. Note, the Judgment is
strange.

Kings thanks. Parliament dism^ssed.
and licensed every one to depart, and so the Parliament ended.

Anno Quadragesimo secundo Edwardi Tertii. Rex primogenito suo Edwardo Principi
Aquitaniae and Walliae, Writs of Summons,
etc. apud Westmonasterium primo die Maii. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium, 24
die Februarii, etc.
JOhanni Duci Lancastriae. Edmondo Com. Cantabrigiae. Ricardo Com. Arundel.
Willielmo de Monte acuto, Com. Sarum. Hugoni Courtney Com. Devon. Roberto de
Ufford Com. Suff. Ricardo Com. Staff. Thomae Vere Com. Oxoniae. Gilberto de
Humfravil Com. de Anegos. Davido Strabolgi Com. Athil. Thomae de Bello campo,
Com. War. Henrico Piercie. Johanni de Nevil de Rabie. Johanni Cherlton de
Powis. Waltero de Manny. Willielmo Latimer. Rogero de Clifford. Guidoni de
Brian. Rado Basset de Drayton. Johanni de Gray de Rotherfield. Petro de Malo
lacu. Johanni Gray de Codonore. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Willielmo de Say.
Michaeli de Poynings. Barthol. de Bourcheir. Gilberto Talbot. Johanni de
Willoughby. Michaeli de la Poole. Thomae de Musgrave. Johanni de Huntingfield.
Roberto de Scales. Ranulpho de Dacre. Johanni de Northwood. Roberto de Holland.
Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth. Willielmo de Ferrariis. Rogero de Bello
Campo. Johanni Mohun de Dunstre. Williemo de Morley. Johanni Buttort. Willielmo
de Furnival. Johanni Cobham de Kent. Willielmo Botelers de Wenne. Johanni de
Clinton. Lucy de Poynings. Willielmo de Bortreaux. Rad. Spinard, Custod. Quing.
Port.
Anno Quadragessimo secundo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at
Westminster the Monday the first day of May in the 42 year of the reign of King
Edward the Third.
Parliament adjourned, because sundry Lords and Commons not yet come.
the Archbishop of Canterbury declared to the Lords, and Commons then
assembled in the Chamber de Pinct, Archbishop, Painted Chamber,
that the Kings pleasure was that the Parliament should be continued until the
Thursday ensuing.

Thursday, the said Archbishop in the presence of the King, Archbishop,
Victory over enemies.
Lords, and Commons declared that the King yielded to God his most hearty
thanks, for giving him Victory over his Enemies, for the quiet government of
his Realm, and for the great Loyalty of his Subjects both in Body and Goods,
Subjects loyalty,
the which Blessing, and good Estate, as he decreed to continue, and amend; so
that he might the better accomplish the same, he had therefore called the
Parliament. Causes of Parliament.


England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Gascoyn, and other foreign places and Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Treaty, King of Scots. Peace, Scotland, Lords and Commons several advise and
Answers.
and David le Bruce of Scotland, this was the last offer of the said David,
viz. that he offered peace, so as he might freely enjoy to him in Fee the whole
Realm of Scotland, without any subjection, or any other thing, which might be
accounted a perpetual charge; Of which Peace the Lords and Commons being willed
to give their advice, made several Answers, that they could not assent to any
such peace, but to the disherison of the King, Disinherison of the King and
Crown.
and of his Crown, and to the great danger of themselves, being sworn to the
same. Oath of Allegiance.


Thanks for Aids and Subsidies granted.
and showed further the great need of the same.

Subsidy granted, Old Customs and new.
viz. of every sack of Wool 30 s. 8 d. so much of every 2^0 Fells, and of
every Last of skins 4 l. over the old Custom 6 s. 8 d of every sack of Wool,
and so much of twenty dozen of Fells, and 13 s. 4 d. of every last of skins.

Petitions of the Commons with their Answers.
Great Charter, Statutes.
cap. 1. agrees with the Record, only the print wants (and all other
Statutes.)

Pardons.


Process of Law.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Commissions,
cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Escheators.
cap. 5. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form, quod nota.

Laborers.
The print touching Laborers, cap. 6. agrees with the Record.

London, Victuals.
cap. 7. agrees with the Record.

London, Forainers, Retail.
Note that the Londoners required that no Forainer should retail any Wine,
Merchandise, or Victuals in London, which was not granted.

Merchants, Wines.
The print touching the restraint of English Merchants to fetch Gascoyne wine,
cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

Green wax, Exchequer.
cap. 9. agrees with the Record.

Callice, Aliens, Callice.
cap. 10. agrees with the Record.

Kings thanks for aids, Lords and Commons dine with the King.
The 21. of May, the King gave thanks to the Lords and Commons for their coming,
and aid granted, on which day all the Lords, and sundry of the Commons dined
with the King: after which dinner, Sir John de Lee, Sir John de Lee.
was brought before the King, Lords and Commons next aforesaid, to answer to
certain Objections following, and first to the complaint of William Latimer, as
follows.

Robert Latimer, Robert Latimers Case.
Wardship,
the Son and Heir of Sir Robert Latimer, with certain Manors during the same
minority, to the Bishop of Sarum, whose estate the same William had, and after
the King granted the same to Sir John Lee. The same William surmised, that the
said Sir John being of power sent for him to London, where he by duress of
Imprisonment enforced the said William to surrender his Estate to him.
Imprisonment, Duress.


John excuses himself, for that the Grant was made unto him, the which was not
allowed, for that the said William was not put out by due process of Law. Due
process of Law.


John, for that during such time as he was Steward of the Kings House, Kings
Steward, Kings Council, Unjust oppression, Attachment.
he should cause sundry men to be attached, and to come before him, as before
the Kings Council in places where he pleased, where being out of Council, he
caused men to answer as to things before the Council.

That he as Steward, having thereby authority only within the Verge did
notwithstanding cause sundry to be attached out of the Verge, Verge,
as John Goddard and others, making them to answer in the Marshals^y,
Marshalsey, Jurisdiction.

Imprisonment.


of things done out of the Verge, and other-some committed to the Tower of his
own Authority, as John Sibill, Edmond Urdsales, and others.

Authority abused, Purveyors.
against the Justices commandment, discharged out of Newgate Hugh Lavenham
Purveyor, who had appealed sundry men of Felony.

Nicholas Lovayn, for the keeping of the Manor of Rainham in Kent, Defrauding
the King

Manor of Raynham.


the which the same Sir Nicholas claimed to hold during the minority of the Son
and Heir of John Saunton, where the said John of Lee knew that the said Manor
was holden of the King in chief, as of the Castle of Dover Dover Castle.
.

John could not purge himself, he was commanded to the Tower of London,
Imprisonment in the Tower,
there to remain as prisoner until he had made Fines at the Kings will; And
commandment given to Sir Allen of Buxhal Constable of the Tower to keep him
accordingly. Constable of the Tower.
And so the Lords and Commons departed.

John being brought to Westminster before the Kings Council, Kings Council.
and being there demanded of the same William Lattimer, made answer, that as
freely as the King had granted to him the Wardship aforesaid, Wardship resigned
to the King.
so freely did he surrender the same into the Kings hands; Whereupon by the
same Council it was ordered, that the Wardship aforesaid, should be reseised
into the Kings hands, and delivered unto the said William Lattimer according to
the Grant made to the said Bishop, and that all Recognizances, Recognisances
vacated.
and conveyances made by the said William to the said Sir John should be void,
saving the Kings right.

Anno Quadragessimo Tertio Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at
Westminster, in the Octaves of St. Trinity, in the 43. Year of Edward the Third.
Winchester, Chancellor of England, Lord Chancellor.
the same day in the Chamber de Pinct in the presence of the King, Lords and
Commons, declared the causes of the Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
in effect following. viz. How the King in his weighty Affairs had always used
their counsel and assent; Parliaments counsel and assent used in all weighty
affairs.
And lastly, in taking the last peace with the French on conditions following,
Peace with the French upon conditions.
viz. That the French by a day should render to the King certain Countries
beyond the Seas. That the same French should by a day pay unto the King certain
sums of money, And that he should not resort to Gascoyne, Gascoyne.
or to any of the parts there, and that the King in consideration thereof
should for the same time leave the style of France, Style of French King
relinquished.
which he had done.

The French breach of conditions.
He further shows, How the French had made no delivery of the Countries nor
Money. How further they had summoned the Earl of Erminake, and the Lord de la
Brett, and others being of the Kings alliance to answer to certain Appeals at
Paris. And how the Prince of Gascoyne also, being of the Kings Alliance, was
also summoned there to appear. How also the French had sent certain Garrisons
of men into Gascoyne, and Ponhoy, where there had surprised certain of the Kings
Castles and Forts. And finally, How the Prince of Gascoyne upon consultation
with his Nobles and wise men had willed the King to write and use the style of
France.

Parliaments advise required.
The Chancellor therefore willed the whole Estates upon good advice to give
their council therein.

Petitions,
Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Guyenne, and other places, and Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Guyenne, etc. as above.

Lords and Commons answer.
On Wednesday after the Bishops, Lords, and Commons answered the King, that with
good conscience he might use the style and name of France, Style of France.
and thereto they give their assent.

Style of France assumed by the King.
Whereupon the King took the same style and name upon him, and the eleventh day
of June the Kings Great Seal was safely laid up, New Great Seal.
and another Seal engraven with the style of France, was taken and used; and
sundry Pattents, Patents, Charters Writs, Seals altered.
Charters, and Writs therewith sealed; And the same day were all other the
Kings Seals in like sort changed.

Subsidy granted,
of Denizens for every sack of Wool Forty three shillings four pence, of every
twenty dozen of Fells, Forty three shillings four pence, and of every Last of
skins Four pounds. Of Aliens for every sack of Wool, Fifty three shillings
four pence; of every twenty dozen of Fells, Fifty three shillings four pence;
and of every Last of skins Five pounds six shillings eight pence, over the old
Custom. Old Customs,


Petitions of the Commons with their Answers.
Forts surveyed and repaired.


Aliens.


Armor, Horse-coursers,
and Horse-coursers.

The King will appoint the Officers of every Town to provide therefore. Answ.


No man punished contrary to Law.


Commissions repealed,


Edward the First. Prescription.


The old Law shall stand. Answ.


Silva cedua may especially be declared. Silva cedua, Tithes.


The Statute shall be observed.

The print touching the pardon of the Forest matters, Answ.
Pardon, Forest,
cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Sheriffs.




That the indicted upon any Trespass or Felony, Answ.
Indictment, Nisi prius against the King.
may upon issue joined have a Nisi prius against the King.

Treason, Cha^cellor.
the Chancellor, or keeper of the Privy Seal shall therein do right.

That such as dwell upon the Sea coasts may set up poles, Answ.
Sea-mark.
or other instruments, whereby men may know the increase or decrease of the Sea.

Times of W^r.
and after taken away. Answ.


Executors refusal, Aquita^ned.




Repeal of Statutes, Variance from the Record.
The Print, cap. 1. touching the repeal of the Statute made in the last
Parliament, tit. 17. does not agree with the Record.

Staple.
The Print touching the Staple to be in England, cap. 1. far swarveth in form
from the Record, quod nota.

King's thanks to the Lords and Commons.
The next day being the tenth of June, the King gave thanks to the Lords and
Commons for their great travels and aid; And in some sort of recompense
promised to all such as should pass with him against the French, Booty in War,
that they should enjoy and bear all such Towns, Castles, and Possessions,
Persons, Names, Arms, and Honors, as they should obtain, get or take of the
French to them in Fee; except to the King all Royalties and the Lands of the
Church, and that every person of his own Conquest and prowess should have
Charters. Conquest, Charters.


Priors Aliens seized.
It is agreed that all Religious Aliens lands should be seized into to the Kings
hands, and let to farm to the Sovereigns of the same.

Clergies Array. Parliament dissolved.
The King also commanded, that all the Bishops should not only muster their own
servants and Tenants, But also all Parsons, Vicars, and other religious persons
of the Clergy, so as they should be ready to resist the enemy.

And so the Parliament was dissolved.

Anno Quadragesimo quinto Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster,
the Monday in the first week of Lent, in the 45. Year of King Edward the third.
Chamber de Pinct, Painted Chamber.
the Bishop of Winchester, then Chancellor, Chancellor, Causes of Parliament.
in the presence of the King, Lords and Commons declared, how the King since
the last Parliament had defraid a great mass of money, Kings necessity.
and had sent over a great Army of men for the Conquest and recovery of his
own, Kings Army.
and how the King was lately ascertained of the power which the French had
prepared to drive the King from his Hereditaments beyond the Seas, The French
Kings power by Land and Sea.
of their great Navy: And further, how he meant to subject the whole Realm of
England, Englands invasion.

Advice of Parliament required.


wherein he willed the whole Estates to give their counsel.

England, Petitions,
Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Guien, and other foreign places and Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Guien etc. as above.

Subsidy granted,
to be levied of every parish within the Realm, twenty two shillings four
pence; so as every parish of greater value, should according to his rate
contribute to the parish of less value, Contribution.
and that by Indenture.

Melcombe. Staple, Melcomb.


Robert Thorp the Chancellor declared, Chancellor.
that forasmuch as Easter approached, Easter, Petitions,
their Petitions could not be answered, but after the same Feast the King would
appoint certain to answer them.

Kings thanks.

Parliament dismissed.


and licensed them to depart.

Winchester at the Utaves of Trinity th^n ensuing, Great C^uncel summoned.
the Chancellor declared to the Lords and Commons there assembled, Chancellor.

Subsidy mistaken.


how that their Grant of twenty two shillings four pence of every parish,
Parish^s.
would not amount to Fifty thousand pounds, for that by the return into the
Chancery, there were not so many parishes within the Realm.

Subsidy supplied, Parish Church.
Five pounds ten shillings, comprising therein the aforesaid sum of twenty two
shillings four pence, excepting the County of Chester, Chester, Mo^tmain.
and all such lands of the Church as were amortized before the twen^ieth year
of Edward the First.

Commission for the Subsidy, Collectors, Commissioners, Knights of Counties.
The form of the Commission for this Subsidy was read before the King, and the
Collectors and Commissioners were appointed by the Knights of the Counties.

Petitions read and answered before the Lords and Commons, Parliament dismissed.
and answered before the King, Lords and Commons, which done, the King licensed
the Estates to depart, and the Parliament ended.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Great Charter,
The print touching the observation of the great Charter, cap. 1. agrees with
the Record.

Churchmen removed, Crowns disinherison, Officers, Laymen prefe^r'd.
the Lords and Commons required that Lay men only may be principal Officers of
the Kings Courts and House there particularly named, and that none of the
Clergy be; saving to the King his free election to choose, Kings election and
prerogative over his Officers.
and remove such Officers, so as they be Lay.

The King will therein do by the advice of his Council. Kings Council.


Answ.
It is agreed that every Petition now exhibited may be by some of the Lords
considered. Petitions considered, Lords.


That all Lands holden of the King in chief may be letten for life without
license. Lands in Capite leased.




Answ.
The print for the pulling down of Mills, Mills.
cap. 2. agrees not fully with the Record.

That there be no Fines for any Writs of the Chancery. Fines for Writs.




Answ.
That no purveyance be made for the King, Purveyance, Measure.
but for ready money, and that the King be served by common measure.

The Statute made shall be observed.

Answ.
That no Air, Air, Treilbaston.
or Treilbaston be holden during the Wars.



Corn, Victuals.
and victuals within the Realm.

Wool.
cap. 3. agrees with the Record in effect but not in form, (quod nota.)

Green wax, Extracts, Certainty, Parliament.
in what Term, in what plea, and between what parties.

Let the same be provided at the next Parliament.

Answ.
The like motion and Answer as at the last Parliament, Number. 19.

Sheriff^,
That the birth of any man, Trial, Birth.
to be tried by men as well of the Country where the birth is alleged, as in
the same County where the Writ is brought.

Answ.
The Law used herein shall stand. Old Law.


Mayors, Bailiffs, Sergeant, Victuall^rs, Taverners.
Bailiff, or any Sergeants, be Victualler, Hostler or Taverner, during their
Offices, on pain of 20. l.

There is in this case a certain Law.

That the Easterlings may find surety to entreat the English Merchants in their
Countries, Answ.
Easterlings, Merchants.
in such wife as they are here



That all Merchants may pass over Wool ^r^^ly. Answ.
Merchants, Wool, Free Trade.


The King will be advised.

Goscoyne, Answ.
Merchants restrained, Wines, Repeal of Statutes
may be utterly repealed.



That all Corporations may enjoy their Liberties, Corporations, Liberties.
any Statute to the contrary notwithstanding.

Such as be grieved upon complaint shall be answered. Answ.


Navies decay, Ships arrested^ Mariners, Merchants restrained, Masters of
Ships, Imposition.
viz. First, For that sundry men's ships are staid for the King long before they
serve, Answ.
whereby the owners are driven at their charges to find their Mariners to
their undoing. Secondly, For that Merchants, the nourishers of the Navy, are
often restrained their shipping, whereby Mariners are driven to seek other
Trades and Livings. Thirdly, for that the Masters of the Kings ships do take up
Masters of other ships as good as themselves are, whereby the most of these
ships do lie still, and the Mariners are enforced to seek new Livings, whereof
they pray remedy.

The King will provide remedy. Answ.


Goods uncustomed, Pardon.
may have the same allowed.

The grieved upon complaint shall be heard.

That every man may freely make Fortresses, Answ.
Fortresses.
Towns, and Walls karnelled and embattelled.

Answ.


Assiises, Justices Parents.


The same shall be as it has been. Answ.


Commissioners charges, Sessions.


The King will provide therefore.

That in Villenage alleged in the Plaintiff as regardant to the Manor, Answ.
Villenage Visne.
the Visne may be where the Manor is laid.

Answ.


Possession, Inquest of Office, Escheator, Trial.
until the right be tried by Scire facias. Scire facias.


The Statute made therefore shall stand.

That no Sheriff or Escheator do remain above one year, Answ.
Sheriff, Escheators.
and they l. within their own County.

The Statute made shall be kept. Answ.


French Varlets,
That the Boys or Varlets of France being here, shall be used either as
Servants, Answ.
or as Bondmen.



Justice not to be delaid, No man to answer without due process of Law.
That the Statutes whereby Justices shall not stay to do justice for the Great
or Privy Seal, or other commandment, and that no man be put to answer, but by
the due order of Law may be kept.

Answ.
Such as are grieved shall be heard.

Impositions, Woolls.
cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Commons House, Subsidy.


The King will be advised.

Answ.
That such as remain upon the Seacoasts, Seacoast guarded Protections,
Commons loss.
by the Kings commandment, may have Protections, with the clause Volumus.

The same is to the apparent loss of the Commons.

Answ.
That such as counterfeit any man's seal to any Deed remain in perpetual prison.
Seals counterfeited, Forgery, Imprisonment perpetual.


The Statutes mad etherefore shall stand.

That all Scottish money be brought into the Kings Exchequer by a day. Scottish
money.


Answ.
The Answer cannot be read.

Priests, Clergies assent.


The Answer as next above cannot be read.

Anno Quadragesimo septimo Edwardi Tertii. Rex etc. Ricardo Com. Arundel, Writs
of Summons.
etc. apud Westmonasterium, crastino Trinitatis Edmundi Regis proximo futuro,
etc. Test Rege apud Westmonast. 4. Octobris.
HUgoni de Courtney Com. Devon. Edwardo de Mortuo mari Com. Marchiae.
Charissimo filio nostro Com. Canterbr. Willielmo de Monteacuto Com. Sarum.
Gilberto Humfravil Com. de Anegos. Johanni de Charlton de Powys. Willielmo de
Latymer. Guidoni de Brian. Gilberto Talbot. Johanni de Clinton. Willielmo de
Botreaux. Johanni de War. Hen^ico de Scroope. Warrinae de Insula. Rogero de
Bello Campo. Johanni de Monteacuto. Rogero de Strange de Blackmers. Nicholao
Burnel. Johanni Gray de Codenore. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Johanni Gray de
Rotherfield. Ricardo de Staffort. Johanni de Cobham de Kent. Willielmo de
Furnival. Willielmo de Say. Willielmo de Huntingfield. Johanni de Northwood.
Johanni Mohun. de Dunster. Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth. Rogero Strange
de Knokyn. Johanni Buttort. Lucy de Ponings. Jacobo de Audley de Helighe.
Almarico de Sancto amando. Radolph. de Dacre. Rogero de Clifford. Petro de malo
lacu. Et Thomae de Musgrave.
Willielmo de Lattymer Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Quadragesimo Septimo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at
Westminster, the next day after St. Edmond the King, in the 47, Year of Edward
the Third.
Westminster Hall, that all such as were summoned to the Parliament might
depart, Parliament adjourned.
and be there the next morning in the Painted Chamber to hear the causes of the
Parliament. Painted Chamber.


John Knyvet, being Chancellor, Chancellor, Causes of the Parliament.
before the King, Lords, and Commons declared, how for the peace broken by the
French, Peace broken by the French.
the King to resist the same his Adversary, and for the obtaining of his right,
Kings right to France.
had sent over great Armies of men; Armies, King of Castile, Aragon, Royal
Navy, Public charges, Aid required.
and lately his Son the King of Castile and Arragon, and Duke of Lancaster had
achieved many great exploits to the overthrow o^ his Enemies, and nobly
acquitted himself. How the King further had set forth a royal Navy of ships; to
all which charges, albeit the Subjects to their pains contributed, yet was the
same far more infinite charge to the Prince.

Nobles, Realms defense.
Remembering then that such Nobles and others as hazarded their lives for the
whole Realms defense, ought speedily to be refreshed with fresh succors, and
aid, and the rather, for that the enemy did never make himself by sea and land.

Season of War, Speedy answer.
it required more speedy answer; they were willed therefore then to depart, and
to be there the next day.

Committee of Lords and C^mmons.
The next day certain of the Commons came to the Lords House, and required that
certain of the Lords there named would vouchsafe to confer with the Commons;
Conference.
Whereupon they went presently into the Chamberlains Chamber to treat with the
Commons.

Aids granted, Wars.
On Thursday in the week of St. Andrew, the Lords and Commons upon consultation
in aid of the Wars granted to the King, as is contained written in a Schedule
indented without any Seals thereunto annexed, the copy whereof is
underwritten, the which being given to the King was read before him, and the
Commons require Answer to their Petitions, Petitions answered.
which was promised.

Chancellor Kings thanks,
After that the Chancellor on the Kings behalf gave unto the whole Estates great
thanks, and it was willed that such of the Commons as would wait on their
Petitions might so do, Commons Petitions, C^mmons dismissed, Parliament ended
and that the rest that would might depart; And so the Parliament ended.

England, Petitions,
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne and other Countries beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

The effect of the Schedule aforesaid, and of the copy of the same.
Subsidy granted upon condition, Tonnage and Poundage.
of every twenty shillings of Merchandise coming into the Realm or going out
six p^nce, for two years, except of Woolls, Skines, and Wooll-Fells. And also
the Subsidy of Woolls for two years, upon condition that if the Wars do cease
within two years, then the latter payments of all their Grants to cease. They
pray that these Grants may be employed upon the Wars: Wars, Commissions, Fees,
Commons house.
They pray that every Shire may have their Commissions without any thing
paying. They further pray, that none of the Commons House be appointed to be a
Collector for any of these Grants. Collectors.
Vide Subsidy, 46 E. 3. tit. 10.

Petitions of the Commons with their Answers.
Magna Charta, Forest.
and the Charter of the Forest be kept.

It pleases the King. Answ.


Petitions answered, Private petitions.


Let that be eschewed which touches any private person.

The print touching the Assizes of broad clothes, Answ.
Clothes, Assizes.
cap. 1. agrees

London, London, Cities, Liberties.
and all other Cities, and Towns may enjoy all their Liberties, any Statute
notwithstanding.

Let them particularly show the breach of any liberty, Answ.
and they shall be answered.

Callice, Staples, Calice.
and no Patent and Grant to be made to the contrary.

The King will appoint the Staple as by the Council he shall Answ.

Kings Council.


think best.

Scottish silver.
cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

Protection, War^^
and do thereof fail by one month to the deceit of the Kings people, Deceit.
such protection to be void.

Answ.
Let the grieved come into the Chancery, Chancery.
and he shall have remedy.

Lyn. Staple at Lin, Woolls.


Answ.
The King grants thereunto, so as the Staple at Yarmouth do continue.

Tithe Wood, Prohibition.
may be enacted no Tithe to be due, and that in all such cases a prohibition
may be granted.

Answ.
Such prohibitions shall be granted as heretofore has been used.

Ordinaries, Jurisdiction, Breach of Faith, Laborers.
They require remedy against Ordinaries, for that upon this term Fidei lasio,
they take upon them cognizance of debt, and to punish Laborers for that they
make sundry blanks, whereupon men by sudden citing are much hindered.

Answ.
For the first, the Common Law serves. To the second, let the special matter be
showed, and it shall be heard.

Purveyors, Resistance.
That the Statute made whereby buyers for the Kings Household should pay readily,
shall stand, and that no man be impeached for resisting them therein.

Answ.
The Statute therefore provided shall be kept, and who will complain shall be
heard.

Accomptants, Exchequer, Imprisonment.
That all Accomptants in Exchequer showing cause of discharge, may so be without
delay, on pain of imprisonment for the Officers.

Answ.
A Statute is made therefore, and the grieved coming thither shall have right.

Cyrographer, Fines, Fees, Common Pleas.
until the foot of the fine be fretted, unless he may have three shillings four
pence, or ^our shillings more then his due fee of forty shillings.

Answ.
Let the grieved come to the Common Pleas, and he shall have right.

Laborers, Justices removed.
and that the Justices may be removed for not doing their duty.

Answ.
The King grants thereunto.

Villenage, Trial.
That villenage may only be tried where it is laid, and no where else.

Answ.
The King means not to alter the Law therein.

Masters of ships, Mariners Wages, Ships pressed, Necessity.
That Masters of ships may be paid the wages of them, and their Mariners from
the day of their being appointed to serve the King.

That taking of Ships shall not be but for necessity, and payment shallbe
reasonable, Answ.
as heretofore.

Allowance for tackling of ships.
The Masters of ships require allowance for the tackling of their ships worn by
the Kings service.

Such allowance has not been heretofore made. Answ.


Provisors, Pope.
whereby he has the first fruits of Ecclesiastical Dignities, First Fruits.
the treasure of the Realm, which being conveyed away, they cannot bear.

Rome touching these, Answ.
before whose return he cannot well answer.

The Burgesses of Bristoll require, Burgesses, Bristoll a County,
Perambulation, Chancery, Charters confirmed.
that the same Town with the Suburbs of the same, may be a County of it self;
and that the perambulation of the bounds of the same returned into the
Chancery, with all the Liberties and Charters granted unto the same, may be
confirmed by Parliament.

The King grants that the Charters, Answ.
Liberties, and Perambulation mentioned before, be confirmed under the Great
Seal.

French Prior Alie^s.
for diverse reasons there alleged.

The King by Council will provide therefore. Answ.


Sheriffs, Bailiff^.
as were before bailed by other Sheriffs.

There is a Statute made therefore, Answ:
whereby the grieved may have remedy.

Exchequer, Suggestions.
contrary to the Statute made in the 42 of this King.

Let any man especially complain, Answ.
and he shall find remedy.

Anno Quinquagesimo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the
Monday next after the Feast of St George, in the 50. Year of King Edward the
third.
Parliament adjourned, because sundry Lords and Commons not yet come.
THe same day most of the Lords and many of the Commons were before the King in
his own Chamber; where for that sundry of the Lords and Commons were not come,
Proclamation was made in the great Hall at Westminster, Proclamation for all
summoned to appear.
that all such as were summoned to the Parliament should be there the next
morning by eight of the clock.

John K^evit Knight, Chancellor of England, Chancellor, King, C^uses of the
Parliament.
before the King, Lords and Commons, declared the causes of the Parliament to
be three. The first, to provide for the Government of the Realm. Government of
the Realm.
The second, for the defense of the same, Defense of the Realm by Land and Sea.
as well beyond the Seas as on this side; as well by Sea as by Land. The third,
how he might prosecute his quarrel by War against his Enemies, Wars against
enemies, Advice of Parliament followed.
and maintaining the same: affirming, that as the King had always in all his
attempts followed their good counsel, so he meant herein to do no less.

Lords and Commons advise apart.
and speedily to consult and give answer.

Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Gascoyne, Petitions.
and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Commons meet in the Chapter house at Westminster.
After that, the Commons were willed to depart to their accustomed place being
the Chapter house of the Abbot of Westminster, whither they went; Whereupon
certain Lords and Nobles were appointed to go and consult with the Commons,
Committee of Lords to consult with them.
who are there particularly named.

Subsidy granted,
Skins, and Wool-Fells, as were granted in the last Parliament to endure three
years from the Feast of S. Michael next ensuing, 47 E. 3. tit. 7.

Commons device, Kings Council, Royal assent, Chancellor.
An Order devised by the Commons that the King should have at least ten or
twelve Counselors, without whom no weighty matters should pass, and for
smaller matters at least six or four of them; whereunto the King granted,
provided that the Chancellor, Treasurer, Treasurer.
and Keeper of the privy Seal, Privy Seal, Officers, Rewards prohibited.
should by their selves end all matters belonging to their Offices, and that
these Counselors should take no rewards.

Officers, Rewards prohibited.


Reports of matters of Council to the King.
and none others.

Ordinances by the King and his Council, Officers.
shall be by all the Kings Officers executed.

London or elsewhere to sell Sweet Wine by retail, are repealed; Ordinances
repealed, Sweet Wines, Retail, London.
and that every Freeman may sell such Wines in London by retail. Lord Mayor,
Prices of Wine.
So always, that the Lord Mayor have the disposing thereof, the price of the
same.

Commons Protestation, Allegiance, King abused by ill Officers, Ransoms,
Subsidies, Wars.
declared, That if he had faithful Counselors and Officers, he could not but
have passed all other Princes in treasure, considering that the Ransoms of the
Kings of Erance and Scotland were to him paid, besides the great Subsidies
here. And therefore they require, that falsehoods and crafts of certain of the
Kings Council, and other persons may be tried and punished; which would long
maintain his wars, without any charge to the Commons: And namely by trying of
three points.

Calice, Councils abuses, Staple, Bullion, Shifts for money, Provide Debts
bought at Undervalues.
for their own private turn. Secondly of such as made shifts for money for the
King deceitfully. Thirdly of such as of Covin between certain of the Council
and them bought of sundry the Kings Subjects debts due to the King to them, for
the tenth or twentieth penny.

Richard Lions Merchant of London was accused by the Commons of diverse deceits,
Richard Lions his Impeachment, Deceits, Extortions, Farmer of Subsidies,
Licenses to transport Wool and Staple-ware, Impositions, Change of money,
Bribes to pay due debts, Council.
extortions, and other misdemeanors, as well for the time that he repaired to
certain of the Kings Council, as for the time that he was Farmer of the Kings
Subsidy and Customs; and namely obtaining Licenses to convey over great Faizons
of Wool and Staple-ware, for procuring new Impositions upon Staple-ware, for
devising the Change of Money, for making the King for one Chevizance of Twenty
marks to pay Thirty pounds; for buying debts of diverse men due to the King for
small values, for taking special bribes to pay some the Kings due debt by way
of brokage. All which he should do by practicing with some of the Council.

Richard answers, His answer and submission.
and to the rest submits himself to the King touching body, lands and goods.

Richard is committed to prison at the Kings will, His censure, Imprisonment,
Seizure of his lands and goods.
and that all his lands, tenements and goods be seized to the Kings use.

Extortions, Commissions of Enquiry, D^sfranchisement.
Order was taken, that by Commission throughout England it should be enquired
of. Also the same Richard was disfranchised.

William Lord Latimer was openly accused by the Commons for diverse oppressions
by him done, Lord Latimers impeachment by the Commons, Oppressions.
as well while he served under the King in Britain, as for the time he was
Chamberlain to the King and his Council, Chamberlain,
Kings Council,
namely, for that he in Britain, and his Officers had taken of the people
there in Victual and ransomes against the Kings will to the sum of twenty four
thousand pound, Exactions, Victuals, Ransomes.
and at another time one hundred thousand pound estentes of gold, whereof was
never answered to Not accounting,




Victuals sold,
The same Lord Latimer was also accused for victual sold in Britain, to the
value of ten thousand Franks.

Latimer was also accused for the loss of the Town, Loss of S. Saviors Fort
and others.
and Fort of S. Saviors in Normandy, while he was Captain there, and of the
Town of Brotherel in Britain, and of other Towns, and Forts.

Richard Lions aforesaid particularly. C^nfederacy with Richard Lions.


Latimer saving the trial of his Peers, His answer, Trial by Peers, Commons.
offered to answer any particular persons, but that would not the Commons do,
but generally as is a^oresaid.

Judgment against him,


For that the Lord Latimer is found in full Parliament in default, by his
singular Council and government against the profit of the King, Ill counsel,
Deceit to the King.
and Realm, and namely for diverse Chevisances to the Kings loss, for grants
procured to the destruction of the Staple, Staples prejudice, Callis.
and of the Town of Callis, and for diverse Impositions laid upon Wools;
Impositions, Peers, Judges, Imprisonment, Marshall, Fines and Ransomes, Commons
request, Officers confiscated, Put from the Council,
he was awarded in full Parliament, by the Bishops and Lords, to be in prison,
in the keeping of the Marshall, and to make fine and ransom at the Kings
pleasure; whereupon the Commons required that he might lose all his Offices,
and no longer be of the Kings Council, which the King granted.

Latimer in Parliament found certain Lords and others, his Mainprisors for the
forth coming of his body, Mainprisors, Marshall.
during the Parliament, as by a Schedule does appear; and by this Mainprize the
Marshall of England so offered him to be at large.

viz.) one Archbishop, Mainprisors.
three Bishops, one Prior of S. John, three Earls, fifteen Barons, and thirteen
Knights, all their degrees of best renown.

William Ellis of great Yarmouth, William Ellis his Impeachment, Extortions,
Farmer of Customs, Subsidy.
was accused of sundry extortions by him done, while he was Farmer of the Kings
petit customs there, and Deputy to Richard Lions, for the Subsidy of
sixpence in the pound granted to the King, as by the Parliament it does appear.

William Ellis sufficiently answered; His Answer, His Judgment, Imprisonment,
notwithstanding judgment was, that he should be committed to prison, and make
fine at the Kings pleasure.

John Peach of London was accused for procuring a license under the Great Seal,
John Peach his Impeachment, Monopoly, Wines, Extortion, Judgment against him.
that he only might sell sweet Wine in London, and that by color thereof, he
took four shillings four pence of every man for every Tun thereof sold, the
which he justified, as lawfully he might; notwithstanding judgment was given
that he should be committed to prison at the Kings will, Imprisonment,
Recompense.
besides recompense to all parties grieved.

John Nevil was accused, Lord Nevill impeached.
that during the time that he was of the Kings Privy Council, Privy
Counselor, Buying debts due to the King at undervalues, Defrauding the King
for soldiers wages, Witnesses produced, Witness imprisoned, Judgment against
him, Imprisoment, Loss of lands goods and offices, Restitution, Executors.
he should buy certain debts due by the King; namely, of the Lady Rav^nsham,
and Simon Love, Merchant, far under the value, and for receiving of the King
more wages, and for a longer time for a hundred soldiers in Britain then was
due. Of the Ladies own good will, for the obtaining her debt, he confesses to
have received ninety five pound, which was not disproved. Of Love he denied any
such to be. Love being thereupon brought into the Parliament, wholly excuses
the same Lord. But because Love had the day before confessed the contrary
before two Knights of the House, he was committed to prison. To the receiving
of wages, the same Lord fully cleereth himself; notwithstanding judgment of
Imprisonment, and loss of lands, and goods, and offices was given of him, as
on others before, and that he should make restitution of the ninety five pounds
to the Executors of the said Lady.

Women, Maintenance, Alice Perers, Forfeiture, Banishment.
and namely, Alice Perrers, upon loss of all that they have, and banishment
for ever out of the Realm.

Ecclefield, Prior of Ecclefield, Alien, Complaint, Lord Latimer.
an alien should exhibit his Bill of Complaint against the Lord Latimer for the
Parsonage of Ecclefield, which the said Lord had wrongfully caused to be
recovered against the said Prior.

Adam de Bury was accused of diverse deceits, Adam de Bury impeached, Deceits
and wrongs, Major of Callis, Delinquents sent for, Contempt, Goods and Chattels
forfeited.
and wrongs done by him while he was Major of Callice, and Captain of
Bellingham, as hereafter may appear; and was sent for to come unto the
Parliament, and came not, nor yet could be found. It was agreed that all his
Goods and Chattels should be arrested: and so they were.

Norwich supposes an erroneous Judgment to be given against him in the Common
Place for the Archdeaconry of Norwich belonging to his Presentation, Error in
Parliament, Archdeaconry of Norwich.
and prays that those Errors might be heard, and redress thereof; whereunto
Answer was made, that Errors by Law in the Common place, Errors in the Common
P^eas, to be reversed in the Kings Bench, and of the Kings Bench in the
Parliament.
are to be corrected in the Kings Bench, and of the Kings Bench, in the
Parliament, and not otherwise.

Leistock, Complaint, Commons, Great Yarmouth, Charter repealed in one clause
only
as the pursuit of the Commons, the grant late made by the King to the Town of
great Yarmouth, that one place in the Sea called Kirklerode, annexed to the
Port of Yarmouth, should be utterly repealed, saving all other their Liberties.

John, at the request of the Commons came into the open Parliament before the
Lords and Commons, Commons request, Prince of Wales, created only by the King,
not by the Lords, Kings prerogative,
Richard Bordeaux, the son and heir of Edward late Prince of Wales, and heir
apparent to the Realm, of whom after the Archbishop of Canterbury had spoken
words of commendation, the Commons with one voice prayed that the Lords would
make him Prince of Wales, as his Father was, who said it laid not in them, but
in the King only

King sick, Lords and Commons attend him, Kings confirmation.
For that the King was diseased at Eltham, the Lords and Commons went thither,
to have the premises before, and after confirmed, and answered.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Magna Charta, Forest.
That the Great Charter, and Charter of the Forest, may be kept in all points.

Answ.
The King grants thereunto.

Sheriffs, Inquests and Juries, Panel, Sheriffs oath.
That the Sheriffs in all their returns of any Inquest, do return the most
honest, and nighest neighbors; and that in every weighty cause, the Sheriff be
sworn to view the Panel, before he return the same.

Answ.




The Statute therefore made shall be executed, and withal adjoined to the Oath
of every Undersheriff, that he in his own person shall survey the Panel before
he return the same.

Liberties, Exemptions, Occupations, Abuses reformed.
A motion made, That all Liberties granted to any Mystery or Occupation in any
City or Town, be revoked, and no more granted; so as the Mayor and Bailiffs of
every City and Town may see things amended. Answ.


Commissions repealed, Extortions, Commissioners of good name, estate and
reputation.
That diverse Commissioners for Extortions, or such like, granted heretofore to
sundry of evil name, may be repealed, and no such granted hereafter but to
Lords and others of best reputation in their Countries.

Answ.
The King grants thereunto, and that no such Commissions be hereafter made but
to the Justices, J^stices, Sergeants, Lawyers.
Sergeants, and others learned in the Law, and of best ability.

Salmons, Fish, Thames, Nets.
For the saving of Salmons, and other Fryes of Fish in the Thames, almost
destroyed by certain Engines, as the King himself has often found: Answ.
That therefore all Trinks between London and the Sea may be overthrown; and
that no Salmon be taken between Gravesend and Henley upon Thames in the
Kipper-time, viz. between the Invention of the Cross, and the Epiphany^ and
that no Nets be laid in the Thames, unless the same be of large mash of assize.

Commissions of Enquiry.


Wears, Braint, Thames.
That the Wears upon the River called Braint in the County of Middlesex, parcel
of the River Thames, may be taken away.

Answ.
The Statutes therefore made shall be executed.

Lombards, Brokers, Usury, Sodomy, Spies, Aliens.
That all Lombards as be called Brokers, and who only maintain Usury, having
brought into the Realm besides the shameful sin which is not to be named, being
also privy Spies, may be remedied.

Answ.
The Brokers of a strange Country, is partly answered in the Bill of London.

Strangers, Corporations, Liberties,
Many inconveniences growing, for that strangers in every Town being not free
of the same, are yet suffered to buy and sell there; It is therefore required,
(...) showed Ch^nce^^.
that Cities and Towns may have their liberties renewed and confirmed for
reasonable Fines, and that they may enjoy them, so as no stranger in any Town
being not free, may occupy there.

Answ.
may show them in the Chancery, where they shall have right.

That the Protections cum clausula Volumus, Protect^^^^ repealed.
whereby many men are undone, and namely by one made to Jacob Iocanim a
Lombard, may be repealed, and no such hereafter granted.

The examination of such had by the Council, Answ.




shall be repealed, if it need.

That Ribalds and sturdy Beggars may be banished out of every Town. Ribald,
Begg^rs^ Banishment.


Touching Ribalds, the Statute of Winchester, Answ.

Winchester.


and the Declaration of the same, with other Statutes of Robersdmen be
executed: R^berdsmen, Counterfeits, Soldiers.
And for such as make themselves Gentlemen, and Men of Arms, or Archers, if
they cannot so prove themselves, let them be driven to their occupation or
service, or to the place from whence they came.

The Counties of Lincoln, Leicester, Nottingham and Derby prayen that the
Staple may be holden at Lincoln, Staple, Lincoln, S. Botolphs,
as it was at the first ordinance and not at S. Botolphs.

It shall continue at S. Botolphs at the Kings pleasure. Answ.

Kings pleasure.




Incontinency, Clergy, Bigamy.
it is requisite that any man may have his Clergy, albeit he marry two wives,
or a widow.

The King will be advised. Answ.


Bailiffs, Forrests^ Forfeiture, Legal trial, Chancery, Mainprise, Air,
Restitution.
and thereon have their Offices seized, and forfeited to the King, being not
called to answer^, may have a Writ out of the Chancery upon the Statute to be
let to Mainprise until the Air, and to be restored to their offices according
as has been used.

Answ.
and shall have remedy.

That all such Officers, Ill Cou^cellors, Officers disabled, Restitution.
and others of the Kings Council being convicted of deceit, and are displaced,
may never be restored, that it be enacted. Answ.


King and Lords liberty.
they will do as to them seems best.

That remedy may be had against such Aliens religious as sue in the Court of
Rome for their pensions or livings. Aliens religiou^ Rome.


Who is especially grieved may declare the same to the Council, Answ.




and shall find remedy.

That Justices of the Peace may be named by the Lords and Knights of every
Shire in Parliament, Justices of Peace^ nominated by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, Oath, Fees.
where they may be sworn, and none to be renewed without Parliament, and that
they may be allowed reasonable Fees.

Answ.

King and Council.


They shall be named by the King and his continual Council, and for the fees the
King will be advised.

Church lands sold.
or other person of the Church, the Statute of Westminster. the second may be kept,
Westminster. 2.
and that judgment executory may be had against the tenant of the lands.

Answ.
The King would have the Statute to be kept, and touching Alienations made
before this Parliament, Alienation^.
writs shall be granted against the tenants of the land, and for such
alienation to be made, the King will be advised.

Hundreds not to be farmed.
That Hundreds be not let to Fee-farm, or other farm letten, but kept in the
Lords hands.

Answ.
The Statutes therefore provided shall be kept.

Indictment, Coroner, Murder, Flight.
That such as be indicted before the Coroner for murder, and flying upon the
same by sinister means, to them they shall forfeit their goods, Forfeiture,
Justices of Goal delivery.
may be enquired of only before the Justices of Goal delivery, whether they so
fled, or withdrew themselves.

Who will especially complain shall find favor.

Answ.
That Staukes, Stankes, Nusances, Havens.
stakes, and other annoyances made about havens may be removed, and thrown down.

The Statute therefore made shall be kept.

Answ.
That the Accounts as well for sums of money for Assarts, as otherwise in the
Exchequer, Accounts, Exchequer.
may be discharged on their averment that there is no means to levy the same.
Averment,


Answ.
The grieved upon declaration shall have right.

Seacoasts defense, Residence.
for the defense of the same may be bound to dwell upon the same.

The King by advice will appoint order therein.

Answ.
That no Sheriff be made but from year to year, Sheriffs, D^puties.
and that such and their Deputies as have to the contrary, may be in the same
case.

The Statutes therefore appointed shall be observed.

Answ.
That none be appointed to be a Justice of Assise in his own Country, Justices
of Assize, Associates.
unless some foreign Justice be associate with him.

Who will complain shall have right.

Answ.
That the Charter made to the men of Yarmouth, Yarmouth, Herring.
that none should within the time of their fishing, buy any Herring within
seven miles of the same Town, may be repealed, Monopoly, Repeal, Free trade.
so as men may openly buy and sell.

The King grants in respect of a new grant above mentioned, saving to the
Town all other their Liberties, with this Clause, licet.

Bar, Collateral warranty, Assets.
but for so much of lands as descended to him by such Ancestry.

The King will be advised until the next Parliament.

Answ.
That the Justices of Assize shall keep their Sessions in Towns where Gaols be,
Justices of Assize, Sessions, Goal deliveries, Patents.
and make their deliverances before their departure at the least once by the
year; and that to the same Justices may be made in one Patent, as well to take
the Assize, as to deliver the Jail.

Answ.
The Justices of Assize shall have their Patent in such wise as has been, and
shall as well take the Assize, as make delivery.

Michael, Sheriffs annually chosen, Exchequer, Extracts,
and so as their gifts and dinners to the Officers of the Exchequer may be done.

That the Justices deliver into the same Court their Extracts at the Utaves of
S. Michael, and that they be delivered to the Sheriff at the fifteen of S.
Martine, or the day after Hilary at utmost. That Sheriffs and Escheators may be
yearly removed. Escheators.
Answ.


Sheriffs and Escheators shall be yearly chosen at Michaelmas, and have out
their Commissions the day after All Souls, Commissions, Dinners,
that no dinners or gifts be given them in the Receipt or Exchequer on pain.

England, to publish the perambulations of the Forest heretofore made,
Perambulations of the Forest, Officers, Forfeiture, Damages.
and to make new perambulations, and to establish the continuance of the same,
so as every Officer upon the breach thereof, do forfeit his Office, and render
double damages to the party grieved. Answ.


England, and wills that the Charter of the Forest be observed. Charter of
the Forest.


That remedy may be had against certain Lombards who have colored certain
ships fraughted, Lumbards, Fraud.

Answ.


and wrecked goods of the Kings enemies, and persued by certain of the Kings
Subjects to be their own, Kings Council,
and by sinister means have obtained the same.

The grieved upon suit to the Council shall have right.

That no lands or tenements be seized by any of the Kings Officers of any
person not attainted of Treason, Seizure of lands and goods, Attainder.

Answ.


or Felony in his life time.



That no Sheriff, Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, Jailer, Justices, Commissioners,
Under sheriff, or Jailer be Justice during their Offices, neither that they be
put in any Commission, then only concerning their Offices. Answ.




That the Bishops do certainly appoint what shall be taken for a Probate of a
Testament, Bishops, Probate of Wills, Fees, Acquittance, Account.
and for an Acquittance upon the account.

The Statutes therefore made shall be kept.

That for goods of Felons found by office, Answ.




every man may traverse such Offices, and upon the reversing of the same to be
discharged.

The Law shall stand as it does.

Scottish money, Answ.
sweet Wine sold without license, Corn, Lead, Tin, Worsted, Butter, and such
like, whereby no profit is to the Prince.

That for Scottish money remedy was provided, Account, Exchequer, Scottish
money.

Sweet Wine,


47 E. 3. tit. 19. for sweet Wines remedy was appointed at the last Parliament,
and for the rest shall be with opportunity.

That the Clerks of the Market of the Kings household do not by extortion take
Fines in gross, Answ.
Clerks of the Marker, Fines in gross, Measures, Weights.
or certain of any Towns, and that there

He shall see punishment done according to the quality of the fault, Answ.
without any such Fines taking there where he does not his Office; And the
measure to be according to the Standard and Statute made. Negligence.


Patent, Escheators enquest.
That no Patent of any Lands found by the Escheators Enquest be granted, so as
the party will stand bound to answer the King the profits thereof, if upon
trial it be found for the King.

Answ.
The King will be advised thereof.

Chancellor, Champerty, Damages.
That the Chancellor upon the Writ of Champerty may grant forth Writs at the
suit of the party, and that he may recover damages in his suit. Answ.




Provisors, Rome.
They require remedy against reservation of Benefices from Rome.

This Bill is elsewhere answered.

Answ.
That the Lord Steward and Marshal of the Kings household do hold no other pleas
then are contained in the Statute called Articuli super Chartas; Lord Steward,
Marshal, Jurisdiction, Articuli super chartas, Verge.
That they of twelve miles may be certainly limited whether from the Kings
presence, or the place of the houshold^ and not from both, unless they be
together, and that the Steward do keep his Session within three miles about the
presence of the King, as it has been accustomed.

Answ.
They shall have jurisdiction from the place where the King himself is,
Jurisdiction.
or from the place where the household is kept twelve miles of every part only,
and not from the one and the other at one time. And further the Statute
therefore made shall stand.

Exchequer, Wager of Law, Prerogative.
That every man in the Exchequer being impleaded, may wage his Law as in other
Courts where wager does lie.

Answ.
They shall not wage their Law in the Exchequer, as in other Courts where the
King is not party.

Corographer, Fines, Fees.
That the Corographer may be sworn, that neither he nor none of his Clerks do
take for the engrossing of a Fine, but only Four shillings.

Answ.
The Statute made therefore shall stand.

Popes usurpations Provisors,
A long Bill against the usu^pations of the Pope, as being the cause of all the
plagues, injuries, famine and poverty of the Realm, so as thereby was not left
the third person, or other Commodity within the Realm, as lately was.

Tax to the Pope. Popes extortions.
does amount to five times as much as the Tax of all the profits as appertain
to the King by the year of this whole Realm; and for some one Bishopric or
other dignity, the Pope by way of translation and death has three, four, or
five several Taxes.

Brokers of Rome, Simony.
That the Brokers of that sinful City for money promote many Caitiffs, being
altogether unlearned and unworthy of a Thousand marks Living yearly, Unworthy
persons promoted, Learnings decay.
where the learned and worthy can hardly obtain Twenty marks; whereby Learning
decays.

Alien enemies, Treasure exported.
That Aliens enemies to this Land, who never saw nor care for to see their
Parishioners, have those Livings, whereby they despise Gods service, and convey
away the treasure, and are worse th^n Jews or Saracens.

Law of the Church, Presentation,
To be considered, that the Law of the Church would have such Livings to be
bestowed for charity only, without praying or paying. That reason would that
Livings given of devotion, should be bestowed in hospitality. Hospitality.
That God had committed his sheep to the Pope to be pastured, Pope.
and not shorn or shaven.

Lay-Patrons, Simony, Popes covetousness, Popes great exactions and treasure
out of England.
do thereby learn to sell their Benefices to beasts, none otherwise then Christ
was sold to the Jews. That there is none so rich a Prince in Christendom, that
has the fourth part of so much treasure as the Pope has out of this Realm for
Churches most sinfully.

Churches honor, Plagues of the Realm for suffering the Church to be defaced.
and that all the plagues there particularly named have justly fallen upon this
Realm for suffering the same Church thus to be defaced, with declaration that
it will daily increase without redress.

Churches reparation. Jubilee.
the fiftieth year of the Kings reign, the year of joy and gladness, then the
which could be no greater.

Letters to the Pope, Great Seal, Nobles Seals,
the one in Latin under the Broad Seal, the other in French under the Seals of
the Nobles, importing these particularities requiring redress.

Lombardy or otherwise, No money to be exported, Lombards, Forfeiture,
Imprisonment
on pain of forfeiture and imprisonment; and to enact the Articles he^eafter
ensuing.

The King has heretofore by Statute provided sufficient remedy, Answ.
and otherwise persueth the same with the holy Father the Pope, Pope.
and so minds to do from time to time, until he has obtained as well for
the matters before, as for the Articles ensuing, being in manner all one.

Popes Collectors, Aliens, Spies, Secrets disclosed.
and other strangers the Kings enemies, and only Legier-Spies for English
Dignities, and disclosing the secrets of the Realm, may be touched.

Popes Receiver and Collector, Peter Pence, Money transported
keeps a house in London, with Clerks and Officers thereto, as it were one of
the Kings solemn Courts, transporting yearly to the Pope Twenty thousand marks,
and most commonly more.

Rome, Cardinals, Aliens, Deans, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Money transported
English Brokers.
whereof one Cardinal is a Dean of York, another of Salisbury, another of
Lincoln, another Archdeacon of Canterbury, another Archdeacon of Duresm,
another Archdeacon of Suffolk, and another Archdeacon of York, another
Prebendary of Them and Nassington, another Prebendary of York in the Church of
York, have diverse other the best Dignities in England, and have sent over
yearly twenty thousand marks, over and above that which English Brokers living
there have.

Popes usurpation, Enemies, Lombards, Subsidy.
who defend Lombardy for him, does always at his pleasure levy a Subsidy of the
holy Clergy of England.

Popes translation of Bishoprics, etc.


Popes Collector, First Fruits.
That the Popes Collector has this year taken to his use the First-fruit of all
Benefices.

Provisors, Rome, Popes reservations, Benefices, Cardinals created Kings
enemies.
To renew all the Statutes against Provisors from Rome, since the Pope reserveth
all the Benefices in the world for his own proper gift, and has this year
created twelve new Cardinals; so now there are thirty, where wonted to be but
twelve, and all those Cardinals except two or three, are the Kings enemies.

Popes usurpations Kings enemies, Kings regality.
That the Pope in time will give the Temporal Manors of those Dignities to the
Kings enemies, since he daily so usurpeth upon the Realm, and the Kings
regality.

Religious houses, Free ele^^ion, Popes incroachment.
That all Houses and Corporations of Religion who unto the Kings reign now
freely election of their Heads, the Pope has accroached the same unto himself.

Legacies from the Pope, Popes covetousness of our money.
That in all Legacies from the Pope whatsoever, the English Clergy bears the
charge of the Legacies, and all for the goodness of our money.

Money transported, Popes Collectors, Cardinals Proctors.
That also it appears, that if the money of the Realm were as plenteous as
ever it was, the Collectors aforesaid, with the Proctors of Cardinals, would
soon convey the same.

England, Popes Collectors banished under pain of death, Proctors banished:
upon pain of life and member: And that no Englishman on the like pain become
any such Collector or Proctor, or remain at Rome.

Popes Collector, Clergies vassalage to the Popes Collector, Persons sent for
to give information to the Lords and Commons.
for that the whole Clergy being obedient to him, dare not him displease, it
were good that Sir John Strensall Parson of S. Botolphs in Holborn may be sent
for to come before the Lords and Commons of this Parliament, who being
straightly charged can declare much more, for that he serves the same
Collector in house five years.

Servants, Beggars, Vagabonds, Laborers.
Beggars and Vagabonds, much after the sort in the Statute made in the good
King Ed. 6. his days against Vagabonds.

Touching this long Bill of Laborers, let the Statutes heretofore made be duly
executed.

Answ.
They require that the Statute made in 14 E. 3. that the Kings Ward should be
committed to the next Heir of the Ward to whom the lands cannot descend, Kings
Wards, Commitment, Preroga^ive.

Answ.


yielding therefore as much as another would, might be confirmed.



Prescription, Writ of Right, Mortdancester, Nuper obiit, Cozenage, Aiel, Old
Law not to be changed.
That time of prescription in Writ of Right may be from the Coronation of the
King E. 1. and in Writs of Mortedauncestre nuper obiit, Cozenage, Aiel, etc.
and such other Writs mixed in the Rights from the Coronation of the King now.

The King will be advised for changing the Law heretofore used.

Answ.
That no Alien do enjoy any living that has cure, or requires residence.
Aliens, Benefices.


Answ.
This Bill is answered before in the two long Bills of Rome.

Errors,
the chief Justice of the Common Pleas, they require that the chief Justice
there be appointed no Justice of Assize. Justices of Assize.

Answ.






That a general pardon may be of all Misprisions, General Pardon of Intrusions.

Prerogative.


and Intrusions made into any Lands holden of the King in chief.

The King will show favor where him likes. Answ.


Account, Executors, Guardian in Soccage.


The King will be advised until next Parliament.

That restitution may be made to Englishmen, Answ.
Restitution, Farmers t^ Aliens.
farmours of any Religious Aliens house.

Answ.

Priors, Churches Conventual, Collegial, Parochial,


Collegial, and Parochial; but for English Governors the King will be advised.

Grants prejudicial to the King and Realm.


Let them declare more especially.

That the Statu^e made for buyers in 36 E. 3. tit. 10 etc. may be kept, and
that Justices of the Peace may enquire of the same. Answ.


Forestallers, Justices of Peace.


That an Infant within age levying a Fine, Answ.
Infants, Fines, Old Law.
may have respite two or three years after his full age to reverse the same.



That no Alien be made Head of any Religious House belonging to Aliens. Answ.
Prior Aliens, Wars, French Alien enemies banished.
And that during the Wars all French Religious persons may

Nothing was done herein.

Prisoners, Ransom.
and unable to ransom themselves, and namely, Sir Matthew de Gorney, Sir
Matthew de Reedman, Sir Thomas Foggs, Sir John Harpeden, Sir Gregory Seas, Sir
Ieffery de Werkesley, Sir Robert Twyford, Sir John Bourcher, and diverse other
good Knights and Esquires, pray the King to ransom them.

The King is w^ll^n^ to do for their comfort, Answ.
as far as reason would.

Devon for diverse oppressions done by the Officers of the Stannary there,
Devon, Oppression, Stannaries, Charter explained in Parliament.
by color of their Liberties, require the King by Parliament, to explain his
grant to them made, which being divided into particular branches is done, but
too long to be abridged,

Cornwall exhibit for the Liberties of the Stannary, Cornwall, Stannaries.
agreeing in grant and answer as the next above, and therefore too long to be
abridged.

Cumberland require aid of the King for the repairing the City of Carlisle,
Cumberland, Carlisles repair, Aid, Poverty, Warden of the Marches.
being in a manner spoiled and fallen down, for that the Townsmen are not able
to do the same, and also for the appointing of one to be Warden of the Marches
there.

The Bishops and Lords together with the Earl of Warwick, Answ.
and Sir Guy de Bryan shall assemble and appoint reasonable order therein.

Port-Towns.
The Inhabitants of the Port-Towns in England pray. That whereas it often
happens that a man or boy being in one of their ships or other vessels,
Ships, Mariners, Deodand.
and by misadventure falling therefrom is drowned, their ship or vessel is
thereupon seized as a Deodand, and that therein remedy may be had.

Answ.
If the Vessel be upon the Sea, it shall be adjudged no Deodand; if upon the
Fresh Water, let him complain to the King, Kings grace.
who will show favor.

Watermen, Nusances, Locks, Wears, Thames, Customs, Stanes-Bridge, Windsor,
Maidenhead.
The Watermen of London complain of leaving of Locks, Stauks and Wears upon the
River of Thames, and namely of a Lock called Hamelden Lock; and for that there
is Custom demanded of them passing the Bridges of Stanes, Windsor, and
Maidenhead, and other Locks, against their Custom.

For the Locks and Kidels, the Statute made in 37 E. 3. tit. 18. shall be
executed. Answ.
And for ex^cting money of them at the Bridges aforesaid, Exacted ^ees,
Chancery, Supersedeas.
or elsewhere against their F^^nchises, they shall make their suit in the
Chancery, and have their Writs grounded on their Liberties to stay such takings.

Kent, Dover-castle, Imprisonment, Jurisdiction.
The Commons of the County of Kent complain against the Officers of the Castle
of Dover, for arresting them by their Catchpoles, to answer before them
whereunto they are bound.

Answ.
The Officers shall have no jurisdiction out of the Fee of the Honor and Castle
of Dover, nor shall make any Process by Capias out of the Liberties of the
Cinque Ports. Process, Capias, Cinque Ports.


Seacoasts, Ships arrested, Reprisal.
Certain of the Seacoasts complain to the King, That where they be by the Kings
appointment with their ships transported. Sir Thomas Felton Steward of Gascoin,
and Sir William Elman Governor of Bayon unto Bordeaux, and from thence went to
the Bay; where certain Spanish Galleys, notwithstanding the Truce taken between
the King and the Spaniards and Frenchmen, boarded and kept them, viz. the tenth
of August last past before, wherein they pray remedy.

Answ.
The King has, and will do his best for redress and restitution.

Southampton.
The Inhabit^nts of the Town of Southampton pray the King to take the Town into
his own hands, for that they are not able to pay the Feefarm, Feefarm,
Fortification,
by reason of their great charge about the Fortification of the same, and that
he will send thither Men of war for the defense of the same. Men of War.


Answ.
The King will thereof be advised.

Winchester, Lib^rties confirmed, London, Murage.
The Mayor and Commonalty of Winchester pray the King to confirm and grant to
them their Liberties, in such wise as was last granted to London; and that
toward the Murage of the same, he would give them some Aid of Custom, or
otherwise.

Thomas Brangtinham Bishop of Exeter, Treasurer of England. Loans repaiment,
Treasurer.


Answ.
They shall be paid as soon as may be.

Lords, Rio^s,
The Lords of the Realm and their Tenants pray the King of remedy against the
Riots of diverse Cities and Towns, for that they enter upon their several
grounds therein claiming Common, Corporations, Common,
considering the Wastes thereunto adjoining may suffice therefore; and namely,
that such of the Townsmen as have not land lying with any of the said Lords,
may have no Common in any of their lands. Answ.


This matter is before the Council. Council.


Bath complain, Bath, Fair, Bristol, Nuisance,
That whereas they had a Fair there at the Feast of S. Calixte, the Town of
Bristol being but ten miles from them, have raised a Fair at Bristol the same
day, and forbidden all their Townsmen of Bristol upon certain pains to bring
any Wares to the said Fair of Bath, whereof they pray remedy. Answ.


It is before the Great Council. Great Council,


Essex and Suffolk pray, Essex. Clothes, Cogware, Kersies.
that certain Clothes there or elsewhere, called Cogware and Kersies, made in
the said Counties, be not within the compass of the Statute of Clothes, made in
47 E. 3.41.

The King wills that they have such words, Answ.
that the strait ware called Cogware and Kersies made in the said Counties,
shall not be intended to be comprised in the said Statute nor under the pain
therein. Statute explained.


London pray, London liberties, Strangers, Broker, Retail.
that they may enjoy all their liberties, and that no stranger do keep house,
or be a Broker, or sell Merchandise by Retail.

The King has granted thereto, Answ.
conditionally that the same City be well governed, Cities government,
Merchants of the Haunce.
saving to the Merchants of the Haunce their liberties.

Houses decayed in Cities and Boroughs, Kings Tenants, Fee-farms.
that diverse of the Kings Tenants having Burgage within them, do suffer them to
fall down, whereby they are the worse able to pay their Fee-farms: and do
therefore pray remedy.

Chichester pray remedy, Chichester.
for that they are impleaded out of the same City for their Freeholds, and for
that they are driven to appear at Assizes and Sessions, contrary to the general
words of their Liberties. Liberties.

Privileges.




Let them show their Charters in the Chancery, Answ.

Chancer.


and they shall have right.

Charters confirmed.


Let them also show their Charters, and they shall have right. Answ.


Surrey and Sussex pray remedy, Surrey and Sussex, Fee farms, Earl of Arundel,
Sheriffs Turns, Sheriffs Account,
That whereas the King out of his Feefarms paid for the said Counties of Surrey
and Sussex, has granted to Richard Earl of Arundel the two Turns of Sheriffs
in the Rapes of Chichester and Arundel, worth by the year 30l. and certain Rent
called Sherringdeld, to the yearly value of 14l. ^9^. 1d. yielding therefore
yearly 3.6.8^. that the Sheriff may upon his account be discharged thereof.

Let it be showed to the King; Answ.
and if it please him that the Earl enjoy the same, the Sheriff shall be
discharged according to the

Southwark, Charter confirmed.
The Burgesses of Southwark pray a Confirmation of their Charter lately burned
by casualty.

Answ.
Let them make their persuit in the Chancery, and they shall have right.

Newcastle, Prior of Tinmouth,
The Major, and Commons of Newcastle upon Tine complain, that where the Prior of
Tinmouth, parcel of S. John of Jerusalem in England^ by cautelous and suborned
means brought his Writ of Freehold in Fernham, False recovery.
and put in view and plaint the greater parcel in value of the same Town,
holden in farm of the Crown time out of m^nde, and recovered: Chancellor,
Whereupon order was taken that the same Justice of Assize, should not in that
Assize have a procedendo, Procedendo,
but that the Chancellor should grant a Commission for the examining of the
truth, Commission,
until which time the matter should stay; they therefore require that the
Assize be no further proceeded in until the Commission return.

Answ.

Parliament,


Remedy is provided in this Parliament, as appears by another Bill thereunto
endorsed.

Defense.
The Commons of the Marches in Estritheng, require that Commission may be made
to the Lord Percy, Commission,
the Prior of Bridelington, Sir Robert Boynton, Sir Robert de Constable, Sir
John of Snareby, and John de Almary, that they may appointable persons for the
defense of the same, and namely for an arrival between a place called
Erledicks, and the Town called Whitby.

Answ.
It pleases the King.

Essex, Hartford, Sheriffs Account,
The Commons of the Counties of Essex, and Hartford pray, that the Sheriff upon
his account be allowed an hundred pounds yearly of that which he cannot receive.

Answ.

Search, Exchequer, Pardon.


Let them search the Exchequer Treasury, and elsewhere for the causes of the
distress o^ th^se Farms for two years now ensuing, and in the mean time the
Sheriff shall have pardon of an hundred marks.

Rochester pray, Rochester, Clerk of the Market,
that the Clerk (of the Market) may have nothing to do within the said City.

He shall make assay and due punishment of such as make default, without taking
any Fines in gross of the same Town where he does not his Office. Answ.

Fines,




Northampton show, that the Sheriff is yearly charged with an hundred pounds
for the profit of the shire, Sheriffs account,
where he knows not how to levy above fifty three pounds three shillings four
pence, Answ.
and pray consideration thereof.



Pardon.

Forfeiture, Attainder.


They pray a pardon of all forfeitures supposed to be done by any of them,
whereof they were not attainted in their life, and that no such hereafter be
made. Answ.




That the Process of such as be at Issue, Process discontinued, Issue, Nisi
Prius.
and do not within one year after sue out his Nisi prius, be discontinued, and
had for nothing.

Old Law.
Answ.
The Law heretofore used shall stand.

Transportation of Corn, Calice.
but only for the provision of Calice.

The Liege people shall be free to carry where they best like for their most
profit. Answ.

Free exportation




Nottingham, Nottingham, Guardian, Mor^main,
Derby and Lincoln, and of the Town of Nottingham, require that by the Kings
Letters Patent the County and Town of Nottingham aforesaid may appoint two
Guardians, who may purchase lands unto them and their successors, for the
maintenance of a Bridge called Heybeth-bridge, Heybeth-bridge.
nigh unto the Town of Nottingham.

The King will be advised. Answ.


London against the horrible vice of Usury, London, Usury, Old Law.
may be observed throughout the whole Realm.

The old Law shall continue. Answ.


Nevel disseisin of Nuisance made to a Miln, Assise, Nuisance, Mill, Common Law.
or to the Frank-tenant of Nuisance made in times past as heretofore.

Let the Common Law run. Answ.


Lombards, Lombaads, Wool, Deceit.
who named themselves to be of the Company of Askertines, or of Stroze, or
other the like, and thereby have upon credit bought Wool of English men, some
to the value of Thirty pounds, and some Twenty pounds, and some have departed
to the great undoing of diverse Englishmen, as Thomas Blanchered, Nicholas John,
and other their Factors lately did.

It is before the Great Council. Great Council.
Answ.


Trial, Births, Old Law,
that the Enquest for the trial may be of the County where the birth is laid,
and not where the Writ is brought.

The old Law therein shall be observed. Answ.


Kiugs carriages, Marshalsey.
and not to charge the Commons therewith: And to remember the Court of
Marshalsey, for there is great complaint thereof throughout the whole Realm.

Answ.
but if they be, he will charge the Steward and other Officers to make redress.
Steward.
And to the Article of the Marshalsey, let it be declared.

The Merchants of the Staple require to be eased of diverse new Impositions,
Merchants, Staple, Imposi^ions.
as Chalking, Tronage, Wharfage, etc.

The King would no new Impositions, Answ.
but that the same be enquired of, Enquiry.
if it be need.

Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Posse Comitatus.
to raise the power of the Shire for the repressing of Routs and Riots. Routs
and Riots.


The King will appoint order, Answ.
and wills that the Statute be executed.

Castle of Nottingham, Nottingham-Castle, An Earl Keeper thereof^ Great Council.
wherein the sons of Sir Charles de Blois are under the keeping of a stranger
not able to answer therefore; where by Record it does appear, that the Keeper
of that Castle was wont to be an Earl of the Realm.

Answ.
Let it be declared to the King and Great Council.

Corporations, Hamlets, Contribution, Break^rs of the Peace.
The Commonalty of Cities and Towns prayen, that such parcel and Hamlets of
Towns lying near to the walls of their Cities and Towns, and yet not belonging
to the same, may be contributory to all charges within such their walled Cities
and Towns; and that the Mayors and Bailiffs of the same may arrest all breakers
of the peace there. Answ.




No^thamberland, Issues pardoned.
That it will please the King to pardon to the Commons of Northhumberland all
issues and amerciaments lost in any of the Kings Courts from 48. unto these
presents.

Answ.
The King will be advised.

Southampton, Extortions, Lord Nevil, Soldiers wages and disorder.
The Commons of Southampton pray remedy against the extortions of the Lord Nevil
for not paying men their wages; whereby the soldiers spoiled the Couutry to the
value of Four hundred pounds, and that remedy may be provided for the like.

Answ.
The offender shall answer for the time past, and for the time to come the King
will provide remedy.

Norfolk, Payment, Purveyors.
The Commons of Norfolk require, that payment may be made to them and to all the
Countries for sheep taken by the Purveyors far under the price against the
Statute.

Answ.
This Bill is otherwise answered within the Bill of Buyers.

Yarmouth, Complaint in Parliament, Oppressions, Kings protection,
That the poor Commons of Yarmouth, who came to the Parliament to complain of
the oppressions done to them by the rich of the same Town, may be in the Kings
protection sworn, and examined for the profit of the King.

Answ.
It pleases the King.

York, Extortion, Admission to Benefices.
The Commons of the Dioces^ of York complain of the outrageous taking of the
Bishop and his Clerks for admission of Priests to their Benefices. Answ.




Sussex, Cinque ports, Contribution, Great Council.
The Commons of the Hundred of Costleing in Sussex desire remedy, forasmuch as
the Cinque Ports have bought half the said Hundred, and will not contribute any
thing to them.

Answ.
It is before the Great Council.

Worcestershire, Salop, Stafford, Hereford, Bristol, Gloucester, Merchants,
Calice^ Arrest for others debts and trespasses, Marches of Wales, Chester,
Felonies, Forfeiture,
The Commons of Worcestershire, Salop and Stafford, Hereford, Bristol and
Gloucester desire remedy, for that the Merchants of those Shires in traveling
to Calice are often arrested for the trespasses and debts of other men, with whom
they have no acquaintance or doing. And also that such as being of the Marches
of Wales and County of Chester, and rob in the Counties first recited, and
commit any other felonies or trespasses, and being thereof attainted in such
shires where the felonies are done, may therefore lose their goods and lands to
their Lords.

Old Law.
Let the old Law there be kept.

Woollen-yarn.
or sold to any person, but employed in Draping. Draper^.


No such Yarn shall pass out of the Realm, Answ.
upon pain of forfeiture. Forfeiture^


Ci^ies liberties confirmed, Farms, Charte^.
and no Farmers of any such Liberties be distu^bed of the same.

Let them show their Charters in the Chancery, Answ.

Chancery.


and they shall have right.

Yarmouth prayen that they may freely buy and sell, Great Yarmouth Free trade,
P^or oppressed the rich.
and chiefly in the Fishing-time according to their Charter, and not to be
oppressed by the rich.

Let them show their griefs in specialties before the Great Council, Answ.

Great Council.


and they shall be heard.

Tividal, Tividel, Restitution.
as well religious as secular, prayen to be restored to their possessions given
from them to their Enemies.

Let the Lords Marchers there named treat thereof, Answ.
and report to the Lords of the Parliament their opinions for remedy. Lord
Marchers Report to the Parliament.


York desire, that where the Lord of Arde and Cockham in Holland has stayed
six and thirty surples of their Wools to the value of Nineteen hundred pounds,
York.

Merchants woo^^ seized for the Kings debts, Reprisal.


supposing that the King owes him money for his service in France, and will
neither for the Kings letters nor other means deliver their Woolls, that
therefore they may have license to stay the ships of the same Lord at Calice,
or in England, till they be paid and answered to the value.

Let it be declared to the Grand Council, Answ.

Great Council.


and they shall have remedy according to reason.

John de Butshorne makes his title to the Manor of Grimsteed in the County of
Wilts, Restitution.
and to the Advowson of the said Manor, and to the moiety of the Manor of
Enkesbury in the County of Southampton, and prays to be restored to the
possession of the same from Robert de Beverley; the premises are confessed to
be holden of the King in chief.

It is before the Great Council. Answ.

Great Council.




Devonshire prayen, that they may be paid for victuals taken of them by the
Duke of Britany, Devon-shire Cotmons, Victuals, Free Quarter, Purveyance.
while he lay there a long time for passage; and that from henceforth no
protection be granted to any passenger over to take any victuals other then for
present pay.

Let the offender for the time past answer, Answ.
and for to come the King will provide.

Nihil habent, Bailiffs, F^le returns, Great Council.
against them for their bribing Fees, and other corrup^ions.

It is before the grand Council. Answ.


Churchyard, Sanctuary.
and upon the matter found awardeth an escape against the Town or Parish,
Escape.
wherein they pray remedy.

Answ.
The King will be advised herein.

Habeas Corpus Nisi Prius.

Disc^ntin^ance, Privy Se^l, Old Law.


That if the party Plaintiff or Defendant, upon his habeas corpus returned do
not sue out his Nisi priu^, that then the whole Process may be discontinued,
and that in all and every of the Kings Courts, and that every man may have the
Nisi prius granted, as well against the King as others, Answ.
without suing to the Privy Seal.



Livery sued.
That such as have, or shall sue livery upon an Inquest of Office by Escheators,
Inquest of Offices, Esch^ator, Averment, Non-^^nure.
where those lands indeed are not holden of the King, may be received to aver
of whom, or by what service the same lands are holden. Answ.


T^aver^e.
If any man's Inheritance be charged by any such Inquest, he who will complain
shall be received to traverse the Inquest before his homage done.

Privy Seal, Kings Deb^, T^easurers Letter, Day of Payment.
for the payment of debts due by the King to him, Answ.
shall not be stayed from the payment thereof, by any private letter of the
Treasurer.

The King grants thereunto.

That a Parliament may be holden every year, P^rliament A^nual, Knights
election, Sheriffs, Knights election,
the Knights of the Parliament may be chosen by the whole Counties, and that
the Sheriff may likewise be without brokage in Court. Answ.


Answ.


Extents at undervalue.
or far better, may be punished.

The King will make enquiries thereof as him pleases.

That no pardon be granted to any impeached in this Parliament, Pardon,
Parliament, Kings Counselors.
being the Kings Counselors, Answ.
or sworn to him, but that such be therefrom removed, and never restored, and
an Act thereof to be made.

Kings Prerogative,


Articles of Complaint, Parliament, Justices, Judgment repealed.
That all the Articles of wrongs declared in this Parliament against any person,
may be duly determined by Commissions by the Kings Justices and other Lords,
and that the Judgments given in this Parliament be not repealed by Brokers
about the King. Answ.


Kings Council.
The King will do by the advice of his Council what shall be best, saving to
every Town his liberties. Liberties^


Government of the Realm, Crown revenues,
They requ^re the King to have good regard for the government of the Realm, and
that all profits of the Crown may be employed to the Kings honor. Answ.


Kings profit, Pe^ples ease.
The King as next above, will do for the good government, his own profit, and
ease of the people.

Imp^sitions without Parliamen^^ Penalty, Common Law.
That such as shall of their own authority lay new Impositions without assent of
Parliament, may lose life, member, and other forfeitures.

Let the Common Law heretofore used run.

Answ.
A long Bill against the Broakers^ and corrupt recovery of Religious persons by
the taking of Sheriffs, that any notwithstanding such Recoveries may have
trial, Broakers, Recoveries, ^^ya^^.
and upon the matter found those religious persons to be punished therefore,
Old Law
as therein is contained, with many other matters touching the same. Answ.




That all Wapentakes, Wapentakes, Hundreds, Bailiffs.
and Hundreds let to farm may be repealed, and none hereafter to be granted;
and that all Bailiffs may be sufficient and able. Answ.




That remedy may be had so as there may be reasonable warning given, for the
holding of Wapentakes and Hundreds. Wapentakes, Hundreds, Warning.


The Statutes therefore made shall be kept. Answ.


Presentiments, Leets, Wapentakes,


That none but such as be resiant do come to any Wapentake, Answ.




or Hundred.

There are Statutes provided therefore.

Against Bailiffs of Markets and Fairs, Answ.




who attach men out of their Jurisdictions.

There are Statutes made therefore.

Against Bailiffs being Farmers of Wapentakes or Hundreds, Bailiffs, Hundreds,
Wapentakes,
and thereby procure plaints in other men's Names, and sue great sums, by
dividing the same into less sums. Answ.




Petitions exhibited by the Clergy, Answ.
and their Answers.
Silva cedua, Consultations, Tithes, Silva cedua.
and that no Attachment do ensue the same.

A Consultation granted does suffice, Answ.
and if need be, there may be a special clause for Prohibitions granted,
Prohibitions^
or to be granted.

Ordinary, Consultations.


Prohibition^
or a Consultation be granted.

Pensions, Prohibition.


The Justices shall meet in the presence of certain Bishops, Answ.

Justices, Bish^ps.


who shall take order therein to content.

Tithes^ Prohibition, C^^on Law.
a prohibition is granted against the Canonical sanction.

Purveyors, Carriages, Liberties^
and Statutes therefore made.

Cattailes be depending before any temporal Judge, Tithes, Ecclesiastical Judge.
that the Ecclesiastical Judge, affirming the contrary shall decide the same.

Consul^ation^ Ecclesiastical Judge,
and so proceed therein.

Prohibition, Libel^ Judges seal.
That no man shall have any Prohibition unless he do bring to the Chancellor the
Libel signed with the Judges seals before whom it is hanging, for the more
perspicuity thereof.

Clerk, Arrest, Churchyard, Sanctuary.
That no Clerk, or his servant being with him, be arrested by any Off^cer, being
in the Churchyard or other sacred place, or in carrying the Communion to any
man. Answ.




Calice, Staple.
The Commons of the Town of Calice pray that the Staple may only be holden there.

Answ.
The King grants that it shall be holden there, and no where else in the parts
beyond the seas, as well of all Staple-ware, Staple.

Staple-wares.


as of Lead, Tin, Worsted, Butter, Cheese, Feathers, etc.

Note in the Request next above was said, then when the Staple stood there upon
all Rodes forth by the Captain, the Mayor of the Staple fu^nished him forth of
the Merchants and their servants to the number of One hundred Bill-men,
Merchants, Soldiers.
and Two hundred Archers, without any wages.

Countess of Artois Charter.
That the old Charter of Mahant Countess of Artois, and confirmed by the King,
may be allowed, except the trial of land, and liberties of Staple.

Answ.
The King will be hereof advised.

Calice.
That in stead of Baily-Eskmins, and Cornmans granted in their old Charter, they
may have a Mayor and twelve Aldermen, and the Mayor one of the twelve at their
election, as in London. Bailiffs, Mayor Aldermen, London.
And where the Mayor heretofore without any charge had Two hundred pounds fee,
that he may have but one hundred pounds, bea^ing the charge of six men, as
every Alderman now does.

Answ.

Calice liberties, Mayor.


They shall have such Mayor and Aldermen, so as they be Englishmen, and to bear
the reputation of the payments and such like charges of the Town; toward the
bearing of which they shall have the Office of Wine, Beer and Ale, the Stallage
of Drapers^ Mercers, and Butchers, the Pickage in the Market, all Issues,
Fines, Profits and Amerciaments of the Mayors Court, excepting to the King the
Fin^s of Strayes, Strayes, Escheats, Watch.
and bloodshed, and Escheats of lands and goods; They to be discharged of all
Watches and Ward, but only before their houses.

Calice granted, worthy to be seen.

Commons, Writs for wages,
The Commons after the delivery of the Bill aforesaid, required that they might
be executed. That done, the Chancellor willed the Commons to sue their Writs
for their Fees according to the Custom. After that the Bishops arised, Bishops,
Parliament ended.
and took their leaves of the King. And so this Parliament ended at Eltham, the
which continued from day to day from the beginning unto this present Thursday,
the sixth of July, in the whole ten weeks and more.

Anno Quinquagesimo Edwardi Tertii. Rot. Parliamenti tent. apud Westminster. die
Lunae prox. post Festum Sancti Georgii, Anno regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post
Conquestum Angliae quinquagesimo, and Franciae tricesimo.
Commons Petitions.
CY apres ensuyent les petitions bailles au Parliament per les Communes ove les
responces faictes a icellis in le Parliament. Commons Petitions.


Pour la City de Londres. Petition to the King and Lords^ London.

A nostre Sieur le Roy, and a son bon Conseil, monstrent les lieges Mayor,
Aldermannes and Communes de la City de Londres, que come ils au plusieurs
fois persuis es diverse Parlements davoir consideration come ils sont empouris
and aneautiz per cause que leurs Franchises per lay and ses nobles progenitors
a eux grants^ and confirms luer sont restraints, Franchises diminished,
and en grande part tolles, and ore al darrain Parliament tenus a Westminster. leur
afuest rendres, que ilz duisiont declarer leur gravances en special, and ils
aurent bon remedy: desque grevances enter diverse sont, Grievances redressed,
que chacun estranger poet demeurer en la dicte City, and tener hostiel, and
estre Brocour and vendre and aicheter tous maniers marchandises a retaile,
Merchant-strangers, Brokers, Retail,
and estranger vendre, and estranger pour revendre a grand en cherussement de
les merchandises, and de fair leur demeure outre 40 jours, la ou en temps
pass null estranges Merchant, null de^ Cestes points solint user, encountre les
franchises de la dicte City, don't ceux heurs annes est uses; per queulx
grevances les Merchants de l^ dicte City sont grandement empoueris, en la
native empaire, and les privites de la terre per les audicts estranges
discouers a vos enemies per Spies, Secrets discovered to the Enemies, Spies,
King and hi^ Council,
and autres estrangers en leur hostiels resceus: plaise a treshault and
tresgratiouse Sieur, nostre Sieur le Roy and a son bon Counseil en enure de
charity, en ce present ordiner, que les estranges Merchants soient de cestes
auant dits points restraints, and que les leiges Mayor, Aldermannes and
Communes de la dite City puisent enjoyir leur ditz franchises, nient
contrerayant aucun estatute ou Ordinance de temps pass faict a la contraire.
Statu^e, Ordinance.


Le Roy de sa grace especial agraunts, Answ.
que south condition quilz mettent la dite City soubs bon Gonnernaille al
honneur de luy and profit de son Royalme, Ci^ies good Government.
que desormais null estranger tient hostiel ne soit brocour ne vendre aucuns
marchandises a retaille deins la dicte City ou les souburbs de celle,
Merchant-strangers, H^ns-Merchants, Alm^ins.
nyant contrestant acune statutes ou ordenance faits alencontre, salves aux
merchants de Hans d' Allemaine les franchises a eulx grants, and Confirms per
les Roix ses progenitors.

Devon, Stanneries, Oppression, Cornwall.
Anno 50. Edw. 3. The Commons of the County of Devon for diverse oppressions done
by the Officers of Staneery by color of their Liberties, require the King by
Parliament, to explain the grant to them made; the like do the Commons of the
County of Cornwall^ Hactenus antea, the particular branches whereof are
abridged her^ next under written out of the Record, Ut sequitur; For redress of
diverse Extortions, and Oppressions, Declaration of the Charters granted to the
Tinners.
Grievances, faitz per les esteyners and les Ministres de esteinerye de le
County de Cornwall, per color de les franchises A eux graunts etc. Les Commons
del dit County priont declaracion de ditz Chartres and franchises, de Article,
and que soit enquire des usages: Les Articles issint ensuent per les parols del
chartre.

Article 1. The Tinners Charter and L^berties.
Omnes Stannatores operantes in Stannariis illis quae sunt dominica nostra, dum
operantur in iisdem Stannariis liberi sunt, etc. Ita quod non respondeant de
alique placito se^ querela infra praed. Stannarios emergentibus, nisi coram
Custode Stannariorum; exceptis placitis terrae, vitae and membri; nec recedant
ab operationibus nisi per summonitionem dicti Custod. and sint quieti de alius
Tallagiis, Theoloniis, Stallagiis, auxiliis, and aliis custumis quibuscunque in
portibus, fereis, and mercatis infra Comitat. praed. de bonis suis propriis.

Resp.
Operantes in Stannariis illis and dum operantur in eisdem Stannariis, serra
entend. de operariis laborantibus duntaxit in Stannariis illis sine dolo and
fraud, and non de aliis, nec alibi operantibus.

Article 2.
Si eusront a^llours oustre demesne que fuerunt soilement Signior le Roy,
averont ^icts les privileges? etc.

Per auters parols in le Charter an general scope semble deesse done, and per
ceo les customs serra consider, and le gardein de ce Lesteiner ne suffra null
ordeur del dit estangerie fover en pres ne autre foyes, neve abate autre boys,
ou autre mesons, ne de tower eve ou course da ewe per malice, and si ils ne
voile obeier gardein il ceo monstracy toft al grand Council le Roy.

Article 3.
Com. les Justices assigns les ferra le dit enquiry des customs, and per
queux Jurors; vid. si per forreins solement, au per esteniers solement, vel per
ambideuz?

Resp.
Ou le grand counseil serra avise, prise, and records en air evidences, and
remembrances and treasury le Roy serra examine, and evidences queux estyners
ount serra regard.

Article 4.
Si le gardein tiendra plea de chose surdant enter esteinier and forrein^r, de
querela surdant ailours que en les leux ou ils sont overunt, Le checune par^e
deins le dit countez?

Resp.
Cest Article serra extend solement accordant as Parols del Chartre, scilicet,
in locis ubi iidem operarii operantur, and nemy ailours, ne en autre manner.

Article 5.
Touchant le imprisoment de esteyners offendant on le castle de Lostuthiel, and
non alibi, and le delivery de eux, and nosment pur ceo que le nust per plusors
and auters prisons per arrerages d' account, en Lostuthiel lou ils ount grand
liberty.

Resp.
Soit enquire per les Justices que serra assigns de enquirer per le authority
ils y fount einssi est cest enquest return soit declarer estre special, sil y
besoigne.

Anno Quinquagesimo Edwardi Tertii, Secunda Pars. Summonitio Parliamenti. Rex
charissimo filio suo Ricardo Principi Walliae, Writs of Summon^.
Duci Cornubiae, and Com Cestriae, etc. apud Westminster. primo Decembris
JOhanni Regi Castellae and Legionis, Ducis Lanc. Edmondo Com Cantabrigiae.
Ricardo Com. Arundel. Thomae de Woodstock Constabular. Angliae. Edmondo de
Mortuo mari Com. Marchiae. Thomae de Bello Campo Com. War. Hugo. de Courtney,
Com. Devon. Hugoni Com. Stafford. Gilberto de Umfrav^l, Com. de Anegos.
Willielmo Com. Suff. Willielmo de Monte acuto, Com. Salop. Henrico Piercie
Marescallo Angliae. Willielmo de Latimer. Willielmo Bardolf. Guidoni Br^an.
Rogero de Bello Campo. Johanni de Clinton. Gilberto de Talbot. Willielmo
Boterax. Johanni de War. Henrico de Scroop. Johanni de Nevill de Raby. Thomae
Roos de Hamelake. Rico. de Stafford. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Johanni Gray de
Codenore. Henrico de Gray de Shirland Nicho. Burnell. Willielmo Zouch de
Harringworth Rogero de Clifford. Almarico de Sancto Amando.
Anno Qunquagesimo primo Edwardi Tertii. The Parliament holden at Westminster,
the Fifteen of S. Hilary, in the One and fiftieth Year of Edward the Third.
Prince, Parliament held by Commission by reason of the Kings absence.
IN the Fifteen of S. Hilary, being Tuesday next after the Conversion of S.
Paul, the year aforesaid, was the first day of the Parliament: At what time the
noble and puissant Richard Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of
Chester, together with the Bishops, Lords, Justices, Commons, and others
summoned to this Parliament, assembled to the Palace at Westminster in the
Painted Chamber; Painted Chamber
where the Prince sitting in the Kings own place, in the absence of the King,
being partly diseased, the King sent thither his Letters Patent to the said
Prince to begin the Parliament.

Commission.
The Commission or said Letters Patent made to the said Prince.

David's being Chancellor, Chancellor, Parliament adjourned, for that diverse
Lords and Commons not come.
at the commandment of the said Prince then and there President, continued the
said Parliament until the next day at nine of the clock in the morning, for
that diverse of the Lords and Commons were not then come.

Chancellors speech.
The next day the Prince, Bishops, Lords and Commons assembled in the place
aforesaid, where the said Chancellor began his long Oration with S. Paul, viz.
Libenter suffertis insipientes, and applied it, That being wise, desired to
hear him the contrary.

Kings recovery.
He proceeded with Scripture; as, that every Messenger bringing joyful news, is
welcomed: Thereby proving that he should be so, for that he brought joyful news
of the Kings good recovery of a dangerous sickness.

Gods love to the King and Kingdom.
By the which he showed, that God loved the King, and Realm: The King; for that,
quos diligo castigo: The King by the Psalmist saying, Uxor tua sicut vitis
abundans in lateribus; and thereby shows, that for children, no Christian
Prince was so happy; and confirms the said happiness by the above saying, Et
videas filios filiorum, which the King saw.



And therefore persuaded such as would be partakers thereof, to conform
themselves thereafter by having love, without which he proves by S. Paul, that
nothing does avail.

The Kings love to the Lords, Prince of Wales.
forasmuch as at their requests, since the last Parliament, the King had
advanced Richard (there present) to be Prince of Wales.

Cullen did to Christ, all honor, by throwing abroad money according to the
order of the Pagans at the coming of their Prince, by offering gold in token of
riches and renown, and myrrh in token of his honorable scepter.

Simeon did Christ, for that they had now seen that which long they had longed
for, and therein showed how they should obey him as the Vicar and Legate of God,
Prince Gods Vicar.
that they might see the true peace in Israel, Peace.
viz. in England, the inheritance of God; whereof, after so great victories,
was great hope.

Causes of the Parliament.
for that the French under color of Truce granted by the King at the mediation
of the Pope, and yet enduring, had allied himself with the Spaniards and Scots
the Kings enemies, Conspiracy and consederacie of the French, Spaniards, and
Scots against the English.
and had prepared puissant and great Armies, thereby conspiring to blot out the
English tongue and Nation: wherein the King willed to have their faithful
counsel. Parliaments advice required.
Wherefore the Chancellor willed them to go together, and give a speedy answer.

Robert de Ashton the Kings Chamberlain declared, That he was to move them from
the King for the profit of the Realm. Chamberlain, Realms profit.
The which words percase lay not in the Bishops mouth, for that they touched
the Pope, Popes usurpations
viz. By protesting first, that the King was ready to do all that ought to be
done for the Pope: But for that diverse usurpations were done by the Pope to the
King, his Crown and Realm, as by particular Bill in this Parliament should be
showed, the King requires them to seek redress.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, France, and Scotland.

Gascoin and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

T Gascoin, etc. as above.

Westminster to treat of these matters, Commons house and place of meeting,
Moneys raised.
and how money might be best levied thereto; and certain Lords there named were
appointed from time to time to confer with the Commons for their better help.
Committee of Lords to confer with the Commons.


Poll-money granted.
man or woman, passing the age of fourteen years, only Beggars excepted.

two Barons, to receive as well their Subsidy, Special Treasurers for the
Subsidy.
as the Subsidy of the Clergy, and the Subsidy of Woolls granted the last
Parliament, so as the same be employed upon the Wars, Wars.
and that the High Treasurer do in no wise meddle therewith.

Treasurers Wages
Afterward, when it was declared to how great a sum the wages of those four
Treasurers would amount unto, the Commons then required that the High Treasurer
might then be doer therein to the use of the Wars. Wars.


A Committee of Lords sent to the sick King.
After the two and twentieth of February, certain Bishops and Lords, the
Chancellor, Treasurer, and Keeper of the Privy Seal, and all the Justices by
the Kings appointment went to Sheen, where the King lay sick, and there in
their presence the Articles of the Kings general pardon as ensues were read,
Kings Pardon, Petitions answered, Royal Assent,
with other answers made to the Petitions of the Commons, as hereafter follow,
whereunto the King agrees, and willed that they should the next day be read in
the House, and to make the same the last day of Parliament: Parliament ended,
President of Parliament.
the which was done the next day, being the three and twentieth day of
February, by authority of the King, and of the said President.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Churches Liberties, Great Charter, Forest.
the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest, cap. 1, 2, 3. agrees with
the Record in effect, but not in form.

Pardon.
cap. 3. agrees with the Record.



Fees, Great Seal.

Answ.




Felony,
Such as for Felonies are to sue, shall do the same before the Nativity of S.
John, and pay the Fees only.

That such as owe unto the King, may upon their Account be allowed of all such
Loans as are due to them, Accounts, Allowance, Loans.

Answ.


or to any of their Ancestors.



Prescription, Liberties.
That title of prescription of any liberties may as well be allowed, as if it
were by grant, Answ.
and that prescription may be from the Coronation of the King.

The King by advice will do herein as he shall think best.

That the Justices of Peace do not enquire of any Articles which are to be
redressed in any Lords Leet, Justices of Peace, Leet, Laborers.

Answ.


but only of the peace, and of Laborers, and that they hold their Sessions
four times a year.

The Statutes heretofore made, cannot stand if this be granted.

That the Patent of Reynold Chamber for being Water-Bailiff of the Thames,
Patent revoked, Water-Baily, Thames, Nusances.
may be revoked, for that thereby he suffers kiddles, trinks, and other
unlawful nets to be laid, Answ.
and cast in the said River of Thames.

The Chancellor calling to him the Citizens of London, Chancellor, Londoners,
Constable of the Tower.
the Constable of the Tower, and Reynold Newport shall take Order therein.

London pray that the King will confirm to them their liberties f^r punishing
all misdemeanors in Southwark, Southwark, Marshal,
and that Commandment be given that the Marshal do not intermedd^e within the
part of Southwark which is called Gildable.

The King cannot do it without doing wrong to others. Injury to others.

Answ.




London require the confirmation of the Kings Letters Patents made to them,
London Charter, Strangers.
that no stranger should sell any Merchandise, or ware, to any other stranger,
to the end that the same should be sold again.

The very words of the Patent.

Answ.


London, Coroner, Kings ancient ^ight.
answering unto the King what belongs thereunto.

The King will not depart from his ancient right. Answ.


Aliens, Wars, Merchant, Artificer.
unless he be a Merchant, or Artificer, and that no Englishman become any
Farmer to any Alien without License; In which Act they protest that of Temporal
things, they owe obeisance to none but to the King. Obedience to the King.


The King by advice will take order therein.

That all Provisors of things from Rome, Answ.

Rome, Praemunire, Pope.


and their Ministers may be out of the Kings protection.

The Pope has promised redress, the which if he do not, the Laws therein
shall stand. Answ.


Perambulations, Forest, Attachment, False Imprisonment.
out of which if any Forrester do attach a man, that the attached may have his
writ of false Imprisonment.

Many Counties are not grieved, wherefore let such as be, show their plaint,
and they shall be heard. Answ.


Marshals Jurisdiction, Prescription.
as before others the Kings Justices.

They shall hold such as have been in the times of the Kings Progenitors. Answ.


Hunting, Purlieu^, Forest, Assarts.
or without the bound of the Forest, and that there be levied no assertments.

The Charter of the Forest shall be kept, Answ.
and to the Assart, the demand is unreasonable.

Priests Wages, Trial.
as the giver thereof, may either forfeit double to the King, Forfeiture.
and that the same may be tried before the Kings Justices.

Answ.


That the next heirs of the Kings Wards, Wards.
may have the Wards lands in farm.

There is a Statute therefore made. Answ.


Officers.

Maintenance, Quarrels.


on pain to lose their Offices, and to answer double to the party grieved.

The King has forbidden his Officers so to do, Answ.
and if any be grieved he shall be heard.

Religious persons,
That if any religious person takes the profits of any lands, whereby it may be
thought to be within the compass of the Statute de Religiosis, that then the
King or chief Lord may enter upon the same.

Answ.
The King intends not to change the Laws. Old Law.


Statutes repealed, Parliament, Purveyors.
and that the Statute of Purveyors may be executed.

They cannot; and for Purveyors, the Law made shall stand.

Answ.
That the Knights fees for coming to the Parliament may be levied of the whole
County, Knights fees, Parliament.
as well within Liberties as without, except Cities and Towns, and the bound
Tenants of such as come by Writ to the Parliament.

Answ.
Let it be as it has been used.

Ordinances, Clergies Petition.
and that no man be bound by any their Constitutions made for their advantage.
Constitutions.


Answ.
Let this be more specially declared.

Leets, Taverns.


Answ.
It is no Article thereof.

Commons, Collectors.


Answ.
The King grants it.

Calice, Protections, Delay, Covin, Kings Council.
or about Picardy, only to delay such as sue them, may be repealed, and no such
from henceforth granted.

Answ.
Let the Kings Council be informed of such covin, it shall be redressed.

Fish, N^^s, Commissions.
and called Wonderchone, in the manner of a Drag, being used in Havens and
Creeks, may be forbidden.

Answ.
Commission to certain to enquire and to certify, shall be made, whereupon
order shall be taken therein.

Debtors, Fraudulent conveyances.
They prayen remedy against such Debtors, as to defraud their Creditors, make
Feoffments by covin, and thereupon fly into Sanctuary. Sanctuary,


Answ.
Upon the finding of such Feoffments to be so made, the Creditors shall have
execution of such Lands, as though no such Feoffments were made.

Pardon, Pyracies, Kings prerogative
That the King would pardon all Pyracies and Felonies done upon the Sea, except
such as be impeached of the death of Sir Henry de la Hay, or of such as be
impeached at the suit of the party.

Answ.
The King will show pardon where him likes.

Charters, Liberties, Clerks of the Market,
That diverse having in their Charters. That no Senescal^ Marescal, or Clerk of
the Market do intermeddle within their L^berties, are thereby little the
better, for that those Office^s do intermeddle, for that there wants these
words, ^am in praesentia nostra, quam alibi; that therefore it be commanded
that none of those Officers do intermeddle.

Answ.
The King would have them to be allowed according to Law and reason, Law, Custom.
as it has been heretofore used.

E. 3. tit. 184.

No Tenant ought to be received to counterplead his own conus^nce. Answ.

Rece^t, C^^nt^rplea.




E. 3. be paid, unless the same be fulled. Custom, Wooll^n clothes.


The King has commanded that no Woollen clothes be carried out of the Realm
before they be fulled, Answ.
and that no Customs be paid before such fulling.

Thomas Brantingham Bishop of Exeter and Treasurer of England, Loans repaid.

Answ


now be paid.



That no Tithe be paid for Sea-coals. Tythe^ Sea-c^als.


Answ.


That no Fines be taken for any Writs according to the Great Charter Nulli
vendemus, Fines for Writs, Mag Charta.

Answ.


etc.

Chancellor.
as it has been.

That no Knight, Esquire, or other be appointed to be Sheriffs, Sheriff,
Escheator, C^rone^, Exemtion, Age.
Escheators, Coroners, Collectors, or such like, after his age of 60 years.

The King will do herein as him shall please. Answ.

Kings pleasure.




Charters allowed.
albeit they never were before.

They shall be allowed as duly heretofore has been. Answ.


Essex and Hertford pray, Essex, Hertford, Kings favor.
as in 50 E. 3. tit. 151.

The King showed favor at the first Parliament, and so will as need shall be.
Answ.


Profession, Nonability, Dispensati^^, Rome.
and continuing the same habit to the age of fifteen years, may upon the trial
of the same in any of the Kings Courts, be in Law utterly debarred of all
inheritance, albeit he has a Dispensation from Rome; against which
Dispensations is the chief grief.

The King and the Lords will provide therefore. Answ.


Herring Price, Commissions.
being now grown to an excessive price.

Indifferent and able men by Commission shall see the price, Answ.
and enquire of the causes, and certify the same, whereupon order shall be
taken.

Devon desire, Devon, Stanneries liberties Parliaments promi^e.
That upon the return of the Commission touching the Customs of the Stannary
there, being now done in the Chancery, that the rest of the liberties of the
Stannery may be declared according to the promise of the last Parliament, and
that the same be made in Letters Patent.

Richard Prince of Wales prays, Prince of Wales^ Stanneries,
That the Declaration made in the last Parliament as touching the Stanneries in
Devon and Cornwall, may be revoked; considering that the same was made, the
Prince nor any of his Council, or any other the Officers being called or made
privy thereto. Privity.


Devon do pray that they may answer to such as allege that the said County
should seek to hinder the profit of the said Prince. Princes (...), S^^nder.


Answ.
The Circumstance shall be examined by the Council of the King and Prince, King
and Princes Council.
and thereupon Order shall be taken.

Leicester, and Northampton, Huntington and Bedford, complain upon the erection
of three Mills upon the high stream of the River of S. Ives, Mills, Nuisance.

St Ives River, Ships, Boats,


whereby neither Ships nor Boats can pass, and whereby they surround all the
grounds about the Towns of Buckten, Brampton, Gormercester, Hemeford, and
Huntington.

Answ.
Let the Statute in such case provided be executed.

Warwick Goal repaired.
The County of Warwick desire that the Goalhouse in Warwick being very ruinous
may be repaired with the profits of the County aforesaid, by the hands of the
Sheriffs.

Answ.

Treasurer, Kings Council.


Let them sue to the Treasurer and other of the Council to have redress.

Wools, Customers, Weighers, Kings Prerogative.
That none such as pass over Wools or have Ships on the Sea be accounted
Customers of weighers of Wools.

The King will appoint such Customers as shall please him.

Answ.
The Heirs and Tennants of the land of chief Taxers of the fifteen, do pray,
that they may be taxed by the Barons of the Exchequer according to the old rate
upon the view thereof, Quinde^ms, Tax, Barons of the Exchequer, Old ra^e.
without bringing any Writ therefore.

The Taxation being once reasonably made should seem to continue. Answ.


Frizes.
The Print as touching Frizes, cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

Severn, Severn. Nuisance,

Ships,


do desire remedy for the course of the same River, between Worcester and
Bristow, which is so straightened, as that the grounds thereabouts are thereby
surrounded, that Ships and Boats cannot pass, and many drowned in their beds.

Answ.

Lords to hear and determine.


Let certain Lords be appointed to hear and determine this matter.

Ship, Boat, Deodand.
or boat, the Vessel shall be no Deodand.

Being upon the Sea it shall be adjudged no Deodand, but being upon a fresh
River, Answ.
the King will show favor.

Age, Livery, Inspection.
That every man may be received to prove his age, and to sue livery by the
inspection of his body, and other sufficient ways, where it is not returned by
Office.

Answ.

Chancellor,


The Chancellor by the sight of the bodies of such Heirs and of Offices
returned, shall do what shall seem best to be done.

Latimer being in the last Parliament by untrue suggestions deprived of his
Offices, Lord Latimers restitution.
and of the Privy Council, may be by authority of Parliament restored thereto
again. Parliament.


Answ.
The King grants thereunto at the prayers of certain Bishops, Lords and of the
Commons.

John de Hankword Knight requires of the King such Charter of Pardon as was
granted to Sir Robert Knowls. Pardon.

Kings Prerogative.




Sir John Clifford Knight requires the like.

Answ.
The King means, and will show favor to them when he pleases.

Provisors.
That the Statute of Provisors made at any time may be executed, and that remedy
may be had against such Cardinals as have within the Provinces of Canterbury
and York purchased any Reservations with the Clause of Ante ferri, Cardinals,
to the value of Twenty or Thirty thousand Scats of Gold, against the Popes
Collector, Popes Collector,
who was wont to be an Englishman, and now is a mere French residing in
London, and conveyeth yearly to the Pope Twenty thousand marks, or Twenty
thousand pounds, and who this year gathers the First Fruits of all Benefices
whatsoever. First Fruits.


Al^ens, Wars,
That no Englishman may become their Farmors, or do send to them any money
without special license, Praemunire.
on pain to be out of the Kings protection.

The Statutes and Ordinances therefore made shall be observed. Answ.


Petitions of the Clergy, with their Answers.
Sylva Cedua, Prohibition, Tythe-wood,
Consultations may be readily granted.



The print touching the proceeding after a Consultation, Answ.

Consultation.


Cap. 4. in effect agrees with the Record, but not in form.

Pensions, Prohibition, Ordineries.
there may no Prohibition be granted, and that the definition thereof may be
only in the Ordinaries.

The King will make search in his Commonplace Treasury, Answ.

Search.


or elsewhere, and thereafter will therein deal.

Consultation.
the Ordinary may of himself take upon him the true understanding thereof, and
proceed therein accordingly. Answ.


The King cannot depart with his right, Kings right, Law.
but to yield to his Subjects according to Law.

Priests arrests.
Cap. 5. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Winchester, Bishop of Winchester.
and matters by him attempted to be reformed, Order was, that his Temporalties
should be seized into the Kings hands.

Writs for Wages, Parliament ended.
and so the Parliament made an end.

Thomas Hungerford Knight, Speaker of the Parliament, Sir Tho. Hungerford
Speaker of the Parliament.
declared how that during the Parliament he had generally moved the King to
pardon all such as were in the last Parliament unjustly convicted, Parliaments
injustice, Pardon.
and how the King willed him to make a special Bill therefore, which was done
to seven as hereafter ensues, but no Answer thereto made.

Richard Lions Merchant of London, Pardon for Rich. Lions.
and for restitution general.

Alice Perrers, Alice Perrers, Judgment reversed.
and for her restitution. Restitution.


The like they make for John de Leicester.

The like they make for Adam de Bury.

Walter Sporier.

John Peach of London makes the like request for himself.

William Ellis Burgess of Yarmouth, makes the like for himself.

Parliament ended


C^mm^ns, Extortion, Commission, Enquests,
that whereas Hugh Staffolk of Great Yarmouth was accused of diverse extortions
in the last Parliament, whereupon Commission was granted to the Earl of Suffolk
and Sir John Cavendish Knight, for the enquiries and determining of the same,
who so had done, and by eighteen Enquests had found him guiltless, as the same
Sir John in open Parliament witnessed, Parliament.
in which matter more was not done.

W. Prynne.
I shall desire the Reader to take notice, That in the Parliament-Roll at large
of 51 E. 3. n. 25. The Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Commons, Citizens,
Burgesses, and Merchants of England in this Parliament, petition the King not
only for a Pardon in general, Pardon, Parliament,
and of Fines and Amerciaments before the Justices of Peace, not yet levied in
special; which this Abridgment only touches: But they likewise subjoyn thereto
this memorable Request (totally omitted by the Abridger) which I thought meet
here to supply. No Aid, Imposition, or Charge to be imposed, but by common
consent of the Prela^es, Lords and Commons in ^u^l Parliament, Customs.
That in time to come your said Prelates, Earls, Barons, Commons^ Citizens and
Burgesses of your Realm of England may not be henc^forth charged, molested, nor
grieved to make Any Common Aid, or sustein any Charge, unless it be by common
assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Lords and Barons, and other people of the
Commons of your Realm of England, and that in full Parliament: Nor no
Imposition put upon their Woolls, Wooll^fells, and Leather, or any the ancient
Custom; That is to say, of one Sack of Wool half a Mark, and of three hundred
Wooll-fells, half a Mark; and of one Last of Skins one Mark of Custom only;
according to the Statute made the 14 year of your Reign; 14 E. 3. r. 1. Stat. 2.
saving to you the Subsidy granted unto you the last Parliament for a certain
time, and not yet levied.

To which last Clause the King then gave this Answer:

And as to that, That no Charge be laid upon the people without Common assent;
The King is not at all willing to do it without great Necessity, and for the
Defense of the Realm, and where he may do it with Reason. And as to that, That
Impositions be not laid upon their Woolls without assent of the Prelates,
Impositions.
Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other people of the Commons of his Realm; There is a
Statute already made, which the King wills that it shall stand in its force.

Anno Primo Richardi Secundi. Rex etc. Charissimo Avunculo suo Johanni Regi
Castellae and Legionis, Duci Lancastriae salutem, apud Westmonasterium,
Quindena Michael, Test Rege quarto die Augusti.
Consimiles Literae subscript.
EDwardo Com. Cantarbr. Ricardo Com. Arundel. Thomae de Woodstock Com. de Buck.
and Constab. Angliae. Edwardo de Mortuo mari Com. Marchiae. Tho. de Bello Campo
Com. War. Hugoni Com. Staff. Gilberto Humfravil Com. Anegos. Willielmo de
Ufford Com. Suff. Willelmo de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Henrico de Percy Com.
Northum. Johanni de Mowbrey Com. Nottingham. Guischardo Com. Huntington. Jacobo
de Audley de Heleith. Willielmo de Latymer. Willielmo Bardolfe de Wermegay Rado
Basset de Drayton. Guidoni de Brian. Rogero de Bello Campo. Johanni de Clinton.
Gilberto Talbot. Willielmo de Botreaux. Johanni de la War. Henrico de Scroope.
Johanni de Nevil de Raby. Hen. de Ferrariis de Groby. Thomae Roos de Hamelack.
Ricardo de Stafford. Johanni Gray de Codenote. Hen. Gray de Wilton. Writs of
Summons.
Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Nicol. Burnel. Williel. la Zouch de Harringworth.
Rogero de Clifford. Almarico de Sancto Amando. Johanni Butstort. Johanni
Lovell. Rogero de Scales. Rado de Cornwall. Michaeli de la Pool Admiral. maris
Septentrional. versus. Petro de malo lacu. Rado Baroni de Greystock. Waltero
Fitzwalter. Waltero de Ferrariis de Wemme^ Roberto Harrington. Willielmo Morley
Chlr. Willielmo de Furnival. Willielmo de Aldeburgh Chlr. Johanni de Cobham de
Kent. Hugoni de Dacre Chlr. Roberto de Willoughby. Johanni de Wells. Johanni de
Clifton, Rogero dk Strange de Knowley. Mauritio de Berkly. Johanni de Arundel.
Warrino de Insula. Hen. de Fitzhugh. Ricardo de Scroop. Philippo de Darcy.
Edmondo Com. Cantabr. Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Primo Richardi Secundi. The Parliament holden at Westminster, in the
Quindeane of St. Michael, in the first Year of King Richard the Second.
Michael, being Tuesday the thirteenth of October, certain Bishops and Lords
assembled at the Palace of Westminster in the Blanch Chamber there, where for
that diverse of the Bishops, and Lords were not come, Parliament adjourned for
that diverse Lords and Commons were not come.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, by the Kings commandment, adjourned the
Parliament until the next day without any further declaration, willing them all
to attend.

Archbishops Speech.
with most of the Lords and Commons assembled in the Painted Chamber, Painted
Chamber, Causes of Parliament.
where the Archbishop of Canterbury pronounced the cause of the Parliament,
beginning with this Theme, Rex tuus venit tibi.

viz. if he come to rejoice, and to be merry with his friend, for any singular
benefit or good hap fallen to his friend, and therefore alleged, Et exultavit
in^ans in utero ejus. Another, if the said coming were to comfort his friend in
adversity, as it is contained in the Book of Job. And the third, for assaying
his friend in time of necessity, according to the Scripture, in necessitate
probabitur amicus.

He applies, that the King their undoubted liege Lord, was now come unto them,
not for one, but for all three causes. For the first, to rejoice with them in
the great providence, and grace of God by sending his person among them, not by
any collateral means, or election, Kings presence, Election,
but by special descent of inheritance, Descent, Kings thanks,
and for their good wil^s was he therefore come to give them thanks.

Comfort.
and adversities, He was also come, as not only for the death of the noble
King E. 3. and for the Prince his Son, but also for the great losses of them on
the Seacoasts, Loss by enemies.
and elsewhere within the Realm, done by their enemies, whereunto he now was
come, not only to proffer himself in aid, but to confirm all their Liberties,
Liberties confirmed, Laws maintained, Peace, Grievances redressed.
to maintain the Laws, and Peace, to redress the contrary.

Council and aids against enemies required.
To assay them, He was also come as to council with them for the depressing of
the enemy, and to require aid of them, without which he could not perform the
same; for all which, he willed them to consult together.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyn, and other Countries beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, Wales, and Scotland, with their places appointed.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Richard le Scroop, Steward of the Kings House, Kings Steward^ Causes of
Parliament repeated.

Advice required.


by the Kings commandment, in the presence of the King, Lords and Commons,
rehearsed the whole matter of the Archbishop, and willed them to consult
thereof.

Commons require a Committee of Lords to con^er with them.
and as chief of them the King of Castill and Aragon, and Duke of Lancaster.

Commons slander the D. of Lancaster.

Treason.


in which his defense he there openly before the King demanded the Combat to
any person whatsoever, Combat demanded.
or what other order the King should appoint.

Purgation by the Lords and Commons.
and requested that he would use no more such words, where to the said Duke
seemed to be content; but said, that the same report to set the Nobles at
debate, Debate between the Nobles, Treason.
was no better then treason.

Pierce de la Mare Knight, Sir Pierce de la Mare Speaker.
being Speaker of the Parliament, making his protestation said; His
Protestation.
that what he had to say was from the whole House, and therefore required that
if he should happily speak any thing without their consents, Speech.
that the same ought to be amended before his departure from the said place.

Feats of Chivalry.
and shows how we were thereby of all Nations renowned, and how by the decay
of the same, the honor of this Realm was, and daily would much decrease.

Merchants, Ships.
and had the free disposition of them, that then one Town in the Realm had more
ships that were good, then now had the whole Realm.

Commons Petitions, Kings Council named to the Parliament, Treasurers for the
Wars.
considering the Kings tender age. First, that it will please the King to name
in the Parliament seventeen sufficient persons of all estates to be continually
resident about the Affairs of the King and Realm, with others of the Kings
Officers, so as they may be ascertained of their names, who shall have the
disposition of such things as they shall grant toward the War.

King Tutors, Kings household charges born with the Crown revenues, Subsidy
employed only on the Wars.
and what now is to be granted to be employed only upon the Wars.

The common Law and Statutes to be observed.
and other Statutes and Ordinances of the Law may be observed, and may not be
defaced with Masterships, or singularities.

Royal assent, Great Officers, Councell^rs.


Counselors elected, Lords assent.
viz. ^he Bishops of London, Carlisle, and Salisbury, the Earls of Stafford and
March, Sir Richard Stafford, and Sir Henry le Scroop Baronets, Sir John
Deverose, and Sir Hugh Segrave Batchelors, so as well these nine as the other
seven shall continue Counselors but one year, and not to be chosen during two
years after.

King Counselors to receive no gift from the King nor wages, Maintenance,
during the said year, but by the common assent of all other Counselors, or
the most of them, that they take nothing other then meat and drink of small
value, upon pain of losing double to the party, and sixfold so taken to the
King, and that they maintain no quarrel, and that the discussion hereof be
only to the King, to his Uncles of Spain, Cambridge, and Bucks.

False complaints.
and not able to approve, shall incur the dangers of Accusers made in the time
of E. 3.

Counselors oath
That such Counselors shall be sworn in the Kings presence to observe these
Orders, at which time the aforesaid Nine were sworn accordingly.

Lords, Kings attendants, Kings Household, Lords assent,
and for the consideration of the Kings Household, the Lords would talk with the
chief Officers of the same, to do therein to the Kings honor. And to the third
request the Lords granted.

Subsidies and Fifteens granted.
and two Tenths of Cities and Buroughs, the Fifteens of all Lands whatsoever,
and Tenths of all manner of goods to be levied between that and Candlemas
ensuing, so as the same with the Subsidy of Woolls be employed upon the Wars
only, To be employed only upon the Wars, Custom of Wools
and that some might be appointed thereunto. All which was granted, saving to
the King the Custom of the Woolls 15000 l. wherein he was indebted for the
Wars; And thereupon William Wallworth, and John Philpot, Merchants of London,
were appointed the keepers of such sums to the uses aforesaid, whereto they
were sworn before the King in open Parliament. Treasurers, Oath in Parliament,


Earl of Sarums complaint.
William de Monteacute, Earl of Sarum complains, that whereas E. 3. gave to
William de Monteacut^, Earl of Salisbury his Father, in general tail with
warranty the Castle, Tail, Castle and Honor of Denbigh, Error in Parliament,
Restitution.
Town, and Honor of Denbigh, with the Contrades of Roos, Rowenox, and
Kiderminster, and the Comote of Dimnael, with the appurtenances in Wales, the
which in the life of E. 3. was recovered in the Kings Bench from the said Earl
by Roger of Mortimer Earl of March, Father to Edward, now Earl, by the name of
the Land of Denbigh, and for that error was in the same recovery; he prays
the exam^nation of the same Record, and restitution, vide 2 R. 2.41 and 31.

Chief Justice, Record brought into Parliament,
Whereupon, Sir John Cavend^sh, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, by appointment
brought out the same Record into the Parliament there to remain until the next
Parliament, Scire facias.
and a Scire facias awarded against the said Edmond Earl of March then to be
there, and to abide further Order.

John de Cobham Knight, Son of the Countess Marshal, shows, that where he for
seisin gave to King Edw. 3. a ring of gold or the reversion of his Manors of
Wenden-hill, Seisin and Grant of reversions to the King of dive^s Manors.
Pademore, Chederoldsenry. Hanshardzolt, Wedon in the Vale, Draiton,
Beauchampe, Nesseworth, Sandresdon, Holpesthorp, Rolvesham in the County of
Bucks, ^olson ^n Norfolk, the good Manor of Adington in Bucks, and Rowlston in
the County of Leicester, to have all the premises after his decease to the
King, and of his Heirs of the Crown; he now prays that according to his
intent the same may remain in the Crown.

Seisin delivered by a ring of gold. Justices, Examination upon Oath, Surrender.
the which by all the Justices was thought to be good, and the Lands to pass
thereby. Note that the examination was by their Oaths; and note that the
Justices and other learned of the King avowed such surrender by delivery of a
Ring to a common person to be good.

William Fitzhug^ Citizen, and Goldfiner of London, exhibited a Bill in the
name of the poor Commonalty of that mystery, Bill, G^^^finers of London.
thereby complaining against John Chichest^r, and John Bolsham of the same
Mystery for diverse oppressions by them done to the said Commonalty. Oppression.


John and John came into the Parliament, Imprisonment by Parliament for
refusing to aver a Bill, Tower.
and heard the same; and for that ^he said William upon demand refused to avow
the same Bill, he was committed to the Tower.

Articles of Agreement, Breast, Lords,
John Duke of Britany, touching the Castle, and Signory of Breast in Britany,
was read before the Lords, who agreed to all the Articles, saving to the
twelfth, touching alliance, the which Roll remains with the Petitions of the
Commons.

Robert Hawley, and John Shakell, Esq^; who had the keeping of the Son of the
Earl of Doney, a Spaniard prisoner, Prisoner of War; Imprisonment for contempt.
taken at the Battle of Na^ar, to which prisoner other made claim, and for that
the said Robert and John would not bring forth the said Prisoner, being
thereunto willed, they were both committed to the Tower. Tower.


Gascoyne and English might freely transport into Gascoyne and Breast to the
Kings friends all manner of Corn and other Victuals, Merchants, Liberties to
transport Corn, Victuals^ Manufactures, Staple, Forfeiture.
and also leather-Gloves, Purses and Caps, Leather-points, Shooing-horns, and
such other kind of small Merchandises notwithstanding any Ordinance of the
Staple, but not elsewhere upon pain of forfeiture therefore, look 2 R. 2. tit.
54.

Guensburough is revoked, Staple of Woolls.
and appointed to be holden at Sandwich.

William de Weston prisoner, William de Weston.

Pri^oner in the Tower, Constable of the Tower,


brought from the Tower by the Constable of the Tower, before the Lords, was
demanded by Sir Richard le Scroop Knight, Steward of the Kings House, being
thereto appointed by the Lords for surrendering the Castle Outherwick in the
time of King E. 3. without Commission, Outherwick Castle surrendered to the
enemy, Treason.
where he the said William took upon him the safe keeping of the same.

William made a long Answer, and if it were true, as it was not disproved, very
reasonable; notwithstanding he was for the same surrender adjudged to death,
Judgment capital.
and returned to the Tower again. Tower.


John de Gomeniz case, prisoner in the Tower, Treason, Surrender of the Town of
Ardes.
John de Gomeniz, was likewise brought from the Tower before the Lords, and
questioned by the said Sir Richard le Scroop for surrendering of the Town of
Ardes in the Kings time, where he took upon him the safe keeping of the same of
King E. 3. whose excuse therein was disproved; whereupon the Lords gave
Judgment he should die; Lords give Judgment of death, Beheading, Judgment
respited till the King was thereof informed.
but for that he was a Gentleman, and a Banneret, and had otherwise well
deserved, he should be beheaded, and Judgment respited until the King be
thereof informed more fully, and so returned to the Tower.

Alice Perrees was brought before the Lords, and by Sir Richard le Scroop
Knight aforesaid, Alice Perrees.
charged for pursuing of matters contrary to the order taken in 50 E. 3. tit.
35. and namely, Lords, Accusation
for that she in the time of E. 3. procured Sir Nicholas Dagworth to be called
from Ireland whether he was sent, and for that she also in the same time
procured from the same King restitution for lands and goods to Richard Lions,
Petition of Richard Lions,
Merchant of London, where the same Lands were given to the Kings own Sons.

E. 3. being examined, Witnesses examined, Private lucre.
proved that she made such pursuits, and in their conceits for her own private
gain.

Lords pronounce Judgment against her.
Then straight Judgment was given by the said Lords against the same Dame, that
according to the order aforesaid she should be banished, Banishment, Forfeiture
of Lands and Goods.
and forfeit all her Lands, Goods and Tenements whatsoever.

To say truth of the Devil, is counted commendable; and therefore certes, the
Record against the same Dame being very long, proves no such heinous matter
against her; only it shows, that the same Dame was in such credit with E. 3.
as she sat at his beds head, Kings Minion,
when all of the Council and of the Privy Chamber stood waiting without doors,
and that she moved those suits that they dared not; and these two suits
wherefore she was condemned, Injustice in Parliament.
seemed very honest; her mishap was, that she was friendly to many, but all
were not so to her. The Record is strange and worthy of sight.

Petitions of the Commons with their Answers.
Liberties of the Church, Great Charter.
The Print touching the Liberties of the Church, the Great Charter, and the
Charter of the Forest, cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Peace,
The Print touching the Peace, cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

Purveyors, Variance from the Record.
cap. 3. in part agrees with the Record, but not in all.

tit. of this year, saving to the King his Regality, Kings Regality saved,
Counselors.
and that Act made for Counselors in 50 E. 3. shall stand.

E. 3. whatsoever, may be exaamined, Kings gifts examined, Revocation.
and being worthily bestowed on any person, to be confirmed, or otherwise
revoked.

Privy Council.
and do thereaft^r.

E. 3. be any more restored to be about the Kings person. Disabilit^, Council
Restitution.


The King grants thereto. Answ.


The Print touching maintenance, Maintenance.
cap. 4. agrees in effect with the Record, but not in form.

And Act, that the Chancellor, Kings minority, Officers elected by the Lords in
Parliament, Chancellor, Treasurer, Steward, Chamberlain, Earl of Oxford
Chamberlain by inheretance.
Treasurer, Steward of the Kings Household, and Chamberlain during the Kings
minority shall be chosen by the Lords in Parliament, saving the inheritance of
the Earl of Oxford in the Office of Chamberlain; so always as if any of these
Officers die between the Parliament, that then the King may name them by the
advice of the continual Council. Privy Council.


Gascoyne, Officers sufficient.
Ireland, Artois, the Marches of Scotland, keepers of the Ports and Castles may
be of sufficient inheritance to answer.

Answ.

Privy Council.




Liberties confirmed, Corporations,
in such wise as they were granted.

That such may be punished who by their own defaults have lost any Forts,
Treason, Forts and Pieces lost, Bribes, R^stituti^n.
Piles or pieces beyond the Seas; and that such as out of any Fort took any
thing of the Kings, may restore the same again.

The King will provide sufficient remedy therefore. Answ.


S^rvants wages, A^^ificers, Laborers, Victualers. Extracts, Poor, Stocks.
Art^ficers, Laborers, and Victuallers may be extracted into the Exchequer,
and employed upon the poor, and that such Labourer in service by reason of any
little tenure, or for that he would be a Victualler, be kept in the Stocks
until he serve.

The Statute made therefore shall be observed. Answ.


Artificers, Wages, Holy days.
or Labourer do take any wages for the holy days.

The Statutes therefore made shall be observed. Answ.


E. 3. whereto the Kings answer was, Petitions, Acts, Ordinances.
The King wills the same to be made in Acts, for that some affirm them to be
but Ordinances, and no Acts.

It is in part done, Answ.
and the rest the King will do according to reason.

Subsidy, Tallage, Account before the Lords.
That such as receive the Subsidy of Woolls, and the Tallage of Groats, granted
50 E. 3. may account in open Court before the Lords.

Answ.

Privy Council.


Certain be appointed to examine the receipts, and to make report unto the
continual Council, who shall take order therein.

Stranger, Reprises.
and that the goods of Strangers attached within the Realm may be restored to
such Englishmen as have had their goods spoiled on the Sea in the time of Truce.

Answ.

Restitution.


To the first point the King grants, except such as be liege men; and to the
second, the King would have a stay of such goods until restitution.

Swanny motes.
That the Swanny-motes may be kept but at one time of the year, and that no
Freeman, other then Officers of the Forest be distrained to come to the
Swanny-Motes. Forest.


Answ.
The King would the Statute therefore provided to be kept.

Imprisonment, Forest, Charter of the Forest, Purlues.
That no man be imprisoned, or amerced for Vert or Venison, or other things
against the Assize of the Forest, unless the same be contained in the Articles
of the Charter of the Forest, and that every man may without impeachment choose
the Purlues.

Answ.
The Charter, and other Statutes of the Forest shall be observed.

Perambulation, Forest,
It is enacted, that the perambulations of the Forest heretofore made shall
wholly stand, and that no Forrester or other Minister of the Forest have to do
without, but according to the assize of the Forest.

Officers of the Forest, Inquiry, Forfeiture.
That the misdemeanor of the Keeper and other Officers of the Forest may be
inquired of, and snch as be removeable and faulty to be expelled.

Answ.
The King will from time to time inquire, and punish such defaults, and who will
complain shall be heard.

Debts, Exchequer.
The Print touching debts allowed in the Exchequer, cap. 5. agrees in effect
with the Record, but not in form.

Exchequer, Officers, Maintenance, P^iviledge 6.
That no Officer of the Exchequer, or of the Kings Household, do maintain any
quarrels in their Countries, and that the privileges for the Officers of the
Exchequer may be declared.

Answ.
Touching maintenance, order is before, and for declaration it has been used
that all Officers, and their servants with them abiding, shall in all personal
actions sue and be sued in the Exchequer, and not elsewhere.

Marshals jurisd^ction.
and that all men may have their liberties allowed as well within the Verge as
without, and that no Court of ancient demeasnes be thereby disturbed.

Answ:
The Marshal shall have such jurisdiction as heretofore, and who will complain
shall be heard.

Popes Collector, First fruits,
being a very novelty, and that no other person do any longer pay them.

Rome, Benefice, Provisions, Rome, Praemunire,
upon pain to be put out of the Kings protection.

Alien^ Farmers, Benefices^ French.
or Prebend on the like pain. In which Bill is rehearsed that the French had
6000 l. yearly of such livings in England.

The Lords of the great Council shall take order in those three Bills. Answ.

Lord of the great C^uncil.




Fe^ff^es in trust.

M^^^main^


and yet take no profits, that the King and the Lords may take the advantage.

The Lords mind not to change the old Law used. Old Law.

Answ.




Leets, Taverners.
and that they be not disturbed, for that the Leet is within the Verge.

It is not the Article of the view of Franckpledge, Answ.
but shall be used as it has been.

London pray, London, Southwark, Malefactors.
that they may have the like punishment of ill doers in Southwark as in London,
saving to all Lords their rights.

It is prejudicial to the King, Answ.

Kings prejudice.


and to the Bishops of Canterbury and Winchester.

Coroner.


The King cannot depart with his old right. Answ.

Kings old right.




Commons, Sheriff, Essex.
that whereas the Sheriffs of the Counties of Essex and Hertford are yearly
charged to pay Two hundred fifty seven pounds 17 s. of the farms of Sergeants,
Hertford, Pardon^
and main Farms, and thereby yearly lose a hundred pounds, whereof the King
yearly one hundred Marks, sometimes more, sometimes less, that the King will
make his pardon certain.

The King will show favor therein according to his pleasure. Answ.

Kings pleasure.




Bed^ord, Sheriffs.
Bucks, Northampton, and diverse other Shires being in the same predicament pray
the like remedy.

The King will semblably as above deal. Answ.


E. 3. tit. 53.

And the like answer thereto made. Clerks of the Market.


That all persons as well religious as otherwise, Answ.




having any poss^ssi^ns within any walled or fortified City or Town now
decayed, may to the re-edifying thereof contribute, as other the Townsmen there
do.

The King will that all such shall contribute according to the assurance of
their tenure heretofore used, Answ.
saving to every man his privilege. Privilege.


Popes reservative^
the same being done against the Treaty of the Pope taken with King E. 3.

The Chancellor calling to him such as he shall please, Answ.

Chancellor,


shall see the Record, and take order therein.

s. of every fine. Chirographer, Fine, Fees.


Answ.
The Statute before made shall be kept.

Wards, Procheinamy.
to whom the Lands cannot descend, shall have such Wards Lands in farm during
the nonage, before any other, may be observed.

Answ.
The King grants thereunto.

E 3. time, may continue in force at the suit of the party. Assizes,
Continuance.


Answ.
There is remedy heretofore provided.

Writs, Hamblet, O^d Law.
as in a Town.

Answ.
The Law heretofore used shall stand.

Partition, Parceners^
purchasers, as between parceners, and prinuyes of blood.

Answ.
The Law as next above.

Collusion.
cap. 9. agrees in effect with the Record, but not in form.

Peter Pence.
That it may be declared whether the Peter Pence shall be paid to the Popes
Collectors, Popes Collectors.
or no.

Answ.
It shall be as it has been used.

Justices of Assize, Nisi prius, Exchequer, King.
That the Justices of Assize may take Nisi prius of issues between the King and
other persons of the Exchequer as well as of the Kings Bench or Common Pleas.
Answ.




Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, Indictments, Sheriffs turn.
That in the Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland and Westmerland Indictments
of manslaughter taken in the Sheriffs turn shall continue good, and elsewhere.
It shall be as the Law wills.

Lords of the Council.
or others of the Council, but before the Justices only.

The King grants thereto.

Answ.
The Print touching Villains Lands, Villinage, Doomsda^.
Tennants, and the book of Doomsday, cap. 6. agrees with the Record in effect,
but not in form.

Soldiers, Age, Exemption, Escheator, Coroners, Justices, Fines.
Coroner, or such like Office, that they be of no Juries, nor loose Fines or
Amerciaments.

The King will have consideration of Soldiers; for the other there is a Statute
made which shall be kept. Answ.

Statute kept.




Clergy, Bigamy, Old Law,
notwi^hstanding the exception of Bigamy.

The Law therefore used shall stand.

Answ.
That all Aliens, Aliens to avoid the Realm.
as well religious as others, do by Candlemass next avoid the Realm, and that
all their Lands and goods during the Wars may be employed thereto for diverse
causes there declared.

Answ.

Dover, Search,


The King grants thereunto, and that they take shipping at Dover to Callice,
where they shall be searched for carrying over more then for their needful
expenses (except Priors conventual) and persons known to be honest, Priors,
Sur^ties ^or good behavior.
and such as be married, or in house with Noblemen, finding good surety ^or
their good behavior.

Retaining, Liveries.
cap. 7. agrees in effect with the Record, but not in form.

Felons, Bishops-Prison.
the same Bishop may more narrowly look to their purgation.

Answ.
which if they do not, he will provide by Law.

That an Escheator upon an Inquest of Office do not seize any man's lands
without a Scire facias out of the Chancery. Escheator

Scire facias, Seizure, Old Law.




It shall be as it has been used. Answ.


Parliament yearly Delays in Suits^ Doubtful cases.
to redress delays in Suits, and to end such Cases as the Judges doubt of.

It shall be as it has been used. Answ.

Old usage.




Justice not to be deferred,
or privy Signet.

That Statute therefore made shall be kept.

The Print touching Protections, Answ.




cap. 8. in effect agrees with the Record, but not in form.

Note that the Commons by their Petition required, Commons Petitions, Averment,
Protection.
that every man might upon such protections aver that the party was not in the
Kings service, according to the surmise of his protection: Whereunto was answer
that averment lay not in such cases. Answ.


Calice should be besieged; Staple, Calice, Merchants, Necessity, Impositions.
and that in such distress the Merchants amongst themselves might levy
impositions for the safe transporting of their goods.

Answ.
It shall be in such places of the Realm as was last used; to the second, let
them then make means to the Council, Council.
and they shall be heard.

Winchester, Pardon, Bishop of Winchester.
who was excepted in the last pardon of King E. 3.

They pray that such as in their Charters have Conuzance of all pleas,
Conuzance of pleas, Profits, Morte Ancestor.
may thereby hold pleas of Assize of No. Disseisen, and Morte de Ancest.

They shall have allowance according to the form of their old Charter, Answ.

Allowance^ Old Charter.


and the allowance heretofore made.

Air, Trailba^ton, War.
or twenty years within the Realm.

The King will be advised. Answ.


Bishops, Clergy, Tallage.
and Subsidy of their temporal possessions, as the Laity does, which yet they
refuse to do.

They shall so do for all possessions come to their hands, Answ^
or which they have purchased since the twentieth year of King E. 1.

E. 3. cap. 10. agrees with the Record. Pardon general.


Sheriffs.
cap. 11. agrees with the Record.

Escheator.
Note the Commons moved to have had the Escheator in the same case, which was
denied.

Errors, Exchequer Kings Bench, Parliament.
or Parliament.

Ship, Boat.
Boat or other Vessel be forfeited as a Deodand, Deodand.
where any person by falling out is drowned.

The King will show favor to such as seek the same, saving his Regality.

Answ.




The print touching prisoners in the Fleet, Prisoners in the Fleet, Variance,
Omission, Exchequer,
cap. 12. for the first part thereof does not altogether agree with the Record.
And for the second part, where a man will willingly confess himself debtor to
the King, the Record is in the Exchequer, which is left out of the print (which
note well.)

Ordinaries, Pecuniary pains, Spiritual penance.
but inflict them with spiritual penance.

The King has charged all Ordinaries to do according to the Laws of the
Church, Answ.

Laws of the Church.


and not otherwise.

That it may be certainly appointed what Ordinaries shall take for the probate
of a Testament, Ordinaries, Probate of Wills, Fees.
and making of the Acquittance.



That the King will examine the cause of the great decay of the Navy. Answ.

Navies decay.




Answ.

Great Council.




Parliament members not to be colectors, Knigh^s Fees, Contribution.
and that all persons whatsoever, having Lay-fee, may contribute to the charges
of the Knights, and to all Talliages.

To the first, the King grants; to the second, the Lords of the Realm will
not so lose their own liberties. Answ.

Lords Liberties.




The Petitions of the Clergy with their Answers.
Kings Counselors, Servants.
and of good skill, and not covetous.

Clergies Liberties, Fine.


Answ.
The King will charge his Counselors to be as good as he may.

Clergies obedience, Ordinaries.


The King would the same, so as the same do not prejudice his person, Crown,
Answ.
or Laws of his Land. Prerogative, Laws.


Clergies arrest.

Marshalsey, Fees.


and pays for his discharge 6 s. 8 d. where a Lay man pays only 4 d.

Answ.

Steward.


Let the grieved complain to the Steward of the Kings Household, and he shall
have remedy.

Purveyors, Clergy, Carriages.
and enforce them to make carriages against their Liberties.

The Statutes therefore made shall be kept, with this adjunct, that for as much
as Clerks cannot have their remedy therefore, as the Statute would, that
therefore they shall have their Actions against such Purveyors by way of
Trespass, Answ.

Trespass, Treble damages,


and thereby recover treble damages mentioned in the Statute.

The Sheriffs and Escheators with their Wives and Servants, Sheriffs, Escheator
Religious Houses.




and horse, do over-charge poor religious houses, and over that do exact great
sums of money of them.

Answ.


The print touching Tithes and Oblations cap. 13. does in part agree with the
Record, Tithes, Variance from the Roll.
but not altogether (quod nota.)

Consultation, Pension, Ordinaries.
all depending before the Ordinary, that the same Ordinary may fully decide the
cause only.

The King will charge the Justices to search forth the old Records, Answ^

Justices, Old Records sea^^led.


and to do thereafter.

Prohibition,


No prohibition shall be granted other then heretofore has been, and what ever
was appointed in the last Parliament shall stand. Answ.

Parliament.




Tithes, Averment.
ca. 14. does not altogether agree with the Record; quod nota.

Ordinary, Consultation.

Answ.

Old Law.




Let it be as it has been.

That upon a prohibition for Tithes of Sylva cedua, Prohibition.




there may be readily granted a consultation; and that neither the Judge,
neither the party pursuant be impeached therefore.

It shall be as it has been.

Answ.
may enjoy the privilege thereof without any temporal Watch or Ward. Sanctuary.

Watch and Ward.




No man shall make any ward but one of the Chancery.

The Print touching Arrests in Churches, Answ.




etc. cap. 15. much swerveth from the Record; which note.

Petitions for the City of London.
Licet. 2. any Statute notwithstanding may be confirmed. London Liberties, Non
obstante.


Answ.
to the second, he will view the contraries, and do thereafter.

They require that no stranger within the same Liberty do buy or sell any
Merchandise of another stranger in pain of forfeiture. Aliens not to buy
Merchandise.

Forfeiture.




The King wills the same between Merchant and Merchant, Answ.

Merchants.


only saving the Liberties of the Merchants of Aquitain. Aquitain.


Command of the Kings Officers.
but only at the Kings suit, being sealed with the Great Seal or Privy, Great
Seal

Privy Seal, Justices.


except the Kings Justices, according to their Charter.

Answ.
Let it be continued as heretofore has been.

Inquests, Customs, Impositions.
It is enacted that the Citizens of London shall by their selves enquire of
Customs, Impositions and purprestures happening or arising within the City of
London.

Mayor and Chamberlain of London.
It is enacted, that the Mayor and Chamberlain of London for the time being,
shall have the keeping of all the Lands and Goods of such Orphans as happen
within the said City. O^phans.
Saving to the King and other Lords their right of such as hold of them out of
the same Liberty.

Interpretation of their Charters.
may be taken according to the intent and claim of the said Citizens.

Answ.

The King to interpret their Charters.


Interpretation of Charters belong unto the King, wherein if any doubt shall
arise, the King by advice will make interpretation according to reason.

London Liberties, Generality and Incertainty.
That the City of London may enjoy all such Liberties as any other Town in the
Realm, if they have any other then the said Citizens have.

Answ.
Let them declare the especial matter and they shall have answer.

Protection royal, Debt, Account, Trespass.
account or Trespass, wherein a Freeman of London is ten pounds.

For victual bought after the voyage, or service whereof the protection
mentions, Answ.

Victuals^


or for debt or contract after the date of such protection purchased, the King
grants.

Newgate, Removal, Exchequer, Kings debts.
That no man condemned and laid in Newgate for any debt to any Citizen, be
removed to answer to the King in the Exchequer, unless that the Kings debt be
first to be due.

Answ:
The King has appointed the Barons and Officers of the Exchequer so to deal.
Barons of the Exchequer.


London be in no wise restrained of any their Liberties or ancient Customs
approved. Londons Liberties, Ancient Customs.


The Commons request to the Lords.
that the King might have all such Lands as his Grandfather purchased to the
ease of the Commons, Kings Lands, Goods, Jewels to descend to his Heir.
and also all the goods and Jewels of his said Grandfather, considering what
had been heretofore done in other Kings days in the like: whereunto was made no
other Answer, but that the Lords wished the same for the Kings part, and the
soul of his said Grandfather.

Parliament continued for 47 days.
The Parliament continued from day to day from the first day, being the 13. of
October this present year until the 18. of November in the same, ( viz.) in the
whole 47 days: At the which 18 day the Bills were read, Bills read and answered.
and the answers as aforesaid. And so the King giving thanks to the Lords and
Commons for their expedition and consideration of aid, willed the Knights and
Burgesses to sue forth their Writs for their Fees and so to depart. And so
ended this Parliament. Parliament ended.

Writs for wages.

License to depars the Parliament.




Anno Secundo Ricardi Secundi. The Parliament holden at Westminster, in the
Quinden. of Easter, in the Second year of King Richard the Second.
April, the Duke of Lancaster and other Bishops and Lords assembled in the
Kings Palace of Westminster, attending of long time the coming of the King; at
the last, Parliament adjourned for absence, Sheriffs return of Writs.
for that certain Sheriffs had not made the return of their Writs, the
Parliament by the Kings commandment was continued until the next day, whereof
Proclamation was made openly in Westminster Hall.

Tuesday, for the cause aforesaid, and for that sundry of the Bishops and Lords
were then absent, Bishops and Lords absent.
the Parliament by the Kings appointment was continued until the next day.

Wednesday following being the 27. of April, the King with most of the Bishops
and Lords came into the Parliament into the Painted Chamber, Painted Chamber.
into the which the Commons were called, Commons.
before whom, Sir Richard le Scroop, Chancellor of England, Chancellor, Causes
of Parliament.
by the Kings appointment declared the causes of the Parliament, viz^

Churches liberty.


Lords of the Privy Council, Parliaments sudden breaking up.
but for the sudden breaking up of the same Parliament, he was not advised of
the number; which being chosen and sworn, togeth^r with the Nobles, consulted
about the Affairs of the Realm, Danger of the Realm,
and the great dangers wherein the same was, and weighing the great charges
which the same needed, would not fully determine the same without Parliament,
Parliament, Army, Navy, Supplies, Kings debts.
but for that time agreed to prepare an Army of men, and a Navy of Ships,
whereunto they lent the King great sums of money, the which Navy and Army he
had prepared, and thereby remained to them and to diverse good Cities and Towns
in debt.

Lords by themselves, Commons by themselves, Necessities, Kings honor, Realms
safety.
and the Commons by themselves to weigh the necessi^ies, and to provide
therefore, and not to muse at the sudden calling of this Parliament,
considering the same was for the Kings honor, and safety of the Realm.

Wars charge, Treasurers of War.


England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Gascoyne and other places beyond the Seas, Petitions.
and for the foreign Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Nobles Committee Kings Revenues examined, Subsidy of Wools, Maletolt, Priors
Aliens, Officers sees, Annuities, Kings Movables, Kings Household expenses,
Fortresses, B^urdeaux^ Subsidy of Cloth, Cardinals possessions.
Sundry Nobles are named to examine the Revenues arising of the Subsidy of
Wool, and to examine all the Revenues of the Realm, viz. the old Maletolt of
Woolls. the revenues of Priors Aliens, and all other receipts of the King
whatsoever. To examine what Fees the Nobles and Officers received in the
beginning of E. 3. what Annuities were granted by E. 3. or the black Prince his
Son; to survey all the Kings Movables, and enquire of the same; to view the
expenses of the Kings Household, of Callice and other forelets, and
apparrelments of War; the Revenues of Bordeaux, the Subsidy of Cloth, the
possessions of Cardinals Rebels upon debts, upon receipts of wages for the
Wars, Wages for the wars.
and of Rome-pence or Peter Pence, Peter Pence.
and the arrerages due for many years.

Subsidy of Staple wares released.

Poundage, Subsidy of Wools contitionally granted.


tit. 29. and the 6d. of every 20. in Merchandise then granted tit. 30. The
Lords and Commons do there grant to the King the Subsidies of Woolls there
granted in the said last Parliament, tit. 29. to endure for one year longer,
and a certain sum of money of every estate of the Realm from the highest to the
lowest. Pol-money.


Justices of the Bench, Chief Baron, Earl.
with the chief Baron, to be 5 l. whereas no Earl was above 4 l.

The Mayor of London paid 4 l. as an Earl. every Alderman 40 s. as a Baron.
Mayor and Aldermen of London.


s. as an Advocate at Law. Advocate,


May released the demand aforesaid, King in Parliament.

Subsidy rel^ased.


tit. 23. thenceforth to cease.

William de Montacute Earl of Salisbury shows the whole Circumstances and
process contained in the last Parliament, Error in Parliam.
tit. 31, 32, 33.

Scire fac. granted the last Parliament to warn Edmond Earl of March is
rehearsed at large. Scire facias rehearsed.


Scire facias awarded to the Sheriff of Shropshire, Scire facias returned.
John de Ludlow Sheriff of the same returned the said Edmond Earl of March to
be warned.

Salisbury by Sir John de Monteacute one of his general Attorneys by Pattent,
Attorney in Parliament,
the same Earl being beyond the Seas in the Kings service, as also the said
Edmond Earl of March came into this present Parliament, and hearing the return
of the said Writs, and Process of the said Earl of Salisbury by his said
Attorney, proffered to assign the errors contained in the said Record. Errors
assigned.


March being there present, alleged that the Writ of Scire fac. is not
sufficiently served, Exceptions to the Scire facias,
for that the Writ wills the Sheriff to warn Edmond Mortimer Earl of March,
Variance of the return and Writ.
Son and Heir of Roger Mortimer late Earl of March, the Son of Edmond de
Mortimer, and the Sheriffs return is, that he has warned Edmond Mortimer Earl
of March, Son and Heir of Roger de Mortimer, Son of Edmond de Mortimer, late
Earl of March, which cannot be intended the same person, for that Edmond the
Father of Roger de Mortimer was never Earl of March.

Salisbury affirms the Return to be good, Return ave^^ed g^^d.
and prays that upon assigning of examination of the Errors, E^rors as^igned.
the Judgment may be reversed.

Public affairs pre^e^red to priva^e.
besides the difficulty of the matter, D^fficulty, A^journment to the next
Parliamen^.
the King gave day to either of the said parties to the next Parliament with
all advantages, and the matter to stand as it now does.

E. 3. of certain purchased Fee-simple lands, infeoffed the Duke of Lancaster
and others in fee by Deed, Feoffment and Livery by the King by De^d, Condition
by Paroll not mentioned in the Deed, Uses limited by Paroll, Obit perpetual,
Justices, Kings S^rgeants, Condition.
and caused Livery and Se^sin to be delivered thereupon without condition by
writing, or word. Long after the same King prayed the said Feoffees by mouth,
that therewith they should provide for the sustenance of the Friars of Langley,
and for the Nuns of Dertford, and to provide perpetual Obit for the Countess of
Huntington, and another for the soul of the Countess-Marshal, and for other
charges. Whereupon all the Justices and Sergeants to the King there named, were
straightly charged in full Parliament to say their knowledge, whether the Charge
thus made to the Feoffees after the Feoffment aforesaid should by Law be
adjudged a Condition, so as the said gift were made conditionally. All who
agreed, that sithence there was nothing spoken before the gift upon the gift,
nor yet upon the livery, that the Kings request after they were thus in
possession, could not make any condition, whereby the Kings right is now
thereby saved.

And note that this motion was made at the suit of the Executors of King E. 3.
who were infeoffed as is aforesaid, Kings Executors.
and receiving of the profits, were forbidden the same.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Church-liberties, Variance from the Rolls, Kings regality saved, Great
Charter, Forest.
cap. 1. swerveth from the Record; for the Record has saving the Kings
regality, which is not in the print: Besides, the print is more large then the
Record in other points; otherwise the print touching the Great Charter, and the
Charter of the Forest, agrees with the Record.

Petitions answered, Statutes made on them before departure from Parliament.
or hereafter to be moved; and that Statutes be thereupon made before the
departure of every Parliament.

Such Bills as remedy cannot otherwise be had but in Parliament, Answ.

Bills answered, Parliament.


reasonable answer shall be thereto made before such departure.

E. 1. Perambulations, Forest, Indictment of Vert and Venison, Certainty.
That the Indictments of Vert or Venison may express the places of the
trespasses, or else to be void. That any impeachment out of the bound of the
Forest, may trebly therefore recover.

Answ.
and who will complain shall be heard.

It is enacted, That in Loans which the King shall require of his Subjects upon
Let^ers of Privy seal, Loans, Privy ^^al, (...)
that such as have reasonable excuse of not lending, may thereto be received
without further summons,

Customers, Comptrollers ^^^ual.
That all Customers and Comptrollers of England may yearly be removed.

Answ.

Kings pleasure.


The King by advice herein will do his pleasure.

Chester, and other Counties Palatine as are outlawed for trespasses or
felonies done in their Counties. Count Palatine, Chester, Outlawry, Tresp^^^,
^^lony.


The King will provide remedy therefore, saving the right of himself and of
other men. Answ.

Rights sav^d.




Scotland for things done since the Truce, Eng^ish (...) in Scotland,
Enlarg^me^^ without (...) Scots.
may be delivered without ransom, as the Scots in like of custom be.

The Wardens of such parts be appointed for the like cases a day of meeting the
last of June, Answ.

Warden^.


at what time good order may be taken.

Sheriff^, D^bts, Accom^^.
where the King for to certain his debts has appointed to certain men sundry
sums of those Sheriffs receipts, may upon their Accounts be discharged thereof.

Answ.

Kings Council.


The King will be advised by his Council.

That Thieves and Robbe^s may speedily come to their deliverance. Thieves,
Deliverance.


Answ.

Jail-delivery.




Scots, Scotland, Woolls transported, Custom.
the most of the Woolls of the Shires of York, Du^esm, Westmerland, Cumberland,
and Northumberland, are transported into Scotland without any Custom. Answ.


Kings Council.
The King by his Council will provide.

Ships to de^end the Sea, Pyracies.
That the King will appoint certain Vessels for the keeping of Stradborough, the
men of which Town with^n two years before paid 1000 l. ransom, and for the
defense of the North-coasts.

Answ.

(...) Merchan^^.


This matter is committed to the Earl of Northumberland, the Mayor of London,
and to certain Merchants of the North, of them to be considered.

Defense of the North coasts and seas, Order consumed by Parliament.
In a Schedule annexed to the Roll, is contained the Order of the parties
aforesaid for the defense of the North-sea coasts, and confirmed by those
Estates of the Parliament.

That those Seacoasts shall be defended with two Ships, and two Barges, and
two Bullinge^s armed and appointed for the Wars at the charges hereafter
ensuing, viz. That every Ship, Boat, or other Vessel whatsoever passing those
Seacoasts, shall pay for every Tun of his burden six pence, except all
Vessels laden with Wines or other Merchandises from Flanders to be discharged
at London, and Ships or other Vessels laden with Staple-ware, and to be
discharged at Cali^e; The which excepted Ships shall not be safe-conducted by
the Admiral of the Sea without consideration. Subsidy^ In post and (...).
A^mira^.


Certain named are appointed keepers of the Sea coasts, Sea coasts guarded.
and to levy the Subsidy aforesaid both by Sea, and by Land.

Certain Merchants are appointed to be Receivers and Comptrollers of the
aforesaid Subsidy. Subsidy, Receivers, Comptrollers,


Cumberland require that it would please the King to repair the City and Castle
of Carlisle, Cumberland, Carlisle repaired.
in manner ruined, and at his charges to appoint a worthy Guardian.

The King is not to repair the same City, but he will give in charge that it
be done, about the Castle he is repairing; touching the Warden, Warden

Answ.


the King by his Council will do his pleasure. Kings Prerogative.


That provision may be found that the money carried forth of the Realm may be
brought in again, Money transported and clip^ed,

Answ.


and not clipped within the Realm ^e carried forth again.

Minters, Merchants.
will provide the best remedy. Priors, Aliens^ Prior of Halenge,


That all religious persons may according to the last Parliament depart the
Realm, and namely the Prior of Halenge. Answ.


If any man will specially complain, Sureties found.

Sheriffs not to be Justices.


he may be heard, for the Prior of Halenge has found surety.



E. 3. borrowed of the Subjects in the 43. year of his reign. Loans repayed.

Answ.




The King will so do so soon as conveniently he may.

The like motion and answer that is made in the last Parliament, Tit. 57.

That half pence, Account.




and farthings may be coined, Answ.
and commandment given to sell according to the same.

Upon having of Bullion the King will do so.

Sylva cedua. Sylva Cedua,

Answ.




As it has been heretofore used.

Gloucester touching Riots, Riots, Statute repealed, Variance from the Record.
cap. 2. does not agree with the Record, for the Record does generally revoke
the said Statute made at Gloucester (which note:)

They require that the Constable, Constable, Marshal, Treason, Felony,
Jurisdiction. Kings Justices.
and Marshal of England do surcease to hold before themselves Pleas of Treason,
or Felony, and that the same may only be determined before the Kings Justices
according to the great Charter. Great Charter,


The Lords dare not disclose the same as well for that the Heirs who claim the
same Office are within age, Answ.




and in the Kings keeping, as for that the Parliament draws to an end. But as
touching the appeal of Treason made in Cornwall, and depending before the said
Constable, and Marshal, the King will take the same into his own hands as shall
please him for determining the same according to the Laws, saving to every one
his rights.

That there be a certain number of Justices learned in the Law, Justices
elected by the Lords and Commons.
which may in every Shire be appointed and chosen by the Lords and Commons that
none be by them associated; Lawyers, Association, Sessions, Wages, Sheriffs.
their Sessions to be holden four times yearly, and there to have Fees at the
Sheriffs hands.

Answ.
The King will appointable Justices, no Association shall be made, Kings
Prerogative, Ass^ciation, Remotion, Council Fees.
no remotion without consent of the Council; two or three of such of them as
shall hold the Sessions shall have the sixth part of the profit of the same
until the next Parliament.

Suit against the King.
A Statute made that such as demand land against the King and evidence therefore
by Writ shown in the Treasury, that in such case who sueth for the King, shall
after the return of four Writs, Writs returned, Respit to answer.
every Writ having ^orty days respit, Answ.
answer.



That the Owners of the ships taken up for the Kings service for their losses
in the same may be considered, Owners of Ships pressed, Losses recompensed,
Mariners wages, Archers.
and that Mariners may have the like wages as Archers have.

Answ.
It shall be as it has been used.

Commons House, Collectors, C^ssors, Aids.
Cessor, or Comptroller of any aids granted now.

The King grants, so as before their departure they in writing declare, who
are most able therefore. Answ.


Pardon, Fees of the Great Seal. Air.
That the King will grant Pardons to all such as will, for the only Fee of the
Great Seal, of all points of E^re, of desperate debts of any of his Ancestors,
and of all points of the Forest until the Feast of Pentecost now present.
Forest.

Answ.






Treasurer for the Wars discharged, Treasurer of England,
That the Treasurer for the Wars may be discharged, and that all which is, or
shall be granted, may be received by the Treasurer of England.

It likes the King.

Answ.
It is enacted to endure until the next Parliament, that all Merchants which
shall bring in any cloth of Gold, Merchants, Bullion, Surety, Tower,
Riverchief Pearls, Jewels, or Furrs, and all Merchants which shall transport
Staple wares, shall find Surety to the Tower to the value of twelve pence in
Bullion for every twenty shillings of such their Merchandise so brought in or
transported.

That no Knight or Lady under forty pound land by the year, Knight, Lady,
Apparel, Furrs, Cloth of Gold, Silk, etc.
do wear any precious Furrs, cloth of Gold, ribond of Gold, or silk on pain to
loose all that they have. Answ.


Goldsmith, Ma^k^, Forfeit^ure.
The King will be advised until the next Parliament.



Callis touching their Liberties, Petitions, Callis, Liberties,
with the answers thereunto.

It is enacted, that the Chancellor and Scholars of the University of
Cambridge, Chancellor and Scholars of Cambridge University, Jurisdiction,
Victuals, Measures, Weights, Major and Bailiffs of Cambridge.
shall for five years in default of the Major and Bailiffs of the same Town of
Cambridge, have the punishment of all manner of Victuals, Measures, and Weights
within the said Town, and also power to punish the Major, and Bailiffs, and
their Officers, if there shall be any Victuallers for any such default.

And it is to be noted, that of the printed Statute cap. 3. touching fained
gifts, F^audulent conveyances, A p^inted Sta^ute not in the Roll.
and Feoffments to defeat men's Creditors there is no mention made in this
Record.

Anno Secundo Richardi Secundi. The Parliament holden at Gloucester, the
Wednesday next after the Feast of S. Luke the Evangelist, in the Second year of
King Richard the Second.
October, and the first day of the Parliament, Parliament at Gloucester,
Parliament adjourned, for that diverse Lords and Knights were not come.
certain of the Nobles met in a Chamber appointed in the Abbey of S. Peter's of
Gloucester; where for that diverse of the Lords were not come, nor the Sheriffs
then returned their Writs, the Parliament was adjourned until the next day by
the Kings commandment.

Spain, Kings Uncles, Causes of Parlia^ment.
Cambridge, and Buckingham, the two Archbishops, and diverse other Nobles,
assembled in the Great Hall of the Abbey of Gloucester, and there appointed:
where the L. B. of David's, by the commandment of the King, declared the cause
of the Parliament as follows, viz.

First, for the liberties of the Church, Churches liberties, Laws maintenance,
Peace.
maintenance of the Laws, and Secondly, for that it was enacted that a
Parliament should yearly be holden. A Parliament annually.
Thirdly, for that the King desired to see, and to consult with them so
honorable an Assembly there gathered in Gods name, which he commends,
Parliaments advice, Unity and Concord.

Wars, Aid.
could not endure and maintain the same without their Aid.

Scots at Roxburgh at Truce thereupon taken for a time, Scots, Truce, French
and Scots alliance.
they the same Scots have allied themselves with the French, to the end to
depart from the same Truce, and by all means to annoy the King and his friends:
All which to recite, and the charges thereof to bear, he wills them deeply to
consider.

viz. That the Law of the Land, Law of the Land, Law of Arms differ.
and the Law of Arms do not concur together; by certain similitudes he wishes
them of those two Laws to make a Relative, so as they may stand with the other.

Slanderers, Sowers of d^scord.
Gentlemen, and Neighbors, the which kind of men he resembles to Dogs that
eat raw flesh, so applying them to eat and consume living men.

Redress, Commons house.
and to be there the next day by eight of the clock to hear further
Declarations, and the Commons to keep the Chapter house within the great
Cloister of the Abbey aforesaid.

England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Receivers of Petitions.
Receivers of Petitions for Gascoyne and other places beyond the Seas, and for
the foreign Isles.

Triers of Petitions.
Tryers of petitions for England, etc. as above.

Tryers of petitions for Gascoin, etc. as above.

October, the Lords and Commons assembled in the said great Hall where Sir
Richard le Scroop Steward of the Kings Household, Lord Steward (...) the
Household.
declaring his own unworthiness there to speak, showed them how they were
environed with enemies, Enemies^ Kings expenses in Foreign parts.
and the King importably charged for keeping possession beyond the Seas;
namely, that Callis cost him yearly twenty thousand pounds, Callis, Foreign
Garrisons, Ireland, Wars, Aid.
Breast twelve thousand marks, besides Ireland, Cherburgh, Bordeaux, and Bayn,
he shows that the old grant of the last Parliament, was only dispended in
the Wars, as the Officers could declare; he wisleth them to consult for the
rescue, and the mean how to levy the charges.

The Commons present their Speaker.
After that the Commons came before the King, where Sir James Pickering knight,
Sir James Pickering.
Speaker of the Parliament for the Commons, makes his Protestation, The
Speakers Protestation.
as well for himself, as for the whole House: And first for the Commons, That
if he should speak any thing which happily might be ill taken, it might be as
as nothing, so as the Commons at any time might amend the same: And so much for
himself.

Churches Liberties, Laws observed, Peace.
maintenance of the Laws, and observations for the Peace, the Commons making
low courtesies rendered therefore most humble thanks; Thanks rendered,
and pray God for the execution of the same.

Aid denied by the Commons.
To the aid required for the King, he shows how in the last Parliament, upon
the like motion to the Commons, repeating the great charges of the King, by the
Treasurer, Treasurer, Kings Coronati^on.
they then made answer, that they saw no such cause of aid; whereunto for the
King it was then replied, that the Kings Coronation was chargeable, and that if
the Commons would grant such reasonable aid, whereby the King might thereby
provide an army, Army.
that they nothing doubted, but that the King of himself might continue the
same without charging them of long time; upon which promise and hope the
Commons did then grant the same large aid, Aid granted upon future promise of
discharge of aid.
and being now unable to do the same, require pardon thereof, thinking that a
great part of the same grant, remained yet in the Kings Treasury.

Richard le Scroop not knowing any such promise of discharge made in the last
Parliament, Commons charg^d with (...) surmise of a prom^se.
charging them with un^ruth for surmising any rest of the last grant to be; And
thereto calls for witness William Walworth, Witnesses.
and John Philpot Citizens of London, Treasurers of Wa^. Citizens of London.
and Treasurers appointed and sworn.

Commons demand an account of the aids formerly granted.
Thereupon the Commons make request to know how and in what manner the same sums
were defraied, whether some were not therefore indebted, and who should be
Counselors and great Officers about the Kings person for this year.
Counselors, Great Officers,


An account of Subsidies granted, how expended.
The said Sir Richard le Scroop by the Kings commandment answered, that albeit
there never was account of Subsidies in or out of Parliament, yet
notwithstanding the King would that the said William and John with others of
the Kings Council should show them the same, ^
so as the same should be taken for no example. Touching any of the Kings
debts, the Exchequer used not to forget them.



The Commons require longer day for the exhibiting of the^r Petitions, Commons
require long^r day f^r e^hibiting (...). Kings pleasure.
which was granted. They also require the Enrollment of the Aids and Subsidies
granted the last Parliament; the which was granted at the Kings pleasure, and
not at their request.

A Coun^il of Lords (...) to confer with the C^mm^n^, C^mm^ns agreement to the
Lo^ds order.
the Lords denied that, saying, the same was the guise of two or three
Parliaments before; but theirs was that the Lords should among themselves choose
a certain number, and the Commons the like; and that they should confer
together which they would do; for if the Commons would not dissever themselves,
neither would they the Lords, to which Order the Commons agreed.

Account of the Receipts and Disbursements in the Wars.
they eftsoon returned into the Parliament and commended the same as very
honorable; only they said that touching the forty six thousand pound defraied
about the Marches of Callice, Breast, and other places of Gascoign, and certain
ransoms of prisoners should not run in their charge, considering those defenses
were out of the Realm.

Foreign garrisons, S^a well guarded.
the which being well defrauded, and the Sea kept, we should then enjoy peace
at home, and not otherwise.

E. 3. able to serve the turn. Whereto was answered, that the same goods were
justly praised and delivered to certain his Creditors, Decei^ed Kings g^ods
praised, and d^livered to (...) his C^editor^.
(except certain implements of household) wherefore the King stood bound to pay
the value to certain of his Cred^tors.

Canterbury came before the King and Lords, Archbishop of Canterbury his speech
and request.
and required audience, giving first most lowly thanks for the confirming of
the liberties of the Church. He then required that the great villainy done in
the Abby-Church of Westminster may be revenged, viz. for that Robert Hamley
Esquire. and one other were murdered in the Church of Westminster by the high
Altar at high Mass time. Murder in a Church by the Altar in time of Mass.
And so beseeches that the King may be virtuously brought up in his youth, and
have good Counsel.

Temporal Lords, Kings education
and pray the King, that where the Clergy has incroached against the Laws,
that the same may be redressed.

Judges and Common and C^non Lawyers opinions delivered upon oath before the
King.
They further say, That the Judges and learned of the Law, and certain Doctors
of the Divine, Civil, and Common Law, being examined and sworn before the
King, have thereby affirmed that no man ought to enjoy the Sanctuary in cases
of Debt, Sanctuary not allowed in case of Debt, etc.
Account, or Trespass, but only in cases where the life or member of a man
lies in danger. All which those Doctors and Clerks did after in this present
Parliament defend and openly prove against the Bishops, whereunto the Bishops
could not then answer, but required longer day, which was granted.

Note, in this Record are made certain reasons against Sanctuary for Debts,
about which privilege it appears this Hurly-burly to have been.

Subsidy of Woolls granted by Lords and Common^, Skins.
The Lords and Commons grant to the King the like Subsidy of Wool and Staple
ware, as was granted in 50 E. 3. tit. 7. but expressed in 43 E. 3. tit. 10. for
one year over and above. Which said subsidies they granted to the King, as a
new increase of the same subsidies: Thirteen shillings four pence of every sack
of Wool; Th^rteen shillings four pence for every twelve score Wooll-fells;
Twenty six shillings eight pence of every Last of Skins passing out of the
Realm, of all manner of persons for one year.

Tonnage and Poundage granted, Wars, Treasurers of Wars, Aids.
They also grant to the King six pence of every Twenty shillings merchandise
passing or coming into the Realm. They require the King to employ their Grants
to the maintenance of Wars, and to appoint suff^cient and able Treasurers
therefore as lately; And to take these their Grants in good part, for that by
Plague, War, and Murrain, they are able to do no more.

William of Montacute Earl of Salisbury, rehearses the old Petition contained
in 1 R. 2. tit. 28. and 29. and prays as there is redress. E^ror in
Parliament.


Scire facias, Scire facias.
whereby the Earl of March was willed to appear.

Sheriffs return,
The Sheriffs return upon the same Scire facias, that the same Earl of March was
not found within this Bailiwick, neither any Lands or Tenements to be warned
thereby, who was Sheriff of Shropshire. Whereupon the said Earl of Salisbury
required another Scire fac. for to warn Edmund now Earl of March, Alias scire
facias,
the son and heir of the said Roger, to be and answer at the next Parliament,
Next Parliament.
which was granted.

Misdemeanor, Imprisonment, Duress, Breach of privilege, Adnullation of
Marriage, Council, Commitment to the Tower.
The Lady Nevill of Essex complains and shows, that where John Brewes and
others brake her house at London, and violently took thereout Margery the
daughter of John Nerfourd son to the said Lady, and carried her away unto the
house of Robert Howard knight; All who kept away the said Margery, to the end
she should not pursue in Court Christian adnullation of contract of matrimony
against the said John Brewes. For which cause the said Robert was by the
Council committed to the Tower, and after delivered surety, and promised to do
his uttermost to bring forth the said Margery by Michaelmas ensuing, or else to
yield himself prisoner to the Tower again.

Council.
The said Robert at Michaelmas came before certain of the Council, and showed
his travel about the expedition asore, but that he could not meet with her. To
whom the said Council gave three months of longer respite. Notwithstanding
upon the said Ladies pursuit, for that the said Robert not bringing forth the
said Margery, did not yield himself prisoner to the Tower, the same Robert was
therefore committed to the Tower again. Commi^ment to the Tower.


William of Windsor and Alice his wife, late called D^me Alice Perrers, Alice
Perrers c^^e, (...) in Pa^liament,
pray the revocation of a Judgment made in the last Parliament, tit. 41, 42,
43. against the said Alice for Errors therein contained. The Record was brought
forth, and Errors assigned. But the Kings learned Council adjudged, Kings
Council at Law.
and the Kings favor they could not sue in such wise, but require that by
A^torney they might sue therefore. Attorney.


William and Alice his wife, late called Dame Alice Perrers, by a new Bill
required, that they by Edmund Clay and Robert Brown their Attorneys might
pursue the Reversal of the said Judgment. Error in Parliament.

Attorney.


The King committed the matter to the Lords order, Lords Order, Kings favor.
who licensed them by the Kings favor to pursue the same as above.

Norwich require, N^rwi^h, Aliens, Forf^iturr, Monopoly.
that no stranger within their Liberty may there sell or buy any merchandise by
retail, on pain of forfeiture.

There is a Statute hereafter made therefore, which shall be kept.

It is enacted for the Citizens of Norwich, Answ.

Norwich, Customs there,


That if their Customs and Usages heretofore used, or hereafter to be used, be
difficult or defective in part, or in all, or that the same need any due
amendment for any new matter arising, whereof remedy was not before that time
had, that then the Bailiffs and 24 Citizens of the same City, so therefore
yearly to be chosen, or the greater part of them, shall from henceforth have
power to ordain and provide from time to time such remedies which are most
agreeable to says and reason, and for the most profit of the good and
peaceable government of the same Town, and of strangers thereto repairing,
Aliens, Ordinances,
as to them shall seem best, so as such Ordinances be profitable for the King
and his people.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
That the liberties of the Church, Churches li^er^es, Magna Charta, and^.
the Great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest may be maintained.

The King grants thereto. Answ.


Cornwall show how by the taking up of their Mariners lately, Cornnwal,
Mariners, Ships, Spaniards.
the Spaniards burned all their ships, and otherwise much endammaged them. The
like complaint made at the Seacoasts, and therefore prayen remedy. Answ.


Council.


That every Disseisin may maintain his Assise against the principal Disseisor,
A^^ise, Diss^^s^r.

Answ.


albeit they make over Feoffments to others in maintenance.

The Statute made therefore in the last Parliament shall be kept.

Riots and R^u^s.
cap. 7. agrees with the Record.

They pray remedy, for that sundry men without any cause are called into the
Exchequer to account for sweet Wines and Scottish money. Exchequ^e^^ Account^
Sweet Wines, Scottish money.


Answ.
The King will cause the Officers to see the same amended.

Ordinaries extortions, Probate of Wills, Summoners, Bribes.
They require remedy against the Extortions of Ordinaries for Probate of
Testaments, and against the slights of false Summoners there uttered, unless
the poor do bribe them with money, which they call the Bishops Arms.

Answ.
Let declaration be made that the old Laws do not provide therefore, and remedy
shall be found.

Tythe-wood.

Answ.


That declarations may be made in what sort men shall pay tithe of their Wood.

As it has heretofore been used.

That men may enjoy their Purlieus freely, Purlieus, Perambulations, Forests.
and that perambulations may be made as was in time of King Henry.

Answ.
The King thinks that the perambulations be duly made, and who will may
complain, and shall be heard.

Freehold, Council, Common Law.
That no man by Writ or otherwise be to answer of his Freehold before the
Council, but only at the Common Law.

Answ.

Oppressions.


No man shall be forced to answer finally thereunto, provided that all persons
shall answer before the Council of oppressions.

Justices of Peace.
and more able in their place.

Answ.
The Chancellor, Treasurer, and other of the Kings Council shall in such cases
appoint the most able.

Justice not to be stayed, Great and Privy Seal.
It is enacted, that no Justice shall stay Justice for any Writ of the great or
Privy Seal, or other commandment whatsoever, the same being against the Law or
Statutes before that time made.

Corporations, Liberties.
It is enacted, that all Cities and Corporations may have their liberties
confirmed according to the grant of the last Parliament.

Patents confirmed
That all Patents of Farms as well of Denizens as Aliens, may be confirmed, Answ.
and not repealed.

Extents.
The King grants, but where there are Extents duly returned, or for other
reasonable causes.

Callice, Merchandises, Callice.
except as is contained 1 R. 2. tit. 36.

That the Justices of the Kings Bench for the delivery of prisoners, Justices
of Kings Bench, Prisoners, Nisi prius, Writs.
may have power to grant Nisi prius without Writs of the Chancery, Answ.

Common Law.


or the Privy seal.

As it has been, it shall be used.

Escheator.
It is enacted, that no Escheator shall remain Escheator in the Office above
three years.

Knights wages, Contribution.
See the next Parliament, tit. 43.

Answ.
It shall be as heretofore.

Sheriff^ Accounts, Liberties, Fee-farm.


Answ.
The Lords during the Kings minority cannot so deal, Kings minority,
but they will understand of the case whereby remedy shall be provided.

Essex and Hartford-shire pray, that the Sheriff of the same may yearly be
discharged of One hundred pounds, Sheriff^ disc(...) Fee-farm.
parcel of his Fee-farm, which for certain causes there expressed he cannot
levy.

The King of his mere good will has pardoned them an hundred marks yearly for
three Quarters ensuing. Answ.

Pardon.




Laborers.
cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

Wales pray that they may not be distrained or impeached in Wales, Marches of
Wales, Wales, Distress.
but where they are Debtors, Su^tors or Trespassors.

The King and the Lords of the Marches will provide remedy therefore. Answ.

Lords Marchers.




Justices of Peace ^ees.


Two or three of the Justices, Answ.
such as shall hold the Sessions, Sessions.
shall be only for one year, and receive the sixth part of the profits of those
Sessions.

Edw. 3. cap. 5. touching taking away of delays, Delays.
shall be observed.

Kent pray, Kent, Seacoasts, Nobles, Contribution.
that remedy may be had for the better keeping of the Seacoasts; so as the
Nobles having great part of the same, they may contribute thereto.

The King by advice of his Council will provide remedy. Answ.

Kings Counci^.




Severn, Severn, Nusances.
require that the Statute made against Kidels, Stauks, and Stakes raised upon
Rivers, be executed.

It likes the King.

Answ.
that no man shall be put out of his Freehold by any Letters Patent granted
upon suggestions, Freehold outed, Letters Patent, I^quests.
unless the same be found for the King by Enquest, or by Evidence in the Kings
Court.

Ships taking, Navies decay.
whereby they have been spoiled, to the utter decay of the whole Navy.

The King will therefore make the best provision he may. Answ.


Normandy upon the North parts of Tyne, Sea-guarding, Pirates and Enemies,
Shipping.
and thereby taking and spoiling diverse and sundry English Boats since the last
Truce.

The King by advice will provide remedy. Answ.


Laborers.
as to avoid the same slay into Cities or Towns, and there become Clerks or
Artificers.

The King will herein do his best. Answ.


Aliens.
having the greatest part of the Church dignities in their hands.

The King by advice of the Lords will provide therefore. Answ.

Lords advice.




Urban that now is, Cardinals, Pope Urban.
shall be seized into the Kings hands.

Wight pray remedy, Isle of Wight, Damages.
for that most of the Inhabitants, by loss of Enemies, and payments, have
forsaken the same Isle. Answ.


The King will do his best.

E. 3. shall be observed. Statutes to be kept.


Merchant-strangers.
and in the Book cap. 1. is so bemouldred and defaced, as much of the Record
wants.

Merchant-strangers.
The Record touching Merchant-strangers in the Book cap. 3. in like sort much
impaired.

Mariners.
The print touching Mariners, cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Pope Urban declared lawful Pope by Act of Parliament.
An Act, that Pope Urban was true and lawful Pope; and that the Livings of all
Cardinals and other Rebels to the said Pope shall be seized in the Kings hands,
Cardinals lands and goods seized, Provision, Praemunire.
and the King to be answered of the profits thereof; And that whosoever within
this Realm shall procure or obtain any provision or other instrument from any
other Pope then the said Urban, shall be out of the Kings protection.

London shall not exact or demand of any the Clergy or Lawyers of this Realm,
London, Exactions, Quindesms, Clergy, Lawyers, Justices, Sergeants, Taxes,
Residence.
Justices, Sergeants, or other learned in the Law, or otherway, who lie in
London, and not make their continual abode there, any Tenths or Fifteens, or
other Taxes for any their goods there remaining. Look 3 R. 2. tit. 46.

Yarmouth shall have their old liberties confirmed, Yarmouth, Liberties,
Herring Fair, Free-trade, Herring.
with their liberty of their Fair of Herring within the same Town, and with the
rod Kingly in such wise as King E. 3. did by his Charter to them lastly
granted, with the Clause of Licet, without any Fine paying; so as all manner of
men, as well Denizens as Strangers, may freely buy and sell Herring within the
same Town during the said Fair freely, notwithstanding the Repeal lately made.

News.
And it is to be noted, that Statute cap. 5. touching Tellers of News of
Noblemen or Counselors, is not in the Record, nor any mention thereof. Quod
nota.

Anno Tertio Richardi Secundi. Rex charissimo Avunculo suo Johanni Regi
Castelli and Legionis, Summons of Parliament.
salutem^ Apud Westminster. die Lunae post Festum Hillarii. Test Rege vicesimo die
Octobris.
Consimiles Literae subscript.
EDmundo Com. Cantabr. Tho. de Woodstock Com. Buck. and Constab. Angliae.
Ricardo Com. Arundel. Edmundo de Mortuo mari, Com. Marchiae. Tho. de Bello
campo, Com. War. Hugo Com. Stafford. Gilberto de Umfravill, Com. de Anegos.
Willielmo de Ufford Com. Suff. Willielmo de Monte acuto Com. Sarum. Hen. de
Percie Com. Northumbr. Guiscardo de Angle Com. Hunt. Johanni de Mowbray, Com.
Northampton. Edmundo Courtney Com. Devon. Jacobo de Audley de Heleight.
Willielmo de Latimer. Willielmo Bardolfe. Rado Basset de Drayton. Guidoni
Brian. Rogero de Bello campo. Johanni de Clinton. Gilberto Talbot^ Willielmo
Bottereaux. Johanni de Wa^re. Henrico de Scroope. Johanni de Nevill de Raby.
Hen. de Ferrariis de Groby. Tho. Roos de Hamalake. Richardo de Stafford.
Johanni Gray de Codonore. Hen. Gray de Wilton. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin^
Mauritio de Berkley. Johanni de Arundell. Warino de Insula. Henrico Fitzhugh.
Richardo de Scroope. Tho. Darcye. Nich. Burnell. Willielmo la Zouch de
Harringworth. Rogero de Clifford. Alm. de Sancto Amando. Johanni Buttort.
Johanni Lovell. Rogero de Scales. Richardo de Cromwell. Michaeli de la Poole.
Petro de Malo lacu. Rado Baroni de Greystock. Waltero Fitzwalter. Roberto de
Fe^rariis de Weme. Roberto de Harrington. Tho. de Morley Chr. Willielmo de
Furnivall. Willielmo de Aldborough Chr^ Johanni de Cobham de Kent. Hugoni de
Dacre Chr. Roberto de Willoughby. Johanni de Wells. Johanni de Clifford. Rogero
le Strange de Knokin.
Edmondo Com. Cantabrigiae, Custodi Quinq. Port.

Anno Tertio Richardi Secundi. The Parliament holden at Westminster, on Monday
next after S. Hilary, in the Third year of Richard the Second.
Parliament adjourned because many Lords not come, nor W^its returned.
THe same Monday being the 17. of January, as well the King in proper person, as
sundry Bishops, Lords and Commons came to Westminster; where for that diverse
Lords were not come by reason of great rain late before fallen, nor sundry
Sheriffs returned their Writs, the Parliament by the Kings commandment was
adjourned until the next day, and thereof open declaration made in the Chamber
de Pinct, Painted chamber, All members to at^end.
with charge that all men do return the same next morning.

Painted chamber, Knights and Burg^ss^s called, Chancellor, Causes of the
Parliament.
The Tuesday following, the King with diverse Bishops, Lords and Commons came
into the said Chamber de Pinct, where the Knights and Burgesses were called.
After which, Sir Richard le Scroop Knight, Chancellor of England, by the Kings
commandment declared the causes of the same Assembly.

Churches liberties^ Laws maintenance, Peace.
First, for the liberties of the Church, maintenance of the Laws, and
preservation of the Peace.

R^gality of the Crown impaired.
Secondly, for that the Regality of the Kings Crown was greatly impaired by
sundry means, as well by the Court of Rome as otherwise, Rome, Provisors.
wherein the provisions therefore made were as well to be executed, as further
remedy to be provided for.

Thirdly, to consult how to resist not only the Enemies of France, Consultation
how to resist foreign enemies, France, Spain, Scotland, Wars raised, Rebels in
Ireland, Gascoin, Defense of the Kings dominions, Aid, Lords of the Great
Council, Account of public moneys and disbursments.
Spain, and Scotland, who had raised hot wars, but also to suppress the Rebels
of Ireland and Gascoin, and how to defend the Kings dominions beyond the seas.
All which, for that the same could not be accomplished without their aid, he
willed them to be advised thereof, showing them further that the Lords of the
Great Council should, when they would, make them privy as well to the receipts
of the last Grant and Subsidies of Staple-ware, as of the disbu^sing of the
same.

Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Gascoin, and other places beyond the seas and of the Isles.

Petitions.
Tryers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Gascoin, etc. as above.

Chancellor, Causes of Parliament further declared, To^nage and Poundage,
Subsidy revoked,
showing of the Grant made by them at Gloucester, of the new increase of
Woolls, and Six pence of every Twenty shillings in merchandise or wares, and
the revocation of the same at the next Parliament, upon grant of singular
persons, which was promised to have been able to have furnished Twenty thous^nd
men of Arms, and so many Archers, Soldiers, Archers,
where the charge of the Soldiers came to Fifty thousand besides many other
charges there declared, for the which the King stood indebted, Kings Deb^^
whereof he willed them to have due consideration.

Commons elect their Speaker.
bringing in Sir John Gildesbrough knight, Speaker, Sir John Gildesbrough.
whom they had chosen then to be their Speaker; who making his Protestation,
Speakers Protestation ^^d Speech.
required, that whatsoever he should speak, and be taken in evil part, might
be imputed to his ignorance, and not unto the Commons. And if that happily he
should speak contrary to the expectation of the said Commons, that they then at
all times amend the same.

He says then, that the Commons suppose that if the King were reasonably
governed in his expenses within, Ill Government about the King.
and without the Realm, that he should little need to charge his Commons,
Commons p^verty, Lords of the Great Council discharged, Five C^u^cellors
appointed, Great Officers to be named, Chancellor, Treasurer, P^ivy Seal,
Chamberlain, Steward of the Household, Not to be removed but by Parliament.
being already much impoverished. And therefore they require the King to
discharge the Lords of the great Council, and to appoint about him only five
Counselors, being his chief Officers, viz. the Chancellor, Treasurer, Keeper
of the Privy Seal, chief Chamberlain, and the Steward of the Household, whose
names they would know^ and that they should not be removed without Parliament,
but for death, sickness or such like causes.

Commissioners to inquire, Kings expenses, Red^ess.
as otherwise, and of all his Officers beyond the Seas, as on this side, and to
appoint redress for defaults since his Coronation.



The whole form and Commission it self with the Names of the Commissioners very
large, Commission granted, Commissioners named.
and worthy the noting.

And granted by the Lords and Commons.
and one Desme, of Fifteenth and a half to be taken within Cities and Towns by
way of a Loan until the next Parliament, Loan.
and to be levied according as the last were, so as the same be only employed
upon the Wars. To be implo^ed only upon the Wars.


Subsidy of Wools Woolle^s and ^ki^^ granted.
woolfels, and skins, from the Feast of S. Michael next, until Michaelmas then
next ensuing, in such wise as was granted in the last Parliament, beseeching
that in the mean time there may not other Subsidies be asked of the Commons.

E. 3. it was adjudged by the Temporal Justices, and confirmed by Parliament,
that where one Iean Imperial Ianeois, Iean Imperials ^ase T^eason, 25 H. 3.
of S. Meces in Iennes, came as an Ambassador to the King, Foreign Ambassador
(...) judged Treas^^^
under the Kings letters of safe conduct for alliance to be had between the
King and the Duke, and Commonalty of Iennes, the aforesaid Iean so being under
the Kings protection was murdered in London, by some of the Kings Subjects:
That such act and stroke was Treason, and a fault of the Kings royal Majesty
impaired.

William de Mountagne Earl of Salisbury comes into the Parliament in proper
person, Earl of Salisbury, Montacute, Petition,
and by petition shows the whole matter contained in the last Parliament,
Error in Parliament.
tit. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. and shows how long he had sued, and that day
was given him until this present time; requires that Sir John Cavendish
Knight, there present, before whom the matter was, might bring before them the
old Process and Record, Process, Record, Errors assigned,
and that he might assign the Errors, and they proceed to Judgment.

Attorney, Lieutenant of Ireland.
Whereupon Sir John Bishopstone Clerk, and servant to the Earl of March, in the
absence of the said Earl then being in Wales in preparing himself toward
Ireland, where he was appointed to be the Kings Lieutenant, shows the Kings
protection made to the said Earl of March for one half year. Kings Protection,


Protection allowed,
The words of the protection being read, as it is there word for word, and
allowed, and the said Earl of March to go without day.

Tail, Temphurst,
Philip Darcy knight shows, that whereas King Edw. 3. granted to John Darcy
knight the reversion of the Manors of Temphurst and Templemeston, and to his
heirs males, which was the said Philip: The Prior of S. John of Jerusalem in
England, Jerusalem, Scire facias, Aid le Roy.
upon the Order of 17 E. 2. had sued a Scire facias against the said Philip,
where the said Philip prayed in aid of the King as in reversion, and that the
said Prior sued in the Chancery for a Procedendo, which he requires to be
stayed.

A Deed produced in Parliament.
The said Philip shows a Deed in the Parliament, whereby the Predecessor of
the said Prior granted those Manors of Flaxfleet, being then in the Kings
hands, together with the Manors of Dennis and Stroud next Rocestre, all being
parcel of the Lands of the Temple to King E. 2. in fee; the which Deed the same
Prior seems to deny: But the same being so showed before, was delivered to
the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer as appertaining to the King,
Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, Proceedings ^tayed, Search for the King,
and order taken that no proceedings should be granted until Michaelmas after;
that in the mean time search might be made for the Kings title.

Pembroke, Zo^ch, Cantlow,
John Earl of Pembroke being in the Kings custody, and William la Zouch of
Harringworth, Cousins and heirs of William Cantlow, show, that where Thomas the
son and heir of Sir Robert Roos of Ingmanthorp, sued them for certain lands in
the Shire of York, which late were the said Williams, supposing certain
Feoffments to be made by the said William without Condition for the advantage
of this Complaint. And for that the said Thomas sought to come to the trial of
the Country, Trial, Jury corrupted, Trial by Parliament.
which he had corrupted, they required redress and trial by the Parliament.

Re^errees.
The matter was committed to John Knevit and John Cavendish Chief Justices,
Chief Justices, Examination and report to the Parliament, Feoffment upon
condition.
and to Robert Belknap Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, to examine and make
report, who did so at large; whereby it falls out that the said Feoffments were
made upon Condition, as may there appear.

Petitions of the Commons^ with their Answers.
The print touching the liberties of the Church, Church liberties, Laws
observation, Great Charter, Forest, Variance from the Roll.
cap. 1. and observation of Laws, cap. 11. in effect agrees with the Record,
but not in form: besides, in the Record are contained the Great Charter, and
the Charter of the Forest.

Captains to recompense damages done by their Soldiers to the Subjects.


The King grants, so as the parties do make complaint to such Chieftains
before their departure out of the Realm. Answ.


Northumberland, Northern Countries, Warden, Garrisons.
Cumberland, and Westmerland, require consideration of a Warden and Garrisons
to lie on their Marches; and that it may be commanded to all such as have
Castles, Castles, Forts, Seacoasts, Residence.
Forts or Lands, as well within those Countries, as upon all the Seacoasts,
that they dwell upon the same.

Answ.
the King will provide. To the second, it is so commanded.

That no mere Welsh-man do purchase or procure any Lands or Lease in any of the
Counties between the River of Severn and Wales, Welsh-men not to purchase lands
between Severn and Wales, Forfeiture.
on pain to lose the same to such on whom it is holden.

To their purchase the King grants, Answ.
so as such mere Welshmen cannot find sureties for the peace and good
behavior. S^reties.


Wales, Marches of Wales.
require remedy against such Welsh-men as come into their Counties, Welsh-men,
Robberies, Rapes, Felonies.
committing sundry robberies, rapes, felonies, and other evils.

The King by the advice of the Lords Marchers will provide remedy. Answ.

Lords Marchers.




Inquest of Office, E^cheator, Possessions outed, Sureties, Patent.
finding Sureties to answer to the King if it be found for him; or that no
Patent be thereof granted.

The Statute therefore made shall be executed.

The Print touching the making of Woollen clothes, Answ.

Woollen cloth, Alnager.


and in the Office of Alnager, cap. 2. agrees with the Record.



Loans repaid.


Five chief Officers not to be displaced without special fault.
be displaced before the next Parliament, without some special fault found in
them.

The Statutes therefore made in this Kings first year shall be observed.

Scots goods remaining within the Realm, Answ.

English merchants Reprisal, Scots goods.


for such their goods as are taken in Scotland.

The King will do what may be done from time to time. Answ.


Mortuaries, Armor.
but that the said Armor may remain to their Heirs and Executors.

It shall continue as it has. Answ.


Provisions, Variance from the Record, Popes abuses, N^velties,
Reservation, and such merchandise from the Court of Rome, cap. 3. in effect
agrees with the Record, but nothing in form: For the Print does make no
mention of the Popes abuses, ne once to name the Pope, where the Record does
altogether, as saying that such novelties and abuses crept up lately, viz.
since the time of Clement the First. It declares that Pope Gregory promised to
Edw. 3. to cease all such doings; and that Urban that then was, had
notwithstanding granted unto one Cardinal Alleine the Priory of Decburst,
Cardinals.
which never before was heard or suffered. That he had granted to the Cardinal
of Cisteron, a Rebel to the King, an expectation through the Province of Kent,
with the Clause of Ante ferri to the Tax of Four thousand pounds in Florins;
and to the said Cardinal the Archdeaconry of Bath, Archdeaconry of Bath.
besides diverse and many others.

Anno Quarto Richardi Secundi. Rex etc. charissimo suo avunculo Johanni Regi
Ca-Castellae and Legionis, Writs of Summons.
Duci Lancastriae etc. salutem. Apud Westminster. Crastino die Johannis ante Portuam
Latinam: Test Rege Vicesimo quarto die Martii.
Consimili^er subscriptis:
THom. de Woodstock Com. Buck. and Constabular. Angliae. Thom. de Holland Com.
Kant. Ricardo Com. Arundel. Thom. de Bello campo Com. War. Hugo Com. Staff.
Edw. de Courtney Com. Devon. Willielmo de Monteacuto Com. Salis. Hen. de Percie
Com. Northumb. Johanni de Moubray Com. Nottingham. Jacobo de Audley de
Helleigh. Willielmo Bardolf de Warmegy. Guidoni Brian Johanni Clinton. Gilberto
Talbot. Johanni le Ware. Henry le Scroop. Tho. Rosse de Hamelake. Johanni de
Nevill de Raby. Johanni Gray de Codenore. Henry Gray de Wilton. Reginaldo Gray
de Ruthin. Mauritio de Barkley. Warrino de Insula. Henry Fitzhugh. Ricardo
Scroop. Nicho. Burnel. Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth. Rogero de Clifford
Johanni Buttort. Rogero de Scales. Rado. de Cromwell. Michaeli de la Poole.
Petro de Malo lacu. Tho. de Berkley. Willielmo de Thorp. Willielmo de Windsor.
Rado. Baroni de Greystock. Roberto de Harrington. Roberto de Willoughby.
Johanni de Clifton. Johanni Cobham de Kent. Hugoni de Dacre. Rogero de Strange
de Knokine. Willielmo de Furnival. Willielmo de Alde Burgge Ricardo de Seymore.
Rado. Basset de Drayton Tho. Dacre Tho. de Morley. Johanni Bourchier. Waltero
Fitzwalter. Johanni Lovel de Hichemerch. Johanni de Monteacuto.
Roberto de Ashton, Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Quarto Richardi Secundi. The Parliament holden at Northampton, the Monday
next after the Feast of All Saints, in the fourth year of Richard the second.
November, certain Bishops and Lords assembled in Northampton, in a Chamber
within the Priory at S. Andrews therefore appointed, where the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Chancellor caused the great Charter to be read; Chancellor,
Magna Charta read, Parliament adjourned because diverse Lords and Commons not
come, by reason of the soul ways and weather.
which done, for that sundry of the Lords and Commons were not come by reason
of the foul ways, much imp^ited by a continual and outrageous wet season; and
for that the Sheriffs had not returned their Writs, Commons Writs not returned,
Kings Command.
the same Parliament by Commandment of the King who then was come in person to
the Manor of (...) was adjourned to Thursday morning next ensuing.

Many Temporal Lords absent upon the Marches, Kings Justices, Serjean^s,
Chancellor, Causes of the Parliament,
for that the Duke of Lancaster and many of the Lords were then appointed to be
on the Marches of Scotland, came into the Chamber aforesaid, whereunto were
called the Kings Justices, Sergeants, Advocates, and Commons; where the
Chancellor aforesaid, for his introduction made a good collation, which is not
expressed.

Churches Liberties^ Peace of the Realm, Wars and Army in France and Scotland.

Aids expected, Defense,


and to see the Common peace preserved; and that the especial cause of the
Parliament was, for that the King in setting forth the Duke of Buckingham with
a great Army of men into France, for enterprizing this voyage into Scotland;
and for defending (...) and other places beyond the Seas, had not only defraied
all that which they granted to him in the last Parliament, but also was
therefore enforced for making of Exchanges and Shifts, to lay in manner his
whole Jewels to gage; Kings Jewels pawned.
all which to them was not unknown.

Galleys to keep the Seas provided by the King, Aid,
and to keep the Sea, which were a matter impossible for any Christian Prince
to accomplish of himself without aid; about which, and with the circumstances
thereunto, he wills them to consult, and speedily to give answer. Speedy
consultation and aid^


Receivers of Petitions.
Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Gascoyne and other places beyond the Seas, and for the foreign Isles.

England, Triers of Petitions.
etc. as above.

Gascoin, etc. as above.

Chancellor, Commons house departed,
The Chancellor then willed the Commons to depart to their lodging, and to
return next morning unto the new (...) within the same Priory, there to
consult, Their consultations, Rancour and malice to be laid aside.
and to forget all manner of rancour and malice.

Commons consult together, Speaker of the Commons Sir John Oldersburgh,
Particulars of the Kings necessities required, Commons poverty,
they came into the Parliament into the Kings presence, where Sir John
Oldersburgh Knight, the Speaker, desired a more fuller Declaration of the Kings
necessity; and what sum total he would require therein, requiring due
consideration of the Commons poor estate, being sundry ways greatly
impoverished.

Whereupon was delivered unto them by the Kings great Officers and Council a
Schedule, Kings Officers, A particular Schedule delivered the Commons amounting
to one hundred and fifty thousand pound.
containing diverse particular charges, amounting to the sum of one hundred and
fifty thousand pounds.

The Commons desire a moderation of the Lords,
and that it would please them to consult how the same might be levied.

After long debate betwixt the Lords and Commons for the levying of this sum,
as by sundry particular devices does there appear, the Commons offered to give
an aid, Commons grant a conditional aid, if the Clergy would give such a sum.




so as the Clergy who had the third part of the Realm, would thereof pay one
third part, which was fifty thousand marks, and the Commons an hundred thousand
marks.

Clergies Privileges, to the aids in Parliament, of their free wills,
but of their free wills, and therefore willed the Commons to do their duties,
and they would do their own.

Poll money granted,
passing the age of 15 years, and being no beggar, twelve pence, to be levied
of every person of every parish according to their estate; so as the rich does
bear with the poor, and that the richest for him and his wife, be not set above
twenty shillings, and the most poor for him and his wife, no less then one
groat.

S. Martin then ensuing, Subsidies of Wools.
unto the Feast of the Nativity of our Lady then following in such wise as was
granted in the last Parliament.

Ralph of Ferriers knight, Sir Ralph Ferriers accused in Parliament of action
of Treason before the Lords, Lords Judges, in Parliament.
who was arrested by the Duke of Lancaster, on the Marches of Scotland, for
suspicion of Treason, as adhering unto the French, the Kings enemies, was
brought into the Parliament before the Lords to answer thereto.

Ralph and sent to sundry French Lords, Evidence against him, Letters of
Intelligence produced against Sir Ralph.
as to the Lord de la River, the Earl of Longvile, the Lord de Clisson, the
Lord Admiral and others, were openly showed, and read in Parliament, before the
said Sir Ralph.

Scots; and to etc. made the first payment requiring them to make the second
payment; occurrences touching the preparation of the English against the
French, request to remember his Fee, and to give credit to the bearers of these
Letters, who were to say much, and also touching the delivery of the Infants of
Bois.

Letters to the Admiral of France.
willed him about Michaelmas to arrive about London, where he should have a
fair day to lay up Clerks, the bearer of the same Letter for that he had
discovered his Council had it not been for the promise of 2000 Franks. The
bearers of these Letters, and Entents were his said Clark, one John Fry, and
another; but the most faithful were Friar William and Cannon who were often
Liegers in France.

Letters out of France,
The Letter of Friar William to the same Sir Ralph shows, how he sped well
with the whole Council of France, that a way was found for Clark that he would
bring the ransoms of the Infants of Boys, and his annuity or see of the French.

Ralph being brought into the Parliament by the Marshal of England, Parliament,
Marshal of England, Council required, and denied, His answer to the Letters and
Evidences, Improbabili^y.
required Council, which was denied him; he then being willed to answer to
those Letters, begins a long circumstance of his acquaintance in France, of
his service there in King Edward the thirds time, at which time he kept holds
when others did not, how he was Captain of Callis; In which times he might have
done hurt, and did not; he therefore alleged the same to prove innocence, and
the unlikelihood of this.

Ralph was remanded to prison, S^r Ralph ^emanded to prison, Parliament,
and diverse of his familiers being called into the Parliament house, as the
Parson of Brington and others, together with the Beggar who first found these
letters beside London; the whole matter was examined, The letters and their
credits examined,
and for that it appeared that certain of the Letters sent by the same Sir
Ralph, to the parties beyond the Seas, were sealed together with other Letters
sen^ from thence to the same Sir Ralph, also sealed all of one hand; and for
that also that the seal was larger then the seal of the said Sir Ralph, it
seemed forged by some of his enemies for his overthrow. The Letters seem forged.


Ralph being once or twice urged to answer, Sir Ralphs answer,
whether these Letters were his or no? answered, That he did not remember that
they were his own letters, and that he was ready to approve, as they should
think good, before which his last answer he offered the combat with any that
would, Combat offered and denied.
where from he was put.

Ralph to be thereof innocent; The Lords think him innocent.
wherefore he was committed to the custodies of the Earls of Warwick, Stafford,
Salisbury, Northumberland, to Reynold Gray of Ruthen, and the Prior of S. who
became pledges body for body for the said Sir Ralph, He is bailed by Pledges
body for body,
to answer when he should be called between that and the next Parliament, Next
Parliament,
and so the said Sir Ralph was set at large, the said Letters and his Seal
being of silver, were delivered into the custody of Sir John Cavendish chief
Justice of England. Chief Justice.


Beggar committed to prison for forgery.
The Beggars being thought to be privy to this falsehood, was committed to
prison, the Parson of Brington, and other the friends of the same Sir Ralph
being delivered.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Great Charter and other Statutes confirmed.
That the great Charter and Charter of the Forest, and other Statutes of the
Realm may be observed.

The King grants thereto. Answ.


Commission of Surv^y sealed F^es f^r the Commissioners.
for the survery of the Kings charges may be proceeded, and that the
Commissioners may have reasonable Fees allowed them.

It pleased the King.

Answ.

Taxes, Wars.




The King will so do, Answ.

Prerogative.


saving his honor and estate.

Buckingham, Tax how to be employed, Wars,
and Lords with him in Britain, and and for the keeping of the Sea.

Answ.


That the County of Chester, Chester, Durham, Cinque Ports,
the Bishopric of Durham, and the Cinque Ports, Answ.
may be comprised within this Tallage.



That half pence and farthings may be coined according to the Sterleage. Half
pence, Farthings,


The King will do for the ease of the people. Answ.


Ship, Deodand,


Upon complaint the King will show favor as heretofore has been. Favor,


Normans ships of the Sea. Normans Ships,


The King will do the best by advice. Answ.


Error, Oath, Suggestion,

Answ.






That no outlawry be pronounced against any man unless the addition, Outlawry,
Addition.
Surname, Answ.
Place, or Town, where he dwells be therein.

The Common Law with the Statutes do suffice therein. Common Law,


O^sl^^ of possession, E^quest of Office, Escheator, Patent,
nor Patent thereof granted to any person, before the Kings right be discussed.

The Statutes therefore made shall be kept. Answ.


Essex and Hartford may be discharged of the hundred and ten pound yearly which
they cannot receive. Sheriffs discharge, Impossibility.


After the expiration of pardon of an hundred marks for two years, Answ.
the King grants the like pardon to the same Sheriff for three other years.
Pardon.


Northampton, Suffolk, and other Counties pray the revocation of the Charter of
great Yarmouth, 2. E. 3.7, 8. Yarmouth, Patent, Revocation, Monopoly.
lately made for the annexing of Kirkley rode to the same Haven of Yarmouth,
Kirkley road.
and that no man should buy Herring within seven miles of the same Rode.

The Commissions lately cer^ified into the Chancery by the Earl of Suffolk,
Answ.
and others, shall by new Commissions be examined, Commissioners.
for that the said liberties were granted thereupon, that the King may do
therein the best; and in the mean season that they of Yarmouth by Writs be
commanded only to use their Liberties. Yarmouth.


Victuals, Butter, Cheese, Transportation ^^^e.
Cheese, and Victuals for one year to any place being friendly to the King.

Holland and Kesteven, Viz. between the water of land, and the water of Witham,
and surrounded, may be by Commission newly made. Lincolnshire bounds,
Commissions.


It pleases the King, if no contrary cause be showed.

Answ.
The Commons of the County of Derby pray that the Assizes and deliverances of
the same County may be holden at Derby, Derby, Assizes, Justices
and no more at Salop.

Answ.
The King will charge his Justices to keep the same in the most convenient
place.

Sussex and Surrey, Sussex and Surrey, Sheriffs allowance Fee farm, Earl of
Arundel,
It is enacted, That the Sheriff of the same Shire toward his charge of
Feefarm shall upon his account be allowed yearly fifteen pound, which the Earl
of Arundel pays for his liberty.

Answ.
That provision may be had against the Popes Collectors, Popes Collectors,
First Fruits.
for levying of the first fruits of Ecclesiastical dignities within the Realm.

Prohibition,
and other cases where the Popes Collector shall attempt any such Novelries.

Answ.
That all manner of Debts of King Edw. 3. may be paid. Debts of E. 3. be paid,




Prior Aliens removed.
That all Priors Aliens may be removed out of their houses, and licensed to
depart, and never to return, and that Englishmen might be placed in their
Livings answering to the King at they did. Answ.




Answ.
That none who has been Sheriff shall be so again. Sheriffs,




Pardon of Felony,
A pardon granted of certain Felonies under a form.

York, Riot in York.
who displaced one John Gisburghthohel, the sworn Major there, Major of York,
unduly sworn and chosen by a Writ.
and unduly chose one Simon in his place, and him swore to be Major.

Commissions shall be directed to the Earl of Northumberland, and others, Answ.

Commissions to enquiry of the Riot,


fully to enquire, and to certify the same.

That two Sergeants of Arms do fetch and bring up twenty four of the heads of
these Rioters to the Council. Sergeants at Arms to arrest the principal
rioters, and bring them to the Council.


That the said Simon be commanded to surcease any longer to play the Major, The
undue elected Major to cease exercising his Office, and appear before the
Council, John de Gisborn commanded by Writ to execute this Office.
and that he appear before the Council.

That John de Gisborn be commanded by Writ to execute the Office of the said
Majoralty.

That the Bailiffs and other Officers be appointed to attend on the said John.

That the Statute touching Wines may more particularly express the gageage of
all kind of Wines. Wines, Gageing of them.


The King would the Statutes to be viewed according to their demand.

Anno Quinto Richardi Secundi. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the
Wednesday next after John Port-Latin, in the Fifth year of King Richard the
Second.
Parliament adjourned, because all the Writs not returned.
the Parliament was adjourned until the Thursday then following.

Chamber de Pinct at Westminster, Painted chamber, Commons all called by name,
Chancellor, Causes of Parliament, Subsidy granted with proviso.
whereinto all the Commons by name were called; before whom Sir Richard le
Scroop knight, Chancellor of England, declared how in the last Parliament was
granted to the King the Subsidy, with proviso that the same would suffice to
serve the Kings turn touching shifts for money.

Windsor, Council of Lords, Voyage royal into France, Lords, Soldiers, Wages,
Merchants, Security.
has determined to make in his own person a Voyage Royal into France, whereto
every Lord had promised for one year to serve him with certain men of war for
single wages; and that upon conference with certain Merchants for money for so
great an exploit, they were come to talk for the only assurance of the same.

Causes of Parliament, Lords and Commons advice.
whereabout he willed the Lords and Commons to consult.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoine and other places beyond the seas, and the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoine, etc. as above.

Commons desire to know the sum required.
Whereto was answer, Threescore thousand pounds; for the which the King would
give good assurance to be made unto the Creditors by the advice of the Lords
and Commons. Loan, Assurance.


Knights of Shires, Conference with the Lords, Merchants conferred with.
that the Merchants might be conferred withal, for they had most knowledge
therein. Whereupon sundry Merchants there named are appointed to talk with
them.

Commons and Knights debates Report to the Lords.
they made relation to the Lords, that they knew no way how to levy the same
sum, for that the Merchants fearing the example of Michael de la Pool,
Merchants,
and other Merchants who in the like shifts were undone, and yet had but little
gain, doubted to do the same; only they offered that if the Lords, Loan by the
Nobles and Gentry.




Esquires, and Earls of the Realm, would freely lend to the King any notable
sum, they would find surety therefore, and otherwise they would not deal.

Merchants, Money advanced by loan, Wools.
For that the King perceived that the Merchants would make no means, or shift
for the money, the King establishes the order ensuing for passage over of
Wools, thinking thereby the more speedily to come by great sums to his content.

cap. 1. agrees with the Record. Merchant strangers,


Staple, Free trade,
cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

Subsidy, Seas guarded.
cap. 3. agrees with the Record.

Parliament,
cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Heresy.
cap. 5. agrees with the Record.

Anno Quinto Richardi Secundi. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the day
after All Souls, in the fifth year of King Richard
FOr that this year All Souls fell on Saturday, the Parliament was adjourned
until Monday ensuing, Parliament adjourned because All Souls day.
on which Monday the King and many Bishops and Lords came; but for that sundry
Sheriffs made no return of their Writs, Parliament adjourned, because sundry
Sheriffs had not returned their Writs.
the Parliament was adjourned until Tuesday after, on which day the King and
Lords and Bishops came into the White Chamber at Westminster, and caused the
names of the Knights and Burgesses to be called; where upon the default of
sundry of them the Parliament was therefore adjourned unto Wednesday after;
Parliament adjourned because many Knights and Burgesses made default.
On which Wednesday for that great debate rose between the Duke of Lancaster
and the Earl of Northumberland, Debates between the Duke of Lancaster and Earl
of Northumberland, who came with diverse armed men and archers to the
Parliament, Parliament adjourned by reason of their armed power.
so as great force of arms, men and Archers armed in warlike manner on both
sides, came to the Parliament, whereof great complaint being made to the King,
the King with his Council and Nobles were much busied to appease the same;
King, Council, and Nobles, desired to appease the discord.
the King therefore adjourned the same Parliament till Saturday after.

The Council called by name in Parliament; Archbishop elect Chancellor of
England, his Oration, Causes of Parliament.
William Cant. elect and confirmed Chancellor of England, began to declare the
cause of the Parliament, taking for this his Theme, Rex convenire fecit
consilium, whereupon in English he made a good Oration applying it to the good
virtuous government of the King and of his reign, affirming that no reign could
long endure if vice reigned therein, Vice suppressed.
the which to redress by this Parliament that could not be by the order of the
other Law, the King therefore had called the same.

Receivers of petitions for England, Ireland, and Scotland.

Receivers of petitions for Gascoin, Receivers of Petitions.
and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Triers of petitions for Gascoin, Triers of Petitions.
etc. as above.

Causes of Parliiament.
willing all men therefore to attend.

Commons called all by their names Treasurer of England.
where Sir Hugh Segrave Treasurer of England, by the Kings Commandment
remembered the Oration of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and said that the
especial cause was to maintain the liberties of the Church, Churches
liberties, Peace, Tumults, Rebellion, Villainies.
and to provide for the observation of the peace; and namely to punish the
horrible tumults, and rebellion made against the King in those tumults, who was
enforced to grant manumissions to the bondmen and others of the Realm,
Manumissions
as on them having Kingly power under the Great Seal of England: Great Seal,
Revocation, Kings wants, Aids, Commons house.
The which he knowing to be done against Law, willed them to seek remedy
accordingly due for the confirmation or revocation thereof. In the end he
touched the Kings great Westminster.

November, the Commons came into the Parliament to present Sir Richard
Walsgrave knight, Commons present their Speaker Sir R. VValsgrave, He desires
to be discharged, Charged on his Allegiance to continue.
whom they had chosen their Speaker, Speakers protestation.
who excused himself and desired to be discharged of the office; whereunto the
King on his allegiance willed him to stand, being chosen by his companions.

Thereupon the said Sir Richard makes the common protestation.

He then required a more full declaration of the Kings meaning, He requires a
more full declaration of the Kings meaning.
either by a mean rehearsal, or by his repetition.

Chancellor, V^llains, Repeal of Manumissions.
The King therefore appointed Sir Richard le Scroop knight, and created
Chancellor, to do the same, who did so, and namely touching the Repeal of the
Manumissions made to the Bondmen.

Parliament, Comm^ns, Repeal, Infranchisement, Commons assent.
Whereto all the Commons cried with one voice, that the Appeal was good and
lawful; adding, That such infranchisement could not pass without their
consents; and so upon the prayer of the Commons, the same Repeal was by assent
confirmed.

Committee of Lords to confer with the Commons.
are appointed to confer with them.

After this Conference, the Commons thought it good that the King would grant a
general Pardon to the offenders in these tumults. General Pardon desired.


Old order of the Parliament, Commons to show their conceits to the Lords.
that the Commons should bring to the Lords their conceits and devises, and not
to the contrary. The which the King would should be observed.

Commons Protestation, Ill government about the King.
showed, that for want of good redress about the Kings person in his household,
in all his Courts touching Maintainers in every County, and Purveyors,
Purveyors, Commons pilled, Enemies unresisted.
the Commons were daily pilled, and nothing defended against the Enemy; and
that it would shortly deprive the King, and undo the whole State. Wherefore in
the same Government they entirely require remedy.

Privy Council, Reformation must begin at the head, Kings Confessor secluded
the Court.
Who, since that they must begin at the Head, and go at the request of the
Commons, they in the presence of the King charged his Confessor not to come
into the Court but upon the four principal Feasts.

The Devises of the Commons, Commons devises
exhibited in a Schedule.
Wise men to be appointed about the Kings person, Wise Officers.
the like Officers for the well governance of both.

That the most wise and able man in the Realm may be chosen Chancellor,
Chancellor to be elected, Chanceries enormities redressed.
and that he seek to redress the enormities of the Chancery.

That the like order may be of the Treasurer, Treasurer, Barons,
Exchequer-Officers
Barons, and Officers of the Exchequer.

Justices of both Benches, Sergeants etc.
and that in th^s year two Justices, two Sergeants, and four Apprentices of the
Law may be sworn to declare the delay and defects of the Law, and that the
same may be remedied.

Commons to view the Names and Ordinances, before confirmed.
and see the Ordinances before the confirming of them.

Tumults suppressed.




Realms great poverty by the wars.
carrying forth of good money, Money exported, Base money.
and base money now remaining, and by the low prices of Wool, Low price of
Wools, Tin and Lead.
Tin, and Lead.

Lords and Nobles, Ordinances executed, General Pardon desired.
upon these Ordinances made, will help them to be severally executed on all
Estates; and that it would please the King to grant a Pardon general, according
to a Petition before made.

Law regulated, Clerks of Chanc^ry, Justices, Barons of Exchequer, Lawyers,
Lords, etc.
were appointed to consult thereon, and to present to the Lords their devises.
And also there were appointed certain Merchants to declare the causes of the
low prices of our commodities, carrying over of our money, washing and clipping
of the same.

Report to the Lords and Commons, Exchequer.
whereof remedy was provided in part, viz. touching the Exchequer, and
Merchants, and defaults of the Chancery, if any there were.

Pardons required confirmed in Parliament.
viz. The first touching Nobles and Gentlemen, which in resisting of Traitors
and rebellious Villains, slew certain persons without due process of Law. The
second for such as were of those rebellious companies. The third for such as
lived in peace without any rising; which was granted.

The Pardon for Nobles and Gentlemen. Pardon.


Canterbury, Rebels pardon, Excepted person^
Bury S. Edmonds, Beverley, Scarborough, Bridgwater, and Cambridge, except such
persons whose names appear hereafter, being the principal and Ringleaders of
the Rebels; except Provers and Appealers of Treason and Felonies, and except
such as slew Simon Archbishop of Canterbury late Chancellor, Archbishop slain,
Treasurer slain, Chief Justice slain,
the Prior of S. John's then Treasurer, and John de Cavendish Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench; so as all men endamaged by such insurrection be not foreclosed
of their due remedy. Due remedy.


Pardon for those who rose not.
The Pardon for such as lived in due obeisance, as free from that insurrection.

Commons request Law-made, Ordinance against Purveyors.
The Commons after came into the Parliament, where before the King they made a
recapitulation of their former requests, and require now to have the same
framed and fashioned out, and namely of the Ordinance against Purveyors.

Kings charges great, Kings marriage with Anne daughter to the Emperor Charles.
as like to be greater for the solemnity of the Kings marriage with the Lady
Anne, the daughter of the late mighty Prince Charles Emperor of Rome, the which
Lady was newly come into the Realm; the tenth part of which charges the King
had not in treasure or otherwise; and that therefore it was as necessary to
provide for the safety of the Kings estate, Aid for safety of the King, State,
and Common wealth.
as for the Common weal.

Peoples ill will, Commons dare not grant greater Taxes. Subsidy of Wool and
Staple-wares, Commons unadvised.
The Commons answered, That considering the Subjects evil wills, they durst
grant no Tax. Then was required of them the continuance of the Subsidies of
Woolls and other Staple-wares: Whereto was answered, that the Commons were not
thereof advised.

Christmas, Parliament adjourned till after Christmas, Further advice, Queens
arrival.
for that the same Feast approached, and that in the mean time they might be
further advised of every particular point. Wherewith the King seemed to be
content, and the rather for that the Queen was arrived.

Arundel and Sir Michael de la Poole were chosen and sworn to be about the
Kings person for Council in governing him. Earl of Arundel, Sir Mic. de la
Poole.


Custom of Parliament, Pardons.
and that the King the last day of the Parliament should answer the same. And
further it was said, that the King used not to grant any thing to the Commons,
King used not to grant ought to the Commons, till they granted something to him.
unless they also granted to him. The Commons answered, Commons answer, Subsidy
delayed.
that of the grant of the Subsidies of Wool and other Staple-wares they would
be advised: And it was answered for the King, Kings answer, Pardons delayed.
that he would so be of any Pardon.

Commons better advised,
The Commons being somewhat better advised, came before and considering as well
the Kings great charges, as fearing lest by the continual grants of the Subsidy
of Woolls the same would grow in custom, and so be challenged by the King as of
right; for avoiding whereof, the Lords and Commons granted to the King the like
Subsidy of Woolls and Staple-wares as lastly was granted, Subsidy of Wools and
Staple-wares granted with an interruption.
from the Feast of the Circumcision of our Lord then ensuing, until Candlemas
then following so as the space between Christmas and the Circumcision, should
be

Pardons openly read, Commons thanks.
whereof the Commons were greatly joyous, and gave the King thanks.

A goodly President of a Commission granted by Parliament for stay of Riots,
Commission by Parliament to stay Riots, Insurrections, Rebellions.
Insurrections, and Rebellions.

Ralph Ferrens knight, expressed in the last Parliament, tit. 24. bring forth,
and desire to be discharged of their Mainprize, Mainp^isors discharged.
and Sir Ralph being received into the Kings protection, and so set at large,
Enlargement^ Richard Cl^nd^n E^quire.
Richard Clynedon Esquire, by his Bill exhibited to the King in Parliament,
accuses Sir William Cogan knight, Bill of accusation, Sir William Coggan
Menaces, Extortion^ Combat.
for that the said Sir William with other his accomplices of the Town of
Bridgewater should by menaces extort of the Prior of S. John of Jerusalem the
sum of two hundred pound for, and in the name of a Fine, and one hundred pound
by Obligation, the which he offers to try by the Combat with the said Sir
William.

William being in Parliament requires Council for that he was unlearned,
C^uncel desire in Par^iament^ denied in Treason, A^swers amended Trial
adjourned ^ou^ of Parliament before the Justices, Common Law,
the which was denied, for the case touched Treason; whereupon after advice
with certain of his friends, he in person making request that he might at any
time correct and amend any his answers, pleaded not culpable, and to be tried
by his County, whereupon in the end of the Parliament both parties were
adjourned before the Justices of the Common Law, for what attained to the Law.

Major and Commonalty of Cambridge accused, Insurrection, Universities
treasury robbed, Universities Charters, Chancellor and the Universities
released by Duress, University Seal.
Bailiffs, and Commonalty of Cambridge were accused for that they in the late
tumults, and uproars, confederates with other mis-doers, brake up the Treasury
of the University of Cambridge, and there took and burned sundry of the
Charters of the University, and also compelled the Chancellor and Scholars of
the said University under their common Seal to release to the said Major and
Burgesses all manner of Liberties, and also all actions real and personal, and
further to be bound to them in great sums of money, whereupon it was agreed in
form following:

That one Writ should be directed to the Major, Writs to the M^jor and
Commonalty of Cambridge to appear and answer in Parliament.
Bailiffs, and Commonalty (that now were) to appear in the Parliament, and to
answer, the form whereof does there appear.

A Writ to the Major and Bailiff,
and Bailiffs (that then were) the form whereof does there also appear.

They appear in proper person, The Commons appear by A^torney.
and pleaded not guilty in writing thereunto, the Commonalty by their Attorneys
appeared at the day.

Not guilty pleaded by the Major.
that he was not privy to any such act, but only by the compulsion of the
other, if any thing were therein done, the which the learned Council did
disprove.

Cambridge delivered into the Parliament the said two deeds, Deeds redelivered,
sealed, gotten by Duress.
sealed by the Chancellor and Scholars.

R^lease of Liberties etc. by Dur^^^.
with a bond of Three thousand pounds, to release all such suits against the
said Burgesses.

Release of Actions.
The other was a Release of all Actions real and personal, as there does appear.

Deeds by Duress cancelled.
After the restitution and redelivering of which two Deeds, they both were
commanded to be cancelled for the causes aforesaid.

Chancellor and Scholars Articles and Petition againts the Mayor and Bailiffs.
and in form of sundry Articles exhibited, showed the beginning and whole
discourse of the Mayor and Bailiffs doings largely, there contained.

Their answer required, Liberties forfeited.
should not be seized into the Kings hands as forfeited? They require a Copy of
the Bill, Council, and respite to answer.

Copy of the Bill, and Council desired.
That since they heard the same, it should suffice; for by Law they ought to
have no Copy. To Council it was said, That wherein Council was to be had, it
should: Wherefore they then were pointed to answer to no crime or offense, but
only touching their Liberties.

Submission to the Kings mercy.
After many dilatory shifts, the said Burgesses touching their Liberties only,
in the end submitted themselves to the Kings mercy and grace, saving their
answers to all other matters.

Liberties of Cambridge seized by consent of Parliament.


Cambridge and suburbs of the same, Privileges and Liberties granted to the
Chancellor and University of Cambridge.
the affise, cognizance, and correction of Bread, all Weights, Measures,
Regrators and Forestallers, with the Fines and Amerciaments of the same,
yielding therefore yearly at the Exchequer Ten pounds, Vide R. 2. tit. 11.

Liberties granted to the Mayor and Bailiffs of Cambridge.
And the rest of the Liberties he granted to the said Mayor and Bailiffs,
yielding therefore yearly the Feefarm of An hundred and one marks, and Four
marks of increase over and above the same, at the Exchequer aforesaid.

William de Burcestor knight, Sir William de Burcestor and Margaret his wise,
their Bill of Complaint.
and Margaret his wife, late the wife of Sir Bartholmew Burcester knight,
shows by a long Bill, how Sir Thomas Hungerford knight was enfeoffed by the
said Bartholmew of the Manor of High-Tresbury, Steart, and Colon in the County
of Wilts, and of certain Lands in Wales, to the end a refeoffment should be
made of the same to the said Bartholmew and Margaret, and the heirs of the said
Bartholmew, and how by the Council of the said Thomas the same was done
accordingly; and that the said Thomas should notwithstanding inform the Lady le
Dispencer, the daughter and heir of the said Bartholmew, that the said
Bartholmew should be disseised of the premises, and thereby should procure the
said Lady to enter upon the premises: And further, that the said Thomas had
bought the Manor of High-Tresbury of the said Lady, and therefore prays
remedy.

Thomas upon warning comes into the Parliament, and by his answer traverseth
every point, Traverse in Parliament of the Bill.
and seems very well to avoid the same.

Principal Rebels excepted out of the Pardon by name.
being many in number, but no Gentlemen or other of name.

Parliament adjourned, Christmas, Queen^ Coronation.
for the preparation of the Queens Coronation and other weighty affairs, on the
15 of December the Parliament was adjourned until the Friday next before the
Convention of S. Paul then following.

The Reassembly of the Parliament, Parliament reassembled.
after the Adjournment.
Parliament adjourned because some of the Lord not come.
The same Monday the Bishops and Lords came into the Parliament, where the
Commons making rehearsal of their former proceedings, required remedy.

Lancaster offered in Parliament, Duke of Lanc^sters offer, Loan of 60000 l.
Portugal, Spain.
that so as the Realm would lend him Sixty thousand pounds, he would enterprise
to enter into Portugal and Spain, and rescue the Englishmen, keep the sea, and
seek to conquer their right; and would further bind himself and his lands to
repay the same in the year in money or service, so as he were sound of body,
and out of prison: Whereof was great dispute and altercation on both sides.
Look 6 R. 2. tit. 13.

Subsidy granted conditionally,
for four years from the Nativity of S. John Baptist then ensuing, to be
employed upon the Wars, To be employed wholly on the Wars,
and Voyage of the said Duke; and that the King will do things according to the
advice of his Council. Councils advice,
By whose advice they grant, for the saving of his credit and profit, he may
for a time transport his Staple-ware to any other place besides Calice, Staple,
Calice.
any Grant to the contrary notwithstanding.

If a League made, the Subsidy to be laid up for the Commons ease.
that then the Grant and profit arising thereby may be laid up for the ease of
the Commons. They also require that the Commons may for a time be eased of
Taxes.

Duress, Insurrection, Entry congeable.
and that no man do enter into any lands or tenements, but where lawfully he
may.

Forcible Entries, Imprisonment.
upon pain of imprisonment or fine. Fine.


Council, Evidences purloined, burned, or cancelled, in the Insurre^^ion.
all such as in these Insurrections have had any Deeds or Evidences purloined,
burned, or cancelled, and make proof of the same, shall have remedy.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Church Liberties, Great Charter, Forre^^.
great Charter, and Charter of the Forest may be maintained.

The King grants thereunto.

Answ.
That it may be enacted that no gift of land, ward, escheat, or other gift be
made by the King before he be out of debt. Kings gifts void.


Answ.
To bind the King in such sort, were dishonorable; Kings dishonor, Assent of
his Council to his gifts and grants,
but the King will grant no such without the assent of the Lords of the Council.

That the Kings great Officers of his house, Oath of great Officers and Lords,
Ordinances.

Answ.


and Lords of the Parliament, may be sworn to observe all Ordinances therefore
appointed.

They are sworn thereunto.

The Print touching the 73 title of Purveyors agrees with the Record.
Purveyors.


Queens debts, Pardon.
due to the King, may be pardoned. Answ.


The King will be advised.

That such Sheriff, Sheriffs accounts pardoned, Insurrection,

Answ.


as failed to account the last Trinity Term, considering the Insurrections
then, may be pardoned.

The King grants thereto.

Collectors of Subsidy.
all issues lost for not appearing at Hilary term last in the Exchequer. Issues
pardoned.


Collectors of Subsidies, Oath, Exchequer,
before the Barons of the Exchequer.

That all debts for lands seized into the hands of the King Edw. 3. may be
pardoned. Pardon of Debts.


Answ.


Exchequer, Attorney.
by payment, or assignment, unless such person be present, or by his Attorney
in Court.

Collectors of the Subsidy, Account, Comptrollers, Surcharge.
and their Comptrollers made, saving that they shall be further charged upon
better proof.

Forresters, Forest, Perambulations.
it is enacted, that the Charter of the Forest be kept, and that
perambulations be made, where any need is, according the bounds made in the
time of King Edward the first.

Exemplifications, Insurrection.
and Charters enrolled in the Chancery, defaced in the late Insurrection
without any fine in the Chancery. Fine.


Sheriffs Allowance, Fee-farms.
or profits belonging to the Sheriffs, which were after, granted to any Lords,
or other person for any annual rent.

Prohibition, Tithe-wood:
demanded of Wood passing the age of twenty years. Answ.




That no Fines be taken in the Chancery for any Writ. Fines for Writs, Chancery.


The King means not to lose any such commodity left him by his Ancestors.
Answ.

Kings old revenue




Yarmouth touching one grant, Yarmouth, Monopoly, Charter repealed,
viz. That no man should buy or sell within seven miles of the same, and that
the road called Kirkleroade in Suffolk, being six miles off the Town, should be
rep^aled, saving their old Liberties.

Rome by Provisions. Provisors.


The King would have the Statutes therefore made to be executed. Answ.


Alien, Benefices.


The King wills as next above. Answ.


Fraud, Mortmain, Extinguishment, Enter congeable,
that notwithstanding any such cautelous Feoffments, the Lords or mean person
of whom the lands are holden may lawfully enter saving to the King his due
prerogative.

Heirs, Executors, Captain, Wages, Account.
or Executors of any Captain taking wages, and being dead, or taken prisoner,
be not charged to pay any thing by them received.

It shall continue as heretofore. Answ.


Sea Captains, Wages.
upon the Kings Letters may receive their wages from the said day.

As heretofore, so in the like case it shall be used. Answ.


Pardon, Insurrection, S. Edmonds Bury.
except the Town of Bury S. Edmonds, and the names of them which are before
excepted in a Roll.

Justices of Peace, Goal delivery,
murderers, robbers, and thieves, taken with the manner, so they be at the
least three, and one of them learned in the Law.

Barons of Exchequer.
cap. 9. agrees with the Record.

cap. 10. agrees in effect with the Record, Accounts in the Exchequer,
Omission in the print.
but not fully, for that some part is left out of the print.

Accounts.
cap. 11. agrees with the Record.

Nihil, Accounts.
cap. 13. agrees with the Record.

Clerk of the Pipe, Remembrancer.
The print touching the Clerk of the Pipe, and Remembrancer, agrees with the
Record.

Livery sued.
cap. 15. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Fees, Exchequer.
The print touching Clerks sues in the Exchequer, cap. 16. agrees with the
Record.

Barons and Officers in the Exchequer.
Clerk of the Pipe, Remembrancer, Opposer, Comptroller, Clerk of the Pleas,
Clerk of the Foreign summons, Auditor, or other Chief Officer of the Exchequer
be made, unless he be well learned in the Law, Learned in the Law, skillful.
or otherwise very skilful in the courses and uses of the Exchequer.

Pardon enlarged.
The King at the request of the Commons enlarges his Pardon for certain
Felonies and Treaso^s, as may in the Record appear.

Money, Vari^n^e from the Roll.
The print touching Money, cap. 2. far swerveth from the Record, as having
additions and diminutions, other then the Record does warrant.

Shipping and Navy, Merchandise.
The print touching Shipping and the Navy, and of Merchandise, cap. 3. agrees
with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Wines.
cap. 4. agrees with the Record to the midst of the same print. The other half
of the Record by evil keeping is lost, unless it may upon search be found again.

Entry into Lands.
cap. 7. agrees with the Record, as appears before, tit 7.

Repeal, Manumissions.
The print touching the Repeal of Manumissions made by the King, cap. 6. agrees
with the Record, as appears before, tit. 12.13.

Anno Sexto Richardi Secundi. The Parliament holden at Westminster in the
Octaves of Saint Michaell, in the 6th. year of K. Richard 2d.
Michaell, being the first day of the Parliament, sundry of the Lords and
Bishops came into the painted Chamber, Painted Chamber Parliament adjourned
because diverse Lords and Commons not come.
looking of long for the other Lords and Commons: but for that sundry Sheriffs
had not returne^ their Writs: Sheriffs return.
the Parliament was adjourned until Wednesday after.

Painted Chamber.
where every of the Commons were by their names called in before the Bishop of
London, Commons called by name.
Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
who by the Kings commandment pronounced the causes of the Parliament for
three points. Causes of Parliamen^.


The first for the maintenance of the liberty of the Church. Liberties of the
Church.


Keeping of the Peace and Laws.
and usages.

Good government of the Realm.
and of the Dominions of the same: as against misdoers, defense of the
Northmarches toward Scotland: defense of the Territories beyond the Seas,
Defense both at home and ab^oad.
for the safety of Ireland, and Gascoyn: North ma^ches Ireland, G^sc^in
Portugal.
for succouring of the Kings subjects in Portugal, for the keeping of the Seas,
and for the charge about the same, whereon he wishes thoroughly to consult.

Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Receivers of Petitions for Gascoine^, and other places beyond the Seas and of
the Isles. Garding the Seas.

Aids.




England etc. as above.

Tryers of Petitions for Gascoine etc. as above. Petitions.


All Members attendance required Causes of Parliament^ reported more fully.


Hereford by the Kings commandment declared the cause more fully, Bishop of
Hereford.
saying, that four things did chiefly encourage to adventure on that thing,
which they desired to atchieve: whereof two appertained not to the proof, viz.
to Array, and not Array: the other two were, Doubt, Doubt.
and Hope, Hope.
as Doubt caused dismaying and fear, so Hope caused honor to be achieved.

Realms misery.
as round beset with enemies, Enemies not like to be conquered^
and such not like to be conquered, if doubt or negligence possessed men's
hearts.

viz. the one was with alliance with the Flemmings, Alliance with the Flemmings.
who offered their service to the King against his enemies.

Duke of Lancasters conquest of Portugal and Spain.
The other was, the offer of the Duke of Lancaster for the conquest of Portugal
and Spain, so as the Realm would lend him but 60000 l. which he would pay
according to his offer made in the last Parliament. Loan^.


Money to be raised with least loss.
He willed them to consult how money to the least loss of the Commons may be
raised for the enterprizing of these two voyages of Flanders and Spain, Voyages
Flanders Spain.
or at the least of the one of them, viz. Spain, whereto all men should much
the more be encouraged, and have good hope, considering that by two Croiseris,
Croiseries.
the one granted to the Duke of Lancaster against Spain, the other to the
Bishop of Norwich against the Antipope, Bishop of Norwich.

Anti Pope.




and all his accompl^ces: the Pope has thereby granted to all such as went,
sought, or dyed in the quarrel, full remission of all their sins.

The Commons having this their charge, Commons house and places of meeting.
departed toward their place in the Abbey at Westminster, but before they did
any thing therein, they made request to have certain especial Lords by name
assigned unto them, Special Committee o^ Lords desi^ed to t^^at with the
Commons.
with whom they might consult; the which was granted, their names then
appearing.

Subsidy granted one 15 th. and one 10 th.
and one Tenth out of the Cities and Towns, to be levied in such wise as the
last grant was, and no otherwise, to be employed upon the defense of the Realm,
Realms defense.
as to the King by the advice of his Council, Advise of the Kings Council and
Lords.
and Lords of the Realm should seem good.

Thomas Feedon, Richard Moory, and Richard Dell, as principal doers in the
late insurrection, Insurrection prin^ciple Malefactors exempted from pardon.
and namely for burning and destroying the house and Mannours of the Order of
St. John of Jerusalem in England, are excepted out of the pardon, and therefore
their names were delivered into the Kings Bench, Process against them in the
Kings Bench.
that the like process might be made against them, as against other Traitors.
Traitors.


John Hene of London, John Battle, and Thomas Battle, with Sir Michaell
Dagworth Knight. do in the Parliamemt wholly submit themselves to the order of the
King and his Council, Submission of a long suit in the Kings Bench to the King
and his Council in Parliament.
touching their long suit sustained in the Kings Bench for the manor of
Bradwell in Essex.

York, pardon of all Treasons, Kings pardon to York.

Fine for it.


Felonies, etc.

Scarbourgh, Kings pardon to Scarbou^gh.
for 900. Marks fine, Fine for it.
whereof the Commonaltie 400. Marks, and forty of the best Burgesses of the
same Town: the other 500. Marks except Robert Aolam, and Robert Killington, who
for their several Fines were also pardoned. Pardons.


Pardon to Beverly Fine.
The King grants the like pardon to the Burgesses of Beverley, for the fine of
1100 Marks, except persons there named.

A pardon to Adam Perkin of Homeson, Murder pardoned




for the death of William Clarke of Winslow, for the fine of 10. Marks.

Ralph Fitz-Iohn of Aston, Pardon.
for murdering his wife Agnes in Ashton wood.

A pardon to the Citizens of York. York.


Scarborow. Scarborow.


Callice may be removed from thence to any other Town, Staple: Callice.
and to provide such orders therefore as to the King and his Council shall
seem meet. Council.


The Lords being required by the King to show their fantasies touching the Duke
of Lancasters offer for the assayling of Spain, Lords advise, Spains invasion
approved.
as is aforesaid, do think the same very good and honorable, but to the number
levying but two thousand men at Arms, and so many Archers, they think very
small.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Liberties, great Charter, Forest.
the great Charter, and Charter of the Forest, and Purveyors; Purveyors.
Cap. 1. agrees in effect with the Record, but not in form.

Abatement of Writs.
Cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Assizes Nuisance.
Cap. 3. agrees with the Record in effect, though not in form.

Merchandise English vessel^
Cap. 8. agrees with the Record in effect, but much swarveth in form.

Annuity, Rent charge.
unless he can prove seisin, and payment of the Annuity.

The King will be thereof advised. Res.


Sea guarded, poundage.
considering that he has vi d. of every pound.

The King by advise will provide remedy. Res.


Aliens: Benefices^
having any Ecclesiastical dignity, and living.

The Statutes therefore made, Res.
shall be observed.

Sweet Wines.
Cap. 7. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Wars with Scotland.
like to ensue with Scotland: they require that the Archbishop of York, the
Bishop of Durisme, the Earl of Northumberland, Residence.
and the Lords Nevill, and Clifford, may lie in their Countries, and that it
would please the King and Queen to approach to York. York.


To the Lords the King grants, Res.
if they have no good excuse, to the rest, the King will do by his Council.
Kings Council.


Enrolment, Exemplification.
and exemplifications of Deeds Cap. 4. agrees in effect with the Record, but
not in form.

Fair: Trail-Baston.
It is enacted that during two years ensuing no Fair shall be holden, and that
during one year no trail-baston shall be.

Exchanges: Merchants.
That Eschanges may be between Merchant and Merchant, notwithstanding any Act in
the last Parliament.

Resp.
The Chancellor being required, may grant License, License.
if the same be reasonable.

Admiral of the North.
That the King will appoint a sufficient Admiral for the North, who by good
order may take upon him to keep the Sea Coasts there. Sea coasts guarded


Resp.
The King grants thereto.

Justices of Assize partiality.
or deliverie, or of the Peace in his Country.

Resp.
The King thereof will be advised.

York, Justices: Sessions York, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland.
may hold Sessions also twice in the year at least, in the Counties of
Northumberland, Cumberland and Westmerland.

That the Justices shall hold their Sessions in order to the order made, Resp.
without reasonable excuse.

Assizes.
It is enacted for holding the Assizes in effect, according to the Print Cap. 5.
but not in form.

Justices Enrolment.
That the Justices and their Clarks do enroll all Deeds, to them brought within
one Quarter of a year after such Deeds to them brought, or else to answer the
party thereby endamaged. Damages.


Resp.
The Statutes therefore provided shall be examined, observed.

Kings person and household.
and rule of his household, so as he may live within his Revenues: Kings Revenue.
and that all profits, and gifts may be employed upon the Wars to the ease of
the Commons. Wars.

Commons ease.




Resp.
The King much desires it, and so by advise means to do.

Pardon, Treasons, Felonies, Insurrection, persons excepted.
and Fellonies done in the late Insurrection (except certain before excepted)
and except John Horn, Adam Carlill, and Walter Sibell of London, now accused
of horrible Acts.

Cheshire men touching their rapes, Cheshire men, Rapes, Oppressions, Lawless.
and other oppressions done in sundry Countries, wherein they seem to be
lawless.

Resp.
The King by advise will take the best order, saving the liberties of Chester.
Chester Liberties.


Ravishers.
The print touching Ravishers Cap. 6. agrees with the Record in part, Variance
from the Record.
but not altogether; for that the print in sundry points contains more than
is in the Record (quod nota.)

Commons.

Bishop of Norwich.

Army allowed.


For sundry causes in the Record alleged, the Commons require, that the King
would allow to the Bishop of Norwich a certain Army and Provision therefore for
the Invasion of France, Invasion of France.
considering that the said Bishop, has the Popes Grosarie to prosecute the
Antipope, Popes Crosier.

Antipope.


and all his adherents, of whom the French were chief. French.


The King has appointed his Council to treat with the Bishop herein. Resp.

Kings Council.




Patent enquest of office.

Excheater.


be granted of any man's lands until the Kings title be fully disclosed. Kings
title.


The Statute therefore made shall be kept. Resp.


Pardon of Trespasses.
or Tenements, Trespasses done by the Kings officers, or other great Lords, and
of Jurors and maintainers of quarrels. Jurors; Maintenance.


Essex, Sheriff of Essex, Hertford.
and Hertford has by Parliament pardon of one hundred marks yearly parcel of
his charge. The King grants the like pardon for three years more. Pardon.


Commons.
the King wills that prohibition be made against the Popes Collectors, Popes
Collectors.
for receiving of first fruits. First fruits.


Commons.
confirms the Statute made in the last Parliament, that the Barons of the
Exchequer, Barons of Exchequer.
may discharge all matters there sued, Discharge.
without further attending of the great or prive Seal.

Revocation of a Statute, because the Commons assented not thereto.
tit. 17. and the 5. Chapter in the Print touching Preachers upon the words of
the Commons being this; Forasmuch as the same Statute was never assented, nor
granted by the Commons, but that which was therein done: for it was never their
meaning to be justified, and bind themselves, and their Successors to the
Prelates, Prelates.
no more than their Ancestors have done before them.

Commons.
that no man from henceforth does transport any Corn out of the Land other
than to Callice, Transportation of Corn, whence.
Gascoyn, Breast, Shirburgh, and Barwick on forfeiting of the same. Forfeitures,
Licenses.
And that no loading be granted to the contrary, and that such as have License
be bound to the same.

Cap. 9. agrees with the Record. Victualler^: Offices.


Fish.
Cap. 10. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form altogether.

Forestallers: Fish.
Cap. 11. agrees with the Record in effect but not altogether in form.

Usury: Brokers.
Usurers, and Brokers.

Touching Usurie the King would the Laws of the Church should discuss the same,
Resp.

Usury.

Law of the Church.


but if any man be grieved by Usury upon account, trespass, extortion,
Ex^ortion, Oppression, Frauds
oppression, falsehood, deceit, or such like means, the Laws and Customs of
the Realm shall punish the same. Common Law.


Officers Oath.
The Print touching the Oath of Officers, for the observation of the four
Articles aforesaid, Cap. 12. agrees with the Record in effect but not in form.

London.
Note that these five Articles aforesaid were devised, and requested by the
Mayor, and Aldermen and Ci^izens of London.

London.
Upon the exhibition of the last Bills by the Mayor, and Aldermen of London as
is aforesaid, as well the said Mayor, and Aldermen, as most of the Fishmongers
were at the reading of the same Bill in the Parliament, Fishmongers.
at what time one Nicholas Exton, who spoke for the Fishmongers, prayed the
King to receive him and his Company into his protection, Kings Protection.
so as no Corporal hurt come to them.

Peace.

Forfeiture.


on pain of loosing all that they had.

Walter Sibell a Fishmonger started up, Fishmongers.
and required audience, which granted, he began to crow, that those devises
were not exhibited for any good zeal to the Commonwealth, but for mere malice
born to the Fishmongers, for that the chief exhibiters being in the time of
King E. 3. condemned to prison for sundry their misdemeanors, were so
imprisoned by certain of the Fishmongers, then being chief officers in London,
for which cause malice was to that time. Malice.

Imprisonment.




John Moore a Mercer answered, that the Citizens of London meant to keep the
Peace toward them, London.

Peace, Rebels.


unless they went about to let into the said City the Rebels of Kent and Essex,
Slander in Parliament.
as the said Walter, and others did lately.

Walter took advantage of these words, and desired the Lords to bear witness.

Inquiry.
Moore hereupon expounded his words, saying, as the report went, and prayed
that the same might be enquired of, which was granted.

Anno Sexto Richardi Secundi. The Parliament holden at Westminster the Monday
in the third week in Lent, An. 6. RICHARDI. 2.
Parliament adjourned because sundry Writs not returned.
THe same Monday being the 24. of February certain Bishops, and Lords assembled
in the place accustomed in the Palace of Westminster, and for that it was
reported to them, that sundry Sheriffs had not returned their Writs, Sheriffs
returns.
the Parliament by the Kings Commandment was adjourned to the next day.

Robert Braybrook Bishop of London, and Chancellor of England, Ch^ncellor.
by the Kings Commandment, declared the cause of the Parliament to be for
maintenance of the Liberties of the Church, Caus^s of Parliament, Churches,
Liberties, Laws Preservation, Peace of the Realm.
and preservation of the Laws and peace of the Realm.

Aid granted.
granted in the last Parliament, and of the Kings purpose to go into Flanders,
for the voyage of the French, Royal Voy^g^.
shows, that since the last Parliament heavy tidings came, how that the
French King had subjected to himself the whole Country of Flanders, French
King.

Flanders.


except the town of Gaunt, Gaunt.
and that upon the same tidings, the King called a great Council at
Westminster, Great C^uncell.
by which it was determined, that the King should pass in person to the rescue
of the town of Gaunt, if safely with his honor he might so do; Kings safety
and honor.
And that now therefore the Parliament was called for them to consult,
Parl^aments advise required.
whether it were best for the King to go in person, or to send an Army: Army.
and for money to maintain the same, Money, Speed.
with the Circumstances thereto belonging; the which he willed them fully to
digest, and to make speedy answer.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyn and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isls.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyn, etc. as above.

Commons debated.
they besought the King to assign to them certain Lords, Committee of Lords
debated.
there named to consult with them, which was granted, albeit it were at the
election of the King to assign these Lords, Confe^ence.

Kings election.


or others at his pleasure.

Commons.
they came into the Parliament before the Kings presence and the Lords, when
Sir James Pickering Knight, then Speaker after the Common Protestation made
says; Spe^ker of the Commons.

Protest^tion.


That albeit the same their consultation did properly appertain unto the King
and Lords, King and Lords properly to consult of Wars.
yet since it stood with their pleasures to charge the Commons therewith,
Commons advice.
their conceit was, that it had been best for the King in person to have
enterprized a voyage, Royal voyages.
which for that it could not for sundry reasons be, they thought it best that
the Bishop of Norwich, Bishop of Norwich:
having the Popes Crosary for persecuting the Antipope, Antipope.
his adherents should take upon him the quarrel against the French, French.
whereof was hope of good success, he says further, that considering the Scots
were so lusty, Scots.
that they would not agree to any reasonable league, Leagues.
whereby we are like to have war, Wars.
which to us was accounted most dangerous, they thought that the King, King not
to be spa^ed out of the Realms.
or his Uncles of Lancaster, Cambridge, or Buckingham, might not in any wise be
spared out of the Realm, until with Scotland some certain order were taken,
the which they spoke not by way of Counsel, Commons spoke not by way of
Counsel.
but to show their advise: Advise.
whereto for the King was said, a little difference to be between Counsel and
advise.

Norwich to the King, Bishop of Norwich his proffer.
and Lords in the beginning of the Parliament was so, as the King would g^ant
to him the whole 15 th. and 10 th. granted in the last Parliament, with the 6
d. of every pound Merchandise, Subsidy Poundage and Tunnage.
and 2 s. of every Tun of Wine lately granted for the safe keeping of the Seas:
Seas guarded.
he would in seasonable time of the year furnish, and send into France 3000.
men at Arms, Army.
and 3000. Archers, of whom 500. men at Arms, and 500 Archers should be
appointed to keep the Sea; Sea guarded.
and further, that if he might have the West-Admirall to attend, Admiral of
the West.
he would before March ensuing, appoint for the defense of the Sea great Ships
of War, Ships of War.
and Barges well appointed.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Church Liberties.
IT is enacted, that the Liberties of the Church, the great Charter, Great
Charter.
and Charter of the Forest be maintained.

Poundage and Tunage.
That for the grant of vi d. of every pound of Merchandise, and ii s. of every
tun of Wine, the Seas may be well kept. Sea guarded.


Res.


Scotland, Marches of Scotland, Barwick.
and namely for Barwick, and Carlisle, Carlisle.
and that some truce or peace may be taken.

The Duke of Lancaster, and other Lords are sent thither of purpose to take
order therein. Truce with Scotland.


Res.
That the Statute of Purveyors may be observed, Purveyors.
and that ready payment may be made. Ready payment.


The Statute therefore made shall be observed.

Res.
That the most approved wisemen may be chose to be chief Officers for the
governance of the Realm, Wise Men.

Chief Officers approved by Parliament.


that their names might be known to the Parliament, and they not removed
without good cause.

The King by advise of his Lords, Res.

Lords advise.

Kings Prerogative.


shall appoint such Officers as shall like him, whom he means not to remove
before the next Parliament.

Pardon.
Cap. 1. far swerveth from the Record.

Variance,
That able men may be appointed to be of Counsel about the Kings Person, Kings
Council.
and that an order may be taken for the Kings household, Kings Household.
so as he may live upon his own. King to live upon his own.


The King therein will be advised of his Lords, Res.

Lords Advise.


and take such orders as may be for his honor.

At the request of the Commons it is enacted, that the City of London shall
enjoy all such liberties as they had in the time of King E. 3. or as were to
them confirmed by the King now, Commons.

Londons Liberties.


saving to all Strangers their Liberties confirmed, Strangers.
and saving that Victuallers should have no particular Liberties by themselves,
Victuallers.
but to be under the rule of the Major.

Norwich had advised himself, Bishop of Norwich offer.
he came before the King and Lords, and offered^ so as the King would allow to
him the fifteenth last granted by the Commons, he would serve the King one
whole year in his wars within France, Wars.
with 3000. men at Arms, and 2500. Archers well horsed, and appointed, the
which offer was thought to be very good, and for the Kings honor: but for that
the King would not adventure any of his Subjects, Kings care of his Subjects.
unless he knew who should be Chieftain, General.
or Lieutenant, considering the Bishops profession was to the contrary, he
required to know who they should be: the Bishop would not that declare, unless
the King did assent to his offer; saying, that if it were his pleasure so to
do, they then should be as ready and worthy persons as any were within the
Realm, his own person, and others of the blood excepted.

The Bishops offer accepted.
whereupon the Bishop gave him four names of them, willing him to chose one
such for his Lieutenant as he thought good; Lieutenant elected.
After the view of whom the King would not seem to choose any Nobleman,
Nobleman.
whereby it was assented, that if the Bishop could not of his own accord agree
with any Nobleman for his Lieutenant, that then the Bishop should take upon
him the charge, and general lycense was granted to all men to pass on with the
same Bishop, Bishops General License to pass on with the Bishop.
except the retinew of the King, and other Nobles.

de la War, Audience.

Lord de la War.


who was lately arrived from Spain, and was to declare how the King might come
to an honorable peace with Spain, Spain, Peace.
the which they much desired; whereto was an answer made, that the King would
advise with his Council, Kings Council.
and therein do what should appertain to his honor. Kings Honor.

Writs of Summons.




Anno Septimo Richardi Secundi. Rex etc. Johanni Regi Castellae etc. Apud
Westminster. die Lunae ante Festum omnium Sanctorum Test Rege apud Westminster. Vicessimo
die Augusti.
Charissimo Avunculo Rs. Edward. Com. Cantabr. Chariss. Avunculo Rs. Tho. Com.
Buck. Chariss. Fratri Rs. Tho. Com. Cantii. Dilecto, and fideli Rico. Com.
Arundell. Thomae Com. War. Hugoni Com. Staff. Edw. de Courtney Com. Devon.
Will. de Monteacute Com. Salop. Rob. de Vere Com. Oxon. Hen. de Percy Com.
Northumb. Tho. de Mowbray Com. Notting. Jacob. de Audley. Will. Bardolf de
Wormegay. Guido de Bryan. Ioh. de Clinton. Gilber. Talbot. Ioh. de Ware. Hen.
le Scroope Chlr. Hen. de Ferrariis de Groby. Tho. Roos de Hamelake. Ioh. Nevill
de Raby. Ioh. Gray de Codonore. Hen. Gray de Wilton. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin.
Hen. Fitzhugh. Rico. le Scroope. Hugoni Burnell. Will. Zouch de Harringworth.
Rogero de Clifford. Iohi. Buttort. Rogero de Scales. Rado. de Cromwell. Michael
de la Poole. Will. de Thorpe. Will. de Winhesser. Rado Baroni de Greystock.
Will. Botteraux Chlr. Iohi. de Bello monte. Robto. de Harrington. Robto. de
Willougby. Iohi. de Clifton. Ioh. de Cobham de Kent. Hugoni de Darcy. Ioh. de
Strange de Knoking. Tho. de Nevill de Halmshir. Will. de Aldburgh. Ric. Seymor.
Rado Basset de Drayton. Thomae Darcey. Thomae Morley. Ioh. de Bourchier.
Waltero Fitz-Walter. Ioh. Lovell de Fishmarch. Ioh. de Monteacuto. Ioh. de
Cherlton de Powis. Ric. de Poynings. Thomae de Berkley.
Simoni de Burley, Constabular. and Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The Parliament holden at WESTMINSTER, the Monday next before the Feast of
All Saints in the seventh year of King RICHARD the 2.
Parliament adjourned because sundry Lords and Commons not come.
THe same Monday being the 25. of October, sundry of the Bishops and Lords
being assembled, looked for the coming of the others, but for that sundry of
them were not come, and the Sheriffs had not returned their Writs, Sheriffs
return.
the Parliament was adjourned until the next day ensuing.

Painted Chamber.
The Thursday after being the next day, the Bishops, Lords, and others of the
upper-House came into the Parliament, in the Chamber de-pinct at Westminst.
whereunto all the Knights and Burgesses were in the presence of the King called
by name, King.

All Knights and Burgesses called by name.


at which time Sir Michaell de la Poole Knight, being Chancellor, Chancellor.
began first to excuse his unworthiness to that place, Forc^d to the place.
and declared that he was forced thereto, which done he shows the cause of
the Parliament to be as follows. Causes of Parliament.


Candlemas ensuing, Truce with the Scots near expired.
for which cause the Duke of Lancaster being sent into Scotland, was returned
with answer, that the Scots would send to London certain that should entreat
therein, as well for such Peace, Peace.
if it might succeed, as for preparation of War; War.
which more was doubted, was the first cause of consultation.

Preparat^on against enemies.
Spain, Spain.
France, France.
and lately Flanders. Flanders.


Offensive Wars best.
then to be assailed; to seek them at home, than to suffer them to come to us,
and that it would so be manifestly showed: further proving, that they must not
lay the cause of these wars to the King, considering that with the Crown the
Wars descended to the King also. Wars descended with the Crown.


Good Laws.
and preservation of the Peace, Peace.
and also in his former matter he remembers them for giving aid to the King,
Aid.
for the supportation of these his great charges.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoygn, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isls.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Lords and Commons consult severally.
and the Commons by themselves to consult about these weighty matters, and for
money to serve his necessity, Money first to be raised.
laying in the mean time all other matters apart.

Fifteen granted by Schedule.


vi d. of every pound of Merchandise, and ii. s. of every Tun of Wine on these
conditions, Tunnage and Poundage granted on condition.
viz. That the Clergy shall grant the like for their parts, Clergy.
and that all estates whatsoever be contributary thereto. Contribution.
And that the service of the Bishop of Norwich, Bishop of Norwich.
and of his Captains with the treasure by them received, not of them deserved,
nor well employed, may only be examined, Account.
and employed to the use of the King.

Northumberland promised for himself, and the Earl of Devonshire, Admiral of
the West, safely to keep the Seas, Admirals Seas guarded.
so far as the charge granted by the Commons therefore would serve, viz. of vi.
d. of every pound of Merchandise, Tunnage and Poundage.
and ii. s. of every Tun of Wine.

Norwich being accused for not doing his service according to promise, Bishop
of Norwich a^cused.

Breach of trust.


and for receiving of several sums, Account of monyes.
as well on this side the Seas, as beyond, requires respit to answer, Time to
answer.
protesting earnestly therein to show his innocence, His P^o^estation.
and being charged particularly of the receipt of 10000. Francks of gold, for
giving up the Castle of Graveling to the French, Selling the Castle of
Graveling to the French.
he fully purges himself thereof, And in repeating the matter it fell out,
that 5000. Francks of Gold given for the said Castle, were in the hands of Sir
Robert Farmers man, Bribery.
who, charged in Parliament, confesses the having thereof, but makes a fair
excuse for the secret taking: wherefore he was committed to prison until he
made payment thereof, Account, Payment.

Imprisonment.


and until further order for his enlargement were taken.

Proclamation.
that all such as had received any money beyond the Seas of the enemy, Brib^s
received.
or of any other, for any cause other than for due wages, Arm^es. Wages.
should the next day bring the same into the Chancery, Treason.

Chancery.


or else to be taken as Traitors; this Proclamation was made the sixteenth of
November.

Briars Crossingham, and John Spickworth Esquires, were accused for surrendering
the Castle of Drinckham in Flanders to the Kings enemies for money, Treason.

Fo^ts surrendered to the enemy.

Bribery.


without the assent of the Kings Lieutenant; There Spickworth proves that the
same was not in his keeping, and thereby was discharged. Crossingham answered,
that he yielded the same upon necessity without money, N^cessity.
and submits himself to their order: this was thought no good cause, and
therefore he was committed to prison. Imprisonment.


Norwich with four chief points, Chancellor.

Bishop of Norwich charge.


viz. First, where he promised the King to serve him with a certain number for
one whole year, he had served but half a year, Bre^ch of promise in Military
service.
and yet returned with his host spoiled. The second, he promised to muster and
show his Army at Callice, No Muster.
which also was not done, and failed of his number. Want of number of Soldiers.
The third, for that in the last Parliament it was agreed, that the King of
Castile, or some of the Kings Uncles, should have gone as General for the
honor of the Realm, No General.
the same was not done, and thereupon the voyage was lost, for that upon the
Bishops promise as good a General was promised. The fourth, for that the King
appointed to have chosen some other temporal Lords, General to be chosen by
the King.
or a sufficient General, the which was not done, because the Bishop took upon
him the same, whereby great villainies, and other displeasures came.

The Bishops answer.
The Bishop answered, that albeit in this case he ought to have Counsel,
Council.
yet making his Protestation, Prot^station.
that he might all times avoid his answer, he answered in person as follows.

Commission.
To the first, his Commission was to go speedily to the rescue of Gaunt, Gaunt.
the which he did, and this done as well the Grantoys, as his own Captains,
thought it best to besiege the town of Ipre, Ipre, besieged.
about which he losing many of his men by dint of Sword, and Diseases, Sickness.
he could not any longer do any good, and therefore upon advice he removed.

To the second, the speed which he made toward Gaunt, Speed.
caused him to make no muster at Callice. No Muster.


To the third, he had good Captains, Captains General.
though not of the best, and the Lord Nevill might have had by his own offer,
but that the King denied him License the last Parliament.

To the fourth, he refused no Lieutenant at the Kings hands, Lieutenant.
only the King writing to the Bishop beyond the Seas touching a General,
General.
he therefore gave great thanks to the King for his great care of him, and his,
and that otherwise he refused none, as by his Letters may appear.

Chance^lors reply.
taking advantage of the Bishops answer in the end, and said, that the Bishops
answer seemed to the King and Lords no sufficient excuse, His answer
insuffi^ient.
for without his Imprisonment, Imprisonment.
for what is contained in these four Articles, he ought to make Fine, Fine
Ransom.
and ransom at the Kings pleasure, by seizing of the Temporalities of his
Bishopric when the King should please. Temporalities seized.


Fail of service in W^ts.
to the end they might serve the King in other places, To serve elsewhere.
to accomplish their promise. Thereto the Bishop answered, that upon the
delivery of Sir Robert Hulmer his Clarke and Treasurer, Sir To. Hulmer enlarged.
he would do so: Sir Robert was delivered, and two several days at the
Bishops entreaty appointed for the case.

Bishops answer.
with somewhat adjoined for his Purgation. Purgation.


Chancellors reply.
and concludes, although the King might pass on the Bishop, Bishop. Sword.
as on a temporal Lord, by reason that he took upon him, to serve him as a
Soldier, and had the Sword carried before him, contrary to his profession: yet
for that time the King would spare to lay hands on his person, for his
Imprisonment, but for his other defaults, and villainies, the Lords by assent of
the Parliament had adjudged him to make Fine, Fine and ransom.

Lords judge and censure him.


and ransom at the Kings pleasure, whereto he should be compelled by the
seizure of his temporalities: Temporalities seized.
and it was commanded him from thenceforth no longer to have the sword carried
before him.

William Elinsham, Sir Thomas Trevit, Sir Henry de Ferrers, and Sir William de
Hurnedon Knights, Treason in surrendering Forts for money.

Bribery.


were openly accused in Parliament before the Lords, for receiving diverse
several sums, for giving up of Holds and Fortresses without the assent of
the King, or his General, Generals.
together with one Robert Fitz-Raph; the sums particularly laid to their
charge, amounted in the whole to 20000. Francks of Gold. They all made certain
fained excuses, Excuse.
and submitted themselves to the Kings mercy. Submission.


Chancellor, judgment by the Lords Imprisonment Fine, Ransom.
and gave judgement^ that they all should pay to the King of what they had
received, and remain in prison until they had made Fine and ransom with the
King, and with them Sir William Harnedon was committed to prison, his body and
goods to be at the Kings pleasure.

Petitions.
Petitions of the Commons with their Answers.
Church Liberties.
THe print touching the Liberties of the Church, the great Charter, Great
Charter.
and the Charter of the Forest, Forest.
Cap. 1. and 2. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Justices and Barons Oaths.

Bribes.


Lords and Commons to do without consideration.

Res.
They be already sworn, and if need be shall be again.

Justices of Peace.

Vagabonds.


and Saylors do put in surety for their good behavior, Saylors.

Sureties.


or else to remain in Prison, Imprisonment.
until the coming of the Justices of Assize, which far swerveth from the Print
Cap. 5. quod nota.

Winchester Cap. 6. agrees with the Record in effect, Statute of Winchester.
but not in form.

Cap. 9. far swerveth from the Record, Woollen cloth.
for that in the print is much more matter than in the Record, Variance from
the Record.
quod nota.

Cap. 8. agrees with the Record in effect, Purveyors.
but not in form.

Praemunire.

Variance.


The print touching Writs of Praemunire Cap. 14. far swerveth from the Record, as
having sometimes more; and sometimes less than in the Record.

Sheriffs.
It is enacted, that if Commission, or Patent be granted to any Sheriff, or
Escheator for longer space than for one year, Escheators.
that the same be void, saving the Kings Prerogative. Kings Prerogative.


d. Custom, Imposition on Wools discharged.
of every Sack newly demanded by the Customers.

Seas guarded.


Res.
The King by advice of his Counsel, Kings Counsel.
and Admirals will provide sufficiently therefore. Admirals.


London, London.
shall enjoy all their whole Liberties whatsoever, Liberties.

Non obstante.


with this Clause, licet usi non fuerunt, vel abusi fuerunt, notwithstanding
any Statute to the contrary. That the Fishmongers, Fishmongers.
and other Victuallers should be under the rule of the Mayor, Victuallers.

Mayor and Aldermen.


and Aldermen, and that the Mayor, and Aldermen should take no other Oath in
the Exchecquer, than they did in the time of K. E. 3.

Nisi prius Cap. 7. agrees with the Record in effect, Jurors.

Nisi prius.


but not in form.

Officer convicted.
or Convicted for any Falsehood about the said Office, Falsehood.

Disability.


be restored thereto again without especial grace therefore had. Restitution.


That no Forrester do take any Chymmage of, Forrester.




or for any Wood, Coal, or Fuel, but where the same is carried to be sold.

Forests.
and other Statutes shall be kept, and who will especially complain shall be
heard.

Castles sufficiently furnished.
or Fortresses nigh the Marches of Scotland, Marches of Scotland.

Residence.


shall sufficiently furnish the same with Men, and Victuals, and so keep the
same, and that the Warden of those parts may be there in his own person.

Oyer, Oyer and Terminer.
and Terminer be granted without assent of the Kings Counsel and good proof.
Kings Counsel.


The Statutes therefore made shall be kept saving the Kings Prerogative. Res.

Kings Prerogative.




Sheriffs.
for being charged with diverse sums, parcel of their Fee-Farmes, Fee Farms:
and granted forth in Liberties. Liberties.


Chancellor.
and Treasurer shall from time to time make such allowance to the Sheriffs as
they shall think good. Treasurer.

Allowance.




The print touching Fishmongers, Fishmongers, Victuallers.
Victuallers, and Vintners, Vintners.
Cap. 10. far swerveth from the Record, Variance from the Record.
for that the Record makes no mention of Victuallers, besides that there is
much more in the print than in the Record. quod nota.

Scarborough being much afflicted by the French, Scarborough.

Pyrars.


Scots, and Flemmings, provide at their own charge for their Defense a Bark of
Dullinger, Defense of the Seas.
the which they being unable to furnish and maintain, do require of the King
certain Contributions of such as pass with Fish, Contribution.
or other things.

The King by the advice of his Counsel and Admiral, Res.

Kings Counsel.

Admiral.


will provide the best remedy.

Burgesses.

Liberty.

Charters.




The print touching Mainpernors in Writs of Debt Cap. 17. agrees with the
Record in effect but not in form. Mainpernors


Rome, Provisions Rome.
Cap. 12. far swarveth from the Record, Variance from the Record.
for that the Record makes two Statutes of the same, besides the swerving in
form. quod nota.

Possession disturb.

Commissions.

Chancery.


or Writ of Privy Seal, Privy Seal.
without due answer, and that all Bills exhibited in this Parliament be
answered. Bills in Parliament answered,


To the first, the Counsel upon grief showed they may provide remedy. Res.

K. Counsel, King.


To the second let such Bills as cannot be ended by the Counsel be exhibited
to the King.

Captains Accounts.
and receive wages therefore may at their return be received to account in the
Exchecquer without delay, Exchecquer, Debts pardoned.
and that all debts upon so much service in the time of King E. 3. extended out
of the Exchecquer, may be pardoned.

Res.
Who will complain, may show his griefs and be heard.

Irishmen.
That the Irish-men which are bailed by the laws of England, may be partakers of
the pardon granted by King E. 3. in his thirtieth year touching Presentiments to
any Benefices, Pardon.

Presentiments.

Benefices.


by voidance of the temporaltie of any Archbishop, Temporalitie of Bishops.
or other Bishops.

Res.
The King will therefore be advised.

Ordinaries.

Extortions.




Res.
The King will charge the Clergy to amend the same.

Variance from the Record.
Compare the 49. tit. before, quod nota.

Non residences.
and not keeping upon the same within England, as late was made against such
Clarks in Ireland. I^eland.


Res.
The King will be thereof advised.

Statute of Northampton.

Armor.


The print touching the observation of the Statute of Northampton Cap. 13.
agrees with the Record.

Elizabeth, wife of Edward, late Lord of Deldofepence, for that upon a Quare
impedit brought by the King, Quare Impedit.
against her for a Parsonage in Glamorgan in Wales, her plea thereto was rased.
Plea rased.
It is enacted that such plea as the Justices should record that she pleaded
should be newly entered, Plea new entered
and the Cleark punshied for the razing. Cleark punished.


Protections.
That remedy may be had against Protections.

Res.
The Chancellor, upon cause, may redress the same.

Armor.
The print touching the carrying of Armor, or Victuals into Scotland Cap. 16.
far swerveth from the Record, Victuals.

Scotland.

Variance.


as having much more; which note.

Fo^resters, Forest.

Vexation.

Variance.


Cap. 3. far swerveth from the Record; for in the beginning the Record would
that all the Statutes of the Forests should be kept, and to the print thus
much ought to be added, and so it is to be enacted: That no man shall be taken,
or imprisoned against the assizes of the Forest, Imprisonment.
nor be compelled thereof to make any obligation, nor other thing against his
will. And if any may be attainted to the contrary of these, he shall pay double
damages to the party greived, Double damages.
and notwithstanding, shall make Fine and Ransom at the Kings pleasure. Fines
and Ransomes.


Note that in comparing the fourth Chapter of the print touching Forests, the
said third and fourth Chapters in print agrees with the Record, containing but
one Chapter.

Queen. Gold.
should be levied of any that has ward in marriage of the King. Ward.


It shall be as it was in the time of Queen Philippa late Queen, R^s.
and of other Queens before.

Guilford (by the Kings Grant) which in the late Insurrection lost their
Charters, Guilford.

Insu^rection.

Charters forfeied. Fees.


should have them renewed for the little Fee of twenty two shillings fonr pence.

Robert de Pleasington, Pardon.
so as the same be no derogation to the Kings Prerogative. Kings Prerogative.


Of the fifteenth Chapter in the print touching Maintainers, Maintainers.

Va^iance.


is no mention made in the Record. quod nota.

Anno Septimo Richardi Secundi. Rex etc. Johi Regi Castellae, etc. Apud Novum
Sarum die Veneris post Festum Sancti Marci Evangelistae, Writ^ of Summ^^
^ertio die Martii.
Charissimo Avunculo Rs. Edward. Com. Cantabr. Chariss. Avunc. Rs. Tho. Com.
Buck. Chariss. Fratri Rs. Tho Com Cancii. Dilecto, and fideli Rico. Com.
Arundell. Thomae Com. War. Hugoni Com. Staff. Edw. de Courtney Com. Devon.
Will. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Rob. de Vere Com. Oxoni. Hen. de Percy Com.
Northumb. Tho. de Mowbray Com. Notting. Iacobo. de Audley de Hedligh Willo.
Bardolf de Wormegay. Iohi. de Cherlton de Powis. Rico. de Poynings. Guido de
Bryan. Iohi. de Clinton. Gilberto Talbot. Iohi. de Ware. Hen. de Scroope Chlr.
Hen. de Ferrariis de Groby. Tho. Roos de Hamelake. Iohi. Nevill de Raby. Iohi.
Gray de Codonore. Hen. Gray de Wilton. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Hen.
Fitzhugh. Rico. le Scroope. Tho. de Berkley. Iohi. de Fallesly Chlr. Hugoni
Burnell. Willo. le Zouch de Harringworth. Rogero Clifford. Iohi. Botuttort.
Rogero de Scales. Rado. de Cromwell. Michaeli de la Poole. Willo. de Thorpe.
Willo. de Windsor. Rado Baroni de Greystock. Willo. Botteraux Chlr. Iohi. de
Bello monte. Robto. de Harrington. Tho. Camois Chlr, Tho. Talbot de Blarkend.
Robto. de Willougby. Iohi. de Cobham de Kent. Willo. de Daere. Iohi. le Strange
de Knokin. Hen. de Nevill de Halmshire. Willo. de Aldburgh. Rico. Seymore.
Rado. Basset de Dray^on. Thomae Darcey. Thomae de Morley. Iohi. Backier.
Waltero Fitz-Walter. Iohi. Lovell de Hichmerch. Iohi de Monteacuto.
Simoni de Burley, Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The Parliament holden at Salisbury on the Friday next after St. Mark the
Evangelist, in the seventh year of K. Richard the 2.
th. of April, for that the Duke of Lancaster and other Lords were not returned
from the North, Parliament adjourned: for that some Lords and Commons not come.
and for that also certain Sheriffs had not returned their Writs; Writs not
returned.
the Parliament was adjourned until the Wednesday following, and in the mean
time the Commons were willed to go together to chose their Speaker.



King.
The same Thursday the King in person, with all the Bishops and Lords, except
such as were with the Duke of Lancaster in Scotland, and the Commons which were
assembled in the great Hall of the Bishop of Salisbury in Salisbury, therefore
richly hanged, and dressed; Sr. Michaell de la Poole, Lord Chancellor of
England, Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment declared the cause of the Parliament. Causes of
Parliament.


Churches Liberties.
observations of the Laws, Laws observations Peace kept.
and preservation of the Peace.

The Second, for treaty of Peace between him and the French: Peace with France.
whereof with opportunity he was to show to them certain Articles, wherein
although the King of himself might well conclude, Kings Prerogative
yet for good will he would not without their knowledge, and consent.

Peace.
He shows that if the Peace take effect, yet cannot the same be concluded
without the meeting of both Princes, which for his Honor requires no small
charge; Besides, the King has spent much, Expenses.
and daily must more, for the defense against the Scots, Defense.
for saving his Peers beyond the Seas, and for the safety of Guienne and
Ireland: Guienne.

Ireland.


the which how the same should be born, he charge them of their allegiance to
consult, Advise to raise Moneys.
and give answer.

England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Petitions.
Receivers of Petitions for Gascoyne, and other Places beyond the Seas, and of
the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

th. of May, the Commons assembled, Commons desire a Committee of Lords.
beseeching the King to grant to them for conference, Conference.
certain Lords and Nobles there named, which was granted.

Lancaster with other Nobles were returned, the Commons besought the King to
grant to them the same Duke, Commons request a Committee of more Lo^ds.
and his two Brothers of Cambridg and Buckingham.

After this, the Lords and Commons granted to the King, a moitie of a tenth, A
tenth and fif^teenth granted conditionally.
and of a fifteenth of the laity: providing further, that if Wars with France
and Scotland did continue, Wars.
that then the King should have the other moitie of a 15 th. so as the Clergy
do pay thereto according to the rate, Clergy.
and so as if Peace be taken, the last moitie to cease.

John Ca^endish Fishmonger of London made his complaint first to the Commons,
Complaint to the Commons and Lords against the Chancellor.
and after to the Lords in full Parliament, requiring, first, that he might
have Surety of the Peace granted against Sir Michaell de la Pool Knight,
Surety of the Peace granted against him.
Chancellor of England, the which was granted, and Sureties for the Peace for
the said Chancellor; his Sureties were the Earls of Stafford, and Salisbury.
His Sureties.


Cavendish shows, that he having a weighty suit depending before the said
Chancellor against other Merchants, Chancellor accused of Bribery.
and breaking with one John Otier a Clarke of the said Chancellors for good
success, Otier undertook he should be well heard, so he would give him 10 l.
for his travel; Cavendish himself became bound to Otier therefore, and shortly
brought Herring and fresh Sturgion to Otier in part of payment; which
rehearsed, he would not charge the Chancellor withal, but left the Lords to
judge thereof: Lords Judges^
only he said, that by the Chancellor he was delayed, Delays.
and could have no Justice at his hands; No Justice.
And further he says, that at a time past the Chancellor caused him to be paid
for his Fish, Chancellor cleared by himself
and his Obligation to be cancelled, but whether of conscience he leaves it to
the Lords Judgment.

Chancellors answer before the Lords and Commons.
and for delay, and not doing Justice objected against him: he avouched the
Justices and Serjants that were at the hearing of the cause: Justices and
Serjants vouched.
to the rest he said that in accompting with his Servants and Officers, he
bolted out the said Herring and Sturgion to have come as a cheat, and
understood also of the Obligation; His oath of Purgation.
whereat being greatly moved, he sent for Cavendish, and ripping up of the
matter, caused him to be paid for the Fish, and his Obligation to be cancelled,
Swearing by the Sacrament of JESUS CHRIST, that he was not otherwise witting,
but altogether ignorant.

Otier being sent for and examined, Otier upon Oath clears the Chancellor.

Witnesses examined upon Oath in Parliament.


swore that the Chancellor was never privy thereunto; And the parties adverse
of the said Cavendish upon their Oaths affirmed, that they never gave any
reward to the said Chancellor.

Chancellor requires reparation for the Slander.
Whereupon the said Chancellor required his remedy against the said Fishmonger
for the same so great a Slander; Te Lords therefore troubled with other weighty
matters, let the said Fishmonger to bail, Bail.
to answer the said Chancellor, and committed the matter to be ordered by the
Justices. The Lords refer it to the Justices.


Robert Tressillian, chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Robert Belknap, chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, with other Justices and Counselors hearing this
whole matter, condemned the said Fishmonger Cavendish in a 1000. Marks for his
slanderous complaint against the said Chancellor, Cavendish condemned in 1000.
Marks for his Slander.
and his body adjudged to prison until he had paid the 1000. Marks,
Imprisonment.
and made Fine and Ransom to the King also. Fine and Ransom.


Commons modesty.
The Commons for answer to Peace, Peace referred to the Kings Council.
said; that it beseemed them not to intermeddle with their Counsel therein, and
therefore refers the whole order thereof to the King and his Council.

Commo^s desire Peace, nor W^r.
for one must they chose: They answered, an honorable Peace for the King; but
for that in the Articles were contained many terms of the Civill-Law, They
understand no^ t^^ms of C^vill Law.
which they understood not; Know not what to say.
and for that as they understood, the Articles were, that the King should have
Guienne of the French by homage and service, Gui^nn^. Ca^lice.

Conquest.

Envy of France.


they knew not what to say; only they hope that the King meant not to hold
Callice, and other Terrytories gotten by Sword of the French.

Peace desired.


St. Edmunds Bury.
The Abbot of St. Edmonds Bury, by a long Bill shows how the men of the same
Town were pardoned for their late Insurrections, Insurrection.
so as they did find sufficient Sureties for their good Behavior to the Abbot,
Sureties for good-Behaviour.
and his Successors: and further shows that the Townsmen hitherto had
shifted the same, and prays that they may enter into Recognizance for the
same, Recognizance.
which condition they in Record expressed.

Prior of Montague.
The Prior and Covent of Montague being an Alien, Alien.
by their Petition declared how Sir William Seymor upon a Sciri Facias to
execute a Fine for the Manor of Omdu-Hall, Petition.

Sciri Facias.


with the appurtenances in Somerset, brought against the said Prior, and Covent
in the Kings Bench, recovered there the said Manor. He shows further how
the said Sciri Facias was purchased, hanging a Writ of right against the said
Prior, to which Writ the said Prior appeared, and that the said Prior was over
ruled to plead further, and no entry thereof made; he further shows matter,
and prays aid of the King, Aid of the King.
and it was over ruled without entry thereof made: whereupon he beseeches
that the roll may be newly made, and amended, Amendment.
and due entries made, New entry.
as in the roll is mentioned, which by the advice of the Justices, and others
their learned Counsel was granted and made, wherein for the Prothonotarie or
Bean-pleader are goodly forms, and directions.

After which amendment and enrollment granted, Amendment.




the said Prior and Covent by a Petition shows the old matter, and Record;
and for certain errors therein contained, Error in Parliament.
prays the Examination, and reversall of the said Judgment in Parliament, and
his Sciri Facias framed upon the said case, Sciri Facias.
to warn the said Richard to appear at the next Parliament, Appearance next
Parliament.
to abide the order of the same, and therein no protection be allowed for the
said Richard: Protection.
and further that the old process and Record be at the same next Parliament:
all which were granted.

Petitions of the Commons with their Answers. Petitions.

Churches Liberty.
the great Charter, Great Charter.
and the Charter of the Forest be maintained. Forest.


Sheriffs Escheator
Under-Sherriff, or Escheator do remain in the office above one year. Res.




That where the Aldermen of London are yearly chosen, Aldermen of London
and returned at the feast of St. Gregory the Pope, they require that free
choice may be made of the most able men, Election.
as well of such as were the year before, Res.
as of others, and that yearly.

The King grants thereunto, as long as thereby is good government in the City.

Sheriffs allowance.
and that provision may be made for all such as shall succeed. Res.


As in times past, the Chancellor and Treasurer may make allowance, Chancellor.

Treasurer.


and for the rest the King will provide.

Ravishers.
in the 6 th. year of this King, Res.
may be revoked.

The Statute shall continue, saving to the King, and other Lords their
forfeiture. Forfeiture.


Anno Octavo Richardi Secundi. Rex etc. Charissimo Avunculo suo Regi Castellae
and Legionis Duci Lancast. etc. Apud West. Test Rege apud Westminster. 28. die Sept.
Writs of Summons

Charissimo Avunculo suo Edward. Com. Cantabr. Char. Avunc. suo Tho. Com. Buck.
Chariss. Fratri suo Tho Com Buck. Dilecto, and fideli Rico. Com. Arundell.
Thomae Com. War. Hugoni Com. Staff. Edw. Courtney Com. Devon. Will. de
Monteacuto Com. Salop. Rob. de Vere Com. Oxon. Hen. de Percy Com. Northumb.
Tho. de Mowbray Com. Notting. Jacob. de Audley. Willo. Bardolf de Wormegay.
Iohi. Fallesly Chlr. Guido de Bryan. Iohi. de Clinton. Gilberto Talbot. Iohi.
de War. Hen. le Scroope Chlr. Hen. de Ferrariis de Groby. Tho. Roos de
Hamelake. Ioh. Nevill de Raby. Ioh. Gray de Codonore. Hen. Gray de Wilton.
Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Hen. Fitzhugh. Rico. de Scroope. Hugoni Burnell.
Tho. Camois Chlr, Willo. le Zouch de Harringworth. Rogero de Clifford. Iohi.
Botreaux. Rogero de Scales. Rado. de Cromwell. Michael de la Poole. Rado de
Lumley. Willo. de Thorpe. Rado Baroni de Greystock. Will. Botteraux Chlr. Iohi.
de Bello monte. Robto. de Harrington. Iohi. de Clifford. Robto. de Willougby.
Rico. Talbot de Blackmert. Ioh. de Cobham de Kent. Willo. de Eure. Ioh. de
Strange de Knokin. Tho. de Nevill de Halmshyer. Willo. de Aldburgh. Rico.
Seymore. Rado Basset de Drayton. Thomae Darcey. Thomae Morley. Thomae. de
Bourchier. Waltero Fitz-Walter. Iohi. Lovell de Fishmerch Iohi. de Monteacuto.
Iohi. de Cherlton de Powis. Rico. de Poynnings. Thomae de Berkley. Iohi
Devereaux.
Simoni Burleigh, Constabular. and Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The Parliament holden at WESTMINSTER, the Saturday next after the Feast of
Saint MARTIN in the eighth year of the reign of K. RICHARD the 2.
Parliament adjourned.
and on the same Monday it was adjourned until Tuesday next following for the
like cause at the Kings Commandment.

King and Lords sit.
and Lords sitting, and the Knights, Knights and Burgesses stand.
and Burgesses standing, Sir Michael de la Poole Knight, Chancellor of England,
Chancellor.
speaking much of the Kings great care, Kings care of the Church.
toward the Church, Commons, Commons.
and Laws of England, Laws.
shows the same to be the chief cause of the Parliament. Causes of Parliament.
Then rehearsing how the King had been environed with the French, F^ench.
Spaniard, Spaniard.
Flemming, Flemmings, Scots Enemies.
and the Scots, who being confederate made great preparations to, etc. which
were like to ensue, unless Politic advice were made to resist, Resisting
Enemies.
which was one other cause of this Parliament, having these adjuncts how
treasure might be gathered, Treasure raised.
without which no resistance could be.

He showed how for these Defenses, Kings person and example.




the King meant to hazard his own person to any perils whatsoever, that he
might justly encourage all estates willingly to offer themselves, and what they
had to such defense.

French Treachery.
and falsehood of the French, for that they, in the last Treaty of Peace at
Callice, Treaty of Peace.
persuading the English to decline there to departed from their own offers; a
good cause of assurance for the English in so good a quarrel to look for
Victory. Victory.


Early in the House.
the second, to repel all Melancholy Passions; Melancholy passions.
the third, to begin at most needful matters, To begin with most needful
matte^s.
And then to direct without mixture of any Orders. No mixture of Orders.
And fourthly, to abandon all Maintaining and partaking. Maintaining and parts
abandoned.


England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyn, Petitions.
and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isls.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Two fifteens granted conditionally.
that the one Moitie of the Fifteen granted in the last Parliament may cease,
and so as if the King go not in Person, If the King go not in person, or if
Peace the moity to cease.
or that Peace be taken, then the last Fifteen may cease.

Cambridge, Cambridge University and Town.
and the Mayor and Bailiffs of the same, for the Kings Grant made to the
Chancellor in the fifth year of this King tit. 59. the King explaineth his said
Grant in two points, Kings Patent explained.
viz. that the said Chancellor, Chancellor of Cambridge.
etc. shall have the delivery of the Bushel, half Bushel, and the Peck, and
the Groat for the Bushel; and every other measure after the rate. Measures.

Fees.


And the said Chancellor shall by his or their proper Officer, Summon, attach
Regrators, Regrators.
and such offenders of Victuals, Victuallers.
to appear, and answer such offenses.

Walter Sibell of London was arrested, Walter Sobbell Arrested.
and brought into the Parliament before the Lords, Brought to Parliament.
at the suit of Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford, To. Vere Earl of Oxford.
for slandring him to the Duke of Lancaster, Peer slandered.
and other Nobles for Maintenance. The same Walter denied not but that he said,
that certain there named recovered against him the said Walter, and that by
Maintenance of the said Earl, Ma^ntenance.
as he thought. The said Earl being present affirmed himself to be innocent
thereof, Earls innocence protested.
and to be tried. Walter thereupon was committed to prison, Imprisonment.
and the next day humbly submitting himself, Submission.
he desired the Lords to be a mean for him, saying, that he could not accuse
him: whereupon the Lords Convicted him to the Damage of 500. marks to the said
Earl; Lords, Judges, Fine 500. marks Damages.
for the which, and for his Fine and Ransom, Imprisonment Fine Ransom.
he was committed to Prison.

Alice the wife of Sir William Windsor Knight, Dame Windsor.
desired to have the Judgment and Order made against her, in the time of King
E. 3. and the Judgment and Statute made against her in the first year of this
King, to be repealed, Judgment in Parliament repealed.
and that she may be restored to all her Lands and Tenements whatsoever.
Restitution.


Res.
The King repealeth those Orders, King^

Saving.


Judgments, and Statutes, so as all Gifts, Grants, and Feoffments of any the
Lands, Tenements, or houses repealed may remain in force.

Montague rehearsed his matter contained in the last Parliament, Prior of
Montague.

Error.


tit. 21. Sir Richard Seymore in proper person appears, upon the Sheriffs
return the old Record and process at large repeated, Sheriffs return.
wherein is a goodly form of pleading, worthy of all good Lawyers to be had by
heart. The Prior is willed to assign his Errors, Appearance.

Errors assigned.


who assigns according to the last Parliament tit. 20.

Error in Parliament.

Aid denied.


the cause in long pleading was this. The King grants to William de Montague,
Earl of Salisbury, etc. by Letters Patents, the Patronage of the said Priorie,
Patronage.
and the Custody and Farm of the same in time of Peace, Peace.
and War: War.
yet after this Grant made to the Earl, Kings Grant.
the same King E. 3. for a certain Rent granted the same Priorie to the said
Prior during the Wars, saving to him Knights Fees, and advousons of Churches,
and after grants the same Rent, or Farm to the Earl. And for that aid of the
King upon this disclosing was denied to the Earl, it was with the other
contained in the title before in error.

Judgment reversed from ever.
and void, and that the Prior should be restored to the said Manor,
Restitution.
with the mean profits, with commandment given to the Chancellor to execute
the said judgment, Chancellor.

Execution.


so always as the said Sir Richard de la Poole by a Writ of Right, Writ of
Right, Scire facias.
or a new scire fac. may prosecute his suit again.

Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
Cap. 1. agrees with the Record in effect but not in form. Churches Liberties.


Cap. 2. agrees with the Record. Justices of Assize^


Justices.
and Barons of the Exchecquer not to take any Man's Fee Cap. 3. agrees in
manner with the Record, Barons.

Fee.

Variance.


but not altogether in form, for that the Record has much more quod nota.

Lands seized.
unless the same be found of Record a Debt. Kings Debt of Record.


It shall be used as in time past. Resp.


Castles unfurnished.
or Fort Resident in the Marches of Scotland, Marches of Scotland.
and do not furnish the same for Defense according to a Statute made in the
sixth year of this King.

The King will charge the Lords, Resp.
to do the same as heretofore they have done.

Prohibitions touching Tyth-Wood, Prohib^tions.




shall be granted according to the Statute made in the 45th. of E. 3. which is
enacted.

Chester.
for their sundry Robberies, Felonies, Fellonies.
and other misdoings done in those Countries, by reason of such misdoers
forfeit no goods in the same Shire, and to pray that they may Forfeit their
Lands, Forfeiture.
and Goods for Fellonies done in other places.

The King means to provide remedy therefore, Resp.
if God so will.

Fry of Fish.
in the River of Thames, Thames.
unless the Mesh^ of the Net be according to the Statute therefore provided.
Nets.


The Statute therefore heretofore made shall be observed. Resp.


Rye, Rye.
and Winchalsey, Winchalsey.
for that upon sudden Invasions of the Enemy, Invasion.
they are often spoiled and burned.

The King will provide therefore. Resp.


Sheriffs.
That none being Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, Under-Shiriffs.
or Escheators shall for three years after execute the same Office again
according to the Statute made. Escheators.


Res.
The Chancellor shall answer by mouth. Chancellor.


The Answer of the Chancellor.
Kings Prejudice.
It were prejudicial to the King, and his Crown after one year to choose eft
soon the same person being an able man; wherefore it shall be at the Kings
pleasure. Kings pleasure.


E. 3. Cap. 7. and in the second Parliament shall be observed. Soldiers.


False Entries.
etc. Cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Clarks.
That such Clarks of either of the Benches, that shall refuse to bring into the
Courts, the Rolls whereby Attornyes may have free search, Rolls.

Attorneys.

Search.


shall be imprisoned for one whole year, Imprisonment.
and Fine with the King. Fine.


Resp.
Who finds himself grieved may complain to the Chancellor, Chancellor.
and shall find remedy.

Clarks.

Exchecker.


who will not allow the Pardons of King E. 3. to the party without great
Charges. Pardons.

Extortion.




Who has cause to complain may so do, and be heard.

Resp.
That a general Pardon of all Felonies, Kings Pardon.
and other Trespasses and Offenses may be granted.

Resp.
The King will thereof be advised.

Common Law.
shall be tried before the Constable, Constable.
or the Marshall. Marshall.


Anno Octavo Richardi Secundi. De Faciendo servitio in Comitiva Regis versus
Scotos. Escuage.

Scotland.


Rex, etc. Charissimo Avunculo suo Joh. Regi Castellae Novum Castr. 14. die
Julii Test Rege apud Westminster. 13. Die Maii.
CHariss. Avunculo suo Ed. Com. Cant. Chariss. Avunculo suo Tho. Com. Buck.
Chariss. fratri suo Tho. Com. Cantii. Rico Com. Arundell. Thom. Com. War.
Hugoni Com. Staff. Edw. de Courtney Com. Devon. Will. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum.
Rob. de Vere Com. Oxoniae. Hen. de Percie Com. Northumb. Tho. de Mowbray. Com.
Notting. Iocobo de Audley de Heleigh. Will. Bardolf. de VVermigay. Ric.
Poynings. Guidoni de Brian. Ioh. de Clinton. Gilberto Talbot. Ioh. le VVare.
Henrico le Scroope Chlr. Hen. de Ferrariis de Groby. Ioh. Roos de Hamelake.
Ioh. Nevill de Raby. Ioh. Gray de Codonore. Hen. Gray de Wilton. Reginaldo Gray
de Ruthin. Tho. de Berkley. Ioh. de Fabsley Chlr. Will. le Zouch de
Harringworth. Hugoni Burnell. Rogero Clifford. Ioh. Buttort. Rogero de Scales.
Rado de Cromwell. Michael de la Poole. Rado Baroni de Greystock. Will. Botreaux
Chlr. Ioh. de Bellomonte. Rob. de Harrigton. Rob. de Willoughby. Thomae Camois
Chlr. Ric. Talbot de Blackmore. Ioh. de Clinton. Ioh. de Cobham de Kent. Will.
de Dacre. Ioh. le Strange de Knokin. Tho. de Nevill de Halmshyre. Ric. Seymore.
Rado Basset de Drayton. Philippo Darcy. Tho. de Morley. Ioh. Burchier. Waltero
Fitz-Walter. Ioh. Lovell de Fishmerch. Ioh. de Monteacut^.
Symoni de Burleigh Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Nono Richardi Secundi. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Regi Castellae, etc. apud Westminster. post Festum Sancti Luci die Veneris,
etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. quinto die Decembris.
CHariss. Avunculo Ed. Duci Eborum. Chariss. Avunculo Tho. Duci Albemarliae.
Chariss fratri Tho. Com. Cantii. Rado Com. Arundell. Thom. Com. War. Hugoni
Com. Staff. Ed. de Courtney Com. Devon. Will. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Rob. de
Vere Com. Oxoniae. Hen. Percie Com. Northumb. Hen. Com. Derby. Tho. de Mowbray.
Com. Notting. Mich. de la Poole. Com. Suffolk. Iocobo de Audley de Heleigh.
Will. Bardolf. de VVermigay. Guidoni de Brian. Ioh. de Clinton. Ioh. le VVare.
Henrico le Scroope. Hen. de Ferrariis de Groby. Ioh. Nevell de Raby. Ioh. Gray
de Codonore. Hen. Gray de Wilton. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Henrico Fitz Hugh.
Ric. de Scroope. Will. la Zouch. de Harringworth. Rogero Clifford. Ioh.
Buttort. Rogero de Scales. Rado de Cromwell. Rado de Lumley. Will. de Thorpe.
Rado Baroni de Greystock. Will. Botreaux. Ioh. de Bellomonte. Rob. de
Harrigton. Rob. de Willoughby. Ioh. de Cliffourd. Ioh. de Cobham de Kent. Will.
de Dacre. Ioh. le Strange de Knokin. Tho. de Nevill de Halmshyre. Will. de
Alderburgh. Ric. Seymore. Rado Basset de Drayton. Philippo Darcy. Tho. de
Morley. Tho. Bourchier. Waltero Fitz-Walter. Ioh. Lovell de Fishmerch. Ioh. de
Monteacuto. Ioh. de Cherlton de Powis. Ric. de Poynings. Tho. Camois Chlr. Ric.
Talbot de Blackmore Chlr. Ioh. Devereux.
Symoni de Burleigh Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The PARLIAMENT holden at WESTMINSTER the Friday next after the Feast of St.
LUKE in the ninth year of the reign of King RICHARD the 2.
Parliament adjourned for that sundry Lo^ds not come, ^or Wr^ts returned.
THe same Friday, for that sundry of the Nobles were not come, nor the Sheriffs
returned their Writs, the Parliament by the Kings commandment was adjourned
until the next day, and the same next day it was adjourned until the Monday
then ensuing.

On the which Monday Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolk, and Chancellor of
England, Chancellor.
in the presence of the King, King.
Lords, and Causes of Parliament.
how the State of the Realm being assaulted on every side, with most mortal
enemies might be defended, Realms Defense against Enemies foreign and
Domestic.
and preserved; the Defense he showed to consist in four points, whereof two
concerned outward, or foreign affairs, and two inward, or affairs within the
Realm.

Staple.
the other concerning Money or Coin. Mo^y, Coyns.
The first of foreign affairs was, what was to be attempted for defense?
Defense.
The second how the same War might be nourished, and maintained?

Stapl^.
he thought best, that the same were planted within the Realm, considering that
the Burgesses of Callice, Call^c^.
and other towns beyond the Seas grew very rich thereby, and good towns at home
within the Realm were much decayed. Towns d^cay.
And so much for the Common profit. Touching the King, he affirmed that the
Subsidy of Wools yielded more to the King, when the Staple was kept in England
by 1000. marks yearly, than it did now being holden beyond the Seas. Staple
beyond Sea prejudicial to the Kings Custom.
Touching the Coin he shows, Coin transported.
that weighing how all Nations much thirsted thereafter, and therefore conveyed
much over, wherefore the best was to raise them by raising the value. Value
raised.


Wars offensive.
and he persuaded by many reasons, that it was better to seek than to be
sought, and that a Subsidy was out of necessity to be granted; Subsidy
demanded.

Necessity.


which was as manifest as being offered to the King would be plausible: about
all which he willed them to consult. Parl^ament to consult about it.


England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoygn, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isls.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Fifteen and a half granted on co^dit^on.
and half a Fifteen, toward the voyage of John King Castle and Portugal,
John King of Castle Duke of Lancaster.
Duke of Lancaster, and for the safe keeping of the Sea, Seas guarding.
and Defense of the Marches. Marches defense.
The voyage of the same King and Duke was appointed into Spain, and agreed by
Parliament upon certain considerations, The last being so, as no part of the
said Subsidy was otherwise to be disbursed by them.

Subsidy of Wools Woolfells, and Skins granted with in erruption to hinder
prescription as a duty.
Wools, and Skins granted unto the King, until the time of Midsummer then
ensuing, should cease from the same time unto the Feast of St. Peter ad
vincula, for that thereby the King should be interrupted for clayming such
grant as due. And from the said Feast of St. Peter, they granted the same
Subsidy to the King for one whole year to endure.

Staple.
shall be holden in England, in such place as to the King, King and Council.
and his Council shall be thought most meet.

Lancaster complains by mouth to the King, Complaint by mouth.
Bishops, and Lords in full Parliament, that whereas after the death of Thomas
Layhane, who held the Manor of Latham in the County of Lancaster, of the said
Duke in Thonage, Tenu^e by Thonage.
whereby the Manor was seized into the hands of the said Duke of Lancaster,
according to his County Pallatine of Lancaster; County Palatine o^ Lancaster.
yet notwithstanding John Stanley Knight, in the right of Isabella his wife,
Daughter and heir to the said John, had entered, and taken the profits of the
said Manor without any Livery, Entry without Livery o^ Su^re.
or other suit made in the Chancery of the said Duke, Chancery of the Duchy.
for which he prays remedy. After which upon full advise of the Justices of
both Benches, Justices advised with.
and others of the Kings learned Council; Kings learned Council.
it was declared in the said Parliament, that the entry of the said John into
the Manor as aforesaid was unlawful, Entry unlawful.
and that the said John ought to make suit by Petition or otherwise in the
Chancery of the said Duke, Petition in the Chancery of Lancaster.
for the Livery of the said Manor in such case to be sued for.

Hounslow lodge in Tividale, Created Edmund Earl of Cambridge, Edmund Earl of
Cambridge made Duke of York.
Duke of York, and to have to him, and to the heirs of his body lawfully
begotten, together with 1000. l. out of the Exchecquer until the King had
provided for him in Tail, Tail.

Annuity out of the Exchecquer.


as is aforesaid, Land to the value of 1000. l. The King by whole assent of
Parliament confirms the same, Confirmation in Parliament.
by girding a Sword unto him, Girding a Sword.
and by putting on his head a Cap, Cap, and circle of Gold.
and circle of Gold.

Thomas late Earl of Buckingham, Th. Earl of Buck. created Duke of Gloucester.
and Essex, and Constable of England, being then and there created Duke of
Gloucester, of the like estate of Revenue, and Ceremonies as is next before.

Michael de la Poole Knight Chancellor of England, Parliament confirms it.

Michael de la Poole created Earl of Suffolk^.

Tail.




being at the place aforesaid created Earl of Suffolk, to have to him, and the
heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten, with xx. l. of the profits of the
County aforesaid, together with 500. l. yearly of the Hereditaments of William
Ufford late Earl of Suffolk, viz. the Castle, Town, Manor, and honor of Eyes
with the Members of Suff. the hundred of Hertsmere, and Stowe in Suff. the
Farm of 23. l. 6. s. 8. d. out of the Manor of Combs in Suff. the Manor of
Gesengthorpe in Essex, the Manor of Canton in Norff. the Manor of Hangley in
Suff. the Manor of Trendon in Suff. the Manor of Lowstock, in the hundred
of Luddington in Suff. 10. l. yearly, which he should pay to the King for his
Manor of Costesly in Norff. the which confirmation was by girding of a sword.
Confirmation.

Girding a Sword.




The like confirmation was made to Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford, Robert de
Vere Earl of Oxford, created Marquess of Dublin.
whom the King lately before created Marquess of Dublin during his Life, Robert
de Vere Earl of Oxford: created^ Marquess of Dublin.
the old Lands and Dominions of Ireland, Lands and Revenews of Ireland.
with all proffits, revenews, regalities, Regalities.
and jurisdictions whatsoever within the same, as ample as the King ought to
have the same, and that he should enjoy to him and to his heirs all Conquered
Lands by him, Conque^ed Lands.
they except the Kings only demesne in deed, or in right: the which
Confirmation was made by the Girding of a Sword, Confirmation.

Girding a Sword.


and putting on a Circle of Gold upon his head. Circle of Gold.


Petitions of the Commons with their Answers.
Statutes observed
Cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Essex and Hertford, require that the Sheriffs of the same may upon their Oaths
be charged, Sheriffs Accounts.
or discharged of their Accounts. Oaths discharged.


The King will provide remedy therefore. Res.


Devonshire pray that the Sheriffs of the same may make their Accounts as they
did before the time of King E. the first. Devonshire.

Sheriffs Accounts.




The King by advise of the Council, Res.

Council.


will provide remedy therefore.

Norfolk, and Suffolk, pray that the Sheriffs of the same may be yearly
discharged of 153 l. 13 s. 4 d. which they cannot receive by certain
particulars there apparent. Sheriffs discharged.


The King by advice of his Council will provide therefore. Res.

K. Council.




Nottingham and Darby, make the like request for their Sheriffs, Sheriffs
Accounts.
being yearly charged with 44 l. 2 s. 4 d. Res.




Contribution.

Knights of the Shire.

Res.




It shall be as it has been used.

That all men upon an inquest of an office found by the Sheriff, Sheriffs
Inquest.
and meaning to traverse the same, may upon surety found in the Chancery,
Chancery.

Travers.


take the same in Lease of the King, Lease.

Surety.

Res.


and no other, until the right be found.

The Statutes so made shall be kept.

Kings debtors.
for the King may have the same in lease, Heirs. Lease.

Extent.


doing therefore as others would therein.

Res.
has been used, it shall be.

Villainies.
Cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

At the request of the Commons it is enacted, to endure until the next
Parliament, that every Ship taken up for the Kings service, Ships pressed.

Navey.

Scotland.


shall toward their apparrelling, Apparrelling.
take for every quarter 2 s. of every Tun-lighter.

Commons House exempted from Collectors.
It is enacted that none of the Commons House shall be appointed Collector, or
Assessor of any the Subsedies now granted.

London, Constable of the Tower of London.

Passage: Purveyance: Exactions.


whereby the Collector of his Office, takes Customs of Wines, Oysters,
Mussels, Rushes, and other Victuals coming to London by water, may be revoked.

Major and Commons of London.
The Petition of the Major, and Commonaltie of London is endorsed.

Purveyors.
and Buyers shall be executed, and that the Justices of the Peace, Justices of
Peace.
shall have power to hear and determine the same.

Kings Household.
once, or oftener by the Chancellor, Chancellor.
Treasurer and Keeper of the Privy Seal: Treasurer.

Privy Seal.


and that the Statutes therefore appointed may be observed.

Res.
The King grants to the first at his pleasure, and to the second he grants.

Trent, Marches.




do keep thereupon, saving that the King may show favor where the same shall
like him. Kings favor.


St. John. of Ierusalems. Responcies Money.
That such money as remains in the Prior of St John's of Ierusalems hands,
called Responcies, may be converted to the Kings proffit. Res.


Rhodes. Turks.
The King wills that the same be sent by the Covent to Rhodes, to be employed
against the Miscreants.

Captains residence.
That all Captains as well of the Marches as of Callice, Breast, Chirburgh, and
elsewhere, may continue them in their Hands, and not let the same to Farm.
Farm.
It is enacted.

Inquisitions.

Res.


as under the License to purchase 10 l. yearly, do purchase 24 or C l.

The King will be advised.

Res.
That sufficient Surety of the Sea be provided, Sea guarded.
and the Admiralls names known. Admiralls nominated.


The King by advise of his Council shall provide therefore. Kings Council.


Res.
They require to know who shall be the Kings chief Officers, Kings chief
Officers.
and Governors of the State.

Kings Prerogative ad Pleasure.
and will change at his pleasure.

That such Patents as are granted unto any Lay-persons, Patents.




or secular Priest of any religious dignity, Secular Priests.
may be revoked, Revocation.
and granted to like of profession, Res.


The Statutes therefore made shall be observed.

Commons petition. Escuage pardoned.
The King at the petition of the Commons pardons the payment of Escuage for
his voyage into Scotland. Scotland.


Treasurers of War. Subsidy duly employed.
shall defray no part of the Subsidy now granted, otherwise than to the use of
the War. War.


It is enacted, that all the revenews, Kings Revenews laid up.




as well in the Exchecquer, as elsewhere, shall be laid up for one whole year,
without any diminution thereof by any gift.

It is enacted, that the Bishops of Winchester and Exeter, and two Bannerets
shall have power to search, Bannerets.




and to take order as well in the Cxxl. Respontions, Scismaticks, and other the
Kings debts, Kings Debts.
together with the Lords of the Council. Kings Council.


Kings Clearks.
or Livings by the King, will grant to the King the first fruits of their
Livings, First fruits to the King.
none otherwise than they would have done to the Pope, being advanced by him.

It likes the King, so the Clergy will thereto accord. Res.


Kings Servants.
and serve him in Fee place, Fee.
may be appointed to serve the King on the Marches of Scotland, Marches of
Scotland:
except old, and impotent.

It likes the King for such as have to live on their money besides the Kings
grant. Res.


Note that of the Statutes of the 3.4, and 5. Chapters contained in the printed
Book, is no mention made in this Record. Statutes not in the Record.


Anno Decimo Richardi Secundi. Rex etc. Avunculo suo Edw. Duci Ebor, etc. Apud
Westminster. primo die Octobris; Test Rege apud Osney viii die Augusti.
Chariss. avunculo. Tho. Duci Gloucester. Chariss. fratri Tho. Com. Cantii.
Rico. Com. Arundell. Tho, Com. Ware. Edw. de Courtney Com. Devon. Will. de
Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Rob. de Vere Marchioni Dublin. Henr. Percie Com.
Northumb. Michaeli de la Poole Com. Suff. Hen. Com. Derby. Tho de Mowbray Com
Notting. Nico. de Audley de Heleigh. Iohi. de Fallesly. Chlr. Tho. Camois Chlr.
Guidoni de Bryan. Iohi. de Clinton. Gilberto de Talbot. Iohi. de Ware. Hen. de
Scroope Chlr. Hen. de Ferrariis de Groby. Iohi de Roos de Hamelake. Willo..
Nevill de Raby. Iohi. Gray de Codonore. Hen. Gray de Wilton. Reginaldo Gray de
Ruthin. Hen. Fitzhugh. Rico. de Scroope. Rico. Talbot de Blackmore. Iohi de
Enerenx. Hugoni Burnell. Willo. la Zouch de Harringworth. Rogero Clifford.
Rado. de Cromwell. Rado. Lumley. Willo. Thorpe. Rado Baroni de Greystock.
Willo. Botteraux Chlr. Iohi. de Bello monte. Robto de Willoughby. Iohi de
Clifton. Iohi. de Cobham de Kent. Willo de Dacre. Ioh. de Strange de Knokin.
Tho. de Nevill de Halmstryer. Willo. de Aldburgh. Rico. Seymore. Rado Basset de
Drayton. Phillippo Darcey. Thomae de Morley. Iohi. de Bourchier. Iohi Lovell de
Fishmerch. Iohi de Monteacuto. Iohi. de Cherlton de Powis. Tho. de Berkley.
Simoni de Burleigh Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The Parliament holden at WESTMINSTER, the first o^ October, in the 10 th. year
of the Reign of K. Richard 2.
Chancellor.
ON this day Sir Michaell de la Poole Earl of Suffolk, Chancellor of England, by
the Kings commandment in the presence of the King, King.
Lords, and Commons declared, that the principal cause of the Parliament was,
Causes of Parliament.
for that upon a Council late gathered at Oxford, Kings intent to pass the
Seas.

Oxford.


the King meant in person with an Army royal, to pass into the parts beyond
the Seas, the which his purpose of the same continued, it was then to be
debated in what wise, and wherewith the King should pass. Kings passage.


Offensive War best, cheapest.
He shows that four causes moves the King to pass: The first, for that he
might with less charges assail his enemies, than against them to make the
defense. The second, to avoid the reproach blazed of him, To avoid reproach of
Cowardice.
that he durst not pass in person. The third, to purchase his right to the
Crown of France. To gain his right to the French Crown.
The fourth, thereby to win Renown and Honor; To gain Honor.
And since the French did daily make themselves strong to invade the Realm,
Frances invasion of England.
he wished them to consult thereon, Advise thereon.
and for the maintenance of the Laws, Laws maintenance.
and preservation of the Peace. Peace preserved.


England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyn, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isls.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Sir Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolk and Chancellor of England, Chancellor
impeached by the Commons.
was accused by the Commons in full Parliament before the King, Bishops, and
Lords, and had objected against him six several Articles, Articles against him.
The first, and chief of the same, that he purchased Lands to a great value of
the King, Purchasing the Kings Lands whiles Chancellor.
during the time that he was Chancellor, in deceit of the King. Deceit of the
King.
The other five seemed of some importance, but were only quarrels, and little
matter.

England, Chancellors.

Demu^rer.


and therefore for the time represented the Kings person in his absence,
Represents the Kings person.
whether he should answer without the Kings presence, for things done while he
was Chancellor. Secondly, he said that by advice of his Counsel, Counsel.
he had appointed Sir Richard le Scroope his Brother in Law, to answer for him.
Answer by Proxy at Council not admitted.
The Lords answered, it was honest, and fit for him to answer for himself,
Personal answer.
Whereupon the Earl making Protestation, His Protestation and Answer.
that he might add, or diminish to his answer, that which might be for him
honorable by the advice of his Counsel, Counsels advice.
they granted thereunto. And to the first, and chief Article, the said Earl
answered, that while he was Chancellor, he neither purchased Lands of the King,
nor the King gave any to him, He purchased no Lands.
unless he was advanced to be Earl, Lands given him with his Earldoms.
but only by way of exchange, Exchange.
viz. That the said Earl had Lands of the King to the value of CCCC. marks for
the like value of Inheritance, which the said Earl had out of the Custom of
Kingston upon Hull; Customs of Hull.
whereof some part was assigned to him before he was Chancellor, His Counsels
answer.
and some touched his descent. But Sir Richard le Scroope therein showed, how
the said Earl by his valiant doings in sundry battails, and his worthy
behavior, and Counsel in sundry Offices at home had justly deserved what he
had. His just demerit of what he had.


The Commons reply.
showed forth his Oath whereto he was sworn being made Chancellor, His Oath of
Chancellor.
the effect whereof was, for doing Justice, observing the Laws, Counselling the
King, keeping his secrets, not to suffer any damage, or disherizon to the King
or to his Crown, and that by all means he should promote the Kings profit. And
hereupon because he confessed the gift of the Lands to him, whilst he was
Chancellor, and that during the same time the Exchange was made to the King of
good Lands for a casual Custom, Exchange of good Lands for a casual Custom.
they inferred, that the same was not for the Kings profit according to his
Oath, and therefore pray judgment. Judgment prayed.
In semblable manner they reply to the answer of the other five Articles, by
urging things to the uttermost, and so of every of them prayed judgment. And
note that where the King gave to the Earls eldest son the Priorie of St.
Anthonies, Priorie of St. Anthonies.
for that the Prior of that same was French, Prior Alien.
who were against the Pope, and therefore Schismatics; Schismatics.
another after by the Popes Provision, Provisions.
was commended to the said Priorie, being worth 400. marks yearly, Annuity.
whom the Earl would not suffer to be admitted to the said Priorie, as the
Commons surmised, until he had granted unto the Earl C. l. yearly, and to his
Son during their lives.

Commons replication.
Upon which the Commons by their replications to the said Article show, how Sir
William Thorpe, Sir William Thorpe Chief Justice.
late Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, was adjudged to death, His Judgment of
death.
and to forfeit his Lands and Goods, Forfeitures.

Bribes.


for receiving 20. l. of one for a matter depending before him, in which
predicament by urging, they would have the said Earl, for the act next before.

Chancellors rejoinder in.
and sufficiently proves that to the Oath was another intendment, Oath.
nothing so straightly as they would enforce, and thereby further approves
that notwithstanding his Oath, he might as he did both lawfully take, and buy.

Difference between Thorpes Case and his.




To the ninth title before he proves great difference between Thorpes Case, and
his; For that Thorpe for matters depending before him took rewards, and sold
Justice, but in the case of the Prior, he came to the said Earl not as a Judge,
but as the Father of his Son, who had the said Priorie, with whom Composition
was made as for a thing in debate.

After which Answer, and replication made by the said Earl. The said Earl at
the request of the Commons, for the grievous offenses against him surmised was
arrested by the Kings commandment, Chancellor arrested at the Commons request.
and committed to the keeping of the Constable of England, Committed to the
Constable of England.

Parliament Privilege.

Bayled.


and after let to Mainprize.

Judgment against him.
that for breach of his Oath contained in the first Article, Oath b^ok^n Lands
given him restored to the King.
all the said Manor and Hereditaments, which he had of the Kings gift
contained in the said first Article, should be seized into the Kings hand, to
have to him and to his heirs for ever, together with all the mean Profits, Mean
profits restored.
and Issues of the same, saving to the said Earl, H. Earldom^ saved and 20. l.
out of the County of Suffolk.
the name and title of an Earl, together with xx. l. yearly granted out of the
Profits of the County of Suff.

Judgment against him for the Lands Exchanged.
for the 400. Marks of Land exchanged with the King for so much Revenues out of
the Custom of Hull. Lands Exchanged.


Flexfleete exchanged by the King for 50. l. yearly going out of the Custom of
Hull.

Anthony. Priory of St. Anthony.


Dover, Dover Charter.
under the great Seal, Great Seal.

Repeal.


though it passed by warrantise, should be revoked, and utterly cease.

Half Desm and Qu^ndesm granted.
and one half fifteen, and for Defense of the Realm of every Tun of Wine coming
in, Tunnage and Poundage.
or going out of the Realm iii s. and xii. d. of every pound of Merchandise,
except the Staple ware, and the Subsidy of Wools and Staple wares: Subsidy of
Wools and Staple commodities.
They also grant for one year another half of one fifteen upon certain
conditions, Upon condition.
viz. that if certain Bishops, Lords, and others there named, and appointed to
be Commissioners for the redress of enormities, Commissioners to redress
Enormities.
do cause the King by their Inventions to be supplied by their Profits, that
then their latter grant to stay, upon condition those persons there named to be
of the continual Council should not be removed, Kings Council not to be
removed.
and have their said Commissions repealed; and that the same their grant, Grant
and conditions.
and conditions be exemplified under the great Seal, Exemplified freely.

Great Seal.


of every Shire freely.

Petitions of the Commons with their Answers.
IT is enacted that the great Charter, Great Charter.
the Charter of the Forest, Forest.
and all other Statutes be observed without any Patent to the contrary, Patent.
saving to the King his Prerogative. Kings Prerogative saved.


Chief Officers.
the Chancellor, Chancellor.
Treasurer, Treasurer.
Keeper of the Privy Seal, Privy Seal.
and Steward of his Household, Steward.
and that certain may be appointed to be of his great Couucell for one year.
Great Council appointed for a year.


The King grants, and touching his Steward of his household, Resp.

Steward of his Household.


he will appoint with the advice of his Counsel. Kings Council.


And note that more than this last Act is no mention made of the first Act in
print of this year.

Cardinal.
nor other Alien do enjoy within this Realm any Prebend or other Benefice.
Alien.

Prebend.

Benefice.




The Statutes therefore made shall be observed.

It is enacted that the Statute touching Priors, Resp.

Priors Aliens.


and possessions of Aliens shall continue without repeal.

Yarmouth shall be confirmed, Great Yarmouths Liberties confirmed.
notwithstanding any repeal; provided always that all manner of persons as
well Aliens, as Demizenes, may lawfully buy and sell Herrings, Free Trade.

Herrings.


and them carry away within the same Town, and Port, at their pleasures, during
the Fair there.

Justices of the B.
and the other should take no reward, No reward.
nor be of any man's Fee, may be observed.

The King has, Resp.
and will charge such Justices, Justices charged to do right.
to Minister right, and will punish the contrary, and therefore wills that
all Statutes made touching them, and the Barons of the Exchecquer be made void.
Barons of Exchecquer.


Inquisition.
That Inquisition may be made in every County of Liberties granted to any
person, Liberties granted.
and of the value, so as upon return of the same every Sheriff may be
discharged of the same values. Sheriffs allowance.


Resp.
The King will provide remedy by the advice of his Council. Kings Council.


That no Protection to delay any man be granted. Protection.

Delay.




Scotland or elsewhere by safe conduct or otherwise. Victuals.

Scotland.

Safe conduct.




Resp.

License.




That there may be no more Sergeants at Arms, Sergeants a^ Arms Mi^demeanour.
than have been heretofore, and that for doing otherwise than they should, they
may be expelled. Expulsion.

Resp.






That no prorogation be granted from henceforth in Assize of Novell Dissesin,
Pro^ogation.

Assize Nov.


or other Plea of Land in delay of the party. Delay.

Resp.






That every owner of a Ship serving the King, Ships serving the King. Wages.
may have for every Quarters service of the same Ship iii s iiii d. of every
tun weight.

Res.

Kings Council.




That all Bishops, and Lords having their Resiants within the Counties of York,
North Quarters.




Gumberland, and Westmorland, may abide there upon a great pain.

The King will request, and charge them so to do.

Resp.
That all Grants of Comptrollers of Ports for life may be revoked, Comptrollers
of Ports.




and not the like hereafter granted.

They upon their Examinations shall continue hereafter, and for their
continuances, the King will provide therefore.

Resp.
That all Charters, Charters repealed.
and Patents made in the time of the last Chancellor, Chancellor.
may be repealed by this Parliament.

The King grants thereto by the advice of his Council. Resp.

Kings Council.




Canterbury, Archbisho^s Protestation.
being appointed among other Lords by Commission to view the State of the
Realm, Commission.
and being moved to answer for the execution of the same, as all other Lords
were, makes a long Protestation, entered by word, the effect whereof was; That
for as much as he and his Predecessors time out of mind, had the Prerogative
that they should, Archbishops Prerogative.
and ought to be in all the Councels and Parliaments of the Prince and of the
Realm, and ought not to be sworn to any inferior unto the Pope, Not to be sworn
to any inferior to the Pope.
and thereby ought not to be sworn, yet of his mere good will, saving the same
his Prerogative, His Oath saving his Prerogative.
he takes upon him the Oath.

The Kings own Protestation.
The King in full Parliament by his own mouth makes open Protestation, that for
any thing which was done in the same Parliament, he would not turn it to the
Prejudice of him or of his Crown, Prejudice of the King and Crown.
but that the Prerogative of him and his Crown might be saved. Prerogative
saved.


Parliament ended.
It is to be remembered that this Parliament made an end on Wednesday the 20th.
of November.

Anno Vndecimo Richardi Secundi. Rex, etc. Ed. Duci Eborum, etc. apud Westminster.
Cro. Purificationis Mariae; Test Rege apud Windsor xvii. Die Decembris.
CHariss. Avunculo Tho. Duci Gloucestriae. Chariss. Consanguineo Regis Rob.
Duci Hiber. Chariss. Fratri Regis Thom. Com. Cantii. Dilecto and Confanguineo
Ric. Com. Arundell. Tho. de Bellocampo Com. War. Ed. de Courtney Com. Devon.
Will. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Hen. de Percie Com. Northum. Hen. Com. Derby.
Tho. de Mowbray Com. Norff. and Marescal Angliae. Iacobo de Audley de Heleigh.
Ioh. de Fallesley Chlr. Tho. Camois. Guide. de Bryan. Ioh. de Clinton. Ric.
Talbot de Godricastle. Ioh. de War. Ric. le Scroope Chlr. Hen. de Ferrariis de
Groby. Ioh. Roos de Hamelake. Ioh. de Nevell de Robie. Ioh. Gray de Codonore.
Hen. Gray de Wilton. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Hen. Fitzhugh. Ric. le Scroope.
Ric. Talbot de Blackmore Chlr. Writs of Summons.
Ioh Deureeux. Hugo Burnell. Will. la Zouch de Harringworth. Rogero Clifford.
Rado Cromwell. Rado de Lumbley. Will. de Thorpe. Rado Baroni de Greystock.
Will. Botreaux Chlr. Ioh. de Bellomonte. Rob. de Harrington. Rob. de
Willoughby. Ioh. de Clinton. Ioh. de Cobham de Kent. Ioh. Beauchampe de
Ridermi^^. Will. Dacr^. Ioh. le Strange de Knokin. Tho de Nevill de Halmshyre.
Will. de Aldburg. Rico Seymore. Rado Basset de Drayton. Phillippo Darcey.
Thomae de Morley. Ioh. de Bourchier. Ioh. Lovell de Fishmerch. Ioh. de
Monteacuto. Ioh. de Cherlton de Powis. Tho. de Berkley. Ioh. de Wells. Philippo
le de Spencer.
Simoni de Burley, Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Vndecimo Richardi Secundi. De essendo ad Parliamentum.
Writs of Summons.
REx, etc. Avunculo suo Tho. Duci. Gloucestriae. Chariss. fratri Rs. Tho. Com.
Cantii. Rico Com. Arundell. Thom. Com. War. Edw. de Courtney Com. Devon. Will.
de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Hen. de Percie Com. Northumb. Hen. Com. Derby. Tho.
de Mowbray. Com. Norff. Marresc. Angliae. Nico. de Audley de Heleigh. Ioh. de
Fallesley Chlr. Tho. Camois Chlr. Guidoni de Brian. Ioh. de Clinton. Rico.
Talbot de Greystock. Ioh. de Roos de Hamelake. Ioh. de Nevill de Rabie. Hen.
Gray de Wilton. Hen. Fitzhugh. Ric. le Scroope. Ioh. Devereux. Hugo Burnell.
Will. la Zouch de Harringworth. Rogero Clifford. Rado Cromwell. Rado Lumley.
Will. Thorpe. Rado Baroni de Graystock. Ioh. de Bellomonte. Rob. de Harrington.
Rob. de Willoughby. Ioh. de Cobham de Kent. Ioh. de le Strange de Knokin. Tho.
de Nevill de Halmshyre. Ric. Seymore. Rado Basset de Drayton. Philippo Dacry.
Tho. Morley. Ioh. Bourchier. Ioh Lovell de Fishmerch. Ioh. Cherlton de Powis.
Tho. de Berkley Chlr.
The Parliament holden at WESTMINSTER the Monday after the Purification of our
Lady, in the eleventh year of the reign of King RICHARD the second.
Thomas Bishop of Ely Chancellor of England by the Kings commandment declared
very wisely, Chancellor.
and eloquently. the cause of the Parliament; Causes of Parliament.
viz. by what means the great troubles grew within the Realm, Troubles.
for want of good Government, Want of good government.
might be appeased, the King better counseled, King better counseled.
the Realm better governed, Good government.
Peace better observed, Peace observed.
the laws more straightly maintained, Laws maintained.
Justice more indifferently ministered, Just^ce administered.
Misdemeanors more severely punished, Misdemeanors pun^shed.
and Well-doers the better cherished; How also the Realm might be best
defended, Realms defense.
how the Sea kept, Seas guarded.
the Marches of Scotland well guarded, Marches of Scotland.
and the parts of Guienne valiantly acquitted, Guienne.
whereof some part was then besiedged, and how the charges about these exploits
might most easily be levied. Charges levied.


Receivers of the Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Receivers of Petitions for Gascoin, and other places beyond the Seas, and of
the Isles.

England etc. as above.

Triars of Petitions for Gascoin etc. as above. Petitions.


Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Duke of Gloucest. Slander. King deposed. U^urpation.
kneeling before the King, said, that he understood how that the King was
informed, Submission to trial of the Lords.
whereupon the King said openly in the Parliament, The King purges him.
that he thought that the said Duke was nothing faulty, and therefore held him
excused.

Lords claim their Liberties.
and Franchises; viz. that all weighty matters in the same Parliament which
should be after moved, Matters of Parliament.
touching the Peers of the Land, Peers.
ought to be determined and judged, and discussed by the course of the
Parliament, Course of Parliament. The Law thereof.
and not by the Civil Law, Laws Civil.
nor yet by the Common Laws of the Land used in other more Courts of the Realm;
Laws Common.

Not the Law and rule of Parliament.


the which claim and liberties the King most willingly allowed, and granted
thereto in full Parliament.

Lords Appellants.
viz. Tho. Duke of Gloucester, Henry Earl of Darby, Rich. Earl of Arundell,
Tho. Earl of Worcester, and Thomas Earl Marshall, made their open
protestations, Protestations.
that whatsoever they attempted, touching their Appeal, Appeal.
and Suit in this Parliament or before, they, and their partakers did the same,
chiefly to the honor of God, Gods Honor.

Kings aid and safety.


the aid and safety of the King, Self preservation.
the Realm, and their own Lives.

Canterbury made openly solemn protestation for himself Arch-Bishop^ and
Cl^^g^es protestation.
and the whole Clergy of his Province entered by word. Entered.
The effect whereof was; that albeit, he might lawfully be present at all their
Parliaments, yet for that in this Parliament matters of Treason were to be
entreated off, Treason.
whereat by the Canonical Law, Canon^c. Law.
they might not be present: they therefore absented themselves, Bishop^ absent
themselves in Cases o^ blood
saving their liberties therein otherwise.

Durham and Carlisle make.

Half D^sme and Fifteenth g^anted Conditionally.
On Tus^day the 10 th. of March, being the 26 th. day of this Parliament, the
Lords and Commons granted to the King one Half Desme, and half Fifteenth for
the defense of the Sea, Seas defense.

No president.


so as the same be thereon only employed: and so as the same be not made, or
taken for an example, being given before the end of the Parliament: whereby any
Subsidy should be hereafter demanded before the end of the Parliament.
Subsid^e^ no^ usually granted till the end of Parliaments.


th. of March, and the 36 th. day of the Parliament, the Lords and Commons
granted to the King in defense of the Realm, Realms and Merchand^ze defense.
and safety of Merchandise, 3 s. of every Tun of Wine, Tunnage and Poundage
granted: Subsidy of Staple Ware.
and 12 d. of every pound of Merchandise, except of Staple Ware: and also they
granted to the King, the Subsidy of Staple Ware.

All Lords and Commons sworn in Parliament to ke^p Peace.
Bishops, and Commons, were openly sworn in Parliament, upon the Cross of
Canterbury, that they should see the Peace kept, that they should live and die
in the quarrel, Live and Dye in the Lords Appellant^ quarrel.
and defense of the bodies of the 5. Lords named, Tit. 8. if any thing were
against them attempted, saving their allegiance to the King, Allegiance to the
King.
and their due obedience to his Prerogative and Laws. Kings Prerogative. Laws.


The same Friday, for that Easter approached, Parliament adjourned.




the Parliament by Common assent of the whole estates was continued from the
said Friday until Monday next after the Quindene of Easter then ensuing, and
thereupon Writs were made to all the Lords summoned to the Parliament, Writs of
Summon^.
to be then there.

Pa^liament revived.


June, being the 30 th. of that Parliament, the Lords and Commons granted to
the King in defense of the Realm, one Subsidy of Wool, Subsidy granted on
Woolls, Wool-fells, Skins.
Skins, and Wooll-fells carried forth of the Realm, Realms defense.
viz. of every sack of Wool over and above the old custom of 6 s. 8 d. and 44
s. 4 d. of Denizens, and of Strangers, Aliens.
46 s. 8 d. of every Last of skins over the custom of one Mark, 4 l. 6 s. 8 d.
of Denizens 4 l. 13 s. 4 d. of Strangers of every CC Wooll-fells, Lords charges
levied.
over the old custom of 6 s. 8 d. of Aliens for one whole year, upon condition
that the said Lords named in Tit. 8. may receive the etc. in manner of this
grant, and Subsidy until they have levied the 20000 l. toward their charges,
laid out for the honor and safety of the King, and of the Realm.

Tit 1. Tunnage and Poundage.

Kings grant.




Anne, Lady Anne Barns.
the late Wife of Sir James Barnes Knight. the Manor of West-Horkey, with the
appurtenances in Surrey, being by the forfeiture of the said Sir James,
Forfeiture.
until she were married, or otherwise advanced freely.

William Fulthorpe Knight. his Father, and being in the Kings hands to have the
same Annuity, Annuitie.
during the life of the said Sir Roger.

Kings grant of Lands confirmed.
granted to Dame Katherine daughter of the Earl of Staff. deceased, and to
Michaell de la Poole, the Son of her Husband, certain Mannours in the Counties
of Lincoln, and Not. the which Sir Michael de la Poole his Father, late Earl
of Suffolk, long before any forfeiture had given the said Dame Katherine, and
to her said Husband, and to the Heirs of their two bodies lawfully begotten;
the which grant the King made at the request of the Earl of Warw. and other
Lords, Lords request.
Cosins, and Allies of the said Dame Katherine.

Lords request.
Appellants; Tit. 8. granted to aid Ieffrey Martin Cleark of the Crown, Clerk
of the Crown.
and at the request of the Commons granted to aid John de Scardeburgh. C^mmons
request.


Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Michaelmas then ensuing. Parliament.


The King will be advised. Res.


That no person do intermeddle about the Kings person, Kings Attendants.




or affairs of the Realm, other than those that be appointed by those of the
Parliament, Parliament.
or other than such as be assigned by the Lords of the continual Council.
Kings Council.


That those Lords may remove all persons in the Kings Household, Servants
removed.
and place others as they think, that those Lords be sworn, Lords Oath.
as in the oath there is contained.

To the first the King grants: Res.
to the second upon proof of any ones unworthiness about his person, Proof.
and declaration to him made, he shall be removed, and others placed.

Oath.
that he should by no means suffer any Judgment, Ordinance, or Statute made in
this Parliament to be repealed at any time to come, Repeal.
that he should see the Laws observed, Laws observed.
and the Peace kept. Peace.


That no hereditaments, Lands Escheated^ not to be granted^ Wars
or other profits then escheated to the King be granted to any during the Wars,
and that no Person do attempt to crave any of the same, but that the same be
employed to the Kings best profit. Kings profit.


Res.
The King grants, except Offices and Bayliwicks, Offices.

Bayliwick^.


and such gifts as he has made in the Parliament, so as all men that do
pretend any title of any thing forfeited, do therefore sue to the Council
Council.


l. to the Kings Household, Queens Contribution to the Household expenses. Dower.
as the late Queen that dyed did, or otherwise according to the rate of the
Dower.

Res.
The King wills the same according to the advice of himself, and of his
Council. Council.


Volumus and Imponimus, Popes Impositions.

Bulls.

Novelties.


of the translations of the Bishops, and such like, may be employed upon the
Kings War against the Scismaticks of Scotland: Kings Wars.

Scismaticks.

Scotland.

Treason.


and that such as bring into the Realm the like Bulls or Novelties, may be
reputed for Traitors.

The King grants, that no such Impositions be to the charge of the people,
Res.
and will write to the Pope, to stay such Novelties.

York, Clergies half Desme.

Praemunire.


may be speedily levied, and that none do save the denyers of the same, upon
pain to be out of the Kings protection.

Res.
The one half Desme is granted, and for the other, the King has written, for
whom the King will ordain punishment, if they refuse to pay.

Bohemians, Bohemians. Aliens.

banished.


and others then such as be by the Council appointed to serve the Queen, Queen.

Praemunire.


may depart the Realm by Midsummer ensuing, on pain to be out of the Kings
protection.

Res.
The King wills that they be warned by the Chancellor, Notice.

Chancellor.


Steward, Steward.
or Chamberlain, Chamberlain.
by that time to avoid the Realm.

The print touching Merchants selling; Merchants.
Cap. 7. agrees in effect with the Record, but not in form.

Annuities.
Cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

Impositions.
Cap. 9. agrees with the Record.

Sheriffs Accounts.
and that all Gaoles let out by Patent may be rejoyned by the Sheriffs. Gaoles.

Res.




Kings Council.
For regard of the Sheriffs, the King grants to his Council power to pardon,
Pardon.
as to them shall seem good between this and the next Parliament, and to the
Gaoles they will be advised.

Privy Seals.
Cap. 10. agrees with the Record.

The print touching the place where Assizes, Assizes. Jail deliverie.
or Gaole-deliveries shall be; Cap. 21. agrees with the Record in effect, but
not in form.

l. as is contained before 11.16. Lords expenses.


London, Commons request.

Pardon.

London.

Persons excepted.


of all Treasons, Fellonies, and other offenses of loss of life, except John
Northampton Draper, John Moore, and Richard Northbury Mercers, saving to the
King all Forfeitures and Escheates, Fo^feitures.

Escheates.


and that such as will have pardon do pursue therefore their Charters. Charters.


York, Archbishop of York.

Attainder.


and others, Cap. 1. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Judgment confirmed.
Cap. 3 agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

No Pardon.
or procured to any the parties aforesaid; Cap. 4. and agrees with the Record
as before.

Kings person.

Misgovernance.


other than be such as are there named; Cap. 2. agrees with the Record as
above.

That the Staple of woolls may be removed from Midleborough unto Callice before
Michaelmas ensuing, Staples.

Callice.


and that the Bullion may be there. Bullion.

Resp.




Kings Council.
with others have power by this Parliament to appoint the same at Callice or
elsewhere.

It is enacted, that the Chancellor, Chancellor.
and Keeper of the Privy, Privy Seal.
Seal, shall have power to Survey the Courts of the Chancery, Courts of
Justice surveyed.
both Benches, the Exchecquer, and the Receipts, to remove such Officers as
therein be not fit, Officers unfit removed.
and others to place in the same.

Comptroller.
or Wayer of any Ports within the Realm do enjoy their said Offices, Weigher.
but during their good behavior at the Kings pleasure. Good behavior.

Kings pleasures




Elye, Bishop of Ely Chancellor.
Chancellor of England to the great decay of the possessions, Houses and store
of Charles of York, whereto the said Chancellor is translated; whereunto the
King by the mouth of his Steward, promised to consider the same to their
contentations.

John Holland his Brother to be Earl of Huntington, Commons request.

Sir John Holland. created Earl of Huntingdon.


by girding him with a Sword; Girding with a sword.

Tail.

Creation Money.


to have the same honor, and style to him and the Males begotten of the bodies
of him, and Elizabeth his wife, with 20. l. of the profits of the said County
of Huntington; He also gives to the said John and his Heirs begotten of the
body of the said Elizabeth Land by year, with the said 20. l. and other Lands
to him before time given; in which grant are recited, the Letters Patents the
King delivered in full Parliam^nt to the said Earl, Patent confi^med.
and him committed to sit among the Peers in the Parliament. Peers.


Lords Merches.

Residence.

Cast^^s.


and other places upon the Marches, saying, that if it were so, the King would
save great charges. Kings Charges saved.


The King answered, that he would have the Lords to do as their Ancestors had
done, Resp.
in the time of his Progenitors.

Commons request.
the King, that it would please him to renew his Oath made at his Coronation,
Kings Oath renewed.
and that Bishops, Lords, and Commons may only swear to him according to the
Oath ensuing. Oath.


June being the 120 th. day of the Parliament, after a Mass of the Holy Ghost
in the Church of Westminster, Mass.
and a Sermon made by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Sermon:
the King renews his Oath with great solemnity in the said Church of
Westminster, King new sworn.
the Bishops, Lords, and Commons beholding the same, At which time the Bishops
did their Fealty to the King, Fealty.
and the Lords their Homage, Hom^ge.
who with the Commons were then sworn openly as ensues. Lords and Commons
swear.


Lords and Commons Oath.
that they by no means should suffer any Judgment, Ordinance, or Statute made
in the Parliament to be repealed, To suffer no Repeal.
that they should see the good Laws and Customs of the Realm to be maintained,
To maint^in the Laws and Custom^.
and Peace kept. Peace kept.


After which done, the Archbishop, and other Bishops pronounc^d a solemn
Excommunication against all breakers of the same. Bishops Excommunication.


June, the Lords yielded most humble thanks to the King for his great Justice
done; Lords thanks to the King for his Justice.
at what time the King by his Chancellor gave them hearty thanks for their
Grants to him made. Kings thanks for their grants.
And thus the said Chancellor willing the Knights and Burgesses to sue forth
their Writs for their Fees, Writs of Wages.
the Parliament ended. Parliament ended.


Touching the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Chapters in Print of this year is no
mention made in this Record. Printed Acts not in the Record.


Anno Duodecimo Richardi ^ecundi. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Av^nculo suo ^d. Duci ^bor. etc. salut^m. apud C^nt^b etc Cro. Nativitat.
Mariae prox. futur: etc. Test Rege apud Oxon. xxviii. Die Julii.
CHariss. Avunculo suo Tho. Duci Gloucestriae. Chariss. fratri Regis Tho. Com.
Cantii. Chariss. fratri Regis Ioh. Holland Com. Huntington. Dilecto and fideli
Consanguineo Ric. Com. Arundell. Tho. Com. War. Ed. de Courtney Com. Devon.
Will. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Hen. Percie Com. Northumb. Hen. Com. Darbie.
Thom. de Mowbray Com. Maresc. and Nottingh. Ric. de Audley de Heleigh. Ioh. de
Fal^esley Chlr. Tho. Camois Chlr. Guide. de Bryan. Ioh. de Clinton. Ric. Talbot
de Godrackcastle. Ioh. le Ware. Hen. le Scroope. Ioh. Roos de Hamelake. Ioh.
Nevill de Raby. Ioh. Gray de Codonore. Hen. Gray de Wilton. Hen. Fitzhugh.
Ric. Scroope. Ioh. Deureeux. Hugo Burnell. Will. la Zouch de Harringworth.
Rogero Clifford. Rado de Cromwell. Rado Lumley. Will. de Thorpe. Rado Baroni de
Greystock. Will. Bottera^x Chlr. Ioh. de Bellomonte. Rob. de Harrington. Rob.
de Willoughby. Ioh. de Clifton. Ioh. de Cobham de Kent. Will. de Dacre. Ioh. de
Strange de Knokin. Tho. de Nevill de Halmshyre. Ric. Seymore. Rado. Basset de
Drayton. Phillippo de Darcey. Tho de Morley. Ioh. Lovell de Fishmerch. Ioh. de
Monteacuto. Ioh. de Cherlton de Powis. Tho. de Berkley. Ioh. de Wells.
Philippo de le Dispencer.
Ioh. Devereux Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno decimo tertio Richardi Secundi. Rex etc. Joh. Duci Lancastriae, W^its of
Summons.
etc. apud Westminster. die Lunae post Festum Sci. Hillarii, Test Rege apud Redding
Sexto die Decembris.
CHariss. Avunculo suo Ed. Duci Gloucestriae. Chariss. Fratri. Tho. Com Cantii.
Chariss. fratri Ioh. Holland Com. Huntington. Ric. Com. Arundell. Tho. Com.
War. Ed. de Courtney Com. Devon. Will. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Hen. de
Percie Com. Northum. Tho. de Mowbray. Com. Maresc. and Notting. Rico. Audley de
Heleigh. Ioh de Fallesley Chlr. Tho. Camois Chlr. Tho. de Morley. Ioh.
Bourchier. Ioh Lovell de Fishmerch. Ioh. de Cherlton de Powis. Ioh. de Clinton.
Ric. Talbot de Greystock. Ioh de War. Hen. de Scroope. Ioh. Roos de Hamelake.
Rado Nevill de Rabie. Ioh. Gray de Codonore. Hen. Gray de Wilton. Reginaldo
Gray de Ruthin. Hen. Fitzhugh. Ric. le Scroope. Ioh. Devereux. Hugo Burnell.
Will. la Zouch de Harringworth. Tho. de Clifford. Rado de Cromwell. Rado
Lumley. Will. Thorpe. Rado Baroni de Graystock. Will. Botreaux. Ioh. de
Bellomonte. Rob. Harrington. Rob. de Willoughby. Ioh de Cobham de Kent. Will
Dacre. Ioh. de Strange de Knokin. Tho Nevill de Halmshyre. Rico. Seymore. Rado
Basset de Drayton. Tho. Darcey. Tho. de Morley. Ioh. Bourchier. Ioh. Lovell de
Fishmerch. Ioh. de Monteacuto. Ioh. de Cherlton de Powis. Tho de Berkley. Ioh
de Wells. Philippo le Dispencer. Almarico de St. Amand.
Ioh. Devereux Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The Parliament holden at WESTMINSTER the Monday next after the Feast of St.
HILLARIE in the thirteenth year of the Reign of King RICHArD the Second.
January, William de Wickham Bishop of Winchester, and Chancellor of England,
Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment declared before him, and the whole Estates, King.
how the King now being come to more full age, Kings ^ull age.
meant the better to see his people governed, and that as well the Clergy as
the Temporallitie should enjoy all their Liberties; Liberties enjoyed.
He further shows how the King being environed with his enemies of France,
Enemies.

France.


Spain and Guienne on the one part, Spain.

Guienne.


and of Scotland, Scotland.
and Ireland on the other, Ireland.
was now to consult in what wise Peace, Consultation.

Peace.


or Defense might be taken with them. Defense.
And how aid to sustain the charges thereof, Aid raised.
might be levied of the Lords and Commons, without which it would not be
avoided.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoine, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isls.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoine, etc. as above.

January, the fourth day of the Parliament the Bishop of Winchester being
Chancellor, Chancellor.
and the Bishop of St. David's being Treasurer, Treasurer.
with all the Lords of the great Council, Lords of the Great Council.
except the Clarke of the Privy Seal, Privy Seal.
prayed the King to be discharged of their said Offices, Officers pray to be
discharged.
and to have others therein placed. At which time the Chancellor gave up to the
King the great Seal, Great Seal succeeded.
and the Treasurer the Keys of the Exchecquer, Exchecquer Keys.
the which the King received, and them discharged, together with the Lords of
the great Council; Lords of Council.
who being discharged, required openly in the Parliament, that every person
would complain of any thing unduly done by them. Complaints.
The Commons required respit of answer until the next day, Cmmons respite.




At which time they with the Lords upon demand, affirmed all to be well done.

Whereupon the King recharged those Officers by delivering the great Seal to
the said Bishop of Winchester, Officers restored and ^einvested Kings Council.
and the Keys of the Treasury to the said Bishop of St. David's, Kings
Prerogative Counselors.

Parliament.


and received those to be his Counselors, which were before, with his Uncles
the Dukes of Lancaster, and Gloucester, with Protestation for any act then
done, he would at his pleasure take, or refuse his Counselors aforesaid; All
of which said Officers, and Counselors were then sworn in Parliament
faithfully to Counsel the King. Oath of Counselors.


Novell Disein, Assize.
granted by Walter Park of Upton Escanda^^ore before the Justices of Assize in
etc. against Joan Prioress of Detford, Prioress of D^tford.
and her Under-Tenants in Ashton, St. George of Ashton Bevell, nor in any
Inquest to be taken in a writ of Trespass by the said Walter before the
Justices of the Common Place against Henry Green Knight, and the said Prioress
for Trespass done at Upton Escandamore, unless he have Lands and Tenements, to
the value of 40 l. a year at the least. Value.


Pa^liament.
The 26 th day of January, John Mandonor Cleark, was charged openly in
Parliament, that he should not pass, nor send over to Rome, Romans
nor attempt to do any thing there touching the Arch-Deconry of Durham,
Arch-Deaconery.
in prejudice of the King, Kings prejudice.
or of his Laws, Laws.

Praeminire.


or of the party presented thereto by the King, on peril of that might ensue.

John Choungeor complainant against Sir Robert Knowles Knight: for that he
infeoffed the said Sir Robert of certain his Lands, until certain money was to
him paid, Mo^gage paid: Lands not restored.
which was done, and that the said John could not have his Land: whereupon by
Writ the said Sir Robert appeared in Parliament, Writ to appear Parliament.
both of which parties being then heard, for that the matter seemed to be
determinable at the Common Law, Common Law.
the same parties were remitted thereto.

John Bowceby Cleark in Lincoln, Appeal.

Jury sufficient.


none should be returned unless he might freely dispend 40 l. by the year at
least.

Bishop Dean:
Deane and Chapter of Lincoln, Chapter Dean of Lincoln.
for that they could never by distress, or other means come to their rents in
the same Town of Lincoln, by reason of the Liberties granted to the said Town,
Liberties.
whereby the Major and Townsmen having the Trial of all such matters before
them, Trial.
kept them from their right. A Writ was directed to the Major and Bailiffs of
the said Town, Writ.
to appear at a certain day before the Lords, Lords.
and to have full authority from the whole Commonaltie of the same, for abiding
their determinations therein: at which day the said Major and Bailiffs appeared
in proper persons, Major and Bayliff^ of Lincoln.

Appearance:


and for that they brought not with them full power from the said Commonaltie;
Commonalty:
they were adjudged unto Contempt. Contempt:


Assize:
Juries, Juries:

Lincoln:


and all other Inquests which should be taken between party and party, before
the Major and Bailiffs, that for the same time shall be: if any of the said
parties would complain of a false Verdict thereby given, False Verdict:
they should have the Attaint to them granted, Attaint:
and the Record by Writ shall be sent into the Kings Bench, Kings Bench:
or Common Place: Common Pleas.
and that in all such Attaints the Sheriffs return Forraigners of the said
County, Sheriff:
without sending to the said City; Non obstante:
the which Jurie the Justices shall take notwithstanding any liberty to the
said City granted.

Cambridg, Universitie of Cambridg.
by their Petition require, Petition.
that they, their Ministers and Servants, Ministers.
be not put to answer of any Treason or Fellonie, Major and Bailiffs of
Cambridg.

Treason, Felony.


or other breach of Law before the Major and Bailiffs of the same Town: and
that upon the Trial of all such offenses, Triall^ Ju^y.
the Sheriffs do return Forraigners o^ the same County, and none of the Town,
or Suburbs; The Major and Bailiffs were commanded as in Tit. 12. before: They
accordingly appear, but brought no Warrant from the Commonaltie of the same
Town, Commonalty.

Warrant.


whereupon they were adjudged to fall into a contempt. Contempt.


Thomas Methom Knight complains, that whereas an Appeal was brought by
Elizabeth, Appeal.
the wife of Sir John Fitz-William of Archsay Knight. for the death of the said
John, against John Ask and others in the Kings Bench: the same John found that
the same Thomas, and one John Freyer were purchasers of the said Appeal, to the
Damage of 500. Marks of the said John Ask, Damages.
for the which Damages, he the said Thomas remained in the Marshallsey.
Marshallsey.


Tho. showed an Error in the same Judgment, Error.
at his request it was adjudged, that he should have a Sciri fac. grounded upon
his case, Sciri facias.
returnable at the next Parliament, Parliament.
to warn the said John Ask then to be there; that the said Thomas should be
delivered out of the Malshallsey upon sufficient Surety, Sureties.
until the Errors heard. Errors.
and thereupon the Bishops of Lincoln, and Norwich, the Lord Nevill, and Sir
John Lovell to make a grant for Damages until the said John Ask undertook to
bring forth the body of the said Thomas the next Parliament, Damages.

Mainperners.

Parliament.


to be rendered to Prison, if then the Judgment were affirmed; and it was
commanded to the Chancellor to make Writs, Chancellor.

Writs.


as well for the Delivery of the said Thomas, Deliverance.
as for the Sciri fac. Sciri facias.


John Freyer, the like order was taken for him upon Sureties aforesaid,
Sureties.
in form as is above.

Annuities.

Justices.


banished into Ireland, Banishment.
in the 11 th. year of the King, without certain limitation how the same should
be paid; It was enacted, that the Wives, or other Friends of the said Justices
so remaining in Ireland, Ireland.

Wives of Exiles.

Non obstante.


should have to Farm, all the Lands of the said Justices, being not sold to the
value of such Annuitie: notwithstanding any Patent made unto others, which if
it will not suffice, then certain of the Council shall take order therein.
Council.


Priors Aliens.
and other possessions should be observed, these being adjoined: that all
Pryors Aliens being inducted by the Bishop of the place, Iuduction.
or by Abbeys Exempt before seisin, Exemption.

Non obstante.


or which have the same during their Lives, shall enjoy their said Priories for
a reasonable sum, notwithstanding any Patent to others thereof granted: and
that no Priorie or other Spiritualitie appropriated do remain in any temporal
man's hands, Priory.
but only to the Clergy. Clergy.


Subsidy on Wools granted.
On Wednesday the second of March the Lords, and Commons granted to the King for
one year xxxviii. s. iiii. d. of every Denizon for every Sack of Wool over the
old Custom of every Alien xxii. s. viii. d. of every Last of Skins of Denizons
over, Aliens.
etc. of Aliens, Tunnage granted.
iii l. xiii. s. iiii d. of Denizenes for every CCxl. Wool Fells xxxiii. s.
iiii. d. over, etc. of Aliens, xxxvi. s. viii. d. over, etc. and of every tun
of Wine coming in, or going out of the Realm, vi. d. And that the same be
employed only to the use of the Wars. Wars.


Parliament.
The King by assent of Parliament created his Uncle of Lancaster, Duke of
Aquitaine by setting a Crown on his head, Duke of Aquitaine created.

Crown.


and giving to him a Rod of Gold, Rod of Gold.
to hold the same Dukedom with all Profits, and Prerogatives to him during his
life of the King; as of the King of France, as largely as ever the King held
the same; saving only to the King, as to the King of France, Tenure.

France.


the direct Dominion, Superiority, and resort of the same Duchy as by the
Letters Patents thereof confirmed may appear.

Homage.
giving most humble, and hearty thanks to the King for the same honor; Thanks.
and protested albeit, Protestation.
he could not of himself maintain, the State of the said Dukedom in time of
War without the aid of the King, Wars.
and Realm, he would notwithstanding of his own dispend to the uttermost;
Defense.
whereunto the King answered, that the charges should be borne, Charges borne.
as between the Duke, and his Council should be agreed; Kings Council.
to which the Commons assented.

Edward the eldest Son of the Duke of York Earl of Rutland, Earl of Rutland
created.
during the life of the said Duke, and gave to him during the said Dukes life
8^0. marks yearly, Annuity.
and in value of the said 800. marks, gave unto him the Castle, Town, and
Domination of Okeham in the said County, Okeham.
together with the old Forest of Rutland, Forest.
and the Office of the Sheriffwick of the same Shire; Sheriffwick.
So as if the same amount not to the yearly value of 800. marks, that then the
rest to be paid out of the Exchecquer, Exchecquer.
as by the said Charter there confirmed, Charter confirmed.
and delivered to the said Earl may appear.

Canterbury, Archbishops and Cleargies.
and York for them, and the whole Clergy of their Provinces, make their solemn
Protestation in open Parliament, Protestation.
that they in no wise meant, or would assent to any Statute, They will assent
to no Statutes restraining the Popes Authority.
or Law made in the restraint of the Popes Authority, but utterly withstood the
same; the which their Protestations at their requests were enrolled. Enrolment.


Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
cap. 16. agrees with the Record in effect, Protections.

Variance^


but swerveth in the rehearsal of the Statute.

Constable.
and Marshall cap. 2. agrees with the Record altogether, Marshall.
quod nota.

The Commons in the same motions required, that the Constable of Dover should
hold no foreign plea, Constable of Dover.

Foreign Plea.


done in Kent, Kent.
unless the same concerned the Ward of the same Castle. Castle Ward.
Whereunto was answered, Answer.
that since the same touched the Kings Inheritance, Kings Inheritance.
the King would send for his Ministers of the same Castle, and take order
therein.

Liveries.


The King will be advised. Res.


cap. 6. agreeeth not altogether with the Record. Serjants at Arms.


Liveries.
and that no Livery be given by color of any Fraternity. Fraternities.


The King will be advised. Resp.


Chancellor.
do make any order against the Common Law; Common Law.
nor that any judgment be given without due process of Law. Proces^ of Law.


The usage heretofore shall stand, Resp.
so as the Kings Royalty be saved. Kings Prerogative sav^d.


Sheriffs allowance.

Liberties.




The King wills that upon examination of how much his Progenitors gave away
by his Council, Resp.

Examination.

Kings Council.


they should make allowance to them accordingly.

The print touching Provisions from Rome, Provisions. Rome.

Variance.




in the second Statute as the print is (though untruly) cap. 2. swerveth from
the Record, by wanting this viz. That if he be another of base degree, he shall
pay to the King the value of his Benefice for which such prayer was made, and
suffer imprisonment for one year (which note well.) Imprisonment.


That no person do appear upon any Writ of quibusdam certis de causis, before
the Chancellor, Chancellor.

Subpaena.


or any other the Council, Kings Council.
where recovery is thereof given by Common law. Chancery. Common Law.


The King wills, Resp.
as his Progenitors have done, saving his Regality. Kings Prerogative saved.


cap. 2.3. agrees with the Record. Marshall. Jurisdiction.


cap. 4. agrees with the Record. Clark of the Market.


Pardon.
in the second Statute as the print is, though untruly cap. 1. agrees with the
Record.

Callice until the Feast of St. Andrew then ensuing. Staple Callice.


cap. 8. agrees with the Record, Laborers.

Variance.


rehearses the Statute made 22. E. 3. where the print is in 25. E. 3. which is
true, and yet swerveth from the Record, quod nota^

cap. 17. agrees with the Record, Receipt.
only the Record, to this word (delays) in the print, Variance.
has annexed, whatsoever, which the print wants, quod nota.

cap. 7. agrees with the Record, Justices of Peace.
that only the Record has next to, sworn, Oath.
as it is in the print (duly, and without favor,) which the print wants,
quod nota. Variance.


Cap. 5. agrees with the Record. Admirals^


Weights and Measure.
Cap. 9. agrees with the Record, only the Record is Cod Caude, where the print
is Cotgare quod nota.

Popes Coll^ctor.

Ban^^hm^n^.


That the Popes Collector be commanded to avoid the Realm within ^orty days, or
else to be taken as the Kings enemy; King Enemy.
and that every such Collector from henceforth may be an Englishman, and sworn
to execute the Statute made in this Parliament. Oa^h.


Resp.
The King will be thereof advised.

Rome.

Bulls.


The print touching the bringing in Romish Merchandise, in the second Statute of
this year in print, cap. 3. agrees with the Record.

Com^l^^n^s.

Oppressions.


without the incurring the pain of the Statute made at Gloucester in the second
year of the King.

Resp.
Every man may complain according to the Law. Law.


Northumberland, King Pardon.

North^mb.


Cumberland, Cumberl.
and Westmerland all Fines, Westm^rland.

Fines.


Issues and Amerciaments, Amercem^nts.
Arrerages of Fifteens, and such like.

Norfo^k, Worsted.
may carry and sell their single Worsted to any place, or persons, being of the
Kings amity, notwithstanding any inhibition, or liberty to the contrary. Free
trade.

Non obstante.




cap. 12. agrees in manner with the Record. Shoomakers.


cap. 10. agrees with the Record. Ray Cloths.


cap. 14. agreeeth not fully with the Record. Cognizance.


Water Baylie:
At the request of the Commons of the town of Cufford, it was inacted that the
Water-Bailiff of Callice should only take four pence Custom of every Boat,
Callice. Custom.

Exaction.


coming with Victuals from the same town, and not six pence as they then took.

Const^bl:

Wool weighing:




The King grants to, Resp.
but for certain considerations the execution was suspended till further
deliberation. suspension:


The print touching Clothes, Cloths:




cap. 11 agrees not with the Record, for the print to these words, upon a
certain pain, has anexed, to be limited by the Justices of the Peace, which
the Record has not quod nota.

Holland and Kestiven there named, Bounds: Holland^:

Kestiven:


may be by Commission only inquired of, Commission:
bounded out, which was granted, and enacted that it shall so be.

That no other Custom than three pence, Custom Kersi^s:
be demanded of every Kersies passage out of the Realm, Resp.
according to the old usage.

King bette^ advised:


Sundry Counties bordering upon Wales, require remedy as it is there contained,
against misdemeanors of the Welchmen. Welshmeu:


Resp.
by treating with the Lords, Lords Merchers:
Merchers to provide remedy therein.

It is enacted^ that every man shall Cocquet his Woolls under his own name upon
the pain contained in the eighteenth year of King E 3. Cocque^, Woll^:

Collasion




The print touching Artifficers, Artificers:




not to keep any Greyhound etc. cap. 13. agrees with the Record in effect,
but not in form.

cap. 1. agrees not with the Record in the end of the same, Collation:

Presentment:

Variance from the Record:


for the Statute has as follows, And further the King wills, that no
ratification granted for the Incumbent, after that the King has presented, and
comme^ced h^s suit, shall be allowed, hanging, nor after judgment shall be
fully executed, as reason demands; which the print wants, quod nota.

Chancellor:
where the King was present, willed the Knights and Burgesses to sue forth
their Writs, and so the Parliament ended, Parli^ment ended:

Variance from the Record:


the day of March.

Of the print cap. 15. touching the Kings Castles and Gaoles, Castles:

Gaoles:


there is no mention made in the Records of this year. Printed Statutes not in
the Record:


Of the print cap. 18. touching the Bishop, Bishop Dean and Chapter of Lincoln:
Dean and Chapter of Lincoln^ it is confirmed before tit. 13.

Of the print cap. 19. touching Salmon sewes, Salmon:
is no mention made in the Record.

Of the print cap. 20. touching Pilgrims, Pilgrims:
is no mention made in the Record.

Anno Decimo quarto Richardi Secundi. Rex, etc. Joh. Duci Lancastriae Avunculo
suo etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. Cro. Martini, apud West. xij die Septembris.
W^its of Summons.
CHariss. Avunculo Regis Tho. Duci Eborum. Chariss. Avunculo Regis Tho. Duci
Gloucestriae. Chariss. consanguineo Regis Ed. Com. Rutland. Chariss. Fratri
Regis Ed. Com. Cantii. Chariss. fratri Regis Ioh. de Holland Com. Huntington.
Ric. Com. Arundell. Ric. Com. Derby. Thomae Com. War. Edw. de Courtney Com.
Devon. Will. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Hen. de Percie Com. Northumb. Ioh. de
Mowbray Com. Maresc. and Nottingh. Nich. de Audley de Heligh Ioh. de Fallesley
Chlr. Tho. Camois. Tho. de Morley. Ioh. Bourchier. Ioh. Lovell de Fishmerch.
Ioh. de Cherlton de Powis. Ioh. de Clinton. Ric. Talbot de Godrickcastle. Ioh.
de Ware. Henr. le Scroope. Iohi. Roos de Hemelake Rado Nevell de Rabie. Ioh.
Gray de Codonore. Hen. Gray de Wilton. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Hen.
Fitzhugh. Ric. le Scroope. Ioh. Devereux. Hugo Burnell. Will. la Zouch. de
Harringworth. Tho de Berkley. Iohi. de Wells. Tho. le Dispencer. Almarico de
St^. Amando. Tho. de Clifford. Rado de Cromwell. Rado de Lumley. Will. de
Thorpe. Rado Baroni de Graystock. Will. Botreaux. Chlr. Ioh. de Bellomonte.
Rob. de Harrington. Rob. de Willoughby. Ioh. de Cobham de Kent. Will. de Dacre.
Ioh. le Strange de Knokin. Tho. Nevill de Halmshyre. Rico. Seymore. Phillippo
Darcey. Waltero Fitz-Walter. Tho. Bardolf de Wormegay.
Ioh. Devereux Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The Parliament holden at Westminster the day after St. MARTIN in the xiiii th.
year of the Reign of King RICHARD the Second.
Martine, the Bishop of Winchester being Chancellor, Chancellor.
after a long, and eloquent discourse of Government of the King, he rehearses
the League taken between the King, Leagues with France.
and the French, and shows how a great part of the substance thereof was, how
a final Peace might be concluded with one whole assent therein, Peace
concluded by assent in Parliament.
without the which the King would not conclude thereon. He shows further, how
that the Scots upon motion refused the League, Scots.

League refused.


and that War at their hands was only to be accounted of, War^, its charges.
the charges whereof with the charges of Ireland, Ireland.
of the Kings Fortresses beyond the Seas, Fo^tr^sses, Se^s kept.
and for keeping of the Seas were so great, as the King of himself without
their aid could in no wise sustain the same: Aid.
wherefore he wishes them to consult as well therein, as for Ordinance of good
Laws. Good Laws.


England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isls.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Callice into England, Staple removed.

Callice.


in such places as are contained in the Statute made 27. E. 3. the which
Statute shall be fully executed, And further that every Alien, Alien.
which brings any Merchandise into the Realm, shall find sufficient surety
to buy and carry away commodities of the Realm, Sureties.
to half the value of his said Merchandise. English Merchandise.


Cap. 2. agrees with the Record. Exchange.


The print touching the Oath of the Officers of the Staple Cap. 3. agrees with
the Record. Oath.

Officers:

Staple.




The print touching the prices of Staple Wares. Prices.

Staple.




Cap. 4. swerveth from the Record, for the Record has for keeping of the high
prices, where the print wants this word [high] quod nota.

Cap. 5. agrees with the Record. Wools transportation.


Cap. 6. agrees with the Record. English Ships fraighted.


York, Duke of York and Gloucester.
and Gloucester require of the King assurance for M. l. yearly to either of
them in especial Tail according unto the Kings promise, Assurance.

Tail.

Kings promise.


whereupon the King wills the Justices to devise such assurance for them,
Justices.
and further commands that they may be readily paid.

Gloucester, in especial tail the Castle of St. Brionell, Castle of Brionell.
and the Forest of Deane, Forest of Deane.

Confirmation.


he now by assent of Parliament grants, that the said Duke shall hold the
same Forest, Forest.
as a Forest.

Westminster the next day after St. Martine, that in the seventh year of this
King the Earldome and Seigniory of Richmond with the appurtenances, Earldome of
Richmond.
were adjudged by the King and Lords, Forfeiture.

Judgment by the King and Lords.


to be forfeited to the King, by reason of the adherence of John Duke of
Britain, T^eason in adhering to the Kings enemies.

Duke of Britain


then Earl of Richmond, Earl of Richmond.
to the French against his Aliance, made as well to the King now, as to King E.
3. for which Alyance, he enjoyed the said Earldome, the which Judgment was not
enrolled in the Roll of the said Parliament, Judgment not enrolled.
for certain causes then to the King and Lords well known.

Kings Prerogative kept.
and his Crown might be kept, and that all things done, or attempted to the
contrary, Nota.
might be redressed, and that the King might be as free as any his Progenitors
were: Kings Freedom.
whereunto the King granted.

Subsidy of Wools, etc.

Tunnage and Poundage granted conditionally.


The Lords and Commons granted unto the King for three years the like Subsidies,
as are contained in the 11th. of this King tit. 16.17, So as the same be only
employed upon the Defense of the Realm, Realms defense.
And upon condition that the Staple be removed from Callice to England, Staple
removed.
and so continue.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Statutes observed.
THe print touching the Observation of Statutes made at Canterbury Cap. 11.
agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Sheriffs.




It is enacted that the Statutes made touching Sheriffs, and Escheators shall be
observed.

Money Scottish.
The print touching Scottish money, Cap. 12. agrees with the Record.

Sundry Counties there named complain of the overcharging of Sheriffs and pray
redress. Sheriffs overcharging.

Resp.




Kings Counsel.
to show favor to every Sheriff upon his Account, Account.
as to them shall seem reasonable.

That the Ordinance made in the 11th. year, Ordinance.
whereby all Lands, Escheated Lands.
then Escheated to the King, Kings advantage.

Resp.


should be sold to his most profit may be confirmed.

Upon a more special Declaration right shall be ministered.

The King pardons to the Commons of Cumberland, Pardon of debts and relief.

Northumb. Cumb: Westmerland:


Northumberland, and Westmerland all sums of money demanded in

That redress may be had against the manifold Oppressions, Oppressions.
and other Trespasses done by the Men of Cheshire in the Counties bordering
thereunto. Trespasses.

Cheshiremen.

Resp.




Chester Liberties.


They pray that against the horrible vice of Usury, Usury.
then termed Schefes, Resp.
and practiced as well by the Clergy as Laytie, the Order made by John Not
late Mayor of London, John Not.

London.


may be executed through the Realm.

Ordinance.
and if the same be found to be necessary, that the same be then affirmed.

The print touching the entertainment of Merchant strangers Cap. 9. agrees
with the Record. Merchant strangers.


It is enacted, that no Denizen do Ship or cocquet Wools, Collusion.




or Merchandise in his own name, which belong to strangers to debar the King of
his Custom on pain of Forfeiture. Strangers goods.

Kings Customr.

Forfeiture.




The print touching Customers, Customers.
and Comptrollers Cap. 10. agrees with the Record, Comptrollers.




only there wants touching Customers of Towns, where the Staple should be
within the Realm, the which the print wants.

Bakers.
Brewers, and Buyers of Corn do claim 8. Bushels to the Quarter striked only
and no more. Measures.

Corn.

Resp.




The Statutes therefore made shall be observed.

That these words (silva Cedua) may be explained, Silva Cedua.




so as no man be driven to pay Tithe Wood to the contrary. Tithes.

Resp.




It shall be used as heretofore it has been.

The King has granted to the men of the Isls of Garnsie, Garnsie. Iarsie.
and Iersie, Sercke, Sercke. Aureney.
and Aureny, that they during the space of 8. days shall be free of all manner
of Tolls, Exemption from Tolls.
Exactions, and Customs within the Realm as his Leiges. Customs.

Kings Leiges.




Kersies.
that they may freely transport the said Kersies for the old Custom. Customs.


It is enacted, that no Estues, Stews.




or Brothell Houses be kept in Southwarke, Southwarke.
but in the Common places therefore appointed.

Admiral.

Jurisdiction.


contract, or Covenant done within their Liberties.

The King will appoint certain of his Council to examine the matter, Resp.




and to take Order therein until the next Parliament.

That remedy may be had against Mills, Mills. Stankes.
Stanks, Kiddells and such like Engines, Kiddels. Thames^
and Devises levied upon the Thames. Resp.




Cap. 8. agrees with the Record. Gaging Rhenish Wines.


The King at the request of the Commons, Commons request.
by the assent of the Parliament, Judgment in Parliament repealed.
repealeth the Judgment given against John de Northampton late Mayor of
London, John de Northampton.
for certain Treasons, Treason.
and other Fellonies.

Outrageous Wages.

Masters of Sh^ps,


and Mariners. Mariners.

Resp.




Admiral.
The Admiral shall appoint them to take reasonable wages or punishment.

Lords and Commons th^nks.
These things being done, the Lords, and Commons give humble thanks for the good
Government, Good Government.
and careful zeal to them borne; Zeal to them.
And the King gave thanks to them for their grants to him made, Kings thanks
for their Grants.
And thereupon the Chancellor willed the Knights, Chancellor.
and Burgesses to sue Writs for their Fees, Writs for Wages.
and so the Parliament ended the third day of December. Parliament ended.


Printed Statute not in the Roll.
And Note that of the 7th. Chapter in print touching the Passage of them out of
the Realm to be only at Dartmouth is no mention made in this Record. Passage.

Dartmouth.




Anno Decimo quinto Richardi Secundi. Rex, etc. Johi. Duci Aquitaniae, and
Lancastriae, etc. apud Westminster. Cro. Annimar. etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. Septimo
Die Novembris.
Writs of Summons.
CHariss. Avunculo Regis Ed. Duci Ebor. Chariss. Avunculo Regis Tho. Duci
Gloucest. Chariss. Consanguineo Regis Ed. Com. Rutland. Chariss. fratri Regis
Tho. Com. Cantii. Chariss. Fratri Regis Iohi. de Holland Com. de Huntingt.
Rico. Com. Arundell. Chariss. Consanguineo Regis Hen. Com. Derbie. Tho. Com.
War. Edwro de Courtney Com. Devon. Will. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Hen. de
Percie Com. Northumb. Tho. de Mowbray Com. Maresc. and Nottingham. Tho. Com.
Stafford. Iohi. de Fallesley Chlr. Tho. Camois Chlr. Tho. de Morley Chlr. Iohi.
Bourchier. Iohi. Lovell de Fishmerch. Iohi. de Cherleton de Powis. Iohi.
Clinton. Rico. Talbot de Godrickcastle. Iohi. le Ware. Hen. le Scroope. Iohi.
de Roos de Hamelake. Rado. Nevill de Raby. Iohi. Gray de Codonore. Hen. Gray de
Wilton. Hen. Gray de Ruthin. Hen. Fitzhugh. Rico. le Scroope. Iohi. Devereux.
Hugo. Burnell. Willo. la Zouch de Harringworth. Tho. Berkley. Iohi. de Wells.
Philippo le Dispencer. Hen. de Scto. Amando. Tho. de Clifford. Rado de
Cromwell. Rado de Lumley. Rado Baroni de Greystock. Willo Botreaux Milit. Iohi.
de Bellomonte. Robto. de Harrington. Robto. de Willoughby. Iohi. Cobham de
Kent. Willo. de Dacre. Iohi. le Strange de Knokin. Tho. de Nevill de Halmshyre.
Rico. Seymore. Phillippo Darcey. Waltero Fitz-Walter. Tho. Bardolf de Wermegey.
Ioh. Devereux Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The Parliament holden at WESTMINSTER, the next day ^ft^r All Souls in the
Fifteenth year of the Ra^gn of King Richard the 2.
THe Friday, being the same next day, the Archbishop of York Primate, and
Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
by the Kings appointment before him being present, King.
declared very wisely the causes of the Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
As first the Church, Church.
then the Laws, Laws.
and further that all Cities, and Towns should enjoy all their Liberties,
Liberties amply enjoyed by all.
as amply as ever they did.

Peace kept.
and maintenance of the Laws. Laws obse^ved.
The Second how the prices of Wools, P^ices of Wools inhanced.
too much ab^sed, might be enhaunced, And how the Wars of the same happily
begun after the expiration of the truce might in best wise be maintained. Wars
maintained.
Thirdly touching the Statutes of Provision, P^ovisions.
to see how the Holy Father might have that to him belonged, Pope.
Reddite quae sunt Cesaris Caesari, and quae sunt Dei Deo.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoin, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England etc. as above.

Gascoin etc. as above.

Staple.

Free Trade.

Wools.


according to the 27.th of E. 3. until the Feast of the Nativitie of St. John
Baptist next ensuing. And that every Merchant Denizon and Alien may, Alien.
during the same time, buy any kind of Wools, of what person soever, bringing
to Callice one Ounce of Gold in Bullion, Gold.

Bullion.

Callice.


for every Sack of Wool. After which Feast of St. John Baptist the Staple shall
be kept in such Towns upon the Sea Coast, as to the Lords of the Council shall
seem good. Kings Council.


Commons trust i^ the King.
The Commons for the great affiance which they repose in the King, granted that
he by the advice of his Lords, might make such toleration, Tolleration of
Provisions.
touching the Statute of Provision, as to him should seem good until the next
Parliament, Commons dissent the next Parliament.
so as the Statute be repealed in no Article thereof, nor none disturbed of his
lawful possession: so also as they may disagree thereunto at the next
Parliament, with this Protestation, Commons Protestation.
that this their assent being in very deed a Noveltie, Noveltie.
be had or taken for no example. Example.


Appea^anc^ before Counsel in Mannou^ Courts Common Law.
or answer before the Counsel of any Lord or Lady of any thing real, or
personal, appertaining to the Laws of the Land.

Desmes and F^fteens gran^ed cond^tionally.

Kings Voyage.


conditionally, that if the King went not personally into France, or Scotland
against his enemies, or that Peace were taken before with his said enemies,
Peace made.
that then the same they grant, should remain to be employed upon other defense
of the Realm. Defense of the Realm.


Trayle le baston should be kept, Commons request.

Eyire suspended.

Trayle le baston.


nor no general Commission of Oyer, Oyer and Terminer.


and Terminer granted without urgent necessity. Urgent necessity.


Subsidies confirmed.


The second day of December, the Lords and Commons require the King, that he
would as largely enjoy his Prerogative, Kings Prerogative enlarg^d.

Non obstante.


as any of his Progenitors did, notwithstanding any Statute, and namely the
Statute made at Gloucester, in the time of King E. 2. the which Statute they
utterly repeal; Statute repealed.
for which their tender affection, the King gives them thanks, Kings thanks.
and grants thereunto.

cap, Recognizances.

Sta^le.


9. agrees with the Record.

Commons declaration.
that if any treaty of peace or league, Treaty of Peace.
were to be taken with the Kings enemies, that it were expedient that the Duke
of Guienne, Duke of Guienne.
as the most honorable, should go to the same treaty; The King answered that
he would the same if the Duke so pleased; whereunto the said Duke did say that
he was very ready.

Holland in Lancashire, Prior of Holland.
complains of a great Riot done by Henry Treble of Throngaston, Riot
complained of.
William his Brother, Robert Gisseldon, Robert Grubber, Richard Sprat, John
Greenbow and others, for an entry made by them into the Parsonage of Whitewick
in the County of Leicester, whereupon John de Ellingham, Sergeant at Arms,
Serjant at Arms.
by verue of a Commission to him made, Commission.
brought into the Parliament the said Henry Treble, Ryo^ers taken and brought
to Parliament.
and John Greenbow, who were principal misdoers, who, upon examination,
confessed the whole matter and were therefore committed to the Fleet,
Imprisonment.

F^eet.


there to remain at the Kings pleasure, Kings pleasure.
and after they made Fine in the Chancery, F^ne. Chancery, Su^et^es for Good
b^haviour.
and agreed with the said Prior and found suertie for their good behavior, and
so were delivered.

Oseches in Essex, complained against John Rechell for diverse imbraceries by
him done, Embraceries.
and namely that the said John should refuse the Order of the Duke of Lancaster
therein, A^b^tt^ement refu^ed.
where he had comprimitted himself thereto; whereupon the said John was caused
to come into the Parliament, Appearance in Pa^liament.
where the Duke affirmed his Award there entered by word, Awards affi^med and
entered.

Ordered to be performed.


the which the Chancelour was charged to see the same John accomplish.
Chancellor.


The Style of the said Duke was, John the Son of the King of England, Duke of
Guiene, and Lancaster, Duke of Lancasters Style.
Earl of Derby, Lincoln and Leicester, Steward of England. Steward.

For that Sir William Bryan Knight, Sir Will. Bryan.
had purchased from Rome, a Bull directed to the Archbps. of Canterbury and
York to excommunicate such as had broken up his house, Popes Bull.

Excommunication of thieves.


and had taken away diverse Letters, Privileges, and Charters; the same Bull
being read in Parliament, Bulls ^ead in Parliament.
was adjudged prejudicial to the King, Prejudicial to the King and Laws.
his Council, and in derogation of the Laws, for the which he was by the King,
Judgment by King and Lords.
and assent of the Lords committed to the Tower, Imprisonment in the Tower.
there to remain at the Kings will and pleasure. Kings pleasure.


Thomas Harding o^ Maintred, accused Sir John Sutton Knight, False accusation
in Parliament.

Sir John and Sir Ralph Su^tton, Conspiracy.




and Sir Richard Sutton Knight his brother, as well by mouth as by writing: for
that by their Conspiracy he was committed to the Fleet, Fleet.
for the Major of Bradwell in Essex: Major of B^adwel.

The accusers Imprisoned.


upon hearing of both parties, for that the two Knights were known to be of
good name: the said Thomas was committed to the Fleet, there to continue during
the Kings pleasure. Kings pleasure.


John Shadwell of Boghsteed, in the County of Sussex, was likewise committed
to the Fleet, there to remain as above: for that he informed the Parliament,
Imprisonment.
that the Archbishop of Canterbury had excommunicated him, Misinformation in
Parliament, Archbishop of Canterbury.
and his Neighbors wrongfully, for a Temporal cause appertaining to the
Crown, Excommunication Temporal cause.
and to the Laws, which was adjudged by the Lords to be untrue. Lords: Judges.


John Shepy Cleark Prebendary of Nassington in the Cathedral Church of St.
Mary in Lincoln complains against a Judgment given in the Kings Bench upon a
Writ of Error, Error in Parliament for a Judgment in Kings B.
between the Prior of Huntington Plaintiff, and himself Defendant, whereupon it
was awarded, that the said John should have his Scire fac. upon his case, Sciri
facias.
to warn the said Prior to be at the next Parliament, Next Parl^ament.
to abide the order therein to be taken, and to have there the whole Record of
Process. Record.

Error in Parliament.




Scire fac. and order was granted to the Deane, Scire fac.
and Chapter of Lichfield, for a Judgment given in the Kings Bench, upon a Writ
of Error, between the Prior of Newport Pannell Plaintiff, and the said Dean and
Chapter Defendants.

Scire fac. Edmund Basset prayed for a judgment given in the Kings Bench,
Error in Parliament.

Scire facias.

Edmund Basset.


between the King Demandant, and the said Edmund Deforceant, for certain Lands
and Tenements in the Winflith, Sa^ford, Dondray, Barn, Backwell, Hasell,
Rochell, and Ashton, in the County of Sommerset, and, of the Advowson of the
Parsonage of Winflith, upon whose Petition it was awarded, Petition.
that the matter should continue in the same estate until the next Parliament
vide 2 tit. 4. tit. 38. Continuance


Robert Knowles, and Sir John de Cobham de Kent, by their Petitions require,
Petition.

Contribution.


that of certain Lands and Tenements in County of Kent, who are bound
according to a certain rate in the Exchecquer, to maintain a Bridge between the
City of Rochester and the town of Strood, Bridges repair.
they may, among themselves yearly, choose two Guardians or Keepers, Gardians
in trust.
who may be of capacity to receive and purchase Lands and Tenements to the
yearly value of five hundred Marks, Capacity.
to impleade, and to be impleaded: whereunto the King grants, saving that
they shall purchase but to the value of 300. Marks yearly.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Statutes observation.
Cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Forcible entries.
Cap. 2. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

E. 3. touching the Castle of Dover, Dover Castle.
and the Ordinance made in the 50 th. year of the same King, Ordinance.
touching the same may be observed upon a certain pain.

Res.
Let the special griefs be showed and remedy shall be had.

Sheriffs overcharged.

Accounts.


by reason of Liberties granted to diverse Persons, Liberties.
being parcel of their fee Farm.

Res.
The Kings Council has power to make allowance to the Sheriffs, Kings Council.
without any further Suit to the King.

Admiral.
Cap. 3. agrees with the Record in effect, Variance.
but not in form.

Measure of Corn.
Cap. 4. agrees in effect with the Record, but not in form.

de Religiosis, Religious Persons.
Cap. 5. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

The King at the request of the Commons, Commons request.
restored to John of Northampton, John Northampt.

Restitution.

Non obstante.


late Major of London, all his Lands and Tenements whatsoever with his blood,
notwithstanding any Judgment to the contrary.

Commons request.
pardons to Ric. Norbury Mercer of London, Richard Norbu^^

Pardon.


all Judgments of Treasons, Felonies, and Misprisions, restores to him all
his Lands, Restitution.
Tenements, and his Blood, notwithstanding any such judgment, and that by
assent of Parliament. Parliaments assent.


The like pardon is made to John Moor, Pardon.
Mercer of London.

John Roches, the Kings Bachelor, may be considered for his charge sustained
about the Castle of Breast, Charges allowed.

B^est Castle.


whereout he was put before the end of the term.

The King has committed the same to his Council. Kings Council.


Knights Fees.
coming to the Parliament, may be levied of all men generally, as well within
the Liberty as without.

It shall be used as heretofore it has been. Res.

Common use.




cap. 6. agrees with the Record in effect, Impropriations.
but not in form.

Villains forfeiture^
and that no Villains do put their Children in School.

The King will be thereof advised. Res.


Gilford, Cloths of Gilford
cap 10. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Barwick, Barwick.
praying that they may buy certain Woolls of one part of Northumb. viz. of
Cochet toward the North, Woolls. Customs.
paying for the sack. 26 s. 8 d.

The King will thereof be advised. Res.


The print touching carrying of Victuals to Barwick, Barwick: Victuals.




cap. 7. far swerveth from the Record, and namely in the whole rehearsal.

Kersies Customs.


They shall pay custom according to the Statute therefore made. Resp.


Silva Cedua may be explained, Silva Cedua.
and full declaration made of that age wood shall be Tithed. Tithes.


It shall be used as it has been.

The Commons of Northumberland Cumb. and Westmerl. pray that they may have full
allowance of the Kings pardon, Resp.

Kings pardon.




granted to them in the last Parliament, touching Issues and amerciaments.

The King grants thereunto.

That the Statute of the Forest, Res.




and namely touching Chyminage may be observed, Chyminage.
as well in the Forest of Sherwood, as in other Forests.

The Statute of the Forest shall be observed, Res.
and who will complain shall be heard.

E. 1. touching the arresting of English Merchants in Wales may be observed.
Wales.

Arrests.




Res.
The King will thereof be advised.

cap. 8. agrees with the Record. Tin.


cap. 11. agrees with the Record. Girdlers.


Ships. English Merchants.
any their Merchandise, where they may have English to serve, on pain to
forfeit the same. Forfeiture.


Res.
Let the Statute therefore made be observed.

Villains seized.

Res






Parliament ended.
The Parliament made an end the second of December.

Variance.
Of the Ninth and twelfth Capter in the print of this year, there is no mention
made in the Record.

Anno decimo sexto Richardi Secundi. The Parliament holden at WINCHESTER, in
the Utaves of St. Hillary, in the sixteenth year of the reign of King RICHARD
the second.
Parliament adjourned^ King.
ON Monday which was the Utaves of St. Hillary, the Parliament, for certain
weighty causes, adjourned until the next day ensuing: on which next day, the
King being present, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop of Canterb.
speech.
by the Kings appointment, declared the cause of the Parliament to be for two
chief matters; Causes of Parliament. Peace.




the first that whether there were War, Peace, or any other League taken
between the King and his Adversaries: Yet should the King of necessity be
driven to defray great sums of money, Kings expenses.
the which how the same might best be levied, they were now consult. Advice
required.
The second was, to provide some remedy touching the Statute of Provisors for
eschewing debate between the Pope and the King, Provisors.

Pope.




and his Realms.

Receivers of Petitions for England, Receivers of Petitions.
Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

Gascoign, and other places beyond the Seas and of the Isles.

Triars of Petitions for Gascoign etc. as above. Triars of Petitions


Triars of Petitions for England etc. as above.

On Wednesday following, Sir Phillip Courtney, Sir Phillip Courtney a Knight to
Devon, petitioned against in Parliament.
being returned for one of the Knights for Devon. came before the King in
Parliament, and for that he was accused of sundry heinous matters, prayed to be
discharged until he was purged, D^scharged his service by the King till his
purgation, resto^ed at the Commons request upon his Submission.
the which was granted, and on Monday after at the request of the Commons was
restored to his place and good name, for that he had submitted himself to
reasonable arbitrament.

Rich. 2. tit. 19. shall be executed, Ordinances.

Priors Aliens.


notwithstanding any Letters Patents to the contrary. Patents.


Commons grant to the King to dispense with the Statutes of Provisors
that he by the advice of his Lords and Commons, should have power to moderate
the Statute of Provisions to the honor of God, and saving the rights of the
Crown, Right of the Crown.
and to put the same in execution, so as the same be declared in the next
Parliament, Next Parliament.
to the end the Commons may then agree to or no. Commons assent.


After this the Commons prayed the Lords in these Ordinances, Ordinances.
to regard the estate of the Universities of Cambridg and Oxford. Universities
of Cambridg and Oxford.


England, may lawfully make their Testament, That the King may make his
Testament.
and that execution shall be done of the same.

Subsidies granted.
as is contained before in 14. Ric. 16. together with one half Desme, and half
Fifteen.

Trayle le baston, Eyres suspended

Trayle le baston suspended.


nor any general Oyer and determiner should be holden until the next
Parliament, except the Oyer and determiner in Norff. touching the death of
Edmond Chipesby the elder, Oyer and Terminer.
and Walter Cook, and one like Commission for the Kings Tenants of Fekenhan, in
the County of Worcester.

Thomas de Poutingdon, complains against Sir Phillip Courtney for wrongful
expelling him out of the Mannours of Bigeleigh, Desseisin and oppression
complained of in Parliament before the Lords Submission in Parliament. to an
award:
both of which etc.

Thomas and Sir Phillip comprimitted themselves by Parliament, to abide the
order of certain there named by a day to be made.

Richard Somestre, Complaint of a Desseisin and oppression.
against the said Phillip, for expelling him out of 4 Marks Land in Thurverton,
in the County of Devon. who committed the same as before.

Rob. de Veer, Lands entailed, not forfeited by attainder. Duke of Ireland.
late Duke of Ireland, and Earl of Oxford, long before his attainder in the 11.
year of this King, the which by the death of the said Duke, ought to descend to
Sir Awbrey de Veer as uncle and heir to the said Robert.

The Lords by assent of Parliament, Restitution in Parliament to Lands, and
honor to the heir of the Duke of Ireland.

Trayle.


made livery of all such Lands to the said Sir Awbrey, and albeit the said Sir
Awbrey had then showed nothing, and that the name title and honor of the same
was entayled. The Lords by assent of Parliament, restored and granted to the
said Sir Awbrey, and the heirs males of his body lawfully begot, the same name,
title, and honor, after which, the said Awbrey was set in his place in the
Parliament among his Peers.

The Kings pardon to the Duke of Lancaster by assent of Parliament.
pardons to John de Lancaster all treasons, Treasons.
misprisions, and misgovernances in Council, while he was about the Kings
person, Kings Council.
and his being with the late Duke of Ireland beyond Sea, after the Judgment
given against him in the 11. year.

Leichfield, a new Scire fac. upon their case returned in the next Parliament
against the Pryor of Newport-Pannell, Error and Scire fac. on it in Parliament.
for that their late Scire fac. did quail sc. 15, R. 2. tit. 23.

Error and Process on it.
The like Scire fac. was granted to John Shepy Cleark se. 15. tit. 23. Edmond
Basset prays a Scire fac. as is contained, 15. tit. 24.



The Arch Bishop of Canterburys protestation against the Popes usurpations,
Provisions, and Excommunications in England.
William Archbishop of Cant. makes his protestation in open Parliament,
saying, that the Pope ought not to excommunicate any Bishop or entermeddle for,
or touching any presentation to any Ecclesiastical dignity recovered in any the
Kings Courts; He further protested, that the Pope ought to make no translations
to any Bishopric within the Realm against the Kings will: for that the same
was the destruction of the Realm, Realm of England. Freedom.
and Crown of England, which has always been so free, as the same has had
none earthly Sovereign, Royalties.
but only subject to God in all things, touching Regalities, and to none other;
the which his protestation he prayed might be entered. Protestation entered.


Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Sheriffs.
THe like motion and answer is made as in the last Parliament, tit. 29.1.

Council Table.
They pray that no man should be forced to appear before any Lords of the
Council etc. cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

Impositions.

Damage.


toward the repairing of their said Town, for a certain term, shall after
same utterly cease.

Resp.
That some way may be found for the maintenance of the Navy of the Realm, Navies
maintenance.
being utterly decayed.



The print touching weights, Weights.
cap. 3. agrees with the Record.

Resp.
That all Conspirations may from henceforth be tried in those Counties where the
Indictments and Deliverances were made. Conspirations.

Trialls.




If any man be grieved, let him sue to the Chancellor until the next
Parliament. Chancellor.


It is enacted, that all the Filth upon the side of Thamise next the house of
Rob. de Parris, shall be utterly removed, Nuisance ordered to be mended.
and that in some place before Easter then ensuing; That the Butchers of London
do build convenient and fit houses whereinto they may from time to time bring
all their Ordure, Butchers of. L^ndon. Order^.
entrayles and other Filths, and the same in Boats carried into the middle of
Thames, Thames.
and there cast the same at a full water, when it first begins to ebb; and
further, that no person do throw or cause to be thrown, or laid any Filth or
Ordure, Muck, Rubbish, or Caystage in the same water of Thames, of the one
side, or of the other between the Palace of Westminster. and the Tower of London, on
loss of 10 l.

Clearks of Courts not to be Atturneys.
or Common Pleas, or at the Assizes be an Attorney, or of Counsel in any case
there to be tried. Res.


The Lords will charge his Council to take order therein. Council.


Customs for Wine. Tunage.
do only pay in Ports, 20 d. for every Tun, and 10 d. for every Pipe.

They shall pay 2 s. for every Tun, or else as they have done. Res.


Tith Wood.
may be fully declared.

The King will move the Bishops therein, Res.

Bishops moved.


between this and the next Parliament.

Liveries.
cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Robert at Mule of Guilford, and Alice his Wife, prays the Kings pardon,
Pardon sued for in Parliament for Treasure trove.
for that they were wrongfully condemned for taking of 700 l. of treasure trove
at Guilford aforesaid.

Let them sue to the King, for this is no petition of the Parliament. Res.

Petition to the King, not Parliament.




Merchant. Strangers. Variance.
Strangers, cap. 1. far swerveth from the Record, for that the print has much
more in the rehearsal, than the Record has.

Wales, President of Wales. Welsh-men.
for every man that is robbed, or endangered by the Welsh men.

The King will be advised. Res.


February. Parliament ended.


Of the print, Cap. 5. is no mention made in the Record, than is contained
before tit. 20. And of the print cap. 1. there is no mention made in the
Record. Statutes printed not in the Record


Anno decimo Septimo Richardi Secundi. Rex, etc. Duci Aquitaniae, and
Lancastriae, etc. apud Westminster. Quindem Hillarii; Test Rege apud Windsor decimo
tertio die Novembris.
CHariss. Avunculo Regis Edo. Duci Eborum. Chariss. Avunculo Regis Tho. Duci
Gloucestriae. Chariss. consanguineo Regis Ed. Com. Rutland. Chariss. Fratri
Regis Tho. Com. Cantii. Chariss. fratri Regis Ioh. de Holland Com. Huntington.
Dilecto and fideli Consang. Regis Ric. Com Arundell. Chariss. Consang. Regis
Hen. Com. Derby. Iohi Com. War. Alberto de Vere Com Oxoniae. Edw. de Courtney
Com. Devon. Will. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Hen. Percie Com. Northumb. Tho. de
Mowbray Com. Maresc. and Nottingh. Tho. de Camois. Tho. de Morley. Ioh.
Bourchier. Ioh. Lovell de Fishmerch. Ioh. Cherlton de Powis. Ioh. de Clinton.
Ric. Talbot de Godrickcastle. Ioh. de Ware. Stephano Scroope de Musham. Iohi.
de Roos de Hamelake. Rado Nevell de Rabie. Rico. Gray de Codonore. Hen. Gray de
Wilton. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Hen. Fitzhugh. Ric. le Scroope. Hugoni
Burnell. Will. la Zouch. de Harringworth. Tho de Berkley. Iohi. de Wells.
Phillippo. le Dispencer. Almarico de St. Amando. Rado de Cromwell. Rado de
Lumley. Rado Baroni de Graystock. Constantino de Clifton. Ioh. de Bellomonte.
Rob. de Harrington. Rob. de Willoughby. Ioh. Cobham de Kent. Will. de Dacre.
Ioh. le Strange de Knokin. Tho. de Lovell de Halmshyre. Rico. Seymore.
Phillippo Darcey. Waltero Fitz-Walter. Tho. Bardolf. Willo. Beauchamp de
Burgaveny. Iohi. de Monteacuto: and Willo. Heron.
Ioh. de Bello Monte Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The Parliament holden at WESTMINSTER in the Quindena of St. HILLARIE in the
Sixteenth year of the Reign of King RICHArD the 2.
ON Tuesday the Quindene of St. Hillary the Parliament for certain causes was
adjourned until the next day ensuing. Pa^liamen^ ^^^jou^ned.
At which day the Archbishop of York Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
by the Kings appointment in his presence declared, King.
that the Parliament was called. Causes of Par^^^^ment.
First that all Bishops, Lords, and Corporations should enjoy their Liberties.
L^berties to be enjoyed.
He further shows that the same was called for three principal causes. The
First for the observation of the Peace. Peace kept.
The Second for Wars, Wars begun by by assent in Parliament.
which by assent of Parliament were begun. The Third how charges might be
levied for the Defense of Guienne, Monys for defense of Guienne.
Callice, Callice.
Ireland, Ireland.
and Scotland. Scotland.


Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoine, Petitions.
and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isls.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoine, etc. as above.

John Bussey for their Common Speaker, Sir John Bussey Speaker presented.
who made the Common Protestation, Protestation allowed.
which being thought reasonable, was allowed.

The Petition of the Deane, Pet^tion quashed.




and Chapter of Lichfield, against the Prior of Newport Pannell for want of
good matter was quailed.

John Sheepy Clarke for the like cause was also quailed. Petition quashed.

Error.




Edmund Basset was continued until the next Parliament. Petition.

Error.

Continuance.




John de Windsor complains, and requires to be restored to the Mannours of
Rampton, Petition.




Cottenham, and Westwick, with their appurtenances in the County of Cambridge,
the which were adjudged to him by the Kings awarde, Kings award.
then being in the possession of Sir John Lisley, and now withholden by Sir
Richard le Scroope, who by Champertie bought the same. Champerty.
The cause was this upon the Petition of Windsor against Lysley, they both
compremitted the matter to the Kings Order; the King commits the same to the
Council, Kings Council.

Reference.


they digesting of the same made a Decree for Windsor under the Privy Seal,
Decree.

Privy Seal.


they sent Warrant to the Chancellor to confirm the same, Chancellor confi^ms
an award.
which was done under the Great Seal by a special Injunction to Lysley, Great
Seal.

Injunction.


and a Writ to the Sheriffs to execute the same; Writ of Execution
After this Lysley by Petition to the King requires, Petition.
that the same might be determined at the Common Law, Common Law.
nothwithstanding any former matter. The King accordingly by Privy Seal gives
Warrant to the Chancellor to make a Supersedeas, Privy Seal.

Supersedeas.


the which was done by Privy Seal. After which Sir Richard le Scroope bought
the same upon the ripping of the whole matter; this sale was thought no
Champertie: Champ^rty.
whereupon it was adjudged that the said Windsor, should take nothing by his
suite, but to stand to the Common Law, Judgment.

Common Law.


and that the said Richard should go without delay.

Richard Earl of Arundell, Ri^ Earl of Arundel his accusation against the D. of
Lancaster.
declared to the King in the presence of certain Lords, that he had certain
conceptions to utter touching the Kings Honor. Kings Honor.
First, that he thought it not honorable for the King to suffer the Duke of
Lancaster to go Arm in Arm with him. Du. of Lancasters arrogance.
Secondly, that it beseemed not the Dukes men to wear the same color of
Liverie that the Kings did. H^s Livery the some with the Kings.
Thirdly that the Duke in place of Counsel, Menac^ng words in Councils and
Parliament.
and Parliament spoke such bitter words; as the said Earl, and such like durst
not frankly to utter their minds. Fourthly it was much against the Kings profit
to give to the said Duke the Duchy of Guienne. Kings disprofit.

Du^chy of Guienne


Fifthly touching the great Mass of money given to the Duke for his voyage into
Spain, Mass of money for his Spanish voyage.
and touching the Peace by him lately taken. Peace made.


Unto all which after the King had answered, and justified it to be good, The
Duke justified.
it was awarded by the King, Award by King and Lords.
by the assent of all the Lords, that the said Earl in full Parliament, Pardon
craved for words in Parlia^ment.
should say to the said Duke, these words following, viz.

Sir since that it seems to the King, and other Lords, and eke that each here
has been so mickle grieved, and displeased by my words, It forethinketh, and I
beseech you of your grace, and Lordship to quite me your man tallant.

The which the said Earl in the presence of the King, and Lords did speak.

Tunnage and Poundage granted.
or going out of the Realm, upon condition, that after Peace taken with the
French, To cease if Peace made.
the same should cease.

William Leygrave of Bristoll shows, B^istoll.
that where he recovered against John Cherleton, and others certain Lands in
Bristoll by an Assize of Fresh force before the Mayor, Assize of Fresh-force.
and Bailiffs there, Mayor and Bailiffs of Bristoll.
the which without Warrant was reversed in the Kings Bench by a Writ of Error,
Error.
he prays the reversall of the said Judgment. Whereupon was granted unto him
a scire facias, Error in Parliament.

Scire facias.


upon his Case against the said Charleton, to be and abide the Order of the
next Parliament, Next Parliament.
and that the whole Record, Record.
and proofs should then be there.

Special Erro^ assigned.
he shows in his Bill some especial point of Error, Error.
whereupon a scire facias is now granted. Scire facias.


John Sheepy Clerk a new scire facias as in the 16 R. 2. tit. 18. Error.

(...) faci^^.




The like was granted to the Deane and Chapter of Litchfield as there tit. 17.

Pe^ce ass^nied to with France by Parliament upon condit^on.
so as the King do no Homage; King to do no homage.
So as also the Liberties of the Kings Person, King^ and Realm L^be^t^es sav^d.
of the Realm, and of the Subjects be saved, and so as the King upon breach of
Peace may resort to the title, Kings Title.
and right of the Crown of France; And further that such moderations may be
made, as that no contestation be like to ensue.

Commons Declaration by their Spe^k^^.
declare by Sir John Bussey their Speaker, that the same passed their Capacity,
Peace passes t^^eir capacity.
and therefore they referred themselves to the King, They r^fe^ them^^lv^^ to
the King and Council.
and Lords and Council; And the rather for that the Lords, and Council
affirmed, that these words [Homage, Homage.
Soveraigntie, Sovera^gnty.
and resort] contained in the Indenture of Peace, Resort.
should be moderated in this wise. That [Homage] should be done, and have
relation to the Duchy of Guienne, Homage for Guienne.
and in no wise touching the Crown, Crown of England.
and Realm of England. And that touching [resort] the King at all times, for
breach of Peace on the French part might resort to the Crown, and right of
France. King^ Title to France.


Sundry of the Bishops, and Lords in this Parliament assented, that the King
might show favor, Kings favor to the Justices banished into Ireland.




and pardon to the late Justices banished into Ireland, touching their return,
whereof the Commons being demanded make the like answer, Commons Answer.
so as they incur not the breach of their Oath, Breach of Oath.
and Conscience by the Statute therefore made.

William de Cullwen Knight, being outlawed in the Kings Bench at the suit of
Robert de Louthe in an appeal of murder, Outlawry.




for the death of Iohn-de Louthe, for certain errors therein, Error in
Parl^ament.
prays reversall thereof: whereupon he had awarded him a scire facias, Scire
facias.
upon his Case against the said Robert, returnable in the next Term, and
therewithal to have there the whole Process and Record. Process.


John Duke of Guienne and Lancaster, John Duke of Lancaster Steward of England.
Steward of England, and Thomas Duke of Gloucester Constable of England,
complain to the King that Sir Thomas Talbot Knight, Sir Th. Talbot.
with others his adherents, conspired the deaths of the said Dukes in diverse
parts of Cheshire, Conspiring their deaths. Treason.
as the same was confessed, and well known; and prayen, that the Parliament may
Judge of the fault. Parliament to Judge thereof.
Whereupon the King, Kings and Lords Judges in Parliament.
and the Lords in the Parliament adjudged the same fact to be open, and high
Treason; Declares of what is Treason.
And thereupon they awarded two Writs, the one to the Sheriffs of York, Writs
to the Sheriff.
and the other to the Sheriffs of Derby, to take the body of the said Sir
Thomas returnable in the Kings Bench, Capill^ returnable in Kings Bench.
in the Month of Easter then ensuing. And open Proclamation was made in
Westminster Hall, Proclamat^on.
that upon the Sheriffs return, and at the next coming in of the said Sir
Thomas, the said Thomas should be convicted of Treason, Conviction of Treason.
and incur the loss, Forfeiture.
and pain of the same.

Receiving a Traitor T^eason.
and pain.

Beaulewi, and elect of Landaffe by the Popes provision, Popes Provisions
allowed to the Bishop^ick of Landaffe.
should enjoy the same Bishopric, notwithstanding any Act so always as this
be taken for no example. No^ obst^nt^.

No example.




Roger de Swiuerton, who was Indicted for killing of John Ipston his Companion,
Knight of Parliament slain.
and one of the Knights of Stafford, be in no wise let to Mainprise until he
be brought to answer. Previledge.

No mainprise.




Commissions of Peace.

Lawyers bound.

G^ol of delivery.


to proceed to the deliverie of Felons, as often as need shall require.

It is enacted, that the Aldermen of London, Aldermen of London.

Election.

Non obstante.


shall not from henceforth be yearly chosen, but remain till they be put out
for reasonable cause, notwithstanding the Ordinances of E. 2. and E. 3.

E. 3. tit. 26. that the Mayors, Sheriffs, and Aldermen of London, London.
that now are, heretofore have been, or hereafter shall be, should incur, or
bear the pain contained in the said Statute of 28 E. 3. tit. 26. for any
erroneous Judgment given, Erroneous Judgment.

Mayor.

Sheriffs.

Aldermen.

Penalty.


or to be given in the said City.

Farrendon within London, London.
may choose an Alderman for the rule there, and that the Inhabitants of
Farrendon without, Farrendon Ward.
may likewise choose an Alderman for the rule there, Aldermen elected.
both of which Aldermen shall continue as above.

And note that these their last Acts, Act by the King and Lords alone.
were enacted by the King, by the assent of the Lords only.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Churchus Liberties.
And that all Statutes not heretofore revoked shall be observed. Statutes
observed.


Conspiracy.

County.


or Liberty.

The Chancellor shall provide remedy for the grieved by Supersedeas, Res.

Chancellor.

Sup^rsed^as.


or otherwise.

Silva Cedua] be declared and expounded, Silva Cedua declared.
what age the same shall be tithed. Tithes.


As it has been heretofore.

That the Statutes touching Sergeants at Arms, Res.




made in the thirteenth may be executed.

That no Serjant in any City, Sergeants.
or Town do carry his Mace out of the Liberty of the same. Maces.

Liberties.




To this motion was no answer made. Collusion.


Religious persons.
as cause the Villains to Marry free women inheritable, V^llaines.

Marriage.

Mortmain.


whereby the Lands come to those Religious hands by collusion.

There is sufficient remedy provided by the Statute.

Res.
Recognizance, Recognizances.
or Obligation made to any adjudged in the 11 R. 2. to other than their own
uses may remain to the very uses. Obligation.

Uses.




The King will be advised.

Res.
or sale of Tyn may be at Lostwithiell In Cornwall, Tin.

Lostwithiell.


and shall not continue at Callice, Callice.
notwithstanding the Council may grant License to Merchants to carry the same
Tyn to what parts they will; Kings Council.

License.


as to them shall seem good.

That Chimniage be not taken in any Forest, Chimniage.




but of such as carry any Commodities thereout to sell, and that by Forresters
of Fees. Forresters.


The Statutes shall be observed, Res.
and the grieved upon complaints shall find remedy.

Merchants M^rchandize.

Fr^e sale.


paying therefore Custom according to the quantity, Custom.
and rate.

The King will be advised. R^s.


Imprisonment.

Great Charter.


that he be brought to his answer, and have right.

The print touching half pence, Money.




Cap. 1. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Corn transported.
Cap. 7. agrees in effect with the Record but not in form.

Kent, Commons request Kent.
granted that the Collectors of all Tenths, Collectors of Tenth.
and Fifteens within the said County, and their Successors, shall Account in
the Exchecquer by the names of Hundreds and not of persons, Account.

Exchecquer.


nor of Towns, so as the King be answered of as much as his Grandfather was,
notwithstanding any account.

Cap. 2. has put to sale, Kersies.
more than the Record warranteth, Variance.
quod nota.

Cap. 3. agrees with the Record. Worsted.


Benefices.

Sufficient persons.

R^sidence.


who may dwell on the same, so as their flock for want thereof do not perish.

The King wills that the Bishops, Bishops Office.
to whose Office the same belongs, do their duties. Res^.




London, London.
who newly exact of diverse bringing any Cattle into Smithfield, Officers
Exactions.

Smithfield.


the third Beast.

Res.
The Mayor, and Sheriffs of London shall answer the same before the Council.
Council.


Colchester, Abbot of Colchester and Abingdon.
and Abingdon, who in their Towns of Colchester, and Culvelin claim to have
Sanctuary. Sanctuary.


Res.
They shall show their Liberties before the Council, Liberties.

Council.


who shall take Order therein.

Sheriffs allowance


Res.
The Kings Council have full power to mitigate the same. Kings Council.


Admiralty.
for holding Plea of matters determinable at the Common Law; the which they
pray may be revoked. Jurisdiction.

Common Law.




Res.
The Chancellor by the advice of the Justices, Chancellor^

Justices.


upon the hearing of the matter, shall remit the matter to the Common Law,
Common Law.
and grant prohibition. Prohibition.


Green Wax.

Exchecquer.

Certainty.


unless the cause be in the same declared.

Res.
The Statutes therefore made shall be observed.

Normandy, Passage of Wools.
and that the Normans may discharge their Wares at Southampton. Normans.

Southampton.




Res.
Let them repair to Callice as it is appointed. Callice.


Damages.

Chancery.


Cap. 6. agrees with the Record.

Cap. 4. agrees with the Record, Malt.
only the Record has [ herth] the which the print wants, quod nota.

Searche^.
The print touching Searchers Cap. 5. agrees with the Record in effect, but
not in form.

March. Parliament ends.


Justices of Peace.
The print Cap. 9. touching Justices of the Peace agrees with the Record, as
appears before tit. 24.

Of the print Cap. 8. touchi^g unlawful Games, Printed acts not in the Roll.

Unlawful Games.


assemblies, and 9th. touching Salmon Sewes, Salmon^
there is no mention made in the Record.

Anno Decimo Octavo Richardi Secundi. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Hen. Com. Darbiae, etc. apud Westminster. Quindena Hillarii Anno xviii. R. 2.
Test Rege Decimo Die Novembris. Consimiles Literae subscript.
THo. Com. Cantii. Rico. Com. Arundell. Tho. de Bello Campo Com. War. Alberto
de Vere Com. Oxoniae. Willo. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Hen. Percie Com.
Northumb. Tho. Camois. Iohi. de Bourchier. Iohi. Cherleton de Powis. Iohi. de
Clinton. Iohi. la Ware. Stephano le Scroope de Masham. Willo. de Roos de
Hamelake. Hen. Gray de Wilton. Hen. Fitzhugh. Rico. le Scroope. Hugo. Burnell.
Willo. la Zouch de Harringworth. Tho. de Berkley. Iohi. de Wells. Philippo de
Dispencer. Almarico de Scto. Amando. Rado de Cromwell: Rado de Lumley. Rado de
Greystock. Constantino de Clifton. Robto. de Harrington. Robto. de Willoughby.
Iohi. de Cobham de Kens. Willo. de Dacre. Iohi. le Strange de Knokin. Tho. de
Nevill de Halmshyre. Rico. Seymore. Willo. Beauchampe de Burga^enney. Iohi. de
Monteacuta. Iohi. de Bellomonte. Custodibus Quinque Port^^m.
The Parliament holden at Westminster in the Quindene of St. HILLARIE in the
xviiii th. year of King RICHARD the Second.
Guardian of England.
ON Wednesday the 15th. of St. Hillarie the Parliament by the assent of the Duke
of York the Kings Uncle, and Warden of England was adjourned until the next
day, Parliament adjourned.
At which day the Chancellor of England (being not named) showed the Parliament
was called for three causes. Chancellor.

Causes of Parliament.


First that the Church should enjoy all her Liberties. Churches Liberties.
Secondly for the good Government of the Realm, Good Government.
and Administration of Justice. Justice.
Thirdly that the Duke of Gloucester was sent into the Realm, to declare the
Kings passage into Ireland, Kings passage to Ireland.
his great zeal to Conquer them, Conquest.

Message.


and the great hope thereof. And how that the said Duke had to them especial
passage by mouth.

Petitions.
Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne and other places beyond the

Tryars of Petitions for England, etc. as above.

Tryars of Petitions for Gascoyne, etc. as above.

The Lords and Commons toward the Conquest of Ireland, Irelands Conquest.
grant to the King one Tenth, and one Fifteenth. Tenth and Fifteen granted.


Petitions of the Commons exhibited to the Duke of YORK Guardian of ENGLAND,
with their Answers.
Sheriffs Overcharge.
SUndry Counties praying remedy against the overcharging of Sheriffs upon their
Accounts. Accounts.


Res.
The Kings former grant made to the Council, Kings Council.
for the mittigation thereof shall continue.

Constable of Nottingham Castle.
They pray remedy against the Ministers of the Constable of Nottingham Castle,
for extorting iiii. d. of every person passing, Extortion.
with one load of Coals for his own use, Coals.
out of the Forest of Sherborne. Sherborne Forest.


Res.
The Statute therefore provided shall stand, the Justices of Peace may further
redress the same. Justices of Peace.


Bristoll.
That remedy may be had against the men of Bristoll, for clayming Custom of
Wines, Custom of Wine.
discharged at Chepstow, Chepstow.
which ought to be free. Resp.




Shoemakers Leather.
That the Statute in the 13th. that Shoemakers shall Tanne no Leather, may be
revoked.

The same Statute shall continue with this adjunct, Resp.
that Tanners shall tanne their leather well and sufficiently, Leather.

Tanners.


on pain of forfeiting of the same. Forfeiture.


Leichfield by their Attorney upon the Scire fac. returned served against the
Prior of Newport-Pannel, Dean and Chapter of Lichfield.

Attorney.

Scire fac.


for errors in Judgment given against them at the Kings Bench: Error in
Parliament.
require the exemplification, Exemplification.
and reverfall of the same.

Default.

Errors examined.


which was granted, and Commandment given to Walter Clopton Chief Justice,
Chief Justice.
to bring in the whole Process and Record, Process.

Record.


which he did.

Pleading.
worthy of noting.

Judgment in Kings Bench reversed in Parliament.
and that the former Judgment given in the Common Place for the said Dean and
Chapter, Judgment in the Common Bench affirmed.
should be good.

Chancellor.

Judgment executed.




Of this year is no mention made in the print.

Anno Vicessimo Richardi Secundi Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Charissimo vunculo suo Johi. Duci Aquitaniae and Lancastriae, etc. apud
West. in Festo S. Vincentii; Test Rege apud Westminster. Tricessimo die Decembris.
EDo. Duci Eborum. Tho. Duci Gloucestriae. Henr. Com. Derbiae. Edro. Com.
Rutland. Tho. Com. Cantii. Rico. Com Arundell. Tho. de Bello campo Com. War.
Aldredo de Vere Com Oxoniae. Edw. de Courtney Com. Devon. Will. de Monteacuto
Com. Sarum. Hen. Percie Com. Northumb. Iohanni de Holland Com. Huntingt. Tho.
de Mowbray Com. Maress. and Nottingh. Tho. le Dispencer. Tho. Camois. Ioh.
Bourchier. Ioh. Cherlton de Powis. Ioh. de Clinton. Ioh. de Ware. Stephano
Scroope de Musham. Willelm. Roos de Hamelake. Hen. Fitzhugh. Ric. le Scroope.
Hugoni Burnell. Will. la Zouch. de Harringworth. Tho de Berkley. Iohi. de
Wells. Phillippo. le Dispencer. Almarico de St. Amando. Rado de Cromwell. Rado
de Lumley. Rado Baroni de Graystock. Rob. de Harrington. Will. de Willoughby.
Ioh. Cobham de Kent. Will. de Dacre. Ioh. le Strange de Knokin. Tho. de Lovell
de Halmshyre. Rico. Seymore. Will. Beauchamp de Burgaveny. Iohi. de Monteacuto.
Iohi. de Fishmerch. Rico. Gray de Codonore. Reg. Gray de Ruthin. Rado Gray de
Raby. Tho. Bardolf. de Wermegey. Tho. de Morley. Will. de Ferrariis de Groby.
Will. Heron. Phillippo Dacre. Roberto Scales.
Edro. Com. Rutland Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The Parliament holden at WESTMINSTER the Monday in the Feast of St. VINCENT,
in the twentieth year of King RICHARD the 2.
Vincent, the King being in the Parliament, King.
the Bishop of Exeter being Chancellor, Chancellor.
by his commandment declared the cause wherefore the Parliament was called,
Causes of Parliament.
and alleged by many authorities of the Scriptures, that four points belonged
to every Prince to consult in his Parliament: First, that the Church should
enjoy her liberties in peace; Churches Liberties.
Secondly that all the Subjects should be governed without oppression;
Government without oppression.
Thirdly that the good laws should be maintained, Good Laws.
the evil amended, Ill Laws amended.
and justice executed; Fourthly that the Realm should be defended against the
foreign enemies: Realms defense.

Enemies.


all which the King was ready to do by good advice.

Scots.

Irish.


the hazard of Guienne, Guienne.
and the Marches of Callice, Callice marches.
and wills them to consult of the same to the least charge of the Realm.
Consultation.


Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Petitions.
Receivers of Petitions for Guienne, and other places beyond the Seas, and of
the Isls.

England, etc. as above.

Guienne, etc. as above.

Sir John Bussey chosen Speaker.
On Tuseday following, the Commons chose Sir John Bussey to be their Speaker,
whereto the King agreed; Kings assent to it.
The said Sir John had his common Protestation there allowed: Protestation
At the same time the Duke of Lancaster, required the King to do Justice upon
Sir Thomas Talbot: Sir Thomas Talbot,
the Chancellor then declared, Chancellor.
that the next day, the Causes of Parliament.


Commons desire the Bishops and Lords absent to be sent for.
to send for such Bishops and Lords as were absent: Delay.
the Chancellor answered, that the same were too long and tedious.

Canterbury, and the Earl's of Rutland, and Marshall in message to his Father
the King of France into the parts of Lumbardie, according to his promise, that
they never were moved, nor meant the same of the event of the same Voyage,
whatsoever it should be, or of any the like. They only require the King to
hold them excused, Commons excuse.

Misinterpreted.

Ambassadors slayed.


and refer the same to his own pleasure. Refer themselves to the Kings pleasure.


Whereunto the King by his own mouth declared certain causes of the same
journey; Kings speech.




First for appeasing of the Wars, Wars appeasing.
and the intolerable losses thereby ensuing. Losses by War.
The second, for that the said King was his Affinee, and Cousin, and his Ally;
Allies.
and further he thought to aid him. The third, for that in conscience he was
bound to help to vanquish the common Tryant. Conscience to Vanquish.

Common Tyrant.




The King declares further, that he would be at liberty at all the like times
to aid any his Allies. Kings Allies.

Aid.




Lancaster, for justice to be done on Sir Thomas Talbot, Sir Thom. Talbot.
the King meant to do justice upon whatsoever he were; Justice required.
yea, though of his own blood.

The Chancellor declares to the Commons, Chancellor.
that he and others of the Kings Officers, Kings Officers.
would come the next Parliament and debate with them of weighty affairs.
Parliament.


On Friday in Candlemas week, the Chancellor being willed by the King,
Chancellor.
to declare the Conference with the Commons, Conferrence with the Commons.
answered that they required four points; Commons desire.
First, for the continuance of Sheriffs; Sheriffs continuance.
The Second, for the defense of the North marches; North marches.




The Third, touching Liveries, Liveries.

Kings enterprises.


and Badges; and the Fourth, for the avoiding the outrageous expenses of the
Kings House, Household expenses.
and namely of Bishops and Ladies.

Kings answer.
and touching the fourth, seemed much offended, Offense.
saying, that he would be free therein: Kings freedom.
and that the Commons thereby committed offense against him, Commons against
the Kings Dignity and Liberty.
his Dignity, and Liberty: the which he willed the Lords to declare the next
day to the Commons. Lords to declare it


And further willed the Duke of Lancaster, to charge Sir John Bussey Speaker to
the Parliament, Speaker to declare the parties name delivered the Bill
to declare the name of him who exhibited the same Bill.

Lords declaration to the Commons.
the Saturday ensuing, they delivered the name of the Exhibiter, which was Sir
Thomas Haxey, Sir Tho. Haxey.

Knight.


the which Bill was delivered by the Cleark of the Parliament, Cleark of the
Parliament.
to the Cleark of the Crown; Cleark of the Crown.
After which the Commons forthwith came before the King, Commons excuse and
submission to the King.

Good meaning.


showing themselves heavy of cheer, and declaring that they meant no harm,
they submitted themselves to the King, and most humbly craved pardon.

Chancellor.
that the King held them excused, King excuses them.
and the King by mouth declared, that they were sunderly bound to him, Commons
bound to the King.
and namely in forbearing to charge them with Desmes, Desmes and Fifteens
forborne.
or Fifteens, the which he meant no more to charge them in his own person.

R. 2. Tit. 16. for three years, as is there contained, Tit. 17.

Subsidy.

Tunage. and Poundage granted


It is enacted, that every Merchant should bring into the Tower of London,
Merchants.




one ounce of Gold, Gold:
foraign Coin, of every sack of Wool, for every CC XL. Wool fells, and for
every half Last of Skins, or else 13 s. 4 d. for every of them, over and above
the due Customs, Customs:
and to put in Security therefore, Security:
Vide 1. H. 4. Tit. 86

Writs to the Customers and Officers of Ports, Customs:
to take such Sureties. Sureties:


Commons grant moderation of Provisors:
power to moderate the Statute of Provisors, as in 16. R. 2. Tit. 8. saving the
right of the Kings Crown. Kings Prerogative saved:


Canterbury and York, Archbishop and Clergies Oath to the Pope:
for themselves and the Clergy of their Provinces, declared to the King in
open Parliament, that forasmuch as they were sworn to the Pope and S^a of Rome,
if any thing were in Parliament attempted, in restraint of the same, they would
in no wise assent thereunto, but utterly withstand the same: the which their
Protestations, they required to be enrolled. Protestation enrolled:

Disassent to any thing against the Pope:




After that, Sir Thomas Haxey by Parliament adjudged to die as a Traitor: Sir
Tho. Haxey:




the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops, craved of the King, that the
said Thomas might have Life, Pardon of Life:

Clergy:


the which the King granted: that done, they for the honesty of the Church
required, that he might remain in their keeping, the which the King also
granted, and commanded Sir Thomas Sercie, Steward of his Household, Steward of
the Household:
to deliver the said Thomas Haxey to the Archbishop, Vide the cause of his
Judgment before Tit. 16. Vide 1. Hen. 4. Tit. 90.

Landaffe, Bishop of Landaff:
prays Restitution of the Manor of Bishippiston in Wales, Restitution:
parcel of his Temporalities, the which Thomas Beauchamp, Earl of War. since
the death of the last Bishop had kept; The Earl of War. being present, was
demanded hereof, and could not deny the same, nor show any cause, wherefore it
was adjudged, that the same Manor should be ^eized into the Kings hands, and
the Issues taken by the Earl to be answered, Judgment.




and that the said Earl should fine with the King for his contempt. Fine for
contempt.


Upon the Petition of the begging Friars there at large is enacted, Petition.

Friars me^dicants.

Transfertation.

License.


that none of that order should pass over the Seas without lycense of his
Sovereign, Sovereign.

Pr^mu^^^^.


nor that he take upon him no order of Master of Divinity, unless he were first
apposed in his Chapter Provincial, on pain to be out of the Kings protection.

William Mounteacute Earl of Salisbury, William Earl of Salisbury.
prays a Scire facias against Roger de Mortimer Earl of March, Sci^e f^c.
returnable at the next Parliament, Next Parliament.

Error.


for the Castle Town and Honor of Denbeigh and the Cantreds of Roos, Castle
and Town of Den^^igh.
Reyvinriocks, and Kardiner: and the Comote of Dimnall in Wales, the which was
granted, Vide 21. Rich. 2. Tit. 25.

Canterbury this Prerogative: Archbishop of Canterbury His Prerogative
confirmed.

Ward-ship.


That the same Archbishop and his Successors, shall have the keeping of all
Lands holden of him in Chief: and thereupon caused to be delivered to the said
Archbishop, the Castle of Tenbridg, Tenbridg Castle.
holden of him in Chief, during the minority of the heir of the Earl of
Stafford. Earl of Stafford.


England, King sole Emperor of the Realm Denization.
for the honor of his blood wileth, and of his full power enabled and made
mulier of his proper authority, Sir John Beauford his Brothers and Sisters, and
also published their legitimation, Legitimation.

Blood royal.


according to the form of his Charter, Charter.
the which was read in full Parliament, and delivered the same to the Duke of
Lancaster their Father.

John Knight, Henry Clarke, Thomas de Damosells, and Joan Beauford the damosel,
and dear children of John Duke of Lancaster. Endenization.

Legitimation.

Duke of Lancaster.




John his Cousin Earl of Somerset, Ioh. Beauford created Earl of Somerset.

Tail.

Creation money.


to have to him, and to the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, with 20
l. in the like manner yearly of the profits of the County of Somerset.

John was brought before the King in Parliament between the Earls, viz. of
Huntington, and Marshall, arrayed in a robe, Earl created: his Robes.
as in a Vesture of honor, with a sword carried before him, Sword.
the pummell whereof being gilded, And the Charter of his Creation was openly
read before the Lords and Commons: Charter of Creation read before the Lords
and Commons.

Enstaulment.


after which the King girded him with a sword aforesaid, took his homage, and
caused him to be set in his place in the Parliament, viz. between the Earls,
Marshall and War.

Nottingham, Earl of Nottingham. Tail.
and to the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten: the Office, Name and
Title of Earl Marshall of England, Earl Marshall of England.
the Office of Marshall in the Kings Bench, Kings Bench.
and in the Exchecquer, Exchecquer.
the Office of Proclaimer Marshall: the Steward, and Marshall of the Kings
Household: and further that the said Earl and his heirs males Marshalls of
England, by virtue thereof may carry before them a certain golden Staff
enamelled black at both ends, with the Kings Arms at the upper end, and his own
Arms at the nether end: the which Charter was openly read in the Parliament,
Charter read in Parliament.
and delivered to the said Earl.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Merchandise.

Variance.


Cap. 4. does not altogether agree with the Record (which note) but it agrees
with tit. 40. in the same Record.

Purveyance.

Horses.


Cap. 5. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Arrests.
or Attachments in Churchyards, Churchyards.
are therefore excommunicated, Excommunication.
whereof remedy is required.

Res.
Right shall be done to such as be specially grieved.

Arms.

Variance.


Cap. 1. agrees with the Record to this point; and moreover, the Kings etc. of
which latter point the Record makes no mention.

Liveries.
The print touching wearing of Liveries, Cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

Justices of Assize.
The print that no Lords should sit with the Justices of Assize, Cap. 3. agrees
with the Record.

Tit. 34.

Justices banished revoked.
The print touching the revocation of certain banished Justices, Cap. 6. agrees
with the Record.

Anno Vicessimo Richardi Secundi Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Johi. Duci Aquitaniae and Lancastriae, etc. apud West. die Lunae post
Festum exaltationis Sanctae Crucis etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. Decimo octavo
die Julij.
EDo. Duci Eborum. Henr. Com. Derbiae. Edro. Com. Rutland. Alberto de Vere Com
Oxoniae. Edw. de Courtney Com. Devon. Hen. Percie Com. Northumb. Iohanni
Holland Com. Huntingt. Iohani Com. Somerset. Ioh. Com. Cantii. Tho. Com
Nottingham and Maresc. Angliae. Ioh. de Monteacuto Com. Saram. Tho. le
Dispencer. Tho. Camois. Ioh. Bourchier. Ioh. Cherleton de Powis. Waltero Fitz
Walter. Ioh. de Clinton. Ioh. de Ware. Willielmo Heron. Stephano le Scroope de
Masham. Willelm. Roos de Hamelake. Hen. Fitzhugh. Ric. le Scroope. Hugoni
Burnell. Tho B^rkley de Berkley. Iohi. de Wells. Phillippo Dacre. Phillippo.
le Dispencer. Almarico de St^. Amando. Rado de Cromwell. Rado de Lumley. Rado
Baroni de Graystock. Rob. de Harrington. Will. de Willoughby. Ioh. Cobham de
Kent. Will. de Dacre. Ioh. le Strange de Knokin. Roberto de Scales. Tho. Nevill
de Halmshyre. Rico. Seymore. Will. Beauchamp de Burgav^ny. Ioh. Lovell de
Fishmerch. Rico. Gray de Codonore. Reg. Gray de Ruthin. Rado Nevill de Raby.
Tho. Bardolf. de Wer^^gey. Tho. de Morl^y. Will. de Ferrariis de Groby.
Edro. Com. Rutland Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Vicessimo primo Richardi Secundi. Rex, Writs of Summons.
Johi. Duci Aquitaniae and Lancastriae, etc. apud West. die Lunae post Festum
exaltationis Crucis etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. quinto die Novembris.
EDro. Duci Eborum. Edro. Duci Albemarlis. Tho. Duci Surr. Iohi. Duci Oxoniae.
Tho. Duci Norff. Ioh Merch^on. Dorset. Alberto de Vere Com Oxoniae. Edw.
Courtney Com. Devon. Hen. de Percie Com. Northumberl. Ioh. de Mon^eacuto Com.
Sarum. Iohi. le Dispencer. Com. Gloucester. Rado de Nevill Com. Westmerland.
Tho. Camois. Ioh. Bourchier. Ioh. Cherleton de Powis. Waltero Fitz Walter. Ioh.
de Clinton. Ioh. de War^. Willielmo Heron. Stephano le Scroope de Masham.
Willelm. Roos de Hamelake. Hen. Fitzhugh. Ric^ ^e Scroope. H^goni Burnell. Tho
Berkley de Berkley. Iohi. de Wells. Phillippo de Darcey. Phillippo. le
Dispencer. Almarico de St^. Amando. Rado de Cromwell. Rado de Lumley. Rado
Baroni de Graystock. Rob. de Harrington. Will. de Willoughby. Will. de Dacre.
Roberto de Scales. Tho. Nevill de Halmshyre. Rico. Seymore. Will. Beauchamp de
Burgaveny. Ioh. Lovell de Fishmerch. Rico. Gray de Codonore. Reg. Gray de
Ruthin. Tho. Bardolf. de Wermegey. Tho. de Morley. Will. de Ferrariis de Groby.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the Monday next after the Exaltation of
the Cross in the xxi th. year of King RICHARD the second, and from thence
adjourned to SHREWSBURY.
King.
the same Monday, being present, the Bishop of Exeter, as Chancellor of England
by his Commandment declared; Chancellor.
that the Parliament was called to the honor of God to the redress, Causes of
Parliament.




and safety of the Realm, Realms safety.
and for his Theme took the words of Ezekiel, Monarchy.
Rex unus erit omnibus: approving by many authorities, that by any other means
than by one sole King, King.
no Realm could be well governed; and that to the well governing of a good
King, three points needed; first, that the King should be puissant. King
puissant.
Secondly severe in execution of Laws, Severe in Government.
whereby he governed. Thirdly that the Subjects should be obedient to the Kings
Laws. Obedience to Laws.


To the end the King might be the more puissant, he shows, that many
Liberties, and Prerogatives were given to the King, Kings Prerogative.
which in his Coronation he was sworn to perform, Kings Coronation Oath.
so as if any thing was done to the contrary by Law, the same was revoked,
Revocation.
and therefore they thereof were now called to consult.

Laws execution.
appeared by the Common example of a good Father, who uses as well to strike as
to stroke his Child; and that the same might the better be executed, the King
had appointed new Judges, Judges. Officers.
and Officers through the Realm, and now was desirous to redress the fame
defects of the Law, Laws defects redressed.
if any there were. And that the Realm and Subjects ought to obey the King and
his Laws, Subjects obedience to King and Laws.
was apparent, for that no man could claym property of life, or of any fruit
of his travel, without the pillar of the Prince, or Law.

He concludes, that the King meant the Observation of the Laws, Laws
observation.
the continuance of all Liberties general, Liberties to all.
and special to every person, and Corporation, and further to show Pardon to
his Subjects excepting some. Pardon.


England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

Tryars of Petitions for England, etc. as above.

Guienne, etc. as above.

John Bussey for their Speaker, Sir John Bussey.

Speaker presented.


who made his Common Protestation, Protestation entered.
and prayed that the same might be entered of Record, which was granted.

Judgment reversed.
for that the Clergy were not present, Clergies absence.
the Commons prayed the King, that the Clergy would appoint some to be their
Common Proctor, Proctor.

Clergies.


with sufficient authority thereunto.

Thomas Percie their Proctor to assent, Sir Tho. Percie the Clergies Procto^.
as by their Instrument appears.

Speakers Speech.
After this Sir John Bussey rehearsed in effect, the Oration made by the
Chancellor, and so shows further, as it appears at large in the printed
Book Cap. 2.

Gloucester, Pardon^ in Parliament repealed.
and the Earls of Arundell, and War. by Parliament, in the eleventh year of
this King are repealed, as done against the Kings will by force only.

Pardon revoked.
A Pardon also granted to Richard Earl of Arundell, dated at Windsor 30. Aprilis
An. 16 R. 2. is also revoked by Parliament.

Commons Protestation and accusation.
The twentieth of September the Commons made their Protestation before the King
saying, that by accusing certain on the same day, they required that they
should not be forebarred, but that they might at any time after, during the
Parliament ef^ soones make further accusations; The which was granted, and
their Protestations entered.

Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, Commons impeachment of the Archbishop
of Canterbury.
that when he was Chancellor he procured, Chancellor.
and as Chief, executed the same Commission made traitorously in the tenth year
of the King. Commission traiterous.
And also for that the said Archbishop procured the Duke of Gloucester, and the
Earls of Arundell, and War. to incroach to themselves Royal power, Regal
power encro^ched.
and to judge to death Simon de Burleigh, and Sir John Barnes without the Kings
assent; Subjects put to death without Royal assent.
Whereupon the Commons required that the same Archbishop might rest under safe
keeping; Archbishops restraint required.
Whereunto for that the same Impeachment touched so great a person, they would
be advised.

September the Commons prayed the King to give judgment on the same
Archbishop, Judgment prayed against the Archbishop.

King to give Judgment.


according to his desert. The King answered, that privately the said Archbishop
had confessed to him, Archbishops private submission.
how he mistook himself in the same Commission, and therefore submitted
himself to the Kings mercy. Wherefore the King, King and Lords judges.
Lords, and the said Sir Thomas Percie adjudged the fact of the said Archbishop
to be treason, and himself a Traitor. Adjudged a Traitor.
And therefore it was ordered that the said Archbishop should be banished:
Archbishop banished.
his Temporallities siezed: his Lands, and Goods forfeited as in Fee,
Forfeiture of his estate.
as in use, as in possession.

Michaelmas at Dover^ toward the parts of France. Banishment.


Treason.
Cap. 3. agrees with the Record.

Sir Thomas Mortimer Knight was impeached of sundry Treasons, Sir Th. Mortimer.




as well by the Lords impeachment, Impeachment.
as by the Commons: And for that he was fled, Flight.
it was enacted that Proclamation should be made in England, Proclamation.
Submission. Conviction.
and Ireland that the said Sir Thomas should yield himself within three Months
after to the Law, or else to be reputed, and to forfeit as a Traitor.
Adherents, Traitors.
The like to be of all his Adherents, and ayders after the said three Months.
Vide the second part of this year tit. 15.

Parliament.




agrees with the Record.

The Bishops, Bishops and Lords Oath.
and Lords swore by the Shrine of St. Edward, that they would observe all
Ordinances of this Parliament, Ordinances of Parliament.
as by their Oaths hereafter may appear. It is enacted by the Common consent,
that the said Oath of the Bishops and Lords should be enrolled in the Chancery;
Oath enrolled^
So the Successors of every Bishop, and the Heirs of every the Lords should
swear the same, before their Livery had of their Temporallities; Taken before
Livery.
for the better observation hereof, the Bishops before the King pronounced
Excommunication, Excommunication.
and provided censures for the impugners of the same.

Cap. the Fifth.

The print touching the Issue of certain forejudged Cap. 6. agrees with the
Record. Issues.

Attaind^r.

Forejudged.




Cap. 7. agrees with the Record. Forejudged.


Cap. seventh agrees with the Record. Benefices.

Attainder.




William Monteacute Earl of Salisbury shows, William Monteacute Earl of
Salisbury.
as in 20. R. 2. tit. 26. and upon the Record of the Kings Bench, there
mentioned, assigned before the King certain Errors, Errors assigned in
Parliament.
whereupon was awarded to him a scire facias against Roger Mortimer Earl of
March, Scire facias.
returnable at the next Parliament. Next Parliament.


York, King purgeth^ sundry Lo^ds.
the Bishop of Worcester, and Sir Richard le Scroope, then living: William late
A^chbishop of Canterbury. Alexander late Archbishop of York, Thomas late Bishop
of Exeter, and Michael late Abbot of Waltham then being dead: of the execution,
Commissions execution.
and intent of the Commission made in Anno tenth, as being assured of their
Loyalties, and therefore by Parliament restores them to their good name.

Henry Earl of Darby, and Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, had Loyally used
themselves toward the King by coming from the Duke of Gloucester, Loyalty.
and from the Earls of Arundell, and War. traitorously assembled in defense of
the King, Traitors and Rebels desert.




The which Earls of Nottingham, and Darbie the King by Parliament took as obey
sant leiges.

The print touching the Principallitie of Chester Cap. 9. agrees Chester
Principality.
in effect with the Record, but not in full form.

Commons request Sergeants at Arms.
that the Statute made for the number, and abillitie of Sergeants at Arms shall
be executed.

Worcester Castle and Tame.
The print touching the Castle, and Town of Worcester, etc. Cap. 10. agrees
with the Record, but that the print is Winchester, where it should be
Worcester, which note.

Courts.
and Liberties of the Duke of Gloucester in Essex, Duke of Gloucester.
Cap. 11. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

It is enacted that all Judgments, Judgments, Ordinances, Declaration^, and
continue as Statutes.
Ordinances, Declarations, establishments of this Parliament shall continue as
Statutes.

Rochester, Rochester Bridge.
then newly better made in another place, And all such Tenements as accustomed,
or were wont to pay any Rents, Rents and Customs to be to the New Bridge.
or Customs to the old Bridge, should from henceforth pay the same to the new
Bridge.

Commons request.
for the defense of the North Marches. No^^h Marches defense.
The King answered that upon understanding from thence he should take order
therein.

Michaelmas week, the King shows three causes, wherefore he meant to advance
certain men. Nobles advanced.
Wherefore the King sitting then crowned in his Royal Majesty, King.
and holding in his hand the Regal Scepter, Royal Scepter.
created his Cosen Henry of Lancaster, and Earl of Darbie, Duke of Hereford,
Duke of Hereford created.

Tail.


to have to him and to the Heirs Males of his body begotten, and gave to him
the Charter of his Creation, Charter of creation read.
the which was read in open Parliament, And thereupon the King girded the Duke
with a sword, Sword girt on.
and set over his head a Cap of honor, Cap of honor as a Duke.
and Dignity of a Duke, and received of him his Homage.

The same day in the same manner, and form Sir Edward Earl of Rutland, Earl of
Rutland.
was created Duke of Aumerle. Duke of Aumerle cre^ted.


In like manner Sir Thomas de Holland Earl of Kent, Ea^l of K^nt created Duke
of Sur.
was created Duke of Surry. So was John de Holand Earl of Huntington created
Duke of Exeter. John de Holland Duke of Exeter.


Sir Tho. Mowbray Duk^ of No^folk.
So was Sir Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, created Duke of Norfolk.

In like manner the King in the absence of his Cosen, Margaret Marshall
Countess of Norfolk, created her Duchess of Norfolk during her life, Duchess
of Norfolk cre^ted.
and sent to her the Charter of the same.

So was Sir Ralph Beauford Earl of Somerset created Marquess Dorset, Marqu^ss
o^ Dorset created.
girded with a sword, and a Circle set over his head.

Thomas le Dispencer was created Earl of Gloucester. E^rl of Gloucester created.


Sir Ralph Lord Nevill was created Earl of Westmerland. Earl of Westmerland
created.


Sir Thomas de Percie was created Earl of Worcester. Earl of Worcest^r created.


William le Scroope was created Earl of Wiltshire. Ea^l of Wiltshire created.


Parliament adjourned to Shrewsbury.
The same Saturday for certain considerations the King adjourned the same
Parliament from that place to Shrewsbury, with all Westminster.

th. day of September aforesaid, sundry Bishops and Abbots there named, made
their oath to the King before the Shrine of St Edward. Oath to the King.


Oath of the Bishops and Lords to the King.


Temporal Lords.
at what time were seven Dukes.



Knights of the County.


Thomas Percie Proctor for the Clergy, Proctor for the Cle^g^e.
sworn to perform the same.

Excommunication denounced.


On Monday after the Quinden. of Hillarie, the King, Lords and Commons
assembled at Shrewsbury according to the adjournment, Parliament adjourned.

Reassembled at Shrewsbury.


where the Chancellor declared, Chancellor.
that the cause of the assembly was, Causes of Parliament.
that the whole Church and all persons, Churches and ^emples Liberties.
should have their liberties, and that thereshould be no Governors within the
Realm but one. No Governors but one in the Realm.
He also declared unto the Commons, Commons advice.
how the King should be of them informed in what wise the charges of the Realm
of Ireland, Cha^ges of Ireland
the Marches of Scotland, Ma^ches of Scotland. Callice.
and Callice, and the Land of Guienne should be born after the truce, Guienne.

Truce expired.


which would shortly end.

Sir John Bussey the Speaker, The Speakers protestation enrolled.
made his common Protestation, which was granted and enrolled.

Roger Earl of March took his Oath by the Cross of Canterbury, Earl of March.

Oath.


to peform what the other Temporal Lords before should do Cap, 12.

R. 2. agrees with the Record. Repeal of the Statutes of 11. R. 2.


Suffolk, Restitution.
Cap. 13. agrees with the Record, only in one place of the print there is the
(10 th. year) where it should be the 11 th.

John Bussey, the Speaker, The Speakers Declaration.
declared before the King, how ready the Commons were to ease the King by some
Subsidy, Commons Subsid^e A general pardon pr^yed.
and prays for the Commons, a general pardon.

Whereunto the Chancellor by the Kings commandment answered, Chancellor.
that the King would be advised until he knew of the Commons Grant. Commons
grant first to be known.


Upon that request of the Commons the Clergy gave the like power to Sir
William le Scroope of Wilts, Commons request.




to answer for them, as they late did to Sir Thomas le Percie.

John Bussey, most of the Bishops and Lords were sworn before the King again
upon the Cross of Canterbury, Speaker. Lords Commons Oath.
to repeal nothing in this year enacted, Not to repeal any thing.
so did sundry of the Proctors of the Clergy, Clergies Proctors Oath.
and most of the Commons by holding up their hands, affirmed that they the same
would do, the Oath does there appear,

England his Successors to perform the same Oath; Pope. Oath.

Kings of England and their Successors.


for that by Oath he could not bind them against the liberty of the Crown.
Liberty of the Crown.


Henry Duke of Hereford, Duke of Hereford.
by the Kings commandment, exhibited to the King in Parliament, a Schedule
containing the accusations of the Duke of Norfolk, Impeachment of the Duke of
Norf.
for words to him spoken by the said Duke of Norfolk, Words spoken.
the effect whereof in chief part was; That the King, Kings dissimulation.
notwithstanding his fair countenances, and great Oaths made, Oath.
did yet mean to oppress the Duke of Lancaster, and the said two Dukes of
Aumerle, and Exeter, and the Marquess Dorset; and that by the Oaths of other
Nobles there named.

Committee of Lords and Commons.
and Knights of the Commons there named, to determine, vid. 21. tit. 15.

Thomas le Despencer, Tho. Earl of Gloucester.
Earl of Gloucester, exhibiteth two Bills, requiring by the first, that the
Revocation of the exile of Sir Hugh le Dispencer, R^vocation of a Judgment ^n
Parliament Exile.

Hugh le Dispencer.


the Father of his Ancestor, made in 15 E. 2. might be brought before the King
and confirmed, and that the repeal of the same made in 1. E. 3. might be
revoked.

Hugh le Dispencer the Son, Hugh le Dispencer.
and his Ancestors.

Hugh le Dispencer the younger, is at large, Hugh le Dispencer.

Exile revoked.


and not elsewhere to be found that I have seen. It first shows the manner of
the apprehension of Newport Castle by whom the particular damages sustained
thereby, his judgment of exile and the errors, Exile Errors in the Judgment.
whereupon the same was revoked; In which I note.

Hugh le Dispencer.

Ca^^le.


The names of 10. Castles in Wales belonging to the said Hugh.

The names of twenty three Mannours, Mannours.
very stately, in Wales, belonging to the said Hugh, besides the Countries of
Camtresmon, Glamorgan, and Wentlock, with the County of Galesy.

Revocation.
The revocation of Sir Hugh le Dispencer the Father is above 6. wherein I note.

Hugh. Hugh le Dispencer.

Mannours.




His personal Estate.
one thousand two hundred Kine with their Calves, and Xl. Mares with Colts of
two years. Cx. drawing Horses. two thousand Hogs. CCC. Bullocks, Xl. Tun of
Wine. vi C. Bacons. iiii xx. Karcases of Martlemas Beef. vi C. Muttons in
Larder, and Tuns of Sider, Sider.
Armor, Plate, Jewels, Jewels.
and ready money better than ten thousand pound. xxx vi. Sacks of Wool, and a
Library of Books. Library.


Justices.
and Barons of the Exchecquer, Barons of Exchecquer.
for the publication of the said revocation, Revocation published.
made in the fifteenth year of E. 2. for the said Lord le Dispencer.

E. 3. as it is in the rehearsal, Revocations repeal.
and the 12. and 13 Chapters in print.

Gloucester prays, that the Revocation aforesaid may be confirmed, R^vocation
confirmed. King.
and the Repeal next above revoked, Repeal revoked.
considering that the said Repeal was made by King E. 3. at such time as E. 2.
his Father being very King, was living at the same time, and Imprisoned, that
he could not resist the same.

Lords ^^ntence of the repeal.
made in the 1. E. 3. thought the same unlawful, whereupon the King by full
assent revoketh the Repeal aforesaid, Repeal revoked.
and confirms the revocation made 15. E. 2. and restores the said Earl to
all the Inheritance of the said Hugh, Restitut^on.
and to all actions Ancestors of the said Hugh and Hugh. Actions, Ancestors.


Proviso.
or any of his Ancestors with warrantie: Kings Warrantie.
and that the said Earl, shall claim none of the said Inheritance being in the
Kings Hand.

Hereford humbly kneeling upon his knees before the King, Duke of Hereford.
requires pardon of sundry his ryots, Pardon.

Ryots.


troubles, and misdemeanors done within the Realm, Misdemeanors.
in offense of the King and of his estate, whereof the King then granted pardon
to him, and published the same afterward to the estates of his Realm.

Ratcot-bridg, Robberies.
Cap. 14. agrees with the Record.

Chancellor.
willed that if any man had, or knew where was the pardon made to Richard late
Earl of Arundell, Pardon repealed.

Richard Earl of Arundell.

Fo^feiture.


and repealed now by Parliament, he should bring the same in on loss of all
which he has; and accordingly Writs of Proclamation were sent through the
Realm. Proclamation.


Thomas Earl of Gloucester of his own free will came before the King sitting in
Parliament, Earl of Gloucester.

Oath.


and holding in his hand the Cross of Canterbury, swore thereby to the King,
that he would never impeach any the Lords here under written, neither his
Highness for the Hereditaments which late were Sir Hugh le Dispencers, Sir Hugh
le Dispencer his Son, his Ancestors, but that he would at ny time make
sufficient releases, Release of rights to Lands.
to them or to their heirs of the me upon request

Alice the late wife of Sir William Windsor Knight, requires the revocation of
a Judgment made against her, Revocation of a Judgment in Parliament.
1. R. 2. tit. 41. by the name of Alice Peers, Alice Peers.
for certain errors therein contained, whereupon it was agreed in full
Parliament, that the King upon good deliberation should end the matter,
Reference to the King
as to him should seem good.

The names of the Lords.
John Duke of Lancaster, Lords Appellants.
Edmund Duke of York, Henry Duke of Hereford, Edward Duke of Aumerle, Tho. Duke
of Surrey, John Duke of Exeter, John Marquess Dorset, Roger Earl of March, John
Earl of Salisbury, William Earl of Wilts.
Marshall, Marshal.
was committed to the Duke of Surrey; The Office of the Admiral, Admiral.

Officers.


was committed to Marquess Dorset, with this declaration, that the King was
contented that the same should be known to the Estates: Kings Prerogative.
albeit the same was freely in him to dispose, and nothing appertaining to the
Parliament. Parliament.


Committee of Lords and Commons to determine matters of Parliament.
and certain of the Commons are appointed by common consent, fully to answer
all Bills, and wholly to determine all other matters moved in the Parliament,
and not determined, with all their Dependants, according to the print, Cap 16
th.

Wherein I note a rare Example, that there was not one of the Clergy among
them. Clergy.


Staple Ware, Subsidy of Staple Commodities granted for life.
according to the last grant, and one Desme, Desmes and Fifteens
and half a Desme, with one xv. and half xv.

Rotcot-bridg: and further to consider the great Charge of the Lords
Appellants, Ryots.

Lords Appellants charges.


whereto the King granted.

Kings pardon.
with excepting certain, agrees with the print, Cap. 15.

Kings Declaration Pardon to cease if the Subsidy were impunged.
that if the Lords or Commons should at any time impunge the grant of the
Subsidy during his life then granted, that then the pardon should cease.

Chancellor.
After which done, the Chancellor by the Kings commandment, gave thanks to the
Lords and Commons for their travels, Kings thanks.
and granted, and willed the Knights and Burgesses to sue forth their Writs,
Writs for wages.

Parliament end den.


and so licensed them to depart the Thursday aforesaid.

Petitions answered by the Lords appointed before tit. 64. The Tuesday next
after St. EDWARD.
THe Merchants Denisons, Merchants, Aliens.
and Aliens of the Realm require to have the Act made in 20 R. 2. tit. 14. to
be repealed, Repeal.
considering that the Duke of Burgundy had enacted, Duke of Burgundy.
that no man should carry forth any Bullion out of the same Country of
Flaunders. Bullion.


The King will send his especial Letters to the said Duke, Resp.

Kings Letters.


and to other his Officers, and Ministers therein, as often as need shall require.

R. 2. tit. 48. shall be observed in all points, Shoemakers.
notwithstanding any repeal to the contrary.

The print touching the Staple at Callice, Staple.

Callice.


Cap. 18. agrees with the Record in effect, though not in form.

The print for bringing Ships fraught with Stone to Callice, Ships. Stone.

Callice.


Cap. 18. agrees in manner with the Record, but not fully.

The print touching annoyance by Water-mills, Nusances.




Cap. 19. agrees with the Record.

Revocation of Acts Treason.
Cap. 20. agrees with the Record.

Bishops and Lords Oath.
and Lords at such time as they should have Livery of their Temporallities, or
Lands was altered, viz. for the Observation of the Acts, To observe the acts
and Orders of Parliament.
and Orders passed by Parliament, as for any Orders made within the time of the
Parliament, as by those several Oaths may there appear.

March in the 22th. year of King R. 2. it was declared, how Henry Duke of
Hereford, Hen. Duke of Hereford.
after the judgment given against him at Coventre, Judgment.
had procured by Letters Patents from the King, that he might during his
absence by his Attornyes sue, Attorney.
and have Liveries of any Lands descended to him, Livery sued.
and his Homage respited, Homage respited.
which Letters Patents were declared to be against the Law: Patents against Law
revoked.
whereupon the King by the advice of the Committees aforesaid, Committee.
and assent of Parliament, revokes those Letters Patents.

Norfolk is also made. Patents nulled.


The observation of which Statute, Statutes to be observed.




and other Ordinances made as well at Coventre as elsewhere by authority of
Parliament, sundry Bishops, and Lords, and certain of the Commons there named
were the same Tuesday sworn before the Kings person to perform upon the Cross
of Canterbury.

Chancellor.
openly, Oath.
that as many as were sworn, and would the observation, should hold up their
right hands, Holding up Hands.
which was done by the whole multitude in the Kings presence.

Note that there is another Roll of this year and contents, marked with the
Letter E.

In one Roll of this year marked with the Letters F. I. are contained the
accusations of the Lords Appellants against the Duke of GLOUCESTER, Lords
Appellants.

Accusations.


the Earls of ARUNDEL, and WAR. etc. and Sir THOMAS MORTIMER with their
Arraignments, and judgments more particularly than before.
tit. 15 and namely for sending by virtue thereof, Treason.

Commission procured.


for Oswald Bishop of Galloway in Scotland the Kings enemy. Bishop of Galloway.


Harringey in Middlesex, Raising War.
and coming into the Court into the Kings presence armed. Coming armed to the
Kings presence.


Accroaching Royal power.
and contrary to the Kings Commandment at the Parliament in 11 R. 2. adjudged,
Adjudging Sir Simon Bu^le^gh to death in Parliament against the K^ng^ command.
and caused Sir Simon Burleigh Knight to be put to death as a Traitor.

Michael in Anno 11. at Huntington purposed to have surrendered from the King
their Homage, Purpose to surrender their Homage and Allegiance.
and Allegiance, and to have deposed the King. Kings deposing.


Reco^d emb^ase^^d
whereby he surrendered the Kingdom, Kingdom surrend^ed.
the which they showing unto the King at the Parliament at Westminster in the
eleventh, said then to the King, that they had good cause then to depose him,
Kings deposition delayed.
but they stayed the same for the love of his Noble Grandfather, and Father,
and in hope of his better Government.

In another Roll annexed thereunto, and entitled as follows. Placita Coronae
coram Domino Rege in Parliamento suo at ud Westminster. die Lunae proximae post
Festum Exaltationis Sanctae Crucis, Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi post
Conquestum 21.
Impeachment, Treason.
and circumstances contained in the last Roll, next before are expressed.

Articles proved.
whose names were Edward Earl of Rutland. Thomas Earl of Kent. John Earl of
Huntington, Thomas Earl of Nottingham, John Earl of Somerset, John Earl of
Salop. Thomas Lord le Dispencer, and William le Scroope Knight.

Appellants.
that such persons appealed, as were under Arrest, Arrest.
might come to their answer; Answer of the parties appealed.
At which time it was commanded to Ralph Lord Nevill there present, Ralph Lord
Nevil Constable of the Tower.
Constable of the Tower, to bring forth Richard Earl of Arundell being in his
Custody, Earl of Arundel brought to the Parliament.
whom the said Constable brought into the Parliament the 21. of September. At
what time the Lords Appellants came also in their proper persons.

Lancaster Steward of England, by the Kings commandment, and assent of the
Lords, declared the whole circumstances; After the reading, and declaring
whereof, the Earl of Arundell says, His Impeachment.

Earl of Arundel pleads his pardon in Parliament, Pardons not allowed, as
unlawful.




and another after that.


that he had one pardon made at the Parliament, in the 11 R. 2. and one pardon
made within six years before that present time, and prays that they may be
allowed.

His further Answer.
that for as much as they were unlawfully made, the present Parliament had
revoked them.

Walter Clopton the Chief Justice by the Kings commandment, Sir Wall. Clopton
Chief Justice.
declared to the Earl that if he said no other thing, that the Law would
adjudge him guilty of all the Actions against him, Judgment by Nihil dicit.
The which Earl notwithstanding would say no other thing, but required
allowance of his pardon. He insists on his pardon.


The Lords Appellants therefore in proper person require, that Judgment may be
given against the said Earl, Judgment demanded against him.
as convict of the Tresons aforesaid. Judgment given, to Treason. Kings.
The Duke of Lancaster by the assent of the King, Bishops, and Lords, Lords,
Judges.
adjudged the said Earl convict of all the Articles aforesaid, and thereby a
Traitor to the King, Traitor to the King and Realm.
and Realm, and that he should be therefore hanged, drawn, and quartered, and
for^eit all such his Lands in Fee, Forfeitu^e of Fee and Tail Lands and Goods.
or Fee tail, as he had the nineteenth day of November, in the tenth year of
the King, together with all his Goods, and Chattels.

His hanging, draw^ng, and qua^tering pardoned.
drawing, and quartering, and granted that he should be beheaded. Beheaded.
And thereupon commandment was given to the Lord de Morley Lieutenant of the
Marshall of England, Lo^d de Mo^ley L^eutenant Marshall.
to do execution next to the Tower of London, and so the said Earl was beheaded
the same day.

Th. Earl Marshall Captain of Callice.
Upon a Writ sent to Thomas Earl Marshall, Captain of Callice, to bring forth
the body of Thomas Duke of Gloucester; Duke of Gloucester.
the said Captain returned the said Earl was dead in his keeping, The retu^n
the Duke was dead.
in the Kings prison at Callice. After which return read in Parliament,
Parliament.
the Lords Appellants in proper persons required, that the said Duke might be
adjudged even as a Traitor; Duke adjudged a Traitor after his death.
The Commons required the same: Whereupon the Duke was adjudged a Traitor. And
that he should forfeit all such Lands in Fee, Lo^ds in Fee and Fee Tail, and
Goods forfeited.
or Fee-tayl, as he had the thirteenth day of November in the eleventh year of
this King, and all his Goods, and Chattels.

Confession.

Examinat^on.


or Record touching the aforesaid appeal of the persons appealed, that the same
might openly be declared; Whereupon one Commission directed to Will. Richill one
of the Justices of the common Place to take the examination of the said Duke
was returned, Commission read.

Richill.

Examination taken and returned, writ with the Dukes one hand.


and read, with the examination of the said Earl, made and written in the
Castle of Callice, with the very hand of the said Duke.

The Confession first declares, how that he was one that procured the
Commission made in Anno 10. and thereby accroached to himself regal power in
restraint of the King, His he^p procured the Com^ission.

A^c^oached royal power.

Rest^aint of the King and his Pre^ogative.


and Derogation of his Prerogative, as since he learned, albeit he then thought
it not any, and therefore craveth pardon. He further confesses an offense for
coming armed into the Kings presence, albeit he did the same for dread of his
life, and craveth pardon therefore. Craveth pardon.

Fear of death.




Pa^don craved.
He further acknowledges an offense for taking the Kings Leters from the Kings
Messengers, Taking the Kings L^tters
and interrupting the same.

Slanderous words.
He also accuses himself for speaking slanderous words to the King in the
presence of others, albeit he meant no harm.

Homage surrendered.
He further confesses his evil for asking of certain learned with others,
whether he might not give up their Homage for fear of their lives, which they
meant.

Meant to depose the King.
Finally he confesses, that he with others for two or three days space, meant
to have deposed the King. For all which his unkindness he craveth pardon.

Judge Richill attests his Confession to be f^ee^
After the reading hereof William Rickhill in open Parliament affirmed the said
Confession to be made by the said Duke of his own free will, being of perfect
remembrance.

Warwick was brought into the Parliament, Earl of Warwick brought to Parliament.
by the Constable of the Tower the 28th. of September, Constable of the Tower.
at what time the Lords Appellants were in proper person, Lords Appellants.
and to the which Earl the Duke of Lancaster Steward of England, The Lord
Steward declared the accusations.
declared the accusations contained before in the tit. 12.13.

The same Earl confessed all the points of Treason aforesaid, The Earls
confession.
and submitted himself to the Kings grace; Submission.

Lords, Judges.


Whereupon the said Duke by assent of Parliament gave the like Judgment of
this Earl, Judgment against him.




as of the Earl of Arundell before tit. ^7. for like Lands, and Goods to have
relation to the 13th. day of November in the 10th. year.

After Judgment the King at the request of the Lords Appellants, Lords and
Commons request.
and Commons, to the said Earl pardons the execution aforesaid, His life
pardon^d.
and gran^eth to him life, to remain banished during the same in the Isle of
Man, Banishment.

Man.


upon condition that no means should be made of any further favor to him.
Condition.
And the said Earl was delivered to Sir William le Scroope, and Sir Stephen his
Brother, to bring him to the said Isle, He is sent to the Isle of Man to be
kept.
both of whom undertook body for body, Mainprise body for body.
safely to keep the said Earl, in the said Isle without departing there from.

Thomas Mortimer Knight for the Treasons aforesaid, Sir Tho. Mortimer.
who was fled into the wild parts of Ireland; His flight into Ireland.
whereupon the Parliament assigned a certain day for the said Thomas to come,
Day assigned him to come in.
and render himself to the Law, or else to be as a Traitor, Traitor.
and that thereof Proclamation as aforesaid. Proclamation.
The Lords Appellants came into the Parliament in proper persons, and required
Judgment of the said Thomas as before. Judgment demanded against him.
Vide in this year before tit. 9.

16. The Duke of Lancaster therefore as Steward of England, Lords Judges.

Steward of England pro tempore.


by the assent of the Parliament, adjudged the said Sir Thomas, attainted of
the Treasons aforesaid, and that he should forfeit all such Lands in Fee,
Forfeiture.
or Fee-tayl as he had the 13th. of November in Anno tenth, together with all
his Goods and Chattells.

The said Lords Appellants impeached Sir John Cobham Knight, Sir John Cobham.




for the Articles expressed in tit. 12. and 13. He answered that he did not the
same of his own procuring, but by the Kings sundry Commandment: Kings command.
notwithstanding the said Duke pronounced him by assent of Parliament a
Traitor, judgment against him as a Traitor.

Treasons.


and therefore death^ that he should forfeit all such Lands as he had in Fee
the nineteenth of November Anno tenth with his Goods, Forfeiture.
and all fee tayled Lands for term of his own life only, Tail forfeited.
the remainder to the right heirs in Tail: notwithstanding the King, after of
his mere grace grants life to the said Sir John Cobham, so that he should
remain in prison in the Isle of Iersey during his life; His life pardoned.

Imprisonment i^ Iersy for life.


and so as no further means of pardon were made for him.

Henry Duke of Hereford, Accusation.
made against the Duke of Norfolk and the Order therein taken, Duke of Norfolk.
as may appear in the 21. before tit. 53. and 54.

March after the accusation aforesaid, both the Dukes appeared before the King
at Bristow, Dukes appearance.

Bristow.


where by assent of Parliament it was agreed, Trial by Martial Law by assent
of Parliament.
that the determination of the same should be ended according to the Law of
Chivalrie, if sufficient proofs were not found.

Dukes appearance.
On the 28th. day of April both the said Dukes appeared before the King at
Windsor, to whom day was given over to appear there on Monday the 29. of April.

Battle joined.

Count Marshall.


On which Monday both the said Dukes appeared, and the Battle was joined
betwixt them, by the advice of a great number of Dukes, Earls, Bishops, Barons
and Knights there assembled, as those who had authority by Parliament, for that
no sufficient proofs could in the mean time be found. Want of proofs.


The King takes up the Battle.
Notwithstanding the King weighing the weightiness of the cause, and how nigh
the said Dukes were to him in blood, for tender love took the Battle into his
own hands, and gave Judgment by authority of Parliament, Gives judgment of
banishment for 10 years.
that the said Duke of Hereford should by a certain day then appointed depart,
and avoid out of the Realm for ten years, and that he should in no wise during
the same term, come in the Company of the said Duke of Norfolk, or of Thomas
Swandell, neither send nor receive any Letters, No Letters nor intelligence.
or Message from them on pain of treason, Treason.
and that not for want of proof of his said accusation, for that he was ready
therein to do his devoir.

Norfolk, Duke of Norfolk.
it was said, that for as much as he had spoken certain words, S^ditious words.
tending to great trouble, and therein reecitd, he was therefore banished the
Realm during his life, Banishment for life into Almayn, Hungary or Bohemia.
to avoyde by a day there limited, and to remain in Almayne, Boheme, or
Hungary, and in no other parts of Christendom, and to pass over the Sea in
Pilgrimage, Pilgrimage.
and further as above on pain of Treason, Treason.
and that for no default, that the said Duke had made in his defense, Defense
rejected.
considering that therein he was ready to make his devoir.

Norfolk sundry Mannours, Lands, Lands, given him forfeited.
and Tenements for joining in the Appeal with the Lords Appelants aforesaid, He
refused to proceed in the app^als.
wherein for that the said Duke failed to proceed without any good ground, the
King adjudged by Act of Parliament, that the said Duke should forfeit all the
said Lands, Officers.

Warranty forfeited.


and all his Offices during his life, together with all Warranties, whereby any
the Kings Ancestors were bound to any the Ancestors of the said Duke.

Arrears to the King.
And also for certain payments behind, and due to the King by the said Duke,
during such times as he was Deputy of Callice, Depu^y of Callice.
The King by authority of Parliament adjudged to seize into his hands, His
Lands seized into the Kings Hands.
all the Hereditaments of the said Duke over and above M l. yearly to be
allowed to the said Duke until the King were satisfied. Allowance.


To the judgment of the said Duke of Norfolk is annexed a Certificate from the
town of Lenestooke in Suffolk, Certificate.

His exile.


of the day of the passage of the said Duke toward Draight in Holland, having
in his Company to the number of thirty persons.

Incharitableness, None to sue for release of judgments.
or procure any suit for them to be made of any release of their Judgments on
pain of treason.

And note that in all the Judgments aforesaid, Cleargies Proxy.
the name, and assent of the Procurator of the Clergy is alleged. Quero
whether it were not the Procu^ator of the Bishop absent.


March in the two and twentieth year of the King, the King by assent of the
Lords, as having full authority therein, does adjudge Sir Robert Pleasington
Knight then dead a Traitor, Sir To. Pleasington adjudged a Traitor after his
death for Levying War.

Forfeiture.


as procuring with the Duke of Gloucester, the levying of War at Harringey, for
which he should lose all such his Lands in Fee or Fee tail, King Judge.
and goods which he had the thirteenth of November in Anno 11.

Henry Bowet Cla^ke for being of Counsel, Henry Bowet.
of the device made to the Duke of Hereford expressed before in tit. 87. Was
adjudged to dye, and forfeit as a Traitor, Treason.
notwithstanding he was after pardoned of life, Pardon.
and banished the Realm. Banishment.


And note that there is one Roll of this year Entitled, Copia Iudiciorum.

Anno Vicessimo tertio Richardi Secundi. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. dilecto Consanguineo suo Henrico Duci Lancastriae salutem apud Westminster. in
Cro. Sancti Michaelis prox. futur. Test Rege apud Cestrium xxix. die Augusti.
EDro. Duci Eborum. Edro. Duci Albemarliae. Tho. Duci Surr. Iohi. Duci Oxoniae.
Iohi. Marchioni Dorset. Tho. de Bellocampo Com. War. Alberto de Vere Com
Oxoniae. Edro. Courtney Com. Devon. Ioh. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Hen. Percie
Com. Northumb. Edo Com. Stafford. Michael de la Poole Com. Suffs. Tho. de
Percie de Wigor. Tho. de le Dispencer. Com. Gloucest. Rado Nevill Com.
Westmerland. Tho. Camois. Ioh. Bourchier. Iohi. de Cherleton de Powis. Willo.
de Clinton. Mro. Tho. de la Ware. Stephano le Scroope de Masham. Willelm. Roos
de Hamelake. Hen. Fitzhugh. Will. de Ferrariis de Groby. Tho. de Morley. Ric.
le Scroope. Hugoni Burnell. Tho. Berkley de Weekley. Iohi. de Wells.
Phillippo. le Dispencer. Almarico de St. Amando. Rado de Cromwell. Rado de
Lumley. Rado Baroni de Graystock. Rob. de Harrington. Iohi. Darcey. Waltero
Fitz-Walter. Will. de Willoughby. Iohi. de Cobham Chlr. Will. de Dacre. Tho.
Nevill de Halmshyre. Rico. Seymore. Will. Beauchamp de Burgaveny. Ioh. Lovell
de Fishmerch. Rico. Gray de Codonore. Reg. Gray de Ruthin. Tho. Bardolf de
Wermegey. Roberto Scales. Petro de malo lacu.
Tho. Erpingham Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Primo Henrici Quarti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Henr. Duci Lancastriae, etc. apud Westminster. in Festo Sct. Fidis Virginis
etc. Sexto die Octobris 13. 99. Test Rege apud Westminster. 30. Septembris.
EDro. Duci Eborum. Edro Duci Albemarliae. Tho. Duci Surr. Iohi. Duci Oxoniae.
Iohi. Marchioni Dorset. Tho. de Bellocampo Com. War. Alberto de Vere Com
Oxoniae. Edro. Courtney Com. Devon. Ioh. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum. Hen. Percie
Com. Northumb. Edro Com. Stafford. Michael de la Poole Com. Suffs. Tho. de
Percie Com. Wigor. Tho. de le Dispencer. Com. Gloucest. Rado Nevill Com.
Westmerland. Tho. Camois. Ioh. Bourchier. Iohi. de Cherleton de Powis. Willo.
de Clinton. Mro. de la Ware. Stephano le Scroope de Masham. Willelm. de Roos de
Hamelake. Hen. Fitz^ Hugh. Will. de Ferrariis de Groby. Tho. de Morley. Ric. le
Scroope. Hugoni Burnell. Tho. Berkley de Berkley. Iohi. de Wells. Phillippo.
le Dispencer. Almarico de St. Amando. Rado de Cromwell. Rado de Lumley. Rado
Baroni de Graystock. Rob. de Harrington. Iohi. Darcey. Waltero Fitz-Walter.
Will. de Willoughby. Iohi. de Cobham Chlr. Will. de Dacre. Tho. Nevill de
Halmshyre. Rico. Seymore. Will. Beauchamp de Burgaveny. Ioh. Lovell de
Fishmerch. Rico. Gray de Codonore. Reg. Gray de Ruthin. Tho. Bardolf de
Wermegey. Roberto Scales. Petro de malo lacu.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the Monday in the Feast of St. Faith in
the First year of King HENRY the Fourth.
Archbishop.
1 THe same Monday being the 6th. of October, Thomas de Arundell, Archbishop of
Canterbury, by the Kings commandment, King.
who then sat in his Royal Estate in the great Hall at Westminster, Causes of
Parliament.
there being present the Lords and Commons, declared how that a Parliament was
summoned by King Richard, to be holden there the Tuesday next before, the which
summons was undone and void by the acceptance of the renouncing of the same
King Richard, Parliament dissolved by King Richards renunciation and deposing.
and deposing of him, made the same Tuesday in the presence of the King, Lords,
and Commons, as by the Process hereafter shall appear.

Childrens government.
2 He then showed, how this most famous Realm for abundance of all felicities,
was long governed by children and young Council, Young Council.
and thereby like utterly to have been despoiled and wasted, had not God sent a
wise and discreet man to govern the same, Wise Kings and Governors.
who meant by Gods help to be governed by the wise and old heads of the Realm.
Old and wise Council.


Kings Issue will govern by advise and consent of his Sages, not after his own
will.

Englands self-sufficiencie.

Preheminencie.


3 After this he took for his Theme these words of the Maccabees, 1. Incumbit
nobis ordinare pro Regno, and that is to say, It is the Kings will to be
governed by the Honorable, Discreet, and Sage of the Realm, and by their common
consent, and not by his own will, ne after his own fashion to rule the same;
And further enforced, that this Realm of any under the Sun might best live of
it self, and for proof alleged this Authority, quod inter Regna, hoc
principatum tenet.

Good government.
4 He further adds, that to every good government three things belong, viz.
Justice; Justice.
the Laws duly observed; Laws executed.
and every Estate in his vocation well governed: and thereupon heaped many
reasons, whereof this Realm ought with all renown to be governed: and said
further, that the King meant to observe those three points.

King Henr. Coronation.
5 He concluded, that King Henry their Lord, meant to be crowned the Monday
ensuing, and after that done, wholly to addict himself to matters touching the
Commonwealth: Common^wealth.
and prays of the Commons, Commons.
the continuance of the Parliament until the Tuesday ensuing: Parliament
adjourned by the Lords and Commons assent.
after which Henry de Percie, Earl of Northumberland, Earl of Northumberland
and Constable of England.
and Constable of England, demanded of the Lords and Commons by the Kings
commandment, whether they would agree to the same continuance, who all being
severally examined, agreed thereunto.

6 Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

7 Receivers of Petitions for Gascoin, Petitions.
and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

8 Tryars of Petitions for England, etc. as above.

9 Tryars of Petitions for Gascoin, etc. as above.

The Record of the renunciation of King Richard the Second, Richard 2.
Renunciation and Deposition.
and the acceptance of the same, together with the deposition of the said King.

10 On Monday the Feast of St. Michaell, in the 23 year of the reign of King
Richard, The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Hereford, Henry Earl of
Northumberland, Ralph Earl of Westmerland, Hugh Lord Burnell, Thomas Lord
Berkley, the Prior of Canterbury, and the Abbot of Westminster, William
Thurming Knight, William Markham Justice, Thomas Stow, John Bur^ach, Doctors of
the Law, Thomas of Erpinham, and Thomas Gray, Knights, William Forraby, and
Dennis Lopham, public Notaries by the assent of sundry of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, Notary public.
and other Lawyers of of all faculties, Lawyers.
gathered in Council in Westminster in the place accustomed, appointed to
execute the Act here underwritten, came to the presence of King Richard, being
in the Tower, about nine of the clock.

11 The Earl of Northumberland for and in the name of them all, remembered the
said King Richard, King Rich. promise to renounce and give up the Crown for his
Defaults and unabilities.
of his promise made to the said Archbishop, and to him the said Earl at
Conway in Wales, at what time the said King Richard was at liberty, How that
he for certain defaults and inabillities in himself to rule, would renounce and
give up the Crowns of England and France, with the whole rule of the same, and
that by the best advice that could be devised; King Richard thereto mildly
answered, That he would willingly accomplish the same.

12 After this the same day Henry Duke of Lancaster, accompanied with the
persons aforesaid, with the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lords of Roos,
Willoughby and of Burgaveny, came into the Tower into the presence of the said
King Richard, King Richard 2. his Renunciation.
where, after familiar talk had between the King, the Duke, and Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, and sundry cheerful countenances; In the end the same King,
calling all them that were present, said openly That he was ready to make his
aforesaid Renunciation; and thereupon it was offered that the Instrument should
be read by an Order. Instrument of it read.
The same King, notwithstanding willingly and cheerfully took and thoroughly
read the same Instrument, in effect following.

13 The Instrument contained a clear absolution and discharge of all his
Subjects Oaths and Obeisance; The Instrument of Renunciation^ Subjects Oaths
and Obedience discharged.

His Oath to confirm it.


with free renouncing of all Regiment and Rule, and all things belonging
thereto; to all which he swore upon the Gospel, never in thought, word, or
deed to impugn, but wholly to observe the same: the which Scedule or Instrument
he subscribed with his own hand. His subscription of it.


14 After which done, the same King by word affirmed, That if it had been in
his power, he would have appointed the said Duke of Lancaster to have succeeded
him, He would have appointed H^nry 4. to succeed him, were it in his power.
which since it did not, he required the said Arch Bishop of Canterbury and the
Bishop of Hereford, whom he made his Procurators, His Procurat to publ^sh it.
to publish the same to the whole Estates and in token thereof pulled from his
own finger a Ring of Gold of his own privy Signet, His priv^e Signet put ^n
Henry 4. his ^inger
and put the same on the Dukes finger.

Westminst^r Hall.
15 This company bidding the King farewell, departed out of the Tower, and came
the next day into the great Hall of Westminster, the place being honorably
garnished for the Parliament, Parliament.
where the said Archbishop and Duke, and other Bishops and Lords after named,
together with the Commons siting in their accustomed place, where also the
Kings Seat being very richly decked was void of any President; Kings Th^one
void.
A^ which time the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Hereford caused the
renunciation aforesaid to be openly read and declared, The R^nunciation read
and admitted.
with all other circumstances; of which the Arch Bishop as chief was first
demanded, and so orderly of all others, whether they would admit the same
Confession or no, all who particularly admitted the same.

Articles against R. 2. for which he ought to be deposed.
16 After which admission it was thought good and expedient over and above the
same, to express by certain Articles, the evil government of the King,
whereby he ought justy to be deposed.

Coronation Oath.
17 First was alleged the Kings Oath made at his Coronation.

Articles 33.
18 The Objections and Articles laid against the King Richard wherefore he was
deposed, are in the whole the number of 33 worth the noting and well marking.

Crown Lands wasted.
19 First for wasting and bestowing of the lands of the Crown upon unworthy
persons, and over charging the Commons with Exactions. Commons overcharged.


Justices procured to speak against Law.

Nobl^s unjustly destroyed.


20 For that the King by undue means procured diverse Justices to speak against
the Law, to the destruction of the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earls of
Arundell and Warwick at Shrewsbury.

Rebels and Murders in Cheshire.
21 For that the King against his promise, procured the Duke of Ireland sundry
Rebels about Cheshire, where diverse murders by him were committed.

Murdering the Duke of Gloucester and others against his own promise, and
pardon.
22 For that the King against his own promise and pardon, at the solemn
procession apprehended the Duke of Gloucester, and sent him to Callice, there
to be choked and murdered, beheading the Earl of Arundell, and banishing the
Earl of Warwick, and the Lord Cobham.

His Soldiers Murders, Rapes, Fellonies, Plunder, Free Quarter unredressed.
23 For that the Kings retinue, and rout gathered out of Cheshire about the
apprehension of those Nobles, committed diverse Murders, Rapes, and other
Fellonies, besides refusing to pay for their Victuals.

24 For that the King condemned the Nobles aforesaid, Nobles condemned against
his Proclamation.
for diverse rodes made within the Realm, contrary to his open Proclamation.

25 For that the King doubly Fined men for their pardons. Double Fines for
Pardons.


26 For that the King to oppress his whole Subjects, procured in his l^st
Parliament, that the power thereof was committed to certain Persons. Power of
Parliament committed to a Committee.


27 For that the King being sworn to minister right, did notwithstanding enact
in the last Parliament, that no mediation should be made for the Duke of
Lancaster, For breach of his Oath in prohibiting mediations.
contrary to his said Oath.

28 For that the Crown of England being freed from the Pope, Crown of England.

Freedom.


and all other foreign power, the King notwithstanding procured the Popes
Excommunication on such as brake the last Parliament, Popes excommunication
procured in derogation thereof the Laws.
in derogation of the Crown, Statutes and Laws of the Realm.

29 For that the King banished the Duke of Lancaster for 10. years, Banishment
without the cause.
without any cause, as the same King openly affirmed.

30. For that the King unlawfully revoked the Letters Patents, Illegal
revocation of Letters Patents.
made to the said Duke of Lancaster, as in An 21. Tit. 87.

31 For that the King contrary to the Laws and wills of the Justices, suffered
Sheriffs to continue longer than one year, Sheriffs continued above one year.
and placed such therein, as were unfit. Sheriffs unfit.


32. For that the King repayed not to his Subjects debts of them borrowed.
Loanes not repayed.


33 For that the King in the time of Truce and Peace, exacted great Subsidies,
Subsidies exacted in times of Peace.

Misspent.


and wasted the same about frivilous matters.

34 For that the King refused to execute the laws, Laws unexecuted.
saying that the laws were in his Mouth and Breast. Laws in his breast.


35 For that the King, by procuring by Statutes that he might be free as any of
his Progenitors, Prerogative abused to subvert Laws.
did under color thereof convert laws according to his will.

36 For this which agrees with the first part of the thirtieth title before.

37 For that the King procured Knights of the Shires to be made to serve his
own will. Knights of Shires procured for his own end.


38 For that the King enforced Sheriffs to be sworn to execute all
commandments under the great Seal, Oaths unusual for Sheriffs to execute his
commands.
privy Seal, or Signet, contrary to their accustomed Oaths.

39 For that the King, to wrack money from his Subjects, Exactions of moneys
from his Subjects.
procured seventeen several Shires to submit themselves to his Grace, whereby
great sums of money were levied.

40 For that the King being sworn to observe the liberties of the Church,
Churches Liberties violated against his Oath.

Ar^ay.

Purveyance.


notwithstanding, at his Voyage into Ireland enforced diverse religious persons
to give Horse, Armor, and Carts.

41 For that the Justices, Justices discountenanced: threatened for their good
Counsel.
for their good good council given to the King, were with evil countenance,
and threats rewarded.

42 For that the King of his own will, in passing into Ireland, carried with
him, the Treasure, Jewels and Treasures transported into Ireland.
Relics, and other Jewels of the Realm, which were used safely to be kept in
the Kings own Coffers from all hazard: and for that the same King cancelled,
Cancelling and razing Records.
and razed sundry Records.

His ill fame and dissimulation.
43 For that the King by writing to foraign Princes, and to his own Subjects is
reputed universally, a most variable and dissembling man.

Tyranical speech.
44 For that the King would commonly say among the Nobles, that all Subjects
Lives, Subjects, Lives, and Goods in his hands without forfeiture.
Lands, and Goods, were in his hands without any forfeiture.

45 For that the King suffered his Subjects to be condemned by Marshall Law,
Subjects condemned by Marshall Law against his Oath.
contrary to his Oath and the Laws of the Realm.

46 For that the Subjects being only bound by their allegiance, were yet driven
to take certain new Oaths, Oaths new imposed on the Subjects.
for serving the folly of the King.

47 For that the King by his private Letters, would charge the Ecclesiastical
Ministers in any new Canonical matter, Stay of Ecclesiastical proceedings
against his Oath.
to stay, contrary to his Oath.

48 For that the King by force in his Parliament, banished the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Banishment without grounds^

The Archbishop.


without any good ground.

49 For that the King by his last will passed under the great Seal and privy
Signet, gave unto his Successors, certain Money and Treasure, upon condition to
perform all the Acts and Orders in the last Parliament, His last Will and
Legacies to his Successors upon ungodly conditions.
which being ungodly, and unlawful, he meant as ungodlily to dye in.

50 For that the King in the 11. of his Reign, in his Chapel, in the Manor
of Langley, in the presence of the Duke of Lancaster and York, and others,
received the Sacrament of the Lords Body, that he would never impeach the Duke
of Gloucester his Uncle, Duke of Gloucester murdered against his solemn Oath.
for any thing before done, and yet to the contrary he procured him to be
murdered.

51 For that the King most fraudulently and untruely against his own Oath,
banished the Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop banished against his Oath.
and wasted his Goods: in which Article in private conference between the King
and the said Arch Bishop, the King in a manner prophesied, His prophecy of
retaliation to himself.
and doubted that the like would happen of himself, and thereupon showed a
special token to the Arch Bishop, that if he sent the same at any time, that
the Archbishop should look that the King would come to him.

52 After this for the causes aforesaid, and the Kings own confession of his
defects, the same seemed sufficient to the whole Estates for the Kings
deposition: Sufficient causes to depose K. Ric. 2.
whereupon by one consent, they appointed the Bishop of Asaph, the Abbot of
Glastonbury, the Earl of Lancaster, the Lord Berkley, Sir Thomas Erpingham, and
Sir Thomas Gray Knights, and Sir William Thurning Justices, Commissioners for
giving sentence of deposition, Commissioners to give Judgment of Deposition
and deposing of the same King R.

53 The sentence of deposition by the Commissioners aforesaid. The sentence of
Deposition.


54 This being done, Henry Duke of Lancaster, so soon as the Kingdom was
vacant, arose out of his seat, and standing upright, so as he might be seen of
the whole people, did humbly cross himself on his forhead and breast, and first
calling on the name of CHRIST, claimed the Kingdom and Crown of England, Henry
Duke of Lancaster, his claim to the Crown by descent from Henry 3.
with the appurtenances, then being void, as his Inheritance descending by
right from King Henry the Third, through Gods grace, through help of his
Kindred and Friends.

55 After which claim made, and consultations had amongst the Lords and
Estates, The Lords and Estates upon consultation assent to elect him King.
they altogether assented that the same Duke should reign over them; and
fortwith so soon as the same King showed unto the Estates the Signet of King
Richard purporting the same their election; The Archbishop of Canterbury took
the same King Henry by the right hand, and brought him to the Royal Seat,
Installed in the royal Thron.
where King Henry, on his knees, made a short prayer: after which the two
Archbishops brought and caused King Henry to sit in the Royal Seat.

56 And before the people could make an end of their joying, the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury made a short Collation, Archbishop
taking this for his Theme; Vir dominabitur vobis 1. Reg. 9. He discourses
thereupon, and says, God forgetting his offense, where he said, Dabo pueros
Principes eorum Esai. 3. turns the same into mercy, and says, Vir dominabitur
populo; He then shows the properties of a Child, Child's properties.
that soon promises and soon forgets, by which inconveniences no Kingdom
could stand: He shows then the conditions of a man, A Man's properties.
which is to understand, to love, and to persist in truth; And so applying the
rule of King Richard to a Child's rule, King Rich. dispraised.

King Henry applauded.


and the rule of this King to the rule of a man, by discommending the one, and
commending the other.

57 Which Collation ended, King Henry openly gave thanks to the whole Estates,
King Henry his thanks.
and protested that by way of conquest, Protestation.

Conquest disclaimed.


he meant not to diminish any man's right, but of such as had been against the
Common Wealth. Commonwealths Enemies.


58 After this for that the power of all Officers ceased, the King appointed
his chief Officers and Justices, Officers and Justices appointed Sworn.
who were sworn after the accustomed manner: Proclamation was made,
Proclamation.
that on Monday next after the Feast of St. Michaell, the Parliament should be
called at Westminster, Parliament called.
so as on the Saturday before all such as claimed to do any service at the said
Coronation, Coronat^on services.
should be before the Steward, Constable, and Marshall of England, at the White
Hall of the Palace of Westminster.

59 On Wednesday which was the next day after the Commissioners, Commissioners.
viz. the Bishop of Asaph for Archbishops, and Bishops; the Abbot of
Glastonbury, for all religious Persons, and the Earl of Gloucester, for Dukes
and Earls, the Lord Berkley for Barons, and Bannerets, Sir Thomas Erpingham
Chamberlain, for Batchellors and Commons of the South, Sir Thomas Gray for
Batchellors and Commons of the North, Sir William Thurning, and John Markham
Justices for the whole Estates came to the Tower to King Richard, of whom Sir
William Thurning for and in the name of them all pronounced the Sentence of
deposition, Sentence of deposition pronounced.
and the words of resignation of Homage and Loyalty. Homage and Loyalty
resigned.


60 The which are at large recorded to the effect aforesaid.

Kings answer.
61 After which words spoken, the said King answered, that he looked not after
rule, but after all this he hoped that his Cosen would be a good Lord to him.

New Lords, new Laws.
Who thoroughly marketh this tragedy, shall not read the same without tears, and
who well notes the sequel, shall see new Lords, new Laws, and for new
bloodshed fresh revenge to ensue. Bloodshed.

Revenge.




Henry 4. his Coronation.
62 On Monday the day of St. Edward, King and Confessor, the same King Henry was
Crowned at Westminster with all solemnity and honor that appertained: at
which day sundry of the Lords and others did their service due at such
Coronation. Coronation services.


Sir John Cheney.
As does appear hereafter.

Speaker presented.
63 On Tuseday after, the Commons presented to the King John Cheney for their
Speaker, whom the King accepted, who forthwith made the Common Protestation
which the King allowed. Protestation.


Sir John Cheney discharged for sickness.
64 On Wednesday ensuing, the same Sir John with the Commons, came before the
King, at what time Sir John declared, that for a sudden disease he was unable
to serve, and how the Commons in his place had chosen Sir John Doreward, Sir
John Doreward elected and confirmed in his place.
beseeching the King to allow the same Sir John Doreward to be the Speaker for
the Commons.

Sir John Doreward. Protestation.
65 The same Wednesday, the same Sir John Doreward made the common Protestation
for him and the whole Commons, as before, the which the King allowed.

Subsidy of Woolls etc. G^anted for 3. years.
66 The Commons by the assent of the Bishops and Lords, toward the Wars with
Scotland, Wars. Scotland.
defense of Callice, Callice, Ireland.
provision for Ireland, amendment of the State, and in hope of their requests
to be granted, Petitions granted.
granted to the King for three years the Subsidy of Wools, Skins, and
Wooll-fells, viz. 50 s. for every sack of Denizens, and four Pound of
Strangers, one Desme, and one Fifteen.

Parliament of 21. R. 2. repealed.
67 The print touching the repeal of the Parliament, Ano 21. R. 2. Cap. 3.
agrees with the Record in effect, though not in form.

Parliament of 11. R. 2. confirmed.
68 The print touching the affirmation of the Parliament, made Ano 11. Richard
2. Cap. 4. agrees with the Record as next before.

Lords restitution.
69 The print Cap. 5. touching the restitution of the Lords, and others
forejudged in Ano 2. R. 2. agrees with the Record as above.

70 It is enacted that all blank writings whatsoever which the City of London,
Blank writings.

London.

Diocese.


and 17. other Counties for fear sealed to King Richard, shall be utterly void.

71 They will the same, and that from henceforth no such Commission be granted
to any the Nobles to aid all matters as were granted in 21 R. 2. Commissions.
And further the print touching Treason cap. 10. agrees with the Record.
Treason.


72 By the motion and means of the Archbishop of Canterbury every of the Lords
and Commons, upon demand, assented and required, that Henry the Kings eldest
Son might be created Prince of Wales, The Kings eldest Son c^eated Prince of
Wales.
Duke of Cornwall, Duke of Cornwall.
and Earl of Chester, Earl of Chester.
and further, that he should succeed the King in the Realm of England,
Succession to the Crown.
whom they promised to accept, and obey accordingly.

73 Whereupon the King sitting in his Royal Seat in full Parliament, Prince of
Wale^. etc. Created. The Command of it.

Corone^.


set on a Circle on the head of the said Henry his eldest Son, and gave to him
a Golden Ring on his finger, Golden Ring.

V^^ga aurea.


and put into his hand a Rod of Gold, and after kissed him, Ki^s. Charter.
and thereof gave to him a Charter, and so created him Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester^ and thereupon caused him, being so arrayed by
the Duke of York his Uncle, to be brought into the place in Parliament
appointed for the Principality. H^s place in Parliament.


Note that all the aforesaid Process was done the first Wednesday in the
Parliament.

74 On Thursday after, the Archbishop of Canterbury, willed all the Lords in
no wise to disclose any thing should be spoke: upon which the Earl of
Northumberland demanded of the Lords what were best to be done for the life of
the late King Richard, Livery.

King Richards life to be saved.


whom they would by all means to be saved; The Lords severally answered, Lords
advise touching R. 2.

Confinement.

Imprisonment.


that it were good safely to keep him in some secret place from all concourse,
and that by such sufficient Persons, as had not been familiar, or about him.

75 The Names of such Bishops, Lords, and Knights, as assented to the
Imprisonment of King Richard. King R. Imprisonment.


76 By full consent of all Bishops and Lords it was agreed, that Henry the
Kings eldest Son, should from henceforth be called Prince of Wales, Princes
Title assented to.
Duke of Aquitain and Cornwall, Earl of Chester, and heir apparent of the Realm
of England. Heir apparent of the Realm.


77 On Monday the 28 th. day of October, the King came into the Parliament into
the great Hall of Westminster, where by the assent of the Bishops and Lords,
Richard late King of England was adjudged to perpetual Prison, Rich. 2.
adjudged to perpetual Imprisonment.
as above.

78 On the same Monday the Commons declared to the King, Commons request.
how that the Duke of Britain had sent word, Duke of Britain.
how that he was ready to do the King all that which he ought to do: and
therefore prayed that the Earldom of Richmond being his inheritance, Earl of
Richmond.
might not be granted away by any Letters Patents, Patents repeal.
the which the Commons required; and further, that the Letters Patents thereof
made to the Earl of Westmerland since the last Parliament might be repealed,
whereunto the King made answer, that the Letters Patents were granted long
before.

Archbishop.
79 The Duke of York, and Earl of Northumberland, and others of the Blood of the
Arch Bishop of Canterbury, pray the King, that the same Arch Bishop might have
his recoverie against Roger Walden, Wastes in the Archbishops Lands.
for sundry wastes and spoils done by the said Roger, in the Archbishopric
aforesaid, whereto the King granted, Kings assent.
and thanked them for their motion.

Commons prayer.
80 The Commons on the 3. of November pray, that forasmuch as they were not made
privy to the Judgment aforesaid, Not priv^^ to Judgments in Parliament.
that no Record be made to charge, or to make them parties thereunto; whereunto
the Archbishop of Canterbury by the Kings Commandment answered, that the
Commons were only Petitioners, Commons only Petitioners.
and that all Judgments appertain to the King, King and Lords only Judges.
and to the Lords, unless it were in Statutes, Statutes.
Grants, Subsidies, Subsidies.

Nota.


or such like, the which order the King wou^d from that time to be observed.

Earl of Northumb. Constable of England.
81 The Earl of Northumberland and Constable of England, the 10 day of November
in full Parliament beseeched the King to purge him, Purgation.

Slander.


and the Earl of Westmerland, Marshall of England, of the reproach laid on
them, that they procured the King to war on Scotland: Wars in Scotland.
whereupon the King took upon himself the same, The King purges them.
and caused the Earl of Northumberland to ask of every Lord his opinion
touching the same War, Wa^s assented to by the Lords.
who encouraged the King thereunto.

The Kings eldest Son Henry created Duke of Lancaster.
82 The King by the assent of the Lords and Commons, enacteth that Henry his
eldest Son should have, and bear the name of Duke of Lancaster, His Title.

Dutchey of Lancaster ^evi^ed from the Crown, and settled on the Prince.


and be called Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitain, Lancaster and Cornwall, and
Earl of Chester; And further that all such Liberties and Franchizes, as were
granted to the Duke of the same Duchy, should remain unto his said eldest
Son, and to his Heirs, Dukes of Lancaster, dissevered from the Crown of
England, and thereupon delivered one Charter thereof made in Parliament to his
eldest Son. Charter in Parliament.


King and Lords enact

New R^ligions suppressed.

Banishment.


83 The King enacteth by the assent of the Lords, that a certain new people
disguised in white garments, and pretending great Sanctimonie, and coming from
beyond the Seas, be in no wise suffered to tarry or harbor within the Realm.

Pardon.
84 The King pardons and receives into his Protection Richard Clifford, then
Keeper of the privy Seal, Privy Seal.
Richard Oltford the Bishop of Sarum, and Mr. Henry Bowell, who were exempted
in An 11. Richard 2.

Liveries.
85 The print touching Liveries, Cap. 7. agrees with the Record in effect, but
not in form.

86 The Commons grant to the King liberty by the advice of such wise men as he
should call to him, Commons grant the King liberty to moderate, or repeal a
Statute.
to moderate, or to repeal the Statute of Provisors at any time made. Prov^so^s.


87 It is enacted, that the Gold granted in An^ 20. Richard 2. Tit. 19. shall
be brought to Callice unto the next Parliament. Gold.

Callice.




88 It is enacted, that the Staple of Wooll-fells, Staple.
Skins, Lead and Tin shall be only at Callice, Callice.
saving that the Merchants of Ieane, Merchants.
Venice, and other places toward the West, being of the Kings amity may
discharge their Merchandise at Hampton, Hampton.
and take in such Staple ware, saving also the liberty to the men of Barwick
for their Woolls. Barwick.

Woolls.




89 The Commons require, that all Liberties granted to any City or Town,
Liberties confirmed.

Corporations.

Fine.


may be confirmed without any Fine with the clause [ licet.]

The Chancellor shall confirm the same according as he has used, R^s.

Chancellor.


paying the Fine, Fine.
saving the liberties of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridg. Un^ve^si^^es
Ox^o^d. ^^mbridg.


90 The City of London prays, London.
that the Sheriffs of the same may take Assizes in the absence of the Coroner.
^ssizes.

S^eriffs.




Upon the taking of the Assize in the Guild Hall of London, if the Coroner come
not in upon Proclamation, Co^oners.

Res.


let the Sheriffs take the Assizes, provided that the same be not in derogation
of the Coroner. Cor^ner.


91 Upon the Petition of Sir Thomas Haxey Cleark, Petition.

Sir Thomas Haxey restored.


the King pardons and revoketh the Judgment made against him in An 20. R. 2.
tit. 23. restores him to the blood, Judgment in Parliament reversed
Restitution.
and to the recoverie of all his Goods, Livings, Lands, and Tenements.

92 William Steward, William Chedder.
alias Chedder complains, that where he by name was presented, and inducted
to the Parsonage of Wotton-underegg, Wotton-underegg.
in the County of Gloucester, and there continued in possession by the space of
four years, until the King by untrue suggestion presented one Sir John Dowtre
to the Parsonage o^ Underegg in the County where there was no such Parsonage
called Underegg, Suggestion.

Presentation.


as the said William pleaded in a Quare Impedit, Q^^re Impedit.
brought by the King, upon which Writ brought, the King recovereth of the said
William, the Parsonage of Underegg, and not Underegg, whereby upon a Writ sent
to the Bishop of Worcester the said William was put from his Parsonage of
Underegg, Writ to the Bishop.
for which mistaking and error, Error Variance.
the Judgment of the said John in full Parliament was reversed, Judgment
reversed^
and a Writ awarded to the said Bishop, Writ of Restitution.
for the Restitution of the said William.

93 Sir William Richill being in ward, Sir William Rich^ll examined.
brought into the Parliament House before them to answer, by what warrant he
took, Warrant.
and certified the confession of the Duke of Gloucester expressed in the third
roll in An 21. R. 2. tit. 10. and 11. and was thereof apposed by Sir Walter
Clopton Chief Justice by the Kings Commandment, Sir Walter Clopton.

Chief Justice.


who answered at the full; declaring thereby as well sufficient authority, as
his sincere dealing therein; upon the hearing of which every of the Lords,
Lords, Judges.
thought he did not but justly; whereupon the said Sir Walter adjudged, and
awarded the said Sir William acquitted thereof for ever. Acquitall by them.


Ragamans burnt.
94. It is enacted, that certain writings, called Ragamanes and blanks contained
before tit. 69. shall be burned.

Pardons confirmed.
95. They grant that all the pardons granted in Anno 21 R. 2. shall be good.

Commons.

Duchess of Ireland.


96. At the request of the Commons the King promises to be good and gracious to
the Duchess of Ireland, and other his Cosins.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Churches Liberties.
97. THe print touching the Church, great Charter, Great Charter.
and Charter of the Forest Cap. 1. agrees with the Record. Forest.


98. That the Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Justices be not from henceforth
received, to say that they durst not for fear of death to say the truth. Fear
of death not to be pleaded.


Res.
The King reputeth them all to be just, and that they will give to him no
contrary Counsel, Ill Counsel.
which if they do, let complaint be made.

Patents.
99. The print touching express mention in every Letters Patents Cap. 6. agrees
with the Record.

Officers Oath.
100. That all the Kings Chief Officers, may be sworn to shun all Bribery,
Bribery Forfeiture.
whereof the attainted to loose all he has.

Res.
Every such Officer upon attaint shall be punished for his misdoing, otherwise
the Statutes made do suffice.

Crown Lands.
101. That no part of the Lands of the Crown be sold, given, or exchanged; (and
that there be a Resuming of these Lands mentioned. Resumption.
)

Res.
The King will thereof be advised.

Actions for Plun^^r, spoils.
102. That every man may pursue his remedy for all havoc, and spoils made since
the Kings coming.

Res.
For spoils done where the Kings host has been, Kings Army.
he takes advice, to the rest he grants.

Facile entry.

Restitution.


103. That all men dispossessed of any Tenements without Process of Law, may be
restored thereunto, being done since the Kings coming in.

Res.
They are remitted to the Common Law. Common Law.


Prince of Wales to succeed.
104. That Henry Prince of Wales may enjoy the Realm after the Kings decease.

Res.
The King grants.

Restitution.
105. Sir Thomas Haxey Clarke is restored as before tit. 90.

Plague.
106. That in consideration of the great Plague in the North, it would please
the King to lie in the midst of the Realm.

The King will be advised. Res.


106. That the King will appoint able Captains as well in England as in Wales.
Captains able.


The King means no less. Res.


107. The print touching the allowance for Sheriffs, Sheriffs allowance
Cap. 11. agrees with the Record.

108. The Commons grant to the King that he shall be as free, Commons grant.
and enjoy as great liberties, as any his Progenitors before him had; Whereupon
the King in Parliament promised, Kings Freedom and Pre^ogat^ve.
that he would not turn the same contrary to the Laws. Not to be used contrary
to Law.


109. The Commons pray the reversall of the Judgment given against Richard
Earl of Arundell in An. 21 R. 2. and restitution of Thomas the Son, Common^
prayers.

Earl of Arundel.

Restitution.

Judg^ment in Parliament ^eversed.


and heir of the said Richard.

The King has showed favor to Thomas now Earl, and to others as does appear.
Res.


110. The Commons pray for the Archbishop of Canterbury as before tit. 78.
which is granted. Archbishop.

Wastes.




111. That such Records touching the inheritance of the said Earl of Arundell
and Surry, Earl Arundel.
late imbezeled, Records embezeled.
may be searched for, and restored.

The King wills: Res.


112. They make the like request for Thomas Earl of Warwick his restitution.
Tho. Earl Wa^^ick.

Restitution.




The King has showed favor to him as before. Res.


113. They require repeal of the Parliament made Anno 21 R. 2. with a general
Restitution of Lands and Goods of all such as lost thereby. Parliament repealed.

Restitution.




The King has been gracious as before, Res.
and to the rest he will be advised.

114. The print touching Subsidies for Kersies Cap. 19. agrees with the
Record. Subsidies.

Kersies.




115. The like motion and answer as is before tit. 88. Liberties.


116. That the Loans which King Richard borrowed may be paid. Loans to Richard
2. repayd.


The King thereof will be advised. Res.


117. The like motion, and answer for Victuals, Victuals.

Purveyance.


taken for King Richard.

118. The Citizens of Lincoln pray to be eased of their Fee Farm being 180 l.
by the year, Lincoln.

Fee-Farme.


the which they were unable to pay.

Let them sue to the King who will be gracious. Res.


119. The Burgesses of great Yarmouth pray to be eased of Desmes, and Fifteens,
Gr. Yarmouth. Desms, Quindesms.
considering their Fee Farm of 60 l.

Let them, Res.
etc. as before.

120. The print touching such as be put out without title, Fo^cible Entry.
Cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

Presentation.
121. That none presented by the King to any Benefice being fallen, B^nefices.
shall be received before recovery had by the King. Recove^y.


Res.
He wills that prohibition be granted according to the pretense of the
Statute. Prohibition.


Mills, Stancks.

Nusances.


122. The print touching Mills, Stankes, etc. Cap. 12. agrees with the Record
in effect, but not in form.

Pu^v^yance.
123. (...) of no man's Beasts brought to Smithfield Market, none be taken to the
use of the Sheriffs of London. Sheriffs of London.


Res.
The Sheriffs of London shall answer to the same Article.

Debts to R 2 paid to H. 4.
124. It is enacted that all the debts due to King Richard be paid to the King.

Debt pardoned.
125 The pardon made by the King to Robert Tharley Receiver of Cornwall,
R^^^iver of Cornwall.
for certain Debts wherein the King was deceived, is revoked. Pardon revoked.


King d^ce^ved.
126. It is enacted, that it might be enquired, Inqu^^y.
by whom any the Goods, or Chattels of the late King Richard be imbezelled. R 2
goods imbez^ll^^.


Cheshi^e, Wa^ch.
127. It is enacted, that the Esquires, Masters of the Watch in Cheshire, shall
for certain moneys received by them of King Richard^ serve the King for a time
at their own costs. Service in Wa^s.

Wages.




Inqu^^y
128 It is enacted, that inquiry be made of the Concealments of Customers,
Conc^^^ments.

Customers.


Collectors, Sheriffs, Sher^^fs.
and Escheators. E^ch^^tors.


129 The print touching Reciaunts of Searchers, S^a^chers.
Cap. 13. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

R^sid^^^e.
130 That the Wives of such as were forejudged of Treason, F^^ejud per. Dow^r.
or Felony, and not guilty thereof may be endowed.

Res.
The Common Law shall be observed. Common Law.

Heirs.




131. The like answer is made for the heirs of such as are forejudged.

Attainder.

Heirs.


132. That the attainder of the eldest Son, in the life of the Father be no bar
to the younger.

Res.
Let the Common Law run. Common Law.


133. The like motion and answer as is before tit, 126. and 127.

Fines repayd.
134. That the Fines taken of such as were of the retinue of the Duke of
Gloucester, and the Earls of Arundell, and War. and such like may be repayed.

Res.
The King will thereof be advised.

Process.
135. The print touching Process to be made against men of Cheshire Cap. 18.
agrees with the Record. Cheshiremen.


I^quiry.
136 The Commons of Salop require, that enquiries may be made touching great
losses by them sustained, Da^mages.
by the Kings late Army there. Kings Army.


Res.
The King will be advised.

Prisons.

Malefactors.


137. They pray that the King will with the same search, provide some sufficient
prison for misdoers.

Res.
Upon information the King will cause the Justices of Assize to take order
therein. Justices of Assize.


Offices repugne.
138. That where two Offices be found upon a diem clausit extremum, the one
contrary to the other, that the heir found in the first Office may have his
Livery, Heirs.

Livery.


notwithstanding any contrary mat^e^r

The King will have his right, Res.

Kings right.


and wills that the Common Law be kept. Common Law.


139. The print, that no man shall be impeached, for taking part with the King
Cap. 2. agrees with the R^cord. Ind(...).

Ayding the King.




140. The C^mmons pray the King that Richard Earl of Oxford, Restitution.

Ea^l of O^ford


who has married Alice the daughter of King Richards S^ster, may be restored
to the Office of Chamberlain of England, Chamb^rlaine.
being his due inheritance, and taken away by violence by King R. 2.

The King will be advised. Res.


141. That all Grants, and Charters made by King R. 2. to unworthy persons of
any thing belonging to the Principallitie of Wales may be revoked. Charters
revoked.

Vnwo^thy p^^^on^ P^inc^pality of ^ales.




When the unworthy persons be known their Charters shall be repealed. Res.


142. That all Releases made by King R. 2. to any person for any debt due to
the Principallitie of Wales, Debts.

R. 2 Releases repeal^d.

P^incipality of Wales.


Duchy of Cornwall, Cornwall.
Earldome of Chester may be repealed. Chester.


143. All releases, Res.
unless the same be under the great Seal, Great Seal.
shall be void.

144. One Article made in Anno 11 R 2. that no person shall attempt to revoke
any Ordinance then made, R^vocation.
is by Act of Parliament repealed. Repeal.


145. The print touching Appeals Cap. 14. agrees with the Record (...) effect
but not in form Appeals.


146. That the King would restore all the Justices banished in the eleventh
yea^ of R. 2. there named, Justices.

^anishmen^.

Restitution.


or their heirs to there b^ood, and Hereditaments.

The King will thereof be advised. Res.


147. The print touching the ^ity of London Cap. 15. agrees with the Record in
effect, London.
bu^ not in form.

148. The Burgesses of Melcomb pray to be released of their F^e Farm of eight
Marks and of Desms, M^lcombe.

F^e Farm.

Desm^^.


and Fifteens for Six years after the expiration of c^rtain years granted by
King R. 2. Fifteens.


They shall have a Confirmation according to King Richards grant. Res.

Confirmation.




149. The print touching the free Packing of Clothes in London Cap. 16. agrees
with the Record. London.

Cl^a^hs f^ee packi^g.




150. The print touching R^taylors of Victuals in London Cap. seventeen agrees
with the Record in effect, V^ctuals.

Ret^yle.


but not in form.

151. It is enacted, that the Statutes made in Anno 25 E. 3. for able Justices
of the Peace shall be observed. Justices of Peace.


152. That the Writs of Attaints may be upon all Verdicts given before the
Sheriffs. Attaint.


Res.
The Common Law shall be observed. Common Law.


English Ships.

Lading.


153. That no man do lade in any strange bottom, where able Englishmen are
ready to serve.

Res.
The Statutes therefore made shall be kept.

Thames.
154 That no Barge, Barge.
on the River of Thames be forfeited as a Deodand. Deodand.


Res.
It shall be as heretofore.

Sales of Land.

Variance.


155. The print Cap. 9. touching Sales of Lands made Anno 11 R. 2. agrees with
the Record in effect, but not in form.

Pardon.
156. The print touching the general pardon Cap. 20. agrees in effect with the
Record, but not in form.

Conspiracy.
157. Robert of Werkesley of Lancaster complains of Nicholas of Werkesley and
others, for that by the action of Conspiracy of the said Nicholas, the said
Robert was imprisoned in the Tower of London. Imprisonment.

Tower of London.




Res.
The Kings Council shall take order therein. Kings Council.


Resp.
158. A large complaint against certain disturbers of the Peace. Peace breakers.


Let more special Information be made to the King, and Council. King and
Council.


Wapentakes.
159. That all Wapentakes, and Hundreds let forth to Farm, Hundreds.

Farms.


may be revoked.

Res.
Sundry Statutes are made therefore.

Presage.
160. That the King may only have two Tuns of Wine, of every Ship of Wine
coming into any Port, in the name of a Prize.

Res.
I^ shall be as heretofore.

Personal Actions.
161. That all personal actions between party and party, may only be tried
by order of the Common Law, Common Law.
and not otherwise.

^es.
The Statutes therefore provided shall be observed.

The Pleas of the Crown, Holden in the Parliament at WESTMINSTER, the Mond^y in
the F^ast of Saint Faith, in the first year of HENRY 4 th.
1 THE Commons do pray the Lords Appellants in Ano 21. R. 2. for their Acts
done, Common^ prayer.

Lo^d App^llants called to a^^wer.


may be called to answer, and the Records were brought and read in Parliament,
in the presence of of Edward Duke of Albemarle, Thomas Duke of Surrey, John
Duke of Exeter, John Ma^q^ess Do^set, John Earl of Salisbury, and Thomas Earl
of Gloucester.

2 The Duke of Albemarle answers, Duk^ of Albem^^le (...)
that he was no contrive^ of the same Appe^l, and what he therein did, was at
the Kings Commandment, K^n^s command (...).
and for fear of the contrary.

3 Touching the Kings exile, K^n^s ^an^shment agai^^^ his w^ll.
and revocation of his Patent, the same was against his will, as he calls
certain Lords to witness the same, W^tnes^^^.
he also excuses h^mself for being of Council, or of any privacie touching
the death of the Duke of Gloucester. Duke of Gloucesters d^a^h.


4 The Duke of Surrey prays the King to weigh his tender age, Duke of Su^rey.

Tender age.


and small reputation at the time of the Appeal made: and further says in all
points as the Duke of Albemerle, all which he offers to approve, as the King
should award.

5 P^e Duke of Exeter ^ffirmeth the like as next above, Duke of Exeter.
only touching the death of the Duke of Gloucester, Duke of Gloucest.
he says, that he heard King Richard say that he should be sl^in.

6 The Marquess Dorset ^ffirmed as next before, Marquess Dorset.
only he makes no mention of the Duke o^ Gloucester.

7 The Earl of Salisbury excuses the appeal by him among the rest done for
fear of his life, Ea^l of Salisbury.

F^a^ o^ l^fe.


and for that he was accused by the Duke of Norff. that he should have mean^ to
have slain the Duke of Lancaster the Kings Father, albeit he was ready by an
order of the King to disprove the same, yet for that he did not offer to acquit
himself thereof, he asks pardon of the same. Pa^don craved.


8 The Earl of Gloucester ^ffirmeth as the Duke of Albemerle. Ea^l of
Gloucester.


9 The Consultation of the King in the Parliament touching the Nobles
aforesaid. Consult^tion.


10 The King and Lords adjudg, King and Lords, J^dges and Judgment D^g^adations
^^om honou^s.
that the said Dukes, Marquis, and Earls, should loose their Names and titles
of Dukes Marquess, and Earls, and all the worship thereto belonging: and that
they should forfeit all the Lands and Goods which they or any of them had given
them at the death of the said Duke of Gloucester, Lands and Goods o^^^i^^d.
or at any time since: and if that they or any of them should adhere to the
quarrel, or person of King Richard lately deposed, Tr^a^on to adher to deposed
King Richard.
that then the same should be Tre^son, the which Judgment was given by Sir
William Thurning, Ch^ef Justice of the Kings Bench, Ch^ef Justice.
by the Kings Commandmen^.

John Hall.
11 One John Hall a Servant of the Duke of Norff being examined b^ Walter
Clopton Chief Just^ce in full Parliament, Examination upon Oath.
con^esseth upon his Oa^h, Co^^ession.
that in the month of September An 21. R. 2. the Duke of No^ff ^^^a^ged the
said John among other to murder the Duke of Glou^ester, Commanded to murder the
Duke of G^ouc^st^^.

H^s Confederates.


then being present one John Col^ox an Esquire of the said Duke of No^ff the
which John and John then being at Callice went to our (...) Church, where they
found William Hempsley E^quire as aforesaid. Br^dshaw Esquire as aforesaid,
William Servadlet of the Chamber of ^he late King Richard Francis Vadlett of
the Chamber of the Duke of Albemerle, William Rogers, William Dennice, and
Cockle of the servants to the said Duke of Norff all whom were sworn upon the
body of Christ, before one S^^ William Chaplin of St. Georges in the Church of
our Lady, that they should not disclose the said fact or murder. O^th of
secrecy, not to disclose the plot and mu^der.


Duke of Norff.
12 After which Oath made, they altogether went with the Duke of Norff. toward
the House called the Princes ^^ne, wherein when they were come, the said Duke
of Norff. caused the Persons afo^esaid to enter into a lodging within the same
House, and so departed.

After which John Lowtofte with sundry other Esquires, brought the Duke of
Gloucester, and delivered him to the said Searl^ and Francis in an inner
Parlour, and said, there is Searl, and Francis; whereupon the Duke of
Gloucester said, now I see I shall do well, and so asked Searl how the King
did? who said well: and sent to him commendations, and so the said John
Lowtofte departed.

Kings will to sl^y him.
13 Whereupon the said Searl and Francis took the said Duke of Gloucester in
o^^n upper Chamber, saying, that they would speak with him: unto whom when they
were come there, they said, that the Kings will was, that he should be slain:
the Duke answered thereto, if it be so, it is welcom^; Searl and Francis willed
the Duke to take a Ch^plain, whom the Duke there took, and was confessed. Duke
confessed.


The Duke smothered.
14 After which confession they caused the Duke to lie upon a bed, upon whom so
lying, the said Searl and Francis threw a Featherbed, the sides whereof the
said Wil^iam Rogers, Dennis, and Cockle of the Chamber held, and Searl and
Francis lay on the mouth of the said Duke until he was de^d; Col^ox, Hampsley,
and Bradstone sat that night by the Duke on their knees, weeping, and praying
for the Soul of the said Duke, and Hall this Examinee kept the door until the
Duke was slain.

15 After the death of which Duke, the Duke of Norff came in, and seeing him
dead said, it were a great matter to have the said Duke living again.

16. By whose confession it seemed to the Lords, Lords, Judges.
that he the said John Hall had deserved a grievous death, whereupon they
adjudged by the assent of the King, They ^djudge him to (...) executed as a
Traitor.
that the same Hall should be drawn from Tower Hill to Tiburn, his bowels to be
burned before him, his body to be hanged, headed, and quartered, and his head
to be sent and set upon Callice, and his quarters at the Kings pleasure; and
the Marshall the same day did Execution accordingly, Execution accordingly.
the which was done on Tuesday the 28 th. of November.

17 On Wednesday the twenty ninth day of November, the Commons require the
Arrest and Judgment made against William le Scroope, Commons request.

Judgment affirmed.


Henry Green, and John Basset Knights, might be affirmed in full Parliament.
Sir Richard le Scroope prayed the King that nothing might be done in
disinheriting of him, or of his Children, considering the same William was his
Son: they asked whether it were lawfully done? Sir Richard a^swered, that the
Judgment was lawful, Judgment lawful.
whereto the King said, that he would have all the Lands of the persons
aforesaid to him forfeited by way of Conquest, Lands forfeited.

Conquest.


as those who were chief dooers of the Parliament of the twenty first of
Richard Second. Chief actors in the Parliament of 21. Rich. 2.


Anno Primo Henrici Quarti. Rex etc. Charissimo filio suo Henrico Principi
Walliae, Writs of Summons.
and Duci Cornubiae, etc. apud Eborum die Mercurii ante Fes^um omnium
Sanctorum, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. Decimo nono die September.
EDro. Duci Eborum. Edro. Com. Rutland.. Iohi. Com. Somerset. Tho. de Bello
campo Com. War. Edro. Courtney Com. Devon. Hen. de Percie Com. Northumb. Tho.
Com Arundell. Edro Com Stafford. Michael de la Poole Com. Suff. Tho. Percie
Com. Wigor. Rado Nevill Com. Westmerland. Tho. Camois. Barth. Bourchler. Iohi.
de Cherleton. Mro. Tho. de la War. Stephano le Scroope de Masham. Willelm. de
Roos de Hamelake. Willo. Heron Chlr. Hen. Fitz Hugh. Will. de Ferrariis de
Groby. Tho. de Morley. Ric. de Scroope. Hugoni Burnell. Tho. Berkley de
Berkley. Iohi. de Wells. Tho. le Dispencer. Almarico de St. Amando. Rado de
Cromwell. Rado Baroni de Graystock. Rob. de Harrington. Iohi. Darcey. Waltero
Fitz-Walter. Will. de Willoughby. Iohi. Cobham Chlr. Will. de Dacre. Ioh.
Nevill de Halmshyre. Rico. Seymore. Will. Beauchamp de Burgaveny. Tho. Lovell
de Fishmerch. Rico. Gray de Codonore. Reg. Gray de Ruthin. Tho. Bardolf de
Wermegey. Roberto de Scales. Petro de malo lacu. Willo. Zouch de Harringworth.
Anno Secundo Henrici Quarti. Rex etc. Charissin o filio suo Henrico Principi
Walliae, Writs of Summons.
and Duci Cornubiae, etc. apud Westminster. Octavis de Hillarii etc. Test Rege apud
Westm-tertio die Octobris. Numerus Nobilium and ordo idem quod in prox.
Praecedenti and Tho ^rping erat tunc Custos Quinque Portuum.
EDro. Duci Eborum. Edro. Com. Rutland. Iohi. Com. Dorset. Tho. de Bello-campo
Com. War. Edro. Courtney Com. Devon. Hen de Percie Com. Northumb. Tho. Com
Arundell. Edro Com. Stafford. Michael de la Poole Com. Suff. Tho. Percie Com.
^igor. Rado Nevill Com. Westmerland. Tho. Camois. Barth. Bourchier. Iohi. de
Cherleton de Powis. Willo. de Clinton. Mro. Tho. de la War. Stephano Scroope de
Masham. Willelm. Roos de Hamelake. Willo. Heron Chlr. Hen. Fitzhugh. Will. de
Ferrariis de Groby. Tho. de Morley. Ric. de Scroope. Hugoni Burnell. Tho.
Berkley de Berkley. Iohi. de Wells. Phillippo le Dispencer. Almarico de St.
Amando. Rado de Cromwell. Roberto Baroni de Graystock. Rob. de Harrington.
Iohi. Dacre. Waltero Fitz-Walter. Will. de Willoughby. Iohi. Cobham Chlr. Will.
Dacre. Ioh. Nevill de Halmshyre. Rico. Seymore. Will. Beauchamp de Burgaveny.
Tho. Nevill de Fishmerch. Rico. Gray de Codonore. Reg. Gray de Ruthin. Tho.
Bardolf de Wermegey. Roberto de Scales. Petro de malo lacu. Willo. Zouch de
Harringworth.
Tho. de Erpingham Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The Parliament holden at WESTMINSTER, in the Utaves of Saint H^llarie, in the
Second year of King HENRY the Fourth.
Knights and Burgesses called by name.
ON the same Thursday being the 20 th. day of Ian. the Knights and Burgesses
were called into the Chancery within Westminster Hall before the Chancellor,
Chancellor.
and the Steward of the Kings House by name, Steward.
upon whose appearance the Parliament was continued until Friday following,
Parliament adjourned.
and so appointed by the Chancellor on the Kings behalf.

Sir William Thurning Chief Justice C. B.
2 The same Friday Sir William Thurning Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, by
the Kings Commandment declared, that the Parliament was called, Causes of
Parliament.
to the end that the holy Church, Church.
and all other Persons and Corporations should enjoy their Liberties,
Co^po^ations.

Liberties to be enjoyed.


that all good Laws should be executed, Good Laws.
and Justice truly ministered, Justice.
and that nothing should be done in derogation of the Common Law. Common Law.


3 He then rehearsed at what great charges the King had been at, King g^^at
cha^^^s.
namely about his Coronation, Coronation.
for the suppression of the late rebellion attempted by certain Nobles: Nobles
^^bellion su^p^ess^d.
his voyage toward the Scots, S^ots voya^e.
and touching the resisting of the rebellion in the North Wales, No^^h ^^les.
all which adventures he attempted in his own proper person; K^^g in Person.
He further shows how the King was bound to return the Queen into France,
Queens retu^n in ^o F^ance.
with all such Jewels and habilities as King Richard had with here in marriage;
Jewels
He remembers the charges for keeping of Callice, Callice Fortresses.
and other the Kings Fortresses, and especially the Duchy of Guienne, Guienn^
an^ex^d to the C^own.
being annexed to the Crown, for the which, war was likely to ensue, Wa^s.
in that the French King had created his eldest Son Duke of Guienne, and for
the wars in Scotland and Ireland; Scotland. Ireland.
for which great charges the Lords and Commons were to consult, Lords and
Commons to consult thereof^
considering the great importance, and so willed the Commons to choose, and the
next day to presentt, heir Speaker. Sp^aker chosen and presented.


Receivers of Petitions for England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

5 Receivers of Petitions for Gascoin, and other places beyond the Seas, and of
the Isles.

6 Triars of Petitions for England, etc. as above.

7 Tryars of Petitions for Gascoin etc. as above.

Sir Arnold Savage Speaker presented
8 The Saturday the 22. of January, the Commons presented unto the King Sir
Arnold Savage for their Speaker, who made the Common Protestation for himself
and the Commons, Protestation enrolled.
the which was granted and enrolled.

9 After which the same Sir Arnold in few words of his authority declared
before the King and Lords, the cause pronounced by Sir William Thurming: the
Lords and Commons granted to the King one Desme and a Fifteen, Speakers speech,
Desme, Quindesme.
two shillings of every Tun of Wine, Tunn^ge and Poundage granted.
and 8 d. of every pound of Merchandise.

10 On Tuesday the 25 th. of January, the Commons in full Parliament gave to
the King most hearty thanks, Commons thanks to the King.
touching his promise for the maintenance of the Catholic Faith. Catholic
Faith maintained.


11 They the same day require the King that he would not give an ear to any
flearing and untrue reports of the Commons- house, Commons request, untrue
repo^ts of the Commons House.
until the end might try the same, whereunto the King granted.

12 The same day the Commons declare to the King, Commons Declaration.
how that to every good government three things belonged, Good government King.
viz. Wisdom, Prowis, Manhood, and Riches, all which they affirm to be in the
King and his Nobles as the World knew, Nobles.
and that they approved, for that the hearts and good wills of the Subjects
(which the King had) was the riches of the King: Subjects hearts.
wherefore with certain reasons they persuaded the King not to agree to the
Challenges which the French had made to the King and his Nobles, Their advice
not to agree to the French Challenges.
which the King promises not to attempt without their advices, Kings promise
to pursue their advice.
and gives them thanks for their tender good wills toward them. Kings thanks
for their good wills.


13 On Monday the last of January, the Commons by mouth require certain
Petitions of the King, Commons Petitions by mouth.
the which the King wills to put in writing, To be put into writing
and promises answer. Answer to them.


14 On Wednesday being the 9 th. of February, the Bishop of Norwich came to the
Parliament, Bishop of Norwich. his pardon.
whom the King caused to be placed in his accustomed place; after which the
King spoke to Sir Thomas de Erpingham his Vice-Chamberlain, then being between
the Duke of York and the Earl of War. who sat then there in their places, and
said, that he took the accusations of the said Thomas, Accusations.
against the said Bishop to be good, and to proceed of great zeal born unto
him: the King notwithstandig considering the order of the said Bishop, Bishops
o^der.
and that he was of the Kings lineage, Kings lin^age.
and further, of his better behavior, the King had pardoned the said Bishop
all his misprisions done against his person, the Bishops all therefore gave
thanks to the King in open Parliament, The Bishops thanks.
to make the said Bishop, and the said Sir Thomas to shake hands, Amity.

Shaking hands.


and to kiss each other in token of amity. Kissing.


15 The Commons the 21. of February pray the King to execute the ordinance of
King Richard the Second upon the Conquest of Wales, Commons request.

Ordinance.

Conquest of Wales.


viz. That no Welchman born should bear any Office there, Welshmen.
etc. The King promises to send for them, and to cause execution.

16 The same day the Commons require the King, Commons request Priors, Aliens
Lands seized.
that he would according to the use and laws of the Realm, seize into his hands
the Houses and Lands of all Priors, Aliens, and Donatives during the Wars. Wars.


Bishops and Lords advice.
17. The King requires advice, and promised therein to do as the Bishops, and
Lords should will him to do.

Annuities revoked.
18. The same day upon the like motion, the King revoketh all Annuities granted
out of the Custom of Wools. Custom of Wools


Commons requests.
19. On Saturday the 26. of February the Commons before the King made sundry
requests, and among them brought in their assent touching the Bill for the
order of Cisteaux, Cisteaux order.
which the Archbishop of Canterbury brought to them before; saying, that the
King, and the Lords had agreed thereto according, A Bill agreed by the King and
Lords sent to the Commons, assented to by them.
as it does hereafter appear.

Wool weighing.
20. At the same time they require the King to commit the charge of the Wool
weighing, King Richards Inventory of his Goods, King Richards Inventory.
which the Treasurers had to them delivered, Treasurers.
to some such persons as might make due inquiry thereof to the discharge of
the Commons. Inquiry by a Committee.

Commons discharge.




21. They also require, that all the matters of the same Parliament might be
engrossed before the departure of the Justices. Parliament matters engrossed.

Justices departure.


It was answered, that the Clarke of the Parliament was appointed to do his
best endeavor therein. Clarke of Parliament.


Commissions for making Boats and Ballengers without assent of Parliament.
22. They also require two certain Commissions late sent to Cities, and Towns
for the making of certain Boats, and Ballengers being done without assent of
Parliament may be repealed: Repealed.
It is considered that after Conference with the Lords thereon reasonable
answer should be made. Conference with the Lords.


23. At the same time, the Commons declare: Commons Declaration.
that it was not the use, that they should grant any Subsidy, Subsidies not
used to be granted before Petitions answered.
before they had answer to there Petitions, and pray the observation thereof
from thenceforth. The King therein requires Conference with the Lords;
Conference with the Lords.
And at the last day of the Parliament it was answered, that there was never
any such use seen, No such use.

Petitions last answered.


but that the Commons should first make an end of all other things, the which
order the King meant not to alter.

24. The same day the Commons require of the King that Sir William Bagot, Sir
William Baggot.
who was impeached of grievous facts, and thereof acquitted; might be restored
to all his Lands. Restitution.
The King answered that as he allowed the pardon of the same Sir William,
Pardon.
so would he otherwise show him Justice.

Patents.
25. The print touching express mention in Letters Patents Cap. 2. agrees with
the Record.

Commons assent.
26. The Commons on Wednesday the second of March do agree to the power granted
to the King, Kings power to dispense with the Statute of Provisors.
for the moderation of the Statute touching Provisors in the last Parliament;
beseeching the King that the same may not License any Cardinal, Cardinals.
or Stranger to enjoy any Benefice within the Realm. Aliens not to enjoy
Benefices.


27. They then also pray the King, that in the same moderation he would
consider the painful service of Master Richard Clifford the Keeper of the
Privy Seal. Si^ Richard Clifford.

Privy Seal.




The King the same promised.

28. They also therein require the King to have consideration of the
Universities of Oxford, Universities.

Oxford.


and Cambridge. Cambridge.


29. The same day was a Writ sent to the Sheriffs of London, Writ de H^^ret.
for the burning of William Sawtre a Clarke, Com^u^^ndo (...) S^^trie.
convicted of the Clergy, and by them appointed and brought to be burned.

30. The Lords Temporal by the assent of the King, Lords judges by the Kings
assent.
adjudged Thomas Holland late Earl of Kent, A^judge sundry Nobles and other
Traitors after execution.
John Holland late Earl of Huntington, John Mountague late Earl of Salisbury,
Thomas le Despencer, and Ra^ph Lumley Knight, and diverse others of England, who
were for their Rebellions, and Treasons by certain of the Kings Subjects taken,
and beheaded, Beh^ading.
to be Traitors; and that they forfeit all such Lands, F^rf^itu^e of Lands and
G^ols.
as they had in Fee the fifth of January in the first of this King, or at any
time after, together with all their Goods, and Chattels.

31. The names of such Lords, Lords names and Judgment
and others as were at the same Judgment.

32. On Wednesday the fifth of March, the Commons coming before the King show,
Commons Declaration.
how that the States of the Realm might be well resembled to the Trinity,
Trinity in Vni^y.
viz. the King the Bishops, and the Lords, and Commons, wherein ought to be
unity, and therefore prayed the King to appease the Earl of Rutland, Ap^e^sing
disteren^es between two Lords.
and the Lord Fitz-Walter, both of whom kneeling submitted themselves to the
Kings order, They submit to the King.
who promised an order.

33. The same day the Commons first and the Lords after pray, Commons and Lords
requests.
the King in consideration of the Earls of Rutland, Ea^l of Rutland

Earl of Som^rset restored to the Kings favor.


and Somerset in the Rebellions, tried to admit them to their Goods, Names, and
Liberties, and to his favor as fully as any other Lords, notwithstanding the
Judgment made against them primo Regis. The which with thanks for their motion
the King then does. Kings thanks.

Restitution.




34. The Commons do grant, Commons grant.
that after a year, and six months, the King may reenter upon any of the
Farmers for non payment of his Rent, King reenter for Non payment of Rent.
except for the Fee Farms of Lordships, Fee Farms.
Cities and Towns, and that from thenceforth the King may make express mention
thereof.

35. The Commons pray the King that Sir Richard Clifford Keeper of the Privy
Seal, Commons request.

Sir R^ch. Clifford.

Privy Seal.


might enjoy the Bishopric of Bath and Wells, whereto he was commended by the
Popes Bull, Popes Bull.
notwithstanding the Statute of Provisors. Provis^rs.

Non obstante.


The King answered, that could not be so, for as much as Master Henry Bonnett
was elected thereunto by the Laws of the Realm, Laws o^ the Land.

Election.


but otherwise he would remember the same Sir Richard in another time.

36. At the request of the Commons it was enacted by the King, Commons request.
that Dame Philip, late the wife of Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, shall enjoy
for her Dower all the Lands, Dower.

Wardsh^p.


as she then had during the minority of the heir of Auberie de Vere late Earl
of Oxford, Earl of Oxford.
so as if the said heir at his full age do confirm her estate, that then she
should have all the Hereditaments of the said Robert, otherwise to forfeit the
same; Confirmation.

Forfeiture.


and that the said Philip should then have her part during her life as of the
Kings gift.

Petition.

Restitution.

Non obstante.


37. Upon the Petitions of Sir Ralph Holt, and Sir William de Burgh, the King
restores them to their blood, and to all their Hereditaments, being in the
Kings possession, or reversion, notwithstanding any Judgment given against
them in Anno 11 R. 2.

Edmond Bassets Case.
38. The Record, and Process given in the Kings Bench against Edmond Basset for
certain Lands expressed in 15 R. 2. tit. 29. was brought into the Parliament,
Error in Parliament
and are annexed to this Record, whereupon the Judgment in the Kings Bench,
Judgment in K. Bench reversed for Error.
for certain Errors was reversed, and restitution of the premises, Restitution.
with the main profits restored to the said Edmond.

Petition John de Burley.
39. Upon the Petition of John son and heir of Roger de Burley, the Cousin and
heir of Sir Simon de Burley Knight, the King revoketh the Judgment made
against Simon in Anno 11 R. 2. and restores the same John to his blood,
Judgment in Parliament revoked.

Restitution with a saving.


saving that the last Will of King E. 3. may be performed touching the Abbey of
our Lady of Grace next the Tower of London, King E. 3. his will.

Lady of Grace Abbey.


the Free Chapels of St. Stephens, Free Chapels.
and the Friars Preachers of London. Friars Preachers.
Vide 5. 14.4 H. 5.4.

40. Upon the like Petition of the Prior of Newport Pannell as before was
granted as Scire facias returnable in the next Parliament. Error.

Scire facias.

Next Parliament.




Cisteaux order.

Variance.


41. The print touching the order of Cisteaux Cap. 4. agrees with the Record in
effect, though not in form.

Provisions, Rome.
42. The print touching provisions from Rome Cap. 3. agrees as before.

Petition
43. The King upon Petition of the Mayor, and Merchants of the Staple of
Callice, Callice Staple.
revoketh certain particular Licenses granted to the Merchants of New Castle
upon Time, Licenses revoked.

Newcastle Merchants.


for transporting of Staple VVare to other places than to Callice.

Commons request.
44. The Commons require the King, to help to pacify the Schism of the Church,
Churches Schisms.
which had of long time continued, so as the same might be no charge to the
Realm; The Lords require the same. Lords request.
The King answered, the Bishops shall consider the same. Bishops to consider it.


Commons request.
45. On Thursday the tenth of March, the Commons require that the Article
touching the moderation made at the last Parliament, Moderation of Provisions.
concerning the Act of Provision may be examined, Misent^y examined.
for as much as the time was recorded otherwise than was agreed. The King
grants thereunto, by Protestation, Kings Protestation.
that the same should be no example. And upon examination the Bishops, and
Lords affirmed the same to be duly done, The entry rightly done.
the which the King then called to remembrance.

Commons kneeling before the King crave his pardon.
46. The same Thursday being the last day of the Parliament, the Commons
kneeling before the King, beseech the King to pardon them, if happily they
should through ignorance offend. Igno^ance.
The King granted.

47. The Commons assemble unto Mass, Commons at Mass.
where the Archbishop read the Epistle, and Gospel, the King did the Sacrifice
by promising to maintain the Churches Faith, Kings promise to m^intain the
Church.
and they were come to say, Ite, missa est, and Deo gratias; they offer their
granted Subsidy aforesaid, Subsidy granted, off^rd at the Mass.
for which the King gives them thanks, Kings thanks.
and the Chancellor wills them to depart. Chancellor.

Parliament ended.




48. The print touching the converting, or punishing of such as hold any
erroneous opinion Cap. 15. far swerveth from the Record, Heresy and Error.

Variance from the Record.


and not only in form, but much more in matter also to maintain tyranny; then
in the Record, which note well.

And note that this was the first Statute, and Butcherly Knife, that the
impeaching Prelates procured, or had against the poor Preachers of Christ
Gospel.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
49. THe print touching the Liberties of the Church Cap. 1. agrees with the
Record. Church Liberties.


50. That all such as procure from Rome any Plurality, Pluralities.
or Non-Residence do incur the pain of Provisors, Non Residence.

Proviso^s.


except the Chaplains of the King, Chaplains.
of the Archbishops, or Bishops, and except Scholars, Scholars.

Praemunire.


and that such as then had any of the said Bulls, Bulls to be cancelled.
do cancel them on the like pain. To which the King answered, that he would
provide remedy therefore.

51. That no appropriation of Benefices be, Appropriations.
on the like pain. The King will be thereof advised.

52. The print Cap. 3. touching provision from Rome, Provisions.
does more properly belong to this title, than to the title before.

53. The print touching carrying of money Cap. 5. for the Act agrees with the
Record, Money exported.

Variance.


and for the rehearsal of the same Act is no mention made, quod nota.

54. The print touching the Marshall Cap. 23. agrees with the Record in
effect, Marshall.

Variance.


but not in form.

55, That the Fees of all Marshals in every of the Kings Courts, Fees
ascertained.

Marshall.


and of the Warden of the Fleet may be certainly appointed upon forfeiture.
Warden of the Fleet.


The King has appointed his Council, Resp.

Kings Council.


the Chancellor, Chancellor.
and Justices to take order therein. Justices.


56, It is enacted, that all Priors, Priors, Aliens.
Aliens, who have Houses, and sing daily service be discharged of their Farms
to the King, Farms.
saving to Bishops their Jurisdictions. Bishops Jurisdiction.


Sheriffs overcharged.
57. The Commons pray that all Sheriffs being overcharged be eased thereof.

Resp.
The Sheriffs of Essex, Hereford, Surrey, and Sussex, and others who have cause
to complain shall have remedy before the Council. Council.


Protections.
58. That no Protection be granted to any person of Religion.

Resp.
The Protections with the clause volumus, Protections revoked.
to them granted, shall be revoked, and they only shall have such Protections
granted as in the time of E. 3.

Consultation.
59. That no Consultation be granted to any person, clayming the Tithe of Wood,
Tith-Wood.
which passes the age of twenty one years.

Resp.
It shall be as heretofore.

Arrest.

Imprisonment.


60. That no person be arrested, or imprisoned contrary to the form of the
great Charter. Great Charter.


Resp.
The Statutes, and Common Laws shall be kept.

Coyns.
61. The print touching strange Coyns Cap. 6. agrees with the Record.

Commons request D^spensation.
63. Upon the request of the Commons, the King promises, that he will not from
henceforth dispense with the Statute of Provision to Benefices. Provisions.


Justice stayed.

Forfeiture.


64. That no man be kept from Justice by any Writ, or other means obtained from
the King by sundry suggestions, on pain of twenty pound to the obtainer of the
same.

Resp.
The Statutes therefore provided shall be kept, and who pursues to the contrary
shall incur the pain aforesaid.

Offices found.
65. That where two Offices be found, proving several titles for the King, and
Livery, Livery sued.

Dispossession.


or ouster le main, is sued on the first, that he who sueth such Liverie, or
ouster le main be not put forth, but a Scire facias awarded against him to
know what he can say. Scire facias.


Resp.
The Statutes, and Laws therefore provided shall be kept.

Justices.
66. That the Justices to take Nisi prius; Nisi prius.
may have power to give Judgment forth with after Verdict found before them,
Judgment.
not tarrying the day of the return of the Nisi prius.

Resp.

Old use.


It shall be as heretofore it has been.

Non suit.
67. The print touching Nonsuit of the Plaintiff Cap. 7. agrees with the
Record.

Justices of Assize.
68. That the Justices of Assize, and Nisi prius may have power to have Deeds
acknowledged before them, Deeds acknowledged.
and to enroll them. Enrolment.


Resp.
It shall be as heretofore it has been.

Subpoenas.
69. That no Writs be sued out of the Chancery, Chancery.
or Exchecquer to any man to appear at a day upon pain. Exchecquer.


Resp.
Such Writs shall not be granted without necessity. Necessity.


70. That the Capias, Capias, Exigent.
and Exigent may be in Writs of Annuitie, Annuity, Detinue.
Detinue, and Covenant. Covenant.


The Statutes therefore provided shall be observed.

Resp.
71. That in all personal Actions, or Writs, wherein any man comes to
distress, being brought against sundry persons, such of them as first comes
in, may have idem dies until they all appear, Appea^ance.
and not to be suffered to fourch by Essoyns. Fou^rcher.

Essoyns.




The old Law shall be observed. Resp.

Old Laws kept.




72. The print touching the Office of the Chirographer Cap. 8. agrees with the
Record in effect, Chirographer.
but not in form.

73. The print touching Commissions of King Richard Cap. 9. agrees with the
Record in effect, Variance.

Commissions.


but not in form.

74. The print touching the Clarke of the Crown Cap. 10. agrees ut supra.
Clarke of the Crown.


75. The print touching the Admiral Cap. 11. agrees ut supra. Admiral.


76. The Commons of the County of Hereford complain against the incroachment
and sundry extortions of the Officers of the Forest of Ewias, Forest Officers.

Extortion.

Encroachments.


and pray redress and perambulation.

Upon the search and sight of the perambulation taken in the time of E. 3.
order shall be therein taken. Resp.

Perambulation.




77. The print touching Welchmen Cap. 12. agrees with the Record in effect,
Welchmen.

Variance.


but not in form.

78. The print touching the pardon of King Richard Cap. 13. agrees ut supra.
Pardon.


79. They require that the Statutes made in Annis 8 and 12 R. 2. touching the
power of the Constable and Marshall, Constable:

Marshall.

Jurisdiction.

Trial.


may be executed; and further require a more streightning of their wilful
power, so as men might be duly tried according to the Laws of the Realm. Law of
the Land.


That Statutes therefore provided shall be observed. Resp.


80. The print touching Purveyors Cap. 10. agrees with the Record. Purveyors.


81. It is enacted, that such persons as be taken, or imprisoned for Lollerie,
Lollerie.
may be taken forthwith to their answer.

82. The like motion and answer is made touching the extortion of the Sheriffs
of Londons Officers in Smithfield, Extortion.

Sheriffs of London:

Smithfield.


as in the last Parliament.

83. That remedy may be had against Parsons clayming Tithes of Meadows, Tithes.
or Wastes newly sown.

Let him Sue that is especially grieved. Resp.


84. It is enacted, that if any Welchman shall arrest any Englishmans Goods,
Welchmen, Wales.

Goods attached.


or Chattels in Wales without cause, or take them out of the Marches into
Wales, Marches of Wales.

Reprisall.


And that the Steward, or other Officer of such place, or Liberty in Wales do
not deliver the same Goods or Chattels to the party grieved within seven days
after the means to him, or them made, that then it shall be lawful to those
Englishmen to arrest such VVelchmens Goods of such place, or Liberty as shall
come into England. The print Cap. 16. agrees with this.

85. That all Traverses of Office, Traverse of Offices.

Scire facias.


and Scire facias going out of the Chancery may be tried in the Kings Bench,
Chancery trial C. B.
or Common place.

Res.

Chancellor.


The Chancellor by virtue of his place may grant the same.

Supersedeas.
86. That the Writs of Supersedeas omnino, being only delay to the party may
no more be granted. Delays.


Res.
It shall be as it has been.

Wears, Mils.

Nusances.

Rivers.


87. That all Estanks, Kiddells, Wears, and Mills raised upon Rivers to
annoyance, at what time soever, may be removed.

Res.
The Statutes therefore provided shall be observed.

Protections revoked.
88. That all protections granted in certain particular Cases there recited may
be revoked.

Res.
The protections obtained by undue means shall be revoked as heretofore.

Jurisdiction.
89. They complain, and request that the Jurisdictions of the Courts of
Marshalsea and Admiralty, Marshalsea.

Admiralty.


may be certainly lymited.

Res.
The Statutes therefore provided shall be observed.

Gloucester.
90. The Commons of Salop, Hereford, Stafford, complain for that the towns of
Gloucester, and Worcester, Worcester.
levied Taxes for their Victuals, Taxes.

Victuals.


brought upon the River of Severne against their old Custom. Severne.

Old Custom.




Resp.
The King forbids all extortions to be used. Extortions.


Lords Marchers.
91. That the Lords Marchers upon Wales be charged to bring forth such
principal doers, Wales.
as were in the late Treasons, Treasons.
and Rebellions of Wales, Rebellions.
which are under their Jurisdiction.

Res.
The King will save his own rights, Kings Rights.
and do right to others.

92. That no pardon be granted unto rebellious VVelchmen, Pardon.

Welchmen Rebels.


until they have made satisfaction unto the Kings Subjects of their losses
sustained. Satisfaction.


Res.
The King will enjoy his Prerogative. Kings Prerogative.


93. The print touching VVelchmen Cap. 17. and 18. agrees with the Record in
effect, Welchmen.
but not in form.

Welchmen.
94. It is enacted, that all such Englishmen as shall take, or receive any
VVelchman to be his Tenant, shall take of him sufficient sureties for his good
demeanor. Sureties for good behavior.


Welchmen.
95. The Print touching Welchmen Cap. 19. and 20. agrees with the Record.

Jurisdiction.
96. That the Jurisdiction of the Constable of Dover, Constable of ^^ver.
may be certainly limited, so as they hold plea of no matters done out of the
same Castle, Dover Castle.
the Land belonging thereunto.

Res.
The said Castle shall enjoy their Liberties duly used. Liberties.


Prisage of Wines.
97. They complain against the undue taking of Wines by the Kings Butler in the
name of prizes, Kings Butler.
as in the last Parliament.

Res.
It shall continue as heretofore, saving the Kings right. Kings Right.


Liveries.
98. The print touching the wearing of Liveries Cap. 21. agrees with the Record.

99. That the Writs out of the Exchecquer, Exchecquer Writ^.
datum est nobis intelligi, may no further be levied.

The accustomed use shall continue. Res.

Use.




100. That in all Actions personal sued to the Exigent, Exigent.
the Attorney of the Plaintiff may be sworn before the Exigent go forth,
Attornys Oath.
that the Contract, or Trespass was done, or made in the same County. County.


There is sufficient remedy provided by the Law to meet with the falsehood of
Attornys. Res.

Law.

Attornys falshood^




101. That every man may as well be received in the Exchecquer to aver,
Exchecquer.

Averments.


that Sheriffs, Sheriffs returns.
and Bailiffs might have returned Issues as in other Courts. Issues.


The Barons of the Exchecquer are charged to do right. Res.

Barons of Exchecquer.




102. The print for repeal of a branch of a Statute made 11 R. 2. swerveth from
the Record Cap. 22. Repeal.

Variance.




103. That the King do not grant away any Lands, Kings Grants.
or yearly profits, which may be by him kept, without the advice of his
Council. Councels advice.


The King will be advised saving his Liberty. Res.

Kings Liberty.




104. It is enacted, that no penal Law nor Statute made in this Parliament
shall take effect before Pentecost then ensuing. Penal Laws.


Anno tertio Henrici Quarti. Rex Hen. Principi Walliae, Writs of Summons.
etc. apud Westminster. die Lunae post purificationem beatae Mariae. Test Rege apud
Westminster. 2. die Decembris.
EDro. Duci Eborum. Ioh. Com. Somerset. Edro. Courtney Com. Devon. Hen. Pereie
Com. Northumb. Tho. Com Arundell. Edo. Com. Staff. Michael de la Poole Com.
Suff. Tho. de Percie Com. Wigor. Rado Nevill Com. Westmerland. Tho. Camois.
Barth. Bourchier. Edro. de Cherleton de Powis. Willo. de Clinton. Mro. Tho. de
la War. Stephano de Scroope de Masham. Willelm. Roos de Hamelake. Willo. Heron
Chlr. Hen. Fitzhugh. Will. de Ferrariis de Groby. Tho. de Morley. Ric. de
Scroope. Hugoni Burnell. Tho. Berkley de Berkley. Iohi. de Wells. Almarico de
St. Amando. Rado de Cromwell. Rado Baroni de Graystock. Rado Harrington. Iohi.
Darcie. Waltero Fitz-Walter. Will. de Willoughby. Iohi. Cobham Chlr. Will. de
Dacre. Tho. Nevill de Halmshyre. Will. Beauchamp de Burgaveny. Ioh. Lovell de
Fishmerch. Reg. Gray de Ruthin. Tho. Bardolf de Wermegey. Petro de malo lacu.
Willo. la Zouch de Harringworth.
Tho. Erpingham Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno quarto Henrici Quarti. The Parliament holden at Westminster. the morrow after
Saint Michael in the fourth year of King Henr. the Fourth.
ON Saturday the morrow after Saint Michael, the Knights and Burgesses were
called by name in the Chancery within Westminster Hall before the Chancellor
and others of the Kings Council, Knights and Bugesses called by name in the
Chancery.

Chancellor.

Kings Council.


and from thence adjourned until Monday after. Adjournment.


2 On Monday the second of October, the Chancellor in the presence of the King
declared the cause of the Parliament before the Lords and Commons, Chancellor.

Causes of Parliament.


that it was the Kings will, that the holy Church, and all Persons, and
Corporations shall enjoy their Liberties. Liberties to be enjoyed by all
Persons.


3 He then takes for his Theme Pax multa diligentibus legem: wherein he much
commended Peace, Chancellors speech.

Peace.


and the commodities thereof; Peace is unto such as obey Laws, Obedience.
contrarily he shows the gall of dissension and disobedience, Dissension.

Disobedience.


and the mischief ensuing the same, and that for want of reasonable Peace, war
was the remedy: War.
he declared that by dissension and private discord, the flower of all
Chevalrie, the stock of Nobles within this Realm was in manner lately consumed,
Nobles and Realms near subversion.
and the whole Realm in like sort subverted, had not God as a mean raised the
King. King raised.


4 He remembers the late great victory given the King against the Scots:
Victory over the Scots.
and further lamenteth the great Schism in the Church, Schisms in the Church.
by having two Popes, and utters that the King means the appeasing thereof
for his part: wherein how the wars of Scotland might be maintained, Wars with
Scotland maintained.
the enemies of Wales utterly subjected, Welsh subjected.
the Irishmen wholly Conquered, Irish Conquered.
and the Prince there stayed. How also Guienne, Guienne.
Callice, Callice defended.

Their advise required.


and the Marches thereof might be defended, they were to consult, for the well
beginning whereof, he willed the Commons to chose their Speaker, Commons to
chose and present their Speaker.
and to present him the next day.

5 Receivers of Petitions for England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

6 Receivers of Petitions for Gascoin, and other places beyond the Seas, and of
the Isles

7 Tryars of Petitions for England, etc. as above.

8 Tryars of Petitions for Gascoin, etc. as above.

9 On Tuesday the third of October, the Commons presented unto the King Sir
Henry de Redford for their Speaker, Sir Henry de Redford Speaker presented.
who making the Common Protestation, His protestation.
had the same granted.

Chancellor.
10 On Tuesday the 10 th. of October, the Chancellor declared unto the King, how
the Commons desired of the King to have certain of the Lords with whom they
might confer, Commons desire a conference with some Lords.
the King did grant thereto, with this Protestation, Kings protestation entered.
that the same was done of favor, and no duty; the which protestation was
entered by the Cleark, after the which, the King sent the Steward of his House,
Steward.
and his Secretary, Secretary.
to declare the same to the Commons, Messengers to the Commons.
who did so, and returned answer to the King, according to his Protestation.

Committee of Lords.
11 The names of the Lords sent, being four Bishops, four Earls, and four Barons.

Commons thanks to the King for his voyages to Scotland and Wales.
12 The 16 th. day of October, the Commons in full Parliament, gave to the King
most humble thanks for his sundry valiant exploits, and namely for his last
voyage into Scotland, and for his three several journeys into Wales, since
that time, wherein they commend the Princes dexterity, and forgot not the
worthy Prowis of the Lord Thomas the Kings second Son in Ireland: Kings Son^
Valor.

Ireland.


and for his victory in Scotland; they require that by policy that may turn
to the Commons tranquillity: and for the Earl of Northumberlands travel in the
same discomfeiture, Thanks to the Earl of Northumberland.
they require the King to give him thanks.

Lord Gray of Ruthin.
13 The same day they require the King, that where the Lord Gray de Ruthin lay
Do-lorou^sley a prisoner in Wales for the ransom of 1000 Marks, Prisoner in
War.

Ransom to be raised by his Friends.


that therefore the Lord Roos and Willoughby, and other of his Parents and
alyes might make shift for the same Fine, without any Impeachment, the King
grants thereto, Kings assistances for his Ransomes.
and promises his, help, for that he knew the same Lord Gray to be a royal
and valliant Knight.

King in Parliament.
14 On Friday the 20 th. of October, the King being in his royal Seat, the Earl
of Northumberland and other Lords brought before him Sir Mardock le Steward,
the Son and Heir of the Duke of Albain the Scottish Kings brother, Scots
Prisoners of War presented to the King in Parliament.
Sir William Grave, the Lord Mountgomerie, and Sir Adam Foster Scots, Sir James
de Helsey, Sir Pierce Hazars, and John Darney Esquire French, who with others were
taken in the battle of Humbledon Hill nigh Woollord in the County of
Northumberland, on the day of the exaltation of the Cross next before.

Scots Prisoners humble deportment.
15 These Prisoners in coming to the Kings presence kneeled three times in
humble wise: First, at the Whitehall gate of the Kings Palace, then in the
midst of the same Hall: and Thirdly, before the Kings presence sitting in his
royal Seat of all whom still kneeling the said Sir Adam Foster, for and in the
name of them all, humbly prayed the King, that they might be entertained
according to the course of War; Their prayer to be entertained according to the
course of War.
the King for that they were valliantly taken in the Field granted thereunto.

16 The same Sir Adam declares, Peace or a League prefered by them with
Scotland.
that for the stay of Christian blood it was now in the Kings hands to have
either a final Peace or league; the King thereupon touching him of flattery
and untruth, Flattery.

Untruth.


and namely by causing the King, by trusting upon his word to have avoided the
Realm of Scotland, answered that he meant therein to be wiser. Sir Adam thereof
asked pardon, they then are committed to the Steward of the Kings House to
abide his pleasure. Steward of the House.


17 Whereas King Richard had delivered by Sir John Ikclington one of his
Chaplains, King Rich. 2. his Money and Jewels left ^n t^ust.
to the value of xxviii. Marks, besides other Jewels to great value, to the end
that upon certain tokens between them known, the same Sir John should dispose
the same, a great part whereof the same Sir John before this Kings coming had
done away, and the rest had delivered to this King; the King by the Parliament
pardons to the said Sir John all Accounts. Accounts pardoned.


18 On Monday the 6 th. of November, the Commons prayed the King to consider
the loyalty of the Earl of Somerset, Earl of Somerset.

Loyalty.

Restitution.


and to restore him to the name and honor of Marquess, Marquess name st^ange
and refused.
which he lately lost. The King requires advise, the Earl thereupon said, that
the same name of Marquess was strange, wherefore he meant he would not take the
same upon him.

19 Thomas Pomery Knight, and Ioane his wife complains, that John the son and
heir of Sir Phillip Courtney, Forcible entry into Lands complained of Sir
Phillip Courtney.
and Joan the late wife of Sir James Chadley Knight deceased, had forcibly by
the maintenance of the said Phillip entered into the Mannours of Clifton,
Aisconne, Shaple hilion, Kakesbred, Affellon, and into certain Lands in Exeter,
in the County of Devon. and in the Manor of Westwidmouth in Cornwall being
the inheritance of the said Thomas Pomery, and praying remedy. Upon the
examination whereof it was adjudged by the King and Lords, Examination thereof.

Judgment by the King and Lords.


that the said Thomas should enter, if his entry were lawful, Entry.
or else to have his Assize without all delays, Assize.
to be tried with more favor at the election of the said Thomas. Election.


20 The Abbot of Meniham in Devon. complains against the said Sir Phillip for
imprisoning him the said Abbot with two of his Monks with great force. Abbot of
Meniham.

Imprisonment.


Sir Phillip being demanded thereof in full Parliament could make no good
justification: Judgment in Parliament.
wherefore it was adjudged that he should not have to do with the Abbot, his
Monks or any of their things, but he should be bound to his good behavior,
Good b^hav^our.
and for the contempt was committed to the Tower. Contempt

Committed to the Tower.




21 Upon the Petition of Nicholas Pontington, Petitions.
Son and Heir of Thomas Pontington, in the County of Devon. against the said
Sir Phillip, Sir Phillip Courtney.
for dispossessing with force the said Nicholas of the Manor of Bikeleigh in
the said County; Upon the hearing of which matter it was adjudged that the
releasee of one Thomas Pontington, Judgment.

Release.


Parson of Bikeleigh, made to the said Sir Phillip, and Anne his wife, in an
Assize brought by the said Nicholas against them, shall only plead in Bar, Bar.
that the said Nicholas was a bastard, Bastardy.
wherein if it were found that the said Nicholas was a mulier, then the said
Nicholas should recover.

Revocations.
22 The Revocation which the King made of certain lycenses of Provision for
Rome, Provisions.
by the Pope there, Pope.
are recited and confirmed by Parliament. Confirmation.


Prio^ Aliens.
23 It is enacted by the King, Lords, and Commons, that all Prior Aliens with
their Lands, Lands seized.
except such as be conventuall, shall be seized into the Kings hand, to be
disposed at his pleasure.

24 It is enacted upon the Petitions of the Merchants of Ieane, Petition.

Merchants of Ieans.


that those Merchants might unlode their said Merchandise at Southampton,
Southampton.
and from thence carry the same by water to London, London.
without paying at London any custom called Seawage, Custom.

Seawage.


provided that those Merchants do bring testimonialls from the customers of
Southampton. Testimonials.

Customers.




25 At the Petition of John Holt, Petit^on.
and William Bourgh, the King restores them to all their Lands and Tenements
forfeited by An^ 11. R. 2. Restitution.


26 The Prior of Newport Pannell assigns five points of error to be in the
Judgment which was given against him in An^ 15 R. 2. tit. 23 for the Dean and
Chapter of Lichfield, Prior of Newport.

Errors assigned in Parliament.


the which Prior has day unto the next Parliament. Adjournment till next
Parliament.


27 George of Dunbar, Earl of March, Earl of March.
by being the Kings liege now prays that he may be restored to all such his
Lands there, Restitution to Lands in Scotland, Conquered by the English Tenants.
as the English shall at any time Conquer or obtain, and that all such his
Tenants and Soldiers as will become English may be in the Kings protection,
Soldiers.

Kings Protection.

Oath.


the which the King grants, so as they be sworn.

28 The 25 th. day of November, the Commons by the assent of the Bishops and
Lords, granted to the King the Subsidy of Woolls, Subsidy of Woolls, and Tunage
and Poundage granted.
Wool fells, and Skins, for three years 3 s. of every Tun of Wine, 12 d. of
every pound of Merchandise, one Desme, one Desme and Fifteen granted.
and one Fifteen, After which grant, the Lords and Commons prayed the King for
the delivery of Sir Phillip Courtney out of the Tower, Petition for Sir Phillip
Courtnies release.
the which the King granted, so as he found good Sureties for his good
behavior; Sureties for the Good behavior.
All which being thus done, the Earl of Northumberland in the absence of the
Kings Steward, required all the Lords and Commons to dine with the King the
next day: All the Lords and Commons invited to dine with the King.
and so the Council willed the Knights and Burgesses to sue forth their Writs
the Parliament the same day ended. Writs for the Knights and Burgesses wages.

Parliament ended.




Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
29 The print touching the Liberties of the Church, Liberties confirmed^
Cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

30 The print touching the Clergy, Clerg^e.

Variance.


Cap. 2. and 3. somewhat swerveth from the Record, having in one place too
much, viz. [apprelles] and in another too little, viz. to the ordinary, which
note.

31 The print touching the Kings gifts, Kings gifts.
Cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

32 That all Sheriffs upon their Oaths may be discharged in the Exchecquer.
Sheriffs discharged.

Exchecquer.




Such as be grieved shall find remedy at the hands of the Council, Res.

Kings Councell^


and Barons of the Exchecquer. Barons.


33 The print touching Sheriffs, Sheriffs.
Cap. 5. agrees with the Record.

34 The print touching Shoomakers, Shoomakers.
Cap. 35. agrees with the Record.

35 It is enacted that from henceforth the Chirographer shall be a man of
ability and knowledge, Chirographer.

Ability.


who shall in proper person continue in the said office always, Proper persons.
without letting the same to Farm, or to occupy the same by deputy, No Deputy.
or otherwise.

36 The print touching the sealing of Clothes in London, Sealing of clothes
Cap. 6. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

37 That Damages in Account may be awarded to the Plantiff. Damages.

Account.




The old Law shall continue. Res.

Old Law.




38 The Statute for avoiding, Forging.

Executors.


forging by Executors may keep place against a Woman Executrix who takes a
Husband.

As next above. Res.


39 That there may no more be taken for weighing in any place of the Realm for
any Aver-depoiz than in London. Weights.

Fees.




The Council by authority of Parliament shall take order therein. Res.

Council.




40 The print touching Desmes, Desmes.
Cap. 7. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

41 That every Executor for any release made by any his Co-executors shall
recover by Account against them to the value of the things released. Executors.

Release.

Account.




It shall be as heretofore. Res.


42 The Burgesses of Lewis require, Old Law.

Lewis.


that the weighing of Woolls may be at Lewis, and Chichester for the County of
Sussex. Chichester^

Weighing of Woolls.




43 The print touching forcible entries, Forcible entries.

Variance.


Cap. 8. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

44 The print touching power in the Chancellor for Commissions, Chancellor.
Cap. 9. agrees with the Record in effect, Commissions.
but not in form.

Kersies.
45 That the Statute made touching Kersies and Cogware, may tinue during the
Kings time.

Resp.
The King hereof will be advised.

46 The print touching halfpence, Halfpence.
Cap. 10. agrees with the Record.

47 That the Statutes made in the 13 th. and 15 th. of R. 2. touching the
Admiral in all his Judgments, Admiralty.
to do according to the Common Laws may be kept. Common Law.


Resp.
If the Admiral, Admiral.
Constable, or Marshall do against Law, Marshall.
the Council by Parliament authority to them granted may redress, Council to
redress.
or remit the same to the Common Law. Common Law.


48. This title agrees with the 23. before.

49 That the Chief Justice of the King be Justice in no other place. Chief
Justice.


Res.
As heretofore, it shall be.

Old Law.
50 The title touching exceptions to villanage to little purpose. Exceptions.

Villanage.




Kiddles.
51 The print touching Kiddles in the Thames, Thames.
Cap. 10. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in full form.

Appropriations.
52 The print touching Appropriation of Benefices, Benefices.
Cap. 12. agrees as next before.

53 The Major and Aldermen of Callice, Callice.
require the King to grant unto them the Assize of Wine, Assize of Wine, Ale,
etc.
Ale, and Beer, and Bread, within the Jurisdiction of the same City called le
Eskenage, Jurisdiction.
as they then by grant enjoyed the same within the same City.

Res.
Let them sue to the King, King.
who will advise, and consider the same.

Callice.
54 They require that they may enjoy the Hospital of St. Nicholas in Callice
called Gods House, Hospital of St. Nicholas.
with all the Lands thereto belonging: the which was founded by the Bailiffs,
Coremains, and Esterins of the said Town.

Res.
As next before.

Staple.
55 That the Statute made in the first year of the King, touching the Staple at
Callice, Callice.
may be observed.

Res.
The King grants except Worsteeds, Worsteeds.

Herring.


and other Clothes, herring, and the Patent granted to the Men of Berwick in
the first year of the King. Berwick.

Array.




None enforced to go out of his County.
56 The print that none shall be enforced to go out of their Counties, Cap. 13.
agrees with the Record.

57 That the Statute made An 36. E. 3. touching the wages of Captains may
continue. Captains wages.


Res.
The King by advise will take order therein.

Residence.
58 That every Parson may dwell and keep Hospitality on his Benefice, Hospitality.

Penalty.


or else to incur the pain of the Statute of Provisors.

The King has charged the Bishops to to take order herein by the next
Parliament. Resp.

Bishops to take order.




59 It is enacted that all the Statutes made for Laborers, Laborers.
shall be observed, and that if any man do retain any one to be an Apprentice
contrary to the form of the Statute of 12. R. 2. Cap. 5. being willed first to
serve at husbandry, Apprentice.

Forfeiture.

Husbandry.


that reteynor shall forfeit ten Pounds.

60 The print touching Laborers, Laborers.
Cap. 14. agrees with the Record.

61 The print touching Merchants, Merchants.
Cap. 15. agrees with the Record.

62 The print touching Friars, Friars.
Cap. 17. agrees with the Record.

63 That the Admiral and his Lieutenant do sit to keep their Courts, Admiralty.
in no Liberty or Town, but only upon the Seacoasts, or Arms of the Sea, and
that every plea before them may be determined in one place without adjournment.
Adjournment.


The Statutes and usages heretofore made shall be observed. Resp.

Usage.




64 That no Person whatsoever have any Dove-house in any Town, Dovehouse.
unless they may dispend 40 s. yearly in the same Town, on pain of 5 l.

The King will be hereof advised. Res.


65 That all the Kings Lands in Wales may be resumed, Wales.

Lands resumed.


and let out to obedient Subjects, and not to rebellious Welch-men. Rebels.


The King will do his pleasure. Res.

Kings pleasure.




66 That in an Assize of Rent brought in the Confine of Counties if there be
pleaded in Bar, Assize of Rent.

Plea in Bar.


a recoverie of the Land whereout the Rent was going in another County,
County.
and that the Plaintiff do allege the same recoverie to be, false that then
the Trial thereof may be in the same County where the Land was recovered.
Trial.


By the Common Law there is sufficient remedy provided. Res.

Common Law.




67 That no Letters Patents of Lands or Goods be granted within one year after
any Office be returned, Grant.

Office returded.


but that the parties may be received to their travers. Traverse.


The Common Law shall be observed. Res.

Common Law.




68 The Citizens of Lincoln for the great poverty of the same Town pray to be
eased, Lincoln.

Poverty.


and released of their Fee-Farms of 180 l. Fee-Farm.


Let them sue to the King and his Council. Res.

King.




69 This title concerns the payment of Fifteens, Quindesmes.
and is to no purpose.

70 A complaint against the liberties of St. Martins le Grand in London, London.

St. Martins liberties.

Ill Fruits.


as a receptacle or Murderers, Thieves, Banckrupts, Shifters, and request to
have the same abolished.

Upon sight of their privileges, Res.
the Kings Council shall take order therein. Kings Council.


71 The print touching Attorneys, Attorneys.
Cap. 18. agrees with the Record: the Record discloseth many falsehoods,
Falshood^s.
and slights of Attorneys.

Attorney.
72 The print that no Officer of any Liberty be Attorney there, Cap. 19.
agrees with the Record.

Forrainers.
73 That any Forrainer being in enquest of Midd. where he never came, may upon
his acquitall have his remedy against them. Acquital.

Remedy.




Res.
The Statutes and Common Laws shall be observed.

Cornwall.
74 The Parochians of the Vicaridges of Leskeret, Lakenighorn, Affallan in the
County of Cornwall, require that the Prior of Launceston, Prior of Lanceston.
who was Parson of the same, may in no wise appropriate those Vicaridges to
their said Priorie, Appropriation.

Penalty.


being 1000 l. yearly, and but 15. Commons to live thereon, on pain of the
Statute of Provisors.

Res.
The King has provided sufficient remedy in this Parliament.

Kent.
75 The Commons of the County of Kent, make complaint against the Constable of
Dover, Constable of Dover.
as in the last Parliament.

Res.
The Kings Council upon the sight of the old Liberties, Kings Council.
shall have power to take order therein.

Array.
76 A prescribed request for the array of every Estate according to their degree.

Res.
The King will charge every Estate to avoid excess, Kings Council.
and the Council shall have power to appoint particularities for every Estate.

Residence.
77 The print touching the Residence of Customers, Customers.
Cap. 10. agrees with the Record.

Suggestions.
78 The Statutes made in the 25. and 42. of E. 3. that no man should appear in
any Court upon Suggestions, may be observed, and if any man shall appear, and
disprove such suggestions, that he shall recover his Damage, Damages.
and the adverse party may therefore be Imprisoned and make Fine. Imprisonment.

Fine.




Res.
The King will charge his Officers to do no otherwise therein than as they have
done.

Exigent.
79 That the Exigent may be in Writs of Annuitie, Annuitie.
Detinue, and Covenant.

Res.
The Common Law shall be kept. Common Law.


80 The like motion and answer as was in the last Parliament, Tit. 71.

Purveyors.
81 That the Statute made in the 36. E. 3. touching Purveyors, may be observed.

Resp.
The Statutes therefore made, shall be observed.

Presentation.
82 The print touching the Kings presentiments in another man's right, Cap. 22.
agrees with the Record.

Outlawry.

Additions.


83 That no man be outlawed without his Surname, name of Town, and County. Res.


Common Law.
The Common Law, and Statutes shall be observed.

84 The print touching the improving of the Alnage of clothes, Al^ge.
Cap. 24. agrees with the Record.

85 The print touching Victuallers, Victuallers.
and Hostlers, Hostlers.
Cap. 25. agrees with the Record.

86 It is enacted that the eldest grant of Annuities by the King, Annuities.

Precedencie.


or any his Progenitors out of the Counties shall first be paid.

87 The print touching the conviction of Englishmen, Conviction.
by Welchmen, Welchmen.
Cap. 26. agrees with the Record.

88 That no Lords of Wales, (...).
or their Ministers do receive any Fellons, Fellons.

Receivers.


or trespassors of any other Lordships, but that they be justified in their own
Lordships.

The Kings Council shall have power to take order herein. Resp.

Kings Council.




89 That no Welchman do receive any evil doer or stranger above one night,
Welchman.

Receivers.


unless he will answer for him.

The Kings Council shall have power to take order therein. Resp.

Kings Council.




90 The print touching the gathering of Congregations, Congregations.
Cap. 27. agrees with the Record.

91 The title is joined before tit. 87.

92 The print touching Congregations in Wales, Wales.

Congregations.


Cap. 28. agrees with the Record.

93 The print that no man should go armed, Going armed.

Variance.


Cap. 25. swerveth from the Record, for that the Record is, no Welchman;
Welchmen.
quod nota.

94 The print touching carrying of Victuals, Victuals.
or Armor into Wales, Arms.
Cap. 30. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

95 That there may be appointed in Wales, Justices.

Wales.


sufficient able men for the keeping of the Peace. Peace.


The Kings Council shall take order therein. Res.

Kings Council.




96 If any Welchman being an offender, Welchmen.
shall not obey the Law, but fly into the Mountains, Flight.
that then the next of his kin shall be apprehended, Next of kin.
and kept until they bring forth the Offender.

The like answer as before. Res.


97 The print that Welchmen should have no Castles, Welchmen^ Castles.
etc. Cap. 31. agrees with the Record.

98 That no Welchman shall buy any Merchandise, Welchmen.

Merchandise.


or exchange Victuals in other places than in market Towns Victuals.

Market Towns.




The Council shall take order therein.

99 The print touching the bearing of Offices by Welchmen, Res.

Offices.

Welchmen.


Cap. 32. agrees with the Record

100 That in all cases of the Crown throughout every Liberty in Wales the Law
of England be only used. Law of England.

Wales. Council le Roy.




Res.
The Kings Council shall take order therein.

Welsh Towns.
101 The print touching the storing of Welsh Forts or Towns with English men,
English men.
Cap. 33. agrees with the Record.

Wales.
102 The print touching the marriage of the kin of Owen ap. Glendor, Owen
Glendor.
Cap. 34. agrees with the Record.

Moneys transportation.
103 The print touching the carrying forth of Money, Cap. 16. agrees with the
Record in effect, but not in form.

Strangers.
104 That every stranger bringing in his own commodities, be bound to buy
English commodities to half the value of his own, English commodities
and that the Money for the other half be not carried out of the Land without
lycense. Money.


R^s.
The Treasurer by his Office, Lord Treasurer.
may do what he shall think best.

Merchants.
105 That every Merchant who shall make exchange to Rome, Exchange to Rome.
be bound to buy the commodities of the Realm, within three months to the
value exchanged.

R^sp.
The Council shall provide remedy therein. Kings Council.


106 That remedy may be found against such Merchants as in their own houses do
pack up their Merchandises, Merchants.
the which be not surveyed by Customers in deceit of the King. Deceit.

Customers survey of Merchandise.




The like answer as before.

Res.
107 It touches Merchants, Merchants.
and is of like purpose.

Customers Oath.
108 It is enacted that every Customer in every Port, be charged, and sworn to
be resident upon his Office: Residence.
and that no comptroller upon pain of imprisonment do exercise his Office by
deputy. Comptroller.

Imprisonment.

Deputy.




Searchers.
109 The print touching Searchers, Cap. 21. agrees with the Record in effect,
but not in form.

Judgments.
110 The print touching Judgment in pleas, real and personal, Cap. 23. agrees
with the Record.

Purveyance.
111 That the Kings debt touching Purveyance of Victuals taken up, Kings debts
paid.
may be paid.

So soon as the same may be.

Feoffees in trust.
112 That remedy may be had against such Feoffees in trust of Lands or Rents,
as do charge the same with rent-charges, Rent charges.
against the will of the Feoffers.

Res.
Let the Kings Council be advised hereof until the next Parliament. Kings
Council


Approver.
113 That all such Abbots, Priors, Knights, Esquires, and other the Kings true
Subjects, as were lately impeached wrongfully by William Tailor late of
Lampworth, William Tailor.
a Common Prover in the Kings Bench, of sundry heinous Crimes, for the which
the said William was hanged, drawn, and quartered, may be discharged, and
acquitted by the Kings Writ to be sent to the Justices of the Kings Bench.
Traitor.

Acquitted by Writ.




Res.
The grant of the King, and the Writ sent to the same Justices.

Anno quinto Henrici quarti. The Parliament holden at WESTMINSTER the next day
after Saint HILLARIE in the fifth year of King HENRY the Fourth.
ON Monday the fourteenth day of January being the first day of the Parliament,
the Bishop of London Brother to the King, and Chancellor of England,
Chancellor.
in the presence of the King, Lords, and Commons declared the cause of the
Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
and that the Kings will was, that the holy Church, all persons and
Corporations should enjoy their Liberties. Liberties to be enjoyed by all
persons.


2. He took then for his Theme these words multitudo sapientum; and thereby
learnedly declared, that by Council every Realm was governed, Council.
and resembled every man to the body of a man, and applied the right hand to
the Church, Church.
and the left hand to the Temporaltie, Temporality.
and the other Members to the Commonaltie, of all which Members and Estates,
the King being willing to have Council had therefore called the same
Parliament, Parliament to advise.
and that for sundry causes.

3. First for the utter appeasing of Welsh Rebellions; Welsh Rebellion.

French enemies.


for rebelling of the malice of the Duke of Orleance, and the Earl of St.
Paul, who had bent themselves wholly against the King, and the Realm, and
namely by their late arrival in the Isle of Wight, Isle of Wight.
where they took the repulse. To consider the imminent peril of the Marches of
Callice, Callice.
Guienne, Guienne.
and other like Dominions; to remember the wars of Ireland and Scotland,
Ireland.

Scotland.


and not to forget to take an order touching the late Rebellions of Henry
Percy, Hen. Percies Rebellion.
and other their Adherents at the Battle of Shrewsbury, and so willed the
Commons to choose, Commons to choose and present their Speaker.
and the next day to present their Speaker.

4. Receivers of Petitions for England, ^etitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

5. Receivers of Petitions for Gascoin and other places beyond the Seas, and of
the Isls.

6. Tryers of Petitions for England, etc. as above.

7. Tryers of Petitions for Gascoyn, etc. as above.

8. On Tuseday the fifteenth day of January, the Commons came before the King,
and presented for their Speaker Sir Arnold Savage, Sir Arnold Savage.

Speaker presented.


who excused himself thereof, Excuse.
but the King would not receive the same, but allowed the election: thereupon
Sir Arnold made the Common Protestation for himself, Protestation.
and the Commons which was accepted.

9. On Wednesday the sixteenth of January the Commons Commons request.
came before the King, and desired him to have regard to the charges, for the
repressing of the Welsh Rebels, Welsh rebels.
and keeping of the Sea, Sea guarded.
to consult of the great charges of his House; Household charg.
That the King and the Prince would give Liveries according to the Statute
made. Liveries.


Repayring of Castles and Houses.
10. That the King would provide for the repayring of his Castles, and Houses,
and namely for his Castle at Windsor, ^ind^or Castle.
which were greatly in decay, and not to grant away, Granting away Lands
the profits of those Castles, and Houses, and notwithstanding to stand to the
repayring of the same, without which he could not but run to the great charging
of the Commons, Charging the Commons.
and to the subversion of the whole estate. Subversion of the State.


Earl of Northumb petition, acknowle^gem^nt and su^m^ssion in parliament.
11. On Friday the eighteenth day of February, the Earl of Northumberland came
into the Parliament before the King, and the Lords, and there by his Petition
to the King acknowledged to have done against his allegiance, and namely for
gathering of power, Gathering of power.
and giving of Liveries, Giving Liveries^ p^^^on prayed.

Ready submission.


wherefore he prays pardon, and the rather for that upon the Kings Letters,
he yielded himself, and came to the King into York, whereas he might have kept
himself away.

Justices.
12. The which Petition the King delivered to the Justices by them to be
considered. Whereupon the Lords made Protestation, Lord protestation.
that the order thereof belonged to them. And so they as Peers of this
Parliament, The only Judges in parliament of Treason.
to whom such Judgment belonged in weighing the Statute of 27 E. 3. touching
treasons, and the Statute of Liveries made in this Kings time, adjudged the
same to be no treason, They adjudge the Earls offense no Treason, o^ Felony,
but Trespass.
nor Felony, but only trespass fineable to the King.

The Earls thanks to the King and Lords for the judgment.
13. For which Judgment the said Earl gave great thanks to the King, and Lords.
And at the request of the said Earl, he the same Earl was then sworn to be true
Liegeman to the King; Oath of Allegiance to the King, prince and their heirs in
tail pardon of his Fine and Ransom.
to the Prince the Kings eldest son, and to the heirs of his body begotten, and
to every of the Kings Sons, and to their issue succeeding the Crown of England,
according to the Laws, and that done the King pardons the said Earl his Fine,
and Ransom.

14. After which the Archbishop of Canterbury prayed the King, Archbishops
prayer.
that forasmuch as he and the Duke of York, with other Bishops, and Lords were
of sundry suspected to have been of the Confederacy of the said Henry Percie,
Suspicion.

Confederacy.


that the said Earl might publish the truth; the Earl upon the Kings
commandment by his oath purges them all thereof. The Earl purges them upon
Oath.


Levying Wars adjudged Treason.
15. And on this day the levying of War, of the said Sir Henry Percie, and
others was adjudged treason by the King, and Lords in full Parliament.

Kings Household reformed.
16. At the request of the Commons, the Lords accorded that four special
persons should be removed out of the Kings House, persons removed.
viz. the Kings Confessors, the Abbot of Door, Master Richard Durham, Mr.
Richard Durham.
and Crosby of the Chamber. Master Crosby.
Whereupon Saturday the ninth of February the said Confessor, Durham, and
Crosbie came into the Parliament before the King, They come into the Parliament.
and Lords, where the King excused them, The King excused them.
saying that he then knew no cause, wherefore they should be removed, but only
for that they were hated of the people, Peoples hatred the only cause of their
guilt.
and therefore charged them to depart from his House according to the
agreement, The King discharges and removes them from his House.
and the like he would also have pronounced against the Abbot, if he had been
present.

17. On the same Saturday the Commons gave great thanks to the King in full
Parliament, Commons thanks to the King Earl Northumberland.
for the favor showed to the Earl of Northumberland; and further declared,
that this third time in worship of the Trinity, the Lords, Bishops, and they
were sworn to be true to the King, Their Oath of Allegiance with the Bishops
and Lords to the King, Prince, and their issue, etc. there taken.
to the Prince, and to his issue, and to every one of the Kings sons, severally
succeeding the Crown of England, albeit the same was more then needed: for the
which the King gave thanks unto them. Kings Thanks.


18. The same day at the request of the Commons the King commanded the Earls of
Northumberland, Commons request.
and Westmerland in token of perfect amity to kiss each other in open
Parliament, Earl^ reconciliation in open Parliament.
and to take each other by the hand thrice, which they did, and so often they
kissed each other as they took hands, Kissing.

Taking by the hand.


being thrice, and promised that their tenants, and men should do the like.

19. The same day the Commons prayed, Commons request.
that such might be appointed to be the Kings Officers of Household, Kings
Household.

Officers ap^ointed with the Parliaments privity.


as were renouned for virtue, and that the Lords, and Commons might be privy
thereto.

20. Friday the two and twentieth of February at the request of the Commons,
Commons request.
the Earls of Northumberland, Earls reconciliation in Parliament.
and Dunbar in token of amity before the King, and Lords in full Parliament,
took each other by the hand, Shaking by the hands.
and kissed one the other. Kissing.


21. The same day at the request of the Commons, Commons request.
the King in full Parliament affirms, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Duke
of York, the Earl of Northumberland, and other Lords which were suspected to
be of the Confederacy of Sir Henry Percy, Kings purgation of suspected Lords.
to be his true Liegemen, and that they nor any of them should not be impeached
therefore by the King, Not to be impeached.
or his heirs at any time ensuing.

22. The Commons rehearsing how King E. 3. in the parliament holden in the
eleven of his reign, created his eldest son Duke of Cornwall, and the same
Dukedom annexed to the Crown, The Duchy of Cornwall annexed to the Crown.
with diverse Hereditaments by his Letters Patents, Letters Patents.
by authority of the same never to be dismembered or sold away, they therefore
pray the King to resume, Resumption and Reversion of it to the Crown.
and sieze, and to unite again to the said Duchy, such Lands as were sold away
by Prince Edward, King Richard, or by the King himself.

Princes Council.
The same Petition was answered in effect following.

It is accorded by the King, and Lords that the Prince by the advice of his
Council shall have his scire facias, Scire facias.
or other his best means of recovery, wherein shall be allowed no protection,
Protection.
or praying in aid of the King, Aid of the King.
unless it be for Sir John Cornwall, Sir John Cornwall.
and Elizabeth his wife, late wife of John Holland late Earl of Huntington, Sir
John Holland Earl of Huntington.
and for such persons to whom the King is bound by warrantie, Kings warranty.
and thereby to render in value all such cases, Recovery in value.
the Prince shall sue to the King.

24. The Commons do amend the Commission for the arraying, Commissions of Array.
or mustering of men, Musters.
and watching of the Beacons: Beacons.
and pray the King, that from thenceforth, there should no other form thereof
be made; whereto the King with the assent of the Lords, Kings and Lords assent.
after consultation therein had with the Judges of the Realm, Judges advised
with.
granted.

Commission of Array.
25. The form, and President of the same Commission.

Commons request.

Committee of Lo^ds.


26. At the request of the Commons, certain Lords especially appointed agreed on
the Articles ensuing. Articles agreed on.
First that all strangers taking part with the Antipope be not about the Kings
person; Aliens.

Antipope.


but do avoid the Realm.

27. That other strangers Catholics, as those of Dutchland be appointed to
remain upon such Frontiers within the Realm where Garrisons are. Banishment.

Aliens Dutch confined.

Frontiers.

Garrisons.




28. That all French persons, Britains, Lombards, Italians, and Bavarians
whatsoever may be removed out of the House of the King and Queen, Aliens
removed from the Kings and Queens servants.
except the Queens Daughters Maria, St. Miches, Alder and John Purian and their
Wives.

Persons excepted.
29: That no VVelchman be about the Kings person. Welchmen removed from the King.


30. All which Articles on Thursday the one and twentieth of February, Kings
assent to these Articles put in execution by his Officers.
the King by assent of the Lords established in full Parliament, gave in full
charge to his chief Officers of Household, there named to put the same in
execution, who at Supper then following did the same.

Queen and her Daughters.
31. After which for more comfort of the Queen and her Daughters, the King by
the assent of the Lords established in full Parliament, Queen attendants
appointed by the King and Lords in full Parliament.
assigned to the Queen besides the persons aforenamed, two Knights, a Damsel,
two Chamborers, one Mistress, two Esquires, one Nurse, and one Chamborer for
the Queens Daughters, and a Messenger to go between at certain times.

Patents confirmed Expenses for the Household 10100 l.
32. The King by his Letters Patents confirmed by Act of Parliament, the
Commission at large, granted that certain Revenues and Custom there expressed,
and amounting to the sum of 10100 l. should be yearly paid to the Treasurer of
his House, Treasurer of the Household.
for the charges of the same his House. In which grant amongst other things it
appears, that the profits of the Hamper in the Chancery at this time was
only worth 2000 l. per Annum. Ham^er worth 2000. l. per an.


Archbishop.
33. On Saturday the first day of March, the Archbishop of Canterbury, declared
to all the Lords in the Kings presence, that the Kings will was that the Common
Laws of the Realm should by no means be delayed; Common Law maintained, and not
delayed.
that the Lords should take order for the Kings expenses of Household, Kin^s
Household ^x^^nc^s ordered by the Lords.
and that there should be appointed certain Treasurers of the Wars, Treasure^s
of the War appointed.
who should employ what was granted to the War only, whereto the King agreed,
and the Commons also. Kings and Commons assent.


34. It is enacted that the Prior of Okeborne Proctor of the Abbey of Fishcamp
in Normandy, Proctor.
and all others Priors Coventuall should remain in England, Priors, Aliens.

Conventual Priors


for that they were Catholics, and that all religious persons borne French,
Religious Aliens removed.
should depart the Realm, and English put in their places. English in their
place.


35. The Archbishop of Canterbury declared openly in the Parliament,
Archbishops Protestation.
that where there came on his head a Debt in the Exchecquer of 200 l. while Sir
Roger Welden was Treasurer of England, Debt.

Exchecquer.

Sir Roger Welden Lord Treasurer.


in the time of King Richard, he protested, that he owed no such debt, and
prayed that the same his Protestation might be entered.

36. At the request of the Commons it was enacted, Commons request.
that if War should happen between the King, Wars with France.
and the French, and the Flemmings, that then the Kings Council should have
power to remove the Staple from Callice to what place they thought best, Kings
Councels ^ower.

Ca^lice.

Staple.


and that no Patent should be granted to carry any of the said Marchand^ze to
any other place. Patents.
Vide post tit. 55.

37. The King at the sundry requests of the Council, Kings great Council
appointed by Parliament.

Knight of the Shi^e.


does name, and appoint as there does appear, certain Bishops, Lords, and
others to be of his great continual Council.

38. ^or that the Sheriffs of Rutland, Sheriff false return amended.
had returned one William Ondeby for Knight for the same Shire, and not Thomas
de Thorpe who was chosen, he was commanded to amend the same return, Sh^ri^^
imprisoned for his false return, and put to a fine and Ransom.
by returning Thomas Thorpe, and further was committed to the Fleet, Fleet.
and to Fine, and Ransom at the Kings p^easure.

39. At the request of the Commons the King granted, Commons request.
that one Bennet William, who was imprisoned to answer before the Constable and
Marshall of England, Imprisonment.
should be tried according to the Common Laws of the Realm, Trial by the Common
Law.
notwithstanding any Commission to the contrary; Constable.

Marshall.

Commission.


and thereupon a Writ was accordingly directed to the J^stices of the Kings
Bench as may appear. Justices of the Kings Bench.


40. Roger Deynecourte the son and heir of John Deynecourte Knight, Roger
Deynecourt.
complains of an erroneous judgment given against him in the Kings Bench,
Error in Parliament upon a Judgment.
for Ralph de Alderlie touching the Manor of Austie in the County of Warwick:
the which Errors are there particularly rehearsed; whereupon a Scire facias was
granted to the said Roger returnable in the next Parliament, Banco le Roy.

Scire facias.

Next Parliament.


and Sir William Gascoyne Chief Justice for shortness of time, Sir William
Gascoin chief Justice.
examined a Copy of the Process, and Record word by word, Transcript of the
Record.
and gave a Copy thereof under his hand to the Clarke of the Parliament.

Clarke of the Pa^liament.
41. It was agreed between the Prince on the one part, and John Cornwall, and
the Countess of Huntington his wife on the other part. That the said John, and
Countess should surrender into the Princes hands all such Mannours, Princes.

Agreement.


and Hereditaments as were parcel of the Duchy of Cornwall, Surrender.

Cornwall.

Duchy.


after which surrender an entry should be made in the Premises on the behalf of
the Prince, and that after the said entry the Prince by Deed and Letters of
Attorney to deliver seizure, Princes Deed.

Letter of Atonement.


should grant the premises to the said John, and Countess, and for that the
Prince was within age, Livery and seisin.

Prince Infant.


he should promise before the Lords to perform the same at his full age,
Promise before the Lords to bind him and his heirs at full age.
and the promise to be made for the Prince his Brother, all which Acts should
be done by Parliament. Parliament.


Form Courts Confession.
42. Whereupon the twentieth of March as well the said Prince, as the said John,
and Countess came in proper persons before the King and Lords, King and Lords
give judgment of Lands in Parliament.
where the said Countess confessed, that she had during her life, certain
Manors parcel of the said Duchy, upon which confession the King and Lords
gave judgment, that the said Prince should be restored to the said Mannours
aforesaid, Restitution to the Prince.

Reconveyance.


and that after seizure had, the Prince should make estate over as is aforesaid.

Princes Grant in Parliament of Manors in the Duchy of Cornwall.
43. The grant of the Prince to the said John, and Elizabeth Countess of
Huntington, during her life of the Castle and Manor of Trematon, the Manor
of Calestocke, the Manor of Ashburgh, the Castle, and Park of Easternell,
the Manor of Perin of Penknith, the Burrows, and Towns of Lostwithiell, and
Camelford, the whole fishing of the Manor of Fowley, Fishing.
the Manor of Tewinton, the Manor of Moreske, the Manor of Tintagell.

Deed read in Parliament.
44. This Deed being read in full Parliament, the Prince, the Lords Thomas,
John, and Humfrey made promise as aforesaid; Infants promise.
Livery, Parliament.
and seizin was delivered to the said John, Livery and seisin in Parliament.
and Countess, and the King promised to confirm the same. Kings confirmation.


45. At the Petition of Ioane Queen of England, Queen Ioanes Petition and Dower
in Parliament.
the King granted that she the said Queen should enjoy during her life, Lands,
and Tenements to the full sum of ten thousand marks by the year for, 10000.
M. per an.
and in the name of her Dower, Dower.
according as other Queens of England had done.

Sir John Cornish.
46. At the like Petition of Sir John Cornwall, Petition.
and Elizabeth Lancaster Countess of Huntington his wife, the King granted that
she the said Elizabeth should be a person able at the Common Law to sue and
recover her Dower of all the Hereditaments, Feme Count enabled to sue at Common
Law against the King or any other for her Dower, though not dowable by Law.
late of John de Holland Earl of Huntington her late husband, as well against
the King, as against all other persons, notwithstanding any Judgment against
the said Earl, and notwithstanding the said Countess be not thereof dowable.
Attainder.

Dower.




47. The like Petition, answer, and grant is made to Constance late the wife of
Thomas le Despencer, (...) Dispence^
for the recovery of her Dower of the Lands of the said Thomas as is aforesaid.
Dower recovery though ^o^^eited.


48. Upon the Petition of Edward Duke of York touching 1000 l. by the year,
Duke of Yorks Petition.
granted by Richard the second to Edward the Father, and to the heirs males in
the 13 R. 2. the King grants to Edward now Duke 4000 l. out of the Customs of
Kingstone upon Hull, (...) i^ Tail chang^d, in the Custome^ of Kingstone and
London.
and 289 l. 6 s. 8 d. out of the Customs of London; Customs.
as parcel of the said 1000 l. and to the heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten.

49. John Earl of Somerset Captain of Callice, John Earl of Sommerset.

Callice.


and of the Marches thereof decla^eth, that where by Indenture between the
King, In^e^^u^e.
and him, he stood bound to keep the town, and Castle aforesaid, taking
therefore for himself, and his Soldiers in time of truce, Soldiers.

Garrison of Callice.

T^uce.

Wa^.


and peace 6301 l. 11 s. 8 d. and in the time of 10509 l. 6 s. 8 d. whereof he
was behind unpayed 12423 l. 12 s. 4 d. he therefore for want of payment p^ayeth
due payment from thenceforth, A^ears of pay demamanded and granted.
the which the King grants.

50. Upon the Petition of Ioane late wife of Thomas Earl of Kent to have 1000
l. yearly during her life of the Hereditaments of the said Thomas, Tho. Earl of
Kent.

Petition.


the Kings by the assent of Edmond Earl of K^nt Brother of the said Thomas,
Ann^ty in
grants to the said Ioane during life certain Mannours, and Hereditaments
there named, to the value of 300. marks over and above her jointure; Jo^^ture.
for the which the said Ioane releaseth to the said Edmond all her Dower. Dow^^
^eleased.


51 The Wardens of the Goldsmiths of London, Go^dsmith^ of London.
by their Petitions show how they ought to have the Survey, Petition.

Survey.

^

Ma^ks.


and sight of the Cutters of London touching the working of Gold and Silver.

52. The Wardens of the Cutlers of London makes the like complaint. Cu^lers of
London.


53. The King thereupon sends those Bills, Bills and Writs ^ent to the Major
of London.
and two Writ to the Mayor of London, willing him to examine the whole matter,
Examination.
and to certify the same. Certificate.


54. The Mayor upon due examination certifieth, The M^jors ^^^^tificat^.
that the Cutlers ought to work Gold, and Silver in their works, but that the
Goldsmiths ought to have the assay of Gold, Goldsmiths.
and Silver by Cutlers wrought. Cu^lers.

^ssay.




55. The King thereupon by assent of the Lords confirms, G^^dsmiths char^ter
confirmed by King with the Lord asse^t
to the said Goldsmiths, their Charter granted 1 E. 3. with the clause of
Licet, and grants to them other Liberties.

56. Sir Bartholmew Verdon Knight, James White; Christopher White, and Stephen
Garnon Esquires, being outlawed for sundry Robberies, and Fellonies done in
Ireland, Outlawly for Felony in Ireland.
whereby all their Hereditaments were siezed into the Kings hands, Seizure and
Forfeiture of their ^^ Lands.
and granted away by the Lord Thomas the Kings son Lieutenant, Lieutenant of
Ireland.
there the persons aforesaid, having their pardons for their lives, Pardon.
require to be restored to their blood, and to all their Hereditaments, the
King restores them to all their Hereditaments during their lives only,
Restitution prayed in blood and Lands.
notwithstanding any grant to any person whatsoever. Granted only for Ir^e.


Petition.
57. Upon the Petition of John son and heir of John de Burley Knight, John de
Burey.
Cosen and heir to Simon de Burley Knight, containing the effect expressed in 2
H. 4. tit. 39. The King by assent of the Lords, Lords assent.
wholly restores the said John to all the Hereditaments of the said Sir Simon
in possession, Restitution.
reversion, or use, except there excepted, and except where the King for any of
the said Lands is bound by warranty, Kings warrants.
in which case the said John shall sue his Scire facias. Scire sacias.


Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
85. IT is enacted as before tit. 36.

Sir Henry Percie Forfeiture.
59. The print touching the Manor of Sir Henry Percie Cap. 1. agrees with the
Record in effect, but not in form.

Pardon.
60. The print touching such as shall procure pardon for any notable Thief Cap.
2. agrees with the Record in effect, Thiefs.
but not in form.

Watches.
61. The print touching the Watches Cap. 3. agrees with the Record.

Aliens Ships stayed.

Reprisal.


62. That such persons as have made delivery of certain strangers Ships, being
stayed at the Kings commandment, by the Kings Writs to them directed may be
therefore discharged against the owners of those Ships in any the Kings Courts.
King writs.

Discharge.




Res.
The King will be thereof advised.

Staple.
63. A motion touching Statutes of the Staple of no purpose.

Articuli super Chartas to be executed.
64. That the Statutes called Articuli super Chartas, or Noni Articuli made in
the time of E. 1. touching the Steward or Marshall of the Kings House may be
executed, Steward.

Marshall.


having this adjoined, that if the contrary be found by Error or averment in
the Kings Bench, Error.

Averment.

King^ Bench.


that those two Officers do forfeit for every such default to the King 20 l.
and to the party 10 l. Forfeiture.


Res.
The Statutes therefore made shall be kept.

Constable of Castle.
65. That no Constable of any Castle be appointed Justice of the Peace, Justice
of Pe^ce.
and that no man be imprisoned but in the Common Gaoles. Imprisonment.

Common Goal.




Re^.
The King wills that no man shall be imprisoned by any Justice of peace,
Imprisonment.
but in the Common Gaols, saving to all Lords their Liberties, And the print
Cap. 10. agrees therewith.

Multiplication.
66. The print touching Multiplication Cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

67. The Commons of Kent make like long complaint against the Constable of the
Castle of Dover, Kent.

Constable of Dove^.


and have the like answer as in.

68. They prayen that no Tithe be paid of Quarries of Stone, Tithes of Stone
and slate.
or Slate.

The King will thereof be advised. Res.


69 The print touching Desms to be paid for, Desmes.
the possessions of Aliens Cap. 11. agrees with the Record. Aliens.


70. The print for cutting out tongues, Tongues out Eyes.
or pulling out eyes^ Cap. 5. agrees with the Record.

71. That every one being attainted to be a Broker of Usury, B^oker Usurie.
or Exchange do forfeit all his Goods. E^change.

Fo^fetu^e.




The same default shall be punished by the Law of the Church. R^s.

Ecclesiastical Law




72. A motion touching the making of Clothes of little purpose. Clothes.


73 That no Custom be demanded of any Clothes called Kendall Clothes, Custom
for clothes.

K^ndal clothes.


or other straight clothes for sale, Sale.
or otherwise, whereof the dozen passes not 3 s. 4 d.

The same is committed to the Kings Council to the taking order therein. Res.

Kings Council.




74 That all such persons as shall arrest any Knight or Burgess of the Commons
or any their servants, P^^v^ledge^ of Parl^ament.

Ar^est of members o^ their servants.


and know them so to be, do fine at the Kings will, F^ne.
and render treble damages to the party grieved. Treb^e damages.


There is sufficient remedy for the cause.

75 That no supersedeas be granted to hinder any man's action. Res.

Supersedeas to hinder right.




The Statutes therefore made shall be kept.

76 The print touching the crafty working of copper instead of gold, Res.

F^aud.

C^pper.

Gold.


Cap. 13. agrees with the Record.

77 The Statute made 4. H. 4. tit. touching appropriation of Benefices shall be
observed. Appropriations.


78 That the Mainprizors, Mainprise^s.
and their heirs of the Kings Farmors upon the Attainder of those the Kings
Farmers for any ^elonie may be discharged. Kings Farms.

Attainder.

Discha^ge.




The King will be thereof advised.

79. The print touching wager of Law Cap. 8. agrees with the Record. Wages of
Law.


80 Sir Richard Tempest Knight prays allowance of 500. marks, Sir Richard
Tempest

Allowance for Soldiers


disbursed to the Soldiers in 20 R. 2. while he was then Lieutenant to the
Earl of Huntington of the town, and Castle of Carlisle, Governor of Ca^lile.
and of the West Marches toward Scotland.

Let him Petition to the King. Res.

Petition to the King.




81. The print touching John Chedder Cap. 6. agrees with the Record in effect,
John Chedder.
but not in form.

82. The print touching the entertaining of Merchant-strangers Cap. 7. agrees
as next before. Merchant-strangers


Gold and Silver.
83. The print touching Gold, and Silver Cap. 9. agrees with the Record.

Statute Merchants.
84. The print touching execution of Statute Merchants Cap. 12. agrees with the
Record.

Fine^.
85. The print touching the foot of Fines Cap. 14. agrees with the Record in
effect, but not in form.

priors Aliens.
86. A motion touching Priors Aliens of little purpose.

General pardon.
87. The print Cap. 15. touching the general pardon swerveth from the Record in
effect, as wanting the word [treason] and in form besides. Treason.

Variance^




Anno Sexto Henrici Quarti. Rex etc. Henrico Principi Walliae, Writs of Summons.
etc. apud Coventri tertio die Decembris. Test Rege apud Westminster. vicessimo die
Octobris.
EDro. Duci Eborum. Ioh. Com. Somerset. Edro. de Courtney Com. Devon. Hen.
Percie Com. Northumb. Tho. Com Arundell. Michael de la Poole Com. Suff Rado
Nevill Com. Westmerland. Rico. Com. War. Barth. Bourchier. Edro. de Cherleton
de Powis. Willo. de Clinton. Mro. Tho. de la War. Stephano Scroope de Masham.
Willelm. Roos de Hamelake. Willo. Heron Chlr. Hen. Fitz Hugh. Will. de
Ferrariis de Groby. Tho. de Morley. Hugoni Burnell. Tho. Berkley de Berkley.
Iohi. de Wells. Rado de Cromwell. Rado Baroni de Graystock. Rob. Harrington.
Iohi. Dacre. Waltero Fitz-Walter. Will. Willoughby. Iohi. Cobham Chlr. Tho.
Nevill de Halmshyre. Will. Beauchamp de Burgaveny. Ioh. Lovell de Fishmerch.
Rico. Gray de Codonore. Reg. Gray de Ruthin. Tho. Bardolf de Wermegey. Petro de
malo lacu. Rico. Seymore. Tho. West. Chlr. Tho. Camois. Ioh. Tochett.
Tho. Erpingham Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Sexto Henrici Quarti. Rex etc. Henrico filio suo Principi Walliae and
Duci Cornubiae, Writs of Summons.
etc. apud Coventrie sexto die Octobris Test Rege apud Lichfield 25. die
Augusti
EDro. Duci Eborum. Ioh. Com. Somerset. Edro. de Courtney Com. Devon. Hen.
Percie Com. Northumb. Tho. Com Arundell. Michael de la Poole Com. Suff. Rado
Nevill Com. Westmerland. Rico. Com. War. Barth. Bourchier. Edro. de Cherleton
de Powis. Willo. de Clinton. Mro. Tho. de la War. Stephano Scroope de Masham.
Willelm. Roos de Hamelake. Willo. Heron Chlr. Hen. Fitzhugh. Will. de
Ferrariis de Groby. Tho. de Morley. Hugoni Burnell. Tho. Berkley de Berkley.
Iohi. de Wells. Rado de Cromwell. Rado Baroni de Graystock. Rob. Harrington.
Iohi. Dacre. Waltero Fitz-Walter. Will. Willoughby. Iohi. Cobham Chlr. Tho.
Nevill de Halmshyre. Will. Beauchamp de Burgaven^y. Ioh. Lovell de Fishmerch.
Rico. Gray de Codonore. Reg. Gray de Ruthin. Tho. Bardolf de Wermegey. Petro de
malo lacu. Rico. Seymore. Tho. West. Chlr. Tho. Camois. Ioh. Tochett.
Tho. Erpingham Custodi Quinque Portuum.

The Parliament holden at COVENTRY the sixth day of October, in the sixth year of
the Reign of King HENRY the Fourth.
1 ON Monday the 6. of October, in the great Chamber within the Priorie of
Coventrie therefore appointed, and hanged, the Bishop of Lincoln^ the Kings
brother, Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
in the presence of the King, King.
Lords, and Commons, declared the cause of that assembly, Causes of parliament.
that first the holy Church, all persons, and all Corporations should enjoy
their liberties. Liberties enjoyed by all persons.


2 He then took for his Theme, Rex vocavit Seniores terrae^ upon which he
learnedly discoursed, how for the safety of the Realm, Realms safety.
as well within, as without, and namely for the repressing of the Welsh rebels,
Repr^^^^ng rebels and enemies within and without.
for resisting Enemies of France, and Britain, who daily reenforced themselves
for the Invasion of the Realm, ^nvasion of Eng^and.
and subversion of the estate, for the observing of Peace, peace.
and ministration of Justice, Justice.
the King had called the wise of the Realm, by them to be counseled.
parliaments advise.


3 He further shows, how by the last Parliament was no sufficient remedy
provided for the quailing of the Welsh, Welchmens quelling.
neither competent relief granted for the performance of so great exploits,
^ide competent.
and ^or that the French had determined war with England, French war.
and had then invaded the Dominion of Guienne, Guienne invaded.
they should not so much marvel at the sudden calling of this Parliament,
parliaments sudden calling.
as they ought most speedily to determine for the avoiding of those so great
mischiefs, Speedy resolutions.
and imminent perils: wherefore he wills the Commons to chose, Commons to
choose and present their Speaker.
and the next day to present to the King their Speaker.

4 Receivers of Petitions for England, petitions.
Ireland, Wales and Scotland.

5 Receivers of Petitions for Gascoin and other places beyond the Seas, and of
the Isles.

6 Tryars of Petitions for England, etc. as above.

7 Tryars of Petitions for Gascoin, etc. as above.

8 On Tuesday the 7. of October, the Commons presented unto the King Sir
William Sturmey to be their Speaker, Sir William Sturmey Speaker presented.
who made the Common Protestation: protestation.
thereupon the Chancellor willed the Commons chiefly to consider how the King
might best be relieved. Kings relief.


9 On the 8 th. day of November, the Commons by the assent of the Lords,
granted unto the King two Desmes and two Fifteens, Two Desmes and Fifteens.
the subsidy of Woolls, Subsidy of Woolls Wooll-fels, Skins.
Wooll-fels, and Skins, viz. of denizens for every sack of Wool 43 s. 4 d. of
every 240. Wooll-fels 43 s. 4 d. and for every last of Skins 5 l. of aliens 10
s. more in every parricular for two years, and 3 s. of every Tun of Wine
passing and repassing the Realm, Tunage and Poundage granted for 2 d.
and 12 d. on every pound of Merchandise, on condition the same should not be
employed, Conditionally to be imploid only in the warrant and defense of the
Realm.
but only to the maintenance of Wars, and defense of the Realm, according to
the order there taken by the oversight of the Lord Furnivall, Lord Furnivall.
and Sir John Pelham Knights Treasurers appointed for the Wars. Sir John Pelham.

Treasurers for the wars appointed.




10 The same day the Lord Furnivall and Sir John were sworn before the King and
Lords in Parliament, Treasurers for the wars sworn in Parliament.
to execute their Offices according to the grant.

11 Where sundry Bishops, Lords, and others appointed to lend unto the King
certain sums of money toward the rescuing of the Lord of Coytife, Money lent
to be repaid out of the Subsidy.
who was besieged in his Castle by the rebels in Wales, Welsh rebels.
the King appointed by Parliament, that such persons as so should lend, should
be repayed of the first payments of the subsidy then granted.

Commons request for the Kings Sons advancement.
12 On Saturday the 26. of October, the Commons came before the King and Lords
in full Parliament, where they in recommending the Lords, John, and Humphery
the Kings Sons prayen the King to advance them to honorable Estates, and
Livings; they also pray the King to remember the Duke of Yorks service in
Guienne, Duke of York.

Good s^^vice in wars to be rewarded.


and elsewhere, so as he might therefore be paid his due Fees behind; Arrears
paid.
They make the like request for the Earl of Somerset, and Sir Thomas Beauford
his brother; They finally beseech the King to render to Richard Duke of Yorks
brother, certain Jewels to the value of 4000 l. which were in the hands of King
Richard the second. Jewels


Lord Coytifes rescue.
13 They make like request as is above for the rescue of the Lord Coytife
besieged by the Welsh in the Castle of Coytife. Welsh rebels.


Certain Petitions of the Commons. Petitions.

FIrst that all such hereditaments, liberties, and Customs, as were to the
Crown in 40. E. 3. and since by any means granted, Resumption of the C^own
Land^ and R^venues.
to be resumed into the Kings hands for ever. provided that all Towns shall
enjoy their liberties, Liberties of Towns.
except also the Lands of such as were forejudged, in the 11 th. Richard second
and sold away.

15 That all Tuns and Pipes of Wine granted to any person by the King, Grants
of Wine^ resum^d.
or any his Progenitors be also resumed.

16 That the Queen may be endowed of all such hereditaments as Anne the late
Queen was in whose hands soever the same be, Queens Dower.
and by what grant soever.

17 That all grants of Edward third or any his Progenitors, and before the said
40 th. year may be confirmed by Parliament. Kings

Grants confirmed.




18 That all Farmers to the King by any like grants may enjoy the same their
Farms, Farmers to the King.

Farms enjoyed.


giving as much therefore as others will.

19 That no man hereby be restrained of any warrant granted to build any
Castle, Castle, Caslet park.
or Caslet, or to enclose any Park.

20 The King makes answer that he will execute their requests, so far forth,
as by the Law, Law.
and his Prerogative he may do, Kings prerogative.
and for that the Lands of the Crown in An. 40 E. 3. were not certainly known:
he would appoint certain Commissioners to enquire, Commissioners to inquire and
execute.
and execute the same.

21 It is enacted, that for one whole year the King shall take the profits of
all Annuities, Resumption for an year.

Annuities and Fees granted.


Fees, or wages granted by King R. 2. or the King now, except certain of the
Chief Officers there named, Ch^^^ Officers.
Justices, Justices.
Barons of the Exchecquer, Barons of Exchecquer
and other Officers of any his Courts whatsoever.

22 And also that the King for the like term shall enjoy the like profits of
all hereditaments granted as is above, except such as are granted to the Queen,
Resumption of Lands granted ^or an year.

Queen.


or any of the Kings Sons, Kings Sons.
and of such as have their grants by Parliament. Grants by parliament


23 That Proclamation be made that all such as have any Patents granted since
40. E. 3. of any Annual value for life, Proclamation.

Patents brough^ in.


or years, do on pain of forfeiting the same, Forfeiture.

Resumption.


bring them in by a day there prescribed, to the end that such as deserve the
same, may have continuance, and the rest revoked.

24 Upon the Petition of Henrei Prince of Wales it was enacted by the Lords,
Lords enact.

Prince of Wales.


that the said Prince should have due payment made of 1000. Marks granted to
him for the keeping of certain men at Arms for the defense of Wales. Soldiers
wages.

Defense of Wales.




Annuity out of the Exchecquer to the Earl of Sommerset confi^med by Parliament.
25 Where the King granted to Henry the Son of John Earl of Somerset, and to the
heirs males of his body begotten 1000. Marks out of the Exchecquer, now at the
Petition of the said Earl, the King by the assent of the whole Parliament,
grants to the said Earl, and to the heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, the said 1000. Marks out of the Exchecquer, until he provide to him
the said Earl Land to that value.

Sir John Cornwall.
26 At the request of John Cornwall Knight, and Elizabeth his wife Countess of
Huntington, the King in full Parliament grants to them the custody and
profits of the Abbey of Fescamp in Normandy during the wars for a yearly rent.
Grant in Parliament.

Abbey of Fescamp.

Wars.




Sir Stephen Scroope Annuity confirmed by Parliament.
27 At the request of Sir Stephen le Scroope of Masham Knight: the King by
assent of Parliament, confirms to the said Stephen in fee for the Manor of
Flaxfleet in the County of York, ten Marks of Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Northallerton, and 20 l. yearly to be taken of the Farm of Kingstone upon Hull,
by the hands of the Bailiffs there.

Petition.
28 At the Petition of the Prior of the Cathedral Church of the Virgin Mary of
Coventrie, the King granted by assent of the Bishops and Lords, Grant by assent
of the Bishops and Lo^ds.
that out of the Conduit of water running to the said Priory no man do make any
head or rock, or break the same Conduit without the assent of the said Prior,
and that the same Prior and their Successors may at all time freely amend,
Prior of Coventrie.
or repair the said Conduit, Conduit of water.
and that no man do cast any ordure, or other filth into their water called
Sherborn on pain of ten pounds to the King, Sherborn water.
and treble damages to the Prior for either of the said defaults. Penalty.

Treble damages.




Petition.
29 Upon the Petition of the Prior of St. Anne of the order of Carthuse next
Coventrie, the King by authority of Parliament, Restitution of a Prio^ and
Lands in Parliament^ by the Kings
restores the said Prior to the Priorie, and Manor of Swonsey, and to the
Vicaridge of the same, which to the Prior by lycense of King Richard 2. was
given by the Abbot of St. George, and Bathe of the order of St. Bennet French.

And note that the said Prior by his Petition requires to be restored also to
the Manor of dry Drayton, whereof the King by his restitution makes no
mention.

Sir Bartholmew Verdon.
30 Sir Bartholmew Verdon Knight, and others named in the 5 th. H. 4 th. tit.
53. makes the like request to be generally restored to their blood and to all
their hereditaments by entry thereto, Restitution to blood and Lands.
without any further suit: the which the King by common consent grants.

31 For that the Scire facias of Robert Deynecourt against Error in Ralph
Adderley for error hanging in Parliament was returned tarde venit: Scire
facias.

Error in Parliament.

^arde re^urned.


It was therefore accorded, that the said Roger should purchase a new Scire
facias returnable in the next Parliament, if he so would, and that the process
should be continued. Process continued.


32 On Friday the last day of the Parliament, the Commons before the King
prayen, that the Ordinance touching the Wars should be executed, Ordinance for
Wa^^
and that the Lords M^rchers of Wales do sufficiently man their Castles against
the Welchmen. Lords Merchers of ^ales.

Castles manned^ Welsh.




33 That the Goods taken upon the sea of such as be friends to the Realm may be
restored. Friends Goods restored.

R^p^^al^




34 That money borrowed for saving of the honor of the Lord John the Kings
Son, Loan money repaid.
and the Estate of the Realm may be answered.

35 That it will please the King to consider the painful service of the Duke
of York, Duke of Yorks a ^^a^s to be ^a^d.
whilst he was the Kings Lieutenant of Guienne, and that he may be paid what
to him i^ due.

36 That it would please the King to remember the ser^vice of Sir Thomas
Erpingham, Souldi^rs services (...) and recompensed.
Sir Thomas B^mpson, John Northbury, and other valiant Knights and E^quires,
who adventured themselves with the King at his coming into the Kingdom.

37 Upon the Petition of the Merchants of Italy, Petition.

Ita^^a^ Merchants


the King by common consent revoketh the Statute m^de in the l^st Parliament,
Sta^ute revoked.
as forbidding to keep their Merchandise unsold by the space of one quarter of
a year, and sets them at liberty to sell the same, as they might before the
same Statute, provided that they shall not carry away any of their Merchandise
once brought into the Realm. It agrees with the print Cap. 4 th.

38 That the Exchange may be between Merchant and Merchant, Exchange between
Merchants.
and for Clearks and Pilgrims, notwithstanding the order made in the last
Parliament, that all Money delivered by exchange in England, Money.
should be employed within the same Realm.

The King will be thereof advised. Res.


39 That the Merchants of Italy may chose their hosts where they like, Italian
Merchants.

Hosts Election.


and be not appointed thereto, as was provided the last Parliament.

The Statute therefore shall be observed. Res.


40 It is enacted that the Merchants of Italy shall pay but four Marks
Subsidy for every sack of Wool as Eglishmen do. Italian Merchants.

Subsidy.




Merchants.
41 That those Merchants may have some day of payment of their Customs.
Customs.


Resp.
The King will thereof be advised.

Customers.
42 That Customers and other Officers of Towns and Ports, Officers of Ports.
may be commanded to entreat those Merchants according to reason. Merchants
well entreated.


Res.
The King wills the same.

Merchants Trial for debt.
43 That those Merchants in all actions of debt, account, Account.
or trespass, Trespass.
may be tried before the Kings Council, Law of Merchants.

Kings Council.


Major, or Aldermen of London, Aldermen of London.
by Merchants Law, and not by enquest.

It shall continue as heretofore.

Res.
44 That all Brokers coming from beyond the Seas, Alien Brokers banished.
may be banished the Realm by writ out of the Chancery, Chancery.
if to those Merchants strangers seems unfit.

Res.
Upon due proof before the Chancellor he shall do therein accordingly.

Italian Merchants.
45 That those Merchants of Italy may employ their money upon any English ware,
English wares.
as well as upon Staple wares. Staple wares.


Res.
The King will thereof be advised.

Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
46 THat some certain place may be appointed for the Staple, Staple.
if wars should be betweeen this Realm and Flanders. Wars.


The King will be advised. Res.


47 That the owners of every Ship or other Vessel serving the King, Ships in
the Kings service.
may have allowance of every Tun weight of the same Vessel 3 s. 4 d. for every
quarter toward the apparrelling of the same Ship. Certain allowance for weight
and apparrelling^


The Statutes therefore appointed shall be observed. Res.


48 That no stranger born be Customer or the like Officer, Aliens.

Officer.

Customer.


neither enjoy any benefice within the Realm, nor that any Welchman be suffered
to go to Rome. Welchmen.

Rome.




The King will be advised. Res.


49 Upon the motion of the Commons, Commons motion.
the King resumeth into his hands all the hereditaments which were the dower of
Anne late Queen of England, Resumption.

Queens Dower.


and granted away by him, or by King Richard to any person whatsoever, except
to the Kings Sons, all which shall remain in dower to the Queen now.

50 That all such Commissioners as are fined for not sitting upon the same,
Commissioners.

Fines for neglect.


and did not know thereof, may upon their Oaths in the Exchecquer be
discharged. Oath.

Exchecquer.

Discharge.




As it has been, Res.
the same shall be.

51 A motion to have certain of the lower house discharged of Collection of the
Subsidies granted. Commons not to be Collectors of the Subsidy.


52 That all wagons and carts coming to Callice for buying of Staple ware may
be free from certain new exactions there named. Callice.

New exactions.




It shall be as it was in the time of King E. 3. Res.


53 That the Kings debts upon Tallies may be paid. Kings debt paid.

Tallies.




The King means the same so soon as the same may be. Res.


54 That the shipping of woolls may be at Ipswich, Woolls shipping.

Ipswich.


and not at Yarmouth from henceforth. Yarmouth.


The same shipping with the Tunage of woolls shall be at both places until the
next Parliament. Res.


55 That the Statute made in the time of King Rich. 2. touching villains,
Villains.
and bond tenants, may be moderated.

The Statute shall be observed. Res.


56 At the request of the Commons, the King pardons 6 s. 8 d. of every sack
of wool, Subsidy of 6 s. 8 di^ abated.
and the like of other Staple commodities of the grant made 4. H. 4. by reason
that so much was mis-entred in the roll. Mis-entry in the roll reformed.


Provisions.
57 The print touching provision from Rome, Rome.
Cap. 1. swerveth from the Record.

Letters Patents,
58 The print touching express mention of Letters Patents, Cap. 2. agrees with
the Record.

Accountss
59 The print touching the Account of the Kings Officers, Officers.

Variance.


Cap. 3. somewhat swerveth from the Record.

Foot of Fines.
60 A motion that a Statute made in the last Parliament, as touching the foot of
Fines, might be revoked. Statute revoked.


Resp.

King and his Council may revoke an Act.


The King with his Council by authority of Parliament, have power to determine
the same petition.

Petitions.
61 There are annexed two Petitions in two schedules of Roger Deyncourt against
Ralph Alderbury for the Manor of Ansley in the County of Warw. requiring to
reverse a Fine, Error in Parliament to reverse a Fine and Judgment.
and Judgment in the Kings Bench for certain falsehoods therein. Falsehoods.


Feoffments by Collusion.
62 That all Feoffments holden by Knights service, and done by Collusion
expressed in the Statute of Marlebourgh, may upon the proof of the same be
utterly void. Resp.


Commissioners.
The King will appoint certain Lords and Justices to take order therein.

Kings thanks to Lords and Commons.
After these being read, the Chancellor on the Kings behalf gave thanks to the
Lords and Commons, and so ended the Parliament. Parliament dissolved.


Anno Septimo Henrici Quarti. Rex, Writ^ of Summons.
etc. Henrico filio suo Principi Walliae, etc. apud Coventrie decimo quinto die
Februarii, etc. Test Rege apud Westmonast. vicesimo primo die Decembris.
EDwardo Duci Eboram. Johanni Com. Somerset. Edwardo Com. Cant. Edwardo
Courtney Com. Devon. Thom. Com. Arundel. Michaeli de la Pool Com. Suff. Rado
Nevil Com. Westmerland. Ricardo Com. War: Barth. Bourchier. Edwardo Cherleton
de Powis. Willielmo de Clinton. Mr. Tho de la War. Stephano le Scroope de
Masham. Willielmo Roos de Hamalake. Hen. Fitzhugh. Willielmo de Ferrariis de
Groby. Tho. Morley. Hugo Burnel. Tho. Berckley de Berckley. Johanni de Wells.
Rado de Cromwell. Rado Baroni de Greystock. Roberto de Harrinton. Johanni Darcy.
Willielmo de Willoughby. Johanni Cobham Chlr. Tho. Nevil de Halmeshire.
Willielmo Beauchamp de Burgavenney. Johanni Lovel de Fishmerch. Hen. Cuart.
Ricardo Gray de Codonore. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Petro de malo lacu.
Willielmo Zouch de Harringworth. Ricardo Seymore. Tho. Camois. Johanni Tutchet.
Hen. de Bello monte. Johanni de Latimer. Ricardo le Strange. Roberto Poinings.
Gilberto Talbott.
Thomae Erpingham Custodi Quinque Portu^m.

Anno Septimo Henrici Quarti. Rex, Writs of S^mmons.
etc. Henrico Principi Walliae, etc. apud Gloucestriae, etc. decimo quinto die
Februarii, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. etc. ut supra; excepto quod Gilbertus
Talbot locatur in loco Stephani le Scroop, qui quidem Stephanus omittendus est.
Parliament proroged.
PRorogatio Parliamenti de Gloucest. decimo quinto die Februarii usque in diem
Lunae in Prima Septimana Quadragessimae; apud Westminster. tenend. ut supra, etc.

Anno Octavo Henrici Quarti. The Parliament holden at Westminster the first day
of March, in the Eighth Year of King Henry the Fourth, and ended 2^. December,
in the same year.
March in the Chamber de Pinct within the Kings Palace of Westminster, Painted
Chamber, Lord Chancellor, King, Causes of Parliament.
Thomas de Langley Clerk, Chancellor of England, before the King, Lords, and
Commons declared, that the King had called the Parliament to the end that the
holy Church^ all persons, and Corporations should enjoy their Liberties,
Liberties to be enjoyed by all persons.
in consideration of their due observance to him showed.

His Theme, Good Government, Welchmens Rebellion.
Multorum consilia requiruntur in magnis, and says, that in the weighty
affairs touching the good government of the Realm, and surety of the Subjects,
which were annoyed by the rebellion of the Welchmen, and likelier to be by the
French and Scots, French, Scots, Guienne, Callice, Irish, Parliament advic^
who ceased not to invade the Marches of Guienne and Callice, besides the
turmoile with the Irish, he had called the same Parliament, as meaning to
follow the counsel of the wise saying, Fili nil sine consilio facias, and tunc
post factum non poenitebit, wherein he meant also to begin with the example of
Ah^shuerus, qui interrogavit sapientes, and illorum cauta faci^bat consilia.

G^ds Law, Peace, Victory.
they might then assure themselves to find peace at home, and victory abroad.

England, Petitions.
Scotland, Wales, and Ireland.

Gascoyne and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

March, the Commons came before the King, and presented for their Speaker Sir
John Tibetott, Sir John Tibetott, Speaker presented.
who made his excuse as well for his youth, His excuse.
as otherwise, but the King affirmed the election. His election confirmed.


One Desme and Fifteeen granted.
and otherwise for one year they granted to the King, as in the last Parliament.

March upon the declaration of the Chancellor touching the Treaty of peace with
the men of Princaves, Chancellor.

Treaty of Peace, Proclamation.


and of other parts beyond the Seas, it was accorded, that Proclamation should
be made through the Realm, Cessation.
that all such Englishmen, as

Speaker presented Protestation, Confirmation of the Common^ Liberties and
Privileges.
On Tuesday the 23. of March, the Commons came before the King, where Sir John
Tibetott their Speaker made the common protestation, and required the
confirmation of their Liberties and Privileges, and that they might at any
time send for any their Bills to the Lords, for amendment of the same,
Amendment of their Bill by message to the Lords.
etc. which was granted.

Speaker makes sundry remembrances before the King, Good Governance
Confirma^ion of Liberties.
namely for good governance; for confirmation of all Liberties, for keeping of
the Sea, Guarding the Sea, Guien.
and for good provision for Guienne which was in the way of losing.

The third of April, the same Speaker before the King required, Speaker,
Enrolment of the Speakers protestation.
that this protestation before made, might be enrolled of Record.

Wales, Princes Residents in Wales, Commission, Wales
and have power given him by Commission, as of record might appear.

That no Hereditaments conquered from the Welsh, Welchmen, Conquest. Gif^s,
be given for one quarter of a year after.



That the time for the avoidance of the French, French and Britains banished^
and Britains out of the Realm be appointed.



That it would please the King to hold the Commons excused, for that report was
made that they had talked of the Kings person, Answ^
otherwise then them beseemed, which was untrue; and so the King by answer took
the same. Answ.


False reports of the Commons discourse of the King Seas safeguard.

Committee.


The names of certain of the Commons appointed to treat with the Lords touching
the safeguard of the Seas.

The Order touching the safeguard of the Seas.
Merchants, Mariners, etc. to provide ships and men to guard the Seas.
First, That the Merchants, Mariners and Owners of English ships shall provide
and find sufficient and able ships for 2000 able fighting men, and 1000
Mariners for a year and a half.

d. of every pound of Merchandise, Tonnage, Poundage, etc. assigned them to
defray the charge.
3 s. of every Tun of Wine, and the fourth part of the Subsidy of Wools,
Wooll-fells, and skins, granted in the last Parliament.

Privy Seals.
The Merchants for the levying of the aforesaid sums shall have privy Seals as
often as they shall need.

Priz^s taken to be enjoyed by them.
The Merchants shall enjoy all such prizes as they shall take, having due
consideration of the Kings Chieftains, if he shall any appoint.

Impressed money required.
The Merchants require 4000 l. in pressed, whereunto was answered, That the King
had it not.

Enemies royal Navy.
If the Royal Navy of the enemy shall happen to be on the Sea, and the King to
make out against them, the Merchants aforesaid shall then have one months
warning to provide^ One months warning.


Notice of peace, Charges allowed.
after which they shall have due consideration of all their charges.

Two Admirals to be nominated for the South and North.
who by commission shall have the like power as other Admirals have had
touching the same.

April, the King for certain weighty affairs adjourned the same Parliament from
the said third day unto the Quinden of Easter then ensuing, Parliament
ad^ourned.
to be holden at the same place of Westminster aforesaid, and licensed the
Lords and Commons for that time to depart.

The Re-assembly of the Parliament. Parliament re-assembled.

April for certain great causes the Parliament was from day to day adjourned
unto the Friday ensuing, Parliament adjourned from day to day.
on which day the Archbishop of York with sundry Bishops, the Duke of York,
with sundry Lords came, Lords Treaty.
and treated of matters concerning the Parliament.

May, it was enacted by the whole assent, that certain strangers by name, who
seemed to be Officers about the Queen, Aliens about the Queen banished by name.
should by a day depart the Realm, and all others the like; whereupon a Writ to
proclaim the same was sent by assent of Parliament to the Sheriffs of London,
Proclamation by assent of Parliament.
and that they should bring in all Patents of Lands or Annuities granted to
them by the King or Queen. Resumption of Lands and Annuities.


May, the Commons came before the King, where the Speaker prayed that he might
under protection have ( viz.) as large Speech as any Speaker before that time
had; Speaker prays as large liberty of ^peech as any Speaker before him^
and that Richard Cliderow one of the Admirals appointed for the Sea, Admiral
elected to go to Sea.
might go there unto, the which the King granted.

At the request of the Commons the King appointed certain by name to be of the
Council, Commons.




and that by authority of Parliament.

May, the Speaker required to know whether the Lords of the Kings^ Council
appointed would take up the same? Speaker, Lords of the Council assent to their
election upon condition.
The Archbishop of Canterbury for himself and the rest of the Council
answered, yea, so there were sufficient treasure, otherwise not.

Callice, Speakers request.

Calice, Guienne, Ireland, Provision, Kings Council.


remembering sundry great charges of the Commons, and that same notwithstanding
the whole Land of Guienne and Ireland stood in hazard of losing, as well for
which, as for the Sea, and others, he requires politic provision. The King
answered, that he would appoint the Council so to do.

He also requires that all Captains beyond the Seas might repair speedily to
their ^orts and Peirs, Captains to repair to theirs Forts and A mier.
as the Earl of Somerset was to Callice bent.

Spe^ker desires Pardon.
or Lords, the which the King granted.

Oath to ab^de an Ar^i^^^ment.
On Tuesday the 25. of May, the Lord Lovel, and William Doyley, before the King
and Lords, swore to abide the arbitrament of six persons the^e named, of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and York, as Umpiers therein, touching the Manor of
Hinton near Brackley in the County of Northampton, Hinton near Brackley.
with the Appurtenances.

Commission, Array.
On Friday the fourth of June it was enacted, that the Commission for the
arraying and mustering of men made 5. H. 4. should not concern the Clergy.
C^^^gy, Musters.


Arbiter^^^ Merchants Cont^oversies.
It was the same day enacted, that certain there named should have power to
determine all controversies between the Merchants of Haunce and Pence, and the
English merchants, according to a Commission thereof made.

Speakers ^equest.
On Monday the seventh of June, the Speaker required that he might freely resort
to his former protestation; P^o^esta^ion
which was granted.

The Crown of England, C^own entailed.
with all the Hereditaments and Rights whatsoever, was by authority of
Parliament, with large conveyance entailed to the King, and to the Heirs males
of his body lawfu^ly begotten; in like sort to the Prince, and for default to
the Lords Thomas and Humphrey successively; but the conveyance is crossed, and
on the Margent is written a Vacat, the which conveyance was exemplified under
the Great Seal. Exemplification.


Speaker, Prince sent into ^ales.
The same Speaker on the said day requires, that the Prince may be sent into
Wales with all speed, considering the rebellion of the Earl of Northumberland,
Rebellion.
and others.

C^stomers fraud, Search^rs, Ireland, Kings Household. charges.
and Searchers, the charge of Ireland, and the little safety of the same, the
great charges of the Kings House, in all which he wishes provision.

June, the Commons came before the King, Commons, Sp^aker.
where the Speaker requires, that he may return to his former protestation,
Protestation, Good Government, Council, Reward.
and that good Government might be by the Council, and they to be reasonably
rewarded therefore.

He also requires that the Queen may be endowed with Ten thousand Marks of
Lands, as other Queens before had been. Queens Dower.


Good service rerewarded.


Furnival and Sir John Pelham, Auditors, Accounts, Treasurers of War.
for that they were Treasurers of the Wars as appears 6 H. 4. tit. 10.

tit. of the last Parliament.

Gods service,
Certain Bishops, Lords, and Justices by the assent of the Duke of York, and
Philip his Wi^e, and one of the Daughters and Heirs of John Lord of Mohun,
A^biterment, ^^parceners, Lord Mohun.
and Joan his Wife, and Elizabeth Countess of Sarum, and Richard le Strange of
Knokin, other co^heirs of the said Lord John of Mohun, and Joan his Wife of the
one party, are appointed by a certain day to determine the right touching the
Castle and Manor of Dunstar, Castle and Manor, Du^ster, Min^head, Culverton,
Carampton Manor and Hundred.
the Manor of Minehead, Culverton and Carampton, with the Hundred of Carampton
in Somerset, the which Arbitrators in open Parliament are sworn to do the same.
Arbitrators sworn in Parliament.


Bartholmew Verdon and his Companions, Petition^, Sir Barthol. Verdon.
weighing their service done in Wales, Service in Wales.
and elsewhere, the which petition the King grants.

Speaker, Petitions read.
some were not; wherefore he requires that all might be read, the which the
King grants, and they are as follows.

Merchants Subsidy.

Seas safeguard.


their fourth part shall be only employed for defense of the Realm. Realms
defense.


Aliens banished, Denizons, Impotent persons, Dutchmen.
men of the Church, impotent persons, and Dutchmen.

That all Lands and other profits let out for life or years by the King,
Kingslands leased, Improvement.
or his Progenitors, may be improved to a more value.

Resumption, Kings households maintenance, Expenses moderated^
and that the outrageous charges of the Kings House may be speedily qualified.

June unto the Quindena of S. Michael then ensuing. Parliament adjourned.


Michael being the 15. day of October, uuto the which day the Parliament was
adjourned, Parliament adjourned, Lords and Commons called, Their default.
for that sundry of the Lords and Commons being called made default, and for
other considerations the said Parliament was continued until the Friday
ensuing, the which Friday and Saturday following^ the Parliament was continued
until the Monday ensuing.

November the Commons came before the King, Commons, Speakers protestation
confirmed.
where Sir John Tibetott their Speaker required the confirmation of his first
protestation, which was granted.

John, Speakers motion, Kings charge to the Lords and Commons.
the King charged the Lords and Commons on their allegiances, Allegiance, ^ll
Government ^ enquired.
that they should particularly enquire of the evil Governments, and provide
remedy therefore.

Manlion which was the key of the three Realms, Castle of Manlion.
and which was kept by Sir Charles de Navar an Alien, Alien removed.
might be kept by Englishmen only.

Wlechmens Fines and Ransoms.


Douglas, and that the other Scottish prisoners should not slightly be
delivered, Prisoners of War, Hostages, Scottish prisoner^.
considering that they were the flower of Scotland.

England expressed before under the 38. tit. is made void, and the same Crown
assured to the King, Crown entailed, Charter vacated.
and his Sons in general tail, according to the Print, 7 H. 4. cap. 2.

Crown entailed, Ducat. Lancanst.
among other things this clause is contained touching the Duchy of Lancaster,
Per hoc tamen Statutum sive ordinationem quoad Ducatum Lancastriae ejusque
jura, possessiones, honores and consuetudines, cum suis pertinenciis universis
ac successionem, and modum succedendi in Ducatu praedict. sive in capite, sive
in membris, nihil mutare, innovare intendimus, sed in omnibus pr^aemissis, and
aliis quibuscunque modis and formis quib us ante hoc statum Ducatus ipsi regi
administrari, and gubernari solebat, antiqua jura, statuta, and consuetudines
ejusdem Ducatus teneri, exequi and illibate observari in posterum volumus,
statuimus, decernimus, and declaramus, hoc nostro statuto, and quocunqu^ alio
in hoc Parliamento non obstante. Non obstante.


Henry Prince, Prince Henry, Speaker, Bill against Lollards.
for and in the name of the Bishops and Lords; and Sir John Tibetott the
Speaker for, and in the name of the Commons, to exhibit a long and bloody Bill
against certain men called Lollards, namely against them that preached or
taught any thing against the temporal Livings of the Clergy: Preaching against
the Clergies temporalitie^^ Prophesi^s, Slanders of the Lollards, Policy of
the Popish Clergy.
Other points touching Lollardy I read none; only this is to be marked, for
their better expedition in this exploit, they joined prophesies touching the
Kings estate, and such as whispered and bruited, that King Richard should be
living, the which they inserted, to the end that by the same subtilty they
might the better atcheive against the poor Lollards aforesaid. Wherein note a
most unlawful and monstrous Tyranny; Tyranny, Officers, Imprisonmment, Inquiry
without Commission, Sanctuary.
For the request of the same Bill was, That every Officer or other Minister
whatsoever might apprehend and enquire of such Lollards without any other
Commission, and that no Sanctuary should hold them.

Petition, Treasurers of war, Auditors, Account, Due allowance, Discharge.
At the Petition of Thomas Lord Furnival, and Sir John Telham Knight, appointed
Treasurers for the Wars in An. 6. H. 4. tit. 9. It is assented, that certain
Auditors in this Parliament assigned to take their Accounts, shall make to them
due allowance; and that upon the same Account, they, their Heirs and Land
Tenants shall be clearly discharged.

Commons request Indemnity.
that no person of what estate soever should be impeached for any act done in
any of the Voyages of Journeys in any the Commissions since the Kings reign,
Impeachment, Voyages, Kings behalf.
being done in the Kings behalf.

At the request of the Commons it was enacted, Commons request, Commons House,
Parliaments Roll engrossed.
that certain of the Commons House should be at the engrossing of the Roll of
this Parliament.

Speaker, Lords of the Council to swear, Oath refused by the Lord.
The Speaker on the behalf of the Commons requires, that the Lords of the
Council might be sworn to observe the Articles ensuing. The Arch Bishop of
Canterbury for himself and others refuses to swear, but offers to do what
they may. The King thereupon charge the same Archbishop and others of the
Council, The King charge them on their allegiance to take the Oath.
on their Allegiance to take the Oath; who took the same accordingly. And
further at the same request it is assented, that all others the Kings Officers
of his household, All the Kings Officers sworn to accomplish the Oath.
and of all his Courts, should be sworn to accomplish the same oath

Worthy Officers.
and not to be removed without good proof.

No due grants to be staid, Great seal, Privy seal.


That none about the Kings person do pursue any suit or quarrel by any other
means, Maintenance of Suits, Order of Law.
then by the order of the Common Law.

Officers, Mediation.


K^ins house, Chamber, Wardrobe.


Kings revenues employed.


Gifts, Profits.


Petitions received and answered.
and that some may be appointed to receive, and give answer to the same.



Counselors Jurisdiction, Common Law.


Purveyors.


That no one of the Kings Council shall give comfort to any suitor before
determination had in full Council. Suitors, Countenance.


Full assent, etc.
unless the same require great haste; in which cases word shall be sent to such
Counselors as be absent, to the end their advice may be known.

Officers, Fees, Extortion.
or other Underofficers, or Clerks of any of his Courts, or of his household,
shall take none other then their accustomed Fees, nor that they do appoint any
Minister under them to do the same.

Queen.
as Queen Philip late did.

Marshalsey, Clerk of the Market.
of the Kings house, or Clerk of the Market, do hold any plea other then they
did in the time of E. 1.

Sheriffs, Election of Knights, fifteen days notice.
shall by open Proclamation in their Counties appoint fifteen days respite,
the day and place.

Kings great Officers.
and of his House shall maintain the Common Laws. Common Laws.


Aliens, Fines.
do make Fines by a day with the King.

Steward and Treasurer of the Kings house, Servants misdemeanors.


Officers of the Kings house, Chamberlain, Statutes.
That the said Officers and Chamberlain of the Kings house may execute the said
offices according to the Statutes of the Kings house.

Judicial Officers and others at will only.
or other Minister within the Kings house, or in any his Courts, have none of
the said Offices but at will.

Officers, Enquiry, Misdemeanors, Report to the Council.
and thereof make report to the Kings Council.

Array, Challenge, Assise special, Sheriffs fees, Panel.
and that the Sheriff do take nothing for making any Panel between party and
party.

That all the Articles aforesaid shall only continue unto the end of the next
Parliament. Temporary Articles.


Ralph de Cuer and Peter de la Hay the keeping of the Temporalties of the
Bishopric of Durham to the use of Thomas Langley Clerk, Custody of the
Temporalties of Durham granted, Bishop elect, Provisions from Rome.
Bishop elect by provision from Rome, which was before granted to John of
Lancaster one of the Kings sons.

Paul's, by the grant of E. 3. was to pay yearly to the King One thousand pounds
for the Custody of the Temporalties of the Bishopric of London, Bishop of
London, Temporalities, Vacation, Dean of Paul's.
for so long as the vacation thereof should endure; the King grants the same
to Henry Bishop of Winchester and others, to the use of Nicholas Bulbewich
Clerk Bishop elect there by the Kings gift. Bishop elect.


Edward Duke of York had the Kings gift of the Lands in Glamorgan in Wales,
Duke of York, Grant of the King
which Constance le Despencer held, paying yearly Three hundred pounds; the
which Rent the said Duke purchased of the King.

Wardship of body and lands granted
The Wardship of the body, and custody of the lands of the Heir of the Lord
Fitzwalter was granted to the Earl of Somerset.

Letters Patent, Duchess of Ireland Earl of Oxford.
Sundry Letters Patent were made between Philip Duchess of Ireland, and
Richard Earl of Oxford, touching certain Manors and other Hereditaments.

Keventhliz, and all the Manors, Regalities and Appurtenances of Wertheromon,
Kandre, Cotrich, Melbeneth, Pilluth, Knigthon, and Knocklaire in the Marches of
Wales, Wardship of lands in Wales, etc. Richard L. Gray.
are granted to Richard Lord Gray, during the minority of Edmond the son and
heir of Roger late Earl of March; and also the Wardship of the body and lands
of the son and heir of John Brightley of Devon was granted to the said Lord.

Annu^ty for life, Sir Rich. Stanhop.
Roger Deynecourt has Forty marks yearly during his life, by the cancelling of
the Letters Patent of Richard Stanhop knight, by the hands of the Sheriff of
Nottingham.

David Holbath is made a Denizen by the Kings Letters Patent, Denizen by
Letters Patent, and assent of Parliament.
and assent of Parliament.

Richard Gabriel Clerk has during his life certain lands in Iopplepenne in the
Town of Caleshowethy in Devon, to the value of Forty six shillings eight pence.
Parents confirmed


Alexander de Knight has the Wardship of the body and lands of John Daniel the
brother and heir of Thomas Daniel of Southhampton, Wardship of body and lands
granted Earl Marshal, Insurrection.
holden of the Earl Marshal by Knights service, being in the Kings hands by the
Insurrection of the said Earl.

Agnes, Pardon of Arrearages, Ward.
the which was the wife of Thomas Raliegh, seventeen pound two shillings five
pence, for certain arrearages due for the lands of the heir of the said Thomas
late in ward.

John Tibetot Knight in fee all the lands and hereditaments of Richard ap
Griffith ap Voethus in the Counties of Carmarthen and Cardigan, and elsewhere
in the Principalities of Southwales, Speaker, Kings Pardon, South Wales,
Forfeiture, Owen Glendor, Traitor and Rebel, Forest of Wabridge and Sapeley.
for that he was adherent to Owen Glendor Rebel and Traitor, and also the
Office and keeping the Forest of Wabridg and Sapeley in the County of
Huntington, without any thing yielding therefore; and further the King gave to
him the goods and chattels of Peter Friswick Carpenter, a Felon, amounting to
one hundred and fifty pounds.

Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
Liberties.
etc. cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Tithes of Slates, and Quarries.
or stones dug out of any quarries.

Tithes of the same shall be paid where it has been used to be paid, Answ.

Customs,


and not elsewhere.

Commons request.

Sheriff^ discharge, Lords of the Council.


and for that the same suffices not for their discharges, the King grants
that Lords of the Council should have power by the next Parliament to take
order therein.

Purveyors, Payment,


The King is willing to do the same, Answ.
and that all the Statutes of Purveyors be observed.

Costs,
cap. 3. agrees with the Record.

Protections, Goalers.
cap. 4. agrees with the Record.

Apparel, Tailor.
with a preview that no Tailor should make any garment contrary to the form
thereof.

The King will thereof be advised. Answ.


Henry Piercy Earl of Northumberland, Earl of Northumberland, Forfeitures.
and Thomas Lord Bardolf, cap. 5. agrees with the Record.

Venire facias is named by one surname, Juror, Mis-nomer, Process discontinued.
and after in any Judicial Writs upon the same Process, the surname altogether
changed where the same Juror is not sworn, that thereby the Process be not
discontinued, the which motion was made, the like case and recovery of one
Thomas Corson being a matter in Law.

Answ.
The Kings will is, that the Justices do agree on the Law therein. Justices to
agree the Law.


Bulls from Rome, Variance.
cap. 6. agrees not fully with the Record.

Nonresidence, Forfeiture.


If the Ordinaries do not their duties, Answ.

Ordinaries, Pope, Penalties.


the King will write to the Pope generally to stay the grant of any Pluralities.

The print touching Arrow-head-makers, Arrow-heads.
cap. 7. agrees with the Record.

Rome any Process touching any Benefice, Rome, Pope, Provisors, Praemunire.
Collation, or Presentation of the same, shall incur the pain of the Statute of
Provisors, made An. 13 R. 2.

The Statutes made shall be observed touching the Kings Prerogative. Answ.

Kings Prerogative




Venice, Poundage in part released.

Venice-Merchants,


which was granted.

Southwark, Southwarks exemption, Fee-farm, London, Patens.
being parcel of the County of Surrey, and paying Ten pounds Fee-farm, may be
exempted from the Jurisdiction of London, notwithstanding any Letters Patent.

The parties shall come before the King and his Council, Answ.

Kings Council.


and according to their evidence shall be heard.

Provision, Popes Pardons.
and Pardons Papistical, cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

A motion touching Protections of no great value. Protections,


Tuns, Pipes, Oil, Gagers.
may be gaged by a Gager appointed, as Wines be.

The Statutes made An. 4 R. 2. shall be observed.

Answ.

Traverse, Inquest of Office, Supersedeas, Seizure.


may have a Supersedeas to enjoy his Land, notwithstanding any seizure into the
Kings hands.

The Chancellor shall do according to the Laws.

John Gricston and others Collectors of the Desms within Salop, Collectors of
Desms, Allowance
pray allowance of certain particulars which could not be collected.



Answ.
A motion is made, that Sir John Shelton knight may be paid for Mardock de Fife
a Scottish prisoner, Prisoner of war, Satisfaction.
who was delivered at the Kings commandment.

Answ.
Let him sue to the King and Council.

Assise, Sir Hugh Lutterell, Dunster-Castle, Jurors.
That in the special Assise between the Duke of York and Philip his wife,
Elizabeth Countess of Sarum, and Richard Lord Strange of the one party, and Sir
Hugh Lutterell knight of the other party, for the Castle of Dunster, and other
hereditaments in the County of Somerset, there may none be impannelled unless
they may dispend Forty pounds yearly.

Answ.
The Statute therefore made shall be observed; and the Sheriff of Somerset shall
be sworn to return the most able men, and least prejudicial men of his
Bailiwick.

Calice, Treasurer of Calice.
which for long time has been misused.

The King by the advice of the Council will take order therein. Answ.


Cloth-makers.
cap. 9. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form. Vide 9 H. 4. tit.
30.

Amerci^ments, S^eriffs Turns, Traverse Pres^ntments, K. Bench.
may be received to traverse, and to try the said Presentment in the Kings
Bench, before the said Amerciaments be levied.

The Common Laws shall therein be observed. Answ.

Common Law.




Ray, Clo^^es of Ray.
cap. 20. agrees with the Record, 9 H. 4. tit. 50.

Commissioners.
cap. 11. agrees with the Record.

Peers.
of no great force.

Sarum, Earl of Sarum.
and Sir Thomas Blunt knight, cap. 12. agrees with the Record.

Impotent persons, Ou^lary. etc.
may be received to traverse the same by Attorney.

The Justices shall have power to enquire of such Distresses, Answ.

Justices.


and to take order therein accordingly. The print, cap. 13. agrees herewith.

Rome, Provisions, Rome.
may be confirmed.

The King thereof will be advised. Answ.


Scots, Scots, Scottish money, Forfeiture.
or other persons as shall bring into the Realm any Scottish money, or
Gally-Half-pence, shall incur the loss of life.

The Statutes therefore made shall be executed. Answ.


London prayed the King, Weavers of London, Charter, Fee-farm.
that their Charter granted by Henry son of Maud the Empress for Twenty marks
two shillings of Fee-farm, may be confirmed, so as the Weavers strangers may be
under their governance. 2 H. 5. tit. 33.

The Council have authority to call and hear the reasons of all persons, Answ.




and to do thereafter.

The print touching Liveries, Liveries, Beadles
cap. 14. agrees with the Record; only the Record has these words more; And
that the Beadles be from henceforth forbidden on the same pain. Which note.

David Holbech, a mere Welsh-man, Wales, Denizens.
might be a full Denizen and able, and a free Subject to all respects; which
was granted.

Election of Knights.
cap. 15. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Laborers, Variance.
cap. 17. agrees not fully with the Record in effect. Quod nota.

Annuities.
cap. 16. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Merchants, Seas guarded, Tunnage and Poundage, Allowance.
and have therefore the Tunnage and Poundage, and the fourth part of the
Subsidy of Staple ware, as in this year does appear, do pray allowance of the
same for a certain time.

The King first wills that they be discharged of keeping the Sea, and that
the Council have power to make allowance. Answ.

Sea guarded, Council to make allowance, Chancellor.




After all which Answers made, the Lord Chancellor gave thanks on the Kings
behalf to the Lords and Commons, Kings thanks.
and so the Parliament ended. Parliament ended,


Reader, Thou may observe, that the Commons young Speaker in this Parliament
took more upon him, W. P.
spoke more boldly and fervently to the King and Lords, then any Speaker did
before him; which beginning to grow into fashion, thereupon the King and Lords
in the Parliament of 13 H. 4. n. 9. put a check upon it, as a Novelty
inconsistent with the Kings Prerogative, as thou may there perceive; which
made the Speakers afterward more modest, and not to speak any thing that was
displeasing to the King, and if they casually did, to pray it might be imputed
only to their Ignorance, not unto the Commons.

Anno Nono Henrici Quarti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Henrico filio suo Principi Walliae and Duci Cornubiae, etc. salutem. apud
Gloucest. ^o die Octobris, Test Rege, 26 die Augusti.
EDwardo Duci Eborum. Johanni Com. Somerset. Edwardo Com. Cant. Edwardo de
Courtney, Com. Devon. Thom. Com. Arundel. Michaeli de la Pool Com. Suff. Rado
Nevil Com. Westmerland. Ricardo Com. War. Richardo Com. Oxoniae. Barth.
Bourchier. Edwardo Cherleton de Powis. Willielmo de Clinton. Mr. Tho de la War.
Stephano le Scroope de Masham. Willielmo Roos de Hamalake. Hen. Fitzhugh.
Willielmo de Ferrariis de Groby. Tho. Morley. Hugo Burnel. Tho. Berckley de
Berckley. Johanni de Wells. Rado de Cromwell. Rado Baroni de Greystock. Roberto
de Harrington. Johanni Darcy. Willielmo de Willoughby. Johanni Cobham Chlr.
Tho. Nevil de Halmeshire. Willielmo Beauchamp de Burgavenney. Johanni Lovel de
Fishmerch. Ricardo Gray de Codonore. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Petro de malo
lacu. Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth. Ricardo Seymore. Tho. Camois. Johanni
Tutchet. Hen. de Bello monte. Johanni de Latimer. Ricardo le Strange. Roberto
Poinings. Gilberto Talbott.
Thomae Erpingham Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Nono Henrici Quarti. The Parliament holden at Gloucester, the 20. of
October, i^ the Ninth year of King Henry the Fourth.
Commons called, Sundry make default, Parliament thereupon adjourned.
ON Thursday the 20. of October, for that sundry of the Commons house upon
calling made default, the Parliament was continued until the Monday ensuing.

October, the Archbishop of Canterbury Chancellor of England, Chancello^ Causes
of Parliament, King to be honored.
by the Kings commandment, in the presence of him, the Lords and Commons,
declared the cause of the same Assembly, and for his Theme took these words,
Regem honorificate: And thereby for three causes approved that the King ought
to be honored.

Church-liberties.
and therefore ought to be honored.

Kings care for his Subjects, Laws observance, Defense.
Secondly, He ought to be honored for his great care toward his Subjects, as
well in the observation of all Laws, as for the defense against the Foreign
Enemies.

Favor and Pardon.


Necessity.
He further shows, how in necessity every member of man's body would seek
comfort of the head as the chief, and by application turned the same to the
honoring of the King as the head.

Speaker to be chosen and presented, Welsh-mens rebellion, Seas safeguard,
Guienne, Calice, etc.
and to present him the next day to the King; and further to consider the
Rebellion of the Welsh-men, the safe keeping of the Sea, the defense of
Guienne, Calice, and Ireland, and the Marches of the North, and how by their
aid the same might be defended:

England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Petitions.
Receivers of Petitions for Gascoin, and other places beyond the seas, and of
the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoin, etc. as above.

Thomas Chawcer Speaker presented Excuse, Protestation.
On Tuesday the 25. of October the Commons presented their Speaker Thomas
Chawcer, who after excuse of himself made, and affirmation of him, he made the
common Protestation, which was granted.

November, the Commons came before the King, where the said Speaker repeated his
former Protestation, and began to rehearse the grant of the Subsidies, Subsidy
granted, Oath for its disposition.
and the oaths of the Lords for the disposition of the same.

Chancellor, Account to the Commons, Oath.
that no Accounts were made to the Commons for the disposition aforesaid; and
that the Lords having little thanks thereof, would by no means take the like
oath again, whereof the King on his request held them excused.

Speakers complaint, Purveyo^s, Steward and Treasu^er of the Kings house.
Whereto the Steward and Treasurer of the Kings house answered, that upon
special grant the same shall be remedied.

Thomas Brook against William Widecombe; Speakers presents a Bill against W.
Widecombe.
upon the reading of which; the same Speaker required Judgment against the same
William, whereof advice was taken, and the said William bound in 1000 l. to
hear his Judgment in the Chancery.

November, upon the coming of the Commons before the King and Lords, Commons,
Speaker, (...) guarded, N^n ^^sidence on the Marches of Wales.
the Speaker showed the great discommodity for not keeping the sea, and for
that such as had lands in the Marches of Wales dwelled not thereon, and prayed
due consideration thereof; the which was promised.

Committee of Lords.


Merchants request Admi^al of the South and West, A^rears allowed.
tit. 142. the King grants that Richard Oliderow late Admiral for the South
and West be allowed 2668 l. to him due, and that he be discharged of all
Accounts.

Thomas Sye and John Camby the Priory of Hinkley, Priory of Hinkley, Aliens,
Wars.
being two Aliens, during the wars, for the yearly Rent of 41 l.

Displeasure taken between Lords and Commons, Subsidy,
the 21. day of November: For the appeasing, whereof, on Friday the last day of
this Parliament, this Order was taken, viz.

Lords and Commons debates several, Absence of the King, Their debates not to
be disclosed to ^he King before determination, and that by the Speakers mouth,
Subsidy, Debates disclosed Kings answe^s.
and of the remedies, and not to disclose the same to the King before a
determination thereof made, and that by the mouth of the Speaker. The which
Order was made, for that part of the aforesaid displeasure arose by the means,
that in the question of the Subsidy, the Lords made the King sundry times privy
thereto, and brought answer therein from the King; upon which the Commons
answered, that the same was against their liberties.

Speakers request.
that the Commons might depart with as great liberty as they had done
heretofore; Commons departure with liberty.
and that sufficient means might be found for the keeping of the seas, and
resistance of the Welsh men.

Wales, Kings thanks, Prince of Wales, King and Prince^ thanks to the Commons,
False reports.
for the which as well the King as the Prince gave thanks to the Commons; after
which the Prince kneeling before the King purges the Duke of York of certain
disloyal reports against him uttered, by affirming him in open Parliament to be
a true and loyal Knight.

Speakers mo^ion, Kings sons to be advanced.
Thomas, John, and Humfrey to some honorable names, and livings, and to charge
the Lords Marchers of Wales, Lords Marchers, Castles.
to keep their Castles, and other Fortresses.

Desme and half, Subsidy, Tu^nage and Po^^d^ge granted.
The Lords and Commons granted to the King one Desme and half, and the like
Subsidy for Staple, and other Merchandise for two years, as in the last
Parliament.

King promises ^o require no other Su^sidies or charge, and enacts it.
or other charge of his Subjects, and for more assurance thereof, wills the
same to be enacted, so as every man that would might have a copy thereof.

Annuities p^id.
The King wills that all men be paid their Annuities according to their
deserts, Deserts, Non obstante to a Statute.
notwithstanding the Statute made in the last Parliament, Tit. 140.

Petitions^
Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Churche^ Liberties.
The Print touching the Church, cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Petition.
At the Petitions of the Citizens of London the King grants that they shall
enjoy all their Liberties, Londons liberties, Non obstante an Act, Revocation.
notwithstanding the Act made in the last Parliament, Tit. 127. by which it is
to be noted, that the Act made as a^oresaid is revoked.

Letters Patents, University of Oxfords libertie^, Steward of Oxford,
Revocation, Kings prerogative, Citizens Liberties.
That the Kings Letters Patents made to the University of Oxford, that they
should not for any Felony answer before any other Judge then before their
Steward, etc. may be revoked, considering that the same is in derogation of the
Kings regality, and breach of the Liberties granted to the Citizens of Oxford,
Vide 11 H. 4. tit. 50.

The Kings Council by advice of the Judges have power to examine, and to take
order herein until the next Parliament, during which time the said new
Liberties granted shall be suspended. Answ.

Kings Council Liberties suspended^




That all Sheriffs upon their Oaths may be allowed in the Exchequer. Sheriffs
Oaths, Allowances.


Answ.

Kings Council.




That in actions personal the Defendant may be received to wage his Law, Wager
of Law, Nonsuit.
and that the Plaintiff be not nonsuited therein.



Kendall Clothes and others, Kendal Clothes, Alneager.
whereof the dozen passes not thirteen shillings four pence, may be sold
without the Alneagers Seal.

The King will be advised.

Answ.
The print touching Kendal Clothes, Kendall Clothes,
cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

Merchant strangers, Commissions, Mariners, Common Law.
That whereupon the suggestion of Merchant strangers sundry Commissions were
directed, whereby many Mariners were unduly punished, the like be not from
henceforth granted, nor the Mariners put to answer other then at the Common
Law.

Answ.
The King will thereof be advised.

Rome for any Benefice but only ^n the Kings Court. Rome.

Benefices.

Kings Courts.




The King thereof will be advised, only the Council shall have power between
this, Answ.

Council.


and the next Parliament to take order therein.

The print touching Felonies in South Wales, Felonies.

South Wales.


cap. 3. agrees with the Record.

Wales, Wales, Fligh^, Felony.
flying to any other Lordship, be from thenceforth delivered to the place where
he committed the Felony there to be tried.

Herefordshire pray remedy against the evil Customs of the Officers of the
Forests of Ewayston, Herefor^shire.

Forest of Ewayston, ^ll Customs, Forfeiture.


namely for taking their Cattle coming thereto as a forfeit.

The old good Laws and Customs shall be observed, Old Laws and Customs,
Privy Seal.
and the contrary forbidden by a Writ under the privy Seal. Answ.


Welsh thieves, Welsh men, Lords Marchers,
they may by the Welchmen be aided therein, the which the King charged the
Lords Marchers to cause their Tenants to do.

The print touching the disclaiming of Welsh Thieves, Disclaim, Welsh thieves.
cap. 4. agreeeth with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Rome, Provisors, Rome, Popes Collectors, First fruits, Praemunire, Variance
from the Record.
expressed in the print, cap. 8. there is no such mention made in the Record;
only it is enacted, that the Popes Collectors should not from thenceforth
levy any money within the Realm, for first fruits of any Ecclesiastical
dignities, as due by any provision from Rome, on pain to incur the penalty of
the Statute of Provisors, which the print has not, and is therefore well to be
noted, Vide postea, tit. 56.

Melcomb in Dorset, Losses, Burgesses of Melcomb, Fee farm, Desmes and
Fifteens, Inquiry, Chancery.
considering their great spoils, required for certain years to be discharged of
their Fee-farms of eight Marks, and of all Desmes and Fifteens, the which
request the King commits to be enquired of, and returned into the Chancery,
and there to have Order taken therein. Vide 2 H. 4. tit. 53.

Chester, Petition, Prince of Wales, Chester Liberties, Adjournments in in
Pleas.
it is enacted, that the Prince of Wales, Earl of the same, shall enjoy all the
Liberties, and namely touching adjournments in Pleas, that in certain Pleas
there expressed, such adjournments might be made without giving any day, or
entering the same in the Record.

Welchmens lands Services to the Lords reserved.
or shall be attainted, and grant of those lands by the King, the services
therefore due to other Lords may be thereupon reserved.

The King thereof will be advised. Answ.


License for all to pass the Seas, Priors Aliens, Kings Confirmation.
and to purchase the Prior Aliens any of their possessions, paying to the King
reasonable Fines for the confirmation of the same.

The King will thereof be advised. Answ.


Assizes
cap. 5. agrees with the Record.

Lyme in Dorset pray, Lyme.
that in consideration of their great destructions, they might enjoy the same
Town forty years for the yearly Feefarm of Five pounds, L^sses, Fee farm,
Desmes and fifteens, Extent, Chancery.
and for Thirteen shillings four pence for every grant of Desms and Fifteens,
according to an Extent thereof returned in the Chancery. Vide 2 H. 4. tit. 55.

Answ.
There is granted to the Kings Council full au^hority to examine this Petition,
Kings Co^ncel, Petition.
and the return aforesaid, and to take order therein.

Clothes.
cap. 6. agrees with the Record.

Shrewsbury show many causes of their impoverishment, Shrewsbury, Poverty,
Discharge of Desmes.
and require therefore to be discharged of Desms.

The King will be thereof advised.

The Burgesses of Denelchester in the County of Somerset pray to be discharged
of their Fee-farms of Thirty pounds, Answ.

Denelchester, Fee farms abated, Restitution, Hundred of Stayn, King John.


and only to pay Eight pounds therefore; or else to have restored to them
parcel of the same Town, and the Hundred of Stain, which was granted away by
king John.

The Council upon examination of this, Answ.

Council to examine,


and of the Commission granted in the time of R. 2. shall take order therein.

Desmes and Fifteens,
cap. 17. agrees with the Record in effect, but not in form.

Stock and other Towns in the Isle of Harling in the County of Southampton,
Isle of Harling, Letters Patents confirmed, Fifteens.
pray that the Kings Letters Patent to them granted may be confirmed, viz.
That all the Inhabitants of the Isle aforesaid should every Fifteen pay only 6
l. 15 s. 7 d. q. and so ever or under, according to the rate. The which the
King confirms.

Yarmouth pray, Great Yarmouth, Desm abated,
that to every grant of a Desme they may pay Forty pounds for Twenty years,
albeit they did always pay before One hundred pounds.

Answ.
The King will thereof be advised.

Provisions, Rome.
The print touching provisions from Rome, cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

Anno Vndecimo Henrici Quarti. Rex etc. Henrico filio suo Principi Walliae etc.
de Bristol, Writs of Summons.
Quindena Hillarii tenend. apud West-monasterium 18 die Decembris, ut ante,
excepto quod Barthol. Bourchier omittendus est, in loco suo Johannes Talbot
Dom. Furnivall ponendus est, similiter Willielmo de Willoughby omittendus est.
EDwardo Duci Eborum. Johanni Com. Somerset. Edwardo de Courtney, Com. Devon.
Thom. Com. Arundel. Michaeli de la Pool Com. Suff. Rado Nevil Com. Westmerland.
Ricardo Com. War. Richardo Com. Oxoniae. Johanni Talbot de Furnivall. Edwardo
Cherleton de Powis. Willielmo de Clinton. Mr. Tho de la War. Johauni de
Oldcastle Chlr. Henrico le Scroope de Masham. Willielmo Roos de Hamalake. Hen.
Fitzhugh. Willielmo de Ferrariis de Groby. Tho Morley. Hugo Burnel. Tho^
Berckley de Berckley. Johanni de Wells. Rado de Cromwell. Rado Baroni de
Greystock. Roberto de Harrington. Johanni Darcy. Tho. Nevil de Halmeshire.
Willielmo Beauchamp de Burgavenney. Johanni Lovel de Fishmerch. Ricardo Gray de
Codonore. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin. Petro de malo lacu. Willielmo la Zouch de
Harringworth. Tho. Camois. Hen. de Bello monte. Johanni de Latimer. Ricardo le
Strange. Roberto Poinings. Gilberto Talbott.
Henrico Principi Walliae, Custodi Quinque Portuum.

Anno Vndecimo Henrici Quarti. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the
Quindene of Hillary, in the eleventh year of King Henry the fourth.
January, being in the Quindene of Hillary, for that there was then no
Chancellor, No Chancellor,
the Bishop of Winchester the Kings Brother, in the presence of the King,
Lords, and Commons, declared the cause of the said Parliament, Causes of
Parliament,
and namely, that the King would that Holy Church, all persons and Corporations
should enjoy all their Liberties. Liberties to be enjoyed by all.


Decet nos implere omnem justitiam, and showed that the Parliament was summoned
for two causes; the first, for the inward government, Good government Laws
observation,
as for the due observation of Laws; the second, for outward governance,
Outward defense against enemies,
and defense against the foreign enemy, wherein he touched how the Duke of
Burgundy, (who then was Governor of France) meant by all force to besiege
Callis, Callis siege.
and to enjoy the Realm.

jus regiminis, and jus subjectionis; allowing jus regiminis to be better,
according to the answer of Aristotle to King Alexander, who being demanded in
what wise the same Alexander might most strongly fortify the walls of a new
Propugnacle, or Frontier Town, answered, that the most assured walls were the
hearty good will of his Subjects, Subjects good will, Obedience.
and obeisance to Laws.

Subjects duty, Honor, Obedience, Benevolence, Hearty assistance,
He then shows that all true Subjects ow to their Sovereigns three chief
points, viz. honor and obedience, reverence and benevolence, and hearty
assistance.

Necessity, Ready and speedy assistance, Consultation, Commons to elect and
present their Speaker.
and speedy dispatch the King had called this Assembly for a full consultation,
the which he wished might redound to the glory of God, honor of the King, and
safety of the whole Realm, to which end he willed the Commons to go to the
election of their Speaker, and to present him to the King the next day.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales; and Scotland.

Gascoin, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoin, etc. as above.

January, the Commons coming before the King, presented to be their Speaker
Thomas Chaucer, Thomas Chaucer Speaker, presented, Excuse.
after whose excuse therein made, he was willed by the King to take the same
upon him: After which, he made the Common Protestation, the which the King by
his own mouth granted, King^ Speech.
adjoining thereunto, that since as well the Lords as the Commons were come to
unity, Lords and Commons unity, No unfi^ting words, or attempts to the contrary.
be doubted not that they the said Commons would speak any unfitting words, or
attempt any thing to the contrary.

February, at the request of the Commons, Commons request Assizes prorogued.
the Assizes were prorogued by the King during the Parliament.

February, the Commons came before the King and Lords, Commons request.
and requested couching Lollard^ which they had before delivered, Lollard^, No
example.
so as nothing was therein acted; whereto the King of his good will for that
time granted, so as the same should remain as no example.

On Saturday the fifteenth of March being Palm Sunday week, at the request of
the Commons, Commons request, Parliament adjourned till after Easter,
Re-assembled.
the Parliament was adjourned until the Quindene of Easter then following,
being the seventh day of April, at which Quindene the Parliament re-assembled.

Certain requests of the Commons, with their Answers. Commons requests.

Kings Council assigned, Justices Oath.
and that they, and all the Justices shall be sworn to give good Council, and
upright Judgment.

Untrue Indictments, Punishment.
shall be duly punished if they may be known.

Payment, Purveyors.


That the King will grant Commissions of Oyer and Terminer to punish Riots in
Northumberland, Commissions Oyer and Terminer.

Riots,

Answ.


Westmerland, Yorkshire, Stafford, Derby, and Nottingham.



Such as have Castles and Towns over the Marches of Scotland, Castles, Marches
of Scotland, Provisors, R^sidence.
shall furnish them with all necessaries, and keep there in proper person.

Wales shall be observed, Wales, Castles and Towns, Provisions, Residence.
and all such persons as have Castles and Towns, or Lands in Wales, have
promised for one year to furnish the same, and to keep thereon in person.

Seas safeguard, Truce with enemies.
and will take Truce with the enemy, as to him shall seem best.

Foreign revenues, Soldiers.
and no such Officer there, Officers Account.
as is immediately accomptable to the King, shall have the same by Patent during
life.

H^reditaments and revenues of the Crown.
or other profits of the Crown, except Offices, and Bailiwicks, shall be
granted to any person; and if they be to be voided, Grants to be void, Queen,
Prince, Kings Sons, Crown land^,
except certain recompense be made to the Queen, to the Kings sons, to the Duke
of York, and to the Lord Gray.

Constable, Marshal, Admiralty.
Marshal, and Admiral of England, shall be observed.

Customer, Comptroller, Searcher Oastry, Fine, Imprisonment.
Comptroller or Searcher do keep any Oastery for any Merchant, on grievous
pains, Fine and Imprisonment.

R. 2. the Subsidy and Custom of Wools came to One hundred and sixty thousand
pounds over and above Poundage, Subsidy and Customs.
Tonnage, Alnage, Pellage, etc.

Custom of Cloth.
of what making or fineness so^ver, according to the rate of whole Cloth, on
pain there limited.

The print, cap 7. agrees with the Record.

Exchange of money, Officers, Judges, Bribe, Reward.
The print touching Exchange of money, cap. 8. agrees with the Record.

None of the Kings chief Officers there named, or Judges shall take any Bribe
or reward, on pain to answer treble to the King. To which in the margent it is
written, Respectuatur per Dominum Principem and Consilium.

Arrest, Lollardy, Bail, Purgation, Sheriffs, Good^ purloined.
That all such persons as shall be arrested by force of the Statute made against
Lollardy, in 2 H. 4. may be bailed, and freely make their purgation: That they
be arrested by no others then by the Sheriffs, or such like Officers; Answ.
neither that any havoc be made of their goods.



Subsidy duly employed as grant^d.
The King grants, that such Subsidies as shall be in this Parliament granted
shall be employed according to the Grant, and not otherwise.

Aliens, Oath, Mercha^ts, Lodging, Allegiance, Service in war, Brokers.
shall protest to live and die in the Kings quarrel, shall serve in the wars if
they be able, shall not be lodged but in English-mens houses, neither that any
of them shall be Brokers, and no Broker shall be a Merchant to his own use.

Calice, Subsidy of Wools, Calice.
the Castle there, the new Tower on Rochbank, and of the Marches of Calice, and
to the paiments of certain debts there.



Indictments.
The print touching Indictments, cap. 9. agrees with the Record; only there
wants in the print [ duly] to go before [ returned:] note well.

John Trebiel knight, imprisoned in the Tower for taking a French ship in the
time of truce, Imprisonment in the Tower, Truce broken, Ship taken,
Justification, Confession.
and brought to his answer, at the first began to justify the same; in the end
he confessed his fault and craved pardon; Pardon craved and granted,
Satisfaction given^
upon which the King at the request of the Lords and Commons granted unto him
pardon, so always as he should satisfy the losses to the parties.

Tail, Forcible Entry, Possession.
John Bartram of Northumberland shows, how Robert de Ogle knight gave to him
in tail general the Castle and Manor of Bothel with the appurtenances in the
same County, and how the Terre tenant was se^sed of the same, until Robert de
Ogle knight, son of the said Robert with two hundred men dispossessed and kept
him therefrom; whereunto he prays restitution. Restitution, Writ to the
Sheriff, A^^se, Proclamation, Defendant to answer.
At whose request it was enacted, that a Writ should go down to the Sheriffs of
Northumberland to take all the promises with all the goods therein and the
same safely to keep, with Proclamation at the gates of the same Castle to will
all therein to depart, and also to charge the said Robert at a certain day to
answer in person at Westminster, as well to the King, as to the said John.

Hugh Erdiswick, Piors and misdemeanors complained of.
Thomas de Swinnerton, Thomas Stanley, William Egerton, John Kingley, William
Venables, John Mayners, William Mayners, Thomas Mayners, Walter Gilbert, Henry
Gilbert, John Gilbert, Hugh del Hollins, John del Hollins, John Delves, and
Hugh Damport in the County of Stafford.

Stafford to apprehend them, Writ to the Sheriffs, Capias, Kings Bench,
Defau^^, Sei^^n of bodies, and lands, and goods, Justices.
returnable at a day certain in the Kings Bench; upon which if they appear not,
then to take their bodies, to seize their lands and goods to answer the same
before the Justices of the Kings Bench, to whom authority was given to end the
same.

May, upon the earnest request of the Commons, Commons request Kings Council
declared, sworn to do Justice, Justices sworn, Prince not sworn.
such Lords as were appointed to be of the Kings Council were declared, all who
with the Justices were sworn to do justice; only the Prince being one of them,
for his worthiness was not sworn.

Walter Hungerford, Sir Walter Hungerford, Waste, Priory of Farl^y, Office
t^aversed, Sheriff, Jury.
who was found faulty for certain Wastes done in the Priory of Farley, whereof
he had the custody, who meaning to traverse the Office, required that the
Sheriffs should return none upon the same, unless he might dispend Twenty
pounds yearly; the same was granted.

Jane Queen of England requires, Queens Dower confirmed by Parliament,
Recompense if seized.
that her Dower made by the Kings Letters Patent may be confirmed by
Parliament, and that recompense may be to her made, if any part thereof were
recovered from her, or seized into the Kings hands. The which was granted.

Richard de Hastings shows, how Ralph de Hastings his brother, Rich. de
Hastings, Attainder, Treason, Restitution to blood and lands.
who was attainted and beheaded for certain Treasons in the sixth year of the
King, dyed without issue; and prays to be restored as well to his blood, as
to all such lands as the said Ralph had at the day of his death, without any
further suit. The which by whole assent of Parliament was granted.

William Doyley and Isabel his wife, as in the right of the said Isabel,
Cousin and Heir of Christian Cheney, etc. makes title to the Manor of Hinton
next Berkley in Northampton, Petition for title to lands.
and to the Advowson of the same, and shows how they were by sundry wrongful
means kept from the same, and shows how they were by sundry wrongful means
kept from the same by the Lord Lovell. Lord Lovell, King names an able Jury,
The Sheriffs enacted to return them, Assise, Delays outed.
Whereupon the King named seven Knights, and eight Esquires; and so it was
enacted, that the Sheriffs of Northampton return twelve of them in an Assise
between the said parties, wherein the Lord Lovell should use no delay.

May, and the last day of the Parliament, the Speaker required the certain
knowledge of the Counselors names, Speaker, Notice of the Counselors names
that were changed, Queen.
upon which two were changed. After which the Speaker recommended to the King
the persons of the Queen, the Prince, the Lords Thomas, John, and Humfrey, the
Kings sons, Kings sons advancement, Kings thanks.
and prays their advancement; for the which the King thanketh them, and
promises satisfaction with opportunity.

An. 9: H. 4. tit. 26. so as express mention were made of the same, Subsidy
granted, Part to be disposed of at the Kings own will.
Provided of their own good wills; whereof they gave Twenty thousand marks to
the King to dispose of at his will.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Counties Petitions, Sheriffs discharge, Accounts, Oath.
according to a Statute made in the first year of king Edw. 3. To all which was
answered as follows.

Answ.
Let every such Sheriffs as are grieved yearly show the same upon their Accounts
unto the Council, Kings Council.
and they shall have power to moderate the same.

Heirs, Knights service, Aetate probanda, Traverse.
may at their full age by a Writ de aetate probanda out of the Chancery
traverse their ages, notwithstanding any Inquest of Office, Inquest, Livery.
and that they may have Livery of their lands accordingly.

Answ.
It shall be as heretofore.

Old use.
At the request of the Commons it was granted, Commons request Norwich,
Worsteds, Seal, Fees, Forfeiture.
that the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Commonalty of Norwich shall for certain years
have survey of measuring all manner of Worsted made as well within Norwich as
in Norfolk wheresoever, and that none be sold without their seal, for the which
they shall take a halfpenny; and that such as keep not measure shall be
forfeited, the one half to the King, the other half to them. In which Grant you
may see all terms, makings, and quantities of all manner of Worsteds.

Patents revoked, Exactions, Clothes, Aulnage.
whereby certain men exacted of every Cloth made, and above the Alnage, certain
money called The measuring money, may be revoked.

Answ.
The Statute therefore made in 27 E. 3. shall be observed.

An. 9 H. 4. tit. 51. the King grants that the Council shall call before them
the Chancellor of the University of Oxford, Council, University of Oxford,
Chancellor Oxfords Liberties.
and shall have power to confirm or revoke any their liberties which are
unlawful.

Truro in Cornwall, Truro, Desmes and Fifteens abated to them.
the King grants that during ten years, in all grants of Desms and Fifteens,
they shall only pay Fifty shillings, where before they paid Twelve pounds and
twenty two pence.

Admiral of the North, Deputy.


Sufficient remedy shall be provided therein. Answ.


Melcombe in Dorset expressed in 9 H. 4. tit. 44. the King grants that for
ten years they shall pay only Twenty shillings for Feefarm, Borough of
Melcomhe, Their Feefarm abated and Desmes, Poverty.
as Six shillings eight pence for their Desmes, where before they paid Nine
pounds nine shillings.

Nisi prius returnable in any of the Benches, Treasurer, Barons, Traverse of
Inquests, Nisi prius.
or County.

The Statutes therefore made shall be observed. Answ.


Ly^e in Dorset have granted to them according as is contained in 9 H. 4 tit.
49. where before their Fee-farm was Thirty two marks, Lymes Feefarm abated, and
their Desmes.
and where they also paid to every Desme Eight pounds ten shillings.

Hatch, otherwise called VVest-Hatch in Somerset, West-Hatch, Desme discharged
Mistake.
may be discharged of Thirty one shillings two pence exacted of them for a
Desme, by a mistaking of the same. Answ.


In regard that the Exchequer has a Record touching the same, Exchequer.
the Barons of the same shall have power to end the same. Barons.


Winchester, Winchester, Maintenance.
the King grants, that within the same City they may purchase Lands and
Tenements to the clear yearly value of Forty marks.

Avon from a time, Nuisance, Wears, Avon.
may be laid open upon a pain. Answ.




The print touching the election of the Knights of the Shire, Election of
Knights.
cap. 1. in full effect agrees with the Record.

Hostlers.
cap. 1. in full effect agrees with the Record.

Admirals usurpations, exactions.
and request to have the same amended. Answ.




The print that the Justices of Assise should deliver all their Records into
the Treasury, Justices of Assise, Records, Treasury.
cap. 3. agrees with the Record.

Justices, Attorneys reduced to a certain number, Their Oath, Imprisonment,
Prothonotaries, Filicers.
more then whom none should practice on the pain following; and that the same
Attorneys should be every Term sworn to deal faithfully and truly, for the
breach whereof they should be imprisoned for one year, and make ransom at the
Kings will; the Prothonotaries and Filicers upon conviction to abide the double
pain. Vide 13 H. 4. tit. 48. On which Grant is indorsed, viz. Respectuatur per
Dominos Principem and Concilium.

Custom, Seal of Kersies and Frizes.
Frizes, or such Cogware.

As heretofore it has been.

Answ.
The print forbidding unlawful Games of Servants and Laborers, Games Laborers.
cap. 4 agrees not fully with the Record, quod nota.

John Cowley of Bridgwater prays, that he may take Letters of Mart and Privy
seal of all French-mens goods having no safe conduct of the King to a certain
value, Reprisal of French goods.
for certain his ships and other goods taken by the French in the time of Truce.

Answ.
Upon his suit to the King he shall have such Letters requisatory as are
need^ul; Letters of Request.
and if the French do refuse to do him right, the King will then show his right.

H. 4. tit. 47.

Gally halfpence.
cap. 5. agrees with the Record.

Cloth, Aulnage
and the Office of Aulnager, cap. 6. agrees with the Record in effect, but not
in form.

Non residence.

Forfeiture.


That the half profits of their Benefices who be not resident thereupon, may be
employed to the Kings use.

Answ.
There was a remedy provided in the last Convoca^ion heretofore. Convocation.


Oxford, Mayor and Commons of Oxford, Contribution, Desms and Fifteens.
who pay to every Desme Eighty pounds fourteen shillings eleven pence, it was
enacted, that all lands belonging to the Church being within the same Town,
being purchased since the 20. year of E. 1. should contribute to all Desmes and
Fifteens.

Court Christian, Civil Contract, Imprisonment, Fine.
A motion was made, that none should be impleaded in Court Christian for any
Temporal Contract, on pain of imprisonment and fine at the Kings pleasure, Answ.
and amends to the party grieved.

Common Law.
The Common Law shall therein he observed.

Thomas Chawcer chief Butler to the King, Kings chief Butler, Prizes of Wine,
Dec^it, Londoners exempted, Coloring Strangers wines.
shows what prizes of Wines the King ought to have of every ship; and also
declares how the King was much deceived thereof, for that the Citizens of
London being exempt from the same, did use notwithstanding for money to make
strangers free thereof.

Answ.
The King will send for the Citizens therefore; London, Citizens res^^nt.
and further wills that none shall enjoy any such Liberty, unless he be there
a Citizen resident and dwelling.

Anno Decimo tertio Henrici Quarti. Rex etc. Henrico filio suo Principi Walliae
etc. salutem apud Westmonasterium in crastino omnium Sanctorum. Writs of
Summons.
Test Rege apud Westminster. vicesimo primo die Septembris.
EDwardo Duci Eborum. Edwardo de Courtney, Com. Devon. Thom. Com. Arundel.
Michaeli de la Pool Com. Suff. Rado de Nevil Com. Westmerland. Ricardo Com.
War: Richardo Com. Oxoniae. Hugoni Stafford. Edwardo Cherleton de Powis.
Willielmo de Clinton. Mr. Tho de la War. Johanni de Oldcastle Chlr. Henrico le
Scroope de Masham. Willielmo Roos de Hamalake. Hen. Fitzhugh. Willielmo de
Ferrariis de Groby. Tho Morley. Hugoni Burnel. Tho. Berckley de Berckley.
Johanni de Wells. Rado de Cromwell. Rado Baroni de Greystock. Roberto de
Harrington. Johanni Darcy. Tho. Nevil de Halmeshire. Roberto de Willoughbie.
Johanni Lovel de Fishmerch. Ricardo Gray de Codonore. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin.
Petro de malo lacu. Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth Tho. Camois. Hen. de
Bello monte. Johanni de Latimer. Ricardo le Strange. Roberto Poinings. Gilberto
Talbot. Johanni Talbot de Furnivall. Johanni Clifford.
No Lord Warden in this Roll.

Anno decimo tertio Henrici Quarti. The Parliament holden at Westminster, the
day after All Saints, in the thirteenth year of King Henry the fourth.
Commons called, Steward, Thomas Beauford, Chancellor, Letters Patents,
Parliament begun and prorogued.
ON Wednesday being the next day after All Saints, and the third day of
November, the Commons were called in the presence of the Steward of the Kings
House according to the Order. After which, Thomas Beauford the Kings Brother,
and Chancellor of England, by the Kings Letters Patents there read and
enrolled, began, prorogued, and continued the same Parliament until the
Wednesday following.

On the said Wednesday, the said Chancellor by the Kings commandment, King,
Causes of Parliament, Good government, Execution of the Laws, Defense of the
Realm, Guarding the seas.
in his presence, and in the presence of all the Lords and Commons declared,
how that the Parliament was called for three causes; namely, for the good
governance of the Realm, due execution of Laws, and defense of the Realm, with
the keeping of the Seas.

Trusty Council, Due obedience, Keeping of the Laws, Hearty relief, Kings
distress.
and due obeisance without grudging. To due execution of Laws did appertain
sincere keeping of the same, and speedy redress for fear of abusion: To the
defense of the Realm, they needed hearty and willing releiving of the King in
his distress, and discreet and speedy provision; for all which causes they
were assembled.

Liberties to be enjoyed by all persons, Commons to choose and present their
Speaker.
He further pronounces how the Kings pleasure was, that the Church, all
persons, and Corporations should enjoy their Liberties, and for better
expedition herein, he wills the Commons by going together to choose their
Speaker, and the next day to present him to the King in full Parliament.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoin, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Tryers of petitions for Gascoin, etc. as above.

On Tuesday the fifth of November, the Commons presented before the King and
Lords Thomas Chaucer to be their Speaker, Thomas Chaucer Speaker presented,
Excuse, Protestation, He to speak as others had done before, without any
Novelty, Kings Prerogative.
who having no allowance of his excuse, prayed that he might speak under
Protestation, whereunto they granted that he should speak as others before had
done; so as the King would therein have no Novelty, and yet would also enjoy
his Prerogative. The Speaker desired respite to answer by Saturday following in
Writing, Speaker desires time to answer in writing.
which was granted with such protestations as others before had, Protestation.
and that whatsoever he should speak to the Kings displeasure might be imputed
to his ignorance only, the which the King granted.

Tunnage and Poundage granted of their own good will, not of duty,
and Poundage, as in the last Parliament, tit. 45. so always as the same should
be confessed to proceed of their own good will, and not of duty.

They also grant that every person having twenty pound land, A Subsidy of 6 s.
eight d. upon every 20 l. land.
above all charges, all pay six shillings eight pence that any person has;
except lands purchased in Mor^main, Mor^main, Frank almoin.
before the twentieth year of E. 1. and of all lands purchased in Frank-Almoin,
since the said twentieth year.

November, the Speaker in the name of the Commons, Speakers request, Kings
thanks, Kings Council, Treasure well employed.
prayed the King to give thanks to the Prince, and others appointed to be of
the Kings Council in the last Parliament, the which the King did, and namely,
for well employing the treasure in the same Parliament granted.

William Lord Roos of Hamalake complains against Robert Thirwit one of the
Justices of the Kings Bench, Lord Roos his complaint, Robert Therwit, Melton
Roos Common of pasture, and Turbary.
for withholding from him, and his Tenants of his Manor of Melton le Roos in
Lincolnshire certain Common of pasture, and of Turbary or Turf in Warbie in the
County of Lincoln aforesaid, and for lying in wait with the number of five
hundred men for the Lord Roos. Lying in wait, Fault confessed, Pardon craved,
Arbitrators elected.
Sir Robert Thirwit before the King confessed his fault, and craveth pardon,
offering further to stand to the Order of two Lords of the kindred of the said
Lord Roos such as he should choose, whereto the King agreed, the Lord Roos chose
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lord Gray.

Gray Chamberlain to the King make a long award, Award in Parliament, Right of
Common referred, William Gascoin Chief Justice, Provisions.
leaving the right of the Common aforesaid, to the determination of William
Gascoin Chief Justice, and further it was enjoined to the said Sir Robert that
at a day certain he should prepare at Melton Roos aforesaid, two Tuns of
Gascoin Wine, two fat Oxen, and twelve fat sheep, and other preparation fit
therefore, and that he should bring thither all such Knights, Esquires, and
Yeomen as were of his aforesaid crew, where they all should confess their
faults to the said Lord Roos, Confederates pardoned, Visitation, Fault
con^essed, Pardon craved, Five hundred marks reparation.
and crave pardon, and further offer to the said Lord Roos five hundred marks
in recompense.

Roos should refuse the same five hundred marks, pardon them, Reparation
refused, Pardon granted,
and take only the dinner aforesaid.

Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury by a long Instrument in Latin shows,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Heretics, Lollards, Oxford subject to the
Archbishops Visitation.
that how in the time of R. 2. the University of Oxford had purchased a Bull to
be clearly exempt from the Visitation of the said Archbishop, University of
Oxo^^ Popes Bull, Exemp^ion,
to the end they might the better support Heretics, and Lollards, and how that
the said King Richard took order that they should be subject to the said
Archbishops Visitation notwithstanding the said Bull.

Archbishop di^^^^bed in his V^^itation of O^f^rd, Chancellor of Oxen, Proct^^^
of Ox^n, Decree in Chancery, Oxford University subject to the Archbishops
Visitation, Their Liberties seized till submission.
He further shows, how in this Kings time he was disturbed of the Visitation
aforesaid by Richard Courtney the Chancellor, by Bennet Bret and John Birch
then Procurators of the said University; and how that by their submission to
the Kings order, it was by him in the Chancery decreed, that the said whole
University, and all Orders, Persons, and Faculties in the same should be fu^ly
subject to the Visitation of the said Archbishop and his Successors, and to his
and their Officers: And that as often as the said Archbishop or his Successors,
or his or their Officers were thereof by the said Chancellor interrupted, their
said Liberties should be seized into the Kings hands, until the said Archbishop
were thereto restored: And further, that for every time of such interruption,
the said Chancellor or other Officer should be bound to pay to the King One
thousand pounds.

Confirmed by Parliament, Kings Prer^gative, Popes Bull^^
All which Articles and Orders, at the request of the said Archbishop, were
confirmed by whole assent of Parliament. By this it most manifestly appears,
that even in these days the Princes prerogatives were nothing subject to the
Popes primacie; for then would not this Archbishop, the Popes fosterer and
adopted son, have so neglected the Popes Bulls, which he (as by this may
appear) took to be mere bulls and bubbles.

College of Fotheringhay, Letters Patent confirmed in Parliament.
The erection of the College of our blessed Lady S. Mary, and of All Saints in
Fotheringhay in the County of York, with all the lands and liberties wherewith
the same was endowed by the Kings Letters Patent there at large, is confirmed
by whole assent of Parliament.

Sir John Lumley, Restitution in blood and lands, Treason, Furry without a
Scire fac.
John de Lumley knight is restored to his blood, and to be son and heir to
Thomas de Lumley, and brother and heir to Thomas de Lumley to the said Ralph,
and brother of the said John, notwithstanding any Judgment of Treason against
them had. And so is restored to all the hereditaments of the said Ralph and
Thomas, or any others to their uses the day of their deaths had; into all which
lands he might enter, without any other pursuit.

William de Lasingby Restitution, Treasurer.
In the like form William de Lasinby is restored to his blood, and to all his
hereditaments, notwithstanding any Judgment of Treason against him had.

Ralph Green, Restitution.
In the like sort Ralph Green Esquire, son and heir of Henry Green and of Maud
his wife, is restored in blood unto all the hereditaments of the said Henry and
Maud; the which Henry was put to death at Bristoll, in the 23. year of R. 2.

Guieneses proclaimed to be Subjects, not Aliens, Reproach, Denizens, King and
Lords.
Certain of Guienne remaining in the Realm, and thereby reproached of the
English as Aliens, pray that by open Proclamation throughout the Realm they to
all intents be enabled Subjects as English men be, and that all such injuries
may cease. The which the King by the assent of the Bishops and Lords does
grant. See 25 E. 3. Stat. 2. de Natis ultra mare.

At the request of the Abbot of Fourneys it was fully enacted, That he might
make Attorneys in any plea for any matter in Craven within Stamlis-Wapentake,
and Frendies-Wapentake in the County of York.

John Calvile it is enacted, that the Advowson of the Parsonage of Newton
should be appropriated to the Guardian and Captains of the Chantry of our Lady
of Newton, Advow^on, Appropriation, Cha^ntry, Vicar.
without any Vicar to be endowed thereupon.

December, being the last day of the Parliament, the Speaker required of the
King in the name of the Commons then present there, Speakers request in the
Commons name, Kings explanation of an Article, Kings prerogative Article
revoked.
to know his meaning touching an Article made in the last Parliament. Who
answered, That the same was to be as free in his Prerogative, as his
Progenitors were. Whereunto the Commons assented, and so the King in Parliament
revoked the Article aforesaid.

Lords and Commons Petition, R^port that the King was offended with them, etc.
for that the report went, that the King was offended with some of the House
for matters done in this, and the last Parliament; whereby they require the
King to embrace them as his Loyal Subjects. Whereto the King of his mere grace
grants.

Queen, Prince, and Kings sons advancement is required.
of the Prince, and of other the Kings sons, prays the advancements of their
estates. For the which the King gives hearty thanks. After which the Petitions
being answered, Petitions answered, Kings thanks, Parliament ended.
the Chancellor by the Kings commandment gave thanks to the whole Estates, and
ended the Parliament.

London, Mint, Minters, Tower.
and all other Minters by the Kings grant may, during two years, of every pound
of Gold of the Tower-weight coin fifty Nobles of Gold, Gold, Silver, Allay,
and of the like pound of Silver coin thirty shillings Sterling; so as the same
Gold and Silver be of as good Allay as the old Coin was.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers. Petitions:

Church-liberties,
etc. cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

Sheriffs surcharged.
To whom answer was made as follows.

Let every Sheriff being grieved show the same to the King, Answ.
and he shall show such Pardon as shall be seen. Pardon.


Account, Exchequer, Quietus est, V^xatlon, etc.
and having his Quietus est, be not after called to account, unless there be
therein found concealment or false allowance.

The King will be thereof advised. Answ.


An. 11 H. 4. tit. 50. Whereto answer is made, That the King will be advised.

License, Woolls, Staple, Calice.
or any other Commodities belonging to the Staple, other then at Calice.

Answ.
The King will ^orbear to grant any License for Woolls growing on this side the
water of Coket, so always as the men of Berwick may pass Woolls growing beyond
the said water. Barwick


Justices of Assise.
The print touching Justices of Assise, cap. 2. agrees with the Record.

Merchants strangers, Lodging, English House, Host, Merchandise, Brokers.
That Merchant strangers may be demeaned within the Realm, as English Merchants
are in Flanders, Viz. That no such Merchant be lodged other then in some
notable English House, that he buy no other Merchandise then his Host may see,
and that he make off his Merchandse within forty days after the same be
brought into the Realm, and that amongst them be no Broaker, Answ.
other then Englishmen enfranchised.

Lords (...) peruse Statutes

Answ.


and therein to give their advice.

Merchants, Free exportation.
That all Merchants may freely transport any staple Merchandise, so they pass
the Straights of Morocco. Answ.




Answ.
It is enacted, That Pepper shall be sold for twenty pence a pound, Price o^
Pepper.
in whose hands soever the same shall be found.

Liveries, Variance.
The print touching Liveries, cap. 3. does not fully agree with the Record.

Northumberland, Justices of Assize, Sheriffs, Coroners, Presentiments, Inquiry,
Maintenance, Money transported, Scotland.
The Commons of Northumberland pray, that Justices of Assize may once yearly
come into the same County, that the Sheriffs and Coroners may yearly yield to
them their presentiments, that enquiry may be made of Maintainers, and that no
money be carried into Scotland.

Certain Justices shall be assigned to make their Inquisitions as need shall
require, and the Statutes therefore made shall be observed.

Answ.
The Inhabitants of the Town of Sutton Prior, and Sutton Vantort, otherwise
called Plymouth, Plymouth, Corporation,
pray that they may be incorporated by the name of Mayor, etc. and that they
may have certain Customs for certain years there expressed. Answ.


Composition, Lords of Liberties, Report the next Parliament.
Let these Suppliants compound with such Lords as have Liberties thereunto
adjoining, and thereof make report at the next Parliament, and they then shall
have reasonable answer.

Gloucester, Officers, Exactions, Impositions^ Severn.
Worcester, and Bridgenorth, do exact no Impositions for any Wares, passing
upon the River of Severn.

The King thereof will be advised.

Wales complain against the manifold Robberies, Marches of Wales Robberies,
Extor-Welchmen.
and other Extortions of the Welchmen, and for redress pray three Articles to
be enacted.

Answ.
The King thereof will be advised.

Impositions upon Clothes and Canvass a grievance, Aulnage.
That certain Impositions newly made upon Clothes and Canvas, called the
Measurage by certain, under the color of their Letters Patents, may uterly be
revoked.

Answ.
The Statutes therefore provided shall be observed.

cap. 4. agrees not fully with the Record, Clothes.

Variance.


and namely in the recital.

etc. cap. 5. does not fully agree with the Record. Customers, Variance.


John Swallow, Thomas Allen, and John Lane Citizens of London, pray a Writ of
Procedendo against Philip Birchford and William Curson who prayed aid of the
King touching certain lands late of William Atmil Jeweller, Procedendo prayed,
Aid of the King.
supposed to die without heir. Answ.




The Citizens of Bristow and Gloucester pray, Bristol, Gloucester, Severn, Free
passage, Due custom, Exactions, Beaudley.
that they may pass the River of Severn with any their Merchandise in Drags,
and Boats, paying their due Customs without any new Taxes to be levied by the
men of Beaudley. Answ.




That all Officers of Wales do arrest the next Cousins of all Rebels, Thieves
or Evil Doers of the Welsh, Welchmen, Arrest of the kindred of Malefactors.
until these Malefactors do yield their selves, for that they by such kinsmen
are only supported.

The King will thereof be advised. Answ.


H. 4. tit. 6. Clerks, Attorneys, Revocation.
Which motion approv^th that the same was an Act notwithstanding the
respectuatur mentioned in the said year of 11. quod nota. Answ.


The Just^ces of both the Benches shall herein consult, Justices of both
Benches to reform mischiefs in their Courts.
and of many other mischiefs in their said Courts, between this and next
Parliament, Next Parliament.
and thereof make their Report.

Anno Primo Henrici Quinti. Rex, Writs of Summons^
etc. Charissimo Fratri Tho. Duci Clarentiae, and Com. Albemertiae, apud
Leicestriam vicessimo nono die Ianuarii. Test Rege apud Westminster. primo die
Decembris.
EDwardo Duci Eborum. Edwardo Courtney Com. Devon. Thom. Com. Arundell. Ricardo
Com. Westmerland. Edwardo Com. Marchiae. Ricardo Com. War. Tho. Com. Sarum.
Johanni Com. Marescallo. Michael de la Pool Com. Suff. Ricardo Com. Oxoniae.
Edwardo Cherleton de Powis Willielmo de Clinton. Magistro Tho. de la War.
He^^. le Scroop de Masham. Willielmo Roos de Hamelake. Hen. Fitzhugh.
Willielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie. Tho. Morley. Hugoni Burnell. Tho. Berkley de
Berkley. Johanni de Wells. Radulpho Cromwell. Radulpho Baroni de Graystock^
Tho. de Dacre de Gilsland. Roberto de Harrington. Roberto de Willoughbie.
Johanni Lovel de Fishmerch. Ricardo Gray de Codonere. Reginal. Gray de Ruthin.
Petro de Malo lacu. Tho. Camois. Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth. Willielmo
de Botreaux. Johanni Latimer. Ricardo Strange. Roberto Poynings. Gilberto
Talbot. Johanni Clifford. Johanni Talbot de Halmeshyre. Noe Lord Warden.
Prorogatum Parliamentum de Leicest. de vicesimo nono die Januarii usque ad
ultimum Aprilis ibidem tenend. ut ante in omnibus. Parliament proroged.
Rex, etc. Tho. fratri Duci Clarentiae etc. apud Leicestriam ultimo die
Aprilis, and Test Rege apud Leicestriam vicessimo nono Januarii, numerus and
Ordo Nobilium in omnibus ut ante.
The Parliament holden at Westminster in the third week of Easter, in the first
year of King Henry the Fifth.
ON Monday the fifteenth day of May and the Monday in the third Week of Easter,
the King sitting in his chair of Estate, King.
then attending on him the Bishops, Lords, and Commons, the Bishop of
Winchester being the Kings uncle, and Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment uttered the cause of the same Parliament; Causes of
the Parliament.
namely, that the Church, Maintenance of the Churches, Corporations, and
Peoples liberties.
and all persons, and Corporations should enjoy their liberties, and also for
that he desired to consult with them.

ante omnem actum consilium stabilire: and so by many notable authorities
showed, how that the King much desired to hear their good advise and Counsel.
Parliaments advise.
First, for the competent supportation of his Royal estate. Supportation of
the K. royal estate.
Secondly, for the due execution of the good laws, Laws execution.
and good governance of the Realm. Good Government.
Thirdly, for the cherishing of such strangers as were his Allies, Allies
cherished.
and for repressing his enemies, Enemies suppression.
and for the better atchieving of those weighty affairs by their ripe
consultations, he willed the Commons to assemble themselves to choose their
Speaker, Commons to elect and present their Speaker.
and the next day to present him to the King accordingly.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

May, the Commons came before the King, and Lords, and presented for their
Speaker William Stourton, William Stourton.

Commons present their Speaker.

Excuse.


who having no allowance of his disabilitie, required the Common protestation,
Speakers Protestation.
which was granted.

Commons Declaration to the King by their Speaker.
On Monday the twenty second of May, the Commons came before the King, where the
Speaker declared before him, that in the time of his Father, many fair promises
were made for due observation of laws, Kings fair promises for observing Laws
not executed.
but that no execution ensued; wherefore he prayed the King the better to
provide therefore; and namely, to see due correction of the late Riot committed
at Cirencester against the Abbot therein. Ryots corrected.

Abbot of Cirencester.


To the which, the Speaker on the Kings behalf, was required to exhibit the
same in writing, Speaker required to exhibit complaints in writing.
to the end the King might be the better provided.

May, John Dorewood, and others sent by the Commons, Committee of Commons.
delivered to the King, a Schedule for provision to be made in form following,
Their Schedule delivered to the King.
viz. Touching Ireland, Ireland. Marches of Wales. Scotland. Callice. Guyenne.
Sea^ garding. Navy. Government.
the Marches of Wales, of Scotland, and of Callice, touching the Duchy of
Guyenne, the safe keeping of the seas, the Navy of England, and governance, and
due observance, and for sure provision to be made in form following, for the
repulse of the enemy. Enemies repulse.


John on the behalf of the Commons, prayed that the protestation of the said
William Stourton might be entered of Record, Speakers Protestation prayed to be
entered on record.
which was granted.

June, the Commons came before the King, John Dor^wood Speaker.
and Lords, and for that the aforesaid William by grievous sickness could by
no means attend to be Speaker, A new Speaker chosen in place of the former.
they presented the aforesaid John, who made the Common Excuse, Excuse.
and the Common protestation, Protestation.
the one refused, and the other allowed.

Annuities.

Patents.


it was enacted by the whole assent, that the King toward the supportation of
his charges should yearly receive 10000 l. and of the rest they should be paid
according to the rate. Kings supportation.


H. 4. had given by his last Will all his goods and chattels to the payment of
his debts, King H. 4. his last Will.
and to the payment of certain Legacies, and of the same Will made Executors
Henry Archbishop of York, The Kings Exec. refuse, because the goods will not
perform the Will.

The Names of the Ezecutors.


Thomas Bishop of Durham, John Pelham, Robert Waterton, and John Laventhorp,
and thereof ordained Overseers the King and Archbishop of Canterbury; Overseers.
for that the said goods were not able to accomplish the same, the Executors
refused the execution of the Will: whereupon the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Ordinary.

The Archbishop of Cant. commits the Administration.


as Ordinary, ought to have the Administration of the said goods, and Chattels.

Kings goods not to be set to common sale.
considering that the same amounted to 25000. marks, the King kept the goods,
and granted to the said Executors out of the Wardrobe, The K. (...) them of the
(...) Executors accomp^ Discharge of Executions.
to be paid, the said sum of 25000. Marks in three years, to dispose the same
goods accordingly upon account, and further, than the same, discharges the
same Executors of all executions growing by the same will.

Note the conveyance, for the same is hardly elsewhere to be found.

Anno 5 H. 4. tit. () for the avoiding of Aliens might be observed; Aliens
avoided.
whereto the King grants, saving his Prerogative. Kings Prerogative.


Reice ap Thomas a Welshman prays, Ryce ap Thomas, a Welshman, made a Denizen.
that he to all intents might be made a loyal Liegeman, notwithstanding the
Statute made 2 H. 4. tit. () the which the King grants.

Subsidy of staple wares granted.
Tonnage and Poundage for 4. years, Tonnage and Poundage granted, upon
condition.
as in 13 H. 4. tit. 10. upon sundry conditions.

General Pardons upon condition.
(but nothing of life, or member) conditionally, that their pardons were sued
out by a day.

Gunwardby, Petition. Gunwardby Erroneous Judgment in the Kings Bench,
complained of in Parliament.
and others, touching the erroneous Judgment given in the Kings Bench on the
behalf of John Windsor, and sundry others in an Assize for certain lands in
Rampton, Cottenham, Westwick, Hekington, Longestanton, and Willingham, in the
County of Cambridge, and upon the disclosing of the Errors aforesaid, Errors
assigned.
a Scire facias was granted to the said Gunwardby, Scire facias, to appear at
the next Parliament.
to warn the said Windsor and others to appear at the next Parliament to hear
the Record, and process.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Election of Knights and Burgesses.
and Burgesses, cap. 1. agrees with the Record.

cap. 2. agrees with the record. Nusances in rivers.


Provisions.
It is enacted, that all the Statutes made against Provisors from Rome shall be
observed. Rome.


Ordinaries oppressions, Probate of wills.
A large complaint, and prayer to redress the manifold oppressions of the
Ordinaries for probate of Testaments, and such like.

Resp.

Bishops promise to redress them.


If the Bishops upon the Kings charge to them given, do not redress the same,
the King will then do it.

Ordinaries oppressions. Pecuniary Penance.
The like is made against Ordinaries, for sessing Penance pecuniary upon
Lechery, etc. Answered as before.

Anno 13 H. 4. tit. 31. Account in the Exchequer.


Knights and Burgesses require Costs and Wages, where nothing was done.
the Commons pray for Costs, because nothing was done at the Parliament, 14 H.
4. which, as it seems, took no effect, require allowance.

Resp.
If upon view of the Kings Records any the like presidents may be found,
Presidents to be searched.
allowance of their fees shall be made.

Forgery of Deeds.

Variance.


cap. 3. does not fully agree with the record.

Under-sheriffs.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Additions.

Exigent.


cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Asaph in Wales, Trials in Wales.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Jurors Oath in Inquisitions.

Embracery. Bribery. Voir dire.


That every Juror in all Inquisitions be sworn, truly to say whether he
received, or that any thing was received to his use for proceeding thereof, and
that upon conviction by his Oath he may be tried.

Priors Aliens.
cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Perambulations.
That all grounds aforesaid, by the perambulations of E. 3. may be utterly
disforrested. Disafforestation.


Resp.

Charters of the Forest.


Such as be grieved against the Charters of the Forest, upon complaint shall be
heard.

Sheriffs surcharge.
A Declaration for surcharging of Sheriffs, and prayer that they may be allowed
upon their Oaths in the Exchequer. Oaths. Exchequer.


Resp.

Council. Barons of Exchequer.


Upon the Sheriffs coming before the Council, and Barons of the Exchequer, they
shall find remedy.

Barge, Ship, Boat.
Ship, Boat, or other vessel going on any river, be taken for a Deodand,
Deodands.
if any person happily falling thereout be drowned.

The King will be thereof advised. Resp.


Richard Marlow, and others, prayen, that where John Calvile Captain of certain
ships, Ships.

Prize taken.

Enemies goods.


had taken two great Hulkes, fully fraighted, lying at Southampton, etc.
suspecting to belong to the French, that those ships might not be delivered
without Inquisition and restitution. Inquisition.


The King will appoint certain Commissioners to hear, Resp.

Commissioners.


and determine the same.

Aliens.
and that all such Merchants Aliens, Aliens Merchants.
as do remain, be under English hoasts, on pain of imprisonment at the Kings
will. Imprisonment.


Priors Aliens lands seized.
except such as be in tit. 32. shall be seized into the Kings hands.

The print touching Irish begging Priests, Irish men.




called Chamber-Deacons, and other Irish, cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Merchants free trade.
and bring into the Realm their goods or Arras, Arras.
and all other Merchandise, except Merchandise of the Staple, and the same sell
at their pleasure to all men, except to Merchants of Ieane, paying their due
Customs. Customs.


The King will thereof be advised. Resp.


Measures.
cap. 9. agrees with the record.

Anno Secundo Henrici Quinti. Rex, Writs of summons.
etc. Tho. Duci Clarentiae, and Com. Albemerciae fratri suo etc. apud Westminster.
die Lunae post Octabis Sancti Martini. Test Rege apud Westminster. Vicesimo sexto
die Septembris, hoc Parliamentum postea prorogatum fuit usque Leicestriam.
JOhan. Duci Bedfordiae Com. de Kendall. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae and Com. de
Pembrook. Edwardo Duci Eborum. Ricardo Com. Cantabrigiae. Edwardo Courtney Com.
Devon. Tho. Com. Arundell. Edwardo Com. Marchiae. Ricardo de Bello campo Com.
War. Ricardo de Vere Com. Oxoniae. Tho. Com. Sarum. Johanni Com. Marescallo.
Tho. Com. Dorset. Michael de la Pool Com. Suff. Radulpho Nevil Com.
Westmerland. Edwardo Cherleton de Powis. Willielmo de Clinton. Magistro Tho.
de la War. Hen. de Scroop de Masham. Hen. Fitzhugh. Will. de Ferrariis de
Grobie. Tho Morley. Hugo Burnell. Tho. Berkley de Berkley. Johanni de Welles.
Radulpho de Cromwell. Radulpho Baroni de Graystock. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland.
Roberto de Harrington. Roberto de VVilloughbie. Johanni Lovell de Fishmerch.
Ricardo Gray de Codonore. Reginal. Gray de Ruthine. Petro de molo lacu.
VVillielmo la Zouch de Harringworth. Tho. Camois. VVillielmo de Botreaux.
Johanni de Latimer. Ricardo le Strange. Roberto Poynings. Gilberto Talbot.
Johanni Clifford. Johanni Talbot de Furnivall. Noe Lord Warden.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the Monday in the Octaves of S. Martine
in the second year of King Henry the Fifth.
Westminster, King.

Painted Chamber.


the Bishop of Winchester, the Kings Uncle, and Chancello^ of England,
Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment, declared before him, the Lords and Commons, how
that the King would, that the Church, Churches, and other liberties to be
enjoyed.
and all Persons, and Corporations should enjoy their liberties.

Kings good Government.
but also enforced himself to recover his due inheritance, Recovery of his due
Inheritance belonging to the Crown.
belonging to the Crown, of long time withholden, the which quarrel he would
prosecute even unto death; and for the attempting of so weighty an exploit,
required good provision. Aid required.


dum tempus habemus operamur bonum, He enforces thereupon that to every
natural disposition, two kinds of times were limited; as to the trees, one
time of growing, and another of blossoming, and fructifying; To man, one time
of labor, and another of rest; To Princes, the heads of men, one time for
peace, Times of -- Peace and War.
and another for war.

Enemy best assailed when peace at home.
and so applied dum tempus.

viz. great Counsel, War requires Good Counsel, Subjects obedience. Free
Aides and Relief.
obedience of his Subjects, and frank relief of his Subjects, who were moved
largely to grant, Kings royal Voyage.
considering that their Prince, their only patron, should be driven to go in
person, wherefore he wills the Commons by their assembling, to choose their
Speaker, Commons to choose, and present their Speaker.
and the next day to present him before the King.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Thomas Chaucer Esquire to be their Speaker, Thomas Chaucer

Speaker presented.


who making the common protestation had thereof allowance. His Protestation.


2 Dismes, and 2 Fifteens granted.
and two whole fifteens to be levied of the Laity.

King and Council.

Ordinances for coin.




Thomas Mountacute Earl of Salisbury, son and heir of John Mountacute late Earl
of Salisbury, in the last Parliament holden at Leicester, by his petition
required to reverse the Judgment made against the said John, Petition to
reverse a Judgment for Errors.

Th. Mountacute Com. Salisbury.


in 2. H. 4. tit. (35.) for certain errors therein contained, Erroneous
Judgment in Parliament^ formerly reversed.
the which he did the more enforce, by comparing the Judgment made against
Thomas sometimes Earl of Lancaster in 13. E. 2. and against Roger de Mortimer
sometime Earl of March in 4. E. 3. the which Earl had day of answer at this
present Parliament.

Lords Judges.
they said, that the cause of the death of the said John, was not like unto the
other two Earls cases; wherefore they adjudged, that the said Earl should get
nothing by his petition: Petition abated.
and further, the said Bishops, and Lords, by the assent of the King, affirm
the said Judgment made against the said John Mountacute Earl of Salisbury to
be good. Judgment affirmed.


London, pray, that all Kiddles, Wears, Nusances in rivers.

Mils.

Wears.


Fishgarthes, Stanks, Milnes, and Stakes, and all other engines levied, or made
upon the water of Thames, Thames.
Maidway, Meadway. Ley.
and Ley, should utterly be laid down.

The Statutes therefore provided, shall be executed, and further, in all
Commissions touching the Water-baily, Commission.

Sewers.


the Mayor or Keeper of London for the time being, Mayor, or keeper of London.
shall be one.

Thomas Smalman, who had recovered by an Assize, Justices of Assize.




certain lands in Thames-Ditton in Surrey, against George Brewes, and others,
but no Judgment could have, for that the said Brewes brought the Kings Letters
Patents to revoke the power of the said Justices: Justices Commission revoked.
wherefore he now craveth that he may now have Judgment, Judgment prayed
notwithstanding.
notwithstanding the said repeal; the which to do, the King wills one of the
Justices by mouth only, notwithstanding the repeal. And note, notwithstanding
the Letters Patents of revocation aforesaid, the Justices stayed not, but took
the said Assizes.

Henry Percie Son of Henry Percie late Earl of Northumberland, Percie E. of
Northumberland.
being within age, and prisoner in Scotland, Prisoner of War.
declaring how the King had enabled him to be Earl of Northumberland,
notwithstanding any the forfeitures of Henry his father, Forfeiture.
etc. he prays now a general restitution to them in blood, Restitution in
blood, and Tail land.
and to all their hereditaments which were intayled, with free entry into all
the same, saving to the King all the lands in fee simple.

Resp.
The King grants unto all the same; so as the said Henry before his entry into
any of the said lands, do first by matter of Record prove in the Chancery the
lands intailed, Entail proved by record.
saving as before.

K. Chief Butler.
Thomas Chawcer Esquire chief Butler to the King, Kings Executors ordered to pay
debts.
prays, that the Executors of H. 4. as in 1. H. 5. may appear, and might pay
to him 868. l. for wine taken up for the King, and due to him upon tallyes,
Tallyes.
whereto the King grants.

Hamond Belknap, Petition.

Belknaps sons restitution in blood and land.


the son of Sr. Robert Belknap, the said Hamond is enabled in blood, and land
to the said Robert, notwithstanding any Judgment made against the said Robert,
in 11. R. 2. saving to the King, and all other persons, the hereditaments of
the said Robert to them due.

Thomas Chawcer Esquire the King by common assent, Petition.
affirms to him all Letters Patents to him granted by John Duke of Lancaster,
Letters Patents defective confirmed.
King R. 2. or H. 4. and of this King, albeit those Letters Patents make no
express mention of the value thereof.

John Chadworth, and other Citizens of London, the Creditors of William Vennor
a Londoner, who upon collusion to defraud his Creditors, had conveyed away his
lands, Fraudulent conveyance.
pray execution of the same lands for certain years, Execution prayed.
according to the Statute made in R. 2.

Resp.
Upon recovery against the said William, Legal recovery.
by due order of Law, after the said William has appeared in person, or by
Attorney, excution of his lands shall be awarded.

Mark le Fair, for 400 l. as is before to Chawcer. tit. 18. Kings Debts to be
paid.


Pardon of forfeitures for liveries.
all forfeitures incurred by the Statute of liveries of Cloth, and Hats.

John Duke of Bedford, and to his heirs males of his body lawfully begotten,
the Castle, Earldome, Honor, and Seigniority of Richmond, The Earldome and
Castle of Richmond confirmed to John Duke of Bedford, and his heirs males.
late John of Brittanies, and which Ralph Earl of Westmerland held during his
life, except the Manor town of Baynbrigg, Lands excepted.
and the free Chase in Wensledale, and sundry hereditaments in Wenstedale
aforesaid, in the County of York, the which lands excepted, King H. 4. by his
Letters Patents in Anno 14. released freely to the said Ralph, Release.
and his heirs.

Neote, Prior of St. Neote.
of the Patronage of the Earl of Stafford, being sometimes Aliens, Prior
aliens, Denizens.
as a Cell of the Abbey of Beekeherlewyn in Normandy, and being made Denizens
by the Letters Patents of H. 4. prays the confirmation of the same;
Confirmation.
the which is granted.

Chichester, Dean and Chapter of Chichester.
to whom King H. 4. by his Letters Patents had granted the Priorie, Manor, and
Prebend of Welmenghton, Prebend and Manor of Welmenghton.
with th'appurtenances in the County of Sussex, then belonging to the Abbey of
Grafton in Normandy, and license to buy the same, pray the confirmation of
those their Letters Patents; Letters Patents confirmed.
which is granted.

Jews John a Welshman, Welshmen Denizens.
is enabled to be a Liege Englishman, notwithstanding the Statute 2 H. 4. tit.
(77.)

John Mountgomerie Esquire. Denizen.


John Steward Esquire. Denizen.


Mary, one of the daughters and heirs of Humfrey le Bohun, late Earl of
Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and Constable of England, as Son and heir
of the said Dame Mary, should be dissevered from the Crown of England, Lands
dissevered from the Crown, and united to the Duchy of Lancaster.

Humfrey Bohun, Constable of England.


and be annexed to the Duchy of Lancaster, Parceners.

Duchy of Lancaster.


to be of the same nature, as by the Kings Letters Patents may fully appear.

In which Grant you may see those Liberties belonging to the Duchy of
Lancaster.

Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
Liberties enjoyed.


Kent, Knights of Kent wages how to be levied.
may generally be levied of all persons holding by Knights Service within the
County, and not particularly of certain in the Guddable of Kent, except of
Bishops and Lords who came to the Parliament.

The Statute therefore made shall be executed.

London, Weavers of London.
as in the 7. and 8. H. 4. tit. 136.

Drue Barentyne, and others of London, pray that the Letters of Mart or
Reprisal, Reprises. Letters of Mart confirmed.
granted by the King against the goods of the Merchants of Ieane may be
confirmed. Merchants of Iean.


Resp.
The which the King grants, and thereby provideth for the safe keeping and
well ordering of the said goods.

English Merchants may use the Iermanoes, English Merchants.
and other Italians, Italians.
touching the Letters of Mart aforesaid, Letters of Mart.
in such wise as they shall use the English.

Resp.
The King will therein write to the Italians, and to the rest will be advised.

Justices of Peace.

Variance.


The print touching Justices of Peace, cap. 1. wants of the record these words
following [remaining within the same Counties] which should be annexed to the
words of the print [of the Kings Council] and these words [in their Offices and
Sessions] to be annexed to [the Justices of Peace within the Duchy of
Lancaster. Duchy of Lancaster.
]

Priests wages.

Variance.


The print touching the wages of Priests, cap. 2. agrees with the record in
effect, but not in form, besides that the record is 37 E. 3. where the print is
36. which note, the print being therein the truer.

Enquests.

Va^iance.


cap. 3. agrees with the record to these words, so that from the beginning of
which words to the end thereof, there is no mention made in the record, quod
nota.

Devonshire, Devonshire Clothes.
and Cornwall, may pay Cocket, Cocket. Customs.
Customs, after the rate of broad Clothes.

Resp.
The King will thereof be advised.

London, Gilding.

Goldsmiths.


cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Treason.
and Felonies of Welshmen, Welchmen.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Southampton, Southampton Fee-farm released in part.
who paid to the King 200 l. fee farm; and 40 l. yearly to two Priors Aliens;
Priors Aliens.
the King for 10. years releaseth to them 140 Marks yearly, and further gives
license to them to purchase lands to the yearly value of one hundred pounds.
License to purchase Lands. Mortmain.


Staple.
cap. 6. agrees with the record in effect, but not in form.

Anno Tertio Henrici Quinti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. dilecto consanguineo, etc. Radulpho Com. Westmerland, etc. apud Westminster.
die Lunae post festum Sancti Lucae Evangel. Test Iohanne Duce Bedfordiae
Custode Angliae, apud Westminster. duodecimo Augusti.
EDwardo Courtney, Com. Devon. Magistro Tho. de la War. Will: de Ferrariis de
Grobie. Tho. Morley. Hugoni Burnell. Tho. Berckley de Berckley. Johanni de
Wells. Radulpho de Cromwell. Radulpho Baroni de Graystock. Tho. Dacre de
Gilsland. Ricardo Gray de Codonore. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine. Petro de Malo
lacu. Johanni de Latimer. Ricardo le Strange. Roberto Poynings. Gilberto
Talbott. Edwardo Cherleton de Powis.
Prorogatio Parliamenti a die Lunae post festum Sancti Lucae, Parliament
proroged.
usque diem Lunae post festum Omnium Sanctorum apud Westminster. tenend. Rex etc.
dilecto etc. Radulpho Nevill Com. Westmerland, Writs of Re-Summons.
etc. apud Westminster. vicesimo nono die Septembris. Test Iohanne Duce Bedford, etc.
THo. Com. Arundell. Edwardo Courtney Com. Devon. Magistro Tho. de la War.
Will. de Ferrariis de Grobie. Tho. Morley. Hugoni Burnell. Tho. Berckley de
Berckley. Johanni de Wells. Radulpho de Cromwell. Radulpho Baroni de
Graystock. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine. Johanni de
Latymer. Ricardo le Strange. Roberto Poynings. Gilberto Talbott. Edwardo
Cherleton de Powis. Ricardo Gray de Codonore.
Rex etc Charissimo fratri suo Tho. Duci Clarentiae etc. apud Westminster. decimo
sexto die Martii. Writs of Summons.
Test Rege apud Westminster. Vicesimo primo die Ianuarii.
IOhanni Duci Bedford. fratri Regis. Humfrido Duci Gloucest. fratri Regis.
Radulpho Com. Westmerland. Consangu. suo. Edwardo Courtney Com. Devon. Edwardo
Com. Marchiae. Johanni Com. Marescallo. Tho. Com. Sarum. Ricardo Com. Oxoniae.
Magistro Tho. de la War. VVillielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie. Tho. Morley.
Hugoni Burnell. Tho. Berckley de Berckley. Johanni de Welles. Radulpho
Cromwell. Radulpho Baroni de Graystock. Tho. de Dacre de Gilsland. Radulpho de
Harrington. Ricardo Gray de Codonore. Reginal. Gray de Ruthine. Tho. Camois.
VVillielmo Botreaux. Johanni de Latimer. Ricardo le Strange. Roberto Poynings.
Gilberto Talbott Edwardo Cherleton de Powis. Johanni Clifford.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the sixteenth day of March in the third
year of King Henry the Fifth.
King.

Painted Chamber.


within his Palace of Westminster, the Bishop of Winchester, the Kings Uncle,
and Chancellor of England, Chancellors speech.
by the Kings commandment, in the presence of him, the Lords and Commons,
declared that the Kings will was, that the Church, all persons, and
Corporations should enjoy their liberty. All to enjoy their liberties.


Causes of Parliament.
and took for his Theme these words, Vobis viam; on which words, he made a
notable declaration, affirming amongst the rest, that a thing well begun, and
continued with diligence, could not but come to good end, according to the
saying, dimidium facti qui been caepit habet.

France for the recovery of the same his due Patrimony. France the Kings due
patrimony.
The continuance he applied to the Kings success, by obtaining Harslew upon
his siege, and by winning a battle of the French nigh unto Callice. The event
and end he refers unto God, and to good hope, by the well beginning. His
good beginning, and proceedings there.


Consultation.
wherefore he willed the Commons to resort to their Accustomed place, Commons
to choose their Speaker.
there to choose their Speaker, and the next day to present him to the King.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Walter Beauchamp Knight to be their Speaker, Sir Walter Beauchamp Speaker
presented.
who making the Common protestation, Protestation.
had the same allowed.

Disms and Quindisms sooner paid than limited.
be sooner paid than the same was then appointed.

Rome, Scismes at Rome.
that all Bishops elect, Bishops confirmed by the Metropolitan.
and other persons, shall be confirmed by the Metropolitan upon the Kings
writs, Kings Writ.
without further excuse, or delay.

Henry, the son of Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland, Henry Percy.
did his homage to the King sitting in his Chair of Estate, Homage made in
Parl. to the King.
before the Bishops, Lords, and Commons, in such wise as other Peers do.

April, the King prorogued the Parliament for sundry urgent causes, Prorogation
of the Parliament.
from the said Wednesday unto the Monday in the third week after Easter, at
Westminster.

Chancellor.
before the King, Lords, and Commons, declared the cause of the said
Adjournment; Causes of the Adjournment.
First as touching the devout time. The Devout time.
Secondly, for that an honorable peace was offered by the French. Peace
offered by French. King of Romans Mediator for Peace. Commons to consult
thereof.
Thirdly, for that the King of the Romans had moved the same peace; wherefore
the Commons were willed to consult with the other.

Lancaster, Duchy of Lancasters Liberties confirmed, Steward of the Duchy.
as in Anno 2. H. 5. tit. 30. should be confirmed; that the Stewards of the
said Duchy within their Circuits should be Justices of peace, Justices of
Peace.
and that no grant of any thing from the said Duchy do pass under any other
Seal than under the usual Seal for the said Duchy appointed, Duchy Seal.

Nullity.


or to be appointed, and if it do, the same then to be void.

The King by full assent of Parliament pardons to John Baskervile of Erdisley
in the County of Hereford Knight, Kings Pardon.

Io. Baskervile.


all Trespasses, and Felonies, and Utlagaries upon the same, and restores him
to all his lands and goods. Restitution.


Alexander Meringe shows how he recovered by his Assize certain lands in
little Martham, Recovery in Assize.

Alexander Meringe.


Tuxfort, Milton, and Bevercot, against John Tuxford, and Katherine his wife,
before Robert Thurwitt, and how by the mistaking of the Clerk, Clerks mistake.
contrary to verdict found, the disseisin was entered to be done after the
Assize brought, Disseisin after the Assize.
whereby no Judgment could be given. He therefore requires, that the
misprision of the Clerk might be amended, Misprision.

Amendment.


and that the Justices might proceed to Judgment; whereupon it was enacted,
that the Justices in the presence of the Chancellor, Justices.
should amend the record in the same only point.

A Judgment very necessary, and yet hardly seen, worthy therefore to be well
marked.

London, London. Wardens.
shall have the search from time to time of all that belong to the said
Mystery, within the said City, and liberty, and the Mayor and Aldermen shall
have the punishment of the same by the presentment of the said Wardens.
Search. Mayor and Aldermen of London.


Richard Cathermayne prays a Scire facias against William Hoar, Scire facias,
returnable next Parl.
and John Hoar, Executors of Thomas Hoar, Executors.
for an erroneous Judgment given in the Kings Bench on the behalf of the said
Thomas, Error in Parliament to reverse a Judgment in B. R.
in an action of Trespass against the said Richard and others, the which
granted returnable in the next Parliament, Attorney in Parliament.
and thereupon the said Richard enters his Attorneys of Record to proceed
therein.

Writs of Error.
It is enacted, that upon error brought into any of the Benches for any
erroneous Judgment given in the City and County of Lincoln, Lincoln.
and in such causes the Writ shall be directed to the Sheriff of the said
County of Lincoln, Sheriffs.
who shall return any such Forainers, any grant to the said Citizens in any
wise notwithstanding. The print cap. 5. agrees herewith.

Coventry prayen, Coventry. Surveyors.
that four of them yearly to be chosen may survey the Dyers of the same Town,
Dyers.
by whom and the Mayor, and Bailiffs, the said Dyers might be punished:

The King thereof will be advised.

Kings debts to be satisfied.
John Shadworth Mercer of London, prays to be paid 53 l. owing to him by
Talleys; Tallyes.
the which is granted, as to Chawcer in Anno 2 H. 5. tit. 18.

Henry Barton for 383 l. as next before.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Churches Liberties, etc.
etc. cap. 1. agreeeth with the record.

Knights wages.
may enter into all Liberties, except the Demeasns of all Lords, and such Towns
as find Burgesses.

Resp.
The Statute therefore made in the 12 R. 2. shall be kept.

Attorneys.

Variance.


The print touching Attorneys in the Wapentake of Staincliff, cap. 2. swarveth
from the record, and namely, in the Amerciaments, Amerciament
which note.

Merchants complaint against Imposition and Extortion of the Kings Officers in
Bayon.
and great Impositions then exacted by the Mayor, Escheators, Jurats Cint Apres
Cominaltie, and Universitie of the Kings City of Bayon, Un^versity.
and request to be freed therefrom.

Resp.
The Officers of Bayon shall be driven to show the causes: whereupon redress
shall be made.

Grievances. Usurpation. E. of Arundel. Free Chase and Warren.
A large complaint, containing sundry grievances, and namely against the
usurpations of the Earl of Arundell, claiming free warren, and using free chase
in other men's grounds through Sussex, but especially in the Rape, Rape of Jews.
if Jews be a party of the said Shire, by color of a grant made by H. 3. in
the 37. year of his reign to the Earl Warren, Earl Warren.
that he should have free warren in all his Demeasne lands in Sussex, of all
which they prayen redress.

After livery sued out of the Kings hand, Resp.

Livery sued.


the Chancellor of England for the time being, Chancellor and Justices.
calling to him the Justices of both Benches, shall thereby have power to take
order therein.

That all Sheriffs may be discharged in the Exchequer, Sheriffs discharge.




upon their oaths.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Ships impressed.
by any Letters Parents, but that the said Letters Patents be seen before the
Mayor and other officers of the Town, Patents for impressing.
that the hire of the freight may be by them made, Freight. Hyre.
and ready payment had. Ready money.


The Statutes therefore made shall be observed. Resp.


Ships serving the King. Freight Wages.
may have 3 s. 4 d. for every Tonne over and above his freight, according to
the Custom.

The King herein will do according to reason. Resp.


cap. 3. agrees with the record. Aliens.


Island, Iseland.
there freely to fish as they have used. Fishing.


The King will be advised. Resp.


Justices. Chief Barons Kings Sergeants. Attorneys.
Chief Baron, and the Kings Sergeants, may have sufficient power to record
Attourneys in any of the Kings Courts whatsoever.

As heretofore it has been, it shall be. Resp.

Old Use.




Incumbent. Benefice. Provisions.
notwithstanding provision from Rome, cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Ordinaries inquiry^
may by a day enquire, and certify into the Chancery, the foundations of
Hospitalls, Hospitalls.
with the circumstances, to the end that redress may be therein made.

The Statute made at Leicester, Anno 2. H. 5. shall be observed. Resp.


That against all men indicted in the Kings Bench, Indictment.




except such as be of the same shire where the Bench is, there may be awarded
three Capias fifteen days between, Capias.
before the Exigent awarded. Exigent.


The King will be advised. Resp.


Purveyors.

Measure.


and that they take up no provision in the market, Marker.
without the good will of the party, and ready pay. Payment.


The Statutes therefore made shall be observed. Resp.


Clergy. Universities.
in a manner wasted, for that the Universities swarmed with new learning, New
Learning.
by reason of the Statute of Provisors, Provisors.
which caused the old says to be neglected. Old ^aith neglected.


Resp:
At the Kings motion the Bishops have promised to provide remedy therein.
Bishops to remedy it.


Washing of money.
etc. cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Prisoners escape.

Arbitrary penalty.


That the escape of any prisoner for counterfeiting, washing, or clipping of
money, may be 100 l.

The pain shall be arbitrable, as heretofore.

Resp:
The print touching Enquiries for Treason, Treason.
for Coinage, Coynage.
cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Mary Magdalen of Tortington next Arundel, Earl of Arundels encroachments.

Prior of Tortington.


desire remedy, for that the said Earl of Arundel had encroached from them the
Manor of Clay, and sundry other hereditaments in the County of Sussex, there
particularly named.

Resp.
It is answered as before, tit: 28.

Complaint against a ^raudulent recovery of 2. Manors in an Assize.
Robert Penney, and Ioane his wife, as in the right of Ioane, Cosen and heir of
Giles Norman, complain, for that Sir Thomas Skeleton Knight, had by subtle means
in an Assize, recovered against them the Manors of Westadderleigh, and Sherle
in Southampton, and Soulfield Loveras in the County of Wilts; they therefore
pray remedy.

Resp.
The Plaintiffs shall have remedy by the King, King and his Assistants.
and such others as he shall call to him.

John Brampton of Beverley Merchant, complains of John Hayton, and others,
for lying in wait to murder him, and prays writs out of the Chancery of the
Peace; Surety of the Peace prayed in Parliament out of the Chancery.
which were granted.

Subpoena, Subpoena^ Chancery.
and Certis de causis going out of the Chancery and Exchequer, Exch^quer.
Common Law. Penalty.
may be controlled, and not granted of matters determinable at the Common Law,
on pain that the Plaintiff do pay by way of debt to the Defendant 40 l.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Fees. Probate of Testaments.
The print touching Fees of Ordinaries for probate of Testaments, cap. 8.
agrees with the record.

Archbishop of York.
At the request of Henry Archbishop of York, the King by the whole assent,
confirms to him all the liberties of his Church, His Liberties confirmed.
with this Clause, Licet: and further grants and confirms to him, that he
and his Officers may hold the Sheriffs turn within the Town of Beverley,
Sheriffs Turn.

Beverley. Rippon.


and Rippon, and there hear, and determine, and punish all manner of Felonies,
Oyer and Terminer. Felonies.
as Justices of the Peace, Justices of Peace.
notwithstanding any liberties granted to the Town of Beverley to the contrary,
the which therein are repealed. Non-obstante.

Repeal.




Admiral ship. Bordeaux.
John Sharp Owner of a Ship called the Christopher of Hull, complaining,
shows, how that the same Christopher at Bordeaux was appointed to be one of
the Admirals of the English Navy then bound for England, and how that all the
English Masters were sworn before the Chief Officers of Bordeaux, not to
depart, or leave the said Admiral, Masters Oaths not to desert the Admiral.
until they came to England, and how by doing the contrary, the said Ship fully
fraighted was taken by the enemy; Ship taken by the enemy. Contributio^.
for the which ship and goods he requires recompense of all the other ships.
Recompense from the other ships.


The Chancellor, Resp.

Chancellor and Justices to order it.


by the advice of three of the Justices, shall have power to take order therein.

Anno Quarto Henrici Quinti. Rex, Writs of summons.
etc. Charissimo fratri suo Tho. Duci Clarentiae, etc. apud West. decimo nono
die Octobris. Test Rege apud Sandwich, Tertio die Septembris.
IOhanni Duci Bedfordiae. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae. Edw. Courtney, Com.
Devon. Johanni Com. Arundel. Tho. Com. Dorset. Hen. Com. Northumb. Radulpho
Nevill Com. Westmerland. Edwardo Com. Marchiae. Ricardo Com. War. Ricardo Com.
Oxoniae. Tho. Com. Sarum. Johanni Com. Marescallo. Willielmo de Clinton.
Magistro Tho. de la War. Hen. Fitzhugh. Willielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie.
Tho. Morley. Hugoni Burnell. Tho. Berckley de Berckley. Johanni de Wells.
Radulpho de Cromwell. Radulpho Baroni de Graystock. Tho. de Dacre de Gilsland.
Roberto de Harrington. Roberto de Willoughbie. Richo. Gray de Codonore.
Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine. Edwardo Cherleton de Powis. Tho. Camois. VVillo.
Botreaux. Johanni Latimer. Ricardo Strange. Roberto Poynings. Gilberto Talbot.
Johanni Clifford. Johan. Talbot Dom. de Furnival.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the nineteenth day of October, in the
fourth year of King Henry the Fifth.
Westminster, King.

Painted Chamber.


the Bishop of Winchester the Kings Uncle, and Chancellor of England,
Chancellors speech.
by the Kings commandment, in the presence of him, the Lords and Commons,
declared; That the Kings will was, that the Church, all persons, and
Corporations should enjoy their liberties. Liberties to be enjoyed.


Causes of the Parliament.
taking for his ground, operam detis ut quieti sitis. Upon which words,
(amongst others) he alleges, that as God in six days created all the world,
and rested the seventh day, so the King according to his oath at his
Coronation, Kings Oath and travel.
had by his great travel, by five his former Parliaments, sought the
establishing of good laws, Good Laws.
upright governance at home, Upright Government.
and foreign peace with the enemy. Peace with Enemies.


French refused not only reasonable peace, French refuse Peace.
but also to render to him his prisoners, Prisoners, and their ransomes refused.
or ransomes for such as were taken at the battle of Agin-court, whereby the
King was driven to his last hopes, King necessitated to War.
and refuge; which was, by dint of sword to seek his own: And so alleging,
Bella faciamus ut pacem habeamus, quia finis belli pax est; He shows, that
the King meant to use their Counsel, Peace the end of War.

Commons to choose and present their Speaker.


and therefore called the Commons to choose, and to present their Speaker.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Roger Flower to be their Speaker, Roger Flower Speaker presented.
who made the common protestation, His Protestation.
and the same allowed.

2 Desmes, and 2 fifteens granted.
The Commons, by the assent of the Bishops, and Lords, granted to the King two
whole Desmes, and two fifteens, to be levied of the Laity.

Moneys advanced by loan, to be paid out of the subsidy.
It is enacted, that all such persons as shall before lend money to the King,
shall freely have Letters Patents to be paid of the first money coming of the
subsidy aforesaid. Sureties for re-payment.
All which to perform, if an end should come to the King, the Dukes of
Clarence, Bedford, and Gloucester, for every of their selves faithfully
promised to accomplish.

Subscription to the Articles.
The names of certain Bishops, and other Lords, who subscribed to the Articles
aforesaid.

Kings general pardon.
A general pardon granted by the King, nothing touching life, or loss of
member.

November, being the last day of the Parliament, King makes an Earl in
Parliament.
the King sitting in his Royal Estate, in full Parliament, created Thomas
Beauford Earl of Dorset, to be It should be Duke of Exeter.
Earl of Exeter, after which the King commands him to sit in Parliament
according to his estate.

A league between the King, his heirs, and successors, and the K. of the
Romans, etc. confirmed by Parliament.
A League and Alliance, between the King, his heirs, and succesors Kings of
England, and Sigismond King of the Romans, his heirs, and successors Kings of
the Romans, are confirmed by whole assent of Parliament.

Note the Instrument of Alliance for the same, is long, and very effectual.

Robert Whittington Esquire and Any his son complaining, show, how that certain of
the servants of Richard Old-castle Esquire and the borderers of Wales, Release by
Duresse.

Wales.


by durance of imprisonment, enforced the said Robert to release to the said
Richard, and Walter Hakelnyt Esquire all manner of Actions, for all which they
prayen remedy.

The Kings Council shall have power to call the parties before them, Resp.

Kings Council.


and to end the same.

John de Holland, son of John de Holland, Earl of Huntington, prays to be
restored in blood, Restitution in blood and lands intailed.

Io. Holland Com. Huntington.


2. H. 4. son of E. his wife, to the said John his father, and to Richard his
eldest brother, who died without issue, and to all the entailed lands of John
the Father, as well of the Duchy of Cornwall, Duchy of Cornwall.
as otherwise, except certain Manors, by name, parcel of the said Duchy, so
as he may freely enter into them.

The King enableth him in blood, Resp.
according to his Petition, Restitution.

Petition.

Tail.


and to all the intailed lands, so as he first prove the same in the Chancery,
except as before; and except all other lands, parcel of the said Duchy,
saving the fee simple lands to the King, so as he do sue a Scire facias against
the said Tenants, Scire facias.
for such whereof he should be in suit.

John Allen, and others, Merchants of Coventry, prayen restitution of 600 marks
of old coin, put into the hands of Richard Garmer, late Master of the Mint
within the Tower of London, Master of the Mine.

Restitution.

Old coin.

Tower.


to be newly coined, for that all the goods of the said Richard were seized to
the Kings use, by the Earl of Arundell Treasurer of England. Treasurer.


Upon proof hereof, Resp.
before the Council, Council.
they shall see the same paid, so far as the goods will extend.

William Clifford Constable of Bourdeaux, Bourdeaux.
complaining, shows, how that he had gotten the Town and Castle Rewle in
Guyenne, wherein he was besieged, and could not keep the same without some
succors, Succors prayed.
the which he prays.

The King will accomplish the same with opportunity. Resp.


Rome, Suit at Rome, and in the Council of Constance.
and in the Council of Constance, between Roger Frank, and John de Rippon,
touching the Abbey of Founteynes, Abbey of Fountains delay.
being very tedious, may be ended.

The King will address his Letters to the Ambassadors at Constance, Resp.

Kings Letters.


to solicit the end.

David Howell of Pembrook, prays a pardon for all Treasons, Pardon prayed,
Felonies and Trespasses.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Irish Bishops, Irish Bishops.
etc. cap. 6. agrees with the record in effect, but not in form.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Great Charter.
etc. cap. 1. agrees with record.

Sheriffs allowance.
cap. 2. having these words, is of extracts therein, Extracts.

Variance.


swarveth from the record, quod nota.

The print touching Patent-makers, Patent makers.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Customs of Wines released.
The King releaseth to John Tutburie, the Customs of certain Wines.

Servants wages.
The print touching servants wages, cap. 4. agrees with the record.

tit. 31.

Debts.
or suits for the same, by color of protection, Protections.
granted to any Prior Alien, Priors Aliens.
but during such time as they shall serve the King beyond the seas. Resp.


Kings Prerogative.
The Prerogative, and Common laws shall be maintained. Common Law.


Merchants aliens.
The print touching Merchants Aliens, cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Pardon.
The print touching the free pardon, c. 8. agrees with the record.

Peace-breakers.
The print touching Peace-breakers and Letters of Mart, Letters of Mart.
cap. 7. agrees with the Record.

Anno Quinto Henrici Quinti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Charissimo Avunculo suo Thomae Duci Exon. salt. etc. apud Westminster. decimo
sexto die Novembris. Test Iohanne Duce Bedford. Custode Angliae apud Westminster.
quinto die Octobris.
CHariss. Consang. suo Hen. de Percie Com. Northumberland. Radulpho Nevill Com.
Westmerland. Edwardo de Courtney Com. Devon. Magistro Tho. de la War.
Willielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie. Hugoni Burnell. Johanni de Wells. Radulpho
Baroni de Graystock. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine Johanni Latimer. Ricardo
Strange. Roberto Poynings. Gilberto Talbot. Edwardo Cherleton de Powis. Tho.
Camois. Willielmo Botreaux. Tho. de Dacre de Gilsland.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the sixteenth day of November, in the
fifth year of King Henry the Fifth.
November, in the presence of the puissant Prince John Duke of Bedford, Duke of
Bedford Warden of England.
Brother, and Lieutenant to the King, and Warden of England sitting in the
Chamber de pinct in the Palace of Westminster; Parliament held by him. Painted
Chamber.
the Bishop of Durham, the Chancellor of England, Chancellor his Speech.
by his commandment, in the presence of him, the Lords and Commons, declared,
that the Kings will was, that the Church, and all Estates, should enjoy their
liberties. Liberties to be enjoyed by all Estates.


Confortamini, viriliter agite, et gloriosi eritis: Upon which words he showed,
what great comfort ought to have been, Kings atchievments
considering that the King in the life of his Father utterly depressed the
rebellious dispositions of the Welsh. Welsh Rebels suppressed.
How also he had resisted the Conspiracies had against Christian faith,
Conspiracies against the Christian faith.
and destructions of his own, and other persons. How further, for his great
Victories obtained against the French at Harfleet, Victory over the French.
and Agincourt. And lastly, for that sundry Towns in Normandy had rendered
themselves unto him. Normandy.


Causes of Parliament.
The first, for keeping of the Peace, Keeping the Peace.
and observation of the Laws. Laws observation.
The second, how to continue the Kings Voyage. Kings Voyage.
Thirdly, for keeping of the Marches of Scotland; Guarding the Marches of
Scotland.
wherein they ought viriliter agere, which if they did, he then assured them of
honor, Honor.
and glory: considering that Remuneratio virtutum est honor. And so willed the
Commons to choose their Speaker, Commons to choose and present their Speaker.
and to present him the next day to the said Warden.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the feas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Warden, and Lords, Roger Flower Esquire to be their Speaker, Roger Flower Speaker
presented.
who with his Common protestations were allowed. His Protestation.


One Dism and Quindism granted.
and one Fifteen.

John Martine, William Babington, William Poole, William Wesburie, John Fame,
and Thomas Ralfe, Apprentices at the Law, Sergeants called Apprentices at Law,
made Sergeants after their refusal.
and Sergeants appointed, had refused the same; where upon the charge of the
Warden of England, Warden of England.
they took the same upon them.

December, and the twenty ninth day of this Parliament, Sir John Oldcastle of
Cowling in the County of Kent Knight, Sir John Oldcastle Outlawed of Treason.
being outlawed upon Treason in the Kings Bench, and excommunicated before the
Archbishop of Canterbury for Heresies, Excommunicated for Heresy.
was brought before the Lords, Brought before the Lords.
and having heard his said Conviction, He answers not to his Conviction.
answered not thereto in excuse; upon which Record, and process it was
adjudged, Adjudged a Traitor to the King and Realm.
that he should be taken as a Traitor to the King and Realm; that he should be
carried to the Tower of London, and from thence drawn through London to the new
Gallows in St. Gyles without Temple-barr, and there to be hanged, His Judgment
of Treason to be hanged and burned.

Tower.


and burned hanging. The Record out of the Kings Bench is at large, The Record
against him.
the effect whereof is; That the said Sir John Oldcastle, and others, to the
number of 20. men, called Lollards, Lollards.
at St. Gyles aforesaid, did conspire to subvert the state of the Clergy,
Conspiracy to subvert the Clergy, kill the King and other Nobles.
and to kill the King, his Brother, and other Nobles. The Archbishop of
Canterburies Instrument for his excommunication is there also at large.

John de Holland Earl of Huntington was stayed of his Livery, Earl of Huntindon.




at the suit of the Countess Marshall, his Sister, and by the Abbot of our
Lord of Grace, next the Tower of London, for that the said Earl did not sue a
Scire facias against them, Scire facias.
being Tenants of part of his Inheritance, according to the last Parliament,
Tit. 16.

Robert Penny being in execution in the Fleet upon outlaw of a condemnation,
Prisoner in Execution Bayled.
was let to Mainprize by the Guardian of England. Guardian of England.


Lord Powis.
A motion is made that the Lord de Powis might be thanked, and rewarded,
according to the Proclamation made for the apprehension of Sir John Oldcastle
Knight, Proclamation.

Sir John Oldcastle Heretic.


the Heretic.

Quid vultis mihi dare, the brother of Judas craveth his reward for betraying
the Innocent, Judas his reward.
wherein it is not to be doubted, but that his lighter reward in this world,
was heavily revenged of God.

Winchester for 21. Marks to be levied of Customs of all Staple Wares passing
out of Southampton, Moneys lent to the King for his wars, repaid out of the
Customs.
the which sum the said Bishop before had lent the King toward the wars, are
confirmed by Parliament. Patents confirmed.


Thomas Duke of Exeter, Duke of Exeters Creation money.

Priority.


who at his Creation had 40 l. given him yearly out of Devon, It is enacted,
that the said Duke shall first be paid before any other.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Liberties confirmed.
which are not repealable by the Common Law.

Insurrections.
in the end they suspect that they were Lollards, Lollards.
and Traitors: Traitors.
A Request that Commissions at all times be granted to enquire of them.
Commissions.


The Statutes therefore made shall be executed. Resp.


The Clergy at this their own Parliament, cease not to rage, and roar after
Christian blood, tanquam Leones rugientes, and whosoever did the fault, they
put John Porter in the stocks, and cried, Crucify Christ, and deliver us
Barrabas, for now all horrible mischiefs whatsoever were imputed to the poor
Lollards.

Nusances in Rivers.
to great annoyances.

The Statutes therefore made shall be observed. Resp.


Merchants. Taxes.
contribute to all taxes, may have their goods free in Port Towns. Port Towns.


It shall be as heretofore it has been. Resp.


Merchants.

Staple.


and their Cocquets therefore, Custom. Cockets.
be not sunderly in other places therefore impeached, or slandered. Vexation.

Slander.




The Lieutenant will send to know the Kings pleasure therein. Resp.

Kings pleasure.




Attornyes.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Collectors of the Clergy.


The Clergy shall appoint their Collectors, Resp.


Anno Septimo Henrici Quinti. Rex, Writ^ of Summons.
etc. Consanguineo suo Henrico Percie Com. Northum. apud Westminster. die Lunae post
Festum Sancti Andreae. Test Rege apud Westminster. Vicesimo primo die Octobris.
RAdulpho Nevil Com. Westmerland. Hugoni Courtney Com. Devon. Magistro Tho. de
la War. Willielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie. Hugoni Burnell. Johanni de Wells.
Johanni Baroni de Graystock. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine. Johanni de Latimer.
Ricardo Strange. Roberto Poynings. Edwardo Cherleton de Powis. Tho. Camois.
VVillielmo Botreaux. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland.
Summon. Parliamenti. Rex etc. Henrico Percie Com. Northumb. apud Westminster. decimo
sexto die Octobris. Writs of Summons.
Test apud Westminster. Vicesimo quarto die Augusti.
RAdulpho Nevil Com. Westmerland. Edwardo Courtney Com. Devon. Magistro Tho.
de la War. VVillielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie. Hugoni Burnell. Johanni de
Wells. Johanni Baroni de Graystock. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine. Johanni de
Latimer. Ricardo Strange. Roberto Poynings. Edwardo Cherleton de Powis.
VVillielmo Botreaux. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the sixteenth day of October in the
seventh year of King Henry the Fifth.
Duresm Chancellor of England, Chancellors speech.
before the Duke of Bedford, Warden of England, Warden of England.

Parliament held by him.


sitting in the Chamber de pinct, Painted Chamber.
in the Palace of Westminster, and before the Lords and Commons, declared: how
that the Subjects had most great cause to embrace, and to pray for the King,
Prayers for the King Peace sought.
considering that for want of peace, which he sunderly sought, he began war in
timore Domini, War began.
which being principium sapientiae, he thereby attained the fruits of wisdom
with victory, Victory.
and honor, Honor.
and the particulars whereof he does not forget to show.

bonum facientes non deficiamus: upon which he shows, how that the King being
of good courage, would have his Subjects to be careful to provide for good
governance, Good Governance.
and defense of the Realm; Defense.
and considering that his enterprise begun could not be left without eminent
perils, Aid.
he would new provisions to be made, and to be granted, to the end he might end
to his honor, and their comforts. He therefore wills the Commons to choose
their Speaker, Commons to choose and present a their Speaker.
and the next day to present him.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Roger Fowler Esquire to be their Speaker, Roger Fowler Speaker^ Presented.
who with the Common protestation was allowed. His protestation.


November the Commons, by the assent of the Bishops and Lords, granted to the
King one Fifteen, One Dism and Quindism granted.
and one Desm, and one half part of them both.

Advance moneys to be secured by it.
as in Anno 4 H. 5. tit. 10.

Lords subscription.


Lords of the Council. Coin.


Moneys kept within the Realm.
it is enacted, that all necessaries shall be bought within the realm for the
Kings soldiers, Necessaries for soldiers bought here.
and sent to them; and also, that certain woolls be bought and sent into
Normandy, Wools transported.
any Statute for the Staple to the contrary notwithstanding. Staple.
Non-obstante.


John Randolfe the Queen Dowagers Confessor, Confessor. Queen Dowager accused
of Treason.
had accused her for compassing the death of the King; It was enacted, that all
the lands and goods of Roger Doller, and Petromell Brocart, her Sureties,
Sureties Lands seized.
should be seized, and paid to the King; wherein sufficient warrant is provided
for all such as shall pay the same.

John Lane, John Brodinge, John Russell Clerks, and others were Indicted,
Indictment removed.
as it was made before the Coroner of the County of York, for a Murder: Murder^
the which Indictment was removed into the Kings Bench^ where indeed there was
no such Indictment found. No such Indictment.
It was therefore enacted, that the said Indictment should be void, Indictment
vacated.
and the said Plaintiff discharged of the same.

John Lebard, Indictment recalled.
and others, made against the said Russell, the like order for them is taken,
as next above.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
THe like Act as in the last Parliament, tit. 27. Liberties.


Lancaster, Consp^racy.
cap. 1. agrees not fully with the record.

Partition.

Copartners.


or the Feoffees or Allies of any of them. Resp.


The Common Law shall be observed. Common Law.


Chaplains wages.

Penalty^




Resp.
The Statute provided shall be observed.

Exigent.
That the day of Exigent may lie in the writ of Forger of false Deeds. Forgery
of Deeds.


Recognizance.
That a man being bound by recognizance to appear at a day certain for keeping
of the peace, Peace.
and then being stayed by sickness, Sickness.
imprisonment, Imprisonment.
or other commandment, may plead the same in bar upon a Scire facias. Plea.


Resp.
The Common Law shall be observed. Common Law.


R. 2. ^it. (58) against Hunters may continue, Hunters.
with this adjunct, that every person being thereof attainted, shall for every
offense forfeit to the King, Forfeiture.
3 l. 6 d. 8 d.

Resp.
The Statutes therefore made shall be observed.

Annuity.
A motion touching the payment of an Annuity, of no great force.

Anno Octavo Henrici Quinti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Chariss. fratri Iohanni Duci Bedford. etc. apud Westminster. secundo die
Martii. Test apud Westminster. decimo sexto die Februarii.
HUmfrido Duci Gloucestriae fratri Regis. Hen. Percie Com. Northumb. Radul: de
Nevill Com. Westmerland. Ricardo Com. War: Ricardo Com. Wigorn. Edwardo Com.
Marchiae. Hugo Courtney Com. Devon. Magistro Tho. de la War. Willielmo de
Ferrariis de Grobie. Johanni Wells. Hen. Fitzhugh. Jacobo Audley. Johanni de
Clifford. Johanni Baroni de Graystocke. Reginal. Gray de Ruthine. Johanni de
Latimer. Ricardo le Strange. Roberto Poynings. Edwardo de Cherleton de Powis.
Tho. Camois. VVillielmo Botreaux. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland. Roberto Willoughbie.
Willielmo Clinton. Johanni Talbott Domino de Furnival. Johanni Gray de
Codonore. Willielmo Harrington. Willielmo Hankeford Capitali Justiciario toto
tempore istius Regis, vel pro majori part.
Anno Nono Henrici Quinti. The Parliament holden at Westminster the first day
of December, in the ninth year of King Henry the Fifth.
John Duke of Bedford, Duke of Bedford.
etc. sitting as in the last Parliament, Parliament held by him.
tit. 1. the Bishop of Durham, Chancellor of England, Chancellors speech.
pronounced touching the Parliament, and took for his Theme, Lex Domini
immaculata convertens animas, etc.

Law.
viz. the law politic, whereby men for fear of punishment forbear to do evil;
the law of love, whereby men willingly do well; the law mercenary, where
through coveteousnesse they rake to themselves.

Peter, James, and John, resembled the same to man, who could not by mortality
be altered, unless he had faith ascribed to Peter, hope likened to James, and
love applied to John; which he affirms, must proceed by the law of God, which
converteth souls.

Causes of Parliament.
the one for establishing of good laws, Good Laws.
the other for the defending of the frontiers of the Realm with manly courage,
Frontiers Defense.
to which end he willed the Commons to choose their Speaker, and to present him.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

England, Lieutenant of England.
and the Lords, Richard Baynard to be their Speaker, Richard Baynard.

Speaker presented.


who with the common protestation was allowed. His Protestation.


1 Desm, and 1 fifteen granted.
and one fifteen to be levied of the Laity.

William Lord of Clinton, William Lord Clinton.
of Say, complaining, shows, how he in trust enfeoffed William de la Pool,
Feoffement in trust.
being of his Council learned, of all his lands in England, and Calli^e, to the
performance of his will, Performance of his Will.
which the said Pool upon sundry his requests, refused to perform, Refusal to
perform the trust.
and prays remedy; where, upon full proof of the surmise aforesaid, it was
enacted, Re-enfeoffement inacted.
Pool being present; that he should re-infeoffee the said Lord, or whom he
would, and their heirs for ever, discharged of all encumbrances done by the
said Pool, Encumbrances discharged.
the which Pool did in open Parliament, Feoffement in Parliament.
in two deeds there enrolled. Deed enrolled.


Walter Cook Parson of Somersham, Somersham.
had recovered in the Arches, the tithes of a Meadow, Tithes of Meadow.

Arches.


or Marsh, called Crowland Meadow, being in the Parish of Somersham, against
William Whitihead, and others, tenants to the Abbot of Ramsey, Abbot of Ramsey.
as to his Manor of Charts, the said Abbot sued forth a Prohibition,
Prohibition.
upon long debate of the Lords, and Justices, it was adjudged, Judgment in
Parliament against the Prohibition.
that the said Abbot ought to have none.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
An. 7. H. 5. tit. 6.

Coin.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Coynage.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Money.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Only both the last Statutes were to endure but to the next Parliament.

Mint Master.

Exchanger.




Resp.
The King thereof will be advised.

Wardens of Exchange.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Callice, Coynage. Callice.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Allay. Money.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Gold.
cap. 7. agrees with the record.

False weights.
cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Temporary Statutes.
Note that the five Statutes last mentioned, were only to continue to the next
Parliament.

Justices. Sheriffs.
Sheriffs, and such officers, may have power to amend all misprisions, Clarks
misprisions.

Amendment.


or negligent writing of their Clarks.

Resp.
Who is grieved, may complain to the Kings Council. Kings Council.


Rome, cap. 9. agrees with the record. Exchangers. Rome.


at the Common Law, Chancery.

Common Law.


shall discharge any matter in the Chancery.

It is enacted to endure unto the next Parliament.

Collectors.
cap. 10. agrees with the record.

Abenden, Abenden Bridges.
called Burford, and Chalam bridge, made by John Hutchions, John Brite, and
others of Abenden, shall continue as free passage for the Kings Subjects, Free
passage.
and their carriages, and that every man set Sallowes, or VVillowes upon the
banks, Willowes.
between Abenden and Burford, for mending of the same.

Anno Nono Henrici Quinti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Chariss. Consangu^ suo Henrico de Percie Com. Northumb, etc. apud Westminster.
primo die Decembris: Test Iohanne Duce Bedford. Custode Angliae: apud Westminster.
Vicesimo die Octobris, per ipsum Regem and Consilium.
CHariss. Consang. suo Radulpho de Nevil Com. Westmerland. Hugoni Courtney
Com. Devon. Magistro Tho. de la War. Willielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie. Johanni
Baroni de Graystock. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine. Johanni de Latimer. Ricardo
Strange. Roberto Poynings. VVillielmo Botreaux. VVillielmo Clinton. VVillielmo
de Harrington. Tho. de Dacre de Gilsland. Jacobo de Berckley. Willielmo
Hankeford Capitulo Justiciario.
Anno Primo Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Chariss. Avunculo suo Duci Gloucestriae, apud Westminster. die Lunae ante
Festum Sancti Martini. Test Rege apud Westminster. Vicesimo nono die Septembris.
HEn. de Percie Com. Northumber. Radulpho Nevil Com. Westmerland. Magistro
Tho. de la War. Willielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie. Johanni de Wells. Johanni
Baroni de Graystock. Reginal. Gray de Ruthin. Johanni de Latimer. Ricardo
Strange. Roberto Poynings. Willielmo Botreaux. Tho: Dacre de Gilsland.
VVillielmo de Clinton. Jacobo de Berckley. VVillielmo de Harrington.
These four in this Parliament Roll follow after the Barons, and after them
these three Barons, as they are here written.

Tho: Com. Marescallo. Edwardo Com. Marchiae. Tho. Duci Oxoniae. Ricardo Com.
War.
Jacobo de Audley. Radulpho Cromwell, Chlr. Henrico Fitzhugh.
Constabulario Castri Doveriae, and Quinque Portuum Custodi, but none named.

The Parliament holden at Westminster, Monday next before the Feast of Saint
Martine, in the first year of King Henry the Sixth.
Commission to hold the Parl. read.
THe same Monday, before any thing was done, a Commission was directed to
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, the Kings Uncle, for beginning of the Parliament,
and was read in the presence of the said Duke sitting in the Chamber de pinct.
and before the Lords, Painted Chamber.
and Commons.

Archbish. of Cant.
After which the Archbishop of Canterbury, by the command of the said Duke, the
Kings Commissary, declared the cause of the said Parliament, Causes of the Parl.
and took for his Theme, Principes populorum congregati sunt cum Deo.

Henry, Henry the 6. King.
begotten of the royal blood of France, France.
whereby the same issue was now become King of France.

The Perfections of the number of 6.
and whereby God had made all things in six days, so God was to accomplish all
the good beginnings of the famous fifth Henry, in this Sixth Henry his son, who
would that all estates should enjoy their liberties. Liberties.


He pronounces, that considering the Kings tender age, Kings infancy.
the same Parliament was called for three causes, the first for the good
governance of the Kings person; Good Governm. of the Kings Person.
the second, for the keeping of the Peace, Keeping the Peace.
and execution of the Laws; Execution of Laws.
the third, for the sure defense of the Realm. Def. of the realm.


Counselors.

Officers.


wherein every Estate was to show his advice, and willed them to follow the
counsel of Iethro unto Moses, as it is contained in Exodus, viz. such as
should fear God, wise, godly, ha^ing covetousness, puissant, etc. And so he
willed the Commons to choose, and the next day to present their Speaker.
Speaker to be elected and presented.


England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Gloucester, the Kings Commissary, Kings Commissary.
and the Lords, Roger Flower Esquire to be their Speaker, Roger Flower
presented Speaker.
who with the Common protestation was allowed. Protestation.


Councils writ^ for summoning the Parliament confirmed.
are confirmed by authority of the same.

Thomas Bishop of Durham, Chancellor of England to the late King H. 5. in the
presence of the Duke of Gloucester and other Lords, Chancellor.
in the Castle of Windsor, delivered, and left with the King the great Golden
Seal of the realm of England, The Great Seal resigned.
whereof he willed them to be witnesses, Witnesses.
and that the same may be enrolled.

London, late Chancellor of the Duchy of Normandy, Chancellor of the Duchy
of Normandy.
delivered the same Seal of that Duchy at Rome to the Duke of Bedford, His
Seal resigned.
who had the governance of the same, and also in the presence as is aforesaid
at Windsor the great Seal of England, Great Seal resigned, Discharge by
Parliament.
which King H. 5. gave to him to keep, and prays to be discharged of the same
by Act of Parliament, and so was.

The Kings Style changed by Act.
and that accordingly there might be graven upon all his Seals as follows,
Seals.
Henricus Rex Franciae and Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae.

Gloucester declared to them, that the King had appointed the Bishop of Durham
to be his Chancellor, Chancellor.
William Rindroffe to be Treasurer of England, Treasurer.
and John Stafford to be keeper of the Privy Seal: Privy Seal.
of all which offices their Patents are made and confirmed by Parliament. Their
Patents confirmed by Parl.


Liberties confirmed to all estates.
being not revoked; without these words Concedimus to be in any of the said
affirmations.

H. 5. made Henry Lord Fitzhugh, King Henry the 5. his Will and Executors.
Walter Hunger^ord, Walter Beauchampe, Lewis Robsart, William Porter, Robert
Babthorpe, John Woodhowse, and John Leventhorpe Esquires, the Executors of his
Will and Testament, the King grants to them 40000 l. Marks for the
performance of the same Will, Legacies.

Overseers.


19 Marks was due to the Executors of H. 4. by oversight of the overseers of
the same Will of the Duke of Gloucester, and others Lords there named.

Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage granted.
Tonnage and Poundage, as formerly, for two years ensuing.

Imprisonment.

Heresy. Lollards.


or Lollardie, should be delivered to the Ordinary of the same place to be
punished. Ordinary.


Petitions referred to the Council to determine.
It is enacted, that all such Petitions as are not ended in this Parliament,
shall be committed to the Council, to be determined according to their
discretion.

Chamberlain of Englands office granted in Parl.
The King, by authority of Parliament, grants to the Duke of Gloucester the
office of Chamberlain of England, with all the profits, at the Kings pleasure.

Constable of England.
In like form the King grants to the said Duke the office of Constable of
England.

John Duke of Bedford, Protector, Protector and Defender of the realm, created
in Parliament.
and Defender of the Realm, and Church of England, and Chief Counselor of the
King, Chief Constable Duke of Bedford.
so long as the said Duke (then being beyond the Seas) should remain in
England, and in his absence only the Duke of Gloucester to supply the said
office, D. of Gloucester Deputy Protector, etc.
the which Duke of Gloucester in full Parliament took upon him the burden
aforesaid, with protestation that the same should not redound to the prejudice
of the Duke of Bedford.

Protectors power.
It is enacted upon the Kings Letters Patents, that the Protectors aforesaid
shall, during the Kings minority, dispose of all the offices of the Forests,
Forests Officers.
Keepers of Parkes, Parkers.
and VVarrens, and all Benefices of the Kings gift being above the value of 20
Marks, Benefices.
to continue during their lives.

Kings Counselors appointed in Parl. with their power.
Certain Bishops, Lords, and others, are named to be Counselors assisting to
the Governance aforesaid.

The which Counselors took upon them in form following^ viz.

Justices of Peace.
That all Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Sheriffs. Escheators.
Escheators, Customers, Customers. Comptrollers. Weighers.
Comptrollers, Weighers, Searchers, Searchers. Officers.
and such other Officers, may be made be their advice and denomination.

Wards. Marriages.
Marriages, Farms, Farms. Casualties.
and other Casualties of the Crown.

All Acts of Council by 6. or more of them. Major part.
but by six, or more at the least, and in all great causes by all, or the most;
and wherein the King is to be conferred withal, that nothing be therein done
without the assents of the Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester. Protectors assent.


England, and the two Chamberlains of the Exchequer, Treasurer. Chamberl. of
the Excheq. Key of the K. receipt.
may for every of them have a key to the Kings Receipt so as they be sworn
before the Council, Oath.

Council.


to make none privy thereto other than the Council.

Clark of the Council.

His Oath.


and truly to enact all things done by them.

Articles enacted.
with the proviso ensuing, were enacted by assent; provided, always that such
officers as have the same for life, Officers.
or otherwise, may appoint Deputies, Deputies.
any of the Articles notwithstanding.

Anne Countess of Stafford, Anne Countess of Stafford.
daughter, and heir of Ellinor one of the daughters and heirs of Humphry de
Bohun late Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and Constable of England,
recites a partition made between King H. 5. and her, Partition.

Constable of England.


of the inheritance of the said Earl, in the ninth of his reign, at what time
certain Knights fees in gross were not parted, whereof she now prays remedy,
and concerning certain members of the Castle of Brecknock in Wales. Brecknock
Castle.


The Kings Council shall have power, Resp.

Kings Council.


by authority of Parliament to take order herein.

Bartholomew Goldbeator Master of the Mint within the Tower, Mint. Tower.
requires larger Commission, touching the Coynage and Exchange of money in the
said Tower, Minters.

Coynage.

Exchange.


albeit the King means that no Minter should hold the Exchange; yet to the
next Parliament likes that the said Bartholomew should keep the Exchange, Fees.
so he takes not above three half pence for the Exchange of a Noble.

cap. 4. etc. agrees with 2. H. 6. tit. 11.

The print touching the wages of Captains, Captains wages.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

The like Act is made touching Exchangers to Rome, Exchangers.

Rome.


as in 9. H. 6. tit. 24.

Thomas Chawcer Chief Butler to the King shall enjoy the said office during his
life, Kings Chief Butler confirmed for life.
according to the Letters Patents thereof, made to him by Hing H. 4.

^nychester, otherwise called Prior Ecclesiae Herodosiae, surrendered unto the
King for ever, Surrender of Common.
the Common of pasture for forty oxen and kine, and twenty hoggs, with the
increase, within the Kings Parkes of Clarindon, Clarindon Parks.
and Wilts, and the right of one called a Stickler, A Stickler.
who was to cut wood daily for them within the said Park the King grants to
them by the assent of Parliament, Exchange confirmed by Parliament.
the Priory Alien and Prebend of Uphaven in the Cathedral Church of Sarum,
Uphaven.
with the Chapel of Charleton belonging to the Abbey of St. Wandragisile in
Normandy, and licenceth the said Abbot to sell, and the said Prior to buy the
same.

Upon two Petitions of Katherine Queen Dowager of England, Petitions.

Dowager.


and the King, in performance of the league made between the French King,
League.

Queens Dower confirmed in Parliament.


and King H. 5. by two Letters Patents granted to the said Queen for her Dowry,
sundry Manors, Customs, and other hereditaments of the Town, and Principality
of Wales, and Duchy of Lancaster there named, to the clear yearly value of
20000 marks, the which Dowry, and Letters Patents, are confirmed by the whole
Estate, wherein sundry provisoes are.

Petitions.
Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Chancery.
THat no man be bound to answer in the Chancery for any matter determinable at
the Common Law, Common Law.
on pain of the Plaintiff to lose 20 l.

Resp.
The Statute made in the 17 R. 2. shall be executed.

Purveyors.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Irish men, Irish men.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Sheriffs.
A motion for the allowance of Sheriffs of no great force.

Staple liberties.
may be confirmed, and that no plea hanging before the said officers, be
removed by writs, Pleas removed.
or Letters.

Resp.
Their liberties shall be confirmed without this Clause licet to the rest; as it
has been heretofore, the same shall be.

Offices confirmed.
It is enacted, that all offices granted to any person for life, or in Fee, by
H. 4. or H. 5. shall be confirmed, albeit in the grant of the same there be no
express mention made of the value.

Anno Secundo Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Humfrido Duci Gloucest. etc. apud Westminster. primo die Septembris; Numerus
and ordo Nobilium idem quod in posteriori Parliamento, praeterque quod Iacobus
de Berckley omi tendus est.
Henrico de Percie Com. Northumb. Radulpho de Nevil Com. Westmerland. Magistro
Tho. de la War. VVillielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie Chlr. Johanni de Welles
Chlr. Johanni Baroni de Graystock. Reginald. Gray de Ruthin Chlr. Johanni
Latimer Chlr. Ricardo Strange. Roberto Poynings. Willielmo Botreaux. Tho. Dacre
de Gilsland. VVillielmo de Clinton. VVillielmo de Harrington. Tho. Com.
Marescallo. Edwardo Com. Marchiae. Tho. Duci Oxoniae. Ricardo Com. VVa Jacobo
de Audley. Ricardo Cromwell, hlr. Hen. Fitzhugh.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the twentieth day of October, in the
second year of the reign of Henry the Sixth.
Humfry Duke of Gloucester, Commission to the Protector to hold the Parliament.
sitting as in the last Parliament, tit. 1. The Bishop of Durham being
Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
by the Dukes commandment, declared the cause of the said Parliament, Causes
of Parliament.
and took for his Theme, Deum timete, Regem honorificate.

viz. with a child-like fear, Fear of God.
quoniam qui timet Deum, diligit eum, and tunc illuminabitur cor ejus. And that
the King ought to be honored, since this realm had their longing, viz. that the
King of England might be King of France, King of England

King of France.


the which being brought to pass by the travel and Conquests of this Kings
Father, Conquest.
enforced the same according to this saying, Omnis qui diligit eum qui genuit,
diligit eum qui natus est.

Lords of the Council appointed in Parl.

Peace of the Realm.


and observation of peace during the Kings minority, Kings Minority.
were assembled, to the end they might by advice and assent of the Commons,
Commons Advice.
perfect the same; wherefore he willed the Commons by their assembling to
choose their Speaker, The Speakers choice and presentation.
and to present him to the said Duke, the Kings Commissary.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

October, the Commons presented before the Commissary and Lords, John Russell
Esquire, John Russell Speaker, presented to the Lords. Protestat.
to be their Speaker, who with the common protestation was allowed.

John la Talbott of Furnivall being the Kings Lieutenant of Ireland, L. Talbott
Lieut. of Ireland. E. of Ormonds accusation.
had accused James Boteiler, Earl of Ormond, of certain treasons, depending
before John Duke of Bedford, and Constable of England in his Marshals Court;
Constable of Engl.

Marshal Court.

Treason.


the King to appease the same does by assent of Parliament utterly abolish the
said accusation, Accusation repealed by Parliament.
and suits upon the same.

Note, the Accusations are particularly recited.

Committee of Commons.
The Commons do send certain by name to the Duke of Gloucester, for vouch
safing to make them privy to the Treaty of the Scottish Ambassador, Scots
Ambassador.
for the delivery and marriage of the Scottish King, Marriage Treaty.
which they liked well.

Minters.
The order that the Minter within the Tower shall keep the Exchange contained in
the last Parliament, Exchange of money.

Tower.


tit. 35. is to continue at the Kings pleasure.

Petition.
It is enacted, at the petitions of the North Counties, that a Coinage should be
at York during the Kings pleasure, Coynage.

York.


and that all men do bring in their gold there to be coined, Gold coined.
which is not of full weight.

Commission.
On Wednesday the 17th day of December, the Chancellor by the Kings Commissary
appointed and adjourned the Parliament, Parliament adjourned.
from the same day unto the next after Saint Hillary, then ensuing.

Parliament.
On the 18th day of February, being the last day of the Parliament, the Commons
granted to the King for two years the subsidy of Poundage, Poundage 2. years.
as in, etc.

Kings Councils names.
The names of such Bishops, Lords, and other persons as were appointed to be of
the Kings Council.

Their Articles and Orders.
far swarving from the Articles in the last Parliament, tit. 26. to 34. and
much in derogation of the Protectors power. Protector curbed.


Clerk of the Council his Oath.
and to procure the poorest man his Bill, Poor. Kings Sergeant. No Fees.
and Answer; And the Kings Sergeant for Council to take no money therefore.

Sir John Mortimer.
John Mortimer of Bishops Hatfield in the County of Hereford Knight, being
committed to the Tower for supposition of Treason done against H. 5. broak the
Tower in the first year of this King, Imprisonment.

Tower.

Treason.

Prison broken.


for which breach he was indicted of Treason, and thereupon the same Indictment
by consent of Parliament was confirmed to be good, and the same John being
after apprehended was at this Parliament brought, against whom upon the same
Indictment, Indictment confirmed by Parliament.
Judgment was given that he should be carried to the Tower, Judgment given.
Tiburn. Drawing and quartering.
drawn through London to Tibourne, there to be hanged, drawn, and quartered,
his head to be set on London Bridge, and his four quarters on the four gates of
London.

Judgment without arraignment or trial
Note, that the Judgment for the same is strange, that any man in a quiet time,
and a realm of Peace, should be condemned upon a bare Indictment, without
arraignment, or due trial.

Katherine Queen of England, Petition.

Q. Katherines dower.


a new Dower is to her assigned by assent of Parliament, for that sundry
defaults were in the same made in the last Parliament.

H. 4. the King by his Letters Patents appoints to pay to the Executors of
King H. 5. 40000 Marks, Kings Executors.
to the end they the last Executors should pay the first, and discharge the
will of H. 5. which Letters Patents are confirmed. Patents.


The Executors of H. 5. prayen delivery of Jewels, Kings Executors.




plate, Plate.
and goods of the said H. to the value of 40000 Marks, which is granted.

H. 4. and H. 5. shall pay all the debts of those Kings due by Talley,
Executors.

Kings debts paid.


as by Debentors.

Kings Jewels pa^ned.
shall not deliver the same till they be paid.

H. 5. it is enacted, that the said Executors shall have all the Wards,
Petition.

Kings Executors.

Wards. Marriages.


Marriages, goods, Goods. Debts.
debts, and Chattels, Chattels.
which were the said Kings, to the payment of his debts, by the oversight as in
the last Parliament, tit. 18.

Durham, Executor to the late Archbishop of York, Executor.
and others prayen the payment of 900 l. ^ent to the King H. 5. upon a
Tabernacle of gold, Loanes.

Payment.

Morgage.


late belonging to the Duke of Lancaster, and to be discharged against the said
Kings Executors for the delivery of the said Tabernacle, Tabernacle.
both of which are confirmed by common assent. Confirmation.


Winchester shall have Letters Patents to be paid out of any the Customs 20000
Marks, Loan repaid.

Patent.

Customs.


which he had lent to King H. 5.

Commissions.

Treaty.


and finally to conclude at Durham with the Scottish Ambassadors, Scots
Ambassadors.
for the delivery of James the Scottish King, Scots Kings delivery.
and of him to make delivery, according to their Orders: the which Letters
Patents are confirmed by common assent. Confirmation:


Edmond Earl of March, son and heir to Roger Earl of March, shows how King H.
5. for the sum of 10000 Marks paid to certain the Kings creditors by the said
Earl, promised to the said Earl of word of mouth his own Marriage, Ward.

King. Promise.

Marriage.


being then the Kings Ward, the which he requires to be confirmed by
Parliament: Confirmation.
the which was granted.

Thomas Duke of Exeter, how that King H. 5. before his death, should much
repent to the said Duke, Kings repentance.
by taking away the land of the Lord le Scroope, Lord Scroops attainder.
upon the attainder of H. the last Lord; Forfeiture of Lands.
for that he understood that the same were entayled to Iefferey, Tail.
Stephen, and John le Scroope his brothers; and that the Lord Fitzhugh, and
William Porter, to whom part of the said lands were given, were contented on
proof of the intail, to make restitution of the same. Restitution.


John Stafford, Treasurer of England, Lord Treasurer.
prays, that the schedule indented made between him on the one part, and the
Executors of H. 5. on the other, touching goods of the said King delivered to
the said Executors, Kings Executors.
to the value of 40000 Marks, might be confirmed, Confirmation.
and he thereof discharged, the which is granted.

Note, the Inventory containing the Jewels, Kings Inventory.
Clothes of Arras, apparel, Kings apparel.
and goods particularly, with their prices, wherein you shall see plain Gowns
of the Kings of less value than 40 s. and such other costly apparel, as the
worst pages of the least Nobleman in these days would scorn to wear.

Jacques Duchess of Gloucester is made a Denizen by the whole assent of
Parliament. Duchess of Gloucester. Indenization.


Anne, wife of the Duke of Bedford, is also made a Denizen by the Kings Letters
Patents, Denizens.

Confirmation.


which are confirmed by the Parliament.

H. 5. had granted to the Dukes of Bedford, and Exeter, Kings grant confirmed.

Mortmain.


and to sundry other persons certain lands, parcel of the Manor of Iscelworth,
with sundry Priories, Manors, Fishings, and other hereditaments, to the use of
the Abbess and Covent of the Monastery of Syon, Syon Abbey.
they require that the same may be confirmed by common consent; which is
granted.

John Earl of Huntingdon, Petition.

Prisoners of War.

John Earl of H^ntington. Ransom^


being prisoner in France, by common consent there was given to him toward his
ransom the Earl of Gancourt, and the Earl of Tokervile, being French prisoners
here.

Ioane Queen of England, Petition. Qu. Ioane her Dower restored.
wife to H. 4. the King by common assent restored to her all her Dower, and
arrerages of the same, and all her goods taken from her.

s. 4 d. subsidy for every sack of wool, Merchant Strangers. Wool.

Subsidy.


notwithstanding the grant made in 7 H. 5.

Petition.
and Brethren of the Hospital of St. Leonards in York, St. Leonards Hospital in
York.
It is enacted, that they do enjoy all their threaves of Corn within the
Counties of York, Threaves of Corn.
Cumberland, Westmerland, and Lancaster, and that they may recover the same by
actions of debt, or detinue.

John Duke of York, Duke of York.
shall by his Attorney, Attorney.
or Attorneys, be received in any Court to sue, or be sued in any action
brought for any hereditaments, where the reversion or remainder belongs to
the said Duke; the print, cap. 3. agrees herewith.

Callice, Staple.

Callice.


cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Hampshire, Transportation.

Looms.


Kent, Sussex, and York, but only at Callice.

Callice uncustomed, Callice. Staple.

Custom.


he shall forfeit the same, Forfeiture.
and make fine, and ransom at the Kings will ^^ cap. 5. agrees herewith.

The print touching the Mint at Callice, Mint.

Callice.


cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Churches Liberties.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

The print that no Cordwayner shall be Tanner, Cordwayner.




cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Assize.
or other Writs of Entry, no man be delayed by the Defendants affirming any
reversion or remainder to be in the Kings hand, Delay.
where none is indeed, and that all feofments or grants made by any disseisor
upon collusion to the King, Disseisor.

Collusion.


to be void.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Commission.

Oppressions.


and misdemeanors done by John Lord Talbot, Misdemeanors.

Lord Talbot.


and Sr. William Talbot Knight, his brother, and by sundry other named their
servants, and officers, to sundry the Kings Subjects, within the Hundred of
Norman-low in the County of Hereford, being ancient demesne, Ancient Demes^e.
as parcel of the Castle of Goderich, Goderich Castle.
and that every of them might find surety for the peace, Sureties.
according to their estates. All which was granted.

Irish, Irish Sureties.
cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Blankingallie half penny suskins, Money.
and Dodkins, cap. 9. agrees with the record.

Embroydered clothes.
or silver, being wrought with copper gold of luke-honey, with Spanish lattin
set to sale be forfeited to the King, Deceit.

Forfeiture.


or Lords of the liberties.

A motion touching men being outlawed, Outlawry.




being beyond the seas in the Kings service, of no great purpose.

Surry, Justices of Peace.
Kent, and Essex, shall at all times needful, have Commission to enquire of
all annoyances done in the river of Thames. Nusances.

Thames.




Officers in Courts.
shall be sworn to appoint able Clarks, Able Clarks.

Deputies.


and Ministers under them, as for whom they will answer. The print cap. 10.
agrees herewith.

Measures.
and Pipes, Pipes.
cap. 11. agrees with the record in effect, but not in form.

Minters.
Goldsmiths, Goldsmiths.
Bullion, cap. 14. agrees with the record.

Master of the Mint Coining.
and Coynage, cap. 12. agrees with the record in effect, but not in form.

Justices of Peace.
by process may call all Masters before them, and them examine what wages they
give, Laborers wages.
and finding them to give more than the Statute would, then to commit them to
prison, Imprisonment.
to make fine, Fine and Ransom.
and ransom, at the Kings will.

Commission.

Sewers.


is devised, and enacted by common consent.

Trunkes.
and Nets, Nets.
cap. 15. agrees with the record.

Reversioner.

Receipt.


albeit the same Defendant were recorded, and for matter moving the Justices
deferred unto the next Term, as which time, he in the reversion comes.

Suspicion of Treason.

Treason.


and therefore to be committed to prison, and break the same prison,
Imprisonment.
that such breach shall be high Treason. Breach of Prison.


Anno Tertio Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Chariss. Avunculo suo Thom. Duci Oxoniae, etc. apud Westminster. ultimo die
Aprilis. Test apud Westminster. vicesimo quarto Februarii.
HEnrico Percie Com. Northumber. Radulpho Nevil Com. Westmerland. Humsrido
Com. Stafford. Ricardo Com. Arundell. Magistro Tho. de la War. VVillielmo de
Ferrariis de Grobie. Johanni de Wells Chlr. Johanni Baroni de Graystock.
Reginal. Gray de Ruthine Chlr. Johanni de Latimer Chlr. Roberto Poynings Chlr.
VVillielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. Willielmo de Clinton.
VVillielmo de Harrington. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Joh. Gray de Codonore Chlr.
Radulpho Cromwell. Lodowico Robessart Chlr. Jacobo de Berckley Chlr. Auford.
Ricardo Berckley. VVillielmo Lovell Chlr. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae. Johanni
Com. Marescallo. Johanni de Talbot milit. Noe Lord Warden.
These names are written twice in the original.

Affidatio Dominorum. Memorandum, quod quarto decimo die Maii, praesentibus in
eodem Parliamento, Praelatis, Magnatibus and aliis subscriptis, viz.
HUmfrido Duci Gloucestriae Protectori, and Defensori Angliae. Hen. Archiepisco
Cant. Johanni Episcopo London. Hen. Episcopo Winton. Cancellar. Angliae. Episc.
Meneven. Philippo Episc. Wigorum. Tho. Episc. Dunelm. Willielmo Episc.
Carliell. Tho. Duce Oxoniae. Hum^. Com. Stafford. Hen. Com. Northumber. Abbe de
Ramsey. Abbe de Reading. Abbe de Berlings. Magistro Johan. Staff. Thesaur.
Angliae. Magistro Willielmo Alremth. Custod. Privati Sigilli. Johanne de Gray.
Will. de Ferrariis de Grobie. Jacobo de Audley. Ludovico de Burchie^. Radulpho
de Cromwell. Johanne le Scroop. VVillielmo de Clinton. Roberto de Poynings.
VVillielmo de Botreaux. Willielmo de Harrington. Johanne de Dacre. Johanne de
Roos infra aetatem, existent. Ricardo Nevil Custode West-Marchiae. Waltero
Hungerford. Johanne Tiptoft. Willielmo Porter.
Tho. Chaucer. Auditisque and diligent^r consideratis nonnullis damnis,
Difference between the Lords.
divisionibus, dissentionibus, and aliis inconvenientiis qua^ pluribus quae ex
controversia and clameo per Iohannem Com. The ill consequences thereof.
Marescallum versus Ricardum Com. War. de and super sessione ipsius Comitis
Marescall. supra praefat. Comitem War. in Parliament. Regiis adin. motis and
subortis, ne dum inter little consanguineos and alligatos verum etiam caeteros
ligeos possent, quod absit, Maintenance of quarrels abjured by all the Lords^
veresimiliter evenire pro hujusmodi damnis, divisionibus, and inconvenientiis
sedandum, and pacificandum, and vitandum, nec non pro pace and quiet regis and
regni inviolabiliter conservandis; praefatus Protector, ac omnes and singuli
praefati Magnates, and alii praedicti suis sacris se mutuo alligabant, and
fideliter affidabant, quod nullus eorum alteri praedictorum Comiti in
praemissis parcialiter adhaeret, nec partem alterius eorum aliqualiter
assumeret sustentandam; sed quod ipsi and eorum quislibet, se in hac part
indifferenter haberent, ac pro pace regia inconcussa observandum, fideliter
astarent suis viribus, atque posse: and ulterius ordinatum suit, Peace and
reconciliation endeavored.
and unanimiter concordatum quod uterque praedict. eorum Comitum per suum
Consilium in Camero tunc sequente jus, and titulum sedis suae in hujusmodi
Parliamento inscriptis apponat in Parliamento supradict. ut hiis visis and
intellectis per ipsorum Protectoris, Praelatorum, Magnatum, and aliorum
praedict. maturas discretiones, and consilia praedict. controversiae, and
clameo finis congruus posset celerius adhiberi, ac pax, unitas, and concordia
inter ipsos Comites, and eorum consanguineos, and alligatos pro perpetuo
facilius solidari.

Earl Marshalls precedence.
The Arguments of the Challenge made by John Earl Marshall to have his place in
Parliament above Richard Earl of Warwick; Earl of Warwick.
with the Answers of the said Earl of Warwick against the said Challenge.
Pedigree of the Earl Marshall.
FIrst, it was alleged for the Earl Marshall, that according to a pedigree
delivered to the Parliament, he was descended of the blood royal from Thomas
of Brotherton son to King Edward the first, Blood royal.
and bare the Arms of this land, by which blood, and arms, he claims to
have place in Parliament, before the said Earl of Warwick.

Counsel or Advocate in Parliament.
The Earl of Warwick by the mouth of Sr. Walter Beauchamp, says, that though
the Earl Marshall claims place in Parliament by blood, Claim without
possession.
and arms, yet he claims no possession had by none of all his Ancestors; but
the Earl of Warwick allegeth possession in himself above the Earl Marshall, in
this sort following.

Precedence.
First, in a Parliament in Anno 11. R. 2. certain Appellants were written in
this order; first, the Duke of Gloucester, that was son to King E. 3. next the
Lord of Darbie, that was after King H. 4. and then the Earl of Darby, the next
to him the Earl of Warwick, father to the now Earl, Defendant, and then
afterward the Earl Marshall, father to the now Earl.

Great Council.

Precedence.


Item also King H. 4. kept a great Council at Westminster, where debate was
moved between the Earls of Kent, Earls of Kent and Arundell.
and Arundell, for their places in Parliament, and likewise between the Earl of
Warwick, Earls of VWarwick, and Marshall.
and the Earl Marshall, brother to the now Earl Marshall, where it was
determined, Resolution in Parliament.
that the Earl of Kent should have place above the Earl of Arundell, and that
the now Earl of Warwick, above the then Earl Marshall, Places in Parliament.
and so they were both set personally in possession.

Patent.
In a patent of King R. 2. made to Thomas Duke of Gloucester, of Holdernes, and
Okeham, in the Testees the Earl of Warwicks father was set before the Earl
Marshalls father. Test Warwick before Marshall.


Pope.
Item, in a letter sent to the Pope by King R. 2. for the matter of provision,
Provisions.
the name and seal of the Earl of Warwick, was set before the Earl Marshall.

Earl of Arundell.
Item, though the Earl of Arundell be not of the blood royal, Blood royal.
nor ever bare the Arms of this land, yet he has had place in Parliament
always above the Ancestors of the Earl Marshall, without interruption.

Blood royal.
Item, he requires the Duke of Gloucester to call to his remembrance the
Parliament holden at Leicester, 2. H. 5. where notwithstanding the noble
service done by the Duke of Exeter, Guienne.

Arms Royal.

War.


then being Earl of Dorset, Earl of Dorset.
in the Duchy of Guienne, who was of the blood royal, and Uncle to the King,
and bare the royal Arms of England, and France, Precedence.
yet nevertheless the said Earl of Warwick had place above the said Marshall,
and the said Earl of Dorset.

Item, where the Lord Stafford that now is, is lineally descended from E. 3. by
royal whole blood, and not demi sanguinis, by his mother, the Countess of
Stafford, daughter of Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, yet the Earl of
Warwick has place above the Lord Stafford. Warwick preceding of the Lord
Stafford.

Blood Royal.




Item, it was declared that E. 1. had issue by his second wife, King E. 1.

Blood royal.


the French Kings sister, Thomas of Brotherton, and Edward the younger brother,
which Thomas the Lord Marshall is descended of, and of Edmond the Lady
Princess, and the Earls of Kent came of the younger, Arms difference^

Precedence.


and that their difference in Arms was further off then the Earl Marshalls,
yet they had place before the said Earl Marshall.

Item, it was also declared, that E. 1. had another wife named Ellinor, King E.
1:

Blood royal.


daughter to Alphonso King of Spain, by whom he had a daughter two years elder
then her brother E. 2. which daughter was wedded to the Earl of Hereford, Earl
of Hereford.
by whom she had two sons, and two daughters, the one named Earl of Hereford,
and the other Earl of Northampton; Earl of Northampton.
the elder daughter being wedded to Courtney afterward Earl of Devonshire,
Earl of Devonshire.

Precedence.


who by this means was lineally descended of the blood royal, and yet the
Earl of Warwick had his place in Parliament before him.

It was moved, that where commandment was before given, that the Earls should
both forbear to sit in the Parliament house, Earls not to sit in Parliament
till their Titles declared^
until the title of both parties were by their Council declared in writing;
Council.
there were then writings exhibited into the Court, declaring each others
titles.

Item, it was alleged for the said Earl of Warwick, Earl of Warwick.
that he ought to enjoy the possession of the place in Parliament, Possession.
till the said Earl Marshall had a Judgment for his right. Judgment.


Item, it was answered for the Earl Marshall, E. Marshalls answer.
that such possession had against Title of right, Possession against right.
which began but lately by commandment, ought not to be affirmed, nor put him
to his action, or out of possession, for lack of Judgment. Judgment.


Item, it was desired by Walter Beauchamp, for the Earl of Warwick, that
learned men might examine the matter, Examination by Learned Lawyers^
and if they should find the same otherwise over - ruled than the law would,
that the said commandment might be reformed, and that they might declare for
the Lord of Warwicks possession, Possession.
and suffer him to enjoy the same peaceably, seeing that all exceptions given
on the Earl Marshals part, may not hurt the possession of the Earl of Warwick.

The writings of both sides being showed, it was desired for the Earl Marshall,
Earl Marshalls proof.
that forasmuch as in his opinion he had brought sufficient proof, he might
have Judgemenr, Judgment praye^^
and that the Earl of War. might be excluded from claiming, or challenging the
said place; and that all matters declared for the Earl Marshall, might be
entered of record. Entry of record^


And for the better and more speedy determination of the said Controversy, the
said John Earl Marshall caused to be showed unto the Court of Parliament, Earl
Ma^shall.
that R. 2. by his Letters Patents dated the 21. year of his reign, created
Thomas then Earl of Nottingham and Marshall of England, Duke of Norfolk, Duke
of Norfolk created.

Duke of Norfolk.


giving him also for the better sustentation of the said Title, forty marks
yearly: Stipend of 40 Marks.
to hold both the said title, and stipend to him and ^is heirs males, which
said Thomas Duke had issue, Thomas and John, now Earl Marshall, which Thomas
died without issue, and so the said John claims to be Duke of Norfolk, as
heir unto his brother Thomas.

Petition.
The said Earl Marshall made humble petition to the King, and to the said Duke
of Gloucester, his beloved Uncle, and the rest of the Lords, that he might be
so reputed, and declared Duke in that Parliament; Dukedom of Norfolk claimed.
saving always the right of possession of him, and his heirs of his body
coming as Earls of Nor^olk, to his place in that high Court, above his said
Cousin the Earl of Warwick; desiring all that all other matters by him and his
Council notified, Council.
and declared, might be entered of record. Entry of record.


King, Lords spiritual, and temporal, and Commons, declare the Earl Marshall
to be Duke of Norfolk.
The King upon consideration of the said Letters Patents, and such other proofs
as the said Earl Marshall had made and declared, by the advice and consent of
the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons of the realm, etc. caused
it to be declared, and with one assent accorded; That the foresaid John Earl
Marshall, as son of the aforesaid Thomas, Duke and brother, and heir of the
said Thomas son of Thomas, by virtue of the said Letters Patents, and by
succession, should from thenceforth be held and reputed Duke of Norfolk, Duke
of Norfolk.
and should use and enjoy the style, title, name, and honor of the Duke of
Norfolk, according to the tenor of the aforesaid Letters Patents: which
declaration etc. accorded, the said Lord Chancellor by authority from the King,
openly delivered; whereupon the foresaid John, as Duke of Norfolk, immediately
did homage to the King; Homage.

Precedence.


which done, the King commanded the said Duke, to take his place amongst his
equals, which he did most thankfully.

The Parliament holden at Westminster the last of April, in the third year of
King Henry the Sixth.
King present in Parliament.
AT the beginning of the Parliament before, the King sitting in person in the
chair of Estate, in the painted Chamber, there being the Lords and Commons,
Painted Chamber.
the Bishop of Winchester Chancellor of England, Chancellor.

Causes of Parliament.


declared; that the Kings will was, that all Estates should enjoy their
liberties: Liberties enjoyment.
and for his Theme he took these words, Gloria, honor, and pax, omni operanti
bonum: the which he divided into three parts, viz. bonum honestum, as which
consisted in due obeisance of the Subject^: Subjects obedience.
bonum del^ctabile, as which stood in giving good Counsel: Good Counsel. Aid.
and bonum utile, which was by free and willing sustentation, or relieving the
Prince, and Commonwealth.

Luke, Gloria in excelsis Deo, and in terra pax, hominibus bona voluntas. Glory
is given to God by due obedience of the Subjects: Subjects obedience.
the Prince is honored by sound Counsel: Sound Counsel. Aid to the King.
the Subjects governed in peace, by relieving the Prince: wherein he affirms
that Princes ought to be obeyed, though they were evil, according to the saying
of Peter, obedite praepositis: for albeit they were not good, yet for that they
commanded many good things to be observed, they ought to be obeyed; Obedience.
and remembers, Sicut Princeps tenetur regere regaliter, sic plebs obedire.

Sound Counsel.
he allegeth, Sapient. 12. Salus ubi multa consilia; and therein showing, how
the Elephant had three properties; Elephant.
the one for that he wanted a gall; the second, ^or that he was inflexible, and
could not bow; the third, for that he was of a most sound and perfect memory;
the which properties, by application, he wished to be in all Counselors.
Counselors.
First, that wanting a gall, they should thereby be free from all malice,
Freedom from malice.
rancor, and envy; by being inflexible, Inflexible.
that they should worship no reward, Reward.
nor in Judgment respect any person; Respect of persons.
of a ripe memory, Memory.
that they by remembering perils past, might prevent dangers to come.

Aid to the King.
he proved that the same ought to be done with all readiness of mind,
considering that God by the young Prince, his chosen vessel, had not only
governed them in safety, but also given to them honorable victories, Victories.
and great conquests: Conquests.
all which ought to enforce them more willingly to offer, than the same should
readily be taken. Wherefore he wills the Commons by their assembling to
choose their Speaker, Commons choice of a Speaker.
and the next day to present him. Speaker presented.


England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

May, the Commons presented before the King, and Lords, Sr. Tho. Nanton knight,
Sr. Tho. Nanton Speaker.
to be their Speaker, whose excuse being refused, Excuse. Protestation.
he with his protestation was allowed.

John Earl Marshall against Richard Earl of War touching the higher place in
the Parliament house, Earl Marshall.

Earl of Warwick. Precedence.


both of which Earls were commanded, Both Earls suspended during the
controversy. Council learned heard.
not to come at the house, till the matters were fully heard, but that the
Council learned of either of them, should be heard what they could say
touching the same: And for that the Lords should be Judges of the same, Lords
Judges thereof.
the Duke of Gloucester being Protector, Protector.
and other the Bishops, Lords, and others of the lower house, swore upon the
Gospel, Oath.
that they would uprightly judge the case, Judgment without affection.
leaving all affection.

Earl Marshalls Title.
Roger Hunt, of his Council learned, Council allowed.
exhibited to the Lords a Pedigree, Pedigree.
showing, that the said Earl Marshall came of the blood royal, Blood royal.
and gave the Arms of England, Arms.
whereby he ought to be preferred.

Note, the said Pedigree proves the Earl Marshall to come of the blood royal,
from E. 1. It farther shows the said Earl to be allied in blood to the King,
from Thomas Earl of Lancaster. Earl of Lancaster.
It also affirms the said Earl to be allied in blood to the King, by the line
of the Earl of Arundell. Earl of Arundell.


Walter Beauchamp Knight, Sr. Walter Beauchamp.
being of the Council learned of the Earl of War. answers, Earl of
VVarwicks Council.
and by many authorities, shows; that Antiquity has had superiority above
the blood royal, and so enforced the title of the Earl of War. but chiefly he
relyeth upon the possession of the Earl of Warwick. His Title.

Antiquity.

Possession.

Pedigree.




Herein is to be noted, that the affirmations, answers, and replications of
both parties being very long, contain many good reasons, and sundry lines of
Noblemen very delectable to be read.

Judgment demanded.
in the end it was devised, and the said Earl Marshall for pacifying of the
same, required, that he might be restored to be Duke of Norfolk, Duke of
Norfolk restored.
according to the Creation of Thomas his father, as brother, and heir to Thomas
who died without issue, son of the said Thomas his father; the which for sundry
considerations worthy the sight, was granted.

May, the Duke of Gloucester by the Kings Letters Patents there read,
Parliament proroged.

Letters Patents.


proroged the Parliament from the same day, unto the Thursday then ensuing.

Lord Talbot bound in the Chancery by recognizance to keep the peace:
John Lord Talbot, with other Lords there named, were bound by recognizance in
the Chancery, that the said John should keep the peace toward Hugh
Wenlockward, that he should appear at the next Parliament. Appearance the next
Parliament.


Lords promise.
to the Bishop of Winchester, that they will not hinder, but further such
assurance as shall be made to the said Bishop by the King, Assurance for money
lent the King.
for money to him lent.

Subsidy ^f Wools.
The Commons by the assent of the Bishops, and Lords, grant to the King the
Subsidy of wools for three years; and Tonnage and Poundage for one year,
Tonnage and Poundage upon condition. Merchants Aliens.
upon condition, that Merchants Aliens should hardly be looked unto.

Scottish hostages according to one Article of league, Scottish Hostages.

Wardens of the Marches.


it is enacted, that the Wardens of the Marches shall not hereafter be
impeached for attempting any hostage for the other, but that upon their oaths
they be discharged. Oaths.
And further, that they may take two, or more hostages, for one, as of good
will, and no duty.

Gloucester, Combat inhibited. Duke of Gloucester, and Duke of Burgain.
and Duke of Burgaine, do in no case proceed, but, that the same by the Kings
Letters Patents, be committed to the old French King, the Kings mother, and to
the regent of France, and that the Duke of Burgain do deliver into indifferent
hands, the person of my Lord of Gloucester.

Winchester, Kings Council.
and other of the Kings Creditors, Assurances to Creditors of the King, made.
of all such debts as are due to them.

Kings Debts. Letters Pa^ents. Customs. Revenues.
to receive 20000 l. of the first money of the Kings Customs, or Revenues of
the Crown arising, the which are confirmed, for which also the Kings Jewels
are to him gaged. Kings Jewels gaged.


John Bishop of Ely in affidavit against John Baldward of Sutton, Bishop of Ely.

Affidavit.


and others, recovered 4000 Acres of Marish in Wisbich.

It is enacted, that the execution of the said recovery should stay unto a
certain time, Recovery.

Judgment respited.


and that before the same time, there should be a perambulation made between
the Shires of Lincoln, Perambulation of Shires.

Lincolnshire.


and Cambridge, Cambridge shire.
by which, if it fell out that any of the premises were within the County of
Lincoln, that then neither the said Bishop, nor any of the Tenants within the
County of Wisbich-hundred, Wisbech.
shall claim any common of pasture in any of the same found, Common.
and contrarily, that the said Baldward, and other Tenants of Sutton, should
claim no common in any of the premises found to be within the County of
Cambridge.

And note, that certain Lords there named, were seized of the Manor of Sutton
in use, by the Feoffement of H. 5. Feoffees in trust to the King.


H. 5. granted unto the executors, Kings Executors.
certain of the Kings Revenues which they had in use, by the feoffement of 9000
marks, Feoffement to uses.
the which the King by his Letters Patents, and authority of Parliament,
confirms. Grant confirmed.


John Cornwall Knight, Sr. John Cornwall is Prisoner of War.
father in law to the Earl of Huntington, Earl of Huntington.
then Prisoner to the Earl of Vandosme in France, having by assignation, the
Wardenship of the body, Wardship.
and lands of John Arundell, John Arundell.
the son and heir of John Arundell of Arundell Knight, except to the King 500
marks, prays the same yearly rent toward the payment of 1800 marks,
disbursed to the Earl Vandosme, toward the ransom of the said Earl of
Huntington, Ransom.
the which is granted.

At the petition of the said Earl of Huntington, Petition.

Huntington.


the Lord of Gancourt and Totovill, French Prisoners, French Prisoners of War.
are delivered to the said Sr. John Cornwall for 5000 marks disbursed for part
of the said Earls ransom. Ransom.


de Totevill, and Gancourt the French prisoners aforesaid. French Prisoner.


Petition.
At the petition of Theobald Gorges, Theobald Gorges.
the son of Thomas Gorges, who being in ward to the King for the fourth part of
the Manor of Sturmists Marshall in the County of Dorset, Ward.
holden of the King in Chief, by Knights service; It is granted, that he shall
have his livery, Livery.
notwithstanding, that by his office he was within age, the which office he did
disprove by means. Office disproved.


Petition.
At the petition of Anne late the wife of Edmund Earl of March and Ulster, It is
enacted, that the said Anne shall have livery of her dower, Dower.
upon finding of any offices after the death of the said Earl, Office.
upon her oath not to marry. Oath not to marry.


Exeter, Duke of Exeter.

Ward.


Thomas by name, having the custody of the body, and lands of John, son and
heir of William Lord Roos of Hamalake, Lord Roos.
of whose receipts the King discharges him.

Ellinor de Wells, during her life, 50 marks out of the Exchequer, Annuity.

Exchequer.


granted by King R. 2.

John Lord Scroop of Masham is restored to all such hereditaments as he can
prove to be intailed to Henry late Lord le Scroop, Lord Scroop.

Restitution.

Tail.


saving all fee simple lands to the King.

William Fitzhugh Knight, Petition.

Lord Fitzhugh.


son and heir of Henry Lord Fitzhugh, it is enacted, that the Escheators of
York do by a day return the offices found after the death of the said Lord,
Escheators of York.

Office returned.


and if none be found, that then he surcease to take the same, and that certain
there named, do by Commission take and return the said offices. Office by
Commissioners.


Gloucester 20000 marks in certain years to be repayed, Duke of Gloucester.
Monyes lent by the King.
it is enacted, that the Lords of the Council shall take the sureties for the
said payment. Security for it taken by the Council.


Petitions.
Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Merchants.

Staple.

Custom. Goods perished and lost.


THat such Merchants of the Staple as pay Custom, and Subsedie for any their
ware, and that the same ware do perish, may ship as much freely.

Resp.
Upon due proof of such loss, the Council shall have power to end the same.
Council.


Merchants. Staple.
having their Sarplers, Sarploss. Weights.
and packets, duly weighed, be not therefore by any suggestions after
impeached.

The King will be advised.

Resp.

Parsons.


That such Parsons, or Vicars, Vicars.
as do not the service, Service and Sacraments. Chapels of ease.
and administer not the Sacraments in Chapels of ease, to their Cures annexed,
may be enquired, and punished.

Resp.
There is sufficient remedy provided heretofore.

Parsons. Vicars.
and Vicars, and others, having Cures, and not resident thereupon,
Non-residence.
may forfeit their Benefices, Forfeiture.
the one half to the King, and the other half to the Patron.

The King has charged the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, Resp.

Arch bishops.


to provide remedy therein.

Impeachment. Accusation. Good fame. Sanctuaries. Sureties.
unless suretyes be bound that proof be thereof made.

The Statutes therefore made, shall be observed. Resp.


Northumberland prayen, Northumberland.
that the extortions of the Sheriffs by yearly leavying certain sums of money
called head pence, Sheriffs extortions. Head pence.
amounting to 51 l. may be utterly abolished.

The same is committed to the Kings Council. Resp.

Kings Council.




Britains in the time of truce, may have Letters of Mart. Merchants robbed.
Letters of Mart.


As in next before. Resp.


Victuals. Soldiers quartering.


The grieved upon complaint, Resp.
shall be heard.

Masons.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Ley, River of Ley.
c. 5. agrees with the record.

Sheep transported.
cap. 2. agrees with the record in effect, but not in form.

That all men imprisoned for treason, Imprisonment.




felony, Felony.
or Lollardy, Lollardy.
may come to their answers speedily. Speedy trial.


The Statutes before made, shall be observed.

That the Treasurers of the Chamber of H. 4. and H. 5. who only are accomptable
to the King, Resp.
Treasurers. Accounts. Exchequer. Due debts. Tallye.
and not in the Exchequer, may pay

The King will be advised.

The print touching the passage over of butter and cheese, Resp.
Butter and Cheese.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Justices of Peace. Sewers.
and touching the waters.



Resp.
Concealment of Customs.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Feoffees. Tail.
may enjoy the same against the King.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Anno Quarto Henrici Sexti. Writs of Summons.
Rex, etc. Charis. Avunc. suo Johan. Duci Bedfordiae, etc. apud Leceist. 18.
die Febr. Test apud Westminster. septimo die Ianuar.
HUmf. Duci Gloucestriae. Tho. Duci Oxon. Johanni Duci Norfolk. Hen. Com.
Northumb. Humfrido Com. Stafford. Jacobo de Berckley Chlr. Magistro Tho. de la
War. VVillielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie Chlr. Johanni de Wells Chlr. Johanni
Baroni de Graystock Chlr. Reginal. Gray de Ruthine Chlr. Johanni Latimer Chlr.
Roberto de Poynings Chlr. VVillielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland
Chlr. VVillielmo Harrington Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho Cromwell
Chlr. Lodovico Robessart Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Johanni le Scroop de
Masham Chlr. VVillielmo Lovell de Fishmorsh Chlr. Willielmo la Zouch de
Harringworth. Waltero Hungerford. Johanni Tibetot Chlr. Reginaldo le War Chlr.
Tho. de Morle Chlr.
Willielmo Cheyney Capitali Justiciario.

Writs of Summons.
Rex, Charissimo Avunculo suo Iohanni Duci Bedfordiae, etc. apud Lecester decimo
Octavo die Februarii. Test apud Westminster. Septimo die Ianuarii.
HUumf. Duci Gloucest. Thom. Duci Exoniae. Joh. Duci Norfolk. Humfrido Com.
Stafford. Jacobo de Berckley Chlr. Magistro Tho. de la War. Willielmo de
Ferrariis de Grobie Chlr. Johanni de Wells Chlr. Johanni Baroni de Graystock
Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin^ Chlr. Johanni Latimer Chlr. Roberto Poynings
Chlr. VVillo. Botreaux Chlr. Johan. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. Willielmo Clinton
Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Johanni Gray de Codonore Chlr. Radulpho Cromwell
Chlr. Lodovico Robesart Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Johanni le Scroop de Masham
Chlr. VVillielmo Lovell Chlr. VVillielmo la Zouch de Harringworth. Johanni
Tibetott Chlr. VValtero Hungerford Chlr. Johanni Tiptoft Chlr.
No Lord Warden.

The Parliament holden at Leicester the eighteenth day of February, in the
fourth year of King Henry the Sixth.
King.
sitting in person in the great Hall of the Castle of Leicester, the Lords and
Commons then being present there, the Bishop of Winchester, Chancellor of
England, Chancellor.
declared, that the Kings will was, that all Estates should enjoy their
liberties. Liberties of all Estates to be enjoyed.


Paul, Sic facite ut salvi sitis; the which he divided into three parts. The
first to God, protecting the faith of the Church, Faith of the Church.
against the invasions of the Heretics, Heretics. Lollards.
and Lollards; the second by imparting some Counsel; Counsel. Subsedy.
the third by granting liberal subsedies.

viz. Glory to God by protecting his faith; Glory to God.
Honor to the King by receiving sound Counsel; Honor to the King. Sound
Counsel.
and Peace to the Subjects by liberal granting. Peace.
Wherefore he willed every estate to labor herein, and the Commons to choose,
and the next day to present their Speaker. Speaker elected.

Presented.




England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

John Duke of Bedford his Commissioner to prorogue, Commissioners to prorogue
and dissolve the Parliament.
and dissolve the Parliament.

February, the Commons presented before the King, Richard Vernon Knight to be
their Speaker, Sr. Richard Vernon Speaker.
who with the common protestation was allowed. Protestation.


Commons Decree. Dissension between the Nobles.
the Duke of Bedford, and other Bishops, and Lords, made among themselves a
solemn decree, that every of them should without affection, hear, and end the
dissension between the Duke of Gloucester, Dissension to be ended.
and the Bishop of Winchester, so as neither of them should be encouraged to
break the peace. Breach of Peace.
To which order, after every of the Lords were sworn, Lords sworn by order from
the Commons. Message to the Commons.
they sent the Copy thereof to the Commons.

May it was enacted, that a proclamation should be made in Leicester,
Proclamation.
that all such as had any Annuity, Annuity and office from the King.
fee, or office of the kings grant, or confirmation, and were in the Town
aforesaid, should there appear before the King, Appearance.

King and Council.


and his Council, on Wednesday ensuing, to abide further direction.

Gloucester, Duke of Gloucester.
and the Bishop of Winchester, Bishop of Winchester.
by their formal Instruments, is compromitted to certain Bishops, Dissension
comprimised by the Lords.
and Lords, who by like formality make a full order between them, viz. that the
Bishop should first submit himself to the King, which he did; whereupon the
Duke of Bedford in open Parliament by the Kings commandment, pronounced the
said Bishop excused, Bishop excused from Treason suggested.
as well of that it was said that the said Bishop had procured one to have
murdered the King, being Prince, Princes death.
as the murderer confessed, who was therefore drowned by the Earl of Arundell,
as also of that it was said that the said Bishop should counsel, and have
procured H. 5. being Prince, Kings Deposing.
to have deprived H. 4. his Father.

Award.
that the said Bishop should acknowledge to the said Duke of Gloucester an
offense, and by his submission to pray his favor, Submission.
and that the Duke should promise the same; Reconciliation.
and that in token thereof, either of them should take the other by the hand,
which was done.

Discharge from the Great Seal.
The thirteenth day of March, the Bishop of Winchester for sundry causes,
prays to be discharged of the great seal, whereof by common consent he was
discharged.

Treasurer discharged.
The Bishop of Bath, Treasurer of England, was of his office also discharged.

March, John Bishop of Bath and Wells, late Treasurer of England, by a Writ of
the privy seal delivered to the Duke of Bedford the Kings great seal of gold in
a leather bagg, Privy Seal.

Great Seal.

Bishop of Bath.


the which the Duke took, and showed openly, and so sealed with his own seal,
and after delivered the same to John Bishop of London, Chancellor of England.
Chancellor.


Bishop of Durham.
The Bishop of Durham, by virtue of a privy seal to him directed, delivered the
last Will and Testament, Kings last Will and Codicell.
with a Codicell thereto annexed, of H. 5. (which was sealed with the great,
and privy seals, and the privy signet) to the Lords of the privy Council,
Lords of Privy Council.
who delivered the same over safely to be kept, to Mr. William Alenwick keeper
of the privy seal. Keeper of the Privy Seal.


Lords of the Council.
It is enacted, that the Lords of the Council shall have full power to bind the
King, King bound by them to satisfy Creditors.
his heirs, and successors, to his Creditors by one assurance for the sum of
40000 l.

Huntington, the King by common consent, releaseth to Jews of Burbon Earl of
Vandesme, Petition. Earl of Vandesme. Ransom released.
all the arrearages of his ransom, being taken at Agincourt field.

Bedford, who had the keeping of the Castle at Barwick, Keeper of Barwick
Castle. Fee.
to him, and his heirs males, with the fee of 500 marks, has license by common
consent, to appoint a Deputy there under him, Deputy. Kings pleasure.
during his life, at the Kings pleasure.

Kings feoffees.
It is enacted, that any of the feoffees of H. 5. may take the homage of fealty
of any tenants holding of them. Homage. Fealty.


Kings Council.
It is enacted, that the Kings Council by authority of Parliament, shall have
power to end all such bills as are not ended by Parliament. Bills ended by them
out of Parliament.


Tonnage and Poundage. Condition.
It is decreed, by Common assent of the Lords, that the late subsedy of Tonnage
and Poundage granted to the King, ought simply to be paid, notwithstanding any
condition.

Lord Chancellor.
The twentieth day of March, before the Lords and Commons, the Bishop of London,
Chancellor of England, by the Kings Commissaries commandment, Commission.
prorogued the Parliament, Parliament prorogued.
from the same day, unto the Monday next after the feast of St. George, at
Leicester aforesaid.

June, the Commons by assent of the Bishops, and Lords, granted to the King the
like subsedy of VVools, Subsedy.
etc. Tonnage and Poundage for two years, Tonnage. Poundage granted.
as in etc.

Trinity in York, Prior of St. Trinity.
being a Cell of the Abbey of Meremaster in France, should be Denizens.
Denizens.


Thomas Cornish of Uxbridge in the County of Middlesex, a pardon for stealing
of Muttons. Pardon for sheep-stealing.


Hauns, Merchants Hauns.
the King according to their liberties, Liberties.
appoints to them one of the Aldermen of London by name, Alderman of London
Judge.
to be a Judge between party and party, of the same Company of the Hauns in all
suits, and that within one month after the death, or leaving over of any such
Alderman, there be appointed to them one other Alderman to supply the same.

Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
Merchants. Subsedies. Customs.

Wools lost.


and could prove before the Council that the same, Council.
or any part thereof were perished, that then he should shipp so much without
Custom.

Presentation.
Collation, or induction to any Alien, of any Benefice, Benefices.

Alien.


or Ecclesiastical dignity, on pain of the praemunire. Praemunire.


The King will be advised. Resp.


An. 3. H. 6. tit. 39.

Patron. Presentation. Non-residence.


The Bishops have promised to take order therein, Resp.

Bishops.




Bribery. Sheriffs.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Joan, Aliens banished.

Queen.


may depart out of the realm.

The Statutes therefore made, shall be observed. Resp.


England for the time being, Chancellor.
may for reasonable fines, grant Licenses to the Kings Tenants (holding in
Chief) to alien their lands, License. Alienation.
and to the Kings widows, Kings widows.

Marriage.


to marry their selves according to their ancient Custom. Ancient Custom.


The King will be advised. Resp.


Clarks misprision.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Knights of Parli^ment^
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Victuals transportation.
The print touching transporting of victuals, cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Assize.
and protections, Protections.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Anno Sexto Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Charissimo Avunculo suo Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, salt. apud Westminster
Quindena Michaelis. Test Rege apud Westminster. quinto die Iulii.
IOhanni Duci Bedfordiae. Hen. Com. Northumber. Johanni Com. Huntington. Humf.
Com. Stafford. Ricardo Com. War. Jacobo de Berckley Chlr. Magistro Tho. de la
War. VVillielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine Chlr.
Johanni de Wells Chlr. Johanni Baroni de Graystock Chlr. Johanni Latimer Chlr.
Roberto Poynings Chlr. VVillielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr.
Willielmo de Harrington Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho Cromwell Chlr.
Lodovico Robesart Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Johanni le Scroop de Masham Chlr.
VVillielm. Lovell de Fishmerch Chlr. Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth.
Waltero Hungerford Chlr. Johanni Tibitott Chlr. Reginaldo le War. Chlr. Tho.
de Morley Chlr.
Willielmo Cheyney Capipitali Justiciario.

Writs of Summons.
Rex, Charissimo Avunculo suo Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, etc. apud Westminster.
Quindena Michaelis. Test Rege apud Westminster. decimo tertio die Iulii.
IOhanni Duci Norfolciae. Hen. Com. Northumb. Johanni Com. Huntington. Humfrido
Com. Stafford. Ricardo Com. Sarum. Joh. Com. Oxoniae. Radulpho Com.
Westmerland. Ricardo Com. War. Jacobo de Berckley Chlr. Willielmo de
Ferrariis de Grobie Chlr. Johanni de Wells Chlr. Johanni Baroni de Graystock
Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine Chlr. Johanni Latimer Chlr. Roberto Poynings
Chlr. Willielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho: Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. VVillielmo de
Harrington Chlr. Jacobo Audley Chlr. Radulpho Cromwell Chlr. Lodovico Robesart
Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Johanni Scroop de Masham Chlr. VVillielmo Lovell de
Fishmersh Chlr. Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth Chlr. VValtero Hungerford
Chlr. Johanni Tibitott Chlr. Reginaldo la War. Chlr. Radulpho Morley Chlr.
Johanni Arundell de Arundell Chlr. Johanni Gray de Codonore Chlr. Tho. Roos de
Hamelake Chlr. Waltero Fitz-walter Chlr. Willielmo Fitzhugh Chlr.
The Parliament holden at Westminster in the Quindene of St. Michael, in the
Sixth year of Henry the Sixth.
Michael, being the thirteenth day of October, before the King, King.
sitting in the Chamber de pinct, Painted Chamber.
the Lords and Commons being present, John Arch Bishop of York being Chancellor
of England, Chancellor.
declared the cause of the Parliament, Causes of the Parliament.
taking for his Theme, Machab. 2. cap. 4. Sine providentia regali impossible
est pacem regibus dare: wherein he noted two points, the one the duty of the
Prince toward the Subjects, Kings duty.
the other the duty of the Subjects toward the Prince. Subjects duty.


viz. That the Subjects should be kept from foreign Invasion, Foreign Invasion.
that Peace might be kept within the realm, Peace kept.
and that Justice should be indifferently ministered. Justice indifferently
administered.
And that three things belonged to the Subjects, viz. First, largely to relieve
the Prince in cases of defense; Princes relief.

Defense.


In peace readily to obey all Magistrates; Obedience.
And humbly to submit himself to the laws. Submission to Laws.


Liberties enjoyed.
And for expedition herein, Expedition.
he willed the Commons to make choice and presentation of their Speaker the
next day to the King accordingly. Speakers choice and presentation.


England; Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

October, the Commons presented before the King and Lords, John Tirrill Esquire to
be their Speaker, John Tirrill.

Speaker presented.


whose excuse made, Excuse.
and not allowed, he with the common protestation was liked. Protestation.


Chancellor.
The Chancellor, by the appointment of the Duke of Gloucester, to whom the Kings
Letters Patents were made for proroguing the Parliament, Patent.
did the same prorogue from the eighth day of December. until the Quindene of St.
Hillary then ensuing. Parliament Prorogued.


Kings Council.
The like power is given to the Kings Council for 24000 l. as in 4 H. 6. tit. 17.

Tonnage and Poundage granted.

Subsidy.


of every Parish Church within the realm 6 s. 8 d. for every twenty Nobles in
value, and 6 s. 8 d. of every person that holds immediately by a Knights fee,
or according to the rate.

Henry Archishop of Canterbury the Letters Patents made by King H. 5. to the
said Archbishop, Archbishop of Cant. Letters Patents confirmed.
of three acres of land, within the Town of Higham Ferres, parcel of the Duchy
of Lancaster, erected into a Chauntry by the said Archbishop, Chauntry.
and of the Priory of Moresey an Alien, Prior Alien.
being parcel of the Abbey of St. Andreon in Normandy.

Thomas de Roos, Patents.

Lord Roos.


son and heir to John late Lord de Roos, an especial livery of all his
hereditaments. Special Livery.


Patents.

Release.


grants that the Duke of Gloucester, and Earl Thomas of Salisbury, and their
heirs and executors, should be discharged of certain Jewels which King H. 5.
laid to them in gage, Kings Jewels gaged.
and of all Accounts due to the King. Account.


John Multon, and Henry Heart, Executors of the last Will and Testament of John
Harris of Cambridge, Executors.
prayen remedy against one John Colls, their Executor, for misusing himself:
the which matter is committed to the Chancellor to be ended. Chancellor.


Canterbury, Commons.

Pope. Rome.

Archbish. purgation.


who was cited to Rome, as one that had wrought against the Pope in this realm.

John Merbury Esquire 40 Marks out of the profits of the County of Gloucester
during his life, Patents.

Annuity.


in consideration that the said John had so much out of the Manor of Isleworth
in Midd. given to the Nuns of Sion. Nuns of Sion.


Petition.
to whom King H. 4. by Debentaries did owe, etc. It is enacted, that the said
parties should be paid at the hands of the Executors of H. 4. Kings debts paid.

Kings Executors.




H. the fifths household, by especial name, require to have pardons of all debts
due by them to the said H. 5. the which is granted, Pardon of Debts to H. 5.
his servants.
and confirmed.

David ap Thomas of Cardegan in Southwales Esquire by his Petition is made a
Denizen. Petition.

Wales. Denizen.




John Sutton Knight, has the Kings Letters Patents of protection for one year.
Protection.


Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, Protector and Defender of the Realm, Protectors
power.
in full Parliament affirmed, that he would not sit in the Parliament house,
Protector refuses to sit in Parliament.
before he understood what the power of the Protector was, for as much as men
speak diversely thereof.

Council and Lords answer.
and Lords, the answer in the beginning it was declared unto the same Duke,
that he ought not to have been Protector, Protector.
notwithstanding to satisfy his desire, it was granted, that he should be
Protector, and have further power as in Anno 1 H. 6. ( tit. 24, 25.)

Protectors power and duty.
imports only a personal duty of attendance to the actual defense of the
realm against foreign enemies, Realms defense against Enemies and Rebels.
and inward rebels, and not any especial government, as properly belongs to
Tutors, Tutors.
Leiutenants, Leiutenants.
Governors, Governors.
or Regents; Regents.
for if they had otherwise meant, they then would have expressed more, whereby
in Council, as Principal Counselor he had pre-eminence; Principal Counselor,
but in Parliament he had no other place, Protectors place in Parliament.
than as the Duke of Gloucester: so as they wished him now to supply his place
in Parliament, and to be content with the power aforesaid, for to other they
would not grant.



Sion, Abbess and Nuns of Sion.
for that the erection was to have the same Corporation as well by Canons as by
Nuns, Corporation.
whereto Pope Martin the 5. would not agree, Pope Martin.
that there should be two Capacities in one foundation, whereto the Canons were
exempted in title, Canons.
but not in deed: so as they should serve securely.

England without the especial license and assent of the King, Marriage Contract
with any Queen of England, prohibited without the Kings special License.
on pain to lose all his goods and lands.

The Bishops and Clergy agree to this Bill, Forfeiture.

Bishops conditional assent to a Bill.


as far forth as the same swarveth not from the Law of God, Law of God.
and of the Church, and so as the same imports no deadly sin.

Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
Exigents.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Mayor of the Staple Pleas.
That the Mayor and Officers of the Staple, may in all pleas before them proceed
to the end, without any removing of the same^ according to the Law of
Merchants, Law of Merchants.
albeit the same be against the Common Laws. Common Law.


Resp.
The King will be advised.

Array, Assize.

Variance.


The print touching the arrayes in Assize, cap. 2. agrees with the record,
only in the record is 8. days, where the print is but 6.

Merchants.
That the Statutes made touching Merchants, Anno 5 H. 4. cap. 7, 9. may be
observed, having thereto this adjunct, that the Officer do make fine, Fine and
Ransom.
and ransom at the Kings pleasure.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

H. 6. tit. 34.

Resp.

Chancellor.

Licenses.


The Chancellor shall grant such licenses as have been used, until the King be
otherwise minded.

License of Alienations.
By the motion it appeared, that the Kings Tenants could not ordinarily have
granted a license of Alienation, unless he first showed to the Council
wherefore the same was made.

Wales called a Rayth. Wales. Trials.


The King, and Lords Merchers will take order therein. Resp.

Lords Merchers.




Capias and Exigents against the giver, Justices of Peace.

Capias. Exigent.


and wearer of liveries. Liveries.


The Statute therefore made shall be observed.

Mayor of London.
and Keeper of London for the time being, may have the execution of the Statute
of Sewers touching the River of Thames. Resp.
Sewers. Thames.


Let them show the bounds of their Liberty, and they shall be answered. Resp.


Laborers.
The print touching Laborers, cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Anno 7 H. 5. cap. 1. may continue for 6. years, Statutes continued.
with this adjunct, that the outlawed in the said County of Lancaster may enjoy
any benefit of suit in any other place, Outlary.

Lancaster.


other than in the said County, and that they forfeit no goods by such outlawry
out of the said County.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Election of Knights.
The print touching the election of Knights of the Shire, cap. 4. agrees with
the record.

H. 5. of no great force. Pardon.


Anno 3 H. 6. tit. 44. touching the river of Ley may be observed, River of Ley.
with this adjunct, that all Bailiffs and other Officers within the precinct of
the same, Bailiffs.
do attend upon the Justices, Justices.
and that the Justices for every of their Sessions may have like fees as
Justices of peace have. Fees.


Resp.
The Statutes therefore made shall be observed.

Staple.
and that no licenses be granted. Licenses.


Drags.
and Floats upon the river of Severn, Floats.

Severn.


without any thing paying therefore.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Sewers.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

The print touching the shipping of Merchants, Shipping.




cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Lords of Cauncel.

Petitions ended by them.


by the advice of the Justices. Justices advice.


Whereof sundry bills, Bills and Petitions answered out of Parliament.
and petitions the twenty fifth day of June, were by certain of the Lords there
named, in the Starr-chamber answered, Starchamber.
and endorsed.

Anno Octavo Henrici Sexti. The Parliament holden at Westminster the day next
after the Feast of St. Matthew, in the Eighth year of King Henry the Sixth.
Matthew, the twentieth day of September, before the king himself then sitting
in the Chair of Estate in the Chamber de pinct. the Lords, King.
Painted Chamber.
and Commons being there present, John Archbishop of York, and Chancellor of
England, Chancellor.
declared learnedly the cause of the same Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
taking for his Theme, Luke 11. Quomodo stabit regnum, etc.

England, he divided into two parts, the one by way of admiration, the other by
way of question. He noted causes three, viz. want of Faith, Faith,
the which was the root of all vice, Eo quod sine side impossible est placere
Deo; the second, the want of due Fear, Fear.
being the author of every good mind, Nam qui nihil timet, negliget; the third
for want of upright Justice, Justice.

Peace.


being the pillar of every Kingdom, namely, ex Iustitia sequitur pax, and ex
pace rerum abundantia maxim procreatur.

Infidelity.

Errors.

Heresy.


Obstinacy instead of fear, Obstinacy, Oppression.
and Oppression in place of Justice. Through Infidelity he showed how Iean and
the late Kingdom of Bohemia were destroyed. Bohemia.
Fear he divided into two parts, the one spiritual, and virtuous, as fearing
God, Fear of God.
and man for God; the other carnal, Carnal fear.
and vicious, as whereby murmr, and rebellion spring, which procured
destruction, such as happened to Chore, Dathan, and Abiram. Numb. 16. He also
proves, that for oppression ensued transferring of kingdoms, Oppression
translates Kingdoms.
according to Eccles. 10. regnum alienum in regnum transfertur propter
in^us^icias, and injurias.

True Faith.
due Fear, Due Fear.
and upright Justice might be restored, Upright Justice.

Kings duty.


there was then no doubt but that this kingdom should flourish. He further
shows, that as the Prince was bound to defend the Subjects, Subjects Duty.

Aids to the King.


and to keep peace, so ought the Subjects to minister to the Prince liberally
of their goods, to the atchieving of the same, to which end the same Parliament
was called, wherefore he willed the Commons to choose, and to present their
Speaker the next day unto the King. Speakers choice and presentation.


England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Committee of Commons.
declared unto the Lords, how they had chosen one William Allington Esquire to
be their Speaker, William Allington Speaker.
and required respite for presenting of him until the Monday following, His
presentation respited.
which was granted.

September the Commons presented before the king, Speaker presented.
and Lords, the aforesaid William, whose excuse being refused, Excuse.
he with the common protestation was allowed. Protestation.


December, the Commons by the assent of the Bishops and Lords, granted to the
King one whole Desme, Desme and Quindesm granted.
and one fifteen to be levied of the laity.

Burbon touching his ransom. King and Council.

Duke of Burbon his ransom.




November in this present year, in the day of Coronation, Kings Coronation.
had taken upon him the protection, Kings Protection of the Realm.
and defense of this realm; It seems good to the Bishops, and Lords, upon
good advise, that the name, The Name and Power of the Protector and Defender
abrogated.
and power of Protector, and Defendor, granted to the Dukes of Bedford, and
Gloucester, should from the same day of Coronation, utterly cease, and that
they the said Dukes should have the name of principal Counselors, Kings
principal Counselor.
any order to the contrary notwithstanding: the which name of Protector and
Defender, as touching his own person, the Duke of Bedford in full Parliament
did release, Duke of Bedford releaseth his Title of Protector.
so always as the same should not hurt the title of Duke of Bedford.

Bishop of Winchester made a Cardinal
The twenty ninth day of December, the Commons at the Contemplation of Henry
Bishop of Winchester, and new made Cardinal, granted one other Desme, Disme
and Quindisme granted.
and fifteen to be levied of the laity.

Note the title of the said Cardinal is as follows.

Reverendissimus in Christo Pater and Dominus, Henricus permissione divina,
titl. Sancti Eusebii Presbyterii Cardinalis de Anglia nuncupatus. The Cardinals
Title.


Tonnage and Poundage granted.
and Poundage, to continue unto the next Parliament.

Chancellor.
declares, how that the King by the assent of the Bishops, and Lords, had
prorogued the same Parliament, Parliament prorogued.
from the said twentieth day of December, unto the Monday next after the feast
of St. Hillary then ensuing, at Westminster aforesaid.

No Cardinal to be of the Kings Council but at his pleasure.
but at his own pleasure, the Bishops and Lords assented, that humble request
should be made to the said Cardinal, Cardinal requested to be of the Kings
Council.
to vouchsafe to be made of the Council, with this protestation, Cardinals
Protestation.
that the said Cardinal should absent himself in all affairs, and Councills
of the King, wherein the Pope, Pope. See of Rome.
or See of Rome was touched upon; which request ^o made, the Cardinal took
upon him the same in form aforesaid.

Talbot being prisoner in France, Lord Talbots ransom.
as toward his importable ransom, Sir William Bircham Knight, a French
Prisoner, Prisoners of War.
if that the same Sr. William were not to be impeached for the death of the
Duke of Burgundy. Impeachment.


And it is to be noted, that the said Lord Talbot served King H. 5. in France
by the space of two years valiantly, without any wages. Service of the King
without wages.


Orleance, Duke of Orleans. Prisoner of War.
the Kings Cosen, then in the Keeping of Sr. Thomas Chamberworth Knight, should
be delivered to Sr. John Cornwall Knight, by him safely to be kept. Safe
custody.


Burbon should be committed to Sr. Thomas Chamberworth Knight. Duke of Burbon.
Prisoner of war.


Marmaduke Lumley Bishop elect of Carlite. Bishop of Carlisle. Election.


John Clement Esquire, Lord and Tenants variances.
and the Tenants and Commons of the County of Cardigan, Cardigan.
and Morgan Clifford, against the Abbot of Stanford, Abbot of Stanford.
is committed to certain Lords there named.

Council.

Assurances to pay debts.




It is enacted, that the Treasurer, and Victualler of Callice shall receive a
certain quantity of Staple ware, Callice.

Staple.




and other revenues within the same Town, to the payment of soldiers there,
Soldiers wages.
and of other reparations. Reparations.


February being the last day of the Parliament the Commons by the assent of the
Bishops, and Lords, granted to the King for two years, the like subsedy of
wools as before. Subsidy of Wol^ granted.


Disms and Quindisms payment shortened.


Articles touching the Kings Council established.
Certain Articles, to the number of 18, touching the Orders of the Kings
Council, are established by the King, Bishops, and Lords.

Amongst which I note, that the Dukes of Bedford, and Gloucester, were in
Council but as any two other of the Council.

Officers.
And this amongst other good orders I see, that the 11th Article of the same
wills to all Offices, and Benefices of the Kings gift, such as had served him
and his Father should first be preferred thereunto. Old Servants of the King
preferred.
A goodly president to encourage Officers to serve faithfully and painfully,
when that their hoping be not turned to haltering.

The Councils promise to perform the Articles.
All which said Articles, every of the Lords of the Council, whose names are
there contained, promised faithfully to perform.

Petitions.
Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Revocation.
THe King revoketh a grant made to Sir John St. John Mayor of Bordeaux, Bordeaux.
and to the Jurats of the same, touching a certain imposition to be raised of
Merchants coming thither. Imposition.


Riots.
The print touching riots done in the Forest of Deane, Forest of Deane.
cap. 27. agrees with the record.

Windsor Chapel.
The King by his Letters Patents confirmed by Parliament grants that the
keeper of his free Chapel of St. George within the Castle of Windsor, shall be
from thenceforth incorporared by the name of Keeper, Corporation.
or Dean of the said free Chapel. Dean of the Free-Chapel of Winsor.


Convocation.

Privilege.


The print touching the privilege of the Convocation-house, cap. 1. agrees with
the record.

Denmark, Denmark.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Sewers.
Cap. 3. agrees with the record in effect, but not in form.

Liveries.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Weights.
The print touching weights, etc. cap. 5. agrees not fully with the record,
being 26 E. 3. where the print is 25.

Burning of Houses. Treason.
The print touching burning of houses to be Treason, cap. 6. agrees with the
record.

Out of the Realm.
That the Statutes made that all Appeals of things done out of the realm should
be tried before the Constable, Appeals. Trial.

Constable. Marshall.


and Marshal of England, and all done within the realm to be tried according to
the Laws of the realm may be kept. Laws of the Realm.


The Statutes therefore made shall be kept. Resp.


Election of Knights.
cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Sheriffs. Process.
and such other Officers be not impeached by process out of the Exchequer for
things not levyable. Exchequer.


The Kings Council shall have power to determine the same. Resp.

Kings Council.




Burgesses, Writs for Wages. Sheriffs.


The King will be advised. Resp.


Justices of Peace. Piracies.


The King will be advised. Resp.


H. 5. extend not to the parts of Scotland. Breakers of Truces. Scotland.


The declarations made upon those petitions, Resp.
Anno 4 H. 5. shall be observed.

Anno 6 H. 6. tit. 42.

Soldiers. Victuals.

Free Quarter.




The King will be advised. Resp.


Contribution. Knights wages.
except Bishops, Lords, and Towns, who send Burgesses. Burgesses.


The King will be advised. Resp.


Laborers.
cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Lambs wool.
and scalding, but only Poundage. Subsidy. Poundage.


The King will be advised. Resp.


The print touching forcible entries into any hereditaments, Forcible entries.




etc. cap. 9. agrees with the record. Besides that the Statute by the record
does not fully agree with the print.

Process. Indictments. Appeals.
cap. 10. does not fully agree with the record.

The print touching taking of Apprentices in London, Apprentices.

London.


cap. 11. agrees with the record.

Errors assigned.
cap. 12. agrees with the record.

Protections.
cap. 13. agrees with the record.

The print touching Felons flying into secret places, Felons.




cap. 14. agrees with the record.

Amendment of Records.
cap. 15. agrees with the record.

Escheators.
cap. 16. agrees with the record.

Privilege of Parl.
One William Lake, servant to William Mildred a Burgess for London, A Burgesses
servant delivered out of execution.
being committed to the Fleet upon an execution of debt, was delivered by the
privilege of the Commons house, Commos House.
and authority given to the Chancellor to appoint certain by Commission to
apprehend him after the end of the Parliament. Chancellor.

Commission.

Re-execu^^on.




Wherein is to be noted, that there is no cause to arrest any such man, but for
Treason, No Arrest but for Treason, Felony, Peace.
Felony, or the Peace.

A motion answered before in tit. 37.

Shipping. Staple.
cap. 17th. agrees with the record.

Staple. Prices.
and the Mint at Callice, Mint. Callice.
cap. 18. agrees with the record.

Merchandise.
cap. 19. agrees with the record.

Callice.
The print touching the Inhabitants of Callice that use to buy Staple ware, cap.
20. agrees with the record.

Newcastle.

Barwick-Calli^e.


The print touching men of Newcastle and Barwick shipping to Callice, cap. 21.
agrees with the record.

Wools.
The print touching clacking, and enforcing of wools, cap. 22. agrees with the
record.

Deceit.

Thrumms.


The print touching subtle dealing in Thrumms, cap. 23. agrees with the record.

Gold. Merchants Aliens.
The print for payment in gold by Merchants Aliens, cap. 24. agrees with the
record.

Assize. Franchises.
cap. 26. agrees with the record.

Mayor of the Staple.
The print for the continuance of the Mayor of the Staple in his Office, cap.
25. agrees with the record.

Petitions committed to the Councils determination.
Certain Petitions were committed to the Council by them to be determined.

Ireland.
Where the Prior of Lantham in Ireland had removed an erroneous Judgment given
in the Parliament in to the Kings Bench here, Error in the Parliament in
Ireland, corrected in the Kings B. and Parl. here.
which could not end the same, he therefore prays to have the same ended in
this Parliament, whereto no answer was made.

Printed Acts not in the record.
Of the 28. and 29. in print this record makes no mention.

Anno Nono Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Humf. Duci Gloucest. etc. apud Westminster. die Veneris ante festum Sancti
Hillarii. Test Humf. Duce Gloucest. Custode Agliae apud Westminster. Vicesimo
septimo die Novembris.
HEn. Com. Northumb. Ricardo Com. Sarum. Joh. Com. Oxoniae. Radulpho Com.
Westmerland. Willielmo Com. Suff. Jacobo de Berckley Chlr. VVillielmo de
Ferrariis de Grobie Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr.
Johanni Baroni de Graystock Chlr. Johanni Latimer Chlr. Roberto Poynings Chlr.
VVillielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. Willielmo de Harrington
Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho Cromwell Chlr. Johanni le Scroop de
Masham Chlr. Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth Chlr. Waltero Hungerford Chlr.
Johanni Tiptoft Chlr. Hen. Gray de Codonore Chlr. Waltero Fitz-walter Chlr.
Willielmo de Clinton, Chlr. Willielmo de Nevill, Chlr. Noe Lord Warden.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the Friday next before the Feast of St.
Hillary, in the ninth year of Henry the sixth.
January, the noble Prince Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, Humfry Duke of
Gloucester.
being Keeper of England, Keeper of England.
sitting in royal estate in the Chamber de pinct. many the Lords him there
assisting, Painted Chamber.
and the Commons being there present, for that John Archbishop of York,
Chancellor of England (who by virtue of his office ought to have declared the
cause of the said Parliament by grievous sickness was unable to do the same)
the said Duke appointed William Linwood (Doctor of the Law) to do the same,
Chancellor.
Sicknesses
Dr. William Linwood.

Causes of Parliament.


who did so, taking his Theme, Firmabitur solium regni ejus, 1 Parab. 22.

King and Kingdom established.
and ought to be established by a tripple virtue. The first, by unity; Unity.
the second by Peace; Peace.
and the third by Justice. Justice.
Unity he divided into three parts, viz. Collectivam, as in scraping goods
together; the other Constitutivam, as in the comparison of sundry members in
man's body; the third Consentaneam, as in the union of every mystical, or body
politic.

Peace.
viz. Peace Monastical, which every man over himself has; Aeconomical, as
touching the governance over his household, and Political, whereby the Kings
estate is most assured.

Justice.
Justice he divided into three parts: the first, by every Subjects due obedience
uuto the Magistrates: Obedience of Magistrates.
the second by counselling his Neighbors, Counsel.
and equals; the third, by relieving the poor, Relief of the poor.
for that the same Unity was divided within the realm by whisperers, and
misdemeanors, whereby utter subversion was like to ensue, the King has called
the same Parliament for amending of the same. Whereby the Kings full mind was,
that every estate should enjoy all their due liberties; Due liberties enjoyed.
wherefore he willed the Commons to choose their Speaker, Speaker chosen and
presented.
and the next day to present him to the Keeper aforesaid.

Petitions.
Receivers of petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

January made a report of their Speaker, Commons reported their Speaker.
as in the last Parliament, tit. 9.

January, the Commons presented before the Keeper, and Lords aforesaid, John
Tirrell Esquire to be their Speaker, John Tirrel.

Speaker presented.


whose excuse being refused, Excuse.
he with his Protestation was allowed. Protestation.


Safe Conduct grants. John Okilith.
The King by his Letters Patents grants a safe conduct to Mr. John Okilith an
Irishman, Ireland.
to come to the presence of the King and his Council.

Is it to be noted, that to this time, and long after, there came no
Ambassador into this realm, Ambassadors.
before such time as they had the like safe conduct. Safe Conduct.


Dism and Quindism granted.
The grant of one Desme and one Fifteen, and of a third of both.

Tonnage and Poundage granted.
A grant of Tonnage and Poundage for two years, with the sub^idy of like value
of all Merchants strangers, Merchants strangers.
over and above the said Tonnage and Poundage.

Subsidy upon lands, 20 s. on every 20 l. Lands and Knights fee.
The Commons also grant to the King, that every lay person holding by a whole
Knights fee, shall pay to the King 20 s. and so according to the value, under
or over, and so of the Clergy for lands purchased since the 20 E. 1. That all
other persons having any hereditaments, to the value of 20 l. over all
reprises, not holden as above, shall pay unto the King 20 s. and so according
to the rate.

John Poultney Knight, Sr. John Poultney.
late Lord Mayor of London, gave to the Master of Corpus Christi Chapel, Lands
given to pious and charitable uses. Corpus Christi Chapel. Prisoners.

London.


besides the Chapel of St. Lawrence in Candleweek-street, certain houses, to
pay yearly 53 s. 4 d. to the prisoners of Newgate; It is enacted, that the
Mayor and Chamberlain for the time being shall distrain for the same. Distress
created.


Of the same Poultney, the Church of St. Lawrence aforesaid to this day is
called St. Lawrence Poultney.

Christs-Church in Canterbury shall enjoy for ever, Prior of Christ-Church.
and distrain for 20 s. quit-rent going out of the Tenement some time Robert le
Panners in the Parish of St. Martin of Ludgate. Distress for a quit-rent.


Dolphin of France. Treaty of Peace with France.


Lewis John of Thorndon in the County of Essex Esquire, prays, that he be not
impeached of any outlawry pronounced against one Lewis John of the West,
Identitate Nominis.

Outlawry.

Additions.


being outlawed before the Statute of Additions, the which was granted.

Rice ap Madock a Welshman should have the Kings Letters Patents to be made a
Denizen. Welshmen.

Denizen.




England, Chancellor.
to end the suit between Lewin le Clarke, Suit for a Bargain of Wool.
Burgess of Gaunt, and William Brampton of Chestervile in Derby, touching a
bargain of wool.

John Tiptoft, and Powis, shall have in fee 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. out of the 12 l
which the Prior of Huntington does yearly pay to the King for the Manor of
Hereford next Huntington, Rent in feee.
and that the said Lord and his heirs may distrain therefore in the said Manor.
Distress.


Northampton for the time being, Mayor of Northampton.
shall compel all Tenants as have any houses, upon certain streets, and places
there named, to * And repay.
pay the same from time to time.

Winchelsey is granted to William Pope Esquire, Baily of Winchelsey.
during his life.

Kings Council.
shall have yearly out of the Exchequer fees by way of reward there expressed.
Officers. Fees.


Kings Council.
to make assurances to the Kings Creditors for 50000 l. Assurance.

Kings Creditors.




Clarence, and other the Coheirs of the Earl of Kent, Coheirs.
cap. 11. agrees with the record in effect, but not in full form.

Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
Assize.
cap. 11. agrees with the record.

tit. 42.

Outlaries pronounced, Additions.
That all outlawries in Actions personal, pronounced before the Statute of
additions made 1 H. 5. may be pardoned.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Payment.

Merchants.


The print touching days of payment to be given by English Merchants, cap. 2.
agrees with the record.

Owen Glendor, Judgments.

Owen Glendor.


cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Forging of Deeds.
the Venire facias may be of both Counties, Venire facias.
as well where the land does lie, as where the writ is brought.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Anno 7 H. 6. tit. 11. touching Denmark, Statute revoked.

Denmark.


may be utterly void, and revoked.

Resp.
The King looks to hear from his Ambassador there, Ambassador.
and in the mean time he will be advised.

Yarn.
of no great force.

Idemptitate Nominis, Executors. Idemptitate nominis.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmerland, and of the Bishopric, prayen,
that the Merchants of Newcastle may at all times buy, Newcastle Merchants.
Wools.
and transport their wools.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Severn, Free passage.

Severn.


cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Anno 1 H. 4. may be good, Judgments.
albeit the Letter of Attorney of any person in the said Judgments be lost,
Letter of Attorney.
saving to John Harper and Ellinor his wife in Fee, their title in the Manor of
Rowley, in Staffs.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Dorchester, Dorchester.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Extortion.

Sheriffs.


The print touching the extortion of the Sheriffs of Hereford, cap. 7. agrees
with the record.

Weights.

Cheese.


The print touching the weighing of Cheese, cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Ley river.
The print touching the river of Ley, cap. 9. agrees with the record.

Attorneys.
cap. 10. agrees with the record.

Attachments.

Prohibitions.

Tith-wood.


may be granted to every person out of either of the Benches.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

l. paid by the Merchants of the Isle of Ely to certain of the County of
Cambridge, Ely Isle.
Cambridgeshire.
to buy twenty marks land by the year. It is enacted, that the said Inhabitants
for ever shall be discharged from paying any thing toward the fees of Knights
of the Shire for Cambridgeshire. Knights of Parliaments Fees.


Searchers of Woollen cloth. Fees.
and to seal the same, Cloths sealed.
taking therefore one penny.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Anno Decimo Henrici Sexti. Rex, etc. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae, etc. apud
Westminster. decimo septimo die Maii, Writs of Summons.
Test apud Westminster. vicesimo quinto die Februarii.
IOhanni Duci Norff. Hen. Com. Northumb. Ricardo Com. Sarum. Ricardo Com. War.
Johanni Com. Oxoniae. Radulpho Com. Westmerland. Willielmo Com. Suff. Jacobo
Berckley Chlr. Willielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine
Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Georgio Latimer Chlr. Johanni Baroni de Graystock
Chlr. Roberto Poynings Chlr. VVillo. Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland
Chlr. VVillielmo de Harrington Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho Cromwell
Chlr. Johanni Scroope de Masham Chlr. VVillielmo la Zouch de Harringworth Chlr.
VValtero Hungerford Chlr. Johanni Tibetoft Chlr. Hen. Gray de Codonore Chlr.
Willielmo Fitzhugh Chlr. Willielmo de Nevill Chlr. VVillielmo de Lovell Chlr.
Johanni de Morley Chlr. Leoni de Wells Chlr. Reginaldo West Chlr. Johanni
Beamond.
No Lord Warden.

The Parliament holden at Westminster the twelfth day of May, in the Tenth year
of King Henry the Sixth.
May, in the presence of the King himself sitting in the Chair of Estate in the
Chamber de pinct. King.
Painted Chamber.
within the palace of Westminster, the Lords and Commons being there also
present, John Bishop of Bath and Wells being Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment, declared the cause of the Parliament, Causes of
Parliament.
taking ^or his Theme the first of Peter, Deum timete, Regem honorificate.

Princes duty.
and serve God according to the words of the Prophet, Nunc Reges intelligite,
erudimini qui judicatis terram, servite Domino in timore. The second, a
commandment to the Subjects, Subjects duty.
to learn to obey and honor the Prince, according to the Apostles saying, Romans
13. Omnis anima sublimioribu^ potestatibus subdita sit, non enim est potestas,
etc. And again, Reddite omnibus debita tributum, cui tributum est, etc.

England might easily attain to the top of peace and prosperity, Peace.
if true fear of God, and honor to the Prince, were in the hearts of the
Subjects: wherefore, for the attaining thereto, and suppressing such rebels as
despised the right of the Church, Rebels against the Church and Ministers
and to destroy the Ministers of the same, was the one cause of the same
assembly.

Laws execution.
The other cause was for due execution of Laws, which was salus cujuslibet
Civitatis, and Regni. And the third cause was, how to enrich the Subjects,
Subjects inrichment.
who of long time have lived in great penury. He further shows, how the Kings
will was, that every estate should enjoy his due liberties; Liberties.
wherefore he wills the Commons to choose their Speaker, Speakers Choice.
and the next day to present him to the King accordingly. Presentation.


England, Peti^ions.
Ireland, Walts, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Lords Unity.
The second day of the Parliament the Duke of Gloucester declared to the Bishops
and Lords, that the Declaration of the Commons, how that the Lords meant in
perfect unity to serve, would encourage them to labor with effect, where the
said Duke promised, Duke of Gloucester.
that although he were principal Counselor, Chief Counselor.
yet would he do nothing without the assent of most of them; King. Council.




the which unity of the Lords, was the next day declared to the Commons by the
Chancellor.

John Russel Speaker.
The ^ourteenth day of May the Commons presented before the King John Russell
Esquire to be their Speaker, Presented. Excuse.
whose excuse being refused, he with the Common Protestation was allowed.
Protestatiion.


Dism granted.
A grant of half a Dism, and half a Fifteen.

Subsidy of Wools.
A grant for one year of the Subsidy of wools, and the like Tonnage and Poundage
as in the last Parliament, Tonnage and Poundage.
tit. 24.

Increase of Poundage released.
The King releaseth the increase of the Poundage of 6 d. in every pound set upon
Merchant strangers.

Cardinals purgation. Rumor.
that he being in Flanders in the way to Rome, returned back into the realm of
his own will, to purge himself of a bruit that he should be a Traitor to the
Realm, Traitor to the Realm.
whereof the Duke of Gloucester, by the Kings Commandment purged him.

But the truth is (as by the next title following may appear) that the Cardinal
having certain of the Kings Jewels in gage, Kings Jewels gaged.
meant to have them brought after him, which Jewels were arrested, Arrested.
and stayed at Sandwich by the Kings commandment; whereupon the Cardinal in a
fustian fume came in post for the recovery of them.

Sandwich (as before) to the great hinderance of the Cardinal, Kings Jewels.
this order was taken, that the Cardinal should pay to the King 6000 l. more
for them, The Cardinals loan of moneys on them.
and lend to him 14000 l. which was done.

Pardon to the Cardinal. Provisors.
punishments, and pains incurred by him against the Statutes of Provisors.

Ralph Lord Cromwell, Petition. Ralph L. Cromwell. L. Chamberlain discharged
for no offense.
it was declared by the Lords, that the Lord Cromwell was discharged of the
office of the Kings Chamberlain, not for any offense, but for that it seemed
good so to the Council. Kings Council.


At the Petitions of the Executors of Richard Whittington, Petition.




Citizen and Mercer of London, all the conveyances touching the erection of
Whittingtons College in London, Whittington College confirmed.
founded by the said Richard, are by common consent to be confirmed.

At the Petition of the Clarks of the Chapel, Petition.




among whom King H. 5. had given 200 marks, order is granted for the payment of
the same. Payment.


Commons Petition^

Justices wages.


Sergeants, Kings Sergeants.
and Attorneys. Kings Attorney.


London do enjoy a certain ground for ever, Prior of Charter House.
coming from Islington to their said house, etc. for a Conduict, Conduict.

Rent.


paying to John Foreby Esquire and Margery his wife, 12 d. yearly, and to the heirs
of Margery, the said Margery enjoying the herbage thereof in fee. Herbage.


Sion for transferring themselves from the first place of erection unto
another, Abbess of Sion.
are confirmed by common consent. Letters Patents.

Confirmation.




Margaret Sernfield late the wife of Nicolas Sernfield Knight of the Manors of
Bourgh and Helston in the County of Cornwall during her life, Letters Patents.
confirmed by common consent. Confirmation.


Accountants.

Pardon.




Richard Duke of York, D. of York. Petition.
son of Richard, brother of Edward late Duke of York, and Cosen to Edmond late
Earl of March, shall have his livery of all the hereditaments of the said late
Duke, Livery ouster le main.
and Earl.

Chantry.

Mor^main.


The foundation of Robert Thresk Clerk, of the Chauntery of St. Anne, in the
Church of Thresk, with license to the Mr. of the same to purchase lands, are
confirmed by common consent. Confirmation.


Kings feoffees in trust.
It is enacted, that certain appointed by the Feoffees of H. 5. shall of the
profits of his lands in use, levy 8000 l. to the payment of certain of the
Kings house. Payment of debts.


In the title aforesaid are to be seen as well the names of the feoffees in
trust, as of the Executors of King H. 5. Kings Executors.


John Cornwall Knight, Sir John Cornwall created a Baron.
Baron of Fannhoppe, and thereby to sit and enjoy the liberty of a Baronie.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Recognizance.

Staple.


THe print touching Recognizance before the Mayor of the Staple at Callice, cap.
1. agrees with the record.

Mayhem. Attorney.


Resp.
The King will be advised.

Hereford prayen, that none be amerced by the Sheriffs for any presentiments
before him in his turn, Sheriffs turn.

Amerci^ment.


but by honest persons before the Justices in their Sessions. Justices.


Resp.
The King will be advised.

H. 4. cap. 17. touching the entreating of Merchant strangers may be executed
with this adjunct, Merchant strange^s.
viz. pains on the Merchants and officers of every Town, for not executing.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Election of Knights.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Denmark, Restitution.

Denmark.


cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Parl. Freehold.

Examination.


or elsewhere, touching his Franck Tenant.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Cornwall prayen and have like answer as before in this year, Co^nwall.

Sheri^^s Turn.


tit. 31.

Hauns in their parts, Merchants Hauns.

Rep^i^al.


may have their remedy by action in London against the Merchants of Hauns there
remaining.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Merchant. Cloth^
broad or narrow, after such time as the Alnager has sealed the same, Alnage.

Seal.


and Custom paid.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Commons House.

Expedition.




The King will be advised. Resp.


Appropriation.

Vicar endowed.


shall be disapproriated.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Entry.

Outlawry.


cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Callice, Calice stone.
cap. 5th. is utterly against the record, Print contrary to the record.
which repealeth the Statute therefore made, in An. 21 R. 2. where the print
reviveth the same.

Gascoyne wines. Gascoyne Wines.


The King will send these Petitions to the Officers of Guienne, to appoint them
to take order therein. Resp.


Sheriffs extortions.
made Anno 9 H. 6. tit. 41. is made to continue for ever.

E. 3. against Parsons suing for Tith wood above the age of 20. years.
Prohibitions.

Attachments.

Tith-wood.




The Statutes therefore provided shall be observed. Resp.


Exigents. Indictments. Appeals.
cap. 6. agrees with the record in effect, but not in form.

Lancaster being outlawed, Lancaster.

Outlawry.

Forfeiture.


do therefore lose any goods, other than be in the said County, nor thereby
disabled but in the same County.

The King will be advised. Resp.


tit. 44. may bar the Plaintiff in those Courts where the Plaintiff is twice
non-suted in such cases as these religious persons offered to wage their law.
Religious persons.

Non-sute.

Wager of Law.




The King will be advised. Resp.


Attaint.

Damages.


Iuries.
or every of them, as the Tenant of the land, and none on pain be returned in
an Attaint, unless he may dispend in the same shire five pounds.

The King will be advised. Resp.


tit. 15. so as there be no mention made of the same. Subsidy released.


The print touching the forfeiture of Staple-ware, Fofeiture.




cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Ioane Beauchamp Lady of Burgavenie, being bound in the Chancery with sureties
by recognizance in 1200 marks, Surety for the Peace. Recogn. Chancery.
for keeping the peace toward one Nicholas Burdett, was after upon a scire
fac. out of the Kings Bench upon the same Recognizance condemned for procuring
certain there named to beat one Smith, Scire facias.
the which judgment for certain errors she requires to be reversed; Error in
Parliament.
the errors are well assigned, Errors assigned.
and day given to her to have Judgment at the next Parliament. Next Parliament.
Vide 11 H. 6. tit. 40.

Note well the errors, as wherein is a great part of learning, as well touching
the recognizance, as the process, and issue thereupon joined.

Anno Vndecimo Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Iohanni Duci Bedfordiae, etc. apud Westminster. octavo die Iulii. Test Rege
apud Westminster. vicesimo quarto Maii.
HUmf. Duci Gloucestriae. Ricardo Duci Ebor. Hen. Com. Northumb. Ricardo Com.
Sarum. Ricardo Com. War. Johanni Com. Oxoniae. Radulpho Com. Westmerland.
Willielmo Com. Suff. Jacobo Berckley Chlr. Willielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie
Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Georgio Latimer
Chlr. Johanni Baroni de Graystock Chlr. Roberto Poynings Chlr. Will. Botreaux
Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. Will. Harrington Chlr. Jacobo de Audley
Chlr. Radulpho de Cromwell Chlr. Johanni le Scroope de Masham Chlr. VVillielmo
la Zouch Chlr. VValtero Hungerford Chlr Johanni Tipetoft Chlr. Hen. Gray de
Codonore Chlr. Willielmo Fits-hugh Chlr. Willielmo de Nevill Chlr. VVillielmo
de Lovell Chlr. Johanni de Morley Chlr. Leoni de Wells Chlr. Reginaldo West
Chlr. Johanni Beamont Chlr. Johanni Cornwall Chlr. Johanni Talbott.
No Lord Warden.

The Parliament holden at Westminster the eighth day of July, in the Eleventh
year of King Henry the Sixth.
de pinct. and of the Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester, King.

Painted Chamber.


Bishops, Lords, and Commons, John Bishop of Bath and Wells, Chancellor of
England, Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment declared the cause of the Parliament, Causes of
Parliament.
taking for his Theme, Suscipiant montes pacem populo, and colles justiciam.

Lords.
by the little hills, Commons.
he meant Knights, Esquires, and Merchants; by the people he meant Husbandmen,
Artificers and Laborers, Artificers.


viz. To the first unity, Unity, Peace.
peace, and concord, without feigning. To the second equity, Equity.
consideration, and upright Justice, Justice.
without maintenance. To the third a due obeisance to the King, Obedience.
his Laws and Magistrates, without grudging.

Commons to choose and present their Speaker.
and the next day to present their Speaker to the King, giving them further to
understand, he would them to enjoy all their liberties. Liberties enjoyed.


England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyn and other places beyond the Seas and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Roger Hunt Esquire to be their Speaker, Roger Hunt Speaker presented.
whose excuse being refused, Excuse.
he with the common protestation was allowed. Protestation.


July the Duke of Bedford declared before the King and Lords, Duke of Bedford.
that for two causes he came to the Kings presence from beyond Seas, the one
for the safeguard of the Kings person, Kings person. Safeguard.
and the other to purge himself, for that it was bruited that the Kings losses
in France and Normandy came by his default and negligence; Losses in France.
False Rumors.
upon whose offer to try the same, the Chancellor by the Kings commandment
pronounced, that the King took him to be his true and faithful liege, Purged
by the King. Loyal Subject.
and most dear Uncle, and for his coming gave him most hearty thanks.

August for that the Plague Plague.
began to spring in London, the Chancellor by the Kings commandment,
Chancellor.
in the presence of him, and of the three estates, gave thanks to them, Kings
thanks.
and prorogued the same Parliament from the same day unto the fifteenth day
after St. Michael ensuing, Parliament proro^
at Westminster.

Kings want of money for his Household.
it was ordered that the Treasurer of England should stay in his hands 2000 l.
L. Treasurer.


November the Speaker presented unto the King and Lords a president of E. 2.
whereby he commanded the Clergy to pronounce sentence of Excommunication
against the offenders, Speaker.
president.
Excommunication.
whereof he wished the like execu^ion; the King takes the President, and
promises to be advised thereupon.

Anno 8 H. 6. That no Nobleman or other should retain in his service any
offender of the Law, President.

Maintenance.

Offender against the Laws.


or maintain any title, or quarrel.

Lords Oaths


November the Duke of Bedford by the appointment of the King and Lords took
oath of all the Commons House to perform the Article aforesaid. All the Commons
sworn against maintenance.


November the Commons coming before the King and Lords by their Speaker,
Commons House.

Speaker.


commended the Duke of Bedford for his notable prowess done in France, Duke of
Bedfords Commendation.
and namely for the battle of Vernoyle, and also for his politic governance of
the Realm, Good Government.
for the which they beseech the King to require the said Duke to attend about
his person; To attend about the Kings person.
wherein, after consultation had with the Council, Kings Counsel advised with.
the same Duke upon the Kings motion granted thereunto.

Bedford had taken upon him to be about the Kings person, he required six
Articles to be granted, Articles established.
which by the King and Lords were established.

Bedford recovered some prerogative, Prerogative.
which the Duke of Gloucester lost by the Cardinal, and Clergies means, his
sworn enemies.

Among them the least, was that a Roll should be made of such as had served at
any time in the wars, Service in the wars.
or otherwise, to the end that they should be preferred to all Offices and
Benefits. Preferments.


November in the 12 year of the King, the Duke of Bedford declares that where
he, Duke of Bedford.
and the Duke of Gloucester for their attendance as principal Counselors had
some years the fee or allowance of 8000 marks yearly, Chief Counselors of the
King.

Fees.


and at other times 6000 marks, sometimes 4000 marks, some times 5000 marks,
he would now for his personal attendance only require after the allowance of
1000 l. a year, and 500 l. for his passage, and 500 l. for his repassage,
Passage.
for his going, and returning beyond the Seas, the which as easy and
reasonable was granted.

one Desme, 1 Dism and Fifteen granted.
and one Fifteen, to be levied of the Laity.

like grant for two years of Tonnage and Poundage, Tonnage and Poundage, and
Subsidy of wools, etc. for 3. years
as Anno 10 H. 6. tit. 12. And a Subsidy of 53 s. 4 d. of every sack of wool
for three years.

Kings Council. Creditors assurance.


Thomas Bishop of Durham prays, Bishop of Durham.
that a Commission granted to the King by certain there named, Commission.
who by virtue thereof sat, and enquired at Horton Poole being within the
Connty Palatine, County Palatine.
might be revoked: Whereupon Sir William Earl Knight, the Kings Attorney
showed, Kings Attorney.
and in manner by good matter proved, that the said Bishop ought to have no
County Palatine, County Palatine of Durham.
neither liberties royal. Of the contrary, the Bishop showed his proof. The
matter on both parts is well debated. Notwithstanding the Judgment was, that
the said Inquisitions returned into the Chancery, Inquisitions nulled.
or elsewhere, should be void.

The matter is large, and shows the foulness touching liberties in the County
Palatine.

Ralph, Lord Treasurer of England, Lord Treasurer.
prays, that the Estates may consider of the Kings Revenews and Charge, Kings
Revenue short 35000 l. per annum of his charge.
the same Revenew being not able to supply the Charge by 35000 l. by the year;
that order may be taken for the Kings household; Kings household.
that he may enjoy the office as freely as any others before, and that no
grant do pass by the King without the knowledge of him the said Treasurer. No
Grant of the K. to pass without the Treasur. knowledge.
He also by three long schedules thereto annexed, shows the particulars o^
the whole Revenues and profits of the Crown, Crowns revenews.
and the charge of the same by all ways and means, the which was willed to be
shown to the Commons, Commons.
the which was done, and all the requests aforesaid granted.

Cromwell by another Petition shows, L. Cromwell. Petition. Warrants.
how Warrants for payments were come to him for more than two years profit of
the Crown, Payments.
wherefore he eftsoon prays consideration of the Kings estate, Kings estate
considered.
and a prescription for his payment.

The three schedules do solely show the particulars of the Revenews and
profits of the Crown, Crowns revenews.
and of all the like particular charge of the same.

Iaquet of Luxemburge Duchess of Bedford, Duchess of Bedford Denizen.
that she should be Denizen.

Andrew Ogard Knight, bornn in Denmark. Denizen.


Ralph Sage born in Normandy.

John Earl of Somerset prisoner in France, Denizen.
shows how H. 4. gave to John Earl of Somerset his Father in fee all the
Manors and hereditaments of Owen Glendor in Northwales, Earl of Somerset.

Prisoner of War.

Owen Glendor.

Tail.


and Southwales, that John Skydmore Knight, and Alice his wife, daughter and
heir of the said Owen, by color of an old intail brought their Formedon for
the Manors of Glendor and Kenthlith in South Wales: ^^^medon.
he therefore prays, that they and all others, may be fore-barred to bring
any action for any the hereditaments aforesaid, (...) of Actions.
other than their petition in the Kings Bench to be returnable. Petition.
The which is granted.

Anno 4 H. 4. that no English man should marry with any of the Amity or
Alliance of Owen Glendor, Owen Glendor.
should be kept, and that all Letters Patents made to the contrary, Patents
vacated.
should be void.

Thomas Gower, and Ioane his wife, the which Ioane was born in Alanson in
France; It is enacted, that all the children between them should be Denizens.
Denizens.


Earl of Arundels Petition.
John Earl of Arundel being in the Kings service beyond the Seas, by his
Petition prays to be admitted to his place in Parliament and Council, Place
and Precedence.
as Earl of Arundel, according as he and his Ancestors Earls of Arundel, Lords
of the Castle, Honor, and Seignory of Arundel, by reason of the said Castle,
Honor, and Seigniory had, and ought to have.

Duke of No^folk.
To this John Duke of Norfolk, being within age, and the Kings Ward, Ward.
by Petition answered, that the abovesaid John Lord Montrevers ought neither to
have the place nor Seigniory aforesaid, for as much as they both belonged to
the said Duke; wherefore he prays that the said suit may stay till his full
age. Paroll demurre.


Council ^n Parliament.
After this the Counsel of the Earl of Arundel, by order of the Lords, exhibited
and proved by writing the title of the said Earl, by force of an entayl. Tail.


Restitution awar^ded.
Whereupon the King, by assent of the Lords, for the causes of the Earl first
declared, restores to him the dignity and place of Arundel.

Petition.

H. Duke of Gloces^er. His honor confirmed.


At the Petition of Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, whom H. 5. had created Earl of
Pembroke, and Duke of Gloucester, only during the life of the said Duke, and
for them both had granted to him 58 l. yearly; the King, by authority of
Parliament, grants to the said Duke the said Title, Annuity granted.

Tail.


and dignity, and 60 l. to him, and his heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, and the Priory of Pembroke, being an Alien, Prior Alien.
to him during his life.

Annuity.
At the request of Hartonkevan Cluxt Knight, to whom King H. 4. had granted 50
l. yearly during his life out of the Priory of Pembroke in Wales, an Alien,
Prior Alien.
The King, by the assent of the Lords confirms the same. Confirmation.


Commons request.
that the Port of Melcombe shall be removed to Poole, Melcomb Port.

Poole Liberties.


and that Melcombe be no longer a Port; that the Mayor of Poole may wall the
Town, take Recognizance, and enjoy the like liberty as the Port of Southampton
has, Southampton.

Non-ubstante.


any Statute or Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding.

Sr. John Radcliff.

Annuity.


It is enacted, that John Radcliff Knight, Steward of Guienne, who by the Kings
warrants should be paid certain sums out of the Port of Melcombe, should now
be paid out of the Port of Poole.

Ioane Beauchamp Lady of Burgaveny, Lady Beauchamp bound to the Peace, Pays
1000 l. for breach thereof.
to whom day was given unto this Parliament, as in Anno 10 H. 6. tit. 52. may
appear, pays to the King one thousand pounds for the relief of her and her
sureties bound for the peace; Sureties.
the which is granted.

December the Bishops and Lords of the Kings Council were demanded, Kings
Council to attend.
whether they would attend? The Cardinal, Cardinal.
the two Archbishops, the Bishops of Ely and Lincoln answered yea, when they
could; all the other promised absolutely to attend.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Stews.

Inquest.


cap. 1. agrees with the record.

John Carpenter of Bridham in the County of Sussex, who cut the throat of
Isabel his wife, Murder.

Baron and Feme.

Judgment of treason.


and then ripped up her womb to see whether she were with child, might
therefore have Judgment to be hanged, drawn and quartered.

For that the same seems to be against the liberties of the Church, Resp.

Churches Liberties.


the King will be advised.

Sheriffs. Assize.

Collusion.


cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Assize. Pernors of profits.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Scots and Britains as shall sue in the Admirals Court for restitution of their
goods, Scots. Britons.

Admiralty. Restitution. Reprisal.


may be bound to Englishmen for their goods taken.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Damages. Attaint^
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Waste.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Justices of Peace.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Stewards.

Counsel learned.




There is sufficient remedy at the Common Law. Resp.


That no Alien be a Broaker, Alien.




or use Broakage within the realm, on pain of 12 l. for every offense.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Englishman without present pay, Merchants alien. Present payment,
on pain to forfeit the same.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Indictments. Sheriffs turns.
The print touching Indictments in Sheriffs turns, cap. 7. agrees with the
record..

Weights and Measures.
The print touching weights and measures, cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Prohibit. Tithwood.
The like motion and answer as in the last Parliament, tit. 45.

Alnage.
The print touching Alnage of Clothes, cap. 9. agrees with the record.

Tenure.
That some plain Declaration may be made touching lands purchased, and held of
the honor of Bolony and Pernel. Honor of Bolony.


Resp.

Kings Council.


The Kings Council, by authority hereof, shall have power to make the same.

Truce-breaking.
That the Statutes made Anno 2 H. 5. touching breakers of leagues, as concerning
the North parts, may be revoked, and the same committed to the Wardens of the
Marches. Repeals. Wardens of North-marches.


Resp.
The Statutes aforesaid shall be observed.

Scire facias.

Statute-staple.


The print touching pursuit of Scire facias by the recognizance of Statutes of
the Staple, cap. 10. agrees with the record.

Affrays.
The print touching affrayes done upon Lords, or the Commons coming to the
Parliament, Privilege of Parl.
cap. 11. agrees with the rcord.

Wax-chandlers.
The print touching Wax-chandlers, cap. 12. agrees with the record.

Merchants Aliens.
An order devised, that in every Town certain may be appointed to see that
Merchants Aliens should without collusion sell their wares within three months
after the landing of the same, Merchandise.
and that they should exhange no money over.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Callice.
The print touching the Act confirmed, made Anno 8 H. 6. for selling of wares at
Callice, cap. 13. agrees with record.

Shipping.

Creeks.


The print touching shipping in Creeks, cap. 14. agrees with the record.

Kings Feoffees.

Kings debts paid.


That the Feoffees of H. 5. may see such of the Kings debts paid, as are due in
the office of the Clerk of the Ordinance.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Customs imbezelled^
The print touching imbezelling of the Kings Customs by the Customers, cap. 15.
agrees with the record.

Customers.
The print touching blank scrolls of Customers, cap. 16. agrees with the record.

Prisoners French.
That all French prisoners, as well hostages as others being within the realm
without the Kings safe conduct, Safe Conduct.
their keeper, or host, may be by any Englishman taken, and ransomed as his
prisoner, considering that the English men be so served in France. ^ex Talionis.


Resp.
The King by advice will provide therefore.

Commissions.

Oath


It is enacted, that all the Lords, Knights, Esquires, Yeomen, and persons
through the realm, should by special Commissions swear to perform the Article
expressed before, tit. 14.

Anno Duodecimo Henrici Sexti. Rex Henric. Com. Northumb. etc. apud Westminster.
octavo die Iulii, and deinde prorogatur usque Reding, Writs of Summons.
Quindena Michaelis: Test Rege apud Westminster. primo die Novembris.
RIcardo. Com. Sarum. Radulpho Com. Westmerland. Jacobo de Berckley Chlr.
Reginal. Gray de Ruthine Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Georgio Latimer Chlr.
Johanni Baroni de Graystock Chlr. Willielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de
Gilsland Chlr. Willielmo de Harrington Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Hen. Gray
de Codonore Chlr. VVillielmo Fitzhugh Chlr. VVillielmo de Nevill Chlr.
Reginaldo West Chlr.
No Lord Warden by name.

Anno Decimo Quarto Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons
etc. Charissimo Avunculo suo Ioh. Duci Bedfordiae, etc. apud Westminster
decimo die Octobris: Test Rege apud Westminster. Quinto die Iulii, Anno Dom. 1435.
HUmfrido Duci Gloucestriae. Ricardo Duci Ebor. Hen. Com. Northumb. Ricardo
Com. Sarum. Ricardo Com. War. Joh. Com. Oxoniae. Johanni Com. Huntington.
Radulpho Com. Westmerland. Willielmo Com. Suff. Hen. Burchier Com. Jacobo
Berckley Chlr. VVillielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de
Ruthine Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Georgio Latimer Chlr. Johanni Baroni de
Graystock Chlr. Roberto Poynings Chlr. VVillielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho de Dacre
Chlr. VVillielmo Harrington Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho Cromwell
Chlr. Johanni le Scroop de Masham Chlr. Willielmo la Zouch de Harringworth
Chlr. Waltero Hungerford Chlr. Johanni Tibitot Chlr. Hen. Gray de Codonore
Chlr. Willielmo Fitzhugh Chlr. Willielmo de Nevill^ Chlr. VVillielmo de Lovell
Chlr. Tho. de Morley Chlr. Leoni de Wells Chlr. Reginaldo West Chlr. Johanni
Beamont Chlr. Johanni Cromwell Chlr. Johanni Talbot Chlr.
Willielmo Cheperney Capitali Justiciario.

The Parliament holden at Westminster the tenth day of October, in the
fourteenth year of the reign of King Henry the Sixth.
October the Bishop of Bath and Wells, Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
in the presence of the King sitting in the Chair of Estate, King.
in the Chamber de pinct. and in the presence of the Lords and Commons, Painted
Chamber.
declared the cause of the Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
taking for his Theme, Soliciti sitis servare unitatem Spiritus in vinculo
pacis: Upon which (amongst other things) he showed how the Duke of Burgundy,
Duke of Burgundy.
who was sworn to the King and his father, revolted, Revolt.
and unwitting to the King or the Council, had appointed a Diet or sitting at
Aras, where two Cardinals came, Cardinals.
touching a peace between the King and the French. Peace.


Ambassadors.
who there made reasonable and mean offers, the which the French refused, and
offered only scoffs, Frenchmens scoffs.
whereby nothing being therein done, the Diet brake up: After which it was
given the King to understand, that the said Duke of Burgundy had entered into
league with the French, so as the same remained to the King, who must either
leave or lose his title, style, and kingdom of France, Kings Title of France.
or else to defend the same with force. Defense with force.


Advice of Parliament.

Commons to choose and present a Speaker.


and the next day to present to the King their Speaker.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

October the Commons presented to the King, John Bows Esquire, John Bows
Speaker presented.
to be their Speaker, whose excuse refused, Excuse. Protestation.
he with the common protestation was allowed.

l. Kings Council.

Assurance to Creditors.




Gloucester, Duke of Gloucester,
the King for 9 years committed the keeping of the Town and Castle of Callice,
Callice.
the Tower of Rishanke, the Castle of Hames and Guynes, with all other the
Kings Dominions there, wherein are appointed the numbers of men for every
piece; the Officers and their fees and wages, Soldiers Wages.
the which indenture was confirmed by the Lords.

William Eskfield, Moneys lent assured.
Hamon Sutton, and Hugh Dicke for 8000 marks sent by them to the King, of the
revenues of the Duke of Bedford, and the Earl of Arundel, being dead.

A Subsidy granted to the King, Subsidy of 6 d. upon every pound land.
viz. That every person having any frank Tenement in Lands, Annuities, Fees,
Offices, or Hereditaments above five pound yearly, to pay for every pound six
pence, upon his Oath. Oath.


A Desme and one fifteen is also granted to the King to be levied of the laity,
Desme granted.
deducting thereof 4000 l. to the relief of decayed Towns and Villages. Decayed
Towns relief.


A Subsidy of 33 s. 4. d. of Merchants Denisons, Subsidy on Wools, etc. and
Tonnage and Poundage for 2 years.
and of 46 s. 8 d. of Aliens for every sack of Wool, and so according to the
rate for other Staple ware is granted to the King, and for two years Tonnage
and Poundage.

November the Bishop of Duresm in full Parliament delivered to the Cardinal,
and other the Feoffees of H. 5. Letters Patents of the said King, Kings
Feoffees in trust.
under the great and privy Seals, declaring the use of the same his feoffment.
Uses declared by Patent.


Thomas Rampston Knight, Prisoner to the Lords of Guyngain in France, Prisoner
of War.

Fine and ransom.

Ransom.


and fined at 18000 Escutes of gold, whereof he paid 9000. Prays the
delivery of William Botiler Esquire of France, prisoner to the Durchesse of
Clarence, and others; the which for his redemption is granted.

William Marfoot Mariner of Winchelsey for breaking the Castle of Dover. Pardon
granted.

Dover Castle.

Prison-breach.




Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Judgments.
and Felonies, Felonies.
agrees with the Record.

The print against licenses for shipping of wools, Licenses.




Cap. 2. agrees with the record.

The print for the Sessions to be kept at Carlisle, Sessions.

Carlisle.


cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Middlesex, Sessions.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Staple.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Aliens.

Victuallers. Retail.


The print touching Aliens Victualers by retail, cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Prizes on the Sea.
The print touching prizes upon the Seas, cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Writ Exchequer.

Penalty.


That no writ be sent out of the Exchequer against any man for any debt paid;
on pain that the Officer do lose his Office, and make fine at the Kings
pleasure.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Vessel.

Deodand.


That no Boat or Barge, or other Vessel be forfeited as a Deodand for the
misadventure or death of any man therein.

Resp.
The Customs heretofore used shall be kept.

Easterlings.

Liberties.


That the Easterlings may no longer enjoy their liberties, since the English
Merchants cannot enjoy theirs in Iceland. Iceland.


The King will be advised.

Resp.
The print touching safe conducts, Safe Conduct.
cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Alien.

Collector of Desmes.




The King will be advised. Resp.


Anno Decimo Quinto Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summon.
etc. Humf. Duci Gloucest. etc. apud Cantabridg. Vicesimo primo die Ianuarii.
Test apud Westminster. Vicesimo nono die Octobris.
JOhanni Duci Norfolk. Hen. Com. Northumb. Ricardo Com. War. Johanni Com.
Oxoniae. Johanni Com. Huntington. Radulpho Com. Westmerland. Radulpho Com.
Stafford Tho. Com. Devon. Jacobo Berckley Chlr. VVillielmo de Ferrariis de
Grobie Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthin Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Georgio
Latimer Chlr. Radulpho Baroni de Graystock Chlr. Roberto Poynings Chlr.
Willielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. Willielmo de Harrington
Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Johanni le Scroop de Masham Chlr. VVillielmo la
Zouch de Harringworth Chlr. VValtero Hungerford Chlr. Johanni Tiptoft Chlr.
Henrico Gray de Codonore Chlr. VVillielmo Fitzhugh Chlr. VVillielmo de Lovell
Chlr. Lionell de Wells Chrl. Reginaldo West. Chlr. Johanni Beomont Chlr.
Iohanni Cromwell Chlr. Roberto Willoughbie Chlr. Hen. Bourchier Chlr.
ParIiamentum Continuat. Vicessimo primo die Ianuarii. Writs of Summons.
Test Rege apud Westminster. Decimo die Decembris.
HUmfrey Duke of Gloucester. John Duke of Norfolk. Hen. Earl of Northumberland.
Richard Earl of Warwick. John Earl of Oxford. John Earl of Huntington. Ralph
Earl of Westmerland. Humfrey Earl of Stafford. Tho. Earl of Devon. James
Berckley Chlr. William Ferrers de Grobie Chlr. Reynald Gray de Ruthin Chlr.
Richard Strange Chlr. George Latimer Chlr. Ralph Baron de Graystocke Chlr.
Robert Poynings Chlr. William Botreaux Chlr. William Harrington Chlr. Tho:
Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. James Audley Chlr. Ralph Cromwell Chlr. John de Scroop
Chlr. William Zouch de Harringworth Chlr. Walter Hungerford Chlr. John Tiptoft
Chlr. Henry Gray de Codonore Chlr. Robert Willoughbie Chlr. William Fitzhugh
Chlr. William Nevell Chlr. William Lovell Chlr. Leonard Wells Chlr. Reynald
West Chlr. Johanni Beomont Chlr. Henry Bourchier Chlr. John Cromwell Chlr.
Thomas Clifford Chlr.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the one and twentieth of January, in the
fifteenth year of King Henry the sixth.
John Bishop of Bath and Wells, Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
in the presence of the King, King.
Lords and Commons, by the Kings commandment, declared the cause of the
Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
and took for his Theme, Isa. 62. Corona Regni in manu dei, etc. Whereupon he
showed, that three sorts of men are Crowned; Crowned men.
viz. All Christians in their baptism, in token whereof they are anointed; All
Clerks in token of their order are shaven, in token thereof; All Kings in their
Coronation, Kings Crown.
in token whereof they wear a Crown of gold set with flowers and precious
stones.

is most firm, and stable, Commonwealth stable.
which is governed in the faithful care of a Prince: as gold is flexible to
the workmen, so ought every Commonalty to be at the beck of the Prince,
Obedience to the Prince.
seeking the prosperity of the same.

Kings Prehem^nence.
The erecting, and standing of the flowers in the upper part of the Crown,
pretends the Kings preheminency over the Subjects, Kings Virtues.
the which ought to be garnished with four Cardinal virtues, viz. In the fore
part ought to be Wisdom, adorned with three precious stones, viz. Memory of
things past; Circumspection to things present; and Prudence of things to come.
On the right hand ought to be Fortitude, accompanied with Courage in
attempting, Patience in suffering, and Perseverance in well meaning.

Justice.
On the left side ought to be Justice, distributing her Arms in triple sort,
viz. to the best, mean, and lowest. On the hinder part ought to be Temperance
with her Trinity, viz. Restraint of sensuality, in fear; Silence, in speech;
and Mortification in will: all which proceeding from God, fully approved, that
the Crown of the King was in the hands of God. Crown in Gods hands.


Justice.
and Peace amongst the Subjects; Peace.
The second, how the Commodities growing within this realm, Vent of Commodities.
might have a ready Vent. The third, how the realm might be defended, Realms
defense.
and the Sea kept against the Enemies and Rebels. Seas guarded against Enemies
and Rebels.
To which end, he willed the Commons to choose, Commons to choose and present a
Speaker.
and the next day to present their Speaker to the King.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Sr. Io. Tirrel Speaker Presented. Excuse.
The Commons presented to the King Sir John Tirrell Knight, to be their Speaker,
whose excuse being refused, he with the common protestation was allowed.
Protestation.


Treasurer.
An authority is given to the Treasurer of England, to pay to the Cardinal 2000
Marks. Debts paid.


Gloucester, Captain of Callice, Callice.
prays, that if any mishap should happen to Callice for want of payment of
the soldiers, Soldiers payment.
the same may not be imputed unto him.

Sr. John Cromwell.
At the request of Sir John Cromwell Knight, Lord of Fanhope, the Prior and
Covent of the Friars Preachers within Ludgate, Corporation of Friars.

Annuity.


are incorporated, to whom the said Lord granted 40. marks yearly for an Obbit
in a Chapel of his own erection there, called Cornwall Chapel. Cornwall Chapel.


Isabel, Petition.

Ravishment,


late wife of John Botler of Beansley in the County of Lancaster Knight, the
which Isabel one William Pull of Winall in the County of Chester Gentleman
shamefully did ravish; It is enacted, that if the said William do not yield
himself after Proclamation made against him, Proclamation.
that he should be taken as a Traitor attainted. Traitor.


Isabel by another Petition shows, Petition.
how the said William by duresse and means of imprisonment, Duresse. Marriage.
enforced her to mary him, and by color thereof ravished her, Ravishment.
for the which she prays her appeal, Appeal.
which to her is granted.

Richard Widonell, Knight, pays to the King 1000 l. for a Fine, Fine to the
King.
for marrying of Iaquett Duchess of Bedford, Marriage without the Kings
license.
without license.

Patents confirmed.
grants license to the Duke of Gloucester, License to impark and build.
and Ellinor his wife, to impark 200 Acres of land in Greenwich; Greenwich Park.
and that their Manor of Greenwich they may embattle, and build with stone, and
also make a Tower of Stone within the same Park.

Duke it is enacted, Petition.
that if the Customs of Callice shall not suffice to pay the Soldiers their
wages, Customs of Callice.

Soldiers pay, Treasurer of Engl.


that the Treasurer of England shall pay the same.

John Earl of Oxford prays the pardon of 300 l. the rest of 3000 l. paid to
the King for marying without license; E. of Oxford. Fine for marriage without
license.
It was answered, that the same debt was assigned: Debt assigned.
but otherwise the King would remember him.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Marshall.

Steward.


cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Corn transported.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

That the Impositions of 4 d. for every 20 s. of Merchandise paid to the
officers of Bourdeaux, Impositions at Bordeaux to cease.
may cease.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Treason.

Burning of Houses.


made Anno 8 H. 6.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Vidimus in a safe conduct, Safe Conduct.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

The print touching Suerties upon writs of Subpoena, Sureties.

Subpoena.


cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Attaint.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

March certain of the Commons being sent, Committee of Commons. Will. Beerley
Speaker. Sir John Tirrel their Speaker being sick.
declared to the King, that the Commons had newly chosen William Beerly Esquire
to be their Speaker, for that Sir John Tirrell by grievous sickness, could not
attend, whereupon the King allowed the same William, and granted that he should
enjoy the common protestation. Protestation.


Disme and fifteen granted.
The like Desme and fifteen is granted, as in the last Parliament, tit. 14.

The like Subsidy of Wools for three years is granted, Subsidy of Wools for
three years.
as in the last Parliament, tit. 19.

l. Kings Council.

Assurance for the Kings debts.




The Kings general pardon of all Treasons, General pardon of Treasons, etc.
felonies, forfeitures, and other offenses.

Katherine Queen of England, Queen Mother.
the Kings mother, was dead, and had made the King sole Executor, King made her
Executor.
the King appoints Rober^ Ralston Clerk, keeper of the great Wardrobe; John
Merston, and Richard Alreed Esquires, to execute the said Queens will, He
deputes others to perform her will.
by the oversight of the Cardinal, Cardinal.
the Duke of Gloucester, and the Bishop of Lincoln, or any two of them, to whom
they should account.

Lords of the Council to answer Petitions.
Authority is given to the Lords of the Council, to answer all such Petitions as
are not answered in the Parliament.

viz. the second of June, these Bills were read and answered by certain of the
Lords there named in the Star Chamber. Bills read and answered by certain Lords
in the Star Chamber.


The print touching Guilds and Fraternities, Guilds.




cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Stancliffe in Yorkshire, Wapentake.
cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Staple wares.
not Customed, Custom.
cap. 8. agrees with the record.

John Norton, and Walter Norton of Bristol Gent. against Thomas Stamford, being
condemned at their Suit in 400 marks, he might therefore continue prisoner in
the Fleet, Prisoner.

Fleet.


and not in the Kings Bench, Kings Bench.
which was granted.

Anno Decimo Octavo Henrici Sexti. Rex etc. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae apud
Westminster. Cro. Martini etc. Writs of Summons.
Test apud Gilford vicessimo sexto die Septembris.
RIcardo Duci Ebor. Johanni Duci Norfolk. Hen. Com. Northumb. Johanni Com.
Oxoniae. Radulpho Com. Westmerland. Humfrido Com. Stafford. Johanni Com.
Somerset. Tho. Com. Devon. Jacobo de Berckley Chlr. Willielmo de Ferrariis de
Grobie Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Ruthine Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Johanni
Tiptoft Chlr. Georgio Latimer Chlr. Radulpho Baroni de Graystock Chlr. Roberto
Poynings Chlr. Will. Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. Will. de
Harrington Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho de Cromwell Chlr. Johanni le
Scroope de Masham Chlr. Willielmo Zouch de Harringworth Chlr. VValtero
Hungerford Chlr. Hen. Gray de Codonore Chlr. Willielmo Fitzhugh Chlr.
Willielmo de Nevill Chlr. VVillielmo de Lovell Chlr. Lionelli de Wells Chlr.
Reginaldo West Chlr. Johanni Beamont Chlr. Johanni Cornwall Chlr. Henrico
Bourchier Chlr. Roberto Willoughby Chlr.
No Lord Warden.

The Parliament holden at Westminster the morrow after St. Martin, in the
Eighteenth year of King Henry the Sixth.
Bath and Wells, in the presence of the King, Chancellor.

King.


Lords and Commons, by the Kings commandment declared the cause of the
Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
and took for his Theme Matthew. 2. Adaperiat Dominus Cor nostrum in lege sua,
and in praeceptis suis, and faciat pacem, etc. Wherein he gathered two special
points. The first, What great desire every Christian ought to have to the
reformation of this life, by the only means of God, who against all hardness
was to bend, and incline his heart to his Laws and Commandments. The second,
what thirst every sick Christian ought to have to crave, and seek peace, after
his manifold conflicts and Battails in this world.

Israel, he noted thereby was meant a mystical unity, according to the 2 Iudic.
Convenit universus Israel ad Civitatem quasi homo unus, eademque mente, unoque
consilio, which being spoken unto them, was left for our learning, that we
might follow the same, and might attain to true peace.

Unity.
there was no doubt but peace of body and soul would ensue. Peace.


Liberties to be enjoyed.
he willed the Commons to choose, Commons to choose and present their Speaker.
and the next day to present their Speaker to the King.

Petitions.
for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Speaker elected.
The second day of the Parliament the Commons notified to the Lords the election
of their Speaker.

William Tresham Speaker Presented.
The third day of the Parliament the Commons presented to the King William
Tresham Esquire to be their Speaker, whose excuse refused, Excuse. Protestation.
he with the common protestation was allowed.

Chancellor.
The one and twentieth day of the December the Chancellor by the Kings
commandment declared to the Lords and Commons, how that the King had prorogued
the Parliament from the same day, Parliament prorogued to Reding.
unto the day after St. Hilary, at the Town of Reding to be holden.

1 Desme and one fifteen and^ half granted.
One Desme, and one Fifteen, and one half of one fifteen is granted to belevied
of the Laity, in such form as Anno 4 H. 6. tit. 13.

Subsidy on Wools.
A Subsidy of Wools granted to the King for 3 years, as Anno 14 H. 6. tit. 14.
only there was six shillings eight pence raised upon the Aliens Tonnage and
Poundage. Tonnage and Poundage granted.

Aliens.




The Commons also granted to the King, that all Aliens not Denizens, Aliens.




within the Realm, shall pay unto the King yearly sixteen pence, being an
Householder, and being none, six pence.

Treasurer.
There is authority given to the Treasurer of England, and others, to make
assurance to the Kings Creditors for 100000 l. Assurance to Kings Creditors.


Kings Debts.
for the provision of his household. Household.


Kings Counci^il.
to take order touching Purveyors. Purveyors.


Gilbert Hoar Sheriff for the County of Cambridge had made no return for the
Knights of the said County; No return of Knights Election of Knights.
it was ordered, that he should go to a new election, and make proclamation,
that no person should come armed thereunto. None to come armed thereto.


H. 5. namely the Cardinal, Kings Feoffees to pay his debts.
and others of the whole Duchy of Lancaster, to make payment of such debts as
were due for the charges of his household. Kings Household.
The Cardinal grants thereunto, but upon such reasonable conditions as is
mavelous to see.

Plymouth, Kings Council.

Petition.

Plymouth.


as to them shall seem best.

St. Laurence Poultney.
For the payment of 9 l. 3 s. 4 d. by the Master of Corpus Christi Chapel in St.
Laurence Poultney, given by Sir John Poultney Knight, to a Chantery in Paul's,
Chantry. Paul's.
and for 20 l. yearly by the Master to the three massing priests in Paul's, the
like remedy is granted to the Dean of Paul's, Dean of Paul's.
and Mayor of London, Mayor of London.

Annuity. Distress.


as Anno 9. H. 6. tit. 16.

Lincoln on the one party, Dean and Chapter of Lincoln.
and the Chapter of the same on the other party, either of them bound
themselves to abide the order of the Bishop of Lincoln: Arbitrament confirmed
by Parliament. Forfeiture.
the Bishop made an order, that if any singular person break any of the orders,
he should pay 20 l. to the reparation of Lincoln Church, Bishop of Lincoln.

Debt.


now therefore it is enacted, that for every such breach the Bishop, and his
Successors shall recover the same 20 l. by action of debt.

Oswalds of Mostell in the Duchy of Lancaster of the Advowson of the Hospital
of St. Nicolls in Pontfract, Prior of St. Oswalds.
and license to appropriate the same, are confirmed by the whole Estates.
Charter confirmed by Parliament.

Appropriation.




Roan, to whom the Pope at the death of the Bishop of Ely by his Bulls had
granted to the said Archbishop during all his life all the profits of the said
Bishopric, Pope.

Provision.

Bishopric of Ely.


by the name of Administrator of the said Bishopric, shows his Bull to the
King, who utterly rejects those Bulls: Popes Bull rejected by the King.
notwithstanding for his service done in France, the King grants him the
Administration aforesaid, Kings grant.

Petition.

Administration of a Bishopric or Commend.


the which to all intents of the petition of the said Archbishop, are confirmed
to be of as great force as though he were Bishop, Confirmation in Parliament.
touching profits, liberties, and abilities.

Henry Percie and Thomas Percie late Earl of Worcester, H. Piercie.
the heir of Henry Percie late Earl of Northumberland, the heirs of the late
Lord Bardolfe, or the heirs of any other attainted, Forfeiture.

Attainder.

Treason.


who were at the battle of Shrewsbury, shall not be debarred of any lands
intailed to them, Tail.
or to any their Ancestors, but that they, and every of them shall have their
due recovery therefore, any Judgment in the 5. or 7. H. 4. to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Florence was severally indebted 3000 l. to the Bishops of St. David's and
Lincoln, and to the Prior of Jerusalem, the which Merchant died intestate:
Merchant Alien dies intestate.
the King by his Letters Patents made to the said Bishops and Prior, grants
that the Administrator of the said Merchant, Administrator.
shall first pay or the said Bishops, and Prior, and there wills to be sworn,
Oath. Parent.
and none before, the which Letters Patents are confirmed by common consent.
Priority of Payment, Confirmation.


At the petition of the Justices it is enacted, Petition.
that all the Justices of both the Benches, Justices of both Benches.
Justices of Assize, Justices of Assize.
the Kings Sergeant, Kings Sergeants.
and Attorney, Kings Attorney.
shall yearly at two feasts of the year there expressed, be paid, and allowed
their fees, Fees and Liveries.
and liveries, by the hands of the Clark of the Hanaper for the time being,
Clark of the Hanaper. Customs of London, Bristol, Kingston.
out of the Customs of London, Bristow, and Kingston upon Hull.

Margaret the late wife of Sr. Thomas Malcfunt Knight, made the like complaint
against Lewis Layson otherwise Gethey, a Welchman, as is contained in An. 15.
H. 6. tit. 14. and 15. against whom the like order is taken as there is taken,
Rape.

Duresse.


only where the rape was committed in Wales, Wales.

Trial.


it is enacted, that the same be tried in Somerset.

William ap Gillin ap Griffith a Welchman is made a Denizon, Welshman.

Denizon.

Condition.


so as he marry no Welsh woman, nor bear any office in Wales.

William Attlone, and other Tenants of the Castle, and Honor of Tutburie in
Darby, parcel of the Duchy of Lancaster, Duchy of Lancaster.
complain that by riot done by Piercie Venables Gent. and many others with him,
Riot.
they took away one Joan Forman who was committed to prison to the keeping of
the said William, Prisoner rescued.
whereupon order was taken that certain Justices should determine the same.
Justices.

Oyer and Terminer.

Ryots.




John Stuch of the County of Salop made against Philip Egerton, the like order
is taken.

Liberties granted Confirmed by Parliament.
Liberties granted by the Kings Letters Patents, and confirmed by the whole
assent of Parliament, with the limit of the same very large, excepting that the
same do not extend to the Manor of Tremerton, Tremerton.
the Borrow of Salterish to the water of Tamer. Salterish. Tamer.


Petition.

Io. Earl of Somerset, etc.


A petition of John Earl of Sommerset, Edmund Earl of Dorset, Margaret Countess
of Devon, John Carpenter, and John Bugebrook, Executors to Margaret Duchess
of Clarence, Executors.
to no great purpose.

Mountgrace in the County of York, Prior of Mount-grace.

Lands confirmed to them Mortmain.


the Manor and Town of Beadelby given to them by the Duke of Surry.

Jerusalem to the King, Council. Annuity.

Prior of Jerusalem.


for two forges in Fleetstreet.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Warrants.

Patents.


cap. 15. agrees with the record.

Juries. Attaint.
The print touching Juryes in Attaint, cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Merchandise foreign.
The print touching Merchandise foreign bought, and foreign sold, cap. 4. agrees
with the record.

Collectors.

Tenths.


cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Office traversed Leases.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Offices returned Escheators.
cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Fines for Alienation.
as of his Duchy of Cornwall, Duchy of Cornwall.
neither that other lands holden of other persons, be not seized into the Kings
hands, where any heir holding of the Duchy be within age. Nonnage.


The King will be advised. Resp.


Fines for knighthood.
be never after called thereto again, and that the fines be not other than they
have been.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Spanish ships on the Seas, Reprisal.

Spanish Ships.


cap. 8. agrees with the record.

The Print touching enterie of the Filiser and Exigenter, Felizer.




cap. 9 agrees with the record.

Sewers.
cap. 10. agrees with the record.

Justices of Peace.
cap. 11. agrees with the record.

Indictments.
cap. 12. agrees with the record.

The print touching outlawries in the County of Lancaster, Outlawries.

Lancaster.


cap. 13. agrees with the record.

Merchants.

Transportation.

Hides. Skins.


Calves skins, Connie fells, and tallow to what place him likes, Tallow.
otherwise than to Callice.

The king will be advised.

The print touching arrays and panels, Resp.




cap. 14. agrees with the record.

Ships.

Damages.


or in any Port, or Creek, if he were not party thereto.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Writs.
all the records of the Kings Bench, and Common pleas in the time of E. 3. R.
2. H. 4. and H. 5. were brought into the Treasury at Westminster, Treasury.
They require that the same may be bro^ght into both the Benches again.

The King will be advised. Resp.


The print touching transporting wools to Callice, Wools.

Callice.


cap. 15. agrees with the record.

The print against deceit in cloath-making, Deceits.




cap. 16. agrees with the record.

The print touching the gaging of vessels of Wine and Oil, Gaging Vessels.




cap. 17. agrees with the record.

That every Customer and Comptroller of every port, Customer.




may license the Kings Subjects to transport Corn from one shire or Town to any
other, License to transport Corn from County to County Surery.
taking surety of debt the to value, that the same be not carried beyond the
Seas.

The King will be advised.

In consideration of the great plague of Pestilence it was enacted, Resp.




that all such persons as should do their homage to the King, Homage.
should do the same without kissing of him, Kissing dispensed with.
and the same homage to be as good, as though they kissed him.

By this it appears. that the order of homage done in those times far does
swarve from the guise now, which is so far from kissing the Prince, as in doing
the same they do not so much as see the Prince.

That no Italian or other Merchant beyond the Straight of Moroccoe, Italian
Merchants^
bring no other Merchandise within the Realm other than are growing in the same
their Countries, No Merchant to import Merchandise but of their own Country.
and that for good reasons in the record.

The King will be advised.

Resp.
That all spiceries sold in any Port within the realm by any Merchants strangers
be as clear garbelled as the same is in London upon pain to forfeit the same.
Spiceries.

Garbelling.

Forfeitures.




The King will be advised.

Resp.
It is enacted that the fourth part of the Desme, 4 part of the^ Desme. to
defray purveyance for the Kings House. Ready pay.
and fifteenth shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Kings household,
Treasurer of the Household.
therewith all to make ready pay for the Kings purveyance.

And by the same Act it appears that the Revennues of the Dutchies of
Lancaster and Cornwall, Duchy of Lanc^ster.

Cornwall.


should be employed to the present payment of the kings purveyance for the
household. Purveyance.


The print touching Captai^s abating of Soldiers wages, Captains.




cap. 18. agrees with the record.

Soldiers going from their Captains.
cap. 19. agrees with the record.

cap. 3. for transporting of butter, Transportations Butter, Cheese.
and cheese, there is no mention made in the record.

Anno Decimo Octavo Henrici Sexti.
HUmfrey Duke of Gloucester. Richard Duke of York. John Duke of Norfolk. Hen.
Earl of Northumberland. John Earl of Oxford. Ralph Earl of Westmerland. Humfrey
Earl of Stafford. John Earl of Somerset. Tho. Earl of Devon. James Lo. Berckley
William Lo. Ferrers of Grobie Leonard Lo. Gray of Ruthin. Richard Lo. Strange.
George Lo. Latimer Ralph Lo. Graystocke^ Robert Lo. Poynings William Lo.
Botreaux Thomas Lo. Dacre of Gilsland. William Lo. Harrington. John Lo.
Audley. Ralph Lo. Cromwell. John Lo. Scroop of Masham. William Lo. Zouch of
Harringworth. Walter Lo. Hungerford John Lo. Tiptoft. Henry Lo. Gray of
Codonore Robert Lo. Willoughbie William Lo. Fitzhugh William Lo. Nevell
William Lo. Lovell. Leonard Lo. Wells Reynald West Chlr. John Lo. Beomont.
John Lo. Cromwell. Henry Lo. Bourchier. Thomas Lo. Clifford.
Anno Vicessimo Henrici Sexti. Rex Humf. Duci Gloucest. etc. apud Westminster. die
Conversionis Sancti Pauli. Writs of Summons.
Test apud Manerium nostrum de Schens, tertio die Decembris.
RIcardo Duci Ebor. Johanni Duci Norsolk. Johanni Com. Huntington. Hen. Com.
Northumb. Hum^rido Com. Stafford. Tho. Com. Devon. Willielmo Com. Arundel.
Iohanni Com. Somerset. Edoardo Com. Dorset. Radul. Com. Westmerland. Ricardo
Com. Sarum. Johanni Com. Oxoniae. Willielmo Com. Suffolciae. Jacobo Berckley
Chlr. VVillielmo de Ferrariis de Grobie Chlr. Edoardo de Gray de R^thin Chlr.
Ricardo Strange Chlr. Johanni Tipto^t Chlr. Georgio Latimer Chlr. Radulpho de
Graystock Chlr. Roberto Poynings Chlr. Willielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de
Gilsland Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho Cromwell Chlr. Johanni de Scroop
de Masham Chlr. VVillielmo Zouch de Harringworth Chlr. VValtero Hungerford
Chlr. Johanni Gray de Codonore Chlr. VVillielmo Fitzhugh Chlr. VVillielmo de
Lovell Chlr. Johanni Vicimetio de Beamont Chlr. Leonardo de Welles Chlr.
Johanni Cornwalliae Chlr. Roberto Willoughbie Chlr. Iohanni Sutton de Dudley
Chlr. Radulpho de Boteler Chlr. Iohanni de Clifford Chlr. Roberto Morley Chrl.
No Lord Warden.
Anno Vicessimo Tertio Henrici Sexti. Rex etc. Humfrido Duci Gloucestriae apud
Westminster. vicessimo quinto die Februarii. Writs of Summon.
Test apud Westminster. decimo tertio die Ianuarri.
RIcardo Duci Ebor. Iohanni Duci Norfolciae. Joh. Duci Oxoniae. Humf. Duci
Buckingham. Edoardo Marchioni Dorset. Willielmo Marchioni Suffolciae. Hen. Com.
Northumb. Tho. Com. Devon. VVillielmo Com. Arundell. Roberto Com. Westmerland.
Ricardo Com. Sarum. Johanni Com. Oxoniae. Iohanni Com. Salopiae. Johanni
Vicecomiti Beamont Chlr. Jacobo Berckley Chlr. VVillielmo de Ferrariis de
Grobie Chlr. Edoardo de Gray de Ruthin Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Georgio
Latimer Chlr. Radulpho de Graystock Chlr. Roberto Poynings Chlr. VVillielmo
Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho
Cromwell Chlr. Johanni de Scroop de Masham Chlr. Willielmo Zouch de
Harringworth Chlr. Waltero Hungerford Chlr. Willielmo Fitzhugh Chlr. Hen. de
Scroop de Bolton Chlr. VVillielmo de Nevill Chlr. Willielmo de Lovell Chlr.
Lionelli de Wells Chlr. Roberto, Willoughby Chlr. Iohanni Sutton de Dudley
Chlr. Radulpho Butler de Sutley Chlr. Tho. de Clifford Chlr. Hen. Bourchier
Chlr. de Bourchier. Edoardo Brook de Cobham Chlr. Iohanni Talbot de Lilsle
Chlr. Tho. de Scales Milit. Reginaldo Gray de Wilton Chlr. Roberto Hungerford
Chlr. Domino de Mollins.
No Lord Warden named.

The Parliament holden at Westminster the twenty fifth day of February, in the
three and twentienth year of King Henry the Sixth.
King.
sitting in person in the Chair of Estate, and of the Lords and Commons, John
Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop.
Primate of all England, Deputy of the Sea of Rome, Deputy of the Sea of Rome.
and Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
declared the cause of the calling of the Parliament, Causes of Parl.
taking for his Theme, Iustitia and Pax osculatae. Psalm. 84.

Suffolk, (the Kings dear Cozen) and other Noblemen Ambassadors sent into
France, Ambassadors.
as well for a treaty of marriage to be had between the King, Marriage Treaty.
and Margaret the daughter of the King of Sicile, as for peace to be had, Peace.
between the realms of England and France, the same Marriage was contracted,
Marriage contracted.

Truce.


and an abstaining from War for a time was granted.

Earl remained in France attending for the safe conducting of the said
Princess Margaret into the realm of England, Safe conduct.
by which two means, through Gods grace, he nothing doubted but that the same
truce should turn in that wise, Truce.
as Justice and peace should be within the realm, Justice. Peace.
more than the same has been; wherefore he willed the Commons to choose,
Commons to choose and present their Speaker.
and the next day to present to the King their Speaker.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Speaker chosen.


William Burley Esquire to be their Speaker, Will: Burley Speaker Presented.
Excuse.
whose excuse rejected, he with the common Protestation was allowed.
Protestation.


March, the Chancellor, Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment, and assent of the Lords, in the presence of the
Commons prorogued the Parliament from that day unto the nineteenth day of April
next ensuing, Parl. prorogued.
at Westminster aforesaid.

December, The 15. June the Parl. for the plague and harvest was prorogued to
20 October.
in the twenty fourth year, etc. the Chancellor prorogued the same Parliament
from the same day unto the twenty fourth of January ensuing, Parl. prorogued.
at Westminster.

Ieane shall not pay any Escuage to the City of London for any the Merchandises
brought from Southampton to London by land. Merchants of Ieane.

Escuage.

London.




The grant of half a tenth, Half a Tenth and Fifteen. Allowance to poor Towns.
and half a fifteen excepting 2000 l. to be allowed to certain poor Towns by
name.

The grant of a tenth, Tenth and Fifteen.




and of a fifteen, except 3000 l. to certain Towns wasted.

A subsedy of wools of 34 s. 4 d. of Denisons, Subsedy^ Tonnage and Poundage
for four years. Aliens.
and 53 s. of Aliens for every sack of wool, etc. is granted to the King for
four years, Tonnage and Poundage of Denisons, and double of Aliens.

England, Patents. Staple.
and under the seal of the Duchy of Lancaster, Lancaster Duchy.
made to John Cardinal and Archbishop of Canterbury, Cardinal Arch^bishop of
York.
and sundry others, of sundry the possessions of the said Duchy of Lancaster,
and three other Letters Patents under the only seal of the Duchy of Lancaster,
Seal.
made to the persons aforesaid, of sundry possessions to the performance of the
last Will and Testament of the said King, Kings feoffees in trust. Confirmation.
are confirmed by the whole estate.

June, the Speaker on the behalf of the Commons made to the King especial
commendation of the person and manifold services of the Marquess and Earl of
Suffolk, Speaker.

Marquess.

Earl of Suffolks good services.


and namely of the marriage of the King, Kings marriage.
and abstinence of war with the French, Peace with France.
for all which, at the request of the Commons, and mediation of the Lords, it
is enacted, His Loyalty specially enacted.
that the said Marquess should be holden a most true and faithful Subject.

Marquess his Declaration of his services.
of his services, and request to the effect aforesaid, made the second day of
June in Anno 23. to the King, Lords, and Commons, on the which the Declaration
aforesaid was enacted.

Petition.
or Hospital of St. Thomas the Martyr of Acres in the City of London,
Hospital of St. Tho. of Acres.
by whole assent they are incorporated by the same name, Corporation.

Mortmain.


and certain houses in London are to them confirmed. Confirmation.


College of Eaton, Eaton College confirmed by Parliament. Patents.
founded Anno 20. H. 6. with all the lands and liberties then, and now granted,
and especially declared, and confirmed by the whole estates.

Cambridge, Patents. College in Cambridge confirmed
are confirmed.

April An. 24. the Chancellor of England, Chancellor and Lords protestation
against the peace of France.
in the name of all the Lords, in the presence of the King, protests, that
the peace which the King had taken with the French King, was of his own motion
and will, and not any of the Lords provocations, the which is enacted.

It is enacted, that a Statute made in the time of H. 5. that no peace should
be taken with the French King that now is, Act repealed.

No peace without consent of the three Estates of England and France.


that then was called by the name of Dolphin of France, without the assent of
the three estates of both realms, should be utterly revoked, and that no person
for giving Counsel to the peace with France, Peace with France.
be at any time to come impeached therefore.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Purveyors.
cap. 1. and 2. agrees with the record.

That all the Statutes touching Welshmen be observed, Welshmen. Denize^s.
and that none of them be made Denisons, or enjoy any office in Wales, Office.
Wales.
and that none of them stand to the contrary on pain of 200 marks.

H. 4. or H. 5. shall therein be observed. Resp.


Shipping thrums.
etc. cap. 3. agrees with the record.

That no Stapler have any voice at the election of any Mayor, Election of the
Mayor of the Staple.
or Constable of the Staple, unless he have goods coquetted in Callice,
Callice.
to the number of 10. sacks.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Worsteeds.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

The print touching the taking of outlawes repairing into Herreford, Outlawes.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Robert Sherborn of London Draper, shows, that whereas one Ienicogh a
Welshman remained in the Kings Bench, Kings Bench.
in execution for debt due to him, Execution.
and by collusion to defraud him, Collusion.
procured himself to be appealed of a felony, whereby he was condemned, and
had his Clergy, Clergy.
and was in the Abbots prison at Westminster for the same.

Habeas Corpus.

Sanctuary.

Satisfaction.


and the Abbot to deliver the body, on pain to answer the debt, which was
granted.

Corn shipped.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Northampton, Head-pence.
cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Sheriffs.
cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Coining. Halfpence. Farthings.
and making current half pence, and farthings, to endure for two years.

Sewers.
cap. 9. agrees with the record.

Indictment. Appeal.

Foreign County.


except the Plaintiff appeal, and exigent be awarded into the County where the
party was supposed to dwell. Exigent.


The King will be advised. Resp.


Extortion. Sheriffs.
cap. 10. agrees with the record.

Knights wages.
cap. 11. agrees, etc.

That every person being of the Lords or Commons house, having any assault,
Privilege of Parliament.

Assault.


or fray made upon him, being at the Parliament, or coming from thence, may
have the like remedy therefore as Sr. Thamas Parr Knight had. Sr. Tho. Parr.


Resp.
The Statutes therefore made shall be observed.

A motion that one John Balton who most shamefully murdered Isabell the wife of
Roger Bakewell, Murderer pardoned.
and by becoming an approver was pardoned of felony, might notwithstanding be
executed. To be executed notwithstanding.


No answer was made thereto.

Servants wages.
The print touching the wages of servants of husbandry, cap. 13. agrees with
the record.

Foreign Pleas.
The print touching foreign pleas, pleaded after issue joined, cap. 13. agrees
with the record.

Gascoyne wines may come down to the Ports of Bayon and Bordeaux, Gascoyne
wines.
and that all English merchants may freely buy and sell the same. Free Trade.


Resp.
The King will be advised.

Gascoyne wine.
A long advise for the making, and full measure of Gascoyne wines.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Purveyors.
The print against Purveyors, cap. 14. agrees with the record.

Knights election.
cap. 15. agrees with the record.

Gageour.
The print touching Gaging pence to the Gaingeor, cap. 16. agrees with the
record.

Escheators. Fees.
The print touching the inquests, and fees of the Escheators, cap. 17. agrees
with the record.

Wines.
cap. 18. agrees with the record.

Anno Vicesimo Quinto Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
Humf. Duci Gloucest. apud Cantabridg. decimo die Februarii. Test apud Westminster.
decimo quarto die Decembris. 14.16. Sed tentum apud Burium Sancti Edmondi eodem
An. decimo die Februarii.
Ricardo Duci Eborum. Johanni Duci Norfolciae. Johanni Duci Oxoniae. Humf. Duci
Buckingham. Edwardo Marchioni Dorset. Willielmo Marchioni Suffolciae. Hen. Com.
Northumb. Tho. Com. Devon. Willielmo Com. Arundell. Radulpho Com. Westmerland.
Ricardo Com. Sarum. Johanni Com. Oxon. Johanni Com. Salopiae. Johanni Vicecom.
de Beamont Chlr. Jacobo Berckley Chlr. Edwardo Gray Mil. Domino de Ferrariis de
Grobie. Edward. Gray de Ruthin Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Georgio Latimer
Chlr. Radulpho de Graystock Chlr. Hen. Percie Domino de Pomiger. Willielmo
Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho
Cromwell Chlr. Johanni de Scroop de Masham Chlr. VVillielmo Zouch de
Harringworth. Waltero Hungerford Chlr. Willielmo Fitzhugh Chlr. Hen. de Scroop
de Bolton Chlr. Willielmo de Nevil Chlr. Willielmo de Lovell Chlr. Leoni de
Wells Chlr. Roberto de Willoughbie Chlr. Johan. Sutton de Dudley Chlr.
Radulpho Boteler de Sutley Chlr. Tho. de Clifford Chlr. Hen. Vicecom. Bourchier
Chlr. Edwardo Brook de Cobham Chlr. Johanni Talbott de Lilsle Milit. Reginaldo
West Chlr. Tho de Scales Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Wilton Chlr. Roberto
Hungerford. Domino de Mollins.
De notificando Parliamentum de Cantabrigia teneri apud Buri Edmundi. Rex,
Humf. Duci Gloucest. etc. apud Buri Sancti Edmundi decimo die Februarii. Writs
of Summons.
Numerus, and ordo Nobilium idem quod in posteriori Parliamento praeterquam
quod Johannes Dux Oxomiae ponendus est ante Iohannem Ducem Norfolciae.
JAcobo de Berckley Chlr. Edwardo Gray Chlr. Domino de Ferrariis de Grobie.
Edwardo Gray de Ruthin Chlr. Ricardo Strange Chlr. George Latimer Chlr.
Radulpho de Graystock Chlr. Hen. de Percie Domino de Pomiger Chlr. Willielmo
Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho
Cromwell Chlr. Johanni le Scroop de Masham Chlr. Willielmo Zouch de
Harringworth Chlr. VValtero Hungerford Chlr. VVillielmo Fitzhugh Chlr. Hen.
Scroop de Bolton Chlr. Willielmo Nevill Chlr. VVillielmo de Lovell Chlr. Leoni
de Wells Chlr. Radulpho de VVilloughbie Chlr. Joh. Sutton de Dudley Chlr.
Radulpho Boteler de Sudley Chlr. Tho. de Clifford Chlr. Hen. Vicecom. Bourchier
Chlr. Edw. Brook de Cobham Chlr. Reginaldo West Chlr. Johanni Talbot de Lisle
Milit. Tho. de Scales Chlr. Reginal. Gray de Wilton Chlr. Roberto Hungerford.
Domino de Mollins.
The Parliament holden at St. Edmonds Bury on the tenth day of February, in the
five and twentieth year of King Henry the Sixth.
King.
IN the presence of the King sitting in the Chair of Estate within the house of
refectory of the Abbey of Bury St. Edmonds, and of the Lords and Commons, John
Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop.
Primate of England, Legate of the Sea of Rome, Popes Legate.
and Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
declared the cause of the same Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
taking for his Theme, Qui autem ineunt pacis consilia, sequitur illos gaudium;
Prove. 12.

Ambassadors.
order was taken for personal interview, Interview.

Safe conduct.


and talk of these two Kings, and sufficient assurance had for the Kings
passage into the parts beyond the Seas, for his safe being there, and like
return. In which cases the King was but to use their Counsel, for the which the
Parliament was called. Parliaments advice.


Qui autum, etc. he showed three Kinds of Counsels; the first, of the wicked,
utterly to be shunned, according to that of the Psalmist, Beatus est vir qui
non ambalavit in con^il^a impiorum. The second, of the good, and learned, who
wrote (...), according to Isay 6. (...) consilio suscepit actior in domusua, et
fecit (...) magnam. The third, of the Holy Ghost, expelling all doubts by
working inwardly, according to the Psalmist; 32. Consilium autem Domini in
aeternum manet, cogitationes ejus a generatione ad generationem.

Parliaments counsel Commons to choose and present their Speaker.
wherefore he willed the Commons to choose and present their Speaker to the
King the next day; and remembered them, that the Kings will was, that all
estates should enjoy their Liberties. All to enjoy their Liberties.


Petitions.
Receivers of Petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

February, the Commons notified unto the Lords, how that they had chosen their
Speaker. Speaker elected.


William Tresham Esquire to be their Speaker, William Tresham Speaker presented.
whose excuse rejected, Excuse.
he with the common Protestation was allowed. Protestation.


Katherine the late wife of John Brockley, late Alderman of London, and other
the Executors of the said John, Executors.

Charitable uses.


who had 7000 marks to dispose for the soul of the said John, It was enacted,
that the said Chancellor should take order therein. Chancellor.


Pontfract may enter, Mr. and Chaplains of Trinity. Pontfract.
and enjoy all such their lands, as Robert Brown Esquire lately entered upon.
Entry.


The Kings Letters Patents made to the Provost of Eaton, Patents.

Eaton, and its Lands and Liberties confirmed.


of the Priory of Deerehurst, and other Manors, Lands, and Tenements, and of
two Fairs at their Denomination of Laighton Bussard in Bedford confirmed by the
whole estates. Fairs.


Cambridge, Patents confirmed.

Kings College in Cambridge.


of sundry Manors, Hereditaments, and Liberties, are in like manner confirmed.

l. 13 s. 4 d. granted to Margaret Queen of England out of the Customs, Queens
Dower confirmed by Parliament.
etc. the King by his Letters Patents grants to the said Queen during her
life, all and singular her hereditaments to the same value; the which are
confirmed by the whole assent.

John Hampshyre, Petition. Reprisal.
and other Merchants, who were spoiled on the sea by certain Britains, Letters
of Mart are to them granted, Letters of Mart.
after the Truce ended. Truce.


Ellinor the late wife of the Duke of Gloucester, Duchess of Gloucester barred
of her Dower.
shall be utterly barred to claim any Dower of any of the hereditaments of the
said Duke.

Kings Council.
to make assurance to the Kings Creditors for 100000 l. Assurance.

Kings Creditors.




Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
London, who required that they and their Successors might in every of the said
parishes place and displace such Schoolmasters Schoolmasters placed and
displaced.
as they thought good; It was answered, that they should the same do by the
advice of the Ordinary, Ordinary.
or of the Archbishop of Canterbury. Archbishop.


Welshmen, Distresses.

Welshmen.


and carrying them into another Lordship, may be felony. Felony.


Resp.
The King will be advised.

Process.
Advice from the true serving of the Process awarded, Anno 8 H. 6. tit. 50.

Leicester in the 22. year of King H. 5. cap. 6. may be repealed. Stat.
repealed.


Resp.
The King will be advised.

Welshman.
The print touching Welshmen, cap. unico, agrees with the record.

Kings debts.
A motion for payment of certain of the Kings debts of household to no great
purpose.

Distress.
That for distress taken, given, or put away, so as the owner may not come
thereby, the owner may in Action of trespass recover treble damages. Trespass.

Treble Damages.




Resp.
The King will be advised.

Anno Vicessimo Septimo Henrici Sexti. Rex Ricardo Duci Eborum, Writs of
Summons.
etc. apud Westminster. duodecimo die Februarii. Test apud Westminster. secundo die
Ianuarii.
WIllielmo Duci Suffolciae. Iohanni Duci Norfolciae. Humf. Duci Buckinghamiae.
Hen. Com. Northumb. Tho. Com. Devon. VVillielmo Com. Arundell. Radulph. Com.
Westmerland. Ricardo Com. Sarum. Johanni Com. Oxoniae. Johanni Vicecomiti
Beamont. Jacobo Berckley Chlr. Edoardo de Gray Milit. Domino de Ferrariis de
Grobie. Edoardo Gray de Ruthin Milit. Ricardo Strange Chlr. Georgio Latimer
Chlr. Radulpho de Graystock Chlr. Hen. Percie Domino de Poynings Chlr.
VVillielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland. Johanni Beauchamp Milit.
Domino de Beauchamp. Jacobo de Fynes Milit. Domino de la et de lebe. Jacobo de
Audley Chlr. Radulpho de Cromwell Chlr. Johanni de Scroop de Masham Chlr.
Willielmo Zouch de Harringworth Chlr. Waltero Hungerford Chlr. Willielmo
Fitzhugh Chlr. Hen. de Scroop de Bolton Chlr. Willielmo de Lovell Chlr.
Lionelli de Wells Chlr. Roberto de Willoughby Chlr. Iohanni Sutton de Dudley
Chlr. Radulpho Boteler de Sudley Chlr. Tho. de Clifford Chlr. Hen. Vicecom.
Bourchier Chlr. Edoardo Brook de Cobham Chlr. Iohanni Talbot de Lisle.
Reginaldo West Chlr. Tho. de S^ales Chlr. Reginal. Gray de Wilton Chlr.
Johanni Surton Milit. Ricardo Wodvill Milit. Dom. de Rivers. Tho. Hoar Chlr.
Tho. Domino de Roos. Roberto Hungerford Milit. Domino de Mollins. VVillielmo
Bourchier Milit. Dom. Fitzwarren. Willielmo Beauchamp, Dom. de Sancto Amando.
Test Rege apud Westmonast. vicess^mo secundo die Maii.

No Lord Warden named.

Rex dilecto and sidelissimo Henrico Bromfleet Milit. salutem. Cum etc. ut
supra, usque ibi tractatum and tum, sic vobis in fide and legiantia quibus
nobis tenemini, etc. ut supra, urgen. tunc volumus cum vos and urgen. vestios
haeredes masculos de corpore vestro legitime exeuntes Barons de Vessey
existere. Test Rege apud Westminster. Vicesimo quarto die Ianuarii.

The Parliament holden at Westminster the twelfth day of February, in the
twenty seventh year of the reign of King Henry the Sixth.
February, in the presence of the King, King.
sitting in the Chair of Estate in the Chamber de pinct. in the Palace of
Westminster, Painted Chamber.
and of the Lords and Commons, John Archbishop of Canterbury, Chancellor of
England, Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment, declared the cause of the Parliament, Causes of
Parliament.
making a notable declaration, and willed the Commons to choose their Speaker,
Commons to choose and present a Speaker.
and the next day to present him to the King.



England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

February the Commons presented unto the King John Day Esquire to be their
Speaker, John Day Speaker presented.
whose excuse made was rejected, Excuse.
and he with the Common protestation allowed. Protestation.


Half Dism and Fifteen granted.
The grant of half a Desme, and half a Fifteen to be levied of the Laity.

Tonnage and Poundage for 5. years granted.
The grant of Tonnage and Poundage for five years of all Merchants, as well of
the Hauns as otherwise, with three shillngs Tonnage more of Aliens, as well of
the Hauns as otherwise.

Parliament prorogued.
The fourth day of April the Chancellor by the Kings commandment, and assent of
the Lords, prorogued the Parliament really from the same day until Wednesday
the seventh day of May next ensuing at Westminster.

Council. Assurance.
There is authority given to the Council to make assurances to the Kings
Creditors for 100000 l. as well upon the Kings Revenues as Jewels. Kings Debts.
Revenues. Jewels.


Plague.
The thirtieth day of May, for that the plague reigned in London and
Westminster, the Chancellor, Chancellor.
as before, prorogued the Parliament from the said day unto the sixteenth of
June ensuing at Winchester. Parliament prorogued.


Half Dism and Quindism granted.
The grant of another half Disme, and Fifteen to be levied of the Laity.

Poll-money granted.

Alien.


The Commons granted to the King sixteen pence to be taken of every householder
within the realm, not being born within the Kings Dominions, and six pence of
every other person being not so born, and no householder; and six shillings
eight pence of every Merchant stranger, and twenty pence of all and every of
their Clerks.

Subsidy of Wools.
The like Subsidy of Wools granted for 4. years as before.

Soldiers wages.
A long motion that the Soldiers wages at Callice, Ca^lice.
and the reparations there to be made, Reparations.
may be supplied out of the subsidy of wools, which is granted.

Lord Hastings.
The Lords Hastings Chancellor of France, and the Abbot of Gloucester being sent
in message by mouth from the Duke of Somerset the Kings Lieutenant in France
declares the same containing in effect 3. points. Duke of Somerset.

Kings Lieutenant in France.

Message from him to the Parliament.


The first, of the great puissance and preparations made by the French; Power
and Preparat. of the French King.
of their daily damages in breach of peace; Breach of Peace.
The second, that if war should happen, War. Normandies weakness. Truce near
expired.
that then the Country of Normandy was not able to defend it self. The third,
how the truce was but to endure for fourteen months; wherefore in discharge of
the said Duke, they require the King and Council, to remember, and to prepare
for the wars. Preparat. for War.


Earl of Devon.
Upon contention between William Earl of Arundel, Ea^l of Arundel.

Precedence.


and Thomas Earl of Devon, for superiority of place in Council and Parliament;
It is enacted by the Kings and Lords, King and Lords enact.
by the advice of the Judges, Judges advice.
that the said Earl of Arundel, and his heirs, by reason of the Castle and
Honor of Arundel, Arundels precedence.
shall for ever enjoy the preheminent place, in the presence of the King and
elsewhere, above the said Earl of Devon.

Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
Staple.
cap. 12. agrees with the record.

The print for the restraint of Clothes in Brabant, Clothes.

Brabant.


cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Welchmen, Distresses. Wales.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Clarks convict.

Prison.




The Clergy shall take order therein.

The print touching Faires, Resp.




and Markets, cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Kings Pardon.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Of the three Chapters in print, this record makes no mention.

Anno Vicessimo Octavo Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Willielmo Duci Suffelciae, apud Westminster. Sexto die Novembris. Test apud S.
Vicesimo tertio Septembris.
IOhanni Duci Norfolciae. Humf. Duci Buckinghamiae. Hen. Com. Devon. Willielmo
Com. Arundel. Radulpho Com. Westmerland. Ricardo Com. Sarum. Johanni Com.
Oxoniae. Johanni Com. Wigorum. Jacob. Com. Wilton. Johanni Vicecom. Beamont.
Jacobo Berckley Chlr. Edwardo Gray Milit. Domino de Grobie. Edoardo Gray de
Ruthin Chlr. Georgio Latimer Chlr. Radulpho de Graystock Chlr. Henrico Poynings
Domino de Poynings. Willielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr.
Johanni Beauchamp milit. Domino de Beauchamp. Jacobo Fynes milit. Domino de
Say, and de Seal. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho Cromwell Chlr. Johanni le
Scroop de Masham Chlr. VVillielmo Zouch de Harringworth Chlr. VVillielmo
Fitzhugh Chlr. Willielmo le Scroop de Bolton Chlr. Leoni de Welles Chlr.
VVillielmo de Lovell Chlr. Radulpho Willoughbie Chlr. Tho. de Clifford Chlr.
Henrico Vicecom. Bourchier. Edwardo Brook de Cobham Chlr. Johanni Talbot de
Lisle Milit. Reginaldo West Chlr. Johanni Sturton Milit. Domino de Sturton.
Tho. de Scales Chlr. Reginaldo de Wilton. Ricardo Wodvill Milit. Dom. de
Rivers. Willielmo Bourchier Milit. Domino de Fitz-warrin. Willielmo Boneville
and de Clinton chaton. Hen. Bromflet Domino de Vessey. Tho. Domino Roos.
Roberto Hungerford Domino de Mollins Milit. Radulpho Boteler de Sudley Chlr.
Tho. Hoar Chlr.
No Lord Warden.

The Parliament holden at Westminster on the Sixth day of November, in the
Twenty eighth year of King Henry the Sixth.
de pinct. within the Palace of Westminster, King.

Painted Chamber.


and of the Lords, and Commons, John Archbishop of Canterbury declared,
Archbishop.
how that the King had really prorogued the same Parliament in London,
Parliament prorogued.

Plague.


for avoiding the infectious air of Westminster, wherefore he willed the
Commons to choose, Commons to choose and present a Speaker.
and the next day to present to the King their Speaker.

The fear of the Plague it seems caused the Archbishop to forget his Oration,
and the Clerk of the Parliament to enroll him as Chancellor.

Petitions.
for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Sir John Popham Speaker.
On Saturday the eighth day of November the Commons presented to the King Sir
John Popham Knight to be their Speaker, whose excuse was received, His excuse
admitted and he discharged.
and he thereof discharged.

William Tresham to be their Speaker, William Tresham Speaker presented.
who with the Common protestation was allowed. Protestation.


December, the Parliament was adjourned from London to Westminster, Parliament
adjourned.
really to be holden by the Chancellor in the presence of the King, Lords, and
Commons, viz. the next day.

December, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop.
Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
in the presence of the King, gave thanks on his behalf to the three estate^,
Thanks to the three Estates.
and prorogued the Parliament from the said day unto the twenty second of
January next ensuing, Parliament prorogued.
at Westminster.

January, the Chancellor was discharged, Old Chancellor discharged.
and John the Cardinal Archbishop of York was appointed Chancellor by the
King. A new appointed.


March, the Chancellor by the Kings commandment prorogued the Parliament from
the said day unto the twenty ninth of April then ensuing at Leicester.
Chancellor.

Parliament prorogued.




The Commons grant unto ^he King a subsedy, Subsidy granted of 6 d. the pound
for lands, of 12 d. above 20 l. to 100 l. and 2 s. above 100 l. lands.
viz. that every person having franck tenement by free Deed, copte, grant of
Annuity, or office, to the clear yearly value of 20 s. to pay 6 d. and so from
20 s. to 20 l. from 20 l. to 200 l. yearly 12 d. for the pound, from 200 l. to
pay 2 s. for every 20 s. as Well for the Laity as the Clergy, Gardians of
Wards, men having fees, and all Corporations to pay accordingly.

Kings Household.




and fee farms are allowed to bear, and pay charges of the Kings household.

The twenty second day of January the Duke of Suffolk requires the King that
he may be especially accused, Duke of Suffolk.




and be heard to answer to that which many men reported him to be an untrue
man. Reports.


The Dukes protestation made to the King, The Dukes protestation. His Ancestors
loyalty and service. His own service in the wars and else where. Taken
prisoner. His great ransom. Order of the Garter. Counselor to the King. His
Purgation required.
shows, how his father, and three of his brethren died in service of the
King, and of his father, and Grandfather, and that he himself had served in the
wars thirty four years, and being but a Knight, and taken prisoner, paid for
his ransom 2000 l. that he had been of the order of the Garter thirty years,
and a Counselor to the King for fifteen years, that he had been seventeen
years in the wars Without returning home, and so asking Gods mercy as he
had been true to the King and his realm, he required his purgation.

The twenty sixth day of January the Commons require that the Duke for his
confession might be committed to ward; The Commons require his Commitment. The
Lords and Justices see no cause for it. Imprisonment. Special matter.
the Lords and Justices upon consultation, thought there was no good cause,
unless some special matter were objected against him.

January the Speaker declared, Speakers charge against the Duke.
how the Duke of Suffolk (as it was said) had sold this realm to the French,
Report of selling the realm to the French.
who had prepared to come hither, and that the same Duke for his own defense
had furnished the Castle of Wallingford with all warlike munition, Furn^shing
VVallingfo^d Castle for his defense. He is committed to the Tower upon request
upon whose request the said Duke was then committed to the Tower of London.

February the Speaker of the Commons, the Chancellor, and the Lords sent to
them by the King a Bill of Articles, Articles of Accesation against Will. de
la Pool Duke of Suffolk.
and accused William de la Pool Duke of Suffolk late of Ewelm in the Connty of
Oxford of sundry treasons, viz.

Duke having the wardship of Margaret, the daughter and heir of John Duke of
Somerset^ To match his Son to the Daugh^. and heir of the D. of Somerset. To
claim the Crown. To depose the K. by aid of the French.
whom he meant to marry to John his Son, and thereby for want of issue of the
King, to claim the Crown, and to procure the French King by the means of
certain French Lords (there named) to depose

Enlarging the D. of Orleance. Practicing with the French to recover France.
The 2d. for that he procured the delivery of the Duke of Orleans in the 27 H.
6. and practicing with him to cause the French to recover France from the King.

Practice to deliver Manns and Main to the King of Sicily, the Kings Enemy.
The 3d. touching the promise of delivery of Manns, and Maine, to require the
King of Sicile the Kings enemy, with the assent of the other Ambassadors.

Dunnois, Disclosing the Kings Couns. to the French.
bastard of Orleance, and to others of the French.

French the strength of the Kings piles, Disclosing to the Fr. the Kings
forces, etc.
Ordinance, and munition beyond the seas.

For causing the Peace to be broken.


Supporting the Ks. Enem. staying arms.
which should have passed against them.

For not comprising the K. of Aragon, and D. of Britany in the last peace.
The 8th. that the said Duke had fortified the Kings enemies by not compromising
in the last peace, the King of Aragon who is almost lost, and the Duke of
Britany lost.

Commons pray the Attic. to be enacted.
All which Articles the Commons require to be enacted, with prosecution therein.

New Articles by the Commons.
The 9th. day of March the Commons make a new complaint against the said Duke of
Suffolk in effect following.

Procuring the King to give away his Crown Lands.
First in procuring the King in his 16th year to give away the inheritance and
lands of the Crown in manner of a spoil.

For procuring Lib. in derogation of the Com. Law, and Justice.
and hinderance of Justice,

Procuring Honors and Pensions.
etc. of the Capiton to be Earl of Kendall, and to have yearly, etc.

Manlion de Soob, For causing the K. to give away a Cast. etc.
and other territories in Guienne.

Amaniake, and other Nobles of Guienne were drawn from the Kings obedience by
the discoverture of the said Duke, The Author of Guienns revolt from the King.
which was the utter decay of this realm.

Normandy and Guienne, For procuring the keeping of Towns and offices on
unworthy persons.
upon unworthy persons.

Percie de Brece (one of his chief enemies) an Imposition of wine and victuals
coming to Roane by the river of Seine. Causing an Imposition on victuals, to
pleasure an Enemy.


Enreney, and Longuevill, Procuring grants from the K. in Normandy to
Frenchmen, his chiefest Enemies.
and other Lordships in Normandy to the bastard of Orleance, and other French,
the Kings chiefest enemies, without the assent of the Council.

France, For procuring the K. to promise to attend in person at a Convention in
France.
to the Kings subversion, if the same had taken effect.

causing the Subsidies granted to be contrarily employed. Misimployment of
Subsidies.


Spending the Kings Treasure, etc.
and other the French.

Dudley, late treasurer, was by him consumed. Consuming the Ks^ Treas.


Pembrooke, For procuring himself to be E. of Pembroke, etc.
and obtaining the Lordships of Hereford West, after the death of Sir Rowland
Lenthall.

For conveying out the Kings treasure.
the obligations of the Finnance of the Duke of Orleance.

William Talbois Esquire of Lincoln, For staying of process on an Appeal, etc.
upon sundry appeals of murder.

William for not appearing upon suertiship of peace. For procuring a Pardon for
a Murderer, etc.


For procuring his Confederates to be made Sheriffs.


Almains the Kings Allies, For fighting with the Kings Allies, etc.
on the part of the French, the Kings enemies.

Art. to be enrolled.
and that the said Duke may answer to them. The D. to answ. them


March the same Duke was brought from the Tower by the Kings writ into the
Parliament Chamber before the King and Lords, The D. brought by writ to the
Parl.
to whom the Articles aforesaid were rehearsed, The Articles read to him.
who desired copies of them, He desires Copies of them. Kept in the Kings
Palace in the Tower t^ll answer, by certain Esquires.
which was granted. And he for more ready answer committed to certain Esquires,
to be kept in the Tower within the Kings Palace.

March, the same Duke appeared before the King and Lords, He appears and
kneels. Denies the 8. articles of treason.
who on his knees denied, as untrue, the 8. Articles as of Treason, and the
same offered to approve, as the King shall appoint. The first, he denied, as
impossible, The 1. impossible.
inferring, that some of the Lords knew that he meant to marry his Son to the
Earl of Warwicks daughter, if she had lived. And to many of the rest, he
refers himself to some Acts of the Council, and to the Kings Letters
Patents. He refers himself to some Act^ of Council, to many of the rest, and
the Kings Patents.
To the yielding of An^oy and Manoy, he referred himself to the Acts of the
Council, which shows, that other Lords were privy thereto, The other Lords
privy thereto.
and says, that the same was delivered by the Bishop of Chichester then Keeper
of the Privy Seal. Bishop of Chichester

Privy Seal.




March the said Duke was ^et to come be^before the Lords, His 2. Appearance
before the Lords.
to whom the Chancellor repeated the Circumstance aforesaid, The Chancellor
repeats his Answer.
and how that the said Duke therein had not put himself upon his Pairage, That
he put not himself upon his Peerage. Protests his Innocence.
wherefore he now asks the Duke, How he would be tried? who kneeling said,
that he hoped he had answered all things to the ^ull, and so protesting his
innocence, ref^rreth Kings order. Refers himself to the King.


He put not himself on his Peerage.
Thereupon the Chancellor, by the Kings commandment pronounced, that since the
Duke did not put himself upon his Peerage, the King touching the Articles of
Treason contained in the first Bill, The King acqui^s him of Treason.
would be doubtful; And to the Article of misprision, not as Judge by the
advice of the Lords, but as one to whose Order the Duke had committed himself,
the King does banish him the realm, King Banishment.

Ban^sheth him upon the Articles of misdemeano^, not as his Judge, but
Arbitrato^, to whom he appealed.


and all other his Dominions for 5. years, from the first day of May then
ensuing.

After which ended, the Viscount on the behalf of the Bishops and Lords
required, The Lords Protestation against it enrolled.
that it might be enrolled, that the same Judgment was by the Kings own rule,
and not by their assent; and required, that neither they, nor their heirs
should by this example be barred of their Peerage.

An Act of Resumption for the King to take into his hands all hereditaments,
Resumption.
offices, liberties, and grants whatsoever, from the first day of his reign
unto the making of the same, is granted, except certain peculiar grants.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Plymouth, Exactions, Searchers. Plymouth.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Welshmen, Distresses. Welshmen
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Will. Talboys.

Privilege of Parl.

Assault.


At the request of the Commons, it was enacted, that William Talbois of South
Lynn in the County of Lincoln Esquire, who in the Parliament time would have
slain Ralph Lord Cromwell, Ralph L. Cromwell.
one of the Kings Council, Kings Council.
in the Palace of Westminster, that the said William should be therefore
committed to the Tower, Imprisonment in the Tower.
there to remain one year, without Bayl, Baison, or Mainprize, and that before
his delivery he should answer to the same, and to all other misdoings. He was
accounted a Common Murderer, and Baretter. Damages.

Common Baretter.




Brabant, Clothes.

Brabant.


cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Pardon. Sheriffs.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Patents. Oastlers.
The print touching Letters Patents made to Oastlers and Brewers, Brewers.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Bury St. Edmonds to be discharged of Desmes by him collected, Abbot of Bu^y.

Disms.


of no great purpose.

A motion that all officers and Clerks of Receipt, Officers.

Extortion.


as have received of any person more than his due fees from the first day of
the Kings reign, Fees.
may render the same to the King.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

Anno Vicessimo Nono Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Ricardo Duci Eborum, etc. apud Westminster. in festo Leonardi, etc. Test apud
Westminster. quinto die Septembris.
HEn. Duci Oxoniae. Iohanni Duci Norfolciae. Humf. Duci Buckinghamiae. Edoardo
Duci Somerset. Ricardo Com. War. Hen. Com. Northumb. Tho. Com. Devon.
VVillielmo Com. Arundell. Radulph. Com. Westmerland. Ricardo Com. Sarum.
Johanni Com. Oxoniae. Johanni Com. Wigorum. Jacobo Com. Wilton. Johanni
Vicecomiti Beamont Chlr. Jacobo Berckley Chlr. Edoardo Gray Milit. Domino de
Grobie. Edoardo Gray de Ruthin Chlr. Rob. Hungerford senior Chlr. Radulpho de
Graystock Chlr. Hen. Percie Chlr. Domino de Poynings. VVilli^lmo Borreaux Chlr.
Tho. Da^re de Gilsland Chlr. Johanni Beauchamp Milit. Domino de Beauchamp.
Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho Cromwell Chlr. Willielmo Zouch de Harringworth
Chlr. Johanni le Scroop de Masham Chlr. Willielmo Fitzhugh Chlr. Hen. Scroop
de Bolton Chlr. Leonide Wells Chlr. Johanni Domino de Clinton. VVillielmo de
Lovell Chlr. Edoard. Nevill Domino de Bergavenney. Roberto Willoughbie Chlr.
Tho. de Clifford Chlr. Hen. Vicecom. Bourchier. Edw. Brook de Cobham Chlr.
Johanni Talbot de Lisle Milit. Tho. de Scales Chlr. Reginal. Gray de Wilton
Chlr. Johanni Sturton Milit. Domino de Sturton. Ricardo Woodvill Milit. Domino
de Rivers. Willielmo Bourchier Milit. Domino de Fitz-warrin. Willielm.
Boneville Milit. Dom. de Boneville and de Chaton. Hen. Bromfleet Domino de
Vessey. Tho. Domino de Roos. Roberto Hungerford Mil. Dom. de Mollins. Radulpho
Boteler de Sudley Chlr. Tho. Gray Domino de Richmond. Willielmo Beauchamp
Milit. Domino de St. Amando. Tho. Percie Milit. Domino de Egremont. Johanni
Sutton de Dudley Chlr.
Breve dirigitur Willielmo Fynes Domino de Say, and Seal, adveniendum ad
Parliamentum, Datum decimo tertio die Aprilis.

The Parliament holden at Westminster on the feast of St. Leonard the twenty
ninth year of the reign of King Henry the Sixth.
King.
IN the presence of the King, sitting in the Chair of Estate in the Chamber de
pinct. within the Palace of Westminster, Lords, and Commons, John the Cardinal
Archbishop of York, Archbishop of York.

Cardinal.


and Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment, declared, that the Parliament was called, Causes of
Parliam.
first for defense of the realm, Defense of the Realm. Seas garding.
safe keeping of the seas, for provision for an Army against the French,
Supplies. Army.
and for the suppression of Insurrections within the realm, Iusurrections.
Suppression. Commons to choose and present a Speaker.
to which end he willed the Commons to choose their Speaker, and the next day
to present him to the King.

Petitions.
Receivers of petitions for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

November, the Commons presented to the King Sir William Oldhall Knight to be
their Speaker, Sir Will. Oldhall Speaker Presented.
who with the common protestation was allowed. Protestation.


Subsidy altered.
Sundry devises and orders for the alteration of the payment of the Subsedy
granted in the last Parliament.

Isabel the wife of William Tresham Esquire, Complaint and Appeal of murder by
the wife.
shows, how Simon Norwich of Brumhurst in the County of Northampton Esquire,
for malice born to the said William, lay in wait for the said William, with
sundry Welshmen there named, Welshman.
and murdered the said William riding, Murder.
and saying of our Ladies Mattins, at a place called Thorpland-close in Molton
in Northampton, toward the Duke of York.

Northampton, Writs of Proclamation for the Male-factors to render themselves.
to proclaim, and cause those evil doers to render themselves by a day, and
that upon their appearance they may be committed to ward, Appearance.

Imprisonment.


and answer to the appeal, Appeal. Trial.
the same to be tried by sufficient men of Northamptonshire only, and that the
sons of the said William may pursue the Appeal if she should happily die:
Appeal by the sons.
the which was granted.

December, the Chancellor in the presence of the King, and of the three
Estates, really prorogued the Parliament from the same day, Parliament
prorogued.
unto the twentieth day of January then ensuing at Westminster.

April the Parliament was likewise prorogued from the same day unto the fifth
of May then ensuing at Westminster. Parliament prorogued.


Kings poverty.
It is enacted, that the King shall be preferred to 20000 l. out of the Customs
of London, Customs.
and Southampton be for C li. payments.

It is enacted, that the Statute made in the eighteenth year of this King, for
the allowance of the Kings Justices wages, Justices wages and Liveries.
and liveries, shall be observed.

l. delivered to the King in Allom by the Merchants of Iean named. Allom.

Merchants of Iean.


It is enacted, that they shall ship any Staple-ware out of the South, To be
repaid for it out of the Customs of Staple wares.
until they be of the said sum answered.

The Allom sold for present Moneys. Monopoly.
paying in hand to the King 8000 l. and no man during two years on pain of
forfeiture, None to bring in, or sell Allom in 2. years.
do bring, buy, or sell any other Allom.

Persons banished the Kings Court, because the people speak ill of them.
that Edmond Duke of Somerset, Alice Poole late the wife of William Poole, late
Duke of Suffolk, William Bishop of Chester, Sir John Sutton Knight, Baron of
Dudley, Thomas Daniel late of London Esquire, John Trevillian late of London
Esquire Edward Grimstone late of London Esquire Thomas Kemp Clerk of the Commons,
Commons Clerk.
John, etc. late of London Esquire Reynold Abbot of St. Peter's in the County of
Gloucester, Thomas Pulford of London Esquire John Hampton, William Myners, John
Blackwell, John Pen^rike, John Gergoran Esquire, Stephen Slegg, Thomas Stacy,
Tho. Hoar Lord Hastings, Edmond Hungerford Knight, Thomas Stanley Knight,
Ienkin de Stanley Usher of the Kings Chamber, Esquire Barthol. Hawley, Ralph
Balthorp Esquire Edmond Hampton Knight, Mr. John Somerset, Mr. Iervis de Deberre
one of the Kings Secretaries, Kings Secretary.
John Newport, alias Spicer, of the Isle of Wight Esquires, and Robert
Wingfield Knight, he abandoned from the Kings presence during their lives,
General accusation.

Ill fame.


and not to come within twelve miles of the Court, for that the people speak
evil of them.

The King of his mere motion is contented, Resp.

King consents for one year, unless they be Lords.


that all shall depart unless they be Lords, and a few of them whom he may not
spare from his person, and they shall so continue for one year, to see if any
man can duly improve them.

Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
Resumption.
as in the last Parliament, tit. 23. to begin at the first day of the
Parliament, Anno 28 H. 6. and to end at the last day of the Parliament,
excepting certain particulars.

H. 6.

Jack Cade, Jack Cade. Attainder
agrees with the record.

Truce Breakers.
The print touching process against breakers of truce, cap. 2. agrees with the
record.

York, Patents.

York.


c. 3. agrees with the record.

Bury, who had in his hands 456 l. 2 s. ^ d. of a rest for a Collection of
Disms, Arrears of Disms to be paid notwithstanding the Kings pardon.

Deceit.


shall pay the same to the King; albeit he have general pardon, for that it was
no meaning of the King to pardon the same, Vide 27 H. 6.

Anno Tricesimo Primo Henrici Sexti. Rex, etc. Duci Eborum, etc. apud Reading,
Sexto die Martii. Writs of Summons.
Test apud Westmonast. Vicesimo die Ianuarii.
RIcardo Duci Somerset. Johanni Duci Norfolciae. Humf. Duci Buckingham. Hen.
Duci Oxoniae. Edwardo Com. Richmond. Jaspero Com. Pembrook. Ricardo Com. War.
Hen. Com. Northumb. Tho. Com. Devon. Willielmo Com. Arundel. Radulpho Com.
Westmerland. Ricardo Com. Sarum. Ricardo Com. Oxon. Johanni Com. Salopiae.
Johanni Com. Wigorn. Johanni Com. Wilton. Johanni Vicecom. de Beamont Chlr.
Johanni Talbott Vicecom. de Lisle Chlr. Hen. Vicecom. Bourchier Chlr. Edwardo
Gray de Ruthin Chlr. Edwardo Gray Domino de Grobie Chlr. Joh. de Berckley Chlr.
Georgio Latimer Chlr. Rogero Hungerford sen. Milit. Radulpho de Graystock Chlr.
Hen. Percie Dom. de Poynings. Willielmo Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland
Chlr. Johan. Beauchamp Chlr. Dom. de Beauchamp. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho
Cromwell Chlr. Johanni le Scroop de Masham Chlr. Willielmo Zouch de
Harringworth Chlr. Hen. Scroop de Bolton Chlr. Leoni de Wells Chlr. Johanni
Dom. de Clinton Chlr. VVillielmo de Lovell Chlr. Edwardo de Nevel de Burgavenny
Chlr. Tho. de Clifford Chlr. Edw. Brook de Cobham Chlr. Tho de Scales Chlr.
Reginal. Gray de Ruthine Chlr. Johanni Sturton de Sturton Milit. Ricardo
VVodvill Domino de Rivers Chlr. Willielmo Bourchier Domino Fitz-warren. Will.
Bonevile, Dom. de Bonevile de Chatton Milit. Hen Bromfleet Domino de Vessey
Milit. Tho. Domino de Roos Mil. Roberto Hungerford Domino de Mollins Milit.
Radulpho Boteler de Sudley Chlr. Tho. Hoo Chlr. Tho. Gray Domino de Richmond
Mil. Willielmo Beauchamp Dom. de St. Amando. Tho. Percie Dom. de Egremont Mil.
Johanni Sutton de Dudley, Chlr.
The Parliament holden at Reding the seventeenth of March, in the one and
thirtieth year of King Henry the Sixth.
King.
sitting in the Chair of Estate in the Chamber of refectory within the Abbey of
Reding, and of the Lords and Commons, William Bishop of Lincoln, W. Bishop of
Lincoln.
in the absence of John Archbishop of Canterbury, Archbishop Chancellor.
Chancellor of England, by the Kings commandment, very notably declared the
cause of the Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
namely, for the good government of the realm, Good Government.
and safe defense of the same; Def. of the Realm.
to which end he willed the Commons to choose, Commons to choose their Speaker.
and the next day to present their Speaker to the King.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the fees, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

March, the Commons presented to the King Thomas Thorp Esquire to be their
Speaker, Thomas Thorp Speaker. Presented.
whose excuse refused, Excuse. Protestation
he with the Common protestation was allowed.

Commons grant to the King one Desme, Dism and Fifteen granted
and one Fifteen.

Commons grant to the King Tonnage and Poundage during his life. Tonnage and
Poundage for life.


They also grant to the King, during his Subsidy of woolls, Subsidy of wools,
and Staple commodities.
viz. 23 s. 4 d. for every sack of Denizens, and 5 l. of Aliens, and so of
other Staple-ware, according to the rate.

They also grant to the King of every Merchant not born within the realm, and
no Denize^, and keeping house, 40 s. and of every such Merchant as shall remain
within the realm but 6. weeks, 20 s. per Annum. And of every Merchant Alien
being no Denizen, Merchants Aliens.

Poll-money.


6 l. 13 s. 4 d. yearly during the Kings life.

The Speaker declared by mouth, Speaker.
how that the Commons had granted to find in the Kings service twenty thousand
Archers for half a years space. Commons to find 20000 Archers for half a year.


March, after thanks given to the Lords by the King himself, Kings thanks to
the Lords.
John the Cardinal, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor of England,
Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment, prorogued the Parliament from the day aforesaid,
Parliament prorogued.
and Town of Reding, to the twentieth day of April then ensuing, at Westminster.

The King discharged the realm, and Commons, of 7000 Archers, Archers, King
discharges them of 7000.
parcel of the 20000 before granted.

A due proportioning of the 13000 men granted to serve the King for every
particu^ar County within the realm. Archers. Soldiers proportionably raised.


In consideration of a sum, The levying of 13000 men respited for a sum of
money.
or Mass of money to be levied by the Commons, the King for three years is
content to respite the levying of 13000 Archers, unless he be drawn by great
necessity, Great Necessity.
(or in person to go himself) to take them.

C^llice. Commande^s, Captains, and Sould^ers arrests paid out of the Customs.
It is enacted, that Edmund Duke of Somerset, late Captain of Callice, shall be
paid 21648 l. 10 s. out of the Customs of the Staple wares going out of the
Port of Sandwich, for fees and wages due to him, and other Chief Captains and
Soldiers, while he was Captain there.

A particular rate out of the grant of a fifteen, for certain in every County
in England, allotted to the repairing of Callice, Callice repair out of the
Quindisms.
and for the making of a Risebanck.

An allotment of 20 s. out of the Subsedy for every sack of wool is allowed
toward the wages, and victualling of Soldiers in Callice. Victuals and
Soldiers pay of Callice out of the Customs.


The Commons grant unto the King the moity of one Desme and of one fifteen.
Moity of a Desme and Quindesme granted


(viz. We thank you for your grants, Kings thanks to the Commons for their
grant.
for the which be ye assured we will be a good, and gracious Lord unto you)
John the Cardinal Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor of England, the
second day of July, by the Kings commandment prorogued the Parliament,
Parliament prorogued.
from the day aforesaid, unto the seventh day of November at Reding.

Schedules sealed with the Kings seal.
The King delivered certain Schedules in parchment, signed with his seal
manuell, the which he willed to be enrolled, Enrolled.
and enacted; The which contain ten purveyances, or provisions for Edmund Earl
of Richmond, and Jasper Earl of Pembrook, and for none other several persons,
as it should seem to be exempted, Exemptions from resumptions.
and out of the Statute of resumption.

Parliament prorogued.
At Reding the twenty second of November, in the 32. H. 6. to which place and
day the Parliament was prorogued, John the Cardinal, Archbishop of Canterb^ry,
and Chancellor of England, by his Letters patents, Patents.
rehearses the beginning, and prorogation of the Parliament, and adjourneth
the same from the day aforesaid, Parliament adjourned.
to the eleventh day of February then ensuing, at Westminster aforesaid.

John Earl of Worcester Treasurer of England. Parliament prorogued.
The eleventh day of February at Reding aforesaid, John Earl of Worcester, and
Treasurer of England, by the Kings Letters Patents prorogued the Parliament
from the day and place aforesaid to the fourteenth day of the same month at
Westminster.

February, Richard Duke of York by the Kings Letters Patents of precedence
presideth in the same Parliament. Richard Duke of York President of the
Parliament. Patents.


February, the Commons made request unto the King and Lords, that Thomas Thorp
their Speaker, Privilege of Parliament. Thorp the Speaker, and Walter Rail
imprisoned.
and Walter Rail a member of their house, who were in prison, might be set at
liberty according to their privileges.

Friday the fifteenth day of February, the Duke of York came before the Lords,
The Speaker imprisoned upon an execution at the Duke of Yorks suit.
and showed how the Duke of York in the vacation, had recovered Damages in an
Action of Trespass against the said Thorp, by verdict in the Kings Exchequer,
for carrying away the goods of the said Duke of York out of Durham house, for
the which he remained in execution, and prays that he may continue the same.

Judges not to judge of Parliaments privileges. Parliament Judge of the Law and
its privileges.
which was Judge of the law: only they said that general Supersedeas of
Parliament there was none, Their advise. Supersedeas special. No privilege in
Treason, Felony, Breach of Peace.
but especial there was, in which case of special Supersedeas every member of
the Commons house ought to enjoy the same, unless the same be in cases of
treason, felony, surety for the peace, or for a condemnation before the
Parliament.

Thorp should remain in execution notwithstanding the privilege, Lords Judges
of the Speakers privilege.
and sent certain of themselves to the Commons to require them on the Kings
behalf to choose a new Speaker. His privilege denied. A new Speaker orderd to
be chosen.


February, certain of the Commons were sent to the Lords to make declaration,
now they had newly chosen (in the place of Thomas Thorp) Thomas Charleton
Knight, A new Speaker elected. Sr Thomas Charleton. Approved by the King.
to be their Speaker; the Chancellor answered, the King liked him, and willed
them to proceed with effect.

March, the Commons required the Lords to remember the hazard of Callice,
Commons request to the Lords.

Callice danger. Seas safeguard. Subsidies rightly employed.


the safe keeping of the seas, and that the Subsidy granted might be employed
upon the same; they also requi^^ ^he Lords to hold them excused of any other
Subsidies; No other subsidies.
and finally they require that a grave Council may be ready to answer all,
Great Council to answer all.
which is promised.

Windsor, Committee of Lords Kings sickness.
and to know his pleasure touching two Articles. Articles.


Canterbury, Who. Archbishop of Canterbury. Lord Chancellor. Privy Counselors
nominated to the King.
and who Chancellor of England in the place of John Kemp, by whose death the
King was to dispose of them? The second, to know whether certain being named to
be of the Council liked him, or no?

March, report to all the Lords, Their report. The King gives no answer.
how they had been with the King at Windsor, and after three several
repaires, and earnest persuasions with the King, they could by no means have
answer, or token of answer, only they said the King was sick. King sick.


The Lords make the Duke of York Protector and Defendor of the Realm, during
the Kings pleasure. Articles.
Whereas the Lords the twenty seventh of March had appointed the Duke of York to
be Protector and Defendor of the realm, so long as the same should please the
King; the same Duke the twenty eighth day of the same Month, required the
Lords Answer to the Articles following.

Lords power.

Protector.


and nothing of his own desire, or seeking.

Resp.
The like Articles shall be made for the same, as was made during the Kings
minority. Kings Minority.


All the Ls. will assist.
That all the Lords will assist the Duke therein.

Resp.
It is agreed by all lawful means.

Protectors power and office.


He shall be chief of Council, Protector and Defendor, which implies a
personal attendance against foreign Invasion, Resp.
and inward rebellion, and no authority of governance: so as the same be no
prejudice to the Prince.

H^s Salary.


Resp.
The presidents shall be seen, and the Duke conferred withal, upon which an Act
shall be made.

Kings Letters Patents conferring his power of Chief Counselor and Protector.
appoints the said Duke to be his chief Counselor, Protector, and Defendor
of this realm at the Kings will, and as unto such time as Edward the Prince
shall come to the age of discretion; the which the Duke in full Parliament took
on him to perform.

Edward the Prince, Prince Edward.
as Anno 1 H. 6. tit. 25. with the yearly fee of 2000 Marks only, Fee of 2000
marks.
besides allowance for riding, and such other exploits; provided the same be
not prejudicial to any grant made to Margaret Queen of England. Queen Margaret.


Richard Earl of Salisbury, John Earl of Shrewsbury, John Earl of Worcester,
James Earl of Wiltshire, and the Lord Sturton, are appointed to keep the seas,
Admirals to keep the Seas appointed by Parliament.
to whom is appointed for three years Tonnage and Poundage granted in the last
Parliament. Tonnage and Poundage.


April in the 32 year, it is agreed, that toward the furniture of the Lords
aforesaid, there shall be a loan made of certain Cities and Towns there named
of particular sums, Loan by Cities and Towns, to be repaid out of the Customs.
and they to be answered of the same out of certain Customs and Subsidies.

A certain particular rate out of the Kings revenues, Kings Household expenses
assigned.
and fee-farms, is allotted to the Treasurer of the Kings house for paying the
Kings provision taken up therefore. Treasurer of the Household.


Anno 28 H. 6. tit. 13. it is repealed.

Robert Poynings of Southwark Esquire, Robert Poynings.
being the Carver, Sword Bearer, and chief doer with Jack Cade, Jack Cade.
Pardon.
and had his pardon, upon which he with certain sureties by recognizance was
bound in the Chancery for his good behavior, Recogn. and sureties in Chancery
for the good behavior.
since which time he had done many riots, and namely, by raising, and going
with men armed, against the Law, in Kent; wherefore it is enacted, that an
Extent upon the said recognizance shall go against the said Poynings, Recogn.
forfeited.

Extended on the parties and Sureties


and his Sureties, and his and their lands and goods. Lands and goods.


Lords fined for absence.
for not coming to the Parliament, according to their degree.

the Mayor, Constable, and Fellowship of the Merchants of the Staple, Staple,
Callice.
shall be paid 10000 marks out of the subsidy of wool at Callice, the which
they lent toward the payment of the Soldiers wages there. Soldiers wages to
be paid out of the Subsidy of it.


Edward his Son Prince of Wales, Edward Prince of Wales created by Letters
Patents, Earl of Chester.
and Earl of Chester, to him and to his heirs Kings of England, with the
Ceremonies thereto belonging, the which are confirmed by the hands of the Lords
there named, Confirmed by the Lords and Commons.
and by the Commons.

Thomas Earl of Devonshire was accused of treason, Th. E. of Devonshire.




and acquitted of the same by his Peers, before Humfrey Duke of Buckingham,
Hen. D. of Buckingh.
Steward of England for the time being; Steward of England.
And for that the Duke of York thought the honesty of the said Earl to be
touched; whereupon the said Earl protesting his loyalty, Protestation.

Loyalty.


referred further trial as a Knight should do, Further Trial.
upon which Declaration the Lords acquitted him as a loyal Subject. Lords
acquit him.


Edmond of Hadsham, and Jasper of Hatfield, the sons of Queen Katherine his
Mother, to be the Kings lawful half Brethren, and Denizens. Denizens.


Edmond to be Earl of Richmond, E. of Richmond created. Precedence above all
Earls.
and that in Parliament and elsewhere, he should have pre-eminence above all
Earls. The King also grants unto the said Edmond, and to the heirs males of
his body lawfully begotten, the whole County, Honor, and Dominion of Richmond,
The whole County and honor of Richmond granted him.
with all the hereditaments, and appurtenances, with warranty by the service
accustomed. Warranty.


Jasper of Hatfield, Earl of Pembrook, Earl of Pembrook created by Patent.
with the preheminency to take place above all Earls, Precedence of other
Earls. The whole County, Honor, and Dominion of Pembroke entailed on him.
Confirmed by Parliament.
next unto his elder brother Edmond, and gave also unto him, and to his heirs
males of his body lawfully begotten, the whole County, Honor, and Dominion of
Pembroke, as above. In both of which Creations, and grants, certain perviews,
or exceptions are; both of which letters Patents are confirmed by assent of
Parliament.

King by assent of Parliament grants to Edmond Earl of Richmond in general
Tail, Lands granted to the E. of Richmond.

Tail general.


the Manor of Woresdall, with the appurtenances, in the Countyes of Lancaster,
Westmerland, and York, late John Duke of Bedfords, to hold only by fealty,
Tenure by Fealty.
with certain provisions therein.

Richard Duke of York being appointed to be Captain of Callice, Duke of York.

Captain of Callice.


requires satisfaction of 13. Articles, Articles required.
or demands concerning ready payment, Ready payment.
and the like succor for the keeping of the same, whereunto no answer is made.

Staple.
The Mayors, and Merchants of the Staple made several demands, and had answers
made thereunto.

Subsidy in part released.
The print, cap. 8. touching a release of some part of the Subsidy of wool,
agrees with the record.

James Earl of Wiltshire, and of Ormond, gave to the Master of the Hospital of
Thomas Peccot of London, called Thomas of Acres, Tho. of Acres Hospital^ Lands
given and conferred to it by Parliament.
the Manor of Hucot, and a Croft called little Milnhome; the which is confirmed
by Parliament.

Romans Chauntery in Shoreditch confirmed.
A Chauntery called Romans Chauntery, founded in the parish of St. Danstans in
Shorditch, for the which the Priest should have yearly 4 l. out of certain
houses in London, is established by Parliament.

Patents.
It is enacted, upon the Kings Letters Patents, that Margaret the Queen, Queens
Annuity of 1000 l. out of the Customs, confirmed.
and wife to the King, should yearly have, during her life, 1000 l. out of the
Customs and Subsidy of woolls in the port of Southampton, in which certain
provisoes are.

Patents.

Queens Dower confirmed.


sundry Manors, and Hereditaments in Northampton, Southampton, and Oxfordshire,
the which are confirmed by common consent.

Patent. A^^ears to the Earl of Shrewsbury to be paid out of the Customs,
confirmed.
The King, by his Letters Patents grants, that John Earl of Shrewsbury should
be paid 6597 l. 18. s. ob. q. out of certain Customs, the which is confirmed
by common consent,

Ralph Lord Cromwell in full Parliament demanded the surety of peace of the
Duke of York, Ralph L. Cromwell.

Surety of the Peace against the Duke of Exeter, granted in Parliament.


against Henry the Duke of Exeter, the which was granted.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Jack Cade, Jack Cade.

Attainder.


cap. 1. agrees with the record.

William Oldhall Knight, William Oldhalls Attainder confirmed.
outlawed of treason, being worker with Jack Cade, is confirmed.

Privy Seals.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Attachments. Wardens of the Marches.
The print touching Attachments made by the Wardens of the Marches, cap. 3.
agrees with the record.

Resumption.
The print touching the Act of Resumption, cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Truce-breach.
The print touching breach of truce, cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Patents.
The print touching Letters Patents made to Gaingiers, cap. 5. agrees with the
record.

Outlawrie^.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Wools.
cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Ravishment, Woman and Heirs.
and Gentlewomen inheritors, cap. 9. agrees with the record.

The which Act was made upon the complaint of Henry Beamont, son and heir of
Sir Henry Beamont Knight, and Charles Powell Esquire against Edward Lancaster of
Skypton in Craven Esquire for taking away Dame Ioane Beamont the late wife of the
said Henry, being lawfully married unto the said Charles, Marriage by Duress.
and for that the said Edw. married the said Dame against her will, and thereby
ravished her, against the which Edward, and many others there named, remedy is
given by way of Appeal. Appeal.


Anno Tricesimo Tertio Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Ricardo Eborum, etc. apud Westminster. Nono die Iulii. Test apud Westmonast.
Vicesimo Sexto die Maii.
JOhanni Duci Norfolciae. Humf. Duci Buckingham. Hen. Duci Oxoniae. Edmond Com.
Richmond. Jasper Com. Pembrook. Ricardo Com. War. Tho. Com. Devon. Willielmo
Com. Arundel. Radulpho Com. Westmerland. Ricardo Com. Sarum. Johanni Com.
Salopiae. Johanni Com. Oxon. Johanni Com. Wigorum. Jacobo Com. Wilton. Johanni
Vicecom. de Beamont Chlr. Hen. Vicecom. Bourchier Chlr. Edwardo Gray de Ruthin
Chlr. Edwardo Gray de Grobie Chlr. Jacobo Berckley Milit. Roberto Hungerford
Milit. Radulpho de Graystock Chlr. Hen. Percie Dom. de Poynings Chlr. Willielmo
Botreaux Chlr. Tho. Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. Johan. Beauchamp Dom. de Beauchamp.
Chlr. Jacobo de Audley Chlr. Radulpho Cromwell. Johanni le Scroop de Masham.
Willielmo Zouch de Harringworth Hen. le Scroop de Bolton. Johanni Dom. de
Clinton. VVillielmo de Lovell. Edwardo Nevil Dom. de Burgavenny Milit. Edw.
Brook de Cobham Chlr. Tho de Scales Chlr. Reginal. Gray de Wilton Chlr.
Johanni Sturton Dom. de Sturton Milit. Willielmo Bourchier Domino de
Fitz-warren Milit. Will. Domino de Boneville, et de Chatton Milit. Hen
Bromfleet Domino de Vessey Milit. Tho. Domino de Roos Mil. Radulpho Boteler de
Sudley Chlr. Tho. Gray Domino de Richmond Mil. Willielmo Beauchamp Dom. de St.
Amando Mil. Tho. Percie Dom. de Egremont Mil. VVillelmo Nevill de Facalbridge
Chlr. Ricardo Welles Domino de Willoughby Mil. Johanni Bourchier de Bruers
Mil.
The Parliament holden at Westminster on Wednesday the Ninth of July, in the
three and thirtieth year of the reign of King Henry the Sixth.
King.
sitting in the Chair of Estate, and of the Lords and Commons, Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, Archb. Chancellor.
and Chancellor of England, declared the cause of the Parliament, Causes of
Parliament.
and took for his Theme, etc.

Other report there is none.

Commons to choose their Speaker.
and the next day to present him to the King. And further shows to them, that
the Kings pleasure was, that all Estates should enjoy their Liberties.
Liberties enjoyed.


England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, Petitions.
etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Articles.
containing the cause of the Parliament. Causes of Parliament.


Charge of the Kings house.
First, To devise order for the charge of the Kings house.

Callice, Soldiers due pay.
and the Marches there.

Keeping the Seas.
and against the Invasion of the French, Defense against French and Scots.
and namely against the Scots, for besieging Barwick, against the truce.

13000. Archers employed.
To appoint how, and when the 13000 Archers granted the last Parliament, should
be employed.

Accord between the Lords.
To make a perfect accord, and unity between the Lords.

Exportation of coin


Seas safeguard.


To foresee that the peace may be kept in Wales. Peace kept in Wales.


Committees of Lords
were severally appointed.

John Wenlock Knight, Sir John Wenlock




to be their Speaker, whose excuse being refused, Excuse. Protestation
he with the common protestation was allowed.

Richard Duke of York, Nobles acquitted of disloyalty by the Kings Charter.
Richard Earl of Warwick and Richard Earl of Sarum, and them takes to be his
loyal Subjects, albeit Edmond late Duke of Somerset, Thomas Thorp, and William
Joseph, by their untrue means, Fa^s^ information.
had caused the King to think the contrary, and thereby to have raised a great
power against the said Duke, Army raised.
and others.

Yorks letters sent to the Archbishop of Canterbury, D. of Yorks Letter.
Chancellor of England, from Royston in May before, touching his coming by
force toward the King, Force raised.
and his griefs conceived. Grievances.


Their Letters to the King.
and Earls, written to the King from Royston in May before, containing their
enterprise, and due obeisance to the King. Their Obedience.


Somerset, Letters kept from the King.
and others, until such time as the said Duke of York and others met with the
King at St. Albones.

York, and his Allies, the twenty second day of May last, came to St. Albones
to have spoken with the King, Nobles kept by force from the King.
whom the Duke of Somerset, and others, did resist with a great number of armed
men, in which conflict the same Duke of Somerset was slain. D. of Somerset
slain.


York and his Allies, Obedience to the King.
in coming into the Kings presence after the said conflict.

The acquittall of the said Duke of York, Their acquittance after the battle.
and of all others coming with him to the said conflict, or battle, to any
harms there done.

All which are confirmed by whole assent of Parliament the twenty third day of
July in the thirty third year, Their acquittance confirmed.
all the Bishops, and Lords, in open Parliament were sworn to be true to the
King, Oath of Allegiance of all Lords and Bishops to the King.
but none here are named, nor their names.

The like order is taken for all other Lords as should after come to take the
like oaths. Oath.


Salisbury, Shrewsbury, and Worcester, and of the Lord Sturton, they were
discharged from keeping of the Seas. The Lords discharged from keeping the sea.


July, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
in the Kings presence, prorogued the Parliament from the same day, Parliament
prorogued.
and place, to the twelfth day of November ensuing, at Westminster.

General pardon. if Treason, etc.
Felonies, Contempts, Trespasses, etc.

November, in the thirty fourth year of the Kings reign, the King by his
Letters Patents appointed Richard Duke of York to proceed in the Parliament,
Parliament holden by Commission under the D. of York.
the which Commission was read before the Lords, and then before the Commons.

The thi^teenth day of November, Burley and others, coming from the Commons,
Comm^ttee of Commons request.
required the Duke of York, and the Lords, to move the King to appoint an able
Protector and Defender of the realm, Protector of the Realm desired.
since the King would not attend the same, Kings negligence.
and that the Commons might have knowledge of him; Commons to have notice of
him. Riots.
wherein they remembered the great ryots, and murders in the West parts,
between the Earl of Devonshire, and the Lord Boneville; the Duke and Lords
promised to answer the same. Answer promised.


The fifteenth day of November, the said Burley, and others of the Commons,
Committee of Commons renew their request.
coming before the Lords, renewed the aforesaid suit, and had the like promise.

Lords consultation.
for a Protector, Protector chosen.
and Defender, they thought the Duke of York most worthy therefore, and
thereupon made request to take the same upon him, according to the presidents
before, the which Duke upon excusing himself, requires respite. Respite
required.


The seventeenth of November, Burley, and others of the Commons, Committee of
Commons renew their suit.
coming before the Lords, revived their suit again as before, tit. 31.32.

The Chancellor declares to the Commons, Chancellor. Kings assent to the D. of
York to be Protector
how that the King by the assent of the Lords, had requested the Duke of York
to be Protector, and Defender of the realm.

The Duke of York makes the like protestation, The Dukes Protestation and
Demand.
and demand, and thereto has the like answer, as Anno 31. H. 6. tit. 34, 35,
36, 37.

After Conference had with the said Duke, by certain of the Lords, it was
agreed, that the said Duke should have toward his charges yearly four thousand
marks. Protectors Stipend. 4000 marks.


After all which Articles agreed, and earnest request made by the Lords to the
said Duke to take the same upon him, The Duke at the Lords request accepts the
Protectorship.
the said Duke at their earnest contemplations, accepted the same charge, not
as sought by himself, but as laid upon him by them.

Patent of the Protector confirmed by Parliament.
and to Prince Edward, as An. 3. H. 6. tit. 38, 39. only where by the former
letters they were to continue at the Kings will, Determinable at the King, and
Lords assent in Parliament.
instead thereof these words were inserted; Quousque Consanguineus noster de
occupatione ejus onere and nomine hujusmodi per nos in Parliamento de
aviseamento, and assensu Dominorum Spiritualium, and Temporalium, in
Parliamento existent, exoneretur. The which Letters Patents are confirmed by
common consent.

Patents.
as An. 3. H. 6. tit. 40.

The twenty third of November, in the thirty fourth year of the Kings reign,
the King commits the whole estate, The Government wholly committed to the
Privy Council.
affairs, and governance of the realm, to the Lords of his Council, only for
matters concerning his person, they shall not proceed, Kings person excepted.
without making him privy thereto.

The King by his several Letters Patents confirms to his Son Edward Prince of
Wales, Patents.

Prince of Wales.


and to his heirs Kings of England, his creation of the Principality and
Earldom of Chester, Earldom of Chester.
with all the particular Dominions and hereditaments belonging to the
Principality and Earldom.

for that the said Prince, Prince, Duke of Cornwall.
the Kings first begotten, the day of his birth is, and ought to be Duke of
Cornwall, the King grants to the said Prince livery of the same, Livery
thereof.
and of all other hereditaments belonging, of common consent.

further it is enacted, that the said Prince shall be at diet, Princes diet in
the Kings Court, till he be of 14 years.
and sojourn in the Kings Court unto his age of 14. years, for the which diet,
the King shall yearly take all the revenues and profits of the said
Principality, Earldom, and Duchy of the said Prince, until the said Prince
come to the age of 14. years, allowing yearly to the said Prince toward his
Wardrobe and wages 10000 l. unto his age of 8. years, His allowance and
Wardrobe till then.
and from the said age unto the age 14. years, 200000 Marks yearly, wherein
sundry provisions are.

Callice, Callice.
Sir John Cheyney Knight Victualler of Callice, Sir John Cheyney

Victualler of Callice.


who by the Appointment of the Council had delivered to the Mayor and Company
certain of their Obligations, to the sum of 2000 Marks, which they lent the
same Sir John by the assent of Parliament, Moneys lent.
is quitted.

Merchants loan of money.
by the assent of Parliament, grants to them payment of the same out of the
Customs, Re-payment assured out of the Customs.
passage out of the Ports of Sandwich, and Southampton.

A general Act of Resumption of all lands, Resumption.
offices, and fees, and other grants, from the first day of the reign of the
King, with sundry provisions therein made.

A particular allotment of 3934 l. 19 s. 4 d. ob. q. out of sundry the Kings
Revenues, Customs, and Fee-farms, yearly is allowed toward the charges of the
Kings household. Kings Household charges.


Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
by the appointment of the Duke of York, the Kings Commissary, Kings Commissary.
appointed by Letters Patents the 14th day of December in the 34 H. 6. in the
presence of the Lords and Commons, prorogued the Parliament from the same day
to the 14th day of January then ensuing, Parliament prorogued.
at Westminster aforesaid.

November, in the 34th year, the King being present in Parliament, Protectors
Power repealed by the Kings Patent in Parliament.
as well by his Letters Patents in the nature of a writ directed to Richard
Duke of York, as by full consent of Parliament, repealeth the power of
Protector, Defendor, Chief Counselor in this Parliament, before the committed
to the said Duke.

Petitions.
Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Servants.
cap. 1. agrees, etc.

Repeal.
touching outlawries in Lanc. cap. 2. agrees with the record. Outlawry.
Lancaster.


Extortion. Excheq.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Brewers.
The print touching Brewers in Kent, cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Silkwomen.
The print touching Silkwomen, cap. 5. agrees, etc.

Fountain, Abbey of Fountain.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Attorneys.
The print touching Attorneys in Norfolk and Suffolk, agrees with the record.

Anno Tricesimo Octavo Henrici Sexti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
Hen. Duci Oxoniae, etc. apud Coventree Vicesimo die Novembris. Test apud
Regem Leominster Nono die Octobris.
IOhanni Duci Norfolciae. Humf. Duci Buckinghamiae. Jaspero Com. Pembroke. Com.
Northumb. Hen. Com. Devon. VVillielmo Com. Arundell. Ricardo Com. Westmerland.
Johanni Com. Oxoniae. Jacobo Com. Wilton. Johanni Vicecom de Beamont Chlr. Hen.
Vicecom. Bourchier Chlr. Edoardo Gray de Ruthin Chlr. Jacobo Berckley Chlr.
Georgio Latimer Chlr. Radulpho de Graystock Chlr. VVillielmo Botreaux Chlr.
Reginaldo Dacre de Gilsland Chlr. Johanni Dom. de Beauchamp Chlr. Tho. Scroop
de Masham Chlr. Williel. la Zouch de Harringworth Chlr. Johanni Lovell Chlr.
Johanni de Scroop de Bolton Chlr. Edw. Nevell Domino de Bergavenney Chlr. Edw.
Brook de Cobham Chlr. Tho. de Scales Chlr. Reginal. Gray de Wilton Chlr.
Johanni Domino de Sturton Chlr. Ricardo Woodvill Domino de Rivers Chlr.
Willielmo Bourchier Domino de Fitz-warren Chlr. Willielmo Domino de Boneville
Chlr. Hen. Bromfleet Domino de Vessey Chlr. Tho. Domino de Roos. Radulpho
Boteler de Sudley Chlr. Tho. Gray Domino de Richmond Chlr. Tho. Percie Domino
de Egremont Chlr. Will. Nevill de Faconbridge. Johanni Bourchier de Barnes
Chlr. Ricardo Wells Domino de Willoughbie Chlr. Hen. Fitzhugh Chlr. Ricardo
Fynes Domino de Dacre Chlr. Johanni Dom. de Clifford Chlr. Leoni Wells Chlr.
Hen. Gray Chlr. Ricardo West Chlr. Johanni Sutton de Dudley. Willielmo Fynes
Domino de Say Chlr.
The Parliament holden at Coventree, on Tuesday the twentieth day of November,
the thirty eighth year of King Henry the Sixth.
King.
sitting in the Chair of Estate within the Chapter House of the Priory of our
Lady of Coventree, and the Lords and Commons, William Bishop of Winchester, and
Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
made a notable Declaration of the Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
taking for his Theme, Gratia vobis, and pax multiplicata. After which he
willed the Commons to choose their Speaker, Commons to choose a Speaker.
and the next day to present him to the King.

England, Petition.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Thomas Tresham Esquire to be their Speaker, William Tresham Speak presented.
whose excuse being rejected, Excuse.
he with the common protestation was allowed. Protestation.


A long Attainder of Richard Duke of York, Duke of Yorks Attainder.
and others, wherein are contained these matters ensuing. First, a
commemoration of the Kings great care in bringing the said Duke up, Kings love
and care in his Education.
and of the manifold benefits to him showed.

The Confederation of the said Duke with Jack Cade, Confederacy with I. Cade to
be advanced to this Crown.
to be advanced to the Crown, The Duke coming out of Ireland, with force to
the Kings Court, Coming with force to the Kings Court.
and presence. The Dukes practice to be Protector. Practice to be Protector.
Practice to raise an Army against the King.
The Dukes intent to have raised an Army against the King at Dertford in Kent.
His Submission, Submission.
and Oath to the King in Paul's, Oath to the K.
after the same.

The Dukes Oath at large.

Warwick and Salisbury. Confederacy with other Nobles.




A rehearsal of the Kings sundry benefits showed to the two said Earls.

Albones, Battle at St. Albons.
at what time the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord
Clifford were slain, and the pacification made by the King between the heirs of
the said Duke, Pacification.
and Earls slain, and the said Duke of York, and two Earls.

Kings Pardon.
and their promises of due obeisance, Promise of Allegiance.
with renumeration of sundry benefits to them after showed.

The Dukes and Earls ambition.
The ambition of the said Duke and Earls, their new Oaths and promises made to
the King, New Oaths.
their policies in not coming to the Council, Policies.
for their readiness in coming together, being far asunder.

Salisbury, Their Expedition and War^ ^ai^ed.
with Thomas and John Nevil Knights, sons of the said Earl; Thomas Parkin,
William Stanley Esquir^s, sons to Thomas Lord Stanley, and Thomas Oringe of
Tongue in the County of York, with 500 men, and Banners displayed on
Blore-heath, on the feast of St. Matthew, Anno 37.

James Lord Audley slain at Blore-heath in Staffordshire by the said Earl, and
John Lord Dudley, with sundry others taken prisoners, Prisoners^ taken.
the King pursuing them by the space of 30 days and nights; Ks. pursuit of
them.
the Kings pardon to them offered, Pardon offered, and refused.
and their refusal.

Their new assemblies in the field against the King.
Edward Earl of March, Richard Earl of Warwick, Richard Earl of Salisbury,
Edmond Earl of Rutland John Lord Clinton, John Wenlock, James Pickering, and
John Coniers, and Thomas Parr, Knights; John Bourchier, Edward Bourchier Esqs.
Nephews to the said Duke; Thomas Colt of London Gentleman, John Clay of Chesunt
in Herefordshire Esquire Roger Egerton of Shrewsbury Esquire and Robert Bold, Brother
to Henry Bold Knight, who with sundry others pitched their field of Ludlow in
the County of Hereford, on Friday the Vigil of the translation of St. Edward,
in Anno 38.

pretended to his company, Kings death pretended.
that the King was dead, for whose soul Mass was said in the said Dukes camp.

Dukes ranging in battle, Bat^el ranged by them. Camp fortified. Ambush to
surp^^ze the King.
the fortifying of his ground with Carts, and Guns set before his eschurmishes
made, his ambush laid, and his meaning suddenly to have surprised the Kings
host.

departure of the said Duke, and Earls out of the field about midnight, under
color to repose themselves at Ludlow, and their flight into Wales, Their
flight.
for that their army sainted, and submitted themselves unto the King,
Sub^ission.
who granted to them pardon. Pa^d^n.


Attaind. of Treason.
The Attainder of the said Duke, Earls, and others aforesaid persons as
Traitors. Alice the wife of Richard Earl of Salisbury, William Old^all Knight,
and Thomas Vaughan of London Esquire were attainted as Traitors for procuring the
treasons aforesaid. Procurers of Treason^.


All, and singular the hereditaments of the said Duke, and others, attainted in
fee, Their lands in Fee and Tail forfeited.
or fee tail, are forfeited.

Richard Gray Lord Powis, Walter Devereux Esquire and Henry Radford Knight, being
in the field with the Duke at Ludlow, are pardoned, Some pardoned.
but all their hereditaments as before, and other profits are forfeited. Their
lands yet forfeited.


Gray, Forfeiture. Provis^es.
and Sir Walter Devereux, the King would be advised.

A very solemn oath, Oath of Allegiance to the King, Prince, and Kings heirs.
whereto all the Bishops, All the Bishops, Lords, take and subscribe it.
and Lords there named, did answer, subscribed, and sealed, the eleventh day of
December, in full Parliament, the effect was, for due obeisance to the King,
the Queen, Prince Edward, and the heirs of the Kings body.

Exchange by the K. with the Queen.
gives to the Queen the Manor of Colsham, with the Appurtenances in Wilts,
and 20 l. yearly out of the Aulnage of Clothes in London, Alnage. Havering.
in exchange for the Manor of Havering at Bower in Essex.

Lancaster, Duchy of Lancaster.
as are comprised in 23 H. 6. tit. 17. which other hereditaments of the said
Duchy, are granted to Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, and to many other
feoffees in trust, Kings feoffees in trust. Kings will.
for the performance of the Kings will, all which are commanded to pass under
the great seal, Great seal. Duchy seal. Parl^^ments confirmation.
and are confirmed by whole assent of Parliament.

Edward Prince of Wales, Petition.

Wales.


by his petition recites the erection, donation, and annexion of the Duchy of
Cornwall, Duchy of Cornwall.
with all the hereditaments and liberties belonging to the same, granted by
Parliament, Parliament. Patents.
and sundry other Patents of E. 3. in An. 11. all which are recited at large;
whereupon the said Prince requires, that he may enjoy the same accordingly.
And among other things, that all such teannts as hold of the said Duchy in
chief, may therefore sue livery out of the said Dukes hand, Livery sued.
although they hold otherwise of the King in Chief, and that he may freely
enjoy the said Duchy, with all the revenues, and liberties of the same, Non
obstante.
as it ought to be, notwithstanding the Statute thereof made, Anno 33 H. 6. all
which are granted by common consent, with certain provisions swarving in part
from 33.

Patents confirmed.
confirms unto the Provost and Scholars of the College of Eaton, Eaton
College.
as well all, and singular his grants, as all other men's grants made to the
said Provost, and Scholars.

The like confirmation is made to the Provost, Patents confirmed.
and Scholars of the Kings College in Cambridge, Kings College in Cambridge.
with a provision for the College, called Pembroke hall in Cambridge. Pembroke
Hall.


Syon, Syon Priory confirmed.
erected by H. 5. is confirmed by whole assent of Parliament.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Patents revoked.

Resumption. Rebels.


and grants of any office to any person which was against the King in the
fields of St. Albones, Blore-heath, and Ludlow, shall be void, and that all
grants made by Richard Duke of York, or by the Earls of Salisbury or Warwick,
to any persons being in those fields against the King, be also void: And that
the grants made by the King to any person being in those fields with him be
good, wherein certain provisions are.

Patents nulled. Sheriffs. Escheators.
or persons, of the offices of Sheriff, or Escheator for life, within the
Counties of Chester, Chester. Flint.
and Flint, be utterly void, except to certain persons there named.

It is enacted, that all such Knights of any County as were returned to this
Parliament by virtue of the Kings Letters, Knights of Shires returned by the
Kings Letters without any election.
without any other election, should be good, and that no Sheriff for returning
them to incur the pain therefore provided in An. 23. H. 6. Sheriffs Indemnity.


Note.
The Commons complain against twenty five Knights, and Esquires by name, of
sundry Countries, for their manifold robberies, Robberies. Rapes.
rapes, and exactions, Exactions.
against the which straight orders are devised to cause them to answer
thereunto. Answers thereto.


Walter Hopton Esquire Roger Kenistone, Fulk Stafford, Esquires, William Hastings
Esquire son of Leonard Hastings Knight, and William Bows Esquire, for being at
Ludlow field against the King, and having their pardons, Rebels fin^d after
Pardon.
are fined therefore.

Stanley of sundry particulars, Lord Standleys accusation. Imprisonment
demanded.
being of confederacy with the Duke of York, and pray that he may be committed
to prison.

Resp.
The King will be advised.

The twenty fifth day of December, in the presence of the King, and of the
three estates, the Chancellor by the Kings commandment, Chancellor.
after thanks given to all the estates, Kings thanks. Parliment dissolved.
dissolved the Parliament.

Anno Tricesimo Nono Henrici Sexti. The Parliament holden at Westminster the
seventh day of October, in the thirty ninth year of King Henry the Sixth.
King.
sitting in the Chair of Estate in the Chamber de pinct. within the Palace of
Westminster, Painted Chamber.
and of the Lords, and Commons, George Bishop of Exeter, and Chancellor of
England, Chancellors speech.
made a notable declaration, taking for his theme, Joel 2. Congregate populum,
and sanctificate ecclesiam: after which done, he willed the Commons to choose
their Speaker, Commons to choose and present their Speaker.
and the next day to present him unto the King.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Speaker elected.


The fourth day of the Parliament, the Commons presented unto the King John
Green Esquire, John Green Speaker presented. Excuse.
to be their Speaker, whose excuse being refused, he with the common
protestation was allowed. Protestation.


Coventree, Parliament revoked.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Walter Clark, Burgess of Chippingham in Wilts, being committed to the Fleet
for sundry condemnations, Privilege of Parl.
and outlawed upon some of them, Burgess taken in Execution^ enlarged.
as well at the Kings suit, as otherwise, is discharged and set at liberty out
of the Fleet. Flee^.


October, the Council of the Duke of York exhibited to the Lords in full
Parliament, Council in Parl.

Duke of Yorks claim and title to the Crown exhibited, and read in Parliament.


a writing touching the right, and claim of Richard Duke of York to the Crown
of England, and Lordship of Ireland, the which Lords upon consultation, willed
it to be read amongst them, but not to be answered without the King. Not to be
answered without the King.


H. 3. to Edw. 3. and proving himself of the right line from Lyonell Duke of
Clarence, His Pedigree and title^
the third son of E. 3. and next shows himself to be indubitate heir of the
said Crown, before any of the line of John of Gaunt the fourth son of E. 3.

The Lords declare the Title to the K.
who willed them to call the Justices, The Justices, Kings Sergeants, and Atney
refuse to answer thereto, though commanded.
Sergeants, and Attorney to answer the same. They so being called, utterly
refused to answer the same, and order taken that every Lord might therein
franckly utter his conceit, Every Lord freely to utter his mind.
without any impeachment unto them. In the end there was objected against the
Dukes title, as follows.

Oaths of the Lords and Duke to King Henry.
and namely of the Duke. Secondly, the Acts of Parliament sunderly made against
the title of the Duke. Acts of Parliament.
Acts of Intayl.
Thirdly, sundry Acts of Intayl made of the Crown of England. Arms born.
Fourthly, that the Duke pretending title from Lyonel Duke of Clarence, should
rather bear his Arms, than of Edmond of Langley, Duke of York.
H. 4. Claimed it as Right heir to H. 3.
Item, that at what time as H. 4. took upon him the Crown of England, he took
the same as right heir to * H. 3. and not as Conqueror. Not as a Conqueror.


The Dukes Answer.
The answer of Richard Plantaginet, commonly called the Duke of York, to the
objections aforesaid.

Oath against the Law of God void.
First, that no Oath, being the Law of man, ought to be performed, when the same
tends to suppression of truth and right, which is against the Law of God.

Anno 1 H. 4. touching a general tail made by him a wrong-doer; Acts by the
Wrong-doer void.
for if he had any right to the same, Needless where right.
he neither needed, nor would have made any such intail.

Duke of Clarence, Arms forborne, not Disclaimed.
and of England, only he forbore the same for a time, as he did his claim to
the Crown.

Henry of Derby. A Cloak of violent Usurpation, void.


England during his life, Lords arbitrament between them.
and the Duke and his heirs to succeed after him; King H. 6. to be K. during
life. The Du. to succeed him.
and appointed that the Chancellor should declare this to the King. Chan. to
declare it.


Duke of Yorks ^pedegree and title was again repeated, and the King assented
that an accord between them should be made, Kings assent to accord.
the which was devised in form following.

King to enjoy the Crown for life.
First, that the King should during his life enjoy the Crown, and pre-eminence
of the Realm of England.

The D. and his Sons sworn not to shorten his life, or impair his Pre-eminence.
the Earl of March, and Edward Earl of Rutland, his Sons, should be sworn by
no means to shorten the days, or impair the pre-eminence of the said King
during his life.

The Duke declared heir apparent to the Crown.
and shall enjoy the same after the death or resignation of the said King.
Resignation.


Hereditaments presently allotted to him and his sons.
viz. 5000 Marks for himself, 35000 Marks for the Earl of March, and 1500 Marks
of the Earl of Rutland.

Compassing the Du. death, Treason.
shall be treason.

Bishops and Lords Oath to the Duke and his heirs.
and Lords in full Parliament shall swear to the said Duke, and to his Heirs,
in form aforesaid.

The Dukes Oath to the Lords.
and his two Sons, shall swear to defend the Lords for this agreement.

Ks. royal assent to the arbitrament.
by assent of the Lords, agrees to all the Ordinances aforesaid, of his free
motion.

Statute of Intayl repealed.
made Anno 1. H. 4. so always as hereafter there be no better title proved,
for the defeating of this title and Act.

A^hall^es, the said Duke, The Duke and his Sons Oath and Protestation to the
King enrolled.
and the two Earls his Sons, came into the Parliament Chamber before the King
and Lords, and there promised, and swear to perform the accord aforesaid, with
protestation, if the King for his part duly observed the same; the which the
King then promised to do: The which protestation the said Duke and Earls
required to be enrolled.

Lands assigned by Patent to the Duke.
assigns to the said Duke sundry Countries, and other Hereditaments in Wales,
and elsewhere, to the yearly value of 10000 Marks, as is aforesaid.

Lancaster; Duchy of Lancaster.
all which are confirmed by whole assent of Parliament. Confirmation.


An Act for publishing of the Duke of York to be rightful Heir to the Crown,
Act declaring the D. right heir to the Crown. Power to suppress Rebellions,
etc. All Sheriffs, etc. to obey him as the King.
and power given him to ride through the whole Realm for suppressing of all
Rebellions, and Insurrections, wherein commandment is given to all Sheriffs,
Officers, and Subjects, to obey him as the King, with certain provisions.

Duchy of Lancaster, Duchy of Lancaster.
as the King had put in Feoffment to the use of his will, Feoffees in trust.
there was appointed one Chief Steward, Steward and Attorney of the Duchy of
Lanc.
and Chancellor, one General Receivor, and Attorney General, and Auditors, with
fees accordingly; The King, by assent of Parliament, revoketh all the said
Offices, and Fees of the same grant, so all the said premises in Feoffment
shall be under the rule and government of such Chancellors, Chancellor of the
Duchy.
and other Officers as were and had the same, before the said Feoffment made.

Duchy of Lancaster, Duchy of Lanc. revenues.
as well of Land and Feoffment, as otherwise, shall be received by the Receiver
General of the said Duchy, Receivor of the Duchy.
for two years, and by him paid over to the Treasurer of England, Treasurer of
England.
and touching weighty affairs of the Realm, Realms affairs.
wherein are contained principal provisions for Foreiners, and Officers of the
said Duchy.

H. 6. tit. 28. are rehearsed, Feoffment to the use and performance of the
Kings will.
and enacted, that all and singular the premises shall go only to the
performance of the Kings will, and not otherwise: albeit the Feoffees had
granted to the King a longer time.

Liveries.
The print touching Liveries to be granted to women, cap. 2. agrees with the
record.

The which Act passed, upon the Petition of John Nevill Knight, and Isabell his
Wife, the Daughter and Heir of Edmond Goldesthorp Knight.

Anno Primo Edwardi Quarti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Johan. Duci Norfolciae, Parliamentum apud Westminster. sexto die Iulii, etc.
Test Rege apud Westminster. Vicesimo tertio die.
RIcardo Com. War. Johanni Com. Oxoniae. Willielmo Com. Arundel. Radulpho Com.
Westmerland. Hen. Vicecom. Bourchier Mil. Edwardo Gray de Ruthin Chlr. Jacobo
Berckley Chlr. Georgio Latimer Chlr. Radulpho Graystock Chlr. Willielmo
Botreaux Chlr. Johan. Domino de Beauchamp Chlr. Johan. de Audley Chlr. Tho. le
Scroope de Masham Chlr. Willielmo Zouch de Harringworth. Joh. le Scroop de
Bolton Chlr. Johanni Domino de Clinton Chlr. Johan. Lovell Chlr. Edwardo Nevil
Dom. de Burgavenny Chlr. Edw. Brook de Cobham Chlr. Reginal. Gray de Wilton
Chlr. Johanni Sturton Dom. de Sturton Chlr. Willielmo Bourchier de Fitzwarren
Chlr. Hen Bromfleet Domino de Vessey Chlr. Radulpho Boteler de Sudley Chlr.
Tho. Gray de Richmond Chlr. Johan. Sutton de Dudley Chlr. Willielmo Fynes
Domino de Say Chlr. Willielmo Fynes Domino de Dacre Chlr. VVillelmo Nevill de
Fauconbridge Chlr. Johanni Bourchier de Barnes Chlr. Ricardo Welles de
Willoughby Chlr. Hen. Fitzhugh Chlr. Hen. Gray Chlr. Ricardo West Chlr. Tho.
Standley Chlr. Johanni Nevill Domino de Mountioye Chlr. Milites omnes excepti
Audley et Clynton, et eo quod Scotorum Rex intravit apud Carliolum, hoc
Parliamentum fuit prorogatum, usque ad quartum diem Novembris prox. sequentem.
Ac tunc tenebatur, et sedebant Domini in ordine subscripto.
De dicto Parliamento tenendo apud Westmonast. quarto die Novembris. Rex, etc.
Iohanni Duci Norfolciae, etc. apud Westminster: quarto die Novembris. Test apud
Westminster. Decimo tertio die Iunii. Numerus et ordo Nobilium idem quod in
posteriori Summonitione in omnibus.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the fourth day of November, in the First
year of the reign of King Edward the fourth.
King.
sitting in the Chair of Estate in the Chamber de pinct. within the Palace of
Westminster, Painted Chamber.
and of the Lords and Commons, George Bishop of Exeter, made a notable
Declaration of the cause of the summons of the Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
taking for his Theme, Ier. 7. Bonas facite vias, and studia vestra. After
which, he called the Commons to choose, and the next day to present their
Speaker. Speaker chosen.


Petitions.
for England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

James Strangewaies Knight to be their Speaker, Sr. James Strangewayes. Speaker
presented. Excuse.
whose excuse being rejected, he with the common protestation was allowed.
Protestation.


Speakers Oration.

Kings Commendation.


and gave God thanks for victories given him. Thanks for victories.


Kings Title to the Crown.
A long Declaration of the Kings title to the Crown of England, containing in
effect, first, as in An. 39. H. 6. tit. 11.

H. 4. with his heinous murdering of King R. 2. H. 4. Tyrannous usurpation.

R. 2. murder.




E. 4. was, and is undoubted King of England, E. 4. undoubted King. Submission
to him and his heirs.
from the fourth day of March last before, and that all the estates yielded
themselves obeysant Subjects to the said E. 4. and his heirs for ever,
affirming the reign of H. 4. to be an Intrusion, H. 4. an Intruder.
and only usurpation. Usurper.


E. 4. was seized of the Crown and profits of the realm of England, E. 4.
seized of the Crown as R 2.
from the said fourth day of March in such wise as King R. 2. enjoyed the same,
in An. 23. In which act is one provision, and one general provision for all
men's rights, Rights excepted.
other then of such as claim by the grant of H. 4. H. 5. H. 6.

Henry of Darbie, otherwise H. 4. and the heirs of his body coming, H. 4. and
his heirs disabled, disinherited.
are utterly disabled to enjoy any inheritance, estate, or profits within this
realm, or Dominions of the same, for ever.

Agreement between H. 6. and E. 4.
A whole recital of the concord made between H. 6. and Richard Duke of York,
and the King now in An. 39. H. 6. and breach of the same by sundry means there
declared. Breach thereof.


E. 4. discharged thereof by the breach.
By which breach it is declared, that King E. 4. was discharged out of the same
concord, and that no title of the same concord should bind this King.



Tenants of Eastmain
The tenants of the Manor of Eastmain in Hampshire, belonging to the Bishop of
Winchester, Bishop of Winchester.
complain against the said Bishop for raising of new Customs upon them, New
Customs raised.
and pretending that they were freeholders, Freeholders.
and copyholders, Copyholders.

Referre^s.


which was committed to certain Lords, and Justices, and upon their report
enacted, Report.
that the said Tenants were in fault, Tenants in Fault.
and that they should continue the said customs and services.

Attainder of K. H. 6. Queen Margaret, and others.
A long attainder of sundry persons following for the death of Richard Duke of
York, and others, viz. Henry the 6. Margaret late Queen, Edward called Prince
of Wales, Prince of Wales.
Henry late Duke of Somerset, Henry Earl of Northumberland.

Knight of the Garter. Beheading against Law.
How William Lord Boniville, and Sir Tho. Kuriell Knights of the garter, and
William Gower Standar-bearer to Richard Duke of York, were against law beheaded
and murdered. Murder.


Thomas Courtney late Earl of Devonshire, Attainders of sundry for the Duke of
Yorks death.
Thomas Lord Roos, John late Lord Nevil, Baldwyn Fulsthurst, Alexander Hedie,
Nicholas Latimer, James Luterell, Edmund Mountford, Thomas Fundern, Hen. Lewis,
John Heron of Ford, Richard Tustall, Hen. Bellingham, Robert Whittingham
Knights, and of Andrew Trollopp late of Guinescoe Esquire and of sundry other
Esquires, Gentlemen, and Yeomen, for being at the death of the Duke of York, at
Wakefield, the thirtieth day of December late before.

Henry Duke of Exeter, William Viscount Beamont, John late Lord Rongemont Gray,
Attainder of sundry Nobles and others for being in Arms against K. E. 4.
Randall late Lord Dacre; Humphry Datren, Philip Wentworth, William Rawkesley,
Edmond Hampden, Thomas Findrey, John Courtney, John Ormond, alias Botler,
William Milley, Simon Haines, William Holland, called the bastard of Exeter,
Thomas Ormond, alias Botler, Thomas Everingham, Henry Ro^s of Rockingham, with
sundry Esquires, Gentlemen, Treason.
Yeomen, and Priests, and sundry attainted persons, are attainted for being
against King E. 4. the twenty ninth day of March before, being Palm Sunday, in
the fields called Saxon fields, and Tawton fields in the County of York.

H. 6. Queen Margaret, K. H. 6. Q. Margaret. and Pr. Edw. attainted.
Prince Edward, and some others of the chief before attainted, for delivering
of the Town of Barwick to James King of Scots, Barwicks surrender to the Scots.
on the feast of St. Mark the Evangelist last before.

Jasper Earl of Pembrook, James Earl of Wilts, Robert Lord Hungerford, with
certain Priests and Friars, are attainted for procuring foreign Princes to
invade the King and realm. H. 6. Qu. Prince^ and others attainted.

Procuring foreign Princes to invade England. Treason.




Carlisle to the Scots. Carlisles surrender to the Scots.


Henry 6th. with certain of the persons aforesaid, John Fortescue, William
Talbois, and other Esquires, Gentlemen, Priests, and Friars, are attainted for
being in field against King E. 4. in the Bishopric of Durham, Treason for
being in Arms against E. 4.
the eighteenth day of June last past.

Exeter aforesaid, Jasper Earl of Pembroke, and others, are also attainted for
rearing of war against the King at Tuball beside Carnarven in Wales, Treason
for levying war against E. 4.
on Friday next after the feast of the translation of St. Edward last before.

H. 6. and namely, Forfeiture of H. 6. for this Treason.
of all the land belonging to the Duchy of Lancaster, Duchy of Lancaster.
that the said King shall hold the said Duchy, and County Pallatine of
Lancaster to him, and to his heirs Kings of England, with all offices, Offices.
Liberties.
and liberties to the same belonging, separate from the Crown, and that the
tenants of the same do enjoy all their liberties, in such wise as H. 6. held
the same, the third day of March last before.

Margaret the late Qu. Prince Edward her son, Treason.

Forfeiture.


and of the other persons aforesaid, certain provisions and saving for dower,
Dower.
and otherwise.

John Skidmore Knight, as adherent to the Duke of Exeter, Jasper Earl of
Pembroke, James Earl of Wilts, and others, are attainted of treason, Treason.
to forfeit all their hereditaments, Forfeiture.
saving to the same John his life, and goods.

John Wallyes of Thornton in Devon. Esquire, and sundry others with him named,
had not yielded themselves to the protection of the King, it was enacted, that
if they after proclamation came not in, Rebellion.

Submission upon Proclamation.


and were obeysant to the King, that then they, and every one of them making
default, to be attainted of treason. Treason.


Annuity enacted to be first paid.
that Cicile Duchess of York, the Kings mother, be first paid yearly the
sum of 600. l. granted by the King, before any others.

Richard Earl of Cambridge and others, Earl of Cambridge.
An. 3. H. 5. is utterly made void, and repealed. Judgment in Parliament
repealed.


Earl of Salisbury.
The like Judgment made against John Montague, late Earl of Salisbury, and
Thomas Lord le Despencer in Parliament, Lord le Despencer.

Judgment in Parliment repealed.


made void, and Richard Earl of Warwick, and Anne his wife, the daughter of
Isabell, the daughter of the said Thomas, as in the right of the said Anne is
restored to all the hereditaments of the said Thomas. Restitution.


Alice Countess of Salisbury daughter to Thomas Montague late Earl of
Salisbury, son of the said John, is restored to all the herediments of the said
John. Restitution.


James Strangewaies Knight, Petition.

Sir James Strangewaies.


Richard his son, and heir to Elizabeth the late wife of the said James,
daughter, and one of the heirs to Philip late Lord Dacre, of John Conyers, and
Margery his wife, and other of the daughters, and heirs of the said Philip,
they are restored to the Manors of Gastonashe, Restitution.
Casterling, Lowthe, and Dunmore with the appurtenances in Ireland. Ireland.


ap Iean, ap Anceon, and other Welshmen did not by a day deliver up the Castle
of Hardelaghe in Wales, Welshmen. Hardelaghe

Castle. Rebels.

Treason.


and yield themselves to the Kings subjection, that then they should be taken
as traitors.

Thomas Lomley Knight, Sr. Th. Lomley Knight
son to John, son to Ralph Lomley Knight, is restored to all the hereditaments
of the said Ralph, Restitution.

Judgment in Parliament reversed.


and the Judgment made against the said Ralph, in 2. H. 4. made void.

December, the Commons being there, the King by his own mouth made a pithie,
Kings Oration the Commons.
and short oration, as follows.

and ye that be come from the Commons of this my land, Kings thanks to the
Commons for his restitution to the Crown.
for the true hearts, and tender consideration they have had to my right and
title, that I, and my Ancestors have had to the Crown of this realm, the which
from us has been long time withheld, and now (thanked be Almighty God, of
whose grace grows all victory) by your true hearts, and great assistance, I
am restored to that, that is my right and title; wherefore I thank you as
heartily as I can, and for the tender and true hearts ye have showed unto me,
in that ye have tenderly had in remembrance, the correction of the horrible
murder, and cruel death of my Lord and Father, my brother Rutland, and my
Cosen of Salisbury, and others; and I thank you right heartily, and I shall be
unto you by the grace of Almighty God, as good and gracious a Sovereign Lord,
His promise to be a good King to them.
as ever was any my noble Progenitors to their Subjects and Liegemen: and for
the faithful and loving hearts, and also the great labor that you have born,
and sustained toward me in the recovering of my right, and title, which I now
possess, I thank God with all my heart, and if I had any better to reward you
withal then my body, you should have it, the which shall always be ready for
your defense, His care of their defense,
neither sparing, nor letting for no jeopardy; praying you also of your hearty
assistance, and continuance, as I shall be unto you very righteous, and loving
Liege Lord. After this, the Chancellor by the Kings commandment, prorogued the
Parliament from the same day, Parliament prorogued to the sixth of May, An. 2.
E. 4.
until the sixth day of May, then ensuing.

Proclamation.

Liveries.


maintenancies, Maintenance. Robberies. Murders.
robberies, and murders, all, and every of which, the Bishops, and Lords by
their hands have promised to perform.

Anno Secundo Edwardi Quarti.
May, for that the King could not attend to be there, Kings absence. Parliament
dissolved by Commission.
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, by the Kings Letters Patents dissolved the
same Parliament.

Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
THe print touching Letters Patents, Patents of H. 4.5.6.




and other judicial matters, passed by H. 4. H. 5. and H. 6. and in their
times agrees with the record.

Indictments. Sheriffs Tournes. Leets.
in Sheriffs tournes, and Leets, cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Inquest. Profits.
so as all Sheriffs may be charged according to the return, Sheriffs.
and no further.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Anno Tertio Edwardi Quarti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. dilecto, and fideli Ricardo Com. War. apud Westminster. vicesimo nono die
Aprilis. Test apud Westminster. vicesimo octavo die Februarii.
Willielmo Com. Arundell. Hen. Com. de Essex. Johan. Com. Wigorum. Radulpho
Com. Westmerland. Edward. Gray de Ruthine Chlr. Georgio Latimer Chlr. Jacobo
Berckley Chlr. Radulpho de Graystock Chlr. Johanni Beauchamp. Johanni de Audley
Chlr. Tho. le Scroop de Masham. Johanni le Scroop de Bolton Chlr. Johanni
Domino de Clynton Chlr. Johanni de Lovell Chlr. Edwardo de Bergavenny Chlr.
Edwardo Brook de Cobham Chlr. Reginal. Gray de Wilton Chlr. Willielmo Bourchier
de Fitz-warrin Chlr. Hen. Bromfleet Domino de Vessey Chlr. Radul. Boteler de
Sudley Chlr. Johanni Sutton de Dudley Chlr. Willielm. Fines Domino de Say Chlr.
Richardo Fines Domino de Dacre Chlr. Johanni Nevill de Mountague. Willielmo
Hastings Chlr. Hen. Stafford de South Chlr. Will. Domino Herberd Chlr. Waltero
Devereux Domino de Ferrariis Chlr. Johanni Wenlock de Wenlock. Ricardo Woodvill
Domino de Rivers Chlr. Anthonio VVoodvill Dom. de Scales. Tho. Domino Standley
Chlr. Roberto Ogle Domino de Ogle Chlr. Tho. Domino Lumley Chlr. Humfrido
Domino Cromwell Chlr. Johanni Bourchier Domino de Barnes Chlr. VVillielmo Zouch
de Harringworth Chlr. Ricardo Welles de VVilloughbie Chlr. Hen. Fitzhugh
Chlr. Hen. Gray Chlr. Ricardo West Chlr.
Aequites aurati omnes praeter Dominum Scales.

Writs of Summons.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the twenty ninth day of April, in the
third year of the reign of King Edward the Fourth.
King.
sitting in the Chair of Estate in the Chamber de pinct. in the Palace of
Westminster, Painted Chamber.
and of the Lords and Commons, George Bishop of Exeter, and Chancellor of
England, Chancellor.
made a notable declaration of the summons of the Parliament. Causes of
Parliament.
After which he willed the Commons to choose their Speaker, Commons to elect
and present their Speaker.
and the next day to present him to the King.

England, Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Petitions.
Receivers of petitions for Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of
the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.



the King John Say Esquire to be their Speaker, John Say Speaker.

Presented.


whose excuse being rejected, he with the Common protestation was received.
Excuse. Protestation


Commons, by assent of the Bishops and Lords, grant to the King in aid 37000 l.
to be levied in the Counties, Subsidy of 37000 l. granted.
Cities, and Towns, according to a rate there.

June, in the presence of the King, Lords, and Commons, the Chancellor,
Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment, gave thanks to the Commons for their aid granted,
Thanks for the aid.
and prorogued the Parliament from the same day, The Parliament prorogued to
the 4.
unto the fourth of November then ensuing at Westminster. November. 3. E. 4.


November, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, the Kings Cozen, by the Kings
Letters Patents, held and continued the Parliament. Parl. held and continued by
Commission.


November, the King of his mere grace released unto the Commons 6000 l. parcel
of the aforesaid grant, The King releaseth 6000 l. of the subsidy.
tit. 8. whereupon it is enacted, that 31000 l. shall be levied in manner of a
Fifteen, Subsidy altered to a a Fifteen.
and be called by the same name of a Fifteen.

Chancellor.
on the Kings behalf, and of his said Lieutenant, adjourned the said Parliament
from the said day unto the twentieth of February then ensuing, The Parl.
adjourned to the 20. Febr. at the City of York.
at the City of York.

February, at York, in the presence of the Lords and Commons, William Bishop of
Lincoln, by the commandment of William Archbishop of York the Kings
Commissary, Kings Commissary.
by Letters Patents held the same Parliament, The Parliament adjourned to the
1. of May, Anno 4 E. 4.
and adjourned the same over, from the said day unto the first day of May then
ensuing at York aforesaid.

Cause of Prorogation. Conspiracies.
for that the King was enforced to go in person to Gloucester, for the
repressing of Conspiracies and rebellions against him. Rebellions.


Anno Quarto Edwardi Quarti.
May, the Lords and Commons being assembled in the great Hall within the Palace
of the Archbishop of York, certain of the Kings Letters Patents made unto
Richard Earl of Warwick, and of Salisbury, were read, which authorized the said
Earl to hold and continue the said Parliament from the said day unto the twenty
fifth of November then ensuing, Parliament held, and continued by Commission.
at York.

Fountains, thereunto appointed by the Kings Privy seal, Parliament prorogued.

Privy Seal.


prorogued the same accordingly.

The cause hereof was, that the King was busily occupied in the Marches of the
North for the repressing of Rebels, Rebels suppression.
and defense of a Foreign Invasion. Defense.

Foreign Invasion.




Commission.
The twenty fifth of November. in the fourth year of the King in the Hall of the
said Archbishop of York, the King by like Letters Patents made to the said Earl
of Warwick and Salisbury, for holding and proroguing the said Parliament from
the same day unto the twenty sixth day of January then ensuing at Westminster
read, The Parliament prorogued to the 26. day of Ianua^y at Westminster.
after which the Abbot of St. Mary's of York, by the Kings appointment,
declared, and prorogued the same accordingly.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Broad-Cloth.
and touching all particular working, and Officers belonging thereto, very
necessary, although the same be not printed, for that in the same year the same
was repealed.

Wools.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Corn imported.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

White Wheat was sold at 6 s. 8. d. the quarter.

Apparel.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Silkwomen.
cap. 31. agrees with the record.

Artificers.
and Handicrafts men, cap. 4. agrees with the record.

26. day of January, Anno quarto Edwardi Quarti.
Tonnage and Poundage granted the King for his life.
THe Commons, by assent of the Bishops and Lords, granted to the King the
Subsidies hereafter, for, and during his life, viz. Tonnage and Poundage of
every English Merchant for every Sack of Wool 33 s. 4 d. of every 240
Wooll-fells 33 s. 4 d. and of every Last of Hides, 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. Of every
Merchant Stranger, as well Denizen as otherwise, for every Sack of Wool 3 l. 6
s. 8 d. of every Last of Hides, 3 l. 13 s. 4 d. of every 240 Wooll-fells, 3 l.
6 s. 8 d.

A provision, that the Town of Callice and the Soldiers there may be
victualled and paid with part of the said Subsidies, Callice.

Soldiers Victuals and Pay.


according to a rate there.

Callice do yearly account in the Exchequer, on a pain, that the said
Treasurer for the time being, may dispose of all offices of Account in Callice,
Treasurer of Callice.

Account.

Exchequer.


or the Marches of the same, to what person him likes, to hold the same at the
Kings will.

Martins le Grange in London, Dean of St. Martins.
the other for the Easterlings.

Attainders.
as hereafter do ensue.

Henry Beauford late Duke of Somerset, D. of Somerset. Treason. Levying War.
for rearing of war against the King, and joining with H. 6. at the battle of
Epham in the County of Northumberland, the 8. day of May last.

Ralph Percie Knight, Ralph Percie. Treason. Surrendering Castles.
for rendering the Kings Castles of Bambourg and Dunstamburgh unto H. 6. and for
rearing the war against the King at Heggelamore in Northumberland, War levied.
on the Feast day of St. Mark last past.

Humphrey Nevil Knight, for taking part with the said H. 6. at Bamburgh,
Treason. Adhering to the Ks. enemies.
the first day of April last past.

Henry Bellingham, and Thomas Phillips Knights, and many other Esquires,
Treason.
Gentlemen, and Yeomen, for taking part with the said King Henry the sixth at
Bamburgh, the last day of May last past.

Edmond Beaufort, and John Beaufort, Treason.
brethren and of the said Henry Duke of Somerset, William Carry, alias Caree
Knight, and others, for adhering unto Margaret late Queen of England.

William Stock of Warrington in the County of Northampton Knight, Treason.
and sundry other Esquires, Gentlemen, and Yeomen, for adhering unto the said
H. 6.

Unto all which the King had granted Pardon in Anno primo. Attainder after a
Pardon.


David ap Iean ap Eynean, and other Welshmen, for keeping of the Castle of
Hardlough in Wales against the King. Treason. Castle kept against the K.


Somerset, Attainders confirmed. Restitutions repealed.
Humfrey Nevil, and Henry Bellingham, made in Anno 1. shall stand, and that the
restitutions to them made shall be void.

Ralph Fercy and others.

Thomas Phillips, Proclamation.
Edmond Beaufort, John Beaufort, William Carry, alias Caree Knights, and others
to yield themselves to the Kings grace by a day, or else to stand attainted of
Treason, Submission.

Treason.


and to incurr the pains of the same.

Resumption of all Crown Lands.
whereby the King takes into his hands all manner of Hereditaments of his
Crown, Principality of Wales, Dutchies of Cornwall and Lancaster, and Earldom
of Chester, from the feast of the Purification of our Lady last before, in such
sort as he had, or ought to have had the same the 4th of March in the first
year of his reign, any Letters Patents to grant or the contrary notwithstanding.

Resumption.
of any of the hereditaments of his Duchy of York, or Earldom of March, be
also void; whereunto are annexed sundry provisions.

An infinite number of particular provisions.

Henry, the Son of Philip Wentworth Knight, Henry Wentworth.
is restored in blood to the said Philip, Restitution.
(for Lands the said Philip had none.)

Anne his Sister, Kings grant to his Sister confirmed.
wife to Henry Duke of Exeter, Feme Coverts use, suit without her Husband.
Duchess of Exeter.
shall be to all intents good in Law, to the only use of the said Anne, and
that she plead, and be impleaded by the name of Anne Duchess of Exeter.

John Earl of Oxford, Petition.

Earl of Oxford.


the Statute made Anno 1 H. 4. in affirmance of the Statute made Anno 11 R. 2.
cap. 5. against Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford, and Duke of Ireland, is utterly
repealed, Repeal.
in which new Act of repeal, there are seven provisions, which abridge much the
grant.

l. which was due to the Mayor and Company of the Merchants of the Staple in
Callice, Subsidy and Customs, assigned to pay Debts.

Callice.

Staple.


the King, by authority of Parliament, in contentation of the same, assigns
them to take a yearly rate of the Subsidies of wool, until payment had.

Sion of their erection, Abbess of Sion.
and of all their particular hereditaments.

Cornwall, Duchy of Cornwall annexed to the Crown.
and annexing of the same to the Crown by Parliament, Anno 11 E. 3.

viz. that the Mayor of London in succession, Mayor of London.
shall have the search, view, and correction of the river of Thames. Thames.


Plymouth in Devon, Plymouth.
paying yearly to the Prior of Plymouth, 29 l. 6 s. 8 d. of fee-farm, Fee-farm.
the said Prior having also further Prerogatives in the said Town.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Cloth.
cap. 1. agrees with the record, the same is remembered before, tit.

Shipping. Staple.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

The print for shipping of wool^s at Newcastle, Woolls.

Newcastle.


cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Woolls.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Burgundy, cap. 6. agrees with the record. Merchandise.

Burgundy.




Sureties. Customers.
and Comptrollers, Comptrollers.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Cordwayners.
cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Horners.
cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Paten-makers.
cap. 9. agrees with the record.

The print touching passengers from Dover to Callice, Passage.

Dover. Callice.


cap. 10. agrees with the record, etc.

Anno 1 E. 4. tit. 43.

Anno 45 E. 3. touching free passing of boats in rivers, Free Passage.

Boats.

Rivers.


may be observed; and that no person do interrupt any man's passage upon, or by
the river of Severn.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Anno Septimo Edwardi Quarti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Charissimo Fratri suo Georgio Duci Clarentiae salut. apud Westminster. tertio
die Iulii. Test rege apud Westminster. vigesimo octavo die Februarii.
IOhanni Duci Norfolciae. Johanni Duci Suffolciae. Ricardo Com. War. and
Sarum. Ricardo Com. Rivers. Willielmo Com. Arundel. Edwardo Tibetot Com.
Wigorum. Radulpho Com. Westmerland. Johanni Com. Northumb. Johan. Nevil Com.
Northampton, qui postea factus. Marchio Montiacuto Chlr. Radulpho Graystock
Chlr. Anthonio de Scales. Georgio Latimer Chlr. Jacobo Berckley Chlr. Tho. de
Scroope de Masham Chlr. Johanni Beauchamp de Beauchamp Chlr. Johanni de Audley
Chlr. Edwardo Nevil de Bergavenny Chlr. Johanni Sutton de Dudley Chlr. Reginal.
Gray de Wilton Chlr. Willielmo Bourchier de Fitzwarrin Chlr. Hen. Fitzhugh
Chlr. Johanni Strange Chlr. VVillielmo Zouch de Harringworth Chlr. Hen. Gray
Chlr. Ricardo West Chlr. Willielmo Hastings de Hastings Chlr. Waltero Devereux
de Ferres. Hen. Bromfleet de Vessey Chlr. Humf. Stafford de Southwick Chlr.
Johanni Scroop de Bolton Chlr. Radulpho Boteler de Sudley Chlr. Willielm. Fines
de Say Chlr. Richardo Fines de Da^re Chlr. Roberto Ogle Chlr. Will. Herbert
Chlr. Tho. Lumley de Lumley Chlr. Humfrido Cromwell Chlr. Tho. Stanley de
Stanley Chlr. Johanni Wenlock de Wenlock. Chlr. Ricardo Welles de VVilloughbie
Chlr. Johanni Bourchier de Barnes Chlr. Waltero Blunt de Mountioy Chlr. Equites
aurati omnes.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the Third of July in the seventh year of
King Edward the Fourth.
King.
sitting in his Chair of State in the Chamber de pinct. in the Palace of
Westminster, Painted Chamber.
and of the Lords and Commons, William Bishop of Lincoln, in the absence of
George Archbishop of York, Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment, declared the cause of the summons of the same
Parliament. Causes of Parliament.
After which he willed the Commons to choose, Commons to choose and present
their Speaker.
and next day to present their Speaker to the King.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

John Say Knight to be their Speaker. Sr John Say Speaker


John, Speaker presented.
whose excuse refused, Excuse.
he with the common protestation was allowed. Protestation.


Kings Oration.
After which, the King with his own mouth, made an Oration to the Commons in
effect following, That he meant to live upon his own, That he would live of his
own, without charging the Commons. Their help required. Good Government.
without charging them; wherein he required their help, and promised requital
in good governance.

Resumption.
tit. 39. to enjoy the same from the Feast of Easter last before, and that the
King should also enjoy for ever all such herediments, as Richard Duke of York
had the 30th day of December in Anno 39 H. 6. any grant to the contrary
notwithstanding, wherein are contained an infinite number of provisions.

Staplers of Callice, Callice.
the King for 8. years and a half granted unto the same Mayor all and singular
the Customs and Subsidies going out of the same Port, Kings grant of the
Customs and Revenues there to satisfy Debts.
and all the Kings revenues in Callice, and the Marches of the same, for the
said term, they allowing yearly a certain in sum for the Soldiers wages,
Soldiers wages.

Fortifications.


and maintenance of the works, and that by Letters Patents.

Thomas Blunt Esquire, Surrender.
Treasurer of Callice, Treasurer of Callice.
the King for 8. years and a half by his Letters Patents appointed John Tuske,
Mayor of the Staple, to be Treasurer of Callice.

Ralph Wolsey Esquire, Victualler of Callice, Surrender.

Callice.


surrendreth to the King his Letters Patents; whereupon the King, for the term
aforesaid, appointed the said John to be Victualler there.

Charters confirmed.


Thomas Tresham Knight, is restored to his hereditaments, Restitution.
and his Attainder made in Anno 1 E. 4. made void.

Richard Wells Lord Willoughby, Lord Willoughby.
son and heir of Leonard Wells Lord Willoughby, is restored in blood to the
said Lord Leonard, Restitution.

Non-obstante.


and to all the hereditaments of the said Lord Leonard, notwithstanding the
attainder made against the said Leonard in Anno 1 E. 4.

July, Robert Bishop of Bath and Wells, and Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment, in the presence of the King, Lords, and Commons,
answered to certain requests of the Commons, Commons requests answered.
and first thanked them for the Statute of Resumption, Kings Thanks.
Resumption. Callice.
ascertained them, that the King had provided for Callice, had the like care
for Ireland, and Wales; Ireland. Wales.
and further, that the King desired the execution of the Laws. Laws execution.


November then ensuing at Reding. The Parl. prorogued to the 6. day of November.
at Reding.


November at Reding, the same Chancellor by the Kings commandment, Chancellor.
and in the presence of the King, Lords and Commons prorogued the same
Parliament, The Parliament prorogued to the 6. of May, Anno 8 E. 4.
from the same day unto the sixth day of May then ensuing at Reding aforesaid.

Anno Octavo Edwardi Quarti.
May, Chancellor.
in the eighth year of the King, King.
at Reding, in the presence of the King, sitting in the Chair of estate, in the
Chamber within the Abbey there, and of the Lords, and Commons, there by the
Kings commandment, adjourned the Parliament from that day unto the twelfth day
of May then ensuing, The Parliament adjourned to the 12. of May, at Westminst.
at Westminster.

Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Worsteeds.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Justices of peace.
returning their recognizance therefore taken at the next general Jail
delivery, Bail. Recognizance.
and that the Justices of the peace may pass upon the trial of such as become
approvers. Approvers.


Resp.
The King will be advised.

Devonshire, Devonshire clothes.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Yarn. Cloth.
and clothes unfulled, not to be transported, cap. 3. agrees with the record.

London, London.
viz. for the apprehending of such felons, Felons.
as should haunt to London, and committing of them to Newgate, Newgate.
shall be void.

May, in the presence of the King, King.
then sitting in the Chair of estate at Westminster, and of the Lords and
Commons, the Chancellor made an eloquent oration, Chancellors speech.
beginning with Justice, Justice.
showing the effects of the same.

Three Estates.
the pre-eminence whereof was to the King as chief, King supreme.
the second to the Lords and Bishops, Lords and Bishops next. Commons next.
and the third to the Commons.

viz. dispoyled of the due inheritance, Crowns Inheritance spoiled. Treasure
wasted.
wasted in the treasure, the laws wracked, Laws wracked.
and the whole estate by usurpation in a manner subver^ed, State subverted by
Usurpation. France lost^ War with Denmark.
besides how the Crown of France was lost, the Dutchies of Normandy, Gascoyne,
and Guienne, the ancient patrimony of the Crown also lost, and further how he
found war with Denmark, pain, Scotland, Scotland. Brittany.
and Britain, and other parts, yea, and with the old enemy of France. France.


Tumults appeased.
and planted inward peace, Peace planted.
so as Law, Law and Justice extended. Peace, and Leagues with foreign Enemies.
Scotland.
and Justice might be extended; now the King had taken peace with Scotland, how
Lord Winters entered into league with Spain, Spain. Denmark.
and Denmark, so as entercourses between them now should be.

Burgundy, Alliance with foreign Princes.
and Britanie, two most mighty Princes, in such wise, as they had assured the
King of their uttermost against the French, for the recovery of France,
Recovery of France.
and other the Kings patrimonies, whereof as they made little doubt, so the
King thought not good to omit such an opportunity, yea such as never the like
was.

Kings royal voyage in person.
he was ready to adventure himself, for which he had called them, and therefore
prays their advise. Advice required.


The Commons by assent of the Bishops, and Lords, granted unto the King two
Desmes and two Fifteens, 2 Desmes and Fifteens granted.
to be levied of the Layity, except 12000 l. to be thereof deducted to the
relief of the most poor Towns. Poor Towns relief.


Elizabeth of her dower, Queens dower confirmed. Enabled to sue. Patents.
shall be good, and that the Queen be by that name personable to plead, and be
impleaded, that parcel of her dower assigned by the Kings Letters Patents
under the seal of the Duchy of Lancaster be good, Seal of the Duchy of
Lancaster.
albeit there be no livery and ^ei^^n delivered upon the same, Livery and
seasin dispensed with.
wherein are certain provisions.

Queens Dower.

Great Seal.




Lancaster, Duchy seal.
with a letter of Attorney therein to deliver seisin. Letter of Attorney.


l. paid in part of payment of a greater sum due by the King to Charles Duke
of Burgundy for marriage between the said Duke, and Margaret his sister, Kings
sisters portion.
and paid by the Mayor and Company of the Staplers, Kings debts paid by
Merchants assrured upon the Customs of Wools.
the King by his Letters Patents grants, that they shall be paid the same of
the subsedy of wools, the which Letters patents are by common consent
confirmed. Patents confirmed.


Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
THe print touching set Clothes, Clothes.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

The like Statute is required as passed, in An. 4. E. 4, tit. 52.

The King will be advised. Resp.


Juries.
The print touching Juries in Middlesex, Middlesex.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Sheriffs.
The print touching Sheriffs agrees with the record.

The like motion and answer, as in Anno 4. E. 4. tit. 59.

Sacrilege.

Treason.


That all such as shall rob any Church of any Pax, Coap, Granel, Masse-book, or
any other trinket of the Church, whereof the whole rabble is named, may be
deemed a Traitor, and be burned therefore; Burnt.
that all such persons be deprived of the benefit of their Clergy, Clergy.
and that the appeal for the restitution may also lie, Appeal.

Restitution.


and that all Justices may enquire thereof. Justices.


By the preamble of these motions, it seems that this Bill was made against
the Lollards. Lollards.


Resp.
The King will be advised.

The print touching liveries of Companies, Liveries.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Complaint. Exchange. Tower.
Upon Complaint made against Hugh Brice, keeper of the Kings Exchange within the
Tower, certain of the Lords and Commons are appointed to hear the same.
Committee of Lords and Commons.


Account.
The particular Account of the said Brice, with the rates by him taken,
answering the Complaint.

Answer to the Complaint.
Tenor hujus Schedulae Schedularum sequitur in his verbis.
Extortion.

Fees.


WHereas George allegeth, that I take of every Noble a halfpenny, contrary to
the Kings proclamation; Proclamation
I answer, that the Proclamation is this, That every man that brings a Noble
of just poise to the Kings Exchange, should have 6 s. 2. d. ob. and so the
Kings intent is to have of every Noble but a halfpenny only: the Proclamation
is long, and must have leisure, and in case the truth should be proved, the
which to your wisdoms shall plainly appear, it must be proved by indifferent
persons: wherefore if it please you to give me reasonable leisure, I shall
prove, Proof.
that I have not offended the Kings intent contained in the said Proclamation,
^e hurt no other person that ought to take any avail by the same.

Also, whereas diverse of my Masters of this house think that my confession of
the 9. d. ob. should condemn my self, Justification.
I will prove sufficiently before your Worships, that I ought to have the said 9
d. ob. by reason of my Farm, as the Kings proper goods belonging to his Crown,
without any wrong done to any person in taking of the same; The premises
considered, I beseech you all my Masters, to take such directions as shall
accord with Gods pleasure, worship to all, and as the truth may be best known.

Tenor alterius Schedulae Schedularum praedictarum sequitur in his verbis.
Memorandum, that there was changed in the Kings Exchange, Kings Exchange.
as it appears by the books of the said Exchange in the Tower, Tower.
from 12 September Anno quinto, unto the Feast of Michael Anno sexto in gold,
137875 old Nobles by weight, whereof he retained of every such Noble
above-written, by way of emption for the Kings Farm, Emption.

Kings Farm.


and for my costs, charges and weights, 1 d.

Summa 574 l. 9 s. 7 d.
Item, there was changed at the Exchange in the year and time aforesaid, as it
appears by the said Book, in silver, 3845 l. Troy; whereof is retained of
every pound above-written, by way of emption, and for my costs, charges, and
wages, 4 d. ob.

Summa 73 l. 1 s. 10 d. ob. Sum total retained of the parcells aforesaid, in
the Exchange at London. 646 l. 11 s. 5 d. ob. Whereof paid to the King our
Sovereign Lord for the time abovesaid. 400 l. And so remains with me for my
costs, charges, and wages. 246 l. 11 s. 5 d. ob.
Memorandum, that there was changed in the said Exchange, from the Feast of St.
Michael in Anno sexto, unto Michaelmas Anno septimo; that is to say 60153 old
Nobles by weight, whereof was retained of every such Noble above-written, by
way of emption for the Kings Farm, and for my costs, charges, and wages, 1 d.

Summa 200 l. 13 s. 7 d.
Item, in Exchange for silver the said year 137 l. 19 s. 9 d.

Sum total retained of the two parcels aforesaid, in the Kings Exchange in
London, 384 l. 13 s. 4 d. Whereof was paid to the King our Sovereign Lord for
that year. 200 l. And so remains with me for my costs, charges, and wages.
184 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Memorand. that there was changed in the Kings Exchange in London, as appears
by the books of the Exchange, and Tower, from the feast of St. Michael in Anno
septimo, unto the Feast of Easter following in Anno octavo; that is to say in
gold 33400 Nobles by weight; whereof was retained of every such Noble
above-written, by way of exemption for the Kings Farm, and for my costs,
charges, and wages, 4 d.

Summa 30 l. 9 s. Sum total retained of the parcels aforesaid, in the Kings
Exchange in London. 102 l. 9 s. Whereof paid to the King our Sovereign Lord for
the time abovesaid. 100 l. And so remains with me for my costs, charges, and
wages, for me, and my servants. 2 l. 9 s.
It is to be known, that I received gold and silver in the Tower by weight, and
delivered it again by the same weight; Therefore taking the Kings Coin
according to his Indenture, without any profit to me or any of mine, as I will
in this and all the points aforesaid be reported by all Merchants bringing gold
or silver to the Tower or Exchange, and also by the Warden, and Comptroller,
and other Masters of the Mint.

Anno Nono Edwardi Quarti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Charissimo Frati suo Georgio Duci Clarentiae etc. apud Eborum Vicesimo
secundo die Septembris, Anno nono Edwardi Quarti.
RIcardo Duci Gloucest. Johanni Duci Norfolciae. Johanni Duci Suffolciae.
Ricardo Com. War. and Sarum. Hen. Com. Essex. Willielmo Com. Arundel. Johanni
Com. Salopiae. Edwardo Com. Cantiae. Radulpho Com. Westmerland. Johanni Com.
Northumb. Johan. Com. Oxoniae. Radulpho Graystock Chlr. Georgio Latimer Chlr.
Johanni Bernes Chlr. Tho. le Scroope de Masham Chlr. Johanni Beauchamp de
Beauchamp. Edwardo de Nevil de Bergavenny Chlr. Reginal. Gray de Wilton.
Willielmo Bourchier de Fitz-warrin Chlr. Waltero Blunt de Mountjoy. Johanni
Strange Chlr. Hen. Gray Chlr. Ricardo West Chlr. Johanni Denham de Carry Chlr.
Will. Hastings de Hastings. VValtero Devereux de Ferris Chlr. Johanni le
Scroop de Bolton. Radul. Boteler de Sudley Chlr. Hen. Fitzhugh Chlr.
VVillielmo Fenis de Say Chlr. Ricardo Fenis de Dacre Chlr. Roberto Ogle Chlr.
Tho. Lumley Chlr. Humf. Bourchier de Cromwell Chlr. Tho. de Stanley Chlr.
Johanni Wenlock de VVenlock Chlr. Ricardo Welles de VVilloughbie Chlr.
VVillielmo Sturton de Sturton Chlr. VVillielmo Lovell de Morley.
Milites omnes praeter Morley.

Anno Duodecimo Edwardi Quarti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Charissimo fratri suo Georgio Duci Clarentiae, etc. apud Westminster. sexto die
Octobris. Test apud Westminster. decimo nono die Augusti.
RIcardo Duci Gloucest. Johanni Duci Norfolciae. Johanni Duci Suffolciae.
VVillielmo Com. Arundell. Hen. Com. Essex. Edwardo Com. Cantii. Radulpho Com.
Westmerland. Hen. Com. Northumb. Anth. Com. Rivers. Johanni Com. Salopiae.
Johanni Com. Wilts. Radulpho Graystock Chlr. T^o. le Scroop de Masham Chlr.
Johanni Beauchamp de Beauchamp Chlr. Johanni de Audley Chlr. Edwardo Nevill de
Bergavenny Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Wilton. Johanni Strange Chlr. Hen. Gray
Chlr. Johanni Howard Chlr. Ricardo West Chlr. VValtero Devereux de Ferrars
Chlr. Johan. le Scroop de Bolton Chlr. Radul. Buteler de Sudley Chlr. Tho.
Lumley de Lumley Chlr. Tho. Stanley de Stanley Chlr. Radulpho Fenis de Dacre
Chlr. Johan. Brook de Cobham Chlr. VValtero Blunt de Mountjoy Chlr. Will.
Sturton de Sturton Chlr. Johanni Bourchier de Bernes Chlr. Fulconi Bourchier de
Fitz-warrin Chlr. Johanni Sutton de Dudley Chlr. VVillielm. Hastings de
Hastings Chlr. VVillielmo Berkley Chlr. Johanni Denham de Carry Denham.
Milites omnes except. Denham.

The Parliament holden at Westminster the sixth day of October, in the twelfth
year of the reign of King Edward the Fourth.
King.
sitting in the Chair of State, in the Chamber de pinct. within the Palace at
Westminster, Painted Chamber.
and of the Lords, and Commons, Robert Bishop of Bath and Wells, Chancellor of
England, Chancellor.
made a notable declaration of the summons of the Parliament, Causes of
Parliament.
after which he willed the Commons to choose, Commons to choose and present
their Speaker.
and the next day to present to the King their Speaker.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Speaker chosen.
The second day of the Parliament, the Commons declared to the Lords, that they
had chosen their Speaker.

William Allington Esquire to be their Speaker, William Allington

Speaker presented.


whose excuse refused, he with the Common protestation was allowed. Excuse.
Protestation.


Commons grant 14000 Archers to the King for one year at their cost.

Contribution.


The last day of November, the Commons grant to the King 14000 Archers, to
serve the King at their costs, for one year, the same to be levied out of all
men's lands, according to a proportion.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal by themselves, grant unto the King, toward
the furniture aforesaid, the tenth part of one whole years revenue, The Lords
grant the tenths of their revenues.
of all and singular their possessions.

Ryots. Maintenance.
maintenance, oppressions, Oppressions. Laborers.
and for laborers may be executed.

Rochester, after thanks giving to the Commons for their grant, Thanks to the
Commons.
does prorogue the Parliament from the same day, The Parliament prorogued to
the 8. of February.
unto the eighth of February then ensuing, at Westminster.

Edward his first begotten son, Prince of Wales, Prince of Wales, and Earl of
Chester created, and the Lords granted to him confirmation.
and Earl of Chester, the which is confirmed by common consent.



Cornwall, Prince.

Duchy of Cornwall.


with the whole appurtenances, all which grants are confirmed by assent of
Parliament, Confirmation.
with sundry provisions.

Henry Percie Knight, Hen. Percie.




son, and heir to Henry Percie late Lord of Northumberland, is restored in
blood to the said Earldome, and to all such hereditaments of the same Earl as
came to the Kings hands, the second day of March, in Ann. 9. E. 4. and the
attainder made against the said Earl, Attainder reversed.
An. 1. E. 4. tit. 17. is made void.

William Grinsby Esquire in An. 1. E. 4. is made void, Attainder reversed.

Restitution.


and he restored.

Robert Talbois Esquire son, and heir to William Talbois Knight, is restored to the
blood, and lands of the said William, and the attainder of the said William,
Restitution.

Attainder reversed.


An. 1. E. 4. tit. 19. is made void.

George Brown Knight, son of Tho. Brown of London, is likewise restored as heir
of the said Thomas, Restitution.
notwithstanding any attainder made against the said George by verdict, An. 38.
H. 6.

Robert Bulling Gentleman, is restored, Restitution.
and the attainder An. 1. E. 4. is made void.

^homas Maidwell, son, and heir of John Maidwell of Kirton in Lindsey in the
County of Lincoln Gent. is restored to blood, Restitution.
and lands of the said John Maidwell, and the attainder had against him the
said John, An. 1. E. 4. made void.

Edmond Cornwall, Restitution.
son, and heir to Thomas Cornwall, is restored as above, and the attainder had
against the said Thomas, An. 1. E. 4. is made void.

Everard Digbie, son, Restitution.
and heir of Everard Digby, late of Stockdry in Rutland, Esquire and the attainder
had against the father, An. 1. E. 4. is made void.

William Lord Berckley, Lord Berckley.
and Joan his wife, and the heirs of the sad William, shall peaceably enjoy the
Manor, and Borough of Wotton under Egg, Borough of Wotton.
the Manor of Symond Hall, and Erlingham, with their appurtenances in the
County of Gloucester, against Margaret Viscountesse Lisle, late the wife of
Thomas Talbot late Viscount Lisle, paying yearly to the said Margaret during
her life 100 l. with certain provisions.

Ralph Nevil, son, and heir of John Nevil Knight, late Lord Nevil, is restored
to the blood, Restitution.
and lands of the said John, and the attainder had against the said John, An.
1. E. 4. is made void, wherein certain provisions are.

Henry Roos Knight, is restored in blood, Restitution.
and lands, and the attainder had against him, An. 1. E. 4. is made void.

Restitution.
Thomas Ormond Esquire is also restored, and the Attainder had against Thomas
Ormond Knight, Anno 1 E. 4. is made void.

Restitution.
The like restitution is made to Ralph Makerel Clerk, and revocation, as before.

John Verney Esquire, son and heir of Ralph Verney Knight, and Margaret the
wife of the said John, daughter and heir of Robert Whittingham Knight, are
restored to the blood and lands of the said Robert, Restitution.
and the attainder had against the said Robert, Anno 1 E. 4. is made void.

Restitution.
William Stok is restored, and the attainder had against him in Anno 1 E. 4.
made void.

Restitution.
John Skidamore Knight, keeper of Pembrook Castle, is restored to all his
hereditaments, and the attainder had against him Anno 1 E. 4. is made void.

William Cliff of Lockington in the County of York Yeoman, son and heir of
Henry Cllff, late of the same Yeoman, is restored to the blood and lands of the
said Henry, and the attainder made against the said Henry, Anno 1 E. 4. made
void.

Restitution.
Robert Mersine, son and heir of Robert Mersine of Andsworth in the County of
Kent Esquire, is restored to the blood and lands of his said Father, and the
attainder had against the said Father in Anno 1 E. 4. made void.

Restitution.
The attainder of William Jasper of London Esquire, Anno 1 E. 4. is made void,
and he restored.

Restitution.
The attainder had against John Ioskin Esquire, Anno 1 E. 4. is made void, and
Edward his son restored to blood, and lands.

Chancellor and Scholars of Oxford.
The Kings release under Letters Patents in Anno 3. of his reign made to the
Chancellor and Scholars of Oxford, Release confirmed.
of 5 l. yearly, which they used to pay for the issues arising for Bread and
Ale, is confirmed by common consent.

St. Ralph Ashton.
Ralph Ashton Knight shows, how in a writ of Right of Ward sued by him
against one Roger Lener, Right of Ward.
of the keeping of the Manor of Great Lener, with th'appurtenances, in
Middleton in the County of Lancaster, held of the said Ralph by Knights
service, as of his Manor of Middleton in the County of Lancaster, the said
Ralph recovered the same, and for that the record was imbezelled, Record
imbezelled.
the said Ralph having nothing but the copy thereof, which is enrolled by
word, prays that the same copy may be taken for the record, Copy enrolled.
and that upon exemplification of the same under the Great Seal he may have
execution; Exemplification.

Great Seal.


the which was granted by full assent.

Johan Glyn.
Johan Glyn widow, late the wife of John Glyn of Marvel in the County of
Cornwall Gent. shows, how Thomas Clemens of Leskerd Borough in the said County
Gent. with sundry others there named, most shamefully murdered the said John:
Murder.
against all which evil doers, straight order is taken for their punishments,
and enacted, that if the said Ioane should die, then the children should have
the Appeal. Appeal.


Murder.
The like Order is taken against Robert Fernell of Newson in the County of York
and others, Appeal.
for murdering of Richard Williamson, at the suit of Katherine wife of the said
Richard.

February in the year aforesaid at Westminster. Parl. re-assembled.


Anno Decimo Tertio Edwardi Quarti.
April, in the thirteenth year of this King, the Commons grant unto the King
one Fifeeen, A Dism and Fifteen granted.
and one Desm, except 6000 l. to be distributed to certain decayed Towns.
Decayed Towns.


after thanks given to the Commons, Thanks to the Commons.
the Chancellor, Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment, prorogueth the Parliament from the said day to the
sixth day of October then ensuing. The Parl. prorogued to the 6. of October.


that upon urgent cause the King moving, Urgent causes.
the King may at any time before call, and re-assemble the same Parliament,
Re-assembling before the day of Prorogation.
sending forth Writs 20 days before to proclaim.

tit. 9. be paid to the Treasurer of England. Subsidy. Treasurer.


Humfrey Dacres Knight, son of Thomas Dacres, and brother to Randolph, son and
heir to the said Thomas, of the body of the said Thomas begotten, is restored
to blood and land, Tail. Restitution.
notwithstanding the several attainders had against the said Randolph and
Humfrey, the which are made void.

A provision for Richard Fennis Knight, Sir Rich. Fennis.




and Ioane his wife, and the heirs of the said Ioane.

Dacre the heir male, as to Fennis the heir general, are confirmed, Tayls
confirmed.
wherein also is to be noted a pedigree for the line of the Lord Dacre.

John Naylor of London Esquire, Restitution.
as well of blood, as of Lands, and the attainder had against him, Anno 1 E. 4.
made void.

Thomas Lord Stanley are affirmed to be good, Tho. Lord Stanley.
notwithstanding the creation, or any Letters Patents made to the Prince of
Wales, Patents.

Non-obstante.

Prince of Wales.


Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester; an exception also of the Milnes of
Lordlamas, and Kennocogh in the Lordship of Beaumaris, and of all the lands
late Richard Knightlyes in the said Lordship.

Roger Kenaston Knight, Confirmation.
for the keeping of the Castle of Hardlagh. Hardlagh Castle.


Roger Heron Esquire, son and heir of John Heron Knight, is restored in blood
and lands to the said John, Restitution.
and the attainder had against the said John, Anno 1 E. 4. made void.

Richard Tunstall Knight is restored, Restitution.
and the attainder had against him, Anno 1 E. 4. made void.

Leicester in succession the Manor of Southorpe called Fillibertscourt in
Glouc. and the Manor of Southorpe called Grayes Court, Confirmation.

Dean of New College in Leicester.


with other lands in Southorpe, the which premises King Edw. the 3. gave to
William Harvey, and Mary his wife in especial tail.

Gloucester. Gloucester.


John Duke of Norfolk, Pardon.
and all other his officers of the Kings Bench in Southwark, the breach of the
said prison made at Michaelmas in the tenth year of King E. 4. by certain
misdoers unknown, Breach of Prison.
and the taking out of the prisoners, to the number of an hundred by name, laid
in for sundry offenses.

Robert Fennel of Neusome, mentioned before, tit. 39. being laid in Newgate
without bail or mainprize, prays, that the Chancellor upon a Corpus cum
causa, Imprisonment.

Habeas corpus.


may let him to bayl; Bayl.
the which is granted.

John Ashton of Holley in the County of York Knight, for imprisoning of the
said John by John Mayfield of Pontefract Esquire, Imprisonment.
and others; against all whom straight order is taken, for causing them to
answer thereunto.

Thomas Tretway of Reskenny in the County of Cornwall Esquire, and many others
within named, upon a complaint of riot by one John Vivian, exhibited for riots
surmised to be done by the said Thomas, Riot.
and others, for want of answering thereunto stood attainted of felony by Order
of Parliament, Attainder of Felony by Parliament.
upon whose Petitions the said attainders have been revoked. Petitions.

Revocation.




Kings Debts assured upon a Fifteen.

Staple.


the King by a long act grants to them a Fifteen; as Anno 7 E. 4. tit. 9.

In a Roll entitled Anno Decimo Quarto, where indeed the same was Anno Decimo
Tertio.
Parliament reassembled.

Adjourned.


THe re-assembly of the Parliament prorogued unto the sixth day of October, in
Anno 13. and from the same continued from day to day, to the thirteenth of
December then ensuing.

Merchants of Hauns. Peace.
The hostility and contention which was between the King and the Merchants of
England of the one part, and the Duke of Hauns, or the Stilliards of the other
part, Stilliard.
from the 21. day of November in Anno E. 4. unto the 19. day of September in
Anno 13 E. 4. are utterly appeased, so as every Merchant of either part to the
said 19. day, may lawfully require of the other part his own, and a free
intercourse between those Countries and Merchants, Restitution.

Free trade.


for ever to be had.

Merchants strangers. Stilliard.
of every Country by name, by King E. 1. but after granted by especial name to
the Merchants of the Stilliard by E. 2. wherein is to be seen their Customs
rated, and the Kings grant not to (...) the same; all which by act of
Parliament is confirmed. Liberties confirmed


John Fortescue Knight, is restored to blood and lands, Restitution.
and the attainder had against him An. 1. E. 4. made void.

William Shetford, Cousin and heir to Joan one of the sisters and heirs of
William Burnen Knight, complains, that he was wrongfully disseised of and in
the moity of the Manor of Treycorn, Coparceners.

Disseisin.


Hamet, Donebant, Deliow, Doyl, Wenell, Delydowbolin, Deliem, Carbolyn, and
Lamlyn, with the appurtenances in Cornwall, by Thomas Bodnegate, Cousin and
heir to Alice the other sister, and heirs to the said William, and that the
premises were assured to Elizabeth the wife of John Wells for life, sometime
the wife of the said Thomas, at whose petition power is given to the
Chancellor, Petition.

Restitution.


and two Justices to end the same.

Resumption.
for the King to take all the hereditaments of the Crown, Dutchies of
Lancaster, Duchy of Lancaster and York.
and York, from the feast of St. Thomas in Anno Dom. 1473, whereof the King was
seized the fourth day of March, An. 1. E. 4. or which came to the Kings hand at
any time since, by attainder, or otherwise.

Lancaster, Commission.

Chancellor.

Duchy of Lancaster.


for assuring the payment of certain of the Kings debts granted out of the same
Duchy, Debts assured.
and to pass under the seal of the said Duchy.

Lancaster, Duchy of Lancaster.
and County Palatine, County Palatine.
nor the officers, or tenants of the same.

Thomas Bourchier a Cardinal, Tho. Bourchier Cardinal.
and Archbishop of Canterbury.

John Howard Knight, Lord Howard.
Lord Howard.

Ralph Verney Knight, Sir Ralph Verney.
Citizen, and Alderman of London.

John Blackhead.

William Hattclyffe the Kings Secretary. Kings Secretary.


Cobb Midwife to Elizabeth the Kings best beloved wife Queen of England. Queens
Midwife.


Haxling in the County of Southampton, Isle of Haxling.

Liberties.


in An. 8. E. 4.

December, in the thirteenth year, the Bishop of Duresm, Chancellor of England,
Chancellor.
in the presence of the King, Lords, and Commons, after thanks giving on the
Kings behalf to every estate, Kings thanks.
by the Kings commandment, prorogued the Parliament unto the twentieth day of
January then ensuing, The Parliament prorogued to the twentieth day of January.
at Westminster.

Parl. re-assembled.
The re-assumption of the Parliament the twentieth day of January aforesaid, and
continuance of the same to the first day of February then ensuing. The
continuance of the Parliament unto the 1. of Feb.


February, in the presence of the King sitting in the Chair of Estate, King.
the Lords and Commons, the Bishop of Duresm Chancellor, Chancellor.
remembered the Commons, that the same assembly was for consultation, how the
King might proceed in the wars; Causes of Parliament.

Wars.


and for that they heard nothing from his brother of Burgundy, whereon he much
depended, he by the Kings commandment prorogued the Parliament from the said
day, The Parl. prorogued to the 9. of May, Anno 14 E. 4.
unto the ninth of May then ensuing.

Anno Decimo Quarto Edwardi Quarti.
Parl. re-assembled.

Adjourned.


THe re-assumption of the Parliament the ninth day of May, and so continued unto
the twenty eighth day of May then ensuing.

George Duke of Clarence, Duke of Clarence.
and Isabel his wife, and Richard Duke of Gloucester, Duke of Gloucester.

Coparcenpis.


and Anne his wife, daughter and heir to Richard Nevill late Earl of Warwick,
and daughters and heirs apparent to Anne Countess of Warwick, shall enjoy to
them, and to the heirs of their said wives, The Mothers Lands granted to them
as heirs, as if she were dead, during her life.
all the hereditaments belonging to the said Anne, in such wise as if the said
Anne were dead; and that their said wives should be of blood to the said Anne,
and enjoy all benefits accordingly, and the said Anne therefore for ever barred.

Coparcentis.

Partition.


and that the said Dukes, or either of them, over-living his wife, shall during
his life enjoy her property.

Discontinuance.

Coparceners.


That all alienations, discontinuances, charges, and encumbrances, Encumbrance.

Nullity.


suffered by any of the said Dukes, or their wives, to debarr the other of
their said purparties, to be utterly void.

Gloucester be at any time after divorced from the said Anne, Duke of Gloucester.

Divorce.


after newly her marriage, and suffer any such encumbrances, Encumbrance.

Coparceners.

Survivorship.


as above, to be void. And further, if the said Duke Richard, upon such
divorce, does the uttermost to be reconciled during his wifes life, that then
after the death of his said wife, he shall enjoy her purparty.

Exchange.
Manor, and Wapentake of Chestersield and Scurnsdale, with the appurtenances in
the same.

Anno 12 E. 4. tit. 59. is in manner recited, Staple.
and thereby enacted, that the said Mayor, during the said term, shall pay 1000
marks for the fees, Fees.
and rewards of the Kings Justices, Kings Justices.
Sergeants, Kings Sergeants.
and Attorneys. Kings Attorneys.


Robert Billesden, one of the Sheriffs of London, Sheriffs of London.
and Henry Newton, one of the Sergeants, Sergeants.
against Robert Gibbs a Captain, for succouring, and taking away of one Thomas
Bishop Grocer of London, being arrested and in the custody of the said Henry;
whereupon order was taken, that the said Sheriff and Henry should be discharged
of the rescues aforesaid, Rescous.
and have their remedy against the said Gibbs and Bishop.

May, the Bishop of Lincoln, Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
in the presence of the King, and the three Estates, prorogued the Parliament
unto the sixth day of June then ensuing. The Parliament prorogued to the 6. of
June.


June, Parliament re-a^sembled.

Adjourned.


and continuance of the same unto the eighteenth day of July then ensuing.

Thomas Daniel of Risinge in the County of Norfolk Esquire, is restored to
blood and lands, Restitution.
and the Attainder against him, 1 E. 4. made void.

In a Roll entitled the 13. where the same should be 14. being a number of the
12. year.
IN the Parliament begun, Parliament pro^gued.




and holden at Westminster the sixth day of October in Anno 12 E. 4. and by
sundry prorogations continued unto the sixth of June in Anno 14 E. 4. It was
enacted, that Katherine, the wife of William Hastings Knight, Lord Hastings,
Lord Hastings.
and before the wife of Bonvile late Lord Harrington the younger, Lord
Harrington.
Cousin and heir to William Lord Harrington the elder, and Cousin and heir
apparent to William before Lord Bonvile, Lord Bonvile.
should for, and during her life, enjoy the Manor of Chaton, Thurle-Bare, and
Mariot in Somersetshire, and certain lands in Foxill in Devonshire, together
with the Dominion or Manor of Aldingham, Dower and Joyntur^ confirmed.
the Manor, or Castle of Gleston, with lands in sundry other Counties, to the
value of 500 marks, parcel of the inheritance of the said Lord Bonvile and
Harrington, and to her assured.

And where the said Lord Harrington, and Bonvile the younger, had issue by the
said Katherine one only daughter called Cicill, a marriage should be had, It was
accorded, that at the age of 13. years of the said Cicill, a marriage should be
had between the said Cicill, Marriage.

Age of consent.


and Thomas the eldest son of the Queen, between whom if there were no mutual
society, that then the said Cicill should marry with Richard, the brother of
the said Thomas.

Infants assurance confirmed.
It is also enacted, that the said Cicill at the age of 14. years may assure all
her hereditaments to the said Thomas and Richard, for, and during their lives,
as aforesaid.

Sir John Florey.

Restitution.


John Bazin, Cousin and heir of John Florey Knight, of Cloford in the County of
Somerset, is restored to blood and lands of the said John Florey, and the
attainder of the said Florey Anno 4 E. 4. made void.

Restitution.
Thomas Lyteley of London, Grocer, is restored to blood and lands, and his
attainder, Anno 1 E. 4. made void.

Richard Welby, and William Dunthorne, Town-clerks of London, Town-Clerks of
London.
Executors to William Haddon Draper of London, Executors.
complain against Thomas Marsh, and James Finch Shereman of London, for
cautelous conveying of their goods and lands, Fraudulent conveyance.
to defraud their Creditors, to whom remedy is granted, that the said Debtors
should answer to the law upon Proclamation. Proclamation.


Dism and Fifteen granted.
The eighteenth day of July, the Commons grant to the King one Desm, and one
Fifteen, and 51117 l. 4 s. 7 d. ob. q. in full payment of the wages for 14000
Archers granted before, Archers wages.
toward the payment whereof every County, City, and Town is severally taxed.
The grant is very long.

Chancellor.
The same eighteenth day, Thomas Bishop of Lincoln, Chancellor of England, by
the Kings commandment, prorogued the Parliament unto the three and twentieth
day of February then ensuing, The Parl. prorogued to the 23. of February.
at Westminster.

Parliament re-assembled.
The re-assumption of the Parliament, the said three and twentieth day of
February, Anno 14 E. 4.

Ordinances.
An Ordinance for the speedy levying of the Tenth of all revenues, Tenths to the
King.
and profits granted to the King, Anno 12 E. 4.

Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Kings Feoffees in trust.
and to sundry others, of sundry the hereditaments of the Duchy of Lancaster,
to the performance of the Kings last Will and Testament. Kings last will.

Duchy of Lancaster.




Duchy of Lanc.

Officers.


shall continue the exercise of their said Offices, as before the making
thereof.

Duchy of Lancaster.
It is also enacted, that all Leases, Leases, Grants.
and Demises, Grants, Offices, Fees, Annuities, Presentations, and Advowsons,
be made from henceforth during the life of the King in his own name, by warrant
from his Highness, and under his Seal of the Duchy, Duchy Seal.
now being the seal thereof, as it has been used and accustomed in times past.

Leases.
as above, shall be made by the said Archbishop, and others, or the longest
liver of them, by warrant, and under the Seal of the said Duchy. Duchy Seal.


Stilliard.
in the parish of Alhallows in London, is by authority of Parliament assigned
to the Merchants of the Hauns, Merchants of the Hauns.
and to their Successors for ever, together with other Tenements to the same
belonging, yielding yearly to the Mayor of London 70 l. and other rents to
others. Mayor of London. Rent.


At the Petition of Richard Duke of Gloucester, Petitions

Duke of Gloucester.

Lands granted.




the King, spares the attainting of John Nevil, late Marquess Montacute, and
by authority of Parliament gives to the said Duke, and to the heirs of his
body lawfully begotten, sundry Honors, Baronies, Castles, Manors, and other
hereditaments, which late were Richard Nevils late Earl of Warwick.

George Duke of Clarence, Duke of Clarence.

Lands granted.


of and in the Manors of Claveringe, with the appurtenances, in Essex, and
Mantion, or Menson, called the Harber, and two Houses adjoining thereto in
London, which late were the said Earls of Warwick.

Exchange.
and Wapentake of Chesterfield, and Scaruesdale in the County of Derby, and of
the Manor of Bushey in Hartfordshire allotted to Richard Duke of Gloucester,
and Anne his wife, Cousin and heir of Alice Countess of Salisbury, viz. one of
the daughters and heirs of Richard late Earl of Warwick, Coperceners.
son and heir to the said Alice, and given to the King in fee, the King gives
to the said Duke and Anne, and to the said Anne in fee, the Manor of
Cottinghem, with the Advowson of the same in the County of York, Advowson.
which late belonged to Richard late Duke of York the Kings Father, and the
Castle, and Town of Scardesburgh, Scardesburgh.
with the Feefarm of the same, and other liberties.

Anne, or the heirs of the said Anne, that then they, or the heirs of the said
Anne, may re-enter upon the premises by them sold. Re-entry.


Anno 14. had given to George Duke of Clarence in especial tail, the Manors of
Stampford, Courtney, Torbrian, Stappleton in the County of Devon. Haslebury,
Iwarne, Courtney in Dorsetshire, Kingesden besides Ilchester in Somersetshire,
the King revoketh the same gift, Kings Grant revoked.

Tail.


and by authority of Parliament gives the premises to the said Duke in f^e,
Grant in see by Parliament.

Tenure.


to hold of the King by Knights service: the which gift was made, Anno 15 E. 4.
by Parliament.

Richard Duke of Gloucester by recovery in the Common Pleas in 14 E. 4.
recovered in fee the Manor of West Thamedon, Recovery.

Confirmation by Parliament.


and Feildhouse, and them of Inge Raulfe, alias Ginge Railfe, excepted 6.
M^ssuages, 30. acres of Land, 30. acres of Meadow, 12. acres of Wood, and 30 s.
2 d. of rent in the same Manor of Inge Raulfe, against Richard Fitzlowes
Esquire; The King, by assent of Parliament, confirms the premises to the
said Duke, against the heirs of the said Fitzlow^s, a general saving for all
other rights, except also as aforesaid.

John Duke of Norfolk to be spent in the Kings service, Duke of Norfolk.
It is enacted, that the said Duke shall, and may make a Lease for 5. years of
sundry his Manors there to Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Lease.
and others, for the payment of his debts. Payment of debts.


Lord Audley.
It is enacted, that John Audley Knight, Lord Audley, shall have the Wardship of
John Audley, Wardship granted.
son and heir of Humfrey Audley Knight, brother of the said Lord, and of Ioane
his sister, if the said John should die, and the Custody of certain Manors by
name in Suffolk, which late were the said Hnmfreys, until such time as the said
Lord had received thereof 600 Marks, which the said Lord paid for the
redemption of the said land, Morgage redeemed.

Forfeiture.


to such persons as the King had given the same unto, in consideration of the
treasons done by the said Humfrey. Treason.


D. of Buckingham.
The 26th day of January, Anno 14 E. 4. It was enacted, that Henry then Duke of
Buchingham, should be to all intents reputed, and taken a person of full age of
21 years. Full age.


Du. of Buckingham.
The King, by assent of Parliament, confirms to the said Duke, Annuity
confirmed.
and to the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, 40 l. yearly, out of the
profits of the Counties of Bedford and Buckingham, according to the Letters
Patents of Creation, Creation money.
and grant thereof made to Humfrey late Duke of Buckingham, by H. 6. m. 23. In
which year of 23. and many years after, the style of the Earl of Warwick was
written thus, Earl of Warwicks
Henricus Praecomes Regni Angliae, et Comes War. The which style was granted
by the Kings Letters Patents, Style.
to the said Earl, and to his heirs.

Annuity confirmed to Executors.
It is enacted, that if Sir Galliard Dureford Knight, of Duras, a Gascoyne,
should die in the service of the King, that then the Executors of the said Lord
for 5. years next after his decease, should enjoy an Annuity of 100 l. yearly
granted to the said Lord during his life, out of the Manor of Bollingbrooke, to
the performance of his will. Will.


John Mannigham of Oldford in the County of Midd. Knight, is restored to the
blood and lands, Restitution.

Outlawry.


and an outlary pronounced against him upon an Indictment of Treason made void.
Treason.


Edward Ellesmere of London Esquire, is restored to blood and lands,
Restitution.
and an attainder against him, Anno 1 E. 4. made void.

John Dacre of Essex Esquire, convicted as Sir John Manningham, tit. 27. is
likewise restored. Restitution.


James Earl Douglas was to pass over with the King, Earl Douglas.
to whom the King had granted yearly during his life out of sundry Customs, 500
l. It was enacted, that if he the said Earl should die within 3. years, next
after his said passage, that then his Executors should in three years after,
Annuity confirmed to Executors.
receive out of the Customs 300 l. to perform his will. Will.


Henry Bodrugan of Cornwall Esquire, and Thomas Bonethon of the same Gentleman,
being attainted of Felony by act of Parliament, Attainder of Felony by
Parliament.
at the surmise of Thomas Nevil Esquire, for that they the said Henry, and
Thomas Bonethon, did not appear and answer at a day certain, according to the
Order of the Parliament, do sufficiently avoid the same by their Petition;
Petitions.
whereupon they are restored, Restitution.
and the said Attainder made void.

It is to be noted, that the said Henry married Margaret Viscountesse Lisle.
Vicontesse Lisle.


Henry being in like sort attainted at the suit of John Arundel of Talverne in
the County of Cornwall Esquire, John Peaporse Esquire, William Cornswiewe
Esquire, and Otrice Philip, Yeomen of the Crown, is restored, Restitution.
as next before. The Complaints against the said Henry are long, and the crimes
heinous.

H. 6. annexed the Priory of Sharborne in Southampton, Priory of Sherborn.
to the College of Eaton: Eaton College.

Chauntry.


It is enacted, that such persons as have the same Priory shall yearly ^ind a
Mass Priest to sing in the said Priory, and to pray for the soul of the King,
and for the Soul of Heenport, Heenport Baron of the Exchequer.
sometime Baron of the Exchequer, and founder of the said Priory.

Richard Wells, late of Hellow in the County of Lincoln Knight, Robert Wells
of the same Knight, and Thomas de Leland, of Horbling in the said County
Knight, for levying war against the King, Treason.

Levying War against the King.

Attainder.


the twelfth of March, in Anno 10 E. 4. at Empingham, in a place called
Hornfield in the County of Rutland.

John Vere, Io. Vere, Earl of Oxford.




late Earl of Oxford, late of Winhod in the County of Essex Knight, Thomas Vere
of the same Knight, William Goldmansion of Bomley in Essex Esquire, Robert
Harleston of Sumplinge in Suffolk Esquire, Robert Gibbon of Wingfield in
Suffolk Esquire, and others, for raising war against the King at Barnet field
in the County of Hartford, Levying War.

Attainder.


on Easter Day, Anno 2 E. 4.

The Attainders of Tresham of Sywell in Northampton Knight, Attainder.




Robert Bainton of Farleston in the County of Wilts Knight, and of John Delves
of Uttokesheter in the County of Stafford Esquire, and diverse others, for
raising war against the King at Tewkesbury the 4. of May, Levying War.
Anno 11 E. 4.

Forfeiture.
with provisions for the Manor of Lilleford in Northampton, and the Manor of
Hokington in the County of Cumberland, and other savings.

Oxford, George Vere, and Thomas Vere, are only pardoned with their lives.
Pardon of life.


Savings.
and namely of all men's rents, and services.

Richard Hastings Knight, had married Jane, the daughter and heir of Richard
Wells Knight, and the sister and heir of Robert Wells Knight, the King, by
authority of Parliament, grants to the said Richard Hastings Knight, Sir
Richard Hastings.

Kings Grant.


for, and during his life, without impeachment of waste, Wall.
22. Manors by name in Lincoln, with sundry other lands in Lanc. 7. Manors in
Norfolk, one Manor in Denbigh, one Message in Lincoln, and one Mease called
the Base Court, with 17. tenements, in the Parish of St. Gyles in London; all
which were Lord Wells, or Robert Lord Willoughy, or the said Richard Wells.
Richard Wells.


Richard Hastings, Sir R. Hastings.
as is aforesaid, sundry other Manors by name, being the hereditaments of the
said Richard Wells, Richard Wells.
and LL.

Oxford, E. of Oxfords pardon.
and his brothers, by which it appears, that the said Earl fortified, and
kept St. Michaels Mount against the King. St. Michaels Mount.


Dism and Quindism granted.
The Commons grant to the King one Desm, and one Fifteen, and three parts of
either of them.

March, Anno 14 E. 4. after the reading of the grant aforesaid, and of the
Petitions ensuing, Petitions.
the Bishop of Lincoln, Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
on the Kings behalf gave thanks to all the estates, Kings Thanks.
and so dissolved the Parliament. Parliament dissolved.


Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers
Anno 12 E. 4. cap. 1. agrees with the record. Sheriffs.


Subsidies.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Bow-staves.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Patents.

Victuals.


cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Escheators.
cap. 9. agrees with the record.

Liveries.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Wools.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Sewers.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Wears. Fish-garths.
and Fish-garthes, cap. 7. agrees with the record.

Welshmen by name, Acquittal.

Welshmen.


upon certain Felonies, being unduly done, and taken before Thomas Brampton,
and John Wymes, Justices of Assize in Hereff. Anno 13 E. 4. may be void,
Justices of Assize.

Repeal


it is enacted.

William Hyde, a Burgess for Chippingham in Wil^s, being in Execution in the
Kings Bench, upon a Capias ad satisfaciend. prays to be delivered by a writ
out of the Chancery; Privilege of Parliament. Burgess delivered out of
Execution. Writ out of Chancery. Execution afterward saved.
the which is granted, saving the right to the other men to have execution
after the Parliament ended.

The 23. of January, Anno 14 E. 4. these Petitions ensuing were enacted.
Petitions.


Kings debts paid.
upon Patents, Bill, or Talley, due from Anno 10.

The print touching the Kings Tenants going in his wars, Kings Tenants.




cap. 1. agrees with his record.

Protections.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Truce-breaking.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Wools.
cap. 3. agrees with the record.

Anno Decimo Septimo Edwardi Quarti. The Parliament holden at Westminster the
sixteenth day of January, in the seventeeth year of King Edward the Fourth.
King.
sitting in the Chair of Estate in the Chamber de pinct. otherwise called St.
Edwards Chamber, Painted Chamber.
and of the Lords and Commons, Thomas Bishop of Lincoln, and Chancellor of
England, Chancellor.
by the Kings commandment, declared the cause of the calling of the said
Parliament, Causes of Parliament.
taking for his Theme, Dominus regit me, and nihil mihi de^rit.

Subjects obedience.
and showed out of the Old and New Testaments, by sundry examples, of such
grievous plagues as ensued the rebel, Rebels plagues.
and disobedient, and the saying of St. Paul, Non sine causa Rex gladium
portat. He further shows how the Majesty of the King was upholden by the hand
of the Counsel of God, King supported by God.

Restored.


whereby he was advanced to the seat of his Ancestors.

Si dominus regit me, nihil mihi deerit, sed in loco pascuae illos collocabit
After which he willed the Commons the next day to choose their Speaker among
their selves, Commons to choose and present their Speaker.
and accordingly to present him to the King.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Speaker chosen.


William Allington to be their Speaker, William Allington Speaker.

Presented.


whose excuse refused, Excuse. Protestation.
he with the common protestation was allowed.

Richard his second Son, Duke of York and Norfolk, Duke created.
Earl Marshal, and Warren, and Nottingham, and had appointed his said Son to
mary with Anne, the daughter and heir of John late Duke of Norfolk, the said
Anne being then of the age of six years. Marriage to a Feme of 6. years.


Anne should happen to dye before issue had by the said Duke of York; that then
the said Duke should enjoy, Husband to enjoy his wifes estate without issue.

Tenant by the Courtesy.


during his life, sundry Baronies, Honors, Castles, Manors, Knights fees, and
other hereditaments by name in Wales, Sussex, and other Countries, parcel of
the inheritance of the said Anne.

Elizabeth Duchess of Norfolk, Jointure confirmed.
late the wife of John Duke of Norfolk, all which premises, with all other the
reversions of the hereditaments of the said Duke of Norfolk, are granted to the
said Duke of York during his life: certain particular provisions for the Lord
Howard, the Lord Barkeley, and others.

Richard Duke of Gloucester, and Anne his wife, in the right of his said wife,
assured to the King in fee, the Castle and Manor of Elvel, with the
appurtenances, in Wales: in exchange whereof, Exchange confirmed.
the King gave to the said Duke, and to Anne in fee, the Castle, and Manor of
Ugmore in Wales, with Clauses of re-entry for either party in cases of
eviction; Re-entry.
the which assurances are confirmed by Parliament.

Exchange confirmed.
The Duke of Suffolk gives to the King in fee the Manors of Eastwordlebam, and
Westwordleham, with the appurtenances, in Southampton, for the Manors of
Dudington, and Ascot, with the appurtenances, in Oxon, in fee, with the like
Clause as before; the which is confirmed, as before.

Richard Duke of Gloucester, and Anne his wife, and the heirs of them, and the
Executors and Assigns of the said Duke, Baron and Feme.
may lawfully Alien, discontinue, Discontinuance.
and grant away sundry Advowsons there named of the inheritance of the said
Anne in Mortmain, Advowsons.
or otherwise, Non-obstante.
notwithstanding the Statute made in Anno 14 E. 4. tit. 22.

George Nevil, George Nevil created D. of Bedford.
the son of John Nevil, late Marquess of Mountacute, and made him Duke of
Bedford, the King, by authority of Parliament, His P^tent revoked in Parliament.
revoketh the said Creation, and all titles of honor, as well from the said
George, and from the said John.

Roger Twyndowe Esquire, Petition.
Cousin and heir of Anckenett Twyndowe, late wife of William Twyndowe Esquire,
deceased; viz. son of John, son of the said William and Anckenett, the
judgment, Judgment repealed.
and process had against the said Anckenett at Ware, Anno 16. E. 4. for
poisoning of Isabel, Poisoning.
late the wife of George Duke of Clarence, is utterly repealed.

Anckenett suffered death for the act aforesaid at Ware, whose Indictment,
Indictment.

Execution.


and process thereon, is annexed to the record.

Elizabeth Not^hill, the sister and heir of Anthony Notehill, late of Riston in
Holderness, in the County of York Knight, and Cousin and heir of Anthony
Notehill, late of the same Esquire, son of the same Anthony, and Walter, the
Attainders against them, Attainders nulled.
Anno 1 E. 4. made void.

Thomas Vere Knight, Attainder revoked.
Anno 13 E. 4. tit. 35. is revoked, and he restored to the Manor of Dillingham
in the County of Cambridge, Restitution.
and all other his hereditaments.

William Finderne Knight, son and heir of Thomas Findern Knight, is restored to
the blood and lands of the said Thomas, Restitution.
and the Attainder of the said Thomas, Anno 1 E. 4. made void.

Canterbury. Canterburies paving.


Taunton in Somersetshire. Tauntons paving.


Ciciter. Ciciter.


Southampton. Southampton.


Ralph Ashton Knight, Sr. Ralph Ashton.
recites the matter contained Anno 12 E. 4. tit. 37. and shows how the said
Roger, with sundry other there named, in most riotous wife, since the said Act,
detained, and kept the Manor of Great Lener, against which riots, Ryots.
order by process is granted with provisions. Process.


Richard Heron of London Merchant, sued John Walden, late Mayor of the Staple
at Callice, and Philip Harbery Merchants of the same in the Court at Bruges in
Flanders, and other foreign Courts, Foreign suits.
It is enacted, that if the said Richard do not after Proclamation made in
London, Proclamation.
surcease the foreign suits, that he then shall be out of the Kings protection.

Petitions of the Commons, Petitions.
with their Answers.
Money.
cap. 1. agrees with the record.

Piepowders.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Games unlawful.
cap. 2. agrees with the record.

Apparel.


Tyle.
cap. 4. agrees with the record.

Clothes sealing.
cap. 5. agrees with the record.

Sheriffs return.
cap. 6. agrees with the record.

Parliament.
The print touching the revocation of a Parliament, holden Anno 9 E. 4. agrees
with the record.

that John at Will. a Burgess for Exeter, being condemned, during the
Parliament, Privilege of Parliament.
in the Exchequer upon 8. several Informations, Exchequer.
by the pursuit of John Tailor of the same Town, shall have as many Supersedeas
therefore as he will, Supersedeas.
until his coming home.

Irishmen.
An Act to continue unto the next Parliament, that all Irishmen born, or coming
of Irish, and which do remain within England, do repair, Residence.
and remain in Ireland, or else to pay yearly a certain sum there rated, for
the defense of the same.

Anno Vicesimo secundo Edwardi Quarti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Charissimo suo filio primogenito Edwardo Principi Walliae, etc. apud
Westminster. Vicesimo die Ianuarii. Test Rege apud Westminster. decimo quinto die
Novembris, 1482.
RIcardo Duci Eborum. Ricardo Duci Gloucest. Johanni Duci Suffolciae. Hen. Duci
Buckingham. Tho. Marchioni Dorset. VVillielmo Com. Arundell. Hen. Com. Essex.
Edwardo Com. Cantii. Radulph. Com. Westmerland. Hen. Com. Northumb. Anth. Com.
Rivers. Willielmo Com. Huntington. Radulpho Graystock Chlr. Tho. le Scroop de
Masham Chlr. Ricardo Beauchamp de Beauchamp Chlr. Johanni de Audley Chlr.
Georgio Nevil Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Wilton Chlr. Georgio Standley de
Standley Chlr. Hen. Gray Chlr. Johanni Howard Chlr. Ricardo West Chlr. VValtero
Devereux de Ferrars Chlr. Johan. le Scroop de Bolton Chlr. Tho. Lumley de
Lumley Chlr. Tho. Standley de Standley Chlr. Richardo Fines de Dacre Chlr.
Johanni Brook de Cobham Chlr. Johan. Blunt de Mountjoy Chlr. Johan. Sturton de
Sturton Chlr. Johan. Sutton de Dudley Chlr. Willielmo Hastings de Hastings
Chlr. VVillielmo Viscount Berckley Chlr. Johanni Denham de Carry Denham Chlr.
Edwardo Gray de Lisle. Fran. Lovell de Lovell Chlr. Ricardo Fitzhugh Chlr.
Tho. Arundell de Montrevers Mil. Hum^. Dacre de Gilsland. Johanni Gray de
Powis. Ricardo Hastings de Wells. Oweno Ogle de Ogle Mil. Edwardo Hastings de
Hungerford.
The Parliament holden at Westminster the twentieth day of January, in the Two
and twentieth year of the reign of Edward the Fourth.
King.
sitting in the Chair of estate, in the Chamber de pinct. commonly called St.
Edwards Chamber, Painted Chamber.
within the Palace of Westminster, and of the Lords and Commons then there
assembled, the Archbishop of York, Chancellor of England, Chancellor.
made a notable Declaration of the calling of the Parliament, Causes of
Parliament.
taking for his Theme, Dominus illuminatio mea, et salus mea, after which he
willed the Commons the next day to choose their Speaker, Commons to choose, and
present their Speaker.
and to present him to the King.

England, Petitions.
Ireland, Wales, and Scotland.

Gascoyne, and other places beyond the Seas, and of the Isles.

England, etc. as above.

Gascoyne, etc. as above.

Committee of Commons.
how they had made choice of their Speaker. Speaker chosen.


John Wood Esquire, John Wood Speaker Presented.
to be their Speaker, whose Excuse made, Excuse.
was refused, and he with the Common protestation was allowed. Protestation.


fifteenth day of February, the Commons by the assent of the Bishops and Lords,
granted to the King one Desm, Dism and Fifteen granted.
and one Fifteen, to be levied of the Laity, except 6000 l. to be bestowed upon
decayed Towns. Decayed Towns.


A yearly Subsidy granted to be levied of all Strangers, An Annual Subsidy on
Aliens.
as well the Denizens as otherwise.

Statutes proclaimed.

Weights, Measures.


of Laborers, Laborers, Beggar^.
Beggars, and Vagabonds, should be proclaimed, and observed.

Annuity of 11000 l. to defray the Kings household expenses.
amounting to 11000 l.

Dorset there by name, Princes.
as in the right of his Duchy of Cornwall, Duchy of Cornwall.
the same Manors are given to William Earl of Huntington, son and heir of
William Herbert Knight, late Earl of Pembrook, in general tail, Tail.
in exchange for sundry Honors, Exchange.
Castles, and Manors in Wales, all which, Confirmation.
by the same authority of Parliament, are annexed to the said Duchy.

Richard Duke of Gloucester, Patents confirmed.

Du. of Gloucester.


and to the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, the Wardship and office
of North Marches, Wardship of the North Merches.
together with the Castle, Town, Lordship, and Fee-farm of Carlisle, with all
the Customs, Customs.
and profits; the Castle, and Fee-farm of Bowcastle, Fee-farms.
with all the appurtenances, and Nichol Forest, and all the Kings
hereditaments, as of his Duchy of Lancaster in Cumberland, Duchy of Lancaster.
the Countries and grounds within Scotland, Scotland.
called Liddalesdale, Elseale, Ewesdale, Avanderdale, Walthopdale, Cliddesdale,
and the West Merches, and all other lands, which he shall get in Scotland, with
sundry royal Prerogatives in the same, Prerogatives royal.
to hold the same of the King by his Knights fee. Knights service.


William Viscount Berckley.
In consideration of 34 l. paid by the King for William Viscount Berckley, by
the assent of the said William it is enacted, that all the part, and purport of
all the hereditaments of John late Duke of Norfolk, which should descend to the
said William, by and after the death of Anne, the daughter and heir of the said
Duke of Norfolk, and wife of Richard Duke of York, in general tail, Tail.
and for want of such issue to the heir male lawfully begotten of the body of
the King, the remainder to the said William in fee, notwithstanding any
discontinuances made by the said Duke of York, Non obstanie.

Discontinuance.


or by the King.

William, as for John Howard Knight and others.

Kings Tenants.
as of his Duchy of Lancaster, Duchy of Lancaster.
by sundry Recoveries, Fines, and Feoffments in use, defeated the King of
Wardships of body, Fraudulent conveyances.

Wardships.


and land, It is enacted, that the King and his heirs shall have the Wardship
and Custody of the body and land of every such person, being within age, to
whose use the interest of fee-simple, Use.
or fee-tail of any hereditaments so holden, shall grow as heirs by death of
any of his Ancestors, and if they be of full age, to have releief, Relief.
notwithstanding any such conveyance.

Writ^. Chancery.
for the imbezelling of any such heir, Imbezelling.
upon pursuit of the Attorney of the Courts of the Duchy. Attorney of the
Duchy.


Corporation.

Dean and Canons of Windsor Castle.


and Canons of the Kings free Chapel of St. George within the Castle of
Windsor, and Confirmation of all grants made by the King, Confirmation.
or any his Progenitors to the same Dean, and Canons, by what name soever.

Thomas the Cardinal, Cardinal of Canterbury. Kings Feoffees in trust. Duchy
of Lancaster. Release.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and other the Kings Feoffees in trust of certain
hereditaments of the Duchy of Lancaster, do release to the Abbot of St.
Mary's in York 80 marks yearly, parcel of 200 marks, which the said Abbot
yearly paid to the Duchy of Lancaster, for the Manor of Whitguifts, and other
lands in the County of York; In consideration whereof, the said Abbot gave to
the King the Advowson of the Parsonage of Boston, Advowson.

Boston.


in Lincoln, the which Parsonage the King appropriated to the Prior of St.
John's of Jerusalem in succession. Appropriation.
For the which the said Prior gave to certain, and to the use of the King in
fee, certain lands, called Beamonds Lees, enclosed with pale in Leicester. All
which grants are confirmed by authority of Parliament. Exchange. Confirmation
of Patents.


It is to be noted, that in all grants, as well of the said Abbots, as of the
said Priors, made to the King, Kings style and supremacy.
they sunderly call the King by these very words, Supromus Dominus noster
Edwardus quartus Rex. At what time if there were any Pope, either his power
here then was very little, or else he was much forgetful by his Books.

Anno 7. granted to Anne the Duchess of Exeter, Duchess of Exeter.
his Sister, during her life, sundry Castles, Manors, and other hereditaments,
and large liberties, in Wales, Cornwall, Devon, Somerset, Dorset, Wilts, and
other Counties, the remainder to Anne the daughter in general tail, Tail.
the remainder to Anne the Duchess in general tail, and the daughter died
without issne, Anne the Duchess afterward married with Sr. Thomas Sentlegier
Knight, and had issue Anne and died, Sentlegier held in by the Courtesy.
Tenent by the Courtesy.


Thomas Marquess Dorset to the King, Patents.
in Northampton, and elsewhere, and namely of the Manors of Thorpe, Waterfield,
Aldwincle, a Church, etc. And in consideration of marriage to be had between the
Lord Thomas, son and heir of the said Marquess, and the said Anne then living,
the King by authority of Parliament, Kings confirmation.
confirms to the said Anne, all and singular the premises in the next title
before, the remainder to the said Lord Marquess in especial tail, Tail.
the reversion to the King by services accustomed.

Richard Gray in especial tail, Patents.

Tail.


all and singular the Manors next before surrendered to hold the reversions of
the King by services to the King accustomed.

Anno 12 E. 4. and restores his heir or heirs. Attainder revoked.

Restitution.




William Hoddie, son to John Hoddie Knight, brother to Alexander Hoddie of
Bower in the County of Somerset Knight, is restored to the blood and lands of
the said Alexander, Restitution.
and the Attainder had against the said Alexander, Anno 1 E. 4. made void.

Excester, Petition. Exeter.
the Kings Letters Patents made for the incorporation of the Tailors of the
same, Tailors.
and granted Anno 6 E. 4. are repealed. Repeal.


Petitions of the Commons, with their Answers.
Apparel.
cap. 1. agrees, etc.

Barrel-fish.
cap. 2. agrees, etc.

Silk-weavers.
cap. 3. agrees, etc.

Bows.
cap. 4. agrees, etc.

Hats. Capps.
and Capps, cap. 5. agrees, etc.

Swans.
cap. 6. agrees, etc.

Woods^ Purliews.
cap. 7. agrees, etc.

Barwick, Barwick.
cap. 8. agrees with the record.

Anno Vicesimo Tertio Edwardi Quarti. Rex, Writs of Summons.
etc. Filio suo primogenito Edwardo Principi Walliae, etc. apud Westminster. Vicesimo
die Ianuarii.
RIcardo Duci Eborum. Ricardo Duci Gloucest. Johanni Duci Suffolciae. Hen. Duci
Buckingham. Tho. Marchioni Dorset. VVillielmo Com. Arundell. Hen. Com. Essex.
Edwardo Com. Cantii. Radulph. Com. Westmerland. Hen. Com. Northumb. Anth. Com.
Rivers. Willielmo Com. Huntington. Radulpho de Graystock Chlr. Tho. le Scroope
de Masham Chlr. Ricardo Beauchamp de Beauchamp Chlr. Johanni Audley Chlr.
Georgio Nevil Chlr. Reginaldo Gray de Wilton Chlr. Georgio Standley de le
Strange Chlr. Hen. Gray Chlr. Johanni Howard Chlr. Ricardo West Chlr. VValtero
Devereux de Ferrars Chlr. Johan. le Scroop de Bolton Chlr. Tho. Lumley, de
Lumley Chlr. Tho. Strange de Standley Chlr. Richardo Fines de Dacre Chlr.
Johanni Brook de Cobham Chlr. Johan. Blunt de Mountjoy Chlr. Johan. Sturton de
Sturton Chlr. Johan. Sutton de Dudley Chlr. Willielmo Hastings de Hastings
Chlr. VVillielmo Viscount Berckley Chlr. Johanni Denham de Carry Denham Edwardo
Gray de Lisle. Fran. Lovell de Lovell Chlr. Ricardo Fitzhugh Chlr. Johanni
Zouch Chlr. Tho. Arundell de Montrevers Chlr Humf. Dacre de Gilsland. Johanni
Gray de Powis. Ricardo Hastings de Wells. Oweno Ogle de Ogle Mil. Edwardo
Hastings de Hungerford.
Anno Primo Ricardi Tertii. In Rotulo Parliamenti tenti apud Westminster. die Veneris
vicesimo tertio die Januarii, Anno regni Regis Richardi Tertii primo, inter
alia continentur, ut sequitur.
Mcmorand. quod quaedam Billa exhibita fuit coram Domino Rege in Parliamento
praedicto in haec verba.
WHereas late heretofore, that is to say, before the Consecration, Coronation,
and Inthronization of our Sovereign Lord King Richard the Third, a roll of
Parchment, containing in writing certain Articles of the tenor underwritten,
on the behalf, and in the name of the Three Estates of this Realm of England,
that is to say, of the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and of the Commons by
name, and diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons by name, and
other Nobles and notable persons of the Commons in great multitude, was
presented and actually delivered unto our said Sovereign Lord, the intent and
effect expressed at large in the same roll, to the which roll, and to the
Considerations, and instant Petition comprised in the same, our said Sovereign
Lord for the public weal, and tranquillity of this Land, benignly assented.

Now for as much as neither the said three Estates, Things done and concluded
without the 3. estates in Parl: give little or no satisfaction to the People,
though in the name of the Parl. and 3. Esta^.
neither the said persons, which in their name presented, and delivered as it
is aforesaid the said roll unto our said Sovereign Lord the King, were
assembled in form of Parliament; by reason whereof diverse doubts, questions,
and ambiguities been moved and engendered in the minds of diverse persons as it
is said.

Therefore, to the perpetual memory of the truth, and declaration of the same,
be it ordained, provided, and established in this present Parliament, The
Parliaments Confirmation.
that the tenor of the said roll, with all the Contents of the same, presented
as is abovesaid, and delivered to our abovesaid Sovereign Lord the King, in the
name, and in the behalf of the said three Estates out of Parliament: Now by the
said The 3. Estates must concur to make a Pa^l else his Title would neither be
valid, nor satisfactory, but ambiguous, as before: No one or two of them being
a full or real Pa^l^ but all conjoined.
three Estates assembled in this present Parliament, and by authority of the
same, be ratified, enrolled, recorded, approved, and authorized to the removing
of the recasions of doubts, and ambiguities, and to all other lawful effects
that shall now thereof ensue, so that all things said, affirmed, specified,
desired, and remembered in the said roll, and in the tenor of the same,
underwritten in the name of the said three Estates to the effect expressed in
the said roll, be of the like effect, virtue, and force, as if all the same
things had been so said, affirmed, specified, and remembered in full Parliament,
and by authority of the same accepted and approved, the Tenor of the said roll
of Parchment whereof above is made mention, follows, and is such.

To the High and Mighty Prince, Richard Duke of Gloucester
The new device of this Bloody Usurper, to entitle himself to the Crown of
England, and take upon him the Regal Government.
Pleases it your Noble Grace to understand the Considerations, Election, and
Petition underwritten of us the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of
this Realm of England, and thereunto agreeable, to give your assent to the
Common and public weal of this land, and to the comfort, and gladness of all
the People of the same.

First, we consider, how that heretofore in time passed, this land for many
years stood in great prosperity, honor, and tranquillity: which was caused for
so much as the Kings reigning, used and followed the advice and counsel of
certain Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Good Counselors.
and other persons of approved sagenesse, prudence, policy, and experience,
dreading God, and having tender zeal, and affection to indifferent
administration of Justice, Administration of Justice.
and to the Common, and public weal of the land: Then our Lord God was dread,
loved, and honored; Then within the land was peace and tranquillity, and among
the Neighbors Concord and Charity; Then the malice of outward Enemies was
mightily resisted, and repressed, and the Land honorably defended with many
great and glorious victories; Then the intercourse of Merchants was largely
used and exercised; Merchandise, and Trade.
by which things above remembered, the land was greatly enriched, so that as
well the Merchants as the Artificers, Merchants.

Artificers.


and other poor people, laboring for their living in diverse Occupations, had
competent gain, to the satisfaction of them, and their households, living
without miserable and intolerable poverty. But afterward, when as such had
the rule and governance of this land, delighting in adulation, Adulation.
and flattery, and led by sensuality and concupiscence, followed the counsel of
persons, insolent, vicious, and of inordinate avarice, Avarice.
despising the Counsel of persons good, Ill Counsel.
virtuous, and prudent, such as above be remembered; the prosperity of this land
decreased daily, so that our felicity was turned into misery, and our
prosperity into adversity, and the order of policy, and the Laws of God, Laws
Confounded.
and man confounded, whereby it is likely this Realm to fall into great misery,
and desolation, (which God defend) without due provision of convenable remedy
be had in this behalf in all godly haste.

Over this, among other things more special, we consider how that the time of
the reign of Edw. the 4. late deceased, Edward the 4. his Marriage blemished.
after the ungracious pretended marriage (as all England has cause to say) made
betwixt the said King Edw. and Elizabeth, sometimes Wife to Sir John Gray
Knight, late naming her self, and many years heretofore, Queen of England, the
order of politic rule was perverted, Laws perverted.
the Laws of God, and of Gods Church, etc. also the Laws of Nature, and of
England, and also the laudable customs and liberties of the same, wherein every
Englishman is inheritor, Liberties and Laws every English man's Inheritance.

Arbitrary Government.

Force.


is broken, subverted, and contemned, against all Reason and Justice: so that
the Land was ruled by self-will, and pleasure, fear and dread, all manner of
Equity and Law laid apart and despised, whereof ensued many inconveniences and
mischiefs, Its mischievous Fruits.
as Murders, Murders.
Extortions, Extortions.
and Oppressions, Oppressions.
namely of poor, and impotent people: so that no man was sure of his life,
Incertainty of Men's lives and Estates.
land, or livelihood, ne of his wife, daughter, or servant, every good Maiden,
and Woman, standing in fear to be ravished, and deflowred. And besides this,
what discords, Discords. Wars.
inward battles, effusion of Christian men's bloods, and namely, by the
destruction of the Nobles blood of this land, Nobles blood destroyed.
was had and committed within the same, it is evident, and notorious through
all this Realm, unto the great sorrow, and heaviness of all true Englishmen.
And here also we consider, how that the said pretended Marriage betwixt the
abovenamed King Edward, and Elizabeth Gray, was made of great presumption,
without the knowing and assent of the Lords of this land, Kings Marriage without
the Lords assent, and by sorcery and witchcraft.
and also by Sorcery and Witchcraft committed by the said Elizabeth, and her
Mother Iaquet, Duchess of Bedford, as the common opinion of the people, Void
Marriage.
and the public voice and fame is throughout all this land, and hereafter if
the cause shall require, shall be proved sufficiently in time and place
convenient. And here also we consider, how that the said pretended Marriage was
made privily, Private Marriage in a Chamber.
and secretly without edition of banes, in a private Chamber, a profane place,
and not openly in the face of the Church, after the Law of Gods Church; but
contrary thereunto, and the laudable custom of the Church of England; and how
also at the time of the contract of the same pretended Marriage, and before and
long time after, the said King Edward was and stood married, and troth-plight to
one Dame Elinor Butler, daughter to the Earl of Shrewsbury, with whom the said
King Edward had made a Pre-contract of Matrimony, Precontract.
long time before he made the said pretended Marriage with the said Elizabeth
Gray, in manner and form aforesaid. Which premises being true, as in very
truth they be true, it appears, and follows evidently, that the said King
Edward during his life, and the said Elizabeth, lived together sinfully and
damnably in adultery, against the Law of God and of his Church; and therefore,
no marvel that the Sovereign Lord and head of the land being of such ungodly
disposition, Edward the 4th his ungodly disposition.
and provoking the ire and indignation of our Lord God, such heinous mischief
and Inconveniences as are above remembered were used, and committed in the Realm
amongst the Subjects. Also it appears evidently, and follows, that all the
issue, and children of the said King Edward be Bastards, and unable to inherit,
His Children illegitimate, and Bastards.
or claim any thing by inheritance by the Law, and custom of England.

Moreover, we consider how that afterward by the three Estates of this Realm
assembled in Parliament, holden at Westminster, Anno 17. of the reign of the
said King Edward the fourth, he then being in possession of the Crown, and
royal Estate, by Act made in the same Parliament, George Duke of Clarence, The
Duke of Clarence attainted by Parliament.
brother to the King Edward now deceased, was convicted, and attainted of High
Treason, as in the said Act is contained more at large; because, and by reason
whereof, all the issue of the said George was, and is disabled, and barred of
all right and claim, His issue thereby not inheritable and incapable to claim
the Crown.
that in any case they might have, or challenge by inheritance, to the Crown
and Dignity royal of this Realm, by the ancient Laws and Customs of this same
Realm.

Richard the 3. declared undoubted heir to the Crown.
Over this, we consider, that you be the undoubted heir of Richard Duke of York,
very inheritor of the said Crown, and dignity royal, and as in right King of
England by way of Inheritance; And that at this time the premises duly
considered, An Englishman by birth.
there is none other person living but you only, that may claim the said
Crown and Dignity royal, by way of Inheritance, and how that you be born
within this Land; by reason whereof, as we deem in our minds, you be more
naturally inclined to the prosperity and commonweal of the same, And all the
three Estates of the Land have, and may have more certain knowledge of your
birth, and filiation aforesaid. His pretended virtue; and ^itness to reign as
King; without one word of his desperate Treasons, Regi^^des, Murders,
Hypocrisy, and other V^c^s.
We consider also the great Wit, Prudence, Justice, Princely courage, and the
memorable and laudable acts in diverse battles, His valor in battle.
which as we by experience know you heretofore have done, for the defense, and
salvation of this Realm^ and also the great nobleness and excellency of your
birth, His honorable and royal birth.
and blood, as of him that is descended of the three most royal houses of
Christendom, that is to say, England, France, and Spain. Wherefore these
premises duly by us considered, we desiring effectually the peace,
tranquillity, and weal public of this Land, and the reduction of the same to
the ancient honorable estate, and prosperity; And having in your great prudent
Justice, Princely courage, and excellent virtue, singular confidence; His
election by the 3. States and this Instrument to be King of England.
have chosen in all that in us is, and by that our Writing choose you high and
mighty Prince, our King and Sovereign Lord, etc. to whom we know of They make
his hereditary Title, the ground of their Choice.
certain it appertains of Inheritance so to be chosen. And hereupon we humbly
desire, pray, and require your most Noble grace, that according to this
election of us the^ Three Estates of your Land, as by inheritance; you will
accept, and take upon you the said Crown and royal dignity, Their Petitition
and importunity to him, to accept of the Crown, though himself most eagerly
thirsted after it.
with all things thereunto annexed, and appertaining, as to you of right
belonging, as well by inheritance as by lawful election; His hereditary right
thereto, seconded by their election.
and in case you so do, we promise to assist and serve your Highness, Their
promise to assist, serve, and obey him, upon his acceptance thereof, as his
Subjects, and to live and dye with him.
as true, and faithful Subjects and Liege-men, and to live and dye with you in
this matter, and in every other just quarrel; for certainly we be determined
rather to adventure and commit us to the peril of our lives, and jeopardy of
death, than to live in such thraldom and bondage as we have done long time
heretofore, Their pretended great Thraldom, Bondage, Oppressions, etc. under
his Predecessors.
oppressed and injured by Extortions, Extortions.
and new Impositions, New Impositions against Laws and Liberties.

Nota.


against the Law of God, and Man, and the liberties, and old policy, and Laws
of this Land, wherein every Englishman is inherited. Our Lord God King of all
Kings, by whose infinite goodness, and eternal providence, all things been
principally governed in this world, lighten your Soul, and grant you grace to
do as well in this matter as in all other, that which may be according to his
will and pleasure; Their prayer for him.

Great Trouble (occasioned partly by himself.)


and to the common and public weal of this Land. So that after great clouds,
troubles, storms, and tempests, the Sun of Justice and of Grace may shine upon
us, Justice.
to the joy and comfort of all true-hearted English men.

Albeit that the right, title and estate which our Sovereign Lord King Richard
the Third has to, Richard the 3. His hereditary Title to the Crown by the Law
of God and Nature.
and in the Crown and royal dignity of this Realm of England, with all things
thereunto within the same Realm, and without it annexed and appertaining, been
just and lawful, as grounded upon the Laws of God and Nature, and also upon
the ancient Laws and laudable Customs of this said Realm; And also taken, and
reputed by all such persons, as been The Lawyers starter, and approve his Title.

The Common people ignorant in the Laws.


learned in the abovesaid Laws and Customs.

Yet nevertheless, The Parl^ author^ty with the people, when true, free, and
real, consisting of the 3. Estates.
for as much as it is considered, that the most part of the people is not
sufficiently learned in the abovesaid Laws and Customs, whereby the truth and
right in this behalf of likelihood may be hid, and not clearly known to all the
people, and thereupon put in doubt, and question. And over this, how that the
Its Declaration qui^teth all men's minds, removes all doubts and seditions. yet
he that con^iders 39 H. 6. n. 8. to 33. 1 E. 4. n. 8. to 40. will scarce
believe this for a truth, neither proved it so in his own case.
Court of Parliament is of such authority, and the people of this Land of such
a nature and disposition as experience teaches, that manifestation and
declaration of any truth or right, made by the Three estates of this Realm
assembled in Parliament, and by authority of the same, makes before all other
things, most faith, and certain The 3. Estates must all concur to make a
Parliament, and valid Election.
quieting of men's minds, and removes the occasion of doubts, and seditious
language.

Therefore, at the request, and by the assent of the They decree and declare
him undoubted King of this Realm, by inheritance and their lawful election
coupled together.
Three Estates of this Realm, that is to say, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons of this Land assembled in this present Parliament, and by authority
of the same, be it pronounced, decreed, and declared, that our said Sovereign
Lord the King was, and is the very undoubted King of this Realm of England,
with all things thereunto within the same Realm, and without it, united,
annexed, and appertaining, as well by right of consanguinity and inheritance,
as by lawful election, consecration and Coronation.

And over this, that at the request, and by the assent and authority abovesaid;
be it ordained, enacted, and established, The Crown settled and entailed on him,
and the heirs of his body.
that the said Crown, and royal dignity of this Realm, and the Inheritance of
the same, and all other things thereunto within this realm, or without it,
united and annexed, and now appertaining, rest and bide in the person of our
said Sovereign Lord the King, during his life, and after his decease in his
heirs of his body begotten, in especial at the request, and by assent, and the
authority aforesaid, be it ordained, enacted, established, pronounced, decreed
and declared, that the high and excellent Prince His Son declared heir apparent.
Edward, Son of our said Lord the King, be heir apparent of the same our
Sovereign Lord the King, to succeed to him in the abovesaid Crown and royal
dignity, with all things (as is aforesaid) thereunto united, annexed, and
appertaining, to have them after the decease of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, to him, and to the heirs of his body lawfully begotten.

Quae quidem Billa Communibus Regni Angliae in dicto Parliamento existentibus
transportata fuit, cui quidem Billae idem Communes assensum suum praebuerunt
sub hiis verbis: A ceste Bille les Communs sont assentes; quibus quidem Billa
and assensu coram Domino Rege in Parliamento praedicto, lectis, auditis, and
plene intellectis, and de assensu Dominorum Spiritualium and Temporalium in
dicto Parliamento similiter existentium, and Communitatis praedictae; nec non
authoritate ejusdem Parliamenti pronunciatum, decretum, and declaratum existit,
omnia, et singula in Billa praedicta contenta fore vera et indubia, ac idem
Here he creats and ratifies his own Title.
Dominus Rex, de assensu dictorum trium Statuum Regni, and authoritate
praedicta, omnia and singula praemissa in billa praedicta content^ concedit,
and ea pro vero and indubio pronunciat, decernit, and declarat.

FINIS.
A Table of the Parliament Rolls and Writs of Summons here abridged.
Tempore Edw. 3.
4 E^ 3. p. 6. 5 E. 3. p. 9. 6 E. 3. Parl. 1. p. 11. Parl. 2. p. 12, 13. 8 E.
3. p. 15. 13 E. 3. Parl. 1. p. 17. Parl. 2. p. 19. 14 E. 3. p. 22. Parl. 2. p.
25. etc. 15 E. 3. p. 31. 17 E. 3, p. 35, etc. 18 E. 3. p. 42, 43. 20 E. 3. p.
46. 21 E. 3. p. 51. 22 E. 3. p. 68, 69. 25 E. 3. p. 72, 73. Parl. 2. p. 77, 78.
27 E. p. 81. 28 E. 3. p. 84, 85. 29 E. 3. p. 89, 90. 36 E. 3. p. 92. 37 E. 3.
p. 95, 96. 38 E. 3. p. 99, 100. 40 E. 3. p. 102. 42 E. 3. p. 104, 105. 43 E. 3.
p. 106, 109. 45 E. 3. p. 111. 47 E. 3. p. 115, 116. 50 E. 3. p. 120. Parl. 2.
p. 141. 51 E. 3. p. 144.
Tempore R. 2.
1 R. 2. p. 153, 154. 2 R. 2. Parl. 1. p. 167. Parl. 2. p. 173. 3 R. 2. p. 181,
112. 4 R. 2. p. 187, 188. 5 R. 2. p. 193. Parl. 2. p. 195. 6 R. 2. p. 281.
Parl. 2. p. 286. 7 R. 2. p. 289, 290. Parl. 2. p. 297, 498. 8 R. 2. p. 202,
203. 9 R. 2. p. 307, 308. 10 R 2. p. 313, 314. 11 R. 2. p. 319, 320, 321. 12 R.
2. p. 327, 328, 329. 14 R. 2. p. 330, 331. 15 R. 2. p. 340, 341. 16 R. 2. p.
346. 17 R. 2. p. 350, 351. 18 R. 2. p. 357, 358. 20 R. 2. p. 359, 360. 21 R. 2.
p. 367. 23 R. 2. p. 382.
Tempore H. 4.
1 H. 4. p. 383, 384, etc. 2 H. 4. p. 403, 404. 4 H. 4. p. 414. 5 H. 4. p. 425.
6 H. 4. p. 435. 7 H. 4. p. 449. 8 H. 4. p. 451. 9 H. 4. p. 463, 464. 11 H. 4.
p. 469, 470. 13 H. 4. p. 477.
Tempore H. 5.
1 H. 5. p. 533, 534. 2 H. 5. p. 557, 538. 3 H. 5. p. 542, 543. 4 H. 5. p. 549,
550. 5 H. 5. p. 552, 553. 7 H. 5. p. 559, 560. 9 H. 5. p. 559, 560.
Tempore H. 6.
1 H. 6. p. 561, 562. 2 H. 6. p. 566, 567. 3 H. 6. p. 571, 573. 4 H. 6. p. 581,
582. 6 H. 6. p. 586, 587. 8 H. 6. p. 591. 9 H. 6. p. 597. 10 H. 6. p. 601, 602.
11 H. 6. p. 606, 607. 14 H. 6. p. 613, 614. 15 H. 6. p. 616, 617. 18 H. 6. p.
620, 621. 23 H. 6. p. 628, 629. 25 H. 6. p. 632, 633. 27 H. 6. p. 636, 637. 28
H. 6. p. 639, 640. 29 H. 6. p. 645, 646. 31 H. 6. p. 648, 649. 33 H. 6. p. 655,
656. 38 H. 6. p. 660, 661.
Tempore E. 4.
1 E. 4. p. 668, 669. 3 and 4. E. 4. p. 673, 674. 7 and 8 E. 4. p. 679, 680,
683. 9 E. 4. p. 686. 12 E. 4. p. 687, 688. 13 E. 4. p. 692. 14 E 4. p. 700. 17
E. 4. p. 701. 22 E. 4. p. 704. 23 E. 4. p. 708.
Tempore R. 3.
1 R. 3. 709, 710.
A Chronological Calendar of all the Admirals, Chamberlains, Chancellours,
Clerks of Parliament, Constables of England, Counselors of State, Custodes,
or Keepers of the Realm, Chief Justices and Judges of both Benches, and Barons
of the Eschequer, Marshals, Privy Seal keepers, Protectors, Speakers of
Parliament, Stewards of the Household, Treasurers, Wardens of the Cinque Ports,
and other Great Officers mentioned in this Exact Abridgment; with the years of
the Kings, number-rolls, and pages wherein they are named.
Admirals of England.
EArl of Arundel, 13 E. 3. n. 13. p. 20. Earl of Huntingdon, 13 E. 3. n. 14. p.
20. Sir Michael de la Pool of the North Sea, 1 R. 2. p. 153. Earl of
Northumberland of the North, 7 R 2. n. 14. p. 291. Earl of Devonshire of the
West, 7 R. 2. n. 14. p. 291. John Marquess Dorset, 21 R. 2. n. 73. p. 734.
Edward Earl of Salisbury, John Earl of Shrewsbury, John Earl of Worcester,
James Earl of Wiltshire, and the Lord Sturton, 31 H. 6. n. 40. p. 652.
discharged at their requests, 38 H. 6. n. 27. p. 657.
Chamberlains.
SIr John Darcy Lord Chamberlain, 20 E. 3. n. 5. p. 46. Sir Bartholmew
Burgherst, 25 E. 3. Parl. 2. n. 9. p. 79. 27 E. 3. n. 8. p. 82. 28 E. 3. n. 58.
p. 88. William Lord Latimer, 50 E. 3. n. 21. p. 122. Sir Robert de Ashton, 51 E
3. n. 13. p. 145. Sir Thomas Erpingham, 1 H. 4. n. 59. p. 389. Earl of Oxford
by Inheritance, 1 H 4. n. 1. 40 p. 397. The Lord Gray, 11 H. 4. p. 479. n. 13.
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, 1 H. 6. n. 22. p. 564. Ralph Lord Cromwell, 10 H. 6.
n. 17. p. 603.
Vice-Chamberlains.
SIr Thomas de Erp^ngham, 2 H. 4. n. 14. p. 406.
Chancellors of England.
BIshop of Winchester, 5 E. 3. n. 1. p. ^. Bishop of London, 6 E. 3. n. 4. p.
11. Bishop of Winchester, 6 E. 3. Parl. 2. n. 1. p. 12. Simon Bishop of Ely, 37
E. 3. n. 2. p. 96. 38 E. 3. n. 2. p. 100. 40 E. 3. n. 1. p. 102. Bishop of
Winchester, 43 E. 3. n. 1. p. 10^. 45 E. 3. n. 1. p. 111. Sir Robert Thorp, 45
E 3. n. 8. p. 111. Sir John Knyvet, 47 E. 3. n. 2. p. 116. 50 E. 3. n. 2. p.
120. Bishop of St. David's, 50 E. 3. n. 3. p. 144. 51 E. 3. n. 3, 4. p. 144. Sir
Richard le Scroope, Parl. 2. R. 2. n. 3. p. 167. 3 R. 2. n. 2. p. 182. Simon
Archbishop of Canterbury, 4 R. 2. n. 1, 2, etc. p. 189. 5 R. 2. n. 32. p. 298.
William Archbishop of Canterbury elect, 5 R. 2. n. 2. p. 195. Sir Richard le
Scroope Knight, 5 R. 2. n. 2. p. 193. 5 R. 2. Parl. 2. n. 12. p. 196. Robert
Braybrooke Bishop of London, 6 R. 2. n. 2. p. 281. 6 R. 2. Parl. 2. p. 287. Sir
Michael de la Poole, 7 R. 2. n. 2. p. 290. Parl. 2. 6 R. 2. n. 3. p. 298. 8 R.
2. n. 2. p. 303. 9 R. 2. n. 2. p. 308, etc. 10 R. 2. n. 1, 7^ to 20. p. 314,
315, 316. Thomas Bishop of Ely, 11 R. 2. n. 1.43. p. 321, 325. William de
Wickham, Bishop of Winchester, 13. R. 2. n. 1, 6, 7. p. 329. 14 R. 2. n. 1. p.
337. Archbishop of York, 15 R. 2. n. 1, 2. p. 341. 17 R. n. 1. p. 351. Bishop
of Exeter^ 20 R^ 2. n. 1. p. 360. 21 R. 2. n. ^, 11, 44. p. 376, 368, 371.
Bishop of London, 5 H. 4. n. 1. p. 425. Bishop of Lincoln, 6 H. 4. n. 1. p.
437. Thomas de Langley, 8 H. 4. n. 1. p. 451. Archbish. of Canterb. 9 H. 4. n.
1. p. 464. Thomas Beauford, 13 H^ 4. n. 1. p. 47^. Bishop of Winchester, 1 H.
5. n. 1. p. 535. 2 H. 5. n. 1. p. 538. 3 H. 5. n. 1.14. p. 544, 545. 4 H. 5. n.
1. p. ^49. Bishop of Durham, 5 H. 5. n. 1. p. 553. 7 H. 5. n. 1. p. 556. 9 H.
5. n. 1. p. 559. 1 H. 6. n. 13, 16. p. 563. 2 H. 6. n. 1. p. 567. Bishop of
Winchester, 3 H. 6. n. 1. p. 576. 4. H. 6. n. 1. p. 583. John Bishop of London,
4 H. 6. n. 1^^ 23. p. 584. John Archbish. of York, 6 H. 6. n. 1. p. 587. 8 H.
6. n. 1. p. 591. 9 H. 6. n. ^. p. 597. John Bishop of Bath and Wells, 10 H. 6.
n. 1. p. 602. 11 H. 6. n. 1. p. 607. 14 H. 6. n. 1. p. 614. 15 H. 6. n. 1. p.
617. 18 H. 6. n. 1. p. 621. John Archbishop of Canterbury, 23 H. 6. n. 1. p.
628. 25 H. 6. n. 1. p. 634. 27 H 6. n. 1. p. 637. 28 H. 6. n. 6. n. 7, 9, p.
641. John Archbishop of York and Cardinal, 28 H. 6. n. 10, 11. p. 641. 29 H. 6.
n. 1. p. 646. John Archbishop of Canterbury, 31 H. 6. n. 1.12.22. p. 649, 650.
Thomas Archbish. of Canterbury, 33 H. 6. n. 1. p. 628, n. 49. p. 656, 657, 659.
William Bishop of Winchester, 38 H. 6. n. 1. p. 661. George Bishop of Exeter,
39 H. 6. n 1. p. 665. 1 E. 4. n. 1. p. 669. 3 E. 4. n. 1. p. 672. George
Archbishop of York, 7 E. 4. n. 1, ^. p. 680, 682. Robert Bishop of Bath and
Wells, 12 E. 4. n. 1. p. 688. B. of Duresm, 13 E. 4. n. 16, 18, 27, 44. p. 693,
694, 695, 700. Thomas Bishop of Lincoln, 14 E. 4. n. 8. p. 696. 17 E. 4. n. 1.
p. 701. Archbish. of York, 22 E. 4. n. 1. p. 705.
Clerks of Parliament.
SIr Thomas of Drayton, 14 E. 3. n. 2. p. 22. 14 E. 3. p. 30. 15 E 3. n. 1. p.
31. 17 E. 3. n. 2. p. 36. 18 E. 3. n. 4. p. 43 20 E. 3. n. 5. p. 46. John of
Codington, 25 E. 3. n. 7. p. 73.
Clerks of the Crown.
GEoffry Martin, 11 R. 2. n. 21. p. 323.
Constables of England.
THomas de Woodstock, 50 E. 3. p. 143. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2.
p. 187. 9 R. 2. n. 15. p. 310. Thomas Duke of Gloucester, 17 R. 2. n. 20. p.
353. Henry P^erry Earl of Northumberland, 1 H. 4. n. 5 p. 384. n. 81. p. 392.
Humfrey ^e Bohun, 2 H. 5. n. 30. p. 541. [in 31 E: 1] ^ H^ 6. n. 34. p. 565.
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, 1 H. 6. n. 23. p. 564. John Duke of Bedford, 2 H.
6. n^ 9. p. 567.
Counselors of State.
BIshop of London, 5 E. 3. n. 54. p. 10. Archbish. of Canterbury, Earls of
Lancaster, Warwick and Huntington, 14 E. ^. n. 36. 55. p. 24, 25. Bishop of
Lincoln, 14 E. 3. n. 56. p. 25. William L. Latimer, 50 E. 3. n. 21, 28. p.
12^^ 122. John Lord Nevil, 50 E. 3. n. 34. p. 123. Bishops of London, Carlisle,
and Salisbury^ Earls of Stafford and March, Sir Richard Stafford, and Sir Henry
le Scroop Barons. Sir John Deverose, and Sir Hugh Seg^ave 1 R. 2. n. 22. p.
156. The Earl of Arundel, and Sir Michael de la Pool, 5 R. 2. n. 38. p. 198.
The Archbishop of Canterbury, 8 H. 4. p. 253. Bishop of Winchester, Bishop of
St. David's, Dukes of Lanc. and York, 13 R. 2. n. 7. p. 3^^. John D. of Bedford,
and Humfry D. of Gloucester, 8 H. 6. n. 25. p. 602. 11 H. 6. n. 17, 18.20. p.
608. Henry Bishop of Winchester Cardinal, 6 H. 6. n. 17. p. 593. Richard Duke
of York, 31 H. 6. n. 36, 38. p: 652. 33 H. 6. p: 658, 659.
Custodes Angliae, or Guardians, Wardens, Lieutenants of England, in the Kings
absence, or Nonage.
EDward Duke of Cornwall, 13 E. 3. Parl. ^. n. 5. p. 17. Parl 2. 13 E. 3. n.
22. 44. p^ 19. 14 E. 3. n. 36, 55. p. 24, 25. Lionel the Kings Son, 20 E. 3. n.
1. p. 46.^1 E. 3. n. 11. p. 52. 25 E. 3. n. 1. p. 73. Edward Duke of York the
Kings Uncle, ^8 R. 2. n. 1. p. 358. John Duke of Bedford, 3 H. 5. p. 542. 5 H.
5. p. 552, 553, 8 H. 5. p. 559. 9 H. 5. p. 661. Humfry Duke of Gloucester, 9 H.
6. p. 597.
Chief Justices of the Kings Bench.
SIr Jeoffry le Scroop, 8 E. 3. n. 22. p. 16. Sir William de Thorp, 22 E. 3. n.
1. p. 69. 25 E. 3. n. 10. p. 74. 10 R. 2. n. 9. p. 316. Sir William Strarshal
25 E. 3. n 8. p. 73. Parl 2. 25 E. 3. n. 5. p. 78. 27 E. 3. n. 6. p 82. 28 E.
3. n. 1. p. 85. 29 E. 3. n. 4. p. 90, 91. n. 10. Sir Hen. Green, 36 E. 3. n. 1.
p. 92. 37 E. 3 n. 1. p. 96. Sir John Cavendish, 1 R. 2. n. 29. p. 156. 3 R. 2.
n. 19. 25. p. 184. 5 R. 2. n. 32. p. 198. Sir Robert Tres^illian, 7 R. 2. n.
15. p. 300. Sir Walter Clopton, 13 R. 2. n. 12. p. 359. 21 R. 2. p. 377. Sir
William Thurming, or Thurning, 2 H. 4. p. 404, 405. n. 2.9. Sir William
Gascoyn, 5 H. 4. p. 429. n. 40. 13 H. 4. p. 479. n. 13. William Hankford, 8 H
5. p. 558. 9 H. 5. p. 561. William Cheyney, 4 H. 6. p. 582. 6 H. 6 p. 586. 14
H. 6. p. 614.
Justices of the Kings Bench.
SIr Richard Willoughby, 8 E. 3. n. 22. p. 16. Sir William Shareshall, 8 E. 3.
n. 22. p. 16. John Knevet, 3 R. 2. n. 25. p. 184 Sir Will. Thurning, 1 H. 4. n.
52, 59. p. 388, 389, 390. Sir Rob: Therwit, 13 H. 4. p. 478. n. 13.
Chief Justices of the Common pleas.
SIr John Stoner, 14 E. 3. n. 31. p. 30. Sir Robert Belknap, 3 R. 2. n. 25. p.
184. 7 R. 2. n. 15. p. 300.
Justices of the Common Pleas.
WIlliam Richil, 21 R. 2. p. 378.
Chief Barons and Barons of the Exchequer.
SIr Tho. Ludlow Chief Baron, 40 E. 3. n. 14. p. 103. Heenport Bar. of the
Exch. 14 E. 4. n. 33. p. 699
Marshals of England.
ROger de Bigot, Com. Norf. 33 E. 1. p. 4. Tho. Com. Norf. 15 E. 2. p. 3. 4 E.
3. p. 5. Hen. Percie, 50 E. 3. p. 143. Thomas de Mowbrey Earl of Nottingham, 11
R. 2. p. 319, 320. n. 8. p. 321. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p.
340. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 20 R. 2. p. 359, 361. 3. H. 6. p. 576. The Office
intailed on him, and the heirs males of his body, 20 R. 2. p. 32. p. 363, 365.
Thomas Duke of Surrey, 21 R. 2. n. 73. p. 374. Ralph de Nevil Earl of
Westmerland, 1 H. 4. n. 81. p. 392. Thomas Lord Morley, Leiutenant Marshall, 21
R. 2. p. 378.
Keepers of the Privy Seal.
SIr William of Keldesby, 15 E. 3. n. 49. p. 34. M. John Thoresby Clerk of the
Privy Seal 20 E. 3. p. 46. n. 5. Michael of Northumberland, keeper of the Privy
Seal, 28 E. 3. n. 58. p. 88. Richard Clifford, 1 H. 4. p 392. n. 84. 2 H. 4. n.
35. p 407. John Stafford, 1 H. 6. n. 16^ p. 563. Mr. William Alremith, 3 H. 6.
p. 573. Mr. Will. Alenwick, 4 H. 6^ n. 16. p. 584.
Protectors and Defenders of the Realm.
JOhn Duke of Bedford, and Humfry Duke of Gloucester, in his absence, 1 H. 6. n.
24, 25. p. 564. 3 H. 6. p. 572, 578. 5 H 6. n. 22, 23, 24. p. 688. 8 H. 6. n.
13. p. 592. Richard Duke of York, 31 H. 6. n. 34. to 39. p. 652. 33 H. 6.30. to
41. p. 658. His power repealed, n. 50. p. 659.
Speakers of the Commons in Parliament.
SIr Thomas Hungerford Knight, 51 E. 3. n. 87. p. 151. Sir Pierce de la Mare
Knight, 1 R. 2. n. 15, 16. p. 155. Sir James Pickering Knight, 2 R. 2. n. 16,
17. etc. p. 174. Sir John Gildesbrough Knight, 3 R. 2. n. 11. etc. p. 182. Sir
John Oldersburgh Knight, 4 R. 2. n. 10. p. 189. Sir Richard Walgrave Knight, 5
R. 2. n. 9, 10, 11. p. 196. Sir James Pickering Knight, 6 R. 2. Parl. 2. n. 9.
p. 287. Sir John Bussey Knight, 17 R. 2. n. 6. 17. p. 351, 353. 20 R. ^. n. 7.
15. p. 360, 361. 21. R. 2. n. 8.11.45. p. 367, 368, 371. Sir John Cheyney
Knight, 1 H. 4. n. 62, 63. excused for his sickness and infirmity, p. 390. Sir
John Doreward Knight, elected in his place, 1 H. 4. n. 63, 64. p. 390. Sir
Arnold Savage Knight, 2 H. 4. n. 8. p. 404. Sir Hen. de Redford Knight, 4 H. 4.
n. 9. p. 415. Sir Arnold Savage Knight, 5 H. 4. n. 8. p. 425. Sir William
Sturmey Knight, 6 H. 4. n. 8. p. 437. Sir John Tibetot Knight, 8 H. 4. n. 8.
11, etc. p. 451, 452. Thomas Chaucer Esquire, 9 H. 4. n. 12, 13. p. 464. 11 H.
4. n. 10. p. 470. 13 H. 4. n. 9. p. 478. William Stourton Esquire, 1 H. 5. n.
7, 8, 10. p. 534. discharged for sickness. John Doreward Esquire elected in his
place, 1 H. 5. n. 10. p. 535. Thomts Chaucer Esquire 2 H. 5. n. 10. p. 539. Sir
Walter Beauchamp Knight, 3 H. 5. n. 9. p. 544. Roger Flower Esquire 4 H. 5. n. 8.
p. 550. 5 H. 5. n. 8. p. 553. Roger Fowler Esquire 7 H. 5. n. 9. p. 557. Richard
Baynard Esquire 9 H. 5. n. 9. p. 559. Roger Flower Esquire 1 H. 6. n. 11. p. 563. John
Russel Esquire 2 H. 6. n. 8. p. 567. Sir Thomas Nanton Knight, ^ H. 6. n. 9. p.
577. Sir Richard Vernon Knight, 4 H. 6. n. 9. p. 583. John Tirril Esquire 6. H. 6.
n. 8. p. 588. William Allington Esquire 8 H. 6. n. 10. p. 592. John Tirril Esquire 9 H.
6. n. 10. p. 598. John Russel Esquire 10 H. 6. n. 10. p. 602. Roger Hunt Esquire 11 H.
6. n. 9. p. 607. John Bows Esquire 14 H. 6. n. 8. p. 614. Sir John Tirrel Knight,
15 H. 6. n. 10. p. 618. excused for sickness. William Beerly Esquire elected in
his place, 15 H. 6. n. 27. p. William Tresham Esquire 18 H. 6. n. 10. p. 622.
William Burley Esquire 23 H. 6. n. 9. p. 629. William Tresham Esquire 25 H. 6. n. 10.
p. 635. John Day Esquire 27 H. 6. n. 8. p. 638. Sir John Popham Knight, 28 H. 6. n.
6. p. 640. excused. William Tresham Esquire elected in his place, 28 H. 6. n. 7. p.
640. Sir William Oldham Knight, 29 H. n. 6. p. 646. Thomas Thorp Esquire 31 H. 6.
n. 6, 25, 26, 27, 28. p. 649. discharged, p. 631. Sir Thomas Charlton Knight,
elected in his place, 31 H. 6. n. 23. p. 651. Sir John Wenlock Knight, 33 H. 6.
n. 17. p. 657. Thomas Tresham Esquire 38 H. 6. n. 6. p. 661. John Green Esquire 39 H.
6. n. 7. p. 665. Sir James Strangewaies Knight, 1 E. 4. n. 6. p. 669. John Say
Esquire 3 E. 4. n. 7. p. 675. Sir John Say Knight, 7 E. 4. n. 6, 7, p. 680. William
Allington Esquire 12 E. n. 7^ p. 688. 17 E. 4. n. 10. p. 702. John Wood Esquire 22 E.
4. n. 7. p. 705.
Stewards of England, and of the Household.
SIr Richard le Scroop, 1 R. 2. n. 11. p. 155. n. 38. p. 157. n. 40. p. 58. 2
R. 2. Parl. 2. n. 15, 16. p. 174. John Duke of Guien and Lancaster, 17 R. 2. n.
20. p. 353. Thomas Mowbrey Earl of Nottingham, 20 R. 2. n. 32. p. 363. John
Duke of Lancaster Steward of England 21 R. 2. p. 377, 379. Humfrey Duke of
Buckingham, pro tempore, 31 H. 6. n. 48. p. 653.
Treasurers of England.
THe Dean of York, 13 E. 3. Parl. 2. n. 2. p. 19. Thomas B^antingham Bishop of
Exeter 52 E. 3. n. 56. p. 149. Sir Hugh Seagrave, 5 R. 2. n. 8. p. 195. Prior
of St. Johns^ 5 R. 2. n. 32. p. Bishop of St. David's, 13 R. 2. n. 6, 7. 329.
Sir Roger Welden: in R. 2d. time, 9 H. 4. p. 429. n. 35. John Earl of Arundel 4
H. 5. n. 17. p. 5^^. William Rindroffe, 1 H. 6. n. 16. p. 563. John Stafford, 2
H. 6. n. 30. p. 3. H. 6. p. 57^ John Bishop of Bath, 4 H. 6. n. 15, 16. p. 58^.
Ralph Lord Cromwell, 11 H. 6. n. 24, 25. p. 609. John Earl of Worcester, 31 H.
n. 23. p. 650.
Treasurers of Wars.
THomas Lord Furnival, and Sir John Pelham, 6 H. 4. n. 9. p. 438. 8 H. 4. n.
43. p. 454. p. 456. n. 63.
Wardens of the Cinque Ports.
BArtholmew de Burghershe, 4. E. 3. p. 6. William de Clinton, Earl of
Huntington, 14 E. 3. p. 26. ^7 E. 3. 36. Bartholmew de Burgherst, 25 E. 3. p.
77. 28 E. 3. p. 84 Roger de Mo^tuo mate Earl of March, 29 E. 3. p. 89. Robert
de Herle, 37 E. 3. p. 95. Ralph Spigurnel, 38 E. 3. p. 96. Ralph Spiriard, 42
E. 3. p. 104. Edmond Earl of Cambridge, 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. Robert
de Ashton, 4 R. 2. p. 187. Simon de Burley, 7 R. 2. p. 290, 298. 8 R. 2. p.
302, 307. 9 R. 2. p. 308. 11 R. 2. p. 319. John Devereux, 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13
R. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 341. John de Bello Monte, 17 R. 2. p.
350. 18. R. 2. p. 357. John de Monteacute, 18 R. 2. p. 357. Edward Earl of
Rutland, 10 R. 2. p. 360, 365. Thomas Erpingham, 23 R. 2. p. 382. 2 H. 4 p.
403. 3 H. 4. p. 414. 6 H. 4. p. 435. 436. 7 H. 4. p. 449. 9 H. 4. p. 963. Henry
Prince of Wales, 11 H. 4. p. 469.
AN EXACT ALPHABETICALL AND Chronologicall Table OF All the Barons, Dukes,
Earls, Lords, Marquesses, Princes of Wales, Viscounts, and other Nobles
summoned by Writ to the English Parliaments, here abridged: and of the Queens
of England, with other Foreign Dukes, Earls, Nobles mentioned in this
Abridgement; and the chief matters relating to their creations, and persons:
very useful for all our Nobility, and such who delight in Heraldry.
If any Reader of this Abridgement or Table, desire to know, why all the
Noblemen and Peers of England, were n^^ always equally mentioned in the Writs
of Summons to our Parliaments, but sometimes diverse of them omitted. The
reasons thereof will appear to be these: 1. The new creations of man of them
from time to time. 2. Their absence in Foreign wars and services beyond the
Seas. 3. Their At^a^nders of Treason by reason of Insurrections and our Civil
Wars^ 4. Their nonage, or death without issue-male. In which three last ^ases,
no Writs of Summons were directed to them, till their return into England,
their Attainders repealed, they and their heirs restor^d, or their heirs become
of full age, otherwise they were all of course and right constantly summoned.
Some of their Christian names being mistaken in the written, and so in the
printed Copy, I have rectified in this Table.

A. Dukes and Earls of Albamerle or Aumarle.
THomas Uncle to Rich. 2. summoned to Parliament 9 R. 2. p. 307. Edward Earl of
Rutland, created Duke thereof 21 R. 2. n. 35. p. 370^ summoned to Parliament ^1
R. 2. p. 366. p. 372. n. 13. one of the Lords Appellants, p. 374. n. 72.
summoned to parliament 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p. 383. impeached and degraded
for his appeal, and hand in the Duke of Glocesters de^^h. Plac. coron. 1 H. 4.
n. 1, 2.3, 11. p. 399, 400. Thomas Duke of Clarence, Earl thereof, summoned 1
H. 5. p. 533. 2 H. 5. p. 537. William de Aldeburg, or Alderburg knight,
summoned to parliament 1 R. 2. p. 153. ^ R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R. 2.
p. 290, 298. 8 R. 2. p. 302. 9 R. 2. p. 308. John de St. Amando o^ Amand,
summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. Almaric de St. Amando, summoned to
parliament 47 E 3. p. 115. 50 E. 3. p. 143. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 2 R. 2. p. 181. 13
R. 2. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 18 R. 2. p. 357. 20 R. 2. p.
359, 361 21 R. 2. p. 366. 23 R 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p. 383. 2 H. 4. p. 403. 3 H.
4. p. 414. Henry de Sancto Amando summoned to Parliament 15 R. 2. p. 341. Earl
of Amaniake in Guienne 28 H. 6. p. 642. n. 33.
Earls of Angos.
Gilbert de Vmfravil summoned to Parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4. Robert de Vmfravil
summoned 13 E. 2. p. 3. Gilbert de Vmfravil summoned to Parliament as Earl of
Angos 4 E. 3. p. 5. 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17. E. 3. p. 35. 18 E. 3. p. 42. 22 E. 3.
p. 68. 25 E. 3. p. 72^ 77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. 2^ E. 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. 37
E. 3. p. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99. 42 E. 3. p. 104. 47 E. 3. p. 115. 50 E. 3. p.
149. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. ^e^e ou^ men to Scotland at his own cost.
14 E. 3. p. 29. n. 41. A Commissioner for the Array in four Counties, and in
the Kings Lands in Scotland p. 28. n. 53. n. 14.
Dukes of Aquitain.
John Duke of Lancaster created Duke thereof, and summoned to Parliament by
that Title 13 R. 2. p. 332. n. 21.22. 15 R. 2. p. 340. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 20 R.
2. p. 359. 365. 21 R. 2. p. 366. Prince Henry created Duke thereof 1 H. 4. p.
392 n. 82. Thomas de Archdeken^ summoned to Parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. John de
Arundel summoned to Parliament 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. John Arundel de
Arundel summoned to parliament 6 H. 6. p. 587. Tho. Arundel de Montrauers
Knight summoned to parliament 23 E. 4. p. 709.
Earls of Arundel.
Warren 33 H. 3. 3 H. 5. p. 547. n. 28. Richard summoned to parliament 34 E. 1.
p. 5. Edward summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. Edmund Earl put to death 4
E. 3. p. ^. n. 13. his attainder revoked 22 E. 3. p ^6. n. 13.14.15. Richard
restored to blood, Lands, Earldome 4 E. 3. p. 7. n. 13. summoned to parliament
24 E. 3 p. 5. 14 E. 3. p. 26.18 E. 3. p. 42. 22 E. 3. p. 68 25 E. 3. p. 72. 7^.
27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. ^9. 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99.
42 E. 3. p. 108. 47 E. 3. p. 115. 50 E. 3. p. 149. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p.
181. 4 R. 2. p. 287. 7 R. 2. p. 290.297. 8 R. 2. p. 302.306. 9 R. 2 ^^ 307. 10
R. 2. p. 313. 11 R. 2. p. 319.320^ 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14 R 2. p.
336, 15 R. 2. p. 340. 17 R. 2 p. 350. 1^ R. 2. p. 357. 10 R. 2. p. 359. Letters
from him and others to the parliament 20 E. 3. p. 50. n. 45. His restitution
granted, declared 4 E. 3. p. 7.8. n. 13. 25 E. 3. p. 73.74. n. 8. His Fathers
unjust attainder revoked, and he restored 28 E. 3. p. 86. n. 13, 14, 15. Chosen
by parliament to Counsel and govern the King 5 R. 2. p. 198. n. 38. One of the
five Lords Appellants and his protest 11 R. 2. p. 327. n. 8. His accusation in
parliament against the Duke of Lancaster, his censure and submission for it. 17
R. 2. p. 352. n. 12. His pardons 11 and. 16. R. 2. repealed by parliament 21 R.
2. p. 368. n. 12, 13.373. n. 69. Traitorously assembled against the King and
deserted p. 369. n. 27. His impeachment of high Treason, plea, and judgment in
parliament; beheading and forfeiture of Lands p. 376, 377, 378. n. 3 to King
Richard 2. impeached, for revoking his pardon, and beheading him against Law. 1
H. 4. p. 386. n. 20.22. His heir restored p. 394 n. 69. This Commons pray the
reversall of his judgment, and heirs restitution p. 395. n. 109. Thomas Earl
of Arundel restored in blood and Lands to his Father Richard 1 H. 4. p. 390. n.
69. p. 391. n. 103. summoned to parliament 1 H. 4. p. 402. 2 H. 4. p. 403. 3 H.
4. p. 414. 6 H. 4. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4. p. 449. 9 H. 4. p. 463. 11 H. p. 469.
13 H. 4. p. 477. 1 H. 5. p. 533. 2 H. 5. p. 537. 3 H. 5. p. 543.

Complaints against his usurpations and oppressions 3 H. 5. p. 546^ 547, 548.
n. 28.43.

John Earl of Arundel summoned to parliament 4 H. 5. p. 549. The place and
precedence of the Earls of Arundel in parliament 3 H. 6. p. 574. Richard Earl
of Arundel summoned to Parliament 3 H. 6. p. 572. John Earl of Arundel his
service beyond Sea, petition, place in parliament, and restitution to the
Earldome 11 H. 6. p. 610. n. 32. to 36. William Earl of Arundel summoned to
parliament 20 H. 6. p. 627. 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. p. 633. 27 H. 6. p. 636.
28 H. 6. p. 639. 29 H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p. 648. 33 H. 6. p. 655. 38 H. 6. p.
660. 1 E. 4. p. 668. 3 E. 4. p. 67^. 7 E. 4. p. 679 9 E. 14. p. 686. 12 E. p.
4. 687. 22 E. 4. p. 704. 23 E. 4. p. 708.

The precedence of the Earl of Arundel before the Earl of Devon resolved in
parliament 27 H. 6. p. 638. n. 19.

William Arundel de Montravers Knight summoned to parliament 22 E. 4. p. 705.
Earls of Athol, or Altieth.
David de Strabelg^ summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. 4 E. 3. p. 5. 42 E.
3. p. 104. James de Audley summoned to parliament 4 E. 3. p. 6. 14 E. 3. p. 26.
17 E. 3^ p. 36. 18 E. 3. p. 42. 25 E. 3. par. 2. p. 77. 27^ E. 3. p. 83. 1 R.
2. p. 153. John de Audeley de Heleigh summoned to Parliament 37 E 3. p. 95. 38
E. 3. p. 99. James de Audeley de Heliegh, summoned to Parliament 47 E. 3. p.
115. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 185. 7 R^ 2. p. 290, 297. 8 R. 2.
p. 302, 306 9 R. 2. p. 307. 11 R. 2. p. 319. Nicholas de Audely de Heleigh,
summoned to Parliament 10 R. 2. p. 313. 1^ R. 2. p. 320. Richard de Audeley de
Heleigh summoned to parliament 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336.
James de Audeley Knight, summoned to Pa^liament 8 H. 5. p. 558. 1 H. 6. p. 562.
3 H. 6. p. 572, 573. 4 H. 6. p. 582. 6 H. 6. p. 586, 587. 9 H. 6. p. 597. 10 H.
6. p. 681. 11 H. 8. p. 606. 14 H. 6. p. 613. 15 H. p. 616, 617. 18 H. 6. p.
621. 20 H. 6. p. 627. 25 H. 6. p. 633. 27 H. 6. p. 636. 28 H. 6. p. 639. 29 H.
6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p. 64^. 33 H. 6. p. ^55. slain 38 H. 6. p. 661. 662. n. 15.
John Lord Audely (I believe it should be James) summoned to parliament 18 H. 6.
p. 626. John de Audeley Knight summoned to parliament 1 E. 4. p. 668. 3 E. 4.
p. 674. 7 E. 4. p. 679. 12 E. 4. p. 687. 22 E. 4. p. 704. 23 E. 4. p. 708.
William de Ayncourt summoned to parliament 14. E. 3. p. 20.
B.
THomas Bardolfe summoned to parliament 4 E. 3. p. 6. John Bardolfe, summoned
to parliament 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17 E. 3. p. 36. 18 E. 3. p. 42. 22 E. 3. p. 68.
25 E. 3. p. 721.77 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. John
Bardolfe junior summoned to parliament 25 E. 3. p. 77. John Bardolfe de
Wermegey summoned to parliament 37 E. 3. p. 95. William Bardolfe de Wermegey
summoned to parliament 30 E. 3. p. 149. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3. R. 2. p. 181. 4. R.
2. 187. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297. 8 R. 2. p. 303, 306. 9. R. 2. p. 307. Thomas
Bardolfe de Wermegey summonned to pa^liament 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 341.
17 R. 2. p. 350. 20 R. 2. p. 360, 365. 21 R. 2. p. 336. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H.
4. p. 383. 2 H. 4. p. 4^3. 3 H. 4. p. 414. 6 H. 4. p. 435, 436. an act
concerning his lands. 8 H. 4. p. 459. n. 111. Edmond Bars^asse summoned to
parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4. Ralph Basset of Drayton summoned to parliament 34 E.
1. p. 5. 13 E 2. p. 3. 4 E. 3. p. 6. 14 E. 3. p. 26, 27. 37 E. 7. p. 95. 38 E.
3. p. 99. 42 E. 3. p. 104. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R.
2. p. 290, 298. 8 R 2. p. 302., 307. 9 R. 2^ p. 308 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. 2.
p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2. p. ^327. 13 R. p. 328. Roger Bauent summoned to
parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4. Henry de Beamont, or Bellomonte summoned to
parliament 13 E. 2. p. 9. John de Beamont or Bellomonte summoned to parliament
7 R. 2. p. 290, 297. 8 R. 2. p. 302, 307. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. 2. p. 319,
320. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14 R 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 341. 17 R.
2. p. 350. 17 R. 2. p. 357. Henry de Beamont or Bellomonte, summoned, to
parliament 6 H. 4. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4. p 549. 9 H. 4. p. 463. 11 H. 4. p. 469.
13. H. p. 477. John Beamont Knight, summoned to Parliament 10 H. 6. p. 601. 11.
H. 6. p. 606. 14 H. 6. p. 613. 15 H. 6. p. 610, 617. 18 H. 6. p. 62^, 627. Made
Viscount, and summoned by that title 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. p. 633. 27 H. 6.
p. 636 28 H. 6. p. 639. 29 H 6. p. 641. 33. H. 6. p. 655. 31 H. 6. p. 6^0.
William Viscount Beamont, attainted of high Treason 1 E. 4. p. 670. n. 20. John
Beauchampe, or de Bello-campo of Somerset, summoned to parliament, 13 E. 2. p.
3. 4 E. 3. p. 6. 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17 E. 3. p. 36. 29 E. 3. p. 77. 27 E. 3. p.
83. 28 E. 3. p. 84. John Beauchamp.. or de Bello-campo de War. summoned to
parliament 25. E. 3. p. 72. 28 E. 3. p. 84. Henry Beauchamp. or de Bello-campo
summoned to parliament 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99. Roger Beauchamp. or de
Bello-campo summoned to parliament 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99. 42. E. 3. p.
104. 47 E. 3. p. 115. 50 E. p. 143. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. John
Beauchampe de Ridermist summoned to parliament 11 R. 2. p. 319. Thomas
Beauchampe de Burgauenny, summoned to parliament 17 R. 2. p. 356. William
Beauchampe de Burgauenny summoned to parliament 18 R. 2. p. 357. 20 R. 2. p.
360, 365. 21 R. 2. p. 366. ^^ R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p. 3^3. 2 H. 4. p. 403. 3
H. 4. p. 414. 6 H. 4. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4. p. 549. 9 H. 4. p. 463.

Sent to Rich. 2. as a Commissioner in the Tower, when deposed, 1 H. 4. p. 385.
n. 12.

John Beauchamp Knight, Lord Beauchamp, summoned to parliament 27 H. 6. p. 646.
28 H. 6. p. 639. 31 H. 6. p. 648. 33 H. 6. p. 655. 38 H. 6. p. 660. 1 E. 4. p.
668. 3 E 4. p. 674. 7 E. 4. p. 699. 9 E. 4. p. 687. Richard Beauchamp de
Beauchamp, 22 E. 4. p. 704. 23 E. 4. p. 708. William Beauchamp Knight, Lord of
St. Amond, summoned to par^^ament 27 H. ^. p. 637. 29 H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p.
649. 33 H. 6. p. 656.
Dukes of Bedford.
John Duke of Bedford summoned to parliament 2 H. 5. p. 537. 3 H. 5. p. 543. 4
H. 5. p. 549, 8 H. 5. p. 558. 4 H. 6. p. 581, 582. 6 H 6. p. 586. 8 H. 5. p.
558. 9 H. 5. p. 561. 11 H. 6. p. 606.

The Earldom of Richmond con^erred on him. 3 H. 5. p. 540. n. 24. 8 H. 5. p.
553. 9. H. 5. p. 569.

Guardian or Keeper of England, 3 H. 5. 582. 5 H. 5. 552 8 H. 5. 558. 9 H. 5. p.
5^1.

Security for moneys advanced, 4 H. 5. p. 556. n. 10.

Made Protector or Defendor of the Realm and chief Councellor by Parliament, 1
H. 6. p. 564. n. 24.30. 8 H. 6. p. 502. n. 13. his wife Anne made a Denizen,
and lands granted to him, 2 H. 6. p. 570. n. 31, 32. The Great Seal re^igned to
him, he has the custody of Berwick Castle to him and his heirs males, 4 H. 6.
p. 584. n. 18, 19 Releaseth his Protectorship in full Parliament, 8 H 6. p.
592. n. 13. The Speaker and Commons commend him in Parliament for his service
in France: he is to attend about the Kings person as his chief Counselor; his
allowance for it, 11 H. 6. p. 608. n. 17. to 21.

George Nevil, created Duke of Bedford 17 E. 4. p. 702. n. 16. Roger Bernes
Knight, summoned to Parliament 9 E 4. p. 687. Thomas de Berkley summoned to
Parliament 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17 E. 3. p. 35. 18 E. 3. p. 42. 22 E. 3. p. 68. 25
E. 3. p. 72.77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 84. Maurice de Berkley, summoned to
Parliament 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R.
2. p. 187. Thomas de Berkley, summoned to parliament 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R. 2. p.
290, 297. 8 R. 2. p. 302, 308. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. ^. p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2.
p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14. R. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 340. 17 R 2, p. 350. 18 R.
2. p. 357. 20 R. 2. p. 360, 365. 21 R. 2. p. 366. 33^. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p.
383.402. 2 H. 4. p. 403. 3 H. 4. p. 414. 6 H. 4. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4. p. 449. 9
H. 4. p. 463. 11 H. 4. p. 469. 13 H. 4. p. 477. 1 H. 5. p. 533. 2 H^ 5. p. 538.
3 H. 5. p. 543, 544. 4 H. 5 p. 549. A Commissioner at the resignation and
deposition of Rich. 2. 1 H. 4. p. 385. n. 10. p. 388, 389. n. 52, 59. James de
Berkley summoned to Parliament 9 H. 5. p. 561. 1 H. 6. p. 562. 3 H. 6. p. 572.
4 H. 6. p. 582. 6 H. 6. p. 586. 9. H. 6. p. 597. 10 H. 6. p. 601. 11 H. 6. p.
606. 12 and. 14 H. 6. p. 613. 15 H. 6. p. 616, 617^ 18 H. 6. p. 621, 626. 20 H.
6. p. 627. 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. p. 633. 27 H. 6. p. 636. 28 H. 6. p. 655.
38 H. 6. p. 660. 1 E. 4. p. 668. 3 E. 4. p. 674. 7 E. 4. p. 673. Richard de
Berkley, summoned to Parliament 3 H. 6. p. 372. John de Berkley summoned to
parliament 31 H. 6. p. 648. William de Berkley Knight, summoned to parliament
12 E 4. p. 688. Viscount Berkly, 22 E. 4. p. 705. 23 E. 4. p. 709. an act that
he shall penceably enjoy the Manors of Wotton under edge, etc. 12 E. 4. p.
689. n. 24. Lands limited to descend to him, p. 706. n. 14. Ralph de Bevil
summoned to parliament 14 E. 3. p. 26. William Blunt summoned to parliament 4
E. 3. p. 6. Walter Blunt de Mountjoy summoned to parliament 7 E. 4. p. 680. 9
E. 4. p. 88^. 12 E. 4. p. 688. 23 E. 4. p. 709. John Blunt de Mount^oy Knight
summoned to parliament 22 E. 4. p. 705. John Bohan of Dunster, summoned to
parliament 38 E. 3. p. 99. William Boneville Knight, Lord of Boneville and
Chaton, summoned to parliament 28 H. 6. p. 640. 29 H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p.
649. 33 H. 6. p. 656. 38 H. 6. p. 661. Knight of the Garter, and beheaded for
adhereing to the Duke of York. 1 E. 4. p. 670. n. 18. William de Boteler of
^^mms, summoned to parliment 13 E. 2. p. 3. 42 E. 3. p. 1^4. Ralph de B^teler
of Suly of Sudly Knight, summoned to parliament 20 H. 9. p. 627. 23 H. 6. p.
628. 25. H. 6. p. 633, 634. 27 H. 6. p. 637. 28 H 6. p. 640. 29 H. 6. p. 645.
31 H. 6. p. 649. 33 H. 6. p. 656. 38 H. 6. p. 661. 1 E. 4. p. 668. 3 E. 4. p.
674. 9 E. 4. and 12. E. 4. p. 687. William de Botreaux or Bortreaux Knight,
summoned to parli^ment 42 E. 3. p. 104. 47. E. 3. p. 115. 50 E. 3. p. 143. ^ R.
2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 281. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297. 8 R. 2. p. 30^. 10 R. 2. p.
314. 11 R. 2. p. 319. 12 R. 2. p. 327^ 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R.
2. p. 341. John de Botreaux summoned to parliament 8 R. 2. p. 302, 307. 9 R. 2.
p. 308. William de Botreaux Knight summoned to Parliament 3 H. 5. p. 544. 4 H.
5. p. 549. 5 H. 5. p. 552. 7 H. 5. p. 555. 8 H. 5. p. 558. 9 H. 5. p. 561. 1 H.
6. p. 562. 2 H. 6. p. 567. 3 H. 6. p. 572, 573. 4 H. 6. p. 582. 6 H. 6. p. 586,
587. 9 H. 6. p. 597. 10 H. 6. p. 601. 11 H. 6. p. 606. 12 H. 6. and 14 H. 6. p.
613. 15 H. 6. p 616, 617. 18 H. 6. p. ^^1^ 616 20 H. 6. p. 627. 23 H. 6. p.
628. 26 H. 6. 633. 27 H. 6. p. 636. 28 H. 6. p. 639. ^9 H 6. p. 64^. 31 H. 6.
p. 648. 33 H. 6. p. 655. 1 E. 4. p. 668. John de Bottort summoned to parliament
13 E 2. p. 3. John de Bottort, or Botut^ort summoned to parliament 4 R. 2. p.
187. 7 R. 2. p. 297. Bartholomew Bourchier summoned to parliament 14 E. 3. p.
27. 18 E. 3. p. 42. 42 E. ^. p. 104. John de Bourchier summoned to parliament 4
R. 2. p. 187. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 298. 8 R. 2. p. 307. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. 2. p.
319, 320. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 340. 17 R. 2. p. 350.
18 R. 2. p. 357. 20 R. 2. p. 359, 365. 21 R. 2. p. 368. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H.
4. p. 383. Thomas de Bourchier summoned to parliament, 8 R 2. p. 302. 9 R. 2.
p. 30^. Bartholomew de Bourchi^r summoned to parliament 2 H. 4. p. 403. 3 H. 4.
p. 414. 6 H. 4. p. 43^, 436. 7 H. 4. p. 440. 8 H. 4. p. 463. Henry Bourchier
Knight, summoned to parliament, 14. H. 6. p. 613. 15 H. 6. p. 616, 617. 18 H.
6. p. 620, 627. 23 H. 6. p. 628. made Viscount Bourchier, so summoned 27 H. 6.
p. 637. 28 H. 6. p. 640. 29 H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p. 645. 33 H. 6. p. 65 5. 38
H 6. p. 660. 1 E. 4. p. 668. William Bourchier Knight, Lord Fitz Warren
summoned to parliament 27 H. 6. p. 637. 28 H. 6. p. 640. 29 H 6. p. 645. 31 H.
6. p. 648. 33 H. 6. p. 656. 38 H. 6. p. 661. 3 E. 4. p. 674. 7 E. 4. p. 679. 9
E. 4. p. 687. John Bourchier de Bruers, or Barns Knight summoned to parliament
33 H. 6. p. 656. 38 H. 6. p. 661. 1 E. 4. p. 668. 3 E. 4. p. 674. 7 E. 4. p.
680. 9 E. 4. p. 687. 12 E. 4. p. 668. Fulle Bourchier de Fitz-warren, summoned
to parliament 12 E. 4. p. 688. Humphrey Bourchier de Cromwell Knight. summon- to
parliament 9 E. 4. p. 987. Thomas de Bradeston summoned to parliament 25 E. 3.
p. 72, 77. 22 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p 89. William de Brewosa
summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. Thomas de Brewes summoned to parliament
25 E. 3. p 83.

Duke of Brahant, 14 E. 3. p. 23.

Duke of Britain, 2^ H. 6. p. 642. 7 E. 4. p. 683.

William Broms^^ot Lord of Vessey, summoned to pa^liament 28 H. 6. p. 640. 29
H. 6. p. 645. Henry Bromfleet Lord of Vessey, summoned to parliament 33 H. 6.
p. 656. 38 H. 6. p. 661. 1 E. 4. p. 668. 3 E. 4. p. 674. 7 E. 4. p. 680. Edward
Brook of Cobham summoned to parliament 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. p. 633, 634.
27 H. 6. p. 637. 28 H. 6. p. 640. 29 H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p. 648. 33 H. 6. p.
655. 38 H. 6. p. 660. 1 E. 4. p. 669. 3 E. 4. p. 679. John Brook of Cobham,
summoned to parliament 12 E. 4. p. 688. 22 E. 4. p. 704. 23 E. 4. p. 709. Guido
de Bryan or Brian summoned to parliament 25 E. 3. p. 73.77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28
E. 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99. 42 E. 3. p. 104.
47 E. 3. p. 115. 50 E. 3. p. 143. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p.
187. 7 R. 2. p. 296, 297. 8 R. ^. p. 302. 10 R. 2. p. 313. 11 R. 2. p. 319. 12
R. 2. p. 327.
Earls and Dukes of Buckingham.
Thomas de Wodstock Earl of Buckingham, and Marshal, summoned to parliament 1
R. ^. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R. ^. p. 289, 297. 8 R. 2. p.
302, 306. employed in Britain, 4 R. 2. p. 191. n. 29. the Commons desire to
confer with him, 7 R. 2 p. 299. n. 10. Humphrey Duke of Buckingham, summoned to
parliament 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. p. 632. 27 H. 6. p. 636. 28 H. 6. p. 639.
29 H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p. 648. 33 H. 6.655. 38 H. 6. p. 660. Lord Steward
for the time, 32 H. 6. p. 653. n. 48. Henry Duke of Buckingham, summoned to
parliament 22 E. 4. p. 704. 23 E. 4. p. 708. Thomas de Bugworth summoned to
parliament 22 E. 3. p. 68. Maurice de Buin summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p.
3. Ralph de Bulmer summoned to parliament 22 E. 3. p. 68.

Duke of Burbon prisoner, and a Treaty about his ransom, 8 H. 6. p. 592, 593.
n. 12. 20.

Duke of Burgain or Burgundy, 31 H. 6. p. 75. a combat 'twixt him and the Duke
of Gloucester prohibited, 3. H. 6. p. 579. n. 19. in league with the French, 14
H. 6. p. 614. n. 2. King Edward 4. allyeth himself with him, and marries
Margaret his sister to Charles Duke of Burgundy, 8 E. 4. p. 683. n. 28, 34.

Bartholomew de Burghershe, summoned to parliament 4 E. 3. p. 6. 22 E. 3. p.
68. 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 48. 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38. E.
3. p. 99. Nicholas Burnel summoned to parliament 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 28 E. 3.
p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99. 47 E. 3. p. 105. 50 E.
3. p. 143. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. 185. 4 R. 2. p. 187. Hugh Burnel summoned to
parliament 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297. 8 R. 2. p. 302, 307. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. 2.
p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2. p. 323. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 340. 17 R. 2. p.
350. 18 R. 2. p. 357. 20 R. 2. p. 365. 21 R. 2. p. 366. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H.
4. p. 383, 402. 2 H. 4. p. 403. 3 H. 4. p. 414. 6 H. 4. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4. p.
449. 9 H. 4. p. 463. 11 H. 6. p. 469. 13 H. 4. p. 477. 1 H. 5. p. 533. 2 H. 5.
p. 538. 3 H. 5. p. 543, 544. 4 H. 5. p. 549. 5 H. 5. p. 552. 7 H. 5. p. 555,
556. One of the Committee to depose King Rich. 2. 1 H. 4. p. 385. n. 10. Thomas
Burnel summoned to parliament 6 H. 4. p. 436.
C. Earls of Cambridge.
Marquis of Iuliers made Earl of Cambridge, 14 E. 3. p. 24. n. 35. Edward the
Kings son, created Earl of Cambridge in parl^ament 36 E. 3. p. 94. n. 36.38,
summoned to parliament by that title, 3^ E. 3. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99 42 E. 3.
p. 104. 47 E 3. p. 115. 50 E. 3. p. 143. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 7 R.
2. p. 289, 297. 8 R. 2. p. 302, 306. 9 R. 2. p. 307. the Commons desire him to
be one of the Lords to confer with them, 1 R. 2. p. 299. n. 10. Richard Earl of
Cambridge summoned to parliament 2 H. 5. p. 537. the process and judgment
against him in the parliament of 3. H. 5. repealed, 1 E. 4. p. 672. n. 32. Hugh
de Camois summoned to parliament 13 E. 1. p. 3. 4 E. 3. p. 6. Thomas Camoi^
Knight, summoned to parliament 7 R. 2. p. 297. 8 R. 2. p. 302, 308. 9 R. 2. p.
308. 10 R. 2. p. 313. 11 R. 2. p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328.
14 R. 1. p. 336. ^5 R. 2. p. 340 17 R. 2. p. 350. 18 R. 2. p. 357. 20 R. 2. p.
359, 365. 21 R. 2. p. 366. 23 R. 2. p. 38^. 1 H. 4. p. 583. 2 H. 4. p. 403. 3
H. 4. p. 414. 6 H 4. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4. p. 449. 9 H. 4. p. 463. 11 H. 4. p.
469. ^3 H. 4. p. 477. 1 H. 5. p. 533. 2 H. 5 p. 538. 3 H. 5. p. 544. 4 H. 5. p.
549. 5 H. 5. p. 552. 8 H. 5. p. 558. Nicholas de Cantilupo summoned to
parliament 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17 E. 3. p. 35. 18 E. 3. p. 42. 22 E. 3. p. 68, 77.
28 E. 3. p. 84. Roger de Chandos summoned to parliament 17 E. 3. p. 36. 18 E.
3. p 42. 22 E. 3. p. 68. 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 27. E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 84.
29 E. 3. p. 89. William de Chandos summoned to parliament 18 E. 3. p. 142. John
de Charleton de Powis summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. 14 E. 3 p. 26. 17
E. 3. p. 36. 18 E. 3. p. 42. 22 E. 3. p. 68. 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 27 E. 3. p.
83. 29 E. 3. p. 89. John de Charleton de Powis, summoned to parliament 37 E. 3.
p. 95. 39. E. 3. p. 99. 42 E. 3. p. 104. 47 E. 3. p. 115. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297.
8 R. 2. p. 382. 9 R. 2. p. 308. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. 2. p. 319, 320. 12. R.
2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 340. 17 R. 2. p. 350.
18 R. 5. p. 357. 20 R 2. p. 359. 365. 21 R. 2 p. 366. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4.
p. 383. 2 H. 4. p. 403. E^ward Charleton de Powis summoned to parliament 3 H.
4. p. 414. 6 H. 4. p^ 535, 536 7 H. 4 p. 449. 9 H. 4. p. 463. 11 H. 4. p. 469.
13 H. 4. p. 477. 1 H. 5. p. 533. 2 H. 5. p. 537. 3 H. 5. p. 543, 544. 4 H. 5.
p. 549. 5 H. 5. p. 552. 8 H. 5. p. 558, William Cheyney Chief Justice, summoned
to parliament 4 H. 6. p. 582. 6 H. 6. p. 586.
Earls of Chester.
Prince Edward, summoned to parliament 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 28 E. 3. p. 84. 29
E. 3. p. 89. Prince Richard, 50 E. 3. p. 143, 144. 51 E. 3^ p. 144. n. 1.
Prince Henry, 1 H. 4. p. 391. n. 72, 73. Prince Edward 31 H. 6. p. 653. n. 47.
33 H. 6. p. 659. n. 43.
Dukes of Clarence.
Lionel the Kings son created Duke thereof, 37 E. 3. p 94. n. 36. Thomas Duke
of Clarence summoned to Parliament, 1 H. 5. p. 533. 2 H. 5. p. 537. 3 H. 5. p.
543. 4 H. 5. p. 549, 550. George Duke of Clarence, summoned to parliament 7 E.
4. p. 679. 9 E. 4. p. 686. 12 E. 4. p. 687. Roger de Claudes summoned to
parliament 14 E. 3. p. 26. John de Claverings summoned to parliament 13 E 2. p.
3. 4. E 3. p. 6. Rob^rt de Clifford summoned to parliament 4 E. 3. p. 5. 18 E
3. p. 42. ordered to defend the North Counties, 13 E. 3. p. 48. n. 22. Roger de
Clifford summoned to parliament 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38 E 3. p. 99. 42 E. 3. p. 104.
47 E. 3. p. 115. 50 E. 3. p. 143. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2 p.
187. 7 R. 2. p. 290.297. 8 R. 2. p. 302, 307. 9 R. 2. p. 308. 10 R, 2. p. 314.
11 R. 2. p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2. p. 327. John de Clifford summoned to parliament
3 R. 2. p. 181. 7 R. 2. p. 297. 9 R. 2. p. 308. Thomas de Clifford summoned to
parliament 13 R. 2. p. 318. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2 p. 341. John de Clifford
summoned to parliament 13 H. 4 p. 477. 1 H. 5. p. 533. 2 H. 5. p.. 538. 3 H. 5.
p. 544. 4 H. 5. p. 549. 8 H. 5. p. 558. Thomas de Cl^fford summoned to
parliament 12 H. 6. p. 627. 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. p. 633, 634. 28 H. 6. p.
640. 29 H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p. 648. John de Clifford Knight, summoned to
parliament 20 H. 6. p. 627. 38 H. 6. p. 661. John de Clifton summoned to
parliament 1 R. 2. p. 153. 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R. 2. p. 290. 10 R. 2. p. 314.
Constantine de Clifton summoned to parliament 17 R. 2. p. 350. 18 R. 2. p. 57.
John de Clinton summoned to parliament 42 E. 3. p. 104. 47 E. 3 p. 115. 50 E 3,
p. 143. 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297. 8
R. 2. p. 302, 306. 9 R. 2. p. 307. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. 2. p. 319, 320. 12 R.
2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15. R. 2. p. 340. 17 R. 2. p. 350.
18 R. 2. p. 357. 20 R. 2. p. 359.365. 21 R. 2. p. 366. William de Clinton,
summoned to parliament 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p. 383. 2 H. H. 4. p. 403. 3 H.
4. p. 614. 6 H. 4. p. 535, 536. 7 H. 4. p. 440. 9 H. 4. p. 463. 11 H. 4. p.
469. 13 H. 4. p. 477. 1 H. 5. p. 533. 2 H. 4. p. 538. 4 H. 5. p. 549. 8 H. 5.
p. 558, 559. 9 H. 5. p. 561. 1 H. 6. p. 562. 2 H. 6. p. 567. 3 H. 6. p. 572,
573. 4 H. 6. p. 582. 9 H. 6. p. 597. John de Clinton summoned to parliament 31
H 6. p. 648. 33 H. 6. p. 655. 1 E. 4. p. 668. 3 E. 4. p. 674. adheres to the
Duke of York against H. 6. 38 H. 6. p. 662. n. 36. Henry de Cobham summoned to
parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. 4 E. 3. p. 6. Stephen de Cobham summoned to
parliament 4 E. 3. p. 6. Reginald de Cobham summoned to parliament 22 E. 3. p.
68. 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3, p. 84. John de Cobham of Kent,
summoned to parliament 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 27 E 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 89. John
de Cobham of Kent, summoned to parliament 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R.
2. p. 290, 297. 8 R. 2. p. 302.307. 9 R. 2. p. 308. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. 2.
p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p.
341. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 18 R. 2. p. 357. 20 R. 2. p. 360.365. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1
H. 4. p. 383. 2 H. 4. p. 403. 3 H. 4.414. 6 H. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4. p. 449.
Robert de Colvil summoned to parliament, 25 E. p. 72, 77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E.
3. p. 84. 39 E. 3. p. 89. 37 E. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99. Philip de Columber
summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. 4. E. 3. p. 6. 14. E. 3. p. 26. Peter
Corbet summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. Ralph de Cornwall, summoned to
parliament, 1 R. 2. p. 153. Sir John Cornwall Knight, summoned to parliament, 11
H. 6. p. 606. 12 H. 6. p. 621. 20 H. p. 627.
Dukes of Cornwall.
Prince Edward, 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 28 E. 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. Prince
Richard 50 E. 3. p. 143, 144. 51 E. 3. p. 144. Prince Henry, 1 H. 4. p. 391. n.
72. 73. Prince Edward, 33 H. 6. p. 659. n. 43, 44. Hugh de Courtney summoned to
parliament, 13 E. 2. p. 3. 14 E. 3 p. 6. Robert de Crendon summoned to
parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4. John de Cromwell summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3.
4 E 3. p. 6. 14 R. 2. p. 338 Richard de Cromwell, summoned to parliament 3 R. 2.
p. 181. Ralph de Cromwell summoned to parliament 4 R. 2. p. 189. 7 R. 2. p. 290,
297. 8 R. 2. p. 302, 307. 9 R. 2. p. 308. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. 2. p. 319,
320. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 15 R. 2. p. 341. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 18 R.
2. p. 357. 20 R. 2. p. 360, 361. 21 R. 2. p. 366. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p.
383. 6 H. 4. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4. p. 449. 9 H. 4. p. 463. 11 H. 4. p. 469. 13
H. 4. p. 477. 1 H. 5. p. 533. 2 H. 5. p. 538. 3 H. 5. p. 543, 544. 4 H. 5. p.
549. 1 H. 6. p. 562. 3 H. 6. p. 572, 573. 4 H. 6. p. 582. 6 H. 6. p. 586, 587.
9 H. 6. p. 597. 10 H. 6. p. 601. 11 H. 6. p. 605. 14 H. 6. p. 613. 15 H. 6. p.
617. 18 H. 6. p. 621. 20 H. 6. p. 626. 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. ^. 6^3. 27 H.
6. p. 636. 28 H. 6. p 640. 2^ H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p. 648. 33 H. 6. p. 655.
Chamb^r^ai^, discharged thereof by the Council without fault, 10 H. 6. p. 603.
n. 17. Demands surety of the peace in Parliament of the Duke of York, 31 H.
6. p. 654. n. 61. William Talboys committed for offering to slay him in
Parliament, 28 H. 6. p. 644. n. 56. Richard de Cromwell Knight summoned to
parliament 2 H. 6. p. 67. John Cromwell Knight, Lord of Fanhope, summoned to
parliament 14 H. 6. p. 614. 15 H. 6. p. 616, 617. 18 H. 6. p. 627. his obit
erected in Cornwall Chapel, confirmed by parliament, 15 H 6. p. 618. n. 23.
Humphrey Lord Cromwell, summoned to parliament, 3 E. 4. p. 674. 7 E. 4. p. 680.
Henry Cuart summoned to parliament 7 H. 4. p. 449.
Earls of Cumberland.
John the Kings Brother, summoned to parliament 4 E. 3. p. 5.
D.
RAlph de Dacre, summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. 4 E. 3. p 5 William de
Dacre, summoned to parliament 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 ^. 3. p.
84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. Ralph de Dacre, summoned to parliament 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38
E. 3. p. 99. 42 E. 3. p. 104. 47 E. 3. p. 115. Hugh de Dacre Knight, summoned
to parliament 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 187. Thomas de Dacre,
summoned to parliament 4 R. 2. p. 187. William de Dacre summoned to parliament
7 R. 2 p. 257. 8 R. 2. p. 307. 9 R. 2. p. 308. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R^ 2. p.
319. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14 R^ 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 341. 17 R.
2. p. 350. 18 R. 2. p. 357.20 R. 2. p. 365. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p. 383. 2.
H. 4. p. 403. 4 H. 4. p. 414. Philip de Dacre summoned to parliament 20 R. 2.
p. 360, 365. John de Dacre summoned to parliament 2 H. 4. p. 403. 6 H. 4. p.
435, 426. Thomas de Dacre of Gisland, summoned to parliament 1 H. 5. p. 533. 2
H. 5. p. 538. 3 H. 5. p. 543, 544 4 H. 5. p. 549. 5 H. 5. p. 549. 6 H. 5. p.
552. 7 H. 5. p. 555. 8 H. 5. p. 558. 9 H. 5. p. 561. 1 H. 6. p. 562. 2 H. 6. p.
567. 3 H. 6. p. 572. 4 H. 6. p. 582. 6 H. 6. p. 586, 87. 9 H. 6. p. 597. 10 H.
6. p. 601. 11 H. 6. p. 606. 12 and 14 H. 6 p. 613. 18 H. 6. p. 616.617 18 H. 6.
p. 621, 626. 20 H. 6. p. 627. 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. p. 633. 27 H. 6. p.
636. 28 H. 6. p. 638. 29 H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p. 648. 38 H. 6. p. 656. John
Dacre de Gisland Knight. summoned to parliament 4 H. 6. p. 582. Reginald Dacre de
Gisland summond to parliament 38 H. 6. p. 660. Humphrey Dacre de Gisland
summoned to parliament 22 E. 4. p. 705. 23 E. 4. p. 709. Richard Damorey
summoned to parliament 4 E. 3. p. 6. Henry Dandle summoned to parliament 4 E.
3. p. 6. Philip Darcy summoned to parliament 4 E. 3. p. 6. John Darcy de Knayth
summoned to parliament 25 E. 3. p. 77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 84. Philip
de Darcy, summoned to parliament 1 R. 3. p. 153. 9 R. 2. p. 307. 11 R. 2. p.
319. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 14 R. 2. p. 338. 15 R. 2. p. 341. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 20 R.
2. p. 365. 21 R. 2. p. 366. Thomas de Darcy summoned to parliament ^ R. 2. p.
181. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 298. 8 R. 2. p. 302, 307. Hugh de Darcy summoned to
parliament 7. R. 2. p. 290. John de Darcy summoned to parliament 23 R. 2. p.
382. 1 H. 4. p. 383. 7 H. 4. p. 449. 9 H. 4. p. 463. 11 H. 4. p. 463. 13 H. 4
p. 477. Ely Dawbenncy summoned to parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4. Edward Deinecourt
summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. William de Deinecourt summoned to
parl^ament ^8 E. 3. p. 42. 25 E. 3. p. 72.77. 27 E 3. p. 89. 28 E. 3. p. 84. 29
E. 3. p. 89. 37 E. 3. p. 95. John de Deinecourt summoned to parliament 29 E. 3.
p. 89. John Denham de Carry Knight. summoned to parliament 3 E. 4, p. 687. 12 E. 4.
p. 688. 22 E 4. p. 705. 23 E. 4. p. 709.
Earls of Derby.
Henry Earl of Derby, summoned to parliameat 17 E. 3. p. 35. 28 E. 3. p. 42.
Surety in Parliament for Sir William de la Pool, 14 E. 3. p. 23. n. 22. Henry
of Lanc. Earl of Derby summoned to parliament 9 R. 2. p. 307. 10 R. 2. p. 313.
11 R. 2. p. 319, 320. 14 R. 2. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 340. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 18 R. 2.
p. 357. 20 R. 2. p. 359. his loyalty declared in Parliament in deserting the
Rebels, 21 R. 2. p. 370. n. 27. created Duke of Hereford, 21 R. 2. p. 370. n.
35.

The style of John Duke of Lancaster, Earl of Derby, when Henry was Earl
thereof, 15 R. ^. p. 343. n. 18.

Edward de le Despencer summoned to parliament 34 E. 1. p. 5. H^gh le Despencer
summoned to parliament, 33 E. 1 p. 4. 13 E. 2 p. 3 both senior and junio^, ib.
his Attainder in Parliament reversed, his great wealth and revenue, 21 R. 2. p.
372, 373. n. 55. to 67. Hugh le D^spencer summoned to parliament 14 E. 3. p.
26, 27. 17 E. 3. p. 36. 18 E. 3. p. 42. Edward le Despencer summoned to
parliament 38 E. 3. p. 99. Ph^lip le Despencer summoned to parliament 11 R. n.
p. 319. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 15 R. 2. p. 340. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 18
R. 2. p. 357^ 20 R. 2. p. 365. 21 R. 2. p. 366. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p.
383. Thomas le Despencer summoned to parlia- 14 R. 2. p. 336. 20 R. 2. p. 359.
one of the Lords Appellants in Parliament, 21 R. 2.377 n. 2. attainted of
Treason, 2 H. 4. p. 407. n. 30.

The judgment against him in Parliament made void, 1 E. 4. p. 670. n. 33.

John Devereux summoned to parliament 8 R. 2. p. 30^. 9 R. 2. p. 308. 10 R. 2.
p. 314. 11 R. 2. p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p.
356. 15 R. 2. p. 340, 341. Walter Devereux, Lord Ferriers, summoned to
parliament. 3. E. 4. p. 674. 7 E. 4. p. 685. 9 and 12 E. 4. p. 687. 22 E. 4. p.
704.
Earls of Devon.
Hugh de Courtney summoned to parliament 34 E. 1. p. 5. 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17 E 3.
p. 35. 18 E. 3. p. 42. Humphrey de Courtney summoned to parliament 22 E. 3. p.
68. 28 E. 3. p. 84. Hugh de Courtney summoned to parliament 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77.
27 E. 3. p. 83. 29 E. 3. p. 89. 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99. 42 E. 3. p.
104. 47 E. 3. p. 115. 50 E. 3. p. 143. Edward Courtney summoned to parliament 3
R. 2. p. 181. 4. R. 2. p. 189. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297 8 R. 2. p. 302, 306. 9 R. 2.
p. 307. 10 R. 2. p. 313. 11 R. 2. p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p.
328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 340. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 20 R. 2. p. 359, 365.
21 R. 2. p. 366 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p. 383, 402. 2 H. 4. p. 403. 3 H. 4.
p. 414. 6 H. 4. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4 p. 443. 9 H. 4. p. 463. 1 H. 5. p. 533 2 H.
5. p. 537. 3 H. 5. p. 542, 543. 4 H. 5. p. 549. 5 H. 5. p 53^. 7 H. 5. p. 555,
556. Admiral of the Wes^, 7 R. 2. p. 291. n. 14. Hugh Courtney summoned to
parliament 8 H. 5. p. 558. Thomas Courtney summoned to parliament 15 H. 6. p.
616, 617. 18 H. 6. p. 611, 626. 20 H. 6. p. 627. 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. p.
632. 27 H. 6. p. 636, 638. 28 H. 6. p. 639. 29 H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p. 648.
33 H. 6. p. 655. accused of treason, and acquitted 31 H. 6. p. 653. n. 48.
con^ention between him and the Earl of A^u^del for precedence, 27 H. 6. p. 638.
n. 19. attainted of Treason after his death 1 E. 4 p. 670 n. 19. Henry Earl of
Devo^ summoned to parliament 38 H. 6. p. 660.
Marquesses and Earls of Dorset.
Sir John Beauford Earl of Somerset, created Marquess of Dorset 21 R. 2. p.
370. n. 35. summoned to parliament 21 R. 2. p. 366, 372. 23 R. 2. p. 381, 1 H.
4. p. 383 one of the Lords Appellants, and Admiral, p. 374. n. 12, 72.
impeached degraded 1 H. 4. p. 369. n. 18. Thomas Beauford Earl of Dorset
summoned to parliament 2 H. 5. p. 537. 4 H. 5. p. 549, 550. Edward Earl of
Dorset summoned to parliament 20 H. 6. p. 627.

Made Marquess of Dorset, and so summoned to parliament 23 H. 6. p. 628. his
petition, 2^ H. 6. p. 624. n. 33.

Thomas Marquess of Dorset, summoned to parliament 22 E. 4. p. 704. 23 E. 4. p.
708.
Marquess of Dublin.
Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford, created Marquess of Dublin, 9 R. 2. p. 310,
311. n. 17. summoned to parliament 10 R, 2. p. 313. John Lord Dudley taken
prisoner 38 H. 6. p. 662. n. 15. Earl of Dunnois in France, 28 H. 6. p. 642. n.
22. Earl of Dunbar, and the Earl of Northumland, reconciled in and by
Parliaments, 5 H. 4. p. 427, n. 20. Earl of March and the Kings Leige-man 4 H 4
p 418 n 27.
E.
William de Effingham summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3.
Earls of Essex.
Humphrey de Bohun summoned to parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4. 34 E. 1. p. 5. John de
Bohun summoned to parliament 4 E. 3. p. 5. 2 H. 5. p. 5^1. n. 30. Henry Bohun
summoned to parliament 22 E. 3 p. 68. Hugh de Bohun summoned to parliament 25
E. 3. p. 72. William de Bohun summoned to parliament 25 E. 3. Par. 2. p. 77.
Humphrey de Bohun summoned to parliament 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 84. 29 E.
3. p. 89. 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99. his daughters and coheirs, 2 H. 5. p.
541. n. 30. Thomas, Earl of Essex and Buckingham created Duke of Gloucester, 9
R. 2. p. 310. n. 15. Henry Earl of Essex, summoned to parliament 3 E. 4. p.
673. 9 E. 4. p. 686. 12 E. 4. p. 687. 22 E. 4. p. 704. Ader de Es^lye summoned
to parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4. William de E^re summoned to parliament, 8 R. 2. p.
302.
Dukes of Exeter.
John Holland Earl of Huntington, created Duke of Exeter, 21 R. 2. p. 370. n.
35, p 372. n. 53. one of the Lords Appellant^, p. 374. n. 12. summoned to
parliament, 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p. 383. impeached and degraded 1 H. 4. p.
399. n. 5, 10. Thomas Duke of Exeter his creation and request in parliament, 5
H. 5. p. 544. n. 16. summoned to parliament 5 H. 5. p. 552. 1 H. 6. p. 562. 2
H. 6. p. 567. 3 H. 6. p. 57^, 573. 4 H. 6. p. 581, 582. his relation of H. 5.
hi^ repentance for taking away the Lord Scroops lands, 2 H. 5. p. 569. n. 29.
has the wardship of the Lord Roos body, and lands 3 H. 6. p. 580. n. 30. Henry
Duke of Exeter, summoned to parliament 29 H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p. 648. 33. H.
6.655. 38 H 6. p. 660. surety of the peace gran^ed against him in Parl. at the
motion of the Lord Cromwell, 31 H. 6. p. 654. n. 61. Attainted of Treason for
being against Edw. 4. 1 E. 4. p. 670, 671. n. 20. Anne his wife, Edw. 4.
sister, has lands granted her for her own use, 4 E. 4. p. 678. n. 48. William
de Eyrm. summoned to parliament 4 E. 3. p. 6.
F.
John de Fallesly Knight, summoned to parliament 7 R. 2. p. 297. 8 R. 2. p.
307. 10 R. ^. p. 313. 11 R. 2. p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2. p. 327 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14
R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 340. John de Falconbridge or Fawconbridge, summoned
to parliament 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17 E. 3. p. 36. 18 E. 3. p. 42. 22 E. 3. p. 68.
Walter de Fawconbridge summoned to parliament 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 27 E. 3. p.
89. 28 E. 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. John de Ferrariis, or Ferrers, summoned to
parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4. William de Ferrariis summoned to parliament 13 E. 2.
p. 3. Henry de Ferrariis summoned to parliament 4 E. 3. p. 6. William de
Ferrariis, summoned to parliament 42 E. 3. p. 104. Henry de Ferrariis summoned
to parliament ^ R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297. 8 R. 2. p.
302, 307. 9 R. 2. p. 307. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R 2. p. 319. Walter de Ferrariis
de Wemms, or Wenne, summoned to parliament 1 R. 2. p. 153. Robert de Ferrariis
of Wemme, summoned to parliament 3 R. 2. p. 181. William de Ferrariis, or
Ferrers de Groby Knight, summoned to parliament 20 R. 2. p. 360, 365. 21 R. 2.
p. ^66. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p. 383, 402. 2 H. 4. p. 403. 3 H. 4. p. 414 6
H. 4. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4. p. 449. 9 H. 4. 463. 11 H. 4. p. 469. 1 H. 5. p.
533. 2 H. 5. p. 538. 3 H. 5. p. 543. 4 H. 5. p. 549. 5 H. 5. p. 552. 7 H. 5. p.
555, 556. 9 H. 5. p. 561. 2 H. 6. p. 556. 3 H. 6. p. 572, 573. 4 H. 6. p. 582.
^. H. 6. p. 586. 9 H. 6. p. 597. 10 H. 6. p. 601. 11 H. 6. p. 606. 14 H. 6. p.
613. 15 H. 6. p. 616, 617. 18 H. ^. p. 621, 626. 20 H. 6. p. 627. 23 H. 6. p.
628. 25 H. 6. p. 633. 27 H. 6 636. William de Finecourt, summoned to parliament
17 E. 3. p. 36. 38 E. 3. p. 84. William Fitz-Bernard, summoned to parliament 13
E. 2. p. 3. Henry Fitzhugh, summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 9. 4 E. 3. p.
5. 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17 E. 3. p. 36. 18 E. 3. p. 42. 22 E. 3. p. (...) 25 E. 3.
p. 7^, 77. Henry de Fitz^ugh summoned to parliament 1 R. ^, p. ^53. 3 R. 2. p.
181. 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297. 8 R. 2. p. 302. 9 R. 2. p. 308. 10 R.
2. p. 314. 11 R. 2. 319, 320. 12 R 2. p. 327. 14 R 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 340.
17 R. 2. p. 350. 18 R. 2. p. 357. 20 R. 2. p. 360, 365. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H.
4. p. 383, 402. 2 H. 4. p. 403. 4 H. 4 p. 415. 6 H. 4. p. 435, 436. ^ H 4. p.
449. 9 H 4. p. 463. 11 H. 4. p. 469. 1 H. 5. p. 533. 2 H. 5. p. 538. 4 H. 5. p.
549. 8 H. 5. p. 558. 1 H 6. p. 562, 563. William Fitzhugh his heir, 3 H. 6. p.
58^. n. 33. executor to H. 5. 1 H. 6. p. 563. n. 28. William Fitzhugh Knight
his petition in parliament, 3 H. 6. p. 580. n. 33. summoned to parliament 6 H.
6. p. 587. 10 H. 6. p. 601. 11 H. 6. p. 606. 12 and 14 H. 6 p. 613. 15 H. 6. p.
616, 617. 18 H, 6. p. 621, 626. 20 H 6. p. 627. 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. p.
633. 27 H. 6. p. 637. 28 H. 6. p. 639. 29 H. 6. p. 645. Henry Fitzhugh
summoned to parliament 38 H. 6. p. 661. 1 E. 4. p. 669. 3 E 4. p. 674. 3 E. 4.
p. 679. 9 E. 4. p. ^87. Richard Fitz hugh Knight. sum. 23 E 4. p. 7^9. Robert Fitz
pain, summoned to parliament 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17 E. 3. p. 36. 25 E. p. 72, 77.
Robert Fitz-walter summoned to parliament, 33 E. 1. p. 4. 15 E. 2. p. 3. John
Fitz-walter summoned to parliament, 18 E. 3. p. 42. 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 27 E.
3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. Walter Fitz walter summoned to
parliament 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 298.
8 R. 2. p. 303, 307. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 341 17 R. 2. p. 31. 20 R. 2.
p. 3. 365, 366. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p. 383, 402. 2 H. 4. p. 40^. 3 H. 4.
p. 4. 4. 6 H. 4. p. 435, 436. his Sons w^rdship granted to the Earl of
Somerset, 8 H. 4 p. 458. n. 95. Walter Fitz-walter Knight, summoned to
parliament 6 H. 6. p. 587. 9 H. 6. p. 597. Fulke Fitz-waren summoned to
parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4. 13 E. 2. p. 3. Ralph Fitz-walter Barn. de Knowel.
sumoned to parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4. Thomas de Furn^val senior and junior
summoned to parliament 15 E. 2. p. 3. 4 E. 3. p. 6. 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. John de
Furnival summoned to parliament 28 Edw. 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. Thomas de
Furnival summoned to parliament 37 E. 3. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 99. William de
Furnival summoned to parliament 42 E. 3. p. 104, 47 E. 3. p. 115. 1 R. 2. p.
159. 3. R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 187. Thomas Lord Furniual, Treasurer of War, 6
H. 4. p. 438. n. 9, 10. 8^ H. 4. p. 450. n. 63. James Fynes, Knight. Lord Say and
Seal, summoned to parliament 27 H. 6. p. 636. 28 H. 6. p. 639. William Fynes
Lord Say and Seal, summoned to parliament 29 H. 6. p. 645. 38 H. 6. p. 661. 1
E. 4. p. 668. 3 E. 4. p. 674. 7. E. 4. p. 680. 9. E. 4. p. 687. Richard Fynes,
Lord de Dacre Knight, summoned to parliament 38 H. 6. p. 661. 1 E. 4. p. 668. 3
E. 4. p. 674. 7 E. 4. p. 680. 12 E. 4. p. 68^. 22 E. 4. p. 704 23 E. 4. p. 709.
G
EArl of Gaucourt, French, exchanged, 2 H. 570. n. 34 Ralph de Georges summoned
to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. Richard de Gloucester summoned to parliament 9 E.
4. p. 686. 12 E. 4^ p 687.
Earls and Dukes of Gloucester.
Ralph de Mont-herme Earl of Gloucester, 33 E. 1. p. 4. Hugh de Audeley Earl of
Glou^ester, summoned to parliament, 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17 E. 3. p. 35. 18 E. 3. p.
42. Thomas Earl of Buckingham and Essex, created Duke of Gloucester, 9 R. 2. p.
310. n. 15. Constable of England, ib. summoned to parliament 10 R. 2. p. 313.
11 R. 2. p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R.
2. p. 340. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 18 R. 2. p. 358. 20 R. 2. p. 359. slandered for
going about to depose the King, and acquitted thereof in Parliament. 11 R. 2. p.
p. 321. n. 56. one of the five Lords Apellant, ib. n. 9. Constable of England,
his complaint against Sir Thomas Talbut, 17 R. 2. p. 353. n. 20. impeached for
incroaching Royal jurisdiction, 21 R. 2. p. 368. n. 15. his pardon revoked, ib.
n. 12. his traiterous assembly against the King, 21 R. 2. p. 369. n. 27. his
impeachment and attainder of High Treason, ib. p. 376, 377, 378. apprehended,
sent prisoner to Calice, and there murdered by King Rich. 2. his command, who
is articled against for it, and repealing his pardon, 1 H. 4. p. 386. n. 20,
22. The Lords Appellants Art. 21 R. 2. impeached for having a hand in his
murder, the manner whereof it at large confessed by John Hall, who is condemned
and executed as a Traitor, for having a hand in his murder, 1 H. 4. p. 399,
400, 401. His precedence when Appellant, 3 H. 6. p. 574. his daughters, p. 575.
Thomas le Dispencer created Earl of Gloucester, 21 R. 2. p. 37^. n. 35.
petitions for the revocation of the judgment against his Grandfather, ib. p.
37^. n. 55, 56. his oath and release in parliament, ib. p. 373. n. 70. summoned
to parliament 21 R. 2. p. 366. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H, 4. p. 383. ^ Commissioner
in deposing R. 2. 1 H. 4. p. 389. n. 53. impeached degraded, and his lands
forfeited, 1 H. 4. p. 399, 400. Humphrey Duke of Gloucester summoned to
parliament 2 H. 5. p. 537. 3 H. 5. p. 543. 4 H. 5. p. 549, 550. 1 H. 6. p. 561.
2 H. 6. p. p. 566. 3 H. 6. p. 572. 4 H 6. p. 581, 582. 6 H. 6. p. 586. 9 H. 6.
p. 597. 10 H. 6. p. 601 11 H 6 p. 606, 607. 14 H 6. p. 613. 15 H 6. p. 616,
617. 18 H. 6. p. 620, 628. 20 H. 6. p. 627. 25 H. 9. p. 632, 633.

He held the parliament by commission, and is made Lord Protector, Chamberlain
and Constable of England, 1 H. 6. p. 563. n. 1, 2. p. 566. n. 22. to 31. 2 H.
6. p. 567. n. 1. the Great-seal resigned, and Speaker presented to him, p. 563.
n. 11, 13. commons suit to him, 2 H^ 6. p 568. n. 10. appealed to, 3 H. 6. p.
574. Earl Marshals petition to him, p. 576. his oath, and proroguing of the
parliament p. 578. n. 10, 14. the King lends him money upon security, p. 580.
n. 34. dis^ention between him and the Bishop of Winchester appeased, 4 H. 6. p
583. n. ^2. the Bishops submission to him, p. 584. n. 33. his power as
Protector declared p. 589. n. 21, to 26. the Kings principal Counselor, 8 H.
6. p. 492. n. 13. 10 H. 6. p. 602. n. 9. 11 H. 6. p 608. n. 20. he purges the
Cardinal of a slander^ p 603. n. 14 his c^eation as Duke by H. 5. and petition,
11 H. 6. p 610. n. 36. made Governor of Calice and Ryebanks, 14 H. 6. p. 615 n.
10. his care for paying the Soldiers thereof, 25 H. 6. p. 618 619 n 12, 18. a
license to him to make a Park at Greenwich, p 619. n. 17. Overseer of Qu. Kath.
will. p. 620 n. 32.

Richard Duke of Gloucester sum. to par. 9 E. 4 p. 686. 12 E. 4 p. 687. 22 E 4.
p. 704. His devise to get the Crown settled on him by the Peoples and
Parliaments importunity R. 3. p. 709, 710, etc. William de Grandeson sum. to
par. 13 E. 2. p 3 John de Gray sum. to par 13 E. 2. p. 3. Rich. de Gray sum. to
par. 13 E. 2. p. 3. 4 E. 9. p. 6 Henry de Gray sum. to par. 4 E. 3. p. 6. 14.
E. 3. p. 26, 27. Roger de Gray sum. to par. 4 E. 3. p 6. 14 E. 3. p. 26, 27. 17
E. 3. p. 34. 18 E. 3. p. 42. 22 E. 3. p. 68. 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. John de Gray
de Rotherford sum. to par. 14 E. 3. p. 26, 27. 17 E. 3. p. 36. 18 E. 3. p. 42.
25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. 38 E. 3. p.
99 47 E. 3. p. 115. Reginald de Gray de Ruthin Knight. sum. to par. 17 E. 3. p. 35
18 E. 3. p. 42. 22. E. 5. p. 68. 25 E. 3 p. 72, 77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p.
84. 19 E. 3 p. 89 37 E. 8. p. 95. 38 E. 3. p. 89. 42 E. 3. p. 104. 47 E. 3. p.
115. 50 E. 3. p. 143. 3 R. 2. p. 181 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297 8 R.
2. p. 302, 307. 9 R. 2. p. 308. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. 2. p. 319. 13 R. 2. p.
328. 14 R. 12. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 340. 17 R. 2. p. 350 20 R. 2. p. 360, 365.
21 R. 2. p. 366. 23 R. 2. p. 382 1 H. 4. p. 383, 402. 2 H 4. p. 403. 4 H 4. p.
414. ^ H. 4. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4. p. 449. 9 H. 4. 463^ 11 H. 4. p. 469 1 H. 5.
p. 533. 2 H. 5. p. 538. 3 H. ^ p. 543, 544. 4 H. 5. p. 549. 7 H. 5. p. 555,
556. ^ H. 5. p. 558. 9 H. 5. p. 561 1 H. 6. p. 562. 3 H. 6. p. 572. 4 H. 6. p
582, 6 H. 6. p. 586, 587. 9 H. 6. p. 597 10 H. 6. p. 601. 11 H. 6. p. 606. 12
and 14 H. 6. p. 613. 18 H. 9. p. 621. 31 H. 6. p. 648. John Gray de Codenore,
son of Richard, summoned to parliament 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17 E. 3. p. 36. 18 E. 3.
p. 42. 25 E. 3. p. 72, 77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. 28 E. 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. 37 E
3. p. 9^. 38 E. 3. p. 99, 42 E. 3. p. 104. 47 E. 3. p. 115. 50 E. 3. p. 143. 1
R. 2. p. 153. 3 R 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297. 8 R. 2. p.
302, 307. 9 R. 2. p. 308. 10 R. 2. p. 314 11 R. 2. p. 319. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13
R. 2. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 340. Henry de Gray de Shirland,
summoned to parliament 50 E. 3. p. 143. Henry de Gray de Wilton, summoned to
parliament 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 187. 7 R. 2. p. 290.297 8 R. 2. p. 302,
307. 9 R. 2. p. 308. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. 2. p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13
R. 2. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 340. 17 R. 2. p. 350 18 R. 2. p.
357. Richard Gray de Codonere summoned to parliament 17 R. 2. p. 350. 20 R. 2.
p. 360, 365. 21 R. 2. p. 366. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p. 383.402. 2 H. 4. p.
403. 6 H. 4. p. 435, 436. 7 H. 4. p. 449. 9. H. 4. p. 463. 11 H. 4. p. 469.
Ralph Gray de Raby summoned to parliament 20 R. 2. p. 360. John Gray de
Codonore Knight. summoned to parliament 5 H. 5. p. 588. 3 H. 6. p. 572, 573. 4 H 6.
p. 582. 6 H. 6. p. 587. 20 H. 6. p. 627. Henry Gray de Codonore Knight. summoned to
parliament 9 H. 6. p. 597. 10 H. 6. p. 601. 11 H. 6. p. 608. 12 and 13 H 6 p.
613. 15 H 6 p. 606 607. 18 H 6 p 626. Leonard Lord Gray of Ruthin summoned to
parliament 1^ H. 6. p. 626. Edward Lord Gray of Ruthin Knight. summoned to
parliament 20 H. 6. p. 602. 23 H. 6. p. 633. 27 H. 6. p. 636. 28 H. 6. p. 639.
29 H. 6 p. 64^. 31 H. 6. p. 648. 33 H. 6. p. 655. 38 H 6 p. 666. 1 E. 4. p.
668. 3 E. 4. p. 673. 1 E 4 p 668. Edward Lord Gr^y de Groby Knight. summoned to
parliament 25 H. 6. p. 633. 27 H. 6. p. 636. 28 H. 6. p. 639. 29 H. 6. p. 645.
31 H 6 p 648. 33 H. 6. p. 655. 38 H. 6. p. 666. Reginald Gray de Wilton Knight.
summoned to parliament 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. p. 633, 634. 27 H. 6. 627. 29
H. 6. p. 645. 33 H. 6. p. 655. 38 H. 6. p. 660. 1 E. 4^ p. 668. 3 E. 4. p. 674.
7 E. 4. p. 679. 12 E. 4. p. 687. Henry Gray Knight. summoned to parliament 38 ^. 6.
p. 661. 1 E. 4. p. 669. 7 E. 4. p. 680. 9 and 12 E. 4. p. 687. Richard Gray,
Lord Powis, pardoned for Treason, but his lands forfeited, 38 H. 6. p. 623. n.
23, 24. John Gray late Lord Rongemont, attainted of Treason, 1 E. 4. p.
678.679. n. 25. Edward Gray de Lisle summond to parliament 22 E. 4. p. 705.
John Gray de Lisle summoned to parliament 23 E. 4. p. 709. Thomas Gray of
Richmond summoned to parliament 29 H. 6. p. 645. 31 H. 6. p. 649. 33 H. 6. p.
656. 38 H. 6. p. 661. 1 E. 4. p. 668. Reginald Gray de Wilton Knight. summoned to
parliament 12 E. 4. p. 687. 22 E. 4. p. 704. John Gray de Powis summoned to
parliament 22 ^. 4. p. 705. Henry Gray Knight. summoned to parliament 12 E. 4. p.
687. John de Greystock summoned to parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4. Ralph de Greystock
summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. William ^aron de Greystock summoned to
parliament 25 E. 3. p. 77. 27 E. 3. p. 83. ^8 E 3. p. 84. 29 E. 3. p. 89. Ralph
Baron de Greystock, summoned to parliament 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R.
2. p. 187. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297. 8 R. 2. p. 301, 307. 10 R. 2. p. 314. 11 R. 2.
p. 319. 12 R. 2. p. 327. 13 R. 2. p. 328. 15 R. 2. p. 341. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 18
R. 2. p. 357. 20 R. 2. p. 360.365. 21 R. 2. p. 382. ^ H. 4. p. 383, 402. 2 H. 4
p. 403. 3 H. 4. p. 414. 7 H. 4. p. 449. 9 H. 4. p. 463. 11 H. 4. p. 469. 1 H.
5. p. 533. 2 H. 5. p. 538. 3 H. 5. p. 543, 544. 4 H. 5. p. 549. 5 H 5. p. 552.
7 H. 5. p. 555, 556. John Baron de Greystock summoned to parliament 8 H. 5. p.
558. 9 H. 5. p. 561. 1 H. 6. 562. 2 H 6. p. 566. 3 H. 6. p. 572. 4 H. 6. p. 582
6 H. 6. p. 586, 587. 9 H. 6. p. 597. 10 H. 6. 601 11 H. 6. p. 606. 12 and 14 H.
6. p. 613. Ralph Baron de Greystock summoned to parliament 15 H. 6. p. 616,
617. 18 H. 6. p. 621, 626. 20 H. 6. p. 627. 23 H. 6. p. 628. 25 H. 6. p. 633.
27 H. 6. p. 636. 28 H. 6. p. 639. 29 H. 6. p. 645. 3^ H. 6. p. 648. 33 H. 6. p.
655 38 H. 6. p. 661. 1 E. 4. p. 668. 3 E. 4. p. 674 7 E. 4. p. 679. 9 E. 4. p.
687. 12 E. 4. p. 687. 22 E. 4. p. 704. Ingram de Grymes summoned to parliament
13 E. 2. p. 3.
H
ANdrew de Harnloe summoned to parliament 13 E. 2. p. 3. William Hankford
summoned to parliament 8 H. 5. p. 558. 9 H. 5. p. 561. Serton de Hansladron
summoned to parliament 33 E. 1. p. 4.

Duke of Ha^ns, 13 E. 4. p. 692. n. 1.

John de Harrington summoned to parliament 4 E. 3. p. 6. 14 E. 3. p. 26. 17 E.
3. p. 36. 18 E. 3. p. 42. 22 E. 3. p. 68. Robert de Harrington summoned to
parliament 1 R. 2. p. 153. 3 R. 2. p. 181. 4 R. 2. p. 287. 7 R. 2. p. 290, 297.
8 R. 2: p. 302, 307. 9 R. 2. p. 30^. 11 R. 2. p. 319, 320. 12 R. 2. p 327. 13
R. 2. p. 328. 14 R. 2. p. 336. 15 R. 2. p. 341. 17 R. 2. p. 350. 18 R. 2. p.
357. 20 R. 2. p. 360, 365. 21 R. 2. p. 366. 23 R. 2. p. 382. 1 H. 4. p. 383,
40^. 2 H. 4. p. 403. 3 H. 4. p. 414. 6 H 4 p 435.436. 7 H 4 p 449. 9 H 4 p 463.
11 H 4 p 469. 1 H 5 p 533. 2 H 5 p 538. 4 H 5 p 549. William de Harrington
summoned to Parliament, 8 H 5. p 558. 9 H 5. p 561. 1 H 6. p 562. 2 H 6. p 567.
3 H 6. p 572, 573. 4 H 6. p 582. 6 H 6. p 586, 587. 9 H 6. p 597. 10 H 6. p
601. 11 H 6. p 606. 12 and 14 H 6. p 613. 15 H 6. p 616, 617. 18 H 6. p 621. 26
H 6. p 626. John de Hastings summoned to Parliament, 13 E 2 p 3. Lord Hastings
Chancellor of France, 27 H 6. p 638. n 18. William Hastings de Hastings Knight
summoned to Parl. 3 E 4. p 670. 7 E 4. p 680. 9 E 4. p 6 87. 12 E 4. p 688.
Edward Hastings de Hungerford summoned to Parliament, 22 E 4. p 705. Richard de
Hastings de Wells summoned to Parliament, 22 E 4. p 705. William Herbert knight
summoned to Parliament, 7 E 4. p 680.
Dukes and Earls of Hereford.
Ralph de Mons Herme Earl of Hereford summoned to Parliament, 33 E 1. p 4.
Humfry de Bohun Earl of Her. summoned to Parl. 34 E 1 p 5. see a H 5 p 541 n
30. John de Bohun Earl of Her. summoned to parliament, 4 E 3. p 5. Henry de
Bohun Earl of Her. summoned to Parliament, 14 E 3. p 26. 25 E 3. p 72. William
de Bohun summoned to Parliament, 25 E 3. Par. 2. p. 77. Humfry de Bohun
summoned to Parliament, 27 E 3. p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 89. 37 E 3. p.
91. Henry Earl of Derby created Duke of Hereford, 21 R 2. p 372. n 35. accuses
the Duke of Norfolk, p 372. n 53. One of the Lords Appellant, p 374. n 72.
Authorized to make an Attorney, p 375, n 87. William Heron Knight, summoned to
Parliament, 17 R 2. p 350. 20 R 2. p 360, 365. 21 R 2. p 366. 1 H 4. p 402. 2 H
4. p 403. 3 H 4. p 414. 6 H 4. p 435, 436. Thomas Hoar or Hoe Knight summoned
to Parliament, 27 H 6. p 637. 28 H 6. p 640. 31 H 6. p 649. Thomas Howard
Knight summoned to Parliament, 12 E 4. p 687. John Howard Knight summoned to
Parliament, 22 E 4. p 704. Walter Hungerford Knight summoned to Parliament, 3 H
6. p 573. 4 H 6. p 582. 6 H 6. p 586, 587. 9 H 6. p 597. 10 H 6. p 601. 11 H 6.
p 606. 14 H 6. p 613. 15 H 6. p 616, 617. 18 H 6. p 621, 626. 20 H 6. p 627. 23
H 6. p 628. 25 H 6. p 633. 27 H 6. p 630. Robert Hungerford Knight, Lord
Mollins, summoned to Parliament, 23 H 6. p 62^. 25 H 6. p 633, 634. 27 H 6. p
637. 28 H 6. p 640. 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H 6. p 649. 33 H 6. p 665^ Attainted, 1 E
4. p 671, n 22. Robert Hungerford senior, Knight, summoned to Parliament, 29 H
6. p 645. 31 H 6. p 648. William de Huntingfield summoned to Parliament, 27 E
3. p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 87. 47 E 3 p 115. John de Huntingfield
summoned to Parl. 37 E 3. p 95. 38 E 3. p 89. 42 E 3. p 104.
Earls of Huntington.
William de Clinton E. H. summoned to Parliament, 14 E 3. p 26, 27. 17 E 3 p
35, 36. 18 E 3. p 42 22. E 3. p 68. 25 E 3. p 72, 77. 27 E 3 p 83. 47 E 3. p
115. Letters sent to him of the Kings proceedings in France, 13 E 3. p 17. n 5.
To attend on the Keeper of England^ 14 E 3. p 24, n 36. A surety for an
Accountant, p 23, n 24. Guiscard de Angle E. H. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 181.
John Holland created Earl of Huntington 11 R 2. p 325. n 45. Summoned to Parl.
12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2. p 336. 15 R 2. p 340. 17 R 2. p 350. 20 R
2. p 359, 365. 1 new created Earl led by him in Parliament, 20 R 2. p 363. n
31. Created Duke of Exeter, 21 R 2. p 370. n 35. One of the Lords Appellants, p
377. n 2. Impeached of treason and degraded, p 399. Beheaded, and adjudged a
Traitor in Parliament after execution, 2 H 4. p 407. n 30. His wife, ^ H 4. p
428. n 23. John de Holland his son restored to blood, honor, lands, 4 H 5. p
551. n 16. His Livery stayed, 5 H 5. p 554. n 12. A prisoner in France, his
petition, and other prisoners given him toward his ransom, 2 H 6. p 570. n 34.
3 H 6. p 579. n 24, 25. 4 H 6. p 584. n 28. Summoned to Parliament, 6 H 6. p
586. 14 H 6. p 613: 15 H 6. p 616, 617. 20 H 6. p 627. William Earl of
Huntington summoned to Parliament, 22 E 4. p 704. Henry Husey summoned to
Parliament, 33 E 1. p 4. 15 E 2. p 3. Henry Hussy summoned to Parliament, 14 E
3. p 26, 27. 18 E 3. p 41. 22 E 3. p 6^.
I.
RObert de Insula, or Isle, summoned to Parl^ 13 E 2. p 3. 14 E 3. p 26. John
de Insula or Isle summoned to Parl. 4 E 3. p 6. John de Insula de rub^o monte
summoned to Parl. 25 E 3. p 72, 77. 28 E 3. p 8^. Warren de Insula summoned to
Parl^ 47 E. p 115. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 180. 4 R 2. p 187.
Dukes of Ireland.
Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland summoned to Parl. 11 R 2, p 319. Lands intailed
to him, his Attainder, etc. 16 R 2, p 347, n 15. The Duke of Lancaster pardoned
for being with him after his ^udgment, p 348, n 16 The Statutes and Acts
against him repealed, upon the petition of John Earl of Oxford, 2 E 4, p 678, n
43. Dame Philip his wife to enjoy her Dower, 2 H 4, p 407, n 36. Philip
Duchess of Ireland, lands conveyed to her, 8 H 4. p 458, n 96.
K. Earls of Kendall.
JOhn Duke of Bedford, 2 H 5. p 537. Capiton, 28 H 6, p 642, n 31.
Earls of Kent.
Thomas E. K. summoned to Parliament, 34 E 1, p 5. Edward the Kings brother
summoned to Parl 13 E 2 p 3. John E K barred of Arundel-Castle, 25 E 3, p 74, n
9. Summoned to Parl. 25 E 3, p 77. Thomas de Holland E.K. summoned to Parl. 4 R
2. p 187. 7 R 2. p 289, 297. 8 R 2. p 302, 306. 9 R 2. p 307. 10 R 2. p 313. 11
R 2. p 319, 320. 12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 15 R 2. p 340. 17 R 2. p 350. 18
R 2. p 357. 20 R 2. p 359. 21 R 2. p 370 377. Attainted of Treason, 2 H 4. p
407. n 30. His wife endowed, 5 H 4. p 431. n 5. Edmund E.K. summoned to Parl.
14 R 2. p 336. quaere, Tho. being then Earl. John E.K. summoned to Parl. 20 R
2. p 365. quaere, since Thomas was then Earl, and summoned. Edward E.K.
summoned to Parl. 7 H 4. p 449. 9 H 4. p 463. his assent to Dower, 5 H 4. p
431. n 50. Edward E.K. summoned to Parl. 9 E 4. p 606. 12 E 4. p 687. 22 E 4. p
704. William de Kerdeston summoned to Parl. 14 E 3. p 26. John de Kinton
summoned to Parliament, 37 E 3. p 95.
L.
JOhn de Laburn or Leyburn summoned to Parl. 14 E 3. p 26. 17 E 3. p 36. 18 E
3. p 42. Anthony de Lacy summoned to Parl. 4 E 3. p 5. Henry de Lancaster
summoned to Parl. 33 E 1. p 4. 13 E 2. p 3.
Dukes and Earls of Lancaster.
Henry D. L. summoned to Parliament, 34 E 1. p 5. Thomas E. L. his road, his
lands seized and forfeited, 4 E 3. p 7, 8. n 8, 9, 18. Henry E.L. sum. to Parl.
4 E. 3. p 6. pardoned and restored, p 7. n 8, 9. To attend as Counselor on the
Duke of Cornwall, 14 E 3. p 24. n 36. Sum. to Parl. 14 E 3. p 25. 22 E 3. p 68.
25 E 3. p 72. M de Duke of Lanc. and ^o summoned, 25 E 3. Parl. 2. p 77. 27 E
3. p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 89. John, King E 3. his son, created Duke of
Lancaster in Parl. with the ceremonies thereof, 36 E 3. p 94. n 36 37. Sum. to
Parl. by that title. 37 E 3. p 95. 38 E 3. p 99. 42 E 3. p 104. 50 E 3. p 143.
1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 181 4 R 2. p 187. 5 R 2. p 191. 7 R 2. p 289. 8 R 2. p
302, 306. 9 R 2. p 307. 13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2. p 336. 15 R 2. p 340 343. 17 R
2. p 350. 20 R 2. p 359 365. 21 R 2. p 366. King of Castile, Leon and Arragon,
ib. Slandered of treason by the Commons, who desired to confer with him and
other Lords; he refused till purged of their slander, 1 R 2. p 155. n 12, 13^
14. Feoffee in trust to E 3. 2 R 2. p 169. n 26. Sent into Scotland to make a
Truce, 7 R 2. p 291. n 3. Employed in the North against the Scots, 7 R 2. p
298. n 1, 3. The Commons desire him for one of the Committee to treat with, p
299. n 10. A Fifteen granted toward his Voyage into Castile and Portugal,
whereof he was styled King, 9 R 2. p 309. n 10. His Tenants of the Duchy of
Lancaster ought to sue Livery; his complaint concerning it, 9 R 2. p 310. n 13.
The Kings Councellor, 13 R 2. p 329. n 7. Created Duke of Aquitain, for which
he does homage, p 332. n^ 21, 22. His style, and his Award confirmed in
Parliament, 15 R 2. p 342. n 17, 18. Accused by the Earl of Arundel for his
arrogancy, etc. Justified, and the Earl ordered to make a submission to him in
Parliament, 17 R 2. p 352. n 11. His complaint against Sir Tho. Talbot, p 353.
n 20. 20 R 2. p 361. n 13. His chil^ren e^denizen'd and legitimated, p 363, n
28, 29. The Kings intent to oppress him, 21 R 2. p 372. n 53. One of the Lords
Appellants, p 374. n 72. Steward of England, p 377. n 4. Gives Judgment in
Treason, ib. n 7. his offer to conquer Portugal and Spain, and money required
for that end, 6 R 2. p 282. n 13^ 14. Not to be spared out of the Realm, 6 R 2.
p 287. n 9^ 10. Henry Duke of Lancaster sum. to Parl. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p
383. repairs to R 2. in the Tower, who renounceth and resigneth his Crown to
him, p 385. n 12, 13, 14, 15. banished by R. 2. without any mediation, p 387,
n. 27, 29, 30. His claim of the Crown in Parl. elected and installed King, 1 H
4. p 388, 389. n. 54, 55, 56, 57. Prince Henry created Duke of Lancaster, 2 H
4. p 392. n. 82. William de Latimer summoned to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3. 4 E 3. p 5.
42 E 3. p 104. 47 E 3 p 115. 51 E 3 p 143. 1 R 2 p 153. 3 R 2 p 181. Impeached
by the Commons, censured by the King and Lords, one of the Kings Council, but
put from it, 50 E 3. p 121, 122. n. 21 to 31. John de Latimer summoned to
Parliament, 6 H 4 p 436. 7 H 4 p 449. 9 H 4 p 463. 1^ H 4 p 469. 1 H 5. p 533.
2 H 5. 538. 3 H 5 p 543, 544. 4 H 5 p 549. 5 H 5 p 552. 7 H 5 p 555, 556. 8 H 5
p 558. 9 H 5 p 562. 1 H 6 p 562. 2 H 5 p 556. 3 H 6 p 572. 4 H 6 p. 582. 6 H 6
p 586, 587. 9 H 6 p 597. George de Latimer knight summoned to Parl^ 11 H 6 p
606. 12 H 6 p 608. 14 H 6. p 613. 15 H 6 p 616, 617. 18 H 6 p 621, 626. 20 H 6
p 627. 23 H 6 p 628. 25 H 6 p 633. 27 H 6 p 636. 28 H 6 p 639. 31 H 6 p 648. 38
H 6 p 660. 1 E 4 p 668. 3 E 4 p 673. 7 E 4 p 679. 9 E 4. p 687.
Earls of Lincoln.
John Duke of Lancaster, Ea. Linc. 15 R 2. p 343. n 18.
Earls of Leicester.
John Duke of Lancaster, 15 R 2. p. 343. n 18. Earl of Longuil in France, 4 R
2. p 189. n 17. Richard Lovel summoned to Parl. 25 E 3 p 72. John Lovel de
Fishmerch summoned to Parliament, 1 R 2 p 153. 3 R 2 p 181. 4 R 2 p 187. 7 R 2
p 290, 297. 8 R 2 p 302, 307. 9 R 2 p 308. 10 R 2 p 314. 11 R 2 p 318, 320. 12
R 2 p 324. 13 R 2 p 327. 14 R 2 p 338. 15 R 2 p 340. 20 R 2 p 360, 365. 21 R 2
p 366^ 23 R 2 p 382. 1 H 4. p 383. Thomas Lovel de Halmshire summoned to Parl.
17 R 2. p 350. 20 R 2 p 360. Thomas Lovel de Fishmerch summoned to Parl. 1 H 4
p. 402. 2 H 4 p 403. John Lovel de Fishmerch summoned to Parl. 3 H 4 p 414. 4 H
4 p 449. 9 H 4 p 463. 11 H 4 p 469. 1 H 5 p 533. 2 H 5 p 538. 6 H 4 p 435, 436.
sworn to abide an award, 8 H 4 p 454. n 35. William Lovel de Fishmerch summoned
to Parliament, 3 H 6 p 572. 4 H 6 p 582. 6 H 6 p 586, 587. 10 H 6 p 601. 11 H 6
p 606. 12 and 14 H 6 p 613, 614. 15 H 6 p 616, 617. 18 H 6 p 621, 626. 20 H 6 p
627. 23 H 6 p 628. 25 H 6 p 633, 634. 27 H 6 p 637. 28 H 6 p 640. 29 H 6 p 642.
31 H 6 p 648. 33 H 6 p 655. John Lovel knight summoned to Parl. 38 H 6 p 660. 1
E 4 p 668. 3 E 4 p 674. William Lovel de Morley summoned to Parliament, 9 E 4 p
687. 12 E 3 p 688. Francis Lovel de Lovel knight summoned to Parliament, 22 E 4
p 705. Anthony de Lucy summoned to Parl. 13 E 2 p 3. 14 E 3 p 26. Thomas de
Lucy summoned to Parl. 18 E 3 p 42. 22 E 3 p 68. 25 E 3 p 7^^ 77. 27 E 3 p 83.
28 E 3 p 84. 29 E 3 p 89. 32 E 3 p 95. 38 E 3 p 99. Ralph de Lumley knight
summoned to Parliament, 8 R 2 p 302. 9 R 2 p 308. 10 R 2 p 314. 11 R 2 p 319,
320. 12 R 2 p 327. 13 R 2 p 328. 14 R 2 p 336. 15 R 2 p 341. 17 R 2 p 350. 18 R
2 p 357. 20 R 2 p 360, 365. 21 R 2 p 366. 23 R 2 p 382. 1 H 4 p 382. Attainted
of Treason by Parl. 2 H 4 p 407. n 30. His heir Sir John Lumley restored 13 H 4
p 480. n 19. His attainder reversed, and Thomas his heir restored, 1 E 4 p 672.
n 37. Thomas Lord Lumley knight restored, 1 E 4 p 672. n 37. summoned to Parl.
3 E 4 p 672. 7 E 4 p 680. 12 E 4 p 687. 22 E 4 p 704.
M.
PEter de Malo-lacu summoned to Parl. 13 E 2 p 3. 14 E 3 p 26. 17 E 3 p 36. 18
E 3. p 42. 22 E 3. p 68. 25 E 3. p 72.77 27 E 3^ p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p
89. 37 E 3. p 95. 38 E 3 p 99. 42 E 3. p 104. 47 E 3. p 115. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R
2. p 181 4 R 2. p 187. Peter de Malo-lacu summoned to Parl. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H
4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 3 H 4. p 414. 6 H 4. p 435.436. 7 H 4. p 449. 9 H
4. p 463. 11 H 4. p 469. 1 H 5. p 533. 2 H 5. p 534. 3 H 5. p. 543. Walter de
Maney summoned to Parl. 22 E 3. p 68. 25 E 3. p 72, 77. 27 E 3. p 83. 28 E 3. p
84. 29 E 3. p 89. 37 E 3. p 95. 38 E 3. p 99. 42 E 3 p 104.
Earls of March.
Roger Mortimer, impeached of Treason, executed without Trial, and all his
Lands forfeited, 4 E 3. p 6, 7. 8 n. 1, 11, 14^ Hi^ Attainder reversed, 28 E 3.
p 85, 86. n 7 to 16. Roger de mortuo mari, or Mortimer, E. Ma. summoned to
Parl. 29 E 3. p 89. Recovers lands, 1 R 2. p 156. n 28. Edward de mortuo mari.
E.M. summoned to Parl. 47 E 3. p 115. 1 R 2. p 153, 156, n 28. Edmund de mortuo
mari. E. M. Scire fac. against him on a Writ of Error, and his plea thereto, 2
R 2. p 168. n 19 to 25. p 176, n 32, 33. summoned to Parl. 3 R 2. p 181. Roger
de Mortimer E. Ma. Scire facias against him upon Error, 20 R 2. p 363, n 26.
His oath in Parliament, 21 R 2. p 371. n 46. One of the Lords Appellant, p 374,
n 72. Edward E.M. summoned to Parl. 1 H 5. p 533. 2 H 5. p 537. 3 H 5. p 543. 4
H 5. p 549. 8 H 5. p 558. 1 H 6. p 562. 2 H 6. p 567, 569. 3 H 6. p 580.
attainted for levying war against H 6. 38 H 6. p 662, 663. n 16 to 23. Earl of
March son to the Duke of York sworn not to shorten King H 6. his days, 39 H 6.
p. 666, n 21. His allowance, p 667, n 23. John de Marmion summoned to Parl 13 E
2. p 3. 4 E 3. p 6.
Earls Marshal.
Thomas Mowbray created Earl Marshal, 20 R 2. p 363, n 32. 21 R 2. p 370. n 9.
John Earl Marshal summoned to Parl. 1 H 5. p 533. 2 H 5. p 537. 3 H 5. p 543. 4
H 5. p 549. Thomas Earl Marshal, summoned to Parl. 1 H 6. p 562. 2 H 6 p 567.
John Earl Marshal, the controversy between him and Richard Earl of Warwick in
Parliament for precedencie, 3 H 6. p 573 574, 575, 577, n 10. 578, n 11, 12,
13. Restored to the Dukedom of Norfolk, ib. William Mattin summoned to Parl. 13
E 2 p 3. John Matr^vers summoned to Parl. 4 E 3 p. 6.25 E 3. p 77. Richard de
Sancto Mauro summoned to Parl. 25 E 3, p 77: 28 E 3, p 84. 29 E 3, p 89
Nicholas de Sancto Mauro summoned to Parl. 27 E 3. p 83. John de Mohun summoned
to Parl. 13 E^ 2. p. 1. 4 E 3. p 6. John de Mohun de Dunster summoned to Parl.
37 E 3^ p 95. 39 E 3. p 9^. 42 E 3. p 104. 47 E 3. 47 E 3. p 111. His daughters
and heirs and award concerning Dunster Castle, 8 H^ 4. p 454. n. 42. Robert de
Monteacuto summoned to Parl. 25 E 3. p 72, 77. 27 E 3. p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. John
de Monteacuto summoned to Parl. 47 E 3. p 115. 4 R 2. p 187. 7 R 2. p 290, 298.
8 R 2. p 302, 303. 9 R 2. p 308. 10 R 2. p 314. 11 R 2. p. 309. 12 R 2. p 327.
17 R 2. p 350. 20 R 2. p 3^0. Will. de Monte^^uto Earl of Sarum, vid. ib.
Robert de Monte albo summoned to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3. William de Morley summoned
to Parl. 33 E 1, p 4. Robert de Morley summoned to Parl. 13 E 2, p 3.4 E 3, p
6. 14 E 3, p 26. 18 E 3, p 42. 25 E 3, p 72, 77. 27 E 3, p 83. 28 E 3, p 84. 29
E 3, p 89. William de Morley summoned to Parl. 38 E 3, p 99. 42 E 3. p 104. 1 R
2, p 153. Thomas de Morley summoned to Parl. 3 R 2, p 181. 4 R 2. p 187. 7 R ^,
p 290, 298. 8 R 2, p 302, 307. 9 R 2, p 308. 10 R 2, p 314. 11 R 2, p 319, 320.
12 R 2, p 327. 14 R 2, p 336. 15 R 2, p 340. 17 R 2, p 350. 20 R 2, p 360, 365.
21 R 2, p 366, 378. 23 R 2, p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4, p 403. 3 H 4, p
414. 6 H 4, p 435, 436. 7 H 4, p 449. 9 H 4, p 463. 11 H 4, p 469. 13 H 4, p
477. 1 H 5. p 553. 3 H 5. p 543. 4 H 5, p 549. Thomas de Morley knight,
summoned to Parl. 4 H 6, p 582. 6 H 6, p 606. 14 H 6. p 614. Ralph de Morley
knight, summoned to Parl. 6 H 6, p 587. John de Morley knight, summoned to
Parliament, 3 H 6, p 601. 11 H 6, p 606. Robert Morley knight, summoned to
Parl. 20 H 6, p 627. Roger de Mortuo-mari, or Mortimer de Wigmore summoned to
Parl. 25 E 3. p, 72. 27 E 3. p 83^ 28 E 3, p 84. Richard de Mortuo-mari,
Mortimer de Wigmore summoned to Parl. 25 E 3. Par. 2. p. 77. John de Mowbray
Lord Mowbray summoned to Parl. 34 E 1, p 5. 4 E 3. p 6.17 E 3, p 36. 18 E 3, p
42, 25 E 3, p 72, 77. 27^ E 3. p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3^ p 89. Commanded to
repair to the defense of the North-marches, 13 E 3. p 18. n. 22. keeper of
Barwick, a Commission of Justiceship made to him, and Impressed money, 14 E 3. p.
24, 25. n. 42 47, 48. John de Mowbray de Axholm, summoned to Parl. 37 E 3. p
95: 38 E 3. p 96. Thomas de Musgrave summoned to Parliament 25 E 3, p 72, 77.
27 E 3. p. 83. 29 E 3. p 89. 37 E 3, p 95. 38 E 3. p. 99. 42 E 3, p 104. 47 E
3, p 115. John de Musgrave summoned to Parl. 28 E 3. p. 84.
N.
RAlph de Nevil summoned to Parl. 34 E 1. p 5.13 E 2. p 3.4 E 3. p 5. 18 E 3. p
42. 25 E 3. p 72, 77. 27 E 3. p^ 83 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 89. 37 E 3. p 95.
Hugh de Nevil sum. to Parl. 13 E 2 p 3. Nicholas de Nevil summoned to Parl. 13
E 2. p 3.14^ E 3. p 26. Ralph de Mont^ Hem^rtii summoned to Parl. 13. E 2. p.
3. 14 E 3. p 26. 17 E 3. p 36. 18 E 3. p. 42. John de Nevil de Raby summoned to
Parl. 42 E 3. p 104. 50 E 3. p 143. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 181. 7 R 2. p 290,
293, 297. 8 R 2. p 302, 307. 9 R 2. p 307. 11 R 2. p 319, 320. 12 R 2. p. 327.
A Privy Counselor and impeached in Parl. 50 E 3. p 123. n. 34. Henry Nevil de
Halmshire summoned to Parliament, 7 R 2. p 298. Thomas Nevil. de Halmshire
summoned to Parliament, 8 R 2. p 302, 307. 9 R 2. p 308. 10 R 2. p 314. 11 R 2.
p 319, 320. 12 R 2 p 327. 13 R 2 p 328. 14 R 2. p 336. 15 R 2 p 341 18 R 2. p
357. 20 R 2. p 367. 21 R 2. p 366 22 R 2. p 382. 11 H 4. p 383. 3 H 4. p 414. 6
H 4. p 435, 436. 7 H 4. p 449. 9 H 4. p 563. 11 H 4. p 569. 13 H 4. p 577
William Nevil de Raby sommoned to Parliament, 10 R 2. p 314. John de Nevil de
Raby summoned to Parliament, 11 R 2. p 319, 320. 12 R 2. p. 327. Ralph Nevil de
Raby summoned to Parliament, 12 R 2. p 327. 14 R 2. p 336. 15 R 2. p 340. 17 R
2. p 350. 20 R 2. p 365. 21 R 2. p 377. John Nevil de Halmshire summoned to
Parliament, 1 H 4. p 402. 2 H 4. p 403. William de Nevil Knight sum. to Parl. 9
H 6. p 597. 10 H 6. p 601. 11 H 6. p 606 12 H 6. p 613. 14 H 6. p 614. 15 H 6.
p 616 617. 18 H 6, p 621, 626. 23 H 6. p 628. 25 H 6. p 633, 634. Edward Nevil
Lord de Burgavenny knight summoned to Parliament, 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H 6. p 648.
38 H 6. p 660. 1 E. 4. p 668. 3 E 4. p 674. 7 E 4. p 679. 9 E 4. p 687. 12 E 4.
p 687. William Nevil de Falconbridge knight summoned to Parl. 33 H 6. p 656. 38
H 6. p 661. 1 E 4. p 668. John Nevil Lord Mountjoy knight sum. to Parl. 1 E 4.
p 669. John Lord Nevil attainted by Parl. 1 E 4. p 670. n 19. Ralph Nevil his
son restored by Parliament, 12 E 4. p 689. n 25. John Nevil de Mountague
summoned to Parl. 3 E 4. 674. Edward Nevil de Burgavenny summoned to
Parliament, 12 E 4. p 687. George Nevil knight, summoned to Parl. 22 E 4. p
704.
Dukes and Earls of Norfolk.
Roger de Bigot Earl of Norfolk summoned to Parl. 33 E 1. p 4. Thomas Earl of
Norfolk summoned to Parl. 15 E 2. p 3. 4 E 3. p 5. Earl of Norfolk prisoner
delivered to Commissioners, 14 E 3. p 28 n 16. Thomas de Mowbray Earl of
Norfolk summoned to Parliament, 11 R 2. p 319, 320 created Duke of Norfolk, and
Margaret created Duchess of Norfolk, 21 R 2. p 370 n 35. accused for words
spoken to the Kings dishonor, p 372. n 53. The proceedings therein by Martial
Law and Battle: The Duke banished, and all his Lands and Offices forfeited, p
379, 380, 381. n 18. to 27. summoned to Parliament as a Duke 21 R 2. p 366.
John Earl Marshal Duke of Norfolk summoned to Parliament, 3 H 6. p 576, 578. 4
H 6. p 581, 582. 5 H 6. p 586. 10 H 6. p 601. John Duke of Norfolk, within age,
and in Ward, claimed the Earldome and Castle of Arundel, 11 H 6. p 610. n 32,
33. summoned to Parliament, 15 H 6. p 616, 617. 18 H 6. p 620, 626. 18 and 20 H
6. p 627, 628. 25 H 6. p 632. 27 H 6. p 636. 28 H 6. p 639. 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H
6. p 648. 33 H 6. p 655. 38 H 6. p 660. 1 E 4. p 668, 669. 7 E 4. p 679. 9 E 4.
p 686. 12 E 4. p 687. Breach of prison pardoned to him, 13 E 4. p 692. n 55.
Earls of Northampton.
Humphrey de Bohun in 31 E 1. His daughters and coheirs, 2 H 5. p 541. n 30.
William de Bohun summoned to Parl. 14 E 3. p 26. 17 E 3. p 35. 18 E 3. p 42. 22
E 3. p 62. 27 E 3: p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. A Commissioner to hear the Archbishops
answer, 15 E 3. p 34. n 49. Letters from him, and others to the Parl.
concerning the French affairs, 20 E 3. p 56. n 45. his wife, 3 H 6. p 575. John
de Mowbray summoned to Parl. 3 R 2. p 181. John de Nevil Earl of Northampton,
after Marquess of Mountacute, 7 E 4. p 679.
Earls of Northumberland.
William de Bohun Earl of Northumberland summoned to Parl. ^5 E 3. p 72. 29 E
3. p 89. Henry de Piercy Earl of Northumberland, summoned to Parl. 1 R 2. p
153. 3 R 2. p 181. 4 R 2. p 187. 7 R 2. p 290, 297. 6 R 2. p 302, 306. 9 R 2. p
307. 10 R 2. p 313. 11 R 2. p 319, 320. 12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2 p
336. 15 R 2. p 340. 17 R 2. p 350. 18 R 2. p 357. 20 R 2. p 359, 365. 21 R 2. p
366, 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H. 4. p 403. 3 H 4. 414. 6 H 4. p 435, 436. A
pledge for Sir Ralph Ferrers, and a Commissioner to inquire of the undue
swearing of the Major of York, 4 R 2. p 290. n 24. p 292. n 48. Debate between
him and the Duke of Lancaster, coming with Armed men and Archers to Parl. 5 R
2. p 195. n 1. Constable of England, and a Commissioner in the Conference with,
renunciation and deposition of R 2. 1 H 4. p 384. n 5. p 385. n 10, 11. His
Petition for the Archbishop of Canterbury, and purgation from being author of
the War with Scotland, p 392. n 79, 81. His worsting of the Scots, presenting
the Scottish prisoners to the King in Parliament, and Commons petition for the
King to thank him for his good service, 4 H 4. p 416. n 12, 14, 15, etc. His
Insurrection against the King, submission and craving pardon for it, adjudged
only Trespass, not Treason by the Lords, his pardon for it, and reconcilation
and Oath of Allegiance to the King and Prince, 5 H 4 p 426 n 11, 12, 13, 14. He
purges other Lords by oath from confederacy with him, ibid. The Commons thanks
to the King for his favor to him, p. 427, n. 17. reconciled in Parliament to
the Earls of Westmerland and Dunbar, and purgation of him by the King, p 427. n
17, 18, 20, 21. An Act concerning his lands, 8 H 4. p 459. n. 111. Henry Piercy
son of the former Henry, within age, a Prisoner in Scotland, restored to the
Earldom, blood and hereditaments of his father, 2 H 5. p 540. n 17. does his
homage to the King in Parliament, 3 H 5. p 545. n 12. summoned to Parl. 4 H 5.
p 549. 5 H 5. p 552. 7 H 5. p 555, 556. 8 H 5. p 558. 9 H 5. p 561. 1 H 6. p
561. 2 H 6. p 566. 3 H 6. p 372, 373. 4 H 6. p 581. 6 H 6. p 586. 9 H 6. p 597.
10 H 6. p 601. 11 H 6. p 606. 12 and 14 H 6. p 613. 15 H 6. p 616, 617. 18 H 6.
p 620, 628. 20 H 6. p 627. 23 H 6. p 628. 25 H 6. p 632. 27 H 6. p 636. 29 H 6.
p 645. 31 H 6. p 648. 38 H 6. p 660. An Act that he shall not be debarred of
his fathers lands, 18 H 6. p 623. n 25. he is slain, 38 H 6. p 662. n 11.
Attainted of Treason, 1 E 4. p 670. n 17. John Earl of Northumberland, summoned
to Parl. 7 E 4. p 679. 9 E 4. p 687. Henry Earl of Northumberland, restored to
the Earldome, and in blood, 18 E 4. p 689. n 15. summoned to Parl. p 687. 22 E
4. p 704. 23 E 4. p 708. John Northwood summon^ to Parl. 37 E 3^ p 95. 38 E 3.
p 99. 42 E 3. p 104. 47 E 3. p 115.
Earls of Nottingham.
John de Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, summoned to Parl. 1 R 2. p 153. 4 R 2. p
187. 14 R 2. p 336. (there mistaken for Thomas, as I conceive) Thomas de
Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, summoned to Parl. 7 R 2. p 290, 297. 8 R 2. p 302,
306. 9 R 2. p 307. 10 R 2. p 313. 12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 15 R 2. p 340.
17 R 2. 350. 20 R 2. p 354, 365. Made Earl-Marshal, and the Marshals Office
inta^led on him, and his heirs male^, 20 R 2. p 363. n 32. His loyalty to R 2.
in deserting the Duke of Gloucester declared, 21 R 2. p 369. n 27. created Duke
of Norfolk, p 370. n 35. One of the Lords Appellants, 21 R 2. p 377. n 2.
Created Marshal, and Duke of Norfolk, and John his son made Duke of Norfolk, 3
H 6. p 576, 577, 578. n. 10, 11.
O.
RObert Ogle Lord Ogle knight, summoned to Parliament, 3 E 4. p 6^4. 9 E 4. p
687. Owen Ogle de Ogle knight, summoned to Parl. 22 E 4. p 705. John de
Oldcastle knight, summoned to Parliament, 11 H 4. p 469. 13 H 4. p 477. Duke of
Orleance in France, his Rebellion, 4 H 4. p. 425. n 3. A prisoner of War. 8 H
6. p 593. n 19. His delivery procured by the Duke of Suffolk, 28 H 6. p 641. n
20.
Earls of Ormond.
James Botelar Earl of Ormond accused of Treason by the Lieutenant of Ireland,
before the Constable in the Marshals Court, his accusation abolished by
Parliament, 2 H 6. p 587, 588. n 9. James Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond his gift
to Sir Thomas of Acres, 31 H 6. p 654. n 56.
Earls of Oxford.
Robert de Vere Earl thereof summoned to Parl. 33^ E 1. p 4. John de Vere Earl
thereof summoned to Parliament, 17 E 3. p 35. 18 E 3. p 42. 22 E 3 p 68. 25 E
3. p 77. 27 E 3 p 83. 28 E 3 p 84. Letters from him and other Lords to the
Parl. concerning the proceedings in France, 20 E 3 p 50. n 45. Thomas de Vere
Earl thereof, summoned to Parliament, 37 E 3. p 95. Robert de Vere Earl thereof
summoned to Parl. 7 R 2. p 290, 297. 8 R 2. p 302, 306. 9 R 2. p 307. Slandered
by Walter Sibell, who is fined and imprisoned ^or it by Parliament, 8 R 2. p
304. n 12. Created Marquis of Dublin, and Lands in Ireland conferred on him in
Parl. 9 R 2. p 310 311. n 17. 16 R 2. p 347. n 15, 16. Lands intailed to him;
which descend to Sir Awbry de Vere, his uncle and heir, notwithstanding his
Attainder, ibid. Albert or Awbry de Vere Earl of Oxford, summoned to Parl. 17 R
2. p 350. 18 R 2. p 357. 20 R 2. p 359, 365. 21 R 2. p 366. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H
4. p 383. His heir within age, and dower demanded against him, by Dame Philip,
wise of Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, 2 H 4. p 407. n 36. Richard Earl of
Oxford, sundry Letters Patent between him and Philip Duchess of Ireland, 8 H
4. p 458. n 96. Summoned to Parl. 9 H 4. p 463. 11 H 4. p 469. 13 H 4. p 477. 1
H 5. p 533. 2 H 5. p 537. 3 H 5. p 143. 4 H 5. p 549. Chamberain of England by
inheritance, 1 H 4. p 397. n 140. John Vere Earl of Oxford summoned to Parl. 6
H 6. p 586. 9 H 6. p 597. 10 H 6. p 601. 11 H 6. p 606. 14 H 6. p 613. 15 H 6.
p 616, 617. 18 H 6. p 620, 626. 2^ H 6. p 627. 23 H 6. p 628. 25 H 6. p 633. 27
H 6. p 638. 28 H 6. p 639 29 H 6. p 649. 33 H 6. p 655. 38 H 6. p 660. 1 E 4. p
668. 4 E 4 678. 9 E 4. p 687. Attainted of treason, 14 E 4. p 699 n 35. Fined
3000 l. to the King for marrying without license, 15 H 6. p 619. n 19 Richard
Earl of Oxford, 31 H 6. p 648. in the Summons he is mistaken for John. John
Duke of Oxford, p 366. 382, 383. Thomas Duke of Oxford, p 562, 567, 572, 573,
581, 582. and Henry Duke of Oxford, p 645, 655, 660. are mistaken, and should
be Dukes Exoniae of Exeter, not Oxoniae; O. being written for E.
P.
RAlph de Palmer sum. to Parl. 18 E 3 p 42. Gilbert Peck summoned to Parl. 43 E
2. p 3. John Peach or Petche summoned to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3. 4 E 3. p 5. Henry
de Peircy or Percy summoned to Parl. 33 E 1. p 4. 34 E 1. p 5. 13 E 2. p 3. 4 E
3. p 5. 17 E 3. p 36. 18 E 3. p 42. 22 E 3. p 68. 25 E 3. p 72^ 77. 27 E 3. p
83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 89. 37 E 3. p 95. 38 E 3. p 99. 42 E 3. p 104. 50 E
3. p 143. Richard Percy sum. to Parl. 14 E 3. p 26. Henry de Percy Lord Pomiger
or Poinings sum. to Parl. 26 H 6. p^ 633. 27 H 6. p 636. 29 H 6. p 645. 33 H 6.
p 655. Thomas Percy Knight, Lord Egremont, summoned to Parl. 29 H 6. p 645. 31
H 6. p 649. 38 H 6. p 661. See Ed^l^ of Northumberland.
Earls of Pembroke.
Ado^nar de Valentia Earl thereof sum. to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3. Laurence de
Hastings Earl thereof sum. to Parl. 14 E 3. p 26, 27. 17 E 3. p 35. 18 E 3. p
42. 22 E 3. p 68. John Earl thereof in Ward to the King his Petition in Parl. 3
R 2 p 184. n 24. Humfry Duke of Glouc. Earl of Pembroke. 2 H 5. p 537. created
Earl thereof by H 5 only for life, 11 H 6. p 610. n 36. Jasper of Hatfield
created Earl of Pembroke 31 H 6 p 653. n 51, Schedules in parchment signed by
King H 6. concerning him, p 650. n 21. Summoned to Parl. 31 H 6. p 648. 33 H 6.
p 655. Attainted of treason 1 E 4. p 670, 671. n 22, 25. William de Perdeston
summoned to Parl. 17 E 3. p 36. Hugh Ponitz (or Pointz) summoned to Parliament,
13 E 2. p 3. Humfry de Ponitz summoned to Parl. 4 E 3. p 6. Michael de Poyntz
summoned to Parl. 25 E 3. p 72, 77. 27 E 3. p 83. 29 E 3. p 89. Nicholas de
Poynings summoned to Parl. 37 E 3. p 95. Michael de Poynings summoned to Parl.
37 E 3. p 95. 42 E 3. p 104. Lucy de Poynings summoned to Parl. 42 E 3. p 104.
47 E 3. p 115. Richard de Poynings summoned to Parl. 7 R 2. p 290, 297. 8 R 2.
p 302, 306. 9 R 2. p 308. Robert de Poynings summoned to Parl. 6 H 4. p 406. 7
H 4. p 449. 9 H 4. p 463. 11 H 4. p 469. 13 H 4. p 477. 1 H 5^ p. 533. 2 H 5. p
538. 3 H 5. p 543, 544. 4 H ^. p 549. 5 H 5. 552. 7 H 5. p 555^ 556. 8 H 5. p
558. 9 H 5. p 561. 1 H 6. p 562. 2 H 6. p 566. 3 H 6. p 572, 573^ 4 H 6. p ^82.
6 H 6. p 586, 587. 9 ^ 7. p 597. 10 H 6. p 601. 11 H 6. p 606. 14 H 6. p 613.
15 H 6. p 616, 617. 18 H 6. p 621, 626. 20 H 6. p 627. 23 H 6. p 639. Michael
de la Poole sum. to Parl. 42 E 3. p 104. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 181. 4 R 2. p
187. 7 R 2. p 290, 297. 8 R 2. p 302, 307. Made one of the Kings chief
Counselors, 5 R 2. p 198. n 38. Lord Chancellor, 7 R 2. p 3. Accused of
Bribery, and acquitted, p 299, 300. n 12, 13, 14, 15. See Duke of Suffolk.
Q.
HEnry Quarts summoned to Parl. 6 H 4. p 430.
Queens of England.
Queen Philip, Woolls assigned to pay her debts, 14 E 3. p 29. n 28. Queen
Isabel Dowager had 4000 l. per annum dower in lands or rents, 5 E 3. p 10. n 9.
Queen Joan, her Alien attendants removed. Endowed in Parl. with her Petition,
and other things relating to her, 5 H 4. p 428. n 28, 30, 31. p 430. n 45. p
4^8. n 31. 11 H 4. p 473. n 41. 2 H 6. p 570. n 35. Queen Anne her dower, and
matters concerning her, 6 H 4 p 439. n 16. 7 H 4. p 454. n 42. Queen Philip her
Dower, etc. 8 H 4. p 457. n 81. Aliens about her banished, p 453. n ^9. Queen
Katherine Dowager, her dower in Parliament, and matters concerning her, 1 H 6.
p 565. n 40. 2 H 6. p 568 n 19. 25 H 6. p 620. n 32. 31 H 6. p 653. n 49. Queen
Margaret, matters concerning her and her dower, 31 H 6. p 652. n 39. p 654. n
58, 59. 38 H 6. p 662. n 27. Attainted of Treason, 1 E 4. p 670, 671. n 17, 20,
etc. 3 E 4. p 677. n 33. Queen Elizabeth, her dower in Parl. 8 E 4. p 683. n
32.
R. Earls of Richmond.
JOhn Earl of Richmond summoned to Parl. 34 E 1. p 5. John de Britannia E. R.
summoned to Parl. 4 E 3. p 5. commanded by Writ to repair to his lands to
defend the North-ma^ches, 13 E 9. p 18. n 22.

His Earldom adjudged to be forfeited for his adhering to the French, but the
Judgment not enrolled for certain causes, 14 R 2. p 338. n ^4. His Earldom and
lands granted to the Earl of Westm^rland, for which the Duke prays
restitution, and promises all^giance, 1 H 4. p 391. n 78.

Edmund de Hadsham created Earl of Richmond, 31 H 6. p 653. n 50, 52. Lands
granted him in tail, ^bid. Certain Par^tchment-schedules signed by the King
concerning him, p 650. n 21. Summoned to Parl. p 648. William de Ridehall
summoned to Parl. 17 E 3. p 36.
Earls of Rivers.
Richard Earl Rivers summoned to Parl. 7 E 4. p 679. Anthony Earl Rivers
summoned to Parl. 12 E 4. p 687. 22 E 4. p 704. 23 E 4. p 708. Lodovic
Rob^ssart Knight summoned to Parl. 3 H 6. p 572. 4 H 6. p 582. 6 H 6. p 686,
687. William de Roos summoned to Parl. 19 E 2. p 3. William Roos de Hamelake
summoned to Parliament, 4 E 3. p 5. 14 E 3. p 26. 25 E 3. p 72, 77. Lord Ros
(or Roos) of Wake to repair to defend the North-marches, 13 E 3. p 18. n 22.
Thomas de Roos (or Ros) de Hamelake, summoned to Parl. 37 E 3. p 95. 38 E 3. p
99. 50 E 3. p 143. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 3. p 181. 4 R 3. p 187. 7 R 2. p 290, 297.
John Roos de Hamelake summoned to Parl. 8 R 2. p 307. 10 R 2. p 314. 11 R 2 p
319, 320. 12 R 2. p 327, 13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2. p 336. 15 R 2. p 340. 17 R 2. p
350. William de Roos de Hamelake summoned to Parliament, 18 R 2. p 357. 20 R 2.
p 360, 365. 21 R 2. p 366. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 3 H
4. p 414. 6 H 4. p 435, 436. 7 H 4. p 449. 9 H 4. p 461. 11 H 4. p 469. 13 H 4.
p 477. 16 H 1. p 533. Accompanies the Duke of Lancaster to R 2. in the Tower,
when he resigned the Crown, 1 H 4. p 385. n 12. His complaint in Parliament
against Robert Thirwit judge for a tior, and the order made therein, 13 H 4. p
479. n 12. John de Roos summoned to Parl. 3 H 6. p 579, 580. Thomas de Roos, a
special Livery granted to him as heir to John, 6 H 6. p 588. n 13. summoned to
Parl. p 587, 588. Thomas de Roos summoned to Parliament 27 H 6. p 637. 28 H 6.
p 640. 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H 6. p 643. 33 H 6. p 656. 38 H 6. p 651. Attainted
for the death of the Duke of York, 1 E 4. p. 670. n 19. Thomas de la Roth
summoned to Parl. 33 E 1. p 4.
Earls of Rutland.
Edward son of the Duke of York created Earl thereof, 13 R 2. p 332, n 21.
Summoned to Parliament, 14 R 2. p 336. 15 R 2. p 340. 20 R 2. p 360. 361, 365.
21 R 2. p 370, 377. 1 H 4. p 402. 2 H 4. p 403. In the rebellion against H 4.
the Commons prayer for his restitution to goods, name and liberty, 2 H 4. p
407. n 33. Edmond Earl of Rutland in the field at Ludlow against King H 6. 38 H
6. p 662 n 46. His oath not to shorten King H 6. his days, and his Annuity out
of the Crown-land^, 39 H 6. p 626. n 21. p 667 n 23.
S.
JOhn de Saint John de Basinge summoned to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3. 4 E 3. p 6. John
de Saint John de Langham some. to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3.
Earls of Salisbury or Sarum.
John de Warrenia Earl of Sarum sum. to Parl. 4 E 3. p 5 14 E 3. p 26. 18 E 3.
p 42. A Commissioner to hear the Archbishops Answer, 15 E 3. p 34. n 43.
William de Monte acu^o Earl of Sarum sum. to Parl. 17 E 3. p 35. 25 E 3. p 72,
77. 28 E 3. p 84. 3^ E 3 p 99. 42 E 3. p 104. 47 E 3. p 115. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R
2. p 181. 4 R 2. p 187. 7 R 2. p 297, 299. 8 R 2. p 306. 9 R 2. p 307. 10 R 2.
p 313. 11 R 2. p 319, 320. 12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2. p 336. 15 R 2.
p 340. 17 R 2. p 350. 18 R 2. p 357. 20 R 2. p 359, 365. 21 R 2. p 366. Brings
a Writ of Error to recover Lands of William de Montacute Earl of Sarum his
Father, 1 R 2. p 156. n 28. 2 R 2. p 168, 169. ^ 19. to 26. p 176, n 21, 22,
23. 3 R 2. p^ 184. n 19. 8 R 2. p 304. n 15. 20 R 2. p. 363. n 26. John de
Monte-acuto Earl of Sarum sum. to Parl. 21. R 2. p 374. 23. R 2. p 382. 1 H 4.
p 383. Attainted of Treason for levying war against the King, 2 H 4. p 407. n
^0. The Judgment and Attainder affirmed and confirmed, 3 H 5. p 539. n 13. The
Judgment reversed, and heir restored, 1 E 4 p 672. n 33, 34. Thomas Earl of
Sarum summoned to Parl. 1 H 5 p 533. 2 H 5. p 537. 3 H 5. p 543. 4 H 5. p 549.
6 H 6. p 608. his Petition to reverse his Fathers Attainder denied, 2 H 4. p
539. n 13. Richard Earl of Sarum summoned to Parl. 6 H. 6. p 586. 9 H 6. p 597.
10 H 6. p 601. 11 H 6. p 606. 12 and 14 H 6. p 613. 20 H 6. p 627. 23 H 6. p
628. 25 H. 6. p 633. 27 H 6. p 636. 28 H 6. p 639. 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H 6. p
648. 33 H 6. p 655. In the field with the Duke of York against King H 6. 38 H
6. p 682. n 46. for which he is attainted of treason, ib. A Commission to him
to hold the Parliament, 4 E 4. p 675. n 15. Summoned to Parl. 7 E 4^ p 679. 9 E
4. p 686. 12 E 4. p 687.
Earls of Salop, of Shrewsbury.
William de Monte acuto summoned to Parl. 50 E 3. p 143. 7 R 2. p 290. 8 R 2. p
302. mistaken (as I conceive) for Sarum, whereof he was then Earl. John Earl of
Salop, one of the Lords Appellants. 21 R 2. p 377. n 2. John E. Salop sum. to
Parl. 23 H 6. p 628. 25 H 6. p 633. 31 H 6. p 648. 35 H 6. p 655. 9 E 4. p 686.
12 E 4. p 687. Appointed with other Lords to keep the Sea, 31 H 6. p 65^. n 40.
Acquitted by Charter of H 6. of suspicion and disloyalty, 35 H. 6. p 657. n 18.
Geoffry de Say summoned to Parliament. 27 E 3. p 83. William de Say sum. to
Parl. 37 E 3. p 95. 38 E 3. p 99. 42 E 3. p 104. 47 E 3. p 115. Robert de
Scales summoned to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3. Robert de Scales sum. to Parl. 25 E 3. p
72 77. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 89. 42 E 3. p 104. 4 R 2. p 187. Roger de Scales
sum. to Parl. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 181. 7 R 2. p 290, 297. 8 R 2. p 302, 307.
9 R 2. p 308. Robert de Scales sum. to Parl. 20 R ^. p 360, 365. 21 R 2. p 360.
23 R 2. p 38^. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4 p 403. Thomas de Scales Knight summoned
to Parl. 23 H 6. p 628. 25 H 6. p 633, 634. 27 H 6. p 637. 28 H 6^ p 640. 29 H
6. p 645. 31 H 6. p 648. 33 H 6. p 655. 38 H 6. p 660. Anthony de Scales
summoned to Parl. 7 E 4. p 679. Henry de Scroope sum. to Parl. 25 E 3. p 72,
77. 29 E 3. p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 89. 47 E 3. p 115. 50 E 3. p 143. 1 R
2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 181. 4 R 2. p. 187. 7 R 2. p 290, 297. 8 R 2. p 302, 306. 0
R 2. p 307. 10 R 2. p 314. 12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2. p 336. 15 R 2.
p 340. Richard de Scroope sum. to Parl. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 181. 4 R 2. p
187. 7 R 2. p 290. 8 R 2. p 302 9 R 2. p 308. 10 R 2. p 314. 11 R 2. p 319,
320. 15 R 2. p 340. 18 R 2. p 357. Richard de Scroope Knight, 11 R 2. p 319,
320. 12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2. p 336. 17 R 2. p 350. 20 R 2. p 360,
365. 21 R 2. p 366. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 3 H 4. p
414. Stephen le Scroope de Masham summoned to Parl. 17 R 2. p 350. 18 R 2. p
357. 10 R 2. p 35^, 3^5 21 R 2. p 300. 23 R 2. p 282. 1 H 4. p 283, 402. 2 H 4.
p 403. 3 H 4. p 414. 6 H 4. p 435, 436. 7 H 4. p 449. 9 H 4. p 463. Henry le
Scroope de Masham sum. to Parl. 11 H 4. p 469. 13 H 4. p 44^. 1 H 5. p 533. 2 H
5. p 538. John de Scroope de Masham sum. to Parl. 3 H 6^ p 573, 580. 4 H 5. p
582. 6 H 6. p 586. 587. 9 H 6. p 597. 10 H 6. p 601. 11 H 6. p 606. 14 H 6. p
613. 15 H 6. p 616, 617. 18 H 6. p 621, 6^^, 20 H 6. p 627. 23 H. 6. p 628,
629. 25 H 6. p 633. 27 H 6. p 636. 28 H 6. p 639. 29 H 6 p 645. 31 H 6. p 648.
33 H 6. p 655. Henry le Scroop de Bolton knight summoned to Parl. 23 H 6. p
628. 25 H 6. p 633, 634. 27 H ^. p 637. 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H 6. p 648. 33 H 6. p
655. William le Scroop de Bolton, summoned to Parliament, 28 H 6. p 640.
(mistaken for Henry.) John le Scroop de Bolton knight, summoned to Parl. 38 H
6. p 660. 1 E 4. p 668. 3 E 4. p 674. 7 E 4. p 680. 12 E 4 p 687. 22 E 4. p
704. 23 E 4. p 708. Thomas le Scroop de Masham summoned to Parliament, 38 H 6.
p 660. 1 E 4. p 668. 3 E 4. p 674. 7 E 4. p 679. 9 and 12 E 4. p 687. 22 E 4. p
704. 23 E 4. p 708. John de Seagrave summoned to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3. 18 E 3. p
42. 22 E 3. p 68. 25 E 3. p 72, 77. William de Secoman summoned to Parl. 19 E
2. p 3. Richard Seymore summoned to Parl. 4 R 2. p 187. 7 R 2. p 290, 298. 8 R
2. p 302, 307. 9 R 2. p 308. 10 R 2. p 314. 11 R 2. p 319, 320. 12 R 2. p 327.
13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2^ p 336. 15 R 2. p 341. 17 R 2. p 350. 18 R 2. p 357. 20 R
2. p 360, 365. 21 R 2. p 366. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 6
H 4. p 435, 436. 7 H 4. p 449, 9 H 4. p 463. William de Shareshal, summoned to
Parl. 14 E 3. p 27. John de Sherlton summoned to Parl. 4 E 3. p 6. John de
Somery sum. to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3.
Dukes and Earls of Somerset.
Sir John Beauford created Earl of Somerset, 20 R 2. p 363. n 30, 31; summoned
to Parl. 20 R 2. p 365. One of the Lords Appellants, 21 R 2. p 377. n 2.
created Marquess Dorset, (mistaken by the name Ralph for John, 21 R 2. p 370^
n 35.) restored to his Name and goods, 12 H 4. p 407. n 32. John Earl of
Somerset, summoned to Parliament, 3 H 4. p 414. 6 H 4. p 435, 436. 7 H 4. p
449, 9 H 4. p 463. 11 H 4. p 469. Captain of Callis, etc. his arrears, the
Commons request for him, 6 H 4. p 431. n. 49. p 438. n. 12. The Custody of the
body and lands of the Lord Fitz-walter granted to him, 8 H 4. p 458. n. 95. All
the lands of Owen Glendor in Wales, etc. granted to him by Hen. 4. 11 H 6. p
609. n 29. John his son Earl of Somerset, his Petition for Owen Glendors lands,
and stay of sults to recover them, 11 H 6. p 609. n 29. Prisoner in France,
ibid. summoned to Parl. 18 H 6. p 621. John Duke of Somerset, the Kings
Lieutenant in France, his message thence, 27 H 6. p 638. n 18. Margaret his
daughter in ward to the Duke of Suffolk, 28 H 6. p 642. n 19. Edward Duke of
Somerset, summoned to Parl. 29 H 6.645. Richard Duke of Somerset, summoned to
Parl. 31 H 6. p 648. Edmond Duke of Somerset, Captain of Callis, his wages
ordered to be paid, 31 H 6. p 650. n 16. His slander of some Lords to the King
who acquits them, 33 H 6. p 657. n 18. slain in the battle of S. Albans, 38 H
6. p 662. Attainted of Treason, 1 E 4. p 670. n 17. Henry Beauford Duke of
Somerset, attainted of Treason^ for levying War against Edw. 4. 4 E 4. p 677. n
29.
Earls of Stafford.
Ralph Earl of Stafford, summoned to Parl. 34 E 1. p 5. Ralph Earl of Stafford
summoned to Parliament, 14 E 5 p 26. 18 E 3. p 42. 22 E 3. p 68. 23 E 3. p 72,
27 E 3. p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 89. 37 E 3. p 25. 38 E 3. p 99. 42 E 3. p
104. Hugh Earl of Stafford summoned to Parl. 50 E 3. p 143. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R
2. p 181. 4 R 2. p 187. 7 R 2. p 290, 297. 8 R 2. p 302. 9 R 2. p 306, 307.
Thomas Earl of Stafford summoned to Parliament, 15 R 2. p 340. Edward Earl of
Stafford, summoned to Parl. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 3 H
4. p 414. Humphry, Earl of Stafford, summoned to Parl. 3 H 6. p 572, 573. 6 H
6. p 586. 11 H 6. p 616, 617. 18 H 6. p 621. Richard de Stafford summoned to
Parl. 47 E 3. p 115. 50 E 3. p 143. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 181. Hugh Stafford
summoned to Parl. 13 H 4. p 477. Henry Stafford de South knight summoned to
Parl. 3 E 4. p 674. 7 E 4. p 680. Thomas Lord Standley de Standley knight
summoned to Parl. 1 E 4. p 669. 7 E 4. p 680. 9 and 12 E 4. p 687. 22 E 4. p
708. Lord Stanley accused by the Commons, 32 H 6. p 664. n 33. his Grants
confirmed, 13 E 4. p 690. n 49. George Standley de le Strange knight summoned
to Parl. 22 E 4. p 704. 23 E 4. p 708. John de Stonore summoned to Parliament,
14 E 3. p 27. Fulk le Strange summoned to Parliament, 13 E 2. p 3. 4 E 3. p 6.
John le Strange summoned to Parliament, 4 E 3. p 6. 14 E 3. p 26. 17 E 3. p 36.
18 E 3. p 42. Roger le Strange de Blackmore summoned to Parl. 29 E 3. p 89. 47
E 3. p 115. Roger le Strange de Knokin sum. to Parl. 47 E 3. p 115. 1 R 2. p
153. 3 R 2. p 181. 4 R 2. p 187. John le Strange le Knokin sum. to Parl. 7 R 2.
p 290, 298. 8 R 2. p 302, 307. 9 R 2. p 308. 10 R 2. p 314. 11 R 2. p 319, 320.
12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2 p 336. 15 R 2. p 341. 17 R 2. p 350. 18 R
2. p 357. 20 R 2. p 360, 365. Richard le Strange sum. to Parl. 6 H 4. p 435,
436. 7 H 4. p 449. 9 H 4. p 463. 11 H 4. p 469. 13 H 4. p 477. 1 H 5 p 533. 2 H
5. p 538. 3 H 5. p 543, 544. 4 H 5. p 549. 5 H 5. p 552. 7 H 5. p 555, 556. 8 H
5. p 556. 9 H 5. p 561. 1 H 6. p 562. 2 H 6. p 566. 4 H 6. p 581. 6 H 6. p 586,
587. 9 H 6. p 597. 10 H 6 p 601. 11 H 6. p 606. An Assise between him and Sir
Hugh Lutterel for Dunster-Castle and other lands, 8 H 4 p 460. n 125. John
Strange Knight sum. to Parl. 7 E 4. p 679. 9 and 12 E 4. p 687. Thomas Strange
de Standly Knight, sum. to Parl. 23 E 4 p 709. John de Strivelin sum. to Parl.
37 E 3. p 95. 38 E 3. p 99. John Sturton Knight, Lord Sturton, sum. to Parl. 28
H 6. p 640. 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H 6 p 648, 652 33 H 6. p 656, 657. 38 H 6. p 660.
1 E 4. p 668. William Sturton de Sturton sum. to Parl. 9 E 4. p 687 12 E 4. p
688. John Sturton de Sturton Knight sum. to Parl. 23 E 4. p 709.
Earls, Dukes and Marquesses of Suffolk.
Robert de Vfford Earl of Suffolk sum. to Parl. 34 E 1. p 5. Robert de Vfford
Earl of Suffolk sum. to Parl. 17 E 3. p 35. 18 E 3. p 42. 22 E 3. p 68. 25 E 3.
p 72, 77. 27 E 3. p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 37 E 3. p 95. 38 E 3. p 99. 42 E 3. p
104. Letters to the Parliament out of France from him and other Lords^ 20 E 3.
p 50. n 45. William de Vfford Earl of Suffolk sum. to Parl. 50 E 3. p 143. 1 R
2. p 153. 3 R 3. p 181. his death, 9 R 2. p 310. n 16. Michael de la Poole
created Earl of Suffolk with Lands and Creation-money, 9 R 2. p 310. n 16. p
308. n 1. Summoned to Parliament 9 R 2. p 307. 10 R 2. p 313. Chancellor of
England, ibid. Impeached and censured in Parliament, 10 R 2. p 315, 316. n 6.
to 17. Sum. to Parl. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 3 H 4. p
414. 6 H 4. p 435, 436. 7 H 4. p 449. 9 H 4. p 463. 11 H 4. p 469. 13 H 4. p
477. 1 H 5. p 533. 2 H 5. p 537. William de la Poole Earl of Suffolk sum. to
Parl. 9 H 6. p 597. 10 H 6. p 601. 11 H 6. p 606. 14 H 6. p 613. 20 H 6. p 627.
Made and summoned as Marquess of Suffolk, 25 H 6. p 632. Made Duke of Suffolk,
and so summmoned to Parliament. 27 H 6. p 636. 28 H 6. p 639. His good service
in making a Match, and Peace with France; his loyalty enacted and declared in
Parliament, 23 H 6. p 630. n 18, 19. his Impeachment, Protestation, Articles,
Answer, Censure, 28 H 6. p 641, 642, 643, 644. n 14 to 52. John Duke of Suffolk
summoned to Parl. 7 E 4. p 679. 9 E 4. p 686. 12 E 4. p 687. 22 E 4. p 704. 23
E 4. p 708. Exchangeth lands with the King, 17 E 4. p 702. n 14.
Earls and Dukes of Surry.
John de Warren Earl of Surry summoned to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3. 4 E 3. p 5. 17 E
3. p 35. Thomas Holland Earl of Kent created Duke of Surry, 21 R 2. p 370. n
35. One of the Lords Appellants, p 374. n 72. Summoned to Parl. 21 R 2. p 366.
23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383. Impeached, degraded^ and sentenced to lose all his
lands and goods, 1 H 4. p 399. n 1.4.10. John de Sutton de Holderness summoned
to Parl. 14 E 3. p 26. 17 E 3. p 36. 18 E 3. p 42. John Sutton de Dudley, Baron
of Dudley, sum. to Parl. 20 H 6. p 627. 23 H 6. p 628. 25 H 6. p 633, 634. 27 H
6. p 627. 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H 6. p 649. 38 H 6. p 661: 1 E 4. p 668. 3 E 4. p
674. 7 E 4. p 679. 12 E 4. p 688. 22 E 4. p 705. 23. E 4. p 709. The Commons
desire his removal from the Court, 29 H 6. p 647. n 16.
T.
GIlbert Talbot summoned to Parliament, 14 E 3. p 26. 18 E 3. p 42. Richard
Talbot summoned to Parl. 14 E 3. p 26, 27. 17 E 3. p 36. 18 E 3. p 42. 22 E 3.
p 68. 25 E 3. p 72, 77. 27 E 3. p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 89. John Talbot
sum. to Parl. 25. E 3. p 77. 37 E 3. p 95. Gilbert Talbot sum. to Parl. 37 E 3.
p 95. 38 E 3. p 99. 42 E 3. p 104. 47 E 3. p 115. 50 E 3. p 143. 1 R 2. p 153.
3 R 2. p 181. 4 R 2. p 187. 8 R 2. p 306. 10 R 2. p 314. Thomas Talbot summoned
to Parl. 7 R 2. p 297. Richard Talbot de Blackmore Knight, sum. to Parl. 8 R 2.
p 302, 307. 9 R 2. p 308. 10 R 2. p 314. 11 R 2. p 319. Richard Talbot de
Greystock sum. to Parl. 11 R 2. p 320. Richard Talbot de Godricastle summoned
to Parl. 11 R^ 2 p 319. 12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p. 328. 14 R 2. p 336. 15 R 2. p
340. 17 R 2. p 350. Gilbert Talbot summoned to Parliament, 6 H 4. p 436. 7 H 4.
p 449. 9 H 4. p 463. 11 H 4. p 469. 13 H 4. p. 477. 1 H 5. p 533. 2 H 5. p 538.
4 H 5. p 549. 5 H 5. p 558. John Talbot de Furnival summoned to Parl. 13 H 4. p
477. 2 H 5. p 538. 4 H 5. p. 549. 8 H 5. p 558. The Kings Lieutenant in
Ireland, his Impeachment of the Earl of Ormond, 2 H 6. p 567. n. 9. A
Commission to inquire of his Oppressions, 2 H 6. p 571. n. 46. John Lord Talbot
bound in Chancery to keep the peace, 3 H 6. p 378. n 16. A prisoners in France,
French prisoner granted him toward his ransom, 8 H 6. p 593. n 18. summoned
to Parl. 11 H 6. p 606. 14 H 6. p 614. John Talbot de Lisle knight, summoned to
Parl. 23 H 6. p 628. 25 H 6. p 633, 634. 27 H 6. p 637. 28 H 6. p 640. 29 H 6.
p 645. made and summoned to Parl. Viscount Lisle, 31 H 6. p 648. John de Thorp
summoned to Parl. 13 E 2 p 3. William de Thorpe summoned to Parliament, 4 R 2.
p 187. 7 R 2. p 290, 297 8 R 2. p 302. 9 ^ 2. p 308. 10. R 2. p 314. 11 R 2. p
319, 320 12 R 2. p 327^ 13 R 2. p ^28. 14 R 2. p 336. John de Tibetot summoned
to Parliament, 14 E 3. p 26. 17 E 3. p 36. 18 E 3. p 42. 25 E 3. p 72. 27 E 3.
p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 89. 38 E 3. p 99. John de Tibetot, Tibetof^, or
Tiptoft knight summoned to Parl. 4 H 6. p 582. 6 H 6. p 586. 9 H 6. 597. 10 H
6. p 601. 11 H 6. p 6^6. 14 H 6. p 613. 15 H 6.616, 617. 18 H 6. p 626. 20 H 6.
p 627. Earl of Tokevile, 2 H 6. p 570. Henry Tregor summoned to Parliament, 13
E 2. p 3. William Tucher^ summoned to Parliament, 33 E 1. p 4. John Tuche^
summoned to Parl. 6 H 4. p 435, 436. 7 H 4. p 449. Marmaduke Tw^nge summoned to
Parl. 1^ E 2. p ^.
V.
ADamanus de Valentia summoned to Parl. 33 E 1. p 4. Lewis of Burbon, Earl of
V^^dosme in 3 H 6. p. 579. 4 H 6. p 589. n. 18. Theobald de Verdon sen. and
jun. summoned to Parl. 33 E 1. p 4. Vere, See Earls of Oxford. Thomas Vgtred
summoned to Parl. 18 E 3 p 42. 25 E 3. p 72, 77. 27 E 3. p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29
E 3. p 89. 37 E 3. p 95. 38 E. 3. p 99.
Earls of Vlton^ or Vlster.
Lionel Earl of Vlton, summoned to Parl. 34 E 1. p ^. Lionel Edw. 3. his son
held the County of Vlton in right of his wife. 21 E 3. p 66. n 67. Edmund Earl
of Vlster, Anne his wife petitions for Dower, 3 H 6. p 580. n 29.
W.
THomas de Wake summoned to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3. Lord Wake, a surety for an
Accountant, 14 E 3. p 23. n. 22. A Commissioner of Array for the West-marches,
p 25. n. 54. Thomas Wake de Ridhal summoned to Parl. 17 E 3. p 36. 22 E 3. p
68. Thomas Wake de Lyde, summoned to Parl. 18 E 3. p 42.
Princes of Wales.
Edward Pr. Wales sum. to Parl. 33 E 1. p 4 Edward Prince of Wales, summoned to
Parl. 4 E 3^ p 5. 25 E 3. p. 72, 77. 27 E 3. p 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 89.
42 E 3. p 10. Richard P. Wales summoned to Parl. 50 E. 3. p 143. Holds the
Parl. by Commission 51 R. 3. p 144. n 1. His Petition against the Declaration
touching the Stannaries, p 51 E 3. 149. n 65, 66. Henry created Prince of
Wales, 1 H 4. p 391, 392 n 73, 76, 82. summoned to Parl. 1 H 4. p 402. 2 H 4. p
403. 3 H 4. p 414. 6 H 4. p 435 436. 7 H 4. p 449, 450 9 H 4 p 463, 11 H 4. p
469. 13 H 4. p 4^7. The Realm of England intailed on sum. 8 H 4. p 454. n 38
Sent into Wales, ib. His Petition, 6 H 6. p 439, 440. n 24. Edward, Letters
Patents to him, 31 H 6. p. 652. n 39, created Prince of Wales, etc. by Patent
in Parliament, 33 H 6. p 659. n 47. p 669. n 42. Made Duke of Cornwall, his
dict and allowance, 33 H 6. p 659 n 43, 44. 38 H 6, p. 663. n 29. Attainted of
Treason. 1 E 4. p 670, 671. n 21, 22, 24. Edward Prince of Wales, summoned to
Parl. 22 E 4. p 704. 23 E. 4. p 708. Simon Ward summoned to Parl. 4 E 3 p 6.
Roger de la War, or Wars, summoned to Parliament, 31 E 3. p 95. John d^ War,
or Warr^ summoned to Parl. 47 E 3. p 115. 50. E 3. p 143. 1 R 2. p ^53. 3 R ^.
p 181. 4 R 2. p 187. 7 R 2. p ^90, 297, 8 R 2. p 302, 306. 9 R 2. p 307. 10 R 2
p 314. 11 R 2. p 319. 12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2. p
336. 15 R 2. p 340. 17 R 2. p 350. 20 R 2. p 357, 365. 21 R 2. p 366. his
Audience after his return from Spain, 6 R 2. p 289. n 23. Mr. Th^mas de la War
summoned to Parl. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 3 H 4. p 414.
6 H 4. p 435, 436. 7 H 4. p 449. 9 H 4. p 463. 11 H 4. p 469 13 H 4. p 477. 1 H
5 p 533. 2 H 5. p 538. 3 H 5. p 542, 543. 4 H 5. p 549. 5 H 5. p 552. 7 H 5. p
555, 556. 8 H 5. p 558 9 H 5. p 661. 1 H 6. p 561. 2 H 6. p 568. 3 H 6. p 572.
4 H 6. p 582. 6 H 6. p 586. Reginald le War Knight sum. to Parl. 4 H 6. p 582.
6 H 6. p 586, 587.
Earls of Warwick.
Guido de Bello Campo (or Beauchamp) Earl thereof, sum. to Parl. 33 E 1. p 4.
Thomas de Bello Campo Earl thereof, sum. to Parl. 71 E 1. p 5. Earl of Warwick
ordered to attend on the Custos regni, 14 E 3. p 24. n 36. A Comm^^sioner to
hear the Archbishops answer, 15 E 3. p 34. n 43. Thomas de Bello Campo Earl
thereof, sum. to Parl. 17 E 3. p 35. 18 E 3. p 42. 22 E 3. p 68. 25 E 3. p 72,
77. 27 E 3. p 83. 2^ E 3. p 84. Letters from him and other Lords out of France
to the Parl. 20 E 3. p 50. n 45. John de Bello Campo Earl thereof, sum. to
Pa^l. 29 E 3. p 89. Thomas de Bello Campo Earl thereof, sum. to Parl. 50 E 3. p
143. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 181. 4 R 2. p 187, 190. 7 R 2. p 290, 297. 8 R 2. p
302, 306. 9 R 2. p 307. 10 R 2. p 313. 11 R 2. p 319, 320. 12 R 2. p 327. 13 R
2. p 328. 14 R 2. p 336. 15 R 2. p 340. 17 R 2. p 350. 18 R 2. p 357. 20 R 2. p
359, 362. 21 R 2 p 368. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 6 H 4.
p 435, 436. 7 H 4. p 449. In arms against R 2. 21 R 2. p 369. n 37. Impeached
of Treason and condemned, p 375.379. n 12, 13, 14. 1 H 4. p 386. n 20, 22.
Richard de Bello-campo Earl thereof, sum. to Parl. 9 H 4. p 463. 11 H 4. p 469.
13 H 4. p 477. 1 H 5. p 533. 2 H 5. p 5^7. 4 H 5. p 549. 8 H ^. p 558. 1 H 6. p
562. 2 H 6. p 567. 3 H 6. p ^73. 6 H 6. p 586. 10 H 6. p 601. 14 H 6. p 613 15
H 6. p 616, 617 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H 6. p 648. 33 H 6. p 655. 38 H 6. p 662^
663. 1 ^ 4 p 668. 3 E 4. p 67^. 7 E 4. p 659. 9 E 4. p 687. The con^ell between
him and the Earl Marshal for precedencie, and his place in Parliament, largely
argued, 3 H 6. p 573, 574, 575, 576, 577, p 578. n 10, 11, 12, 13. The King
acquir^ and takes him for his loyal Subject, 33 H 6. p 6^7. n 18. Levieth war
against H 6. attainted for it, 38 H 6. p 662, 663. n 10, to 23. The estates
made by him after his insurrection, made void, p 664. n 33. Anne his wife,
daughter of the Lord Spencer restored to blood and lands, 1 E 4. p 172. n 33. A
Commission to him and others to hold and adjourn the Parl. 4 E 4. p 675, 676. n
15, 16. Ad^. de We^^s sum. to Parl. 14 E 3. p 26. 18 E 3. p 52. John de Wells
sum. to Parl. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 180 10 R 2. p 318. 13 R 2. p 327. 14 R 2.
p 3^8, ^36. 15 R 2. p 340. 17 R 2. p 350. 18 R 2. p 357. 20 R 2. p 360, 365. 21
R 2. p 366 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 3 H 4. p 414. 6 H 4
p 435, 436 7 H 4 p 449. 9 H 4. p 463. 11 H 4. p 469. 13 H 4. p 477. 1 H 5. p
533. 2 H 5. p 538. 3 H 5. p 543. 544. 4 H 5. p 549. 5 H 6. p 552. 7 H 5. p 555,
556^ 8 H 5. p 558. 1 H 6. p 564. 2 H 6. p 567. 3 H 6. p 572. 4 H 6. p 582. Leo,
or Leonard de Wells Knight, sum. to Parliament, 10 H 6. p 601 11 H 6. p 606. 14
H 6. p 614. 15 H 6. p 616, 617. 18 H 6. p 621, 626. 20 H 6. p 627. 23 H 6. p
628. 25 H 6. p 633, 634. 27 H 6. p 677. 28 H 6. p 640. 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H 6. p
648. Attainted of treason, 7 E 4. p 681. n 14. Richard Lord Wells restored in
blood and to lands, 7 E 4. p 6^1. n 14. A Knight and summoned to Parliament, 9
E 4. p 687. Richard de Wells Knight, Lord VVillougby, summoned to Parl. 33 H
6. p 656. 38 H 6. p 661. 1 E 4. p 669. 3 E 4. p 674. 7 E 4. p 680. John
VVenlock de VVenlock summoned to Parl. 3 E 4. p 674. 7 E 4. p 680. 9 E 4. p
687. Thomas West Knight summoned to Parl. 6 H 4 p 4^^, 436. Reginall West
Knight, sum. to Parl. 10 H 6. p 601. 11 H 6. p 606. 12 H 6. p 613. ^^ H 6. p
616, 617. 18 H 6. p 621, 626. 25 H 6. p 653, 654. 27 H 6. p 637. 28 H 6. p 640.
Richard West Knight summoned to Parl. 38 H 6. p 661^ 1 E 4. p 665. 3 E 4. p
674. 7 E 4 p 680. 9 E 4. p 687. 12 E 4. p 687^ 22 E 4. p 704. 23 E 4. p 708.
Earls of Westmerland.
Ralph de Nevil created Earl of Westmerland, 21 R 2. p 370. n 35. summoned, to
Parl. 21 R 2^ p 366. 23 R 2^ p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 13 H 4. p
414. 6 H 4. p 435, 436. 7 H 4 p 449. 9 H 4. p 463. 11 H 4. p 469. 13 H 4. p
477. 1 H 5. p 553. 2 H 5 p 537 3 H 5. p 543. 4 H 5^ p 549. 5 H 5. p 55^. 7 H 5.
p 555, 556. 8 H 5 p 558 9 H 5 p 561. 1 H 6. p 561. 2 H 6. p 566. 3 H 6. p 572.
^ H 6. p 586. 9 H 6. p 597 10 H 6. p 601. 11 H 6. p 606 12 and 14 ^ 6. p 613.
15 H 6. p 616. 21 H 6 p 617. 18 H 6. p 620, 626 20 H 6. p 627. 23 H 6. p 628.
25 H 6. p 633. 27 H 8. p 636. 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H 6. p 648. 33 H 6. p 655. 38 H
6 p 660. 1 E 4. p 6^8. 3 E 4. p 673. 7 E 4. p 679. 9 and 12 E 4 p 687. 22 E 4.
p 704 22 E 4. p 708. One of the C^mmissioner^ to confer with, and depose King
Richard the second, 1 H 4. p 385 ^ 10 The Earldom of Richmond granted to him by
Patent^ of which the Commons pray a Revocation, 1 H 4. p 392 n 78. Reconciled
in Parliament to the Earl of Northumberland, by kissing and shaking hands, 5 H
4. p 427. n 18. John de Widhurst summoned to Parl. 37 E 3. p 95. John de
Willoughby summoned to Parl. 14 E 3. p 26. 17 E 3. p 36. 18 E 3. p 42 22 E 3. p
68 25 E 3. p 77. John Willoughby de Bresby summoned to Parliament, 25 E 3. p
72. 27 E 3. p. 83. 28 E 3. p 84. 29 E 3. p 89. 37 E 3^ p 95. 38 E 3. p 99. 42 E
3. p 104 Robert de Willoughby summoned to Parl. 1 R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 181. 4 R
2. p 187. 7 R 2. p 290^ 297. 8 R 2. p 302, 307. 9 R 2. p 308. 10 R 2. p 314. 11
R 2. p 319 320. 1^ R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2. p 336. 15 R 2. p 341 17 R
2. p 350. 18 R 2. p 357. William de Willoughby summoned to Parl. 20 R 2. p 360,
361. 21 R 2. p 366. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 492. 2 H 4^ p 403. 3 H 4. p
414. 6^ H 4. p 435, 436. 7 H 4. p 549. 9 H 4. p 563. Accompanied H 4. to King R
2. to the Tower, 1 H 4. p 385. n 12. Robert de Willoughby summoned to Parl. 13
H 4. p 477. 1 H 5. p 533. 2 H 5. p 538. 4 H 5. p 54^. 8 H 5. p 558. Robert de
Willoughby sum. to Parl. 15 H 6. 616, 617 18 H 6. p 621, 626. 20 H 6. p 627. 23
H 6. p 628. 25 H 6. p 633, 634. 27 H 6. p 637. 29 H 6. p 645. Ralph de
Willoughby summoned to Parl. 28 H 6. p 640. Richard Wells Lord of Willoughby
summoned to Parl. ^8 H 6. p 661. Reginald de Wil^on summoned to Parl. 28 H 6. p
640.
Earls of Wil^shire, or Wilton.
Sir William le Scroop created Earl of Wiltshire, 21 R 2. p 370. n 35. One of
the Lords Appellants, p 374. n 78. James Earl of Wilton, summoned to Parl. 28 H
6. p 639. 29 H 6. p 645. 21 H 6 p 648. 33 H 6. p 655. 38 H 6. p 680. Appointed
one of the Admirals, to keep the Seas, 31 H 6. p 652. Earl of Ormond, gives
lands to Sir Tho. of Acres, p 654. n 56. Attainted of Treason, and to forfeit
all ^is lands, 1 E 4. p 678. n 12. 28. John Earl of Wilts, summoned to Parl. 12
E 4. p 687. William de Winchester summoned to Parl. 7 R 2. p 290. William de
Windsore summoned to Parl. 4 R 2. p 187. 7 R 2. p 297. James de Woodstock
summoned to Parl. 14 E 3. p 27. Thomas de Woodstock summoned to Parl. 50 E 3.
p. 143. Richard Woodvil ^night, Lord of Rivers summoned to Parl. 27 H 6 p 637.
28 H 6. p 640. 29 H 6. p 648. 38 H 6. p 661. 3 E 4. p 674. A^thony Woodvil
knight Lord Scales sum. to Parl. 3 E 4. p 674.
Earls of Worcester, or Wigorn.
Thomas de Piercy, Earl of Wigorn, created 11 R 2. p 310. n 35. One of the five
Lords Appellants, p 321. n 8. summoned to Parl. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383,
402. 2 H 4. p 403. 3 H 4. p 414^ Attainted, yet his heirs males made
hereditable, 18 H 6. p 623. n 25. Richard Earl of Wigorn sum. to Parl. 8 H. 5.
p 558. John Earl of Wigorn summoned to Parl. 28 H 6. p 639. 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H
6. p 648 33 H 6. p 655. 3 E 4. p 673. Treasurer of England, and prorogues the
Parl. 31 H 6. p 650. n 23. Edward Tibetot, Earl of Wigorn summoned to Parl. 7 E
4. p 679.
Y. Dukes of York.
EDmund Earl of Cambridge created Duke of York, 9 R 2. p 310. ^ 14. sum. to
Parl. p 307. 10 R 2. p 313. ^ R 2. p 319. 12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 14 R 2.
p 336. 15 R 2. p 340. 17 R 2. p 350. 18 R 2. p 358. 20 R 2. p ^59, 365. 21 R 2.
p 366. 23 R 2. p 382. 1 H 4. p 383, 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 3 H 4. p 414. 6 H 4 p
43^. 436. 7 H 4. p 449. 9 H 4. p 463. Purged as innocent in Parliament by Rich.
the second, 21 R 2 p 369. n 26. One of the Lords Appellants, p 374. n 72. his
Petition for the Archbishop, 1 H 4. p 392. n 79. The Kings Lieutenant in
Gu^enne, his service there, and ar^ears to be paid, 6 H 4. p 441. n 35. An
A^^uity granted to him by R 2. of 1000 l. per annum, 6 H 4. p 431. n 48.

A^ A^^le between him and Philip his wise, and Sir Hugh Lutterell, for the
Castle of Dunster, p 454, 455. 460.

Edward Duke of York his lands in Wales, 8 H 4. p 458. n 31. Summoned to Parl.
3 H 4 p 4^3. 11 H 4 p 469. 13 H 4. p 477. 1 H 5. p 533. 2 H 5. p 537. John Duke
of York to sue by his Attorney, 2 H 5. p 570. n 24. Richard Duke of York, son of
Richard, brother of Edward Duke of York, his Petition to have Livery of his
lands, 10 H 6. p 603, 604. n 25. Summoned to Parliament, 11 H 6. p 608. 14 H 6.
p 613. 18 H 6. p 620, 626. 20 H 6. p 627. 23 H 6 p 628. 26 H 6. p 63^. 27 H 6 p
636 29 H 6. p 645. 31 H 6. p 648. 33 H 6. p 655. Presides in the Parliament by
Patent of Precedence, and takes Thomas Thorp Speaker in Execution for dammage^
recovered, 31 H 6. p 651. n 24. 26 Appointed and made Protector of the Realm,
and chief Counselor, p 652. n 34 to 39. Cap^ain of Calice, p 653. n 53. The
Kings Commission and his power of Protector repealed, 33 H 6. p 659. n 49, 50.
His Treasons, Attainder, Ingratitude, and Accomplices in Rebellion against King H
6. and forfeiture of lands, 38 H 6. p 661, 662, 663. n 7 to 26. All his Grants
petitioned to be void, p 664. n 33. The Lord Stanley accused at his
Confederate, ib. n 38. King Henry the 6. and other Lords and persons who slew
him, attainted for his death, 1 E 4. p 670. n 17, 18.19. His claim to the Crown
exhibited in Parlia^ent, 38 H 6. p 665, 666, 677, 668. The Accord made in
Parliament between H the 6. and him by the Lords assent, ibid. n 20 to 36. 1 ^
4. p 670. n 13, 14.
Z.
WIlliam la Zouch summoned to Parl. 13 E 2. p 3. William la Zouch de Mortuo
mari, sum^ to Parl. 4 E 3. p 5. William la Zouch de Harringworth sum. to Parl.
4 E 3. p 5. 14 E 3. p 26. 17 E 3. p 36. 18 E 3. p 42. 22 E 3. p 68. Walter la
Zouch de Harringworth sum. to Parl. 25 E 3. p 72. William la Zouch de
Harringworth sum. to Parl. 21 E 3. p 77. 27 E 3. p 83. 28 E 3. p ^4. 29 E 3. p
89. 37 E 3. p 95. 38 E 3. p 99. 42 E 3. p 104. 47 E 3. p 115. 50 E 3. p 143. 1
R 2. p 153. 3 R 2. p 181. 4 R 2 p 187. 7 R 2 p 290. ^97. 8 R 2. p 302, 307. 9 R
2. p 308. 10. R 2. p 314. 11 R 2. p 319, 320. 12 R 2. p 327. 13 R 2. p 328. 14
R 2. p 336. 15 R 2. p 340. 17 R 2. p 350. 18 R 2. p 357. 20 R 2. p 360. 1 H 4.
p 402. 2 H 4. p 403. 3 H 4. p 414. 6 H 4. p 436. 7 H 4. p 449 9 H 4 p 463. 11 H
4. p 469. 13 H 4. p 477. 1 H 5. p 533. 2 H 5. p 538. William la Zouch de
H^^ringworth sum. to Parl. 4 H 6. p 582. 6 H 6. p 586, 587. 9 H 6. p 597. 14 H
6. p 613. 15 H 6. p 616, 6^7. 18 H 6. p 621, 626. 20 H 6. p 627. 23 H 6. p 628.
25 H 6. p 623. 27 H 6. p 636. 28 H 6. p 639. 29 H 6. p 645. 33 H 6. p 655. 38 H
6. p 660. 1 E 4. p 668. 3 E 4. p 674. 7 E 4. p 679.
The Names of Persons and Places mistaken in the Written Copy, and so in the
Print; I have rectified in this Table, and chose rather to insert them into
this ensuing Errata, then to alter them in the Manuscript, or Print, lest I
might seem over- Critical; wherefore correct them thus:
PAge 5. line 31. for Com. Sur. read Sar. p. 72. l. 18. for Com. Oxoniae, r.
Warw. l. 30. for Bian r. Brian. p. 99. l. 27. for de Briae, r. Brian. p. 143.
l. 23. for Salop r. Sarum, p 153. l 7. for Edwardo, r. Edmundo, p 1^7. l 2. for
Edmond, r. Edward, p 298. l 2. for Barkier, r. Bourchier. p 302. l. 8. for Com.
Buck. r. Cantii, p 307. l 30. for Rado r. Rico, p 314. l. 14. for de Enerenx,
r. Devoreux, p. 328. l 6. for Gloucester, r. Eborum, p 336. l. 5. for Thomas r.
Edmundo, l 16. for Richard r. Henry, p 350. l 19. for Iohanni, r. Thomae. p
365. l 9. for Dacre, r. Darcy, p 366. l. 6. for Edwardo r. Edmundo. p 370. l
40. for Ralph r. John, p 382. l 9. p 383. l 9. p 562. l 8. p 567. l 1. p 572^ l
15. p 573. l 7. p 645. l 5. p 655. l 22. p 660. l 18. for Oxoniae, r. Exoniae,
p 402. l 22. for Thomae, r. Iohanni, p 403. l. 15. for Roberto, r. Rado. l 25.
for Tho. Nevil, r. Iohanni Louel, p 414. l 12. for Rado r. Roberto, p 553. l
10. for Ricardo, r. Radulpho, p 613. l 30. for Com. r. Chlr. p 614. l. 3. for
Cheperney, r. Cheyney, p 616. l. 29. for Radulpho, r. Humfride com. Staf. p 626
l 29. for John r. Iacobo, p 628. l 15. for Roberto r. Radulpho, p 636. l 33.
dele and de Leb. r. Say and de Seal, p 639. l 23. for Hen. r. Tho. p 648. l 29.
for Iohanni Com. Wilt. r. Iacobo. p 668. l. 33 for Willielmo r. Ricardo.

Reader, Note that in this Table, N line ult. Ralph de Monte Helmetii being
placed in the wrong Column, makes the next Page not immediately to follow, the
first Figures whereof belong to John Nevil de Essex, which is to be supplied.

A Table Alphabetical of the principal matters and heads comprised in this
exact Abridgement.
A
ABatement of Writs, not for non-tenure of parcel, p. 80. By bringing a new
writ pending the other, p. 87. By not laying it in the proper County, p. 283.
Abjuring the Realm by bringers in of Popes Bulls or Provisions p. 64. Accounts,
Receivers of Wools moneys, and goods for the Kings use, called to account, find
sureties in Parliament, and auditors of worth appointed to receive their
Accounts, p. 23, 32, 39, 54, 63, 75, 160. Commissioners for weights and
measures called to Account before the Barons in the Eschequer, p. 46.
Accountants to make Attorneys in the Eschequer, when they have formerly
accounted, not to be there vexed by Barectors, nor to be called to a second
Account, after ter a quietus est, unless in cases of concealment, or other
default, or surcharge justly charged on them, p. 54, 55, 401.

No issues against Accountants before they be warned, and what process lies
against them, p. 70.

Sheriffs to be discharged of Fee-farms, and Liberties granted away, upon their
Accounts, Oaths in the Eschequer, pardoned such sums that are not justly
charged on them and they cannot levy, and to be no further charged than they
can receive. Sundry Petitions from many Counties for this purpose, and the
answers to them, p. 83, 103, 126, 133, 134, 161, 170, 178, 179, 191, 192, 203,
301, 311, 318, 324, 333, 338, 344, 348, 356, 358, 395, 410, 419, 459, 465, 474,
481, 536, 547, 552, 566, 595.

Accountants showing cause of discharge in the Eschequer to be discharged
without delays, p. 118.

None to Account in the Exchequer for Scottish money, sweet wines, victuals, and
other things whereof no profit comes to the King, p. 125, 177.

Account of Executors before the Ordinary, p. 127, to the King p. 535. Account
prayed against Executors of Gardians in socage, p. 131. Accountants to be
allowed upon their Accounts, all Debts and Loanes owing them by the King, p.
148. Account of subsidies never given to the Commons, yet rendered at their
request, with the receipts and disbursments of the wars, p. 174, 175. Collectors
of Subsidies to Account upon Oath, according to the Roll, and surcharged upon
better proofs, p. 202. Statutes touching Accounts in the Eschequer, p. 203,
204, 395, 444, 459, 474, 552. Account by Heirs and Executors of Captains taking
wages, p. 203. Account for moneys taken for surrendering Castles, and by
corruption, p. 292. Accounts of Nobles and Captains to be received in the
Eschequer without delay, p. 296. Accounts for money and jewel pardoned by the
King, p. 417, 588 603.

Damages required for Plaintiffs in Accounts, p. 419.

That one Executor upon Account may recover the value of the Debt released by
the other, p. 419.

Accounts of the Treasurers of Wars, and special Auditors to receive them, p.
454, 464.

Treasurers of the Chamber accountable only ^o the King, not Exchequer, p. 581.

Account of Brice keeper of the Exchange in the Tower to a Committee of Lords
and Commons, p. 684, 685, 686. Accusers without Information or Indictment not
to be heard in Courts, p. 54. To be punished if they prove not their
complaints, p. 156. To find sureties to make good their Accusations if in
surcharge, p. 587. None to be sen^ for by writ, by the voluntary suggestion of
an Accuser, p. 56. Persons banished the Court upon General Accusations that the
people spoke evil of them, p. 647. Acquittal by Writ of persons wrongfully
impeached by a Common approver who was executed, p. 424. Acquittances by
Collectors of wools, p. 62. Of Executors refusing admini^^ration, p. 109, 110.
Of Ordinaries for Accounts and extortion therein, p, 127.

The Hospital of St. Tho. of Acres London, incorporated and endowed, p. 630,
654.

Additions of Surname, place in Exigents and Outlawrias, p. 191, 536, 599, 600.
Adjournment of Parliaments; see Parliament. Adjournment of causes into
Parliament for difficulty in Law, p. 30, 56, 63^ Adjournment of Pleas in
Chester, p. 467. Administrator to have the like ^ction as the Testator, p. 40.
To a Merchant alien ordered to pay particular debts first, p. 623.
Administration committed by the Archbishop when the Kings Executors or others
refuse, p. 535. Administrator, and Administration of the Bishopric of Ely,
granted to the Archbishop of Roan, by the Pope and King without in^talment, p.
623. Admirals of the West and North appointed, with their power, to ^tay ships,
and warn them into safe harbors, p. 20. To convoy ships, and to receive
consideration for it in some cases, p. 107, 179. To guard the Sea and Sea
Coasts, p. 284, 288, 291, 294, 295, 312, 452, 453.

Their names to be known, p. 312. Merchants to name them, p. 453.

Acts and Petitions against them, not to hold plea or meddle with any thing
done within the Realm, or triable at the Common Law, etc. p. 334, 344, 356,
411, 412, 420, 421, 472, 475. Prohibition to them if they do, p. 356.

To appoint Mariners reasonable wages, p. 340.

The Admirals Jurisdiction to be limited, ascertained, and not to keep Courts
in Towns or Liberties, but on the Seacoasts, or Arms of the Sea, without
adjourning till the plea ended, p. 412, 421.

Admirals exactions and usurpations complained of, p. 421, 475.

To make a Deputy in the North, p. 475.

Admiral Ship of the Navy taken by the Enemy by the other ships deserting her;
for which the owner requires recompense from all the other ships, p. 548, 549.

Suit in the Admiralty by Scots and French for restitution of goods taken by
the English, p. 611.

Admirals appointed by Parliament to keep the Seas, p. 652. discharged thereof
upon their request, p. 657.

See the names of the Admirals in the 1 Table, to which Richard Clitherow (one
of the Admirals chosen by the Merchants) must be added, 8 H. 4. p. 453. n. 30.
9 H. 4. p. 465. n. 19. His arrears ordered to be paid without account, Ibid.

Admission to Benefices, refused upon the Archbishops inhibition, p. 81.
Unreasonable fees for Admissions to Benefices complained of, p. 136. Advance
money to Soldiers, p. 20, 25, 452. Advocates of the King, attend in
Parliament, p. 188. At Law, their Poll-money, p. 168. Advowson, belonging to
the Crown, not to be severed from it, p. 58. Advowson of the Hospital of St.
Nicholas in Pontefract, appropriated to St. Oswalds, p. 623. Afforesting of
what was disafforested, and of men's purlie^es, complained of, p. 59, 71. Age
Full, to be proved by Inspection, and other ways, and by Writs de Aetate
probanda, p. 103, 150, 474. Alienation without license, in times of pestilence,
prayed to continue good, p. 97. That land in Capite may be let for life without
fine, prayed; p. 112. the Chancellor for reasonable Fines to grant Licenses of
Alienation, p. 585, 590. For lands held of the Duchy of Cornwall, p. 624, 625.
Alienations of lands by religious persons inquired of, p. 126. Aliens, the
number and value of their Benefices to be certified, p. 22. Priors Aliens
confined, their lands seized in times of War, and the Benefices of Alien
Enemies, p. 23, 45, 49, 50, 110, 129, 162, 331, 405, 406, 409, 418, 434. 465,
467, 537, 611.

Priors Aliens to pay no ninths, p. 28.

Persons born beyond the Seas who shall not be Aliens but Denizens, p. 38, 39,
106, 480.

Alien Merchants taxed, p. 37, 433. Aliens advancement to Benefices and
Ecclesiastical preferments by Provisions and Bulls from Rome. much complained
of, and the mischiefs thereby, p. 41, 49, 61, 64, 65, 128, 129, 179. Alien
Monks, Priors, Clerks and others to be banished the Realm, and Englishmen and
Scholars put in their places, p. 49, 65, 133, 147, 151, 162, 171, 192, 429,
443, 452, 453, 457, 535, 536, 537, 585.

That no Alien may enjoy a Benefice or Prebend, p. 30, 203, 283, 317.

English men not to be farmers to ^^ligious Aliens, or Collector to the Pope,
p. 49, 130, 147, 151, 161.

Bringing in of Alien Enemies to be punished, p. 49.

No money to be transported to Aliens, p. 49, 130, 151.

Aliens that stay, to find Sureties, 171.337.

To be removed from remoter Towns, p. 428.

Aliens disclose the secrets of the Realm, and are Spies, p. 50, 129, 141, 408.

Impoverish the Nations, p. 141.

Aliens to send no Letters in times of War, p. 50. Aliens Priors to be removed
from the Seacoasts, p. 119. Aliens to be no Customers nor Officers, p. 443.
Aliens suing in the Court of Rome for livings and pensions, remedy prayed
against them, p. 125. Alien keeper of Nottingham Castle complained of, p. 136.
and of Manlion, p. 455. Aliens not to buy or sell by retail in London, Norwich,
etc. p. 141, 177. Aliens attending the Queen, or King, removed and banished,
except those allowed by the Council, p. 324, 428^ 453, 585. Aliens to make
fines to the King, p. 457. To take an Oath to live and dye in the Kings
quarrel, to lodge only in Englishmens houses, and serve in the wars, if able,
p. 472. 537. Alien Priors protections to bar none of their Debts p. 552. To be
no Collector of Desms, p. 616. Alien Prior endenized by Parliament, p. 585.
Alien, none to be a Broker, p. 610. See Brokers.

Poll money imposed by Parliament upon every Alien, p. 622, 638^ 649.

See Merchants Aliens, and Strangers.

Allegiance due to the King protested by the Commons, p. 121. Privy Counselors
charged on their Allegiance by the King, to take the Oath prescribed them by
Parliament, p. 456. The Speaker charged upon his Allegiance to accept this
Office, p. 196. And Lords and Comm. to redress disorders, p. 455. Allies
procured by E: 3. p. 17. Peace to be made with their assent p. 24. The
Parliament to consult what is best for the King and them, p. 27. To be aided p.
361. Alliance with the Flemings, p. 282. With the Dukes of Burgundy and
Britain, p. 683. Ambassadors, whether to be sent to Rome, to be advised by
Part. p. 37. Flemish Ambassador to be talked with for redress of Grievances at
Bruges, p. 70. Duke of Lancaster, sent Ambassador to Rome, to treat a Peace
with France, p. 90. Ambassadors treat a Peace with Scotland, p. 92. At Rome to
treat about Provisors, p. 119. Iean Imperial an Ambassador for Genoa, slain in
London: adjudged Treason, p. 183. Ambassadors to France to procure Peace and
Alliance p. 361. Ambassadors sent to the Council of Constans, and the Kings
Letters to them, p. 551. Scottish Ambassador treating their Kings enlargement,
and a Marriage; the Commons desire to be privy to his treaty, p. 568. An
Ambassador from Ireland: Safe conduct granted to him, and usually to all
Ambassadors before arival, p. 598. Ambassador in Denmark, p. 600. Ambassadors
in France, to treat a Peace and Marriage, p. 629. Allom taken up and sold to
supply the King, p. 647. Amendment of a roll where no entry of a plea was made,
ordered by Parliament, p. 300, 301. Of misprisions of Clerks prayed, p. 560.
enacted by as Statute, p. 585, 595. Amerciaments, to be ascertained in the
Extract, p. 112. Pardon of them desired, p. 139. In the Sheriffs turn for
Nusances, to be traversed ere levied, p. 461. In the Wapentake, p. 546. In the
Sheriffs turn complained of, p. 604. Ancient Demesne, exempt from contribution
to Knights wages, p. 1. Ancient demesne Courts not to be disturbed by the
Marshall, p. 160. Normanlow Hundred in Hereford, Ancient Demesne, p. 571.
Annuity not to be charged on other men's lands without seison and payment
proved, p. 283. Granted by the King out of the Exchequer to the Duke of York
upon his creation, p. 310. Granted by the King, p. 323. A Statute concerning
such Annuities, p. 324. Assigned to the banished Justices in Ireland, p. 333.
Out of the Exchequer to the Earls of Rutland, and Somerset, upon their
creation, p. 334, 440. All Annuities out of the Customs of Woolls revoked, p.
406. To Aliens resumed, p. 453.

Process in Writs of Annuity, p. 410.

Eldest grants of Annuities by the King to be first satisfied, p. 423.
Annuities granted by King R. 2. revoked, p. 439. Granted by the King, p. 458,
580, 583, 588. An Act and motion for payment of Annuities, p. 461, 558. All to
be paid them according to their deserts p. 466. King to receive 10000 l. out of
Annuities to be paid to others for his support, p. 535. All that had Annuities
^um. to appear before the King and Council, p. 583. Granted by the King in Tail
to the Duke o^ G^ocester, p. 610. To the Duke of Buckingham, upon his creation
confirmed by Parliament p. 698.

St. Anthonies Priory given by the Popes provision, etc. p. 315, 316.

St. Annes Priory near Coventry, Lands restored to it, p. 440.

Apparel, Statutes concerning it^ etc. to be executed, p. 97, 98, 172, 459,
704. Appeals where to be brought, an^ tried, p. 70, 594, 595. Appeals moved to
be tried by Nisi prius, not in the K. B. for the Northern Counties, p. 91, 92.
Appeal of murder by the Wife, error assigned in Parl. to reverse the Outlawry
and Judgment in it, p. 333, 353.

Statutes concerning Appeals, p. 397, 605.

Appeal of Rape granted in Parl. p. 619, 655. Appeal of Murder for the wife,
and for the sons if she die, granted by Parl. p. 646, 690.

Lord Appellants in Parl. p. 321, 374, 377.

Apporcioment of woolls granted on every County by Commissioners, p. 34.
Apprentice how and where to be retained, p. 421, 595. Appropriation of
benefices petitioned against, p. 422, 409. An Act concerning it, p. 420.
Appropriation of the Advowson and Parsonage of Newton to the Guardian and
Chantry of Newton, without any Vicar endowed, by Parl. p. 481.

That all parsonages appropriated without a Vicar endowed within 6. months may
be disappropriated, p. 605. The advowson of St. Nicolls Hospital appropriated
to the Prior and Covent of St. Oswalds, p. 623.

Approvers of persons of good fame, by goalers instigation, to be redressed, p.
40, 107, 424.

A murderer becoming an Approver and pardoned, petitioned to be executed
notwithstanding, p. 632. That Justices of Peace may try such as become
Approvers, p. 682.

Aquitain Dukedom and Duchy conferred on the Duke of Lancaster by R. 2. who
does homage for it, p. 332. Arbitrary Government, articled against, condemned;
the badges and mischiefs thereof, p. 387, 388, 711, 713. Arbitrators,
Arbitrements, and Awards made, or ratified in and by Parliament, p. 343, 347,
351, 454, 455, 479, 480, 483, 485, 623. Be^ween King H. 6. and the Duke of
York, touching the Right and Succession of the Crown, p. 666, 667, 668, 770.
Archbishops contentions about bearing their Crosiers, hinder the Parliaments
proceeding, p. 13, 14. Letter to the Archbishop and Clergy of York to
contribute to the Defense of the North, p. 18. To certify the Number and
values of Aliens livings, p. 19. His Inhibition to the Bishop to admit a Clerk,
to be undone by a Writ of Dismission out of Chancery, p. 81. His Protestation
and Prerogative to be of all Parliaments and Councils, though not to be present
in cases of blood, as prohibited by the Canon Law. And to be sworn to none
interior to the Pope, p. 318 322. The Lords, Bishops, and Commons sworn on his
Cross, p. 34.322. Takes an Oath voluntarily with protestation, p. 318. His
Protestations against the Popes Excommunication and Usurpations, p. 348. Sworn
to the Pope, and cannot a^^ent to but oppose what ever is attempted in Parl. to
restrain his power, p. 362. Archbishops Prerogative to have the Custody of
Wards Lands held in Capite during ^he Kings Wardship o^ them, confirmed, p.
363. Attain^e^ of Treason and banished, p. 368, 392. Chief Actor in Richard the
2d hi^ renunciation and deposing, p. 384 385, 386, 389, 391. Refuses to be
sworn as a Privy Counselor, till charged by the King on his Allegiance to take
the Oath^ p. 456. Complains against the Universitie of Oxford; they resist his
Visitation; his right and award to visit it, confirmed by King and Parliament,
p. 479, 480. His Protestation against a Debt in the Exchequer, p. 429. His
Submission to the King in Parl. and desire to be openly arraigned to quit
himself from defamation, p. 31, 34. His Complaint for violating the Sanctuary
at Westminster examined, p. 175 176. Cited to Rome, p. 586. The King to
nominate him when the Sea is void, p. 651. The Lords desire to know who shall
be Archbishop, Ibid. Exactions for Probate of Wills, and admissions to
benefices complained of. See those Titles. Archdeaconry of Bath, granted by the
Pope to the Cardinal of Cisteron, complained against, p. 186. Archdeaconry of
No^wich, belongs to the Bishops presentation, Error in Parliament concerning
it, p. 123. Alien Cardinals Archdeacons of Canterbury, York, Duresm, Suffolk,
p. 129. Arrayes of men in several parts, and Archers provided for defense of
the Realm and North-marches, by order and grant of Parliament, with the
Commissioners names, instructions power; p. 18, 21, 22, 24, 25, 28, 69, 79,
110, 281, 387, 428, 590, 649, 650, 656, 688. Arrayes and Commissions for them
without Parliament, complained against as grievances, p. 47, 48, 53.60, 428.
None to go out of their County, etc. p. 428. Arrayes and Panels in Assise.
Acts concerning them, p. 590.625. Chal^enge to the Array, p. 458. Arms royal of
England borne by the Du. of Exeter, being of the blood royal p. 574. Not borne
by the Du. of York, p. 666. Difference of Arms, p. 575^ 666. A^mies raised by
the King for invading France, and other occasions, p. 111, 116, 167, 188, 287,
292, 394.396, 646. Parliaments called to supply them, Ibid.

Riding Armed prohibited, p. 364.

Feats of Arms prohibited, p. 18.

Armor and Weapons prohibited to be worn by Proclamation, where the Parl. sat.
See Proclamation. Excessive Price of Armor, complained of, and order to
redress it, p. 109. Armor to go to the heir, and not taken for Mortuaries, p.
185. Carrying Armor into Scotland prohibited, p. 296. and into Wales, p. 423.
Arches su^e there for Tithes, p. 500. Arrests of Clerks in Churchyards, sacred
places, and carrying the host, complained of and prohibited, if not by covin,
p. 140. An Act against Priests Arrests, p. 151: and Arrests in Churchyards,
etc. p. 105. Complaint against Clergy-mens Arrests into the Marshalsey, p. 194.
Kings Officers Excommunication for making Arrests in Churchyards; complained of
as a grievance, p. 364. See Sanctuary. Arrests of the next kinn of Rebels in
Wales, p. 483. Arrowheads, p. 460. Articuli super Chartas, bound the the
Stewards and Marshals Courts, p. 128. Articles of Complaint in Parliament to be
determined by Commissions, p. 138. Articles exhibited against King R. 2. p.
386, 387, 388. Against William de la Poole Duke of Suffolk, p. 641, 642, 643.
Artificers, An Act concerning them, p. 97. Fines for excessive wages, p. 159.
Against Laborers flying into Towns, and turning Artificers, p. 179. Not to
keep Greyhounds, etc. p. 335. Arundel Castle, restored to the Earl of Arundel,
and his precedence by reason thereof, p. 8.610, 638. Earl of Arundels a^tainder
and Judgment without trial by his Peers, reversed as illegal, and his heir
restored, p. 7, 8.73.74, 86. See Earls of Arundel, in the former Table: Has
the Sheriffs Turns in the Rapes of Chichester and Arundel, p. 133, 134.
Assarts, to be levied, p. 147. See Forest. Assets; no heir to answer the King
unless he has Assets in fee by descent, unreasonable, p. 80. No man to be
barred by collateral warranty, without Assets by descent, prayed, p. 126.
Assise, no Writs to delay it or prorogation being taken, but in case of
necessity, p. 40.308. Juries to say the verity of the fact i^ Assise of Novel
disseisin, p. 71. Such as ^^e ^orth Assizes, not to pay for the Justices
Patents, p. 113. An Assise slayed by reason of Fraud and the Kings interest,
and a Procedendo denied, til the truth examined by Commission, p. 134. Assizes
sned i^ E. 3. his reign, to continue in R. 2. prayed, p. 162, 177. Assise
against the principal disseisor, notwithstanding a ^eo^fment over, p. 177. A
sufficient Jury of 40 l. land a year, returned by special order in an Assise,
p. 330.460. Assizes in Lincoln; Attaint upon a false Verdict in them, p. 330.
Sheriffs of London to take Assizes in the Coroners absence, p. 393. An Assise
ordered to be brought upon a disseisin complained of in Parliament, p. 417.
Assise of rent in the confine of a County, where to be tried p. 421 An Act for
taking Assizes, p. 467. No judgment in an Assise after verdict, because the
Justices Patent was ^raudulenty revoked, remedied in Par^iament, p. 539.540.
Disseisin in an Assise found after the Assise brought by the Clerks mis-entry
contrary to the Verdict, whereby no Judgment could be had, rectified by Parl.
p. 545. Recovery in an Assise by subtle means, complained of, and referred for
redress, p. 548. No delay in Assizes prayed by sugge^ting the reversion to be
in the King, p. 571. An Act against delays in Assise by Protections, etc. p.
586. An Act touching Arrayes in Assise, p. 590. For Assizes in Franchises, p.
596. Touching Prorogation of Assise, p. 599. For an Assise against pernors of
profits, p. 611. Assise of Nuisance, to Mills and Freeholds, recovery, and an
Attorney therein p. 135. An Act touching Assise of Nuisance, p. 283. Assizes to
be kept in Towns where Goals be, p. 126. To be kept in the most convenient
places, p. 192. In the principal and chief Towns of the County, p. 284, 324.
Sir Ralph Ashton his recovery in a Writ of Right of Ward, of the Custody of the
Manor of Great Lener: the record imbezelled is exemplified: after which he
complains of riots, in detaining that Manor from him, p. 690, 703. Association
in Assizes to the Justices, p. 126. No Association to be made to Justices of
the Peace in their Sessions. p. 171, 172. Assurance for moneys lent the King
proffered by the Commons, p. 193, 194. See Customs, Loans, and Kings Debts.
Attachment of men of ill life and name: that power abused, to the arrest of
honest persons, p. 32. Attachments, granted against the Sheriffs of London and
others for attaching a a Cl^rk of the Chancery in London against his
privilege, p. 45. Bailiffs to attach no man out of their Liberties^ p. 139. An
Act for Attachments by Wardens of the Marches, p. 654. Attainders in Parliament
of Treasons, etc. reversed in and by Parliament, p. 86, 127, 689, 690, etc.
637, 702. See Restitution. Attainder of the eldest son in the Fathers life,
moved to be no bar to the younger, p. 396. Attaint, prayed in all writs of
Debt and others where the damages amount to 40 shill. and in Su^es by informers
both for the King an^ themselves, but denied, p. 55, 56. Attaint, by one
attainted upon a wri^ of Oyer and Terminer, prayed, pending the suit against
others, p. 87. An Act touching Attaints, p. 88. An Attaint prayed upon Verdicts
in the Eschequer as well as in other Courts, p. 92. Attaint ordered upon false
Verdicts given in Lincoln, in which the Sheriff of the County should return
Foreiners, p. 330. That the Pl. in Attaint may recover damages against the
petie Jurie, and none returned in Attaints but such as have 5 l. lands, p. 605.
An Act for Damages in an Attaint, p. 611, And touching Juries in Attaint, p.
624. The Kings Attorney to pursue a Venire facias for the Jury where the King
is party, p. 97. Sir William Earl the Kings Attorney, opposes the Bishop of
Durhams County Palatine, p. 609. The Kings Attorney his fee and Livery by whom
to be paid, p. 623, 695. Utterly refuses to defend King H. 6. his Title
against the claim of the Crown in Parliament by the Du. of York, p. 665, 666.
Attorney General of the Duchy of Lancaster, p. 667. Attorneys, to be made in
all cases where there is Appeal, in Accounts in the Exchequer in some cases,
and to be answerable for their Lords, p. 54, 55. Attorneys for such as are
indicted before Justices of the Peace, p. 92. Suit by Attorneys by Baron and
Feme to reverse a Judgment in Parliament for Error, p. 177. The Commonalty of
Cambridge appear by Attorney in Parliament, to answer a complaint against them,
p. 199. Attorney in the Exchequer, p. 202. To have the search of Rolls in the
K. B. p. 306. Clerks of Courts, or Assizes, not to be Attorneys, p. 349.
Letters Patents to sue Livery by Attorney revoked, as illegal, p. 375. Attorneys
to be sworn in personal Actions sued to the Exigent, and Laws provided to
prevent their falsehood, p. 413. An Act to prevent their falsehoods, p. 421, 422.
No Officer of any Liberty to be an Attorney there, p. 422 Impotent persons
outlawed to traverse the same by Attorney, p. 461. Justices of both Benches to
appoint a certain number of Attorneys in every Connty; they to be sworn every
Term to deal faithfully and truly; to be imprisoned, fined, and ransomed if
they do otherwise: none else to practice but they, p. 475, 483. Abbot of
Fountain, to make Attorneys in any plea in Wapentakes, p. 480, 481. An Act
touching Attorneys in a Wapentake, p. 546. The Justices to have power to record
Attorneys in Courts, p. 547. An Act touching making Attorneys, p. 555. For the
Duke of York to make Attorneys to sue or be ^ued in any Court, p. 570. An Act
for the Attorneys of religious persons in the North, p. 600. In an appeal of
Mayhem, the defendant prays to make an Attorney, p. 604. An Act touching
Attorneys in Norfolk and Suffolk, p. 660. Attorney of an Earl by Pa^ent appears
in Parliament for him p. 88. Letters of Attorney, to be taken by Justices of
Assise in the North, p. 88. That Judgments may be good, though the Letters of
Attorney be lost, p. 600. Letter of Attorney to deliver seisin to the Queen of
Duchy Lands, p. 683. Averment, prayed against a record falsely entered, p. 62.
Averment by a stranger, that he that levied a fine had nothing in the land,
but, not by the wise, who was party, p. 30. Averment of Accountants of things
they cannot levy, to be received, p. 126. Averment of whom and by what services
lands are held against the Escheators Office, p. 138. Averments against
Protections, that the party is not in the Kings service, not receivable, p.
163. Averments touching Tithes, an Act for them, p. 165. Averment against
Sheriffs return of small Issues, p. 413. Averment in K. B. concerning the
Marshal and Steward. p. 432. Aulnage, Commissioners made ^or it except that
granted to the Flemings, p. 40. Aulnage of Worsted, granted for life prayed to
be revoked, p. 71. An Act and motion concerning Aulnage, p. 76. A Petition to
revoke the Office of Aulnage and for the King to take 3 d. of every Cloth, p.
82. An Act for the improving of Aulnage, p. 423. Exactions over and above the
Aulnage complained of p. 482, 474. An Act touching Aulnage, p. 476, 612. An
Annuity to the Queen out of the Aulnage of cloth in London, p. 663. Aulnager,
not to meddle with whole woollen clothes, p. 80. Acts concerning his office, p.
185, 476, 612. Kendal clothes prayed to be sold without his Seal, p. 466.
Aulnagers sealing broad and narrow clothes, p. 605. Aureny Isle, the Kings
grant to it, p. 339. Avon river, Nusances in it to be removed, p. 475.
Authority abused to oppression and injustice punished, p. 106^ 107. Aid to
make the Kings son a knight, and marry his daughter, prayed to be pardoned, p.
18. Granted and levied to make the Prince of Wales a Knight, p. 50. An Act
concerning it, p. 80. Not to be demanded both against the mesn Lords and
Tenants in demesne, p. 91.40 s. of every knights see, Ibid. Aid prayed of the
King in reversion, and stay thereupon, p. 184. Aid prayed of the King, denied,
and not entered, error, p. 300, 304, 305. No Aid of the King to be allowed
against the Prince for lands of the Duchy of Cornwall by special Order of
Parliament, p. 427, 428. A Procedendo prayed, where Aid of the King was
granted, p. 483. Aids of money demanded by and granted to the King in
Parliaments: See Parliament, Taxes, Tonnage, etc.
B
BAgo de Bayons attainted of Treason in Parliament for the death of the Earl of
Kent, p. 7. Bail by Sheriffs of Prisoners indicted in their Turns, p. 119. But
Justices upon suspicion of Felony, prayed, p. 682. Of one committed for Murder
upon a Corpus cum causa, by the Chancellor, by order in Parliament, p. 691,
692. See Mainprise, Marshall not to let prisoners to bail, p. 78. Bailiffs of
Jersey to seize goods, p. 21. Distress by Bailiffs, p. 55. Not to be a
Victualler, Hostler, or Taverner during their Office, p. 113. Bailiffs in fee,
indicted and their office seized for vert and venison, p. 125. Bailiffs of
Cities and walled Towns to arrest all breakers of the Peace, p. 136. Remedy
prayed against the retorns, bribery, and corruption of Bailiffs, p. 137. To be
sufficient and able, and to arrest none out of their Jurisdictions, p. 339.
Bakers measure, p, 339. Bannerets, p. 313. John de Gominez to be beheaded,
because a Banneret, p. 158. Banishment out of the Realm by Judgment of
Parliament, p. 66, 123, 158, 331, 368, 372, 380, 381, 386, 387, 397, 644. Out
of Towns, p. 125. Aliens to be banished the Realm, p. 131, 442. See Aliens.
Justices banished the Realm, p. 331, 353. Revoked from banishment by act of
Parliament, p. 364, 397. Banishment against Law for no cause objected to King
R. 2. p. 386, 387, 388. New Sects banished by Parl. p. 392. Barectors, their
vexing of Accountants in the Eschequer complained against, p. 54, 55. Barons
may wear swords, except in the Kings presence, and place of Council, p. 51.
Baron of Fanhope created, p. 604. See Lords. Barony, p. 33. Barons of the
Exchequer, to hear and examine Accounts of receivers of wool and moneys for the
King, p. 32, 33. To call Commissioners of Weights and Measures to account, p.
46. To allow Sheriffs what is reason upon their Accounts^ p. 80 419, 536. To
make allowance of d^e Debts and Loans to the King to Accountants, p. 146. To
tax Quindisms according to the old rate, p. 150. To see the Kings debts
satisfied, p. 166. The chief Baron rated 5 l. Pollmoney, p. 168. A deed
produced in Parliament delivered to the Barons as belonging to the King^ p.
184. To redress the Enormities o^ the Exchequer, and to be wise and able men,
p. 197. An act concerning them p. 203. to be well learned in the Law^ and
skilful in the Courses of the Court, p. ^04. may discharge all matters there
su^ed without attending a Privy Seal, p. 285. Their Oath p. 294, 317. Charged
to do right, p. 413. Their Fees, p. 439. To end the difference of Quindisms
touching the Town of Hatch. p. 475. To grant a Nisi prius in Traverses of
Inquests of Office, p. 475. To have power to record Attorneys, p. 547. Barony
tenure, p. 33, 86. not to contribute to Knights fees, Ibid. Baron and Feme join
in petition in Parliament, p. 8.30, 177, 430, 695, 696. The wife cannot vouch
the husband, nor averr against his fine wherein she joined p. 30. Lands given
to them dispunishable of waste. p. 60. Femes holding jointly with their
husbands, p. 87. Make an Attorney to sue in Parl. p. 177. The wives of the
banished Justices to have their Lands in Farm to the value of their Annuities,
p. 331. Judgment given in Parl. upon confession of the wife being covert, p.
430. Lands given to the use o^ a feme covert, and she enabled to plead and to
be impleaded by the name of a Duchess, p. 678. Grant to Baron and Feme of
their Mothers lands in her life as if she were dead; with power for them to
make partition, etc. p. 694. Encumbrances of the husband after divorse to be
void against the wife; yet the husband after her death to enjoy her purpar^ty,
p. 694. To mary the husbands brother if no mutual society, p. 696. Marriage at
6. years confirmed, p. 702. their grants and sales of the wives lands made
good, and the exchange of the husband confirmed, and he to enjoy the Lands for
wife^ though the wife die, p. 702. Barwick victualled, p. 20, 21. A Governor
and Garrison ordered for it in Parliament^ p. 24. Chamberlain of it and his fee,
p. 25. Provision for its defense, p. 288. An Act for carrying victuals to it,
and their Petition to buy woolls in Northumberland, p. 345. Their liberty to
transport woolls saved, p. 393, 420, 482.596. Duke of Bedford has the Custody
of Barwick-Castle, to him and his heirs males, with a fee of 500 marks, and
power to make a Deputy, p. 584. Besieged by the Scots, p. 656. Edmond Basset,
his writ of Error and case in Parl. p. 344, 348, 408. Bastardy pleaded and the
Bishops certificate therein how far and whom it shall conclude, p. 61, 62.
Ordered to be put in issue, p. 417, 418. Edward the 4. his marriage declared
illegitimate, and his issue Bastards by Richard the 3. to gain the Title to the
Crown, p. 711, 712. Bath, its fair, and complaint in Parliament against
Bristoll, p. 113. Its Bishopric con^erred by the Pope, p. 407. Battle and
Combat offered by persons accused or slandered to clear themselves, p. 66,
155. Battle joined between the Dukes of Hereford and Norfolk, p. 579.580.
inhibited between the Duke of Gloucester and Burgaine, p. 579. Bayon, Sir
William Elman Governor thereof taken by the Spaniards during the truce, p.
132. The Kings expense for its keeping and defense, p. 174. The English
Merchants Complaint against the Extortions of the Officers and University of
Bayon, p. 546. Gascoin wines to be brought to its port, p. 632. Beacons, and
Commission for their watching, p. 428. Beawdley men's exactions complained
against, p. 483. Beaumaris, Mils within it, p. 691. Beers transportation
inhibited, p. 96. Beggars and Vagrants to be banished out of every Town, p.
125. An Act against them, p. 130. to put in sureties for good behavior, or
imprisoned, p. 295. Letters produced against Sir Ralph Ferriers found by a
Beggar, he acquitted, and the Beggar committed, p. 189, 190. Benefices in
England bestowed on Aliens. ( Shoo-makers, Tailors, or Chamberlains) by the
Pope, p. 49, 50. The benefices of aliens seized, and their number and values to
be certified, p. 50. Orders against the Popes conferring Benefices by
provisions and taking their First Fruits and aliens enjoyment of them, p. 64,
65, 128, 129, 130, 161, 169, 317, 333, 356, 409^ 467, 547, 585. Sufficient
persons to be presented to, and keep residence on them, p. 356, 460. Collation
to Benefices of persons attainted by the King, p. 369. Presentment to be^efices
by the King not before recovery of them had, p. 396. No appropriation of
Benefices under pain of a Praemunire, petitioned for, p. 409. An act concerning
their Appropriation, p. 420, 443. No alien to enjoy a Benifice, petitioned for,
p. 443, 585. None to sue to Rome for Benefices, but only in the Kings Court, p.
125, 467, 547. Sir Tho. Berkly, arraigned, tried by a Jury in Parliament for
the murder of Edward the 2. acquitted, and bayled, p. 8, 10. Sir Simon
Beresford attainted; condemned and executed in Parliament by Judgment of the
Lords, without any legal trial, And the Lords Protestation thereupon. ^. 6, 7.
Beverly; a pardon granted to the Burgesses thereof for a fine, some few
excepted, p. 282. Archbishop of York to hold the Sheriffs Turn within it,
notwithstanding any Liberties granted to it, p. 548. Bigamy to be tried only
in Court Christian, p. 15.44. A Petition that any man may have his Clergy,
although he marry 2. wives or a widow, to prevent incontinency^ p. 125, 162.

Bills of Purveyors General, and uncertain, p. 55. a Bill delivered by the
Commons to the King and Lords against the Popes Provisions, p. 65. The Commons
desire answer of their Bills, and dismission, p. 67. A special Bill to be made
by the Commons for pardon of such as were unjustly convicted in the former
Parliament, p. 151. Their Bill against Provisors, p. 161. Bills read and
answered the last day of Parl. p. 166, 169. Answer to Bills as remedy cannot be
given to but in Parliament, to be made before the Parliament depart, p. 169.
Such Bills in Parliament, as cannot be ended by the Council to be exhibited to
the King, p. 295. The Speaker required to deliver the name of one who put a
scandalous Bill into Parliament, against the King, who is condemned as a
Traitor for it, p. 361, 362. The Speaker presents a private Bill of Complaint,
and requires judgment upon its reading, p. 465. The Lords of the Council by
order of Parliament answer and endorse sundry Bills not ended by the Parl. p.
591, 620. The Commons Petitions whereto the King and Lords agreed, not to be
altered by any new colored Bill, p. 71. The Prince suborned by the Clergy to
exhibit the Bill against Lollards, p. 456. Bills sent to the Lords by the
Commons, may at any time be sent for by them and amended, p. 552. A Bill of
Complaint exhibited in the name of the Gold-finers of London, and the deliverer
committed for re^using to avow the Bill, p. 157. Bill of the Navy exhibited in
Parl. p. 70. The University of Cambridge Bill of Complaints against the Mayor
and Townsmen in Parl. the Copy of it denied them, p. 200. William de Burcester
and his wives Bill of Complaint in Parl. p. 260. See more, Title Parliament and
King.

Bishops, their promise never to dissent from the Kings promise for the Customs
of wool, but by common assent of Parliament, p. 24. A Statute exemplified
under the great Seal at their request, p. 44 Bishop elect, p. 45. Bishops to
certify the names of all Aliens Benefices, and their value into the Chancery,
p. 50. Their Officers extortions complained of, which the King will speak to
them to redress, p. 61, 536. See Archbishop. Their Certificate of Bastardy, p.
61, 62. it appertains not properly to them to give Counsel in matters of Peace,
or punishments of evils, and malefactors, p. 11. Consult a part by themselves,
p. 11, 13. They and the Judges to meet and settle the differences about
Pensions of Churches, p. 139. Bishops to look to the purgation of notorious
felons committed to their Prisons: To pay to the subsidy as the Laity do for
their temporal possessions come to them or purchased since, 20 E. 1. p. 163.
The Bishop of Winchesters, pardon Ibid. To punish Usury, p. 285. Not to be
imprisoned, but fined and ransomed only by reason of their Order, for temporal
Offenses, p. 293. Their Protestations to be present in all Parliaments, but not
in cases of Treason and blo^d, by reason of the Canons, p. 322. All sworn in
Parliament on the Archbishop, Cross, Ib. The King will move them concerning
Tith of woo, p. 349. Their Tenants not to contribute to Knights wages, p. 1. By
office to take care sufficient persons be presented to Benefices and that they
reside on them, p. 356. An Oath prescribed to them and their successors and
taken by them on the shrine of St. Edward, to observe all Ordinances of the
Parl. of 21 R. 2. p. 369. Their joint thanks to the King in Parliament for
pardoning the Bishop of Norwich p. 405. They jointly intercede to the King for
the life of Sir Thomas Haxey condemned in Parliament, p. 362. Their Chaplains
dispensed with for Pluralities, and Non-residence, p. 409. Their Jurisdictions
saved by a Proviso, p. 409. To take order that every Parson may reside on his
Benefice and keep Hospitality, p. 420, 421. Bishops elect to be confirmed by
the Metropolitan upon the Kings writs without delay by reason of the damnable
scism at Rome, p. 445. The Bishops assent to the Bill, (that no man should
contract himself to any Queen of England without the Kings license and assent,
under pain of loss of goods and lands,) so far forth as it swarveth not from
the Law of God, and the Church, and imports no deadly sin, p. 589. All sworn
to the Pope and See of Rome; and therefore protest against any thing attempted
in Parliament to restrain the Popes power, p. 362. To attend the Kings Counsel
(when chosen of it) only when they could, p. 611. To pray for the Kings estate,
the peace and good government of the Land, and continuance of the Kings good
will to the Commons, p. 96. They make a Common Proctor to represent them in
Parliament in Criminal causes, wherein they could not be personally present by
the Cannons, p. 368, 371. The Bishopric of Ely, granted in Commenda, p. 623.
Blood Royal, Nobles descended of it, their precedence, p. 363, 574, 575, 576,
578, 665, 666, 667, 94, 332, 370, 564. Bohemians banished, p. 324. Bohemia
destroyed through Infidelity, p. 591. St. Botophs, the Staple held there, p.
125. The Bounds between Holland, and Kesteven, Cambridge, and Lincolnshire, to
be set out by a Commission and Perambulation, p. 335, 579. Bowstaves, an Act
concerning them, p. 700. Brabant, debate touching keeping the Peace and
Covenant with the Duke thereof, p. 23. the free trade of those of Brabant, for
woolls to the Staple at Bruges, restrained, p. 52. An act for restraint of
Clothes and wools in Brabant, p. 639, 644. Brant river, the Wears thereon to be
removed, p. 124. Breach of Prison. See Prison. Breakers of the Peace to be
arrested, p. 136. See Peace, and Privilege of Parl. Brecknock Castle, p. 565.
Breast in Britany, p. 157, 174, 175, 312, 345. Browers, an Act concerning
Patents made to them, p. 644, and concerning Brewers in Kent, p. 660. Bribery
and Bribes against Judges oaths. Thorp Chapter Justice condemned to death, for
taking Bribes, p. 74, 316. Richard Lions impeached and censured for taking
Bribes to pay the Kings due debts, p. 121. Bribes for probate of Wills
complained of, p. 178. A Castle sold and surrendered for Bribes, the money
ordered to be paid to the King and parties censured, p. 292, 293. The Justices
of both Benches and Barons to be sworn to take no consideration or Bribes, p.
294. The Lord Chancellor accused of Bribery, and acquitted, p. 299, 300, 316. A
Petition that all the Kings chief Officers may be sworn to shun all Bribery,
and the attainted thereof to lose all he has, p. 394. No Judges, or chief
Of^icers to take Bribes under pain of treble damages, p. 472. Hugh Brice his
impeachment and Account of the kings Exchange to a committee of Lords and
Commons, p. 684, 685, 686. Bridges, lands purchased, and Guardians appointed
for the repair of Rochester bridge, p. 344. Rents and Customs, paid to the old,
to be paid to the new bridge there, p. 370. An Act for Burford and Chalam
Bridges near Abindon, and free passage over them, p. 561.

Custom demanded of Boats at Bridges complained of, p. 132.

Bridgenorth men to exact no imposition for wines, passing Severn River, p.
482. Bristol petitioned to be made a County, bounded, their Charters and
Liberties confirmed by Parliament, p. 119. They erect a fair, and prohibit
their Townsmen to bring any wares to Bath fair, out of malice to Bath, for
which redress is sought, p. 133. complain of their wrongful arrests at
Callice, for the Trespasses and Debts of others, p. 138. Lands recovered before
the Mayor and Bailiff thereof by an Assize of Freshforce reversed in the K. B.
by error, and thereupon error brought in Parliament, p. 352. Claim and take
Custom for wines discharged at Chepstow, complaint thereof, p. 358. Complain
and require redress of new taxes imposed on their wares passing the River of
Severn, by the men of Beaudley, Gloucester, Worcester, Bridgenorth, p. 482,
483. Britain, Lord Latimers oppressions there p. 122.

Petition for payment of victuals taken by the Duke in Britain in Devonshire in
his passage, p. 137. Articles between the king and John Duke of Britain read,
and agreed by the Lords: Liberty granted to transport victuals and Merchandise
into Britanie thereupon, p. 157. Henry 6. his war with Britain, and Ed. 4. his
peace and alliance with the Duke of Britain, p. 683. Merchants robbed by the
Britains, p. 581.

Brocage of debts and usury complained of and examined, p. 61, 121, 285.611.
Brokers of Rome their abuses, p. 128. Brok^rs and Lumbards maintaining usury
and Sodomy complained of, and to be banished; p. 124 442. No Stranger to be a
Broker, p. 133, 141, 442, 482, 611. Remedy prayed against Brokers, Usurers, p.
285. Brothelhouses not to be kept in Southwark, p. 339. Bruges in Flanders, the
staple of wools held there, and complaints against their Monopolies, and
restraints, p. 52, 70.

A complaint for suing the Mayor of the staple in Callice, by a London Merchant
in the foreign Court of Bruges, and he ordered to incur a Praemunire, if he
surcease it not, p. 703.

Sir William Bryan Knight, imprisoned by Parl. for purchasing a Bull of
Excommunication from Rome directed to the Archbishops, against such who brake
his house, and took away his Charters and Privileges, p. 543. Bullion orders
and means for its importation, p. 70, 171, 172, 341, 375. Inquiry of such as
convey it away, p. 121. Bullion to be brought to the staple, p. 121, 325, 341.

Its exportation inhibited by the Duke of Burgundy, p. 70, 375.

Bulls of the Pope complained of, inhibited, nulled, and their bringing in
punished in a praemunire, p. 41, 45, 50, 64, 103, 324, 334, 343, 457, 460, 479,
480, 584, 623, See Pope, Provisions. Bordeaux, ship passing thither taken, p.
132. The revenues of it examined by Commissioners, p. 168. expenses for its
keeping, p. 174. An Imposition on Merchants coming thither granted to the
Mayor, and Jurates thereof revoked, p. 594. Another imposition there complained
against, and to cease, p. 619, Gaiscoyn wines to be brought down thither, p.
632. Burgesses of Parliament, see Commons and Privilege. Duke of Burgundy
inhibits exportation of Bullion, p. 375. His perjury, and revolt to the French,
p. 614. Ed. the 4. allieth himself with him, p. 683. Much depends on him, p.
694. An Act touching the Merchandise of Burgundy, p. 679. Buroughs, and Houses
held in them by Burgage suffered to fall down complained of, p. 123. Adam de
Bury accused in Parl. sent for, came not, could not be found, all his goods are
arrested for it, p. 123. restored to him afterward at the Commons motion, p.
152. Butchers of London, where to keep slaughterhouses, and cast their ordure,
p. 349. Butler of the King to deliver wines to furnish Castles, p. 21^ Moneys
assigned him out of Aides, p. 28. Complaint of his undue taking wines by the
name of prizes, p. 398, 412. Tho. Chaucer chief Butler declares what^ prizes
of wines the king ought to receive of every ship, and how he was defrauded of
them by the Londoners, p. 476. Prays payment of moneys upon Tallies for wines
taken up by him for the king, p. 540. The Office settled on him by Patent for
life, confirmed by Parliament, p. 565. Butter not to be exported, p. 96. its
exportation licenced for one year, p. 192. An Act concerning its exportation,
p. 581, 626.
C
Jack Cade, the Act for his attainder, p. 647. Robert Poynings of Southwark Esquire
his Carver and Sword Bearer, pardoned, p. 652. Sir William Oldhall knight,
outlawed of Treasons for joining with him, p. 654. Richard Duke of York,
confederated with him, to be advanced to the Crown, p. 661. Callice, King Edw.
3. his siege thereof^ and reso^ution to take it, p. 47. Merchants to repair to
it by the Lords consent, p. 92. Impositions on Wools there complained of and
nulled, p. 101. An Act that those born there should be Denizens, and
inheritable in England, p. 106. A motion that the Staple may be kept there
only, p. 117. Staple ware and Bullion to be conveyed no where but thither, p.
121. Lord Latymer impeached for procuring grants to the destruction of the
Staple and Town of Callice, p. 122. Adam de Bury Mayor thereof impeached for
diverse deceits and wongs, p. 123. Corn and privisions to be transported
thither, p. 135. Complaints of English Merchants arrests there for others Debts
and Trespasses, p. 136. The Staple settled there, and no where else in foreign
parts, ^t incorporated, endowed with sundry Liberties, Privileges, and a Mayor
and Aldermen, p. 140. Protections of such as lie there only by covin revoked,
p. 148. The expenses of Callice examined, p. 168. Petitions of the Mayor and
Aldermen thereof touching their Liberties, p. 172. Callice cost yearly 20000 l.
p. 174, 404. The Commons not to be charged with its expenses, p. 175. All
merchandise to be carried thither, p. 178. Staple removed thither, p. 325. Acts
that the Staple may be removed thence, p. 283, 309, 337, 338. Not to be held of
the French King, being gotten by the sword, p. 300. The Burgesses grew rich by
the Staple there, the good Towns at home poor^ and the King lost in his
Customs, p. 309. Captains of it and the Marches to reside there, p. 312. Staple
enacted to continue there for a time, p. 334, 341, 356, 393, 408, 570, 464,
472. Charges to be levied, and aid granted for its defense, p. 351, 472, 360,
375, 390, 404, 415, 425, 451. A Petition that the sale of Tinn may not continue
there, p. 355. License to transport Staple wares to other places revoked upon
their Petition, p. 408. They pray the Assise of wine, ale, bear, bread to be
granted them, p. 420. John Earl of Somerset Captain thereof, his Salary and
Soldiers wages agreed on by Indenture both in times of Peace and War, his
arrears ordered to be paid, p. 431. Complaint of their exactions upon wagons,
p. 443. Infested by the French, p. 451. Provision for the dearth there, p. 453.
The abuses of the Treasurer thereof complained of and ordered to be redressed,
p. 461. Its Siege, intended by the French and Duke of Burgundy, p. 470. Three
parts of the Subsidy of Wools employed for its defense, p. 472. No wools or
Staple commodities to be transported but thither, p. 481. Its defense and
supply to be considered of by the Parliament, p. 534. The Mint and Staple
settled there, p. 570, 571, 596, 612, 625, 631. The Treasurer and Victualler
thereof ^o receive Staple Wares and other revenues there for the payment of the
Soldiers, p. 593. Recognizances before the Mayor of the Staple by Act, p. 604.
An Act touching bringing of Stone thither, p. 605. The keeping thereof
committed to the Duke of Gloucester for 9. years by Indenture; wherein the
Numbers of the Garrison Soldiers, Officers, their fees and wages are expressed,
p. 615. Danger like to happen to it for want of pay, p. 618. The Treasurer of
England to pay the Soldiers thereof what the Customs there will not pay^ p.
619. What Staplers shall elect the Mayor and Constable of the Staple there, p.
631. Edmund Duke of Somerset Captain thereof, his arrears to be pai^, p. 650.
Du. of York Captain thereof, requires satisfaction to 13 Articles, p. 653. The
Mayor, Constable, and Staplers allowed out of the Customs there the moneys lent
toward the Soldiers pay, p. 653, 659, 678, 681. The Parliament to take order
for the due paying of the Soldiers thereof, p. 656, 658^ 677^ The Treasurer
thereof to account yearly at the Exchequer, and dispose of all offices of
Account there, p. 677. An Act touching Passengers from Dover thither, p. 679.
The Treasurer and Victualler of Callice surrender their Patents, and others are
appointed and confirmed in their places, p. 681. Provision for its victualling
and soldiers pay, p. 677. Camb^idge University, a difference between the
Friars Mendicants and i^, heard and settled by the Lords in Parliament, p. 102,
103. The Chancellor and Scholars thereof to punish all victuallers, and
defaults in weights, measures, etc. in the Mayors default, with the Mayor and
Bayli^ts thereof and their Officers^ p. 172. The Chancellor and Scholars Bill
accusing the Mayor, Bay^i^ts, and Commonalty thereof, for breaking n^ their
Treasury, taking away and burning their Charters, enforcing them under their
Seal to release all their Liberties, all actions real and personal, and enter
into bonds of great sums to them, in a riotous manner, for which they are
fined, censured in Parliament, their Liberties settled into the Kings hands, the
Government and privileges thereof granted to the Chancellor and Scholars, p.
199, 200. Their grant explained and confirmed, p. 304. Their Petition, that
neither they nor their Servants may be put to answer any Treason, Felony, or
breach of Law before the Mayor and Bayli^ts; who are summoned thereupon, and
adjudged in a contempt, p. 331. The Commons pray the Lords to regard their
estate, p. 347, 407. Their Liberties confirmed without fine, p. 393. Canon Law,
and Constitutions of the Church, would have benefices bestowed only for
charity, without praying or paying, p. 128. Prohibitions granted in cases
against the Canon Law, p. 139. No man to be bound by the Clergies Constitutions
made for their own advantage; p. 148. Ordinaries to do according to the Laws
of the Church, p. 164. The Laws of the Church to discuss and punish usury, p.
285. See Usury. The Bishops by the Canonical Law, not to be present in matters
of treason and blood, p. 322. Nor to advise in matters of punishment, p. 11.
The Bishops agree to a Bill so far forth as it swarveth not from the Law of
God and the Church, p. 589. Canterbury, the Staple settled there in honor of
Thomas Becket, p. 82. An Act for its paving, p. 703. A distress for a
Quit^rent, granted to the Prior of Christ Church in Canterbury, p. 599. Capras
awarded against a Clerk upon the Sheriffs return, p. 32. against wearers of
Liveries, p. 590. prayed in writs of Annuity, etc. p. 410. Captains to be
placed and displaced by Commissioners of the Array, and to forage on the
Enemy, not English, p. 21, 22. The heirs or Execut. of Captains dead, or taken
prisoners, prayed not to be charged to pay ought by them received, p. 203.
Impeached for miscarriages in Service, 157, 158, 292, 293. To be admitted to
Account in the Exchequer without delay p. 296. To continue their commands in
their hands, and not let them to farm, p. 312. Able Captains to be appointed by
the King, p. 395. Their wages, an Act for it, p. 420. To reside on their Forts,
p. 453. Acts touching Captains abating So^^diers wages, and their departing
from their Captains, p. 626. A complaint against a Capt. rescuing a Prisoner in
Land. p. 695. Captains to answer for their Soldiers damages don to the
subjects, p. 185. Cardinals sent by the Pope to treat a Peace between England
and France, p. 37.614. Sundry livings, preferments, and great revenues grante^
to them by the Popes Provisions in England, Complaints against it, p. 41, 42,
61, 64, 65, 129, 130, 151, 186. The profits of their Livings answered to the
King, to whom they were Enemies, p. 49, 129, 130, 186.186. All Cardinals
livings against Pope Urban, seized into the Kings hands, p. 179, 180. No
Cardinal to enjoy any living in the Realm, p. 317, 406. The Bishop of
Winchester made Cardinal, his Title, p. 592, 593. requested to be of the Kings
Council; to absent himself in all affairs wherein the Pope or See of Rome were
touched, p. 593. His purgation from being a Traitor to the Realm; His pawned
Jewels of the King stayed, p. 603. To attend the Council when he could, p. 611.
One of the Feoffees of H. 5. p. 615, 622. Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of
Canterb. made Cardinal, p. 693. Carriages of the King to be made in an easy
manner, and in Summer time, p. 93. Petition to be of the Kings own Carts and
Horses, and not charge the Commons therewith, p. 135. The Clergy not to make
Carriages for the King, yet forced by purveyors, complaint against it. p. 139,
165. Carlisle, king of Scots appointed to serve there with 40 men, p. 28. Aid
required for repairing thereof, being decayed, spoiled, and the Inhabitants
unable to do it, p. 131, 171. The King not to repair it, but will give in
charge it be done, and will repair the Castle, p. 171. The King prayed to
provide for its defense, p. 288. Its surrender to the Scots by practice,
treason, p. 671. Caresbrocke Castle, provisions for its victualling and
defense, p. 21, 28. Castles and Forts, in foreign parts, impeachments for their
surrender to the Enemy by Cowardice, Treachery, or Corruption, in Parliament,
and judgments thereupon, p. 157, 158, 159, 29^, 293 671. All such as have
Castles or Forts in the North or Seacoasts to furnish, defend and reside upon
them, p. 185, 305, 466, 471. Kings Castles to be joined to the body of the
County, p. 335. The King to repair his Castles, and not grant away their
profits, p. 426. None to be imprisoned in Castles, nor Constable of a Castle to
be a Justice of Peace, p. 432. Castles or Castlets to be built by the Kings
Warrant and License, p. 439, 619. All Captains of Castles and Forts to repair
to them, p. 453. To be kept by Englishmen not aliens, p. 455. Those that held
Castles against the king proclaimed Traitors if they deliver them not up by a
set day, p. 672, 677. Attainder of Treason for surrendering king E. 4. his
Castles to H. 6. p. 677. Catholic Faith, the kings promise to defend it,
Commons thanks to him for its defense, p. 405. neglected, p. 547. John
Cavendish fined and imprisoned for accusing the Lord Chancellor falsely of
bribery, p. 299, 300. Challenge of the Indicter by the party indicted, p. 39.
Of ^he Array how to be tried, p. 458. Chamberlain of England Earl of Oxford by
Inheritance, p. 159, 397. One of the 5 great Officers, and to be of the Kings
Council, p. 183. To warn Aliens to depart the Kings Court, p. 324. To execute
his Office according to the Statutes of the Kings house, p. 458. The Office
with all the profits granted to the Duke of Gloucester at the Kings pleasure^
p. 564. Ralph Lord Cromwell discharged of this Office by the Council, without
any offense, p. 603. Chamberlains of the Eschequer to have a key to the Kings
receipt, p. 564, 565. Champertors not to be maintained by any great person, p.
51. Champerty, Writs and damages to be granted there^n, p. 128. buying of a
Title of one in possession, against the Councils irregular decree, no
Champerty, p. 351, 352. Chancellor, See the Catalogue of Chancellors: Usually
declared the Causes of Parliament before the King, Lords and Commons, and
adjourned, proroged dissolved the Parliament. See Parliament. His Oath, p. 34,
315, 316. refuses an Oath prescribed by Parliament, as contrary to his former
Oath of Chancellor, p. 34. Ought to have conusans of all Trespa^ses done by
Clerks of the Chancery, p. 45. One of those who make choice of Sheriffs, p. 15,
178. See Sheriffs. To survey the Chancery, both Benches, Exchequer, and
Receipts, remove such officers as are unfit, and place others, p. 325. Nor to
make any Process or Subp^na against the Common Law, or in causes where
recoverie is given by it, p. 333. impeached and acquitted of Bribery, and the
accuser fined, imprisoned for the slander, p. 299, 300. Impeached by the
Commons, forced to answer in person, and censured, p. 315, 316. Sureties of the
Peace prayed and granted against him in Parliament, p. 299. To be gracious in
writs of Grace, and moderate the fine for writs, p. 15, 75, 87, 88, 149. One of
the Peers, p. 31. To be chosen in Parliament, and sworn to observe all Laws,
p. 32. To be one of the Peers, prayed, p. 39. The King to appoint him at his
pleasure, p. 39. To appoint certain fees to Justices of Peace, p. 40. No Bu^ls
or Letters to be brought into the Realm^ unless first showed to him, p. 50.
One of the Commissioners to reform Errors in the Exchequer, p. 56. To make just
allowance to Sheriffs, p. 302. References to him upon Petitions in Parliament,
p. 82, 93, 97, 134, 150, 161, 284, 306, 355, 409, 442, 547, 549. To be one of
the Governors of Merchant Strangers, p. 88. Declares the Kings intention to
advance his sons. p. 94. To take order for Juries where the King is party, in
the Attorneys neglect, p. 97. To be one of the Council, and end all matters
belonging to his Office, p. 120, 183. To grant writs in Champertie upon the
suit of the party, p. 128. To grant a Commission^ to examine the truth of a
misdemeanour suggested in a view upon an Assise p. 134. Libels signed to be
brought to him before Prohibitions granted on them, p. 140. At the end of
Parliaments wills the Knights and Burgesses to sue forth writs for their
wages, p. 140. See Knights and Writs for wages: To inspect heirs when they sue
Livery, p. 150. To be chosen by the Lords in Parliament during the Kings
minority, p. 159. To take order against the Popes reservations, p. 161. The
most wise and able man in the realm to be chosen Chancellor, and to redress
the Enormities of the Chancery, p. 197. To grant licenses for exchanges between
Merchants, where reasonable, p. 284. To hear complaints of Attorneys against
Clerks refusing to bring Rolls in Court, p. 308. ordered to answer some
Petitions in Parliament by mouth, p. 306. Surrenders the Great Seal in Parl.
and desires any to complain of any thing unduely done by him: Afterward is
justified by the Commons, and restored, p. 329. Ordered to make a Writ of Scire
fac. and Habeas Corpus upon an Error brought in Parl. p. 331. Ordered to see an
award accomplished, p. 343. Confirms an award of the Council under the Great
Seal, p. 351. To grant a Supersedeas in Writs of Conspiracy brought out of the
shire, p. 354, 355. To execute a judgment given in the C. B. upon the
Judgment affirmed in Parliament in a Writ of Error against the reversal in B.
R. p. 359. Answers the Commons Petition for a general pardon by word of
mouth, p. 371. Replies to the Bishop of Norwich his answers to his Impeachment,
and pronounces the Lords sentence against him in Parliament^ p. 292, 293. The
Knights and Burgesses called before him, and the Steward by name, p. 404, 415.
To regulate the fees of all Mashals and Warden of the Fleet, p. 409. May order
Traverses of Offices to be tried in the K. B. or C. P. by virtue of his place,
p. 412. Declares to the King the Commons desire of a Conference with some of
the Lords, p. 416. His power to grant Commissions settled and regulated by an
Act, p. 419, 420. To banish Alien Brokers coming into the realm by writs out of
Chancery, p. 442. Gives thanks in the Kings behalf to the Losds and Commons, p.
462, 480, See King; No Chancellor in the Parl. of 11 H. 4. p. 564. The Earl of
Arundel's Free Warren and Chase in Sussex, referred to him and the Justices, p.
547. To grant writs of Surety for the Peace, p. 548 He and the Justices to take
order in a case of contribution from other ships to the Admiral taken by their
deserting her, p. 548, 549. Resigns the old Kings seal to the new King and
Protector in Parliament, then is made Chancellor and receives the Seal and a
Patent from the new, confirmed by Parl. p. 563. Declares the pleasure and
Judgment of the King and Lords for the Earl Marshal to be Duke of Norfolk,
according to a former Patent, p. 576. Discharged of his Office and Great Seal
by Common assent in Parl. at his request, and the Seal delivered to another^ p.
584. A Complaint in Parl. of an Executors abuse referred to him, p. 588. To
grant such Licenses of alienation, as have been used, p. 590. To appoint
certain by Commission to apprehend one who took a Burgesses servant in
Execution, against the Privilege of Parliament, p. 596. To end a suit between a
Burgess of Gaunt and an Englishman touching a bargain of wool, p. 599. To take
order to dispose moneys given to charitable and religious uses by a testator
deceased, p. 635. Discharged, and a new appointed by the King, p. 641.
Prorogues the Parliament thrice by Commission, p. 650, 675, 681. Answers
certain requests of the Commons in the presence of the King, Lords and Commons,
thanks them, etc. p. 681. His Eloquent oration to the Lords and Commons, p.
682, 683. Bails a Felon by a Corpus cum causa, p. 692. He and two Justices hear
a complaint about a disseisin, p. 693. Censured for breach of his Trust, p.
368. Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, his fees and power, p. 667, 693.
Chancery, writs out it to prohibit exactions at bridges, p. 132. Accounts of
receivers of Wools and moneys for the King to be enrolled in Chancery, p. 32.
The rate of wools for every County granted to the King, delivered by Roll into
the Chancery, there entered, and Commissions issued thence to levy them, p. 34.
The Names of all Aliens, their Benefices and values certified by all Bishops
into the Chancery, p. 50. The Names of all Parishes upon a Subsidy granted,
returned into it, p. 118. To examine and redress frauds in Protections, p.
118. The perambulation and bounds of B^istol to be returned into it, p. 139.
Charters of Cities and Towns to be showed in Chancery, and there confirmed, p.
125, 137. Such Bayliffes as are imprisoned before Justices of the Forest for
Vert or Venisor, to have writs out of the Chancery to ^ayl them till the Air,
p. 1^5. To right such Cities whose liberties and Charters are infringed by
being impleaded for their Freeholds out of their Cities upon showing their
Charters there, p. 133 To grant a new Charter to Southwark, their old being
casually burnt, upon suit, p. 134. The Chancellor to seek to redress the
Enormities of it, p. 197. The Commission and proceedings touching the Customs
of the Stanneries returned into it, p. 149. No watch and ward to be made of
persons flying to Sanctuaries but by order out of Chance^y, p. 165.
Exemplifications of Deeds and Chatters enrolled in Chancery defaced in the
Insurrection, to be granted there without fine, p. 202. Motions against taking
fines for writs there, p. 80, 203. See Writs, and Fines. No man's possession to
be disturbed by Commission or Privy Seal out of Chancery, without due answer,
p. 295. To be surveyed by the Chancellor and keeper of the Privy Seal, and
remove ^uch officers as are unsit, p. 325. Rioters make a Fine in Chancery, p.
343. Prohibition to the Admiralty thence for holding plea of matters triable at
the Common Law, p. 356. An Act touching Damages in Chancery, p. 356. No Writs
of Subpaena to appear at a day to be granted out of the Chancery, but in cases
of necessity, p. 410. One bound in 1000 l. by order of Parliament, upon a
complaint there, to hear his Judgment in Chancery, p. 465. A Commission
concerning the great spoils and losses of Melcomb, returned into Chancery, and
thereupon order for their relief in their Fee-farms, Tithes, and Fifteens, p.
467. An extent of the Fee-farm of Lyme returned in Chancery, p. 468. Writs of
Surety of the Peace granted out of it, p. 548, 605, 606, 611. All writs of
Subp^na, and certis de causis to be controlled, and not granted of matters
determinable at Common Law, under a penalty, p. 548. That the exception, how
the party has sufficient remedy at the Common Law, shall discharge any matter
in the Chancery^ p. 560, 561, That no man be bound to answer in Chancery for
any matter determinable at Common Law on pain the Plaintiff to lose 20. l. p.
567. The foundations of all Hospitals and their circumstances to be certified
by all ordinaries into Chancery by a day, p. 547. Proof of lands intayled to be
made in Chancery before restitution to them, after an attainder, p. 551. Writs
thence against Purveyors, p. 81. No Prohibition to be granted, till the
circumstances there examined, p. 165. Charters of privileges, and exemption
confirmed, and all to enjoy them, p. 81, 124.125, 133, 137, 148, 149, 163, 166.
Sea Magna Charta.

Sealed with the Kings great Seal, and the style of France and England p. 209.
Charters to Bristol, and their liberties confirmed under the great Seal, p.
119. Interpretation of Charters belongs to the King, p. 166. Charters of
indenization and Creations of Earls, read and confirmed in Parliament, p. 363.
See Confirmation, Patents. A Charter repealed only in one illegal clause, p.
123, 203, The Charter of the Tinners Liberties explained and declared in
Parliament, p. 142. So the City of L^ndons Charter, p. 166. And the Charters to
the Chancellor and Scholars of Cambridge, p. 304. Charters lost in the
Insurrection, or casually burnt, renewed and exemplified, p. 134, 202, 297.
Charters ordered to be revoked by Parliament, and quite nulled, p. 316, 318,
123, 203, 294, 312, 610, 664.

Charter House Prior in London, an Act for some ground, and a Conduict, p. 603.
Chantries erected and confirmed by Parliament in several places, p. 588, 604,
622, 625, 654, 699. Chaplains of Archbishops and Bishops dispensed with for
non-residence and pluralities, p. 409. Chapels of ease annexed to cures to have
service and Sacraments administered in them, p. 580. The free Chapel of St.
George in Windsor incorporated, and a Dean thereof, p. 594. Clerks of the Kings
Chapel, 260 marks given them by R. 5. ordered to be paid, p. 603. Cheese, Acts
against and for its exportation and weighing, p. 96, 192, 581, 600, 626.
Cheshire men, execution prayed of their outlawries for felonies, trespasses,
rapes, oppressions in sundry Counties, p. 170, 284, 305, 339, 396. That they
may forfeit their lands and goods for Felonies done in other places, p. 305.
Masters of the watch in Cheshire, for certain moneys received to serve the King
at their own cost, p. 396. An Act for process against Cheshire men, p. 396.
Chester, a Franchise royal, and County Palatine, p. 62.170. How Judgment there
is to be reversed; and what remedy when the Justices record the pleas before
them falsely, p. 62.

The County of Chester not comprised within the Tallage, and exempted from
Taxes, p. 191. Chester liberties saved, p. 284. Felons there forfeit no lands
and goods, p. 305. The King will be advised of their liberties, p. 339. An Act
touching the Principality of Chester, p. 369. All releases made by R. 2. to any
for debts due to the Earldom of Chester, not under the great Seal, repealed, p.
397. Prince of Wales, Earl of Chester, enacted to enjoy all the liberties
thereof, and touching adjournments in Pleas, with out giving any day or entry
thereof, p. 467. The Principality and Earldom thereof created and settled by
sundry Charters in Parliament upon the Prince, p. 659. An Act of Resumption of
the Earldom into the Kings hands, p. 677. Prince Ed. created Earl thereof, and
all the hereditaments thereto belonging granted him by Patents confirmed by
Parliament, p. 689.

Chichester, the customers of it to receive the customs of Wools shipped at
Jews. Its Liberties violated and Charter confirmed, p. 133. The weighing of
wools for Sussex to be there, p. 419. Children of the King and others born
beyond the Sea inheritable, p. 38, 39. See Aliens and Denizens. A Petition that
no Villains put their children to school, p. 345. Children and young
Counselors a long time governed the Realm, almost to its utter ruin, p. 384
389. Their properties, Ibid. Chimenage in Forests complained against, and not
to be taken but in some cases, p. 345, 355. Church, the liberties thereof
confirmed, enjoyed, and the violations of them redressed, one principal cause
of calling Parliaments, p. 32, 33, 34, 39, 44, 61^ 64, 65, 92, 96, 100, 139,
140, 146, 158, 164, 165, 167, 169, 173, 174^ 175, 182, 185, 188, 195, 202, 281,
283, 287, 288, 294, 298, 301, 303, 305, 341, 351, 358, 360, 371, 394, 404, 409,
419, 424, 424, 437, 451^ 464, 466, 470, 478, 481, 534, 538^ 541, 544, 548, 549,
553, 554, 571. Acts for their confirmation^, Ibidem. The King sworn to observe
the Churches Liberty: the violation of which Oath by R. 2. in enforcing all
religious persons to give Horse, Arms, Carts, when he went into Ireland,
banishing the Archbishop, and staying Ecclesiastical proceedings, is part of
his impeachment, p. 387, 388. How the French would dispose of the English
Church revenues if conquered by them p. 47. The King reserves the lands of the
Church in the conquest of France, p. 110. Church lands sold to be recovered, p.
126. The Crown dis-inherited by the Realms Government by Churchmen, who are
dis-officed, p. 112. The suppression of Rebels disposing the right of the
Church, and attempting to destroy the Ministers thereof, one cause of the Parl
of 10 H. 6. p. 602. Cinqueports, bound to guard the Seas, for which they have
Privileges, p. 18. They set out 30 ships to guard the Sea, and bear half the
charges, the Council promising to bear the other half, p. 20. The Officers of
Dover Castle to make no process by capias out of the Liberties of the
Cinqueports, p. 132. Bought most of the hundred of Costlenig in Sussex, yet
would not contribute any thing to them, p. 136. To contribute to the Tallage
granted by Parl. p. 191. Circumspecte agatis to be kept in all points, p. 81.
Cirsteaux Monks, a Bill and Act against them, p. 406, 407. Citations for
trifles complained of as an oppression, p. 15. Clarindon Park, a release of
Common and Estovers in it, p. 365. Clergy, their Petitions in Parliament
against grievances, and their answers, p. 23, 32, 44, 45, 81, 139, 140. 148,
151, 164, 165. Arrayed and mustered, p. 110. not to be arrayed, p. 454. To pay
Taxes with the Laity for some of their temporal possessions of later times
purchased, p. 163. Not to contribute, nor their Tenants, to Knights wages, p.
1. Judgments in Parliament reversed, because the Clergy not present at them,
whereupon they make a Procter in Cases of treason and blood, p. 368, 371. Put
from their temporal offices, p. 112. Imprisoned without due process, a
grievance, p. 32. A Capias not to be awarded against them without a writ to the
Bishop, p. 32. Much wasted and to be comforted, p. 547. To appoint their
Collectors, p. 555. Their encroachments against Law to be redressed, p. 175.
Not to allow sanctuary in cases of Debt, Account, Trespass, but only where the
life and member of a man are in danger, p. 76. Not to grant any aid but by
themselves at their free-wills, not Commons pleasures, p. 189. Letters to the
Archbishop and Clergy of York to contribute to the aid of the Northern parts,
p. 18. Their Oppressions complained of, p. 16. See Bishops and Probate of
Wills. Their Protestation and Liberties, See Archbishop and Bishops. Clergy,
not to be allowed in Treason, p. 53. nor in case o^ Bigamy, p. 125, 162.
Allowed in felony, p. 631. Clerks convict delivered over to the Ordinary, p.
362. to live always in prison, p. 639. The Bishop to look narrowly to their
purgation, p. 163. Clerk of the Parliament his election and office, p. 22, 30,
31, 36, 43, 46, 73, 78, 362, 406, 416, 430. Clerk of the Commons, p. 647.
Clerks of Chancery exempted from Knights wages, p. 1. To be sued only in
Chancery for Trespass, their Privilege confirmed by Parliament, p. 45. One of
them murdered, p. 81. Clerk of the Council, his Office and Oath, p. 365, 368.
Clerk of the Crown, his Office, p. 87, 323, 362, 415. Clerk of the Hanaper, to
pay the Judges, Kings Attorney, and Sergeants, their wages, p. 623. Clerks of
the Kings Bench, Common Place, and Exchequer, refusing to bring in records, and
allow pardons, complained of, and remedy ordered, p. 306. Not to be Attorneys,
p. 346. To be able, and such as appoint them to answer for them, p. 571. Their
misprisions ordered to be amended, p. 545, 560, 585. Clerks appointed for the
Navy and War, p. 20, 21. Clerk of the Ordinance, his office, p. 612. Clerk of
the Pipe, and an Act concerning him, p. 204. Clerk of the Merkets: not to take
Fines in gross of any Towns, p. 127, 134. To punish according to the quality
of the fault, without taking any fines where he does not his office, p. 127,
134. Not to intermeddle within Liberties and Towns contrary to their Charters,
p. 148, 161. An Act concerning him, p. 333. Clipping. See Money. Cloth woollen,
Clothes of all sorts; Acts and Petitions for making, measuring, sealing, and
Custom concerning the same, p. 52, 57, 76, 80, 82, 96, 117, 133, 149, 185, 299,
334, 335, 345, 347, 397, 419, 433, 460, 468, 472, 476, 482, 483, 542, 601, 605,
625, 639, 645, 676, 678, 682, 683, 705. Cluny Abbot, an yearly pension of 2000
l. paid to him, moved to cease, p. 50. Cocquet; every man to cocquet wools in
his own name, p. 335. Merchants having their Cocquets and goods customed, not
to be impeached, p. 555. Sir William Cogans case and accusation, p. 199.
Collectors of Subsidies, Wools, etc. vexed in the Exchequer after their
Accounts made, by Barrectors, and denied to make Attorneys, complained of, and
renewed unless in case of concealments, p. 54, 55. Their extortions and frauds
complained of and examined, p. 61, 62, 69. appointed by the Knights of Shires,
p. 112. That none be a Collector after his age of 60 years, prayed, p. 149. To
account upon Oath before ^he Barons of the Exchequer according to the Roll
between them and the Controllers, p. 202. Of Kent, to account by names of
Hundreds, not persons or Towns, p. 355. Their conconcealments inquired after,
p. 396. To be allowed such particular sums they could not collect, p. 460. For
the Clergy appointed by themselves, p. 555. An Act for the recovery of one
Collector against another, p. 561. That no religious Alien be a Collector of
Desms, p. 616. An Act touching the Collection of Tenths, p. 624. A discharge of
Desms collected desired by the Collector, p. 644. Arrears of a Collection of
Desms in the Collectors hands ordered to be paid, notwithstanding the general
pardon; as being contrary to the Kings meaning, p. 648, 396. None of the
Commons house to be Collectors. See Commons. Collusion, Covin, Deceit, Fraud:
Feofment by Collusion, to deceive the Lords of Wards, to be redressed, p. 17.
Of Collectors of wools, complained of and examined, p. 62, 69. In wines through
the Gangers neglect, p. 63. Richard Lions and others impeached in Parl. for
deceiving the King, p. 121, 122, 123, 158.292, 293, 315, 316, 626. For
defrauding Soldiers of their wages, p. 123. See Captains. Counterfeit
Soldiers and Gentlemen to be punished, p. 125. Colourers of alien Enemies
goods, and the Customs of aliens, to be inquired of and punished, p. 127, 476.
Corrupt recoveries of religious persons, a Bill against them, p. 138. Such as
keep in Sanctuaries by Covin, to be arrested, p. 140, 175, 176. Protections of
such who lie beyond Sea by Covin, to delay such as sue them, to be revoked, p.
118, 148. Petitions and Acts against Feofments by Collusion, and Fraud, p. 162,
172, 444, 540, 696. Against fraudulent enfeoffing the King by procurement of
religious persons to extinquish the Lords tenure, and procure Mortmain, p. 203.
Frauds of Usurers to be punished at Common law, p. 286. Religious persons
Fraud^ in purchasing more lands than they are licensed, to be inquired of, p.
312. An Appeal by practice suppressed, p. 331. Against the Collusion of
religious persons, who cause their Villains to marry inherittixes, p. 355.
Articles against R. 2. for perverting Justice, and oppressing his Subjects by
undue and deceitful means against his Oath, p. 386, 387, 388. A pardon to a
receiver wherein the King was deceived, reversed, p. 396, 648. A fine and
Judgment prayed to be reversed for Falsehoods and Frauds, p. 444. Feoffments of
disseisors to the King by Collusion, to be void, p. 571. An Act against naming
Sheriffs by Collusion in Assize, p. 611. Executions avoided by Collusion laid
on the person in the Ordinaries prison, p. 631. An Act against Fraud in working
Copper instead of gold, p. 433. Commissions; illegal, oppressive, unjust,
complained against in Parliament, and revoked, p. 13, 18, 32, 34, 35, 44, 48,
53, 62, 66, 109, 406, 466. A Commission touching the Earl of Norfolk a
prisoner, p. 28. To Justices of Peace, p. 37, 67, 611, 127. To the Barons of
Exchequer to receive Accounts, p. 46. To inquire of Nusances, Wears, etc. in
rivers, p. 57. To inquire of the Abuses of Purveyours and takers, p. 58. To
inquire of Oppressions, p. 34. To inquire of Scots Laborers, p. 109. For
Assessing and Levying Subsidies granted, p. 112. To the Justices and other
Lords to determine complaints of wrongs made in Parl. p. 138, 192. To enquire
of Engines, Nets and Dregs to destroy Fish and Fry, p. 148. To set and certify
the prises of Herrings, p. 149. To examine and determine extortions and ^rongs
complained of in Parl. p. 152. An Act for Commissions of inquiry of offenses,
p. 106. To set out bounds between lands, p. 192. To inquire of and punish
riots, p. 192, 471. To a General in Foreign wars, p. 292, 293. To redress all
public Enormities, and inquire into the Kings revenues, expenses, etc. p. 168,
317, 318. To a Sergeant of Arms to a^prehend and bring Riotors to the
Parliament, p. 342. Of Oyer and Terminer, not to be granted, but upon great
necessity, p. 342, 471. To ^ake the examination of the Duke of Glo^ester at
Calice, p. 378. Treason to pro^^re a Commission accroaching royal power, the
Lords procuring and executing it attainted for it, p. 368, 369, 376, 377, 378,
379. An Act touching the Commissions of R. 2. p. 411. To the Prince of Wales
for suppressing the Welsh Rebels, p. 452. Concerning ships taken and prize
goods, p. 537. The Commission of Array amended in Parliament by the Commons
with the Judges advise, and assented to by the King and Lords, p. 428. Enacted
it should not concern the Clergy, p. 454. A Commission to certain to determine
all Controversies be^ween Merchants by act of Parliament, p. 454. To inquire of
the Losses and Fee-farm of Melcomb, p. 475. Made by the Council in the Kings
infancy confirmed by Parl. p. 563. To hear and determine the manifold
oppressions of John Lord Talbot, p. 571. To apprehend one who arrested a
Burgesses servant against the privilege of Parliament, p. 596. To swear all the
Lords, Knights, Esquires, Yeomen, and others to certain Articles agreed on in
Parliament, p. 612. To hold, adjourn and prorogue the Parliament. See
Parliament. To grant certain things to the Lords and Commons in Parliament, in
the Kings absence, p. 17. Commissioners of Sewers and Acts concerning them, p.
572, 581, 590, 594, 625, 631, 700. Commissions public to be granted without
Fees to Clerks or others, p. 87. For to inquire of extortions, p. 124. Sheriffs
Commissions, p. 127. Commissioners; No Sheriff, Constable or Jailer to be where
men are imprisoned, p. 91. For Subsidies appointed by the Knights of Counties,
p. 112. To be allowed their charges out of their Sessions^ none of evil name,
but Lords and others of best reputation, p. 113, 124. No Sheriff, Undersheriff,
or Jailer to be put in any Commission, but such as concern their offices, p.
127. Commissioners to inquire of all the Kings household, and Officers charges,
public expenses, revenues, etc. and to have fees allowed for it, p. 183, 191,
317, 318. Sworn to execute their Commission, p. 318. Commissioners fined for
not sitting, though they knew not of it: prayed to be discharged upon their
Oaths, p. 443. An Act concerning Commissioners, p. 461. Commissions of
Purveyors, p. 18, 75. See Purveyours. To search and Seal woolen Clothes, p.
601. Common of Pasture not to be claimed by Towns, nor by Citizens who have no
lands, lying in the Lordships where claimed; Riots committed in several
grounds by them, under pretext of common, p. 132, 133. Common of Pasture in
Clarindon Park surrendered to the King for ever, and lands given for it in
exchange, p. 565. An order concerning common of Pasture between the Bishop of
Ely and Tenants of Sutton, p. 579. A complaint and accord in Parliament
touching the forcible withholding of Common of Pasture and Turbary, and a riot
therein, p. 479. Common good and profit; things for it to be granted, and
Commissions contrary to it revoked in Parl. p. 71, 309. To be preferred before
private Interests, p. 66, 114. Commonalty of a City summoned to appear in
Parliament; appear by Attorney, p. 199, 200, 330, 331. Common Place, attaints in
it for false Verdicts in Lincolns, p. 330. Traverses of Offices may be tried in
it, p. 412. Errors therein reversed in the Kings B. p. 56^ See Error. A Seal
prayed for Judicial writs therein, p. 60. That every Judgment there may pass
under the Seal of the Chief Justice, to save the charges of the Great Seal, p.
75. The Justices there to rectify the Extortions of Cirographers for Fines, p.
1^8. Search in the Treasury thereof touching the definition for Churches
Pensions, p. 151. See Clerks, Courts, Justices. Commons and Commons House of
Parliament, called by name, the first day of Parliament, before the causes
thereof declared, p. 193, 195, 281, 290, 404, 415, 464, 478, 455.

The Parliament adjourned to another day, because diverse of them not come, nor
their writs returned by the Sheriffs: See Parliament. Present with the King and
Lords in the painted Chamber, and elsewhere when the causes of Parliament are
declared. See Causes of Parliament and Painted Chamber. Their advice required
both in matters of Aids, Subsidies, Defense by Land and Sea, Peace, War, Good
government, Execution of Laws and Justice, and redressing Grievances. See
Causes of Parliament, and more particularly, p. 9, 10, 17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 37,
43, 47, 51, 65, 67, 70, 79, 111, 120, 145, 154, 155, 342, 453, 361, 371, 405,
437, 567.

Their first usual place of meeting was in the Chapter house of the Abbot of
Westminster, p. 120, 145, 175, 196, 282.

They sat and consulted alone by themselves, not with the Lords House, and
gave answers by themselves, p. 11, 12, 13, 17, 18, 22, 31, 32, 37, 43, 51, 105,
120, 145, 167, 175, 189, 193, 196, 282, 287, 291, 465.

Their first Speaker that is mentioned, p. 151.

The Commands to them to choose and present their Speaker, the manner of
presenting him to the King and Lords, his excuses, protestation, and request
for its Entry, Speeches and Motions in the Parliament to the King or Lords, or
what else concerns him, p. 151, 155, 179, 183, 189, 196, 287, 298, 353, 360,
361, 367, 368, 371, 390, 404, 405, 415, 425, 426, 437, 438, 451, 452, 453, 454,
455, 464, 465, 470, 471, 474, 478, 479, 481, 534, 535, 539, 544, 545, 550, 551,
553, 556, 557, 559, 563, 567, 577, 583, 587, 588, 592, 598, 602, 607, 608, 614,
618, 619, 620, 622, 629, 630, 634, 635, 637, 638, 640, 641, 646, 649, 656, 657,
660, 665, 669, 674, 675, 680, 688, 701, 702. See Speaker and the Catalogue of
Speakers in the former Table.

Committees of the Commons, p. 23, 61, 69, 70, 175, See Parliament.

They desire a special Committee of Lords to advise and consult with, which is
granted at the Kings and Lords pleasures, p. 10, 79, 116, 120, 145, 155, 175,
196, 282, 287, 299, 416, (See the Kings prot^station there, that the same was
done of favor and no duty, which was entered by the Clerk) 452, 455.

They require longer respite than was first limited to them to give their
answers to the things demanded, p. 17, 19, 43, 47, 145, 175, 198. and elsewhere.

They profess their inability, to advise in matters of Peace, Leagues and War
propounded to them, and refer themselves therein to the King, Lords, and
Council, p. 32, 51, 88, 287, 288, 300, 353, 361, 193.

The King and Lords showed to them the special points of the Justices of Peace
charge, p. 37, n. 12.

They confer with the Lords, and certain Merchants, and make report thereof
to the Lords, p. 193, 194^ 452, 455, 361.

The old course was for them to bring their conceits, votes, and devises to the
Lords, not to send for the Lords to them which the Lords refuse to alter, p.
196.

Their Confession that the judgement^ of Parliament belong only to the King and
Lords, not to them, which the King refuses to alter upon their Petition, p.
392.

Their public Petitions and Bills of request to the King and Lords in
Parliament, with their answers to them, p. 22, 23, 28, 31, 32, 33, 34, 43, 44,
48, 51, 52, 74, 75. 79, 80, 86, 87, 88, 91, 92, 96, 97, 106, 107, 109, 110,
112, 113, 114, 116, 117, 118, 124, 125, etc. 146, 147, 158, to 167, 169, 170,
185, 186, 190, 191, 192, 197, 198, 201, 202, 204, 283, 284, 285, 288, 289, 294,
to 297, 305, 306, 311, 312, 313, 317, 318, 323, 324, 325, 333, 334, 335, 338,
339, 340, 344, 345, 346. 348, 349, 354, 355, 356, 358, 359, 364, 394, to 399,
405, 409, to 414, 419, to 425, 432, 433, to 447, 455, 456, 459, to 463, 466,
467, 468, 471, 472, 474, to 477, 481, 482, 483, 534, 536, 537, 546, 547, 548,
552, 554, 560, 561, 580, 581, 585, 586, 594, 595, 596, 600, 601, 604, 605, 611,
612, 615, 616, 619, 620, 624, 625, 626, 631, 632, 635, 636, 639, 644, 647, 648,
654, 655, 660, 664, 673, 676, 678, 679, 682, 683, 684, 700, 704, 708. Their
Petitions by mouth to be put into writing, ere answered, p. 405.

Their private Petitions and requests to the King and Lords, or both, for the
Queeen, Prince, Kings sons, or some particular Lord, or other person, for their
advancement, pardon, or some office, place, grant, confirmation, revocation of
former attainders, judgments, and restitution to bloo^ or lands, p. 117, 150,
151, 152, 325, 339, 344, 347, 391, 392, 394, 395, 397, 406, 407, 416, 417, 418,
427, 428, 429, 438, 439, 441, 454, 455, 456, 460, 465, 466, 474, 481, 603, 908,
610, 658.

Their Complaints and Bills against the Popes usurpations, extortions^ Bulls,
Provisions, Innovations, p. 41, 42, 65, 128, 129, 130. See Bulls, Pope,
Provisors: Their agreement and grant of liberty, for the King to moderate and
dispense with the Statute of Provisors for a time; so as the Statute be
repealed in no Article, and they may disagree thereto the next Parliament; and
this being a mere novelty, be not taken for an example, etc. p. 342, 347, 362,
393. See Provisors. Their Impeachments, Articles, Complaints, Proceedings
against Lords and other Delinquents in Parliament, p. 67, 121, 122, 123, 315,
316, 317, 368, 369, 399, 400, 641, 642, 643, 644, 645, 426, 427.

They are sworn in Parliament to see the Peace kept, live and die with the
Lords Appellants, saving their allegiance to the king, and due obedience to his
prerogative and Laws, p. 322. That they should by no means suffer any
Ordinance, Statute made, or Judgment given in the Parliament to be repealed,
see the good Laws and Customs of the Realm maintained, and peace kept, p. 326,
371, 372. To retain in their service no offender of the Law, or maintain any
title or quarrel, p. 608. To be true to the king, Prince, and their issue, p.
427. See Oath.

Their Petitions, that none of the Commons summoned to Parliament, might be an
Assessor or Collector of Subsidies, Sometimes denied, but most times granted by
the King, p. 62, 71, 79, 114, 117, 148, 164, 172, 312, 443.

They dare not agree to any new devised Tax or Subsidy without conference with
their Counties about it, though they tender the Kings estate and are ready to
aid him, p. 17.

They are charged to advise the King how the peace of the land might be better
kept, which they do by a Bill, and desire answer to it, p. 67. They nominate
Justices of the Peace to the King, and he to choose them, p. 97. They desire to
be dismissed, because they had long continued together to their great costs and
mischiefs, p. 67.

The Knights of Shires nominate and appoint Collectors and Commissioners for
subsidies 112.

The Commons Petitions are answered in their presence by the King and Lords, p.
112. They desire all Petitions for the Common profit may be answered before
them in Parliament, so as they may know their endorsment, p. 52. They grant an
Aid conditionally, that their ensuing Petitions might be answered, p. 69. See
Petitions, and Parliament. They refuse to grant any Aid or Subsidy, til their
Petitions be first granted, and a general pardon: which the King refuses to
do till they grant him Aids first, p. 174, 198, 199, 322, 371, 374, 360, 406.

They request, certain of the Commons House may be at the engrossing of the
Parliament Roll of 8 H. 4. which is granted, p. 456.

They s^nd a special Committee to the Protector in 2 H. 6. to vouchsafe to make
them privy to the Treaty of the Sco^s Ambassador, for the delivery and marriage
of their King, which they liked w^ll, p. 568.

They assent to a Bill against the Order of Cisteaux, sent to them from the
King and Lords, who had agreed thereto, p. 406.

They desire two Commissions sent to Towns to make certain Boats and Ballengers
without assent of Parl. I may be revoked, p. 406. And that other illegal
Commissions be revoked, p. 32, 44, 47^ 48, 53, 54. See Commissions illegal.
They amend and agree to a Commission for Array, p. 428.

They require that the King may have good Counselors, that they may know the
names of the Lords of the Council and great Officers, and that they may be
sworn to certain Articles, (devised by them) which was granted, p. 120, 121,
174, 183, 288, 312, 456, 457, 471, 473, 594. See Council. That a grave Council
may be ready to answer all, p. 651.

They require reformation of the Kings Household, Court, Expenses, and removal
of some Counselors and Attendants about him and the Queen, and of his
Confessor, Ibidem; and p. 196, 284, 288, 289, 316, 323, 361, 362. 426^ 427,
428, 429.454, 455 457, 458, 647.

They importunately desire an able Protector, and Defender of the Realm, since
the King would not attend the same, p. 658. And that by the underhand
solicitation of the Duke of York, who took that office, not as sought by, but
laid upon him, p. 658. compared with p. 662.

They desire an Account of the Subsidies granted, and of the Treasurers of war,
which is granted, p. 174, 175, 454, 456, 464.

They desire reconciliation and unity between dissenting Lords, p. 407, 427.
602, 603.

They request the Marquess of Suffolk may be enacted to be holden a most true
and faithful Subject, and thanked for his service in, and making a Peace with
France, 23 H. 6. p. 630. which is done; yet impeach him soon after as an
Arch-Traytor for it, 28 H. 6. p. 641, 642, 643.

Their Innovations, Encroachments, on King, Lords, in Parl. checked, opposed by
the King and Lords, p. 125, 175, 196, 392, 416, 464, 478.408, 406.

They require ease from Taxes, in respect of the Commons, peoples poverty,
which is promised, p. 191, 201, 176, 189.196, 602.

Their devises and Articles for reformation exhibited in a Schedule to the
Lords, p. 196, 197, 456, 457, 458, 426, 427, 288, 155, 120, 121, 31, 33, 37.

A difference between them and the Lords about a Subsidy; and the order for
appeasing it; to debate all matter by themselves, and not to disclose the same
to the King till determined, and that by their Speakers mouth, p. 465.

They pray they may depart with as great liberty as they had done, p. 465. The
King and Lords made some Acts without them, p. 354.

They are Petitioners, not Judges in Parl. p. 392.

Their contest with the King about Subsidies, and sight of the Kings Pardon;
their submission upon better consideration to his will, p. 198, 199, 406.

They durst grant no tax, considering the Subjects discontents and evil wills,
p. 198.

They are admonished to forget all manner of rancor and malice^ p. 189.

They require the total sum of the Kings demands, and supplies required which
is granted them, and offer to give and aid, so as the Clergy who had the 3.
part of the kingdom, would pay a third thereof, p. 189.

They will not be bound by the constitutions of the Clergy, nor by any o^ their
Statutes or Ordinances mad^ without their assent, p. 148, n. 45. See the record
at large. p. 385.

No Statute or Ordinance to bind them, nor Tax granted or imposed on them
without their common assen thereto, p. 39, 41, 53, 54, 148, 196 285, 347, 392,
353 714.

Pray that a Statute made against the Law and Kings prerogative may be
repealed, which was done, p. 39.

They require all matters of Parliament may be engrossed before the Justices
departure, p. 406.

Their flattering motions to the King, for the Queen, Prince, kings sons, and
kings thanks to them for the same, p. 123, 124, 474, 481.

Attend the sick king with the Lords at Eltham for his royal assent, p. 124.

Licensed to depart from Parliament before the Lords^ p. 14. charged on their
allegiance to enquire (as well a^ the Lords) particularly of evil government,
and provide remedy, p. 454.

Their Protestation of their due allegiance to the King, etc. and motions,
impeachments ushered in with Protestation, p. 121, 196, 368, 688.

Their thanks in Parliament to the King for his great goodness showed to them,
uttered by his own mouth, p. 96. for his promise to maintain their Liberties,
Laws, and peace, p. 174. For a general pardon granted to them, p. 199. For his
good government and careful zeal to them born, p. 340. For his promise to
maintain the Catholic faith, p. 405. For his sundry valiant exploits in the
wars, p. 446. For his favor to the Earl of Northumberland, p. 427. for his
courage and victories, p. 669.

The Kings thanks for their tender good wills toward him, p. 405. and for
their aids, See King.

They desire the King in Parliament to give thanks to the Earl of
Northumberland for his good service against the Scots, p. 416.

They thank and commend the Duke of B^dford for his good service in France
before the King and Lords, for his politic governmen^ of the Realm, and
beseech him to attend on the Kings person, which he assents to, p. 608.

They petition the King to command the Bishops and Clergy to pray for his life,
the peace and good government of the Realm, and the continuance of his good
will toward the Commons, p. 96.

Ought not to talk irreverently of the King, nor use unfitting words to stir up
discord, p. 452, 471, 361.

The King displeased with them for offending him, his dignity and liberty by
their Bill, motion touching the outrageous expenses of his Court, and ^voiding
the Bishops and Ladies thence: r^quires the name of him who exhibited the Bill,
which they deliver with the Bill to the Clerk of the Crown, for which he is
condemned of Treason: they submit themselves humbly to the King, excuse the
receipt of the Bill, and humbly crave his pardon, p. 361, 362. They excuse
themselves before the King and ^ords of mis-reports of them, Ibid. 452. Desire
him to receive no mi^-reports of them, till they were examined p. 405, 452.
They crave pardon on their knees before the King, for offending him through
ignorance, p. 408. They desire the King to embrace them as his loyal Subjects,
upon a report he was offended with them for matters done in this and the last
Parliament, p. 481. Pray a Resumption of the Duchy, and other lands of the
Crown, for their ease, p. 166, 394 427, See Resumption.

The Parliament adjourned at their request, p. 198, 471.

They are charged convicted of an untruth and misinformation by the Treasurer,
p. 174. and by the Lords house, p. 408.

They are mistaken in their subsidy and number of Parishes, p. 111, 112.

They pray they may at any time send for their Bills for amendment of them,
which was granted, p. 452. Their liberties and privileges confirmed, ibid. 565.
Their unjust, ignorant, insolent, motions and requests, p. 122, 123, 124, 315,
316, 323, 361, 362, 465, 641, 647, 658.

Their Privileges, Elections, Members formerly determined by the Lords, p. 346,
347, 352, 354, 432, 651, See Privileges and Elections.

King Edward the 4. his speech, thanks, promise to them to be a good king in
Parliament, p. 672.

They hear Mass with the king and Lords the last day of the Parliament, and at
the Ite missa est, offer their granted Subsidy, p. 409.

They dine with the king, p. 106, 418.

They are ordered to sue out writs for their wages at the end of the
Parliament, p. 151, 166, 326^ 335, 340, 374 418, 595. See Knights.

See more of them in King, Lords, Parliament.

Compurgators, offered to acquit one condemned in Parliament in his absence,
without trial, p. 66. Concealment of any sums in Accomptants, to be answered to
the king after accounts passed and allowed, p. 55. after pardon, p. 396, after
a Quietns est, p. 481. and an Acquittance, p. 45. Condition, annexed to the
Subsidy of wools for 3 years, that if the wars did cease, the grant should
cease, p. 69. upon condition such persons may be of the Council, and not
removed etc. p. 317. Pardon granted upon condition the king might enjoy the
subsidies granted. See Taxes.

A feofment and livery by the king, without any condition in the Charter,
cannot by any subsequent words by him be made conditional, p. 169.

Confederacy, Indictment and punishment for it, p. 87, 91. Confederacy of
Merchants complained of, p. 61. Confirmation of the Kings other Charters,
Patents, Liberties, Lands Annuities, Grants, Chantries, Offices, Exchanges,
Corporations in and by Parliament, p. 81, 82, 85, 119, 133, 134, 159, 178, 363,
418, 439, 440, 480, 540, 541, 542, 543, 563, 565, 566, 569, 570, 579, 580, 586,
594, 602, 603, 604, 610, 611, 623, 630, 635, 653, 654, 663, 667, 681, 689, 691,
692, 693, 694, 697, 698, 699. Of a judgment formerly given in Parliament, p.
539. Congregations, gathering of them prohibited, 423. Conisance of all Pleas
by former Charters allowed, p. 163. Conquest, every person passing with the
king into France, to enjoy all Towns, Castles, Possessions, Persons, Names,
Arms, Honors, as he could get or take by his own conquest or prowess, and to
have Charters of them, saving to the king all royalties and Church Lands, p.
110. The king sent an Army into France for the Conquest and recovery of his
own, p. 111. Callice and other Territories gotten by Sword from the French, by
the king, not to be held by homage, and service of the French king, p. 300. The
king passes into Ireland with great zeal and hope to conquer it, p. 358. K. H.
4. his Protestation, that he claimed not the Crown by way of Conquest, nor to
diminish any man's right, but such who had been against the Commonwealth, p.
389. whose land he would have to him forfeited by way of Conquest, p. 401. king
H. 4. took upon him the Crown, as right heir to H. 3. and not as a Conque^our
p. 666. The Ordinance of R. 2. upon the Conquest of Wales; that no Welshman
should bear any office there, etc. to be executed, p. 405. They and the
Irishmen wholly conquered, p. 415. The Earl of Dunbar being the kings Liege,
prays he may be restored to all such his lands in Scotland, as the English
shall at any time conquer or obtain, which is granted, p. 418. Robert de Vere
to enjoy to him and his heir, all lands he conquered in Ireland, p. 311.
Conspiracy, Inquests on it to be returned by the Sheriff himself, of the most
lawful men, p. 87. The points of it to be explained, seeing Judges judge
rashly in it; None to be punished for it, but where the Statute is express, p.
91. To be tried in the County where the Indictments were made, p. 348. Not to
be sued out of the Shire or Liberty, p. 354, 355. Imprisonment in the Tower
upon an Action of Conspiracy in Lancaster complained of, p. 398. An Act
touching Conspirations in the Duchy of Lancaster, p. 557. Conspirators,
outlawries against them not to be reversed, p. 39. No great person to maintain
them, p. 51. Constables^ Purveyors to take them with them, p. 48. Men and
horses of the King not to be harbenged or take any thing but by them, and
deliver the Bills of the Marshal of the House to them, p. 55. To have the
weighing of wools, p. 335. To apprehend Felons and levy hue and cry, 12.
Constables of Castles, or Gaolers not to be Commissioners where men are to be
imprisoned, p. 91. Constable of England, not to hold plea of Treason, Felony,
or things triable by the Common Law, p. 171, 306, 333, 411, 420, 429, 472, 594,
595. The Chancellor after his impeachment and answer arrested by him, p. 316.
Such as claim to do any service at the Coronation appear before him, and
others^ p. 389. All Appeals of things done out of the Realm to be tried before
him, p. 594. Constable of Dover Castle. See Dover. Consultation, In what cases
to be granted; and where twice, p. 139, 151, 165^ 410. Contempt, Adam de Bury
his goods seized for not appearing in Parliament upon summons to answer his
accusation, p. 123. The Mayor and Bailiffs of Lincoln and Cambridge adjudged in
contempt in Parliament, for not bringing a Warrant or Attorney from the
Commonalty of the said Towns, p. 330, 331. Contribution levied upon Neighbor
towns for the fortification of Southampton, p. 20. To Disms, Quindisms paid,
notwithstanding Charters of exemption, p. 81, 476. By the Cinque Ports to those
of Costleing hundred, of which they had half, p. 136. Of religious persons,
toward the repair of walled and fortified Towns where they have possessions,
p. 161. To Knights wages, who shall contribute, and who not, p. 1.164, 311,
595. Toward the Guarding of the Seacoasts, p. 179. and of the Sea, p. 295.
Toward a ship and goods lost by the ships de^erting her against their Oath, p.
548, 549. To Taxes by Merchants resiants in Towns^ p. 555. See London.
Quindisms. Hamlets near the walls of Cities and Towns, and no part of them, not
to be contributory to all charges in them, though moved, p. 136. Contr^llers of
Customs, not to let their office to farm on pain of forfeiture, p. 38. To be
yearly removed; desired, p. 170. Their grants for life moved to be revoked, p.
318. To enjoy their Offices only during good behavior, and the Kings pleasure,
p. 325. An Act for it, and that he has no ship of his own, p. 339. To keep no
Ostery for any Merchant, p. 472. To be made by advice of the Council, p. 564.
Denied to license transporting corn from one shire to another upon Sureties, p.
625. An Act for Sureties found to them, p. 679. Conviction of English by Welsh:
an Act concerning it, p. 423. Convocation, Writs to the Archbishops to call one
in both Provinces, p. 19. Many absent from it when called, whereat the King was
offended, and commanded the Archbishop to punish the defaulters, p. 43. Bishops
before the next Convocation ^o certify the names and benefices of A^iens, p.
50. A Constitution for tithes of Underwood made in it, p. 60. Provided remedy
against Non-residence, p. 476 The Privilege of its members from arrests, etc.
p. 594. Copy of a Bill of Complaint in Parl. denied to be granted to the
Defendants, p. 200. Coronation of the King, p. 384, 389, 390. Coroners, to have
sufficient in their Counties, p. 75. An Act concerning their election, p. 87.
Indictment before them for murder, p. 126. Londoners pray they may choose, place
and displace a Coroner, from which ancient right the King will not depart, p.
147, 161. None to be after 60 years of age prayed 149 162. Sheriffs of London
may take Assizes in the absence of the Coroner after proclamation, p. 391. May
execute their Office within Forests, p. 16. Corporations^ to enjoy all their
Charters and Liberties, p. 113, 117, 124, 125, 137, 159, 178, 341, 351, 367,
393^ 404 437, 451, 478, 538, 541, 544, 549.

Sion, The Abbess and Nuns incorporated, p. 589.

Corporations, Weights and Measures to be well examined and corrected in them,
p. 40. Strangers not free thereof, not to buy or sell in them, p. 124, 125,
141. Hamlets near their walls, no parts of them, not to contribute to their
Charges or be under their Government, p. 136. Move to have their pardon freely,
p. 146. The Friars Preachers of Cornwall Chapel within London incorporated, p.
618. Cornwall, their complaint against Tidman for the Monopoly of Tinn, p. 58.
Complain of the Oppression of the Officers of the Stannerie, pray a Declaration
of their Charter, which is done, p. 131 142. Their complaint of the taking up
of their Mariners, and plunders by the Spaniards, p. 177. The Duke of Cornwall
created and his Charter confirmed in and by Parliament, p. 427, 428, 430, 678.
The Duchy of Cornwall settled by Charter and Parliament on the Prince, Ibid.
and p. 659, 663, 677. United to the Crown, p. 678. A prayer, that non^ pay
fines for license of alienation o^ Lands holden of this Duchy, nor other Lands
held of other persons seized for wardship, which is denied, p. 624, 625. A
Petition that all releases of Debts due to this Duchy by R. 2. should be
revoked, p. 397. The Surrender to and Lease of the Duke of Cornwall of Lands in
the Duchy confirmed in Parliament, p. 430. The Lands thereof resumed, p. 677.
Corn, its exportation inhibited, p. 18 100, 135, 285, permitted, p. 355, 625
631. Act against forestallers of it, p. 97. The measure of it, p. 339, 344,
537. Costs, an Act touching them, p. 459. Coventry Prior, a grant of a Conduict
of water to him under a penalty for Nusances confirmed, p. 440. Council, and
Counselors. The Great Council used for the Lords in Parliamen^ or Parliament,
p. 111, 133, 135, 136 137, 142, 161, 164. For the Lords extraordinarily
assembled out of Parl. p. 81 85, 193, 167, 286, 314. For the Lords of the Privy
Council, 182, 183, 329^ 429. styled the Lords of the Continual Council, or
Continual great Council, p. 126, 159, 160, 167, 317, 419.429.

The Privy Conncil not to hold plea of Freehold, Life, Member, or any thing
triable by the Common Law, p. 74, 77, 106, 107, 162, 178, 348, 4^7, 333. Nor to
send for any to appear before them upon suggestions, p. 56, 348. To give
answers to Bills and Petitions not answered in Parliament, which they answered
in Starr-chamber, or elsewhere, p. 295, 444, 468, 564, 565, 584, 591, 596, 620.
The King and his Council used for the Lords in Parl. who enact and award
restitution of Lands forfeited, p. 7. Summon all English Merchants to appear
before them, upon a reprisal, p. 11. commit a Member to prison for ill words
and breach of the Peace before them, p. 12. are to receive the Commons answer,
and advise the King in matters of war, peace, and Laws, p. 51, 53, 55, 57, 71^
141, 282. To hear, and determine public Grievances, p. 61. To employ Subsidies
granted for defense of the Realm as they see good, p. 282. They Declare the
power of the Protector, p. 589. The King in answer to Petitions promises to
do things by advice of his Council, p. 40, 51, 52, 57, 58, 62, 63, 64, 67,
112, 119, 138, 177, 179, 159, 170, 179, 202, 294, 312, 294, 311, 318, 324, 419,
481. The King and Council to treat with the Duke of Burbon touching his ransom,
p. 592. The King and his Council to make Ordinances, and all Officers to
execute them, p. 121. To appoint the Great Officers, p. 159. The Reports of
matters of Council to be made to the King by two of the Council appointed for
it, p. 121. Answers to Petitions by their advise, p. 67, 71, 49, 52. Have power
to make Ordinances touching coin, p. 539, 557. All such who have Annuities or
Offices of the King summoned before them, p. 583. Bringers in of Popes Bulls to
be taken and brought before the king and his Council for their contempt, p. 64.

The King to redress controversies between the Universities and Friars
Preachers by his Councils advice, p. 103. He and his Council, examine the
abuses oppressions of Sir Ioh. Lec, to make ward therein, p. 106, 107. The K.
to appoint the Staple where he thinks best by his Councils advice, p. 117, 163,
325, 429. To redress the abuses of such who sue in the Court of Rome, p. 125.
of Protections, Ib. 148.

To appoint Justices of Peace, p. 126, 178.

To examine the abuses of Lumbards coloring enemies goods, p. 127. Imprison
for a Rap^ of a Gentlewoman and duresse, p. 176. oppressions to be answered
before them, p. 178. To be Governors of Merchants Strangers, p. 88. To summon
Merchant to appear before them, at a day, to buy wools, p. 28. To take order
touching Purveyors, p. 622.

References and redress upon Petitions, and requests for things or grievances
in Parliament made to the Council, p. 150, 159, 282, 284, 313, 318, 324, 333,
338, 339, 345, 355, 356, 358, 398, 409, 421, 422, 423, 433, 444, 457, 458, 459,
460, 461, 466, 467, 468, 474, 536, 551, 560, 581, 595, 612.

To appoint the Statutes against Thieves to be executed, p. 170. No association
to or remotion of Justices but by assent of the Council, p. 172. Riotors
summoned to appear before them, p. 192. To acquaint the Commons in Parliament
with the Kings wants, p. 196. H. to make no grant of Lands, but by their
advice, p. 202, 439.

A long suit wholly submitted to the King and his Council, p. 282, such Bills
as cannot be ended by the Council, to be exhibited to the King, p. 295.
Merchants debts prayed to be tried before them, p. 442. To make allowances to
Merchants who guarded the Sea, p. 462. have power to revoke or confirm any of
the Universities of Oxfords Liberties, p. 474.

Sworn to observe the Great Charter, Laws, and other Rules, Orders prescribed
them in and by the Parliament, and rightly to Counsel the King, p. 50. 155,
156, 329, 456, 457, 471, 473, 564, 565, 568, 593, 594, 602, 608, 611, 120, 121.

To do all by consent of the Major part, p. 457, 564, 602. Worthy ones to be
appointed, and not removed without good cause and proof, p. 317.457, 28^, 288,
564.

To be honest, sage, stable and gravest men, p. 155, 164, 384, 457, 471, 563,
574, 577, 651.

Nominated, appointed and prescribed orders in and by the Parliament, p. 10^
24, 25, 156, 159, 167, 183, 198, 288, 317, 329^ 453, 456, 457, 458, 471, 471^
473, 519, 563, 564, 567, 568, 592, 593, 594, 608, 651, 652. But this was during
the Kings absence in foreign parts, or his minority, or with his consent and
approbation, with a protestation of his freedom herein, p. 329.

Elected, approved and changed by the king at his pleasure, p. 155, 167, 175,
312, 329, 453, 471, 563, 564, 651, 652.

Discharged at the Commons motion, p. 183. The King at the Commons request
gives them thanks, and namely for well employing the Treasure, p. 479.

The King to do things by his Councels advice, p. 201.

They take the charge conditionally if there be sufficient Treasure, else not,
p. 453, 568. To take no rewards, p. 120, 457. To govern well, p. 454, 457. To
stay no good grants at the great or priny Seal^ p. 457. To prefer all the Kings
old servants to all the Kings offices and benefices before others, p. 594, 608.

Salaries granted them out of the Exchequer, p. 599, 608, 454.

Counselors censured for abusing their authority, to the vexation and
oppression of the people, p. 106, 107, 121, 122, 123, 368: Such of them who are
convict of deceit never to be Counselors more, p. 22.125, 138. restored when
unjustly deprived at the Lords and Commons Petition, p. 150. They remove the
Lord Chamberlain, p. 603.

To appoint set days of the week for receiving, answering Petitions, p. 457.

To appoint all Inferior Officers, p. 564. To make the most of the kings
casual revenues, p. 564. The Clerk of the Council to be sworn duly to enter the
names of them who sit, and truly to enact all things done by them, p. 565. and
ever to prefer, procure the poorest man's Bill and Answer, p. 568.

Promise absolutely to attend, but the Bishops only when they could, p. 611.

King H. 6. committed the whole E^state, affairs, government of the realm to
his Council, except matters concerning his own person, in which they shall not
proceed without his privity, p. 658^ 659.

A Pardon to the Duke of Lancaster of all Misgovernment in Council whiles about
the Kings person, p. 348. An awar^ by the Kings Council upon a reference for a
matter of Title though ratified by the Chancellor, binds not the party at
Common law, p. 351, 352.

Empowered to make assurances to pay the Kings debts and Creditors, p. 579 609
614, 584^ 588, 599, 635. To al^low Merchants who have paid Custom and Subsidy
for their Staple wares which perished, to ship as much freely, upon due proof
of the loss, p. 580. To take sureties for moneys lent by the King, Ib.

No Cardinal to be of the Kings Council, but at his pleasure: A Cardinal in
treated to be of it by the Bishops and Lords, with liberty to absent himself
when any thing was debated concerning the Pope or See of Rome, p. 593.

Counselors condemned some times upon false surmises, for what deserves
com^mendation, p. 85. Council of Constance, the Kings Embas^sadors there, and
Letters to them, p. 551. Counsel learned at Law both of the King and Prince,
their resolution and advice in points of Law, p. 149, 150, 177, 310. They
utterly refuse to defend King H. 6. their Sovereigns right and Title in Parl.
against the claim of the Duke of York to the Crown, upon the Lords request, p
665, 666. Counsel at Law, admitted in Parliament in Civil, and in some criminal
cases, p. 66, 199, 315, 573, 574, 575, 576, 578, 610, 665, 666. Disallowed in
Treason and other criminal cases in Parliament, p. 190, 199, 200, 292, 315. To
be admitted by Stewards in base Court, p. 611. Coventry, its Mayor, Bailiffs
and Dyers, p. 546. A Conduict of water confirmed in Parl. to the Prior of St.
Mary, therein, p. 440. Counterplea of Voucher, p. 30. Counterfeiting Seals and
Deeds, to be punished with imprisonment, p. 114. Covenant, what process in it,
p. 410. County Court. See Hundred. County-Palatine, how judgments may be
reversed in it, p. 62. Proceedings against such who are outlawed in it of
Treason or Felony, p. 170. See Chester, Durham. Sir Philip Courtney, his
oppressions, imprisonment, and release by Parl. p. 346, 347, 417, 418. Tenant
by the Courtesy without issue, made by Parl. p. 702. Coin, The King and
Council to make Ordinances concerning it, p. 539, 557. An Act concerning it, p.
560. See Money. Coynage in all places to be open, p. 48. Propositions
concerning Coynage, p. 565. Courts of Justice to be surveyed, and unsitting,
ill officers removed by the Chancellor and Keeper of the Privy Seal, p. 325.
Courts of the Duke of Gloc. in Essex: in act concerning them, p. 370. Courts
Baron: how execution shall be made of judgments in them, p. 55. See
Wapentakes. Crown, resigned by King R. 2. p. 385, 386, 389, 390. Intailed, p.
454, 455, 666, 664, 714. Worn by Kings; in Gods hands, and to what resembled,
p. 617, 618. Claimed in Parliament by H. 4. p. 389. By the Duke of York, p.
665, 666, 667, 670. His Title to it, and from what time vested in him Ib.
Richard the 3d. his project to settle it on him and his issue, p. 709^ to 714.
Crown Lands, Franchises, Revenues, not to be aliened, but retained, improved,
ordered, disposed for the Kings maintenance, support, and peoples ease: p. 40,
58, 138, 284, 323, 324, 394, 439, 455, 457, 268, 564, 609. To be resumed, when
given away, alienated or sold; See Resumption. The wasting and giving them
away, an Article against King R. 2. p. 386. Against the Duke of Suffolk in
Parl. as Treason in him p. 642. The sum of the Crowns revenues, p. 609. The
foreign Revenues employed to pay the Soldiers there, p. 471. Commissioners to
inquire after, and resume the Hereditaments, Liberties, and Customs of the
Crown that were granted away, p. 439. Cumberland, petitions thence, and matters
concerning it, p. 131, 162, 171, 334, 338, 345, 600. Customs old, on Wools,
Skins, Woolfels, and other Merchandise what they are; to be only taken, and no
new raised, imposed, levied, but by Acts and grants in Parliaments^ which have
enhanced and diminished them from time to time as they saw cause, p. 18, 28,
29, 34, 38, 39, 47, 56, 57, 76, 78, 105, 152, 335, 339, 345, 355, 358, 441,
442, 406, 418, 433, 472, 476, 538, 570, 581, 585, 605, 612, 620, 622, 646, 654,
693, 698. See ^axes, ^onnage and Poundage. Customs that are due and granted by
Parliament, only to be paid by Strangers and Denizens, and no more exacted, p.
16, 20, 88, and the former pages. Customs assigned to secure moneys lent and
advanced for the public, p. 28, 29, 58. See Loans. Customs farmed by rich
Merchants, to reimburse their moneys lent, and defraud the poor, p. 58.
Complaints of the Kings losing Customs, by abuse of Officers, Monopolists, p.
61. Of Wools into Scotl. without Custom, p. 170

Goods forfeited for not paying Customs, but not the whole Ship, p. 101, 113.
No Custom to be paid for woolen clothes before they be fulled, p. 149. What
Customs to be paid for Cloth, p. 542. See Cloth. An Act against Denizens
coloring or customing Aliens goods, p. 339. An Act against concealing Customs,
p. 424, 581. Such Merchants who have paid Customs for their wares, which
perish; to ship as much ware again freely without Custom, upon due proof before
the Council, p. 580.

Customers Office to be granted only at the Kings pleasure, and not let to
farm, p. 38, 339.

To dispatch all Merchants coming in with wares, p. 88. Of Chichester and
Yarmouth to receive the Customs of Jews and Ly^ne, p. 101. Sworn to be
resident^ p. 422, 424. That none who have ships, or be Merchants of wools be
Customers, p. 150, 339. That they be yearly removed, p. 170. An Act to ^^quire
of their Concealments, p. 396. To entreat Merchants according to reason, p.
442. No Alien to be a Customer, p. 443. Remedy provided against their Frauds,
p. 454. To keep no Ostery for Merchants, p. 472. To be made by the Councils
advice, p. 564. To make no blank Scrolls or Cockets, p. 612. Their license to
transport Corn from one County to another, denied, p. 625. An Act touching
Sureties found to them, p. 679.

Custos regni, p. 52, 554, 556, 559. Cutlers, the Wardens in London to survey
their wares, p. 431. Cyrographer, to ingrosse Fines: Petitions and Orders
against their extortions, abuses, p. 118, 411. He and his Clerks to be sworn
not to take above 4 s. for engrossing a fine, p. 128. To render tenfold as much
as he receives above it, p. 161, 162. An Act to this purpose, p. 411. To be a
man of ability, knowledge, to reside on his office, and not let it to farm, p.
419.
D
Damages: Attaint prayed for them when excessive and above 40 s. p. 55 56.
Damages of Merchants goods lost by Pirates, through default of those who
undertook their Safe Conduct, to be satisfied by them, p. 63. In a writ of
Champerty, 128. Treble against Pur^eyors for taking carriages of the Clergy, p.
165. For a false Appeal, p. 331. In Chancery, and an Act for it, p. 356.
Desired in Account, but denied, p. 419. For a false suggestion in Courts, p.
422. Treble for arresting any Knight or Burgess of Parliament, prayed 433.
Prayed against the Defendants Pety Jury in an Attaint, p. 605. enacted, p. 611.
From one Ships owner hurting another, p. 625. Treble for Distresses eloigned,
prayed, p. 636. Dartmouth, the Navy to ride there, p. 20. The Statute touching
passage thence not in the roll, p. 540. Deceit. See Collusion. Deeds cancelled
in the Insurrection or lost, exemplified, renewed, p. 201, 202. Acknowledged,
enrolled, p. 410. Default, and Judgment thereupon, p. 359. Defense of the
Realm, etc. p. 23. 134. See Kingdom, Parliament. Degradations of Dukes and
Nobles by Parl. p. 399^ 400. Delay, or Stay of Justice by the great or Privy
Seal, or other mean^ complained of, enacted against, p. 40, 54, 55, 59^ 61, 63,
114, 118, 163, 172, 178, 179, 299, 318, 412. Delivery of beasts escaping in
Forests without fine, p. 16. Denizens: who born beyond Seas shall be such: who
not Aliens. p. 38, 39, 76, 106^ 418, 480.

Asiens ende^ized by the King and Parl. p. 363, 418, 458, 561 535, 541^ 570,
585, 609, 610, 655, 589, 599^ 624. Walshmen not to be made Denizens, p. ^31.
Welshmen endenized. See Welshmen.

Denbigh Castle, Honor, Manor, p. 156, 363. Denmark, an Act concerning it, and
trade thither, p. 594, 600. Restitution of goods taken by the King of Denmark,
p. 604. War with it, p. 682. Deodands of Ships Boats and Vessels, complained
of: when and where not for the death of a man, and how to be moderated, p. 132,
150, 164, 191, 398, 537, 616. Deputies, Officers for life may appoint them, p.
564. To be able, p. 571. Duke of Bedford, enabled to make a Deputy Governor of
Barwick Castle, p. 584. Customers, Controllers, Searchers, Captains, and
Cyrographers may make no Deputies. See those Titles. Derby, the Assizes prayed
to be kept there, p. 192. Dertjord Nuns, p. 169. Detinne the Process in it, p.
410. Debts of poor Merchants, and of other men, bought at undervalues, by rich,
and the Kings Officers, complained of; impeachments, censures for it in
Parliament, p. 58, 61, 121, 122^ 123. Of the King to be abated and allowed to
Acomptants in the Exchequer, p. 40, 160. The Kings to be paid, p. 443. See
King. No man to be impeached for a Debt in the Exchequer, after payment made,
and a tally, p. 93, 160. Privy Seal for payment of Debts due by the King not to
be stopped, p. 138. Goods and Lands of a deceased person not to be seized for the
Kings Debt, un^ess found by record, prayed, p. 305. Lands seized to satisfy
Debts to the King, p. 380. Debt by order of Parliament to be paid to the Bishop
of Lincoln for moneys toward the repair of the Church, upon breach of an award
^ade by himself, p. 623. Devisable Lands^ writs of possession to lie of them
where not devised, p. 60. Devonshire, their complaint of oppression by the
Stannary Officers, p. 131, 142. They desire a Declaration of their Charter, and
answer to those who alleged, they sought to hinder the Princes profit, p. 149.
Dyers of Coventry, p. 546. Disability of Counselors and Officers convicted of
deceit, to be ever restored, p. 122, 125. Descent of Lands to Parceners, that
are Enemies to the King to be prevented, p. 66. To the younger Son,
notwithstanding the elders attainder in the Fathers life, prayed, p. 396. Desms
granted, See Quindismes, Taxes: The Clergy who pay Disms not to be taxed to
Ninths, granted p. 28. Discontinuance of process after issue for want of
prosecution, p. 134 138. by the Kings death, p. 162. by a Jurors misnaming, p.
459. Discord, its mischief to the Realm, p. 415, 598. Disseisor, Assise against
him after his feo^^ment over, p. 177. Judgment against him for the Land and
me^ne profits, and he fined in Parliament, p. 362, 363. Disseisins remitted to
Common Law, p. 374. Feofments by Collusion to the King by Disseisors to be
void, p. 571. Di^^eisin complained of in Parl. referred to the Chancellor and
Chapter Justices to end, p. 693. Distresses, in Hundreds and Wapentakes when to be
apprised and sold by the Bailiffs upon Judgments in them, p. 55. Of English
men's goods coming into Wales for other men's debts and Trespasses, petitioned
against, p. 87. Against taking Distresses by Welshmen, and carrying them into
another Lordship, p. 630, 639, 644. Granted to Strangers, Corporations for
rents to charitable and pious uses, by Parliament, p. 599, 623. Divorce, the
Charges of the husband on the wives inheritance made void against her after
divorce yet the husband to enjoy her lands for life after her death, if he
desires reconciliation, p. 694. Doctors of Divine, Civil, and Canon Law,
dispute the case of Sanctuary in Parliament against the Bishops in point of
Debt and Trespass^ p. 176. See 597. Doomsday Book, an Act concerning it, p.
162. Dorchester, an Act touching the Liberties thereof, p. 600. Dove-house,
none to have any unless he may spen^ 40 s. per ann. prayed, p. 421. Dover, a
Charter granted to it under the Great Seal nulled in Parliament, p. 316. An Act
touching Passengers from it to Calice, p. 679. Dover Castle, complaints of the
Oppressions, Process, abuse^ of the Constable of it, and his Jurisdiction
limited, p. 107^ 132, 333, 344, 412, 422, 433. Dower rendered to a Wife upon
petition in Parliament, where the husband was attainted a Treason, p. 7^ 407,
430, 431, 671, 396. Of the Queen by Parliament. See Queen. Barred by
Parliament, p. 635. The King to have the Forfeiture of his Widows Dowagers,
not holding jointly with their husbands, p. 87. Dower upon oath, not to marry,
p. 580. Dukes created in Parliament, with their Creation-money, Pensions,
Patents, Ceremonies, p. 94, 310, 332, 370, 550, 559, 576, 578, 698, 702, 703.
Degraded, p. 399, 400. Duchess created, p. 370. Dunster Castle, an Assise,
special Jury, and reference of the difference for it, the Manors of Minehead,
Culverton, Carhampton, and its Hundred, between the Coheirs of the Lord Mohun,
and Sir Hugh Lutterel, p. 454, 455, 460. Duresse; Releases, Grants, Fines,
En^ranchisements, Bonds, Deeds made by it, and in times of Insurrection,
complained of in Parl. and nulled, p. 8, 9, (See Parl. 1 E. 3. c. 1, 2, 3.
Parl. 2. c. 15.) 81, 106, 107, 176, 177, 195, 196^ 199^ 200, 201, 214, 387,
391, 551. Marriage by Duresse complained of and nulled, p. 619, 655.
Imprisonment for it in the Tower by the Lor^s, p. 176, 177. See Rape. Durham, a
Franchise Royal and County Palatine, yet denied by the Kings Attorney, p. 62,
609. not comprised within the Tallage, p. 191. The temporalties of the
Bishopric thereof granted by the King for 600 l. to the use of the Bishop
elect by Provision from Rome, p. 458.
E
EArls created in Parliament, with their Creation-money, Charters and
Solemnity, p. 34, 94, 103, 110, 325, 326, 332, 363, 370, 610, 533. Privileged
to wear swords in Parliament-time, but not in the place of Council, p. 51.
Summoned to Parliament; see the 3. Table of their Names and Summons. Aetate
probanda, p. 183, 474^ Eaton-Colledge incorporated, endowed, confirmed by King
H. 6. in Parliament, p. 630, 635, 663^ 699. Easter, the Parliament adjourned by
reason of its approach, till it was past, p. 322, 471, 545, 111. Ease of the
people from Taxes desired, and to be sought by Parliaments and Kings, p. 58,
70, 138, 191, 201, 284, 360. Eastmain Manor in Hampshire, the Tenants complain
of the Bishop of Winchester for raising new Customs, but falsely, p. 670.
Ecclefield Prior, an Alien, his complaint, p. 123. Edinburgh-Castle garrisoned,
and kept by the English, p. 20^ 21, 25. K. Edward 2. his Murderers condemned
for Traitors by Parliament, though deposed; his death examined, and Earl
Mortimer the chief actor in it condemned and executed without legal trial, p.
5, 7, 8. Those who conspired to enlarge him, acquitted, pardoned, restored,
ibid. K. Edward 3. his Title to France, his Seal and Style thereupon newly
altered as King of France, p. 23^78, 108. His wars and victorious proceedings
in France, p. 27, 37, 47, 87, 90, 105, 116. See France. Creates his sons Dukes
and Earls, p. 94^ and his Grandchild Richard Prince of Wales, p. 123, 124, 144,
145. His great goodness and good will to his people, and their thanks for it,
p. 96. 10^. His thanks to God for victory over his Enemies, p. 105. To the
Lords and Commons, whom he feasts, p. 106. Advises with his Parl. touching his
affairs in France, Ireland, Voyage to the Holy Land, p. 9, 10, 11, 12, 17. His
sickness and recovery from it, p. 124, 140, 144, 146, Gods love to him and his
Realm, p. 144. His goods praised and sold to pay his debts, p. 175. K. Edward 4
his Title and Claim to the Crown, p. 665, 666, 670. Confirmed by Parliament,
and submitted to. K. H. 4. H. 6. and their heirs d^sinherited and attainted as
Usurpers, Traitors, p 670, 671. His speech and promise to the Commons in
Parliament, p. 67^. His marriage, government, issue, life, branded by Richard
3. who usurped the Crown, and murdered his sons, p. 610^ 611, 612, 613.
Election of the Speaker in Parliament, see Commons. Of Knights for Parliament,
when and how to be made by the whole County by common consent, p. 138, 387,
457, 461, 475, 536, 590, 593, 604, 622, 632, 664. None to come armed to it, p.
622. A new Election made, ibid.

The Chancellor and other great Officers to be chosen in open Parliament^ p.
32, 34^ Justices of Peace to be chosen in Parliament, p. 37. See Justices of
Peace.

Religious Houses to have free Election of their Heads, p. 130. Alde^men of
London, when to be elected, p. 301, 304. Of Coroners, p. 87.

Bishops Election, p. 407. Of the Mayor of the Staple, p. 631. Of King H. 4. in
Parliament, p. 388. Of Richard 3. by the three Estates and Parliament, p. 711.
to 714.

William Ellis his impeachment and censure, p. 122. Ely Isle discharged from
contributing to the Knights wages of Cambridge, for 200 l. to purchase lands,
p. 600. Embracers not to be maintained by Great persons, p. 51. An Act against
them, p. 101, 343. Enemies; provision for defense against, advice and aid to
resist, suppress, assail them, one chief cause of calling Parliaments, p. 20,
21, 27, 31, 45, 49, 50, 63, 66, 110, 116, 127, 129, 131, 154, 182, 188, 196,
281; 291, 329, 342, 437, 534. See Kingdoms defense. England, its invasion,
conquest intended by the Normans and French, p. 47, 111, 145^ 173, 303, 305,
314, 437, 656. Its misery and danger, p. 281. It Is self-sufficiencie and
freedom, p. 684, 687. No^ subject or tributary to the Pope by King John's
Charter^ p. 102, 387. English men to be preferred to Benefices and
Ecclesiastical Livings, and Aliens ejected, p. 49, 192, 429. Enriching the
Subjects, one cause of calling a Parliament, p 602. Enrollment of Accounts in
Chancery, p 32. O^ Patents, p 23: Of the Commons Conditions, p 69. Of matters
in the Parliament-Roll^ by the Clerk of Parliament, p 73. Of Aids and Subsidies
granted, p 175. Of Deeds and Charters in Chancery, p 202. An Act concerning
Enrollments, p 284. Of a Plea, p 301. Of the Clergies protestation in
Parliament, p 332, 348. Oath of the Bishops and Lords enrolled in Chancery, p
369. Of Deeds acknowledged, p 410. Of the Speakers protestation, p 452. Of the
Duke of York and his sons oath and protestation, p 667. Of a Recovery in right
of Ward, p 690. Entry into Lands by the Lord for Mortmain upon a fraudulent
conveyance to the King, p 203. Upon a forcible Entry and Disseisor^ p. 417. An
Act concerning Entry into Lands, p 204. Entry of a Plea omitted, p 300. An Act
touching false Entries of Clerks, p 306. Rectified when mistaken, p 545, 560,
585. Entry of Apparances, p 605. Error in Parliament; the manner of bringing
the Record of it into parliament by the Chief Iustice^ the Scire facias,
proceedings, continuance of it from one parliament to another, assignment of
Errors, the execution of the Judgment when reversed therein, p. 66, 85, 123,
156, 157, 164, 168, 169, 176, 177, 184, 282, 300, 301, 304, 305, 331, 343, 344,
348, 352, 353, 359, 363, 369^ 373, 398, 408, 418, 429, 341, 535, 539, 546, 665,
666, 611. Error upon a Judgment in an Information for the King and party, p 56.
In the Exchequer to be redressed in the Kings Bench, p 56^ 71, 164. An Act
touching Errors in London, p 87. Errors in the Common Place to be redressed in
the Kings Bench; Errors in it, in Parliament, p 123. Before Justices of Assise,
revocable before the Chief Justice of the Com^lace, p 130, 131. In either Bench
for an Erroneous Judgment in Lincoln, p 546. An Act for assigning Errors, p
595. Error in the Kings Bench and Parliament, upon a Judgment in Ireland, p
596. Escapes of Fugitives out of Churchyards enquired of by the Stewards of
the Kings house, and an Escape awarded thereon; complained as a grievance p
137. Of Prisoners and Felons, how to be punished, p 548. Escheators to be
sufficient persons within the County, p 57, 113. To answer the profits of the
Kings tenants, p 87. To seize lands into the Kings hands, p 91. Waste done by
them how to be punished, p 93. An Act concerning them, p 106. None to remain
above one year, p 113, 127, 164. ^94. That no Patent for any Lands found by
their Inquest be granted, or the party outed of possession if he will be bound
to answer the profits, if it be found for the King upon his Traverse, p 128^
185, 191, 285, 624. Their Inquests and Offices to be traversed, how and when, p
138, 624. See Traverse.

None after sixty years to be an Escheator, p. 162. Not to seize any man's lands
upon an Inquest of Office without a Scire fac. p 163. Oppress Religious houses,
p 165. None to remain in office above three years, p 178. None to execute the
office for three years after his remove, p 306, 338. Enquiry of their
Concealments, p 396. To be made by the Councils advice, p 564^ Ordered to
return an Office by a day, p 580. An Act touching their Inquisitions, p 596
touching Returns of their Offices, p 624 touching their Fees, p 632^ Patents to
them for life in Chester and Flint made void, p 664. An Act concerning them, p
700.

Escheats of Lands and Goods granted to Calice, p 140. Not to be granted by the
King to any during the Wars, p 323, 324. Excepted out of the general pardon p
325. To be sold for the Kings most profit, p 338. Escuage pardoned, p. 312,
313. No Escuage to be paid to London by the Merchants of Iean for their
merchandise customed at Southampton, p 629. Essoins, no Fourcher to be suffered
by them, p 411. Estreat, p 86. Evidence to be given openly at the Bar in
Inquests of Conspiracy, etc. p 87. Examinations read in Parliament, of the
Duke of Gloucester taken by Commission at Callis, to attaint him of Treason
after his death, p 378. Of Doctors, of Divine, Civil, and Canon Law upon Oath,
touching the privilege of Sanctuaries, p 176. None to be compelled to be
examined touching his Freehold in Parliament, or elsewhere. p 604.

Of Witnesses on Oath. See Parliament.

Exchanges of Lands etc. with the King, confirmed in Parliament, p 588, 663,
565 694, 697. Of Lands for a casual custom with the King, adjudged fraud in
the Chancellor, p 315, 316. Exchange of Moneys, and Exchangers Office, p 23,
48, 52, 121. between Merchant and Merchant, notwithstanding any Statute, p 284,
421. Acts touching Exchange, p 337, 472, 560, 80. No Mintmaster to be a Master
of Exchange, p 560. yet 565.568. dispensed with: An Act touching Exchanges to
Rome, p 565. Fees for Exchange, p 97, 565. An account thereof to a Committee of
Parliament, p 684, 685, 686. Exchequer, A Commission to the Opposer of it
repealed, p 24. Justices Extracts to be certified into it, p 40. Kings Debtors
to rebate the same there in debts due to them from the King, p 40. Vexations of
Accountants therein complained of, p 54, 55. Attorneys in accounts to be there
received, ibid Error there where to be redressed. See Error: Writs out of it
upon Inquests, on Arrays to double or treble the value of the lands found,
complained of, p 60. Process and Issues there against Accountants, p 70. The
right use thereof to be kept, in levying aid to make the Kings son a Knight, p
91. An Attaint prayed for Verdicts there given, p 92. No man to be impeached
there for a debt after payment and a Tally, p 93. An act touching the
Remembrancer of it, p 97. That all Scots money be brought into it by a day, p
114 All Accountants to be discharged there without delay, under pain of
Imprisonment, p 118.

None to be called thither upon suggestion without due process, p 119.
Discharge of Sums upon Oath, and averment which cannot be levied, by Sheriffs
and others Accounts there, to be made by the Barons and Council, or Treasurer,
p 126. see Accounts. Sheriffs not to give Dinners to the Officers of the
Exchequer, p 127. That men may wage their Law there as well as in other Courts,
denied, p 128. Search in the Treasury there for Discharges, p 134. An Act
touching Debts there allowed, p 160. That Justices of Assise may take Nisi
prius of Issues between the King and other persons of the Exchequer, as well as
of the K. B. and C. B. p 162. Confession to be the Kings Debtor on Record
there, p 164. Where prisoners in Execution in Newgate for Debt, shall or may
not be removed into the Exchequer for the Kings debt, p 166. Remedy prayed
against calling men to account for Sweet wines and Scottish money, p 177. See
Account. The wisest and ablest men to be Officers there, p 197. The privileges
of the Officers there to be declared, p 160. Collectors of Tenths to account
there upon oath, p 202 An Act touching Accounts there, p 203. Clerks Fees
there, p 280. The Barons and all other Officers there (specified) to be learned
in the Law, or very skilful in the courses of the Court, p 204. The Chancellor
and Keeper of the Privy Seal to survey the Exchequer and Receipts; to remove
such Officers therein as are unfit, and to place others, p 325. An Annuity to
be paid out of it, p 322.

Complaint against Writs thence, Datum est nobis intelligi, p 413. Averment
there against Sheriffs returns of small issues, p 413. Commissioners fined for
not sitting^ to be discharged there upon their oaths that they had no notice, p
443. No man after a Quietus est to be called there to Account, but for a
Concealment or False allowance^ p 481. That all Subpoena's thence Quibusdam
certis de causis, may be controlled, p 548. The Treasurer and two Chamberlains
of the Exchequer to have a Key to the Kings Receipts^ and their Oath, p 564,
565. No Sheriff or other Officer to be impeached by process thence for things
not leviable, p 595. No Writs to be issued thence for any Debts paid, under a
Penalty, p 616. An Act against the Extortions of Officers there, p 660.

Excommunication denounced against Breakers of Peace, Maintainers, False
Jurors, Malefactors, p 12, 25, 26. For Perjury^ p 66. Against all Breakers of
the Oaths taken in, 11 and 21 R 2. p 326, 369, 371. Of the Kings Officers for
making arrests in Churchyards complained against, p 364. Sir John Oldrastle
excommunicated for Heresy, p 554. The party cannot answer to the cause after
it, p 75. The Popes Excommunication procured against breakers of the Parliament
of 21 R 2. in derogation of the Laws and Crown, p 387. See p 343. Protested
against by the Archbishop and Clergy, p 348. See Bulls. Excommunicato capiendo
lies without a Scire facias which was desired, p 75. A complaint against an
Excommunication by the Archbishop for a civil cause, p 343. Execution avoided
by practice, recharged on the party in the Bishops prison, p 631. Of Lands at
the day of the Writ purchased, denied, p 53. see p 55, 56, 62, 696. Executors,
acquittance of one refusing administration prayed to be void, p 109, 110.
Restitution of a reward made to the Executors, p 113. Of Guardian in socage, an
account prayed against them, p 131. Of Captains taking wages to pay what they
received p 203. pray payment of debts from the King p 569. pray redress in
Parliament against the abuses of a Co-executor, p 588: may have an identitate
nominis, p 600. Whitington College founded by his Executors, p 603. Petition
in Parliament, p 624, 635, 696. An Annuity confined for five years to
Executors, after the death of him to whom it is granted, p 698. Executors made
by the King, they to pay his debts, refuse to administer for want of Assets,
etc. p 169, 419, 535, 563, 564, 569, 570, 588. King H. 6. sole Executor to Q.
Katherine his Mother, appoints others to execute her will, p 620. Executors of
Executors, cannot have the like action as the estator, yet prayed, p 40. What
actions are given them by Statute, p 79. Exemplifications under the Great Seal,
of Articles in Parliament, p 23: Of Statutes, Conditions, and Commissions for
inquiry of Oppressions, p 34. Of the Statute for Tithes^ p 44. Of judgments in
the Common Pleas, p 75. Of all Deeds and Charters enrolled, lost, burnt, or
defaced in the Insurrection, p 202. An Act touching Exemplifications of deeds,
p 284. Of an aid granted, and the conditions, for every County under the Great
Seal freely, p 317. Of a judgment enrolled, when the Record in imbezzelled, p
690. Exemption from Offices and Juries, prayed for all men above 60 years, p
149, 162. Exigents, where, when and how to issue, and in what actions, p 46, 57
91, 410, 413 422, 535, 547, 558, 589, 590, 605, 625, 631. Extents at
undervalues to be inquired of, p 138. Of Aliens Farms duly returned, p 178. Of
the Kings debtors Lands upon his heir, p 511. Extortions, Exactions, and abuses
complained of in Parliament, and Orders for redress in Officers of the Forest,
p 358 The Lord Nevil p 136. Sheriffs p 32, 119, 165, 581, 600, 631. Escheators,
p 32, 165. Aulnagers, p 474, 482. Ordinaries and Bishops Officers p 118, 127,
136, 296. Farmers of Customs p 58, 61, 67, 112, 121, 122. Collectors of Woolls
and Taxes, p 63. Searchers, p 644. Gagers of Wines, p 63. Officers and Sheriffs
of London, p 356, 396. Merchants, p 58, 67, 411. Officers of the Exchequer, p
660. Admirals p 113, 475. Marshalsey, p 164. Privy Counselors p 122:
Cyrographer, p 161. Pope and his Officers, p 128, 129. See Pope. Usurers, p
286. Others p 132, 152, 334 335.412, 413, 482, 483.591, 644, 664, 684.
Commissioners for Extortions, p 124, 152. Extracts of Justices to be yearrly
returned into the Exchequer, p 15.40, 127 159. To be mentioned in the
Green-Wax, at whose suit, in what Term etc. p 112. Eyres, of Forests not to be
kept during the Wars, p 70, 112, 125, 163, 347, Judgment to pass in them under
the chief Justice Seal, p 75. All points of the Air desired to be pardoned, p
^72. No Air to be kept without urgent necessity, p 342.
F
FAir at Bath, another raised at Bristol to its Nuisance; complained of, p 133.
No Fair to be held in two years, p. 284. An Act touching Fairs, p. 639. Faith,
want of it the root of all vice, p. 591. The restitution of true Faith, the
best means to make the Kingdoms flourish p. 592. Faith Catholic to be
maintained, p. 405, 447. False Imprisonment upon Attachments by Forresters, p.
147. Farm Customers and others not to let their Offices to Farm, p. 38. No
Englishman to take any thing to Farm of an Alien religious, prayed, p. 49, 131,
147, 151, 161. Hundreds, not to be let to Farm, p. 126. Bailiffs of Wapentakes
and Hundreds not to Farm them, p. 139, 398. Farms of Prior Aliens to the King
discharged, p. 409. Farmers to the King to enjoy their Grants upon resumptions,
giving as much as others, p. 439. Mainperers of the Kings Farms for felony, and
their heirs how far chargeable to the King, p 433. Farmers of Customs and
Subsidies, abuses, exactions, p. 58. See Extortion. Farthings to be coined, p.
41, 97, 171, 191, 631. Fear of death not to be pleaded in excuse by any Lord or
Judge, p. 394. No excuse, p. ^99, 400. The kinds and effects of Fear, p. 591,
592. Fee-farms, Sheriffs to be discharged of those granted to others, and which
they cannot levy, p 80, 178, 179, 203. Port-Towns Petitions to be discharged of
their Fee-farms, or to be abated, p. 132, 133, 385, 397, 421, 467, 468, 475. Of
Cambridge, p. 200. No Re-entries for not payment of Fee-farms of Cities and
Towns, p 407. Fees for Justices of Peace; see Justices. For sealing Writs, p.
15, 60. For admission to Benefices, p. 136. Of Gaugers, p. 63. Of Clerks in the
Exchequer, p. 204. Of the Chamberlain of Berwick, p 25. For Probate of Wills,
p. 147, 148. Of Cyrographers for Fines, p. 128, 161, 162. For measuring of
Vessels in Cambridge, p. 304. For Worsteds search and sealing, p. 474. For
Searchers of Cloth, p. 601. Of the Exchanger, p. 565, 684, 685, 686: For the
Protector, p. 652, 658. Fees accustomed only to be taken, p 457. Fees of the
Justices and Barons increased, p. 51. Pardons granted without Fees, p. 146.
Fees examined by Commissioners, p. 168. To be ascertained, p. 409, 419, 457.
Extorted Fees more then due, to be rendered to the King, p. 644. Felons not to
be maintained by Great men or others, p. 10. An Act concerning such as fly
into secret places, p. 595. A Clause for apprehending such as haunt London, and
committing them to Newgate, p. 682. An undue acquital of a Felon before the
Justices of Assise nulled, p 7^0. Felons goods found by office, traversed, p.
127. Felony to be enquired of by Justices, p. 16. Indictment and Acquital of
it, p. 57, 146. Issue joined thereon prayed to be tried by Nisi prius, p. 109.
Of Chester-men, see Cheshire. Constable and Marshal not to hold plea of Felony,
but the Justices only, p. 171. Pardon of Felonies, p. 192. To be tried in Wales
where committed, p. 467. An Act touching Felonies, p 615. Attainder of Felony
by Act of Parliament for not appearing at a day; Avoided upon petition. p. 699.
Cutting out Tongues, Felony, p. 433. Pulling out Eyes, ibid. Feme-covert,
surrender by her and her husband of Lands held of the Duchy of Cornwall, entered
in Parliament. and her confession; to bind her; and the Lands conveyed back to
her by the Duke, under age, for life, p 430. Grants of Goods and Lands by the
King, to the only use of a wise being covert; and she enabled to sue and to be
sued by Parliament, p 670. Feoffments and Feoffees in trust by the King and
others, ratified, and the breach of trust complained of and redressed in
Parliament, p 200, 414, 559, 560, 579, 584, 604, 612, 615, 622, 630, 653, 667,
668, 696. Feoffment absolute by Deed without Condition by the King can have no
Condition annexed to it afterward by Parol, p 169. Sir Ralph Ferrer's arrest
and trial in Parliament, upon suspicion of Treason, p 189, 190, 199.
Fescamp-Abby, p 440. Filicers how to be punished for untrue dealing, p 475. An
Act concerning them, p 627. Fines for Contempts and offenses, by Justices of
Oyer and Terminer, p 38, 75. For not arraying men, p 48, 60, 101. In Leets, p
40. Of Commissioners, p 44^. In common and gross, p 40, 127. for Riots^ p 134.
For false imprisonment, p 296^ Several, p 40.134. For Insurrection and
Trespass, p 396.426.

Pardoned, p 40, 4^6. By the Clerk of the Market, p 134. For not receiving
Gold, p 49. On Laborers, p 74. For withholding Lands without Title, p 363. For
arresting Knights and Burgesses against their privileges, p 433. For suing in
Court Christian, p 476. Of Masters for giving excessive wages, p 471. For
marrying without License, p 619. For sorcible Entry, p 201.

Fines and Amerciaments of Cambridge granted to the University, p 200. Fine and
Ransom for offenses and misdemeanors, p ^3, 296^ 455, 471, 59^. In Parliament.
p 295. For a false Return of a Knight, p 429. Fine by Duress complained of, p
81. After pardon, p 664. Fines excessive in Leets complained of, p 42, 82, 93.
Fines for restitution, p 9. For Liberties confirmed, p 293. For
Exemplifications, p 202. For Writs, p 15. see Writs. Fines levied of Lands by
Duress complained of, and restitution granted, for money, p 8, 9. Averment
against it by a stranger, not by a Feme-covert party to it, p 30.

Non-claim of Fines not to Bar, p 40. Justices to take Recognisances of Fines
in their Circuits beyond Trent, p 88. Fees for engrossing them, p 118, 161,
162. Fine by an Infant not reversible after his full age, though prayed, p 131.
An Act touching the Foot of Fines, p 434, 444. A Petition to reverse a Fine for
falsehood, p 444.

First Fruits of Benefices levied by the Popes Officers, complained of and
prohibited as a grievance, p 74, 110, 130, 151, 160, 192, 285, 467. To be paid
to the King, as they were to the Pope, p 313. Fish^ An Ordinance for its sa^^
at Blackney, p 97. An Act and Commissions against destroying the Fry of Fish in
the Thames, p 124, 305. In Havens and Cre^ks, p 148. An Act for retailing of
Fish^ p ^85. That all may freely go to Island to Fish, p 547. Fishmongers of
London under the rule of the Mayor and Aldermen, p 86, 294, 295. Flanders
debates concerning it in Parl. p 23. Prohibit Merchant-strangers to buy
Staple-wares; complained of, p 70. taken by the French King, p 287. In enmity
against England, p ^91. Voyage into it, p ^^2. Flattery of the Scots prisoners
taxed by the King, p 417. Fleet, an Act touching prisoners in it, p 164. see p
620. Flemings silver according to the Sterling to be current among Merchants, p
37. Liberties granted them, p 40. Enemies to England, p 303. Flight, Forfeiture
of Goods for it, p 126. of Felons into secret places, p 595. Forcible Entries,
p 201. Forfeitures of all Lands and Goods for Treason, p 53, 59, 323, 325, 333,
338, 345, 369, 377, 378, 379, 380, 399, 4^0, 401, 407, 459, 662, 663, 670, 671,
672, 699. For Felony, p 57, 127, 136, 305, 325, 467. By Outlawry^ p 590.
Forfeiture to the Lord lost by Treason, p 52, 59. Of Goods and all, for
deserting Garrison-Frontier-Towns in times of war, p 20. Of a Jurats goods in
Iersey, for revolting to the Enemy, p 21. For not paying Customs, p ^9. By
flight, p 57. For negligence and fraud of Officers^ p 59, 63, 125, 127. Of
Widows-dowagers for marrying, p 87. Not of an whole ship for a trisle
uncustomed, p 101. For Vert and Vemson, p 125. Without Attainder, p 134. Of
Yarn transported, p 137. Of other Manufactures exported, p 1^7. Of Goldsmiths
not setting their Marks to Plate, p 172. Of Corn transported, p 285. For
customing strangers goods in Denizens names, p ^39. For shipping goods in
strangers bottoms, p 346. For holding plea in the Marshalsey of matters at
Common Law, p 432. For Usury or Exchange^ p 433. For not customing wares, p
57^. Copper L^ce and Imbroide^y instead of Gold forfeited, p 571. Or Staple
Ware, p 605. Forestallers Acts against them, 76, 79, 97, 2^5. Punishment of
them in Cambridge by the Vice Cha^cellor, p 21^. Foreign County against trials
in it, p 66, 70, 630. Foreign Inquest, and Iuries in cases of Corporations, p
93; 3^0, 331. complained against in Forresters, p ^9. Foreign pleas, an Act
concerning them, p 632. Forging Deeds, an Act against it^ p 536 A Writ for it,
and exigent in it^ p 558, 600. The Venire in it, ibid. A Formedon stayed, p
609. Forts and Fortresses, all the Kings to be surveyed, p 1^9. The Petition
that every man might freely make them, denied, p 113. Accusations, Impeachments
for loss of foreign Forts, p 122, 292, 293. The Barbicans of the Realm, and
to be well defended, p 175. Very chargable, aid prayed to keep them, p 337.
Welshmen to have none, and all there ^tored with English Soldiers, p 423, 424.
Captains beyond the Seas to repair their Forts, p 453. Fountain Abbey. A suit
hanging long in the Court of Rome, and Council of Constance concerning it, p
551. An Act concerning it, p 660. France, Treaties of peace, Truces, Marriage
with it, and proceedings in them p 9, 10, 12, 78, 79, 85, 88, 90, 10^, 329,
337, 341, 35^, 353, 361, 545, 550, 614, 629, 630, 641, 64^, 64^. English King
thereof, and his style, p 23, 78, 108, 314, 538, 545. Wars with it^
proce^dings, successes, victories, expenses in them, and relations of them, p
31, 37, 5^, 63, 69, 78, 82, 90, 105, 108, 110, 111, 116, 145, 182, 188, 193^
287, 291, 298, 303, 309, 314, 3^9, 34^, 342, 352, 404, 405, 415, 425, 43^, 451,
464, 470, 538, 539, 544, 550, 5^3, 567, 577, 607, 614, 615, 638, 64^, 666, 682,
683^ Frenchmens Treachery, p 108, 111, 145, 303, 425 470, 567, 614. Prisone^s
of them taken, and exchanged or ransomed, p 550, 570, 612. See Prisoners of
War. The French here how to be used, p 114, 119, 129, 131 See Aliens. Duke of
Suffolks treachery in selling France, under pretext of Peace, etc. p 641, 642,
643^ Franchises their mischief, and restraint desired, p 54. No royal
Franchises to be grant^d or severed from the Crown, p 58. Assize of Lands
within them, p 596. Fraternities, Liberties granted them, pra^ed to be revoked
p 24 No live^y to be given by color of them, p 333 A^ Act concerning them p
620. Freehold, no man to answer for it before the Council but by due Process^
of Law, p 74. No man to be outed of (...) by Letters Patents upon Suggestions,
un^^ss found for the King by Inquest, or Evidence in Court, 179. None to be
compelled to be examined concerning it in Parliament or elsewhere, p 6^4. Free
quarter and Forage to be taken upon the enemies in Scotland, not on the Marches
of England, p 21. Kings and Queens Horses, complaints against their Free and
irregular quartering and purveyances, and order for relief of the grieved, p
58. The Subjects to be satisfied for Victuals of Soldiers lying for passage^
and no Victuals to be taken by color of any Protection, but for present pay, p
137 All Captains lying upon the Seacoasts for passage^ must satisfy the
damages done to the Subjects by any of their Soldiers, so as they make
complaint before their departure, p 185. King Richard the second articled
against for his Soldiers disorders, and not paying for their Victuals, p 3^6.
Remedy upon complaint provided for the Victuals of Soldiers quartered in
sundry ^owns, p 581. A Petition that all Soldiers passing through the Realm do
pay ^or their victuals, and lodging, p 595. See p 394^ 396. Free Trade,
Importation, exportation, buying, s^lling of goods and Merchandise without
restraint^ petitioned for, and oft^ granted, p 52, 58, 88, 112, 113, 136 137,
18^, 194, 317, 334, 355^ 482, 537, 54^, 625, 631. Friars Mendicants, a
difference between them and both Universities, and Order settled therein, p 101,
102. Their Petition, and Order thereon, Not to pass the Sea, nor to take
Degrees or O^ders of Divinity on them, unless allowed by their Provincials, p
363. An Act concerning them and other Friars, p 421. see Alien^. Frizes, an Act
concerning them, p 150. Forest, the Charter of it confirmed to be observed, p
15, 39, 91, 117, 125, 146, 147, 158, 160, 169, 177, 185, 190, 202, 283, 288,
294, 296, 301, 317, 345, 394, 536. Purlieu granted throughout them, and their
bounds ascertained by Ed. 1. but not kept by the Forresters and Ministers of
the Forests, whose abuses, oppressions, vexations are complained of, p 16, 59,
71, 160, 202, 296, 355, 411. To render double damages, p 296.

None to chase the Kings game escaped out of the Forest, but the Lords of the
Woods, p 67. No Eyres to be kept there d^ring the Wars, see Eyres. Purlieus in
them to be enjoyed, p 59, 71, 202, 296.

Persons indicted before the Justices thereof for Vert and Venison, without
being called to answer, to be bailed by an Habeas Corpus till the next Air, p
125. Old perambulations of Forests to be published by Writ and observed, and
new made, p 127, 147, 169, 178, 202, 411, 536.

None to be impeached for hunting in the Pur^ieu, out of the Forest lands, p
157, 160, 169. No man to be imprisoned or amerced for Vert or Venison against
the Assise of the Forest, p 160, 169, 202, 296. The Indictments of Vert and
Venison to express the places, else to be void, p 169. Pardon desired for all
points of the Forest, p 172.

The Forest of Dean granted as a Forest to the Duke of Gloucester in tail by
assent of Parliament, p 338. An Act touching Riots in this Forest, p 594.
Wardens of Forests to keep their Officers from Extortion, p 16.

Fotheringay, College of S. Mary and All Saints therein, p 480^
G
GAgeors and Gaging of Vessels of Wine and Oil; Acts, Petitions, Orders, Fees,
Complaints concerning them, p 63, 108, 460, 625, 632, 654. Games prohibited by
proclamation in places where Parliaments sat, p 11, 12. Unlawful Games
prohibited, p 356, 476, 703. Garnishment in a Scire fac. and Recognisance, p
56. Garnsey Isle to be defended, p 29. Exemption from Tolls and ^allages
granted to the men thereof for a time, p 339. Receivers and Triers of its
Petitions, see Parliament. Garrisons, Order for them, p 20, 21, 185. See
Castles, Forts. Gascoigne, passages concerning it, and its defense, and Wines
there made, p 23, 102, 18^, 281, 682. Receivers and Triers of Petitions thence,
see Parliament. Gaunt City, complaints and matters concerning it, p 52, 287,
292. General of the Army to be named by the King; impeached and censured for
miscarriages, p 289, 292, 293. Girdlers, an Act concerning them, p 346. Owen
Gl^ndor, his Lands forfeited and given away for Treason, an Act against
marriage with his Kindred, A Formedon by his heir staid, p 424, 459, 600, 609,
610. Gloucester, complaint against their Officers exactions for Wares passing
Severn, p 482. pray they may freely pass Severn with Boats etc. p 483. Order
for pa^ing the chief streets in it, p 692. Duke of Gloucester slandered for
intending to depose the King, and acquitted of it, p 321. His confession,
murder, attainder after death, p 378, 399, 400. See the 2. Table. Protector,
see the Table of Protectors. Goal ruinous to be repaired with the profits of
the County by the Sheriff p 150. Granted away, annexed by Act to the Shrivalty,
p 45, 324. A printed Act concerning Goals, not in the Record, p 335. No man to
be imprisoned by Justices of Peace, but in Common Goals, p 432. They to be in
Towns, p 126. Goal delivery, to be made by Justices of Assize, p 15, 120. See
Justices of Assize, To be speed^ly made, p 170. Justices of Peace to make
delivery of them, p 29^. Places where to be made by Act, p 324, 325.
Recognizance of persons bailed returnable the next Jail-delivery, p 682.
Goalers not to be Commssioners where men are to be imprisoned, p 91. Not to be
a Justice of Peace, p 127. An Act concerning them, p 459. Goderich Castle, p
571. Gold Florines refined, and all strange Gold forbidden, p 37. None to be
enforced to receive it, the sum being under 20 s p 46. To be received by the
Kings receivers^ p 48. Merchants to receive it for their Wares under a penalty,
p 49. Payment of it so high in Flanders, that great loss comes by its
Exchange, p 52. An Act for its Exchange, p. 80. Advice for more plenty of it, p
93. To be paid to Merchants for Wares, p 96. One ounce of Gold to be brought in
by Merchants ^or every sack of Wool, p 341, 362, 393. An Act concerning it, p
434. Gold coined in the Tower, and its allay, p 481. An Act concerning its
weight, p 560^ To be new coined that is not of full weight, p 568. An Act for
payment of Gold by Merchants Aliens, p 596. Cloth and Ribband^ of Gold, who may
wear, and who not, p 172. Deceit by Copper in stead of it, p 433. Gold-Finers
of London, p. 157. Goldsmiths, to set their marks upon their Vessels, and how
punished, if not according to the sterling, p ^72^ Their Charter in London
confirmed, ought to have the Assay of Gold and Silver wrought by Cutlers, p
431. An Act touching their guilding, p 54^. An Act concerning them, p 571. John
de Gominez his Impeachment and censure for surrendering up a foreign garrison
before extremity, p 158. Theobald Gorges case, disproving an Office, that found
him within age, and a Ward. p 580. Thomas of Gourney condemned of Treason in
Parliament^ for murdering K. Edw. ^. after his deposing. p 7. Government good,
one cause of summoning Parliaments, and to be procured, supported, p 37, 102,
121, 136, 281, 321, 358 360, 361, 384, 405, 452, 478, 534, 538, 550, 556, 562,
567, 649, 680. Often promised, but not performed by K H^ 4 p 534 III Government^
King Rich. 2. Impeached and deposed for it in Parliament, p 383 to 390. To be
inquired of, and redressed in Parliament, p 455. brings destruction ^o Realm, p
384, 711, 712. 713 The benefit and means of good Government, p 384 385, 710,
711. Governors of Garrisons power and duty, p 20, 21. See p 158, 159. Castles
and Forts. Grants of the King, not to be made of Advowsons, Franchises Royal,
o^ Lands annexed to the Crown, p 58, 471. See Resumsion. Not to be made without
the Councels advice and Treasurers, p 413. See Council. Of Lands found upon
Escheators Offices when and to whom to be made, p 128. See Escheators,
Inquests. None to be made to the prejudice of the King and Realm, p 13^, Of no
l^nds, escheated during the Wars, p 324. Confirmed in Parliament, p 332, 458,
697, 699, 700. See Confirmation, Charters. No Legal grant to be stayed by the
Council at the great or privy Seal, p 457. Green wax, complaints and Orders
concerning it, p 16, 106, 356. Greenwich, its Park and Tower, with license to
erect them, p 619. Grievances to be complained of, and redressed in Parliament,
p 31, 54, 59, 60, 61, 62, 85, 96, 119, 141, 165, 455. See Parliament.
Greyhounds^ not to be kept by Artificers, p 335. Grocers, An Act concerning
them, p 97. Guienne, Matters concerning it, its defense, Government, etc. p. 9^
31, 63, 298, 300, 321, 329, 351, 352, 360^ 371, 404, 415, 435, 437, 441, 451,
452, 4^3, 464, 534, 601, 610, 615, 642, 682. The Natives are Denizens, not
Aliens^ so declared, p 480. Recei^ers and Triers of their Petitions appointed.
See Parliament. Guilford, Their Charter burnt in the Insurrection renewed, p
297.
H
HAbeas Corpus in a Nisi Prius, p 138 To remove a Prisoner out of the Bishops
prison into the Kings Bench in execution, p 631: Out of Chancery to bail a
murderer upon a Petition in Parl. p 692. Haleng^ prior^ p 171. Hall condemned
and executed by judgment of Parliament, as a Traitor for murdering the Duke of
Gloucester at Callis p 400, 401. Halfpence to be coined, and Gally half pence,
p 355, 420, 476, 671, 631. Hamlet where a Writ lies in it, or not? p 162.
Hamper, Clerk of it to pay the Judges, and Kings Lawyers their Wages, p 623.
worth 2000 l a year in 5 H 4. p 428. Harlagh Castle confirmed to Sir Roger
Kenaston, p 691. Harling Isle in Southampton, their Patent confirmed, and what
Quindesms they are to pay, p 468, 693. Sir Tho. Haxey condemned of Treason for
exhibiting a scandalous Bill to the Commons in Parl. against K. R. 2. His life
pardoned at the Bishops suit, p 362. restored and pardoned at the Commons
petition, p 393, 394. Heir: to answer the King if he have no Assets by descent,
not a common person, p 80. Of Captains to pay any thing by them received, p
203. That the Heirs of the Kings debtors upon extent, may hold the lands in
Lea^e, denied, p 311. To have a Writ de aetate probanda, at full age, p 474.
King Henry 4. his claim of the Crown, election, instalment, Coronation, p 388,
389, 390: The Crown intailed on his heirs male, p 554, 666. that Intail
reversed, his Heir disinherited, and he pronounced a Murderer and Usurpe^, p
670. His promises to execute the Laws not performed, p 534. His Will, Legacies,
Executors, goods, debts, p 535, 569. King Henry the fifth his right to the
Crown of France, resolution to pursue it, and proceedings in it, p 538, 544^
553. His Will, Legacies, Executors, Overseers p 563 564, 583, 5^4. His conq^est
of France, p 567. King Henry the sixth King of France, p 562, 567, 614. crowned,
and his Protector discharged, p 592. His Crown revenues, p 609. His T^uce with
France, and Marriage with Queen Margaret, p 629. His Feoffment in trust to the
use of his will, p 630. Eaton and Kings Colleges founded and endowed by him, p
630, 635, 663. and the Nunnery of Sion p 570, 588, 589, 603. He has a
Protector set over him at his full age, and commits the whole government of the
Realm to his Council, p 652, 658, 659. His answer to the Duke of Yorks claim
and title to the Crown, and submission to the Lords award concerning it, p 665,
666, 667, 670. He and his Issue deprived of the Crown, attainted of Treason,
together with his Queen and adherents by Parliament. p 670, 671, 672, 677.
Heresy, The Faith to be maintained against it, p 409. An act against Heretical
Opinions varying from the Record, ibid Imprisonment for Lollery, p 411. N^w
Sects from beyond Seas, banished and suppressed, p 392. Excommunication for
Heresy, p 553, 554. Imprisonment for it, p 564 invadeth the faith, p 583. The
mischief of it, p 591, 592. A Writ de Haeretico comburendo granted in
Parliament^ p 407. Heretics in prison delivered over to the Ordinary, p 564.
Invade the Church, p 583. Despise the rights, and destroy the Ministers of the
Church, p 602. Heybeth-bridge, p 1^5. Herrings, Act concerning them, their
prizes and fishing, p 126, 149, 180, 191, 317, 420. Holidays, No Wages to be
taken for them, p 159. Homage, not to be done to the French King for Guyen,
Callis, or what was got by the sword, by the King of England, p 300, 353. Done
to the Pope by King John, but refused by the King and Parliament, p 102. Done
to the King in Parliament for the Duchy of Aquitain, p 332. To be done to the
French King for Guyen, else no peace, p 353. Homage done in Parl. by the Duke
of Hereford upon his creation, p 370. Patent for respiting it revoked, p 375.
Subject, surrendering their Homage to the King, Treason^ p 376, 377. Resigned to
R 2. upon his deposing by the Commissioners for the three Estates, p 389, 390.

Done to the King in Parliament, p 545. By the Duke of Norfolk in Parliament,
before he took his place, p 576. Feoffees of H. 5. may take the Homage of any
Tenants holding of them, p 584. Kissing the King in making Homage, dispensed
with by Parliament because of the plague, p 625, 6^6.

Honor of the King to be supported, p 17. See King. Hope, p 281, 282. Horners,
an Act concerning them, p 679. Horses of the King and Queen, and Purveyance for
them complained of, his abuses therein, p 55, 58, 75. An Act against taking
Horses without authority, p 364. Horse-coursers, complaint against their
excessive prices, p 109. Hospitality to be kept on Benefices, p 65, 100, 128,
129. Decayed by Aliens possessing of them, ibid. Hospitals to pay no Taxes,
unless they did formerly, p 28. All Ordinaries to certify their Foundations
etc. into the Chancery, that redress may be made in them, p 547. Of S. Leonards
in York, to enjoy their Thraues of Corn in several Counties, and recover them,
p 570. Hostages of the Scots, an Act touching them, p 578, 570. Hosteries and
Inns, an Act concerning them, p 475. Houses decayed in Buroughs, p 133. Hu^
and Cry to be made and pursued, p 12. Hundreds not to be let to farm, p 126,
398. Reasonable warning to be given for holding them, p 139. Hunting, No man to
be impeached for hunting within the Purlie^, and out of the bounds of the
Forest, p 147. An Act against Hunters, p 558.
I
IDentitate Nominis, an Act for it, p 97, 99. For Executors by Act, p 60^.
Iersey, the Bailiffs thereof to sense the goods of a Iurate revolted to the
Enemy and choose another, p 21. Care taken for i^s defense, p 29. The King of
Navar's promise to meet K. Edw. 3. there with a a great force to invade France,
p 90. Exemption granted to the Inhab^tants within England from Tolls and
Customs for a time, as Lieges, p 339. Sir John Cobham attainted of Treason in
Parliament; Adjudged to remain prisoner in Iersey during life. p 379. Jewels of
the King pawned, redeemed, and disposed of in cases of want of money, p 29, 569,
579, 588^ 603, 638. The King to have all his Grandfathers Jewels p 16^, 417.

Merchants bringing in Jewels, etc. to transport Staple-ware, p 172. King R 2.
impeached for carrying the Crown-Iewels into Ireland, p 388. King bound to
return the Queen into France with all her Jewels, p 4^4. King R 2. his Jewels
left in trust, disposed in part, the rest delivered to H. 4. who pardons all
Accounts for them, p 417, 588. Jewels in R. 2. his hands prayed to be restored
to the Duke of York, p 438. Delivered to H. 5. his Executors to pay his debts,
p 569. Impeachments in Parliament, see Commons, Parliament, Treason.

Impositions; That such as by their own authority shall lay new ones without
assent of Parli^ment, may lose life, member, goods and lands. p 138. None to be
imposed on Merchandise without Act of Parliament by the three Estates p 91,
1^2. fee Taxes, To^nage and Poundage.

King and Lords grant, That Merchants amongst themselves, in cases of distress,
might levy Impositions for the safe transporting of their Goods from the Staple
at Calice, if besieged, p 63. But their Grant cannot bind the Commons without
their assent thereto, p 39, 52, 53, 54. See Taxes.

Impressing of Masters and Mariners of Ships, its mischiefs, p 113.
Imprisonment for breach of the Peace both of Members and others, p 12, 14. see
Privilege of Parliament. Complained of in Parliament, p 692. For menaces and
revenge, p 7. For not receiving gold, p 99. For forcible Entry, p 201. Of
Clerks for abuses, p 306. Of Vagabonds and Counterfeits, p 294. Of Lollards and
Heretics, p 411, 472, 564, 582. Of such as infringe the good Orders for
Attorneys p 475. For suing in Court Christian, p 476 For Felony, p 581. Of
persons impeached in Parliament, p 316, 642, 643, 664. For slandering Peers,
not avowing Bills false Complaints and Contempts in Parliament, see Lords,
Parliament. Surrendering Forts to the Enemy, p 157, 158, 292. For Treason, p
581. Imprisonment not to be without due process, not against the Great Charter,
and Complaints against it, when contrary, p 32, 33, 79, 93, 296, 410, 422, 81,
16^. No Jailer or Constable of a Castle to be a Commissioner in cases of
Imprisonment, p 91. Imprisonment to be in common Goals, not private Castles, p
432. By Duress complained of and censured, p 81, 106, 398 For misdemeanors
complained of, p 107, 121. For delaying Accountants in the Exchequer, p 118.
For Oppression, Fraud and Extortion, p 12^, 122. Of the Tinners in Lestithiel
Castle, p 142. By Officers of, or in the Forest, p 169. For murder, p 690,
692. Of Goldsmiths for not setting their Marks to Plate, etc. p 172. Of a
Bishop, spared for his Order, p 293. For Provisions from Rome, p ^33.
Imprisonment perpetual and for life, of Provisors, p 44, 64. Of Englishmen
Farmers to Aliens Benefices, p 49. For counterfeiting others Seals and Deeds, p
114. For Treason by Judgment, p 379. Of King R 2. p 391. Of Clerks convict, p
639. Impropriations, an Act to license them, p 345. Incertainty; Fine and
Ransom intended, when penalties are uncertain, p 53. In Indictments of the
Forest, to null them, p 169. In Extracts to be certified, p 112. In Purveyors
Bills, p 55. Incontinency, occasioned by denying Clergy for Bigamy, p 125.
Indemnity in Civil Wars and Insur^ections when ended, with Exception of some
particular persons only, p 7, 9, 23, 394, 396, 397, 456, 432, 657, 664.
Indictment, none to be accu^ed but by it, p 54, 55. By For^esters, by men of
other Counties, complained against, p 59. Before Justices of Peace, p 92.
Before the Coroner, p 126. In the Sheriff. Turn, p 162. O^ Vert and Venison, to
express the places where taken, p 169. Conspiracy upon Indictments, p 348. An
Act touching them, p 472, 625. Process in it, p 547, 595. An Act concerning
Indictments in Sheriffs Turns, p 612, 673. None in a Foreign County, unless the
Plaintiff appeal, etc. p 631. Fraudulent suppressed, p 557. Of Treason
confirmed in Parliament, p 568. Indictor challenged by the party indicted, p
39. None to be put in the Inquest of Th^eves, p 79. Infant, at full age, how to
avoid a Recognisance during his minority, p 16. Inspected in Parliament upon an
Aetate probanda, and there adjudged under age after his Livery sued, and his
Lands reseised, p 103. To have two or three years respite after his full age to
reverse a Fine in his Infancy, denied, p 131. Makes a Lease in Parliament, and
promises there to confirm it at full age, p 430. The Duke of Buckingham an
Infant enacted to be of full age to all purposes, p 698. Informers for the King
and themselves, take the whole principle and damages to themselves. Error, not
Attaint lies on Judgments on their Informations, p 56. Engrossing of Wines to
be enquired after and by whom, p 93. Inhibition of the Archbishop to admit, how
to be avoided, p 81. Inquisitions and Inquiry. Inquests of things done in
Religious houses by the Kings Officers, complained against, p 32. Of the Kings
Revenues in Ireland, and neglects, frauds in his Officers there, p 59^ Men not
to be put out of possessions of their Lands by Inquests of Office found by
Escheators or others, if they put in Sureties to traverse them, and answer the
profits if found against them, prayed, p 59, 113, 115, 191, 311, Traversable, p
538. Inquests of the value of men's Lands returned into Chancery upon oath, p
60. Inquiries of false money, frauds and oppressions, p 62, 70. Of Nin^hs, moved
to cease, p 70. Of Robbery and ^hieves. p 79 Of Conspiracy and Maintenance to
be returned by the Sheriff of the most lawful and nearest men, p 87, 124. Of
Extortions, p 152. Of Mortmain, p 312.

Of Liberties granted in every County, p 318. Of Maintainers etc. p 482. Jurors
in Inquisitions to be sworn, and demanded on their oaths whether they, or any
for their use received any thing, p 536. An Act touching Inquisitions by
Escheators, p 596, 542.

Inquiries of the whole profits of every County prayed, p 672. Inspection of
persons whether of age, p 103, 150. Insurrections pardoned, p 7, 282, 212. see
Duress. Intrusions into lands held in chief, desired to be pardoned, p 131.
King John his Homage to the Pope for England, not binding to his Successors or
the Realm, p 102. S. John's of Jerusalem, a Scire fac. sued by the Prior
thereof, p 184. Their house and Manors destroyed in the Insurrections, and
those who were chief Actors excepted out of the Pardon, p 282. Responcies in
the Priors hands converted to to the defense of the Rhodes against the Turks, p
312. His Forges in Fleet Street, and Rent for them, p 624. Iointenants,
summoned and severed, p 40, 41. Iointure confirmed in Parliament, p 702.
Ipswich, the Staple and Shipping of Woolls prayed to be there, p 101, 443.
Ireland, care and aid for its safety, defense and affairs in Parliament: The
Kings expeditions thither to conquer and subdue it when rebellious, p
9.10.12.13.10^.174.184.281.298.319.337.351.358.360.371.387.390.404.416.425.451.453.454 464.534.681. Receivers and Triers of Petitions thence, see Parliament.

King R. 2. impeached for Exaction^ on the Clergy for it, and carrying over his
Jewels thither, p 387, 388.

Justices banished into Ireland, Annuities assigned them, p 331. Men learned in
the Law sent thither to serve as ^ustices to have no excuse, p 10. All the
Kings Records to be searched to see what has been done for its amendment, p
10. All who have any lands there, to repair thither for its defense, ibid.
Inquiry after the Kings revenues, and his Officers frauds and neglects there, p
59. Order taken that the lands of Coparceners there might not descend to
persons Enemies to the King, who would move wars against him, p 66.

Earl of March Lieutenant of Ireland, his Protection allowed in Parliament, to
stay proceeding^ on a Writ of Error, p 184.

Robert de Vere created Marquess of Dublin; the old Lands and Dominions of
Ireland conferred on him, and all Lands there conquered by him, p 310^ 311.
Outlawry for Felony in Ireland, and hereditaments therepon seized by the Kings
Lieutenant; restitution prayed, p 431, 432.

John Lord Talbot Lieutenant of Ireland his Impeachment of the Earl of Ormond
for Treason by Articles in the Marshals Court, utterly abolished, p 567, 568^

Error for Erroneous Judgment in the Parliament of Ireland brought in B. R.
which could not end it, prayed to be ended in Parl. here, p 596.

S^fe-conduct granted to an Irish man to come to the King and his Council, p
598. Restitution in the Parliament of England to Lands in Ireland, p 672. All
Irish men in England to repair into Ireland for its defense, under pain of an
yearly penalty there rated, p 704. An Act against Non-residence in Ireland, and
prayer that Irish-men bailed by the Laws of England may enjoy the benefit of K.
Ed. 3. his pardon, etc. p 296. An Act against Irish begging Priests and
Beggars, p 537. Against Irish Bishops, p 551. For avoiding Irish-men, p 566.

Iron, an Act against its Exportation, 87. Island, free liberty of Fishing
there prayed, p 547. Issues lost by the reason of the Insurrection, pardoned, p
202. Issues in the Exchequer against Accountants before warning, complained of,
p 70. Pardon of Issues lost, craved, p 136. Averment against small Issues
returned in the Exchequer, p 413. Judge, none to be in his own case, p 56 130,
131, 330^ Judgment, Scire fac. and Error on it, p 56. see Error. An Act
touching Judgments in Pleas, p 424. Judgment affirmed in Parliament, p 539.
Prayed in Parliament where no remedy at Law and granted, p 539, 540, 545. All
Judgments against Owen Glendor confirmed by Act, p 600. An Act touching
Judgments, p 615. Ivelchester, its Burgesses petition to be discharged of a
Fee-farm, etc. p 468. Jurors, false to be enquired of and excommunicated, p 15.
Special able Jurors ordered and returned in special cases by order in
Parliament, 330, 460, 473, 474. Jurors to say the verity of the fact in every
Inquest and great Assise, as well as in Novel Disseisin, p 71. To be of the
most lawful and nearest men in the County, p 87, 124. Upon Appeals in K. B. p
92. An Act against their corrupt taking p 101: Complained of and examined, p
184. An Act touching their discharge in Nisi prius, p 295. What persons in
Lincoln, and in Attaints upon Verdicts there, p 330. Misnamed in the Venire
fac. what remedy, p 459^ To be sworn and examined upon oath truly to say
whether they or any of them received any thing, p 536. Damages in an Attaint to
be recovered against them, and none to be returned therein under 5 l. p 605,
611, 624. An Act touching Iuries in Middlesex, p ^84. Justice, its due
execution desired, promised by our Kings, and one chief cause of calling
Parliaments, p 37, 100, 114, 163, 172, 178, 321, 358, 360, 367, 404, 437, 478,
534, 587, 591, 592, 598, 607, 618. Not to be denied or kept back from any, p
114, 410. See Justices of the Bench. Justices of the Bench, sworn to t^ke no
reward, give good Counsel, etc. their respective Oaths, p 34.48, ^1.197, 294,
305, 317, 471, 473. Their Fees increased, and by whom to be paid, p 50, 603,
623, 692. To enquire of false Jurors and Maintenance, p 15. To ride Circuits
twice a year, and take Cogni^ance of Fines and Letters of Attorney, prayed, p
88. Judge rashly in Confederacy, p 88. To be Governors of Merchant-strangers,
ibid. Not to stay Justice for the Great or Privy Seal, or any other command, p
114, 178, 317. A Procedendo to them, and adjournment for difficulty into
Parliament by them p 30. To meet with the Bishops, and take order concerning
Pensions, p 139. To execute their Offices without assent of the Council, p 155.
Deliver their opinions in Parliament touching a Livery and Seisin, which is
judged accordingly, p 157. No suit between parties to be ended before the
Council, but Justices only, p 162. Londoners to attend before the Kings
Justices only, p 166. Polled Five pounds a man, when as Earls paid but Four
pounds, p 168. Charged in full Parliament to say their knowledge touching a
point in Law about a Condition by Paroll, p 169^ Examined and sworn before the
King upon oath to deliver their Opinions in Parliament touching the privilege
of Sanctuaries in Debt and Executions^ p 176. To have power to grant Nisi prius
for delivery of prisoners, p 178. Called to the Parliament of Northampton,
where the Causes of it were declared, p 188. To be of the wisest and ablest
men, and sworn to declare the delays and defects of the Law, that they may be
remedied, p 197. Advised with in Parliament in a case of suing Livery within
the County of Lancaster, p 310. Some of them banished into Ireland, have
Annuities assigned them, p 331. Recalled thence, p 364, 397. To devise
Assarances for Annuities granted to the Dukes of York and Gloucester, p 337.
Declare to a Peer arraigned in Parliament, and pleading his Pardon revoked by
it; -- That the Law would judge him guilty, if he said nothing else p 377. Sir
William Thurning a Justice pronounces the sentence of Deposition against K.
Rich. 2. p 390. His procuring his Justices to speak against Law,
discountenancing them for good advice, saying, the Laws were in his own breast,
etc. chief branches of his impeachment for which he was deposed, p 386, 387.
One of them examined in Parliament, about the examination of the Duke of
Gloucester, which he took by Commission, and acquitted p 393, 394. Appointed to
order the Fees of Marshals, p 409. That the chief Justice may be Justice in no
other place, prayed, p 420. Petition of the Earl of Northumberland in
Parliament, touching his Insurrection delivered by the King to the Justices to
be considered; whereupon the Lords protested, that the Judgment in this case
belonged only to them, which they only Judge to be but Trespass. and no
Treason, p 426 They are consulted with by the King and Lords in in the
Commission of Array amended by the Commons, p 428. A Writ directed to the
Justices of the Kings Bench to try one committed by the Marshal of England,
according to the Common Law, p 429. Their Fees excepted from resumption, p 439.
To agree on the Law touching a Jurors mis-naming, p 459, 460. To appoint the
number of Attorneys for every County, swear them every Term to deal faithfully,
and regulate the mischiefs in their Courts, p 475, 483. To have sufficient
power to record Attorneys, p 547. Whether a Prohibition ought to be granted in
case of Tithes, resolved in Parliament it ought not, upon long debates of the
Lords and Justices, p 560. The Lords of the Council to end all Petitions not
ended by Parliament by advice of the Justices, p 591. Remove a prisoner
formerly in execution out of the Bishops prison, till the execution satisfied,
p 631. Judgment in Parliament in case of precedence between the Earls of
Arundel and Devon, given by the Judges advice, p 638. The Lords and Justices
upon the Commons Impeachment of the Duke of Suffolk, in Parliament, and motion
for his commitment upon consultation, thought there was no good cause for it,
without some special matter objected, p 641 Demanded their advice in a case of
privilege concerning the taking of the Speaker in execution, answer that it
was not their part to judge of the Parliaments privileges; only said there
was no general but special Supersedeas of Parliament, etc. p 651. may inquire
of Sacrilege, p 684. Matters referred to them upon petitions in Parliament:
See Parliament. They refuse to advise or make defense touching the Duke of York
his claim, and t^^le to the Crown, p 665, 666. No Prelate to be impeached of
any Crime before them, nor they to inquire of Process made by Ecclesiastical
Officers, p 44. Such as sue forth Assizes, not to pay for the Justices patents,
p ^13. They or their Clerks to inroll all deeds within three months after they
are brought, p 284. To remit matters in the Admiralty to the Common Law, that
belong unto it, p 356. Justices of Assise, take an Assise after their patent
revoked, whereby the plaintiff could have no judgment on his Verdict but by
special Order of Parliament, p 539^ 540. To make speedy deliverance of Thieves
and Robbers so often as need shall require, p 70. Justices of Assise, and Goal
delivery, what to inquire of, and to make delivery before they depart, p 15,
126. To be sworn as Justices of the Bench, to inquire of false moneys, p 54. To
keep their Sessions in Towns where Goals be, to have pa^ents of Goal-deliveries
as well as Assize, and make deliverance before their de^arture at least once a
year, p 126, 482. The chief Justice of Common Bench to be none, because the
Errors of Justices of Assise are revocable before him, p 130, 131. To take Nisi
Prius, in issues between the King and others in the Exchequer, p 162. None to
be in his own County, and when and where to keep their Sessions, p 284. An Act
touching them, p 305. No Lord to sit with them, p 364. To take order for
sufficient prisons, p 396. To deliver their Records into the Treasury, p 475.
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, to be sworn as those of the Bench, and the chief
to swear the rest, p 48. To be assigned in Parliament, p 1. To be learned and
determine all Felonies, p 48. To inquire of false Moneys, and advise with the
King before they allow of pardon granted for it. p 54. To assess and take the
Fines of sureties in their presence p 74. To inquire of the liberty of Tinners
imprisoned, p 142. No Writs of Oyer and Terminer to be granted, but by advice
of the Council, and upon good proof, p 295. No general Commission to be granted
without urgent necessity, p 342, 347. To be assigned in Northumberland, as need
shall require, p 482, Inquest of Office taken before them, p 113: Justices of
Peace to be appointed in every County with their Commissions, powers what to
do, hear and determine, p 10, 15, 17, 18, 37, 62, 67, 70, 82, 86, 93, 118, 146,
312, 334, 335, 354, 356, 358 571, 581, 590, 595, 619, 682. One or two of them
to be learned in the Law who shall be chief, p 15, 40, 67, 70, 171, 354, 397,
625. To certify their extracts yearly before the King, or into the Exchequer,
p 15, 40. See Extracts. To have Fees allowed them, p 15, 48, 51, 70, 93, 113,
121, 126^ 171, 172, 179, 590. 40. To be nominated and chosen in the Parliament,
p 37, 86, 97, 125, 126, 171. To be great men, Lords, Knights, and of best
quality, p 67, 70, 79, 82, 40, 178, 397, 625. The poorer to be removed, p 178,
625. To keep their Sessions four times a year, p 86, 146. None to be displaced
without the Kings special command, or testimony of their fellows, p 86, 97,
171, 172. To make no Deputies, p 91. No association to them, p 171, 172. No
Sheriff or Coroner to be one during their Offices, p 40, 91, 171. Atturnies to
be made by such as are indicted before them, p 92. The Commons to nominate, and
King to choose them at his pleasure, p 97. The King and his Council to name
them, p 125, 126, 542. No Constable of a Castle to be a Justice of Peace, p
432. Justices of Peace, To set the Assize of Wines, p 98. To be removed for not
executing the Statute of Laborers, p 118. To raise the power of the Shire to
suppress Routs and Riots, p 135. Not to inquire of any thing to be redressed
in Lords Leets, p 146. No Justice of Assize to be a Justice of Peace in his own
County, p 284. To take Sureties of good behavior from Vagabonds and Sailers,
else to commit them, p 294. An Act concerning them and their Oath, p 334. Acts
concerning them, p 356, 397, 611. To imprison none but in Common Goals, p 432.
Stewards of the Duchy of Lancaster to be Justices of peace within their
Circuits, 542, 545. To amend misprisions of their Clerks, p 560. Amerciaments
in their Sessions, p 604.
K.
KEepers of England, and Parliaments held by them. See Custos Regni, The first
Table, and Parliaments. Kent. Edmund Earl of it slain, p 6, 7. The manner of
collecting Subsidies in it, p 355. See Dover Castle. Kersies, Acts concerning
them, and Customs for them, p 133, 335, 339, 345, 355, 395, 420, 476. King,
Personally present in the beginning of Parliaments, when the causes of them
were declared: at their ending, and at some other seasons, p 11, 30, 43, 51,
78, 82, 85, 90, 92, 96, 98. 100, 108, 111, 116, 120, 154, 167, 168, 179, 182,
188, 193, 281, 287, 290, 303, 309, 314, 335, 341, 357, 360, 361, 370, 384, 415,
415, 437, 451, 463, 470, 478, 533, 534, 538, 544, 549, 576, 582, 587, 601, 607,
608, 614, 617, 621, 629, 634, 637, 645, 646, 649, 656^ 659, 661, 665, 669, 674,
680, 681, 688, 694, 701. Speech in Parliament, p 96, 290, 361, 650, 680.

The Parliament summoned by his Writs, adjourned, prorogued by his Order,
Commissions, held by him and his Commissioners, and dissolved by his Order, See
Parliament. His Coronation Oath p 326, 367, 386, 387, 550. renewed p 326. To
consult with, and to be counseled and advised by his Parliament and Council,
in matters of the Kingdoms defense by Land, Sea, War, Peace, Government,
Execution of Laws, redress of Grievances and all public affairs: See these
Titles; Parliament, and p 108, 120, 154, 173. 201, 202, 287, 298. 405, 406,
437, 451.534, 538, 577, 583, 587, 592, 602, 634. His duty toward his Subjects
declared, p 151^ 154. 365, 367, 464 550. His Subjects duty toward him, to
obey, aid, defend him cheerfully, etc. in his necessities, p 109, 111, 367,
464, 470, 538, 556, 557, 587, 592, 602, 607, 618, 701. Sole Emperor of the
Realm, and sole supreme Governor of it, p 363, 371. His Crown free from the
Pope, and all other Foreign power, subject to no earthly Sovereign but only
to God, and none other in all things touching Regalities, p 102, 348, 387, 480.
His Supremacy over his Subjects, p 618, 682. Sworn to defend the Prerogatives,
Liberties and Rights of his Crown, p 367. 387, 352.

Statutes and Acts against, and in derogation of his Prerogative and Crown
void, repealed as null, at the Commons and Parliaments petition, p 38, 39, 338,
342, 367, 387.

His Prerogatives and Liberties saved, excepted by his Protestations, in answer
to Petitions and Royal Assent to Laws in Parliament, which seem to impeach and
trench thereon, p
54.57.65.71.97.112.117.150.159.203.294.297.317.323.329.333.338.342.367.374.412.413.439.466.478, 479.481.535.552.164.169.175.183.381.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament pray, enact, That the Kings Prerogative
and Crown may be kept, all things attempted or done to the contrary redressed,
and that he might be as free and enjoy his Prerogative as amply as his
Progenitors, notwithstanding any Statute, p 338, 342, 387. 395, 481.

The abuse of this power to subvert Laws articled against K R 2. p 387. which H
4. promises not to do, p 395. His Prerogative to make the Prince of Wales
Earls, Dukes, p 123, 124, 125. See these Titles.

All his Children where ever born Denizens, and inheritable, not Aliens, p 38,
39. To present at any time to his Churches that fall void, p 50. To have aid to
make his son a Knight, and marry his daughter, p 50^ See Aid. To seize the
Lands and Benefices of of Priors Aliens in times of War, p 50. See Aliens. In
taking Purveyance, p 57. See Purveyance. To appoint such Assessors and
Collectors of Taxes and Subsidies as he shall like, p 7^. See Electors. To
appoint Justices of Peace 26. To displace them by special command, p 80. No
Nisi Prius to be taken where he is party without his Attorneys consent, p 97.
No Attaint in Verdicts in the Exchequer found for him where he is party, p 56.
No alienation of lands held of him in chief without license, p 97. Has free
election to choose, approve, and remove his Officers and Council at his
pleasure, p 112, 150, 288, 312, 317, 324, 329, 374, 149, 175. His liberty to
aid his Allies, p 361. No Averment lies against Protection, p 163. To appoint
the Staple where he and his Council think best, p 117. See Staple.

To grant pardons and show favor when and to whom he pleases at his pleasure,
p 10, 131, 148, 150, 161, 412. See Pardon.

His Game not to be killed or chased, p 67. To have Deodands, p 164. see
Deodands. Not to give an Account of Subsidies, p 174 175. To have Fines for
Writs in Chancery, to lose no such commodity left him by his Ancestors, p 203.
see Fines. In granting Patents to Sheriffs and Escheators for longer space then
one year, p 294. To dispense with men's residence at his pleasure, p 312. In
Subpoena's, and proceedings in Chancery, p 333. In prisage of Wines, p 398. see
prisage: In granting Lands without his Councils advice, p 413. To have his own
rights, and do right to others, p 412. To resume Crown lands and Annuities
granted, so far as by Law and his prerogative he may, p 439. see Resumption.
Patents in derogation of his prerogative revoked, p 466. Grants liberty of
speech and privilege to the Speaker and Commons in Parliament, saving his
prerogative, p 478. Gives a Non obstante to the Popes own Bull to the
University of Oxford for the Archbishops visiting it, p 479, 480. Avoids Aliens
saving his Prerogative, p 535. His goods not to be set to common sale, p 535.
To maintain his Prerogative, and the Common Law in Protections, p 552. He may
charge Heirs Executors and Accountants where common persons cannot p 80. See
Heirs, Executors, Accounts, Exchequer: None may wage his Law where the King is
party, p 128.

Kings Protestations in Parl^ament for saving his prerogative and liberties
when trenched upon by any thing demanded, or g^anted for at the present, p 318,
329. 416 To appoint Eyres and other Inqui^ies at his pleasure, p 70. To
cont^nue the Staple in certain places at his pleasure, p 125. To appoint or not
at his pleasure, such as are above sixty years to be Officers, p 149. To show
favor to Sheriffs in their Accounts at his pleasure, p 161. Will do his
pleasure in removing Sheriffs, Customers and Controllers yearly, p 170, 306.
His Household to be viewed at his pleasure, p 312 Officers during the Kings
pleasure, p 325, 329. Imprisonment during his pleasure, p 343. Not to depart
with his old right to have and choose a Coroner in London, nor grant any thing
to his prejudice, p 161, 164. Will do his pleasure in resuming and letting
Lands in Wales, p 421. His pleasure to be known touching Customed goods, p 555.
A Mint at York during the Kings pleasure, p 468. The Chancellor to grant
Licenses of Alienation till the King be otherwise minded, p 590.

A Protector of the Realm made in Parliament, so long as it shall please the
King, p 652, 658. Might conclude a Peace without a Parliament, but will not
without their advice, p 298.

The Kings disinheritance, the impairing of his Regality and Crown by the Popes
provisions, usurpations, or otherwise, not to be endured, but redressed and
punished by Parliaments, p 41, 61, 64, 65, 100, 102, 105, 130, 145, 182, 190,
330, 333, 343, 387. His ancient Rights not to be parted with, or granted to
others, p 147, 151, 161, 397, 412. His profit to be advanced, and things
contrary to it denied when petitioned for, p 49, 58, 61, 121, 122, 131, 201,
203, 315, 325. His safety to be provided for by Parliament, p 287, 321, 322,
323, 607. His Honor to be tendered, supported by his Subjects, Parliaments,
Council; nothing done against it upon petitions; Aids granted for that end, p
27, 62, 64, 65, 91, 138, 141, 156, 167, 190, 201, 202, 287, 298, 314, 321, 322,
323, 352, 353, 361, 362, 463, 470, 556. Cannot subject his Realm or Subjects to
the Pope, or any Foreign power, nor prejudice his Successors without their
common consent in Parliament, p 102, 372.

Dishonorable, to be bound to make n^ gift of Land, Ward, Escheat, or other,
till out of Debt, and refused by him, p 200. Such as hold any Fee from him, to
serve him in the Wars, p 313. Slandered by a Bill exhibited to the Commons, who
crave pardon for it, deliver the Bill, for which the Exhibitor is condemned of
^reason, p 361, 362. The Common^ crave pardon of him in Parliament on their
knees for a misinformation, p 40^. Ought not to talk of the Kings person in
Parliament otherwise then beseems them, p 452. Grieved for the Kings
displeasure and crave his pardon and good will p 362, 405, 408. Their thanks to
him for his goodness, good will, good government, travel in the wars, etc. p
416, 452. See Commons.

The King ought to live of his own, without burdening and taxing the Subjects p
13, 155, 284, 288, 680. The total of his Revenues, p 609. Ought to yield to his
Subjects according to Law, though he cannot part with his right, p 151. Purges
Lords suspected of Treason and Disloyalty in open Parliament, p 321, 369, 426,
427. He gives Judgment of Banishment in Parliament on a Peer, in an
extraordinary way, without the Lords, who protest against it, p 644. Gives
Judgment of Banishment and Forfeiture of Lands for Tre^son, in Parliament,
against the Archbishop of Canterbury, together with the Lords, p 368, 388.

The King and Lords Judges in Parliament, p 392. See Parliament. Gives judgment
of banishment by authority of Parliament, against the Duke of Norfolk, for
sedition^ words spoken against him, p 3^0. His Royal assent to and confirmation
of Bills, Petitions etc. in Parliament, p 43, 49, 101, 118, 120, 124, 146, 153.
666, 667, 714. To a Bishop elect, p 593. His public thanks to the Lords and
Commons, jointly and severally, by himself or his Chancellor, for their aids
granted, pains taken, good advice, and affections showed to him or his
children^ p 98, 100, 101, 103, 105, 106, 110, 111, 116, 154, 166, 326, 340,
405, 409, 444, 462, 465, 474, 481^ 608, 641, 652, 664, ^81, 688, 691, 693.
Gives thanks to his Council and others, at the Commons request, 479 416. A
Committee of Lords and Commons sent to him for his Royal assent, and to visit
him etc. when sick, p 146, 651, 652.

The Kings expenses, revenues of all sorts examined by special Commissioners,
ordered by them, and his Council by order of Parliament, p 168, 191, 313, 564.
See Council. His grants and gifts examined, resumed p 153. See Resumption. His
Court, household, moved to be regulated, reformed, his Confessor with others
suspected, hated persons, and Aliens removed out of it: supervised, regulated
at the motion of the Commons, and by Order of Parliament, during the Kings
minority, and sometimes at his full age by his Assent, with a Protestation of
his Liberty, etc. and sometimes opposed, p 156, 164, 168, 196, 197.284, 288,
312, 317, 323, 361.426, 427, 455, 457, 622, 641, 646, 647.652, 656, 659. Cannot
bind his Successors by any Oath, p 372. Good government prayed about his
person, and virtuous education during his Minority, p 325, 175, 562. Crowned, p
390, ^17, 618. That he may be the better counseled, prayed, p 321.

The Kings Minority, p 175, 178. Of full age, and then takes the Government to
himself, p 329, 592. His Protector during his Minority, and their power: See
Protector. Custos or Keepers of the Realm in his absence, with their power; See
the first Table, and Parliament. He holds and claims the Crown by descent and
birthright as from God, not by election from the people, p 154, 389, 665, 666,
667, 670, 672, 713^ 714. Yet R 3. claimed and took it, both by election and
descent, p 713, 714.

The Kings Council and Court Officers named in Parliament, when and in what
cases, with Protestation of his liberty, to admit or change them at his
pleasure; See Commons, Council. p 156, 427, 318, 651, 652. His voyage royal
into France, Ireland, the holy Land, and Marriage with France, consulted of,
and resolved in the Parliament, p 9, 11, 12, 43, 287, 303, 314, 315, 322, 538,
544, 603, 629, 630. His style and Arm altered in relation to France, by consent
of Parliament, p 23, 108, 109, 353, 562, 563, 567. Hi^ Houshold-Charges settled,
and provisions for it by Parliament, p 3^8, 428, 429.

His Castles and Houses to be surveyed, repaired, and their profits not to be
granted away, p 426. Authorized by Parliament to make a Will, his Will and
Executors, p 347, 408, 584. see Executors. His debts paid by his Executors,
Trustees: Orders in Parliament for payment of them by assignments and
otherwise, p 58, 192, 535, 540, 546, 569, 578, 579, 581, 584, 588, 593, 599,
604, 609, 612, 614, 620, 622, 635, 636, 638, 692, 693, 701.

Kings revenues laid up for one whole year, without any diminution by gifts, p
313. His Jewels pawned to relieve his necessities and the public, p ^9, 569.
see Jewels Ought to be puissant and severe in the execution of his Laws, p 367^
An Inquisition for his Goods embezelled, p 396. His messengers to the
Parliament, relating his Foreign affairs, and wants to them, p 17, 27, 37, 45,
47, 50.

Edward 3. no lawful King during his deposed Fathers lif^, p 373. Kings
Officers who employ their pains in his service falsely accused, to be speedily
tried and acquitted, p 67, 152. The Kings command to arrest Traitors, a
sufficient ground of indemnity for murder and felony in the execution, and
pardon of them, p 9. His promises to be really performed, p 337, 564.

King Henry 4. his many (...) promises for due execution of the Laws not
executed, p 534.

The Kings Crown in Gods hands, p 618. What his Crown imports and signifies, p
617, 6^8.

His Majesty supported by the hand and counsel of God, p 701.

To hazard his own person to any perils for the defense of the Realm, to
encourage others, p 303.

The Subjects hearts his best riches and security, p 405, 470.

To grant no pardon for any murder or felony, but where he may save his oath, p
75.

Not to subject the Realm to the Pope against his Coronation Oath, p 102. Not
to be acquainted with, or take notice of any Debates or Votes in the Commons
House till concluded of, and that only by the mouth of the Speaker, p 465.

He feasts the Lords and Commons, see Commons.

Accroachment of his Royal power; attempting to depose or kill him; adhering to
his Enemies, clipping or counterfeiting his Coin, etc. Treason; See Treason.
Has power by Parliament with his Council to make Ordinances for Coin, see
Ordinances.

Parliaments ended and dissolved by his Order and Commission; see Parliament.
Inviteth all the Lords and Commons to dine with him, p 418.

Entrusted to moderate and dispense with the Statute of Provisors, see
Provisors.

Kingdoms defense by sea and land, one principal cause of summoning Parliament
for aid and advice concerning it, p 13, 45, 120, 167, 191, 281, 282, 30^, 309,
321, 322, 329, 338, 351, 360, 438, 464, 470, 478, 534, 553, 555, 562, 567, 618,
646, 649, 655. Could not be subjected to the Pope by King John, without the
Parliaments consent, p 102. Undone and oppressed by Children, young and ill
Council and Government, p 384, 710, 711, 712.

The Kingdom of England always so free, that it is subject to none but God, not
to the Pope, nor any other foreign Power, p 102.148.

Knighthood, Fine for not recovering it to be but once made, p 625: Knights of
Shires for Parliament, how and by whom to be elected; see Election.

Elected only upon the Kings Letters^ not by the peoyle; an Article against
King R. 2. p 387. Yet their Election by the Kings Letters alone without the
people, voted to be good, and the Sheriffs discharged from penalty, by a
patched Parliament, p 664. see 39 H 6. c. 1.

A new Election ordered, and none to come armed to it, p 622. A Sheriff fi^ed,
imprisoned for a false return of a Knight, and ordered to amend it, p 429.

To nominate Justices of Peace for the County in Parliament, p 86, 125. Appoint
Collectors and Commissioners for the Subsidy, p 112.

The Knights of Shires by themselves require a Conference with the Merchants, p
193. Assent to a Peace with France, so as the King do no homage, p 353. Writs
for their wages in parliament, when and now granted, how and on whom to be
levied, and on whom not; not on Lords or Bishops, or their Tenants, nor yet on
Franchises, p 1.86, 148, 151, 164, 166, 178, 311, 326, 335, 340, 345, 374, 418,
536, 541, 595, 600, 601, 632. To receive no wages when nothing is done in
Parliament, unless old presidents warrant it, p 536.

Kings Bench, To stay in Warwickshire for a time, p 16. Errors in the
Common Pleas reversed in it, and in the Excoequer prayed, p 56, 71. A Great
Seal ordained for sealing Judicial Writs in it, p 60. Juries in the remote
North-Counties will not appear in it upon Appeals, p 91, 92.

Error and Attaint therein upon Judgments and Verdicts in Lincoln, p 330.

Traverses of Offices and Scire fac. out of the Chancery to be tried in it, p
411, 412.

King's Bench prison, and prisoners in Execution there, p 620.
L
LAborers: Acts concerning them and their wages, the Justices to enquire of and
fine them for excessive wages, their fynes how to be disposed of^ etc. p. 70 74
76, 78^ 86, 88 93, 106^ 109, 118^ 130 145, 179, 334, 420, 460, 552, 571, 590,
595^ 632^ 686. Lancaster: the Earls insurrection and pardon, p. 7. A County
Palatine: A Chancery, where the Tenants are to sue livery, p. 310. The Duchy
of Lancaster settled on the Prince in tail, dissever'd from the Crown, p. 392,
456 541, 545, 693. Its Customs and Rights confirmed, p. 456, 545. Lands
annexed to it by Parliament to be of the same nature, p. 541. The Stewards
thereof, to be Justices of Peace, p. 545. No Land thereof to pass or be
granted, but under the Duchy Seal, p. 545, 630, 667, 683 693, 696. A Chantry
of Lands of the Duchy confirmed by Parliament^ p. 588. An Act concerning
Outlawries in it, p. 590, 605, 625. To lose Goods, and be outlawed only, as to
the Duchy, ibid. p. 625. King Henry the sixth his Feofment of a great part
thereof, under the Great and Duchy Seal, to feofees in trust to the use of his
last will, p. 630, 663^ 667, 668 683, 696. The Officers respective, and
Government thereof, p. 667, 668^ 696 697. Part thereof assigned to the Queen
for her Dower under the Duchy Seal alone, without Livery and seisin; enacted
and confirmed to be good, p. 683. Resumed and united to the Crown^ and the
Chancellor of the Duchy to make Assurances out of it, for payment of the Kings
debts, p. 693. Langley Freers, p. 169. Laimen made chief Officers in place of
the Clergy, p. 112. William Lord Latymer his Impeachment, censure in
Parliament, p. 121, 122. Pardoned and restored, p. 150. Robert Latymer his Case
about a ward, p. 106, 107. Law: Patent against it, revoked p. 375. The
Maintenance, Execution, Observation of the Laws, and redress of the breaches of
them, one chief cause of calling Parliaments, and so declared, p. 11, 51, 71,
74, 76, 100, 154^ 155, 173, 174, 182, 185, 281, 287, 291, 298, 303, 321, 323,
341, 360, 367, 384, 404, 410, 464 470 478, 534 553, 559, 562, 587, 602, 681.
See Justice, Great Officers, and others sworn to keep them, p. 32, 34, 323,
326, 375 557. see oath. All ought to obey them p. 367. Their obedience the
cause of peace, p. 415. Good Laws to be made where wanting, p. 100. 337 360^
550, 559. Delays and defects in them to be redressed, p. 197. Ill Laws to be
reformed, and obscure explained, p. 15, 39, 80, 100. Statutes repealed because
contrary to Law, p. 38^ 39. An Oath refused by the Justices and others because
contrary to Law, p. 34. Law to be free and denied to no man the chargeableness
thereof to be redressed, p. 41, 60. perverted against the Letter and intent, p.
32. New required in particular Cases, p. 54, 55, 56, 59, 60, 62, 70, 131, 158.
Old Law not to be altered but by Act of Parliament p. 53, 71, 87, 540, 548.
Procuring Judges to speak against the Law, an Impeachment against K. R. 2. p.
386, 387.

The Common and old Law to stand not to be altered; that the King and Lords
will not alter the Law; that the Common Law shall be kept, the Answer to sundry
Petitions in Parliament. p. 38, 40, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59^ 62, 66, 70, 86, 87, 91,
92, 109, 110, 112, 127, 131, 134, 135, 136, 138, 139, 148, 155, 161, 162, 198,
199, 280, 306, 331, 333, 342, 351, 356, 364, 396, 397, 398, 410, 411, 419, 420,
422, 429, 457, 466, 467, 468, 476, 548, 550, 552, 557, 558, 560, 561, 566, 590,
594, 595, 601, 610, 611. Nothing to be done in Derogation of the Common Law, p.
404. Matters at Common Law not to be sued before the Council, Admiral, Marshal,
or Chancellor. See those Titles. Subversion of the Law, an Article of
Impeachment against K. R. 2. p. 387, 388. and charged against K. E. 4. p. 711,
712. The King not to use his Prerogative to the subversion of the Law, nor
contrary to it, p. 395, 387, 388. That all Laws are in the Kings breast, and
that he may alter, or expound them at his pleasure; And Article against R. 2.
when deposed, ibid, Common Law not to be delayed or stayed, p. 429. See Justice
and Justices. All the Kings Officers to maintain the Common Law; to pursue no
suit or quarrel by any other means then by order of it, nor appoint any Officer
by any mediation contrary to Law, p. 457. All the Council swears thereunto, p.
456, 457. See Statutes: Every English man's inheritance, p. 711.

Law-breakers not to be retained or maintained by any of the three Estates, p.
10, 51. Law-Civil, the Terms of it not understood by the Commons, p. 300.
Doctors of it, sworn to deliver their Opinions concerning the Privileges of
Sanctuaries, p. 176. Law-Canon: the Bishops prohibited by it to be present in
Parliament in matters of blood, p. 322. See Canons. Law-Martial, and of the
Land differ, p. 173. Trial by it for Treason, ordered by Parliament, p. 372,
379, 380. Suffering Subjects to be tried by it, contrary to the Law of the Land
and Kings Oath, an Article against R. 2. when deposed, p. 388. A trial intended
by it, referred to the Judges to be by the Common Law, p. 171, 429. A general
pardon granted to such who in the Insurrection executed any Rebels without due
process of Law, by Martial Law, p. 190. A Commission in times of War, to
execute all Rebels by way of Martial Law, p. 25. Executions of men by it
without legal trial, reversed by Parliament, as erroneous, p. 5, 6. Lawyers
sent to be Justices into Ireland, and to have no excuse, p. 10. To repress and
redress the Laws defects, p. 137. To be Justices of Peace in every County, etc.
See Justices, active in deposing of King R. 2. in bringing in K. R. 3. and
approving his title to the Crown, p. 385, 389, 390, 713. Decline the Defense of
K. H. 6. His title against the claim of the Duke of York, p 665, 666. Leagues
and Truces with France, Scotland, and other Nations and Princes, related to, or
approved, confirmed in Parliament, p. 201, 287, 456, 550, 551, 565, 614, 629,
630, 683. Learnings decay, and learned men's discountenance by Provisions and
Aliens preferments complained against for redress, p. 128. L^ases of Lands
found by ^^quest to be made to the party that traverseth it, p. 311. Of
Dutchy-Lands, and by Trustees how to be made, p. 696, 697. See Customers,
Controllers, Sheriffs, Farmers. Leather, an Act concerning its tanning, p. 358.
Sir John Lee, Steward of the Kings House, his Impeachment Answer, censure, p.
106^ 107. Leets: excessive fynes in them to be redressed, p. 40. That
presentiments may be in them but twice a year, p. 139. Justices of Peace not to
e^quire of any Articles to be redressed in them, p. 146. not to punish
Taverners, nor be disturbed though within the verge, p. 161. An Act concerning
Indictments in them, p. ^73. Letters to the Parliament, p. 50. not to be sent
by Aliens in time of War. See Aliens. Given in evidence when found by a beggar
in an Impeachment of Treason, p. 189, 190. Leiutenant of an Army made by the
General, p 289. Jews Wool to be there shipped, p. 101. and weighed, p. 419.
Ley River: nusances in it, how and by whom to be redressed, p. 539, 581, 590,
600. Leicester, the New College in it. Land confirmed to the Dean thereof, p.
69^. Libel to be sealed with the Judges Seal, and showed to the Chancellor upon
a prohibition prayed, p. 140. Liberties, that all Persons and Corporations may
fully enjoy their Libertys, Franchises, one prime cause of calling Parliament,
and so declared; and the conservation of them one chief Petition of the
Commons, when violated, p. 32, 33, 34, 113, 117, 124, 125, 137, 138, 146, 154,
159, 160, 166, 178, 295, 341, 351, 353, 354, 367, 371, 404, 425, 439, 451, 452,
459, 470, 534, 538, 541, 544, 546, 549, 553, 557, 562, 563, 576, 583, 587, 602,
662, 634, 656, 710. See Corporations, Church, and Magna Charta. Liberties of
Cambridge seized into the Kings hands for the towns-mens Insurrection and
abuses to the University and Scholars, p. 199, 200. Lords of Liberties to be
compounded with p. 482. Library of Hugh le Dispencer, p. 372. License: none to
be granted by the King to buy Wines against the Statute, p. 38. Procuring
Licenses to transport Wool and staple ware. An Article of Impeachment in
Parliament p. 121. For exchange between Merchants by the Chancellor, p. 284. To
transport Cor^, p. 285. To pass over sea with the Bishop of Norwich to the
wars, p. 289. To carry victuals to Scotland and elsewhere p. 318. An Act for
Licenses of Impropriations, p. 345. For transporting staple wares, revoked upon
Petition p. 408. For all to pass the Seas to P^iors: Aliens denied p 467. None
to be granted to transport Wools or Looms but only to Calice, p. 481, 482,
585, 590. Of Alie^a^ion by the Chancellor^ p. 59. An Act against them fo
shipping Wool, p. 615. For Marriage p. 619. By the Customer to transport Corn
from County to County denied; p. 625. To transport T^^, p. 355. Lincoln, A
Petition for holding the Staple there. p. 125. A Complaint of the Bishop, Dean
and Chapter thereof, against the M^jor and Townsmen; and the inj^stice of
their Trials and Juries: their contempt, and the Order thereupon touching
Ju^ies and Attaints there, p. 330. An Act touching the Bishop, Dean and Chapter
thereof, p. 335. The Citizens pray to be eased of their Feofarme, p. 395, 421.
Writs to be directed to the Sheriff of the County upon error brought for a
judgment in it, p. 546. An Accord between the Dean and Chapter made by the
Bishop, confirmed in Parliament, with a forfeiture to repair the Church of
Lincoln, p. 623. Liveries and Retainers, Acts and Orders and Petitions
concerning them, p. 163, 333, ^61, 364, 392, 412, 426, 46^, 482, 540, 590, 594,
668, 673, 684, 700. Livery and Seisi^ by a ring delivered adjudged good in Law^
p. 157. Of Lands in the Kings Case without condi^ion upon his Charter^ p. 169.
Of Lands in Cornwall, made in Parliament by the Prince, then an Infant, p. 430.
D^wer assigned to the Queen of Duchy Lands, enacted to be good without Livery
and Seisin, p. 683. Livery ouster le main, by a Writ De Aetate probanda,
eversed in Parliament by inspection and judgment, that he was (...) age. p.
103. Upon an inquest of Office by Escheators, p 138. Livery to be sued by
inspection, p. 150. An Act concerning suing out Livery, p. 204. To be sued for
D^chy Lands in the Chancery of Lancaster, p 310. A Patent to sue Livery by
Attorney reversed as illegal, p. 375. When two Offices are repugnant, p. 396,
397, 410. Upon an Office traversed, p. 474, 580. Of the Earl of Arundel^ p.
547. Stayed for want of a So^re fa^. against the Tenant p. 554. Granted upon
Petition in Parliament p. 603, 604. In ^he Duchy of Cornwall, for Duchy Land
though they hold Lands of the King in chief p. 663. A special Livery granted,
p. 588. William Lynwood, Doctor of Law, declares the causes of Parliament in
the Chancellors absence, p. 597, 598. Loans, of Wools to the King to supply his
occasions, p. 69. Wools and other Merchandise to pass freely without any Loan
but the due Custom, p. 70, 75. Merchants to be paid their Loans on every sack
of Wool, p. 75, 80. Petitions of the Commons of several Counties for payment of
moneys lent; which is promised as soon as may be, p. 132, 149, 171, 185. All
Loans due to be allowed Accountants on their accounts, p 146. The Lords and
Council levied and lend a great sum to set forth an Army and Navy upon urgent
necessity, which the Parliament is called to reimburse by aides granted^ p.
167. Loans required by Letters of Privy Seal, and reasonably excused; the
excuse for not lending to be received without further molestation, p. 170.
Repayment of diverse Loans upon P^ivy-Seals required, the day being long past,
prayed, and promised, p. 185. A Parliament called to borrow 60000 l. of the
Subjects; for the payment whereof, the King would give good security: the
Merchants excuse the Loan of the Money, but the Commons promise security for
repayment to the Lords and Esquires, who should freely lend it, p. 193, 194.
The non-payment of Loans borrowed, an Article against R. 2. when deposed p.
287. The payment of Loans to R. 2. prayed from H. 4. p. 395. Moneys borrowed
for saving the honor of the Kings Son and Realm, prayed to be paid, p. 441.
Money lent upon the Kings Jewels, p. 603. Loans certain sums of money by
particular towns by order of Parliament, and security for repayment, p. 652,
659.

Moneys advanced to the King by way of Loans for public defense in cases of
exigent before they could be levied by subsidy, secured and ordered to be paid
by the King Lords and Parliament, out of Aides or Customs granted or to be
granted, p. 438, 550, 554, 557, 569, 578, 579, 652, 653, 681, 678 683.

Lollards and Lollardy Acts, Petitions and Proceedings concerning them, p. 411,
456, 471, 472, 554, 556, 557, 581, 583, 684. London the Major and Sheriffs of
it to help to execute Traitors, p. 7. The Sheriff attached for contempt of a
Supersedeas (in case of a Chancery Clerk there sued against his privileges) by
order of Parliament, p. 45. Mices of Silver allowed to be carried before the
Major, p. 46. An Act touching errors and misprisions there, p. 87. weights and
measures to be there made, ib. Engrossing of Wines in it to be inquired of, p.
93. An Act touching Victuals in London, and Petition that no Foraigner should
retail any Wine Merchandise or Victuals, or be a Broker in it, p. 106, 133,
141, 147. To enjoy all its Liberties, p. 117, 141. An Ordinance against
retailing in it repealed, and that every Freeman may do it, so as the Major set
the prize^ p. 121. To be well governed, p. 133, 141, 302. An Ordinance made
there against Usury, p. 134, 339. Their Petitions and Answer^ p. 141, 147, 161,
166. The nusances, kiddles, wears, in the River of Thames, to be redressed by
the Mayor and Aldermen, p. 146, 348, 349, 539, 599, 678. See Thames. Then
Liberty to punish all misdemeanors in Southwark prayed to be confi^med but
denied, p. 147, 161, 460, That they may place and displace a Coroner amongst
themselves, denied them, p. 147, 161. Their Liberties confirmed notwithstanding
any Statute^ or not used or abused^ p. 165, 166, 289, 296, 464. To attend on no
command of any the King's Officers, but only at the King's suit under the
Great or Privy Seal; except the Justices. To enquire of Customs, Impositions,
Purprestures, and have the custody of the Lands and Goods of O^phants. No
protection royal to be allowed in their suits, etc. p. 166. The Defense of the
North-Seas referred to the Major of London and others, p. 170. Not to exact any
tenths, fifteens, or taxes of any Clergymen, Lawyers, Justices or Sergeants
lying in it upon their occasions, and not continually residing there, p. 180.
Bills devised and enacted at the request of the Major, Aldermen and Citizens
against forestalling of Fish; the abuses of Victuallers, Usury, Brokers, and
the Fishmongers of London: passages in Parliament touching them, p. 285, 286.
The Victuallers of it, to have no particular Liberties by themselves but to be
under the Majors rule, p. 288, 289, 294. The Major and Aldermen to take no
other Oath in the Exchequer then they did in E. 3. his Reign, and the
Fishmongers to be under their Government, p. 294. The Aldermen thereof yearly
chosen at the feast of St. Gregory; and that of the ablest men^ as well of such
as were Aldermen before as others, p. 301. Not to be yearly chosen, but remain
till put out for reasonable cause, p. 354. Their Petition against the
Lieutenant of the Tower his taking Customs of Wines, Oysters, Victuals, etc.
coming by water to London, p. 312. A pardon to them of all Treasons and
Felonies, except to some private persons, p. 325. John Not, Major, his Order
against Usury prayed to be executed throughout the Realm, p. 339. Butchers of
London, where to have slaughter-houses, where to cast their Ordure, etc. p.
349. The Major Sheriffs and Aldermen, not to bear the penalty of the Statute
for erroneous judgments there, p. 354. Farrindon-ward within and without
London, may elect each of them an Alderman to rule there, p. 354. Complaints
against their Officers Exactions of those who bring Cattle to Smithfield, which
the Major and Sheriffs are ordered to answer, p. 356, 396, 411. The Sheriffs
may hold assizes in the Guild hall in the Coroners absence after proclamation,
p. 393. Acts concerning Errors, Inquests, packing of Cloth, and Retailers of
Victuals in London, p. 397. A Complaint against the Liberties of St. Martins
Le-grand in London, as a receptacle of thieves and other lewd persons, and
request for their revocation, p. 421. Goldsmiths of London to survey the
Cutlers working in Gold and Silver, their Petition referred to the Major, his
Certificate thereon, and their Charter of 1. E 3. confirmed: p. 431. Annuity
granted out of the Customs of it: p. 431. Merchants Aliens Debts, Trespasses,
Accounts moved to be tried by the Kings Council, Major or Aldermen of London by
Merchants Law: p. 442. Southwarks prayer to be exempted from the Jurisdiction
of London, notwithstanding any Patents: p. 460 Weavers of London their Charter
by H. 2. confirmed, and all Strangers Weavers to be under their Government: p.
461. Citizens of London exempted from prizes of Wines, and color other men's
wines to defraud the King; complained of, and none but resien^ Citizens to
enjoy this exemption: p. 476. M^jor and Aldermen to have the punishment of
misd^meanors presented by the Wardens of the Companies in it: p 545. One of the
Aldermen thereof to be Judge between the Merchants of the Hauns there: p. 585.
The Major to distrain for rents granted to Corpus Chr^st^ Chapel in St.
Laurence Foultney, if behind: p. 622, 623. Merchants of ^ean, not to pay
Es^ua^e or Seawage to the City of London for their M^rchandize brought by Land
from Southampton thither: p. 629. Parsons of the Parish Churches there may
place and displace Schoolm^sters by advice of the Ordinanary or Archbishop: p.
325 336. Dean of St. Martins le Grand, provisions for him: p. 677. The Major
and Citizens to apprehend the e^es hau^ting London, and Commit them to Newgate
by Patent, which is repealed p. 682. The Sheriffs complaint of Resc^us made by
a Captain of a Priso^er in his custody, and order therein by Parli^ment: p.
695. The rent of 70^ l. paid to the Major of London by the Merchants of
Still-yard, and lands thereto granted by the King: p. 697. The Earl of
Lancaster commanded to seek no revenge of the Citizens of London upon the
Majors complaint of Menaces by some of his followers: p. 7. Dean and Chapter of
Paul's paid 1000 l. yearly to the King, for the Temporalties of the Bishop of
London in their custody, which afterward is granted to others: p. 458. Lords;
Lords House in Parliament, and Peers The Par^iament beginning and sitting,
fr^quently adjourned because diverse of them absent and not came: See
Parliament. The Commons Pe^i^ion, that such Lords as were absent might be sent
for to the Parliament: p. 361. They are called by name, and such of them as
were absent fined: p 43, 195, 455, 653. The Causes of Parliament declared in
their presence. See Causes of Parliament. They sit, and the Commons stand
before them: p. 303. They are Judges in civil and criminal Causes in
Parliament, as well of Commoners a^ Peers^ and give judgment of death,
banishment, imprisonment, fine and ransom in c^ses of Treason, misdemeanors,
contempts, scandals; misinformations, sometimes by the Kings command and
assent, sometimes by themselves alone, and likewise in Writs of Error brought
before them without the Commons^ p. 5 6, 7 74. 106, 107, 121, 122, 123, 85 86,
87, 157, 158, 2^2, 293, 294, 304, 176, 177, 189, 190, 316, 338, ^42, 343, 352,
353. 368, 373^ 276, 377, 378, 379, 386, 39^, 394, 399, 400, 401 407 417 426 430
5^9. 554 560, 578 610, 643 644^ 300 330, 331, 363. The King an^ Lords judges in
Parli^ment, by the Commons own con^ession, and to estab^^sh^d by the King for
the future: p. 392. (the Roll at large being most ^ull: N. 79. which here is
80) The N^mes of the temporal Lords summoned to Parliament. See T^ble 2. A
special Comm^ttee of the Lords de^ired by the Commons to treat and ad^ise with:
See Commons. The Commons confer with them: p. 91, 189, 361, 406, 282.
Committees o^ Lord in Parliament to advise, examine, debate, dr^w up several
matters, and their proceedings in them: p. 10^ 14 23, 31, 32, 34, 116, 175,
196, 361, 651, 652, 657. A Committee of them sent to the King when sick, to
demand answer to Petitions, his general pardon and royal assent, p. 146. To
know who should be Chancellor and Archbishop of Canterbury, and their report to
the rest concerning their usage: p. 651, 652. To advise the King touching the
Wars, which the Commons promise to assent to and confirm^ p. 51.

They grant an Aid for themselves to the King, without the Commons: p. 17, 19,
688, 691. They consult and sit alone by themselves without the Commons, p. 11,
12, 13, 43. See Commons. Confirms an Imposition upon Cloth against the Commons
Petition to take it off^ and that without their assent^ p. 57. They assent that
the King should create the Lord Cowey an Earl, p. 103. They are to elect the
King's Great Officers during his Minority, p. 159, 289. Privy-Counsellors
chosen by their advice, p. 156. Great Officers to be chosen by their assent in
Parliament, p. 34.

Aides granted to be employed on the Wars with the Lords assent, p. 83, 282.
Receivers of the subsidies to account in open Court before them, p. 160. The
King promises to do what the Bishops and Lords shall advise him, p. 406.
Restitution to Lands and Blood in Parliament of one attainted by it, by the
King with the Lords assent^ p. 432. The King, by the Lords assent, confirms
the Goldsmiths Patent, p. 431. An Imposition on Merchandise by the King, Lords
and Prelates by the Merchants consents for safe conduct of their Goods without
the Commons, p. 53, 54, 63. Judges of what is Treason, what not: p. 353, 354
426. The King, Bishops and Lords establish orders for the Privy Council: p.
594. make Acts, p. 354. They are the sole Judges of Peers, to be tried in
Parliament and out of it by their Peers, and the course of Parliament: p. 7, 8,
31, 35, 86, 122, 321^ 426^ 643, 644. Appointed to examine the Kings expenses
and revenues: p. 166. To prevent and redress mischiefs: p. 66. To advise of the
reformation of abuses and grievances, and some specially chosen for that end:
p. 196. They have a negative voice, and will not alter the Law upon the Commons
Petitions^ p. 87, 157, 161, Their advice concerning Peace with Scotland: p. 92.
The Commons Petitions committed to certain Lords to be amended, by the Kings
assent, p. 32. To heat and determine Complaints concerning Nusances i^ Severn:
p. 150. The Lords think a Petition of the Commons reasonable, and command it to
be executed: p. 49. The Lords will take Order that Franchises shall be granted
with good advice^ p. 54. The King and Lords will provide remedy against the
Popes dispensations^ p. 149. The Lords will not intermeddle in appointing any
about the King's person; and touching his household, will do that which is for
the King's honor: p. 156. Their Demands in Parliament, and the King's Answer^
p. 33, 34. Will not lose their ow^ Liberties: p. 164. Are not to contribute to
Knights wages: ibid. 178. See that Title. Reconciliation of dissenting Lords
made in Parliament by the King and other Lords, sometimes at the Commons
request: p. 12, 407, 427, 572, to 578, 583, 584, 656, 682. Bills read and
answered by certain of the Lords in Star-chamber^ p. 620. Writs to stop Assizes
to be granted only by the Lords assent: p. 40. Not to maintain thieves and
Peace-breakers, etc. and sworn to that end: p. 70, 608. They appoint a
Protector of the Realm during the King's pleasure: p. 652. Their Protestations
in Parliament, to be Judges only of their Peers: p. 7. To be Judges of
Articles of Impeachment against Peers in Parliament, etc. their claim of this
their Liberty: p. 321, 426, 644. Against the Peace made with France: p. 630.
Against the extrajudicial Judgment of Banishment given by the King upon the
Duke of Suffolk's Impeachment: 644. The King to dispense with the Statute of
Provisions by the Lords advice: p. 342. They order a subsidy granted
conditionally, to be absolutely payed^ p. 584. A Lord slandered by the Commons,
requires and receives reparation from them p. 155. Lords slandered in
Parliament purged from reports raised of them: p. 392, 603, 657, 321. Commoners
imprisoned, fined for slanderous and false Complaints against Lords: p. 299,
300, 304, 343. Submission of one Peer to another by Order of the Lords for an
accusation and words then uttered against him: p. 352. Controversies between
Lords for precedence, resolved in Parliament: p. 172, to 578, 638. Suspended
from siting in the House, during the debate of their precedencies there: p.
573, 575, 577. Their Oath to the King not to alter any Act, Judgment or
Ordinance in Parliament: 21 R. 2. p. 326, 371, 372. Their Oath of Allegiance to
the King in Parliament: p. 427, 657. All of them sworn to a solemn Decree made
between themselves, without affection to hear and determine the controversies
pending between the Duke of Gloucester and Bishop of Winchester so as neither of
them should be encouraged to break the peace: which they sent to the Commons:
p. 583. The like Oath taken by them in the controversy for precedence between
the Earls Marshal and Warwick: p. 572, 573. Sworn to observe all Ordinances
touching the King's Grants, etc. p. 202. To help that Ordinances may be
executed on all Estates: p. 197. Their censure of the Duke of Lancaster's
Voyage, and propositions to conquer Spain: p. 283. At the request of the
Commons, they grant a suspension of all Eyers, Trailbastons, Oyers and
Terminers: p. 347. Kept from the King, and complaint thereof: p. 651, 652, 657.
They limit the Protectors power: p. 589. Their thanks to the King for his good
Government, Care, and Zeal toward them: p. 340. For his great Justice done: p.
326. They accord to the removing of certain persons from about the King,
because hated by the people: p. 426, 427. Lords Appellants in Parliament^ their
Protestation, Oath, and Proceedings^ p. 321, 322, 374, 376, to 382. Lords to be
Justices of Peace in their Counties: p. 79. Consent to the Commission of Array
by the Judges advice: p. 428. They Dine with the King: p. 106, 418. A Trial
before them for Treason by a Jury: p. 8. A Great Council of them called, and
the King's Great Council^ p. 193. See Council. The Great Officers to be Lords.
See Officers. They judge of the privileges of the Commons, and their Speaker:
p. 651. See Commons. Their award in Parliament, between King H. 6. and the Duke
of York touching the succession of the Crown upon the Dukes claim thereof; and
their submission, assent, Oath thereto^ p. 665, 666, 667. Freely to u^ter their
conceits touching the Title of the Crown^ p. 666. The Commons to bring their
conceits in Parliament to them; not they theirs to the Commons: p. 196. They
oppose the Commons Innovations and Encroachments on their Privileges in
Parliament, p. 196, 135. S^ Commons. The King's consent for a Committee of
Lords to treat with the Commons, a matt^r of Favor, not Duty, and he not they
to name or change them: p. 418, 287. The Consultation about Wars, properly
appertains to the King and Lords, not Commons: p. 287, 288. The Lords and
Commons are to choose their respective Committees, and a Committee of Lords not
to treat with the whole House, but a Commit^^^ only of Commons: p. 135. They
confirm the Inden^ure between the King and Duke of Gloucester touching Calice,
etc. p. 615. They cease and null the Name and Power of the Protector: p. 592.

Lords Marches to restore Englishmens possessions given to the En^mies: p. 137.
Losses by Enemies complained of, considered, and abate Tenths: p. 154, 179,
196, 197, 467, 468, 580, 585. Loyalty of the Subjects to Ed. 3. both in Body
and Goods, a great Blessing; for which he gives God thanks: p. 105. The Commons
protestation of it to the King^ p. 121. Of some Nobles in deserting Rebels,
attested and declared by the King: p. 369. Lyme: Their great destruction by the
Enemy, alleged for the abatement of their Feefarm and Tenths; which is
granted: p. 468.475. Richard Lions his Impeachment and Censure upon the Commons
Petition: p. 121. Who petition for his pardon and Restitution, as being
unjustly censured, the next Parliament: p. 151.
M
MAces before Mayors in Towns not to be of silver, but only the Kings
sergeants and in London, p. 46. Not to be carried out of the Liberty in Towns,
p. 355. Magna Charta, confirmed in Parliament upon the Lords request and
Commons Petitions by several new Acts, and commanded to be observed, p. 15, 31,
32, 33, 34, 39, 71, 74, 91, 106, 109, 112, 117, 124, 146, 149, 156, 169, 177
189, 190, 202, 283, 288, 291, 301, 317, 394, 552. See Confirmation Churches,
Liberties, Corporations, Liberties. All Great Officers and others sworn to
observe it: p. 32.355 Offenders against it to be punished in Parliament and
elsewhere: p. 33, 35, 106, 107. All to be tried before the Kings Justices for
felony and Treason according to the Great Charter, not before the Constable or
Marshal: p. 171, 670. No person to be arrested or imprisoned contrary to the
form of it: p. 410. Trial, condemnation of a Peer, and others without his
Peers, against the form of the Great Charter though in and by Parliament, to be
reversed as unjust and erroneous: p. 7, 8, 66, 85, 86, 125, 387, 388. Read
openly in the beginning of a Parliament by the Archbishops and Chancellours
command: p. 188. Beheading men against it, and without lawful Trial, Murder: p.
670. Mainperners, put in by persons impeached in Parliament, and discharged on
their acquittal: p 10.122. An Act touching them in debt, p. 295. When to be
discharged against the King: p. 433. Mainprise, such as let to it for breach of
Peace to put in good Sureties, as Esquires or Gentlemen: p. 18. To be duly made
to all persons: p. 93. Of persons imprisoned by Officers of the Forest for Vert
and Venison: p. 125. Body for body for any accused and acquitted of Treason to
appear when called between that and the next Parliament: p. 190. Di^charged: p.
199. Of the Earl of Suffolk after his Impeachment and answer in Parliament: p.
316. Upon Error brought in Parliament, to reverse a judgment in an Appeal of
Murder: p. 331. A Knight of Parliament killing his companion, ordered not to be
let to Mainprise till brought to trial, p. 354. Of a Prisoner in Execution in
the Fleet upon an Outlawry by the Guardian of England: p. 554. See Bail,
Sureties Of body for body for one banished into the Isle of Man, to be kept
there: p. 379. Maintenance and Maintainers, inquirable by the Justices of the
Bench, Assize, Oyer and Terminer, Peace: p. 15. No great Persons or Officers to
maintain any Traitors, Felons, Trespassers, maintainers, breakers of Peace,
etc. p. 51.70.147. The Lords and Commons all sworn to it in Parliament: p. 608,
612. Of no Plea or quarrel in Courts: p. 53, 156, 147, 160. Inquests in
maintenance to be returned by the Sheriff himself of the most lawful and
nighest men: p. 87. An Act touching Maintainers: p. 101, 688. No woman to
maintain any Plea in the Kings Courts; and namely Alice Piers under loss of all
and banishment: p 123. Her censure and banishment thereupon: p. 152, 158, 177,
304. An Act concerning it: p. 297, 159. Complaints against Maintainers in every
Court: p. 136. The Commons willed to abandon all maintainers and parties: p.
303. An Earl accused in Parliament for maintenance, and acquitted: p 304.
Enquiry after Maintainers prayed: p. 482. Articles proclaimed against
Maintainers: p. 673. The Statute against Maintenance prayed to be executed: p.
688. Ma^ors of Towns, none to be a Victualer, Hostler or Taverner during his
Office: p. 113. To see things amended in every mystery and occupa^^on: p. 1^4.
To arrest breakers of the Peace within their precincts, not out of them though
adjoining: p. 136. A complaint against the undue Election of the Mayor of York,
and vicious acting: the Mayor duly elected and sworn, is restored; commanded by
Writ to execute the office, and the other to forbear: p. 192. Mayor and
Common^lty of Cambridge accused of an Insurrection, and not in Parliament in
contempt, and censured: p. 199, 200. See Cambridge^ London, York. Major of the
Staple and of Calice. See Staple, Calice. Major Part: nothing to be enacted by
the Council in great causes, but by all (...) most of them: p. 564 602. Malice
the ground of Roger Mortimer's judgment, afterward reversed: p. 85. Malt its
transportation prohibited: p 96. An Act concerning it: p. 356. Mal^olt on Wools
to be revoked: p. 17. Man Isle, Earl of Warwick banished to it, and finds bail
Body for Body to continue there: p. 379. Manslaughter: Indictments of it in
Sheriff^ Turns, prayed to continue good: p 162. Manumissions of Villains by
duress in the ^^surrection, revoked, nulled: p. 195, 196, 204. Marches of
Scotland, and North Marches, Orders for their defense against the Scots; for
Owners of Castles in those parts to furnish, fortify, and reside upon them,
Arrays for that purpose, Aides in Parliament for their defense, and other
things concerning them: p. 20, 21, 23, 35, 37, 43, 49, 79, 100, 131, 134, 137,
185, 188, 281, 283, 284 285, 305, 309, 312, 313, 318, 321, 326, 361, 370, 464,
553, 578, 579, 612, 654. Marches of Wales^ those dwelling on them, pray not to
be distrained or impeached in Wales; but where they are Debtors, Suitors or
Trespassers: to which the King and Lords Marches promise to provide remedy: p.
179. See Wales. Marriage: The Marriage-Treaty of the King, and marriage advise^
of, and assented to in Parliament: p. 9, 10, 629, 630. Marriage-Contract, its
annihilation pursued in Court-Christian: p. 176. By duress complained, and
nulled^ p. 619, 655. Of an Infant of s^x years ra^ified by Parliament: p. 702.
Widows endowed not to marry without the King's assent: p. 589. The King's
Widows Oath not to marry without License. See Oaths: p. 585. None to marry with
the kindred of Owen Glendor: p. 424, 610. Fine by a ward for marrying without
license. See Fine.

A Marriage at thir^een years confirmed, and if no mutu^l society, and hu^band
die, his Brother to marry ^er after his decease: p. 695, 696. Justices punish
the Clergy for taking money for solemnizing Marriage: p. 32. They are not to
have conusance of it: p. 33. The promise of K. H. 5. by word of mouth to a ward
of his own marri^ge for the sum of 10000 l. made, confirmed by Parliament under
H 6. p. 569. Kings marriage without the Lo^ds c^nsent complained against, p.
711. By W^tchcraft, Sorcery, and after a precontract, void: p 711, 712.

Mariners and Masters driven to other Trades by restraining shipping, and
taking them up by Masters of the Kings Ships^ to the decay of the Navy;
complained against for redress: p. 113. To be paid their wages from the day of
their being appointed to serve the King, and pray allowance for the tackling of
their Ships: 118, 119. Mariners to have the like wages as Archers when taken
up for the King; but the former use confirmed: p 172. A complaint of taking up
Mariners, whereby Ships are lost and burnt by the Enemies, and remedy
promised: p. 177. An Act touching Mariners to be re^ressed by the Admiral: p
340. The punishment of Mariners by Comm^ssions upon suggestions of strangers,
complained of; and they not to answer but at common Law, prayed: p. 466. See
Ships, Navy, Admiral. Marquess created in Parliament the manner of it: p. 310,
311. Degraded: p. 399. A strange new title, therefore restitution of a degraded
Marquess to that title refused: p 417. Marshals of Courts, their Fees to be
regulated. See Chancellor, Justices. Marshal of England. See the first Table.
The Earl Marshal to see Traitors executed: p. 6. To make no process but what
was used in Ed. 2. reign, and limited by the Statute: p. 74, 75. Lord Latimer
upon his impeachment and censure, committed to the Constable and bayled: p. 316.

Complaints of his holding Plea against the Statute of Actio super Chartas, and
things triable at Common Law: his Jurisdiction and Court limited to the verge,
which is twelve miles, p. 128, 160, 171, 306, 411, 420, 429, 457, 39, 135, 147,
432. Acts made concerning its limitation and jurisdiction^ p. 306, 333, 411,
420, 457, 472, 432.

Prohibition is to be granted where they meddle of things at Common Law. p.
420. Sir Ralph Ferrars impeached of treason brought into Parliament by the
Marshal of England: p. 190. Not to meddle within the Guild Hall of Southwark,
o^ Liberties granted to others by Charters; prayed: p. 147, 148, 160. Not to
hold Plea of Treason or Felony done within the Realm, but only without it: p.
171, 594, 595. Those who were to do service ^. the Coronation, to appear before
the Marshal and others, p. 389. Marshal not to bayl or release any committed to
him for the peace, p. 70. A prisoner remitted from the Marshal to a trial
before the Judges at the Commons request, p. 429. A Charge of Treason in the
Marshals Court against the Marquess of Ormund by the Lieutenant of Ireland,
abolished by the King ^ith the Parliaments assent, p 567, 568. The Clergies
complaint of Ar^ests into the Marshalsey: p. 164. That every man there may tell
his own tale, and the Officer there not pass the verge: p. 39. That none of the
King's Servants implead a^^ there, denied, p. 80. Sir John Lee impeached for
attaching men to answer in the Marshalsey, when Steward, of things done out of
the verge: p. 106, 107. G^ea^ Complaints against the Marshalseys throughout the
Realm, p. 135. Prescription to be allowed before the Marshal, as well as in
other Courts: p. 147.

The Earl Marshals Office granted i^ tail p. 363, 364. His conrest for
precedence with the Earl of Warwick: p. 575, 576.

Marshalsey: A Prisoner in it in Execution for damage^, p. 351. Martial Law:
King R. 2. impeached for suffering Subjects to be condemned by Martial-Law
contrary to his Oath, p. 388. The Duke of Norfolk tried for words against the
King in the Marshals Court by Marshal-Law, by Order of Parliament: p. 379, 380.
Marshal-Laws condemned, p. 171. Commission to punish Rebels in time of War, by
Marshal-Law, p. 25. Those who executed Rebels by it in the insurrection, have a
pardon for it, being against the Law of the Land, p. 197. Beheading men by it
against Law, murder, p. 670. M^rt. Letters of it. See Reprisals. St. Martins le
grand, its Liberties complained of p. 421. Masons: An Act concerning them, p.
581. Sir John Matrevers: his Judgment in Parliament without Indictment or
calling to answer, p. 6. petitioned against, and reversed, as erroneous and
unjust: his proffer for his Purgation, Pardon, Restitution, p. 66, 78, 81.
Mayhem, that the Defendant in an ^ppeal thereof may make an Attorney, prayed,
p. 604. Meadows River-nusances in it, complained of, p. 539. Measures Acts and
Petitions concerning them, and their view, corrections in ^owns, Franchises,
and elsewhere by the Clark of the Market, and other Officers: what the measure
of Corn shall be p 40, 46, 78, 79, 87, 91, 127, 304, 339, 344, 537, 547, 571,
612. M^lcombe, a Staple there, p. 101, 111. In respect of their great spoils,
pray a re^ease of their Feefarms, Tenths and Fi^teens, ^. 397, 467, 475. Its
Port removed to Po^l ^. 610. Melancholy, to be abandoned by the Commons p. 303.
Merchants Masters of Ships and Mar^ners sent for to attend the Parliament;
^usted with and ordered to guard the Seas, which they undertake, p. 19, 20,
^70, 452, 453, 462, 467. They elect then Admirals. ^ee Admiral. Called by Writ
to Parliament, ^reated and advised with concerning the Staple, safe-convoys,
defense of the sea, sale of ^ools, advance of coin, exchange, loan of money,
buying of wools, and trade^ p. 21, 24, 28, 29, 92, 193, 194, 197, 31, 41, 171.
^^rant an increase of Customs, confirmed by the King and Lords without the
Commons ^ssent for safe Conduct which is levied; (the ground of Tonnage and
Poundage) and complained against by the Commons, as not binding to them, p. 39,
41. Complaints of Rich Merchants oppressing the poor, and of their frauds,
injuries, and farming of Customs, p. 58, 61, 67, 97, 121, 122. Merchants robbed
by default of such who undertook their conduct, to recover damages against them
p. 63. None to be impeached of overplus of weight after the sworn Officers have
weighed their goods^ p. 80. English-Merchants restrained freely to pass over
Wools, p. 113, 337. To buy T^n, p. 56. To fetch Wines from Gascoynes p. 113.
Their restraint and stay of Ships for the Kings service long before they serve,
the cause of the Navies, Mariners decay, p. 113, 155. Their wools in Holland
stayed for the Kings Debts p. 137. Exchanges to be between them notwithstanding
the Statute. p. 284, 337, 441. To freight English Ships, p. 263, 337, 346. An
Act touching Arrests of English Merchants in Wales, p. 345. May transport
Kersies paying the custom, p. 345. Merchants not to pack up their Merchandise
in their own houses without survey of the Customers in deceit of the King, p.
424. Their complaints against the Impositions and Exactions at Ba^en, p. 546.
Having their Goods customed and cocke^ed, not to be slindered or impeached, p.
555. An Act touching days of payment to be given by English Merchants, p. 600.
Merchants who have lost their Goods customed, upon proof made, to ship as much
freely without custom p. 585. Merchandise. See Staple. The ready vent of
English Merchandise one cause of calling the Parliament, p. 618. An Act
touching Merchandise Foreign, bought and sold, p. 625. A Petition that every
Merchant may freely transport all manner of Hides, Skins, and Tallow to any
place, denied, p. 625. Merchant strangers Goods arrested by the English for
Wares and Goods seized by the Duke of Brabant and others^ by way of reprisal.
See Reprisal. Freely to buy any Staple Wares, paying the due cu^stomes, p. 26.
To be taxed where they dwelt as other Merchants, p. 37, 555. Acts touching them
and the sale of their Merchandise, p. 76, 88, 194, 324, 349, 421, 441, 552,
570, 590. If one of the Company turn Bankrupt and depart, the o^ther to
satisfi^ (...) debt p. 80. Freely to tell their Merchandise to any person, to
make exchange of them buy Wares paying the custom, p. 88, 180, 194, 324, 337,
^41, 355, 441. Customers to dispatch all Merchant strangers, p. 88. The
Chancellor, Treasurer or some other of the Council to be their Governor, p. 88.
May buy and transport Wools and Clothes to the value of their Merchandise
imported, but not Victuals, p. 96, 97. Gold to be paid them for their Wares,
not Silver, p. 96, 421, 596. To find Sureties to treat the English-Merchants,
as they are treated here: p. 113, 433, 482. Acts touching their entertainment,
p. 339, 433. None to sell by re-tail p. 113, 141, 165, 355. To be no Brokers or
Usurers. See Brokers, Lumbards. To bring in Bullion, p. 122. See Bullion. To
find sureties to bring and car^y away Commodities of the Realm to half the
value of their Merchandise imported, p. 337, 421, 424. Of Jean, not to pay any
Sea-wage to London for the Merchandise brought by Land from Southampton: p.
418, 629.

The Merchants of Hauns Liberties saved to them p. 133, 165, 585. An Alde^man
of London to end all their suites, p. 585. Differences between the
English-Me^c^ants and them referred to Arbitrators, p 454. Such as have their
Goods taken by them, may have their remedy against them in London, p. 604. The
hostility between the English and them, reconciled^ with recovery of damages
against each other, p. 691. Their Liberties granted by E. 1. confi^med, p. 693.
Such as exchange to Rome, to be bound within three months to b^y English
Commodities to the value of the exchange^ p. 424.

Italian Merchants to choose their hosts where they ^^ke, to sell their
Merchand^ze freely, but not export them when impo^^ed; what customs they shall
pay, p. 441, 442. To be treated according to reason by Customers and other
Officers: to employ their money upon E^gl^sh as well as Staple Wares and to be
t^ied by Merchants Law, ibid. Merchants Ali^ns, not bound to serve the King in
his Wars, or swear as other strangers, p. 472. To lodge in some notable English
House, to buy no other Merchandise then their host may see, to sell off their
Merchandise within forty days, and to be no Brokers; moved^ p. 482 537. A
Petition that certain men be appointed in every Town to see Merchants Aliens
sell their Goods without collusion within three months after landing, and to
exchange no moneys, p. 612. A motion, that the Easterlings may no longer enjoy
their Liberties here, since the English cannot enjoy theirs in Island^ p. 616.
Allom taken up of the Merchants of Jean for the Kings present necessi^ies, who
are to ship any Staple Wares to the value: the Merchants of the Scuth to have
the Allom, paying 8000 l. p. 647. A Petition that no Merchants beyond the
Straight of Morocco, bring into the Realm any other Merchandise then such as
are growing in their own Country for sundry reasons, rej^cted p. 6^6.

M^lls built on Rivers to the obstructing the ^ree p^ssage of Ships, Boats and
Vessels to be demolished as nusances^ p 57, 75, 76, 112, 150^ 334, 375, 396,
412. An Assize of Novel disseisin for a Mill, and Attorney in it p. 175. Mint
Plate to be received in it by weight, p. 81. Merchants to bring in Gold and
Bullion to it. p. 362. Gold seized in it to the Kings use restored, p. 551. An
Act touching the Mint at Calice p. 571. Mint-Masters Fees for coynage, p. 481.
His Commission, p. 565. No M^nt-master in the Tower to be a Master of exchange
without it, prayed, but denied, and the practice contrary, p. 560, 565, 568.
Money: motions and Acts against its exportation p. 16, 37, 49, 73, 74, 96, 129,
130, 171, 197, 204, ^09, 409, 424, 482, 557, 643, 657. Necessaries for Foreign
Soldiers bought within the Realm for that end^ p. 557. The want of it, how to
be remedied p. 18, 37 309. Its goodness to be enhanced, p. 37. C^ipping and
washing of it, Complaints and Acts against it, p. 177, 548. Money raised, p.
309. Acts and Complaints against fal^e and Foreign money, p. 39, 47, 48, 54,
61, 62, 70, 75, 197, 571. Shifts how to raise moneys in public necessities, p.
27, 28, 29, 647. An Act concerning money, p. 204. Silver to be coined according
to the old Allay, and current^ p. 37. To remain within the Realm, p. 96. Good
money to be as here^ofore, farthings to be current, and the price of Florins
abated, p. 41. An Act against embasing money, p. 80. Acts concerning Scottish
Silver, p. 117, 127. and Strange Coyns, p. 410. The King and his Council have
power to make Ordinances touching money, p. 539. Acts touching the ^llay and
weight of money and coynage at Calice^ and elsewhere, p. 560. Expending and
conveying^ out the King's Treasure to and French, and Article against the Duke
of Suffolk^ p. 642, 643. See Exchange, Bullion Gold, Silver. Monopolies, the
restraint of free buying and selling Commodities complained against p. 52, 58.
Of T^nne, p. 56. Of Wools, p. 58, 61. Of sweet Wines in London, a censure upon
a complaint for it in Parliament, p. 122, 123. Of Herring, That none may buy it
within seven miles of Yarmouth in fishing time^ repealed, p. 126, 191, 203. Of
Allom for two years to supply the King's present wants, p. 647. Morgage
redeemed and not restored, complained of in Parliament, and referred to Law, p.
330. The wardship of an heir granted to him who redeemed the Lands being
morgaged till the Money raised, p. 698. Morda^cester: conusance of Pleas to be
granted in it. p. 163. Roger Mortimer Earl of March condemned and executed in
Parliament without Arraignment or Trial, p. 6, 8. His Attainder is therefore
reversed, p. 85, 86. Mortmain, Acts concerning it, p. 44, 161.

Frauds to elude it, by religious persons taking the profits, p. 148. By
Feofments in trust to others without receiving the profits, p. 161. By first
infeofing the King to re^infeof them in Mortmain to extinguish their rights of
whom they are held p. 203. By causing their villains to marry Inheritrices that
are Free, p. 355. Against all which there are Remedies prayed. To the use of
Rochester-Bridge, p. 344. To Winchester: p. 475. To Southampton: p. 542. To St.
Annes Chantry: p. 604. To others, p. 624. Lands purchased in Mortmain^ exempted
from the Commons Tax, p. 479.

Mortuarie, armor taken for it, complained against, p. 185. Mountgrace Prior
and Covent, Lands settled on it, p. 624. Murage, aides of some Customs prayed by
Winchester toward it: p 132. Religious persons to contribute toward it: p.
161. Impositions granted toward it, to cease: p. 348. Murder^ proclamation and
order in Parliament for apprehending Murderers, wi^h a reward for their taking:
p. 6 7. Indemnified and pardoned in apprehending Malefactors^ by, the Kings
command: p. 9. And in times of Insurrection: p. 197. Indictment for it before
the Coroner, and forfeiture for flying: p 126. Oyer and Terminer granted upon
Murders: p. 347. Of one Knight of the Shire, killing the other, no Bayl before
Trial: p. 354. Of the Duke of Gloucester at Calice, adjudged Treason, and
execution accordingly: p. 400 401. Of an Husband ripping up the Wives womb to
see whether she were with child; prayed to have judgment of hanging, drawing
and quartering: p. 6^1. A motion that a shameful Murderer becoming an Approver
and pardoned, might be hanged notwithstanding: p^ 632. Staying process upon
Appeals of Murder^ an impeachment against the Duke of Suffolk: p. 643.
Complaints of barbarous, murders of Husbands by Wives in Parliament, and
Appeals granted to them and their Sons if they die, with process thereon: p.
646, 690, 691. Articles proclaimed against Murders: p. 673. Beheading men
against Law, Murder: p. 670. By Poisoning: An Indictment and Judgment
thereupon repealed in Parliament: p. 703. Pardon of it for a Fine: p. 283, 428.
N
NAturalization by Parliament: p. 363. King of Navar, his promise and
perfidiou^ness to ^ E. 3 p. 90. Navigation, obstructions of it in great Rivers
to be removed: p. 57. See Nusances. Navy^ the causes of its decay: p. 113, 164,
179. Raised, maintained and kept together for the defense of the Sea, and
Merchants sa^e conducts, aids, contribution for that end: p. 20, 21, 25, 29,
69, 70, 116, 167, 204, 311, 312, 348, 452, 534. Necessity, Assizes not to be
delayed but in case of Necessity: p 40. Impositions excused, as made upon great
Necessity: p. 53, 60, 152. Eyres and other Inquiries to cease for the Subjects
case, if great and urgent Necessity do not otherwise cause: p. 70, 342.
Merchants to carry overmonies only for their great Necessities: p. 74. Taking
of Ships not to be but for Necessity: p. 118. Friends to be assayed in times of
Necessity: p. 154. Due and speedy aides desired in the Parliament, as knowing
the Necessity: p. 175. and to serve the Kings Necessity, p. 291. Yielding a
fort to the enemy pleaded to be upon Necessity without money taken: yet
censured in Parliament: p. 292. No Subpoena's to be granted out of the Chancery
or Exchequer without Necessity: p. 410. In Necessity every member seeks to
comfort and defend the head; so the Subjects the King^ p. 464. Present
Necessity, requires speedy dispatch, and ready assistance from the Parliament:
p. 470. Archers granted in Parliament to aid the King, respited by him, unless
drawn by great Necessity to take them: p. 650. Upon ^rgent Causes the King may
re-assemble the Parliament within the time of its proroguation: p. 691. 697.
See p. 167. St. Neots, the Prior and Covent, Aliens, made Denizens: p 541. Nets
destroying fry of Fish, etc. prohibited: p. 572. Lord Nevill, His Impeachment
and Censure in Parliament: p. 123. His extortions complained of, in not paying
his Soldiers Southampton their wages: p. 136. New Castle upon Tyne, their
complaint against the Prior of Tinmouth, upon a false recovery and View: p.
134. License granted the Merchants of it, to transport Wool other where then to
Calice: p. 408. An Act concerning it: p. 596. A Petition of the Northern
Counties, that New Castle may always buy and transport their Wools; p. 600. An
Act for shipping Wools there: p. 679. Newgate Prison and Prisoners, matters
concerning them: p. 49, 107, 166, 499, 682. Newport-panel Prior, p. 418. News,
the Statute of it: 2. R. c. 4 not in the Record, p^ 180. Nisi Prius, prayed,
upon Appeals in remote Northern Counties: p. 91, 92. Where the King is party:
p. 97. Upon any Trespass or Felony upon issue joined against the King: p. 109.
To be sued within one year after issue joined: p. 134. After the Habeas Corpus
returned, or else discontinued^ and to be granted in the Kings suits without
suing a Privy Seal: p. 1^8. Of issues between the King and other persons of the
Ex^chequer: p. 162. Granted by Justices of the Kings Be^ch, without Writs from
the Chancery or Privy Seal^ p. 178. An Act touching discharge of Juries in it:
p. 295. That the Justices may have power to give Judgment forthwith after
Verdict found, without s^aying till the day of the Nisi Priu^ return: p. 410.
To be granted in a traverse of any office, returnable in any of the Benches or
County. See Office, Inquest. Nonability of persons professed to inherit,
notwithstanding the Popes dispensation: p. 149. Of Councillors and Officers
once censured and removed for Delinquency, not to be restored: p. 122, 159,
295. Nobles, See Lords. Noncavits of Fines levied, surrendered to be no bar: p.
40 a motion rej^cted, that none be barred by Non-claim: p. 70. Non-obstante,
Grants, Restitutions, etc, with a Non-obstante to other Acts, etc. p. 165, 284,
330, 342, 344, 347, 354, 407, 49, 456, 466, 610, 623, 66^, 68^ 691.
Non-residence occasioned by Provision^ to Aliens, and the mischiefs of it,
complained against: p. 65, 128, 409 Non-resident Aliens worse then Turks or
Jews: p. 128. A provision against them made in Ireland desired in England: p.
296. A Praemuni^e prayed against such as procure any dispensations for
Non-residents from Rome, except Archbishops and Bishops Chaplains: p. 409.
That the King may enjoy half the profits of Non-residents livings: p. 460, 476,
581. Remedy provided against it by Ordinances and the Convocation: p. 466, 476.
Non-residents to forfeit half of their Benefices to the King, the other to the
Patron: p. 581. That Patrons may present anew for Non-residency: p. 585.
Nonsuit of the Plaintiff, an Act touching it: p. 410. Upon wager of Law: p.
466, 605. To be a Bar, Ibid. Non-tenure of part: p. 80. Normandy, the Crowns
inheritance, lost: p. 682. Northampton Major to compel the Tenants to pave the
streets before their doors^ p, 599. John of Northampton, Major of London
excepted from pardon, condemned of Treasons and Felonies, yet after pardoned
and restored: p. 325, 339, 340^ 344. Norwich, its Major to have survey of
Worsteds in it and Norfolk: p 474. Bishop of it, General of the Army ^ent to
Flanders, impeached, censured ^or his miscarriages in the service, but not
imprisoned, though fined: p. 282, 284, 285, 288, 289, 291, to 295.
Northumberland's and other Northern Counties petitions, etc. p. 91, 92, 334,
482. Earl of Northumberland ^^quited of Treason for his Insurrection, by the
Lords: his homage thereupon to the King: p. 426, 427. See Table 2. Nottingham,
the Goal there, annexed to the Sheriff wick upon their Petition. p. 45. Its
Castle wont to be kept by an Earl, then by an Alien, whose removal is prayed:
p. 135, 176. Complaints against the Constable of it for exacting for every load
of Coal for private use: p. 358. Novelties, to be suppressed: 65. Not to be
taken for an example: p. 342. Prohibited and opposed by the King and Lords in
Parliament: p. 190, 392, 478, Nusances and Obstructions in Rivers navigable, by
Mills, Wears^ Stanks, Kiddles, and the like, complained of Acts made,
Commissions appointed to inquire of, and redress them, p. 57, 75, 76, 80, 97,
112, 124, 126, 146, 150, 179, 139, 339, 348, 349, 375, 396, 412, 420, 475, 535,
539, 555, 571, 700. In London removed, p 348, 349.
O
OAth and Swearing: Of the King at his Coronation remedied; to be kept:
violated by his Acts of Oppression and Injustice against Law, p. 102, 326, 367,
386, 387, 388. No Pardon to be granted any Felon etc. but where the King may
save his Oath: p. 75. Oaths: Of the Justices, Judges, Ba^ons, all Great
Officers, Privy Counselors, and others, to observe, maintain the Great
Charter and the Laws, faithfully to coun^el the King to do Justice, etc. p. 32,
33, 34, 35, 37, 46, 48, 51, 52, 74, 294, 315, 316, 318, 323, 329, 334, 456,
457, 471, 473, 202.

Of the Lords and Commons in Parllament, of Faith, Homage, and due Allegiance
to the Kin^ and his Heirs: p. 105, 426, 427, 455, 576, 657, 662, 663, 666.
Also, to see the Peace, kept, not to alter, repeal any Act, O^dinance, or
Judgment of Parliament: To live and die with the Lords Appellants in the
Cause, etc. saving their Alle^iance to the King, and due Obedience to his
Prerogative and Laws: p. 322, 326, 369, 371, 372, 375. Taken upon the
Arcbishop's Crosser, and St. Edward's Shrine, holding up their right hand: p.
34, 322, 371, 372, 369, 373, 375, 376.

The Great Charter to be newly proclaimed and confirmed by Oath: p. 32. The
Chancellor, Treasurer, and some of the Justices refuse an Oath, as repugnant to
their former Oath, and Laws of the Realm: p. 34.

Oath of Praisers of Goods attached before sold in Execution by Bailiffs of
Hundreds, p. 55. Sir John Matraver's offer to acquit himself of what he was
condemned, without hearing in Parliament by Oath: with four hundred Knights his
Compurgators, p. 66.

Judge Thorpe condemned to death for breaking his Oath by taking Bribes: p. 74,
316.

Merchants to be credited touching prizes of their Wares upon their Oaths: p.
88.

King of Navarres Oath most willingly to enter into League with K E 3. yet he
breaks it: p. 90.

King John's subjecting his Crown, Realm to the Pope, contrary to his
Coronation Oath: p. 102. Lords and Commons sworn to the King's Crown, cannot
assent to (...) dis-inheritance, p. 105. Sheriffs and under Sheriffs sworn to
view the Panel in every weighty Cause ere returned, p 124. Cyrographer and his
Clerks to be sworn to take but 4 s for engrossing a fine p. 128. Treasurers of
War sworn before the King in open Parliament, p. 156. Diverse Lords and others
examined in Parliament upon Oath to prove a Deed and Livery p. 157. Judges,
Lawyers, Doctors of Divine, Civil and Canon Law examined and sworn before the
King to deliver their Opinions touching the Privileges of Sanctuaries in debt,
etc. p. 176. Suggestions of Writs sworn to be true by the parties and others of
good name, p. 191. Collectors of Tenths to account upon Oath, p. 202.

The Major of Londons Oath by Act, p. 286.

The Chancellor impeached for breaking his Oath in defrauding the King, etc. p.
315, 316. Archbishop not to be sworn to any inferior to the Pope, yet takes
Oath of a Privy Counselor voluntarily, saving his Prerogative, p. 318.

The Oath of the Mayors of the Staple by Act, p. 337. The Bishops and Commons
would have favor showed to the banished Justices, so as they incur not the
breach of their Oaths and Conscience, p. 353. The Oath of the Earl of
Glocester^ in Parliament, never to implead the King or other Lords in
possession, for the Lands of his Ancestors, upon his restitution, p. 373.

An Oath enrolled in Chancery for all Bishops Successors Lords heirs, to take,
confirmed by the Pope to bind them, the Kings Successors, Kingdom in
perpetuity, p. 369, 371, 372, 375, 387. A resignation of all Subjects Oaths and
Allegiance to R. 2. p. 385, 390. Atturneys Oath before an exigent issue, that
the contract or Trespass was in the same County, p. 413. Scots indenized to be
sworn to the King, p. 418. Sheriffs to be discharged on their Oaths in the
Exchequer, p. 419, 466.

The Kings chief Officers to be sworn, to shun all Bribery, p. 394. The
Customers sworn to be resident on their Office, p. 424. Earl of Northumberland
purges suspected Lords upon his Oath^ p. 426. An Oath in Parliament before
King and Lords to abide an Arbitrament, p. 454. Privy Counselors and the
Archbishop charged by the King on their Allegiance to take the Oath then
presented^ them by Parliament, which they did, p. 456. The Lords Oath for
disposing the subsidy granted^ p. 464. All Aliens coming into the Realm, except
Merchants, to protest to live and die in the Kings quarrel p. 472. The Prince
not sworn when all the rest of the Council and Justices were, for his
Worthiness, p. 473. Atturnies of both Benches to be sworn every Term to deal
faithfully and truly, and cashiered if they do not p. 475. Every Juror to be
sworn to say, whether he or any other for him received any thing, p. 536. Clerk
of the Council sworn duly to enter the Names of the Council that si^, and their
Acts, p. 565. And to pass, promote the poorest Man's Bill and Answer: and the
King's Sergeants for counsel therein to take no money, p. 568. All Officers of
the King's, having Patents in Courts to be sworn to appoint able Clerks and
Ministers under them p. 571. The Lords and Commons Oath in Parliament,
impartially to judge the Case of Precedence between the Earls Marshal and
Warwick, without affection, p. 373, 378. Warders of the Marches of England and
Scotland to be discharged upon their Oaths touching hostages, p. 579. Livery
of Dower to the Duchess of Norwich upon her Oath not to marry, p. 580. The
Lords sworn without affection to hear and end the dissension between the Duke
of Gloucester and Bishop of Winchester in Parliament p. 583. All the Lords and
Commons sworn in Parliament, and others by Commission, not to retain any
Offender of the Law, or maintain any Title or quarrel, p. 608.612. An
Administrator of an Alien Merchant sworn to pay his Debts, p. 623. An Oath
against the Law of God, void^ p. 666. Oath of the Duke of York and his Heirs in
Parliament, to perform the award made by the Lords touching the Crown between
H. 6. and him; and the Lords Oath to the Duke and his Heirs: and their Oaths to
defend the Lords for this agreement, p. 667. Oath of secrecy taken by those who
murdered the Duke of Gloucester, upon the sacrament in Cali^^, p. 400.

Oath of the Major of London in the Exchequer, p. 294.

There are within the Realm too many forsworn already; therefore imposing a New
Oath was refused, p. 33.

Obit perpetual for two Countesses to be erected^ p. 169. Obligations of an
Infant made void, p. 103. To others uses to remain good after their Attainders,
p. 355. By Duresses in the Insurrection repealed and nulled, p. 200. Blank ones
sealed to, R. 2. through fear, nulled, Burned, p. 391, 394. Officers fraud
referred to certain persons to determine, p. 10. When, how, and where
travers^ble, p. 59, 127, 138, 396, 397, 421, 460, 624, 311, 411, 461, 473, 474,
475, 580. The party not to be oute^ upon it, ibid. Where repugnant, which shall
stand, p. 396, 367, 410. Where to be taken by the Escheator, where by
Commissioners, p. 580. See Inquest, Escheators. Office, Officers: Great and
other public Officers to be freely elected by the King. p. 39, 112, 312, 317,
329, 374, 375. See King Council.

By the Lords and Parliament, p. 32, 34, 155, 159, 174^ 288. See Commons, King,
Lords, Council.

To be of the wisest, best, and ablest men in the Realm, p. 197, 288, 457.

Ill Officers complained of; a Declaration, That such who were grieved by the
King or his Officers, upon complaint, should find remedy, p. 31, 35. Great
Officers and Judges sworn to observe the Laws, and Great Charter: p. 32, 34.
See Oath, Justices, Council.

Complaints against the King's Officers in Parliament: they censured, removed
for misdemeanors: p. 32, 33, 34, 35, 39, 121, 122, 123, 315, 316, 368, 641,
642, 643, 644. The King to resume their Offices every Parliament, and they to
answer to all complaints: p. 34, 35. which they resign in Parliament till
cleared, and then are readmitted: p. 329. Customers, Controllers and Surveyers
Offices forfeited by letting them to Farms: p. 38. No Aliens to be Officers: p.
39.

Old Servants and Officers of the King to be first preferred: p. 594, 608. All
to be of sufficient Inheritance to answer: p. 159. To maintain no
Peace-breakers, Offenders, Suites, Quarrels: p. 51. See Maintenance. To forfeit
their Offices, to be disabled to enjoy them, upon default found in them, and
for neglect, and misdemeanors: p. 59.122, 123, 63, 147, 149, 160, 295, 457,
127, 394. To be sworn: p. 80. See Oath. Laymen only to be principal Officers in
the King's Courts and House, not Clergymen: p. 112. To end all matters
belonging to their Offices: p. 120, 155.

None to be compelled to bear any Office after sixty years of Age; prayed: p.
149. To be all sworn to shun all Bribery, and to lose all they have upon
Attainder: p. 349.

No Officers high or low, or any under them, to take other then their
accustomed Fees: and no Officer to be appointed by any mediation contrary to
the Laws: p. 457. No Officer Judicial or Ministerial in the King's Courts or
House to have their Offices, but at Will, and yearly to make inquiries of all
misdemeanors and misprisions done under them, and report them to the King's
Council: p. 458.

Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Escheators, Customers, and suchlike Officers, to
be made by the Councils nomination and advise: p. 564.

Officers for life may make Deputies: p. 565. Officers by Letters Patents sworn
to appoint such under them for whom they will answer: p. 571. All Officers
ceased by the resignation, deposition of R. 2. and new ones made by H. 4.
thereupon: p. 389.

All the King's Great Officers of every Court, and of his House, shall maintain
the Common Law: p. 557. To be sworn to observe all Ordinances: p. 291.

Great Officers not to be displaced but by Parliament: p. 183, 185, 288. See
Council, Chancellor, King, Lords, Treasurer, Commons, Parliament; (the first
Table of Officers) Customers, Escheators, Sheriffs, Majors Constables,
Marshals, Privy Seal, Steward, Barons, Justices.

Oil: its Vessels to be gauged: p. 460, 625.

Sir John Old-Castle, his Excommunication for Heresy, Judgment and Execution
for Treason: p. 553, 554.

Oppressions, inquired of by Commission: p. 34, 57, 571. By the King's Council:
p. 178. complained of, redressed in Parliament in the Pope and his Officers,
Lords of Franchises, Farmers of Customs, Forresters, Exchequer-men, Customers,
Levyers of Taxes, Ordinaries, and their Officers, Privy-Councellors, Sheriffs:
p. 37, 41, 55, 58, 59, 60, 62, 75, 106, 107, 121, 122.

Of John Lord Talbot: p. 571. By Officers of the Chancery: p. 142. By
Gold-Finers of London: p. 157. By Sheriffs thereof: p. 284. By Usurers: p. 286.

The Commons neither could or would any longer bear the Pope's Oppressions:
which, if not redressed, they would help expel his power out of the Realm by
force: p. 41. See Pope.

That all may complaint according to Law, of the Oppresions of what person or
Estate soever, without penalty: p. 334.

Oppression in place of Justice: p. 591^ Statutes against it to be executed: p.
688. Of King E. 4. complained of by R. 3. p. 712, 173. Of King R. 2. for which
he was impeached: p. 186, 187, 188. See Exactions, Extortions.

William Ogle attainted in Parliament for murdering K. Edw. 2. p. 7, 8.

Ordinances of Parliament, the same with Acts and Statutes, put, used for them;
and had the King's, Lords and Commons threefold assent to them: p. 32, 51, 52,
53, 56, 58, 63, 85, 88, 96, 140, 151, 155, 198, 202, 323, 326, 338, 344, 347,
354, 369, 375, 397, 405, 696.

The King's Answer to the Commons Petitions, as some affirm, makes them to be
but Ordinances, (that is temporary) and not Acts; to be made into Acts: p. 159.

None to be made at the Petition of the Clergy without assent of Parliament: p.
148. The Commons to view Ordinances before they be confirmed: p. 197. contemned
and held as nothing: p. 53.

A Roll of Ordinances made in the Great Council at Westminster: p. 82.
confirmed to continue for ever: p. 86, 88.

The Chancellor demanded of the Lords and Commons, whether such things as they
agreed on, should be by way of Ordinance or of Statute? who answered, By way of
Ordinance: for that they might amend the same at their pleasure: p. 98.

The threefold assent was to Ordinances as to Statutes; and by Ordinances here,
they only intend they should be probationary; and temporary Laws which they
might repeal as there was occasion, not perpetual Acts, which they could not
alter at their pleasures: so that if there be any real difference between an
Ordinance or Statute, as some have hence collected; it is only this, That one
is but temporary till confirmed and made perpetual; the other perpetual at
first, as some Ordinances also were. See p. 86, 88, 141, 159, 331, 375, 377.

Ordinances of the King and his Council (distinguished from those of the
Parliament) to be executed by all his Officers: p. 121, 148, 354, 485.
Ordinances of Ordinaries obeyed by the Clergy: p. 264, 539. Ordinances of the
Bailiffs and Corporation of Norwich to be made for the good Government thereof,
so as they be profitable for the King and his People: p. 177. Ordinances of the
Major of London to be viewed, and if need be confirmed: p. 339. Ordinances of
the Lords in Parliament, to which the King, by their assent agrees, between
the King and Duke of York: p. 667. Ordinaries to punish living Usurers: p. 33.
To answer and have an Action for the Goods of Person intestate: p. 40. Not to
take conisance of the temporal Laws and Causes: p. 41.

Their Oppressions and Officers complained of: p. 15, 378, 296, 536.

Where they may refuse to admit the King's Clerk: p. 81.

Their Jurisdiction in Pensions and other Ecclesiastical Things; where, when
they may have a Consultation, and proceed notwithstanding a Prohibition: p.
151, 164, 165.

The Clergy not to be impeached for obeying their Ordinaries, if they prejudice
not the King's Person, Crown or Laws of the Land: p. 165. To punish
non-residency, and prevent it: p. 460.

Persons imprisoned for Heresy, to be delivered over to them: p. 564.

Schoolmasters to be placed and displaced with their advice: p. 535, 536. See
Archbishop, Bishops, Clergy, Spiritual Courts.

Outlawry, in case of Privision: p. 49. For Felony: p. 57, 170, 353, 431, 432.
Forfeiture of Goods, etc. thereupon: ibid. For Treason: p. 553. Before Justices
of Peace: p. 15, 86. No pardon to Outlawries but by Parliament; prayed: p. 15,
600. Not to be made without additions: p. 191, 422, 599. In debt, Detinue,
Replevin, by Act: p. 80.

None to be outlawed without due process: p. 86.

All impotent persons outlawed, may make Atturneyes: p. 461. Of persons beyond
Seas in service: p. 571.

Of persons in the County of Lancaster, to disable them to sue, and forfeit
Goods in that County only, prayed; and Acts concerning it: p. 590, 625, 660.
To appear in proper person, and their appearance to be entered: p. 605, 625.

An Act for taking Outlaws repairing to Hereford: p. 631.

An Act touching Outlawries: p. 655.

Owse-River to be kept open and free for Navigation: p. 57. Oxford-University;
a Difference and Order in Parliament touching the Scholars of it, and the
Freers Mendicants there: p. 102, 103. The Commoners pray the Lords to regard
the estate thereof: p. 347. Their Liberties saved and confirmed: p. 393.

The Commons pray King H. 4. to have consideration of it, in the moderation of
the Statute of Provisions: p. 407.

The Commoners Petition, That their Charter, not to answer for Felony before
any Judges, but their Stewards, etc. may be revoked, as derogatory to the
King's Royalty and Citizens Charter; the suspension of their Liberties granted
thereupon: p. 466. The Council upon the said Petition empowered to call the
Chancellor of the University before them, and to confirm, or revoke any of
their Liberties that are unlawful: p. 474.

They oppose the Archbishops Visitation by a Bull of Exemption from it, granted
them by the Pope, which is disallowed by the King: the Order thereupon for
their Visitation by the Archbishop, and Confirmation of his Visitation of them
by Parliament: so that if he or his Officers were interrupted therein, their
Liberties should be seized into the King's hands, until the Archbishop were
restored; and that for every such interruption they should pay to the King a
thousand pound: p. 479, 489.

Oxfords Major and Commonalty, their Dism, and Petition for contribution to it,
and Order thereon: That all Lands belonging to the Church within the said Town,
purchased since the twentieth year of E. 1. should contribute to all Disms and
Fifteens: p. 476.
P
PAnnels, the Sheriff and Undersheriffs sworn to view them ^re returned^ p
124. Parceners where they may be summoned and severed, p 40, 41. Their Lands in
Ireland not to descend to such as are the Kings enemies; Order to prevent it, p
66. A Writ of Partition between them and Tenants in common, p 162, 557, 565.
Pardons general, petitioned for by the Commons in Parliament, granted by the
King at his pleasure, p 97, 106, 109, 113, 131, 146, 152, 163, 172, 192, 196,
197, 198, 199, 203, 204, 282, 289, 284, 285, 296, 306, 338 339, 345, 367, 371,
394, 411, 434, 540, 50, 552, 620, 639. Denied, 131, 134, 172, 306. Persons
excepted out of general pardons, p 163, 203, 284, 325, 367, 292. Not granted
till the last day of Parliament, and after aids, p 19^, 199, 371. Pardons
special and particular petitioned for by the Commons, and granted thereupon
only out of grace, and at the Kings pleasure, p 81, 134, 151, 152, 282, 283,
325, 345, 472. denied, p 136, 150, 550. Pardon of Sheriffs accounts, p 134,
179, 202, 644. See Accounts.

Of Sheep stealing, p 585.

Of Outlawries, p 600. Of Trespasses, p 285, 306. Of Prison Breach, 615, 692.

Of Treason, and Insurrection, p 7.196, 203, 204.282, 283, 284, 325, 340, 345,
348, 424, 426, 551, 620, 663, 677, 699

Of Fines and Amerciaments, p 152, 347^

Of Murder, p 283, 334, 632. Of Arrears of Rent, p 459. Of the Air or Forest,
p 172. Of Provisors p 603.

Of Felony, p 146, 192, 204, 282, 283, 284, 306^ 325, 334, 341, 545, 551. Of
Old Debts, p 18, 32, 33, 172, 202, 296, 588, 338, 339. Of Riots and
Misdemeanors, p 373.

Of Merchants for goods not customed, p 213.

Of Intrusions, p 131.

Of Piracy upon satisfaction, p 472. Of Issues, p 136, 347. Of Treasure house,
p 349, Of Reliefs, p 339. Of Liveries, p 540^

Commissioners to receive Rebels and others to pardon, p 25.

Pardons granted, repealed by Parliament, and the persons pardoned, arraigned,
condemned, notwithstanding them p 368, 373, 377, 378, 386, 387. This charged
as an high misdemeanour on R 2. p 386, 387.

Justices to consider of Malefactors Pardons ere they allow them, p 54. The ill
effects of pardons to Malefactors, p 62 64, 75. A pardon to a receiver of a
debt wherein the King was deceived, revoked, p 396.

Pardons, Not to be granted to Falsifiers, Clippers of Money, p 54, 62, 64, 75.
No^ to persons censured by Parliament^ 1^8, 353, 364. Nor of a debt assigned, p
619. A pardon pleaded, and allowed in Parliament, p 10. All pardoned persons to
resort to defend the Sea coasts under pain of forfeiting them, p 20. All
suggestions to be put into Pardons, p 82, 334.

An Act touching Charters of Pardon, p 334.

An Act for such as procure pardon to any notable Thi^f, p 432.

King Henry the fourth showed pardon to any offender that craved the same, p
464.

A motion that a murderer pardoned, might yet be executed, p 632. Arrea^ of
Desms paid, notwithstanding a general Pardon, p 648. Pardon of Treason, yet the
lands forfeited, p 663, 699.

Parishes and Parish Churches how many in England, a Tax granted on them, and
the Commons mistaken in their number, p 111. PARLIAMENTS, summoned by the Kings
Writ, by his Authority, and in his name alone, p 2, 4, 5, 25, 26, 35, 42, 68,
72, 77, 83, 84, 89, 95, 99, 104, 115, 143, 153.187, 289, 297, 302, 306, 313,
319, 320, 327, 328, 336, 340, 350, 357, 359, 365, 366, 382, 383, 402, 403, 414,
435, 436, 449, 450, 463, 469, 477, 533, 537, 542, 543, 549, 552, 555, 556, 558,
561, 566, 572, 581, 582, 586, 597, 601, 606, 613, 616, 617, 620, 626, 627, 628,
632, 6^3, 636, 639, 645, 648, 655, 660, 668, 673, 679, 686, 687, 705, 708. The
Summons of it abated, nulled by the Kings resignation of his Crown, p 384.
suddenly called, p 166, 167. Parliament consists of the King and three Estates,
(Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and Commons;) always summoned to, and present in
it. p 10.11.12.13.14.17.329.384.425.281.425.392.
567.607.701.709.710.712.713.714. See Causes of Parliament.

A Parliament is to be held once or twice every year, p 1.93.138.163.173.

The King himself personally present in it, both at the beginning, end, and at
other times as there is occasion; as being held by, before, and under him; see
King.

Held in his absence out of the Realm, Infancy or sickness, by the Guardian of
Custos Regni, Protector, or Commissioners by Commissions from the King (whose
Commissions were read and recorded in Parliament) in the Kings name as his
Deputies. p 17.19.73.144.146.358.553.562.567.583.597.651.658.659.675. President
of it, p 651, 658, 659.

All Members are to repair to, be present in, and not depart from it without
license; called by name, and fined if absent. p 13.14.43.142.194.281.361.653.
See Commons, Lords.

A Proclamation made at the beginning of it, That none should bear arms,
weapons, or use any Games where the Parliament was kept, to prevent all force,
fear and disturbance thereby. p 11.12.14.17.19.22.27: 31.36.45.46.51.76.78.
Adjourned by reason some Lords came to it with force and armed men, p 195.

The beginning, sitting of the Parliament adjourned of course till a further
day, because many of the Lords and Commons were not come, nor their Writs
returned; and the declaration of the causes of calling it deferred till they
all appeared and were come. p
11.13.14.19.31.36.46.51.69.73.78.90.92.96.105.120.144.154.167.173.182.188.193.195. 201.281.286.287.290.298.308.454.464.

The Causes of calling the Parliament declared in the beginning of it by the
Chancellor for the most part, sometimes by the Chief Justice, or some Bishop,
Lord or Officer, in the presence of the King, Lords and Commons assembled
together (usually in the Painted-Chamber when held at Westminster;) which are
usually declared to be, To counsel, advise, consult together, resolve, aid,
assist the King, how to defend the Realm and his Dominions at home or abroad by
Land and Sea against foreign Enemies, or domestic Rebels; and to grant Aids,
Subsidies for that end: How to maintain or carry on defensive or invasive wars;
How to treat, settle Peace, Leagues, Truces with Enemies by Ambassadors,
Treaties, Marriages: How to preserve the public peace at home, and suppress
the disturbers thereof; How the Kingdoms people may be well governed. Justice
duly executed; the Great Charter, Churches, Corporations, all other men's
Liberties confirmed, enjoyed; the Laws maintained, and duly executed; Good Laws
established, Obscure explained, Ill redressed; Oppressions, Extortions, all
public Grievances redressed; the Commodities of the Realm vended, enhansed;
the people eased, enriched; the Church, and true Catholic faith defended
against Heretics, Sectaries; and the Kings public necessities supplied. p
9.11.12.13.17.19.22.27.31.36.37:
43.47.51.69.73.78.82.85.90.92.96.100.102.105.108.111.116.120.144.145.154.167.173.174.182.188. 193.195.196.281.287.291.298.303.309.314.321.329.33^.341.346.351.358.360.361. 367.371.384.404.415.425. 437.451.463.464.470.478.534.538.544.549.550.553.556.559.562.567.583.587.591.592.597.602. 607.614.617.618.621.622.629.634.637.646.649.656.657.665.669.674.680.688.701.

Receivers and Triers of Petitions appointed in the beginning of every
Parliament for England, Ireland, Scotland, Aquitane Gascoign, the Isles. (of
Iersey, Garnsey, etc.) and other Foreign parts, who were to receive, examine
all their Petitions, and to give or procure such Answers to them from the King,
Lords, C^uncil, as was fitting, p 14.22.24.31.36.43.45.51.73.
78.85.90.94.96.100.102.105.108.111.116.117.120.145.154.155.167,
168.174.182.188.193.195.281.287.298.299.303.309.315.
321.329.337.341.346.351.358.360.367, 385,
386.404.415.425.437.451.464.470.478.534.539.541.550.551.556, 557.563.587, 588,
562.598.602, 607.614.618.622.629.634.635.637. 640.646.649, 656, 661, 665, 669,
674, 680.688.702.705. These Triers of private Petitions endorsed them, where
and by whom they were to be answered; As Coram Rege, which the King himself was
to answer before the Parliament ended, p 93. n 31. Such as were unproper for
Parliament, they rejected, and thus endorsed, Let them sue to the King, for
this is no Petition of Parliament, p 349. Let them sue to the King, who will
advise and consider the same, p 420. Let him petition to the King, p 443 etc.
Such as were referred to the Council and Parliament, were thus answered by
them. The same is committed to the Kings Council to take order therein. p 443.
etc. See Council.

The manner of the Commons choosing, presenting the Speaker to the King and
Lords: his Protestation, Speeches, duty in Parliament. See Commons: Speaker:

Committees of Lords and Commons appointed in Parliament, to treat, debate of
matters, Articles, proposals, and confer together to prepare, ripen them for
the Houses Resolution, with the manner of their proceedings, p 11, 12.14.23.31.
32.61.69.79.116.175.196.361.372. 374.452.534.391.568.619.651. 652.657.674.684.
See Commons, Lords.

No matters to be proposed, resolved, ordered, concluded but in full
Parliament, p 13, 14, 43, 50, 66, 74, 152, 169, 318, 321, 335, 371, 373, 392,
426, 427, 488, 430, 439, 440, 652, 655, 665, 710. See Causes of Parliament, and
Adjournment of it for absence to this effect.

The manner of making Acts of Parliament; see Statutes, Ordinances.

The Parliament adjourned, nothing concluded, and resummoned by special Writs,
because diverse Lords and Bishops appeared not at it, p 13, 14.

A new Parliament and Convocation ordered in Parliament to be summoned by a
certain day, p 19.

Parliaments adjourned, prorogued by Commission; Reassembled (sometimes by new
Writs of Summons) by reason of the Plague, Enemies, Incursions, Insurrections,
the Kings urgent occasions, or other causes, with the manner thereof, p 14, 22,
23, 31, 47, 82, 90, 98, 100, 116, 191, 198, 201, 303, 322, 346, 351, 358, 371,
384, 389, 404, 415, 452, 453, 455, 471, 478, 533, 543, 554, 568, 578, 583, 584,
588, 593, 608, 622, 629, 638, 640, 641, 646, 650, 65, 657, 659, 673, 675, 676,
681, 682, 688, 691, 693, 694, 695, 696.

The whole power of Parliament committed by Parliament, to certain persons, by
R. 2. his mean^: The ill consequence of, Repeal and Protest against it; greatly
derogatory to the Estates of the Realm, and never after to be drawn into
example, p 374, 387, 390, 391.

Matters of Peace, Leagues with Foreign Princes, States, debated, consulted
of, and concluded in Parliament, p 9, 10, 12, 37, 43, 51, 67, 69, 73, 78, 85,
88, 90, 92, 105, 108, 291, 298, 300, 329, 337, 342, 346, 351, 353, 415, 437,
438, 451, 452, 545, 550, 559, 562, 587, 602, 614, 626, 630. See Peace, Leagues.

Matters of War, Arrays, and public defense by Land and Sea, debated,
consulted, ordered in and by Parliament, p 11, 12, 13, 37, 43, 56, 73, 79, 82,
105, 111, 116, 120, 145, 173, 174, 175, 182, 188, 189, 191, 281, 287, 288, 289,
291, 303, 309, 314, 321, 323, 337, 341, 348, 351, 392, 405, 415, 425, 437, 438,
451, 470, 534, 538, 544, 550, 555, 556, 614, 638, 646, 683, 694. See War,
Kingdoms defense, Array.

Aids of Moneys for public defense, and public supply of the Kings
necessities, required from, and how to raise it, advised of by Parliaments, p
17, 22, 27, 47, 70, 118, 154, 173, 182, 188, 281, 291, 303, 321, 329, 337, 342,
346, 351, 360, 371, 404, 437, 470, 478, 538, 577, 597, Aid^, Subsidies,
Tunnage, Poundage, New Customs, Impositions, Taxes, to be granted, imposed,
levied only by grant in Parliament, not otherwise. See Quindesms, Taxes,
Tunnage, Poundage, Impositions, Commons.

All matters concerning the Church, Religion, Faith, Heresy, the Popes
Usurpations, Innovations, Bishops, Ordinaries, and their jurisdictions, Clergy,
Tithes, Nonresidence, Pluralities, Provisions, and the like, debated, ordered
in Parliament; see these Titles.

The Title and Inheritance of the Crown debated, determined, settled in tail,
and confirmed in and by Parliament, p 382, to 393.665, to 673.710, to 714. See
Crown, Kings.

Matters of Justice, Law, Government, regulation of the Kings Council, Courts
of Law, Officers of all sorts, Justices, Exchequer, Revenues, Household,
Stannery Courts, and reforming abuses in them, debated, ordered, settled by
Parliaments; see these Titles.

Matters concerning Corporations, Trade, the Kings ships, Merchants, Mariners,
Merchandise, Staples, Staple-Commodities, Woollen Cloth, Artificers, Laborers,
manufactures of all sorts, Moneys, Monopolies, Weights and Measures, and
regulation of abuses, defects in them debated, treated, consulted of; ordered,
enacted by Parliament. See those Titles. Merchants sent for and advised with in
Parliament thereupon; see Merchants.

Matters concerning Nusances and Obstructions of Navigation in Rivers; Sewers,
Commissions of all sorts, legal or illegal, Charters, Patents; their revocation
if illegal, mischievous; confirmation, or supply of their defects, if good,
examined and ordered in and by Parliament. See Commissions, Nusances, Charters,
Patents, Confirmation, Monopolies.

The power of enacting, repealing, confirming Laws, Ordinances, Statutes, only
in the Parliament; see Laws, Ordinances, Statutes.

Matters of Treason, Impeachments, Judgments, Attainders, Forfeitures,
resolutions concerning it in and by Parliament; p 6, 7, 8. see Treason, Lords.
A Trial in case of Treason by Jury before the Lords there, p 8.

Matters of Fraud, Oppression, Practice, Injustice, Extortions, Fines, Grants,
Releases, Recognisances by Duress, Forcible Disseisons by Lords, Great persons,
Members of Parliament, Insurrections, Riots, Tumults, horrid murders, Rapes,
outrages complained of, examined, redressed in and by Parliaments; or by
Commissioners, Justices, other Courts, appointed to examine them by their
order, p 8, 9, 58, 61, 81, 106, 107, 120, 121, 199, 200, 342, 343, 346, 347,
362, 363, 417, 472, 473, 479, 534, 548, 551, 559, 560, 571, 618, 619, 62^, 624,
635, 646, 664, 692, 693, 695, 696, 703, 315, 316. See Duress, Collusion,
Murders, Exactions, Rapes.

The betraying or surrendering up Forts and Towns to the Enemy, through
cowardice or corruption, in Foreign parts, examined and censured in Parliament,
See Forts, Treason.

Errors upon Judgments in Civil and Criminal causes given in the Kings Bench
brought in Parliament, and the proceedings therein; see Error.

Lands, Rents given to particular Corporations, Colleges, Persons, Chauntries,
Obits, and Queens Jointures confirmed in and by Parliament: See Confirmation,
Chauntries, Obits, Queens, Corporation, Charters.

Princes of Wales, Dukes, Dutchesses, Earls, Marquesses created in, and their
Charters confirmed in Parliament; see these Titles. Precedence of Lords there
decided, see Lords, Precedence.

Denizens endenized, and persons naturalized in and by Parliament; see Denizens.

A Feme-covert made capable to sue and be sued; An Infant declared to be of
full age; and persons attainted of Treason either in or out of Parliament,
restored in blood and lands in and by Parliament: see those Titles, and
Restitution.

Difficult cases in Law which cannot be decided or resolved by the Judges, to
be adjourned into and resolved by Parliament, p 30, 63, 163, 560, 38, 39.

Judgments given without legal process, hearing, trial, or without just cause,
through malice, faction, power in one Parliament, commonly complained against,
nulled, reversed in another, p 6, 7, 8, 65, 86, 1^0, 151, 152, 158, 177, 304,
339, 340, 372, 373, 386, 387, 388, 393, 394, 408, 672, 678. see Restitution.

Whole Parliaments and their Acts reversed, nulled as illegal by succeeding
Parliaments; especially when packed, held by power, faction, unduly elected,
nominated by the Kings Letters, not chosen by the peoples free Votes; and when
they have prescribed new kinds of Oath, Acts, to perpetuate their Judgments,
Acts, Devices, to bind posterity never to revoke them; or transferred the whole
power in Parliament into the hands of some selected Time-serving Members in the
absence of the rest, p 38.371.390.665.704. See 34 H: 6. cap. 1^ 17 E. 4. cap.
7. 15 E. 3. stat. 2:

Means to expedite businesses in Parliament, p 303.

Judgments given in Parliament in cases of Treason, Impeachments for several
crimes, slanders of Peers, breaches of privileges, Error, and the like, by the
King and Lords jointly, or Lords alone both upon Peers and Commons, as sole
Judges in Parliament, without the Commons; together with Capital censures of
beheading, hanging, drawing, quartering, imprisonment, banishment, fine and
forfeiture both of lands, goods, offices, inflicted upon offenders by the King
and Lords alone as sole Judges in Parliament, p
6.7.8.85.86.106.107.121.122.123.157.158.176.177.
190.292.293.294.304.316.330.338.342.343.353.363.368.373.376.377.378.379.380.392.394^ 399.400.401.407.417.430.539.560.578.610.643.644.665.666^ 667.

Goods seized for a Contempt in not appearing in Parliament upon summons to
answer a Complaint, p 123.

Persons attainted of Treason, Felony, are to be censured by order of
Parliament^ if they shall not appear and render themselves in Parliament upon
proclamation by a set day, p 6.7.66.353.354.361. 433^ 618.619.623.641.643.646.
699.612.

The Statute of such as make affrayes on Lords or Knights. p

Examinations taken by and before the King and Lords in Parliament of
Witnesses, (and of Lawyers Common, Civil, Canon, and Doctors of Divinity in the
case of Sanctuary) upon oath, p 138.157.158.176.299.372. See Oath.

Sundry Oaths presc^ibed and taken in Parliament by the Lords and Commons,
Privy Counselors, Great Officers of State, Justices, Barons and others. See
Oath.

King R. 2. after the resignation of his Crown, articled against, deposed,
adjudged to perpetual prison in Parliament for his misgovernment; The Articles,
proceedings against him at large recited, and secrecy required, that none
should disclose any thing spoken in that Debate, p 384.385.386.387.388.399.
390.391.

King Henry the Sixth, with his Queen, and Son the Prince of Wales, attainted
in Parliament of High Treason, deprived of the Inheritance of the Crown, etc. p
664. to 676.

King Edward the fourth, his Issue bastardized, and the Crown settled by
election, and descent on R 3. by his power and policy in Parliament in the name
of the three Estates. The Instrument and Act at large for that purpose, p 710.
to 714^

King Henry the fourth declared by Parliament, an Intruder, Usurper, Murderer
of R. 2. the Heirs of his body wholly disinherited of the Crown, and all their
Inheritance and Estates within the Realm, p 670.

K. Edward the fourth discharged of his agreement with Henry the sixth, to
enjoy the Crown during his life, and declared actual King, and right heir to
the Crown from a day certain, by Parliament, p 670.

So King Richard the Third, after him, declared undoubted and only Heir to the
Crown by the Law of God and Nature, p 710. to 714.

But these were Notes above Ela, and acted rather by the Law of the longest
Sword, then of the Parliament or Kingdoms^

Protectors and defenders of the Realm appointed, and their power limited,
declared by the Parliament. See Protector.

References of Petitions and matters complained of in Parliament to the King,
himself the Council, Chancellor, Chancery, Treasurer. See those Titles.

Of matters triable at the Common Law to the Justices, Courts of Law, and a
Legal Trial, p 48, 138, 171, 184, 197, 300, 310.624, 670, 693.

The Judges consulted with in Parliament in matters of Law and Privileges;
their answers and advice therein. p 651. See Justices of the Bench.

All weighty matters moved in it touching the Peers ought not to be discussed,
judged, determined, by the Civil or Common Laws used in other Courts, but by
the Court of Parliament, p 321.

The Judges ought not to judge of the Parliaments privileges, which is Judge
of the Law and them, p 651.

Privilege of Members of Parliament or their Servants from Arrests and
Executions, holds in all cases except Treason, Felony and breach of the Peace,
in which cases they may be arrested or forced to put in Sureties for the Peace
in Chancery, p. 12, 14, 299, 354, 548, 571, 578, 596, 605, 606, 611, 654, 664.

Knights, Burgesses of Parliament, and their Servants taken and imprisoned upon
Execution during the Parliament, released out of prison to attend the House,
but to be taken again in execution after the Parliament ended, p 433, 596, 651,
665, 701, 704.

Thomas Thorpe taken in Execution during the prorogation of the Parliament,
adjudged not to have his privilege, but to remain in execution, and a new
Speaker thereupon chosen in his place, p 651. An Act that such who make affrays
on Lords or Knights of Parliament shall pay double damages, p 433. ( Cheddars
case) 612, 632, 644.

Talboys committed to the Tower for a year without Bail or Mainprise, for
offering to slay the Lord Cromwell in Parliament time, and to answer the same
besides, p. ^44. The King and Lords, Judges of the breaches of the Privileges,
Elections of the Commons House, p 651. See Commons, Lords. Elections of Knights.

Their Members not to be Assessors or Collectors of Subsidies, granted of grace
by the King, not their privilege, See Collectors.

Public matters in Parliament, to be preferred, dispatched before private, p
31.169.300.303.

Consideration of things taken till the Writs returnable in, and referred to
the next Parliament, p
32.34.38.39.53.126.128.131.157.169.172.335.339.347.348.424.450.466.467.48^.483.

Reports of matters referred, made to the Parliament, p
137.152.184.197.483.651.652.670.

Messengers and Letters sent from the King to the Parliament, p 46.47.638.

Letters of the King, Lords, Commons, under the Great Seal, the Lords, Commons
Seals to the Pope against his Innovations and Provisions, p 129. see Provisors.
Pope. A Clerk sent for to inform them of their abuses more fully, p 119.130.

Judgments against persons in Parliament not to be pardoned or repealed: See
Pardon, and p 323.369^ 371.372.

Judgments in cases of Treason, Blood, reversed in Parliament, because the
Prelates not present at them; whereupon they make a Lay-Proxy to represent them
in such cases, p 368.

Remedy given by Parliament in cases remediless at Law, p 539.540.545. See
Misprision.

The Jurisdictions and Exorbitances of the A^miral, Constable, Marshals, Clergy
of England, and their Courts, limited, regulated by Parliament: See these
Titles.

The Right and Title of Freeholds examined, and in some sort determined and
settled in Parliament, p 137.184.106.107.200.201.282.430.474.610.695. 696.713.

None may be examined in it against his will touching his Freehold, p. 604.

A Di^^ress created by it to a stranger for Rents to pious and charitable uses;
see Distress.

Voidable or void Exchanges of Lands with the King, Infants, and others, by
husbands and their wives of the wives inheritance, confirmed by Parliament; see
Confirmation, Baron and Feme, Exchange, Infant.

Monks and Spiritual persons cannot be tried by Parliament, p 49.

Matters of Parliament are to be engrossed in the Roll by the Clerk of the
Parliament, p 406.

Some of the Commons to be present at the engrossing thereof, petitioned for,
granted, p 456.

The Commons suggestion that the time of the moderation of provisors granted
the last Parliament to the King was misentred; examined by the Lords, and
resolved to be duly done, p 408.

Accounts of Subsidies, Treasurers of Wars, and the Kings Exchange, taken in
Parliament; see Accounts, Commons, Exchange.

The Articles and Arraignment of the Archbishop of Canterbury brought into
Parliament and Council, p 38. The proceedings against the Earl of Ormond in the
Marshals Court nulled by Order of Parliament; see Marshal.

The several Debates of the Lords and Commons in Parliament touching the Realm,
not to be disclosed to the King before a determination of them, and that by the
Speaker, p 465.

The high esteem the people of England h^ve of the resolution and authority of
Parliament, p 713, 714.

Petitions in Parliament to be last answered, and Aids granted before Pardons;
see Petitions, Pardons, Aids.

Parliament dissolved by the Kings resignation and deposing, p 384. by his
death; and therefore nothing done, no wages due, p 536.

The manner of ending, dissolving of Parliaments; with the Kings thanks to
them, and granting Writs for wages thereupon, p 12.14 101.103
110.151.156.112.117.340.346.318.326.335.340.374.409.410.444.362.481.664.

See Commons, Lords, King, Justices of Bench, Chancellor, Council, Admiral,
Officers, Petitions, Statutes, Taxes, Tunnage, Poundage, Quindesms, Merchants,
touching Parliaments.

Partition, where to be made between parceners and others claiming by descent
or purchase from them; see Parceners. Passage free for Woolls prayed, p 70. See
VVoolls, Staple. Of Boats in Rivers, p 679. Patents, none to be made contrary
to the Staple, p 117.

Of Lands found by Inquest of Office, not till the Kings title be fully
disclosed, p. 285. see Inquest.

Express mention to be made in them, p 394, 406, 444.

None to be granted within one year after the Office found, prayed, p 421.

An Act concerning Warrant for them, p 624.

An Act concerning Patents to Ostlers and Brewers, p 644.

An Act touching Patents, p 673^

To Searchers p 700. Patents revoked, p 439, 453, 539. See Charter, Information.

Patents for assurance of Debts, p 569. Patent-makers, three Acts concerning
them, p 552, 679. Patrons disinherited by the Popes provisions, Usurpations on
them, p 61, 64^ See Provisions. Learn Simony from the Pope, and sell their
Benefices to Beasts, p 129. That they may present for Nonresidence, moved, p
585. Payment, present and ready to be made by Purveyors for what they take, p
10, 18, 48, 55, 57, 61, 63, 80, 87, 112, 118, 136, 137, 288, 424, 455, 471,
447, 686. An Act touching days of payment to be given by English Merchants, p
600. Peace the preservation of it, and preventing its disturbance, one chief
cause of calling Parliaments, p
11.17.23.25.27.51.54.78.88.92.154.158.173.174.182.188.195.197.281.287.298.314.322.323.328.329.341.351.415.437.548.562.587.598.607.618.

Injoined to be kept, and made between Members of Parliament and others, p.
7.9.12.74.286.405.573. 578, 579, 583, 584, 602, 603, 607, 656.

Surety of the peace demanded against the Chancellor, Dukes, Lords, Members of
Parliament, others in Parliament, and there granted against them p 293, 548
571, 578, 605, 606, 611, 654.

The Lady Beauchamp bound by Recognizance and sureties of Peace in the Chancery
in 4000 l. for breach whereof she paid 1000 l. being mitigated on her petition
in Parliament, p 605, 606, 611, See p 558.

Breakers of Peace to be arrested, p 14.76, 552.

The privilege of Parliament holds not in breach of Peace, but that the
Members may be arrested for it, till they give Sureties; see Parliament,
Justices of Peace.

Peace at home, a good opportunity to assay Enemies abroad, p 538.

The King advised to make any reasonable peace with the Enemy, p 24. See
League, Parliament.

John Peache his Impeachment, Imprisonment, for a Monopoly of Sweet Wines, p
122, 123. Pecuniary pains inflicted by Ordinaries complained against as
illegal, p 32, 33, 164, 576. Peers, See Lords, Chancellor, and Treasurer to be
Peers, p 39. Henry Piercy his Rebellion, order to be taken in Parliament
concerning it, p 425, 427.

His Impeachment of High Treason, for levying War, p 426. See Table.

Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, p 663.

Priory of Pembroke, p 610.

Pensions of Churches where a suit lies for them in the spiritual Court, where
not, and prohibitions granted therein, p 50, 139, 151^ Pepper, enacted to be
sold at twenty pence the pound, p 482^ Perambulations of Forests to be new
made and kept, p 71, 147, 160. See Forests. Perjury, too many forsworn within
the Realm already, and therefore no need of other swearing, p 33.

Breach of Oath In a Judge by Bribery p 74. Charged against the Chancellor,
Ibid:

Charged against Judge Thorpe 74, 315, 316: against R 2. when deposed, p 386,
387. See Oath.

Peter pence to be paid to Rome, the Collectors of it, p 129, 162, 168.
Petitions in Parliament. See Parliament. For a Procedendo p 30, 65. To reverse
judgments and Attainders, and for restitution to goods, blood, lands, p 7, 8.
See Parliament, Restitution: To be granted, answered, before the Parliament
ended; and those not answered, referred to the Council to be answered after it,
p 69, 70, 71, 74, 76, 111, 112, 116, 117, 146, 169, 295, 471, 700. See Council.
Petition of any single person against Law, and the common good, to be rejected,
p 66.

Certain Orders to receive and Answer Petitions on set days, and no other
times, prescribed to the Privy Council, p 457.

Petitions of the Commons in Parliament to be last answered, after Subsidies
granted, see Taxes p 406.

The Commons petitioners, not judges, in Parliament, p 392.

Piepowder Courts, p 703. Pinnaces for the Governor of Southampton, p 20.
Piracy, pardon of it, prayed, p 148^ see Reprisals.

That Justices of peace might inquire of it prayed, p 595.

Plague and Pestilence, Parliaments adjourned, prorogued to some other place
and time by reason thereof, p 73, 607, 608, 638, 640.

Kissing the King in doing homage dispensed with, by reason of the plague, p
625.

Leases for life made during it by Tenants in chief without License of
Alienation prayed to continue good in Law, p 96.

Commons disabled ^arge^y to supply the King, by Plague, War, and Murrain, p.
176.

Alice Per^ers (or Pierce) Her Impeachment, banishment^ Petition restitution,
p. 123, 152, 158, 177, 304, 375, 534. Plate to be received into the Mint by
weight^ p. 81. See Goldsmiths. Money. Plea, new entered, p. 296. In bar, upon a
Recognisance and Scire fac. that he was sick, or imprisoned, p. 558. Pleadings
to be in English, p. 94. Plimouth^ its Petition to be incorporated, p. 482.
Their Petition referred to the Councils order, p. 622. Liberties granted, and
confirmed to it by Charter and Parliament, p. 624. An Act against the Exactions
of Searchers there, p. 644. A Confirmation to the Mayor and Commonalty thereof
of Liberties, under a Fee farm rent to the Prior, p. 678. Pluralities: the
Kings will write to the Pope to stay the grant of them, if Ordinaries do it
not, p. 460. Complai^ned against: See Cardinals, Provisors Pope. Poisoning of
the Duchess of Clarence^ the Judgment and process on it repealed p. 703.
Poll-mony granted by Parliament, on Denizens and Aliens, p. 145, 168, 189. 62^,
6^8^ 649. Pool^ made a Port-town; The Mayor to wa^^ it, and take Recognizances,
p. 610 611.

Sir Mich. de la Pool, his accusation and acquittal from bribery, p. 299, 300.
His impeachment and censure, p. 315, 316.

Poor people to have writs for Gods sake, p. 60. To be aided in their
Fif^teenths, Tenths, Fee farms, for which Lincoln, Melcomb, Lyme, and other
places pray relief and abatement by reason of their poverty, losses, which are
examined by Commission, and they eased thereupon, p. 74, 421, 467, 468, 568^
598, 398. See Quindism. Fines of Laborers to be distributed among Poor Towns
only, not the poor of the whole County^ p. 74, 86, 159. Halfpence and
Farthings of silver to be coined for their use, p. 97. Prisoners of war unable
to ransom themselves, pray the King to do it, p. 131. The Poor Merchants
complain of sundry Oppressions by the rich, p. 58, 61. So the Poor of Yarmouth
by the rich there, p. 136. Pope, Letters of Complaint against his Innovations,
Usurpations, Provisions sent by the King, Lords, Commons to him, under their
Seals, p. 64, 65, 69, 129, 130, 460. Large, bitter Complaints in Parliament
against his Usurpations, Extortions, Provision, First Fruits, Taxes, Simony,
etc. the Acts, remedies against them, and his Collectors, Usurers, Brokers,
Suits in the Court of Rome for Benefices; conveying the Treasure out of the
Realm, all subjected to a Praemunire, banishment and perpetual Imprisonment, p.
41, 42, 45, 49, 50, 51, 61, 64, 65, 74, 76, 80, 81, 82, 100, 102, 103, 109,
119, 128, 129, 130, 145, 147, 149, 151, 161, 180, 182, 186, 200, 294, 295, 316,
324, 330, 333, 334, 341, 346, 354, 387, 407, 408, 409, 418, 444^ 458, 460, 461,
467, 468, 536, 547, 574, 603, 623, 551, 560, 565, 588, 593. Pope sends
Cardinals to treat a Peace between England and France, advised with and
Ambassadors sent to him about it, p. 14, 37, 90, 190, 43, 82. The Statute of
Provisors moderated, to eschew debates with the Pope, p. 346. Treated with as a
Friend, not a Judge in the Peace with France, p. 37. The war with France not
to be stayed by any Letters or requests from him, p. 43. The Commons protest in
Parl. they neither would nor could any longer bear his strange Oppressions,
Provisions, desiring the King and Lords to redress them, or else to help them
to expel his power out of the Realm by force, p. 41, 61, 74. He intends to
cite the King to Rome for his Homage and Tribute for England and Ireland, which
King John by his Homage and Charter subjected to him^ The whole Parl. resolve
them to be void, and against his Oath: and that they would with all their power
resist him, and his Citations concerning it, p. 102. The Popes dispensation to
persons professed to inherit Lands, complained of, and nulled, p. 149. His Bull
to exempt the University of Oxford from the Archbishops visitation, set aside
and nulled by the King and Parliament, p. 479, 480, The Archbishops
Protestation against the Popes power to excommunicate any Bishop in England, or
intermeddle in any presentations to Benefices recovered in the Kings Courts; or
translation of Bishoprics against the Kings will; the same being to the
destruction of the Realm of England; always so ^ree, as that it had no earthly
Sovereign, but only subject to God, p. 348. A great Scism in the Church by
having 2. Popes, which the King meaned to redress, p. 415. It is enacted by
reason of the damnable Scism at Rome, that all Bishops elect and other persons
shall be confirmed by the Metropolitan upon the Kings writs without further
excuse or delay p. 545. An Act, that Pope Urban is the true Pope; That the
Livings of all Cardinals and other Rebels to him should be seized into the
Kings hands, and every one under a Praemunire, who should procure any Provision
or Instrument from any Pope but him, p. 179, 180.316. A Crossado granted by the
Pope against the Antipope, and an Army raised under the Bishop of Norwich, to
prosecute his adherents, p. 180, 284, 285, 287, 316. The Popes Notary
commanded, to make a public Instrument, of the Commons agreement, submission
in Parl. to the King and Lords, to make a Peace with France, p. 88. No moneys
to be transported hence to the Pope, p. 49. A Protestation of the Commons, in
relation to the Pope, that in temporal things they owe obedience to none but
the King, p. 147. The Bishops and Clergy of England sworn to the Pope, whence
they make a Protestation in Parliament, that they neither can nor will assent
to any thing, Law or Statute, in derogation or limitation of his power; but
wholly withstand the same, p. 318, 332, 362. The Popes Rights in England
provided to be saved if the French conquer it, p. 47. Sent to by King R. 2. to
^a^ify the Oath for confirmation of, and against the repeal of the Statutes,
Judgments in 21 R. 2. p. 371, 372. For which he is impeached, as a derogation
of the Crown of England (freed from the Pope) and of its Statutes and Laws p.
387. Collectors of Impostrions by the Popes Bulls, to be Traitors, and those
who bring them in, p. 324. The Archbishop cited to Rome, as one who had wrought
against the Pope in this Realm: The Commons pray the King would write to the
Pope to purge him, p. 588. Pope Martin refuses to agree to an incorporation of
Canons and Nuns together in Syon Nunnery, being against the Canons, there
should be two Capacities in one foundation, p. 589. A Cardinal admitted of the
Kings Council with this Protestation, that he might absent himself in all
Affairs and Councils, wherein the Pope or See of Rome were concerned^ p. 593.
See more in Aliens, Cardinals, Provisors, Rome. Por^smouth, its ships, p. 20.
Portugal, Duke of Lanc. his undertaking to enter it, p. 291. The Kings subjects
in it to be succored, p. 281. Posse Comitatus to be raised by the Sheriffs and
Justices of every County to suppress routs and riots, p. 135. Possession no
good title without right, p. 575, 576. See Inquest: and p. 113^ 185. Poultry,
an Act concerning their price p. 97. Powder 32 Tons in 14 E. 3. (before its
pretended invention) p. 24. Sir John Poultney, his gift to Corpus Christi
Chapel and Prisoners in Newgate, p. 599, 622, 623. Prayers for the Kings,
State, etc. to be made by the Clergy, p. 96. Preachers and Priests to instruct
the people, p. 65. The Statute against Preachers revoked, because not assented
to by the Commons, p. 285. Priests wages limited p. 93, 114, 147, 542, 557. An
Act touching their arrests, p. 151. Precedence, of other Earls granted by
Patent, p. 653. Cases of it resolved between Earls in Parliament, p. 638, 698,
574, to 579. Prelates, not to be impeached before the Justices, p. 41.
Praemunire against such as bring in Provisions or Bulls from Rome, p. 147, 161.
See Pope. Against deniers of Disms, to the King, p. 324. None to present,
collate, induct any alien to an Ecclesiastical living, under pain of a
Praemunire, moved, p. 585. Against a Merchant for suing an English Merchant in
the Court of Bruges, being a foreign Jurisdiction, p. 703. Prescription, the
time of it, the King will not alter the Law in it, p. 109, 130 146. That Title
by Prescription to Liberties, may be allowed, as well as by Grants, and in
Pleas before the Marshal, as well as before the Kings Justices, prayed, 146,
147. Presentation, to Churches and dignities obtained by Provision from Rome by
Bishops and Religious persons within 4. Months, p. 44, 45. The King may
present to any Church fallen void in his gift, at any time within 3. years, p.
50. The Ordinary not to refuse the Kings Clerk presented, upon any Judgment
for the King, p. 81. A motion touching Irishmens presentiments to Benefices to
be within the Pardon of E. 3. p. 296. An act touching it, p. 335. That none
presented by the King to any benefice fallen, be received before recovery, p.
396. An act touching the Kings Presentiments in others rights, p. 422.
Presentiments, that they may be made but twice a year in Leets and Wapentakes,
prayed, p. 139. Presidents, to be searched in case of Knights wages, p. 536.
For Irelands Government: See Ireland. Prices Of Wares of Merchants Strangers to
be credited on their Letters and Oaths, p. 80. Of Poultry, p. 97. Of Wines to
be set by the Justices of Assise p. 97, 98. Of Sweet Wines, set by the Mayor of
Londou, p. 121. Of Herring to be set by Commissioners, p. 149. An act touching
the Prices of Staple wares, p. 337, 596. Of Pepper enacted, p. 482. Low Prices
of Wool, Tin, etc. to be considered, how to be advanced, p. 38, 167, 341.
Prince. See Wales. Prisage (or Prizes) of Wine by the Constable of the Tower by
Patent, complained against p. 312. That the King may have only 2. Tun of Wine
of every ship in the name of a Prize, prayed, but the old usage kept, p. 398,
412. Undue taking of Wines by the Kings Butler by way of Prizes, complained of,
with the answer, p. 412. What Prizes of Wine the King ought to have out of
every ship, declared by the Kings Butler: The Citizens of London exempted from,
and fraud therein, p. 476. Prises, or Prizes at Sea, what custom to pay for
wines taken, p. 349. Merchants undertaking the care of the Sea, to enjoy such
Prizes as they take, having due consideration of the Kings Chieftains, p. 452.
Taken upon Suspicion to belong to the Enemy, not to be discharged without
examination, p. 537. An act touchcng Prizes, p. 616. Priors Aliens. See Aliens.
Priority of payment of Debts, Annuities ordered in Parl. p. 554, 623, 672.
Prison, breach of it by one committed for suspicion of Treason, adjudged
Treason, and he execute for it, p. 568. An Act accordingly, p, 572. Pardoned,
p. 692.615. Prisoners, how and by what writs to be delivered by the Justices,
p. 178. An yearly rent to be paid to the Prisoners in Newgate, granted and
confirmed in perpetuity, p. 599. See Imprisonment, Gaols. Prisoners of War:
the King and Council to take order for their Safe Custody, and take Sureties
for their good behavior, p. 52, 454. Great, Dangerous Scots prisoners not to
be delivered upon ransom or faith, desired by the Parl. p. 69, 70, 155. Poor
English unable to ransom themselves, pray the King to ransom them, who
promises it as far as reason would, p. 131. French kept in Nottingh. Castle,
under an Alien, complained of, p. 136. Differences about a Spanish Prisoner,
the party committed to the Tower for refusing to bring him forth, p. 157. That
English Prisoners in Scotland for things since the Truce, may be delivered
without ransom as the Scots are here of custom, prayed, p. 170. Lord Coucy a
Prisoner in Wales his ransom desired, ordered in Parliam: p. 416. Scots
Prisoners presented before the King in Parl: their behavior slattery; desire
they may be entertained according to the course of war; which the King
grants, for that they were taken valiantly in the field: Committed to the
Steward of the Kings House, p. 416, 417. Certain Castles Hostages for the Earl
of Douglas upon his delivery: Other Scots prisoners not to be slightly
delivered, being the flower of Scotland, p. 455. A ransom prayed for a Scottish
Prisoner by him that took him, being delivered by the Kings command, referred
to the King and Council, 460. The French refuse to deliver the English
Prisoners, or ransom them taken at Agincourt battle, p. 550. French prisoners
granted to English ones in France, toward their ransom and exchange, p. 570,
579, 615. Moneys and Rents allowed by the King toward ransoms of English
prisoners of war, p. 579. Arrerages of ransom released to a French Prisoner, p.
584. Order in Parliament for the safe keeping of the Dukes of Orleans and
Burbon, prisoners of war, and a treaty about their ransom, p. 592, 593. Earl of
Somerset Prisoner of war in France, his Petition to stay a suit for lands given
him: which is granted, p. 609, 610. That all French prisoners, as well Hostages
as others, in England, being without the Kings safe conduct, their Keeper, or
Host, may be taken by an Englishman and ransomed at hi^ pleasure the English
being so ser^ved in France, p. 6^2. Privilege of Clerks of the Chancery, p. 45.
Of Exchequer men: See Exchequer. Of Parliament Members. See Parliament.
Privy Seal, and Keeper of it. See Seal. Probate of Wills, complaints against
extortions used in it, with the answers thereunto, and matters concerning it,
p. 15, 32, 33, 61, 127, 164, 178, 536^ 548. Procedendo prayed and granted in
Parl. p. 30, 63, 483. denied, p. 134, 184, 483. Process Legal, due: none to
be imprisoned or answer for his free hold, life, etc. without it, p. 32, 33,
74, 106, 114, 282, 333, 394. Process usual in the execution of Stat. Merchants
to be used, p. 62. Against Accomptants in the Exchequer what, p. 70. upon
Indictments or Appeals p. 80, 595. Against persons complained of in Parliament
to bring them in to answer, etc. p. 7.353, 354. See Parliament. Against men of
Cheshire, p. 396. In an Annuity, Detinue, Covenant, p. 410. See Exchequer,
Exigents. Proclamations; against wearing weapons, and games in places where
Parliaments sit: See Parliament. For the apprehending and appearance of persons
impeached or attainted in Parliament, in their absence, p. 7.553, 554. See
Parliament: For all who have Pardons to repair to guard the Seacoasts, p. 20.
That no persons buy any woolls, before the King be ferved, p. 28. For free
buying of wools, p. 46. Against Popes Bulls and Provisions, p. 64. For true
making of woollen cloth, p. 67. Of the Staple, p. 82. Against transporting corn
or Victuals, p. 97. That all Members may for the present depatt and return the
next, or a set day to hear the causes of Parliament declared, p. 100, 116, 120,
167, 389. For such who had Annuities, fees or Offices of the King to appear
before him and his Council, p. 583. To bring in the Earl of Arundels charter of
Pardon, p. 373. For the Banishment of Aliens and bringing in all their Patents
of Lands and Annuities, p. 453. To bring in all Moneys received by any beyond
the Seas from Enemies or others, except due wages, or else to be taken as
Traitors, p. 292. Of those of Guien, to be Denizens, not Aliens, p. 480. Of
sundry in Rebelling to yield themselves to the Kings Protection by a day, else
to be attainted to Treason; by the Parliament Orders, p. 671, 677. Of Articles
against Liveries, Maintenance, Rebellions, Murders, p. 673. Touching Exchangers
and their Fees, p. 684. To surcease suits in Foreigners Courts, p. 703.
Prohibitions to spiritual Courts, where grantable, where not, in cases of
Tithes, tithe-wood, proceedings for punishment of the Soul, Pensions, etc. with
the Clergies complaints against them, p. 44, 139^ 140, 151, 165, 203, 305, 560,
600, 605. To the Popes Collectors for levying First Fruits of Ecclesiastical
Livings, p. 192, 285. To the Admiralty, p. 356. Profession of Religion, p. 149.
Protections, complaints against them, p. 54, 296, 318 412. Acts concerning
them, p. 81, 163, 333, 410, 586, 460, Prayed for those who remain on the
seacoast by the Kings command; but denied, as being to the Commons apparent
loss, p. 114. For such as go in the Kings wars, by Act, p. 70^. To be void to
such as serve not actually in the wars in deceit of the kings people, p. 114,
118 148. Cum Clausul^ volumus, whereby many are undone, repealed, p. 125^ 412
410. Not to be granted to Religious persons^ Ib. 552. For Petitioners and
^omplainers in Parliament, p. 136, 286. where to be allowed, where not against.
Actions of Londoners, p. 166. To the Lieutenant in Ireland allowed in
Parliament, in error brought against him, while he lay for passage thither, p.
184. Obtained by undue means to be revoked^ p. 412, 552. No Protection to be
allowed against the Prince for Duchy Lands to be recovered, p, 428. An act
against Protections for Ciaclers p. 459. Persons put out of the kings
Protection: See Praemunire. Protectors of the Realm made in and by Parliament,
their Commission, Au^thority, Allowance, p. 564, 568, 589 592^ 562, 658, 658
659. During the kings pleasure, Ibid. The Lords and Commons suborned by the
Duke of Yorks practice, to importune him to take the Protectorship on him, as
imposed against his will, when as he ambitiously desired it^ p. 652, 658.
compared with p. 662. Protectorship Resigned, p. 592. Revoked p. 659.
Protestations, of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishops and Clergy in
Parliament: See Archbishop, Clergy: Of the Commons, Lords, King, Speakers, in
Parliament. See all these Titles, and Parliament. Against a Debt by the
Archbishop, p. 429. Prothonotaries, p. 475. Provisions from Rome, complaints
acts against them. See Pope, Praemunire. The King empowered by Parliament, and
entrusted with the advice of his Council^ to moderate and dispense with, but
not repeal the Statutes against Provisions, with certain limitations cautions,
to eschew debate with the Pope p. 342, 347 36^, 393, 406 407, 408, 412.
Whereupon certain Provisions of Bishoprics and Benefices by the Pope were here
made; till the Statutes against them were re^confirmed to prevent the new
mischief, p. 246, 354, 387, 407, 408, 409, 418, 444, 458, 460, 461, 467, 468,
536, 547, 574, 603, 623.

A Lay Proxy in Parliament for the Clergy, in cases of Treason and blo^d, p.
368. See Clergy, Parl.

Purgation of Clerks delivered to the Ordinary to be more narrowly looked ^oo,
p. 163. Of Lords suspected, by Oath, p. 426. Purveyance to be made only for the
King, Queen, and their children, by good warrant, and ready payment, p. 10, ^6,
57. See Payment. Half of it ^eleased by the King in respect of the Great
dearth, p. 74. Purveyance, Purveyours, Complaints, Petitions, Acts concerning
them, and the gross abuses, excesses of them; in what cases, by what
Commissions, how, where^ upon whom, of what things they are to be made, by the
o^ersight of Constables, and for present pay: p. 10^ 16, 18, 39, 44 47^ 48, 53,
54, 55, 57, 58, 62, 71, 75, 79, 80, 81, 87, 93, 112, 118, 136, 139, 165, 196,
202, 283, 288, 294, 312, 364, 405, 411, 422, 424, 457, 459, 465, 471, 547, 566,
622, 631, 632.
Q
Q^^are Impedit, the plea in it razed, ordered to be new entered, page 296.
Queen: her Dower made, confirmed in and by Parliament, p. 10, 430, 439, 443,
454, 565, 566, 568, 569, 635, 654, 683, 473, 510. Customs assigned to pay the
Queens Debts, by Parl. p. 29. Aliens about the Qu^ remo^ved the Court, banished
by order of Parliament, p. 324, 428, 585. Queen to pay proportionably to the
King^ household expenses, p. 324, 457. Commons recommend the Queens estate and
advancement to the King, who thanks them for it, p. 474, 481. Her Debts to the
King denied to be pardoned, p. 202. Queen Dowager accused of Treason in
Parliament for compassing the Kings death by her Confessior: the Lands and
Goods of her Sureties thereupon seized, p. 557. No man to Contract or marry
with any Queen of England, without the Kings special License, on pain to lose
all his goods and Lands, enacted, p. 589. Queens arrival and Coronation, a
cause of adjourning the Parliament, p. 198, 201. Queens gold when and how to be
levied, though petitioned against, p. 296, 297. Queen returned into France with
her Jewels, p. 404. Queen Katherine makes the king her Son sole Executor, p.
620. Kings Grants to the Queen, excepted from Resumption, p. 439, 471. Queens
Midwife, a provision made for her, p. 693. Quindisms granted, and how to be
levied: often abated to poor Towns in respect of their poverty: who are to
contribute toward them; and how to be rated, collected. See p. 47, 48, 49, 50^
69, 71, 81, 150, 180, 202, 355, 362, 395, 397, 421, 451, 467, 468, 475, 476.
and Taxes.
R.
Ransom of Prisoners of War, p. 131. See Prisoners. Fine and Ransom, p. 590.
See Fine. Rape, Ravishment of women, complained of orders therein, p. 284, 618,
619^ 623, 624. Acts against them, p. 284, 655. Of a Ward, p. 311. Rainham
Manor in Kent, holden of the King in chief, as of Dover Castle, p. 107. Rebels
and Rebellion, A Commission of Array to punish them, p. 25. In Ireland and
Gascoign: A Parliament called how to suppres; them. p. 182. and how to punish
the horrible tumults and Rebellion at home against the King, p. p. 195, 437,
602. Ringleaders in Insurrections, Rebellions excepted out of general Pardons,
p. 201, 203, 282, 284, 412. Such as resisted, slew, executed them without due
process at Law in time of rebellion, pardoned, p. 197. Liberties of Cambridge
seized into the Kings hand for their tumult, rebellion, p. 199, 200. Let into
London, p. 286. The Kings great pains and expense in suppressing them, p. 404.
Power given by Parliament to the Duke of York declared right heir to the
Crown, to ride through all the Realm, and suppress all Rebellions,
Insurrections, p. 667 The Parliament adjourned, because the King was enforced
to go in person to suppress Conspiracies and Rebellions against him, p. 675,
Rebels by proclamation to come in and submit themselves, and deliver up their
Castles by a day, else to be attainted of Treason, p. 671, 672. See Treason,
Jack Cade. Welshmen. Receipt, of a feme Covert in Reversion, p. 30. Of the
remainder in tail, in default or fraud of tenant for life, p. 91, 334. No
tenant to be received to counterplead his own conusance, p. 149. An Act for
receipt of him in reversion, p. 334.572. Recognisance, a Scire facias to issue
on it, p. 56, 606. Of an Infant nulled, p. 103. By duresse, cancelled, p. 107.
For the Peace, page 605, 606, 611. For good behavior, p. 300, 652, 653. An Act
touching Recognizances, p. 334. To others uses to remain to their uses p. 355.
To appear at a day, plea in bar against it, p. 558. Before the Mayor of the
Staple at Calice, p. 604. Error in Parliament upon Judgment given therein in
the K. B. p. 606. upon Bayl taken by Justices of Peace for appearance, p. 682.
Recompense to parties and their Executors in Parl. p. 123. Records searched for
Ireland, p. 10. Averment against a Record where the Plea is mis^entred in
County-Palatins, prayed, p. 62. Chancellor to view the Record of the Popes
Treaty with E. 3. about Provisors, p. 161. Old Records, concerning Prohibitions
and Consultations in cases of Pensions, to be searched by the Justices and to
do thereafter, p. 165. Cancelling and razing sundry Records an Article against
King R. 2. p. 388. Records imbezelled touching the Earl of Arundels
inheritance, to be searched for, and restored, page 395. Justices of Assise by
Act, to deliver all their Records into the Treasury, p. 475. Kings Records to
be searched for presidents for Knights wages^ when nothing was done in
Parliament, p. 536. Intail to be proved in Chancery by matter of Record before
Restitution thereto upon an Attainder, p. 540. All Records of the K. B. and C.
B. in the time of Ed. 3. 3. R. 2. H. 4. and 5. brought into the Treasury at
Westminster, prayed to be brought back into the Benches again, p. 625. Record
of a recovery in Right of Ward imbezelled, but the Copy enrolled, ordered to be
exemplified and taken for the record, page 690. Attorneys to have free search
in Court of the Rolls thereof, which the Clerks are to bring in, p. 306.
Re-entry of the King for non-payment of Rent, except of Corporations,
Fee-farms, p. 407. Regrators, remedy prayed against them, page 97. To be
attached by the Chancellor and Scholars of Cambridge, p. 304. Relation, a
recovery in Debt and Trespass, prayed to extend to land, the day of the Writ
purchased as to execution; which could not be but by a new Law, p. 53. Releases
by Duresse avoided, p. 8. 199, 200, 551. Subsidy released by the King, p. 168.
Of an heir restored by Parliament upon request to the Kings Feoffees, p. 373.
Released of K. R. 2. not under the great Seal, made void, p. 397. A Release
ordered to be pleaded in bar, p. 417. Release of one Coparcenor binds the
other, and no Account lies for it, p. 419. Release of Dower, p. 431. Of the
King by his Letters Patents to a tenant for life, and his heirs of Lands, p.
540, 541. Of Customs of certain Wines by the King, p. 552. Religious Houses,
violations of their privileges, p. 32. Remembrancer of the Exchequer, his
office by Act, p. 204. Rent-charges, remedy against them prayed, when granted
by Feoffees in trust against the will of the Feoffers, p. 424. Reprisals, and
Letters of Mart, Merchants of Brabant arrested by English Merchants for wools
taken up for the Duke of Brabant, who are to abide the Councils order therein,
p. 11. Remedy and restitution prayed by English Merchants against Spanish
Galleys, who boarded and took their ships and goods after the truce: wherein
the King promises to do his best, p. 132. Merchants of Bristol and other
places arrested for the Debts and Trespasses of other English, with whom they
have no acquaintance or dealing, at Calice, pray redress, p. 136. Merchants of
York whose wools were arrested by the Lord of Arde in Holland, for a debt
pretended due to him for service from the King of England, refusing to deliver
them upon the Kings Letters or other means, pray license to stay this Lords
ships at Calice, or in England, til they be paid or answered the value; which
the grand Council are to remedy according to reason, p. 137. The Goods of
Strangers attached in England, prayed to be replevied to such Englishmen, as
had their goods spoiled on the Sea during the Truce: which is granted, except
they be Leiges, p. 160. English Merchants to be answered of Scots goods
remaining in England, for their goods taken in Scotland, p. 185. Englishmen
whose goods are arrested in Wales without cause, and not restored within 7.
days after means made for restitution, may take Welshmens goods in England of
such place or Liberty, p. 411. Letters of Mart prayed and granted to an
Englishman against such Frenchm^n as have not the Kings safe conduct, for his
goods taken by the French, i^ they refuse to do him right, p. 476. The Next
Cosins of Welsh Rebels and Rioters prayed to be arrested, until the Malefactors
render themselves, page 483. The London Merchants pray in Parliament a
confirmation of Letters of Mart and Reprisal granted them by the King against
the Merchants of Iean, which is granted; with provision for the safe keeping
and well ordering of the goods, p. 541, 542. An Act touching Letters of Mart,
552. That such Merchants as are robbed by the Britains during the Truce, may
have Letters of Mart^ prayed, and committed to the Council, p. 581. An act
touching restitution of goods taken by the king of Denmark, and Petition, that
all persons who have their goods taken by the Merchants of Hauns, may have
their remedy against those of that Company remaining in London, p. 604. That
such Scots and Britains as shall sue in the Admiralty for restitution of their
goods, be bound to Englishmen for their goods taken, prayed, p. 611. An act
touching the taking of Spanish ships by way of reprisal, p. 625. Letters of
Mart granted to English Merchants upon Petition in Parlia^ment, after the Truce
ended against the Britains who had spoiled them, p. 635. A Petition, that the
goods taken upon the Sea of such as are friends to the Realm may be restored,
p. 441. Rescous of a Prisoner complained of and the Sheriff indemnified, p. 624
695. Residence prayed, and prescribed to those who have Lands and Castles on
the Seacoasts, the Northern Marches^ Ireland^, to the Inhabitants of
Garrisoned Towns, and Marches of Wales in times of War and danger, under a
penalty, p. 18, 20, 22, 26, 187, 283 312, 318, 326, 463, 471, 704. Residence of
Priests on their Benefices prayed, under a forfeiture and penalty, p. 65 556,
420. See Non-residents. Restitution of Lands given to Enemies prayed, p. 137.
Of Merchants goods seized, p. 132, 160, 441. Of Lands and b^oud to persons
attainted of Treason or Felony in or out of Parliament, by Act and Judgment of
Parliament out of Pardon, Grace, or Justice, and the first A^tainder pardoned,
reversed, nulled, page 7.31, 59, 73, 74, 85, 86, 125, 1^7^ 171, 304, 344, 345,
347, 372, 373, 390, 394, 395, 406, 407, 408, 417^ 418, 431, 432, 440, 480, 547,
557, 570, 580, 604 610, 651, 672, 678^ 681, 689, 690, 691, 693, 695, 696^ 698
699 703. Restitution only for life, p. 431, 432. Resumption of Lands, Rents,
Revenues, Customs, Annuities granted, alienated, by and from the Crown at the
Petition of the Commons in Parliament, for their ease from Taxes and that the
King might ^he better live of his own; Acts for that purpose, p. 159, 166,
334.397, 421, 427, 428^ 430, 439, 443, 455, 644, 647^ 650, 654, 659, 664 678^
680, 681, 682^ 693^ 453. Grants to the Queen or Prince by Parliament, by order
of Parliament exempted from Resumption, and some other, p. 439. Returns
dishonest of Bailiffs, complained of, p. 137. Revenge prohibited to persons
pardoned, p. 7. Rewa^ds promised to the apprehen^er, of persons attainted by
Parliament, p. 7. Of service in the apprehending Tray^ors, Rebels, by gif^s of
Lands, p. 8. Judges and other officers to take no Rewards, p. 120, 12^. See
Justices Oaths. Service. Ribalds, to be banished every Town, p. 125. King
Richard 2. to be virtuously educated, during his Minority, p. 175, His Marriage
with An^e the Daughter of Cha^les the Emperor, and great expenses, p. 198. His
Revenues, Expenses surveyed by a special Committee, p. 168. His Protestation of
his liberty to choose his great Officers, Council, at his pleasure, p. 212, 329.
Haxy attainted of Treason for exhibiting a scandalous Bill in Parliament
against his Household and Government, p. 362. Come ^o more full age, meant to
see his people better governed, p. 329. His Protestation to save the
Prerogative of himself and Crown, p. 318. His Coronation Oath renewed and taken
again, p. 326. Entrusted by the Commons to moderate and dispense with the
Statutes of Provisors: p. 342, 347, 362. Statutes appointed for his Household
and Officers, p. 312. Enacted, that he might be as free, and enjoy his
Prerogative, as amply as any of his Progenitors, p. 338^ 342, his abuse of this
Power, p. 387. His new devised Oath ratified by the Pope, his devise to oblige
his Successors to make good his Acts, and put the whole power of Parliament,
into the hands of a special Committee: his Tyrannical Speeches, Actions,
Oppressions^ Misgovernment, drawn up into Articles; for which he was forced to
resign his Crown, then solemnly deposed and adjudged to perpetual close
Imprisonment during his life, p. 369, 371, 372, 374, 384, to 390. His Jewels
and money how disposed, p. 417. His Releases, Grants nulled, resumed: See
Resumption: The Tyrannous Usurpation of H. 4. upon, and heinous murder of him,
at large related, condemned, and his Right to the Crown justified in
Parliament, p. 670. King Richard 3. His blasting of Edw. 4. his Marriage, issue,
Government; and Matchiavilian practice, Bill in Parliament to gain, intail the
Crown to himself and his Posterity, as pressed thereto against his will, by the
election of the 3. Estates, etc. p. 709. to 714. Richmond Earldom forfeited and
granted away for the Earls Treason, p. 338, 391, 392, 424, 540, 653. Riots,
Justices of Peace, Assise to punish them; complaints, proceedings, censures,
Acts against them in Parliaments; sometimes referred thence to the Justices,
Council, Chancellor, special Commissioners, to hear and determine, with matters
touching them, p. 11, 39, 132, 133, 135, 171, 176^ 177 192, 19^, 200, 343, 373,
377, 471, 534, 594, 652, 653, 654, 688, 692, 703. Robberies at Ratcot bridge,
an act concerning them, p. 373. Roberdsmen, acts against them to be executed,
p. 125. Rochesters petition, p. 134. Its Bridge, See Bridges. Rhodes, money
designed for it, p. 312. Rome, Complaints, Acts against suits for Benefices and
other things in the Court of Rome, Provisions, Exactions thereof, p. 49, 50,
51^ 64, 65, 74, 81, 90, 100, 102, 103, 119, 128, 129, 130, 149, 182, 330, 334,
467, 551, 560, 565, 588, 593. See Pope, Provisions. Rye, remedy, defense prayed
for it, against the Enemies sudden invasions, often spoiling and burning it, p,
305.
S.
SAcrilege: such as take any Pax, Coape, Graile, Masse-book, etc. out of a
Church, to be deemed Traitors, burned, and have no Clergy, and all Justices to
inquire of it, prayed, denied p. 684. Safe conduct, an Imposition on wools,
wines, and other Merchandises by grant of the Merchants for Safe conduct of
their ships, complained against, p. 52 53, 54^ 63, 75, 363. Such as undertook
it, to answer the Merchants for their ships taken by the enemies through their
default, p. 63. Safe conduct granted to an Irishman (usually to Ambassadors) to
come to the King and Council, p. 598. An act touching Safe Conducts, p. 618,
619. Salmon, acts for their preservation, increase, and against their taking at
unreasonable times, p. 75, 124^ 3335^ 57. Sanctuary: Flying to Churchyards to
save men's lives, and escapes thence inquired of, p. 137. No Clark to be
arrested in the Churchyard or any other sacred place, granted upon Petition so
as none do keep in the Sanctuary by covin, p. 140. Creditors making Feofments
by covin, and then flying into Sanctuaries, complained against, p. 148. All
flying to Churchyards or other holy places to enjoy their privilege without any
temporal watch or ward, p. 165. An act touching Arrests in Churches and
Churchyards, p. 165. Parsons murdered in the Sanctuary at Westminster in time
of high Ma^^e complained of: and resolved by the Judges, learned in the Law,
Doctors of Divine, Civil, Canon Law, and Parl: that the Privilege of Sanctuary
is not to be allowed in cases of Debt, Account, etc. but only in cases where a
man's life or members are endangered, p. 175, 176. Complaints against the
Sanctuary claimed by the Abbots of Colchester and Abingdon^ referred to the
Co^ncil to take order therein, p. 356. No Sanctuary to be allowe^ to Lollards,
Heretics, Traitors, p. 456. No man of good name to be impeached by any in
Sanctua^y, unless Sureties be bound to make proof thereof, p. 581. A person in
Execution for Debt in the K. B. appealed of Felony by Collusion, and allowed
his Clergy, removed out of the Ordinaries prison and Sanctuary, by a writ of
the Justices to the K. B. till the Debt satisfied, 631. Sacraments and Service
to be administered in Chapels of ease, p. 580. Sandwich, provisions made there
for the Kings Navy, p. 25^ 28. The Staple of wools appointed there, p. 157.
Arrears to the Duke of Somerset to be paid out of the Customs of it, p. 650.
and moneys lent by those of Calice, p. 659. Satisfaction awarded for taking a
French ship in time of Truce, p. 470. To Executors, 123. Scarborough, matters
concerning it, p. 282, 283, 295. Schoolmasters to be placed and removed by the
Parish Priests in London by advice of the Ordinary or Archbishop, p. 635^ 636.
Scholars English to be encouraged, preferred ^o Aliens and other Livings. See
Aliens, English: Dispensed with for non residence, p. 409. See Cambridge,
Oxford. Scire facias, upon Recognisances, Writs of Error in Parliament, and in
other cases, p. 44 56, 113, 157, 163, 168, 176, 300, 301, 331, 343, 348, 352,
353, 363, 369, 408 410, 411^ 428 429 432, 441, 535, 546, 551, 554 458, 612.
Scisms of the Church complained of, p. 408, 415, 545. Schismatics, page 313.
See Heresy, Pope. Scotland, Towns and Garrisons in it fortified and victualled
by the English, p. 20, 21, 25. Englands ancient Patrimony, p. 680, 689. The
Kings Lands in it, p. 25. The Lords and Commons will not ^ssent to any Peace,
that the King thereof should enjoy the Fee of the whole Realm of Scotland
without any Subjection, to the dishinheri^on of the King and his Crown, p. 105.
Statutes against Breakers of Truces extend not to Scotland, p. 595. Receivers
of Petitions for Scotland in Parliament. See Parliament, King of Scots to serve
with 40 men at arms at Carlisle p. 28. King James taken prisoner, sends
Ambassadors to treat his delivery and a Marriage, which the Commons approve,
and desire to be acquainted with, p. 568, 569. Barwick surrendered to him, p.
671. Scots; Parliaments called, aids granted, Arrays, forces raised, and the
North-Marches garrisoned, invasive Wars against them, and means to prevent
their Invasions: p. 13, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28, 91, 92, 145, 182, 188, 281, 283,
287, 298, 303, 329, 337, 342, 351, 360, 390, 401, 415, 425, 534, 553. Scots
Prisoners taken in wars how to be used, secured, when ransomed, and when not
admitted to ransom, p. 52, 69, 70, 170, 416^ 417 455. Victories over them, p.
52 415 416. Their perfidiousness, cruelty slattery, p. 52, 145, 173, 416, 417,
451 656. The French, if they conquered England, would surrender to the Scots
whatever the English had formerly taken from them, p. 47. They invade England,
p. 52. Take Barwick, p. 91. besiege it against the Truce, p. 656. Surrendered to
them, p. 671.

Trea^ies of Peace with them, page 92. 105. 170^ 173, 287, 288^ 291, 337 416,
417, 568, 569, 578, 656. No victuals, armor, wools to be carried into Scotland;
nor any Protection or Passe-port to any Scot, to pass through the Realm, p.
100, 296, 318. Commissions to enquire of Scottish Laborers within the Realm,
repealed, p. 109. All Scottish money to be brought into the Kings Exchequer by a
day, p. 114 127, 177. Acts touching Scottish Silver and Gally halfpence, p.
117, 177, 338, 461. Their Merchants goods here seized to satisfy English
Merchants, whose goods were seized in Scotland, p. 185. Schismatics of
Scotland^ war against them, p. 324. Scottish Hostages charge etc. p. 578, 579.
Scots Sue in the Admiralty for restitution of goods, p. 611. Persons attainted
of Treason for practicing to deliver up Carl^sle, and surrendering Barwick to
the King of Scots, p. 671. Earls of Angus and Athol summoned to English
Parliaments. See Table 2. Lands conquered and recovered by the English in
Scotland, to return to such Scots Lords and their Tennants who continue
faithful, and are sworn subjects to the King of England, p. 418.

Sea; Complaints of its ill guarding and losses by Enemies Pirates, guarding of
it one cause of summoning Parliaments; Admirals, Navi^s, ^axes, Merchants, the
Cinque Ports appointed to guard it, sale conduct of ships, by the Parliaments
advice; the Merchants consulted with, and Impositions of Tonnage, Poundage
granted for that end; all other matters concerning it and the Navy. See page
17, 18, 19, 20 27, 29, 48, 53, 63, 64, 1^0, 170, 171, 177, 179, 188, 190, 191,
194, 201 281, 283, 284, 288, 291, 294, 295, 309, 312, 321, 322, 337, 426, 452,
453, 455, 462, 463, 464, 465, 471, 478, 5^4, 618, 646, 651, 652, 656, 657. The
Cinque ports and Haven Towns have privileges, and are bound to guard it, p. 18.
See Admirals, Navy, Ships, Merchants. Sea-coasts^ Parliaments called, and
Orders made for their defense, in times of danger, invasion; all who have lands
there to repair to, and reside on them; and I who have pardons: with other
matters concerning the same, p. 10, 20, 21, 23, 48, 114, 126, 171, 177, 179,
185^ 284. See Kingdom. Sea ma^ks, and Poles to know the increase and decrease
of the Sea, to be set up, p. 109. Seals: Great Seal altered; A new made with
the Style of King of France engraven in it, page 23, 108, 109, 563.
Exemplifications and Commissions under it, p. 23.75.690. See those Titles.
Patents, Charters, Writs, Releases, granted, confirmed under it, p. 109, 119,
166, 397, 615, 663, 683. See those Titles. Justices not to stay to do Justice
for the Great or privy Seal, page 114. See Justice, Justices. A Letter to the
Pope under it, p. 129. Pardons granted under it freely, without paying any
thing, except for Felones, who are to pay the Fees thereof, p. 146, 172.
Manumissions under the Great Seal by Insurrections and Force repealed, page
195, 196. Surrendered up to the King and his Protector by the Chancellor; and
re-delivered to him in Parliament, p. 329 563, 584. An award of the Privy
Council confirmed under the Great Seal, binds not the parties Title at Common
Law, p. 351, 352. No due grants to be slayed at it by the Council, p. 457. Of
Gold, the Chancellor discharged of it, delivered sealed in a bagg, showed
openly in Parliament, then delivered to the New Chancellor; p. 584. Patents
under it, and the Duchy Seal of Duchy lands in Lancaster, p. 630. Queens
Dower assigned, under it, p. 683. See Chancellor Charters, Confirmation. Seal
Privy allowed, Letters, Writs passing under it, and matters concerning it, what
may be done, or not done without it, p. 87, 109, 114, 138, 163, 166, 178, 285,
295, 324, 351, 352, 457, 467, 584, 615, 654. Loans required under it, p. 170.
No man's possession to be disturbed by any writ under it, p. 295. King Hen. 5.
his last Will sealed with the Great and Privy Seal, p. 584. Keeper of the Privy
Seal: Matters referred to him upon Petitions in Parliament p. 97. See
Parliament, and Council. A Privy Counselor, one of the Chief Officers, and to
do all matters be longing to his Office, page 120, 155 183, 317, 329, 563. The
Statutes of the Kings house to be yearly viewed over by him and others, p. 312.
He and the Chancellor to survey and regulate the Chancery, other Courts of
Justice, remove ill Officers, and place others, p. 325. The Commons pray the
King to have consideration of his Service, p. 406. His Patent confirmed by
Parliament, p. 563. Clerk of the Privy Seal, p. 329. Seal of the Duchy of
Lancaster, what leases, and grants are to pass under it, p. 545, 630, 663,
683, 596, 697. Seal of the Duchy of Normandy surrendered by the Chancellor of
it to the Protector, p. 563. Seals of the Chief Justice of the Common Place,
and Chief Justice in Air, p. 75. For Sealing Judicial Writs in K. B. and C. B.
p. 60. Seal for Cloth, with the sealing and fees, page 601, 615, 704. See
Aulnage. Seals of Nobles and Commons of Corporations set to their Letters sent
to the Pope against Provisions. See Pope, and p. 574. Search of Records. See
Records, Ireland. For the King Title, where aid is prayed, p. 184. Searchers,
their Office forseited for letting them to farm, p. 38. Acts concerning them,
p. 356, 396, 424. To be resiant, p. 396, 424. Their decits complained of p.
454. Not to keep any hostery, p. 472. To be appointed by the Councils advice,
p. 564. An act against their Exactions, p. 644.

Seizure of Lands into the Kings hands by Escheators and others, p. 91, 127,
163. See Inquests, Escheators.

Sergeants at Arms, to provide Timber and other necessaries to fortify
Southampton p. 20. Two sent to bring up chief Rioters about the choice of the
Mayor of York to the Council, p. 192. That there may be no more of them then
formerly, and to be expelled for doing otherwise than they should, p. 318. An
act concerning them, p. 333, 355. By Commission bring up the chief rioters to
the Parl. p. 342, 343, The Act concerning the Number and Ability to be
executed, p. 370. To bear Maces of silver, p. 46 Sergeants of Corporations, not
to bear Maces of Silver, but only in London, nor out of their Liberties, p. 46,
355. None to be Victuallers, p. 113. Sergeants at Law, No Commissions of
Extortions to be made but to Sergeants or others learned in the Law, p. 124.
All the Justices and Kings Sergeants charged in full Parl. to say their
knowledge in a point of Law touching a feoffment made by K. E. 3. whether
conditional or no, p. 169. Called to hear the Causes of Parl. p. 188. 2.
Justices, 2. Sergeants, and 4. Apprentices of the Law to be sworn to declare
all delays and defects of the law that they may be remedied, p. 197. The
Chancellor accused in Parl. for not doing Justice, avoucheth the Justices and
Sergeants that were at the hearing of the cause; who acquit him, p. 299, 300.
That Kings Sergeants have sufficent power to record Attorneys in every Court,
prayed p. 547. Six Apprentices of the Law appointed to be Sergeants and
refusing the same, are charged in Parl. by the Warden of England to take it
upon them; which thereupon they did, p. 553. Kings Sergeant to take no Money for
poor men's Bills and Answers to them, p. 568. Order taken for payment of the
Kings Sergeants fees and wages at the Commons petition, by the Clerk of the
Hanaper, and Mayor of the Staple, p. 603, 623, 695. The Kings Sergeants called
by the Lords, to answer the Duke of Yorks claim to the Crown in Parl. utterly
refused it, p. 665, 666. Serk Island: p. 339. Servants: an Act touching the
spoiling of their Masters Goods: p. 660. Kings old Servants to be preferred.
See King. Service good rewarded: p. 8, 24, ^41, 454, 455. See Rewards.
Sessions: where, when and how to be kept by Justices of Assize and Peace: p.
146, 171, 172, 179, 284, 615. Severn Complaint against Nusances, Obstuctions in
it; Orders, Acts for their redress: free passage of Boats in it; and Exactions
demanded for passage of Wares: p. 150, 179, 412, 482, 483, 591, 600, 679. See
Extortions. Sewers: See Commissions. Sheep: p. 80, 96, 136, 581. Sheriffs to be
able and responsible men: p. 15, 48, 57, 71, 79, 113, 419. By whom to be
nominated and chosen: p. 41, 564, 15, 127. To continue in their Offices but a
year, and yearly removed: p. 15, 41, 48, 57, 88, 91, 113, 126, 127, 294, 301,
305, 306, 338, 361, 387, 664. Made by Writ during the King's pleasure: p. 24.
Sworn: p. 17, 124. To return I quests of the honestest and nighest: p. 87. To
view all Pannels ere returned; all Under-Sheriffs sworn to it: p. 124 None to
be twice Sheriff; moved: p. 192. Not to be Justices of Peace during their
Office, nor Commissioners in some cases: p. 40, 127, 171, 700. To make
Provision for Garrisons, by Writ: p. 20. To muster men: p. 20. To make payment
of the King's Duties and Purveyances: p. 63, 65, 87. Complaints, and Orders
against their Extortions and Abuses: p. 32, 581, 600, 605, 631. See Exactions.
Fined, imprisoned for a false Return of a Knight of the Shire: p. 429.
Petitions of several Counties for Allowance of Feefarms, and other things
granted away, not leviable upon their accounts in the Exchequer, with Answers,
Pardons, Orders, Allowances therein: p. 80. 109, 112, 134, 138, 170, 178, 179,
191, 192, 149, 161, 163, 165, 202, 203, 301, 311, 318, 324, 333, 338, 344, 348,
356, 358, 395, 410, 4^9, 459, 466, 474, 481, 536, 547, 557, 566, 595. See
Accounts, Exchequer. Sheriffs sworn to return the most able men in the County
in an Assize for Dunster-Castle, and other Manors: p. 460. An Act against
Sheriffs Bribery: p. 585. K. R. 2. impeached for suffering Sheriffs to continue
longer then a year; placing unfitting persons to be Sheriffs; procuring them to
return such Knights of Shires, as he appointed, without due election, and
enforcing them to unusual Oaths, to execute all his Commands under his Great or
Privy Seal or Signet: p. 387. The Duke of Suffolk impeached, amongst other
Articles, for procuring persons of his confederacy to be made Sheriffs, p. 643.
Remedy prayed against such Sheriffs as take bayl of persons indicted in their
Town, as were before bayled by other Sheriffs: p. 119. To raise the power of
the County to suppress all Riots and Routs: p. 135. His return on a Scire Fac.
in Parliament, that a Defendant is not firmed, nor has any Lands within his
Bayliwick: p. 176. Inquiry to be made touching Sheriffs concealments: p. 396.
To make Proclamation in the County, and give fifteen days respite in the
Election of Knights of the Shire: p. 457. An Act concerning them: p. 631. An
Act touching the King's pardon to them: p. 644. An Act touching the naming them
by collusion in Writs of Assize: p. 611. Command to all Sheriffs to obey the
Duke of York as King: p. 667. Inquiry prayed to be made of the profits of all
Counties, and Sheriffs to answer no more: p. 673. An Act touching Indictments
in their Tourns: p. 673. Two Tourns of the Sheriffs of Suffolk granted the Earl
of Arundel, in the Rapes of Chichester and Arundel; of which the Sheriff prays
discharge: p. 133. Indictments of Manslaughter in Sheriffs Tourns^ in
Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmoreland; moved to continue good: p. 162. Such
as are amerced in their Tourns for annoyance, to be received to traverse or try
the Presentment in R. B. before the Amercements levied: p. 461. Commons of
Hereford pray they may not be amerced before the Sheriff in his Tourn; but by
honest persons before the Justices in their Sessions: p. 604. An Act touching
Indictments in their Tourn: p. 612. In all Inquests to return the most honest
and richest neighbors: p. 124. An Act touching the Sheriffs Return: p. 704.
Shooe-makers and Cord wai^ers: Act, and Matters concerning them: p. 358, 359,
375, 419, 679. Shrewsbury: they pray discharge of their Tenths for poverty: p.
468. Ships provided to guard and defend the Seas; their Rendezvouses, Admirals,
wages appointed by Parliament, and where to victual, etc. p. 20, 170, 204, 311,
312. See Navy, Seas defense. Impositions for their safe conduct by Sea: p. 52,
53, 63. See Tonnage and Poundage. Complaint of Ships taken and lost in the
King's service without any recompense, by which the Navy is also destroyed: p.
63. The whole Ship not to be forfeited for a trifle not customed: p. 101.
Complaints of staying Ships for the King's Service long before they serve,
whereby the Owners are forced to keep the Mariners to their undoing: of the
often restraining of Ships, and taking up their Masters and Mariners for the
King's Ships, whereby most of the Ships lie still, and Mariners are forced to
seek new Trades to the decay of the Navy: p. 113. Taking of Ships not to be but
for necessity; allowance for the Tackling of them worn in the King's service,
prayed, though not used before: p. 118, 119. If a man or boy fall out of a Ship
or Vessel in the Sea, it shall be no Deodand; if in the Fresh Water or Port,
the King will show favor: p. 132, 150. Complaint against Obstructions in
Navigable Rivers, that Ships and Boats cannot pass: p. 150. When Merchants had
free disposing of their Ships, one Port-Town had more good Ships, then now had
the whole Realm: p. 155. That the Owners of Ships taken for the King may be
considered, their losses in the same, prayed: p. 172. Complaints of burning and
taking Ships by the Spaniards and other Enemies in Cornwall and elsewhere, by
pressing and taking their Mariners, to the destruction of the Navy: p. 177,
179. An Act touching Shipping: p. 204. Touching lading of Merchandise in
English Ships and Bottoms: p. 283, 346, 398. Enacted, That every Ship taken up
for the King's service shall, toward their apparelling, take for every quarter
2 s. a Tun: p. 311, 312. That every Owner of a Ship serving the King may have
for every Tuns weight, 3 s. 4 d. a quarter for the Ships service: p. 318. So
much prayed toward their apparelling: p. 443. Commissions sent to sundry
Port-Towns to make Boats and Ballengers without assent of Parliament; repealed:
p. 406. Stayers of Ships of strangers by Writ directed to them by the King's
Command, to be indemnified against the Owners of them in any of the King's
Courts; prayed: p. 432. Ships taken upon suspicion they belong to the Enemies,
not to be released without Examination: p. 537. That no Ship be taken for the
King's service by any Patents before they be seen by the Major and Officers of
the Town, and the price of the freight by them made, and ready payment; prayed:
p. 547. Ships sworn to defend the Admiral, and deserting her whereby she is
taken by the Enemy, to contribute to the loss: p. 548, 549. That no Owner of a
Ship may be impeached for any harm done by his to another Ship, in the Sea, or
any Port or Creek, if he were not privy thereto; prayed, but denied: p. 625.
Imprisonment in the Tower for taking a French Ship in time of truce, and
recompense made to the Owner: p. 472. See Navy, Reprisals, Admirals, Merchants.
Walter Sibel excepted out of the general pardon for horrible acts: p. 284. He
opposes the Bill against the Fish-mongers, and is taxed for attempting to let
the Rebels into London: p. 287. Fined, imprisoned for slandering the Earl of
Oxford: p. 304. Silk-women: An Act concerning them, p. 660. Silva Cedua. See
Tithes. Silver: Petitions, Orders, Acts concerning it, and its coining, etc. p.
37, 48, 80, 93, 96, 439, 481, 560. Skins Transportative, p. 645. Slanderers of
Noblemen, sowers of sedition; the censure of such; and publick-purging of some
suspected Nobles from slanders and suspicions in Parliament, by the King and
others, p. 155, 173, 299, 300, 321, 343, 352, 392, 465, 607, 641, 657. Summons
and Severance: p. 40, 41. Soldiers covenanted to serve the King with a certain
number of men in war and peace for an yearly fee: the ancient manner of
entertainment and raising Soldiers, p. 10, 11, 20, 24, 25, 396, 431, 439, 440.

A month^ pay before hand to Soldiers by way of advance, p. 20, 25. Those who
went to the wars had protections. See Protections. Found at the King's Wages,
p. 20, 24, 331, 333. Set out by Arrays, p. 21, 22, 24, 25.

Commissions to find Hoblers and Archers complained against, p. 53. contrary
to Law, p. 60. None to find men at arms, but such as hold by that service,
enacted, p. 79.

Such as feign themselves men at arms or Archers, and cannot prove themselves
such, to be driven to their Occupations, p. 125. Complaint of Soldiers at
Southampton, spoiling the Country, because they were not paid their wages, and
remedy prayed against it, p. 136. The Major and Staplers of Calice upon all
Roads furnished at their own costs without wages one hundred Billmen, and 200
Archers, p. 140. Soldiers broken in the wars exempted from bearing Offices and
serving in Juries, p. 162. Their Children born beyond Sea when they are in the
King's service, Denizens, and not Aliens, p. 38, 39. A Subsidy promised to
furnish 2000 men at arms, and so many Archers which came to 50000 l. p. 182.
Chieftains of Soldiers to recompense the damages done by them whiles they lay
for passage, upon Complaint, p. 185. None to be enforced to go out of their
Counties, but upon sudden coming in of Enemies, p. 420.

Disbursments of moneys for payment of Soldiers, and Soldiers Arears ordered
to be paid, p. 431, 433, 439, 440, 653, 681.

Their good service prayed to be considered, p. 441. The Kings Foreign
Revenues to be employed on the Soldiers there, p. 471. Necessaries to be
bought for the Kings Soldiers within the Realm, and sent to them, p. 557. The
Soldiers Victuals taken in diverse Towns to be paid for, p. 581. The Lord
Talbot served the King two year without wages in France: p. 593. That all such
Soldiers as pass through the Realm may pay for their Victual and Lodging, p.
595. Peril for want of ^aying the Soldiers then at Calice, premonished, p.
618. The Treasurers of England to pay the Soldiers wages there, if the
Customs will not do it, p. 619. An Act touching Soldiers going from their
Captains, and their abating their wages, p. 626. The Soldiers wages at Calice,
ordered how to be paid, p. 638, 656, 681. The Commons grant to find 20000
Archers in the Kings service for half a year, p. 650. And 14000 Archers for one
year, p. 688.

Southampton: Orders in Parliament for its fortifying, victualling,
Garrisoning, defense, p. 20, 25, 28.

The Inhabitants pray the King to take the Town into his own hands, being
unable to pay the Feefarm in regard of the great charge of their
Fortifications; and that he will send men of war thither for its defense, p.
132. They pray remedy against the Extortions of the Lord Nevil, for not paying
the Soldiers, and the spoils done for want of pay, p. 136. That the Normans
may discharge their Merchandise there; prayed: p. 356. The Merchants of Iean,
and other places, may discharge their Merchandise there, p. 393, 418, 629. Upon
their Petition there is 140 l. a year of their Feefarm released for ten years,
and license to purchase Lands to the yearly value of 100 l. p. 542. Pool to
enjoy the like Liberties of a Port as Southampton, p. 610. Payment of a Debt
ordered out of its Customs, p. 659, To be paved, p. 703.

Southwark: how far subject to London, and matters concerning it, p. 161, 369,
460, 132, 146, 147. Spain, Spaniard: matters concerning the peace and wars
between England and them, and their enmity against England, p. 140, 177, 182,
201, 283, 289, 291, 303, 309, 329, 352, 625^ 682. Speaker of the Commons house,
his Election, presentation, protestation, Office. See Commons, Parliament. The
Names of Speakers. See Tables 1. Discharged for sickness, and another chosen,
p. 390, 534, 535, 619, 620, 640. Taken in execution during the Parliaments
prorogation, not allowed his Privilege, and another elected^ p. 649, 650, 651.
During the Parliament, he generally moved the King to pardon such, who, the
last Parliament, were unjustly condemned, and was willed to make special Bills
thereof, which was done: p. 151, 152. He requires confirmation o^ the Commons
Li^erties and Privileges, that they may send for their Bills to the Lords at
any time, to amend them, that his Protestation might be entered: and make
sundry other Reques^s, motions: p. 452, 453, 454, 455, 456, 464 Presents a Bill
against Wide comb, and prays judgment against him: p. 465. The Debates of the
Commoners not to be disclosed to the King before a determination, and that by
the mouth of the Speaker: p. 465. He demands certain knowledge of the Councils
Names, recommends to the King, the Person of the Queen, Prince, and other his
Sons, and prays their advancement: p. 474, 481. R^quireth of the King in the
Commons Name, to know his meaning touching an Article made the last Parliament;
which he thereupon explained: p. 481. Commends in the Commons House, the Duke
of Bedford, beseeching the King he may attend about His Person: p. 608. Speedy
Justice to be done: p 63. Speedy Aid to be granted: p. 174, 188, 291, 470, 478.
Speedy Trial of Felons: p. 581. Spoils and plunders in wars, that every man may
have his action for them: p. 341, 346. Spices to be garbled: p. 626. Spies:
Aliens such: p. 109, 124, 129, 141. Spiritual Court and Jurisdiction, what
things belongs to it, and where a Prohibition or Consultation lie, etc p. 32,
33, 35 40, 81, 139, 140^151, 165, 176, 285 476. See Clergy, Ordinary,
Prohibition, Tithes. Stanneries: The Oppressions of its Officers complained
against, and Charter of Liberties explained: p 142, 149, 150. Staple: Acts,
Ordinances, concerning it: the Major, Officers of it, Staple Wares; and
removing it from one place to another, both in England and beyond the Seas:
with all matters concerning it and Staple wares: p. 16, 41, 52, 70, 81, 82, 85,
86, 87, 88, 91, 94, 101, 110, 111, 117, 118, 122, 125.135, 136, 146, 153, 163,
194, 201, 282, 309, 310, 325, 334, 337, 338, 341, 375, 425, 429, 432, 443, 461,
54^, 555, 566, 570 5^0, 590, 596, 605, 615, 631, 639, 654, 658, 663, 695, 121,
172, 322. Statutes printed in Statute-books, not extant in the Record and
Statute-Rolls: p. 35, 46, 82, 98, 172, 180, 297, 515, 326, 335, 340, 346, 349,
356, 467, 596, 626, 629. Statutes printed contrary to the Record: p. 605.
Statutes printed varying from the Record and Statute-Roll in substance,
omitting some things in it, or adding to it: p. 93, 94, 100^ 106, 110^ 164^ 65,
169, 171, 185, 186, 203, 204, 283, 285, 288, 294, 295, 296, 305, 313, 324, 333,
334, 335, 337, 339, 349, 364, 409, 419, 423, 4^4 444, 461, 466, 476, 472, 542,
546, 552, 605. Statutes printed varying from the Record in Form: p. 79^ 80,
106, 115, 146, 151, 159^ 160, 162, 163, 165, 204, 283, 284, 285, 286, 294, 295,
296, 305, 324, 325, 333, 338, 344, ^45, 355, 356, ^64, ^71, 397, 408, 411, 413,
419, 420, 432, 433, 434, 444, 461, 463, 475, 476, 482, 483, 536, 542, 552, 581,
594, 595, 605. Statutes and Acts of Parliament, how and by whom made. That of
19 E. 3. Stat 2. in the print, concerning the subsidy: sundry Bishops, Lords,
and Commons were appointed to sit daily, till they had reduced the Grant of it
into the F^rm of a Statute^ which being done, it was agreed by the King and the
whole Estates: p. 23. The Petitions and Articles of the Lords and Commons, and
were then made into Statutes, exemplified under the great Seal, and delivered
to the Lords and Commons: p. 34. The Articles that were made in the Parliament
of 15 E. 3. being reasonable, and others agreed in Parliament of 17 E. 3. shall
be made into Statutes by advice of the Justices: p. 38. It is agreed by the
King, Earls, Barons, Justices, and other Wisemen, that the Petitions of the
Commons there mentioned, be made in sufficient Form of Law: p. 45. The Commons
Petition for a Law against Provisions from Rome, and that the same be reduced
into a Statute perpetually to endure, as often has been desired: It seems to
the Council fit to be done, if it please the King by assent of the Great Men to
command the Commons before him in Parliament, to advise him what they think
best to be done; whereupon they declared their advise to ^he King an^ Great Men
by a B^^l: p. 65. The Commons pray the Petitions delivered by them in the last
Parliament, wher^un^o the King and Lords had agreed, may be kept and not
altered by any new colored Bill or Practice. The King by assent of the Lords
made An^wer, That Laws and Proces^ heretofore u^ed, could not be altered
without making a new Statute, which as yet they could not alter, but shortly
would: p 71. The ^ommons pray that their P^ti^ion^ in 50 E. 3 to which the
King's Answer was, The King w^ll^th the same: to be made into Acts; for that
some affirm them to be but Ordinances and not Acts. The Answ^r is, It is in
part done, and the rest the King w^ll do according to reason: p. 159. The
Commons pray that answer re^sonably may be given to all their Petitions; and
that Statutes be thereupon made before the departure of every Parli^ment: Ans.
To such Bills as remedy cannot any ways be had but in Parliament, reasonable
Answer be made before such departure, p. 169. Its enacted that all Judgement^,
Ordinances, Declarations, Establishments of the Parliament of 21 R. 2 shall
continue as Statutes: p. 370. Some Acts mad^ by the King and Lords without the
Commons: p. 354. By the King, Temporal Lord and Commons, without the spiritual
Lords ^u^l assent: p. 589. Judgments of Parliament appertain to the King and
Lords unless of Statutes, grants of su^sidies, or suchlike, wherein they have
their voice and assent: p. 392. A Statu^e made against Preachers revoked,
b^cau^e the Commons assented not to it: p. 285 An O^th not to repeal or consent
to repeal any Acts, Ordinances or Statutes made in Parliament: p. 369, 370,
375, 588. yet they and this Act were repealed soon after: p. 397. Public
Statutes not to be altered upon any private case or petition: p. 76. Obscu^e
Statutes ought to be explained by Parliament: p. 15, 39, 61. Ill reformed, and
good ones made: p. 100. Statutes and Laws formerly-made and in force,
confirmed; Ordered to be kept, executed: p. 15, 32, 33, 34, 39, 51, 57, 71, 74,
87, 92, 96, 106, 114, 155, 169, 317, 338, 344, 354. See Magna Charta. Statutes
repe^^ed: p. 32, 34, 35, 38, 39, 110, 148, 171, 285, 371 660. Statute of
Winchester to be executed, p. 57, 125^ 294 St^tute of Northampton: p. 54, 296
Stat. of West. 2. p. 126. Stat. de Religiosis: p. 344. Articuli Cleri: p. 432.
See Bill, Statute Merchants: matters concerning them: p. 62, 103, 355, 434.
Sterling Castle fortified: p. 21, 24. Steward of the Kings house, Sir Ioh. Lee,
(omitted in the Catalogue of Stewards: 42 E. 3. p. 106, 107. n. 24. The abuse
of his power, in committing many, suing them for things out of the verge,
complain^d against; he censured for it: ibid. Sir Thomas Sercy another
(omitted) 20 R 2. p. 362. n. 23. To make no other Process then in the time of
Ed. 2. and limited by the Statute ther^in pro^ided: p. 74, 128, 432. To hold
his Sessions within three miles of the Kings presen^e, as has been accustomed:
p. 128. To make redres, in the abuse of carriages for the King: p. 135. Inquiry
by him of escapes out of ^hurchyards, complained of: p. 137. Sir Richard le
Scroop, Steward of the Kings house, appointed by the Lords to interrogate,
charge William de Weston and Gominezy for surrendering Foreign Castles to the
enemy: p. 157, 158. To be chosen by the Lords in Parliament during the King's
Minority: p. 159. Such Clergymen as are grieved by Arrest into the Marshalsey,
to complain to him, and they s^all have remedy: p. 164. To be one of the Kings
Council, and his Name made known to the Commons in Parliamen^: p. 183, 387. To
warn the Aliens in the Kings Court, to depart the Realm: p. 324 Earl of
Nottingham made Steward and Marshal of ^he Kings household: p. 363, 364. Those
who do any service at the Coronation to appear before him: p. 389. The Knights
and Burgesses of Parliament called in Chancery by Name before him and the
Chancellor, p. 404, 478. Scots, Prisoners committed to him, p. 417. Sworn to do
nothing against the Common Law, etc. He and the Treasurer have full power to
discharge the Servants and Officers of the Kings House for their misdemeanors,
p. 457. An Act touching him, p. 619. Earl of Devonshire accused and acquitted
of Treason by his Peers, before the Steward of England for the time being. p.
653. See Marshal, p. 34. Stewards of Kings Courts to admit counsel brought
before them, p. 611. Steirs, p. 339, 611. Stocks, p. 159. Strangers not to sell
by retail in Corporations, etc. p. 124, 125, 133, 141. See Aliens. Subpoena's
out of the Chancery and Exchequer, to be controlled and not granted, if matters
determinable at the Common Law p. 548. An Act touching sureties upon such
Writs, p. 619. Subsidies granted after Petitions answered, p. 94, 322, 406. To
be granted before the Pardon or Petitions answered, p. 111, 112, 116, 371, 374,
426. See Taxes. Suggestions, none to be taken or imprisoned for them, p. 79,
422. All Suggestions to be put into Pardons, p. 82. An Act touching them p. 98,
101, 119. None to be called into the Exchequer without Process upon
Suggestions, contrary to the Statute, p. 109. No man to be put out of his
Freehold upon Letter Patents granted by Suggestions, unless the same be found
for the King on inquest, etc. p. 179. Plaintiffs sworn by themselves, and
others of good fame, that their Suggestions are true in all points, p. 191.
None to be kept from Justice by Writ or any other means obtained by Suggestions
from the King, under pain of 20 l. p. 410. None to appear in any Court upon
them; and if any appear and disprove such suggestion, that he recover his
damages, and the Suggestor to be imprisoned and fined, p. 422. Supersedeas to
Commissions of Array and others that are illegal^ and to other proceedings,
granted, p. 46, 48, 53, 38, 45, 412, 433, 460, 465, 651, 704.

William Duke of Suffolk his Protestation, Articles of Impeachment, Answer,
Censure, p. 641, to 645.

Sureties for the Peace. See Peace. For Accountants, p. 23. For the good
behavior in Parliament, p. 10, 11, 163, 294, 300, 342, 442. For Prisoners of
War, p. 52. Upon a Subpoena p 619. Upon Traverses and Inquests of Office, for
Merchants Aliens, and others, p. 52, 113, 162, 171, 172, 167, 185, 311, 331,
337, 362, 379, 412, 581, 652, 653, 625, 557. Surry and Sussex, p. 71, 133.
Surrender, p. 107. Swannymite-Courts to be kept but once a year; and no Freemen
then Officers of the Forest, distrained to attend them, p. 160. Symony of the
Pope and Clergy occasion it in the Lay-Patrons, p. 128, 129. Sym-Monastery
erected, incorporated, endowed, confirmed, p. 573, 586, 589, 603, 664, 678.
T
TAil: the Crown intailed. p. 554, 555, 556, 666, 667, 691, 697. Honors, p.
325. See Earls, Dukes. Lands intailed; where forfeited for Treason; when not,
but restored, because intailed after an Attainder, p. 8, 10, 156, 184, 337,
338, 347, 363, 440, 472, 550, 551, 569, 580, 581, 609, 610, 623. How Tenant in
tail may alien, p. 40. Sir Thomas Talbot adjudged a Traitor, Process against
him, p. 353, 354, 361. Tallies: debts by them allowed, discharge by Tally, and
matters concerning them, p. 93, 443, 540, 546, 581, 701. Tallow: A Petition
that every man might transport it to what place he pleases, denied, p. 625.
Tanners: Petitions, Acts concerning them p. 358, 359, 571. Taverners: No
Major, Bailiff or Sergeant to be a Taverner during their Offices, p. 113. Leets
not to inquire of them, being no Article of them p. 148^ 161. Taunton to be
paved, p. 703. Taxes, Subsidies, Tenths, Aids, Tonnage, Poundage granted to the
King in and by Parliament for public defense against the Enemy: One tenth and
fifteenth toward the wars with Scotland, p. 13, 19. The tenth Shaif Wool and
Lamb granted by the Lords for two years, p. 17. 30000 Sacks of Wool by the
Commons, p. 19. The ninth of Grain, Wool and Lamb for two years, the ninth of
all townsmens goods, a fifteenth of such as dwell in Forests and Wastes, p.
22, 27, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34. 20000 Sacks of Wool let at undervalues to be paid
out of the next years subsidy, p. 27, 28, 29, 34. A subsidy of 40 s. upon every
sack of wool, above the old custom granted, p. 38, 39, 47. A triennial tenth
granted by the Clergy, two fifteens of Counties, and two tenths of Cities
granted by the Commons, p. 43. Two fifteens in two years, p. 47. Three fifteens
in three years upon conditions, p. 69. One fifteen granted, p 79, 81. The
subsidy of wool granted for three years, to be whoolly employed on the wars,
p. 82. Of wool for six years, p. 91. After the Petitions answered, the subsidy
of woolls, woolfells and skins was granted by the Lords and Commons for three
years. p. 94, 96. The subsidy of woolls, viz. 30 ^. 8 d. of every sack of wool,
270 wool-fels, and every last of skins 4 l. above the old custom of 6 s. paid
for every sack of wool, and so much of every twenty dozen of fells, and 13 s. 4
d. of every last of skins granted for ^wo years p. 105. A subsidy granted for
three years of Denizens for every sack of wool 1^0 dozen of fells, 43 s. 4 d.
Of Aliens 53 s. 4 d. a piece. Of every last of skins 4 l. of Aliens 4 l. 6 s. 8
d. above the old customs, p. 109. The like subsidy granted for three years, p.
120, 152. A subsidy of 50000 l. granted to be levied, viz. of every Parish, 1
l. 2 s. 4 d. and the great Parishes to contribute proportionable to the less:
which amounting not to the sum, they grant 5 l. 10 s. of every Parish Church
assessed within the Realm, p. 111^ 112. Two fifteens granted to be paid in two
years with Tonnage and Poundage, p. 117. Poll-money granted p. 145, 146. Two
fifteens and two tenths granted out of Cities and Boroughs, the fifteenth of
all Lands, and tenth of all manner of Goods granted, with the subsidy of wools,
p. 156. A subsidy of wools and Poll-money, p. 168. denied at first but at last
granted, with the subsidy of wools and staple wares with an increase of 13 s. 4
d. on woolls, woolfels, and 26 s. 8 d. on every last of Skins, p. 174, 175,
176. The like granted for a year, and one fifteen and half out of Cities and
Towns by way of loan, p. 183, 191. A subsidy granted on wools, etc. and staple
commodities in sundry proportions, for guarding the Seas, p. 194, 198, 199,
201, 323, 332, 348, 342. For life p. 374. For three years p. 390, 418, 438,
466, 472, 473. For four years. p. 535. For two years, p. 585, 598. For four
years p. 630. For life, p. 649. One fifteen and tenth, p. 282, 288, 299. One
dism and half, and one fifteen and half p. 575. One dism and half, p. 466, 474.
Half a dism and half fifteen p. 604, 630. Two disms, p. 555. 559, 401, 404,
592, 598. 602, 609, 615. 620, 622, 649, 650, 675, 683, 691. 696.

Subsidies granted upon condition, That the Maltot upon wools be revoked, and
this grant not turned into a Custom: p. 17. Upon condition expressed in a pair
of Indentures^ p. 19. Upon condition the King grant the things in their
Petitions contended in the Schedula: and that all things in the Statute wherein
the ninths are granted, be kept; else they think themselves not bound to pay
any thing. If the King grant the things in their Petitions, they will then make
him reasonable answer: p. 32, 33. The conditions exemplified under the
Great-Seal delivered to the Lords and Commons: p. 34. Two fifteens in five
years; if the wars cease, then the last fifteen to cease: p. 47. Three fifteens
granted in three years, so as the subsidies on wool might cease, and the
prisoners of Scotland then taken, be not delivered, and if the wars cease
within three years, that the grant cease: p. 69. Subsidy of woolls granted for
six years, so as no other aid or imposition be laid upon the Commons: p. 91.
Subsidies granted for two years upon condition to cease if the wars cease: p.
117, 299. A subsidy granted on woolls for one year longer, and Pol-money, so as
the King shall ease them of the subsidy on the staple wares, and poundage,
granted: p. 168. The subsidy of woolls, wool-fels and skins granted the King
for a year, upon condition no other subsidy be demanded of the Commons: p. 183.
A subsidy of staple wares granted for four years, to be employed in the wars,
and that the King will do according to the advice of his Council: and if any
Truce be made, the profits of it to be laid up for ease of the Commons: p. 201.
Tonnage and Poundage granted, on condition that the Clergy shall grant the like
for their parts; and all Estates contribute thereto: p. 291, 299. Two
fifteenths granted conditionally, that the moity of the former fifteen granted,
may cease; and so, as if the King go not in Person, or Peace be taken, the last
fifteen to cease: p. 303, 309. No part of the subsidy to be otherwise disposed
then limited: p. 309, 313. Granted upon condition the Lords Appellants may
first be paid the 20000 l. laid out toward their charges: p. 322, 323.
Subsidy on staple wares, etc. upon condition the staple be removed from Calice
into England, and there continue: p. 338. For three years, on condition the
same shall cease, if the Peace be made with France: p. 352. Subsidy. Tonnage,
Tenths, on condition the same should be employed only on the wars, according
to the order taken by the oversight of the Treasurers, p. 438, 464. Upon
condition by the King, That for two years ensuing he will require no other
subsidy or charge of his Subjects: p. 466. Granted, so as express mention b^
made, provided of their own good wills: whereof they gave 20000 l. to the King
to dispose of at his pleasure: p. 474. Tonnage and Poundage; so as the same
should be expressed, to proceed of their own good will, and not of duty: p.
479. For four years upon sundry conditions: p. 535. Upon condition that Aliens
should hardly be looked into: p. 578. To be paid simply notwithstanding any
condition by the Lords common assent: p. 584.

Ninths and tenths not to be paid otherwise then upon conditions, and in the
mane^ they were granted, p. 32, 33. The fifteens in Towns and ancient D^meines
to be levied without increase as in Counties, and according to the accustomed
use p. 48. The fifteens beyond Trent to be employed only on the defense of the
North p. 49. Vexing of Collectors of subsidies, after accounts passed of the
subsidies collected by Barrecters complained of, p. 54.55. Diverse Aids granted
to the King for maintenance of his wars, to the intent they should be wholly
for his profit, yet abused by Merchants, and Farmers of them p. 61, 62. That
the subsidy of woolls for every sack might cease, denied, because granted to
the King for a time yet enduring, p. 75. Subsidy of woolls pardoned, p. 93. The
Kings great thanks given to the whole Estates for their aids, p. 105, 116. See
King. An Account of the aids and subsidies demanded, p. 174, 175. The Commons
pray ease from their importables Taxes to the wars, p. 191.

No impositions on wools, etc. but by Parliament, p. 114, (45 E. 3. c. 4.) 152,
324. Justices, Lawyers, Sergeants, who be in London about their occasions, and
keep not continual residence there, not to contribute to taxes in it, for any
there goods their remaining p. 180. The Commons durst not grant a Tax by reason
of the peoples evils wills, will be advised touching the continuance of the
subsidy on staple wares, wools, etc. p. 198. The custom of woolls interrupted,
intermitted for a season, lest the King should claim it of right and custom, p.
198, 199, 309. Exacting subsidies in times of peace to the peoples oppression,
and wasting the same, an Article against R. 2. p. 387, 388. The Commons to have
an assent in all subsidies, p. 392. An Act for the subsidy of Keirsies p. 395.
The Commons offer their granted subsidies at the Mass, p. 409. Italian
Merchants to pay but four marks subsidy, p. 441, 442. A pardon of 6 s. 4 d. of
every sack of wool, and so proportionably of the staple commodities of the
subsidy, granted p 443. Displeasure between the Lords and Commons about
disclosing the debates of the subsidy sundry times to the King before concluded
of, p 465. The subsidy and custom of Wools etc. came to 150000 l. above
Poundage, Tonnage. Alnage p. 472. Custom of cloth and remnants of cloth p. 472.
The Commons by assent of the Lords, appoint the disms fifteens granted by the
former Parliament should be paid sooner then ^^mitted, p. 545, 595. Merchants
strangers to pay only 43 s. 4 d. subsidy for every sack of wool,
notwithstanding the grant made in 7 H. 5. p. 570 A subsidy of 6 s. 8 d. of
every Parish Church 6 s. 6 d. of every person holding by a Knights fee and for
every 20 Nobles of Land, p. 588. No subsidy to be paid for lambs wool and
scalding, but only poundage p. 595. Of every Knights fee 20 s. and 20 l Lands^
20 s. and so pro rata, p. 598. The King for certain doubts utterly releaseth
the subsidy granted the former Parliament, so as there be no mention made
thereof, p. 605.

Every one that has thy Lands; Annuities, Fee, or Office above ^ive pounds the
year, to pay six pence the pound upon oath, p 615. A Subsidy and poll-money on
Aliens only, p 622.

The fourth part of the Dism and Fifteen paid to the Treasurer of the King^
household, to make ready pay for his purveyance ^ 226. A Subsidy on Lands Free
or Copy, Officers, Annuities from Twenty shillings to Twenty pound^ 6^. the
pound and Twelve pence on every pound above Twenty pounds per annum, p 641:

Devises and Orders for altering the payment of the Subsidy granted the
Parliament before, p 646. A Subsidy on Denizens, Poll-money on Aliens, p 649. A
grant of Twenty thousand Archers for half a year; 7000. of them released, and
the rest, for a sum of money granted, p 650. Loans paid out of Subsidies, p 652.
see Loans^ A Subsidy of 37000 l. granted; the King releaseth 6000 l. of it, the
rest to be levied in manner of a Fifteen, p 675: The Commons grant 14000
Archers to serve at their costs one year; The Lords Spiritual and Temporal by
themselves the Tenth part of one whole years Revenue of their possession, p
688. A Subsidy mis-entred in the Roll aba^ed p (...) The levying of it on some
places respited, p 21, 22, 24, 28. Released, p 605, 654. 675.

Tonnage and Poundage, 21 E 3. It was ordered without the Commons, that for the
keeping of the Realm, and safe conduct of ships, there should be taken upon
every Sack of Wool passing the seas two shillings; upon every Tun of Wine two
shillings; and upon every pound of Merchandise brought into the Realm six
pence, to continue till March then ensuing, which was still continued after:
The Commons pray it may cease; upon which all was laid down but two shillings
upon every Sack of Wool to endure till Easter next, p 52, 53. This was the
original of Tonnage and Poundage. It was ordained by the King, Peers and
Prelates, by the assent of the Merchants, who were slain and robbed on the sea,
That all Woolls which should pass to the Staple should pay Twelve pence upon
every Sack for safe conduct, p 63. This was prayed to cease, but denied, p 75.
which grew soon after to be a Custom called Tonnage and Poundage, ibid. A grant
of (...) pence upon every pound of Merchandise imported or exported, except of
Woolls, Wooll-fells, Skin^ for two years; to be employed in the war^, to cease
if the wars ceased, p 157. The like, p 176, 182, 188. Six pence granted for
every Tun (...) of every Ship, Vessel, Bo^t passing the North-seas, except
Vessels from Flanders to be discharged at London, and Ships l^den with
Staple-wines to Calice, for safe conduct; and they not to be safe conducted
without consideration. Rec^ivers, Controllers, and Leviers of it appointed, p
170, 171. Tonnage, Poundage, and a Subsidy granted for guarding the Seas, p
194. The King has six pence a pound to guard the Sea, and two shillings of
every Tun of Wine, p 283, 288, 291. But six pence on every Tun of Wine granted,
p 332. Prizes of Wines to pay twenty pence for every Tun, and ten pence for
every Pipe, p ^49. For three years six pence for every pound of Merchandise,
and one shilling six pence of every Tun of Wine, p 352. The same for five
years, p 362. Of every Tun of Wine two shillings, and eight pence of every
pound of Merchandise, p 405, 409. For three years three shillings for every Tun
of Wine, and twelve pence of every pound of Merchandise, p 4^8, 438. The same
for two years p 462. For one year of their own good will, not duty, p 479. For
four years upon conditions, p 535. For two years, p 564, 568. For one year, p
578, 584. For two years, p 585, 588. Till the next Parliament only, p 593. For
two years, p 598. For one year, p 602. For two years, p 609.615. For five years
of all Merchants, as well those of Hanns as others, and three shillings Tonnage
of Aliens, p 638. Tonnage and Poundage during the Kings life, p ^49. For three
years to guard the seas, p 650. Tonnage, Poundage, with the Subsidy of Woolls
and Staple commodities granted to Ed. 4. for life, p 676, 700. The King
releaseth the impost of six pence the pound set on every Merchant-stranger, p
602, 603. Tonnage released to Venice Merchants, p 4^0.

Taxes, Impositions, Customs, Exactions, laid or levied on, or exacted from the
Subjects without their common consent in Parliament, by the King, his Council,
Officers, or the Merchants with the Kings and Lords assents without the
Commons, complained against as illegal, and condemned, suppressed as such by
Parliaments, special Acts against them, p
13.17.29.47.48.49.52.53.54.57.58.60.61.63.69.70.75.76.91.101.114.121.122.123.131.132.135.138.151.152.163.164.170.171.294.295.313.324.339.348.358.386.387.388.406.412.474.482.483.546.594.601.619.642.711.713. See Impositions, Subsidies, Commons, Parliament, Customers, Collectors, Accounts, Merchants.

Tenures, and matters concerning them p 59.103.107.112.137.138.330.612.697.
Temporalties of the Provost of Wells restored, p 21. Of the Bishop of
Winchester seized, p 153: Of the Bishop of Durham granted to the use of the
Bishop elect, p 458. Of the Bishopric of London during the vacancie, granted
to the Dean and Chapter of Paul^, rendering One thousand pounds per annum to the
King, p 458. Tese River, p 57. Thames River, Order for removing the
Obstructions, Nusances in it, and matters concerning it, with the Mayor of
London, and others jurisdiction in its custody, and fishing, p 57, 80, 124,
146, 305, 339, 348, 349, 398, 420, 539, 571, 590, 678. Thanksgiving for
Victories, p 105. Thanks given by the King for Aids etc. to the Lords and
Commons, and their Thanks to him; see King, Lords, Commons. Thieves, Robbers,
no Great men to retain or maintain them; see Maintenance. To come to speedy
deliverance, p 170. William Thorpe Chief Justice, his Judgment of death for
Bribery, confirmed by Parliament, p 74, 316. Thrums, Acts concerning them, p
596, 631. Timber to be delivered to fortify Southhampton, p 20.

Purveyors to fell no Timber Trees about any man's house, p 75, 79.

Tin, matters concerning its preemption, monopoly, exportation, p 56, 197, 346,
355, 142. Tinners, The Declaration of their Charter and Liberties, p 142: see
Stanneries. Tithes of Underwood, Silva Cedua, Petitions and Answers concerning
them, and Prohibitions in this case, p 40, 44, 60, 80, 109, 139, 165, 175, 178,
203, 305, 339, 345, 349, 355, 410, 600.605, 652.

A Petition that no Tithe be paid of Sea-coal: It shall be as heretofore, p 149.

Of Slates, Stones dug out of Quarries where Tithes used to be paid, else
no^, p 459, 433. Remedy prayed against persons claiming Tithes of Meadows, or
Wastes newly sown, p 411. Tithes of Meadow recovered in the Arches against the
Tenants of the Abbey of Ramsey Resolved by the Lords and Judges in Parliament.
That no Prohibition may in this case stay the suit, p 560.

Tividale, the Commons of it, Secular, and Religious, pray restitution of their
lands given to the enemies, p 137. Tolls, Iersey and Garnsey exempted from
them, p 339. Tonbridge Castle held of the Archbishop of Canterbury in chief,
and shall not be in Ward to the King, p 363. Tower of London, prisoners
committed to it by Order of the King, Council, Parliament, p 157, 158, 176,
177, 107, 377, 379, 417, 418, 472, 554, 568, 641, 643, 644. The Constable in it
to bring forth thence, and help to execute Traitors, p 6. 107, 177, 377, 379.
Complaints against his taking of Oysters, Wine and other things as prizage
coming by Water. p 312. To help remove the Obstructions in the Thames, p 146.

The Mint and Exchange in it, and Gold to be brought to it, etc. p 362, 481,
551, 565, 684, 685.

King Richard 2. imprisoned, resigneth his Crown in it, etc. p 385, 386, 389,
390.

A complaint for imprisonment in it by Conspiracy, p 398.

Traverse, see Inquests, Officer. Trailebastons, petitions against them, and
for their suspension, p 67, 112, 163^ 284, 342, 347. Traicors, and Treason. The
murder of Edw. 2. after his deposing, Treason, p 6. 7, 8. Endeavoring to
restore him and King Richard the 2. after their deposing, adhering to them,
reputed Treason, p 16, 189, 190, 338, 399, 459, 641, 671 Accroachment of Royal
power. Treason, p 53, 195, 368, 376, 378. Actual In^urrection, and levying War
against the King, Treason, p 369, 376, 378, 381, 383, 407, 426, 647, 654. 661,
662, 663, 671, 672, 699, 700.

Procuring a Commission in parliament, and executing it in derogation of the
Kings Royal power, Treason, p 368, 378. See Commission. Intending to depose the
King, Treason, p 321^ 376, 377, 378, 584. surrendering up Homage and Allegiance
to the King by Peers and Subjects, Treason, p 376, 378.

To compass the Kings death, or attempt, conspire to kill him Treason, p 554,
557. Killing a Foreign Ambassador Treason, p 183. Burning of Houses, Treason p
594. 619. Breaking of prison upon a Commitment for it^ Treason, p 568, 572.
Clipping, washing, coining, and uttering false Money, Treason, p 48. 54, 548^
Exhibiting a scandalous Bill against the King in Parliament, p 362, 378. The
judgment thereof reversed, p 393. See Haxey. To seek to repeal Acts made, or
Judgments given in Parliament, made Treason, p 375, 381. To render the Kings
Castles by Corruption, Treachery, or Cowardice to the Enemies before extremity,
p 157, 158, 292, 293, 294, 642, 671, 677. In keeping a Castle against the King,
and not surrendering it to him upon Proclamation to do i^, p 673, 677. In Rebels
not submitting to the King by a day upon Proclamation, p 6^2, 677.

Murdering the Earl of Kent, Treason, p 6, 7. Of the Duke of Gloucester at
Callis. p 400, 401. Conspiring the death of the Duke of Lancaster, p 353; 354,
361. Conspiring the Duke of Yorks death, after declared right Heir to the
Crown, p 667. For murdering the said Duke, and Attainders for it, p 670.
B^ingers in of Popes Bulls, moved to be Traitors, p 324.

Not to appear upon Proclamations by Parliament upon Impeachments, there made
Treason, p 353^ 354, 369, 379, 618, 619. See Parliament, Proclamation.

Trials, Attainders, judgments of Traitors, and Treasons in and by Parliament,
p 6, 7, 8, 366, 374 to 382, 399, 400.401, 183, 653, 661, 662, 663, 664, 670
671^ 677.

The Lords Judges of and in Treason, p 6, 7, 353, 354, 189, 190, 361, 377, to
382, 407, 426, 427. See Lords, Parliament.

The Lords in Parliament declare and judge what is Treason, what not, p 407,
426, 427.

Treason, by Accroachment of Royal power, prayed to be declared in certain by
Parliament, and not left to the Judges determination, p 53.

Clergy, or Sanctuary not to be allowed therein; see those Titles.

Lords lose the Forfeiture of their Tenants in Treason, p 53.

Trial of it before the High Steward, and Acquital, p 653. Sir Ralph Ferrers
tried and acquitted of it in Parliament by the Lords, p 189, 190. So the Earl
of Northumberland, p 426, 427.

Forfeiture of Lands in Fee, and in Tail (sometimes Estate real, personal)
Wives Dowers, for Treason, p 7.8.41.53.59.374. to
378.127.407.661.662.663.670.671.672.677. See Forfeiture, Dower^

Bishops not to be present in Parliament in cases of Treason, and therefore
appoint a Lay-Proxy, p 322, 368.

Judgments of Treasons reversed in Parliament, and thereupon the Heirs restored
to blood, lands by Parliament, p 7, 8, 339, 340, 344, 345, 393, 394, 408, 472,
676. See Parliament, Restitution.

Treason pardoned for a Fine, p 282, 348, 377, 551. See Pardon.

Judgment of hanging, drawing, quartering^ beheading in Treason, p 6, 7, 377,
378, 401, 568, 158, 81, 424.

Queen Dowager accused of Treason, and her Sureties, Lands, Goods seized
thereupon, p 557. A Pardon reversed, pleaded and insisted on in it; therefore
Judgment given against him that pleaded it, p 377, 378.

Condemnation of Treason in Parli^ment, and Forfeiture of lands, goods after
death, p 378, 381, 647. Treason against K. H. 5. tried, and the Traitor
executed for prison-breach under H. 6. p. 568.

Treason done, beyond seas to be tried before the Constable and Marshal; but
all others at and by the Common Law and Justices, p 171, 567, 568, 594, 595.

An Act touching Inquiries of Treason for Coining, p 548. Nisi Prius not
allowed in it after Issue joined, p 109.

A Peer slandered of Treason by the Commons, requires ^eparation, and is
assoiled by them. Reports to s^e the Nobles at debate, no better then Treason,
p 155. The Statute of 25 E 3: of Treasons explained by the Lords (as Judges) in
Parliament, p 426. Such as rob any Church moved to be declared a Traitor, and
b^rned for it, but rejected, p 684^

Treasure, Complaints^ Acts against its transportation, p 73. 128. 129 se^ Money
Treasure trove, pardon ^ard for it^ p 349. Treasury ^or Records, p 475, 625^
see Records. Treasurers of Wars appointed by Parliament to receive and dispose
of Subsidies, Tonnage and poundage granted^ sworn, called to an Account, which
they give in Parliament; discharged, p
145.146.155.156.167.171.172.174.175.183.184.301.313.317.324.^29.430.454.456.464. Treasurer of England; see the Catalogue of them, Table 1.

Refuses to be sworn, p 34.

One of the Peers and great Officers, 31.39.120.159.329.

One of the Privy Council, p 120.

To appoint Fees for Justices of Peace, p 40.

One to receive the Accounts of Collectors of Woolls and Subsidies, p 33.
Matters referred to him upon petitions in Parliament, p 58.81.150.

One to hear Errors in Judgments in the Exchequer, p 56. To take order to pay
poor Creditors, p 58.75.

To discharge Sheriffs of what they cannot levy, p 80.

To consider of the Compositions offered for Aulnage, p 82. One of the
Governors of Merchants Aliens, p 88. To end all matters belonging to his
office, p 120^ 155^ His private Le^ter not to stay any man's payment by
P^ivy-seal, p 138. To receive the Subsidy granted for the use of the Wars, p
146, 172. To give allow^nce for repairing a Gaol decayed, p 150. To be chosen
by the Lords during the King^ minority, p 159. Declares the Kings want of
moneys, and toxeth the Commons with an ^ntruth, p 174. One to remove the poorer
sort of Justices, p 178. To be a m^st wise and able man, p 197. One to view the
Statu^es of the Kings house yea^ly, and see them duly observed, p ^12. He
resignes (...) his Office and the Key of the Exchequer to the King in
Parliament. Requires any one might freely complain of any thing unduly done by
him; is justified by the Commons, and restored, p 329. He and the Steward have
full power to discharge the Officers of the Kings household for misdemeanors, p
457. To remedy the complaints against Pur^eyors, p 465. To have a key to the
King^ Receipt, and sworn to make none privy to it but the Council, p ^64. 565.
Ordered to stay in his hands 6000 l. to find the Kings house, p 608. Gives a
Particular of the Kings charges and revenues to the Parl^ Warrants come to him
for above two years payment, and what order to take therein, p 609. No Grant to
pass the King without his knowledge, ibid. Authority given him to pay moneys to
partciular persons. p 618. And Soldiers wages at Calice, p 619. The revenues of
the Duchy of Lancaster to be paid to him, p 667, 668. The money of the Tenths
granted by the Lords to be paid to him, p 691.

Treasurer of the Kings household alloted moneys for its expenses, p ^52. Treaty
by Commissioners with the Scots Ambassadors to conclude a Peace, p 569. Of the
English with the French, p 614. Transportation; see Corn, Victuals, Merchants.
Trent River, p 57. Trespass by Clergymen against Purveyors for purveyance on
them, p 165. Trial, of Villenage, and other things, Actions to be in their
proper, not foreign Counties; and matters concerning trials in our Puny Courts,
p. 66, 113, 118, 125, 135, 138, 147, 331, 411, 412, 421, 442, 516, 623, 567,
568. Truces made, approved, confirmed by Parl. matters concerning them, and
acts of hostily done in them, p. 25, 37, 43, 69, 78, 79, 145, 170, 173, 295,
371, 595, 612, 629, 638, 688, 654, 705. Imprisonment for taking a French ship
in time of Truce and Satisfaction given, p. 472. Truce Breakers, an Act for
process against them, p. 648.654, 701. Tumults suppression, p. 195, 197. See
Riots. Tyle, an act concerning it, p. 704. Tyrant Common; the King bound in
conscience to help vanquish him, and Subjects to aid him therein, p. 361.
Tyranny of the Prelates against the Lollards, p. 456. A good decription of it,
and a Tyrant, p. 711, 712.
V.
VAgabonds. See Beggars. Variance of the return and Writ, p. 168. Of the Record
from the Church, recovered in a Quare Impedit, for which it is reversed, p.
393. Venire Facias, p. 97.500. Verdict, p. 71. Verge, p. 106, 107, 128, 160.
See Marshal. Vexations of Accountants and others complained of, p. 54, 59, 106,
107, 128, 160. Vicars, appropriation made without Vicar or Vicaridge, p. 481.
Vicars to be endowed within 6 Months, upon all appropriations, p. 605. The
Appropriation of Vicaridges in Cornwall petitioned against, p. 422. Victories
mentioned, and thanks to God for them, p. 27, 90, 91, 105, 115, 416, 451, 553,
556, 577, 669. Victuals, provided for Garrisons and the Navy, p. 20, 22, 24,
25, 28, 48. See Navy. Victuals, Victua^lers, and matters concerning them, their
transportation, regulation, prices, forestalling, etc. p. 20, 21, 79, 82, 53,
96, 97, 100, 106, 112, 113, 122, 137, 157, 159, 172, 192,, 285, 289, 295, 296,
304, 318, 393 395, 397, 412, 423, 581, 586, 595, 616, 700. Villainies, Villain
Tenure, Villenage, matters concerning them, their trial, manumission, etc. p.
80, 98, 113, 118, 162, 195, 311, 345, 346, 355, 420, 443. Universities, matters
concerning them p. 102, 103, 172, 199, 200, 304, 331, 347, 407, 547. See
Oxford, Cambridge. Unity, Union, Concord ought to be, and endeavored amongst
the Members, Houses of Parl. People, Kingdom, p. 173, 598, 607, 621, 656.
Visue, p. 113. Voucher, p. 30. Vphaven Prior and Prebend, 565. Usurpation of
the Crown by H. 4. p. 670. The whole estate in a manner subverted by
Usurpation, p. 682. Usurers, and Usury; punished by the Justices, p. 32.
Punishable by the Ordinaries in Spiritual Courts, whiles living, p. 33, 35,
433. Every one that is attainted for a Broaker of Usury to forfeit all his
goods, moved, p. 433. The King will have the punishment of dead Usurers, p. 33,
35, 285. Complaint against Lumbards as Maintainers of Usury, p. 124 An Order
made in London against the ho^rible vice of Usury, prayed to be observed
throughout the Realm, p. 135, 339. Remedy against Usury and Usurers, prayed by
Bill, p. 285. Any man grieved by Usury upon account, trespass, extortion, etc.
the Law of the realm shall punish it, p. 285, 286. This horrible vice of Usury
practiced as well by the Clergy as Laity, p. 339.
W.
WAger of Law: In other Courts, but not in the Exchequer; where the King is
party; not in other suits, p. 128. An act concerning it, p. 433. Prayed in all
personal actions, and that thereby the Plaintiff might be Non-sute: but denied,
p. 466. By religious persons, and Non-sute thereupon, p. 605. Wages of Knights.
See Knights of Shires: Of Servants, Laborers, Priests, Mariners, Soldiers,
Archers; regulating their Excesses; Order for due payment thereof; and acts,
motions concerning them. See those Titles, and p. 118, 123, 136, 140, 146, 147,
150, 159, 168, 172, 193, 203, 296, 420, 431, 433, 438, 441, 465, 542, 552, 557,
593, 603, 632, 650. Of Masters of Ships, and from what time to be paid, p. 540,
571. Wales: Prince of Wales; his manner of Creation, Lands, Revenues, and
matters concerning him, as Prince thereof, Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester,
etc. S^e p. 5, 43, 123, 124, 144, 145, 149, 391, 392, 423, 426, 428, 454, 465,
50, 56, 394, 653, 659, 689, 700. See the 1. Table. Not sworn as a Privy
Counselor for his dignity, p. 473. Wales, matters, acts concerning it, and its
Government, p. 87, 136, 345, 397, 405, 415, 416, 421, 423, 424, 439, 440, 454,
459, 467, 471, 556, 557, 623. President of Wales, p. 349. Wales Marches of it,
and Lords Marchers, matters, acts concerning them and their Defense, p. 87, 79,
185, 411, 412, 465, 466, 467, 482, 534, 590. Wapentakes, matters concerning
them, and Attorneys in them. p. 139, 481, 620. War, the subject wasted,
s^oyled, impoverished, undone by it, p. 85, 176, 189, 196, 197, 361. Advised
of, resolved, concluded in and by Parliaments, together with the best means to
manage it when invasive or defensive: An invasive resolved better than
defensive; matters, advise concerning it, both at home and abroad; Aids,
Subsidies granted to be wholly employed on the wars, p. 21, 34, 43, 49, 57, 61,
69, 70, 78, 82, 85, 90, 91, 109, 110, 112, 116, 117, 120, 121, 151, 155, 162,
163, 167, 168, 173, 174, 191, 201, 202, 284, 289, 309, 324, 361, 415, 429, 472,
550, 556, 662, 682, 683, 701. See Parliament^ Kingdoms, Defense, Taxes. Wards,
Wardships, matters concerning them, collusions in them, their grants, to the
next of kin, marriage, Liveries, proof of full age, etc. p. 7.17, 106, 107, 130,
162, 171, 363, 458, 564, 569, 580, 579, 690, 698. A Ward restored to Li^ery of
his Lands, as of full age; adjudged under age by Inspection in Parliament, and
the Land and Wardship reseised, p. 103. See Collusion, Inspection, Livery
Ouster le main. Warden of the Cinqueports, p. 50. See the Catalogue of them,
and their Summons to Parl. Table 1. Warden of the North Marches, p. 14.170. See
Marchers. Warrants for Letters Patents, p. 624. Warranty, p. 126, 428, 432.
Warren Free of the Earl Arundel in Sussex complained against, p. 546, 547.
Wards, Watches, p. 140, 432. Waste to be surveyed, punished, etc. p. 22, 60,
93, 392, 473, 611. Waterbaily of the Thames, p. 334^ 539. Watermen, p 132.
Waxchandlers, p. 612. Wears in navigable rivers to be removed^ p. 97, 124. See
Nusances. Weavers of London, their Petition and Charter, p. 461, 541. Weighers,
and Weighing of wools and other things, p. 325, 335, 406, 419, 564, 600. Weight
Isle, with the Inhabitants of it respited payment of the Aid granted during the
wars, p. 21. The Sheriff of Southampton to muster the Inhabitants, and choose a
keeper of it, till further order, p. 28, deserted by most of the Inhabitants,
through losses by Enemies and Taxes, p. 179. Invaded by the Du. of Orleance,
French, repulsed thence, p. 425. Weights, Petitions, Matters, Acts concerning
them, p. 40, 41, 46, 61, 62, 79, 80, 87, 91, 93, 127, 151, 172, 200, 334, 348,
594, 612. Wells, the temporalties of the Provost restored, p. 21. Welshmen,
their insurrections, rebellions, murders, robberies, felonies, misdemeanors,
distresses complained of, Petitions, Acts, Orders for their suppresston, p.
185, 335, 349, 411, 412, 415, 421, 423, 424, 425, 426, 437, 438, 451, 452, 464^
465, 482, 483, 542, 553, 623, 624, 636, 639, 644. Not to have or keep any
Castles, bear any office in Wales, 405, 423, 631. Not to be made Denizens in
England, p. 631. Removed from the Kings person and Court p. 428. Not to
purchase lands between the river of Severn and Wales, p. 185: To find sureties
for the Peace, and good behavior, p. 285, 412. Their goods to be arres^ed by
Englishmen, whose goods are there wrongfully detained, and not delivered within
7. days after mean^ made, p. 411. No Welshman to go armed, p. 423. No victuals
or armor to be carried to them. p. 423. Not to receive any Malefactor, nor yet
stranger for above one night, unless they will answer for him, p. 423. The next
of kin to bring forth the Offenders, p. 423, 483. Their Forts and Towns to be
stored with Englishmen, p. 424. No English to marry with any of the kin of Owen
Glendor p. 4^4. No Welshmen to be suffered to go ^o Rome, prayed, p 443. Their
fines and ransomes to be employed toward the wars with them, p. 455. To be
deemed Traitors if they yield not themselves and a Castle held by them, p. 672.
Some indenized by special Letters Patents confirmed by Parl. p. 458 461, 535,
541, 589, 624, 599. A Welshman made a Denizen, so as he marry no Welshwoman,
nor bear any Office in Wales, p. 624. The undue acquittal of some Welshmen at
an assizes ordered to be void, p. 700. West Hatch, charged with a Tenth by a
mistake, p. 475. William de Weston his case and Sentence, p. 157, 158. Widows,
Dowagers of the King, where he shall have their forfeiture, p. 87. Must have
licens to Marry, p. 585. And take an Oath not to marry without the Kings
consents, p. 580. See p. 589. Winchester, the Mayor and Commonalties petition
to have their Liberties confirmed, and a Murage granted, p. 132. Their License
to purchase 40 l: a year, p. 475. Winchelsey, the Navy to ride there, p. 20.
Remedy prayed against its spoils, and burning by sudden invasions of the enemy,
p. 305. The Bayliwick of it granted for life, p. 599. Windsor Castle, prayed to
be repaired by the King, p. 426. The Dean and Chapter there, incorporated, p.
594. Wines, acts concerning them, their making, shipping, importation, prizes,
sale, etc. p. 2^, 63, 82, 93, 96, 97, 98, 101, 106, 113, 121, 123, 127, 177,
180, 192, 204, 339, 349, 358, 398, 412, 439, 552, 605, 229, 625, 632. What
Tonnage was granted on them. See Taxes, Tonnage. Whittington College Charter,
confirmed, p. 603. Women, not to maintain or pursue any thing by maintenance in
the Kings Court under pain of banishment, p. 122. Wools, orders, acts,
petitions concerning their Staple, sale, passage, weight prices, Customs,
grant or loan of them to the King, etc. p. 17, 19, 27, 28, 29, 34, 35, 37, 38,
39, 41, 46, 52, 53, 56, 57, 58, 61, 62, 69, 70, 75, 76, 82, 86^ 91, 92, 93, 96,
101, 105, 109, 112^ 114, 118, 120, 121, 122, 150, 152, 168, 170, 194, 197, 198,
294, 335, 337, 341, 356, 406, 443, 481, 482, 557, 585, 595, 596, 599, 600, 615,
625, 655, 676, 679, 700, 701. See Staple, Merchants. The Subsidies, Customs
imposed upon wools from time to time: See Customs, Taxes. Wotton under Edge, a
Qu: Impedit for the Church of it, p. 393. Worcester, an act concerning its Town
and Castle, p. 370. Complaint against Taxes there imposed, upon wares and
victuals passing Severn, p. 412. Worsteds, Acts and motions concerning them and
their ordering, p. 71, 334, 355, 400, 474, 631, 682. See Norwich. Wreck, p.
127. Writs of Summons to Parl. to the Spiritual and Temporal Lords, p. 2, 4, 5.
See Parliament. Of Re-summons to Parl. upon Adjournments or Prorogations, p.
322. For the Wages of Knights and Burgesses, p. 151, 166, 326, 335, 340, 374,
418, 595. See Knights. Writs out of Chancery moved to be granted without fine;
but the King will not part with such a profit, but referr^ it to the Chancellor
to moderate the Fines, p. 15, 60, 75, 80, 87, 88, 101, 112, 149, 203. A writ to
deliver over the body of a Prisoner to Commissioners, p. 28. To be directed to
the Bishop in case of Clerks p. 32. Out of Chancery for purlews, p. 71, 178. Of
Possession, p. 60. See Subpaena, Habeas Corpus.
Y.
YArmouth, a clause in its Charter tending to a Monopoly, revoked; its other
Liberties confirmed, the poor men^ complaint thereof against the rich: The
Controversy between Great and Little Yarmouth, p. 16, 101, 118, 123, 126, 136
137, 180, 191, 203, 317, 443, 468. Yarn, Acts against its exportation, p. 137,
600, 689. York, their Merchants goods seized in Holland for the Kings debts,
and Petition thereupon, p. 137. A riot about electing a Mayor there, an order
for the punishing thereof, removing the Mayor unduly elected, and settling the
other ejected, p. 192. A pardon of all Treasons, Felonies, etc. granted to it
for the ^ine of 1000 l. p. 282^ 283. The King and Queen desired to approach to
it, in regard of the Wars with Scotland, p. 283. The Parliament adjourned
thither, and a writ to the Mayor thereof: p. 13. A Mint there, p. 568. Letters
Patents to it confirmed by an Act, p. 648. York Archbishop of it; difference
between him and Canterbury about Crossbearing, p. 13, 14. Attainted of Treason,
p. 325. His Liberties confirmed, p. 548. York, Richard Duke thereof, made
Protector, p. 652, 657, 658. Attainted of Treason, p. 661, 662. His Claim and
Title to the Crown, and Lords award thereupon between him and King H. 6. p.
665, 666, 670. Slain, p. 670. Edward Duke of York made and Declared King p.
669, 670. See Table 1. Ypre, p. 52.
COurteous Reader, the Table of the principal Matters in this Abridgment, will
serve not only as a Ready- Index to point thee to all things of Special Note
comprised in it: but likewise as a general Repertory to all the Records at
large therein abbreviated, for a Common Place book or Treatise to many of the
Heads of most public concernment therein specified: Especially to those of
Chancellor, Commons House, Council, Customs, Impositions, Justices, King,
Lords, Marshal, Marshal Law, Necessity, Parliaments, Pope, Queen, Statutes,
Taxes, Tonnage, Poundage, Statutes, Treason, and some others; which thou shall
hardly meet with in any Law Books, or other printed Authors; And will also mind
thee of many things of moment, which otherwise thou would have taken little
Notice of in the perusal of this Abridgement. The Labor in digesting it was the
Publishers alone, who desires the delight, profit of this and the other Tables
may be thine; and prays thee to correct these few Errataes, which through have
have escaped in some of the printed Copies.

ERRATAES.
In the Preface, page 12. line 14. r. Summons; l. 25. dele that; p. 15. l. 21,
who, which; p. 16. l. 20. concluded; p. 29. l. 30. r. 39 H. 6. p. 22. l. 16.
subjoyn, l. 17. Prolocutor, Proctor; p. 29. l. 16. r. H. 4. In the Abridgment,
p. 1. l. 4. r. faits; l. 6. on, ou; p. 2. l. 7. Colloquium; l. 12. impensuri;
p. 53. l. 12. record, r. recover; l. 21. proved, provided; l. 22. names, pains;
p. 63. l. 34. Duchy; p. 66. l. 24. Defendant, Demandant; p. 80. l. 9. c. 13.
r. 23; p. 101. l. 10. r. not be; p. 108. l. 24. Ponthoy; p. 142. l. 43. on, ^u;
p. 159. l. 35. r. the fine^ for excess; p. 160. l. 20. choose, use; p. 165. l.
34. one, out; p. 173. l. 28. dele at; p. 175. l. 39. defrauded, defended; p.
177. l. 41. Disseisee; p. 196. l. 20. appeal, repeal^ p. 199. l. 23. attained,
pertained; p. 202. l. 27. contribure, r. be accountable; l. 23. r no some; p.
295. l. 30. of Dullinger, r. or Ballenger; p. 300. l. 41. having, hanging; p.
301. l. 19. Protestation, r. Protection; p. 349. l. 13. Lords, r. King; p. 355.
l. 23. Chrymenage; p. 361. l. 25. Tyrant; p. 387. l. 29. convert, r. subvert;
p. 388. l. 45. Lancaster, r. Gloucester; p. 405. l. 21. them, him^ p. 408. l.
30. Tyne; p. 426. l. 18. r. King; l. 25. r. 25 E. 3. p. 431. l. 15. of war; p.
604. l. 35. tenant tenement; p. 649. l. 34. his life.

In the Margin of the Preface, p. 11. l. 16. for 20 R. 2. r. 11 R. 2; p. 25. l.
12. Auctorum, r. Actuarium. In the Abridgement, p. 53. l. 4. Treasons, r.
Trespass; p. 65. l. 8. cause, cour^^^; p. 71. l. 31. Norwich; p. 301. l. 19.
Churches, r. Chancellor; p. 354. l. 3. Capit, Capias; p. 430. l. 18. and 47. r.
Feme-covert; p. 431. l. 7. changed in, r. charged on; p. 571. l. 25. by men, le
mere; p. 661. l. 8. William, Thomas.

The Reading of that Famous^ and Learned Gentleman, Robert Callis, Sergeant at
Law, upon the Statute of 13 H. 8. Cap. 5. Of Sewers. Sold by William Leake.

The Reports of Sir George Crook Knight; with hands of all the Judges
thereunto. Sold by William Leake at the Crown in Fleetstreet, betwixt the two
Temple Gates, and at Grayes Inn Gate, and Lincolns Inn Gate.

FINIS.

