THE Countrey-Minister's REFLECTIONS, ON THE City-Ministers Letter To his
FRIEND; Showing the Reasons why We cannot Read the King's Declaration in Our
Churches.
UNless you had told me in what manner your Friend was Concerned, when he met
with His Majesty's Order to Read His Declaration; I cannot tell whether he had
any ground to wonder or not: It looks like Ingenuity in you, to tell your
Friend your thoughts freely; but if you mean by freely, the liberty you take to
tell the World plainly, how much you Clash with your Prince, which seems to be
your meaning, by your saying, It is not a time to be Reserved: Such a Freedom
taken, might not long since have met with such a Suspicion, of something being
Reserved in this presumed Freedom, which might have been Accompanied with a
dangerous Inuendo.

Your next Paragraph Owns, You are entirely Outwitted; which does as little
Credit your Prudence, as your following Discourse, does your Cause: But if you
fall for want of Forecast, who can help it? You would not abate your Violence
one jott, when seasonably prompted to consider what the Fruit of your Rigorous,
and more then Legal Prosecution of Protestants upon Penal Laws would produce;
Nor will you stand to your Old and Avowed Principles.

There is indeed an Honorable way of Falling: When a Christian is called to
Suffer for such things as will bear him out in Suffering, and whereof he will
never have occasion to be Ashamed, 1 Pet. 4. 16. But it may deserve a
Clergy-mans Consideration, Whether a Sturdy Resolvedness not to part with such
things, as have often occasioned uncommendable Practices, may not have some
Affinity with that Evil-Doing, and as a Busy-Body in other Men's matters, which
St. Peter cautions against, v. 15.

In the next place, You says* That to take away the Test and Penal Laws at this
time, is but one step from Popery.

Why did you not then Consent, and Press to have them taken away, when there
was no such Danger, yea, when the Taking them away, might have rendered the
Introducing of Popery inconceivably Difficult, if not Impossible?

But how do you know, that you judge Right in this Case now? Why say you, We
have the Concurring Opinion of the Nobility and Gentry with us, who have
already Suffered in this Cause: But is this the proof of an Opinion, to say,
That some of Honor and Wealth, have Embraced and Adhere to it, though with
some Inconvenience to themselves? It would almost tempt a man to think a
Reasoner is at a great Loss, when instead of Arguments, he insists for proof on
the Outside Grandeur of such as are of the Opinion he pleads for.

When the Prince, and many of the People were averse to the Crucifying of
CHRIST, what a Clamor did the Clergy make, Have any of the Rulers, or the
Pharisees believed on him? But this People who know not the Law, are Accursed:
John 7. 48, 49.

But suppose you are right in this point, What Efficacy has the Clergy's
Reading the King's Declaration, to take off the Tests and Penal Laws? If the
Clergy's Breath can shake, or throw them away, Either the Laws are of little
worth, and have a very sorry foundation, or the Clergy are Men of an Admirable
Character.

But say you, Though our Reading, do not immediately bring in Popery, yet it
sets open our Church Doors for it: I cannot imagine, Why our Church Doors may
not be Shutt and Locked as fast after Reading, as before; But if the Clergy
pretend to such Power with their breath (as to break the Strongest Bars, set
Open our Church-Doors so Wide, as that they can never be Shut again) They may
well allow their Prince a Dispensing Power; or how can He be Safe, as long as
they can breathe?

Say you, If we comply with this Order, all good Protestants will Despise and
Hate us: To Hate any Person, is against an Essential part of a good Protestants
Religion; if the Order be not Sinful, they will have no cause to Despise you,
because you read it, and Act therein according to your Avowed Doctrine.

If the Order be in your Opinion Sinful, Why do you not show, what Law of God
is Broken by it? This is that you should have done, and not have insisted on
such poor low considerations, as Personal Danger, Dishonor, and falling
without Pity.

He that Suffers on a Good Account, has Honor and Comfort enough in himself,
and from his God; He that Suffers in a bad Cause, falls Dishonourably, though
he have never so many Great Men to pity him.

The Great Difficulty, You say, of your Case is this, That fall you must,
Sooner or Later; And therefore like Prudent Men, you think the Wisest Course
is, to be Ruined presently; But it is not the first time I have heard of that
Wise sort of People, who are for a short Life, and a Merry: But what Necessity
is there of your latter Falling? This is certainly like a Melancholy Man's
cherishing such a resolved Jealousy of wanting Bread at Last, as makes him
Pine himself to Death in the midst of Plenty. But what is the ground of this
Jealousy? If we fall after Reading, this is the way never to Rise more: And
what mean you by that? Is it that after Reading the Declaration, if Penal Laws
be taken away, you shall never be trusted again with such a Power to mischief
your Fellow Subjects? If this be all, it may be all for the better; for neither
the Prosperity of the Church of Christ, nor the Honor or Welfare of the
Kingdom, do at all depend on One Parties having it in their Power to Impoverish
or Ruin all the Rest of the Nation for Mere Matters of Conscience.

You now come to Examine the Matter, as you say, Impartially; And first, Yo^
Suppose, That no Minister of the Church of England can give his consent to the
Declaration: This is just as much as to beg the Question you should prove, and
so all you Write signifies nothing with those who do not Suppose what you
Suppose.

If you had indeed impartially Examined, and Proved the matter of the
Declaration to be Sinful; you would have had no occasion to have discovered
your Disloyalty, in pretending an Authority against the Command of your Prince,
nor of Instancing (as if you had lately perused the Old History of the Barons
Wars) that you have the Nobility and Gentry on your Side.

You say, Reading the Declaration would be no fault at all, but our duty, when
the King Commands it, did we approve of the Matter of it. This is not Expressed
after the usual manner of the Church of England, when treating with the
Dissenters; They would not then yield that Orders might be Suspended from a
Publication, till those who were required to publish them did approve the
matter; but it was then constantly Affirmed, that the Order must be Obeyed, if
the matter of it were not plainly Sinful; and of this, you Asserted, Authority
was to judge: Was not this the lowest, you would ever stoop, when Scruples were
raised, and Conscience pretended against your Orders? Where does the Scriptures
forbid it? If it be not Forbidden, the Command is plain (and the safest way
must be taken, which is) to Obey. It is certain, some parts of the Declaration,
contain very plain and necessary Truths, which Church-of-England-Ministers
ought to Approve; If there be any thing in it which you think you may not
Approve, that should have been Specified; it would have been more modest,
humbly to have Applied to the King for a convenient Explication in that part,
then presently in Print, to Cry the whole is Sinful, and a device to ruin that
you call the best Church in the World.

Next, You endeavor to prove, That Reading the Declaration in our Churches, is
an Interpretative Consent: Because, say you, By Our Law, Ministerial Officers,
are accountable, for their Actions; and the Authority of Superiors, though of
the King himself, cannot justify Inferiors in Executing any Illegal Command:
With reference to the Command of Superiors, we are to exercise our own
Judgment and Reason; and we may not obey a Prince against the Laws of the Land,
or the Laws of God, because what we do, let the Authority be what it will that
Commands it, becomes our own Act, and we are responsible for it.

This sort of Arguing (whatever may be in it) would not a few years since be
allowed by some sort of People sufficiently known in this Kingdom, when urged
in opposition to their Inclinations: Then the Prince was set above Law, and it
was His Command, and the Notification of His Pleasure, made any thing (which
was not Malum in se) Obliging; Private Judgment might by no means be admitted,
when once the Governors had interessed themselves in it, and made a
Determination. Is it not very Dis-ingenuous for any Men, especially for
Ministers, to have recourse to a Principle of their Adversaries, (which they
have for many years decried) only because they would serve themselves with it
upon a particular Occasion, and to forsake their own Doctrine, which they
Avowed so long as it would gratify their Revenge and Ambition, tho now they
think it may do them some Diskindness? This is to fetch Weapons out of their
Adversaries Artillery, not to Fight against them, but to Assault their Prince,
and batter that Authority of which they formerly boasted, They were the only
Supporters: The most Unjustifiable, and Shameful Inconstancy, is that of
Altering, and Changing, and Closing with any thing, to serve a present Turn;
Why may you not tell the People in his Majesty's words, That none of His
Subjects shall be Forced by Fines, and other Penalties, to Submit their
Judgment to others in the weightiest matters, as well as to tell the Nation
this in Print, That Clergymen must follow their own Judgment, not only in
matters of Religion, but of Law also? If Inferior Officers are not satisfied
that their Superiors Command is not Lawful, Is it not enough for them to
desist from Obeying it, without making Clamours against it in Print? Can they
not comfort themselves (in Silence) with that Doctrine of Universal
Passive-Obedience, which they, when in the height of their Ease and Authority,
Preached to others as Orthodox and Sound; and thought they thereby Signalized
their Loyalty above all other Societies of People in the World? If a Prince
Declares, That there are some Laws in being, which are greatly Injurious to
many of His Subjects, and that He is willing, That these Inconveniences shall
be redressed in a Legal Way: Can any thing be more Condescending and Gracious,
then for him to Certify this to his People, who are to Choose those that are
to Repeal such Laws as are Prejudicial, and make such Others, as may be for the
Public Good? What hurt can there be in making known the Princes Pleasure in
this, as particularly as he shall think meet, that His People may have time to
Consider and weigh Matters, that nothing be done Unadvisedly in such Important
Concerns?

But say you, Ministers of Religion have the Care and Conduct of Souls, and
therefore are bound to take Care, that what they publish in their Churches be
neither contrary to the Laws of the Land, or the good of the Church.

If you would keep close to your own Argument, you should have said, That
Ministers who have the Care of Souls, are bound to take Care, that what they
publish in their Churches, be not contrary to the Law of God.

But Since you Speak of the Laws of the Land, I can see no reason from thence,
Why such Orders as are given, by those that are under His Majest^ should be
Enjoined to be Observed, (though Conscience be really concerned in the Matter)
and His Majesty's Orders, which have far greater Authority be, Denied: It may
be when People are well acquainted with the Kings Declaration, it may have this
good Effect, That the Ministers of Religion, shall not be compelled to Publish
other Peoples Pleasures in their Churches; at least, not under such severe
Temporal Penalties, as have been heretofore insisted on.

You say, Ministers of Religion are not looked upon as common Cryers; but what
they Read they are supposed to Recommend too.

If they have not been looked upon as common Cryers, I think they have been
looked upon as Worse; When Bishops sent Orders made Arbitrarily by Justices of
the Sessions, to be Published by them in time of Divine Service: B^t does not
the Rubric appoint, That what the King Enjoins, as well as what the Bishops
Enjoyn^, shall be Published in the Churches? The Clergy of the Church of
England have loudly Taught, and solemnly Owned, That the King of England, as
Head of the Church, has Power to make Injunctions and Constitutions, and are
not Ministers every jot as much obliged to be His Majesty's Cryers, as to be
Instruments through which the Bishop's Echo may sound more Audibly to the
People?

But what they Read, they Recommend too. Ministers are not to be considered
alike, in every thing they Publish in the Church. A difference arises from the
Nature of the things we Publish: Reading a Chapter in the Bible, and Publishing
the Banns of Matrimony, or Citations, are differently to be Considered; when
you Publish the Banns, what do you Recommend, unless it be to know, Whether any
of the People have any thing to Object, against such Persons Marrying? But
seeing you say, That for a Minister to Read any thing in the Church which he
does not consent to, or approve, is to Misguide the People: I would ask you
this one Question, Whether you do really think, that the Worship which His
Majesty does Celebrate, be the true, and right Way of Worshipping God, which
Protestants ought to Pray He may be kept and strengthened in? If you are for
the Negative, Pray consider what you Recommend to the People, when you Read
these Words in the Litany; That it may please Thee to keep and strengthen, in
the true Worshipping of Thee, Thy Servant James, Our most Gracious King and
Governor.

But Reading is Teaching: Very good; What then? I may not Read any thing in the
Church, but what I approve. But, are not the People Judges for themselves of
what you Read? It is not your Reading a thing in the Church, that Determines
the People, unless they pay the Clergy a greater Deference than they deserve;
After all your Reading, and Teaching too, be it in a Sermon of your own making,
(which no doubt, you prefer much above His Majesty's Declaration) Protestants
will not follow your Conduct any farther, than they are Convinced it is good: A
Man is not Determined by what he hears, otherwise than by the Evidence he has
concerning it: Now it would almost tempt People to believe the Declaration has
so much Reason and Light accompanying it, as Our Clergy cannot well Answer; and
that therefore they are afraid to read it, least the People should be
Convinced, and not follow their Conduct so servilely as they would have them.

But, Why may I not then Read a Homily for Transubstantiation, or Invocation of
Saints, if the King sends me such? Let the Question be, Whether every thing
Read in the Church, be a part of Divine Service? And then if you Consider, and
Answer it sedately, you will find your own Question Resolved.

If you can prove the Declaration to be contrary to the Word of God, I will
have no further Contest with you about Reading it in the Church: I wish no
humane Orders were imposed upon Ministers, to be Read in the Church: But if any
Persons have right to enjoin them to Read such Orders there, certainly the KING
has much more.

The King intends, Our Reading this Declaration should signify to the Nation,
Our Consent and Approbation of it: What have Clergymen to do, to pry into the
King's secret Intentions? The Declaration speaks plainly for it self. But the
D^claration does not want Publishing. How can you tell that? Must the Clergy,
or His Majesty judge when His Declaration is sufficiently made known? But this
is designed to serve instead of Addresses of Thanks, which the Clergy generally
refused, though it was only to thank the King for His Gracious Promises,
Renewed to the Church of England: Many of the Clergy have been looked upon a
great while, as Persons Addicted beyond Measure to flatter their Prince; and
behold, all on a sudden, they are become Rude toward him, or worse; if they
may not have leave to Mischief their Dissenting Neighbors, they will not thank
their Prince for renewed Promises to Protect and Maintain them: Was ever ill
Manners and Ingratitude toward a Prince, thus rudely and disingeniously
boasted of? Who can think these Persons apprehend themselves to be in danger of
falling without Pity, who brag thus openly of their Stoutness, that they would
not so much as give their Prince Thanks, for the most Gracious Promise he could
make them?

You say, It does not become a Minister of Religion to do any thing, which in
the Opinion of the most Charitable Man, can only be Excused. In this, I think
you are very much in the Right; I wish the Multitude to whom your Letters are
sent, may fix their Hearts on this pertinent Passage: No Charity can Excuse at
present, a great many of your former Practices, nor will they find any Excuse
at last, if not timely repented of: If you had hitherto Acted by this Rule, you
would never have needed to fear your Fall with Contempt, or without Pity.

You mention the Book of Sports, which w^^ ordered to be read in Churches. I
will not say, how strict the greatest Churchmen were for Reading of it, nor
how well it did Comport with the Fourth Command; I only enquire, whether the
present KING, has not as much Right and Power, to Order his Declaration to be
Read in Churches, as King Charles the 1st. had, to order the Book of Sports to
be Read there? And which of these two did Thwart the Holy Scriptures most?

You say, It is against the Constitution of the Church of England; It is to
teach an Unlimited and Universal Toleration, which was Declared in Parliament
Illegal, in 1672, and has been condemned by the Christian Church in all Ages.

The King's Authority to make Injunctions and Orders, has been heretofore cried
up, as a main part of the Constitution of the Church of England; How comes this
Change all on a sudden? But, what is this Universal Toleration? No more but
this, That no one Party of His Majesty's Subjects, shall be trusted with a
Power to destroy all the Rest: Will nothing serve your turn, unless you may
continually render your selves grievous to your Fellow Subjects? Must none live
and enjoy the comfortable Influences of Society and Government, but those who
will entirely surrender themselves blindly to your Dictates? Methinks, Sober,
Understanding and good Clergymen, should be afraid, lest any of that which was
Levi's Reproach, should be a Brand upon them.

The Instruments of Cruelty are in their Habitation; Oh! My Soul, come not thou
into their Secret, Genesis 49. 5, 6.

I will not intermeddle with Parliaments, but only say, They are not always of
one and the same mind; and Time was, when many of the Clergy of the Church of
England, talked very contemptibly of some of them. But in that you say, It has
been Condemned by the Christian Church in all Ages; this wants Proof: If it be
well considered, the Christian Church will be found to thrive best, under such
an Universal Toleration as Constantine did grant, before Ease, Pleasure and
Wealth, had Corrupted the Bishops. Hence the Proverb, Golden Priests, and
Wooden Chalices, Golden Chalices, Wooden Priests; till the Clergy grew
Negligent and Haughty under Constantines Reign: It is certain, the Orthodox had
no Humane Penal Laws whereby to punish Heretics.

Say you, (1.) It is to Teach my People, they need never come to Church more:
To what an Extravagant Indecency, toward both their Prince and their Church,
will the Affection of Tyrannizing over others, Transport some Churchmen? Could
any Enemy of the Church of England, have advanced any thing more to Her
Discredit, than to say, Her Members are under no Obligation to attend on Her
Ministry, but what arises from Force and Penal Laws? Why may not People have
your leave, as well as their KING's, to go, not only to Conventicles, but to
the Mass, till they are convinced, that they do ill in going thither? It is
much better becoming a Minister of Religion, to Convince such by Scripture and
Reason, that their Worship is false, then to Contend to have them cast into
Prison, and by Fines and Confiscations, to Compel them against their Conscience
to come to Church; for their Presence there, is no more pleasing to God, nor
Beneficial to their own Souls, whilst their Minds are elsewhere, than it would
be, if they were at a Conventicle, or at Mass.

(2.) It is to teach the Dispensing Power, which alters what has been formerly
thought the whole Constitution of this Church and Kingdom.

Who are they that thus thought formerly? Surely, none of those who Taught
loudly, and in Prints solemnly Authorized, That Acts of Parliament were Acts of
Grace, that the Princes Power could not be bounded; if there be any remaining,
who were always of another Opinion, they may pretend the same things now as
heretofore: But for such Persons as have been Instruments of Wrong and
Mischief, to borrow such Notions from others, before they have Renounced their
former Avowed Principles, and satisfied for their Injuries they have done, They
can have nothing to Allege for themselves, which can justify them in this
present Affair.

(3.) It is to Recommend to Our People the Choice of such Persons to sit in
Parliament, as shall take away the Test and Penal Laws.

Is not this to Recommend the Clergy, as Persons of great Tenderness toward the
People? You would never permit them to be Quiet, as long as it was in your
Power to make them Uneasy: You would now persuade them, that the Nobility and
Gentry are as much against the People's Ease, as you are; (for which, I
suppose, some of them will return you no Thanks) and now you will not Read the
King's Declaration to your People, because it teaches them how they may
provide for their own Ease, so as to live peaceably among themselves, and
securely, under His Majesty's Tender and Equal Care for them all.

(4.) It is to Condemn all those great and Worthy Patriots of their Country,
who forfeited the dearest thing in the World to them, next a good Conscience;
viz. The Favor of their Prince, and a great many Honorable and Profitable
Employments with it, rather than consent to that Proposal, of taking away the
Test and PenalLaws, which they apprehend Destructive to the Church of England,
and the Protestant Religion: And he who can in Conscience do all this, I think,
need scruple nothing.

Your Reading the Declaration, does no more condemn those who approve not of
the King's Intentions therein Explained, than your refusing to Read it, does
Condemn the KING: A good Conscience should be very Dear to every Man; I think
no Man should Act in direct Opposition to an Erring Conscience, till he can be
better Instructed. Those that do really Apprehend, that taking away Penal Laws
will be Destructive to the Church of England, and Protestant Religion, ought
not to Interest themselves for the taking them away: But I do not understand,
why both these may not be sufficiently secured by other means, than by putting
a Power in the Hands of one Party of His Majesty's Subjects, to ruin all the
rest; whether such a Security may not be found out, will be best Determined,
when considered by the Wisdom of the Nation, when met; and in a Capacity to
Repeal some Old, and make other New Laws, as Emergencies may require.

Now let any Rational Man judge, Whether, notwithstanding all your Arguments, a
Conscientious Man, who does not scruple to Read the King's Declaration, may not
scruple at many things which you have done formerly, and at your striving to
keep your selves still in a Capacity, to do the like for the future.

You say, Reading the Declaration, will Render your Persons and Ministry,
infinitely Contemptible. Infinite Contempt, is huge Contempt indeed; I
acknowledge, Ministers ought to behave themselves so, as that they be neither
Blamed nor Contemned: There is scarce any thing makes a Minister more justly
contemptible, than Encouraging Immoralities, Flattering and Soothing great Men,
and showing a Domineering Temper, and Insatiable Cruelty, where they can have
an Opportunity to Exercise it: Let such as have been Guilty of these or the
like Crimes, reflect on themselves and Repent, and they need not fear Contempt
for Reading the Declaration.

Nothing will so Effectually tend to the Final Ruin of the Church of England,
because Our Reading will discourage, or provoke, or misguide all the Churches
Friends.

In that You except not one of her Friends, you horridly affront them all, by
the Character you give them; for you herein suppose them all to be either very
Timorous, very Testy, or very Ignorant Persons; But I think you are greatly
out, and lay abundantly more Weight on the Clergies Reading the Declaration,
than it will bear: For whether you Read or no, such as are judicious and good
Friends to the Church, will be firm to Her, and to their Religion; and till you
prove, that nothing can secure the Religion of our Church, but these Penal Laws
and Tests, your dismal Consequence vanishes into Nothing: The Church of England
may be kept upon Her true Foundation, (and I hope Penal Laws have not much to
do there) and be by Law secured in all Her Rights, from being hurt by any other
Parties, (if these LAWS and TESTS be Repealed.) And she will be never the less
Beautiful and Prosperous, because the Power which she has used to hurt others,
is taken out of her hands: But how does your Reading Contribute so mightily to
a Repeal, when all that hear it, are at Liberty to judge for themselves? Your
Way of Discoursing as you do, about Reading the Declaration, would tempt one to
think, that you are of Opinion, either, that the Declaration is Attended with
such convincing Reason, as will certainly satisfy People as soon as they hear
it; or else, that nothing is necessary in any Point to Determine, and fix
People's Minds and Judgments, but only to have such a thing Read by the
Minister in the Church.

Your Answer to the Objection you raise touching Dissenters, is very Faint: Say
you, When there is an Opportunity of showing Our Inclinations without Danger,
they may find We are not such Persecutors as we are Represented.

Though they are not to be Compared with the Nobility and Gentry; yet one would
think, one Positive Promise might have been by you, on this Occasion afforded
them; What signifies, They may find, that which they could never yet find? For
as often as you have been Tried hitherto, you have as soon as ever you were in a
Capacity, proved Unfaithful to them; They have felt the Weight of your Fingers:
There neither has been, nor is any need of others to Represent to them what
Persecutors you have been, and may be found again, if you have Opportunity of
showing your Inclinations without Danger, for ought that you have hitherto
Manifested to the contrary: For here is not a Word of any positive Respect or
Tenderness toward them: Is there a Change wrought in your Inclinations,
without any Sense of the Wrong you have done? Here is not a Syllable of any
Relenting at your former Severities; your Letter abounds with Flattery toward
the Nobility and Gentry, Repeated many times over, but not a tittle of any Care
you have taken, that the Dissenters may have their Liberty: As often as it has
been granted by Royal Dispensations, you have been angry at it; as often as it
has been proposed in Parliament, you have Opposed it: So that you might have
Omitted this Objection you have raised concerning the Dissenters, and have
passed them over in Silence, as a People, whose Anger or Friendship you have no
regard to; unless after you made the Objection, you had vouchsafed to have
Answered it also, more to their Satisfaction.

You Conclude with a very honest Proposal of Prayer, with which I heartily
Concur; and Pray, That every Party of Professed Christians, may upon all
Occasions, approve themselve Persons of True Piety, Moderation, and Real
Fidelity.

Allowed to be Published this 9th. Day of July, 1688.

LONDON^ Printed for E. Reyner and W. Faulkner, and are to be Sold by most
Booksellers.


