THE Countries Vindication, FROM The Aspersions of a late Scandalous Paper
(Nicknamed) Robert Tell truths Advice in choice of the next Parliament. In
which his Popish Designs are fully discovered and detected. By a Lover of his
King and Country.
Respice and Cave.
BY how much Designs are l^id most opposite to Truth and Righteousness, to much
the more are those workers of iniquity active and industrious to promote those
indirect Interests, Per fas a^^^nefas, turn every stone, never wanting the
presence of public advantage. In this art of Legerdemain, our old, but now
most vigorous enemies, the Papists, are upon their great trial of skill. In
some Pamphlets they throw off the Plot, as visible as it is; and in a late
Paper ^hey undertake to advise the People of England in their Elec^ions of
Parliament Men; and have made it their business to create Jealousies amongst
the Protestants, thereby to divide that Interest which is all little enough
when entire, to resist their devilish and hell-bred Machinations. This
Sophister tells us, There has been Factions in all Ages playing their tricks;
and that in nomine Domini, I can consent with him to our sad experience, I can
turn the truth upon the Popish faction, and by that time I have done, lay all
the Devilish tricks at their own door. In the mean time tell him, Turpe est
Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum: Thou that teach another should not steal,
do thou murder, and commit Sacriledg? thou Hypocrite, take out the beam out
of thy own eye first, before thou undertake the mote in thy brothers; and ere
you hope to have your Advice to pass, let us examine your Composition. I find
your whole Receipt has dangerous Ingredients, Reflections upon Parliaments,
upon all godly sober men, and upon honest Countrymen. Another part in the
mixture, are seeds of Jealousies and Divisions thrown amongst us, your old
stratagems! this will not do, Mors in olla, we find a Snake in the sweet herbs,
and death in the pot; I believe you have had this recipe from Sir George
Wakeman, skilful in the venomous Art of Poisoning. Your design, Sir, is
discovered, therefore you cannot hope to succeed; your caution against the
Godly, the sober party, nor the honest Countryman, will not divide us: I can
assure you, Sir, they are no Papists; and for those unhappy divisions that are
and have been amongst us in the Church, we shall demonstrate the Jesuit
enforced 'em; and he must needs go that the Devil drives; and to draw a suspect
one amongst another, he tells us of what tricks, and what vizards were worn in
Forty-eight by Puritans and others; at which time you say they lost their Mask;
a favor of your own bestowing, and now has reassumed it again, with which you
are playing the Devil in the shape of an Angel of light; but what have you to
do to rake up our former miseries, which I hope God has forgiven, and the King
has graciously so long since pardoned? by whose wisdom and goodness he sits
Enthroned in his peoples hearts; all your subtilties can not unsettle the
favorable apprehensions his Majesty has of his Protestant subjects loyalty
after twenty years experience; nor any ways bring in question the duty and
affections of his People; no, Sir, the resentments of former evils are too
fresh amongst us for any Popish machinations to dissolve this union; take the
holy cheat to your self your Piae frauds are the best support of your Romish
Church; and had not your Engines played amongst us, our Puritan had never
separated from the Church of England; for I must tell you, all the sober, godly
party, and Puritans too, were all conformable to the decent and orderly
government of the Church of England; read and heard Divine service, and wore
the Surplice, and there held steady till the fourth Commandment was almost
expunged the Decalogue; witness the Book s^t out by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, for licensing Sports, Pays, and Dancings on the Lords day,
enforcing all Ministers to read it in their Churches, which diverse otherwise
conformable out of conscience refused, for which they were turned out of their
Ministry, and a company of scandalous debauchees, men of any latitude, put into
their places: This was a bird hatched at Rome, sent to be nursed in England,
knowing well it would bring to pass their infallible design to divide us; and
from the same counsels came into our Churches those crowds of Trumperies,
Tapers, and Crucifixes, Cringings and Bowings, that the Service of God was
turned to a Popish Antic; all in pretense as it was publicly asserted by some
Grandees then in the Church, to bring us to as near an union with the Church of
Rome as possibly the temper of the present time would bear. We do not forget
what was enforced upon the peaceable Kirk of Scotland, where the three footed
Stools from the old Women's Tayls began the War; all these were likely ways to
preserve us from Popery, contrary to the designs of our blessed Reformers King
Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory, who by degrees as
those days would endure, drew us still further off from those Fopperies; and we
might have expected then when the Nation was become generally Protestant, to
have kept a greater distance by a further Reformation; and as in the Church, so
in the State, men of corrupt minds, and pernicious practices, to satisfy their
avarice and boundless ambitions, obtruded several Illegal Impositions, as
Loan-money and Ship Money, against Law, (for which diverse Noblemen and
Gentlemen endured long Imprisonments); Customs exacted without Act of
Parliament, with swarms of Monoplies, under which the Nation groaned; then came
in the Scotch with a formidable Army to our Borders, with their Petitions. A
Parliament was called, who inspecting the Grievances of the Nation, discovered
those wicked Counselors, and dangerous Influences of the Papists, Impeaching
and calling to account those contrivers and actors of these Oppressions; some
whereof fled; others for their own protection, (and the Jesuits the better to
shuffle in their designs in the midst of our confusion,) made the best of Kings
suspect his safety amongst his People, and drove us into that unnatural War;
then the Papist not out of affection to his Majesty, but having no other
subterfuge, and to carry on their designs, ran in with their Arms, got into
several great places of Trust, Military and Civil; contriving and effecting an
Act of Pacification with the bloody Irish Rebels, after they had imbrued their
hands in the blood and murder of a Hundred thousand of his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects in Ireland; all which begat desperate apprehensions in the minds of
most men, that Arbitrariness and Popery were breaking in upon us; though as we
are bound to believe, never designed by that blessed Prince and glorious
Martyr. The Papist joining unfortunately in this War, heightened the confusion,
and now blood and rapine know no bounds, the King is over thrown in his just
Cause by the wicked designs of these disturbers of the World, and enemies to
Mankind, who brought him also to his miserable End; and it can, and is now
proved, that the Jesuits had in that Traiterous and horrid murder a principal
hand, Quis Talia fando sustinet a lachrimis. After this dismal Tragedy was
over, and we in the height of distraction, and the Land in a Chaos of
confusions, estranged from peace and settlement, God in Judgment remembered
mercy, and by his Miraculous Providence, our blessed Prince, like the glorious
Sun, after our dismal Nights, and sharp winter of afflictions, appeared in our
Horizon, to our almost distracting-joys, receiving his People with open arms of
Clemency, to which his People ecchoed with all loyal expressions of grateful
affections and duty, our Government of Church and State established, and we now
in the apprehensions of peace and safety, every man expecting to sit down under
his own Vine and Fig Tree, enjoying the fruits of his labors, in which the
Papist had more than an equal share, through the Grace and Princely bounty of
our King (not suspecting their designs) and they boasting themselves as his
most loyal subjects.

Whilst they were in this unquestionable credit, and all the severe Laws
against them laid asleep, infinite swarms of Jesuits, Priests and Friars, and
all sorts of Orders, like the Egyptian Plague of Locusts, came in amongst us,
perverting the Kings Subjects contrary to Law, compassing Sea and Land to gain
Proselytes, in which they have proved too successful; and amongst those many
hundreds seduced (to lay their foundations sure) they have robbed our Nation of
the most Heroic Victorious Prince, next Apparent Heir to the Crown. This we
may remark as an infallible confirmation of their damnable Plot, a Treason of
the deepest dye, never to be forgiven by any Protestant, and a quarrel never to
be reconciled; they had wounded us in our several Members before, but in this
they stabbed us to the very heart; and now it began to be fair day, their
designs obvious, the ruin of King and Kingdom, with all the artifice that Hell
could secretly and cunningly contrive; and had been as certainly executed, had
not the infinite mercy of God taken care of us, unmaskt their designs and
discovered their horrid Plot, by the prudent, faithful, and unquestionable
Informations of Dr. Oats, Mr. Bedlow, Dugdale and others, who under God
preserved the Life of our most Gracious King, and with him our Lives,
Liberties, Religion, and all that is dear to us; for which faithful important
service they deserve the best of Rewards here, and their Names to be written in
Characters of Gold, Chronicled to posterity; and though their serious and most
congruous Evidences, backed with many most undeniable Circumstances, have past
an Examination by His Majesty and Council, and by two Parliaments successively;
and lasty, by all the Judges of the Nation, in fair, full, and Legal Trials
confirmed, and the Conspirators justly Convicted, and brought to punishment:
yet such is the blinded wilfulness of many, and the malicious Impudence of
others, that notwithstanding all, and the Murder of brave Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey to boot, they would fain wash their hands in Innocence, and are still
playing their Game in new disguises, imposing a belief upon the world, that the
danger lies in the Dissenting Protestants; but the Devil cannot detect them for
one act of Disloyalty since His Majesty's Restoration, whilst you have been
plotting all this while, and wrought your designs into Treasonable Acts of all
kinds; and yet by the help of your Principles, special Merits and Absolutions,
as innocent as the Child unborn. But, Sir, these fig leaves will not cover your
nakedness, you cannot catch Englishmen in Cobwebs; nor can you, and all your
Popish Masquerado's, dance in your Nets, but you must be seen, Noscitur ungue
Leo, the Devil is known by his Cloven-foot, and your Characters are written in
the flames of London, and in indelible Characters of Blood, which cry for
judgment to Heaven against you: Take heed therefore, you that forget God,
Christianity, and Morality, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver you: it is not the least happiness, that you are known to the world, you
cursed Jesuits; What was your behavior when you were banished Franc, when you
were expelled the Venetian Territories, and other States, where they found you
Firebrands that would have destroyed their Kingdoms, and Commonwealths? Who
Murdered the French Kings? No Puritan, no Godly party, no honest Country man.
Phanatick Priests and Jesuits are principl'd for those Butcheries. You are too
well known by the bloody Colors; and the Noble Cavalier that fought
Conscienciously for his King, found such ill success with you in the late War,
you robbing him of his Laurel, and of the due Rewards of his blood and sweat,
will never hand with you again: All your wheadles will never g^^^^^^n from the
Church of England, nor make him insensible of the safety of his King, nor less
car^^^^ of the Interest of England by well-Elected Parliaments; neither shall
all your false insinuations prevail to make the world believe, That either our
Parliaments or People would put down Bishops, a Trick to put the design off
your selves, that you may better, without suspicion, do the wor^^; no, Sir, we
honor that Government, and by Gods Grace will stand to it, and revere our
Grave and Learned Bishops, whom we look at, under God, the best Bulwarks
against your Tyrannies Popish Innovations.

The next thing he brings out of his Box, is a new Shiboleth, or a distinction
betwixt the honest Countryman and Courtier; and, indeed, there is a great
difference, for the honest Countryman is for the honor, peace, and safety of
the King and Kingdom; takes care, and labors hard to get money to support the
King and Government; and this Courtier detested by all, and comes under the
reproachful distinction, is a pernicious piece of Luxury, a Drone, a too-fac'd
Janus, that has crept into the Confines of the Royal Palace, where he fawns and
flatter, till he has obtained so much countenance, as can get him into some
Trust; and observing how the wind blows, turns his Sails so readily, that in
time he dare attempt with Commendatory Letters, an Election in some petty
Borough, where he must drink away an honest Country Gentleman; and by the
strength of a public Purse he is chosen by those pitiful S^ts, that understand
no other danger or advantage, than the profit of the present Carowzing; he is
now returned and sits, having neither honor, honesty, nor estate, necessary
qualifications for the trust of others Lives and Estates, his work is then to
make up his stake by any device. I cannot compare it better than to the
practice of some Knavish Master of a Ship, who being entrusted by his Owners
with a goodly Ship, and fraught with a valuable Cargo; he having no part in
either, takes up on Bottom R^^ as much money as ever his credit can possibly
stretch to; and having made up his Market, the next best opportunity, when he
can most colourably do it, runs his Ship upon the Rock, or Shelves, where he
may save himself, but undoes his Merchants and Owners. The Metaphor will hold
as well with this Courtly Senator, who will serve the French King for Crowns,
and sell his own Prince, whose bread and favor supported his being, and for a
Pension, betray the Lives, Liberties and Religion of the three Kingdoms, and is
now known to the Kingdom by the name of Pensioner. It Is this Treacherous Crew
of Court-Vermin we inveigh against, and that we caution against in all our
Elections: but for all those men of Honor, Wisdom, and Integrity, that are
faithful to His Majesty, and the Interest of the Kingdoms (attending the Court)
we Love and Honor: Therefore cease your Calumnious Aspersions, and pack from
amongst us.

The quarrel now is purely betwixt Protestant and Papist: Since all must suffer
together, of what persuasion soever, under the denomination of Protestant, I
think it concerns all to stand together, and unanimously provide for our
selves, by all lawful means: The chief of which, and the only remedy under God,
is our Parliaments; who like good Physicians, purges away corrupt humors,
representing our grievances to the King, providing Remedies for all our
distempers, and supporting His Majesty against all foreign and homebred
enemies. This, as it is the great privilege and birthright of English men, and
is the bond of their safety, if the best of men be elected to that great trust;
so if care be not taken to keep out Atheists, Papists, Pensioners, and beggarly
Prodigals, that will snap at every bait, your M^^^cine shall prove your Poison,
and your Physicians your fatal Executioners. Shut not the^^^^re your eyes, nor
stop your ears, you see and understand enough by what is laid open, (...) ^ll
matter of fact; This design and devilish Plot has been long a g^^wing, and now
(...) is laboring in its great Crisis; now is the time that all Hands, Hearts,
P^^^^^^, (...) are all little enough to succor in this deplored calamity.
Parliaments would (...) ^^^covered the Plot; offer remedies, and some think
with too much hearty zeal. So that (...) Parliaments are already Dissolved, to
the amazement of the Nation in this j^^ct^re (...) and it is hard and strange we
cannot be thought well with Parliament, be they (...); neither can we be
without them; and these His Majesty graciously declares shall (...).

Therefore Gentlemen, and my dear Contrymen, in the Name of God, and as you
value the concern of the Gospel, the honor, life and safety of your Prince,
your Religion, Lives, Liberties and Estates, take care now of your Elections,
as much, or more than ever; up and be doing, and the Lord that has hitherto
preserved you, will still deliver, if you be not wanting to your selves in the
use of those lawful means God has put into your hands.

I shall only add this necessary Advertisement, That if Parliaments be
frequent, your danger will be so; for by often dissolutions of Parliaments, and
your exp^ct^ion ^ot being answered, you may thereby be discouraged, grow
negligent, and so let your wa^ch^ul enemy have an opportunity to bring in their
rotten Hirelings, that will sell your birthright, or any things, to answer
their hungry appetites.

The next danger is, lest frequent Parliaments, besides the trouble, will bring
on a frequent insupportable charge, which those honest Gentlemen that deserve
so great a trust, cannot undergo the burden of, and so be forced to desert you.

Therefore I humbly advise, and heartily beseech you, hear and pity the dying
groans of your languishing Country; it is but your reasonable service, Nomo
sibi nascitur partem patria, partem Parents, partem Amici, all are concerned.
I address my self first to you the Electors, the Principal great Ingine, by
which this mighty work must move; let no discouragements make you weary, but
faithfully and duly attend your Elections, and actively strive to raise all
your Friends, Acquaintance and Relations with you, and make your choice of men
fearing God, and hating Covetousness; men of Honor, men of Honesty, and men of
Estates, and then miss of a good Parliament if you can. Next, encourage those
faithful Gentlemen, of whose fidelity you have already had experience; choose
them, and that freely, not charging them with a Penny, that they may be still
in a capacity to serve you, without their ruin. And you most worthy Patriots,
that have immortalized your names by your faithful discharging of your Trusts
in Parliament, let nothing discourage you, but stand to, and for your King and
Country; be not weary of well doing, let not your hearts faint before you have
fully wrought deliverance for the Kingdom; your merits can never be forgotten,
for the memory of the just shall never fade. Give God his due, in maintaining
his truths in our established Religion; give Caesar his right in his Royal
Prerogative, and keep and maintain the peoples right, as a sacred relic
deposited in your hands; and he that will break but one Link in this
Golden-Chain, let him be Anathema, Maranatha: Lift up then your heads, brave
English men, let nothing daunt you, mind well your Elections, and then Pope and
Devil do thy worst, nothing but our own neglects and sins can undo us: and it
will be the greatest shame, that we should be less active in so good a Cause to
preserve our selves, than the Enemy in a wicked one, to destroy us.

FINIS.

