A SUMMARY, OF Certain PAPERS About WOOL, As the INTEREST OF ENGLAND Is
Concerned in It.

By W. C.

London, Printed for the Author Anno Dom. 1685

TO THE READER.
HAving wrote a Treatise, about fifteen Years ago, and then presented to his
Late, and Present Majesty, Entitled ENGLANDS INTEREST by the Improvement of
the MANUFACTURE of WOOL, the same was pretended to be answered in Anno 1677,
though it was not, by a PAPER Entitled REASONS for a LIMITED EXPORTATION of
WOOL, to which I made a REPLY in the same Year, and there detected the
weakness and insufficiency of that ANSWER.

But finding in my Attendance on a late Committee of the Honorable House of
Commons, appointed to consider a Bill depending before Them, for the
Explanation and better Execution of two Acts of Parliament, made in his late
Majesty's Reign, Prohibiting the Exportation of Wool, that ANSWER was urged by
some against me, supposing no REPLY was made to it: I have for that and other
Reasons, now reprinted an ABSTRACT, both of my first DISCOURSE my Opponents
ANSWER and my REPLY thereunto, werein I have endeavored to remove that Gross
mistake, as if the hindering the EXPORTATION of WOOL was the Cause of the low
Price thereof, the Cause of the Fall of RENTS and Value of LANDS, the contrary
whereof I do Assert, and shall plainly Demonstrate the true Cause thereof,
Evincing, that the hindering the EXPORTATION of WOOL will Cause the recovery
of our TRADE, the raising the Price of WOOL, and Consequently of LANDS which
is the Principal Drift and Design, of the Following DISCOURSE.

I will for Arguments sake, suppose that by a Liberty to Transport such a
limited quanty of Wool as is propounded; the price of a Pack of rough Wool,
for one or two Years were advanced from 8 l. to 10 l. which is 40 s. p. Pack
more then it is now, and that the Price of a Pack of kembed Wool were advanced
from 20 l. proportionable, for the latter is the sort of Wool, which is most
usually exported to France, a Pack of such kembed Wool, manufactured, makes
Stuffs and Stockings worth above 120 l. Ster. as more particularly hereafter
appears.

But if we Export our Wool unkembed, we give the French another advantage, in
mixing it with their own course Wool and and fine spun Linen for Druggats, by
which means, one Pack of our unkembed Wool Exported to France unmanufactured,
worth 10 l. as aforesaid, prevents the working up of two Packs in England,
which I thus prove; if the French had not our Wool, they must have our
Woollen-Manufacture, but the French by having and working our Wool to supply
themselves, with Stuffs Druggats, and Stockings, that they have no occasion for
those sorts of our Manufacture, and by that means, the more Wool remains in
England, on the Graziers and Farmers hands, and so the 40 s. per Pack advanced
as supposed, for one Year or two at first by such an Exportation, would in a
short time, not only sink to nothing; but the price of the Pack at 8 l. would
dwindle and consume in like manner; because the French making so much more
Manufacture of a Pack than we do; and refusing to accept of our Manufactures it
cannot but naturally follow, that our Wool at home will grow cheaper and
cheaper, notwithstanding such a Limited Exportation.

Upon enquiry it will appear, that before such quantities of Wool were
Exported as lately have been, the City of Exeter alone vended above the value
of three hundred thousand pounds Ster. every Year to France in Serges and
Perpetuanys more then now; that City does in any one Year.

And Dorcet, and Hampshere almost depended upon the French Trade, besides many
parts in England, especially Norwich for Stockings, which Trade is almost lost.

Give me leave to name two Towns (viz.) South-hampton, and Rumsey, where within
this 20 Years, 30 Clothiers and upwards employed in making Cloth Rashes, most
of which, was sent to France, and now there is not 10 Clothiers in both these
Towns who make that Manufacture, and those drive but very small Trades; I am
somewhat sure, not a 3d. part if a 4th is now made in those Towns, of what was
formerly, and that which is made is so much debased in the price, that the
Clothiers are discouraged from making it, and all caused by the Transportation
of Wool; and yet those Gentlemen, that are Favorers of Transportation of
Wool, are complaining of the low price of it, which is the Natural Effect of
that Transportation.

Now we will suppose to Illustrate this Argument further, that there was only
Kent in Fngland, that produced Wool, and only Pickardy in France, that did
take of and consume our Manufacture of that Wool, and admit that there grows
Yearly in Kent, 6000 Packs of Wool, more or less (Rumney-Marsb alone producing
1670 Packs by my Opponents computation) and admit that all this were
manufactured here, and exported into Pickardy, two thirds of it into Stockings
and Stuffs, and one third part in Cloth, for that is the usual proportion;
suppose the Stockings and Stuffs, sold here at 120 l. Ster. per. pack, and the
Cloth at 50 l. per Pack, comes to 579999 l. when the Wool of those Packs at 10
l. per Pack comes to 60000 l. so that the County of Kent, if those Packs were
exported raw would loose, 519999 l. which Instance I mention as a Plea to the
Charge given by my Opponent, pa. 5th wherein he reflects upon me for cruelty in
detecting and prosecuting the exporters of Wool he supposing that for want of
Exportation of Wool, was lost in Rumney-Marsh 12320 l. which if it were true
the comparison of this loss in Rumney-Marsh (which by the computation, is near
one third part of the Wool in Kent, as before mentioned) I say when the
comparison is truly made, I hope to be cleared by the Impartial Reader, and
the cruelty justly to be charged upon the said Exporter, that shall hinder so
much proffit to the Poor in Kent, as well as to the Gentry in Kent, upon which
occasion I will use my Opponent's own words (Viz.) By which pray y' Judge how
many Millions are Yearly lost through all England: where is now the Cruelty? I
must confess this contention is not with any pleasure, but meare necessity
draws it from me.

Besides the loss of our Manufacture to France, we of course comes to another
and greater loss, by the Exportation of our Wool to France: For the French by
this means not only prevents the Importation of our Woollen-Manufacture, but
becomeing Rivals with us in the said Trade, can undersel us in other more
remote parts, having this advantage of us, if they paid double the Rate for
Wool, that the English does, because the Workmanship is 5 times more then the
vvorth of the Wool, and the French vvorking at half the wages, or less then
the English.

AN ABSTRACT OF Englands Interest, by the improvement of our Woollen-
Manufacture.
IF I should value the discouragements of appearing in public in this Matter,
I should be silent, but observing the Nature of this National Mischief of
exporting Wool, and the necessity of preventing it; that the greatest Strength
of the Nation in People, the greatest Power upon the Seas in Shipping, the
greatest Revenues of his Majesty, being his Customs, do all arise from Clothing.

And considering these great Advantages are endeavored to be gained from us by
a powerful Neighbor abroad, while some at home are not only reasoning, but
appear in Print for it, and others despairing upon a preposest opinion, that
all endeavors to recover our selves, will be rendered fruitless and vain.

The consideration whereof, has prompted me to use the utmost of my little
Skill, that the threatened Ruin of all may be prevented, and some good part of
that, which is lost, may be recovered,

I shall therefore in this Discourse relate very little more than Matter of
Fact; the Wool of England, before King Edward the 3d's time, was always of
great account and esteem abroad, sufficiently testified by the great Amity
which it begat, and for a long time maintained between the Kings of England and
the Dukes of Burgundy, only by the great advantage from that Commodity did
accrue to those People (who at that time had the sole Manufacturing of Wool)
in so much that they received the English Wool at 6 d. per l. and returned the
Cloth made thereof into England at 10 s. per yard, (whereas Wool now worrh 10
d. per l. will not make Cloth worth above 6 s. per yard.) to the great
enriching of the Burgundian State, both in the advancement of the Revenues of
their Dukes, and in a full Employment of their People, whereby the Merchants of
England were occasioned (as a People unwilling to be wholly dispriviledged of
so great abenefit) to transplant themselves (with their Families in great
numbers) into Flanders, from whence they held a constant Commerce with most
parts of the World, this Amity continued without intermission, between England
and Burgundy, until King Edward the 3d. made his mighty Conquest over France
and Scotland, and during his residence in Flanders, where he acquainting
himself with the Flemings Affairs, and obtaining then by his assistance in
their War with France, thereby gained a good opinion amongst them, and he, in
order to draw over the Woollen Artificers into England, represented to them,
the danger they were in by the bordering Wars with France, and the peaceable
condition of England and freedom of the People that are Subjects here,
propounds an Invitation for them to come over hither, wherein he promises them
the same Privileges and Immunities with his own Subjects, which they accepted
and came over, and brought their families with them; and the said King most
Royally performed those promises, and by it also replanted many of his own
Subjects in England, who had been long settled in Flanders, and in a short time
by Act of Parliament prohibites the exportation of Wool, the advantage whereof
has been very great to this Nation thereby, for some hundred years past, by
the vigilance of the Government, and the protection of its Laws, in the careful
execution thereof upon Offenders; but so it is (for some years past) the French
by their Diligence to enrich themselves upon us, has so far exceeded our Care
to preserve our selves that its come to, if not beyond, a question who may have
the greatest benefit of the Manufacture of English Wool, they who have no
right to it, or they to whom of right it does belong.

That this is so will appear, that not only Holland has for a long time been
Rivals with us in our Trade: But France is like to be too hard for us also, for
the reasons before given, besides our damage, in putting that value on the
French Fancies, by giving them double the worth for the same Manufacture,
(which we our selves make) of our English Wool, so much have we been deceived
(in this matter) that whereas in the time of the late War with the Dutch and
French, that French Druggets, and other Stuffs, not coming so freely from
France, some English broad Clothes striped, at 10 s. per yard, were rent in 3
parts (Viz) Breadths, and put in the form of French Druggets, and each part
sold for 8 s. per yard, which makes that one yard come to 24 s. which, as
English Cloth was sold for 10 s, and the like Fancy many have for Dutch Black
Cloth, if it have the name of Dutch, though of our own Make, this is real matter
of Fact.

To return, it is aver'd, that the Exportation of English and Irish Wool is of
a Dangerous and Destructive Consequence to the very Being of our Trade, and to
the riches and strength of this Kingdom, and to his Majesty's Customs,
notwithstanding the Objections produced against it, with respect to the
Graziers Advantage thereby, supposing, as before at large premised, that 40 s.
upon a Pack of Wool was advanced for a year or two by Exportation, yet other
things would be lessned by it, it being not to be denied at the same time, that
the poor and laborious People can be employed, as to have money to buy them
Bread, Beef, much less Mutton, the want of which must of necessity fall the
price of all manner of Victuals, and if we name only Mutton (which is relative
to our subject) and that be sold but 6 d. per quarter the less, which being 2
s. in the carcass, which comes to 10 l. for 100 Sheep, they producing a Pack of
Wool, which at that rate is the value of the said Pack modestly computed: But
then for Beef and Corn, if that be lesned proportionable, it must be of course
a greater damage to the Farmer and Grazier, it being reckoned three times the
value of Wool throughout the Nation, one with another. And supposing there
should be grown yearly in England Fourteen Hundred Thousand packs of Wool, one
year with another: And supposing that once in four years the sheep were all
killed, (Viz) 25 yearly, which 25 Sheep valued so low as 10 l. which is the
value of the Wool yearly shorn.

It may therefore prevail upon us to believe, that Beef and all sorts of Corn
must be of a far grater value than Mutton, (and consequently of Wool) because
the greatest number of People by far, are the poor and labourious People which
consume Beef, Bread and Bear, and few of such do often buy Mutton, or at at
least any quantity proportionable to other provision, and therefore whatever
some others think, that a Country can be enriched without the poor laborious
People, I am of another opinion: For it is matter of Fact, that in England it
self, in those parts where the inhabitants are thin, and the Countries not full
of People, that the Land in those parts will not yield much above half the
value, as Land of the same goodness will yield near Towns well Inhabited, or
Countries where Trade is good, and if thus in England it is much less in
Ireland, which I think is a good Demonstration; for the Clothier can no way
possibly conceal his Markets, being betrayed by his hastening his Cloth not
then ready for the like Market, by which means the Grazier raises the price
of his Wool, and the Workfolks advance their wages, the profit whereof goes
to the said Grazier and Farmer, it being obvious such people do not lay up
their money, but lay out most for the Belly.

These things considered on the other hand, it will manifestly appear, that the
Exportation of Wool unmanufactured will not only be destructive to the
Merchants and Clothiers Trade, and the exposing the poor to distress, for want
of employment; but confequently the Farmer and Grasier will not be able to pay
his Rent: For if it be so, that whilst we have have some little Trade left,
there are such general complaints, what may be expected if our Foreign Trade
should be wholly taken away, which is now in more danger, by the French, than
it has been this three hundred Years past, and we seem to sleep and take no
notice of it.

And then we may consider what price Wool will bear, when we, some of us by
our remissness, and others wilfulness have lost our Trade, by the circumventing
practices of Forreiners, and we our selves helping forward, for fear they
should not be able to do it alone, and all this for a mere fancied and
supposed profit, for there was not more Art and Skill used by our Ancestors, to
bring home the workers at first to the Wool, and Prohibiting the Exportation
thereof, and settling the Manufacturing of it in England, than is now used to
Export the materials unmanufactured to Foreign Artificers; and if by the means
of that which is exported already, Wool is now made so cheap as it is, a
greater Exportation would make it yet cheaper, supposing ten thousand Packs
shipped into France, which by their sort of working it and mixing it with
Lining, and their own course Wool, and thinness of their work, goes as far
there, and makes as many yards in the whole, as twenty thousand Packs if
Manufactured here, into more thick and substantial Cloth and Stuffs, which Ten
Thousand Packs, if they were not Exported into France, it would unavoydably
follow, that France would take of us the quantity of Twenty Thousand Packs, in
our Manufacture.

By all which it is obvious, that in time to come, the Wool in England will be
much more cheaper than now it is, because, by the aforesaid means, more Wool
will be Exported, and less will of course be used in England, and that little
which will be Manufactured here can bear little or no price, Foreigners
making that themselves, which we should furnish them with; which if it be true,
as it is generally asserted, that Wool is as cheap in France, as in some parts
of England at this time, it is but rational to think it must be much cheaper
hereafter, when our Wool dos increase on our hands, and our Manufacture
decrease, both in quantity and value.

For the better clearing of this point, give me leave to insert one instance or
two, as matter of Fact: That when Wool was wholly Manufactured in England, and
very little, if any at all Exported raw, the price thereof for several years
together continued, betwixt 12 d. and 18 d. per l. weight, and I verily
believe as much, if not more, Wool was grown in England at that time, (Viz)
betwixt 20 and 30 years ago, then is now at this time, the reason is plain,
from the great quantity of our Woollen Manufacture vended beyond Sea, which was
so considerable, that it kept up the price of Wool at home. On the other hand
in Ed. 3's. time, when all the Wool was Exported Un-manufactured, it was sold
for 6 d. per pound, as is before asserted, by which it is manifest, that the
advancement of the price of Wool, consists in the consumtion and vent of our
Manufacture freely beyond the Seas, and not in the Exportation of our Wool
Un-manufactured.

Before I conclude, give me leave to add here, what Sr. Walter Rawlegh in his
time presented to King James the first, (Viz) that by means only of the
Exportation of Cloth undyed and undressed, was lost to the Kingdom above Four
Hundred Thousand Pounds yearly, in the Workmanship, which the Dressers and
Dyers, and other Artificers would have gained thereby, besides the damage to
the King, in discouraging the Importation of Dying Stuffs, which pay a
considerable Custom.

Now, if it was thus with England when the Wool was made up into Cloth, and
that only for want of the Dressing and Dying it here, so much loss came to this
Kingdom thereby, what must the loss be, when it is not Manufactured here at all,
but the Materials Exported raw, without any manner of gain to any Artificer at
home?

For if we first consider his Majesty's loss, next the Merchants and
Clothiers, after which must follow, the Detriment to all other Persons
depending on Trade, there being such a connection of Trades one to another, that
the damage of one harms the rest, and profit of one advances others, while the
whole is enlarged by the abounding of working and laborious people, who supply
the Farmer and Grazier with money, with which he pays his Rent to the Nobility
and Gentry, and they again disperse it amongst Tradesmen, by which circulation
all degrees of Men are either employed or enriched or both, and hence naturally
comes content, harmony and pleasure, that one condition of Men take in the
other, the poor being by employment delivered from fear of want, the Nobility,
Gentry, Merchant and Tradesman, being also secure from those inconveniences,
the want of poor may naturally expose them to, employment rationally is the
strength of any People, but Idleness brings Poverty, Shame, and Ruin, which is
a temptation to Theft, and all manner of vilany; certainly we are all concerned
more or less in this rich treasure of Wool, because it is that which sets more
than half the hands of the Nation to work, I may say three parts of the
laborious and industrious employed about it, considering that much of the
Shipping is employed in this affair, and also many other Tradesmen depending,
either for materials, provision, or other necessaries on the Clothing Trade,
and so from his Majesty down to the meanest, all are more or less concerned,
the King mostly, not only in that his People are by that most employed, and
provided for, but because so great Revenues comes directly into him, upon the
Trade of Importation occasioned thereby.

But before I conclude this first part of my discourse, give me leave here to
insert the advantage we do receive by one Pack of Wool, manufactured into
Stockings, being that which is obvious to the meanest capacity, (viz.) a Pack
and half of fleece Wool, worth 10 l. per. Pack, making a Pack of combed worth
20 l. and one pound of such Wool, at that rate comes to 20 d. which will make
two pair of Hose at 5 s. per pair, or three pair at 3 s. and 4 d. or the
slightest, four pair at 2 s. and 6 d. per pair; either sort, the pound of Wool
is improved from 20 d. to 10 s. So that a Pack of such Wool containing 240
pounds weight, being so many 10 s. in Stockings, comes to 120 l. out of which
deduct 20 l. for the Wool, and there remains 100 l. Sterling, gained only by
the labor of spinning and knitting, besides the dying, leging, packing and
fitting it for Sea; but there are some sorts of Stockings made about Norwich,
worth 7 or 8 s. per. pair, made of fine Wool, and one pound will make 3 pair
of such Hose, so that such a Pack would be worth 200 l. and more, and some
sorts of Stuffs made in Norwich, worth 6 l. and the Wool not worth above 10 s.

I shall in the next place, Impartialy relate the substance of what has been
objected against me, in my Opponents answer, caled Reasons for a Limited
Exportation of Wool.

FINIS.

