The Last and Truest INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND: BEING A true Relation of the
taking of a Castle from the Rebels, called the Castle of the Knights of the
Elms, on the river of Limbrick, by the soldiers of the English Fleet, who took
in the Castle 1000. Bushels of Wheat, 4000. weight of Butter, with great store
of Barley, Malt, and salted Beef, September. 28.

ALSO The taking of a French ship on the river of Limbrick which brought
Ammunition and other Provision from S. Mallos to assist the Rebels, wherein the
English Fleet took 120. barrels of Powder, Ammunition for 500. men, 35. Butts
of Sack, with great store of Salt.

Set forth in the true copy of a Letter sent to M. Barnet Pewterer, in
Fanchurch Street Lon. from M. Owen Cox Master of one of the ships for the Irish
Expedition called the Arkelles. Dated, September. 29.

Printed for A. Wildgoose. October 17. 1642.

The Truest and last INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND: Being a true Relation of the
taking of a Castle on the river of Limbrick from the Rebels, by the soldiers
of the English Fleet, wherein they took 1000. bushels of Wheat, 4000. weight of
Butter, besides great store of Barley, Malt, and salted Beef, September. 28.
M. Barnet*
IT was my promise to let you understand the proceedings of this our
expedition, but finding no convenient opportunity to write, nor conquest worth
the writing till now, I hope I may the better be excused. What has been done
since our Fleet came together, you shall understand.

On the 9. day of August we arrived before Galloway, which is the strongest
town they have, except Limbrick, and there laid siege to it: so the Lord of of
Clenrikard came down and conferred with our Lord Forbes, and the Merchants of
the town: they strongly replied, and said, that they were the Kings loyal
subjects, and had not offended in the least thing, but that the soldiers in
the Kings Fort had done them wrong: but had the King sealed to our Commission,
we should have found enough against them, that we might truly have made an
onset upon the town: we were so near the town with our garrison, that we
could hear them plainly call our Parliament rogues, Parliament-dogs, and
Puritan-Dogs: so you may very well conceive what subjects they are. On the
third and fourth day we re-fetcht aboard our soldiers, and the sixth day we
set sail from Gallaway to go to Limbrick, and on the ninth day we arrived in
Limbrick river, and on the two and twentieth day we laid siege to the Knights
of the Elmes Castle, that is to say in English, the Knights of the valley; the
which Castle we played upon two days and two nights with two Demi-Canons: so
the second day we entered the Castle, slaying all we found alive: but when we
came to bury them we found but eighteen or twenty, the rest made an escape
and got into the woods: there came a great army of the Irish within sight of
the Castle; there marched out betwixt four and five hundred, and when they
began to approach, the Irish men fled, and durst not stand: We took in this
Castle a thousand bushels of Wheat, three or four thousand weight of Butter,
besides Barley, Malt and salt Beef: this Castle we took on the three and
twentieth of September with the loss of five men, a Trouper and a Footman in
the pursuit after the first landding, and three other after we came under the
Castle walls, two common soldiers, and the Master of Captain Thompsons ship:
after they were under the Castle walls, they went off again, and so were
shot from the castle out of one of the lovver holes: but when we entered the
castle, we lost never a man: and for their men, we know not the number we
slew before the castle was taken, for they buried their dead out of our
sight. We had a very hard siege of it by reason of the foulness of the
vveather, I think they did set all the devils they serve to work; for it did
rain and blovv all the time; we were in the cold exceedingly, and in that
regard my Lord has given us ten days to rest our selves, and then to go to
some other castle upon this river.

A TRUE RELATION of the taking of a French ship which came from S. Mallos with
provision to assist the Rebels on the river of Limbrick with 120. barrels of
Powder, Ammunition for 500. men, and 35. butts of Sack.
AS we passed along the foresaid river of Limbrick, We took on the river a
French Ship that came from S. Mallos, which had in it an hundred and twenty
barrels of powder, and Arms for four or five hundred men, as Muskets, Pikes,
and such like, besides thirty and odd butts of sack, and great store of falt,
which has been very helpful unto us. M. Barnet, I do entreat you that you
would be pleased to remember me in your prayers, for God has been very
merciful unto me in giving me my life, for I was at push of Pike with them in
the castle an hour and an half before I entered in, and then was feign to
enter in at a small hole, as much as I could do to creep in at with my arms,
and had no harm at all, I praise God for it. Thus hoping you will not be
unmindfull of me, I rest,

From the River of Limbrick, September. 29. 1642. Yours, etc. Owen Cox.

FINIS.

