SOME THOUGHTS ON THE BILL Depending before the Right Honorable THE HOUSE OF
LORDS, FOR Prohibiting the EXPORTATION of the Woollen Manufactures of Ireland
to Foreign Parts.

Humbly offered to their Lordships.

DVBLIN, Printed by Joseph Ray in Skinner Row, over against the Tholsel.
MDCXCVIII.

REASONS against the Bill for Prohibiting the Exportation of the Woollen
Manufactures of Ireland, to Foreign Parts.
THE Bill for Prohibiting the Exportation of the Woollen Manufacture out of
Ireland to Foreign Parts, being now under your Lordships Consideration, I have
presumed to offer my Thoughts concerning it, and shall endeavor to show it
will be detrimental to the Interest of both England and Ireland. If this has
the end I design by it, I shall think my time well spent; If not, I hope the
Sincerity of my Intentions will atone for my Inability of Performance.

I shall begin by showing the great Advantages England reaps by the Trade of
Ireland, that your Lordships may judge how little Reason there is to be jealous
of them, and how tender this Nation ought to be of putting unnecessary
Difficulties upon them.

It Is a common Saying amongst us, that it would be well for England if Ireland
was under the Sea; whereas I hope to make it appear, that England gets more by
Ireland than by the Trade of the whole World besides; and if in the late Reigns
Ireland had not in a great measure supplied the Losses we suffered by the
French, Indian and Eastern Trades, we had been long since undone, and it had
not been now the common Debate of the Town how to undo them.

This will appear to be evident, if we consider the Particulars relating to
both Kingdoms.

Near a third part of all the Lands of that Kingdom, belonging to English
Proprietors who inhabit here, and have their Rents constantly returned in ready
Money.

Besides this, most of the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland spend their Estates
here; they live no longer in Ireland than to raise a sum of Money to spend here
in their Pleasures. This is the Seat of Government: Here are the Court and the
Societies of Law: Here all the Nobility and Gentry come for Employments,
Education, or Pleasure; which Considerations alone would exhaust that Kingdom,
if it had the Riches of both Indies

I will add to this, that England supplies Ireland with most of the Commodities
they consume; and notwithstanding all our frights, there are nine in ten of
that Country, that are able to buy it, clothed in Woollen Manufactures sent
from England, and in exchange we have very few Commodities from them; for their
Cattle are prohibited, there are Impositions upon their Tallow, Leather, and
Corn, which almost amount to a Prohibition; and last Year the Tonnage and
Poundage was doubled upon their Linen and other Manufactures; and such
Commodities as are suffered to come from thence are either absolutely necessary
to us, or Materials for our Manufactures, as Wool, Flax, Cony skins, raw
Hides, Sheepskins, Rape-seed, etc.

In times of Peace there was near 100000 l. per annum returned near to the
Court, besides the Charge of that Government; and since the War they have
contributed to the Public Charge as far as their late Misfortunes would suffer
them, and without doubt in a new War will advance large Supplies of Men and
Money, if we do not disable them.

Besides this, most of the Trade of that Kingdom is carried on by English
Stocks, and in English Bottoms; and a great number of their E^tates are
mortgaged to English Men at the unreasonable Interest of ten per cent. They are
but Factors, and most of the Profit redounds to us; they toil for our
Advantage, they sow and we reap.

I have enumerated these Particulars, to show, that whatsoever Ireland gets by
Trade from the whole World centers in England, and is returned hither by Bills
of Exchange from Spain, Holland, France, the West Indies, and other places. If
they gained ten Millions a Year, it would come to England; and if they get but
ten Thousand Pounds, we can have no more from them. They have no Mines of
Silver and Gold, and therefore can send none to us but what they get first from
others; and if we hinder them from making Advantages of other Nations, we can
make none of them; so that what is lost in the Parish is got in the Hundred.
Nor is it possible that Ireland should advance in Riches in any proportion to
England, for the former Issues will draw away their Wealth as fast as ever they
get it: and this is manifested by twenty Years Experience before the War; for
though they got a great many Millions over-balance from the rest of the World,
yet according to the best Computations they never had above three hundred
thousand Pounds in that Kingdom.

The Particulars I have mentioned amount to above 600000 l. per annum, besides
the great Advantages we receive by being supplied from thence with Materials
for our Manufactures, as beforementioned. If so, I submit to your Lordships,
whether the Over-balance we have of the rest of the World amount to as much
more: If it does, I am sure we shall quickly be a rich People; but if not, then
how tenderly ought we to use a Nation that yields us so much Profit? There is a
Mediocrity in Nature which we cannot exceed without destroying what we design
to advance. Moderate Impositions raise large Sums, and great ones often raise
nothing. We may sheer our Sheep so close, as to flee them that they shall never
bear Wool again. I have heard of a Man that tried to bring his Horse to live
without Meat, and then he died. I wish this be not the case of Ireland, that we
desire to get so much from them, till at last we put them out of a condition to
pay us any thing.

But there is another Consideration which strikes deeper yet; Whether by Bills
of this kind we shall not make the Possession of that Kingdom insecure to us,
and after so much expense of Blood and Treasure at last throw it again into
Irish hands.

My Lords I have heard but of two ways of keeping conquered Countries in
Subjection, by Arms, or by Colonies

As to the first (besides the Charge of it, which commonly eats up the whole
Profit) I think few will deny but it is equally dangerous to the conquering or
the conquered Country: There can be no Force in the Province but may be brought
to the Mother Kingdom; and if they are sufficient without other Assistance to
keep one Country in entire Subjection, in time they will keep the other so too.

The other way is by Colonies, and this is the method that free Governments
have always taken to secure their Conquests. This Rome did for four hundred
years, till at last their Conquests were so large that their Government grew
top-heavy, the Trunk was not large enough to support its Branches. This our
Ancestors did to secure Ireland, and is the easiest, least chargeable, and
least dangerous Method.

Now the establishing Colonies, my Lords, is often done by establishing the
conquering Army on some part of the conquered Lands, sometimes by sending forth
a number of your People to inhabit there; but always by giving them such
Encouragements, that it shall be their Interest to keep the Natives in
subjection.

This is the case of Ireland, that after five hundred years contending, 52
Rebellions and Massacres, to the loss of a Million of English, the conquering
Army often planted in the Country, and multitudes besides leaving England to
inhabit there, almost the whole Kingdom is at last got into the English hands;
and if we should lay such difficulties upon them, that they should think it
their Interest to leave the Country, or not be very solicitous for the English
Interest there, I submit to your Lordships great Wisdom, whether that Kingdom
may not hereafter give us fresh trouble. France is but a new Friend, and
Scotland for late reasons is not much in humor with us; and we know the whole
North of Ireland is inhabited by that Nation, and multitudes of them go over
every day, and will do so notwithstanding this or any other Law that can be
made.

I would not suggest such improbable and such wicked thoughts, as that the
English of that Country should join with them in any Interest but in
subserviency to England; but I hope I may say without offense that the better
any People are used, the better Subjects they will make: And I believe no one
will deny, if they had thought it their Interest to have joined with the late
King, we had had much more trouble in reducing the Country. The Town of
Londonderry, the Iniskillen-men, and the Militia of Ireland, had their share,
and a considerable one too, in bringing the Country to obedience.

No one knows what unhappy occasions may arise in ages to come of difference
between our Kings and People and therefore we ought to be tender how we make it
the Interest of a whole Kingdom to be subservient to the designs of a corrupt
Court, who will offer them any advantages. Most of us have read, and some of us
have seen with our Eyes, those times that Courts have played England against
Scotland, Scotland against England, and Ireland against both; and we have heard
of the time, that an Irish Parliament has been called to give Money to reduce
an English one.

They are not contending for Power or great Riches; they neither Trade to the
East Indies, Turkey, or Africa; they have neither Hamborough, Hudsons-Bay,
Greenland, or Russia Companies; they have no Fleets or Plantations; they ask
only the common benefits of Earth and Air. They desire only to change their
native Commodities for those they want, and to manufacture a small part of
their own Product, which is a liberty seems to be allowed them by the Law of
Nature, and which I don't find has been denied by the most severe Conquerors.

And here, my Lords, I would distinguish between Colonies for Trade, and
Colonies for Empire. The first is when a small number of your people are sent
forth to plant Commodities which your native Country does not produce, as in
the West Indies, or else when they are sent to negotiate a Trade with the
Natives, and build Forts for their Security, as in Africa and the East Indies.
In both these cases it has been usual to restrain their whole Trade to their
Mother Kingdom; for there can be no other reason for their establishment, and
their number being small, they will have sufficient encouragement for all their
Charge, Industry, and Hazard.

But Colonies for Empire stand upon quite different reasons; they are always
planted to keep great Countries in subjection, and prevent the charge and
hazard of constant standing Armies. These have always received the utmost
Encouragement, much less been restrained from making the best advantage of
their natural Product, and having their whole Trade restrained to their
Mother-Kingdom; but with humble submission, the Case of Ireland is yet harder:
for by this Act they will be restrained to carry their Woollen Manufactures to
Foreign parts, and the Impositions formerly laid, are sufficient to hinder them
from coming hither, so that they must carry them no where.

But my Lords, if we had destroyed the Woollen Manufacture in Ireland, is it
necessary that all will be made in England, that is hindered from being made in
Ireland? That Is a Tartar's Conceit, that if they kill any man, they shall
immediately enjoy his Wisdom and Beauty; but I am afraid this will not be the
Case of England: for Holland, Scotland, Venice, Germany, and France, pretend to
the Woollen Manufacture as well as they; and France has been always equal, if
not superior to us, in their skill of making Stuffs: and can it be conceived
that they will not share, if not in a great measure engross the benefit we
propose in the destruction of that Manufacture in Ireland? If so, then how much
more will it be to our advantage to receive the whole profit at second hand,
than at best to divide it with other Nations, and chiefly with France, which
has always sent Stuffs to Spain and Portugal, as well as England? and these
are the only Nations I have heard of, which Ireland has dealt with in that
kind; and tho for a few years before the War, Ireland might increase in their
Manufacture of Stuffs, yet it is very plain it was not upon the ruins of
England, for those Manufactures both then, and during the War, have advanced
prodigiously here, as will appear by the Entries in the Custom-house, as well
as by a greater consumption of them at home; and it seems a very hard case to
hinder Ireland from enriching themselves, and in consequence this Kingdom, at
the expense of other Nations.

But it seems we are particularly afraid of Ireland, because we are told they
can under-work us, and send their Commodities to a Foreign Market cheaper than
we; which fact with humble submission is otherwise. It Is true, common labor in
Husbandry is much cheaper there then here, but such as requires skill and
knowledge is not so: and this is true not only in Ireland, but in all Countries
thin of people, for there cannot be brought together numbers enough to carry on
any Manufacture with success; and if they could, Stocks and Materials are
wanting to set them to work: besides, naturally men choose rather to live in
idleness and sloth, than labor; and in poor Countries, where they can satisfy
the ordinary occasions of life with little industry, they will hardly be
persuaded to learn an Art, to which it will cost them seven years pains to
attain; and those who give themselves that trouble, will be sure to be better
paid than in a well peopled Country, where they must either work or strave.
This is the reason that in the West Indies, where the labor of a Black, is not
worth above Six pence a day, yet an ordinary Artificer will earn a Crown, and
sometimes ten Shillings. This is the reason that linen Cloth does not thrive
so well in Ireland as in Holland, where common labor is three times as dear;
and this is the reason that Woollen Cloth could never be made in Ireland so
cheap as it is sent from England, notwithstanding Freight and great Customs
paid there; which appears by their being never able to set up that Manufacture
with success, most of the Gentry and Merchants of that Kingdom being clothed
with English Cloth. They make only a few Stockings, Stuffs, and Frizes, which
are different from those made in England, and the sale of them is more owing to
the particular way of making them, than any advantage in the price; and yet
notwithstanding they send but very few abroad, it appearing by the Custom-house
Books of Ireland, that the Woollen Manufacture imported into Ireland from
England, is ten times the value of what is exported from Ireland to the rest of
the World. But admitting they could work cheaper there, yet it is no consequence
they can sell the Manufacture cheaper. There are several Foreign Materials
necessary to it, which come cheaper to us than them: besides, the difference of
Interest gives us a great advantage. No man will employ his Time and Stock in
any Manufacture without trebling the common Interest of his Money. This
Consideration alone makes above fifteen per cent. difference: besides, men upon
small Stocks, and in a poor Country, will expect to get much more in
proportion, than upon great ones in a rich Country, because there are so many
ways in the former, of turning their money to advantage. Great Stocks and low
Interest carry away the Trade of the World; and, as is observed by Sir Josiah
Child in his Book of Trade, where Labor is dearest, there are most
Manufactures, as in Holland and England, more than in any Countries in Europe,
and in the West of England more than the North. Whether this is the Cause or
Effect, is not material, since it is plain that Dearness of Wages does not
destroy Manufactures, but always is an Evidence that they thrive, as we
experience every day, that when the Woollen Manufacture is most demanded, Wages
run highest.

But they tell us, that Ireland will drein away our People; tho by the way they
give but a scurvy Argument for it, when they say, they can earn less Wages
there. Now, my Lords, I could be glad to know how many People have gone to
Ireland that could live in England? Few Men leave their Country, their
Acquaintance and Relations, but for necessity, because they would not hang or
starve at home; Men who are in Debt, Unfortunate, or spent what they had; and
if they had not Ireland to go to, would go to the Plantations, or else to
Holland and other Countries, and be lost to the Kingdom for ever.

But what shall those men do, that are bred up to that Manufacture in Ireland,
and understand nothing else? Men that have spent their whole Lifetime in
learning an Art, will not go to School again to learn a new one: They will
rather leave their Country, and find another, where they may receive more
Encouragement. They cannot come to England, for the Laws of the Poor prohibit
them to live in any Parish: Holland will receive the Protestants, and France
the Papists; or perhaps they will go to some Country, and set up the
Manufacture where it is not yet pretended to. All the Nations in the World would
promote any Proposition of that kind, and with open Arms receive those who
would give them any Assistance. 'Twas the Duke of Alva's driving out the
^^emins that set up the Woollen Manufacture in England, and the Persecution in
France has very much improved it, and many of the French Protestants for want
of Employment in England, are gone to Ireland; and if we should drive them and
other Protestants out there, they will go somewhere else, where they will be
sure to be received: and the Consequence to the Public is the same, whether
People leave their Country for fear of Persecution, or because they cannot live
in it; but the Consequence will be much more fatal to Ireland, by driving out
such a number of Protestants, to the lessening the English Interest there.

And after all, are we sure, my Lords, this Act will answer the ends designed
by it? I would not suggest so unbecoming a Thought, as that the Magistrates in
Ireland should not do their utmost to execute it, but that we find the Officers
in other Countries are not over-zealous for the public Interest when their own
is concerned. Few Men are in any Employments in Ireland, but either have or
hope to have an Interest in the Country: and what probability can there be of
having a Law well executed, when the Nobility, the Gentry, and the whole Body
of the People have an Interest against it? We have an Instance of this in the
Coasts of Kent and Sussex: for though it is the Interest of the whole Kingdom
besides to prohibit Wool going to France, yet because it is the Interest of a
few hundreds that it should, all the Laws made to the contrary have proved
ine^fectual; and in my humble Opinion it is worth your Lordships deepest
Consideration, whether this Law may not put Ireland upon negotiating a secret
Trade with France, than which nothing can be more fatal to England. But there
is another Country that pretends to the Woollen Manufacture nearer than France.
Scotland fies but three hours sail from Ireland, and the whole North of that
Kingdom is inhabited by Scots, and if we should put such Hardships upon them, I
am afraid it will not be an easy matter to hinder their trafficking with their
Countrymen, which may be done in little Boats; and what is not worked up in
Scotland, may be sent from thence to France. The whole Kingdom of Ireland
thinks it as much their Interest as ours to prohibit the carrying their Wool
to Foreign Parts: but if we should hinder them from sharing in the Benefit of
that Law, it is to be feared they will send it where they can get most for it,
notwithstanding this or any Laws that can be made to prevent it. Besides, there
is another thing worthy of Consideration, whether if we should hinder the
People of Ireland from sending any of their Woollen Manufactures abroad, they
will not agree together to spend none but their own at home, which if they do,
this Act will recoil upon England with a witness. The Bill prohibiting their
importing Irish Cattle has put them upon Navigation, and an extentive Trade
with other Nations; and it is to be feared, if we should hinder them from
selling their Manufactures to other Nations, they will have Wit enough to spend
none but their own in Ireland.

But if, my Lords, notwithstanding all that may be said, it shall be thought
the Interest of England to destroy the Woollen Manufacture in Ireland, there is
an easier and Gentler way of doing it. The Power of the Government is very
great in that Country, and may give it secret Discouragements, and let it
decline by degrees: they may divert it by setting up the Linen Manufacture in
the places where the Woollen most prospers. Perhaps the Parliament of Ireland,
now they see the Pleasure of England, will do their Endeavors to divert their
Stock and People to the Linen Manufacture; but with the utmost Submission I
say it, that it seems too severe to tell them and the whole World in so solemn
a manner, that they shall not Manufacture any of their own Product; it bears a
Sting in the Tail of it, and teaches them this hard Lesson, that whenever
hereafter they with great Charge, Hazard, and perhaps forty Years Industry
arrive to a degree of Perfection in any thing, if it appears to be the real or
mistaken Interest of England to suppress it, all their hopes and Endeavors
must be dashed to pieces in a moment, their Cattle are already prohibited, their
Corn, their Leather, their Tallow, are so in a great measure, they cannot come
from the West Indies but must touch in England: But this Bill goes farther yet;
it says, in effect, they shall not bring their Manufactures here, nor carry
them any where else: why may they not expect that another Parliament will say,
that the carrying abroad their Beef will lesson the Price of our Beef, the
carrying abroad their Corn will lessen the Price of our Corn, and so the rest
of their Commodities; and with so much the greater probability, as they have
the Precedent of this Act to justify the Reasonableness of it; Nay, my Lords,
it is the common Subject of the Pamphlets, and Discourse of the Town, that it
ought to be done already; and what Assurance shall they have that the Linen
Manufacture (which they are so often complimented with) will never be set up in
England? It has been often attempted, and the want of Success in my poor
Opinion has been more owing to the Stock-jobbing and ill Conduct of the
Managers, than any reason from the nature of the thing: yet notwithstanding a
great deal of Linen is made in Lancashire, Westmoreland and other Parts of the
North of England, who begin already to grumble at the bringing in Flax and
Linen from Ireland. And if those Countries should improve in that Manufacture,
I know no reason why it should not be as much Justice to prohibit the Linen
Manufacture in Ireland as now the Woollen, and no doubt the Parliament will not
want Petitions to that purpose; they trade in no Commodities that England does
not produce, and if they must not trade in those, they must trade in none; and
then the English at best will quit the Country, and it must be maintained by
vast Armies supported by the Men and Money of England; and even that is an
uncertain Security, when all the Natives are their Enemies, and neighboring
Nations ready to assist them. But what seeems hardest yet is, that the People
of England should do that, now almost the whole Kingdom is in English and
Protestants hands, which was never thought fit to be done whilst in Irish and
Popish.

I have often lamented that some method has not been found out to make England
and Ireland join hand in hand in the same Interest, that England may not look
upon Ireland as Rivals of their Trade, nor Ireland upon England as severe
Masters, who would sacrifice them upon every imaginary and perhaps mistaken
advantage. I doubt not but Expedients of this kind may be offered, but it is not
now my Province, it is a Subject worthy of the Legislative Power, and your
Lordships great Wisdom; but I humbly conceive Acts to ruin their Trade will
work a quite contrary effect, and make Ireland look upon England instead of
their Protectors, as the check to all their endeavors, and the obstacle to all
their hopes. I know your Lordships are not to be diverted from your purposes by
distant Surmises; but it is no dishonor to apprehend just consequences; for to
fear nothing is as great an extravagance, as to fear every thing.

It Is your Lordships noble Province in this Government under Heaven, to redress
Grievances, to relieve the Oppressed, and not only to correct the Exhorbitances
of Inferior Courts, but to moderate the Excesses (if any should happen) of the
other parts of the Government; and it is to your generous compassion that is
offered the condition of an unhappy Nation, who in the cause, and for the sake
of England have lost their Fathers, their Children, their Brothers, their
Relations; who have seen their Country every where on a light fire, their
Cities and Towns laid in rubbish and ashes, their Estates ravished from them,
their Faith tortured, and their own blood spilt promiscuously in the Fields and
Lanes, in the Highways and Streets. Few have escaped this general destruction;
and it is hoped you will not let those few be in the condition of poor
^hipwrackt men on some Coa^^s, who when they are thrown half dead a shore, meet
their ruin from those of whom they did expect relief. They are Englishmen sent
over to conquer Ireland, your Countrymen, your Brothers, your Sons, your
Relations your Acquaintance; governed by the same King, the same Laws; of the
same Religion, and in the same Interest, and equally engaged in the same common
cause of Liberty. And they hope this Nation that has so lately escaped the
fetters of Tyranny, will show themselves easy and Gentle Masters to them; they
hope you will not let them by their service to England, their zeal to their
Religion, their love to their Liberty, and by the loss of their Stock, and
benefit of their Estates for a great many years, purchase the loss of them for
ever.

FINIS.

