MYOTOMIA REFORMATA:

OR, A New Administration OF ALL THE MUSCLES OF Humane Bodies;

WHEREIN The true Uses of the Muscles are Explained, the Errors of former
Anatomists concerning Them Confuted, and several Muscles not hitherto taken
notice of Described;

To which are subjoined, A Graphical Description of the Bones; And other
Anatomical Observations.

Illustrated with Figures after the Life.

By WILLIAM COWPER Surgeon.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith and Ben. Walford at the Prince's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCIV.

Librum hunc Cui Titulus MYOTOMIA REFORMATA, etc. dignum judicamus qui
Imprimatur.

Thomas Burwell Praeses. Censores.
Samuel Collins, Fr. Slare, William Dawes, Tancred Robinson,




Viris Expertissimis ROGERO KNOWLES Magistro, Reliquisque Gubernatoribus
Societatis Chirurgorum Londinensium, NEC NON Doctissimis Ornatissimisque D.
Dbus EDVARDO BROWN, ATQUE EDVARDO TYSON, Coll. Regal. Med. Land. Sociis, ATQUE
Anatomiae Praelectoribus in Anphitheatro Celeberrimae Societatis Chirurgorum,
MYOTOMIAM.

Hanc Observantiae ergo D. D. D. GUILIELMUS COWPER.

THE PREFACE.
IN the Contemplation of NATURE, we meet with nothing that affords us A more
Invincible Argument of the WISDOM of the DIVINE ARCHITECT, than the Structure
and Composition of ANIMAL BODIES, nor are the effects of that INFINITE
UNDERSTANDING more visible in any parts of an Animal Body, than in the
INSTRUMENTS of VOLUNTARY MOTION, whose Variety and Contrivances are both
Admirable.

In this respect ANATOMICAL DISQUISITIONS are exceedingly entertaining; but
besides it behooves PHILOSOPHERS who inquire into the Nature of Things, and
PHYSICIANS especially, whose province it is to preserve the CURIOUS FABRIC of
the HUMAN BODY, to acquaint Themselves fully with the Nature and Constitution
of that NOBLE SUBJECT; for that is the only way to learn what are the Secret
Springs by which the Mysterious Operations of SENSE and MOTION are performed,
to discover the CAUSES and SEATS of DISEASES, and their SYMPTOMS, and the
proper Methods of CURING and PREVENTING them.

What Opinion the most Judicious and Best of Men had of Enquiries of this
Nature, even in their Infancy, we may learn from our Great Master HIPPOCRATES,
who was sent for to DEMOCRITUS the Founder of the Mechanical Philosophy, to
cure Him of his supposed Madness, and finding Him Dissecting the Bodies of
Animals to discover the seat of the Bile, and assign the reasons of its
Effects, was so far from looking upon Him to be Mad, that He pronounced Him the
Wisest Man in his Country.

Nor is the Story that is told of our Modern Philosopher DES CARTS* less
remarkable, who showed a Gentleman that came to see his Library, nothing but a
Calf which he designed to Dissect.

But it is needless at this time to Enlarge either upon the Usefulness of
ANATOMY in general, or the particular Advantages of an Exact Knowledge of
MYOLOGY. in order to the PRACTICE of SURGERY, and therefore I shall wave
what might be said upon those Heads, and only give a short History of the
Advancements that have been made in MUSCULAR ANATOMY in several Ages, and the
Reasons why I undertook to Write upon that Subject.

Without doubt HIPPOCRATES was well skilled in ANATOMY, as it appears by his
Books De Glandulis, De Fracturis, etc.

ARISTOTLE Dissected many Animals before He began to Compose their History, of
which we have only a few Fragments.

RUFFUS EPHESIUS had also made some Progress herein, and gave the External
parts their proper Names.

GALEN and the Anatomists of his time were indefatigable in their Anatomical
Labors, as appears not only from those Excellent Books of his Of Anatomical
Administration, and Of the Use of Parts; but in that Compendious System of the
Muscles collected out of Them by ORIBASIUS: Before and after whom we find no
considerable progress made in ANATOMY, till the Rise of the Accurate Jacobus
Sylvius, and Andreas Vesalius, about the middle of the last Century.

There have been indeed diverse Others who have Written of ANATOMY, as Alcmaeus
Crotoniata, Diocles Carystius, Erasistratus, and Herophilus, of which the two
Latter are said to have Taught ANATOMY Publicly, and to have Dissected many
Hundreds of Human Bodies in Greece, Syria, and Egypt: GALEN was a Disciple of
the last; but we have none of their Writings now extant. Besides These there
are Others mentioned by Galen, as Lycus, Quintus who was Lycus's Master, and
Marianus, but we shall not repeat their Names, since their Observations afford
Us no occasion to mention them hereafter.

Amongst the many ARABIANS that have Written on this Subject, Avicenna is
esteemed the Chief; and amongst the Ancient LATINS, Mundinus is reckoned the
First; whose Works are Commented on by Jacobus Berengarius Carpensis, and
Curtius; but neither of these furnish Us with any discoveries in Myology.

THOMAS DE ZERBIS is also mentioned, but his Writings are supposed to be
Collected from the Observations of Others.

NICOLAUS MASSA a Physician of Venice, is reputed A Benefactor to Anatomy, and
mentioned by Anthropog. Lib. ii. Cap. viii.
Riolan to have first Observed the Musculi Pyramidales described by Falloppius.

CAROLUS STEPHANUS assisted by the Industrious Hand of STEPHEN RIVERIUS a
SURGEON, (as Riolan Writes) was a Diligent Improver of this Art, and
Illustrated it with Figures before Vesalius; but we were never so fortunate as
to see either of these Three last mentioned.

JACOBUS SYLVIUS was an Accurate Anatomist of his time; He Wrote an Admirable
Commentary on Galen's Book of the Bones, and an Answer to the Calumnies of
Vesalius, whom He calls Vesanus: After his Death was Published that
Incomparable Piece Entitled, Isagoge Anatomica, wherein He digested the
MUSCLES and Vessels into order, which were Treated of confusedly before by
Galen, Vesalius, Columbus, and Falloppius, and gave Them their NOMENCLATURE
still Used by ANATOMISTS.

Before Sylvius, or at the same time, FERNELIUS, and JOHANNES GUINTERUS
ANDERNACUS, were Contemporaries; but neither of Them have made any Improvements
in the Knowledge of the MUSCLES.

ANDREAS VESALIUS began very young to examine the Parts of several Animals, in
which Study by a Wonderful Sagacity and peculiarity of Genius, he made a swift
but Steady Progress; He was * Scholar to Guinterus, as himself confesses in
his Institution Anatom. ac Lib. de Veteri and Nova Medicina; and a Disciple to
Sylvius, as He acknowledges in the PREFACE to his first Impression, De Fabrica
Humani Corporis, Printed in the year 1543, which passage is left out in the
second Published in the year 1555. And here it may not be amiss to take notice
by the by of another difference between these two Editions, to wit, that the
Figures of the Former are much finer, but the Descriptions are more Correct in
the Latter.

Indeed much is owing to this Great Man, whose Accounts of the MUSCLES as well
as all other Parts that were known to Him, are generally very faithfully
delivered. He was Contemporary with REALDUS COLUMBUS, GABRIEL FALLOPPIUS,
VALVERDA, and BARTHOLOMAEUS EUSTACHIUS, all excellent Anatomists, especially
the Two Former, the First of which and CAESALPINUS started early hints of Their
Knowledge of the CIRCULATION of the BLOOD; which perhaps for some Reasons They
afterward concealed. Falloppius was a most Accurate Dissector of the MUSCLES,
as will appear in the following Tract, and his Ingenuity in acknowledging what
He took from Vesalius is very Commendable.

From THESE the MYOLOGY has received its greatest Improvements; and though
there are diverse others that have Written on this Subject, yet none except
HIERONYMUS FABRICIUS ab AQUAPENDENTE, and JULIUS CASSERIUS PLACENTINUS, have
given any true Marks of their knowledge herein.

Both the RIOLAN's pretensions are great, but we Trace Them in Falloppius.

There are diverse Others in Repute with the Vulgar for their Descriptions of
the Muscles, amongst which SPIGELIUS is the chief, but there seems to be
nothing extraordinary in his Book besides the Figures of Jul. Casserius
Placentinus, some of which are very Imperfect. Since our last named Author
there has been nothing discovered in MYOTOMY except M. DU VERNY's Oblique
Muscle of the Ear.

The Sculptures of BIDLOO are not to be forgotten, since they Express diverse
MUSCLES and other Parts so near the Life.

The many that have lately written on this Subject have rather increased than
diminished the Errors, especially those that Write in ENGLISH, and particularly
that Treatise of Mr. WILLIAM MOLINS, and that most Erroneous one of JOHN BROWN,
are only Collections of the Mistakes of others.

Indeed the greatest part of Books now Extant are mere Copies, or Extracts, and
Useless Rhapsodies; ORIGINALS are few and Rare; MANKIND finding it much easier
to Transcribe and Steal, than to Invent and Improve, though NATURE affords an
Unexhaustible and yet hidden Treasure, sufficient to employ the search and
Industry of all the HANDS and WITS in the World. One great Mistake has much
Obstructed the Advancement of true Knowledge, and that is a general opinion the
Senses are Gross and Ignoble, and that Abstracted Contemplations are the
perfections of Human Nature; and so it comes to pass that MAN is fed and
pleased with Chimera's and Shadows, instead of true substantial Knowledge,
which is to be learnt by true Physical Examinations of Sense and Experiment, by
Enquiry and Observation.

Thus, after repeated DISSECTIONS, finding the Errors of the Latter Writers of
MYOLOGY to equal, if not exceed those of the more Ancient AUTHORS; I was
induced to think that a Reformation of so considerable as well as Useful a Part
of ANATOMY, would not be altogether Ungrateful to the Public at this Time.
Neither did I entertain such a design without foreseeing it would meet with its
Enemies, some of which I am Confident will disapprove of the Undertaking merely
for the sake of the Undertaker.

I did at first, I must confess, only design the Publication of my own
Observations and Discoveries made in DISSECTION of the MUSCLES, but considering
the Confusion Authors make, and the Multitude of Mistakes with which the Books
of this kind for the most part are filled; I conceived it might prove a Work of
more general Use to give their entire History; Wherein, according to my
ability, I have rectified their Descriptions, supplied the Defects, and
retrenched the Errors of Others, and done Justice to every Man by whom I have
been assisted.

I have by way of INTRODUCTION premised my Conjectures concerning the
Composition of a MUSCLE, and its Contraction for the convenience of Those who
are not acquainted with the Ordinary Doctrine; which I hope the Learned Reader
will excuse. For the same Reason it seemed advisable to add the Administration
of their Dissection in imitation of Galen, Vesalius, and Others; whereby the
Learner may at once be Informed not only of what is in NATURE, but of the
manner of discovering it. These RULES are Inserted in a different Character
preceding to the Descriptions, and there more especially where any difficulty
may arise to the Unacquainted OPERATOR. And to render what my particular
Enquiries have given me occasion to Observe more serviceable, those MUSCLES
here described which have escaped the Observations of Others are not only
Delineated, but Those also that have not hitherto been well expressed by the
Figures of Vesalius, Julius Casserius, (which are annexed to the Works of
Spigelius) and those of Bidloo, and some others; To which Authors, References
are placed in the Right hand Margin at the Beginning of the Description of each
MUSCLE, that the Reader may know where to find it Figured.

Lastly, to complete my Design, and to render this Account still more
Intelligible, I have added Two Figures of the SCELETON, to which References are
made in the Text by Numbers answering, or subsequent to the Numbers placed upon
the Figures Cited in the Left hand Margin; To the end the whole (which are my
most Hearty Wishes) may be of more Use and Service to the Public.

Fig: I.


Fig: II.


Fig: III.


Fig. V.


Fig. IV.


Fig: VI


Fig: VII


Fig: VIII


Fig: IX


Fig: X.


Fig: XI.


Fig: XVII.


Fig: XVIII


THE INTRODUCTION: CONTAINING A Description of a Muscle.
A MULCLE is the chief and Immediate Instrument of Spontanious Motion: It Is
called by the Greeks (...), either from the resemblance diverse of Them have to
a Flead Mouse, or to the Shell Fish called Musculus, or from (...) to Contract.
Under this denomination of Muscles is comprehended all that which is called
Flesh, which is not one continued Mass, but is distinguished into diverse
Portions, lying contiguous to each other, in such decent Order as conduces as
well to an Elegant Symmetry of the whole Body, as to the Execution of each
Muscles particular Office.

A Muscle is composed of Membranes, Tendon, Arteries, Veins, Nerves, to which
some add Lymphe-ducts and Fat. Of These the two first are esteemed Proper Parts
of It, the rest are counted Common: As to their Origin, whether any of the
Former are derived from the Latter, or whether by an admirable Stenography of
Nature they were all delineated in the Ovum of the Female, or Semen of the
Male, or partly in both before the Impregnation, shall not be our Task at
present to consider: But we shall briefly enquire into the Intimate Structure
of a Muscle, as it appears in an Adult Body.

A Muscle is commonly distinguished into three parts, viz. the Head, Belly, and
Tail: The Head or Beginning is as it were the Center of its Motion, fixed to the
most Stable Part; its Middle or part most Tumid is called its Belly; and its
other Extreme Implanted in the Part moved is Denominated its Tail or Ending.

The Common Integument of Muscles first offers it self to view after the Skin
and Adipose Membranes are removed. This is frequently Complicated with the
Tendons of Muscles, especially where Stricter Enclosures are necessary, as on
the Muscles of the Cubit, and those of the Thigh and Tibia; the Uses of Which
we have Demonstrated, Chap. XXVI.

The Proper Membrane of a Muscle does immediately Enclose It, and is frequently
conjoined with the Former, especially on those Parts last mentioned, where it is
complicated with Tendinous Expansions, that it becomes inseparable from it:
This not only involves each Muscle, but distinctly incloseth each Fasciculus of
its Fleshy Fibers, as is evident in the Glutaei Maximi Deltoides, etc. And
these Fasciculi of Fleshy Fibers are in a peculiar manner assisted by These
their proper Enclosures, as the Muscles of the Cubit are by the Fascia lata,
Whose Office I have elsewhere endeavored to Explain.

In the Interstices of these Fasciculi in Robust Bodies we frequently find Fat,
which, by the assistance of an ordinary Microscope, appears composed of certain
Transparent Membranous Cells distended with an Oily Matter; which plainly
discovered it self to the Naked Eye of that Inquisitive Anatomist, Dr. Tyson,
in the Dissection of a Porpess. These Adipose Cells are furnished with Blood
Vessels, as was sufficiently demonstrated in an Experiment I lately made by
Injecting of Mercury into the Artery of the Arm. The Use of the Fat, according
to the Ingenious Dr. Havers in his Osteologia Nova, page 209. is to be joined
with the Muscilage separated from the Neighboring Glandules, and help to make
up a Composition to preserve the Tendinous and Fleshy Fibers from growing Dry
and Rigid, and to Lubricate them, and render them fit for Action.

The Tendon of each Muscle is eithe partly united, or partly divided, or
totally divided; if united it is merely Tendinous, if divided it is esteemed
Fleshy, wherefore it is said to consist of Tendinous and Fleshy Fibers, or
Fleshy Fibers only: Those parts of Them entirely Tendinous are a Compages of
Filaments compactly joined without the apparent Interposition of other Parts,
as Blood Vessels, Nerves, etc. The Fleshy Fibers are continuous with the
Former, and are furnished with Blood Vessels, Nerves, and Lymphe-ducts: These
are divided into diverse Fasciculi of a Prismatical form, Hexagon, Square, or
Triangular; each Fasciculus is composed of diverse Tendinous Filaments which lie
Parallel to each other. Though by the disruption of these Prismes diverse
oblique Interfibrillae appear (which not unlikely gave occasion to Steno to
imagine them of a Rhomboidal Constructure) yet by the assistance of the
Microscope They also appear no otherwise than parts of the divided Fasciculus;
that appearance of Them being partly caused by their agglutination to each
other, and partly by the distribution of the Blood Vessels and Nerves passing
to each Fibrilla; which Intersecting each other, I am apt to think, might
impose on Borellus, and make Him conceive these Fibrillae to be Composed of
many Links of a Rhomboidal or Lozenge Figure. Each of these Fibrillae are much
smaller than the finest Hair, Their Figure is Cylindrical, their Internal
substance is porous like a Hair, with this difference, to wit, the Pores of
That are more numerous and less, and in This the Pores are larger and fewer;
which we shall have occasion to mention in examining the Distribution of the
Blood Vessels.

The Nerves accompany the Blood Vessels at their Ingress into Muscles, and are
distributed to all their Carnous Fibers: some have thought the Head of the
Muscle to be the place of their Insertions, but that opinion has been long
since exploded, it being evident that diverse Muscles receive two or three
Branches of Nerves in differing parts of Them. How the Extremities of Nerves
Terminate in These and other Parts, is still likely to be a secret in Nature,
since neither the Naked Eye, or any Microscopes yet known, are capable of
rendering it a matter of Autopsie. The examination of Nerves by the Microscope
does sufficiently inform us, that nothing that has been said of them hitherto
is less probable, than that They are employed in conveying any Part of the
Succus Nutritious to other parts, which some have so grossly dreamed of. It Is
true that an Atrophea of Parts will follow upon the abscission or relaxation of
their Nerves; but if we consider what alteration must inevitably happen in the
Tone of those Parts, whose Nerves are divided or relaxed, we should not be much
at a loss in assigning a Cause for that Phenomenon. That the Trunks of Nerves
are composed of diverse Fasciculi of Fibrillae lying parallel to each other, is
what ocular demonstration evinceth; but by the help of our Glasses those
Fibrillae, which before scarcely appeared to Us, will discover themselves to be
still made up of diverse Others; and all of Them full of Pores; And if by chance
you discover a single Fibrilla, as I have sometimes done, you will find its
substance porous; but (if I may be allowed to calculate its dimensions by the
same Microscope) it does not seem to exceed the Hundredth part of a Hair: Its
contents in those curious fine Cells or Pores must necessarily be very subtle;
nor will I contend with those who will call them Animal Spirits, or an Aerial
Body, such as the Materia Primi, or Secundi Elementi, of Des Carts, nor shall
I concern my self with an account of the Transmission or derivation of this
subtle matter from the Great Fountains, whether of the Brain* or Blood
Vessels, passing immediately between the Nervous Fasciculi, since I hear my
Ingenious Friend Dr. Ridly, will Publish his Accurate Anatomical Lectures
lately Read in the Amphitheatre of the College of P(...)ians, wherein He has
touched on this particular.

The Blood Vessels of each Muscle, like those of other Parts, are Arteries and
Veins, of which the former import Blood into it, and the latter convey it back
again to the Heart. How These transmit their contents to each other, has been a
Controversy among Anatomists, till the Industrious Leewenhock, by the
Assistance of his Microscope, discovered those Vessels in the Transparent
Fimbriae of the Tail of an Eele, or Lacerta aquatica, to be continued Channels,
without the interposition of any Spongious Body, which Anatomists had so long
imagined, which pleasing Phenomenon, is commonly demonstrated by those
Improved Microscopes made by Mr. Living in Abchurch lane.
Mellang, that it is needless to say more of it in this place: Wherefore I shall
proceed to relate what offered it self in an Experiment I lately made, by
Injecting Mercury into the great Artery of the Arm, which not only proved what
Borellus had observed, that even the Fleshy Fibers of Muscles are in themselves
white, and that their red Tincture is from Blood, but was an Intimation of a
peculiar Conformation of the Extremities of the Blood Vessels, which were
filled as full with Mercury as they could be before with Blood; and afterward,
in examining the Fibrillae, I found their Cells beforementioned filled with
the Mercury. These Cells, by what I have as yet observed, do not communicate
with each other, but as I have some reasons to conceive, there are certain
Foramina in the sides of the Arteries that open into Them. Each Globule of
Mercury in the Fibrillae appeared to be almost as big as two or three Globules
of the Blood: Hence it may be accounted how the Intumescence of these Parts
happens by often injecting Water by the Arteries in dead Animals; That being a
Body whose parts are very apt to insinuate themselves, qua da tur Porta, these
Cells become distended by it. Hence also an account may be given how Muscles
are excited to act by such Injections made soon after the Death of the Animal;
but of this hereafter.

These Contemplations compared with some Experiments I afterward made, did
almost tempt me to form an Hypothesis of the Contraction of a Muscle; but
reflecting on the various Conjectures of so many Learned Writers, who had
already employed themselves on this Subject, I found it would prove a Work of
more time to refute what has already been proposed, and corroborate my
Conjectures with repeated Experiments, than I had allotted my self for that
purpose.

The former Anatomists being unacquainted with the Intimate structure of a
Muscle, and Use of the Parts which compose it, placed the power of Contraction
in its Nerves, or in its carnous Fibers only.

The Accurate Steno conceiving the Fleshy Fibers, and opposite Tendons of
Muscles, to bear an Analogy in their Constructure to Parallelograms, imagines
that an alteration of the Angles of their Areae may be made by extension only
of its Fleshy Fibers; and this He supposed may be done without the Accession of
new Matter.

Dr. Willis pretends that the Animal Spirits brought by the Nerves, are lodged
in the Tendons of Muscles, which joining with other Particles of an Active
Nature, supplied from the Blood, make an effervescence, by which the Carnous
Fibers are exagitated, which being Lax and Porous, are stuffed, and become
Corrugated; hence he supposes the whole Muscle is also Contracted.

Dr. Mayow imagines the Contraction of a Muscle may be made by an effervescence
arising from the Commixture of Sulphureo-saline Particles, secreated from the
Mass of Blood, and Nitro-aerious ones transmitted by the Nerves.

M. Du Verny Conjectures an Intumescence may be made in the Carnous Fibers of
Muscles without a Ferment, supposing (like Dr. Willis) that the Tendons are
Storehouses of Spirits which are excited by new ones from the Brain, and those,
together with a Juice supplied by the Arteries, Extend the Fleshy Fibers, like
a Fiddle-string exposed in a Moist Air.

Dr. Croon supposes each distinct Carnous Fibers to consist of an Infinite
number of small Globules or little Bladders opening into one another, and that
the Nourishing Juice conveyed at large among the Carnous Fibers through the
Artery, by the constant pulse of the Heart is driven on, and after mixing with
another Liquor between those Fibers, passes into the Cavity of each Globule or
Bladder, where it mixes with a second sort of Matter more Active than the
Former, and by These constant agitations, ebullition, and effervescence, with
the Natural Heat; He imagines is partly the cause, and partly the constant
assister of the Motion of a Muscle. Vid. Hook's Philosophical Collect. N. 2. p.
22.

Ioh. Alphonsus Borellus enlightened with Mechanical Demonstrations, after an
enquiry into the intimate Structure of a Muscle, conceives its Fibers to be
composed of a Chain of diverse Rhombi or Lozenges, whose Areae may be enlarged
or diminished by the Accession or Retrocession of Bodies, insinuating
themselves like so many Wedges into it; and these He thinks are a Nervous Juice
instilled ad Imperium Animae, joining with the Blood or Lymphe, whence an
Ebullition or Fermentation does Arise.

The Experiments I have made, compared with that above mentioned (by Injecting
Mercury) seem to intimate, that the Blood, barely as a Fluid, is an Assistant
in the Contraction of a Muscle: and this did not only appear by making a
Ligature on the Descending Trunck of the Aorta of a living Animal, whereby all
the Inferior Parts become Destitute of Motion, which they again recovered by
loosing* that Ligature, and admitting the Blood to flow again into the Muscles;
But even after the cessation of motion in the same Animal it was surprising to
Observe the Muscles of the Legs renew their Contractions, upon the injection of
Water only into the Crural Artery; which Experiment I have frequently repeated
with the like success.

Hence I began to suspect, that the Blood is the Pondus by which the Action of
a Muscle is performed; and that either by a Turgescence began in the Parietes
of the Cells of the Fleshy Fibers caused by the contents of the Nerves Agitated
ad Imperium Animae, or by Constriction of the Venous Duct, may be the immediate
cause of Replietion of the Cells, whereby the length of their Fibrilla is
lessened: And this Opinion I could rather entertain, because it seems to
Quadrate with that of De Motu Animal.
Borelle's, and the late Ingenious Dr. M. Hooks Philos. Collect. Numb. 2.
Croon, to whose farther Explications I refer the Inquisitive Reader.

THE CONTENTS.
CHap. I. Of the Muscles of the Abdomen. 17 Chap. II. Of the Muscles of the
Testes. 30 Chap. III. Of the Muscles of the Penis. 31 Chap. IV. Of the Muscles
of the Bladder of Urine. 35 Chap. V. Of the Muscles of the Anus. 37 Chap. VI.
Of the Muscles of the Hairyscalp and Forehead. 40 Chap. VII. Of the Muscles of
the Eyelids. 43 Chap. VIII. Of the Muscles of the Eye. 47 Chap. IX. Of the
Muscles of the Nose. 54 Chap. X. Of the Muscles of the Cheeks and Lips. 57
Chap. XI. Of the Muscles of Auricula or Outward Ear. Page 63 Chap. XII. Of the
Muscles of the Internal Ear. 65 Chap. XIII. Of the Muscles of the Os Hyoides or
Bone of the Tongue. 73 Chap. XIV. Of the Muscles of the Tongue. 78 Chap. XV. Of
the Muscles of the Larynx. 80 Chap. XVI. Of the Muscles of the Fauces. 86 Chap.
XVII. Of the Muscles of the Gargareon. 90 Chap. XVIII. Of the Muscles of the
Lower Iaw. 93 Chap. XIX. Of the Muscles of the Thorax that Appear the Body
lying Supine. 98 Chap. XX. Of the Muscles of the Scapula or Shoulder Blade. 109
Chap. XXI. Of the Muscles of the Thorax which Appear the Body lying Prone. 113
Chap. XXII. Of the Muscles of the Head. 116 Chap. XXIII. Of the Muscles of the
Neck. 127 Chap. XXIV. Of the Muscles of the Back and Loins. 131 Chap. XXV. Of
the Muscles of the Arm. Page 138 Chap. XXVI. Of the Muscle of the Cubit. 145
Chap. XXVII. Of the Muscles of the Palm of the Hand. 152 Chap. XXVIII. Of the
Muscles of the Four Fingers. 155 Chap. XXIX. Of the Muscles of the Thumb. 166
Chap. XXX. Of the Muscles of the Wrist or Carpus. 171 Chap. XXXI. Of the
Muscles of the Radius. 174 Chap. XXXII. Of the Muscles of the Thigh. 178 Chap.
XXXIII. Of the Muscles of the Leg. 192 Chap. XXXIV. Of the Muscles of the Foot
or Tarsus. 206 Chap, XXXV. Of the Muscles of the Great Toe. 214 Chap. XXXVI. Of
the Muscles of the Four Lesser Toes. 218
Books Printed for Samuel Smith and Benjamin Walford, at the Prince's Arms in
St. Paul's-Church-Yard.
MArtini Lister M. D. and S. R. S. Exercitatio Anatomica de Cochleis maxim
Terrestribus, Limacibusque, quarum Dissectiones Tabulis aeneis ad ipsas res
affabre incisis, Illustrantur. Interseritur Digressio de Respiratione. 80.

Pharmacologia, seu manuductio ad materiam medicam, in qua medicamenta
officinalia Simplicia, hoc est, mineralia, vegetabilia, Animalia, eorumque
parts in medicina officinis ustata, in methodum naturalem digesta, succincte,
and accurate, describuntur: cum notis generum Characteristicis, Specierun,
Synonymis, differentiis, and viribus. Opus omnibus Medicis Philosophis,
Pharmacopeis, Chirurgis, and Pharmacopolis ut^lissimum. A Samuel Dale in 120

Medicinal Experiments: Or, a Collection of choice and safe Remedies, for the
most part simple, and easily prepared: Useful in Families, and very
serviceable to Country People. In two Volumes. By the Honorable R. Boil Esquire
Fellow of the Royal Society. Containing about Five Hundred Receipts published
from the Author's Original Manuscripts, in 120.

Pharmacopoeia Bateana in English, by William Salmon. Containing above a
Thousand Choice and Select Receipts, their Names, Compositions, Preparations,
Virtues, Uses, and Doses, with many Chemical processes, as they are applicable
to the whole practice of Physic and Chyrurgery, with the Arcana Goddardiana
Goddard's Drops, Russell's Powder, the Prince's Powder, and Emplastrum
Febisfugum, etc. in 80. 1694.

MYOTOMIA REFORMATA: Or, A New Administration of all the MUSCLES OF Human
Bodies, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Muscles of the Abdomen.
IN the regular Administration of a Human Body, we must begin our Section with
the Lower Belly, least the speedy Putrefaction of its Viscera should become
troublesome and offensive: For this purpose, Incision must be made through the
common Integaments of the Body, in a Crucial Form. The first and direct Line of
Division beginning at the Cartilago Ensiformis (32), must be continued to Fig.
xvii.
the Os Pubis (38). The other Transverse from the Navel on each side to the
Region of the Loins, after which, the Skin, Fat, and Membranes, of each Portion
being raised from their respective Angles, the Muscles, which cover the
Abdomen, will appear in their proper Situation. These may be comprehended under
the general Title of Epigastrick, whereof some are Anteriour, seated in the
Forepart only, some Lateral, others Posteriour, best referred to the Back and
Loins. In their particular Enumeration and Description we shall constantly
observe the Method we proposed to our selves, and Treat of them according to
the Order that they appear in Dissection.

First then, Obliquus Descendens seu Declivis.
This Muscle derives its Name from Vesalius prima Musculorum Tabula PP.
the Progress of its Fibers. It arises with several acute Productions, partly
Fleshy, and partly Tendinous, from the lower Margin of the fifth ( n), sixth (
o), seventh ( p), and eighth Ribs ( q), where Fig. xvii.
its several separate Originations lie between the Indentations of the Serratus
Major Anticus; These for better Distinction we choose to call its former Origin;
besides which it continues to derive more heads in like manner from the ninth (
r), tenth ( s), and eleventh ( t), and sometimes from the extremity of the last
Bastard Rib ( u), where it is also Fig. xvii.
indented with the Serratus Inferior Posticus, Human. Corp. Tab. Lib. II. Cap.
XXXI.
as Vesalius has well observed: From its former Origin, its oblique descending
Fleshy part expands it self into a broad Membranous Tendon, before it marches
over the Rectus to its Insertion in the Linea Alba and Os Pubis (38): From its
latter in the same manner descending it ends partly Tendinous in the Ligamentum
Pubis; but chiefly Fleshy on the superior and forepart of the circular edge of
the Os Ilium (36). It adheres not to the Fig. xvii.
Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae Human. Corp. Fab. Lib. IV. Cap. X.
Syntagma Anatomica. Cap. II.
Lumbares, as Spigelius, Veslingius, and with them most Anatomists have
imagined. But its largest, last, and most Fleshy Digitation, leaving the lowest
Bastard Rib at its extreme Point, and in its oblique Descent declining
forwards, still recedes gradually more and more from the Vertebrae (34),
forming a Triangular Interstice, Fig. xvii.
comprehended by the Sacrolumbus, Os Ilium (36), and its lower side; in which
Area the Fibers of the subjacent Muscle plainly appear.

Besides the Actions vulgarly ascribed to this Muscle, and its Partner,
together with the rest of their Fellows, viz. Compressing the Intestines and
Bladder either in excluding the Faeces and Urine in both Sexes, or Faetus in
Women; They have still a farther and more Noble Use. That part of either of
them that is interjacent between their latter Origin and Spine of the Os Ilium
(37), bearing an Analogy in its position to the Mastoideus of the Head, (of
which hereafter) serves for the Circumrotation of the Trunk upon the Axis of
the Vertebrae, when we convert the Body to the contrary side, the Feet
remaining unmoved, for which necessary Motion Authors have assigned no De
V^ntricul. and Intestinis.
Instrument, though this I think did not escape Dr. Glisson's Judicious
Reflection.

For the better Dissection of these Abdominal Muscles, observe the following
Method. The Body being supported on its side, the Dorsi Latissimus of the
contrary must be Freed from its diverse Fleshy Originations at the Curvated
parts of the Ribs, as also the Tendinous part of it, which Arises from the edge
of the Os Ilium: This done, the Blood being dried, and the Fat cleared, which
caution (to prevent Confusion) must perpetually be observed, the Originations
of the described Obliquus Descendens will appear.

Begin its Separation by Introducing your Fore Finger between it and the
following Muscle in the above noted Interstice, then Raise that Part of it
which Springs from the Lowest Rib, and Terminates in the Spine of the Os Ilium,
proceeding to Free the rest of its Digitations from between the four
abovenamed Serrati, being cautious not to wound its Tendon in dividing it from
its subjacent Muscle, especially as it marches over the Rectus. Nor may their
Separation be attempted in every Subject by reason of their strict Adhesion;
wherefore in preparing these Muscles when they are to be Demonstrated after
Dissection, you may proceed in the following Order.

The Obliquus Descendens being Raised on either side (as before) to the Rectus,
cut through and Raise both Tendons together, leaving them at their Insertions
in the Linea Alba, taking sufficient care in their Separation from the
Intersections of the Rectus. This done, on the contrary side Raise its* Fleshy
part only, beginning in the Linea Semilunaris, by making an Aperture in its
Tendon toward its Lower part, where it is separable from that of the following
Muscle, thrusting a Probe between the Two Tendons, divide this Superior one
through the length of the Abdomen. Then, the Fleshy part on this side being
also Raised, and cleared to the Extremities of its Digitations and left there:
Raise the oblique Ascendent; and on the same side you Raised the former toward
its Origination, Raise this E Contrario, so pursuing it to the Linea Alba,
where it is to be left: On the contrary side, its Fleshy Portion must be Raised
to its Origination. The rest of these Muscles appearing in situ require no
Dissection.

Obliquus Ascendens seu Acclivis.
So called from the oblique Ascent Spigel. Tab. 10. Lib. 4. LL.
of its Fibers, the same Error noted in the preceding Description is likewise
here committed by Vulgar Anatomists. Neither of these Muscles having any
Communication with the Lumbal Vertebrae. It arises Fleshy from the whole
circular edge of the Os Ilium (37), and Ligamentum Pubis, Fig. xvii.
without any Thin Membrane springing either from the Loins, or Os Sacrum, Human
Corp. Fab. Lib. II. CXXXI.
as Vesalius would persuade us, or from the Apices of their Transverse
Processes, as others pretend, thence mounting with an order of Fibers inclining
Forwards, Forms a Broad Membranous Thin Tendon, Implanted into the whole length
of the Linea Alba, and the Cartilages of the eighth ( q), Fig. xvii.
ninth ( r), tenth ( s), eleventh ( t), and twelfth Ribs ( u).

Besides its known Use in compressing the Abdomen and its Contents, that part
of it which arises Fleshy toward the back part of the edge of the Os Ilium, by
the oblique Ascent of its Fibers, to the Cartilaginious Endings of the Ribs,
not only Depresses them and streightens the Cavity of the Thorax in Expiration,
but in regard the Order of Fibers of this Intersect those of the Former Muscle,
on the same side may Antagonise it in the Circumrotation of the Trunk of the
Body on the Axis of the Vertebrae; as on its contrary side, its series of
Fleshy Fibers being parallel to those of the said Descendens, on the opposite
side may Act in Concurrence with it in discharge of its Office. In the
Structure and Reciprocal Cooperation of these Muscles, the Ascending on the
Right, and the Descending of the Left, Turning the Body to the Right, and Vice
Versa. The Ascending in the Left and Descending in the Right in like manner
Turning it to the Left, the Art of Nature indeed is very admirable.

Pyramidalis vel Succenturiatus.
This Muscle lying on the Rectus Bidloo T. 32 Q.
presents it self next in order of Dissection. It has its Name from its Figure
aptly representing a Pyramid from a broad Basis ending in a Point. It Arises
from the superior part of the Os Pubis (38), and in its Ascent lessens its Fig.
xvii.
self gradually till it becomes a long Tendon inserted in the Navel. Riolan
Anthrop. lib. 5. cap. xxxiv.
has observed the left to be most commonly the lesser, and if either be absent,
it most usually is that; Falloppius Observat. Anatom.
(who first discovered these Muscles) conjectures they compress the Bladder of
Urin. Fabritius ab Aquapendente Vid. Anatom. Thom. Bartholin, lib. 1. cap. vi.
imagines they support the Abdomen, and hinders the superior parts from
pressing too violently on the inferior; but this Opinion seems to take its rise
from observing the Anatomical subject in a supine Position. The Use, which we
think most genuine and natural is this. When the Diaphragm has pressed the
Viscera, whereby the Abdomen is become Tumid, these pull the Navel downwards,
by which means they make a more adequate compression of the Bladder in the
expulsion of Urine, than any other Muscle of this part; though it must be
confessed they all contribute their assistance in that Action. They are called
Succenturiati by their Author, or Auxiliary Muscles from a supposition that
they are only supplemental to the following in their action, the order of
Fibers in both agreeing, and these being always absent, when those are
continued Fleshy to the Juncture of the Ossa Pubis.

Rectus.
Bid. T. 32. MN. PP.
So called from the Rectitude of its Position. Anatomists differ in assigning
the Origination of this Muscle, some deriving it from the Sternum, others from
the Os Pubis; but it seems a matter more of controversy than use, since either
part is indifferently moved by it, the opposite remaining stable. Little can be
added to the common and well known description of these Muscles, they being
continued according to the length of the Lower Belly from the Cartilago
Ensiformis (32), and two of the Cartilages Fig. xvii.
of the True, and two of the Bastard Ribs down to the Os Pubis (38), and
divided into four or five Portions by three or four Intermediate Perigraphae,
or Transverse Tendinous Intersections. The Vessels which pass underneath its
Upper part are the Mammary Artery Descending, and its Vein Ascending. Those of
its Lower part are the Epigastrick Artery Ascending, and its Vein Descending.
The Enclosure of this Muscle in the double Tendon of the Ascendens we could
never as yet discern, rather suspecting that the Adhesion of the Ascending
Tendon to that of the following Muscle in the Linea Semilunaris might occasion
the mistake.

Transversalis.
Ves. Mus. Tab. 5. Y.
So called because its Fibers run transversly over the Abdomen. This Muscle
does not Arise according to the Vulgar Tradition, from any Ligament, whither
springing from the Os Sacrum, or covering the Sacrolumbus, but, as Realdus
Columbus truly writes, from De Re Anato, lib. 5. cap. xxii.
the Transverse Processes of the Lumbal Vertebrae (34) Spine of the Os Ilium
Fig. xvii.
(37), Ligamentum Pubis, and Cartilaginious endings of the Ribs below the
Sternum, from whence its Fleshy part passes over the Unequal Surface of the
Peritonaeum, and becomes a Broad expanded Tendon before it runs under the
Rectus to its Implantation in the whole Longitude of the Linea Alba. When this
Muscle with its Partner Act, they Press the Abdomen directly inwards, as in
Expiration. Caspar Bartholin De Structura Diaphragmatis. Cap. ii.
observes in Bulls and Animals of the larger size, that part of this Muscle is
continuous with the Diaphragm at the Cartilaginious endings of the Ribs below
the Sternum; whence he supposes the Diaphragma to be a Trigastrick Muscle. But
whither this Observation will quadrate to a Human Body whose Posture is Erect,
and manner of Respiration different from that of Quadrupeds, we leave undecided
till farther Enquiries afford us better Information. The Spermatick Vessels
pass through this and the Ascendant Muscle near the Inguina in the Midway
between the Forepart of the Spine of the Os Ilium and Os Pubis, whence
descending for some space between the Fleshy part of the last named, and Tendon
of the Obliquus Descendens, they run through a Fissure of the said Tendon near
the last named Bone. These Perforations not exactly corresponding to each
other, is an Artifice in Nature to prevent a Prolapsus of the Intestines
through them, not much unlike that oblique Insertion of the Uretres and Ductus
Bilarius passing between the Membranes of the Intestines and Bladder, whereby
the retrocession of the Bile in one, and the Urine in the other is prevented.

N. In the Dissection of these Muscles care must be taken not to wound the
Cremaster on either side. The Peritonaeum with its Contents present themselves
next to our Examination, but they not being Subjects of our present Enquiry,
they must be all immediately removed for Reasons already mentioned. We proceed
next to the Muscles of those parts, which for convenience in Dissection offer
themselves next, namely, the Testes, Penis, Bladder of Urine, and Anus. The
Body being laid with the Buttocks near the brink of the Table, and the Legs
forcibly devarricated for the more commodious prosecution of the work, let the
Operator place himself between them, and continue the Division of the Skin,
Fat, and Membranes by a Semicircular Section on each side of the Pubes meeting
in the Perinaeum near the Anus, and begin to raise the Skin of the upper part
of the Penis, freeing it from the Spermatick Vessels, next raising that part
which lies in the Perinaeum. This done, and the Fat removed, the following
Muscles offer themselves to view.

CHAP. II. Of the Muscles of the Testes.
EAch Testicle is attended with one proper Muscle called Cremaster, to which
Riolan adds another, and Anthropog. lib. 5. C. xxxvi.
thinks it common to both, comprehending them in the manner of a Bag* and
serving for their Succussation; but other Anatomists esteem it a Membrane only,
calling it Dartos.

Cremaster.
Or Suspensor Testiculi. It Arises De Graaf de Virorum Organis T. 2. F. 1. CD.
Fleshy from the Lowest and Forepart of the Spine of the Os Ilium (37) and Fig.
xv^
Upper part of the Ligamentum Pubis, its Fibers running parallel with those of
the Obliquus Ascendens, (not with the Transversalis as Bartholin objects Lib.
1. cap. xxii.
against Riolan) and almost encompassing the Process of the Peritonaeum,
descends on it to its Inferior part, which entertains the Testicle.

Its name declares its Office.

CHAP. III. Of the Muscles of the Penis.
ANatomists generally describe two Pair of Muscles belonging to the Penis, viz.
Acceleratores and Erectores. To these Fabritius ab Aquapendente adds a Third
Pair, which are also mentioned by Bidloo, and expressed in his 47 Table.

Acceleratores Urinae.
So called from their Use in expediting the Ejection of Urine and Seed. Authors
have been mistaken in the assigning the Originations of these Muscles, either
to the Sphincter Any or Tubercles of the Ossa Ischij. They Arising Fleshy from
the superior part of the Urethra, as it passes under the Ossa Pubis, and
encompassing the External part of the Bulb of its Cavernous Body ( CC)
(mentioned in our Fig. xii.
Appendix). Both Muscles meet on the Inferior part, ( bb) and march according
to the length of the seam of the skin in the Perinaeum, parting from each other
( cc) They Ascend to their Fig. xii.
Insertions on each side the Corpora Cavernosa Penis (GG).

Besides the Use commonly ascribed to these Muscles in compressing the Urethra
in driving out the Remains of Urine, and promoting the Ejaculation of the Semen
in Coitu, (which Action is chiefly done by the last described Part of them
embracing the Urethra as they pass to their Insertions on each side the
Cavernous Bodies of the Penis) They also assist the following Muscles in Its
Erection, by driving the Blood contained in the Bulb of the Cavernous Body of
the Urethra (A) toward the Glans in greater Fig. xiv.
quantities, whereby it becomes distended, the Veins which carry off the
Refluent Blood from the Corpus Cavernosum Urethrae at that time being also
comprest by the Tumefaction of these Muscles.

Erectores Penis seu Erigentes.
By some called Directores, and by Spigelius, Collaterales Penis. They Arise
Lib. 4. cap. xii.
Fleshy from the External Knob of the Os Ischium (39) below the beginnings Fig.
xvii.
of the Cavernous Bodies of the Penis, in whose thick Membrane they are
Inserted. ( DD). Fig. x. Fig. xii. F F.


When these Muscles Act they pull the Penis toward the Ossa Pubis, whereby its
great Vein is comprest, and the Refluent Blood denied its passage under those
Bones, by which means the Penis is Erected, of which, hereafter we shall give a
more full Account.

Transversalis Penis.
So called from their situation. These are mentioned by Lindanus after
Aquapendens, as * Thom. Bartholin takes Lib. 1. cap. xxiv.
notice. They Arise near the Former, from whence they pass Transversly to their
Insertions at the upper part of the Bull of the Cavernous body of the Urethra.
(EE.) Fig. x, and xii.


To these may be added the Muscles of the Clitoris, and that of the Pudendum in
Women.

Anatomists differ concerning the number of these Muscles belonging to the
Clitoris, some with Falloppius Observat. Anatom.
(who first Observed them) reckon One Pair only; Others Two; but De De Mulierum
Organis, etc
Graaf inclines to the First Opinion, which we also think most agreeable to
Truth. Authors have not bestowed any Proper Names on them, but since they agree
so exactly with the Erectores Penis (above Treated of) except in point of
Magnitude; The same Apellations may also serve here.

Erector Clitoridis.
This Arises Fleshy from the External De Gaaf de Mulierum Org. T. xl ii. T.
iii. F. l. GG.
Margin of the Os Ischium (39), and Fig. xv^
is Implanted into the Beginning of the Cavernous Body of the Clitoris.

The Action and Use of This and its Partner is the same with the Erectores
Penis. The other Pair of Muscles ascribed to this Part by Vulgar Anatomists,
and Figured by De Graaf, are a Portion of the Following, adhering to it.

Sphincter Vaginae.
This lies immediately under the Ibid. e e. and T. iii. F. 28. EE.
Clitoris, incompassing the Vagina with Circular Fibers, Three Fingers in
Breadth; in some Subjects, it scarcely appears Fleshy.

This Acting not only streightens the Vagina, but thereby also it hinders the
Blood in its return from the Plexus Retiformis, of the Pudendum; by compressing
some of its subjacent Veins which pass underneath, by which means the Labia
become Distended, and Vagina Contracted.

CHAP. IV. Of the Muscles of the Bladder of Urine.
GAlen and the Ancient Anatomists Lib. de Musculis, C. xxviii.
take notice but of One Muscle belonging to this Part, viz. the Sphincter, but
Aquapendens mentions an other, which Spigelius calls Detrusor Urinae from its
Use, which we shall first Describe.

Detrusor Urinae.
This by some is reckoned the First Spigel. Lib. viii. T. 13. MM.
Proper Membrane of the Bladder, lying under that which is derived from the
Peritonaeum; its Carnous Fibers embracing the whole Bladder like a Hand (as
Spigelius represents it) Lib. iv. cap. 12.
compresses it in the Evacuation of the Urine.

Sphincter Vesiicae.
Fallopius observes, that the Anatomists Observat. Anatom.
of his Age had not well Described this Muscle in placing it below the
Prostatoe, in which case as he alleges the Semen in the Venereal Act could not
be emitted without the Urine; which Observation latter Authors have not taken
notice of, either through inadvertency in Dissection, or being imposed on by
Part of the Levatores Any, which remained on the Prostates, which Riolan calls
the Anthrop. Lib. v. C. xxxvii.
Sphincter Externus. It is seated in the upper part of the neck of the Bladder,
immediately above the Glandulae Prostatae, "Where (as Fallopius says) Observat.
Anatom.
you must not expect to find an entire Muscle and Substance distinct from the
Subject Cannal, like that of the Anus, but the more Fleshy part of the neck of
the Bladder composed of many Transverse Fibers, whose Contraction hinders the
Involuntary Egress of the Urine."

N. To discover these Transverse Fibers, our Author advises to Immerge the
Bladder in scalding Water after Inflation, the External Right Fibers being
removed These will appear underneath.

CHAP. V. Of the Muscles of the Anus.
THe Penis, together with the Bladder of Urine being removed, the Muscles of
the Anus offer Themselves to View. Anatomists have not agreed in their Number,
Galen divides De Musc. cap. xxx.
the Sphincter into Two, ( viz.) Carnosus, and Cutaneus, which with the Two
Levatores make Four Muscles belonging to this Part. Riolan multiplies Anthrop.
lib. v. cap. xl.
them to the Number of Nine, Three Sphincters, namely Carnosus or the
Outermost, Cutaneus or the Middle, and Vaginalis or the Superior and Inmost,
and Six Elevators, Two Internal, and Four External; but this Opinion seems
rather grounded on Fancy, or some particular Subject, than a general Appearance
of them in Dissection.

Sphincter Any.
Bid. T. 47. F. 5. B, D, D, C.
This is a Large, Thick, Fleshy Muscle encompassing the Anus; its Figure and
Series of Fibers Externally, immediately under the Skin, incline Fig. xii.
to an ablong Oval; It is Connected Forwards to the Accelerator Urinae (D) (as
above noted); Backwards to the Os Coccygis; As it is continued farther upon the
Body of the Intestinum Rectum; its Fibers are Circular for near Two Inches in
Breadth; it is much larger in Man than in other Animals, in whom by reason of
the erect Position of the Body, there is greater Force required to Retain the
Faeces, which is the Office of this Muscle.

Levatores Any.
Ibid. E E.
Riolan reprehends Spigelius for his Animad. in lib. Anatom. Spigelii.
Description of these Muscles. They Arise Fleshy from each side the Ossa Pubis,
internally within the Pelvis (33), Fig. xviii.
as also from part of the Os Ischium (31) and Sacrum (O); from these Places,
like Lines drawn from a Circumference toward a Center, its Fibers Descend over
the Musculi Marsupiales, to their Implantation at the Lower end of the
Intestinum Rectum in the Anus. The Use of these Muscles is chiefly to Suspend
and Draw the Anus Upwards, lest the Faecis should be burthensom to the
Sphincter. In their Descent on each side Forwards from the Ossa Pubis they Pass
close over the Glandulae Prostatoe, in a manner embracing them (as before) by
which Mechanism they are rendered capable of Compressing them; and by Retraction
of the Anus at the same time Act on the Vesiculoe Seminales, in order to
promote the Emission of the Seed in Coitu. We proceed next to the Muscles of
the Hairy-scalp, etc.

CHAP. VI. Of the Muscles of the Hairy-scalp, and Forehead.
N. TO Demonstrate these Muscles, the Following Method may be Observed; make
Incision through the Common Integuments of the Head, the First and Direct Line
of Division being continued from the Middle, and Inferior part of the Os
Occipitis, to the same part of the Os Frontis; The other Transverse from Two
Circular Ducts round each Ear, intersecting the Former on the Sinciput, begin
from the Concourse of Angles, taking Care in Freeing the Forehead not to Raise
the Frontales.

Occipitalis.
This and its Partner are mentioned by Columbus, and Accurately Described Lib.
v. cap. vii. Observat. Anatom.
by Falloppius; They are Short, but Broad, Thin, Fleshy Muscles, situated on
the Occiput, from whence they Derive their Names; each of these Arises Fleshy
from that Part of the Os Occipitis Fig. xviii.
where the Mastoideus and Musculus Splenius are Inserted, and soon becoming
Tendinous joins with the Pericranium, which firmly adheres to the Hairy-scalp
on the Sinciput. When these Act, they pull the Hairy-scalp Backwards.

Frontalis.
This Arises Thin, Broad, and Fleshy, from the Upper part of the Os Frontis
near the Sutara Coronalis, and Descending by the Posterior and Fore part of the
Temporalis, meets with its Partner near their Insertions to the Skin of the
Eyebrows. (AA.) Fig. i.


These Acting draw up and wrinkle the Skin of the Forehead, and cannot
Antagonise the Former Muscles, as some Imagine, since their Originations is
from the Bone Above, and their Terminations in the Skin of the Lower part of
the Forehead.

Besides these, Volcherus Coiter counts Observat. Anatom.
another Pair, which later Authors call Corrugatores, Arising near each Great
Canthus of the Eye at the Puncta Lachrymalia; seeming to Terminate about the
Middle Region of the Eyebrows. But We rather incline to the Opinion of Others,
who take them to be Two Oblique Elongations of the Former Muscles.

N. To raise the Skin, and discover the Muscles of the Face, which in the Order
of Dissection are next to be prosecuted, continue your Former Division from the
Dorsum Nasi where you before left it, to its Apex, from Two Semicircular
Sections on each side the Alae Nasi to the Septum Narium, make a direct one to
join with a Circular Incision about the Lips, and from the middle of that of
the Lower Lip, draw your Knife directly over the Chin Neck and Sternum till you
meet that longitudinal one made in Dissection of the Muscles of the Abdomen.
The Skin is best cleared from the Eyelids, after Raising it from the
circumambient parts. In the Practice of this Operation, special Attention must
be had, lest you wound the Orbicularis Palpebrarum; Care also must be taken in
Raising the Skin of the Neck, and Face, not to raise the Quadratus Genae with
it.

CHAP. VII. Of the Muscles of the Eyelids.
GALEN and the Ancient Anatomists, De Dissect. Muscul. Cap. VI.
together with Vesalius, were extremely deceived in their Ideas of these
Muscles, in dividing the Orbicularis Hum. Corp. Fab. Lib. II. Cap. X.
into two, and supposing thereby all the Motions of the Eyelids were
performed. But this Systeme was first altered by Falloppius, partly Observat.
Anatom.
from an Intimation of Oribasius in his Book De Dissect. Muscul ex Galeno Cap.
VI. where he takes notice that in the Cure of an Aegilops, not only the
described Beginnings of these Muscles are Cut and Burnt away, but the Bone
underneath Exfoliated, and yet the Motion of the Eyelids remain: And partly
from the Dissection of the Eye in a Sea-Calf, where he observed four Muscles
latent in the Orbit, inserted above Underneath and on both sides the Palpebrae:
He was induced to make the like Enquiry in Man, in whom he happily discovered
the Aperiens Palpebram Rectus, which shall be described hereafter. We mention
this Passage, because some latter Authors have favored the Account of the
former, retaining their Distinctions into Semicircularis Superior, and
Semicircularis Inferior.

Orbicularis Palpebrarum.
This is a Thin Fleshy Muscle, whose Fibers do Circularly environ the Eyelids
BB, and are Inserted to Fig. i.
them, (like the Sphincter Labiorum) not adhering to any Bone, from whence we
may derive their Origin, except the Superior part of the great Bone of the
Nose; by some reckoned the fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw.

This Muscle Acting like the Sphincters of other Parts, Constringes the
Eyelids. To these Riolan adds another Anthropog. Lib. V. Cap. X
Muscle belonging to each Eyelid, which he calls Ciliaris, which we take to be
a Portion of the former adjacent to the Cilia.

To discover the following Muscle, that part of the former, lying between the
Upper Eyelid and Eyebrow, must be Raised; After which, the Glandula
Lachrimalis, with part of the Fat within the Orbit being removed, by extending
the Upper Eyelid, either with a Hook, or your Fingers only, its Tendinous
Insertion and slender Fleshy Body will appear.

Aperiens Palpebram Rectus.
So called from its straight Progress Bid. T. 12. F. 4. A.
and Use. It Arises Sharp and Fleshy from the profoundest part of the Orbit,
near the place where the Optic Nerve is Transmitted, passing directly over the
Musculus Attollens it becomes Tendinous as it marches over the Bulb of the Eye;
whence growing still Broader and Thinner, till it is Inserted to the whole
Superior part of the Upper Eyelid.

These Muscles of the Eyelids being Hyron. F brit. De Visione. Cap. XI.
removed, we proceed next to those of the Eye it self; in the Demonstration of
which, Aquapendens proposes two ways; the one showing the Eye with its Muscles
in situ, the other the Eye taken out of its Cavity, and its Muscles expanded on
the Table: The First exhibiting their Motions, the Second their Figure or
Shape. In the First, though our Author advises the Brain to be taken out, and
the Bones of the Orbit divided; yet we choose to perform this Operation in the
following manner, without troubling our selves with either. Both Eyelids being
removed, first, with your Forefinger feel gently for the Trochlea, situated
near the brink of the Orbit ( o), toward the Nose; then Fig. iii.
clear the Tendon which passes through it: This done in like manner clear the
Opposite Muscle, the Obliquus Inferior, first observing its Origination at the
brink of the Inferior part of the Orbit ( e), with Fig. iii.
the Assistance of a small Hook and Scissars* extract the Fat and Membranes,
and Vessels from between the straight Muscles. The other manner of
Demonstration may be Practiced in the same Eye, or with the contrary, taking
Care in dividing the Trochlea from the Orbit, to prevent Wounding the Tendon,
which passes through it; The Inferior Oblique Muscle being cut off close from
its Origin, as also the rest of the Muscles, and Optic Nerve at the
profoundest part of the Orbit, and the whole Eye dislodged; Disingage its
Muscles, and display them, whereby you may observe, that the Trochlearis is the
longest Muscle of the Eye; and that its Insertion is directly behind the
Attollens; and on the contrary, the Obliquus Inferior is the shortest, whose
Termination is directly behind the Abducens, by which means you may distinguish
each, and find the side to which it belongs.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Muscles of the Eye.
Columbus reprehends Galen, Vesalius, De re Anatom. Lib. V. Cap. VIII
and the Anatomists of his Time, for ascribing the Aperiens Palpebram Rectus,
and Obliquus Superior to the Eye, and at the same time commits no less an Error
himself, not only in supposing that the last named Muscle belongs to the
Eyelid, but imagining that the Obliquus Inferior begins and ends in the Cornea
of the Eye. But Observat. Anaton.
the Accurate Fallopius, who first observed the Trochlea, has given us the most
exact Description of these Muscles.

Obliquus Superior or Trochlearis.
It receives its first Denomination from its Oblique Position and Course, in
regard of the rest of its Fellows. The Second, it derives from that
Cartilaginous Ring, suspended near the Brink of the upper Part of the Orbit
toward the Nose ( o) through which Fig. iii.
its Tendon passes, being reflected on it, as a Rope on a Pully: (A) Besides
Fig. ii.
which, it is called Longissimus Oculi, as exceeding the others in length. It
arises sharp, and Fleshy from the profoundest Part of the Orbit, near the
Origination of the Abducens, and becoming a Fleshy Belly (D) as it passes
Obliquely close under its Superior Part, makes a round Tendon running through
the Trochlea (as above mentioned) from whence reverting back (A) its inserted
to the Tunica Sclerotis, in the middle of the Distance between the Termination
of the Attollens, and Optic Nerve, toward the back Part of the Bulb of the
Eye. (A)

Obliquus Inferior.
Also called Brevissimus Oculi, it being the shortest Muscle of the Eye. This
springs sharp and fleshy from immediately within the Lower, and almost outward
Part of the Orbit (e), at Fig. iii.
the Juncture of the First Bone of the Upper Jaw (6), with the Fourth (5.),
Fig. xvii.
becoming Thicker Ascends Obliquely over the Deprimens, growing Tendinous at
its Insertion to the Tunica Sclerotis near the Implantation of the Former,
directly betwixt the Abducens and Optic Nerve. (I.) Fig. ii.


These two Oblique Muscles are by some called Circumagentes, and Amatorii from
their Actions in Winding and Rolling the Eye about, which Motions we call
Ogling. Anatomists differ in assigning the Proper Offices of these Muscles,
some asserting when the Superior Acts, the Eye is Rolled from the Nose, when
the Inferior, to it: Others on the contrary, suppose that the Former Draws it
to the Nose, and the Latter Directs it toward the Lesser Canthus of the Eye.
But if we rightly consider the Position of the Trochlea (o), which determines
Fig. iii.
the Motion made by the Superior Oblique Muscle, and the Origination of the
Inferior ( e), and that the Tendon of the Former, and the whole Ductus of the
Latter pass Obliquely from the External edge of the Orbit to their Insertions
at the Back part of the Bulb of the Eye, as expressed Fig. ii. We must
necessarily conceive, that the Vulgar Doctrines of their Motions are Erroneous:
wherefore if the Obliquus Superior Acts, the Posteriour Part of the Bulb of the
Eye must approach toward the Trochlea, whereby its Globe is not only drawn
somewhat Forwards, but its Pupil is directed downwards; so on the contrary,
when the Obliquus Inferior Acts, the Posterior part of the Bulb of the Eye
approaches toward the External edge of the Inferior part of the Orbit; and its
Pupil is directed Upwards, and its whole Globe Pulled somewhat outward. Hence
it is that the Bulb of the Eye is more Protuberant in those Actions, which
Contrivance in Nature seems very necessary, since the Projections of the
Eyebrows and Cheeks would be liable to hinder our Prospect, whether directly
Upwards or Downwards: Besides the Uses of these Oblique Muscles now mentioned,
they have still a more notable one, not only in pulling the whole Eye directly
Forwards, but they hold it from being Retracted, when any of the Four Straight
Muscles Act, which otherwise would rather draw it Inwards, then turn it either
Sideways, or Upwards, or Downwards. But these Muscles, one of them Descending
inwardly from the Uppermost, and the other Ascending from the Lowermost edge of
the Orbit to their Insertions, in effect not unlike an Axis, prevent its being
Retracted. Hence it is when they cease to Act, the whole Globe of the Eye
sinks, which may give Occasion for that Vulgar Tradition, that the Eyestrings
break in Dying Persons.

The rest of the Muscles of the Eye are called Recti from their Straight
Progress and Use.

Elevator Oculi.
It is also called Superbus from its moral signification, it being one of the
chief common marks of a Haughty Disposition to look high; wherefore its
Opposite Muscle is called Humilis; but Placentinus thinks the Motions of
Casserius, Lib. v. C. xviii.
the Upper Eyelids denote those Dispositions more significantly, for says he,
Qui enim hanc elatam habent, (speaking of the Upper Eyelids) Superbi and
Feroces sunt; qui vero Depressam ac dimidium fere Oculum Claudentem, ita ut
Terram adspicere videantur, Humiles ac Mites sunt. This Muscle Arises Sharp,
and Fleshy, near the place where the Optic Nerve enters the Orbit, and
becoming a Fleshy Belly makes a Thin Tendon Inserted to the Tunica Sclerotis on
the Superior and Forepart of the Bulb of the Eye under the Adnata. (E.) Fig. ii.


Depressor Oculi.
This, like the Former, Arises from the Profoundest Part of the Orbit, and like
it passes directly to its Insertion to the Opposite part of the Globe of the
Eye. ( G.) Fig. ii.


Adductor Oculi.
So called because it inclines its Pupil toward the Nose, and Bibitorius, it
directing the Eye toward the Cup. The Origin and Progress of This is agreeable
with the Two Former, and is Inserted to that part of the Tunica Sclerotis
bordering on the Nose. ( H. Fig. ii.


Abductor Oculi.
So called from its Action in Retracting the Eye from the Nose; it is also
called Indignabundus, because it is made use of in scornful resentments. This
like the Three Former Arises where the Optic Nerve is Transmitted; and is
Inserted like Them to that part of the Tunica Sclerotis, that respects the
Lesser Canthus of the Eye, Opposite to the Implantation of the Former ( F).
When these Four Right Fig. ii.
Muscles Act together, They Pull the whole Globe of the Eye into the Orbit,
from whence it is Pulled Forwards again by the Two Obliqui as before.

To these Mullinete adds another, Dissertat. Anatom. Cap. vi.
which he calls the Fifth Right Muscle; the Office of which he confines to the
Motion of the Trochlea, (supposing it moveable) but what he has said concerning
it either as to its Existence or Use is so Obscure, if not Impossible, that We
can see no Reason to give it any place or description amongst those other
Muscles of the Eye. Neither could we ever discover by Dissection any such
Muscle, but we suspect that part of the Orbicularis Palpebrarum, which adheres
to the Trochlea, might occasion the Mistake, which I rather remark, because I
find others upon Mullinete's Authority, without strict enquiry into the Matter,
have fallen into the same Error.

CHAP. IX. Of the Muscles of the Nose.
THe Nose is altogether immovable, except in its Lower Gristly parts, which are
not improperly called Alae or Pinnae, these by their approach or Recess, do
Constringe, or De Dissect. Musc. Cap. iii.
Dilate, the Nostrils. Galen assigns but One Pair of Muscles to them, to which
Iacobus Beringarius of Carpus in his Commentary on Mindinus adds another,
Arising from the extremities of the Bones of the Nose, and Inserted to the
Inside of the Alae; wherein he is followed by Vesalius. Columbus Lib. ii. Cap.
xiii. De re Anatom. Lib. v. Cap. iv.
pretends those described by Galen belong to the Upper Lip, and that Those
placed in the inside of the Nose (above mentioned) are entirely fictitious;
Describing still another Pair Arising from the upper parts of the Bones of the
Nose, and Inserted to their Alae. Falloppius is not positive Observat. Anatom.
whether he has seen Those Internal Muscles mentioned by Carpus and Vesalius;
but Mr. Bvessier an Accurate Anatomist informs me he has frequently Observed
them, adding that those Described by Columbus above mentioned do not properly
belong to the Alae, but are rather parts of the Orbiculares Palpebrarum.
Falloppius still Observat. Anatom.
describes another Muscle, not taken notice of before him, which latter
Anatomists call Constrictor Alae Nasi; The Invention of which Placentinus
assumes. Casser, Lib. iii. Cap. ix.
In Describing these Muscles we shall imitate the Order of Riolan and others,
who divide them into Proper and Common.

The Proper, are those which move the Alae only, as the Dilatores Alarm Nasi.

The Common, are those which move the Alae together with the Upper Lip, as the
Retractores, and Constrictores Alarm Nasi. First of the Proper.

Dilatores Alarm Nasi.
These are Small Thin Muscles, having a double Order of Fibers decussating each
other, not unlike the Musculi Intercostales: They Arise from the Inferior and
Internal parts of the Ossa Narium, and are soon Inserted to the superior parts
of the Alae. These pull up the Alae and Dilate the Nostrils; but I am apt to
think they are not found in all subjects.

Retractores Alarm Nasi and Elevatores Labii Superioris.
These were mentioned by Galen; They Arise Broad and Fleshy from the Fourth
Bone of the Upper Jaw (5), Fig. xvii.
whence descending obliquely they are soon Inserted to the Upper Lip and Alae
Nasi. (C.) Fig. i.


The Constrictor Alae Nasi mentioned by Falloppius and Placentinus, we suspect
to be altogether Fictitious.

Constrictores Alarm Nasi ac Depressores Labii Superioris.
These Arise Fleshy from the Foreparts of the Fourth Bones of the Upper Jaw,
immediately above the Gums of the Dentes Incisorii, and ascending, are soon
Inserted to the roots of the Alae Nasi, and superior parts of the Upper Lip. (
D.) Fig. iii.


When these Act they draw the Upper Lip and Alae downwards; by which means they
bring the latter nearer each other. Hence, when we attempt the Reception of any
Odoriferous Effluvia, the Upper Lip is pulled downwards.

CHAP. X. Of the Muscles of the Cheeks and Lips.
SInce Authors generally disagree concerning the Number, Description, and Use,
of these Muscles; We shall not Insert their particular Differences.

These Muscles of the Lips are either Common to the Cheeks and Lips, or to both
Lips, or Proper to the Upper or Under Lip only.

Those Common to the Cheeks and Lips, are Two Pair on each side, Two Muscles, (
viz.) the Quadratus and Buccinator.

Quadratus Genae, seu Tetragonus.
Vesal. M. T. 3. (...).
By Galen called Platusma Muoides, De Mus. Cap. ii.
or the Muscular expansion. This is a great square Muscle lying under the skin
of the Neck, and is spread over the whole Inferior Region of the Face. It
Arises Thin and Membranous, according to Galen, from the Spines of the
Vertebrae of the Neck; It also springs from the skin on the superior part of
the Cuccularis, and Pectoral Muscle, from hence ascending under the skin of the
Neck becomes Fleshy, and one part adhering to the Os Hyoides, is soon Inserted
to the Middle of the Lower Jaw; The other Broader portion proceeding farther to
its Implantation in the Cheeks below the Angle of the Lips.

When both these Muscles Act, they pull down each Angle of the Mouth, together
with the Cheeks, which Posture of the Face is the proper Expression of Sorrow.
But if the Inferior Parts of these Muscles (which lie on the Neck) Act alone,
they distend the superincumbent skin by making it Aproach to a Direct Line with
the Claviculae (14) and Lower Jaw Bone Fig. xvii.
(10), which otherwise is Indented according to the Formation of the part,
where by a Double Chin (as they call it) is Represented.

Buccinator.
So called because in Trumpeters it Forces out the Breath. This Muscle does not
spring from the Gums of the Upper, and end in those of the Nether Jaw; nor is
it of that Figure which Vulgar Anatomists would persuade Us; or Intertext with
various Orders of Fibers, as others Pretend. It Arises Broad and Fleshy from
the Forepart of the Processus Corone (B) of Fig. iv.
the Lower Jaw Bone, from hence proceeding with direct Fibers it adheres to the
Gums of Both Jaws, and is so Inserted to the Angle of the Lips. ( K.) Fig. i.


Through the middle of this Muscle Passes the Ductus Salivalis superior (d),
which Placentinus had observed and Theat. Anatom. Lib. iii. Cap. lxix.
called Vinculum robustum (as Casper Bauhin writes.) Besides the Use Trumpeters
makes of this Muscle, it also pulls the Lips or Mouth to one side.

The Muscles Common to both Lips are such as are Inserted into the Angles of
the Mouth, as the Zugomaticus, Elevator, Depressor, and Constrictor Labiorum.

Zugomaticus.
So called by Riolan because it arises Anthropog. Lib. v. Cap. 12.
from the Os Iugale or Zugoma (9). Fig. xvii.
Its Origination is Round and Fleshy from the External part of the said Bone,
whence Descending Obliquely Forwards is Inserted near the Angle of the Lips. (
G.) Fig. i.


When this Muscle and its Partner Act, they draw both Lips upwards, and make a
Pleasant Countenance.

Elevator Labiorum.
This lies between the Former Muscle and Elevator Labii Superioris Proprius. It
Arises from the Os Quartum of the Upper Jaw (5), and Descends Fig xvii.
Directly to its Insertion under the Termination of the Former. ( D.) Fig. i.


Depressor Labiorum.
This Arises Fleshy from the Lower Edge of the Inferior Jaw Bone (10) Fig. xvii.
laterally, and Ascends Directly to its Insertion at the Angle of the Lips. (
H.) Fig. i.


This with its Partner and the Quadrati Acting express a sorrowful Countenance,
in drawing down the Corners of the Mouth and Cheeks.

Constrictor Labiorum it. Sphincter, and Orbicularis Labiorum.
This environs the Lips with Orbicular Fibers, and when it Acts it Purses them,
wherefore some name it Osculatorius. (F F.) Fig. i.


The Muscles Proper to the Upper or Nether Lip in particular are three Pair, (
viz.) Elevatores Labii superioris; Depressores and Elevatores Labii Inferioris:
Of these in Their Order.

Elevator Labii Superioris.
This Arises Fleshy from the Forepart of the Os Quartum of the Upper Fig. xvii.
Jaw (5) immediately above the Elevator treated of before, and descends
obliquely under the skin of the Upper Lip, joining with its Partner in a Middle
Line, from the Septum Narium to its Termination in the Sphincter Labiorum.
(EE.) Fig. i.


Depressor Labii Inferioris.
Its difficult to determine whether This be One only or Two Muscles. It lying
between the Depressores Labiorum Communes (described above) possesses that part
of the Lower Jaw called the Chin (10), and Ascending Fig. xvii.
with a direct and transverse order of Fibers is Inserted into the Nether Lip,
Fig. i. (...) Fig. iv. G. G.
in Depressing of which it Turns it Outward. ( I.)

Elevator Labii Inferioris.
This Muscle with its Partner lies within the Lower Lip. These We First
Observed some time since, They Arise Fleshy from the Inferior Part of the Gums
of the Lower Jaw, which belong to the Dentes Incisorii, and Descend Directly to
their Implantations in the Inferior part of the Skin of the Chin ( FF); hence
it is when Fig. iv.
These Act they make diverse Indentations in the Chin, as may be Observed in
Living Persons when the Lower Lip is drawn upwards.

CHAP. XI. Of the Muscles of the Auricula or Outward Ear.
FAlloppius the Author of these Muscles, Observat. Anatom.
informs us there are sometimes found Three, belonging to each Auricle; the
First or Attollens, the Second or Deprimens, and the Third which is part of the
Platusma Myoides. These, he says, are sometimes wanting, though he has
frequently seen them. Placentinus multiplies them to Casserius, Lib. iv. Cap.
iv.
the number of Five; but M. Du Verney in his Accurate Treatise of the Ear
describes Two only, whose Account we have found the truest from those Enquiries
we have made into this Part.

Attollens Auriculam.
This consists of diverse Fleshy Fibers, and is annexed to that part of the
Pericranium that covers the Temporal Muscle, whence it Descends Directly to its
Implantation at the superior part of the second Wrinkle of the Cartilage of the
Ear. ( M.) Fig. i.


Its Name declares its Use.

Retrahens Auriculam.
Spigel. Lib. iv. T. I. F. I. T T.
By some called Triceps Auris, because it has sometimes Three Beginnings. M. Du
Verney says it is composed De l'Org. Del'Ovie.
of Five or Six Fleshy Fibers which have their Origination from the superior
and Forepart of the Apophysis Mastoides, and Descend obliquely to their
Insertion in the middle of the Concha Auriculae.

N. These Muscles of the Internal Ear cannot be Demonstrated till after those
of the Head are dispatched, and the Brain removed; but we shall follow the
example of others, and insert their Descriptions in this place; it being also
customary in the Myological Lectures at Surgeons Hall to show them in a
dried Preparation from the precedent Subject.

CHAP. XII. Of the Muscles of the Internal Ear.
THese Muscles were altogether unknown to former Anatomists, the most Internal
of those belonging to the Malleus is Accurately Described Opuscula, Anatomica.
by Bartholomeus Eustathius, and is called Internus Auris. Volckerus Coiter
mentions Two Muscles lattent on the Anatom. Observat.
second Meatus or Concha commonly called Timpanum, but does not Describe them;
his Observations being made from Brutes, we suspect one of them De Aure pars
prim Lib. iv. Cap. xii. De Aure, Lib. iv. Cap. xiii.
was the Internal Muscle of Eustathius, and the other the Musculus Stapidis.
Fabritius ab Aquapendente, and Casserius of Placentine contend for the
invention of another lying in the Meatus Auditorius called Externus, in the
description of which they are followed by most Anatomists except M. Du Verny,
who (not taking notice of the Accounts of others, but Writing from Dissection
only) Describes Two Muscles belonging to the Malleus, wherein he omits the
External one of Aquaperdens and Placentinus, and in stead of it adds another
which he also calls Externus, because it lies on the External Bony Paries of
the Ductus, leading from the Palate to the Ear, which from its Position we call
Obliquus Auris; hence it follows that Three Muscles belong to the Malleus, of
which the first that appears in Dissection is the Externus of Aquapendens; the
second is the Externus of Du Verny, which we call Obliqus Aurus, and the Third
is the Internus of Eustachius; to which may be added the Fourth belonging to
the Stapes, called Musculus Stapidis Described by Placentinus in Brutes, and in
Man by Du Verny.

For the better Demonstration of these Muscles (after the Dissection of the
Brain and all the Muscles which arise from, or are Inserted to the Basis of the
Cranium) Divide the Os Temporale with part of the Os Sphaenoides of one side,
and the Os Occipitis on the other, from the rest of the Bones, (it being well
cleared of the Muscles, Membranes and Vessels, that remain on it) with a small
semicircular Chisel cut away the Inferior Part of the Meatus Auditorius, taking
care not to Wound the Membrana Timpani. This Performed, you must be very
cautious in Raising the Glandulous Membrane that Invests the Meatus, to which
the External Muscle adheres. The other Two Muscles of the Malleus lying
enclosed within the Os Petrosum require our next Inspection. First observe the
last named Bone's Conjunction to the Os Sphaenoides, where with the Chisel
lightly cut off their external Laminae, and the Oblique external Muscle of Du
Verny will appear, together with the Internal one of Eustachius. But if you
still proceed to break off more of the Os Petrosum, you will not only have a
Prospect of the Bony part of the Aqueduct, but the Articulation of the Malleus
with the Incus, and the whole Cavity of the Timpanum. Wherein may be Observed
the longer process of the last named Bone, joining with the Os Orbiculare, and
Stapes, and the Tendon of the Musculus Stapidis, running out of a Perforation
in the Os Petrosum, down to its Insertion in the Head of the Stapes, together
with the Internal Surface of the Membrana Timpani, and the long Process of the
Malleus lying on it.

Externus Auris vel Laxator Externus.
Fabricius ab Aquapen. De Aure. F. 17. r.
This lies in the Upper Part of the Meatus Auditorius, having a short Fleshy
Body with a long slender Tendon. It Arises from the External and Superior
Margin of the Meatus Auditorius, soon becoming a slender Tendon passes directly
to the Upper part of the Membrana Timpani, on which it Descends for some space
to its Insertion in the long Process of the Malleus, where it is Contiguous to
the said Membrane. This draws the Manabrium of the Malleus, together with the
Membrana Timpani Forwards.

Obliquus Auris.
Du Verny De Organ. Auditus, T. 6. F. 5. C D. F. 7. E.
This may be also called Semicircularis from its Position it lying in the
External Parts of the Bony Channel of the Aquaeduct, whence marching somewhat
Upwards and Backwards, it enters the Timpanum in a very oblique Sinuosity
Excavated immediately above the Bone where the Timpanum is Inchased, and is
Inserted to the slender Process of the Malleus. The Sinuosity in which this
Muscle passes is that which may be taken notice of in the Upper Part of the
Bony Circle of the Faetus. This we don't find Described any-where before Du
Verny.

Internus Auris.
^^. T. 6. F. 5. E. F.
This lies in a Bony Channel Excavated in the Os Petrosum, which makes one of
the Parietes Timpani; one part of this Channel is without the Timpanum, and
lies in the upper part of the Bony Passage which goes from the Ear to the
Palate; the other Part which is within the Timpanum, advancing as far as the
Fenestra Ovalis, makes in that Place a Rising, upon which, as on a Pully, the
Tendon of this Muscle passes to the other side of the Timpanum, and Inserts it
self at the Posterior Part of the Handle of the Malleus a little below the
Insertion of the External Muscle; by which means it draws it toward the Os
Petrosum. The Origin of this Muscle is Precisely in that Place where the Bony
part of the Aquaeduct Terminates. It is covered with a Nervous Coat which forms
a Sheath, accompanying it in its whole progress, and binding it fast to the
Channel. When this Muscle Acts it pulls the Manubrium of the Malleus toward
the Os Petrosum, whereby the Membrana Timpani becomes somewhat Concave
outwardly.

In the Tendon of this Muscle in some Animals Schelhamar has sometimes Chap.
iii. Sect. iv.
Observed a small Bone, which we suspect he mistook for the Musculus Stapidis,
in which Tendon, my very good Friend, Dr. Adair, an Accurate Anatomist, lately
communicated his Observation of it to me, as it appeared in a Calves Head, which
at first sight may deceive the Enquirer, it being annexed to the Stapes, and in
Figure like the Osculum Quartum of Sylvius; but if you be careful in your
Examination, you may find both in the same Organ; the latter commonly remaining
on the long Process of the Incus when separated: but if if you leave the Stapes
(C) in Situ, Fix. ix.
you may see in that Animal, the Origin, ( E) Progress ( F) and Insertion ( C)
of its Muscle, together with the Bone in its Tendon ( F) as it passes over a
Projection of the Os Petrosum, which composes the Foramen Rotundum (B) on which
we suspect the Tendon of this Muscle Acts, as on a Trochlea, to which end that
small Bone is placed, not unlike the Petella of the Knee and Ossa Sesamoidea of
the Feet; which is an elegant Mechanism in Nature.

Musculus Stapidis.
Du Verny, T. 5. F. 8. F.
This lies hid in a Bony Pipe, excavated in the Os Petrosum, almost at the
Bottom of the Timpanum, whence it takes its Origin. It Is Belly is big and
Fleshy, and suddenly forming a very thin Tendon, which Descends to its
Insertion at the Head of the Stapes. The Pipe, which contains the Belly of this
Muscle, is about the sixth part of an Inch long, and is much larger then the
Foramen, through which its Tendon Passes.

When this Acts, it draws the Stapes upwards to the Foramen Ovale.

The Order of Dissection obliges us to Examine the Muscles of the Os Hyoides
next, to which end the Mastoidei must be raised on both sides of the Neck; the
one being Freed from its Origination, and left at its Insertion; the other on
the contrary may be raised from its Insertion, and left at its Origin. This
done, the Biventral Muscles of the Lower Iaw may be observed in their whole
Progress, wherein may be Noted, that They Descend from their Originisations
through the Stylohyoides to the Os Hyoides, where an Annulus is made on each
side for the Transmission of their middle Tendons; after which They reascend to
their Implantations. These being also Raised contrariwise like the
abovementioned Mastoidei, and the Perforations of the Stylohoidei enlarged,
through which each contrary end of These must be drawn, leaving the one at its
Origination, and the other at its Insertion, till we come to Describe the rest
of the Muscles which move the Lower Iaw.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Muscles of the Os Hyoides or Bone of the Tongue.
SInce the Os Hyoides is fastened to the Tongue and Larynx, the Muscles which
move it ought to be esteemed common to both. Authors Disagree concerning their
Number, Lib. ii. Cap. xvii.
Velasius, Lib. v. Cap. xii.
Columbus, Lib. iv. Cap. vi.
Spigelius, etc. Describe Four Pair, ( viz.) Sternohyoideum, Coracohyoideum,
Stylohyoideum, and Geniohyoideum. To these, the Accurate Observe. Anatom.
Falloppius adds another Pair, which latter Anatomists call Mylohyoideum; the
Invention of which, is Arrogated by Riolan, in his Animadversions in Caspar
Bauhins Theatrum Anatomicum.

All these Muscles of the Os Hyoides receive their Denominations, from their
Originations and Insertions.

Sternohyoideus.
Bid. T. 15. F. i. F F.
This does not Arise from the Upper part of the Sternum (31), as Anatomists Fig
xvii.
generally write, but from the Internal part of the Clavicula (14) next Fig.
xvii
it, where its Origination is Broad and Fleshy, and Ascends directly over the
Sternothyreoideus and Larynx, of an equal Breadth and Thickness, to its
Insertion at the Basis of the Fore Bone of the Os Hyoides. (S. S.) Fig. i.


This with its Partner Acting, pulls the Os Hyoides, together with the Tongue
and Larynx, directly downwards.

Coracohyoideus.
Ibid. G G.
This does not Arise from the Processus Coracoides Scapulae (16), as Vulgar
Fig. xvii
Anatomists pretend It Is Origination being Round and Fleshy from the superior
Costa of the Scapula, at the root of the said Process, whence, marching
Obliquely under the Mastoideus, it becomes Tendinous, but growing Fleshy again,
It Is Inserted into the Basis of the Fore Bone of the Hyois, near the
Implantation of the Former Muscle. ( T. T.) Fig. i.


This running under the Mastoideus as on a Trochlea, it there becomes
Tendinous, not unlike the Digastricus of the Lower Jaw, wherefore, This by some
is also Called Biventer. When It Acts together with Its Partner, They do not
only assist the Former in drawing the Os Hyoides, Tongue and Larynx, downwards;
but, They also pull them somewhat Inwards, toward the Vertebrae of the Neck.

Stylohyoideus.
Bid. T. 15. ^rope C.
By some called Styloceratohyoideus, because its said to be Inserted to the
Horns of the Os Hyoides. It Arises sharp and Fleshy from the Processus
Styloides (f), and soon growing larger, Fig. iii.
It Descends obliquely Forwards to the Os Hyoides, in half its Progress
thither, its Fleshy Body is Divided, to give way to the Transmission of the
Middle Tendon of the Digastricus of the Lower Jaw. This Muscle is well expressed
( in situ) by Bidloo.

This with its Companions, the Styloglossus and Stylopharyngoeus Acting on each
side, do draw up the Os Hyoides, Tongue and Larynx, together with the Fauces in
Deglutition; whereby the Masticated Aliment is not only Comprest into the
Latter, (they being then Dilated) but the Epiglottis is Deprest, and adequately
covers the Rimula of the Larynx by its Aproximation to it, by which means the
Descent of the least Part of the Aliment into the Aspera Arteria is Hindered;
which Mechanism in Nature is indeed very Admirable.

Mylohyoideus.
Bid. T. 15. F F.
Though Falloppius and his Followers Dissertat. Anatom.
make this a Pair of Muscles, It seems not to be divisible without apparent
Violence. It possesses all that space which is between the Lower Jaw and Os
Hyoides; Arising Fleshy from both sides the Mandible (10) Internally Fig. xvii.
near the Dentes Molares (A), Fig. iii.
whence Marching with a double order of Fleshy Fibers, the outwardmost of which
pass directly to their Implantation in the Os Hyoides; and the Middle run
Transversly over the following Muscles, being inseparably joined to each other
with a Middle Line, as is well expressed by Bidloo. T. 15.

Besides the Uses commonly ascribed to this Muscle in moving the Os Hyoides
Tongue, and Larynx, Upwards and Forwards, and to either side; its last
Described Transverse Order of Fibers have still a further Use in Compressing
the Glandulae Sublinguales who lie immediately under them on each side: whereby
they Hasten the Egress of the Spittle from the Inferior Salival Ducts into the
Mouth. Hence it is we employ these Muscles (as in the Action of Deglutition)
when we want Saliva to moisten the Mouth: And in that Action also they supply
it with fresh Saliva to join with those Aliments where Mastication is not
required; which Artifice of Nature deserves our Admiration.

Geniohyoideus.
Bid. T. 15. F. 2. F F.
This with its Partner are Short, Thick, and Fleshy Muscles, Arising from the
Internal parts of the Lower Jaw Bone called the Chin ( A), and Fig. iii.
Dilating themselves, are soon lessened again, and Inserted to the superior
part of the Fore-Bone of the Os Hyoides.

These Acting pull the Os Hyoides, etc. both Upwards and Forwards, and assist
the Genioglossi in thrusting the Tongue out of the Mouth; of which in the
following Chapter.

All these Muscles of the Os Hyoides being raised from their Originations, and
left at their Insertions, the whole Bone together with them may be taken out;
by dividing its two extremes from the Two Processes of the Scutiformal
Cartilage, and cutting off the Originations of the Ceratoglossi and
Hyothyroeidei, ( of which hereafter). This done they may be expanded on a
Plain, as they are represented by Placentinus and Veslingius Casser. Lib. ii.
Syntag. Anatom. Cap. xi.
in their Figures; the latter of which calls the last Described Geneiohyoides,
and the preceding Geneiohyoides par internum.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Muscles of the Tongue.
AUthors assign various Numbers of Muscles to this Part. Some reckoning Eight,
others Nine, some Ten, and others Eleven, amongst which they count the Tongue
it self; with whom we shall not enter the List, contenting our selves at
present with their Descriptions only, as they have appeared to us in Dissection.

N. These Muscles of the Tongue, like those of the Os Hyoides, are named from
their Originations and Insertions.

The Administrations of These is not Difficult, provided the Muscles of Os
Hyoides are carefully Dissected.

Genioglossus.
This with its Partner lies immediately under the Described Geniohyoidei. They
Arise Fleshy from the Forepart of the Lower Jaw Internally ( A), and Fig. iii.
enlarging themselves, are inserted to the root of the Tongue. ( DD.) Fig. v.


When these Act they pull the Tongue Forwards, and Thrust it out of the Mouth.

Ceratoglossus.
This we cut from its Broad Fleshy Origination at the superior part of the Os
Hyoides laterally, whence it Ascends to its Insertion at the Root of the
Tongue. ( C C.) Fig. v.


This with its Partner Acting draw the Tongue into the Mouth directly; if One
of them Acts only, it moves it to one side.

Styloglossus.
This Arises Sharp and Fleshy from the Processus Styloides (f), whence Fig. iii.
Descending Obliquely Forwards its Inserted to the root of the Tongue
immediately below the Implantation of the Former. ( E E.) Fig. v.


This Pulls the Tongue Up and Inwards in the Action of Deglutition, as before
noted.

To these most Authors except Falloppius
add the Basioglossus, by some called Hypsiloglossus, Arising from the Os
Hyoides, and Inserted to the Tongue, but whether there be such a Muscle our
late Enquirers have not acquainted Us.

CHAP. XV. Of the Muscles of the Larynx.
THese Muscles of the Larynx are generally divided into Common and Proper.

The Common Arise from other Parts, and are Inserted to it, concerning which,
Galen and the Ancient Anatomists erred in their Accounts; reckoning Three Pair,
of which the Oesophagiaeus is esteemed as One: But this Mistake is Corrected by
Aquapendendente; De Lar. Cap. viii.
It being but One single Muscle, and belonging to the Gula, wherefore these are
reckoned to be Two Pair only; ( viz.) Sternothyroideum and Hyothyroideum.

The Proper Muscles of this Part are such whose Rise and Termination are
Confined to the Cartilages themselves. Falloppius and Aquapendente Observat.
Anatom.
have both employed themselves in their Investigation: The First rectified the
Ancient System, the Latter accurately Expressed them in his Figures. These are
Four Pair, besides one single Muscle, ( viz.) Cricothyroideum,
Cricoarytaenoideum posticum, Cricoarytaenoideum laterale, Thyroarytaenoideum
and Arytoenoideus.

N. B. That all these Muscles of the Larynx (like those Treated of in the Two
precedent Chapters) have their Denominations from their Originations and
Insertions.

Sternothyroideus. Bid. T. 15. F. i. H H.

This Arises Broad and Fleshy from the Upper and Internal part of the Sternum,
(31) whence Ascending on the Fig xvii.
sides of the Windpipe over the Glandulae Thyroidei, it is Inserted to the
Inferior part of the Thyroidal or Scutiformal Cartilage. This with its Partner
Pulls the Larynx Downwards, and lengthens the Canalis or Distance between the
Rimula and Tip of the Tongue, (which latter we take to be the true Plectrum
Vocis) whereby the Tone of the Voice is rendered Grave.

Hyothyroideus. H^eron. Fab. ab Aquapen. De Lary. F. 23. n. 34. N.

This Arises Fleshy from the inferior part of the Os Hyoides laterally,
opposite to the Origination of the Ceratoglossus, and Descends directly to the
lower part of the Scutiformal Cartilage near the Implantation of the Former.

This with its Fellow draw the Larynx upwards in an Acute Tone of the Voice;
the Canale of the Aspera Arteria being also streightened thereby.

We proceed next to the Proper Muscles of the Larynx.

In the Administration of These, the Musculus Oesophagioeus must be freed from
both sides the Scutiformal Cartilage, and the Arytenoidal Cartilages divided
from the Glottis, and the Aspera Arteria also separated from the Gula: Cut off
the Former near the Bronchia, and the Dissection of the subsequent Muscles will
be the better performed.

Cricothyroideus. Idem. F. 26. R R.

This is seated on the Forepart of the Larynx, and is a Short Thin Fleshy
Muscle: Arising from the Forepart of the Cricoides, whence marching obliquely,
is soon Inserted to the Scutiformis internally laterally.

This by De Musc. Cap. xii.
Galen and Lib. ii. Cap. xxi.
Vesalius is made Two Muscles; but in separating the Inferior processes of the
Scutiformal Cartilage from the Anularis, you will find but One on each side,
says Aquapendente: Fabrit. De Laryn. C. viii.
The Origination and Insertion of which is supposed by some to be e contrario,
and that its Use is rather to pull up the Anularis than to bring down the
Scutiformis nearer it; but the Controversy (we think) is of no moment, since
all Muscles move the Parts less Stable to those more Fixed, as is Instanced in
the Recti Abdominis after Spigelius. Chap. i. page 26.

Cricoarytaenoideus posticus. Aquapenden. F. 25. S S. 38. S.

This lies on the back part of the Larynx, and is of a quadrangular Figure. It
Arises from the Posterior part of the Anular Cartilage, filling a shallow
depresure of it with Fibers ascending Obliquely outward, to their Insertion at
the lowermost part of the Arytenoidal Cartilage.

This with its Partner serve for the Apertion of the Rimula; which will plainly
appear, if with your Knife you repress this Muscle, the Arytaenoidal Cartilage
will then be opened thereby.

Cricoarytaenoides lateralis. Id. F. 24. 32. 33. V.

This is a small, short, Fleshy Muscle, Arising from the Cartilago Cricoides
laterally, and Ascending obliquely is Inserted to the Arytenoidal Cartilage
near the Implantation of the Former Muscle.

This pulls the Arytaenois sideways, and thereby opens the Rimula.

Thyroarytaenoideus. Aquapen. 24. M. 32. 33. xxx.

This is the largest of all the Proper Muscles of the Larynx. It Arises
together with its Partner in the Internal and Concave part of the Scutiformal
Cartilage, from whence they Ascend to their Implantations at the Foreparts of
the Arytaenoides.

When these Act, they approach the Cartilages to which they are Fixed, and shut
the Rimula. The Contraction of these Muscles through an Inflammation in an
Angina will bring sudden Death, which Case I remember I heard the late Dr.
Croon say he had once Observed in Dissection.

Arytaenoideus. Id. F. 25. 38. T.

This is the smallest Muscle belonging to the Larynx, it is in the Opinion of
some Double, but has always appeared to us Single. It Arises from the External
part of one of the Arytenoidal Cartilages, and running Transversly, is Inserted
to the other.

This pulls the Arytenoidal Cartilages nearer each other, and shuts the Rimula
Adequately.

The Opinion of Dr. Croon (as it is related by Dr. Gibson) concerning the Book
v. Chap. xi.
Use of these Muscles, we can by no means Approve.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Muscles of the Fauces.
RIolan not only pretends to the Invention Animad. in Spigel. and Vestin.
of these Muscles, but assumes the Discovery also of those of the Gargareon,
though they were most Accurately Described before him by Observat. Anatom.
Falloppius under the general Title of the Muscles of the Fauces. Neither
Vesalius nor Columbus mentions These, or those of the Gargareon, though the
Former are partly described by Galen, Oribasius, and Avicenna, as Histor.
Anatom. Lib. v. Cap. ix.
Laurentius observes. Latter Writers have followed the Erroneous System of
Riolan, who, as I am apt to think, either took Falloppius his Account upon
Trust, or was not willing to diminish his Number of those belonging to the
Fauces, lest it might appear Those of the Gargarion were also Described by him.
Finding the History of these Muscles so confused, We thought it necessary to
give a Figure of them to Fig. vi.
render our Account more Intelligible.

Stylopharyngeus.
This has a Round, Sharp, and Fleshy Origination at the root of the Processus
Styloides, (with the above treated Styloglossus) whence descending obliquely,
it expands it self at its Termination on the Internal Glandulous Membrane of
the Fauces, in the middle of which its joined with its Partner. ( AA.) Fig. vi.


These Acting draw the Fauces upwards, and Dilate Them in order to receive the
Masticated Aliment in Deglutition.

These being Cut from their Originations, the next that offer themselves to the
Knife are those which fasten this Part to the Basis of the Cranium, which
according to Riolan and others Anthrop. Lib. v. Cap. xix.
consist of Two Pair of Muscles; but to us rather seem to be but one Muscle
with Two Fleshy Beginnings springing from the Processus Pterigoidei, wherefore
we Call it Pterigopharyngeus.

Pterigopharyngeus.
This Arises Thin and Fleshy from both Pterigoidal processes of the Os
Cuneiforme, also from the Root of the Tongue and extremities of the Os Hyoides;
from these Places its Fleshy Fibers run in a semicircular manner, embracing the
superior and Back part of the Glandulous Membrane of the Fauces, where they
meet in a middle line. ( B B.) Fig. vi.


When this Muscle Acts it brings the Middle or Back part of the Fauces toward
a Plain, by which means, the Tonsils, together with the rest of the Glandules,
are Comprest in the Evacuation of their Mucus, to join with the Aliment in its
Descent into the Stomach in Deglutition. And at other times to promote
Screation, in which This Muscle is the chief Instrument; That the Tonsilae
approach toward each other, is Observable when we Inspect these Parts in
living Persons.

Oesophageaeus seu Sphincter Gulae.
This seems to be a continuation of the Former; Arising from each side the
Scutiformal Cartilage, and like it passes to a Middle line on the Back part of
the Fauces. (C. C.) Fig. vi.


This does not only assist the Former in Compressing the Masticated Aliment
into the Gula, but is thought by some to streighten the Scutiformis, and render
the Tone of the Voice more Acute.

To these may be added the Perforated Muscle of the Gula, as Dr. Willis calls
it.

Vuginalis Gulae.
Steno supposes this to consist of a double order of spiral Fibers mutually
intercussating each other. Dr. Willis Pharma. Rational. Cap. ii. Sect. ii.
says the whole Oesophagus seems to consist of Two Muscles, which make Four
Parallelograms with their opposite Fibers decussating each other. But in Man we
find it far otherwise, in whom the Fibers of this Muscle are Longitudinal, and
Oblique; the Former seem to take their Original at the Arytenoidal Cartilages,
and passing somewhat Obliquely to the Back part of the Oesophagus (BB), Fig.
vii.
descend to the Stomach: The Latter ( AA) seem to be a continuation of the last
treated of Muscles, descending obliquely in a spiral manner not unlike
Dissertat. in Lib. de Febribus intermittentibus.
those of the Intestines Described by the Learned Dr. Cole.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Muscles of the Gargareon.
THese were First Described by a Observe. Anatom.
Falloppius, as was above noted, amongst those of the Fauces. Riolan b
Anthropog. Lib. v. C. xx.
First Ascribed Them to this Part, and Gave Them the Names of
Pterigostaphylinus Internus and Externus, which Appellations not pleasing the
late Dr. Croon, (to whose Memory we shall In his Learned Lectures in Surgeons
Hall.
ever pay a Just Defferance for his generous Encouragement of our Young
Endeavors) he changed them for that of Sphaenopalatinus, and Pterigopalatinus,
or Sphaenopterigopalatinus; for which Reason he has been Vulgarly Reputed Their
First Discoverer. Neither did he propose a Third Pair, as Dr. Gibson Book v.
Chap. xii.
conceives.

Sphaenopalatinus. ^slingius Tab. Cap. xi. b b.

This descends from a Round Fleshy Origination at a Process of the Os
Sphaenoides (X), which is in a Direct Fig. iii.
Line between the Ala Vespertilionis (P), and Processus Styloides (f), becoming
a Round Fleshy Belly, in half its Progress grows less again near its lateral
Insertion to the Posterior part of the Gargareon.

This with its Partner Acting Draw the Gargareon with the Vuula Upwards and
Backwards; which hinders the Masticated Aliment from Regurgitateing through the
Foramina Narium in Deglutition.

Pterigopalatinus seu Sphaenopterigopalatinus. ^bid. c c.

The Former Appellation intimating its Progress and Insertion; the Latter its
Origin also. This Arises from the same Process of the Os Sphaenoides, as the
Preceding Muscle, and like it, Descends according to the length of the
Interstice made by the Internal Ala of the Os Sphaenoides and Musculus
Pterigoideus Internus (B) of the Lower Fig. iii.
Jaw; and becoming Tendinous, marches over the Processus Pterigoides, and is
Inserted to the Forepart of the Gargareon.

The Tendon of This, passes over the Pterigoidal Process, which like a Pully
gives It a Different Power from that of the Former Muscle, though they have
both their Origin from the same Place. Wherefore, contrary to the Preceding.
This Draws the Gargareon Forwards and Downwards; which Contrivance in Nature is
no less remarkable than any of those where the like Artifice of a Trochlea is
made Use of.

N. Now all the Muscles of the Lower Iaw may be Dissected; its Depressors being
left at Their respective Originations and Insertions, as before, Chap. XII.
Page 72.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Muscles of the Lower Iaw.
De Mus. Cap. vii.
GAlen, Lib. ii. Cap. xv.
Vesalius, and other Anatomists Describe Four Pair of Muscles belonging to the
Lower Jaw, ( viz.) Temporales, Masseteres, Digastrici, and Pterigoidei. To
These Falloppius adds a Fifth by later Authors called Pterigoidei Externi. And
Riolan a sixth Lib. v. Cap. xv.
the Quadratus Genae, by him named Musculus Latus, already described Chapter X.

Temporalis it. Crotaphites. Fig. i. L.

This has a large Semicircular Fleshy Beginning, from part of the Os Frontis
(2), Syncipitis (1), Sphaenoides, Fig. xvii.
and Temporalis (3), from these places its Fibers pass (like Lines drawn from a
Circumference to a Center) under the Os Iugale (9), from whence also Arise some
Fleshy Fibers joining with the Former at their United, partly Tendinous and
partly Fleshy Insertion, to the Upper part of the Fig. iv.
Processus Corone of the Lower Jaw. ( B.)

This with its Partner draws the Lower Jaw upwards. We could never Observe
those Dreadful Symptoms Authors Relate in Wounds of this Muscle, though part of
it has been Divided to Apply the Trepan in Fractures of the Cranium.

Masseter.
This is a short, Thick, partly Fleshy, and partly Tendinous Muscle; Arising
Forwards from the Os Primum Maxillae superioris (6) Backwards from Fig. xvii.
the Os Iugale (9), from hence Descending (with Fibers, decussating each other
in Acute Angles) is Inserted to the Inferior and External part of the Lower Jaw
Bone.

This Assists the Former in its Office. The Ductus Salivalis Superior passing
over this Muscle, is a Provident Contrivance in Nature to Accellerate the
Motion of Saliva in Mastication. The next which offers it self to our
Consideration is the Digastricus, by some called Graphoi(...)s, imagining it to
Arise from the Styloidal Process.

Digastricus seu Biventer. ^id. T. (...)5. F. i. (...)BB.

So called from its peculiar conformation, having Two Bellies. It Arises Fleshy
from the Forepart of the Processus Mastoides (8), whence Descending Fig. xviii.
Fig. iii. G.
it becomes Tendinous, passing through the Stylohoideus and an Annular Ligament
laterally fastened to the Os Hyoides; from which Bone some Tendinous Fibers do
Arise and join with its Second Fleshy Belly, Ascending from thence to its
Insertion at the Middle of the Inferior part of the Lower Jaw. The Middle
Tendon of this Muscle and its Partner passing through Two Annular Ligaments
Fixed to the Os Hyoides, as Ropes through a Double Pully is a Wonderful
contrivance of the Author of Nature to render them capable of Pulling the Lower
Jaw Down, which had their Progress been Direct from their Originations, they
could not have performed. Nor is there any Processes whether of the Vertebrae
of the Neck, or the Neighboring Parts, that could give an Origination to these
Muscles, below their Insertions, as in some Quadrupeds; Wherefore the Divine
Architect of Human Bodies has placed this Double Pully below their
Terminations, whereby they Perform their designed Office. Hence Deglutition is
hindered, when these Muscles are in action, they then preventing the Ascent of
the Tongue and Larynx. Neither can we at that time draw the Lower Jaw down
because the Center of direction is pulled upwards. Wherefore we are obliged on
that occasion to keep the Jaws close together. But in Dogs and other Voracious
Animals who have these Muscles Arising from the Transverse Processes of the
First Vertebra of the Neck, these Actions are not Dependent; whence it is they
devour their Aliment so Quick.

Pterigoideus Internus.
So called from its Origin and Situation. It Arises partly Tendinous and partly
Fleshy from the Processus Pterygoides or Aliformis of the Os Sphaenoides,
whence it Descends to its Implantation at the Internal and Inferior part of the
Lower Jaw Opposite to the Termination of the Masseter. (B.) Fig. iii*


Either of these Acting draws the Jaw to the Contrary side, if Both Act they
assist the Temporales and Masseteres.

N. To discover the Following Muscle the Two last Named on either side must be
removed. But if you still desire a fairer Prospect of it, with a Chissel Cut
off part of the Processus Corone, together with the Os Jugale.

Pterigoideus Externus.
This like the Former receives its Name from its Situation and Origin: It
Arising from the External Part of the said Processus Pterigoides, (P) and
superior Fig. iii*
part of the Os Sphaenoides (C) seated in the cavity of the Temples opposite to
the Os Iugale (9), and runs Backwards Fig. xvii.
to its Insertion at the Neck of Fig. iii. E. Fig. iv.
the Processus Condyloides (AA) of the Lower Jaw.

When This and its Partner Act, They draw the Lower Jaw Forwards; and Force the
Teeth of the Inferior Jaw beyond those of the Superior, as Falloppius their
first Describer observes. Observat. Anatom.


CHAP. XIX. Of the Muscles of the Thorax.
TO this Part Two Movements may be ascribed. The First of the Whole Chest with
its Contents on the Vertebrae of the Back. The other of the Parts which
circumscribe its Cavity ( viz.) the Ribs, by whose successive Elevation and
Depression the included space is enlarged or diminisht. This Constant
Vicissitude is necessary for the great Work of Respiration, without which no
Animal Body can subsist The Muscles or Instruments of its Motion are
distinguished into Proper and Common.

The Proper are such as are peculiar to it, and have their Rise and Termination
confined within the Limits of the Thorax.

The Common, are such, which though they regard the adjacent Parts, yet chiefly
respect This; of These, some are Principal Inserted here, and immediately
moving This, together with Those Parts from which they are derived; Others are
Auxiliary, and only move the Contiguous Bodies, whose subordinate Actions
Contribute to the better performing the Grand Motion. Thus the Elevation of the
Scapulae is required in Ordinary Respiration, without which, the Serrati could
not Act. Thus in Asmatic Persons, Peripneumonies, Pleurisies, or other Cases,
where these Parts are Inflamed or Obstructed in the due Execution of their
Office; the Extension of the Vertebrae of the Neck becomes necessary for the
Introsusception of Air through the Aspera Arteria and Repletion of the
Vesiculae of the Lungs.

Of the Muscles Proper to the Thorax which appear on the Fore Part, a Riolan, b
Caspar Bauhin, and others Anthro. (...)ib. v. (...)ap. xxxi.
reckon Three Pair ( viz.) Subclavius, Serratus Major anticus, and
Triangularis, Theat. (...)natom. (...)ib. iv. (...)ap. vi.
to which c Falloppius adds six more ( viz.) three on each side, by us called
Scalenus Primus, Secundus, and Tertius; Observe. (...)natom.
But in our Distribution we shall rather place the two First together with the
Three Last among the Muscles common to This and the Neighboring Parts, and add
the Iutercostales to the Triangularis, which together are all the Proper
Muscles seated before.

Intercostales externi and Interni.
Bid. Tab. 26. F. i. C C. A A.
These are placed in the Intervals of the Ribs as their Names Declare. Their
Number on each side is Twice Eleven, equal to the Number of the Interstices in
which they are lodged. Their Originations are differently assigned by
Anatomists, but we shall acquiesce in the Opinion of Dr. Muyow (after Steno)
who thinks both ( viz.) Intercostales Externi, and Interni, do Arise from the
Lower Edge of each Superior Rib, and are inserted to the Upper edge of each
Inferior one. These are Thin and Fleshy; the Fibers of the External pass from
above Obliquely downwards to the Forepart or Ossa Pubis (38): Those of the
Internal, Fig. xvii*
descend in like manner obliquely toward the Back-part or Os Sacrum (O): Fig.
xvii*
Their Fibers Decussating each other like the Letter X.

The Sternum being raised by dividing its Cartilages on each side from the Bony
endings of the Ribs, the following Muscle will appear underneath.

Triangularis.
Bid. Tab. 2. F. i. BB.
This with its Partner lies on each side the Cartilago Ensiformis (32) within
Fig. xvii.
the Cavity of the Thorax under the Sternum (I); some times this appears to
Fig. xviii.
be Three, at other times Four distinct Muscles on each side. It Arises from
the Inferior part of the Os Pectoris, whence its Upper part Ascends, and Lower
Descends to its Implantations at the Bony endings of the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth,
and sometimes Seventh, and Eighth Ribs, near their Conjunctions with their
Cartilages.

Its reputed Use by most (if not all) Anatomists, is to Contract the Breast.

The second Order of Muscles ( viz.) such which move the Thorax in Common with
the Contiguous Parts to which They are affixt; Comprehends the three Scaleni,
two Serrati Antici, Sabclavius, and Diaphragma.

Scalenus primus.
Vesal. M. (...). 8. C.
This Arises Fleshy from the Forepart of the Second, Third, and Fourth
Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck ( n n); and Descending Fig.
xviii.
Obliquely Forwards, becomes Tendinous at its Insertion to the First Rib ( i);
The Axiliary Nerves pass Fig. xvii.
between This and the Following Muscle.

Its Use is to draw the superior Rib together with the rest Upwards in
Inspiration.

Scalenus Secundus.
Vesal. M. T. 14. M.
This springs Fleshy from the Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth Transverse
Processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck ( n n), laterally (like the Former);
Fig. xviii.
in its Descent it becomes Thin, and Tendinous, marching over the First Rib to
its Insertion in the Second and sometimes to the Third.

Scalenus Tertius.
Idem N.
This has its Beginning near the Former, from the same Transverse Processes of
the Vertebrae of the Neck; as also from the Fifth and Sixth of those Processes,
and is soon Inserted to the First Rib.

These Three last Treated of Muscles are called Scaleni from their Figure,
having three unequal sides. Though they are most commonly Enumerated and
Described among those of the Neck, to whose Motion they are subservient, yet
the Judicious Falloppius Observat. Anatom.
duly considering the Subclavius and Serratus Superior Posticus to be
insufficient for the Elevation of the Chest, assigns These part of that Office.

Subclavius.
Ibid. T. 5. Z. Spig. T. 18. Lib. 4. F.
This next presents it self to the Knife. It Arises Fleshy from the Inferior
part of half the Clavicula (14), Fig. xvii.
next its connection with the Spina Scapulae (15), hence its Fibers Descend
Obliquely Forwards to its Insertion at the superior part of the First Rib ( i)
near the Sternum. Its Use is intimated above; but Spigelius who has written
Lib. iv. Cap. ix.
a Chapter expressly about this Muscle, pretends it Depresses the Clavicula,
for which Opinion he Argues strenuously, and to this purpose relates an
Observation from Hippocrates, that when the Clavicula is Fractured near the
Sternum that next part visibly Ascends, and that part next the Scapula,
together with the Humerus, falls down; but if it is Fractured near the Scapula,
then neither part Rises; which, as our Author not absurdly Conjectures, to
depend on the Termination of this Muscle. In the first Case, it draws the
Clavicula, together with the Humerus downwards, the Fracture being betwixt its
Insertion and the contrary end of the Bone that is fixed to the Sternum. In the
Latter, it being Fractured on that part where its Inserted it may draw the ends
of the Bone nearer each other.

Serratus Minor Anticus.
Vesal. M. T. 5. T: id. T. 4. K.
Anatomists generally reckon this Muscle amongst those of the Scapula; but we
are persuaded from its Position that it may be equally serviceable to the
Thorax, in Elevating those Ribs it is Inserted to: Wherefore we offer it
Indifferently, whether belonging to one, or the other; but choose to Insert it
in this place, because it now appears in Situ. If due Care be not taken in
raising the Pectoralis, you will be in danger of Wounding this. It Arises
Fleshy from the Processus Coracoides Scapulae (16), and Descends Obliquely Fig.
xvii.
Forwards, becoming Broader and Thinner, and is Inserted Fleshy to the Bony
part of the Second ( k), Third ( l), Fourth ( m), and Fifth Ribs ( n). If the
Scapulae are Elevated by their Proper Muscles, This with its Partner are then
capable of Dilating the Breast in Large Inspirations. But if they are Deprest,
it may be easily conceived with what Difficulty that Action must then be
Performed.

Serratus Major Anticus.
Ibid. T. 2. OOO.
This Arises Fleshy from the whole Basis Scapulae, and Passing under the
Subscapularis it becomes Broader and Thicker, still running somewhat Forwards
till its Inserted to the Eight superior Ribs laterally ( i k l m n o p q) Fig.
xvii.
by so many Distinct Fleshy portions or Digituli, representing the Teeth of of
a Saw; The Two and sometimes Three Inferior of which are Indented with the
Obliquus Descendens of the Abdomen, as was before noted. This like the Former
Dilates the Thorax, or Moves the Scapulae Forwards and Downwards when its
Muscles are relaxt.

The next Muscle belonging to the Thorax, and appears as the Body lies Supine,
is the Diaphragm. We shall not here enumerate the many Names bestowed on this
Part, our Task being only at Present to consider it as a singular Muscle
elegantly Framed for those Uses for which the Author of Nature has designed it.

Diaphragma.
Bid. T. 52. B C D E F G H.
Specim. Myologiae.
Steno supposes this to be a Digastric Muscle. Diaphr. Structur. Cap. ii.
Caspar Bartholin conceiving it Double, calls the Lower part springing from the
Vertebrae of the Back and Loins the Musculus Inferior, and the Opposite Arising
from the Cartilaginous Endings of the Ribs, the Superior: or Imagines it
Trigastrical, as above noted Chap. I. Which latter Opinion of his seems to
quadrate to this Part in Birds. But whether we may suppose it One or Two
Muscles in Man, is a matter more of Controversy then Use. Its Inferior part
Arises partly Tendinous and partly Fleshy on the Right, from the First ( u),
Second ( w) and Third Vertebrae Fig. xvii.
of the Loins ( x); on the Left from the Last, and Last but one of the Back,
hence Ascending with Fleshy Fibers on each side running Straight, but in the
middle pass somewhat Curvedly, intersecting each other do as it were embrace
the Oesophagus, after which they become Tendinous, and join with its Upper
part, which Arises Thin and Membranous, but soon grows Fleshy at the whole
Inferior Margin of the Cartilaginous endings of the Ribs, and lower part of the
Os Pectoris; whence, its Fleshy Fibers like Lines drawn from a Circumference
toward a Center, pass to its Middle part, where its Tendinous Fibers are
Intercussated with each other, and exhibit a Rete. It has Two large
Perforations, the One in its Tendinous part to Transmit the Vena Cava toward
the Right Auricle of the Heart; the other in its Fleshy part, which like an
Anulus embraces the Oesophagus (as above noted). Its double Origin at the
Vertebrae (34) Fig. xvii.
gives way to the Descending Trunck of the Arteria Magna, and Two Ascending of
the Ductus Chyliferus and Vena Azygos.

Its Use in the Animal Economy is too Large to be Inserted in this place.
Pecquet observes when all the Muscles of Respiration are separated and removed,
the Diaphragma and Intercostales excepted, the Animal still persists to Breath.
When we Inspire, its superior surface comes toward a Plain. In Expiration it is
Convext toward the Thorax, and Concave toward the Abdomen. In the Former the
Viscera of the Lower Belly are Comprest, and the Cavity of the Thorax enlarged.
In the Latter the Air is expressed out of the Vesciculae of the Lungs.

We might here Insert another singular Muscle the Heart, but it not being an
Instrument of Voluntary Motion, or moving any other Part besides it self and
the Blood, we shall therefore leave it, being sufficiently sensible how
Accurately Dr. Lower, Vieusenius, and Others have Described and represented it
in their Figures. The rest of the Muscles that appear on the Body lying Supine,
do partly belong to the Head, Neck, and Limbs, of which in their Proper Order.

N. To Prosecute our Work We must now lay the Subject in a Prone Position the
Back Uppermost, continuing our Section from the Occiput down to the Os Sacrum,
Intersecting it with a Transverse Line over the Regio Lumbalis. Which done, and
the Common Integuments removed, the Subjacent Muscles may be best Dissected in
the following Order.

CHAP. XX. Of the Muscles of the Scapula or Shoulder Blade.
THese Muscles Constitute the Third Order of those belonging to the Thorax. The
Reason of this Division may be seen before. page 98 and 99.

Cucullaris, and Trapezius.
Vesal. M. T. 9. E K, G H.
So named because this with its Fellow covering the Back Represents a Cowl. It
Arises Fleshy from the Os Fig. xviii.
Occipitis (2), Tendinous from the Ligamentum Colli, and Apex of the Spine of
the last Vertebra of the Neck ( f), and Eight superior of the Thorax (PP), Fig.
xviii.
from which Broad Origination becoming Thick and Fleshy, its so Inserted to the
Clavicula (11), and Tendinous to the Spina Scapulae (16), Each Muscle is
Triangular, and both conjointly compose a Lozenge or Trapezium, whose large
Diameter extends from the Occiput to the Fifteenth Vertebra; the shorter from
near the Extremity of the Spina Scapuloe on one side, to that of the other.
They contain a Triple Series of Fibers; the Middle passing directly Transverse
from the First Vertebra of the Thorax: those Above Descend, and those beneath
Ascend to their Insertion; whereby the Scapula is variously moved according to
their Directions, either Obliquely Upward, Directly Back, or Obliquely
Downwards.

N. You must proceed with Caution in the separation of this Muscle, least you
Raise the following with it, which adheres very strictly to its Tendinous part,
where it springs from the Superior Spines of the Vertebrae Thoracis.

Rhomboides.
(...)id. G. H. I. K.
So called from its Figure. It lies immediately under the Former, in some
Subjects we have found it divided into Two distinct Muscles on each side, which
Bidloo also observes. It Arises Tendinous from the Two Inferior Spines of the
Vertebrae of the Neck ( e f), and Four Superior of the Fi. xviii.
Thorax (PP), whence descending Obliquely, becomes Thick and Fleshy, and is so
Inserted to the whole Basis Scapulae (13, 13).

When it Acts, it draws the Scapula Upwards and Backwards.

N. This adheres strictly to its Subjacent Muscle the Serratus Superior
Posticus, wherefore you must be cautious in Raising it.

Levator Scapulae.
Ibid. C.
By some called Levator Patientiae, because we make use of it in large
Inspirations, in order to Expire, as when we Sigh, (as they call it.) This lies
immediately under the Cucullaris, arising by so many separate Originations from
the Second, Third, Fourth, and Fifth Transverse Processes of the Fi. xviii.
Vertebrae of the Neck ( nn), which uniting into one large Fleshy Body,
Descends Obliquely to its Insertion at the Superior Angle of the Scapula (13).
Its Name declares its Office.

N. We proceed next to the Muscles of the Thorax which appear on the Backside,
the Body lying Prone; to discover which, the Latissimus Dorsi must be removed,
part of it being raised in the Ilia in Dissecting the Muscles of the Abdomen,
where you must pursue its Separation, first Cutting it from the Posteriour part
of the Spine of the Ilium (30), separating it (if possible) from the Serratus
Inferior Posticus; Freeing it from the Spines of the Loins (RR), and Inferior
of the Tho^ax ( PP), and leave it at its Insertion to the Os Humeri (19). This
done on both sides, the rest of the Muscles of Respiration offer themselves.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Muscles of the Thorax, which Appear, the Body Lying Prone.
THose of the Forepart we examined, Chap. XVIII. the same Order we shall here
Observe. First therefore of the Proper Muscles relating to this Part.

Serratus superior posticus.
Vesal. M. T. 11. F.
This lies immediately under the Rhomboides, as above noted. It Arises with a
Thin Tendon from the Two Inferior Spines of the Vertebrae of the Fig. xviii.
Neck ( f g), and Three superior of the Thorax (PP), from thence Descending
Obliquely over the Splenius Capitis, and Upper Parts of the Sacrolumbalis, and
Dorsi Longissimus, it becomes Fleshy, marching under the Scapula to its
Insertion at the Curvature of the Second ( i), Third ( k), and Fourth Ribs (
l), by so many distinct Fleshy Endings, Representing the Teeth of a Saw.

This assists in Elevating the Ribs or Thorax.

Serratus inferior posticus.
Vesal. M. T. 11. D.
The Origination of this Muscle is much Larger than Authors generally assign
it; In a Robust Subject we Observed its Continuation not only from the Spines
of the Vertebrae of the Loins ( RR), but from all those of the Fig. xviii.
Thorax (PP), as well underneath as below the Former Muscle; its Superior and
Inferior Parts being entirely Tendinous, its Middle growing Fleshy near its
Serrated Termination at the Curvature of the Ninth ( q), Tenth ( r), Eleventh (
s), and Extremity of the Twelfth Ribs ( t): The Ductus of Fibers of This
passing Transverse, and those of the Precedent Descending Oblique; do Decussate
each other in Acute Angles; which Riolan has well Observed, Anthrop. Lib. v.
and contrary to the Opinion of Authors, assigns It with its Partner a
different Use, in Depressing the Thorax, Both performing the Office of a
Bandige in Binding together and Constringing the Posterior Muscles of the
Spine, not unlike those constructive Enclosures of the Thigh and Cubit
hereafter mentioned.

The Common Muscles referred to the Thorax, and appearing on the Backside, are
the Sacrolumbi. However We think these may be included among those of the Back,
yet in imitation of most Authors we shall Treat of them in this place.

Sacrolumbalis.
Ibid. Q.
This with the Dorsi Longissimus have their Origination in Common; Externally
They are Tendinous as They spring from the Posterior part of the Spine of the
Os Ilium (30), and Superior Fig. xviii.
Spine of the Sacrum (34), and all the Spines of the Vertebrae of the Loins (
RR); Internally it Arises Fleshy, not only from those Parts, but from the
Transverse Processes of the last named Vertebrae (u w x y z); whence with
direct Fibers Ascending before it marches over the Last Rib ( t) its divided
into Two Fleshy Bodies, the Outward most of which is called Sacrolumbus, whose
Fibers ascend directly, and make so many Thin Tendons as there are Ribs to whom
they are Inserted; which are joined with so Accessory Muscles, Arising from
each Rib, and united with them before their Insertions as they pass over the
Superior, as Steno has well Observed. Specimen Myologiae.
And This Order or Multiformed disposition of it, is continued the whole length
of the Thorax to the Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Vertebra of the Neck,
which Superior Part is by Diemerbroeck made a distinct Muscle, Lib. v. Cap. vi.
and called Cervicalis descendens. Now all the Muscles of the Head may be
examined.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Muscles of the Head.
THe Head is moved by Muscles that are either Common or Proper.

The Common are those which move the Head together with the Vertebrae of the
Neck, which shall be described in the following Chapter; under the Title of the
Muscles of the Neck.

The Proper are those, which move the Head together with the first Vertebra of
the Neck only, the rest remaining unmoved, of which Latter Anatomists, as Lib.
iv.
Speigelius, Cap. xii.
Veslingius, and others reckon seven pair, viz. Mastoidei, Splenii, Complexi,
Recti Majores, Recti Minores, obliqui Superiores and obliqui Inferiores; But
Lib. De Disset Muscul e^ Galeno, Cap. x.
Oribasius adds two pair more, who is followed by Observe. Anatom.
Falloppius, which shall be described here, as They Arise in Dissection,
together with another pair of Muscles, not mentioned by any Author, (for what I
know) but first observed by me sometime since.

Splenius.
Bid. T. 16. AA.
So called from its Figure, somewhat representing an Oxes Spleen, It Arises
partly Tendinous and partly Fleshy, from the four superior Spines of the
Vertebrae of the Thorax (PP), Fig. xviii.
which Lower part seems to be Distinct from its superior, which Arises from
the Spines of the two Inferior Vertebrae of the Neck ( f g): The former
Ascending obliquely grows Fleshy, and becomes Tendinous again at its Insertion
to the Second, Third, and Fourth Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the
Neck ( n n): The latter in like Fig. xviii.
manner Ascending obliquely outward, grows Fleshy, and is so Inserted to the
Occiput (2), part of it lying under the implantation of the Mastoideus (C).
Fig. viii.
Although this Muscle by Anatomists be reckoned amongst the Proper Muscles of
the Head, yet when it Acts it must necessarily move the Second and Third
Vertebrae of the Neck (to which it is Inserted) obliquely backwards; But Acting
with its Partner it pulls them directly backwards.

Complexus.
Ibid. F G H.
Or Implicatus according to Laurentius, it is also called Tergeminus from its
being said to have Three Beginnings as some imagine, which we could never as yet
observe in Dissection. Lib. v. Cap. xxi.
It Arises with six Thin, small Tendons from the Transverse Processes of the
Vertebrae of the Neck ( nn), and in Fig. xviii.
its descent from thence becoming Thicker and more Fleshy grows partly
Tendinous about its middle, where it is interwoven with various Orders of
Fibers, and becoming still more Fleshy again, is so Inserted to the Superior
part of the Os Occipitis laterally (2), Fig. xviii.
and the back part of the Processus Mamillaris (b); The Fibers of this Muscle
Fig. viii. D D D.
are rightly observed to decussate those of the Former. Falloppius makes
Observat. Anatom.
that part of it which is Inserted to the Processus Mamillaris a distinct
Muscle; It Arising from the Transverse Processes of the First, Second, Third,
Fourth, and Fifth Vertebrae of the Thorax, and from as many of those of the
Neck; which we have sometimes observed, but this not appearing so commonly,
inclines us rather to think it a Lusus Naturae than a separate Muscle. Either
of these Complexi Acting moves the Head backwards to one side; If both Act
together, they assist the two Former. This with its Partner being raised, the
Four following Muscles appear underneath, on each side.

Rectus Major.
This Arises partly Tendinous, but chiefly Fleshy from the Superior part of
the double Spines of the Second Vertebrae of the Neck, and in its Ascent
becomes Broader and Fleshy, and is so Inserted to the Posterior part of the Os
Occipitis. (EE.) Fig. viii.


This Muscle with its Partner Acting, pulls the Head directly back on the First
Vertebra, (These being both raised, the Following will appear). This with the
four subsequent Muscles are named from their Progress, Position, or Magnitude.

Recti Minores.
These are Two small Muscles appearing both in sight at once, They arise Fleshy
from the Posterior part of the first Vertebra of the Neck; and are so Inserted
to the middle part of the Os Occipitis in two shallow Depressures of the said
Bone. ( HH.) Fig. viii.


These from their Use may be called Renuentes or Nodders Backwards, and are
Antagonists to those we shall hereafter describe and call Annuentes.

Obliquus Superior.
This Arising Fleshy from the Backpart of the Transverse Process of the First
Vertebra of the Neck, and in its somewhat oblique Ascent becomes a Fleshy
Belly, and lessening it self again, is Inserted to the Os Occipitis laterally.
( FF.) Fig. viii.


By this, together with its Partner (they never Acting separately) the Head is
moved Backwards on the first Vertebra.

Though the two Former Muscles seem adapted for all necessary motions of the
Head Backwards, yet it seems a provident Contrivance of Nature to add these;
since the Recti Majores are by accident Extended when either of the Following
Muscles Act in turning the Head to one side, whereby they are deprived of
performing their Office at that time, but the first Vertebra of the Neck moving
with the Head; these Muscles are then employed in Pulling the Head Backwards,
as in looking upward to one side.

Obliquus Inferior.
This Arises Fleshy from the External part of the Spinal Process of the Second
Vertebra of the Neck, close by the Origination of the Rectus major, and being
dilated into a Fleshy Belly, passes obliquely to its Insertion at the
Transverse Process of the First, where the Former Muscle begins. ( G) When this
acts on either Fig. viii.
side the Transverse Process of the first Vertebra of the Neck is moved toward
the Spine of the Second; wherefore some Authors have reckoned it amongst the
Muscles of the Neck. But since the Head is also moved thereby, and the Face
turned to that side on which it Acts, it is not improperly reckoned amongst
the Muscles that move the Head; it is Assisted by the Mastoideus. But of this
more in its Order.

The Body must now be turned on the Back again, to examine the rest of the
Muscles of the Head that appear on the Forepart, together with those of the
Neck, of which the First is the Mastoideus which is best raised, by freeing it
at its Origination on one side, and its Insertion on the other as in Chapt.
XII. in Order to Dissect the Muscles of the Tongue, Os Hyoides and Larynx.

Mastoideus.
Vesal. M. T. 1. P.
So called, because it is Inserted to the Mammillary Process of the
Temple-Bone: It Arises partly Tendinous, and partly Fleshy from the Upper Fig.
xvii.
part of the Os Pectoris (31) and near half the Clavicle; (14) with two (as it
were distinct Originations, the first Ascending somewhat obliquely outward
joins with the Second, and marches up more directly, composing it Round, Thick,
Fleshy Body, and as it passes over the Upper part of the Musculus Levator
Scapulae, becomes Broader again, at its Insertion to the Back part of the
Processus Mamillaris (b) Fig. viii.
and the Adjoining part of the Os Occipitis, (B) where the Splenius (above
treated of) is Implanted. ( P.) Fig. iv.


Anatomists not taking Notice of the true Insertion of this Muscle, have
generally erred in their conjectures concerning its Use, supposing, that if
both Act, the Head is bended Forewards, which Action, if rightly considered,
cannot be performed by these Muscles, except the Vertebrae of the Neck are also
inclined Forward with it, since their Insertion are right e Diametro opposite,
if not behind the Articulation of the Head with the first Vertebra; which part
of the Cranium (namely the Processus Mamillaris) neither Ascends nor Descends
in that Action: Wherefore it necessarily follows, that when the Head is moved,
either directly Forwards or Backwards on the first Vertebrae, these Muscles
cannot Act. But if either of them Act, the Face is then turned to the contrary
side; so when we look over the Left Shoulder, the Right Muscle Acts and vice
versa; which may be observed in the naked Necks of living Persons, and is
commonly expressed by Painters. But if either of these Muscles should more and
more contract, the Head is pulled down to one side forwards, as we see in
Wry-Necks commonly so called; where one of these Muscles is always contracted.

The next Muscle that presents it self to the Knife, is partly described by
Lib. de Musculis. Cap. x.
Galen, and mentioned by Lib. ii. G. xxviii.
Vessalius belonging to the Back: Observat. Anatom.
Fallopius makes it his ninth pair of the Head. It is also mentioned by Riolan,
Casp. Bauhin, Bartholomeus, Eustachius and others. Tho they are large Fleshy
Muscles, and appear immediately under the Gula or Pharynx, yet Spigelius and
some others take no notice of them. They are likewise expressed by Bidloo, and
called Recti interni: But we having observed an other small pair of Muscles
underneath them of a right position likewise, deserving the Name of Recti, to
distinguish which from those of the Back part, and these following Muscles we
shall call them Recti interni Minores, and These, Recti interni Majores.

Rectus internus Major.
Bid. T. 18. (...)L.
This Arises Tendinous but chiefly Fleshy, from the Forepart of all the
Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck, except the first and second
and in it is Ascent becoming Fleshy, passes over those two Superior Vertebrae
and is inserted to the Anteriour Appendix of the Os Occipitis near the great
Foramen, that Transmits the Medulla Oblongata.

This manifestly Bends the Head Forewards, and therefore may be called Flexor
Capitis from its Use.

This with its Partner being removed, the following Muscles appear underneath
them.

Rectus internus Minor.
This and its Partner appear on the Forepart of the first Vertebrae like the
Recti minores on the Back part, and arise near its Transverse processes and
Ascending directly, are inserted to the Anteriour Appendix of the Os Occipitis
immediately under the Former i. Fig. iii.


These nod the Head forward, and are Antagonists to the Recti minores as is
above noted, wherefore they may be called Annuentes.

The last pair of Muscles which we shall Treat of belonging to the Head, are
mentioned by Galen, and Accurately described by Falloppius in these Observat.
Anatom.
Words, Ultimo loco notandi sunt Musculi duo admodum parvi qui A Processis
Transverso Primae Vertebrae orti, valde graciles ascendunt ad Caput and in
illud inseruntur prope Mammillarem processum. These we shall call Recti
Laterales, from their Progress and Position; they may be also called Renuentes
Laterales from their Use.

Rectus Lateralis.
This is a Short, Thick, Fleshy Muscle; Arising from the Superior part of the
Extremity of the Transverse Process of the first Vertebra of the Neck, between
the Former and Obliquus Superior, thence Ascends directly to its Insertion to
the Os Occipitis in the Interstice made by the Processus Mammillaris and
Styloides, k. Fig. iii.
This nods the Head to one side.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Muscles of the Neck.
THE Muscles of the Neck move the Head secondarily, wherefore they are Esteemed
as Common to both, of which Authors reckon Four Pair, namely the Longi Colli,
the Scaleni, (which according to Falloppius are described amongst the Muscles
of the Thorax) the Transversales and Spinati Colli. But first of those that
appear in the Forepart.

Longus Colli.
This Arises partly Tendinous, but chiefly fleshy from the Forepart of the
Five Superior Vertebrae of the Thorax, and being dilated in its middle to a
fleshy Belly, is Inserted to the Forepart of all the Vertebrae of the Neck.

This with its Partner Acting bends the Neck right forwards. Between this and
the Scalenus, (described Chap. Cap. xi.
XIX.) lies the Rectus internus Major, described in the precedent Chapter,
which Veslingius calls Musculus Brevius.

The Body must be now turned on its Face again in order to examine the rest of
the Muscles that appear on the Back part of its Trunk.

Spinalis Colli.
So called, because it accompanies the Spines of the Neck, it arises from the
Five Superior Transvers Processes of the Vertebrae of the Thorax, and
Inferior of the Neck, and in its Ascent becomes more Fleshy, and is so
inserted largely into the Inferior part of the Second Vertebrae of the Neck,
laterally II. etc. Fig. viii.


These Draw the Vertebrae of the Neck directly backwards: Either of these
Muscles being Raised, the Following will appear underneath.

Transversalis Colli.
This Arises Fleshy from all the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the
Neck except the First and Second, and is inserted after an oblique Ascending
progress to their Superior Spines ( K): It being a Continuation of the same
Series of Muscular Fibers that compose the Sacer and Semi-Spinatus, of which
hereafter.

If either of these Muscles act, the Vertebrae of the Neck are moved obliquely
Backward, as when we look over one Shoulder.

Besides these Muscles (which are already Treated of by Anatomists) we observed
in Dissection some Fleshy Bodies lying between the Bifurcated Spines of each
Vertebra, which upon Examination proved to be so many Pair of Muscles, as there
was Insterstices between the said Spines. And in those Bodies that have the
Spinal Process of the last Vertebrae somewhat Broader than it is commonly
found; we have seen Five Pair of these Muscles, which from their Situation we
call Interspinales Colli.

Interspinales Colli.
These are small Fleshy Muscles, arising from the Superior parts of each double
Spinal Process of the Fig. xviii.
Neck ( b, c, d, e, f,) except that of the Second Vertebrae (a), and are
Inserted to the Inferior parts of all the said double Spines. LL. Fig. viii.


When these Muscles Act, they draw the Spines of the Vertebrae of the Neck
nearer each other. These we first discovered in the year 1690.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Muscles of the Back and Loins.
WE shall not insert the various Opinions Authors have entertained concerning
these Muscles, since we have observed so great a difference in diverse Subjects,
as has inclined us to think, that amongst Ten of them Three will scarce be
found exactly alike in this respect; which might induce Falloppius to that
Ingenious Observe. Anatom.
Confession, that they seemed to him to be an Indigested Heap and confused
Chaos. In order to render an Account of them as explicit as we can, we shall
consider them as Common to the Back and Loins, or as Proper to either.

The Common are such as arise from the one, and are Inserted to the other as
the Dorsi Longissimi.

The Proper are either such as Arise from the Os Sacrum or Ilium, and are
Inserted to the Vertebrae of the Loins only, as the Quadrati Lumborum, or Arise
from the Transverse Processes, either of the Vertebrae of the Loins or Thorax,
and are Inserted to their Superior Spines; as the Transversales Vertebrarum
Dorsi and Lumborum; which by Authors are commonly called Sacer and
Semispinalis: First of the Common Muscles.

Dorsi Longissimus.
Vesal. M. T. 12. N. T. 13. T.
This Arises in Common with the Sacrolumbalis from the Spine of Os Ilium Fig.
xviii.
(30) and the Superior part of the Sacrum (34) and all the Spines of the
Vertebrae of the Loins ( RR); Externally Tendinous, Internally Fleshy, in its
Ascent it is Inserted to the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins
( S S S S) and as it marches over the last Rib ( t), this great Muscle divides
it self into Two, the Outermost of which is the Sacrolumbalis as described
Chap, the XXI; But the Innermost next to the Spine, is the Longissimus Dorsi,
which Ascends with a partly Fleshy and partly Tendinous outside, and Fibers
passing somewhat obliquely outward. Part of which Tendinous Fibers arise
distinct from the Inferior Spines of the Vertebrae of the Thorax (PP) and
Superior Fi. xviii.
of the Loins ( R R) from which likewise Arise some Fleshy Fibers Ascending
obliquely Inwards, and are Inserted to the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Spine of
the Thorax (PP) as expressed by Bidloo, and called Semispinalis. Tab. 28. P.
The other larger part of this Muscle ascending on the Thorax Tab. 29. KK.
divides it self into many distinct Fleshy Portions not much unlike a Palm
Branch, which are Inserted in a twofold manner to the Transverse Process of
each Vertebra of the Thorax (O O O) and Tubercle of each Rib; as also to the
Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck ( n n.)

When this, and its Partner Acts, they are not only Serviceable in keeping the
Trunk of the Body erect and bending it backwards, but they are also useful in
Progression, as it may be observed when either Leg is moved forewards; This
Muscle on the same side is in Action, which to us seems to be advantageous in
rendering the Os Ilium at that time stable, so that the Thigh may be the more
commodiously Elevated; in regard it is so moved by a Muscle arising from the
Vertebra, above the Os Ilium, namely the Psoas.

( To examen this Muscle it is better to use the Fingers, or the pointed Handle
of a Dissecting Knife, to divide it from its Companion, the Sacrolumbalis, and
discover its Ansulae, as Spigelius calls those parts of it which are Inserted
to the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Back and Loins;) This being
removed, the Proper Muscles offer themselves to view; first of those of the
Loins.

Quadratus Lumborum.
Vesal. M. T. 13. 8. 14. P.
This is a Short, Thick, Fleshy Muscle, situated in the Region of the Loins, or
between the last Rib and Spine of the Os Ilium, it arises Fleshy from the
Posteriour part of the Spine of the Os Ilium (30), and is inserted Fi. xviii.
to all the Tranverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins internally ( u w
x), under the Psoas Muscle* This like the Musculus Rectus Abdominis, either
moves the Vertebrae of the Loins nearer the Os Ilium laterally, when we are
standing, on both Legs firm, or else moves the Os Ilium nearer the said
Vertebrae, on the contrary side; when we stand upon one Leg only.

Sacer.
Vesal. M. T. 14. T.
This may be also called Transversalis Lumborum. It lies under the Tendinous
part of the Longissimus above mentioned; It arises Fleshy not only from Fi.
xviii.
the Os Sacrum (34), but also from the Transverse Processes of all the
Vertebrae of the Loins, and is inserted to their Superior Spines. We have
sometimes observed a Spinalis Lumborum like the Spinalis Colli above described,
which Arising from the Superior Spines of the Os Sacrum, and marching with
direct Fleshy Fibers, isso Inserted to Superior Spines of the Vertebrae of the
Loins; The Transversalis Lumborum, now described lying under it.

Semispinatus.
Idem. T. 13. K.
This seems to be a mere continuation of the precedent Muscle, therefore might
not improperly deserve the Name of Transversalis Dorsi; it Arises Fleshy from
all the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Thorax (OO), and marching
obliquely Fi. xviii.
upwards is Inserted to the Superior Spines of the said Vertebrae (PP). These
with the former, and Transversales Colli, Acting, move the whole Spine, or
Vertebrae of the Neck, Back, and Loins, obliquely backwards, as when we
endeavor to look very much behind us: If they all Act together on each side,
they assist in Erecting the Trunk of the Body.

We need not wonder at the many Multiform Muscles inservient to the Extention
or Erection of the Head, Neck, Back and Loins, if we consider how much greater
force is required to that end, in regard to the projecting forewards of the
Head and Thorax; for as it appears in the Skeleton, Fig. xviii. we should on
the other hand think it constantly liable to fall on its Face, were it not
supported by these many strong Muscles; in which we have a plain Demonstration
of the Immense Wisdom of the most Wise Architect, in Frameing a Structure
projecting from its Fulcimen, which for several Ends (too numerous to specify
here) is to be moved Forewards, Backwards, and Sideways, and therefore by no
other means could be supported so as to render it upon occasion Flexible, but
by Muscles, since they only are capable of a greater Contraction and Relaxation
than any other Springy Bodies composed of Ligaments, etc.

Thus having briefly Treated of all those Muscles, as yet known that appear in
the Trunk of the Body; we come next to those belonging to the Artus, and first
of those that move the Arm; two of which, namely, the Pectoralis and
Longissimus, we were obliged to Dissect, Page 104. 112. to discover their
Subjacent Muscles, but we shall now describe them amongst the rest* as the
order of Dissection requires; for the convenient Performance of which, we are
wont to take of the whole Arm together, with the Scapula and Clavicula, by
dividing the latter from the Os Pectoris, by which means the trouble in
examining the following Muscles is lessened, those moving the Scapula being Cut
from it.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Muscles of the Arm, or, Os Humeri.
Chap. xviii.
GAlen, Isagog. Anatom.
Iacobus Sylvius, and Lib. II. Chap. xxiv.
Vesalius, describe Seven Muscles belonging to each Arm, viz. Pectoralis,
Deltoides, Teres Major, Latissimus Dorsi, Supraspinatus, Inferaspinatns, and
Subscapularis. Arantius, in his Anatomical Observations, counts another by Lib.
V. Chap. xxiv.
Riolan, called Coracobrachieus, to which Ta. xvii. Lib. IV. Spigelii.
Julius Casserius Placentinus adds the Teres Minor, by some reckoned as the
eighth Muscle of this part, which is therefore called Octavus Humeri
Placentini: Of these in their Order.

Pectoralis.
Vesal. Muscul. T. 1. L.
So called from its Situation. This has a broad Semicircular, Fleshy
beginning, above, from near half the Inferior part of the Clavicula (14); Fi.
xvii.
Below, from the Os Pectorale (31), and all the Cartilaginous Endings of the
six superior Ribs, and from the Bony part of the seventh, it has a distinct
Fasciculus of Fleshy Fibers, (which sometimes we have seen confounded with the
Obliquus Descendens Abdominis) from this large Origin it marches Transversly,
and becoming narrower but thicker, lessens it self as it passes over the upper
part of the Biceps Cubiti, and is Inserted by a short but broad strong Tendon,
to the Superior part of the Os Humeri, above the Termination of the following
Muscle.

The Fibers of this Muscle Decussate each other, near their Implantation to the
Os Humeri; those of the Superior part running downwards, and those of the
Inferior marching up, Intersect the Former in Acute Angles.

When it Acts it moves the Arm either obliquely Upwards, or directly Forewards,
or obliquely Downwards, according to the various Direction of its Series of
Fibers.

Deltoides.
Vesal. Muscul. Tab. I. K.
So called from its Figure, being like the Greek D. It has a broad
Origination, forewards from above one third of the Inferior and External Fi.
xviii.
part of the Clavicula (11), where it is entirely Fleshy; Backwards it
springs partly Fleshy, but chiefly Tendinous from the whole Inferior Margin
of the Spina Scapulae (16), from these places descending soon becomes Thick and
Fleshy, growing narrower till it is inserted by its partly Fleshy, and partly
Tendinous Apex, to the middle of the Os Humeri (17). This draws the Arm either
directly upwards, or somewhat Forewards or Backwards according to the Direction
of its differing Series of Fibers.

Supraspinatus.
Vesal. M. T. 11. G.
So called because it is placed above the Spine of the Shoulder Blade; It
Arises Fleshy from the Superior part of the Basis Scapulae (13), that is
above its Spine, as also from the said Spine and Costa Superior of the Scapula
(15), from thence passing between the Processus Coracoides (16), and
Anchoreformis Fig. xvii.
(15), it grows less and becoming Tendinous, marches over the Articulation of
the Humerus, joining its Tendons with the following, is Inserted to the Head of
the Os Humeri Fig. xvii.
(20). The Proper Use of this Muscle is to lift the Arm upwards toward the
Occiput.

Infraspinatus.
Ib. T. T. I.
So called because it is placed below the Spine. This Arises Fleshy from the
Inferior part of the Basis Scapulae (13), as also from from its Fi. xviii.
Spine (16), and Inferior Costa (14), and Dorsum (12); from hence passing in a
Triangular Form according to the Figure of the part, lessening itself as it
marches over the Juncture it becomes Tendinous, and is inserted like the Former
to the Head of the Os Humeri (19). This moves the Arm directly Backwards.

Teres Minor.
Spigel. T. 17. Lib. 4. a, b.
So called from its Figure and Magnitude, to distinguish it from the Following.

This Muscle in some Bodies is confounded with the Former, but in others we
have found it distinct.

It Arises Fleshy from the Lower part of the Inferior Costa of the Scapula (14)
and descends obliquely Fig. xviii.
over the Superior Head of the Gemellus Major, where becoming Tendinous it is
Inserted to the Head of the Os Humeri (19).

When this Acts the Arm is moved somewhat Backwards and Downwards.

Teres Major.
Vesal. M. T. 11. L.
This Arises from the Inferior Angle of the Scapula (13), and becoming a Round,
Fleshy Body Ascends obliquely with the Former, but then passes under the
Superior Head of the Gemellus and makes a short, Flat Tendon Inserted below the
Neck of the Os Humeri close to that of the Following.

Latissimus Dorsi sive Aniscaptor.
Vesal. M. T. 9. O. P
The first Appellation it receives from its large demensions, it with its
Partner covering the whole Back.

The latter from the use that is sometimes made of it. Its Thin, Broad,
Tendinous Origination is continued from the Seven Inferior Spines of the
Vertebrae of the Thorax (PP), and all those of the Fig. XV
Loins ( RR) and Superior of the Os Sacrum (34), and the Posterior part of the
Spine of the Os Ilium; (30) beginning to grow Carnous as it passes over the
Longissimus Dorsi and Sacrolumbus, and in its Progress over the Curvated part
of the Ribs it receives several Fasciculi of Fleshy Fibers Arising from thence,
which by their Conjunction compose a Thick Body, still lessening it self in its
demensions as it marches toward the Axilla and running over the Inferior
Angle of the Scapula, from whence sometimes does Arise a Fleshy part of it,
which I have Observed in those Bodies in whom the Teres Minor was absent, is at
last inserted by a Short, but Flat Strong Tendon to the Os Humeri near the
Former.

The next Muscle that presents it self, is the Coracobrachialis, by some called
Perforatus, which is described by Galen and Vesalius with the Internal Head of
the Biceps Cubiti.

Coracobrachialis.
Vesal. M. T. 1. R.
So called from its Origination and Insertion; it Arises partly Fleshy and
partly Tendinous from the Extremity of the Processus Caracoides Scapulae, (16)
Fig. xvii.
and in its descent it becomes larger, strictly adhering to the Internal
Tendinous Beginning of the Biceps, and parts from it near its Tendinous
Insertion at the middle of the Internal part of the Os Humeri (18). Through
this Muscle passes a Large Nerve; wherefore by some it is called Perforatus.

When it Acts the Arm is moved Upwards, and turned somewhat Obliquely Outward.

Subscapularis.
Bid. Tab. 65. E.
So Named from its Situation, by some called Immersus. It is a Large Fleshy
Muscle, filling he Internal Con cave part of the Scapula (17); Arising Fleshy
from its whole Basis and Superior and Inferior Costa Internally, and marches
forward, lessening it self according to the Demensions of the Bone, and passing
over the juncture, is Inserted in a Semicircular Manner to the Neck of the Os
Humeri (20). Fig. xvii.


When this Acts, the Os Humeri is Pulled nearer the Trunk of the Body. The
Tendon of this Muscle together with the Supra and Infraspinatus and Teres Minor
unite near their Insertions, and Environ the Articulation of the Os Humeri with
the Scapula not unlike the Ligamentum latum of the Coxa, to prevent frequent
Luxations: And by their Successive Alternate Acting, the Arm is moved
Circularly.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Muscles of the Cubit.
THE Lower Part of the Arm from the Elbow to the Wrist, is called the Cubit,
which is either Bended or Extended by Five Muscles, Namely, Biceps, Brachiaeus
internus, Gemellus, Brachiaeus externus, and Anconaeus.

Biceps.
Vesal. M. T. 1. Q.
Because it has two Heads or Beginnings, the First or Outmost, Arises with a
long Round Tendon from the Upper Part of the Brink of the Acetabulum Scapulae,
(17.) and runs under Fig. xvii.
the Ligament of the Articulation in a Sulcus or Channel on the Head of the
Shoulder Bone, wherein it is enclosed by a proper Ligament. In its Descent it
begins to grow Fleshy as it marches under the Termination of the Pectoral
Muscle, where dilating it self into a Large Fleshy Body, it joins with its
other Head or Beginning. The Latter Arises with a somewhat Broad, Flat and
Long Tendon at the Extremity of the Processus Caracoides Scapulae (16); in its
descent it strictly adheres to the Coracobrachialis (wherefore some Authors not
rightly describing that Muscle amongst those of the Arm, have mistaken it for a
Fleshy Beginning of this) But then parting from it, both these Heads compose a
Large Fleshy Belly, which becoming Tendinous near the Cubit, is commonly said
to be Inserted by a Strong, Round Tendon to the Tubercle at the Upper Head of
the Radius, (25.) But we Fi. xvii.
have observed this Tendon to be double, the External of which being Thin
passes obliquely over the Musculus Pronator Radii Teres, and Membrane like
expanding it self, joins with the Membrana Communis Musculorum, which Embraces
all the External Muscles of the Carpus and Fingers.

When this Muscle Acts the Cubit is Bended.

The double Tendinous Termination of this Muscle, (though not taken Notice of by
any Author that we know) is very evident, and was observed first by us, some
years since in Dissecting these Muscles, in Company with our very good Friend,
that most Indefatigable and Curious Botanist Mr. Samuel Doody. It appears
immediately under the Skin and Membrana Adiposa of the Cubit.

As for the use of this External Tendon which we call Fascia Tendinosa, it
seems designed not only for the more advantageous Elevation, or Bending of the
Cubit, which it more easily moves, by how much the more it recedes from the
Center of its Motion or Fulcimen at the Lower part of the Arm-Bone, (23) and
approaching Fig. xvii.
to its other Extreme; But likewise strictly including all the External
Muscles, whether belonging to the Radius, Carpus, or Fingers, it thereby
Corroborates them in performing those strenuous Actions they are necessarily
employed in. This Latter Use was first suggested to us by observing those
Artificial Bandages made of Leather which some Laborious Mechanics make Use of
(by Adapting them to the Bellied part of the Muscles of the Cubit) amongst
which Turners and especially those that use the Rasp in making the Frames for
Cane-Chairs (as they are commonly called) like a double Screw, are frequently
obliged to this Artifice.

In Phlebotomy the ductus of these External Tendinous Fibers ought to be
respected by directing the Launcet according to their Length, to avoid too
great a division of them which is frequently the Occasion of those ill Symtoms
that remain after that so commonly Practiced Operation by Bold Blood-Letters.

An extraordinary Case relating to this Muscle once happened in our Practice. A
Woman, three days before she consulted us, had, (as she suspected) Dislocated
her Shoulder Bone by wringing of Linen Clothes after washing (which is
commonly done to express the Water) adding, that in straining her Arm, in that
Action, she sensibly felt something (as she thought) slip out of its place on
her Shoulder. After examining the part, we were well satisfied that there was
no Dislocation: But observing a Depressure on the External part of the Deltoide
Muscle, and finding the two Inferior Tendons of this Biciptal Rigid, and the
Cubit thereby denied its due Extention, we suspected that the External
Tendinous Beginning, (before taken notice of) was slipped out of its Channel in
the Os Humeri; but finding the part at that time somewhat Inflamed, she having
not long before made use of it. We advised her to an Emollient Application, and
to give it rest till the next morning, at which time we found our Conjecture
true, and by turning the whole Arm to and fro, it readily slipped into its place,
she recovering the use of the Part immediately.

Brachioeus Internus.
Vesal. M. T. 1. S.
This derives its Name from its Situation, lying partly under the Former, It
Arises Fleshy from the Internal part of the Os Humeri (18) at the Fig. xvii.
Insertion of the Deltoides and Caracobrachialis Muscles, and descending over
the Juncture of the Cubit with the Arm-Bone, it is Inserted partly Fleshy and
partly Tendinous to the Superior and Forepart of the Ulna (26). This is also a
Bender of the Cubit.

Gemellus.
Id. M. T. 2. O P Q.
So called from its double Origin, It Arises first Tendinous from the Superior
part of the Inferior Costa of the Scapula (14) internally, and as it Fig. xviii.
passes between the two Round Muscles it grows Fleshy, and in its Descent
joineth with its other Beginning, which Arises Broad and Fleshy from the Upper
and Back part of the Os Humeri, under the Deltoid Muscle, and being Tendinous
on the outside and Fleshy within, is so Inserted to the Superior and External
part of the Ulna called Olecranum, and Ancon, or the Elbow. (24.) Fig. xviii.


Its use is to Extend the Cubit; If we examine the two beginnings of this Muscle
we shall find them interwoven with various Orders of Fibers, whereby it is
rendered capable of performing the Extension of the Cubit with a greater
strength, which appears in Tumblers when they are Walking on their Hands, who
by an Immediate Extension of their Cubits can return to their Feet.

Brachiaeus Externus.
Id. M. T. 12. X.
This seems to be the Third Beginning of the former Muscle, its Origination is
continued from above the middle of the Inferior and Back part of the Os Humeri
(17), to its Cavity, which receives the Olecranum (24) in the Extension of the
Cubit, where joining with the Tendinous outside of the Former, it is Inserted
with it, as abovesaid.

Anconaeus.
Bid. T. 69. prope B.
So called by Riolan from its Situation, It Arises Fleshy from the Inferior
Lib. v. Cap. xxv.
and Back-part of the Os Humeri (20), growing larger as it marches Fig. xviii.
between the Superior ends of the Ulna and Radius, and is Inserted Fleshy to
the Lateral part of the Former a Thumbs length below the Olecranum. (24.)

This is also an Extender of the Cubit.

The Muscles of the Palm of the Hand offer themselves to be Dissected, before
we can Examine Those of the Carpus, Fingers, and Radius.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Muscles of the Palm of the Hand.
THe Ancient Anatomists mention Observat. Anatom.
but one Muscle belonging to the Palm, namely, the Palmaris longus; But
Falloppius describes the Palmaris brevis, communicated to him by Ioannes
Baptista Cannanus an Eminent Anatomist his Contemporary, and was first
published by Valverda in his Anatomy, written in Spanish.

Palmaris Longus.
Bid. T. 64. B C.
This has an Acute Beginning from the Internal Extuberance of the Os Humeri
(22), and soon becoming a Fig. xvii.
Fleshy Belly, and contracting it self again to a Long, Flat, Slender Tendon,
marches obliquely with the Tendon of the Flexor Carpi Superior, and passing
over the Ligamentum Anulare where it expands it self, and cleaves firmly to the
Skin of the Palm, is Inserted to the roots of the Fingers laterally; It being
there divided to Transmit the Tendons that Bend them.

Columbus observes the long Beginning of this Muscle from the Extuberance Lib.
v. C. xxxiii.
of the Os Humeri is sometimes wanting, which observation is also confirmed by
our Experience. It Assists in firmly, grasping any Tactile Body, and defends
the subjacent Tendons from External Injuries.

Palmaris Brevis.
Bid. T. 64. K.
By Spigelius called Caro Musculofa Lib. v. C. xxxv.
Quadrata. Anatomists have been extremely deceived in their Idea's of this
Muscle; it not Arising from the Membrana Carnosa, as Columbus pretends, or from
the Eighth Bone of the Carpus, as Falloppius Writes; but it springs Observat.
Anatom.
with a Broad Membrane-like Tendon from the External part of the Os Metacarpi
Minimi Digiti, and one of the Bones of the Carpus; whence Ascending over the
Abductor Minimi Digiti it becomes a Thin Disgregated Fleshy Muscle, marching
under the Tendinous expansion of the Former in the Palm, and is Inserted by a
short, strong Tendon, to the Eighth Bone of the Carpus.

This Acting Draws the Mons Lunae toward the Os Metacarpi Minimi Digiti,
whereby the Palm becomes hollow; contrary to the Opinion of Spigelius, who
pretends it Extends the Hand when we open it; which is not done by any proper
Muscle, but by the Common Extenders of the Fingers.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Muscles of the four Fingers.
THESE we shall divide into Common and Proper. The Common Muscles of the
Fingers are such as Arise from the External or Internal Protuberances of the Os
Humeri, and subdividing themselves, are Inserted into most, if not all the
Fingers; namely Perforatus, Perforans, Lumbricales, and Extensor Communis
Digitorum. The Proper Muscles of the Fingers are such as have their Beginnings
distinct, and are Inserted without any subdivision into each respective Finger;
as the Interossei, The Extensor and Abductor Indicis, the Extensor and Abductor
Minimi Digiti: First of the Common Muscles of the Fingers.

Perforatus.
So called because its Tendons are Perforated to admit Those of the following
Muscles to pass thorough Them to their Insertions; It is also called Sublimis
from its Situation, being above the Following; and Flexor secundi Internodii
Digitorum from its Use. It Arises Tendinous from the Internal Extuberance of
the Os Humeri (22) between the Flexores Carpi; Fig. xvii.
it also has a Disgregated Fleshy Origination from the Forepart of the Radius,
between the Pronator Radii Teres and Flexor Pollicis Magnus, composing a Fleshy
Belly lessens it self in less then half its progress, where it is divided into
Four Fleshy Portions, each of which soon becomes so many Roundish Tendons, and
are included in their proper Mucilaginous Membrane as they pass under the
Ligamentum Transversale Carpi through the Palm; near the first Internode of the
Fingers each Tendon is divided to admit those of the following Muscle to pass
through them, then joining, and subdividing again, immediately before they are
Inserted to the superior part of the second Bone of each Finger (30.)

This and the following Muscle are Accurately expressed by Bidloo, Tab. 67.

Perforans.
Because its Tendons run through those of the Former, it is also called
Profundus from its Situation, and Tertii Internodii Digitorum Flexor from its
Use. It Arises Fleshy from near two Thirds of the Superior and Forepart of
the Ulna (26), as also from the Fig. xvii.
Ligament between the last named Bone and Radius, becoming a Large Thick
Bellied Muscle, grows outwardly Tendinous before it passes over the Pronator
Radii Quadratus, and is divided into Four Round Tendons which march under those
of the former Muscle beneath the Ligamentum Transversale abovementioned, (from
each of these Tendons the Musculi Lumbricales are said to Arise) after which
they pass through the Fissur's of those of the Former, and proceeding over
their extremities, Terminate in the superior and forepart of the third Bone of
each Finger. (30.) Fig. xvii.


The Tendons of the last described Muscle running through those of the
Precedent, is a no less Useful then Stupendous Artifice in Nature.

To the end the Fingers (like so many Leavers) should be Bended with great
Force, it is absolutely necessary the strongest Muscle should be Inserted
nearest their Extremities, and farthest from their Fulcimina the Ossa
Metacarpi: But in regard every Internode should be attended with a particular
Muscle, the better to accommodate them to various Employments, and the
Origination of the superior or Perforatus is confined to the Apex of the
Internal Extuberance of the Os Humeri and upper part of the Radius only,
wherefore could not be a fit Instrument for so Strenuous an Action, and that
not only in regard to its Magnitude, but by the Approach of its two Extremes
when the Cubit or Carpus are Bended; both which would be no small impediments
in diverse Actions; it is therefore necessary it should be employed in the
Motions of the second Internodes: But since these superior Tendons would be
hereby liable to interrupt the Inferior in their Right progress to the
Extremities of the Fingers, it seems an Argument of great Counsel in
transmitting the Latter through the Fissures of each of the Former, whereby the
Actions of Both are not only distinctly performed, and the extremities of the
Fingers attended with the Largest Muscle, (whose Origin is below the Os Humeri,
wherefore its Extremes cannot approach in the Flexion of the Cubit) but their
Motions are preserved, though the Superior Muscle is totally divided, which
indeed is a Provident Contrivance of the Author of Nature, and is in it self
sufficient to excite our Admiration.

Lumbricales.
(...)id. T. 67. (...)MMM.
So called from their Figure, being not much unlike the Common Earthworms; they
are also called Flexores Primi Internodii Digitorum from their Use. Anatomists
generally derive the Originations of these Muscles from the Tendons of the last
treated of; but in a Subject which we lately Dissected I observed part of that
Lumbrical Muscle belonging to the Forefinger had a distinct Fleshy Original,
and a long slender Tendon lying between the Two Preceding; which suggested to
me that the other Three and those of other Subjects have their Beginnings in
common with the Perforans, and Uniting with its Tendons are afterward
Disunited again, and growing Fleshy pass to their Tendinous Implantations with
the Interossei at the first Internode of each Finger externally laterally next
the Thumb.

These we suppose perform those Minute Motions of the Fingers when the Second
and Third Internodes are Curvated by the two last treated of Muscles; and
therefore Used in playing on Musical Instruments, and may be thence Named
Musculi Fidicinales.

Extensor Digitorum Communis, seu Digitorum Bid. T. 69. G.
Tensor.
This has an Acute Tendinous Origination from the outward Extuberance of the Os
Humeri (20) between Fig. xviii*
the Extensores Carpi becoming Fleshy, in less than half its progress its
divided into three Portions which become so many Tendons (of which the
Middlemost is the Longest) passing under their Annular Ligaments between the
Lower parts of the Ulna (23) and Radius (22) march separately over the Dorsum
Manus, and remitting. Tendinous Filliaments to each other as they pass the
First Internodes of each Finger, and are afterward Inserted to the superior
parts of the First, Second, and Third Bones of the Fore, Middle, and Third
Fingers. (28.) Fig. xviii.


There being no Force required in the Extension of the Fingers, we need not
wonder that the Muscles employed in that Office are no Larger in Proportion to
their Antagonists.

The Proper Muscles of the Fingers now offer themselves to the Knife, which we
shall Treat of in the Order they are above Named.

Interossei Manus.
These are Distinguished into External and Internal, They are aptly named from
their Situation: Authors disagree in their Number, some reckoning Six, others
Eight, amongst which they esteem the Abductor Minimi Digiti and Indicis, but we
rather incline to the First Opinion, conceiving the Two latter named Muscles do
not deserve these Denominations. They Arise Fleshy Internally in the Palm from
the superior parts of the Metacarpal Bones (28) next the Carpus (27), whence
Fig. xvii.
descending between the last named Bones they become Tendinous at the first
Internode of each Finger laterally, and pass to their Insertions with the last
Treated of Muscle. Each Interstice of the Metacarpal Bones entertaining Two
Muscles Inserted to the sides of the Fingers.

When all these Interossei Act together they Draw the Fingers nearer each
other, and Assist in their Extension, as Galen takes notice, at which Lib. i.
De Us. par. C. 18.
time they together with the Abductor Indicis and Minimi Digiti are capable of
Divaricating the Fingers, which Action cannot without some Difficulty be
performed by them when they are Bended; which Contrivance of the Most Wise
Architect is also observed by Galen. Loco supra citato.


Extensor Indicis seu Indicator.
Bid. T. 70. not lettered.
It Arises Fleshy from the middle of the External part of the Ulna (23) Fig.
xviii.
next the Radius (22), immediately below the Extensores Pollicis, and
descending obliquely becomes Tendinous as it passes under its Annular Ligament
at the Lower part of the Radius and Carpus (25), passing over Fig. xviii.
the Os Metacarpi Indicis, and joining with the Tendon of the Extensor
Communis, is Inserted with it to the superior part of the 3d Bone of the
Forefinger. The Tendon of it is sometimes divided. Its Name Declares its Use.

Abductor Indicis.
Bid. T. 68. H.
This is not to be seen till the Abductor Pollitis is Raised; by some it is
reckoned amongst the Interossei as above noted. It Arises Fleshy from the Os
Metacarpi that sustains the Forefinger Fig. xvii.
(28), and descending over the First Internode of the said Finger becomes
Tendinous, joining with the Tendon of one of the Lumbrical Muscles, and is
Inserted with it together with the Tendon of the former Muscle. Its Name
intimates its Use, in Drawing the Forefinger from the rest.

Extensor Minimi Digiti.
Bid. T. 70. and 71. K, K.
This Arises partly Tendinous at the Extremity of the External Apophysis of the
Os Humeri (20), and Fig. xviii.
partly Fleshy from the superior part of the Ulna (23), between the Extensor
Communis Digitorum and Musculus Ulnaris Extensor, and becoming Tendinous as it
passes under the Ligamentum Annulare at the Carpus (25); it is there divided
into Two, sometimes three Tendons, which are United into one at its Insertion
to the superior part of the 3d Bone of the Little-finger: Its Name Declares its
Action.

Abductor Minimi Digiti.
This Appears in some Bodies divided into Two or Three Muscles, having each a
differing Series of Fibers; The First of which seems to be a Flexor primi
Internodii Minimi Digiti; The Second an Abductor of the same; The Third
Abductor Secundi and Tertii Internodii: But this Division is not Constant,
wherefore we shall Describe it as One Muscle, lest we might appear inclinable
to multiply their Number, which has been a Vice amongst some. It Arises Fleshy
First from the Ligamentum Transversale, and Fourth Bone of the Carpus; Secondly
from the Third Bone of the Carpus; Thirdly and lastly from the superior part of
the subjacent Os Metacarpi: The two First continue Fleshy to their Insertions;
the Former Terminating at the superior part of the First Bone of the
Little-finger forwards, the Latter ending at the same part of the said Bone
laterally; the Third and Last becoming Tendinous like the Interossei, is
Inserted like them with the Tendon of the Extensor Minimi Digiti at the
superior part of the 3d Bone of the Little-finger.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Muscles of the Thumb.
AUthors disagree concerning the Number, Rise and Insertions of these Muscles,
which may partly Proceed from that great Variety which may be so frequently
observed in diverse Subjects: As they have most commonly appeared to me, I shall
endeavor to Demonstrate; first of the Benders of the Thumb.

Flexor tertii Internodii seu Longissimus Bid. T. 68. L.
Pollicis.
This we have frequently observed to have a Twofold Beginning; the first and
superior of which Arises Acutely from the Internal Extuberance of the Os
Humeri (22) between the Fig. xvii.
Perforatus and Perforans, becoming a Fleshy Belly and then Tendinous joins
with the Middle Tendon of its other Larger Head: The second or Inferior Origin
of this Muscle (is that part of it which is commonly Described) Arising with a
Double Order of Fleshy Fibers for some space on the Radius (25), from
immediately below its Fig. xvii.
superior part, which uniting in a middle Line or Tendon (not unlike the
Fibrillae of a Feather joining to their Stamina) which passing over the
Articulation of the Carpus becomes entirely Tendinous as it runs over the
Flexor primi and secundi Internodii to its Implantation at the superior part of
the 3d Bone of the Thumb (29): For the better Dissection of the rest of the
Muscles of this Part, Raise the Abductor Pollicis.

Abductor Pollicis.
Bid. Tab. 64. I.
This Arises Broad and Fleshy from the Internal part of the Ligamentum
Transversale Carpi, whence Descending lessens it self, and becomes Tendinous at
its Implantation to the superior and external part of the second Bone of the
Thumb laterally.

This Draws the Thumb from the Fingers, from whence it derives its Name.

Flexor primi and secundi Ossis Pollicis.
This is a Large Disgregated Fleshy Muscle Arising from the Ligamentum
Transversale Carpi Bones of the Carpus (27) Fig. xvii.
at the Basis of the Mons Lunae and Os Metacarpi (28) of the Middle Finger,
whence passes to its Insertion partly to the Ossa Sesamoidea of the second
Internode, and partly to the first Bone of the Thumb. This may be divided into
Three, as Vesalius writes, and Bidloo has Figured it Tab. 68. M, NN, OO, P. Its
Actions are various according to the diversity of its Series of Fibers; so it
Bends the First or Second Bones of the Thumb either directly, or obliquely
toward the Carpus, and Volam Manus.

Adductor Pollicis.
Bid. T. 71. L.
This Arises Tendinous in Common with the Abductor Indicis, becoming Fleshy
Ascends obliquely to its Broad Termination at the superior part of the first
Bone of the Thumb (29). This brings the Thumb nearer the Forefinger.

The rest of the Muscles employed in the Motion of the Thumb are Extenders:
Though Anatomists generally reckon but Two of them, yet it does not occur to
our memory we ever found less than Three distinct Fleshy Muscles, neither do
the Figures (that seem to be done after the Life) in Vesalius and Bidloo
exhibit them otherwise.

Extensor primi Internodii Pollicis.
Bid. T. 70. not lettered.
This Arises Tendinous from the upper part of the Ulna (23) immediately Fig.
xviii.
below the Supinator Radii brevis, soon growing Fleshy, and becomes Tendinous
again as it Descends obliquely over the Tendons of the Radialis Extensor, and
is Inserted to the superior part of the First Bone of the Thumb (27). This we
have sometimes found divided into Two and sometimes Three distinct Muscles.

Extensor secundi Internodii ossis Pollicis.
Bid. T. 70, 71. not (...)etter'd.
This Arises Broad and Fleshy from that part of the Radius (22) next the Ulna
(23), and becoming Tendinous Fig. xviii.
passes under the same Involucrum with the Tendons of the Former to its
Implantation of the superior part of the second Bone of the Thumb.

Extensor tertii Internodii Ossis Pollicis.
Bid. T. 70. C.
This has a Broad, partly Tendinous, but chiefly Fleshy Origination from the
Ulna, immediately below the Beginning of the Extensor primi Internodii, or
between it and the Indicator, as also from Ligament between the last named Bone
and the Radius, whence Descending obliquely, becoming Tendinous as it marches
in a proper Sinus on the inferior Appendix of the Radius, wherein its Enclosed
by its Annular Ligament, and passes over the Two Tendons of the Radialis
Extensor to its Insertion at the superior part of the Third Bone of the Thumb.

When this Acts it does not only Extend the Thumb, but Brings it somewhat
Backwards, in so much that some can place it on the superior and Back part of
the Ossa Metacarpi.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Muscles of the Wrist or Carpus.
THese are generally well described by most Authors, and receive their Names
from their Situation and Use.

Flexor Carpi Radialis.
Bid. T. 68. E.
This Arises Tendinous from the Internal Extuberance of the Os Humeri (22)
Becoming Fleshy adheres Fig. xvii.
strictly to the Pronator Radii Teres, and in half its oblique Progress to the
Carpus (27), it becomes a Flat Tendon which passes over the Annular Ligament,
and is Inserted to the Upper Part of the Os Metacarpi (28) which sustains the
Forefinger.

Flexor Carpi Ulnaris.
Ibid. not lettered.
This Arises Tendinous from the same Tubercle of the Shoulder Bone with the
Former, as also from the Superior and External Part of the Ulna (26) where the
Musculus Perforans does Fig. xviii.
Arise, and continuing Fleshy according to the length of the Ulna is partly
Inserted by a Short, Strong Tendon into the Fourth Bone of the Carpus, and
partly into the Os Metacarpi which sustains the Little Finger.

Their Names declare their Use.

Extensor Carpi Radialis.
Bid. T. 69. D. F.
By some called Bicornis and Radiaeus Externus. It has Two Beginnings, and
indeed seems to be Two distinct Muscles, the Outermost Arising Fleshy above the
External Protuberance of the Os Humeri (20), immediately below the Supinator
Radii Longus, in its descent becomes a Fleshy Belly, and grows Tendinous above
the middle of the Radius (22): The other Beginning of this Muscle is partly
Fleshy and partly Tendinous Below the Former, either from the Apex of the
Extuberance of the Os Humeri or Superior Part of the Radius, and continues
Fleshy somewhat Lower than the Superior; Both Tendons marching under the
Extensores Pollicis, run under the Ligamentum Annulare, and are Inserted to the
Superior Parts of the Ossa Metacarpi of the Fore, and Middle Fingers. (26.)
Fig. xviii.


Extensor Carpi Ulnaris.
Ibid. E.
This has an Acute Tendinous Beginning from the Outward Extuberance of the Os
Humeri (20), and becomes Fleshy as it Descends according to the length of the
Cubit, growing Tendinous again as it marches over the Inferior part of the
Ulna (23), and passing under the Annular Ligament, It is Inserted to the
Superior Part of the Metacarpal-Bone of the Little Finger. (26.)

If this Muscle and the Ulnaris Flexor Act, they move the Hand sideways toward
the Ulna, and in like manner if the Radialis Flexor and Extensor Act, they move
it toward the Radius. It is well observed by most Authors, that the Extenders,
whether belonging to the Fingers or Carpus Arise from the Outward Extuberance
of the Os Humeri, and their Antagonists the Flexors, from the Internal
Protuberance of the same Bone, as also from the superior and external part of
the Ulna next the Anconeus (above treated of.)

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Muscles of the Radius.
THE Radius (22) is Moved in Fig. xviii.
Common with the Ulna, or Cubitus (23), but besides that, it has Id. 24. and
26. Fig. xvii.
also a Proper Motion, in which the Carpus together with the Hand is chiefly
Moved, or Turned, either Upwards or Downwards, and to this End there are two
sorts of Muscles: of which some are called Pronatores, or those that turn it
Inwards, and the Palm of the Hand Downwards, and others Supinatores, which turn
it Outward, and the Palm of the Hand Upwards. These have their Names from
their Figure and Use.

Pronator Radii Teres. Vesal. M. T. i. v.

By some called Pronator Superior Rotundus; It Arises Fleshy from the Internal
Extuberance of the Os Humeri (22), where those Bending the Fig. xvii.
Carpus and Fingers do Arise, and Firmly adhering to the Flexor Carpi Radialis,
It Descends obliquely Downwards to its Fleshy Insertion, a little above the
Middle of the Radius (24) Fig. xvii.
Externally.

Pronator Radii Quadratus. Bid. T. (...)8. B.

Or Inferior Quadratus, It Arises Broad, and Fleshy, from the Lower and Inner
part of the Ulna (26), and passing Transversly over the Ligament, that joins
the Radius to the Ulna, and is so Inserted to the Superior and External part of
the Radius.

Supinator Radii Longus. Ibid. C.

This Arises Broad and Fleshy from the Superior and External part of the Os
Humeri (17) three Fingers breadth Fig. xviii.
below the Termination of the Deltoides, and Descending obliquely inwards, It
gradually lessens it self, and becomes a Flat, Broad Tendon, which likewise
grows narrower till it is Inserted to the External and Inferior part of the
Radius (24) near the Carpus. (27.) Fig. xvii.


Supinator Radii Brevis. Bid. T. 71. G.

This Arises partly Tendinous and Fleshy from the Superior and External part
of the Ulna (24) next the Fig. xviii.
Radius, and passing obliquely Transverse over that Bone, is so Inserted to its
Superior part below the Prominence of the Radius, where the Round Tendon of the
Biceps ends. (25.) Fig. xvii.


We come next to the Muscles of the Thigh, Leg, and Foot, though Riolan sharply
reprehends Gaspar Bauhin in his Animadversions on his Theatrum Anatomicum for
Maladministration of the Muscles of the Leg before those of the Thigh,
alleging that those of the Former may be all demonstrated, and the Latter
remain untouched, yet we cannot agree with him in that particular, knowing it
to be absolutely necessary to separate diverse Muscles of the Tibia, as well as
to cut off some of those moving the Os Femoris it self, before we can have a
tolerable prospect of others; especially the Rotator Femoris Extrorsum. However
since some Muscles which belong to the Thigh do Arise from the Vertebrae of the
Back, Loins, and Os Sacrum, we shall begin with them First; and then divide the
Os Ilium from the Sacrum, and remove the Trunk of the Body, which Practice is
not only convenient for Dissection, in respect the Limb is more easily turned
to and fro upon the Table, but in public Demonstrations is done to avoid an
offensive Scent Apt to arise from the Trunk. This done, proceed to divest the
rest of the Muscles of their Common Teguments the Skin, Fat, and Membranes:
Taking care that the Fascia Membranosa of the Thigh and Leg be not wounded, and
that you likewise take off all the Fat in the Planta Pedis, and avoid Cutting
the Long Tendon of the Musculus Plantaris as it descends internally by the
great Tendon of the Gasterocnemii near the Os Calcis.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Muscles of the Thigh.
AUthors differ in the Enumeration, Description and Office of the Muscles
belonging to this Part. De Mus. Cap. xxxi.
Galen, Lib. ii. Cap. lvi.
Vesalius, and Lib. v. C. xxviii.
Columbus mention Ten, viz. Psoas, Iliacus internus, Pectineus, Glutoeus major,
Glutoeus medius, Glutoeus minor, Pyriformis, Marsupialis, Triceps, and
Obturator Externus; To These Falloppius adds another Observat. Anatom.
called Quadratus Femoris, whose Invention Riolan pretends, is due Animad. in
Theat. Anatom. Bauhini and Anthropog. Lib. v. Cap xli.
to Sylvius; and describes another, which he calls Psoas parvus, lying on the
Great Psoas. To These Lib. iv. Cap. xi.
Tho. Bartholin adds yet another distinct from that mentioned by Riolan, lying
beneath it, having the same Fleshy Beginning about Three Fingers in Breadth,
and is so Inserted to the upper Edge of the Os Ilium Backwards, where the
Iliacus internus does Arise; This he tells us he found in a strong Muscular
Body in the year 1651; and the following year he says he saw it with Michael
Lyserus, who had observed it in a Monkey to equal the Great Psoas. That
mentioned by Riolan we have frequently observed, Which, notwithstanding is
absent in some Bodies, as he has well remarkt. But the Latter of Bartholin I
could never yet discover. But if such be found, I conjecture it should rather
be referred to the Loins, together with the Quadratus Lumborum, of which I
suspect it is a Part that may sometimes be Distinct. The like Lusus Naturae we
frequently find in other Cases, of which the Rhomboides Scapulae and Triceps
Femoris afford us Examples.

Psoas Parvus.
Though This ought to be counted amongst Those belonging to the Loins, yet its
subserviency to the Great Psoas, and for our better convenience in Dissection,
we choose rather to reserve it for this Place. It Arises Fleshy from the
superior part of the First Vertebrae of the Loins internally laterally within
the Abdomen, immediately below the Cavity of the Diaphragm, whence descending
obliquely Inwards toward the Pelvis Abdominis (where it ceases to be Fleshy)
in a manner embracing the Great Psoas, and is Inserted with a Thin, Broad,
Strong Tendon, to that part of the Os Pubis (40), where it is joined to Fig.
xvii.
the Os Ilium. This Muscle with its Partner Acting assist the Recti Abdominis
in drawing the Ossa Pubis upwards, as in raising our selves from a Decumbent
Posture. Thus Ropedancers hang by their Hands, and Raise the Inferior parts of
their Bodies to take hold of the Rope with their Feet. Though their proper
Action is to bend the Loins, yet their Tendons embracing the Two following
Muscles (which we have frequently observed to extend over their inferior parts)
not unlike the Fascia Tendinosa Cubiti and Lata of the Thigh, do also
Corroborate them in their Action.

Psoas Magnus seu Lumbales. Vesal. M. T. 8.. Bid. T. 52. K. K.

So called from its Situation, Its a Round, somewhat Large and Fleshy Muscle,
Arising from all the Vertebrae of the Loins (34), and their Transverse Fig.
xvii.
Processes ( w x y z) internally and laterally, within the Cavity of the
Abdomen; from thence descending over the superior part of the Os Sacrum (35),
and Spine of the Ilium Fig. xvii.
(37), where it is joined with the Fleshy Fibers of the following Muscle; with
which its inseparably united at their partly Fleshy and partly Tendinous
Insertions in the Inferior part of the lesser Trochanter of the Thigh Bone. (46)

This assists the Following in its Action.

Iliacus Internus. Bid. T. 52. N N.

This Arises Fleshy from above half the Superior Region, and Internal concave
part of the Os Ilium (36), and in its descent over the Inferior part of the
last named Bone (40), joins with the Former, and is Inserted with it as
abovesaid, partly under the Termination of the Following. This together with
the Former move the Thigh Forwards in Progression.

Pectineus. Spigel. L. 4. T. 31. not lettered.

So called from its beginning at the Os Pubis or Pectinis (38). It has a Thick,
Broad, and Fleshy Origination from the External part of the said Bone, between
the Two last described Muscles and second Head of the Triceps, and Descending
Obliquely Backwards it becomes a flat strong Tendon near its Implantation to
the Asperity (37) on the Posterior part of Fig. xviii.
the Os Femoris, immediately below the Lesser Trochanter, at the Insertion of
the Two Former Muscles.

This Acting together with the Two Preceding, do not only Draw the Os Femoris
Upwards, but directs it Outward, by its Curve descent from its Origination to
its Insertion at the posterior part of the Os Femoris; which is a Provident
contrivance of Nature in Walking since the Thighbones by their Oblique position
do thereby render the Toes liable to turn Inwards. These Three last treated of
Muscles, besides the Recti Abdominis and Psoi parvi, seem to serve for the
Inflexion of the Body, and Direct the whole Limb, to wit, the Thigh, Leg, and
Foot outward in a more Graceful Step.

The Musculus Membranosus presents it self next to the Knife; therefore must be
Raised before we can gain a View of the rest which move the Thigh bone. This
may be done, either by cutting it from its Fleshy Origination at the point of
the Spine of the Os Ilium (37), and Fig. xvii.
turning it Downwards; or after its well cleared of the Skin, Fat, and
Membranes, it may be Raised contrariwise by cutting off its Tendinous Insertion
at the superior Appendix of the Fibula (53), and Freeing it from all the
Muscles of the Tibia, and leaving it at its Origination: Either of these being
done, proceed to Raise the Pyriformis from its Origin within the Pelvis of the
Abdomen (40), and part of the Fleshy Beginning of the Glutaeus Major from the
External part of the Os Sacrum (34) and Coccygis (0). Fig. xviii.
The Bodythen being laid in a Supine Posture, and the Legs Divaricated; with a
Thin Knife divide the Os Ilium (36) Fig. xvii.
from the Sacrum (35.)

Glutaeus Major. Vesal. T. 9. ^. T. 10. K. Spigel. T. 29. L. 4. CC.

So called from its being the largest Muscle of those which compose the
Buttocks It has a large Semicircular Beginning; Forwards merely Tendinous, from
near two Thirds of the External Part of the Spine of the Os Ilium (30);
Backwards its Origination Fig. xviii.
is Thick and Fleshy from the Posterior part of its Spine, and hindmost part of
the Sacrum (34) laterally, and whole Os Coccygis (O) as also from a Broad
Ligament that is extended between the two last Named Bones and Tubercle of the
Os Ischium (31); its Fleshy Fibers Descending Disgregately in an almost
semicircular manner become Tendinous as they approach the Great Trochanter
(40), where its United with its First described Tendinous Beginning, Descending
over the External part of the Great Trocanter, after being joined with the
Tendon of the Membranosus, proceeds to cover and strictly Embrace all the
External Muscles of the Tibia like the External Tendon of the Biceps Those of
the Cubit: But the other part of it proceeding from the Fleshy Body of this
Muscle, is largely Inserted to the Linea Aspera (37) on the Back Fig. xviii.
part of the Os Femoris, near Four Fingers breadth below the Great Trochanter.

The first described Tendinous Beginning of this Muscle does not only serve to
support its Fleshy Body, but its Fibers Intersecting those of the Membranosus
as they cover all the Muscles of the Tibia, do more adequately include them,
whereby they are corroborated in their Action. When this Muscle Acts it pulls
the Thigh directly Backwards.

Glutaeus Medius. Vesal. M. T. 10. s. Bid. T. 72. D F. Spigel. T. 29. L. 4. L L.

This lies chiefly under the Tendinous beginning of the Former Muscle, and
Arising Fleshy from almost the whole External part of the Spine of the Os Ilium
(30), in its Descent becomes Thicker and Fleshy, and is Inserted by a short
strong Tendon to the Superior and External part of the Great Trochanter (40) in
a Semicircular manner.

If the differing Series of Fibers in this Muscle are rightly considered, their
Position will manifest they are not so Useful in Extending the Thigh as Authors
would persuade us, but rather employed in Turning it Inwards. This will plainly
Appear if in the time of Dissection you give the Thigh that motion, you then
may observe the Forepart of this Muscle notably relaxt. And in living Persons
when the Thigh is turned inwards, you may see it Tumified; or if in performing
that Action with your own Thigh you lay your Thumb on this Muscle, you may feel
it contract or Move under the Skin. Besides its being partly useful in
Extending the Thigh with the former Muscle, it is also employed in divaricating
the Legs, it cooperating with the Musculus Membranosus in that Action.

Glutaeus Minor, Vesal. M. T. 11. Z. Spigel. T. 30. L. 4. G G.

Lies totally under the Former Muscle, it being so much less than the Former,
as the Former is the Precedent; It arises Semicircular, Broad and Fleshy, from
the Dorsum Ilii (29); from hence its Fig. xviii.
Fleshy Fibers descend to their partly Tendinous, and partly Fleshy Insertion
like the Former, at the Superior part of the Root of the great Trochanter (40).

The Fibers of this running Parallel, with those of the Former, assist it in
all its Actions: Whatsoever Authors have said concerning an Obturator Femoris
introrsum, we are well assured, that there is no other Muscle employed in that
Action, but the Foreparts of these Two only. They also assist in rendering the
Articulation of the Thigh Bone, with the Coxa, more Stable in standing Erect.

Pyriformis seu Iliacus Externus. Vesal. M. T. 10. b. Spigel. T. 29. Lib. 4. M.

It receives its First Name from its Figure, the Second from its Situation; its
beginning is Round and Fleshy from the Inferior and Internal part of the Os
Sacram (35), where it respects the Pelvis of the Abdomen, and Fig. xvii.
descending obliquely in the great Sinus of the Os Ilium (35), above the Fig.
xviii.
Acute Process of the Ischium, and joining with the Glutaeus Medius, its
Inserted by a Round Tendon to the Superior part of the Root of the Great
Trochanter (39). This moves Fig. xviii*
the Os Femoris somewhat Upwards, and turns it Outward.

Marsupialis seu Bursalis.
Spigel. L. 4. T. 29. QQ.
So called from its Tendinous running thorough (as it were) a Second Fleshy
Beginning of it self, which Duplication represents a Purse; It is also called
Obturator Internus from its Situation, and not from its Use, as some have
imagined. It Arises Broad and Fleshy, from that part of the Os Ilium, Ischium
(31), Pubis (33), and Ligament that is extended in the Great Foramen (36), of
the two last named Bones internally, and marching Transversly in the Sinus of
the Ischium, (fenced on each side by two Processes, the one Acute (32), the
other Obtuse (31), where it is Externally Fleshy, but Internally it has Three,
sometimes Four Tendons passing in so many distinct Furrows in the said Sinus,
like so many Cords in a Qadruple Pulley, where it meets with the other Fleshy
Beginning, commonly called its Marsupium, arising from the abovementioned
Acute and Obtuse Processes, which joining with the said Tendons at their united
Insertion to the Superior part of the Root of the Great Trochanter near the
Implantation of the Former Muscle (39). Fig. xviii.


Riolan makes two Muscles of the Anthrop. (...)ib. v. (...)ap. 41. (...)
Anatom. Cap. xix.
Marsupium; which Error is taken notice of by * Marchette, who thinks the
Marsupium a contrivance of Nature, whereby the Motion is confirmed, and the
Subjacent Tendons defended from too great a pressure.

When this Muscle Acts, its Insertion is directed toward that part of the
Ischium, over which its Tendons run after the manner of a Pulley, and the Os
Femoris is thereby turned Outward.

Quadratus Femoris.
Spigel. T. 19. L. 4. not lettered.
So called from its Figure; it Arises Broad and Fleshy from the Apophysis of
the Os Ischium (31), and passes Transversly, with an equal Breadth and
Thickness to its partly Fleshy and partly Tendinous Insertion at the Posteriour
part of the Os Femoris, partly below the Great Trochanter.

This Assists the Former Muscle in turning the Thigh Bone outward. The next
Muscle belonging to the Thigh, which appears as the Back part of it, lies
Uppermost, is the largest Beginning of the Triceps, which, (contrary to others)
we reckon the First Head of that Muscle.

Triceps.
Vesal. M. T. 12. Z. Spigel. T. 32. L. 4. AADD. C.
So called from its Three Heads or Beginnings, the First and Largest of which
Arises Broad and Fleshy from the Inferior Edges and External parts of the Os
Ischium and Pubis, where they are joined to each other (33) lying Fig. xviii.
between the Semitendinosus and Semimembranosus, and that of the Gracilis, and
Descending with an Oblique Order of Fleshy Fibers, is Inserted partly Tendinous
and Fleshy near an Hands Length in Breadth to the Linea Aspera of the
Thigh Bone (37), that is immediately below the Insertion of the Former Muscle;
Its Inferior part making a Strong Round Tendon Inserted into the Superior Part
of the Internal and Lower Appendix of the Thigh Bone (47). The Second Head Fig.
xvii.
or Beginning of this Muscle Arises Tendinous from the Os Pubis (38), but in
its Descent soon becomes Fleshy, and joins with the Former, near to its
Insertion to the Middle part of the Linea Aspera of the Thigh Bone (37). The
Third and Last Beginning Fig. xviii.
of this Muscle springs from the Inferior part of the Os Pubis, between the
Origination of its Last Described Head, and That of the Pectineus, and
Descending obliquely joins with the First, near its Insertion to the Linea
Aspera of the Thigh Bone, immediately above the Termination of the Second Head
of this Muscle.

This moves the Thigh variously according to the Diversity of its Beginnings,
so the First described part of it pulls the Thigh Bone Upwards, Inwards, and
somewhat Backwards; The Second and Third Beginnings of it Pulls it more
Inwards, and turns it somewhat Outward, as when we put our Legs across each
other.

Obturator Externus.
Spigel. T. 32. L. 4. H.
So called from its Situation, and Rotator Femoris Extrorsum from its Use; It
has a Large Fleshy Beginning from the External parts of the Os Ischium (39)
and Pubis (38) and Membrane Fig. xvii.
that covers their Foramen (41) Externally, opposite to the Origination of the
Marsupialis or Obturator Internus (already described) and passing transversly
Backwards, lessens it self, and becomes Tendinous at its Insertion to the Root
of the great Trochanter of the Thigh Bone (39) near the Termination Fig. xviii.
of the Last named Muscle. This turns the Thigh Outward.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Muscles of the Leg.
De Mus. C. xxxii.
GAlen, Lib. ii. Cap. liii.
Vesalius, Lib. v. C. xxix.
Columbus, and Lib. iv. C. xxxii.
Spigelius, describe Ten Muscles which move the Tibia, namely, Membranosus,
Sartorius, Gracilis, Seminervosus, Semimembranosus, Biceps, Rectus, Vastus
Externus, Vastus Internus, and Popliteus: To these Iacobus Sylvius, Isagog.
Anatom. Lib. v. C. xxix.
Laurentius, and latter Authors add another Muscle lying between the two Vasti
and call it Crureus: Of These we reckon the first seven as Common both to the
Thigh and Leg, they Arising either from the Os Ilium Pubis or Ischium, and are
Inserted into the Tibia or Fibula, in Moving of which they move the Thigh also*
The other are Proper Arising from the Os Femoris only, and Inserted to the
Tibia.

Membranosus.
Vesal. M. T. 4. 3. Spigel. T. 34. L. 4. RRSS.
So called from the large Membranous Expansion it is Continuous with, enclosing
all the Muscles of the Tibia and Tarsus; whence it is also called Fascia Lata:
It has an Acute Fleshy Beginning from the Forepart of the Spine of the Os
Ilium (37) between Fig. xvii.
the Origination of the Sartorius and Tendinous Beginning of the Glutaeus
Magnus, and being dilated to a Fleshy Belly which fills the Interstice made by
the First of the two Last named Muscles and Upper part of the Rectus and
Forepart of the Glutaeus Medius; in its Oblique Descent becomes Tendinous, Four
Fingers breadth below the great Trochanter (45), whence it Fig. xvii.
passes directly over the Vastus Externus to its proper Termination, at the
Superior Appendix of the Fibula (53), but in its progress thither it is
Conjoined with the Tendinous Expansion of the Glutaeus Magnus which Arises
from the Spine of the Ileum (30) covering Fig. xviii.
the External part of the Glutaeus Medius and all the External Muscles of the
Tibia as well as those of the Thigh Bone; and Descending over the Patella
comprehends the Muscles of the Tarsus, and joins with the Ligamentum Annulare,
which retains the Tendons of the Toes and Foot: Unless it may be supposed that
the said Fascialata should end at the Lower part of the Thigh Bone or Superior
parts of the Tibia and Fibula, and that the last named Bones should give an
Origination to the Inferior part of the said Fascia, which seems to be a Matter
more of Controversy than Use. When this Muscle Acts, the Leg and Thigh are
Drawn outward; its Tendon being joined with part of the Glutaeus Maximus, and
having a different Series of Fibers intersecting each other, do thereby,
compose a strong Involucrum, as well including all the Common Muscles of the
Leg, as covering the Proper; whereby they Corroborate them in their Action, as
the Tendinous Expansion of the Biceps Cubiti does Those of the Carpus and
Fingers.

Sartorius.
Vesal. M. T. i. o. Spigel. T. 34. L. 4. AA.
It receives this Denomination from the Use Tailors make of it in bringing one
Leg and Thigh over the other to sit cross Legged; It is also called Longissimus
Femoris, it exceeding the rest of the Muscles of that Part in Length, and
Fascialis from its passing over the Muscles of the Thigh and Leg like a Swathe.
It Arises Sharp and Fleshy from the Forepart of the Spine of the Os Ilium (37)
close by Fig. xvii.
the Former Muscle, and Descending obliquely inwards above the Musculus Rectus
and Vastus Internus, and over part of the Triceps, of an equal Breadth and
Thickness, meets with the Gracilis below the Middle of the Thigh internally,
and Descending with it becomes Tendinous in its Passage over the Internal and
Inferior Head of the Thigh Bone, (under a strict Enclosure of the above
described Fascia Lata) and is Inserted Four Fingers Breadth below the Superior
part of the Tibia, internally (44). Its use is declared Fig. xviii.
above.

Gracilis.
Vesal. M. T. i. P. Spigel. T. 34. L. 4. F. F.
So called from being the most slender of these Muscles; It Arises somewhat
Broad, partly Tendinous and partly Fleshy from the Os Pubis (38) Fig. xvii.
internally, between the First and Second described Heads of the Triceps, and
in its Straight Descent in the Inside of the Thigh grows narrow, and becomes
Tendinous a little above the Former Muscle, and is so Inserted (immediately
beneath it) to the Tibia. (44.) Fig. xviii.


It Assisteth the Former and Following Muscles in bending the Thigh and Leg
inwards.

Seminervosus seu Semitendinosus.
Vesal. M. T. 9. tt. Spigel. T. 33. L. 4. L.
Which is so called from its being half Tendinous, and Nerve-like. It Arises
partly Tendinous and partly Fleshy from the External part of the Protuberance
of the Os Ischium (31), Fig. xviii.
and presently being Dilated to a Large Fleshy Belly, becomes a Round Tendon in
half its progress, which Descending over the Fleshy Belly of the Following
Muscle, marches close by the Gasterocnemius on the Posterior part of the
Superior Appendix of the Tibia, from whence it passes Forwards to its Insertion
in the said Bone immediately Below the Termination of the Former Muscle. (44.)

This with the Former Muscle Acting, Bend the Tibia directly Backwards. Its
Tendon together with the two Former and following Muscles make the Inward
Hamstrings, as they are commonly called.

Semimembranosus.
Vesal. M. T. 9. u u. Spigel. T. 33. L. 4. K.
So called from its being half Tendinous and Membrane-like; lying immediately
under the former Muscle. It Arises Broad and Tendinous from the Protuberance
of the Os Ischium, and in its Descent becomes broader, and in less than half
its Progress begins to grow Fleshy, (where the Belly of the Former Muscle
lessens it self) and is dilated into a Large and Fleshy Belly, lying under the
Long Round Tendon of the Former, becoming a Short Thick Tendon Inserted to the
superior part of the Upper Appendix of the Tibia Backwards. N. B. That the
Fleshy Belly of the former Muscle is above; and That of This is Below, and
their Tendons on the contrary.

Biceps.
Vesal. M. T. 9. s. T. 10. PS. Spigel. T. 33. Lib. 4. M. V. T. X.
Or Biceps Femoris to distinguish it from That of the Cubit: It having Two
Heads, the superior and longest of which Arises with a Round Tendon from the
same Protuberance of the Ischium, as the Two Former, in its Descent becomes
Large and Fleshy, and in above half its progress lessens it self again, where
it is joined with its other Head, having a Broad, partly Tendinous and partly
Fleshy Beginning from the Linea Aspera of the Os Femoris (37), immediately
below Fig. xviii.
the Termination of the Glutaeus Maximus; it being thus united grows Tendinous,
as it marches in a Channel on the External Appendix of the Os Femoris,
becoming perfectly Tendinous at its Implantation to the Superior Epiphysis of
the Fibula. (47.) Fig. xviii.


Besides the Office commonly assigned to this Muscle in Bending the Tibia
together with the Two Former, it is likewise employed in turning the Leg
together with the Foot and Toes outward, when we sit with the Knees Bended.

Popliteus.
Vesal. M. T. 14. ^.
By some called Subpopliteus, It Arises with a Short, Strong Tendon from the
External Head of the Inferior Appendix of the Os Femoris (42), from whence
descending obliquely over the Juncture becomes Fleshy, and Expanding it self is
so Inserted to the Superior part of the Tibia internally immediately below its
Superior Appendix (44). This does not only Assist the Three Former Muscles in
Bending the Tibia, but Antagonizeth the Precedent by turning the Foot and Toes
outward in that Position of the Leg as before Noted.

Rectus Femoris.
Vesal. M. T. i. S. Spigel. T. 34. L. 4. a a id. T. 35. AA. EE.
Is named from its straight Progress and Situation, it Arises Fleshy from a
Tubercle of Os Ilium, that is in the Midway between the Forepart of its Spine
and the Acetabulum, from Fig. xvii.
thence descending directly between the two following Muscles and over the
Crureus, Its Fibers Externally Descend from a Middle Line obliquely Laterally;
internally they run according to its Length, and become entirely Tendinous Four
Fingers breadth above the Patella, where it is united with the Tendons of the
three following Muscles, and Inserted together with them at the Upper part of
the Tibia. (50.) Fig. xvii.


Vastus Externus.
Vesal. M. T. i. r. id. T. 2. t. Spigel. T. 35. L. 4. GG.
So called from its Magnitude and Situation, It Arises outwardly Tendinous,
Inwardly Fleshy from the External part of the great Trochanter (45); and Linea
Aspera of the Thighbone Fig. xvii. Fig. xviii.
(37), from whence its Fibers Descend Obliquely Forwards, and on the contrary
become outwardly Fleshy and Tendinous Internally, and so soon as They meet with
the Tendon of the Former Muscle, grow perfectly Tendinous, and join with it and
that of the two Following.

Vastus Internus.
Vesal. M. T. i. t. Spigel. T. 35. L. 4. LL.
This like the Former has its Denomination from its Situation and Magnitude;
Its Beginning is Large, partly Tendinous, and partly Fleshy; it being continued
from the Linea Aspera on the Back part of the Thighbone (37), from immediately
below Fig. xviii.
the Lesser Trochanter, till within Three Fingers Breadth above the Inferior
Appendix of the said Bone Internally Laterally; from hence its Fleshy Fibers
Descend obliquely outward in an almost Semicircular manner, and on a sudden
(like the Former Muscles) ceasing to be Fleshy, its Tendon is United with that
of the Rectus, together with the Former and following Muscles, and Inserted
with them.

Crureus seu Femoreus. Vesal. M. T. 5. II. Spigel. T. 35. L. 4. KK.

So called from its Situation on the Bone of the Thigh, like the Musculus
Brachiaeus, on that of the Arm; Its Origination is Large and Fleshy, being
continued from between the Greater and Lesser Trochanter of the Thigh Bone
Forwards (42), to its Fig. xvii*
Lower part, that is Immediately above its Inferior Appendix, Its Fleshy Fibers
descending directly, and become perfectly Tendinous a little below the Upper
part of the Tendon of the Rectus, where it joins with it, and the Tendons of
the Two Last Described Muscles, which passes over the External part of the
Patella, (or on each side of it) and is Inserted to a Prominence at the
Superior and Forepart of the Tibia. (50.)

These Four Muscles last treated of, viz. Rectus Vastus Externus, Vastus
Internus, and Crureus, may be esteemed One, in regard they make but one Tendon
at their Insertion, and serve for the same Use in Extending the Tibia, or Leg,
however they are divided into several Bodies, and one of them is Enclosed on
all sides by the Fascia Lata, namely the Rectus, and in themselves have a
Multiform Series of Fleshy Fibers, whereby they are rendered capable of
Performing their Office with greater strength, which is absolutely necessary
not only in Running, Walking, Leaping, etc. but in Standing to keep the Body
Erect, by opposing that Flexure at the Knee, which must otherwise necessarily
happen through the superincumbent Pressure. For this reason likewise we find
these Extending Muscles in so great a proportion Larger than their Antagonists
the Benders, which appeared by their Weight, when at the Request of my very
good Friend Dr. Brown, (now Reader on the Muscular Dissections at
Chyrurgeons-Hall) these Extending Muscles were weighed, and their Antagonists
the Benders in the same Body, whereby we found the Former exceeded the Latter,
two Pounds wanting an Ounce; The Former, namely the Extensores, weighing Three
Pounds six Ounces, and their Antagonists the Latter but One Pound seven Ounces.
Should it be inquired, (since it is so Apparently necessary in most, if not All
Motions of the whole Body that the Leg ought to be Extended with great Force,
it being Bended to support its own weight only) Why the Muscles employed in
that Action should all Terminate in one Tendon, when their Antagonists the
Benders have Diverse Inserted on both sides the Bones of the Leg; whereby They
have a greater advantage in doing their office than that one single Insertion
of the Extenders? It may be Answered, that such a Structure is not only for the
Beauty of the Part, but it is necessary that the Tendons of the Former should
be United into One near their Insertions, and that a Bony Body, such as is the
Patella, should be placed on the Articulation of the Thigh Bone with the Leg to
defend it from being pressed on, in going down steep places, which could not have
been done, had They been divided and Inserted on each side of the Bones of the
Leg like the Flexors, which is a Stupendous Device in Nature.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Muscles of the Foot or Tarsus.
COlumbus, Falloppius, and other Anatomists Lib. v. Cap. xxx. Observat. Anatom.
reckon Eight Muscles belonging to each Foot, rejecting Vesalius his Ninth, it
being part of the Extensor Digitorum longus that is Inserted to the
Metatarsal-bone of the Little Toe: but Spigelius, *Veslingius, Lib. iv. C.
xxiv. C. xix.
and latter Authors making of their two first the Gasterocnemius Externus and
Gasterocnemius Internus One, giving it the name of Gasterocnemius Externus
only, and call its subjacent Muscle Gasterocnemius Internus, which former
Anatomists had named Soleus, have reduced their Number to Seven in each Foot,
whose Example we shall follow.

Gasterocnemius Externus, it. Gemellus. Vesal. M. T. 9. (...). Spigel. T. 38.
L. 4. Fig. i. GG DE. Bid. T. 83. E.

So called because (with the Soleus or Internus of that name) it composes the
Calf of the Leg: it is also called Gemellus from its being as it were double.
It has two Distinct Fleshy Originations from the Superior and Hindmost parts of
each Tubercle of the Lower Appendage of the Thighbone (42), which in their
descent are Fig. xviii.
each dilated into two large Fleshy Bellies; The innermost of which is Thickest
and Largest, having each a differing Series of Fleshy Fibers, and join to each
other near where they make a Broad Strong Tendon, which narrowing it self joins
with the great Tendon of the Gasterocnemius Internus, four Fingers breadth
above its insertion to the Os Calcis. (49.)

Riolan asserts, with Vesalius, that in Lib. v. Cap. 43.
the two Beginnings of this Muscle there are two Ossicula sesamoidea, which we
must acknowledge with Marchette have hitherto escaped our Observation, though
its likely it may be so in Aged Bodies, as it appeared in a Subject I lately
Dissected on One Side only.

When this Muscle Acts the Foot is said to be Extended or Pulled Backwards,
which motion of it is very necessary in Walking, Running, Leaping, and standing
on Tiptoe, etc. Hence it is those that Walk much have these Muscles Larger than
others, through the frequent use of them, and amongst which those that carry
Heavy burdens, and especially Sedans or Chairs in this Town; and Those who
wear Low-heeled Shoes have these Muscles remarkably larger than Others.

Plantaris. Vesal. M. T. 13. PH. Spigel. T. 38. (...) 4. Fig. 2. I^K.

So called from its Tendon expanded in the Planta Pedis like that of the
Palmaris in the Palm of the Hand. It Arises Fleshy from the Superior and
Back-part of the outermost Tubercle of the Lower Appendage of the Thighbone
(42) immediately under the External Fig. xviii.
Beginning of the Former Muscle, and Descending Obliquely between it and the
Following, soon becomes a Thin Flat Tendon, which passing out from between
Their Fleshy Bellies descends internally laterally, by their great Tendon; and
marching over the Os Calcis (49), expands Fig. xviii.
it self on the Soal of the Foot, where it firmly adheres to the Fleshy Body of
the Musculus Flexor Digitorum Perforatus, and is Inserted on both sides the
first Internode of each lesser Toe. The Action of this Muscle is very obscure,
its Tendinous Expansion on the Bottom of the Foot being chiefly serviceable in
defending the subjacent Muscles, Tendons, Nerves, and large Blood Vessels, from
being Comprest in Standing, Walking, etc. We have sometimes observed that the
Fleshy Beginning and long Tendon of this Muscle is wanting.

Gasterocnemius Internus. Vesal. M. T. 14. (...). Spigel. T. 38. L. 4. Fig. 2.
MM. Bid. T. 84. F.

This is placed under the two former Muscles; It Is also called Soleus from its
Figure; resembling a Sole-Fish: its External Fleshy part is covered with a
Transparent Tendinous expansion, which makes it appear of a livid Color. Its
Beginning is partly Tendinous, but chiefly Fleshy from the hindmost part of the
upper Appendix of the Fibula (47), and Fig. xviii.
Back-part of the Tibia (45), that is below the Insertion of the Subpopliteus,
and increasing to a large Fleshy Belly composed of Various Orders of Fleshy
Fibers, some of them underneath aptly expressing the Figure of the top of a
Feather, whose Stamina here being Tendinous join with the great Tendon which is
about four Fingers breadth in length, and Inserted to the Superior and Hindmost
part of the Os Calcis. Fig. xviii.
(49.)

The Foot, together with the Toes, being as it were a Leaver to the whole Body,
ought therefore to be attended with Muscles of great strength to Extend it,
wherefore we find these Muscles so much to exceed their Antagonist the Tibaeus
Anticus, as well in the advantageous construction of their differing Series of
Fleshy Fibers, as their Magnitude and Insertion at the extremity of the Os
Calcis: whereby they are not only rendered serviceable in Walking, Running,
Leaping, etc. but do also support the Tibiae in standing, lest the
superincumbent Pressure of the Weight of the Body should make them incline
forwards at their Articulations with the Talus.

Tibialis Anticus. Vesal. M. T. i. Z. Spigel. T. 40. NNO. Fig. 2. Bid. T. 80.
D. T. 81. E.

So called from its situation on the Forepart of the Tibia, its also by
Spigelius called Musculus Catenae, because when it is divided the Patient is
forced to use a Sling to support the Foot in Walking. Its Origination is Fleshy
from the Lower part of the Superior Appendage of the Tibia (50) Fig. xvii.
between its Prominence, where the great Tendon of all the Extending Muscles of
the Leg is Inserted, and the Origination of the Musculus Extensor Magnus
Digitorum Pedis: it also continues a Disgregated Fleshy Origination for near
two Thirds of the Superior part of the said Tibia Externally lateral next the
Fibula (52); which Composing a Fleshy Belly lessens it self in Half its
Progress, and growing into a Strong and somewhat Round Tendon descending
obliquely over the Inferior Part of the said Tibia, and under the Annular
Ligament, is Inserted to the inside of the Os F. xviii. 53.
Cuneiforme Majus (57) that sustains the Os Metatarsi Pollicis.

This pulls the Foot Upwards and Forwards Directly.

Peroneus primus. Vesal. M. T. i. ^. Spigel. T. 40. F. 2. C D. Bid. T. 81. E.
82. C.

By some it is called Longus it being the First that offers it self to view;
and the longest Muscle seated on the Fibula or Os Perone (56). It Fig. xviii*
Arises Externally Tendinous, and Fleshy Internally from above half the
Superior part of the said Bone, and marching somewhat Backwards becomes a
Strong, Flat Tendon, Four Fingers breadth in Length above the Inferior
Appendage of the said Fibula called Malleolus Externus (48), passing Fig. xviii.
behind which in a Channel like a Rope in a Pully, and from thence being
inflected forwards together with the Tendon of the following Muscle, they pass
under an imbanding Ligament as they run over the Os Calcis, but this Tendon
declining from its companion marches over the F. xvii. 60.
Os Cuboides (51) under the Musculus Abductor Minimi Digiti, and over the Ossa
Cuneformia in the bottom of the Foot, and under the Tendons and Muscles Bending
the Toes, and is Inserted to the Superior and Hindmost part of the Os Metatarsi
of the Great Toe.

The Tendon of this Muscle being conveyed over the Hindmost part of the
Malleolus Externus (44), as on a Fig. xviii.
Pully, is an elegant contrivance in Nature, whereby the Ball of the great Toe
(as that part is commonly called to which It is Inserted) is directed toward a
Perpendicular bearing of the Weight of the Body on the Leg in standing on
Tiptoe by pulling the Foot and Toes somewhat outward.

Peroneus Secundus. Visal. M. T. 6. PS. Spigel. T. 40. L. 4. F. 2. EEF. Bid. T.
82. B.

By some called Semi-fibulaeus: It has an Acute Fleshy beginning above the
Middle of the External part of the Fibula (46) under the Fleshy Belly Fig.
xviii.
of the Former Muscle, it also continues its Fleshy Beginning from the
Posterior Sharp Edge of the said Fibula, and Becoming a Fleshy Belly grows
Tendinous as it runs under the Malleolus Externus (48) together with Fig. xviii.
the Tendon of the former Muscle, and is inserted to the Superior and External
part of the Os Metatarsi of the Little Toe.

The proper Action of this Muscle is to pull the Foot and Toes outward.

Tibialis Posticus. Bid. T. 85. G. Vesal. M. T. 15. D E.

This being placed on the Back part of the Tibia, is also called Musculus
Nauticus, because Mariners chiefly use it in climbing up the Masts of their
Ships. It lies partly under the Flexor tertii internodii Pollicis, which Muscle
must be partly raised, together with the Flexor tertii internodii Digitorum
Pedis, before we can have a clear sight of it. It appears Biventral, Arising
partly Tendinous and partly Fleshy from the Superior and Back-part of the
Fibula (47), as also from the Ligament Fig. xviii.
that is continued between the said Bone and the Tibia (45), in near half its
progress it becomes less, and grows Fleshy again, and making a Strong Round
Tendon which runs in a Sinus on the back-part of the lower Appendage of the
Tibia called the Malleolus Internus (51) under an Annular Fig. xvii.
Ligament, and is inserted to the Os Naviculare (54) internally and laterally.
Fig. xviii. Fig. xvii. 56.


This draws the Foot upwards and inwards.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Muscles of the Great Toe.
THe great Toe is moved by its Proper Muscles, which we reckon to be six in
number, namely, Extensor Pollicis Longus, and Extensor Brevis, Flexor Pollicis
Longus, and Flexor Brevis, Adductor and Abductor Pollicis; Though Anatomists
commonly mention but Four of these, yet we have observed them in several
Dissections to be so many Distinct Muscles as they are Accurately Figured in
Bidloo. To these may be added Tab. 81, and 82.
the Musculus Transversalis Placentini, which our abovementioned Author and
some others make to be an Adductor Pollicis, But we take it rather to be an
Adductor Minimi Digiti, Wherefore it shall be described in the following
Chapter.

Extensor Pollicis Longus. Vesal. M. T. 4. 14. Spigel. T. 40. L. 4. F. 2. L.
Bid. T. 81. H. T. 82. G.

This Muscle does not Arise as most Describe it, from the Tibia, or from the
Ligament between it and the Fibula. It Is Beginning is Large and Fleshy from the
Forepart of the Fibula (52) from immediately below Fig. xvii.
its superior Appendix, to Four Fingers Breadth above the Inferior one, and
Descending under the Ligamentum Annulare of the Tarsus, between the Tendon of
the Tibialis Anticus and those Tendons of Extensor Pedis Longus, and marching
along the superior part of the Foot, Is Inserted to the Upper part of the
Second Bone of the Great Toe (63). Its Name Intimates its Use.

Extensor Pollicis Brevis. Bid. T. 82. not lettered.

Though this Muscle is not mentioned by Anatomists, yet we constantly observe
it in Dissection, It has been rather taken for part of the Extensor Digitorum
Brevis, but we frequently find it Distinct.

It Arises Fleshy from the Forepart of the Os Calcis (61), being Dilated into
a Belly, soon becomes a Long, Slender Tendon, passing obliquely over the upper
part of the Foot, and is Inserted to the superior part of the Second Bone of
the Great Toe, which it Extends or Pulls Upwards.

Flexor Pollucis Longus. Bid. T. 84. not lettered. TT. 85. K.

This is a direct Antagonist to the Extensor Longus, It Arises opposite to it
from the Back-part of the Fibula (46) with a double Order of Fleshy Fig. xviii.
Fibers, running to a Middle Tendon, (like the Flexor tertii internodii
Pollicis Manus above) which cease to be Fleshy as it passes over the
Juncture, and runs through a Channel on the Internal part of the Os Calcis (49)
under the Tendon of the Musculus Flexor Digitorum Longus Perforans over the
Following Muscle, and is Inserted to the Upper End of the Second Bone of the
Great Toe.

Flexor Pollicis Brevis. Bid. T. 86. F. i. not lettered.

Is Short, Thick, and Fleshy, seemingly divided into Two Muscles by the Tendon
of the Former passing over it. It Arises from the superior part of the Os
Cuneforme medium (58), Fig. xvii.
and running over the Termination of the Musculus Peroneus, is Implanted into
the Ossa Sesamoidea of the Great Toe, who are likewise Tied to the superior
part of the Second Bone of the said Toe, which it Bends.

Abductor Pollicis. Bid. T. 86. F. 2. C C.

This Arises Fleshy from the Os Calcis internally Laterally, in half its
Progress becoming Tendinous, it joins with another Fleshy Beginning, springing
from the Os Cuneforme majus (57) Fig. xvii.
that sustains the Os Metatarsi of the Great Toe; both which making one Tendon,
are Inserted to the External part of the Os Sesamoides of the Great Toe
Laterally.

This pulls the Great Toe from the rest.

Adductor Pollicis. Bid. T. 86. F. 2. D.

This is Described and Figured by C. xix.
Veslingius, It is also mentioned by Marchette, It arises partly Tendinous and
partly Fleshy from the Inferior parts of the Os Cuneforme Tertium (59), and
Dilating it self to a Fleshy Belly, marches obliquely in the bottom of the
Foot, and becomes less and Tendinous at its Insertion to the Internal part of
the Ossa Sesamoidea of the Great Toe laterally, opposite to the Termination of
the Former.

This Brings the Great Toe nearer the rest.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Muscles of the Four Lesser Toes.
THese (like the Muscles of the Fingers) we shall divide into Common and Proper.

The Common Muscles of the Toes are such as have their Tendons Inserted into
all the Lesser Toes, as the Extensor Digitorum Pedis Longus, Extensor Brevis,
Perforatus, and Perforans. The rest are the Proper Muscles of the Toes, namely,
Lumbricales, Abductor Minimi Digiti, Transversalis Placentini, and the
Interossei: Of these in their Order.

Extensor Digitorum Pedis Longus. Vesal. M. T. i. a b. Bid. T. 82. D.

This has an Acute Fleshy Beginning Externally from the Inferior part of the
Upper Appendix of the Tibia (50) next the Fibula (53), as also a Fig. xvii.
Long Fleshy one from the Superior part of the last named Bone, and lessening
it self in half its Descent on the Leg, it joins with a Second, Broad,
Disgregated Fleshy Beginning, continued for near half the Inferior part of the
said Fibula, where Descending under the Ligamentum Annulare of the Talus, it is
divided into Five Tendons, Four of which are Inserted to the Third Bones of all
the Lesser Toes; The Fifth to the superior part of the Os Metatarsi of the
Little Toe, which part of it Vesalius makes his Lib. ii. Cap. lx.
Ninth Muscle belonging to the Foot.

Extensor Digitorum Brevis. Vesal. M. T. 6. O. Bidloo T. 82. F.

This is a short Fleshy Muscle lying under the Tendon of the Former on the
Foot. It Arises Fleshy from the External and Forepart of the Os Calcis (61),
soon Dilating it self to a Fleshy Belly, which being divided into Four Fleshy
Portions becomes so many Tendons, passing over the Upper part of the Foot, and
making Acute Angles with the Tendons of the Former Muscle as they run over the
First Internode of each Lesser Toe to their Insertions at the superior parts of
their Second.

Perforatus. Vesal. M. T. 14.. Spigel. T. 42. F. 2. C. D. Bid. T. 85. I.

So called because its Tendons are Perforated like Those of the Fingers. It is
also called Flexor Secundi Internodii Digitorum Pedis, from its Use and
Sublimis from its Situation, It springs from the Inferior and Internal part
of the Os Calcis (49) between Fig. xviii.
the Musculi Abductores of the Greater and Lesser Toes. Dilating it self to a
Fleshy Belly after it has passed the middle of the Planta Pedis, it is divided
into four Fleshy Portions, which become so many Tendons, and are divided near
their Terminations to Admit the Tendons of the following Muscle to pass through
them to their Insertions; These being United again, pass underneath them to
their Implantations at the Upper part of the Second Bone of each Lesser Toe.

Perforans. Vesal. M. T. 15. P. Bid. T. 85. H.

So called because its Tendons run through the Fissures in the Tendons of the
Former, It is also called Flexor tertii Internodii Digitorum Pedis from its
Use. It has an Acute Fleshy Origination from the Back-part of the Tibia (45)
immediately under the Fig. xviii.
Musculus subpoplitaeus, having a double order of Fibers united in a middle
Tendon like the Flexor Pollicis Longus, but cease to be Fleshy as it passes
behind the Malleolus Internus, and running in a Channel over the Internal part
of the Os Calcis (49) under it, Imbanding Liguments in half its Progress
through the Sole of the Foot, it is divided into Four Tendons which march
through the perforations of the Tendons of the Former Muscle, and are Inserted
to the Third Bone of every Lesser Toe.

Lumbricales. Spigel. T. 42. F. 3. F F. Bid. T. 86. FF. Bid. T. 86. F. i. FF.

So called from their Figure like those of the Hand, and though Anatomists have
generally described them Arising from the Tendons of the last treated of
Muscle, yet we rather think the Carnea massain the Planta Pedis, is their true
Origin, It springing from the Internal part of the Os Calcis, and becoming
Tendinous joins with the Tendons of the Former Muscle, in the middle of the
Sole of the Foot, Then dividing it self into Four (as it were) distinct Fleshy
Muscles, they all become Tendinous at their Insertions to the Internal parts of
each Lesser Toe Laterally next the Great Toe.

Abductor Minimi Digiti. Spigel. T. 42. Lib. 4. F. 3. K M. Bid. T. 86. F. 2. B.

This Arises outwardly Tendinous, inwardly Fleshy from the External part of
the Os Calcis (49), becoming Fig. xviii.
Tendinous in half its progress on the outside of the Foot, it joins with the
other Fleshy part of this Muscle Arising Fleshy from the Outside of the Os
Metatarsi of the Little Toe (57), and making one Tendon at its Insertion to the
Upper part of the First Bone of the Little Toe Externally Laterally.

Transversalis Pedis. (...)id. T. 16. F. 2. (...).

So called from its Transverse Situation. It Arises Tendinous from the
Internal Os Sesamoides of the Great Toe, and becoming a Fleshy Belly in its
Progress over the First Internodes of the two next Toes, it is Lessened at its
Insertion to the Inferior part of that Metatarsal Bone which supports that Toe
next the Lesser.

Its Use is to bring the Lesser Toe toward the Greater.

To this may be Added a Flexor.
Primi Ossis minimi Digiti, though some reckon it amongst the following
Interossei, yet its situation does not deserve that Name. It Arises Fleshy
from the Superior part of the Os Metatarsi Minimi Digiti, and passes directly
to its Insertion in the First Bone of the Lesser Toe. In the Tendon of this and
the Interossei, the Ossa Sesamoidea of the Lesser Toes are entertained.

Interossei Pedis. Spigel. T. 43. L. 4. F. 2. D D C C. Bid. T. 86. F. 3. AAA.

These are reckoned to be Seven in Number, They derive their Names from their
Situation, and may each deserve a Proper Appellation from their Use. The First
may be called an Adductor Minimi Digiti. The Second, which is the Largest,
draws the next Toe toward the Lesser, and may be called Abductor A^ricularius.
The Third Antagnises the Former, and is an Abductor of that Toe. The Fourth may
be called Abductor Medii Digiti. The Fifth is an Adductor of the same. The
Sixth is an Adductor, and Seventh Abductor Indicis Pedis. All these Arise
Fleshy from the Superior part of the Ossa Metatarsi of the Lesser Toes (62),
Fig. xvii.
and becoming Bellied grow Tendinous at their Insertions to the First Internode
of each lesser Toe laterally.

AN APPENDIX: Containing a Description of the Penis, and the manner of its
Erection.
REgnerus De Graaf in his Elaborate Treatise of the Organs of Generation, has
Accurately Described this Part; and Fredericus Ruysch in his late Anatomical
and Chyrurgical Observations Demonstrated the Structure of its Glans, which the
Former has not so well Observed; to which I shall add what upon a strict
Enquiry on this Subject has given me occasion to discover.

I shall not here repeat those many Synonimous Appellations which Lascivious*
Wits, or over sedulous Authors have Invented. The Penis is an Organ Contrived
by the Author of Nature for the Ejection of the Seed, and Emission of Urine,
composed of certain Spongy or Cavernous Bodies with their Vessels and
Integuments, of which in their order. First of its External or Common
Containing Parts, as the Cuticula, Cutis and Membrana Carnosa.

In the Cuticula we could never Observe The Cuticula.
any considerable difference from that of other Parts, except on the Glans,
where we find, by the assistance of a Microscope, that its Exterior surface
appears Villous or Downy.

The true Skin or Cutis (AA) in The Cutis.
Fig. x.
This and the Scrotum is much Thinner than we commonly find it in other Parts;
and both have a peculiar disposition of their Blood Vessels (KK): the Arteries
are called here Pundenda, which Arising from the External Branch of the Illiac,
and running under the Superior part of the Skin of the Penis, divide themselves
into many Branches, the larger of which are still subdivided, till they become
Capillary; from whose Extremities are continued so many Veins, which again
uniting into larger Branches, do pass into those that partly Arise from the
Corpora Cavernosa Penis, and marching under the Common Integuments, do empty
themselves into the upper part of that continued from the Saphena Vein of the
Foot; These for distinction we call Venae Praeputii. (K.) Fig. x.


Besides the Bloud-Vessels now mentioned, The Lymphe-Ducts.
it has Lymphe-Ducts (LL) which I had first an opportunity of observing by
Injecting this Part with Prepared Mercury; which confirms the Opinion of
Schelhamer, and the Accurate Nuck, concerning the Origin of these Ducts: But
whether they Arise here from that part of the Canalis Sanguineus called the
Artery, or the Vein, did not appear from my Experiment; since I made Injection
into both promiscuously: I observed diverse Trunks on each side, passing under
the Common Integuments accompanying the Venae Prep^tii, which do (as I suspect)
afterward empty themselves (like those Arising from the Inferior Parts) into
the Glandulae Inguinales. This Contemplation may serve to Inform us how the
Morbid matter comes to be conveyed more particularly to those Glands in
Venerial Cases, and Cause those Tumors that frequently happen on that occasion,
commonly called Buboes; which Conception is the more confirmed, by observing
those Phenomenon that are previous to that Effect, as Ulcers, and Inflammations
on the Prepuce, and by the too early Use of Astringent Topics; which probably
may inspissate the Refluent Lympha, and render it unfit to pass through those
Vesciculae Glandosae into their exporting Lymphe-Ducts; from which obstruction
begun a Tumor may Arise; Hence an Account may be also given how soon the
Malignity may be sometimes conveyed into the Mass of Blood, by the common
passages of the Lympha; and a very good Reason offered for the Practice of
opening those Tumors before the usual time of Supuration.

In that part where the Praeputium is The Glandulae Odoriferae.
contiguous to the Balanus, my very good Friend that Judicious Anatomist, Dr.
Tyson, has Discovered certain small Glands (a a); which he calls from the Fig.
x.
great scent their separated Liquor emits, Glandulae Odoriferae: their Number
is uncertain; in those that have the Praeputium longer than ordinary, they are
not only more, but also larger, and separate a greater quantity of their Juice,
which being lodged there, often grows Acrid and corrodes the Glans. They are
very conspicuous in most Quadrupeds, particularly in Dogs and Boars, in the
latter of which; their separated Liquor is contained in a proper Cist, at the
Verge of the Praeputium; out of which there is a large Aperture, whereby it is
remitted again to lubricate the Penis of that Animal.

The Third Common Tegument is The Membrana Carnosa.
the Membrana Carnosa. This Part commonly wanting Fat for diverse Reasons.
First, lest its Erection into that necessary Stiffness should be thereby
hindered; Secondly, lest it should be too Bulky; and lastly, it would have
dulled the Pleasure the Male is affected with in Venery. But whether these
considerations induced the Author of Nature to Frame this Part without a
Membrana Adiposa does not appear, since its want of Fat may not unlikely depend
on its great Alteration, from that Flaccidity when it is not Erected to that
Extension of it when it is. In the Former, though we can conceive no great
obstacle why its Adipose Cells should not be supplied with their Oil, except
its too great laxity should retard the Influent Blood in its passage through
its Capillary Arteries; yet in the Latter its great Extension may not unlikely
Compress them to void their contained Oil; which may be the cause why the
Interstices of the Muscles and other Parts most quiescent are subject to be
filled with Fat. And in the Penis it self in Children before Erection has been
frequent, I have observed its Membrana Adiposa to be extended with fat; but
afterward though the Membrane remains, yet the Increase of Fat is hindered,
and therefore we find it commonly without; yet in some Subjects, and those
Adult too, I have found it almost covered with Fat; But what inconvenience the
Party suffered when Living, was not my Fortune to be acquainted with.

I come next to take notice of its The Ligaments, first, Fraenum.
Ligaments; first of that called the Fraenum (a) which ties the Prepuce to the
Fig. xii.
lower part of the Glans (A). This in some we have found so short, that we have
been obliged to divide it to procure a complete Erection; in others I have been
obliged to do the like, where a Cicatrix has been made after large Ulcers on
it, which frequently happens in Venerial Infections.

The next Ligament which I shall The Ligamentum suspensorium Penis.
speak of, I call Suspensorium; although it has escaped the Observation of
Anatomists, yet it is very conspicuous, and of remarkable Use; of which
hereafter, when we come to give an Account how this Part becomes Erected. It
Arises from the Anterior Part of the Ossa Pubis, and is fixed to the Upper part
of the Dorsum Penis (c c) on each side its great Vein (I). Fig. x.
The rest of the Ligaments are such as compose its Capsulae or divide them as
their Septums; These we shall mention in Treating of its Internal or Contained
Parts, which are, the Two Corpora Cavernosa Penis, the Corpus Cavernosum
Vrethrae, Their Septums, Muscles and Vessels, of which as they appear in
Dissection.

First of the Vessels that carry The Arteries.
Blood to it, viz. the Arteries (GG). These Arise sometimes from the Rami
Iliaci interni, at other times from the Inferior parts of the Umbilical
Arteries; whence an Account may be given why this Part is less than usual by
tying the Umbilical Rope too close to the Belly, and that not only from the
retraction of the Uracus, but by the constricture attending these Arteries by
the great Extension of the Umbilical ones, from whom They have their Rise;
whereby may be denied that plenty of Influent Blood; but this we leave to
future Observation. As these Arteries pass toward the Penis, they send forth
Two or Three Branches on each side, the Two Inferior of which ( gg) run to the
Fig. x.
Musculi Directores Penis: The Two Superior ( hh) administer Blood to the
Adjacent Parts, particularly to the Musculi Elevatores Any, between which and
the Marsupiales Femorum, these great Trunks pass, but marching over the
Cavernous Bodies of the Penis, They are both subdivided into Two large
Branches, the Two Inferior of which ( ii) pass to the Bulb of the Cavernous
Bodies of the Urethra, but the Two Superior ( kk) are both subdivided again,
the External ( dd) running on the superior surface of the Cavernous Bodies of
the Penis, the Internal ( ll) entering the Capsulae pass through the middle of
each Cavernous Body* ( DD), wherein they divide Fig. xi.
themselves into innumerable Branches ( CC) from whose Capillary extremities
Fig. xv.
are continued so many Veins, in the The Veins.
Cannals of which are diverse Apertures into as many Cells ( D) which Fig. xvi.
communicate with each other, and empty themselves into the larger Venous Ducts
( E), running on the superior surface of the Penis, some of which joins with
those of the Prepuce; others make one large Trunk which we call Vena ipsius
Penis (I), Fig. x.
marching on the Dorsum Penis immediately under the Ligament that ties the Ossa
Pubis together internally; whereby its Comprest in Erection, as shall be
hereafter Demonstrated, but proceeding further on the Prostatae, it is there
Bifurcated, and enters the Rami Illiaci interni on each side. The Veins which
arise (in like manner) from the Corpus Cavernosum Urethrae pass from its Bulb
through the Musculi Acceleratores (CC), whereby they are Fig. xii.
comprest when those Muscles are in Action.

The Nerves (HH) that belong to The Nerves.
Fig. x.
this Part, are derived from the Trunk composed by the coallescion of the Third
of the Os Sacrum, and a Branch remitted from the Great Crural Nerve; which
after their union provide Nerves for the Testes, Perinaeum, and Muscles of this
Part, ascending on the Cavernous Bodies of the Penis, and expanding themselves
on its superior surface Fig. x.
( cc), are distributed to all its Parts. Its Lymphe-Ducts we mentioned in
describing its External Integuments, wherefore we proceed next to its Cavernous
Bodies.

The Corpora Cavernosa Penis (BB), The Corpora Cavernosa.
Fig. x. id. Fig. xii. GG.
by De Graaf called Nervosa, by others Nervea spongiosa: are Two Capsuloe or
oblong Folliculi every where outwardly fenced with a Thick Membrane, by Lib. v.
Cap. xiv.
Vesalius and Lib. xi. Cap. xv.
Columbus supposed to be like Ligaments, whose External surface is covered with
Nerves and Bloud-Vessels as is Represented ( ddee); Fig. x.
They spring with Two distinct Originals from the Lowerside of the Ossa Pubis,
whence stretching forwards meet each other, leaving an Interstice before their
Conjunction, in which the Urethra (F) is conveyed: where they leave the Ossa
Pubis, they are each covered with a Membrane, and are afterward joined to each
other by the intervention of a Septum intermedium, The Septum intermedium.
which the nearer it approaches the Glans, is more diminisht ( a), and Fig.
xiii.
before it arrives to the middle of the Penis, its Fibers Ascend from the
Urethra (B) to the Dorsum Penis (de) Fig. xii. Fig. x.
like the Teeth of a Comb, as De Graaf has well observed: but is not
obliterated, and the two Cavernous Bodies united near the Glans, as he would
persuade us; but on the contrary rather grows Thicker and Narrower ( a), as
Ruysch has well observed. Fig. xiii.
In Inflation the Wind I confess may sometimes pass from these Cavernous Bodies
of the Penis to that of the Urethra; which yet will not always happen; which
communication, depends on the Mediation of their Blood Vessels, as our last
named Author also takes notice. Anatomists differ Their Internal substance.
Lib. v. Cap. xiv.
concerning the Internal constructure of these Cavernous Bodies: Vesalius
accuses Galen for his inadvertency herein. Columbus first observed their
Arteries, Lib. vii. De Cord and Arter.
which proceeding straight to their Extremities, disperse themselves into
innumerable Branches; which escaped the Observations of Former Anatomists, as
he writes. Dr. Whorton imagines they are partly composed of Glandulous Flesh:
others conceive They are intertext with diverse Nerves, from whence the Names of
Nervosa was first imposed on them. Diemerbroeck supposes they are not a mere
Texture of Vessels intricately interwoven in the manner of a Net, as Bauhinus,
Riolan, and Veslingius imagine, but their substance is Fibrous, Fungous, and
Cavernous, like the Lungs, receiving into their hollow Interstices Blood and
Spirits from the Vessels that are dispersed through their substance. The
Enquiries I have made inform me, that there is a great Analogy between the
Internal structure of This and that of the Spleen, which Columbus also remarks;
in both Lib. xi. Cap. xv.
which the sides of the Veins have large Apertures or Cells, which most plainly
appear in the Bulbus of a Dogs Penis (DE): but in a Humane one Fig. xvi.
they are here much less, and larger in the Spleen, and do also open into each
other; wherefore when the Refluent Blood is stopped, the Penis becomes equally
Distended thereby, and it is driven forwards toward the Glans when its Muscles
Contract.

Under these Cavernous Bodies of the The Corpus Cavernosum Urethrae.
Penis lies the Urethra (B), which has Fig. xii.
also its Corpus Cavernosum differing very much in Figure from that of the Two
Former; they being less at each End, and Largest in the Middle, whereas this on
the contrary is there Least, and Largest at its Two Extremes: neither is its
Proper Tegument so Dense. The superior Part of it lying between the Two Crura
of the Former, we call from its Figure Bulbus, which is covered with the Its
Bulbus.
Musculus Accelerator Urinae (CC) (described Fig. xii.
Chap. III.). It possesles the Lower part ( E) of the Urethra (D), Fig. xiv.
extending it self in the Perinaeum, and is divided in Cutting for the Stone*
in which Operation caution ought to be had to its Arteries which enter that
part of the Bulb toward the Anus laterally. It has also a Septum intermedium
Its Septum.
( a) (though not hitherto taken notice of by Anatomists) dividing the Right
side of the Bulbus (A) from the Left, which Descending to the end of the
Bulbous Part, is there obliterated. The Office of this Septum we conceive is to
direct the Refluent Blood to the exporting Ducts, its Two Veins mentioned
before. As this Corpus Cavernosum descends on the Inferior Part of the Urethra
(D) it is lessened ( E), but when it approaches Fig. xiv.
the Extremities of the Two Former, it again Dilates it self and covers them,
Composing that Body which we call Glans or Balanus (A), which The Glans.
Fig. xii.
De Graaf had mistaken for a Fleshy substance distinct from either. This Ruysch
has well described and Figured in his abovementioned Century of Observations.
Its Cells (C) in the Fig. xiii.
Glans (B) are much less than those of the Former, but toward its superior
Part or Bulbus (A) they equal Them. Fig. xiv.
Having already described the Muscles of this Part, we shall proceed to give an
Account how It becomes Erected.

Galen and the Former Anatomists not knowing the Circulation of the Blood, or
that it past from the Arteries into the Veins, were extremely deceived in their
Ideas of the Erection Lib. xi. Cap. xv.
of the Penis. Columbus, who has given an almost complete Description of that
Grand Work, still conceives the Arteries of this Part pour out Spirits with a
great force into It by Lib. i. G. xxxii.
which means its Extended. Caspar Bauhin supposes in a Venerial Appetite the
Blood and Spirits flow into this Part in great plenty, and being filled like a
Gut with Wind, it begins to swell, and grows hard, which he imagines is done by
a Sphincter Muscle Constringing the Neck of the Bladder and roots of its
Cavernous Bodies. De Graaf assigns two kinds of Vessels with its Muscles for
the performance of this Office; The Nerves by which the Animal Spirits flow
into its Membranous Parts, and render them more Rigid and Tumid; and the
Arteries carrying Blood to distend the Corpora Cavernosa, for, as "he Reasons,
we are firmly persuaded the chief Extension of the Penis is from Blood, first
by Injecting Water into its Corpora Cavernosa, by its Arteries, in a Dead Body,
we see it Extended to the same dimensions as when the Animal was living:
Secondly, in firmly tying a Dogs Penis in Coitu, and afterward examining it,
we find nothing but Blood to Distend it." To which may be added, that in
Criminals which Hang long after Death, this Part becomes Erected, the Blood in
that Position of the Body falling to the Inferior Parts: And by Inflateing the
Blood Vessels of a Dead Animal It will also Erect; which we first practiced in
a Human Body by inserting a Blow-pipe into the Saphena Vein; whereby it was not
only Erected, but afforded a prospect of the External disposition of its Blood
Vessels, particularly its Veins, which suggested to us a Contrivance in Nature
in this Action which has hitherto escaped the reflection of Anatomists. De
Graaf not considering the Use of the Adjacent Parts, assigns its Erection to
its Muscles; Imagining, that by the Intumescence of their Bellies they not only
compress the Corpora Cavernosa, and drive the contained Blood toward the
Glans, but likewise the Passages through which it ordinarily Flows back; which
latter, we can by no means admit in the Cavernous Bodies of the Penis it self,
since the Musculi Erigentes are so remote from their Great Vein. Our Hypothesis
founded upon the Observation abovementioned, and compared with the Structure
and Situation of its Parts is as follows. The Penis is approximated to the Ossa
Pubis when those Muscles Act by means of the Ligamentum Suspensorium, whereby
the Blood is not only driven Forwards toward the Glans in greater plenty, and
its Veins distended, but their great Trunks running over the Dorsum Penis, are
Comprest as they march close under the Ligamentum Transversum of the Ossa
Pubis. The like cannot happen in the Cavernous Body of the Urethra since there
is no Bone whose Position can have that effect upon its Veins, as the Ossa
Pubis has upon those of the Penis itself; wherefore the Musculi Acceler atores
Compressing Those of its Bulb do that Office: hence it happens in an imperfect
Erection the Glans is not equally Extended with the Penis it self, and at other
times is soonest Relaxt; But when those Muscles Act, the Blood contained in the
Bulb is driven forwards toward the Glans, whereby it becomes more Extended; so
in a piece of Gut, which if filled with Wind or Water, and either end Comprest
the opposite being tied, we shall see it strut out and be more distended, as De
Graaf instances after Caspar Bauhin. The Blood thus hindered in its return,
Distends the Cavernous Bodies which are thereby Erected; the Arteries which
before were flaccid, having then their Trunks also extended, do more
plentifully Import Blood into this Part. But since it is absolutely necessary
some part of the detained Blood should be still passing off, lest it become
Grumous and unfit for a Reflux; to this end the Venae Praeputii are joined to
those of the Penis it self, as above noted, and are placed under the Skin only,
and running over the Ossa Pubis carry off part of the Impelled Blood, to give
way to a fresh supply from the Arteries, and preserve the Circulation
uninterrupted. I remember once in an obstinate Priapisma which would not yield
to ordinary repeated Phlebotomy, I opened the Vein of the Penis it self, not
without the expected success, it immediately loosing its troublesome Rigidity,
by which I was confirmed in my Conjecture.

This elegant contrivance in disposing these Exporting Sanguiferous Ducts, that
some are liable to be Comprest whilst others remain altogether Free, is not
only observable in the Penis of Men and Clytoris of Women, but in that of all
Animals which have hitherto fell under our Examination, as well as in the
Pudenda of all Females; and is indeed an Artifice that deserves our Admiration.

THE EXPLICATION OF THE FIGURES.
FIG. I.
Represents the Muscles of the Face, the Quadratus Genoe being removed.

AA, The Muscnli Frontales. BB, The Orbiculares Palpebrarum. C, The Musculus
Retractor Alae Nasi, conjoined with the Elevator Labii superioris Proprius EE.
D, The Elevator Labiorum Communis. EE, The Elevator Labii superior is proprius.
FF, The Sphincter Labiorum. GG, The Musculi Zugomatici. H, The Depressor
Labiorum. I, The Depressor Labii Inferioris proprius. K, The Buccinator partly
in situ. L, The Temporalis. M, The Attollens Auriculam. N, The Masseter. O,
Part of the Digastricus in situ. P, Part of the Mastoideus. Q, A Portion of the
Cucullaris. R, Part of the Elevator Scapulae in situ. SS, Parts of the Musculi
Sternohyoidei. TT, Parts of the Coracohyoidei. a, Part of the Os Iugale. bb,
The Cartilage of the Auricula. cc, Glandula Parotis. d. Its Ductus (d)
Excretorius passing over the Musculus Masseter. ee, A Branch of the Corotid
Artery. f, Part of the Lower Jaw Bone Bared g, The Glandula Maxillae
Inferioris.
FIG. II.
EXhibits the whole Eye, together with the Origination, Progress, and Insertion
of its Muscles, when taken out of the Orbit.

AA, The Tunica Sclerotis, composing the External surface of the posterior part
of the Bulb of the Eye. aa, The Optic Nerve. B, A Portion of the superior part
of the Bone of the Orbit next the Nose, to which the little Cartilage called
the Trochlea b... is fixed. (b)
C, A Portion of the inferior and opposite part of the external Edge of the
Bone of the Orbit, from whence the Oblique inferior Muscle does Arise. c, The
Originations of the Four Right and superior Oblique Muscle of the Eye from the
profoundest part of the Orbit. D, The Musculus Obliquus superior, whose Tendon
runs through the Trochlea b... to its Insertion at the posterior part of the
Bulb of the Eye ( A) behind the Termination of the following Muscle. E,
Musculus Attollens. F, Abducens. G, Deprimens. H, Adducens. I, Obliquus
Inferior.
FIG. III.
Shows the Basis of the Cranium, with the Muscles that Arise from the First
Vertebra of the Neck, and are Inserted to It, together with some of Those
employed in the Motions of the Upper and Under Lip.

A, Half of the Inferior Jaw Bone on the Left side. B, The Musculus
Pterygoideus Internus in situ. C, Part of the Os Sphenoides. cc, The Ala Nasi.
D, Musculus Depressor Labii superioris proprius, seu Constrictor Alae Nasi, in
situ. d, Part of the Elevator Labii Inferioris proprius remaining at its
Origin. e, The Inferior part of the Brink of the Orbit, from whence the
Inferior Oblique Musele (expressed at I, Fig. II.) does Arise. E, The Os Iugale.
P, The Processus Pterygoides, or Aliformis. ff, The Processus Styloides, one of
which is frequently Broken by the Rope after the common Execution of
Malefactors, as it happened in this Subject on the Right side. GG, The
Processus Mastoides or Mammiformes. H, The posterior part of the First Vertebra
of the Neck; gg, its Two (gg)
Processes that are Articulated with the Second Vertebra. h, The Extremity of
the Transverse Processes of the said First Vertebra. i, The Musculus Annvans or
Rectus minor anticus, which I first observed in the year 1685. k, The Musculus
Abnvans Lateralis or Rectus Lateralis, mentioned by Falloppius. b, The Obliquus
superior Capitis. m, The Rectus minor posticus. I, The Right Auricle or outward
Ear, nn, its Lobus Cut off. (nn)
KK, The Os Occipitis. L, The Os Squammosum or Temporale. M, The Os Frontis. o,
That part of the Orbit to which the Trochlea adhereth.
FIG. IV.
Represents the Lower Jawbone, with the Proper Muscles of the Under Lip
remaining on it.

AA, The Processus Condyloides. BB, The Two other Processes of the Lower Jaw
called Conone. CCC, Part of the Internal Membrane that Invests the Mouth. DDEE,
The Nerves and Blood Vessels passing out of the two Perforations in the Lower
Jaw Bone to the Glandules and Muscles of the Lips and Cheeks. FF, The Musculi
Elevatores Labii Inferioris proprii, not hitherto described by any Author for
what I know. GG, The Internal surface of the Musculus Depressor Labii
Inferioris Proprius. HH, The Glandules of the Cheeks. II, Part of the Musculus
Spincter Labiorum.
FIG. V.
Shows the Under side of the Tongue with its Muscles.

A, The Apex or Tip of the Tongue. B, Its Basis or Root freed from the Os
Hyoides. CC, The Musculi Ceratoglossi. DD, Genioglossi. EE, Styloglossi. a, A
Branch of the Gustatory Nerve.
FIG. VI.
DEmonstrates the Back part of the Muscles of the Fauces.

AA, The Musculi Stylopharyngei. BB, The Pterygopharyngei. a a, The Glandulae
Tonsillae. CC, The Musculus Oesophageus. b b, The superior part of the
Oesophageus raised to discover the progress of the Stylopharyngeus underneath
it. c, A Piece of the Long Process of the Thyroidal Cartilage that is joined to
the Os Hyoides. D, The superior part of the Oesophagus or Musculus Vaginalis
Gulae.
FIG. VII.
Shows the superior part of the Oesophagus or part of the Musculus Vaginalis
Gulae.

AA, The Internal or Transverse Fibers being continued from the Oesophageus
Muscle. BB, The External or Longitudeinal Fibers of the Vaginalis Gulae.
FIG. VIII.
REpresents diverse Muscles of the Head and Neck.

A, The Hairy-scalp. B, The Os Occipitis. C, Part of the Musculus Splenius.
DDD, The Complexus Raised from its Insertion. EE, The Recti Majores on the
Right side in situ, on the Left depending. FF, The Obliqui superiores. GG, The
Obliqui inferiores. HH, The Recti Minores. ae, The Os Iugale. b, The Processus
Mastoides. c, The Back-part of the First Vertebra of the Neck. d, Part of the
Musculus Complexus remaining in situ, which Falloppius makes a Distinct Muscle,
and reckons it with its Partner to be Third Pair of the Head. III, The Musculi
Spinales Colli. K, The Transversales Colli. LLL, The Interspinales Colli. e e e
e, The Apices of the Double Spines of the Vertebrae of the Neck. f, The
Extremity of the Spine of the First Vertebra of the Thorax.
FIG. IX.
Shows part of the Organ of Hearing of a Calf.

AA, Part of the Os Petrosum divided. B, The Foramen Rotundnm. C, The Stapes in
its proper site on the Foramen Ovale. E, The Musculus Stapidis. F, A small Bone
in the Tendon of the last named Muscle as it passes over a Projection of the Os
Petrosum which composeth the Foramen Rotundum B. G, Part of the Cochlea broken
up.
FIG. X.
REpresents the Forepart of the Human Penis Prepared with Mercury.

AA, The Skin together with the rest of the Common Integuments of the Penis
freed from it. aa, That part of Them which composeth the Praeputium. B, The
Beginnings of the Corpora Cavernosa separated from the Ossa Pubis. bb, The
Veins; cc, The Nerves, (cc)
dd, The Arteries, as they appear on (dd)
the Back-part or Dorsum Penis. C, The Glans or Balanus. DD, The Musculi
Erectores. EE, The Transversales. F, Part of the Sphincter Any. f, A Blow-Pipe
Inserted in the Urethra. GG, The Trunks of the two Arteries of the Penis Cut
from the Internal Branches of the Iliac Arteries: gg, Their two Inferior
Branches which (gg)
run to the Musculi Erectores; hh, Their (hh)
superior Branches which administer Blood to the adjacent Parts; ii, Those (ii)
Arteries which pass to the Bulb of the Cavernous Body of the Urethra; k k,
Their large Trunks which are subdivided again; the External of which d d, (dd)
pass on the superior surface of the Penis; the Internal ll, enter the Corpora
(ll)
Cavernosa. HH, The Nerves of the Penis. I, The Vena ipsius Penis. KK, The
Venae Praeputii which are joined with the Former. LL, The Lymphe-Ducts.
FIG. XI.
Shows the Two Corpora Cavernosa Penis, and that of the Urethra, after a
Transverse Section, when Inflated and Dried.

AA, The Corpora Cavernosa Penis. B, The Corpus Cavernosum Urethrae. C, The
Trunk of the Vena ipsius Penis. DD, The Trunks of the two Arteries passing
through the Corpora Cavernosa of the Penis.
FIG. XII.
REpresents the Back-part of the Human Penis.

A, The Balanus. a, The Frenum. B, The External surface of the Corpus
Cavernosum Urethrae. CC, Its Bulb covered with the Musculus Accelerator b, The
conjunction (b)
of its Right side with the Left, corresponding to the seam of the Skin in the
Perinaeum; c c Its two extremities (cc)
embracing the Corpus Cavernosum Urethrae, which terminate on the sides of the
Cavernous Bodies of the Penis it self. D, Part of the Sphincter Any. EE, The
Musculi Transversales Penis. FF, The Directores or Erectores. GGGG, The Corpora
Cavernosa Penis. HH, The Arteries d d d, Those (ddd)
Branches administering Blood to the Muscles; e e Two large Trunks of (ee)
Them which are subdivided into Two more f g. (fg)
I, I, The Nerves of the Penis.
FIG. XIII.
Shows the Internal parts of the Extremities of the two Cavernous Bodies, and
that of the Glans Penis.

A, The Dorsum Penis, covered with its Capsula. B, The External part of the
Glans. a, Part of the Septum of the Corpora Cavernosa. b b, The Internal
Membrane of the Corpora Cavernosa Penis covered by the Glans. C, The Corpus
Cavernosum Glandis Penis, on the Extremities of the Corpora Cavernosa Penis.
FIG. XIV.
EXhibits the Bulb of the Cavernous Body of the Urethra, being Dried after
Inflation.

A, The external part of the Bulb divested of the Musculus Accelerator Urinae.
B, Part of the Bulb raised after Section to show its internal Cavernous
Constructure. a, The Septum Bulbi. CC, The Musculi Transversales.
FIG. XV.
Shows part of one of the Cavernous Bodies of the Penis, being likewise dried
after Inflation.

A, That part of the Capsula of the Cavernous Body next the Os Pubis, which is
here comprest by the Ligature made to retain the Wind. B, The Musculus Erector
Penis. CC, The Artery as it is distributed within the Cavernous Body of the
Penis on either side.
FIG. XVI.
REpresents the Bulb of a Dogs Penis after Inflation.

A, The external surface of the Bulb; B, A Ligature made on a Vein that Arises
from the superior part of It, into which the Veins of the Prepu^e enter, and
may therefore be called Vena Praeputii. CC, The large Trunk of one of the Veins
of the Penis it self, which in this Animal is double, Arising from each side
the Bulb. D, The internal appearance of the Corpus Cavernosum of the Bulb. EE,
The Cavity of the Vein which communicates with the Cavernulae of the Bulb. FF,
The Corpus Cavernosum Penis.
FIG. XVII.
REpresents the Forepart of the Human SCELETON.

1, The Os Sincipitis or Bregmatis. 2, The Os Frontis. 3, The Os Temporum or
Squammosum. 4, The Two Bones of the Nose, either of which is reckoned the Fifth
Bone of the Upper Jaw. 5, The Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw. 6, The First Bone
of the Upper Jaw. 7, The Septum Narium. 8, The Processus Mastoides or
Mammiformis. 9... The Os Iugale. 10, 11, 12, The Lower Jaw Bone; 10, that part
of it called the Chin; 11, its Posterior Process that is Articulated to the Os
Temporum, called Condyloides; 12, The Anterior Process called Corone. 13, The
Bodies of the Two Inferior Vertebrae of the Neck; f g h, Their Transverse
Processes. 14, The Clavicula. 15, The Spina Scapulae. 16, The Processus
Coracoides Scapulae. 17, The Short Process of the Scapula. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, The Os Humeri, or Shoulder Bone; 18, that Part of it where the Deltoides
Muscle is Inserted; 19, Its Head that is Articulated with the Shoulder Blade;
20, the Asperity where the Musculus subscapularis is Inserted; 21, A Sinus in
the Upper part of the Shoulderbone that receives the External Tendinous Head of
the Musculus Biceps; 22, The Internal Protuberance of the Lower part of the Os
Humeri, whence the Two Flecting Muscles of the Carpus, Pronator Radii Teres,
Palmaris, and Musculus Perforatus of the Fingers do Arise; 23, The External
Protuberance of the last named Bone, whence the Muscles Extending the Carpus
and Fingers do Arise. 24, 25, The Radius, 25, Its Prominence to which the Large
Tendon of the Musculus Biceps is Inserted. 26, The Ulna. 27, The Eight Bones of
the Carpus. 28, The Four Bones of the Metacarpus. 29, The Three Bones of the
Thumb with their Ossicula Sesamoidea. 30, The Bones of the Fingers, Composed of
Twelve Bones, of which, Three belongs to each Finger. 31, The Upper part of the
Os Pectoris or Sternum. 32, The Lower part of the Os Pectoris or Cartilago
Ensiformis, which is some times Bifid, as it appeared in the Subject from
whence This Figure was Drawn. 33, 33, The Vertebrae of the Back or Thorax. 34,
34, The Vertebrae of the Loins. i, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, The Twelve
Ribs. w, x, y, z,, The Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins. 35,
The Os Sacrum. 36, 37, 38, 39, The Os Innominatum, though by some called
Coxendix; 36, 37, That part of it called Ilium; 36, its Internal Concave part,
and 37, its Spine; 38, the Os Pubis or Pectinis; 39, The Os Ischium, where it
is joined to the last named Bone. 40, 40, Shows the Great Sinusses of the Ossa
Ilii, and circumscription of the Pelvis Abdominis. 41, The Foramen of the Os
Ischium and Pubis. 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, The Os Femoris or Thigh Bone: 43,
Its Head which is received into the Acetabulum or Cotyle of the Os Innominatum:
44, Neck of the Thigh Bone: 45, The Great Trocanter: 46, The Lesser Trocanter,
where the Musculus Psoas and Iliacus Internus are Inserted: 47, The lower and
Internal Head of the Thigh Bone, to which the strong Tendon of the Musculus
Triceps is Implanted. 48, The Mola or Patella, by some called Rotula. 49, 50,
51, The Tibia; 50, a Prominence on its upper part, where the Tendons of all the
Extending Muscles of the Leg are Inserted; 51, The Malleolus Internus. 52, 53,
54, The Fibula; 53, 54, Its Superior and Inferior Appendix. 55, The Os
Astragali. 56, The Os Cymbiforme. 57, The Os Cuneiforme majus, seu Internum.
58, The Os Cuneiforme medium. 59, The Os Cuneiforme Externum. 60, The Os
Cubiforme. 61, Part of the Os Calcis in situ. 62, The Five Bones of the
Metatarsus. 63, The Two Bones of the Great Toe. 64, The Twelve Bones of the
Lesser Toes, of which Three compose each Toe. ****, etc. The Appendices of the
Spina Scapulae, Os Humeri, Radius, Ulna, Os Femoris, and Tibia.
FIG. XVIII.
REpresents the Back, and Side of the SCELETON.

1, The Os Sincipitis. 2, The Os Occipitis. 3, The Processus Mammiformis. 4,
The Os Squammosum. 5, Part of the Os Sphenoides. 6, The Os Iugale. 7, The First
Bone of the Upper Jaw. 8, Part of the Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw. 9, 10, The
Lower Jaw Bone; 10, The Internal part of It, where the Musculi Geniohyoidei and
Genioglossi do Arise. 11, Part of the Clavicula. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, The
Scapula or Shoulder Blade; 13, 13, Its Basis: From 13 to 14, Its Costa
Inferior: 14, Its Processus brevis: 15, Part of the Processus Coracoides on the
Left side, in situ; 16, Spina Scapulae. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, The Os Humeri; 17,
That Part of It where the Musculus Brachiaeus Externus begins to Arise; 18, Its
Head; 19, The Asperity of the Humerus, where the Musculi Supraspinatus,
Infraspinatus, and Teres Minor, are Inserted; 20, The External Protuberance;
21, The Internal Protuberance of this Bone. 22, The Radius. 23, 24, The Ulna;
24, Its superior part called the Olecranum or the Elbow. 25, The Eight Bones of
the Carpus. 26, The Four Bones of the Metacarpus. 27, The Three Bones of the
Thumb. 28, The Bones of the Fingers., The First Vertebra of the Neck wanting a
Spinal Process. a, b, c, d, e, f, The Spinal Processes of the other Six
Vertebrae of the Neck, of which the Five superior are Double, between whom are
placed the Musculi interspinales Colli. n, n, n, n, The Transverse Processes of
the Vertebrae of the Neck. h, i, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, The Twelve Ribs.
o o o, etc. The Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Thorax; PPP, etc.
Their Spines. RRR, etc. The Spines of the Five Vertebrae of the Loins. SSS,
etc. The Transverse Processes of the said Vertebrae. u, w, x, y, z, The Bodies
of those Vertebrae. 29, The Back part of the Os Ilium, by some called Dorsum
Ilii. 30, The Spine of the Ilium. 31, The Protuberance of the Os Ischium,
whence the Muscles Bending the Leg do Arise, namely, the Seminervosus,
Semimembranosus, and one of the Heads of the Biceps; and the Quadratus Femoris.
32, An Acute Process of the Os Ischium, between which and the last mentioned
Protuberance 31 the Tendons of the Musculus Marsupialis pass, as on a Pully.
33, Part of the Os Pubis. 34, The Os Sacrum. 0, The Os Coccygis. 35, The large
Sinus of the Os Ilium, wherein the Musculus Pyriformis passes to its
Termination. 36, The Great Foramen of the Os Ischium. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42,
The Os Femoris; 37, The Linea Aspera; 38, Its Head that is received in the
Acetabulum of the Coxendix; 39, The Neck of the Thigh Bone; 40, The Trocanter
major, to which diverse Muscles are Inserted; 41, The Lesser Trocanter; 42, 42,
The Two Inferior Protuberances of the Lower Appendix of this Bone. 43, Part of
the Patella in situ. 44, 45, The Tibiae; 44, that part of the Left, where the
Musculus Sartorius, Gracilis, and Seminervosus, are Inserted. 46, 47, 48, The
Fibula; 47, 48, Its Superior and Inferior Appendix. 49, The Os Calcis. 50, The
Os Astragali. 51, The Os Cuboides. 52, The three Ossa Cuneiformia. 53, The Os
Cuneiforme majus. 54, The Os Cymbiforme. 55, The Ossa Metatarsi. 56, The Bones
of the Toes. ***, etc. The Appendices of the Spina Scapulae, Os Humeri, Radius,
Ulna, Ossa Metacarpi, Os Ilium, Femoris, and Tibia.
Index Musculorum.
A.
ABductor Auris, vid. Retrahens Auriculam. Abductor Indicis. Page 163 Abductor
Minimi Digiti Manus. Page 164 Abductor Minimi Digiti Pedis. Page 222 Abductor
Occuli. Page 53 Abductor Pollicis Manus. Page 167 Abductor Pollicis Pedis. Page
217 Accelerator Urinae. Page 31 Acclivis, vid. Obliquus Ascendens. Adductor
Minimi Digiti Pedis, vid. Transversalis Pedis. Adductor Oculi. Page 52 Adductor
Pollicis Manus. Page 168 Adductor Pollicis Pedis. Page 217 Anconaeus. Page 152
Ani-scalptor, vid. Latissimus Dorsi. Any Sphincter, vid. Sphincter Any. Any
Levator, vid. Levator Any. Annuens, vid. Rectus minor anticus. Antithenar, vid.
Adductor Pollicis Manus. Aperiens Palpebram Rectus. Page 45 Arytaenoideus. Page
85 Attollens Auriculam. Page 64 Attollens Nasi Alam, vid. Elevator, etc.
Attollens Oculi, vid. Elevator Oculi. Attollens Palpebram, vid. Aperiens
Palpebram. Auriculae Elevator, vid. Attollens Auriculam.
B.
Basioglossus. Page 80 Bibitorius, vid. Adductor Oculi. Biceps internus Humeri.
Page 146 Biceps externus Humeri, vid. Gemellus. Biceps Femoris. Page 198
Bicornis, vid. Extensor Carpi Radialis. Biventer, vid. Digastricus. Brachiaeus
Externus. Page 151 Brachiaeus Internus. Page 150 Buccinator. Page 59 Bursalis,
vid. Marsupialis.
C.
Caro Musculosa Quadrata, vid. Palmaris Brevis. Catenae, vid. Tibieus Anticus.
Ceratoglossus. Page 79 Ciliaris, vid. Orbicularis Palpebrarum. Clitoridis
Musculi, vid. Erector Clitoridis. Cnemodactilius, vid. Extensor tertii
Internodii Digitorum. Collateralis Penis, vid. Erigens. Complexus. Page 118
Constrictor Palpebrarum, vid. Orbicularis. Constrictor Labiorum. Page 61
Constrictor Alae Nasi seu Depressor Labii superioris. Page 57 Coracobrachialis.
Page 144 Coracohyoideus. Page 74 Cremaster. Page 30 Cricoarytenoideus Posticus.
Page 84 Cricoarytenoideus Lateralis. Page ibid. Cricothyroideus. Page 83
Crureus. Page 202 Cubiteus Extensor vid. Ulnaris. Cubiteus Flexor vid. Ulnaris.
Cucullaris* Page 109
D.
Declivis, vid. Obliquus Descendens. Deltoides. Page 139 Depressor Labii
superioris seu Constrictor Alae Nasi, vid. Constrictor Alae, etc. Depressor
Labii Inferioris Proprius. Page 62 Depressor Labiorum Communis. Page 61
Depressor Maxillae Inferioris, vid. Digastricus. Depressor Oculi. Page 52
Detrusor Urinae. Page 35 Diaphragma. Page 106 Digastricus. Page 95 Dilatator
Alae Nasi. Page 56 Director Penis, vid. Erector. Distortor Oris, vid.
Zygomaticus. Dorsi Latissimus, vid. Latissimus Dorsi. Dorsi Longissimus. Page
132
E.
Elevator Any, vid. Levator. Elevator Auris, vid. Attollens Auriculam. Elevator
Oculi. Page 51 Elevator Labiorum Communis. Page 61 Elevator Labii inferioris
proprius. Page 63 Elevator Labii superioris proprius. Page 62 Elevator
Scapulae, vid. Levator. Erector Clitoridis. Page 34 Erigens seu Erector Penis.
Page 32 Extensor Carpi Radialis. Page 172 Extensor Carpi Ulnaris. Page 173
Extensor Communis Digitorum Manus Page 160 Extensor Digitorum Pedis Longus.
Page 219 Extensor Digitorum Brevis. Page ibid. Extensor Indicis seu Indicator.
Page 162 Extensor Minimi Digiti Manus. Page 164 Extensor primi Ossis Pollicis
Manus. Page 169 Extensor Pollicis Pedis Longus. Page 214 Extensor secundi Ossis
Pollicis Manus. Page 169 Extensor Pollicis Brevis. Page 215 Extensor tertii
Ossis Pollicis Manus Page 170 Exterus Auris vel Laxator Externus. Page 68
F.
Fascialis, vid. Sartorius. Fascia lata, vid. Membranosus. Fibuleus, vid.
Peroneus Primus. Fidicinales, vid. Lumbricales Manus. Flexor Capitis, vid.
Rectus major Anti^^s. Flexor Carpi Radialis. Page 171 Flexor Carpi Ulnaris.
Page ibid. Flexores primi Internodii Digitorum Manus, vid. Lumbricales Manus.
Flexor Pollicis Longus. Page 216 Flexor Pollicis Brevis. Page 216 Flexor primi
Internodii Digitorum Pedis, vid. Lumbricales Pedis. Flexor secundi Internodii
Digitorum Manus, vid. Perforatus Manus. Flexor primi and secundi Ossis Pollicis
Manus. Page 168 Flexor secundi Internodii Digitorum Pedis, vid. Perforatus
Pedis. Flexor tertii Internodii seu Longissimus Pollicis. Page 166 Flexor
tertii Internodii Digitorum Manus, vid. Perforans Manus. Flexor tertii
Internodii Digitorum Pedis, vid. Perforans Pedis. Frontalis. Page 41
G.
Gasterocnemius Externus. Page 206 Gasterocnemius Internus. Page 209 Gemellus.
Page 150 Genyoglossus. Page 79 Genyohyoideus. Page 77 Glutaeus Major. Page 184
Glutaeus Medius. Page 185 Glutaeus Minimus. Page 186 Gracilis Page 196
Graphoides, vid. Digastricus.
H.
Hyothyroideus. Page 82 Hypsiloglossus, vid. Basioglossus.
I.
Iliacus Externus, vid. Pyriformis. Iliacus Internus. Page 181 Immersus, vid.
Subscapularis. Indicator, vid. Extesor Indicis. Infraspinatus. Page 141
Intercostales Externi. Page 100 Intercostales Interni. Page 100 Internus Auris.
Page 69 Interossei Manus. Page 161 Interossei Pedis. Page 224 Interspinales
Colli. Page 130
L.
Labiorum Sphincter, vid. Constritor L. etc. Latissimus Dorsi. Page 142 Levator
Any. Page 38 Levator Scapulae. Page 111 Lividus, vid. Pectineus. Longissimus
Dorsi, vid. Dorsi Longissimus. Longissimus Oculi, vid. Obliquus superior.
Longus Colli. Page 128 Longus Femoris, vid. Sartorius. Lumbricales Manus. Page
159 Lumbricales Pedis. Page 222
M.
Marsupialis. Page 188 Mastoideus. Page 123 Masseter. Page 94 Membranosus. Page
193 Minimi Digiti Manus Abductor, vid. Abductor Minimi Digiti. Minimi Digiti
Pedis Abductor, vid. Abductor Minimi Digiti. Minimi Digiti Tensor, vid.
Extensor Minimi Digiti. Mylohyoideus. Page 76
N.
Nauticus, vid. Tibies posticus. Nonus Humeri Placentini, vid. Rotundus Minor.
O.
Obliquus Ascendens. Page 23 Obliquus Descendens. Page 18 Obliquus minor seu
inferior Oculi. Page 48 Obliquus superior Oculi cum Trochlea. Page 47 Obliquus
Inferior Capitis. Page 121 Obliquus superior Capitis. Page 120 Obliquus Timpani
Auris. Page 68 Obturator Externus. Page 192 Obturator Internus, vid.
Massupialis. Occipitalis. Page 40 Oesophagaeus, seu Sphinter Gulae. Page 89
Orbicularis Palpebrarum. Page 44 Orbicularis Labiorum, vid. Constrictor, etc.
P.
Palmaris Longus. Page 153 Palmaris Brevis. Page 154 Patientiae, vid. Levator
scapulae. Pectoralis. Page 138 Pectoralis internus, vid. Triangularis.
Pectineus. Page 181 Pedieus, vid. Perforatus Pedis. Perforatus Manus. Page 155
Perforans Manus. Page 157 Perforatus Pedis Page 220 Perforans Pedis Page 221
Peroneus Primus. Page 210 Peroneus Secundus. Page 212 Plantaris. Page 207
Platysma Myoides, vid. Quadratus Genae. Popliteus. Page 199 Pronator Radii
Teres Page 174 Pronator Radii Brevis seu Quadratus. Page 175 Psoas Magnus. Page
180 Psoas Parvus. Page 179 Pterygoideus Externus. Page 97 Pterygoideus
Internus. Page 96 Pterygopalatinus. Page 91 Pterygopharyngeus. Page 88
Pyramidalis. Page 24 Pyriformis. Page 187
Q.
Quadratus Femoris. Page 189 Quadratus Genae. Page 58 Quadratus Lumborum. Page
134
R.
Radialis Extensor, vid. Extensor Carpi. Radialis Flexor, vid. Flexor Carpi.
Rectus Abdominis. Page 26 Rectus Femoris. Page 200 Rectus Capitis Lateralis.
Page 127 Rectus Capitis major Anticus. Page 125 Rectus Capitis minor Anticus.
Page 126 Rectus Capitis Major Posticus. Page 119 Rectus Capitis Minor Posticus.
Page 120 Rectus Palpebrae, vid. Aperiens, etc. Renuans, vid. Rectus Capitis
minor Anticus. Retractor Alae Nasi, seu Elevator Labii superioris. Page 56
Retrahens Auriculam. Page 46 Rhomboides. Page 111 Rotundus Major, vid. Teres
Major. Rotundus Minor, vid. Teres Minor.
S.
Sacer. Page 135 Sacrolumbalis. Page 115 Sartorius. Page 195 Scalenus Primus.
Page 101 Scalenus Secundus. Page 102 Scalenus Tertius. Page ibid. Semifibuleus,
vid. Peroneus secundus. Semimembranosus. Page 197 Seminervosus. Page 196
Semispinatus. Page 135 Serratus Major anticus. Page 105 Serratus Minor anticus.
Page 104 Serratus Superior posticus. Page 113 Serratus Inferior posticus. Page
114 Soleus, vid. Gasterocnemius internus. Sphenopalatinus. Page 91
Sphenopterygopalatinus. Page ibid. Sphincter Any. Page 38 Sphincter Gulae, vid.
Oesophagaeus. Sphincter Labiorum, vid. Constrictor. Sphincter Vaginae Uteria.
Page 34 Sphincter Vesicae. Page 36 Spinalis Colli. Page 128 Splenius. Page 117
Stapedis Musculus. Page 71 Sternohyoideus. Page 73 Sternothyroideus. Page 82
Stylohyoideus. Page 75 Styloglossus. Page 80 Stylopharyngeus. Page 87
Subclavius. Page 103 Subpopliteus, vid. Popliteus. Subscapularis. Page 144
Succenturiatus, vid. Pyramidalis. Supraspinatus, seu superscapularis. Page 140
Supinator Radii Longus. Page 175 Supinator Radii Brevis. Page 176 Supopliteus,
vid. subpopliteus. Suspensor Testiculi, vid. Cremaster.
T.
Temporalis. Page 93 Tensor seu Extensor Digitorum Manus. Tensor Pollicis, vid.
Extensor. Teres Major. Page 142 Teres Minor. Page 141 Thenar, vid. Abductor
Pollicis Manus. Thyroarytaenoideus. Page 85 Tibialis Anticus. Page 209 Tibialis
Posticus. Page 213 Transversalis Abdominis. Page 27 Transversalis Colli. Page
129 Transversalis Dorsi, vid. semispinatus. Transversalis Lumborum, vid. Sacer.
Transversalis Femoris, vid. Quadratus. Transversalis Pedis Placentini. Page 223
Transversalis Penis. Page 33 Trapezius, vid. Cucullaris. Triangularis. Page 101
Triceps. Page 190 Trochlearis, vid. Obliquus superior Oculi.
V.
Vaginalis Gulae. Page 89 Vaginae Uteri sphincter, vid. sphincter, etc. Vastus
Externus. Page 200 Vastus Internus. Page 201 Ulnaris Extensor, vid. Extensor
Carpi, etc. Ulnaris Flexor, vid. Flexor Carpi, etc.
Z.
Zygomaticus. Page 60
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 19 in the Margin r. Anatomicum, p. 25. l. 12 r. hinder, p. 29 l. 1 r.
Ureters, l. 19 r. Divaricated, p. 33 l. 19 r. Bulb, p. 38 l. 6 r. oblong, p. 41
l. 11 r. Sutura, p. 54 l. 18 r. Mundinus, p. 56 l. 1 r. Dilatatores, p. 57 for
Defferences r. particular accounts of Them, p. 58 l. 10 r. Platysma Myoides, l.
19. r. Cucullaris, p. 60 l. 12 r. Zygomaticus, p. 65 l. 20 r. Tympanum, l. ult.
r. Placentinus, p. 68 l. 21 r. Manubrium, p. 73 l. 8 r. Vesalius, p. 82 l. 6 r.
Thyroideae, p. 83 l. 22 r. Annulaeris, p. 89 r. Oesophagaeus, p. 90 l. 21 r.
Deference, p. 99 l. 8 r. Asthmatic, p. 104 l. 6 r. depends, p. 116 l. 1 for so
r. so many, p. 123 for it r. a, p. 124 l. 11 r. Insertions, p. 128 l. 18 r.
Brevior, p. 136 l. 15 r. Latissimus, l. 21 r. off, p. 142 r. Aniscalptor, p.
144 l. 21 r. for he r. the, p. 168 l. 18 r. Vola, p. 170 l. 12 for from
Ligament r. from the Ligaments, p. 180 l. 23 r. Lumbalis, p. 182 l. 13 r. Does,
p. 186 for is the r. is than the, p. 202 l. 11 r. becoming, l. 16 r. pass, p.
216 l. 4 r. Pollicis, p. 221 l. 17 r. its, p. 224 l. 10 r. Aricularis, p. 230
in the Margin r. First of the Fraenum.


