THE HISTORY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT METHODIZ'D, ACCORDING To the Order and Series
of Time wherein the several things therein mentioned were transacted.

IN WHICH The difficult passages are Paraphrased. The seeming Contradictions
reconciled. The Rites and Customs of the Jews opened and explained.


To which is annexed a SHORT HISTORY OF THE Jewish Affairs FROM THE End of the
Old Testament to the Birth of our Savior; And a Map also added of Canaan, and
the Adjacent Countries, very useful for the understanding of the whole History.

By SAMVEL CRADOCK, B. D.

Psalm. 77. v. 5. I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.

Sint Castae deliciae meae, Scripturae tuae: Nec fallar in eis, nec fallam ex
eis. August. Confess. Lib. 11. Cap. 2.

Manifestis pascimur, obscuris exercemur. Idem. Tract. 45. in Joh.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Princes-Armes in Ludgate Street,
M.DC.LXXXIII.

THE PREFACE.
HAving formerly written the History of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and
of his holy Apostles, and a Paraphrase upon all the Apostolical Epistles, I
thought it would be a work not only profitable to my self but useful also to
others, if I should write the History of the Old Testament. Accordingly (humbly
imploring the Assistance of God) I set upon it, and my design therein was as
follows: 1st, To Methodize that Sacred History according to the order and
series of time wherein the several things therein mentioned were transacted.
2ly, To Paraphrase and explain the difficult places and passages thereof. 3ly,
To reconcile the seeming contradictions, which are not a few. 4ly, To open the
Jewish rites and customs which are very necessary to be known in order to a
clear and full understanding thereof. Lastly, to add a Map of Canaan, and those
other adjacent Countries, which were the stage on which the great things
mentioned in the Old Testament were acted.

Pursuant hereunto I have digested the whole work into seven Chapters,
containing an History of the Seven Ages of the World from the Creation to the
death of our Savior.

The first Chapter contains the History of the first Age of the World from the
Creation to the Flood, comprehending a space of 1656 years.

The Second Chapter contains the History of the Second Age of the World, from
the Flood to the Promise made to Abraham in Vr of the Chaldees, comprehending a
space of 422 years, and ending in the 2078 year of the World.

The Third Chapter contains the History of the Third Age of the World, from the
Promise made to Abraham in Vr of the Chaldees, unto the Israelites departure
out of Egypt, comprehending a space of 430 years, and ending in the 2508 year
of the World.

Within the compass of this Age falls the History of Job, whereof I have given
a brief Analysis.

The Fourth Chapter contains the History of the Fourth Age of the world, from
the coming of the Israelites out of Egypt, to the laying the foundation of
Solomon's Temple, in the fourth year of his reign, comprehending a space of 480
years, and ending the 2988 year of the World.

The Fifth Chapter contains the History of the Fifth Age of the World, from the
laying the foundation of Solomon's Temple to the destruction of it, and
Captivity of Judah, in the 11th. year of Zedekiah, containing a space of 420
years Some make this space 424 years, vide usserii Annals.
, and ending in the 3408 year of the World.

The Sixth Chapter contains the History of the Sixth Age of the World, from the
destruction of Solomon's Temple, and the Captivity of Judah, unto the liberty
granted them by Cyrus for their return, containing a space of seventy years,
and ending in the 3478 year of the World.

The Seventh Chapter contains the History of the Seventh Age of the World from
the return of the Jews out of Babylon, and the end of the seventy years
Captivity to the death of Christ, containing a space of 490 years (signified by
Daniels seventy Weeks, Dan. 9. v. 24, 25, 26, 27.) and ending in the 3968 year
of the World. Now though this Age, as to the first part of it, belongs to the
Old Testament, yet it extends much further, even to the death of Christ, which
takes up about 33 years of the New Testament-story; for the History of the Old
Testament reaches no further than the end of the Book of Nehemiah, which ends
in the 32th. year of Artaxerxes Longimanus; so that the History of the Old
Testament extends but 99 years in the compass of this Age, and ends 358 years
before the Birth of Christ, who being Crucified in the 33th. year of his age,
those three sums, viz. 99, 358, and 33, make up the 490 years of this interval.
Now because some may be desirous to know what was the state and condition of
the Jews after the end of the Old Testament during those 358 years to the Birth
of Christ, I have thought fit to set down, 1. What Persian Kings succeeded
Artaxerxes Longimanus till that Kingdom was Conquered by Alexander the Great,
in whom the Grecian or Third Monarchy began. (2) To show how after Alexander's
death, his Empire was divided into four Kingdoms, viz. 1. that of Macedonia; 2.
of Syria; 3. of Asia the less; 4. of Egypt; and to give a Catalogue of the
several Kings that reigned successively in those Kingdoms till they were all
Conquered by the Romans, in whom the Fourth Monarchy began. (3) To show who
were High Priests among the Jews after their return from the Babylonish
Captivity, wherein we have occasion to give a short History of the Maccabees
till their power was swallowed up by Herod, made King by the Romans, in the
35th. year of whose reign Christ the Savior of the World was born.

As we go along in the History of the Kings, we meet with several eminent
Prophets, whom God raised up both in Judah and Israel, after the division of
the Kingdom, and by considering the temper and condition of those times, and
the several vices and disorders that then reigned and prevailed, we may the
better discern the scope and drift of their Prophesies. And for the clearer
understanding of them I have set down the time wherein they lived and
prophesied, and have given a brief Analysis of their Prophesies. They seem to
have Prophesied in this order.

1. Jonah, in the days of Jeroboam the Second, who was Contemporary with
Amaziah King of Judah, 2 King. 14.25. 2. Isaiah, who Prophesied in the days of
Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, Kings of Judah. 3. Joel, in the days of Vzziah.
4. Hosea, in the days of Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah,
and seven Kings of Israel, viz. from Jeroboam the Second to Hoshea, who was
Contemporary with Hezekiah. He was sent chiefly to Israel. 5. Micah, in the
days of Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, Kings of Judah. 6. Amos lived in the same time
with Hosea, and was sent principally to the people of Israel. 7. Nahum seems to
have Prophesied in the days of Hezekiah. 8. Habakkuk in the days of Manasses
and Josiah, for he forewarns the Jews of their approaching destruction by the
Chaldeans. 9. Zephany, in the days of Josiah. 10. Jeremy began to Prophecy in
the 13th. year of Josiah, and continued Prophesying till the final captivity of
Judah, and two years after in Egypt. The Lamentations seem to be written by him
upon Judahs Captivity. 11. Ezekiel began to Prophecy in Babylon in the fifth
year of Jehoiakin's captivity, and continued Prophesying about two and twenty
years. 12. Obadiah seems to have been Contemporary with Jeremy and Ezekiel, for
he Prophesies against the Idumeans in almost the same words and phrases that
they did. Compare his Prophecy with Jer. 49. and Ezekiel. 25. 13. Daniel, in the
first year of Belshazzar, had the Vision of the four Beasts; and in his third
year the Vision of the Ram and He-goat. And in the first year of Darius the
Angel Gabriel informed him concerning the Seventy Weeks.
These three last Prophesied after the return from Captivity, viz. Haggai,
Zachary, Malachi.

Thus having given a short account of this my undertaking, and humbly desiring
that God may have glory, and my Reader much benefit and advantage thereby, I
shall conclude this Preface with that short, but fervent prayer, which that
excellent person Nehemiah put up for himself when he concluded his Book, and
therewith the History of the Old Testament,

Remember me (O my God) for Good.
May 5. 1683.
THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chap. I. From the Creation to the Flood.
Sect. 1. OF the Creation of the World in six days, and Gods resting on the
seventh, and instituting the Sabbath. Sect. 2. Gods Covenant with man in the
state of Innocence. Man's fall. The Covenant of Grace. Sect. 3. Adam and Eve
cast out of the Garden of Eden. Sect. 4. Cain and Abel sacrifice. Cain kills
Abel. Cains posterity. Lamech brings in Polygamy. Sect. 5. Seth born to Adam.
His race carried on to the Flood. Sect. 6. Noah born. Enoch's Translation.
Sect. 7. Giants on the Earth. The wickedness of the old World. God determines
to send the Flood. Noah's Character. Sect. 8. Noah's three Sons born, Japhet,
Sem and Ham. Noah is commanded to build an Ark. Sect. 9. Noah with his Family
enter the Ark. The Flood comes. Sect. 10. The Ark rests on Ararat.
Chap. II. From the Flood to the Promise made to Abram in Ur of the Chaldees.
Sect. 1. NOah, his Family, and all living Creatures leave the Ark. Sect. 2.
Noah builds an Altar. The Rainbow a pledge of Gods Covenant. Sect. 3. Noah
plants a Vineyard. His drunkenness. Cham cursed. Sect. 4. The Tower of Babel.
Confusion of Languages. Assyrian Monarchy begun. A Catalogue of the Kings
thereof. Sect. 5. The Earth divided among the Sons and Grandchildren of Noah.
The Original of Nations. Sect. 6. Man's life shortened. Sem's posterity. Sect.
7. Abram and Sarai born. Sect. 8. Chedorlaomer subdues the Kings of Pentapolis.
Sect. 9. Abram called out of Vr of the Chaldees, and the great promise that the
Messiah should spring from his loins made to him.
Chap. III. From the promise made to Abram to the departure of the Israelites
out of Egypt.
Sect. 1. ABram's removal from Vr to Charran, from thence to Canaan. Two Altars
there built by him. A promise of that land made to his posterity. Sect. 2.
Abram goes into Egypt. His danger there upon the account of Sarai (whom he
calls his sister) from Pharaoh King of Egypt. Sect. 3. Abram, Sarai and Lot
return into the Southern parts of Canaan. Abram and Lot part. A new promise of
that land made to Abrams posterity. Sect. 4. The King of Sodom with the petty
Kings of Pentapolis shake off the yoke of Chedorlaomer; he comes with an Army
to chastise them, vanquishes the forces of the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah,
plunders those Cities, and among other Prisoners carries away Lot who dwelt
there. Abram pursues Chedorlaomer, defeats him, rescues Lot, and the rest of
the Prisoners. At his return he is met by Melchizedek and blessed by him. Sect.
5. A Son promised to Abram, he believes and is justified. God makes a Covenant
with him to give the land of Canaan to his posterity: Confirms it by a sign and
a vision. Sect. 6. Abram takes Hagar. Ishmael born. Sect. 7. God appears again
to Abram, renews his Covenant with him, changes his name into Abraham.
Institutes Circumcision. Sect. 8. Abraham entertains three Angels. Sarai's
laughter. Abraham intercedes for Sodom. Sect. 9. Two Angels conveigh Lot out of
Sodom. His wife turned into a Pillar of salt. Sodom destroyed. Lot's Incest,
from whence issued Moab and Ammon. Sect. 10. Abraham sojourns in Gerar, is in
danger there again upon the account of his wife, from Abimelech King of the
place. He being punished by God restores Sarah to her husband. Abraham prays
for him, whereupon he and his family are cured. Abimelech dismisses him with
presents. Sect. 11. Isaac born. Hagar and Ishmael cast out. Abraham makes a
Covenant with Abimelech. Sect. 12. Abraham commanded to offer up Isaac. The
place called Jehovah-jireh. The promise renewed to him. Sect. 13. Sarah dies.
Abraham buys a burying place for her. Sect. 14. Eliezer sent into Mesopotamia
to provide a wife for Isaac. His presents to Rebeckah. Isaac's marriage. Sect.
15. Abraham marries Keturah, by whom he has six Sons. Sect. 16. Esau and Jacob
born. Sect. 17. Abraham dies. Sect. 18. Heber dies. Sect. 19. Esau sells his
Birthright. Sect. 20. A famine in the land. Isaac goes to Gerar. His danger
there on the account of Rebeckah (whom he also called his sister). He and
Abimelech make a Covenant. Sect. 21. Esau's displeasing marriages. Sect. 22.
Ishmael's death. Sect. 23. Isaac's dimness. Jacob gets the blessing. Esau's
hating of him. Jacob's vision and vow. Sect. 24. Esau marries Mahalatha the
daughter of Ishmael. Sect. 25. Jacob meets Rachel. Leah given him for a wife
instead of Rachel. Leah's four Sons. Sect. 26. Rachels barrenness. Jacob takes
Bilhah, and Zilpah. Joseph born. Sect. 27. Jacob's fourteen years service and
great increase. Sect. 28. Jacob leaves Laban. Rachels Teraphim. The Covenant
between Jacob and Laban at Galeed. Sect. 29. Jacob's vision of Angels. His
prayer and wrestling. Sect. 30. He meets Esau. They embrace each other. Jacob
builds an Altar at Sychar. Sect. 31. Dinah ravished. Simeon and Levi's revenge.
Sect. 32. Jacob goes to Bethel. Deborah, Rebeckahs nurse dies. Rachel dies.
Reuben defiles his Fathers bed. Sect. 33. Joseph's dream. His Brethren sell
him. Jacob's mourning. Sect. 34. Isaac's death. Sect. 35. Judah's incest with
Thamar. Pharez and Zarah born. Sect. 36. Joseph sold to Potiphar. His
Mistress's false accusation. His Imprisonment. Sect. 37. The chief Butler and
Baker imprisoned. Joseph interprets their dreams. Sect. 38. Pharaoh's dreams.
Joseph's advancement and marriage. The famine begins. Sect. 39. Jacob sends his
Sons into Egypt. Simeon bound. Sect. 40. Jacob sends his Sons into Egypt again.
Simeon released. Benjamin's Mess. Sect. 41. The Cup in Benjamin's Sack. Judah's
intercession for him. Sect. 42. Joseph discovers himself. Jacob rejoices at the
sight of the Wagons. Sect. 43. Jacob goes into Egypt. His joy to see his Son
Joseph. Sect. 44. Joseph brings five of his Brethren to Pharaoh. Obtains Goshen
for his Brethren. Introduces his Father. Sect. 45. Joseph's prudent
administration in the severe famine. He is sent for by his Father. Sect. 46.
Ephraim and Manasseh blessed. Jacob's gift to Joseph. Sect. 47. Jacob blesses his
Sons in order. His death. Sect. 48. The mourning for and burial of Jacob.
Joseph's death. Sect. 49. The History of Job. Sect. 50. Levi and Amram die.
Sect. 51. Israel increases. Taskmasters appointed. Sect. 52. Aaron's birth.
Sect. 53. The Midwives commanded to destroy the Male-children. Sect. 54. Moses
born. He is taken up and educated by Pharaoh's daughter. Sect. 55. Moses after
forty years leaves the Court, and flys into Midian. Sect. 56. Moses's marriage.
His two Sons. Sect. 57. Caleb's Birth. Sect. 58. The Lord appears to Moses,
commissions him to deliver Israel, enables him to work miracles. Sect. 59.
Moses confirmed and encouraged, commanded to go to Pharaoh. Sect. 60. Moses
stopped in his journey. His Son circumcised. Sect. 61. Aaron meets Moses. They
declare their commission to the Elders of Israel. Sect. 62. They go to Pharaoh.
The oppression of the Israelites increased. Sect. 63. Moses and Aaron go again
to Pharaoh. The Magicians called in. Sect. 64. The ten Plagues.
Chap. IV. From the Israelites departure out of Egypt to the laying the
foundation of Solomon's Temple.
Sect. 1. THe Israelites depart out of Egypt. Sect. 2. The Paschal Lamb and
Passover appointed. Sect. 3. The Lord conducts the Israelites by a Pillar of
cloud and fire. Joseph's bones carried with them. Sect. 4. They encamp at
Pihahiroth. Pass through the Red Sea. The Egyptians drowned. Sect. 5. Moses's
Song. Miriam a Prophetess. Sect. 6. The people marching through Shur, murmur
for want of water. Sect. 7. The twelve Wells and seventy Palm Trees. Sect. 8.
They turn from Elim to the Red Sea. Sect. 9. The people murmur. Quails given
for one meal. Manna falls. Sect. 10. Water gushes out of the rock. Sect. 11.
Moses praying, Joshua fights Amalek. The Altar called Jehova-Nissi. Sect. 12.
Jethro's story deferred to Sect. 51. Sect. 13. Moses called up to the top of
Mount Sinai. The terrible sight. Sect. 14. The Promulgation of the Law. Sect.
15. The people in fear. Moses encourages them. Sect. 16. Similitudes of God
forbidden. The Materials for Altars. Sect. 17. The Judicial or Political Laws.
Sect. 18. The Angel of the Covenant promised to guide them. The bounds of
Canaan. Sect. 19. Moses erects an Altar and twelve Pillars. Sect. 20. Moses
continues in the Mount forty days, and forty nights. Sect. 21. Directions
concerning the Tabernacle and all its utensils and appurtenances. Sect. 22. The
Golden Calf. Sect. 23. Moses comes down, breaks the Tables. Gods anger. Moses
intercedes for the people, and sees the glory of God. Sect. 24. Two new Tables
of stone. Sect. 25. God renews the Covenant upon Moses's prayer. Moses's face
shines. Sect. 26. The Sabbath anew enjoined. Contribution to the Tabernacle.
Sect. 27. Bezaleel and Aholihab appointed chief workmen of the Tabernacle.
Sect. 28. The Tabernacle finished, being set up, is filled with Gods Glory.
Sect. 29. Laws given concerning the several sorts of sacrifices. Sect. 30.
Aaron and his Sons consecrated. Sect. 31. Aaron enters upon his office. Fire
from the Lord. Sect. 32. Nadab and Abihu slain by fire from heaven. Sect. 33.
Of clean and unclean creatures. Sect. 34. Women's separation. Sect. 35. Laws
concerning Leprosy. Sect. 36. Ceremonial uncleanness in men. Sect. 37. The
Passover celebrated. Sect. 38. Several sorts of Laws given. Sect. 39. Blasphemy
punished in the Son of Shelomith. The Law of retaliation. Sect. 40. Diverse
other Laws given. Sect. 41. Promises and threatenings. More Laws given
concerning diverse matters. Sect. 42. The Book of Numbers. Sect. 43. The
Encamping of the Tribes. Sect. 44. The Levites Charge. Sect. 45. The Levites
consecrated. Sect. 46. The Offerings of the Princes. Sect. 47. Laws concerning
Jealousy. Sect. 48. Concerning Nazarites. Sect. 49. The solemn blessing. Sect.
50. The Silver Trumpets. Sect. 51. Jethro's story and advice. Sect. 52. The
Camp of Israel marches. Jethro leaves them. Sect. 53. Upon the moving of the
Ark Moses pronounces the blessing. Sect. 54. The people murmur at Taberah.
Sect. 55. Quails given for the space of a month. A Plague follows. Sect. 56.
Miriams Leprosy. Sect. 57. Spies search the land. Sect. 58. Their different
report. Sect. 59. The ten Spies smitten. Sect. 60. Israel defeated by the
Amalekites and Canaanites. Sect. 61. The ninetieth Psalm composed. Sect. 62.
Some Laws explained. Sect. 63. The Rebellion of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.
Sect. 64. Aaron's Red blossoming. Sect. 65. The work and portion of the Priests
and Levites. Sect. 66. Water of Purification. Sect. 67. Miriams death. Sect.
68. They murmur at Kadesh for want of water. Moses strikes the Rock in anger,
is doomed not to enter into Canaan. Sect. 69. The King of Edom refuses them
passage. Sect. 70. Aaron dies and is buried upon Mount Hor. Sect. 71. Arad the
Canaanite vanquished. Sect. 72. The Brazen Serpent. Sect. 73. Several stations
of the Israelites. Sect. 74. The Miraculous Well. Sect. 75. Sihon slain. Sect.
76. Og totally subdued. Sect. 77. The Encamping at Abel-shittim. Sect. 78.
Balaam sent for to curse the Israelites. His Ass speaks. Sect. 79. Balaam
attempts to curse Israel. Sect. 80. The Idolatry and Whoredom of the Israelites
at Mount Peor. Sect. 81. Midian Conquered. Sect. 82. Moses and Eleazar number
the people. Sect. 83. Zelophehad's daughters. Sect. 84. Joshua appointed
Successor. Sect. 85. A repetition of the Law of sacrificing. Sect. 86. Laws
concerning Vows. Sect. 87. The Reubenites and Gadites desire a possession on
that side Jordan. Sect. 88. The Journal of Isreal's Travels. Sect. 89. The
Limits of Canaan. Sect. 90. The Levites Cities. Sect. 91. Orders concerning the
Marriage of Zelophehad's daughters. Sect. 92. The Book of Deuteronomy,
containing Moses's dying speech to Israel. Sect. 93. Moses's death. Isreal's
mourning for him. Sect. 94. Joshua begins his Government. Sect. 95. They come
near unto and pass the river Jordan. Sect. 96. Circumcision enjoined them.
Sect. 97. The first Passover in Canaan. Manna ceases. Sect. 98. Jericho taken,
burnt, and cursed. Sect. 99. The Israelites defeated at Ai. Sect. 100. Joshua
marches against Ai. Sect. 101. A Monument of stone, and an Altar erected, and
Blessings and Cursings pronounced at Mount Gerizim, and Mount Ebal. Sect. 102.
The League with the Gibeonites. Sect. 103. Adonizedek and his allies besiege
Gibeon. Their discomfiture. Prodigious Hailstones. The Sun and Moon stand still
at the prayer of Joshua. Sect. 104. Several Kings vanquished, and their Cities
taken. Sect. 105. The rise of the Sabbatical year. Sect. 106. Joshua's war with
the Northern Kings. His victory over them: Sect. 107. Joshua's rest from war.
Sect. 108. Joshua divides the land. Sect. 109. Joshua and the Elders proceed to
divide the land; Ephraim and Manasseh complain. Sect. 110. Caleb's request to
Joshua. Hebron given to him. Othniel's marriage. Sect. 111. Seven Tribes desire
a stop may be put to the division of the land. Sect. 112. The first Sabbatical
year. Sect. 113. A solemn Feast of Tabernacles kept. Sect. 114. The Camp and
Tabernacle remove to Shiloh. Sect. 115. The seven Tribes reproved. Their lots.
Sect. 116. Joshua's Inheritance. Sect. 117. Cities set apart for the Levites.
Sect. 118. Israel's possession of Canaan. Sect. 119. The Reubenites and Gadites
commended and blessed. Their Altar Ed. Sect. 120. The Elders of Israel called
together by Joshua. His speech to them. Sect. 121. The Tabernacle removed to
Sechem. Joshua's Exhortation to the Israelites. Joseph's bones solemnly
interred. Joshua's and Eleazar's death. Sect. 122. The Book of Judges. Sect.
123. Bezek taken: Adonibezek's usage. Sect. 124. The settlement of the Kenites.
Sect. 125. Hormah and other Cities taken. Sect. 126. Bethel taken. Luz built.
The Canaanites remain. Sect. 127. An Angel appears to them in an humane shape
and reproves them. The people weep. Sect. 128. Micah's Idolatry. His Priest.
Sect. 129. The Danites carry away Micah's Idol. Laish taken. Sect. 130. The
wickedness of Gibeah: The Levites Concubine. Sect. 131. A Convention at Mizpeh.
The War against Benjamin. Sect. 132. Six hundred Benjamites in Rimmon. The
Virgins surprised at Shiloh. Sect. 133. Israel for their sins given up into the
hands of Cushan King of Mesopotamia. Othniel delivers them. His conquest of
Cushan, and death. Sect. 134. Ehud kills Eglon. Shamgar delivers the people
from the Philistines. Sect. 135. The History of Ruth. Sect. 136. Jabin
oppresses Israel. Deborah and Barak. Sisera slain. Sect. 137. Deborahs Song.
Sect. 138. The Midianites oppress Israel. Gideon's vision. He throws down Baals
Altar. The Fleece dry and wet. Sect. 139. Gigeon's army diminished. The dream
of the Barley Cake. He destroys the Midianites; slays their Kings. Ephramites
expostulate with him. Sect. 140. The people offer Gideon to make him King. His
Ephod, and death. Sect. 141. Baal-berith. Abimelech's Tyranny. His death at
Thebez. Sect. 142. Tola's Government and death. Sect. 143. Jair the Gileadite.
Sect. 144. Ammon invades Israel. Jeptha's victory and vow. Sect. 145. Jeptha
subdues the Ephraimites. His death. Sect. 146. Ibzan judges Israel. Manoah's
vision. Samson born. Sect. 147. Elon and Abdon. Sect. 148. Samson marries a
Philistine. Honey in the Lions Carcass. Samson's Riddle. He burns the
Philistines Corn. Slays many of them. Sect. 149. Breaks the bonds with which he
was bound. En Hakkore. Sect. 150. Samson taken with Dalilah. His locks cut, and
eyes put out. He pulls down Dagons house, and dies. Sect. 151. Eli judges
Israel. Hannahs prayer. Samuel born. Sect. 152. Hannahs Song. Samuel left with
Eli. Sect. 153. The wickedness of Eli's Sons. A Prophet comes to Eli. Sect.
154. Samuel called. He denounces judgment against Eli. Sect. 155. The
Philistines invade Israel. The Ark of God taken. Hophni and Phinehas slain.
Eli's death. Sect. 156. The Ark carried in triumph. Dagon broke. The
Philistines plagued. The Beshemites smitten. Sect. 157. The Ark at
Kirjath-jearim. The meeting at Mizpeh. The Philistines overcome. Sect. 158.
Samuel made Judge. His Circuit. He builds an Altar. Sect. 159. Samuel's Sons
very wicked. The people desire a King. Sect. 160. Kish sends his Son Saul to
seek his Asses. Samuel meets him. Saul Prophesies. Sect. 161. Saul taken by
lot. The manner of the Kingdom. Sect. 162. Nahash besieges Jabesh-Gilead. He
requires to put out their right eyes. The place relieved by Saul, and the
Kingdom renewed. Sect. 163. Samuel shows the people their sin in asking a King.
Extraordinary Thunder. Sect. 164. Saul raises forces to go against the
Philistines. He sacrifices. Samuel declares his rejection of God. Sect. 165.
The passage at Michmash. Saul and his Armor-bearer take a fort of the
Philistines. The confusion of the Philistines Army thereupon. Jonathan eats
honey. Readiness Sons. Sect. 166. Saul sent to destroy Amalek. He spares Agag and
the best Cattle. Agag slain by Samuel. Sect. 167. Samuel sent to Jesse the
Bethlemite. Jesse's Sons pass before him. David taken and anointed. Sect. 168.
Readiness Frenzy. David plays on his Harp to him. Sect. 169. David leaves the
Court. The Philistines invading Israel, bring a Giant with them. David visits
his Brethren. He slays Goliath. Jonathan entirely loves him, and makes a
Covenant of friendship with him. David is highly applauded. Sect. 170. Readiness
hatred of and designs against him. David escapes to Ramah. Sect. 171. David
flies to Jonathan, who intercedes with his father for him. Jonathan and David
renew their Covenant. Sect. 172. David flies to Nob. He eats of the shewbread
given him by Ahimelech. And takes Goliah's Sword. His several removals. Doegs
malice. Eighty five Priests slain by him. David's Enterview with Saul. Samuel's
death. Nabal's churlishness. Michal being given to Phalti, David marries
Abigal. He flies to Hachilah, thence to Achish. Achish going against Israel
dismisseth him. Saul and the Witch of Endor. David defeats the Amalekites. Saul
and his sons slain. Sect. 173. Mephibosheth's fall. Sect. 174. David has news
of Readiness death. He mourns. The Amalekite slain. Sect. 175. David's Funeral
Elegy for Saul and Jonathan. Sect. 176. David goes to Hebron. Is there
anointed. Sect. 177. Abner makes Ishbosheth King. Sect. 178. David marries the
King of Geshur's daughter. Sect. 179. War between David and Ishbosheth. Abner's
Challenge to Joab, that twelve of a side might fight. Asahel slain. Sect. 180.
The War continues. David's six Sons. Sect. 181. Abner strongly upholds
Ishbosheth's side, and Joab David's. Michal returned to David. Abner
treacherously slain by Joab. Sect. 182. Baanah and Rechab murder Ishbosheth.
Sect. 183. David made King of Israel. A list of the Tribes. Sect. 184. David
takes Zion. Hiram's Embassy to him. Sect. 185. The Philistines encamp at
Rephaim. Their defeat. Sect. 186. The Ark removed. Vzzah slain. Obed-Edom
blessed. David removes the Ark to Zion, and dances before it. Michal scoffs.
Sect. 187. Levites appointed to attend the Ark. A Psalm appointed by David to
be sung. Sect. 188. David designs to build a Temple. Nathan's message from the
Lord to him about it. Sect. 189. David's several wars with the bordering
enemies. His great Officers. Sect. 190. David's kindness to Mephibosheth. His
orders to Ziba. Sect. 191. David's Embassy to Nahash King of Ammon. The base
usage of his Ambassadors. The Ammonites and Syrians vanquished. Sect. 192.
Rabbah besieged. David's Adultery. Vriah slain. Sect. 193. Rabbah taken. David
assumes the Crown. His severe usage of the conquered. Sect. 194. David's
repentance. His Child dies. Solomon born. Sect. 195. Ammon ravisheth Tamar.
Absalom murders him. Sect. 196. The woman of Tekoa. Absalom's return. Sect.
197. Absalom's Conspiracy. Sect. 198. David flies. Several Remarkables during
his absence from Jerusalem. Sect. 199. A famine. Readiness sons are hanged. Sect.
200. War with the Philistines. Four Giants. Sect. 201. David's Triumphant Song.
Sect. 202. David's Prophecy. Sect. 203. David's Worthies. Sect. 204. David's
Militia. Sect. 205. The people numbered. Of three judgments propounded David
chooses the Plague. Araunah's floor. Sect. 206. David receives the pattern of
the Temple, makes great preparations for the building of it. Sect. 207.
Officers appointed for the Temple. Sect. 208. Rehoboam born to Solomon. Sect.
209. Abishag brought to David. Sect. 210. Adonijah aspires to the Crown.
Solomon anointed. Adonijah's submission. Sect. 211. David's charge to Solomon.
Sect. 212. David's farewell Exhortation to the people. His Prayer. Solomon's
prosperity. Sect. 213. David's last words to Solomon. His death. Sect. 214. The
Book of the Psalms. Sect. 215. Solomon upon the Throne. Adonijah slain. Joab
slain. Shimei's Oath not to pass over Kidron. Sect. 216. Hadad the Edomite
returns. Sect. 217. Solomon's marriage with Pharaoh's daughter. Sect. 218.
Solomon settled in the Kingdom. Gods appearing to him in a dream, and asking him
what he should give him, and Solomon's choosing wisdom. Sect. 219. Solomon's
judgment on the two Harlots. Sect. 220. Hiram's Embassy to Solomon. A League
between them. Sect. 221. Solomon's levy for the Temple. Sect. 222. Shimei put
to death.
Chap. V. The fifth Age from the building of the Temple to the destruction of
it, and Captivity of Judah.
Sect. 1. THE Temple described with all its parts. The Temple-Officers. Sect.
2. The Temple finished. Solomon's solemn dedication of it. Sect. 3. The Lord
appears to Solomon again in a dream. Sect. 4. Solomon's Palace. His stately
Throne. The house of Lebanon. His Golden Targets and Shields. Sect. 5. Gezer
taken by Pharaoh and given to his daughter, Solomon's wife. Sect. 6. Hiram
dislikes the Cities which Solomon offered him. Sect. 7. Solomon removes his
Queen to the House built for her. The Song of Solomon. Sect. 8. Solomon's Navy.
Sect. 9. Solomon's other buildings. Sect. 10. Hamath taken by Solomon's forces.
Sect. 11. Solomon's care in matters of Religion. Sect. 12. Solomon's greatness,
splendour, and glory. Sect. 13. Solomon's Wisdom. His Proverbs. Sect. 14. The
Queen of Sheba comes to hear his Wisdom. Sect. 15. Solomon's many wives and
defection from God. Ahijah the Prophet sent to him with a sad Message. Sect.
16. Solomon writes his Ecclesiastes. Sect. 17. Solomon's Adversaries. Ahijah
sent to Jeroboam to acquaint him that he should be King of the Ten Tribes.
Sect. 18. Solomon dies. Sect. 19. The division of the Kingdom.
Kings of Judah.
1. Rehoboam is petitioned for ease of Taxes. Ten Tribes revolt. His Buildings
and Wives. Shishak King of Egypt plunders the Temple. 2. Abijah reigns, p. 505.
His army and speech to Jeroboam. Israel routed. 3. Asa reigns, page 509. His
Grandmothers Grove. Zerah invades him, and is subdued. Asa's league with
Benhadad, and death. 4. Jehoshaphat reigns, p. 515. Removes all high places
used for false Gods. His reformation. His greatness and riches. His affinity
with Ahab. He goes to Samaria. Jehu the Prophet reproves him. His care of the
Kingdom. His Fleet broken. His victory and death. 5. Jehoram succeeds, p. 525.
His Idolatry. Slays his six Brethren. Elijah's Letter to him. Edom revolts.
Libnah revolts. Philistines invade him. His sad end. 6. Ahaziah, p. 529. His
wickedness. Is slain by Jehu. 7. Athaliah, p. 532. Her Idolatry and cruelty. 8.
Joash, p. 533, He is set up by Jehoiada. Athaliah slain. Baal's house pulled
down. Jehoiada's good instruction of him. Collection for the Temple. Jehoiada
dies. Joash's Idolatry. Zachariah stoned. The Syrians vanquish him. His death.
9. Amaziah, p. 541. He begins well. His war with Edom, and victory. His
Idolatry. Joash King of Israel defeats him. Amaziah slain. 10. Vzziah, p. 546.
His Coronation. He recovers Elath. Conquers the Philistines. His herds and
husbandry. Isaiah Prophesies. Also Joel. Vzziah's pride, leprosy, and death.
11. Jotham, p. 554. He subdues the Ammonites. Micah Prophesies. Jotham dies.
12. Ahaz, p. 555. His wickedness. Syria and Israel invade him. Isaiah sent to
him. Jerusalem's siege raised. Ahaz forsakes the Lord. His calamities. His
league with Assyria, and death. 13. Hezekiah, p. 563. His goodness and
reformation. He shakes off the Assyrian yoke. Jerusalem besieged. Rabshakeh's
blasphemy. Hezekiah's prayer. Isaiah's message to him. Hezekiah's sickness. His
thanksgiving. The Assyrians destroyed. Ambassadors from Babylon come to him.
Manasses born. Nahum's Prophecy. Hezekiah dies. 14. Manasses, p. 595. His
great Idolatry. He is taken captive, shortly after is restored. His
reformation. Habakkuk's Prophecy. Manasseh dies. 15. Amon, p. 600. His
Idolatry and death. 16. Josiah, p. 601. His piety. Jeremiah Prophesies. The
Book of the Law found. Huldah the Prophetess. Josiah throws down Idolatry. He
goes to Bethel and other places. His solemn Passover. His death greatly
lamented. Zephany's Prophecy. 17. Shallum or Jehoahaz, page 611. His Idolatry.
Jeremy's admonition to him. Pharaoh Necho carries him away. 18. Jehoiakim, p.
612. His Idolatry and oppression. Jeremy exhorts him to repentance. Vriah's
Prophecy. Jeremy's bonds and yokes. Baruch's roll. Nebuchadnezzar conquers the
Egyptians. Jehoiakim taken prisoner. Daniel and others carried to Babylon.
Jehoiakim burns the roll. Nebuchadnezzar returns home. His dream of the great
Image made of four metals. Jehoiakim revolts. The Golden Image set up by
Nebuchadnezzar to be worshipped. Jehoiakim dies. 19. Jehoiakin, p. 617. His
Captivity. Cyrus born. 20. Zedekiah reigns, p. 618. His wickedness. Jeremy
Prophesies. Several Ambassadors come to Zedekiah. Hananiah a false Prophet.
Jeremy's Letter to the Captives in Babylon. Shemaiah a false Prophet, inveighs
against him. Jeremy prophesies his death. Ezekel's first vision. Jerusalem
besieged. His other visions. His Types. Zedekiah revolts. Judea is invaded.
Ezekiel's wife dies, for whom he is commanded not to mourn. Jeremy imprisoned.
Jerusalem's siege raised. The Egyptians are overthrown, and the siege renewed.
Jeremy put into the dungeon. Ezekiel prophesies again. Jerusalem taken. The
Temple burnt. The Kingdom of Judah come to an end.
Kings of Israel.
1. Jeroboam chosen by the ten Tribes, he fortifies Shechem. Sets up the Golden
Calves. A Prophet sent to him who declares against his Altar. His hand withers.
The Prophet being seduced, a Lion slays him. Jeroboam's son falls sick and
dies. His own death. 2. Nadab an evil King, slain by Baasha, p. 508. 3. Baasha
reigns, p. 509. He does evil. He builds Ramah. Jehu's message to him. Baasha
dies. 4. Elah reigns two years, p. 511. Zimri slays him. 5. Zimri burnt, p.
511. 6. Omri made King. His Idolatry and burial, p. 512. 7. Ahab, p. 512. He
marries Jezabel. Jericho rebuilt. Obadiah hides the Prophets. Elijah's
miracles. Elisha called. Benhadad conquered. A Prophet reproves Ahab. Naboth's
Vineyard. Elijah meets Ahab. Ahab slain at Ramoth-Gilead. Moab revolts. 8.
Ahaziah, p. 543. His fall. His message to Baalzebub. Elijah brings down fire
upon two companies of fifty. He dies. 9. Jehoram, p. 545. He maintains the
Golden Calves. Elijah's Translation. Elisha takes up his Mantle. Elisha's
Miracles. The Moabites destroy one another. The King of Edom sacrifices his
Son. Elisha works more Miracles. A sore famine in Samaria. Its miraculous
relief. The Shunamite returns. Benhadad sends to Elisha. Hazael stifles
Benhadad. Jehoram recovers Ramoth-Gilead. Jehu anointed. Joram slain. Ahaziah
slain. Jezabel's death. 10. Jehu made King, p. 585. The slaughter of Ahab's
offspring, and Ahaziah's brethren. Baal's Priests slain. Jehu's Idolatry and
death. 11. Jehoahaz reigns, p. 590. The Syrians oppress him. He dies. 12.
Joash, p. 591. He visits Elisha. Elisha dies. Joash takes Amaziah after his
conquering the Syrians. Joash dies. 13. Jeroboam the second, p. 593. Jonah,
Hosea, and Amos Prophecy. Jeroboam's death. The Anarchy or Interregnum. 14.
Zachariah, his short reign, p. 598. 15. Shallum, is slain by Menahem, p. 599.
16. Menahem, p. 599. His cruelty. The Assyrian invades him. He dies. 17.
Pekaliah, p. 600. 18. Pekah reigns, p. 600. His victory over Ahaz. The Assyrian
carries five Tribes into Captivity. Pekah slain. 19. Hoshea, p. 602. He
continues Jeroboam's Idolatry. Salman after makes him Tributary. Upon his
revolt Samaria is taken, and himself confined. The Kingdom of Israel ends. New
Colonies planted. Others sent after them. An Anti-Temple built. Afterward
destroyed by John Hircanus.
Chap. VI. The sixth Age from the Captivity of Judah to their return.
ZEdekiah taken, sees his Children slain, and then has his own eyes put out,
and in chains, is carried to Babylon, page 627. The City of Jerusalem and the
Temple burnt. Gedaliah set over those poor people that were left in the land to
dress the Vineyards, and till the ground, page 630 Seraiah the chief Priest
with other principal men carried to Nebuchadnezzar to Riblah, and there put to
death, Ibid. Jeremy had his choice whither he would go into Babylon and there
be honorably treated, or stay in Judea. He chooses the latter, Ibid. Ismael
conspires against Gedaliah. Johanan discovers it. But Gedaliah would not
believe it, and so was treacherously murdered by Ismael, page 631. Johanan took
from Ismael his prisoners, but he himself escaped with eight more to the
Ammonites. Johanan and his Captains, and many of the people go into Egypt, and
carry Jeremy and Baruck along with them. Ezekiel Prophesies of the destruction
of the last remainder of the Israelites. He threatens murmurers and hypocrites,
and unfaithful shepherds, and the Edomites, page 632 Obadiah Prophesies against
Edom. Ezekiel comforts the captive Israelites, promising that God would avenge
them on their enemies. He prophesies their return out of Babylon, though their
condition there seemed as hopeless as of dead men in their graves, who are
become dry bones, page 633 He prophesies of their victory over Gog and Magog.
He prophesies against Egypt. He prophesies against the Israelites that were
gone into Egypt, and against Pharaoh himself. The Lamentations of Jeremy, page
633. Tire besieged by Nebuchadnezzar. Nabuzaradan carried away the remainder of
the Jews to the number of seven hundred forty five, Ibid. Ezekiel has that
glorious vision of the new Jerusalem and new Temple, page 634. Tire taken.
Nebuchadnezzar invades Egypt, makes great havoc there, Ibid. He returns now
into Babylon. He has there the dream of the great Tree, whose destiny was to
be cut down, Ibid. He new builds Babylon. He falls distracted, and so continues
for seven years, page 635 He returns to his wits. Praises God and dies.
Evilmerodach succeeds him. Jechoniah advanced. Zedekiah dies. The King of
Babylon engages in a war against the Medes and Persians. Of whose Armies Cyrus
was made General. He obtains a great victory over the Babylonians, Ibid.
Belshazzar succeeds. In Belshazzar's first year Daniel has the vision of the
four Beasts, Ibid. In his third year he has the vision of the Ram and He-goat,
page 636. Cyrus conquers the Babylonians, besieges Babylon with a vast Army.
Belshazzar Carousing with his Nobles sees the handwriting on the wall. Daniel
interprets it, is thereupon advanced, page 636 Belshazzar slain. His Kingdom
brought to an end. Darius takes on him the Kingdom. Cyrus marries Darius's only
daughter, and so is entitled to the Kingdom of Media. Darius sets over the
Provinces an hundred and twenty Governors, over whom he makes three principal
overseers, and Daniel the chief of all. The Nobles being stirred with a spirit
of envy against him, move the King to make a decree that for thirty days space
no petition should be made to any God or man but to himself. Daniel hereupon
cast into the Lions den, Ibid. The seventy years of the Jews Captivity drawing
to an end, Daniel prays for the promised deliverance. The Angel Gabriel gives
him the Prophecy of the Seventy weeks, page 637. Cyrus upon Darius's death is
made absolute Monarch of the East. The Jews show him the Prophecy of Isaiah,
foretelling that he should be their deliverer. He thereupon makes an Edict for
their return, and that they should go and build their Temple.
Chap. VII. The seventh Age from their return out of Captivity to the death of
Christ.
CYRUS made Zerubbabel chief Captain of those Jews that returned, and consigned
into his hands the vessels of the Temple. The number of them that returned.
They offer toward the building of the Temple. On the first day of the seventh
month of the first year of their return, they built the Altar, and thereon
offered sacrifices. On the 15th. day kept the Feast of Tabernacles. In the
second month of the second year of their return they lay the foundation of the
Temple, the old men weeping, the young men rejoicing, page 642 The Cuthaeans or
Samaritans offer to join with them, but being refused, by their interest in
Cambyses's Court give a stop to the work, Ibid. Daniel's vision of the Kings of
Persia, and of Alexander and his successors, Ibid. Cyrus dies. Cambyses
succeeds. The Samaritans now frame an open accusation against the Jews, page
643. Cambyses dies. Darius Histaspis succeeds, called Ahashuerus. He marries
Alosta or Vashti the daughter of Cyrus. In his second year Haggai Prophesies,
and reproves the Jews for their negligence in not going on with the building of
the Temple, whereupon Zerubbabel and Joshua took the work in hand afresh, page
644. In the eighth Month of the same year Zachary began to Prophecy to the
same purpose that Haggai did, Ibid. In the ninth month of that second year of
Darius, the Temple began to be reared by Zerubbabel and Joshua. Upon the same
day the two last Prophesies of Haggai were revealed to him. The Samaritans,
viz. Tatnai and Sether-hoznai strive again to hinder them. page 645 The Prophet
Zachary has a vision of Horsemen, and several other visions, Ibid. Cyrus's
decree being found the King commands the Samaritans not only not to hinder the
Jews in building their Temple, but that they should furnish them with money out
of the Kings Treasure for it, page 646 Darius in the third year of his reign
makes a royal feast for his Princes. Vashti refuses to come to him when he sent
for her, she is thereupon divorced, page 647. God answers the Jews inquiring
concerning their Fasts of the fifth and seventh months. In the eighth Chapter
of Zachary he tells them he will change their Fasts into days of rejoicing,
Ibid. In the sixth year of Darius the second Temple was finished and dedicated,
page 650. Upon the 14th day of the first month they celebrated the first
Passover in the second Temple, rejoicing exceedingly because God had turned the
heart of the King of Persia toward them. In the seventh year of Darius, Esther
made Queen, Ibid. The History of Esther. Ahasuerus dies. Zerxes succeds him. He
makes wars upon the Grecians. Artaxerxes succeeds him. Ezra obtains a large
Patent from him to settle the Jewish Commonwealth. Liberty was also granted by
him for such of the Jews as would, to return. Ezra with a great number returns,
having first kept a solemn Fast to seek a blessing from the Lord. They come to
Jerusalem and present the Gold and Silver they had brought with them which was
laid up in the Temple. Ezra mourns and fasts because many of the people had
married strange wives. They are moved to put away their strange wives, and the
children they had by them, which they consent to do. In the twentieth year of
Artaxerxes, Nehemiah his Cup Bearer hearing how things went at Jerusalem, and
that their walls were not built, obtains a Commission from the King to be
Governor of Judea, and to build the walls of Jerusalem. He comes thither and
goes about it. Sanballat and Tobiah at first scoffed at it, but then grew very
angry, and conspired to fight the Jews and hinder the work. But Nehemiah arms
the people that so they might be in readiness for them. Nehemiah redresses the
oppressions among them, viz. concerning Slaves, Debtors and Mortgages.
Sanballat and Tobiah, and their Accomplices strive now by false rumors and
false Prophesies to terrify Nehemiah from the work. And some false Brethren at
home seek to hinder the work also. However the walls of Jerusalem in fifty two
days were finished, and the dedication solemnly performed. Nehemiah appoints
Hanani and Hananiah Governors over the City, calls together the Princes, makes
a Collection for the rebuilding the City. On the Feast of Trumpets the Law of
God was by Ezra and others read and expounded to the people, at which they were
much affected. Ezra is consulted concerning the Feast of Tabernacles. They keep
a solemn Fast, and make a Covenant with the Lord, and seal it. Ezra's Prayer.
The matter of the Covenant, and the persons that sealed it. The chief heads of
the people voluntarily offer to dwell in Jerusalem. The rest cast lots about
it. Nehemiah goes back to his Master Artaxerxes. He returns and governs Judea
many years. In the twelfth year of his Government, and thirty-second of
Artaxerxes he went to him again, and soon after returned with a new Commission,
and then reformed those disorders in the State, mentioned Chap. 5. and the
disorders in Religion mentioned Chap. 13. The Prophet Malachi.
ERRATA.
THE most considerable faults of the Press are thus to be amended: Page 14.
line 11. read backward. p. 16. l. 10. make the * at Pull. p. 17. l. 53. r.
Rhoine. p. 46. in last part of Marg. after 12. add children. and l. 6. r. fifth
son. p. 47. l. 30 r. freedom. p. 57. l. 1. r. attended. p. 59. l. 12. in Marg.
r. Chapter 36. p. 63. l. 47. r. how violent the rage of jealousy is. p. 69. in
marg. near bottom r. there is. p. 80. l. 9. r. to any of. l. 32. r. posterity.
p. 81. l 1. r. Gad. p. 85. l. 8. r. Chapter 12, 13, 14. p. 98. l. 30. r. every. p.
124. l. ult. r. slew. p. 141. l. 36. r. vanity. p. 144. marg. (a) r. paschate.
p. 158. l. 5. r. fast. p. 162. l. 1. r. new. marg. l. 12. r. hinc. p. 166. l.
penult. r. for no man. p. 170. l. penult of Sect. 41. blot out v. 30. to the
end. p. 171. l. 18. r. in all. p. 188. l. 1. r. mutiny. p. 197. l. 11. r.
amicably. p. 206. l. 5. r. infested. p. 212. l. 10. r. alleging. p. 231. l.
16. r. in a vision. p. 278. l. 8. r. High Priest. p. 284. l. 23. r. at present.
p. 294. marg. l. 4. at * r. art susoria. p. 313. l. 1. add them. p. 328. l.
49. r. refuse. p. 346. marg. l. 7. r. damna. p. 398. marg. l. penult. r.
daemonum. p. 412. marg. (a) r. disoperiens. p. 434. marg. l. penult. r.
cogitat. p. 447. marg. fig. 3. r. in regard of the transcendent holiness. p
448. marg. l. 2. r. them. p. 464. l. 12. r, 1 King. p. 478. l. 1. add know. p.
474. near the bottom for A r. The. p. 476. l. ult. for daily or weekly. p. 478.
l. 1. r. we do not find. p. 480. l. 19. r. preserved. p. 517. marg. r. ob
religionem. p. 522. l. 16. r. fly not. p. 543. l. 48. r. more. p. 581. marg. r.
pollebat. p. 598. l. 1. marg. r. 26. p. 621. l. 33. after Captivity r. as some
learned men conjecture, though others assert the continuance of that Kingdom to
have been only 254 years, see page 605. There are some who begin these years at
Jeroboam's setting up the Calves at Dan and Bethel when the Ten Tribes became
Idolatrous, and end them at the destruction of Jerusalem, and they include the
house of Israel in the house of Judah, because many of them joined themselves
to them, and these the Prophet seems to mean by the house of Israel, including
also their predecessors, who were dead long before. p. 638. l. 29. r. This I
find to be the opinion of the learned Willet, and followed by Mr. Allein in his
Chronology. But for my part I cannot see that there were above twenty years
from the laying the foundation of the Temple to the finishing of it as we have
showed page 650. Some learned men begin these seven weeks or 49 years at
Cyrus's decree, and end them when the walls of Jerusalem were finished by
Nehemiah; which interval of time they make 49 years. But the holy Scripture
having not set down expressly the number of the years of the Kings of Persia,
and profane Authors differing so much about them, it is a difficult thing to
determine any thing certainly in this matter.

If any Errors have happened in the Continuation of this History, the Reader is
desired to mend them with his pen, the Author not having had time to read those
sheets over.

A Chronological Table of the Seven Ages of the World, from the Creation to the
Death of JESUS CHRIST.
The First Age of the World, from the Creation to the Flood.
1 ADam. 130 Seth. born. 235 Enos born. 325 Cainan born. 395 Mahalaleel born. 0
Jared born. 622 Enoch born. 687 Methuselah born. 874 Lamech born. 1056 Noah
born. 1558 Noah's three Sons, Japheth, Shem, Ham.
The Ark built.
1656 The Flood.
The Second Age, from the Flood to the Promise made to Abraham in Ur of the
Chaldees.
1658 NOah and his Family come out of the Ark.

Noah builds an Altar.

The Rainbow a Pledge of Gods Covenant.

Noah plants a Vineyard.

Arphaxad born to Shem.

1693 Salah born. 1723 Eber born. 1757 Peleg born. 1787 Reu born.

Nimrod the Grandchild of Cham.

The Tower of Babel

The Confusion of Tongues.

The Assyrian, or First Monarchy begun by Nimrod. See the Kings thereof, page
15. of Chap. II.

The dispersion of the children of Noah.

The Original of several Nations.

1819 Serug born. 1846 Nahor born. 1878 Terah born. 2008 Abraham born.

The King of Elam and his Allies, conquer the King of Sodom and his
Confederates.

2078 The Promise made to Abraham in Vr of the Chaldees.
The Third Age, from the Promise made to Abraham in Ur of the Chaldees, unto
the departure of the Israelites, out of Egypt.
2094 ABraham's removal to Charran, and from thence to Canaan. Two Altars there
built by him. A Promise of that Land made unto his Posterity.

He goes into Egypt by reason of the Famine in Canaan. His Danger there on the
account of Sarah his Wife.

He returns into Canaan, vanquishes Chedorlaomer, rescues Lot, is met by
Melchizedec, and blessed.

He takes Hagar.

Ismael Born.

2107 Circumcision Instituted.

Abraham entertains Three Angels; intercedes for Sodom.

Sodom and Gomorrha Consumed with Fire from Heaven.

Lots Incest.

2108 Isaac Born.

Hagar and Ismael cast out.

Abraham's sacrificing Isaac.

Isaac marries Rebeccah.

2168 Esau and Jacob Born.

Jacob's marriage with Leah and Rachel.

His hard Serv^ce under (...).

2259 Joseph Born.

Joseph's Dream. His Brethren sell him.

He is sold after to Potiphar. His Mistress 's false Accusation. His
Imprisonment.

Pharaoh's Dream. Joseph's Interpretation thereof, and Advancement.

The Famine begins.

Jacob sends his Sons into Egypt to buy Corn.

Joseph makes himself known to his Brethren.

Jacob goes into Egypt.

He blesses his Sons and dies.

Joseph dies.

The History of Job.

Aaron Born.

2418 Moses Born.

His Education by Pharaoh's Daughter.

He flies into Midian.

He is sent by the Lord to deliver Israel.

He works Miracles before Pharaoh.

The Ten Plagues.

2508 The Israelites departure out of Egypt.
The Fourth Age, from the Departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, to the
laying the Foundation of Solomon's Temple.
2548 THe Paschal Lamb.

The Fiery Pillar.

The Israelites pass through the Red Sea.

Manna.

Joshua fights with Amaleck.

The giving of the Law on Mount Sinai.

Moses 40 days in the Mount.

Directions concerning framing the Tabernacle.

The Golden Calf.

The History of the Israelites, during their 40 years continuance in the
Wilderness.

Moses having governed 40 years, dies.

Joshua succeeds.

Conquers and divides the Land, and governs in all, 17 years.


The Judges. 2565 Othniel 40 years. 2605 Ehud 80 years.

The History of Ruth.

2685 Deborah 40 y. 2725 Gideon 40 y. 2765 Abimelech 3 y. 2768 Tholah 23 y.
2791 Jair 22 y. 2813 Jephtha 6 y. 2819 Ibzan 7 y. 2826 Elon 10 y. 2836 Abdon 8.
y. 2844 Samson 20 y. 2864 Eli 40. y. 2904 Samuel and King Saul 40 y. 2944 King
David 40 y. 2985 King Solomon 4 y.
2988 The Foundation of the Temple laid in the 4th. year of Solomon's Reign.

The Fifth Age, from the laying the Foundation of Solomon 's Temple, to the
Destruction of it, and the Captivity of Judah.
Solomon reigned over all Israel from the laying the Foundation of the Temple,
36 years.

The Kingdom divided.

Kings of Judah. 302^ REhoboam reigned 17 years. 304^ Abijam 3 y. 3044 Asa 41
y. 3085 Jehoshaphat 25 y. 3106 Jehoram 8. y. 3113 Ahaziah 1 y. 3114 Athaliah 7
y. 3120 Jehoash 40 y. 31^9 Amaziah 29 y. 31^9 Vzziah 52 y. 32^0 Jotham 16 y.
32^6 Ahaz 16 y. 3271 Hezekiah 29 y. 3300 Manasseh 55 y. 3355 Amon 2 y. 335^
Josiah 31 y. 3387 Jehohaaz 3 mon. 3388 Jehoiakim 11 y. 3398 Jehoiakin, or
Jechoniah. 3 mon. 3^99 Zedekiah 11 y.
Kings of Israel. 302^ JEroboam reigned 22 years. Nadab 2. y.
304^ Baasha 24 y. Elah 2 y. Zimri 7 days.
3044 Omri 12 y. Ahab 22 y.
3085 Ahaziah 2 y. Jehoram 12 y.
3106 Jehu 28 y.
3113 Jehoahaz 17 y. Joah 16 y.
3114 Jeroboam 2d. 41 y.
3120 An Interregnum of about Eleven years and an half. Zachariah 6 months.
Shallum 1 month.
31^9 Menahem 10 y.
31^9 Pekahiah 2 y.
32^0 Pekah 20 y.
32^6 Hoshea 9 y.
3271 The Israelites carried into Captivity by the Assyrians in the sixth year
of Hezekiah.

The Jews carried into Captivity by the Babylonians in the 11th. year of
Zedekiah.
The Sixth Age, from the Captivity of Judah, to their Return out of Babylon.
3408 JErusalem taken.

Zedekiah brought to Nebuchadnezzar; sees his Children slain, then has his
Eyes put out, and in Chains is carried to Babylon.

The City and Temple burnt.

Seraiah the Chief Priest, and other Principal men put to death at Riblah.

Gedaliah set over the Poor people left in the Land.

Jeremy, upon his own choice, stays with them.

Ismael Conspires against Gedaliah. Johanan discovers it to him: He believes it
not, and so is treacherously murdered.

Johanan recovers from Ismael his Prisoners, but himself escapes.

Johanan and his Captains and many of the people go into Egypt, and carry
Jeremy and Baruc with them.

3409 Ezekiel utters several Prophesies in Babylon.

Jeremy about this time writes his Lamentations.

Tire besieged by Nebuchadnezzar.

3413 Nebuzaradan carries away the last Remainder of the Jews to the number of
745.

Nebuchadnezzar invades Egypt, and makes great Havoc there.

Having finished his Conquests, he returns unto Babylon, and there has the
Dream of the great Tree, whose Destiny was to be cut down.

He new builds Babylon.

3427 He falls distracted, and so continues for 7 years. He is recovered to his
Understanding; blesses God; and dies. 3435 Evil Merodach succeeds him.
Jechoniah advanced. Zedekiah dies, and is honorably Buried.

Cyrus being made General of the Armies of the Medes and Persians, obtains a
great Victory over the Babylonians.

Belshazzar succeeds Evil Merodach.

In the first year of his Reign Daniel has the Vision of the four Beasts.

3465 Cyrus gives the Babylonians another great Defeat, and with a vast Army
besieges Babylon.

Belshazzar carousing with his Nobles, sees the Handwriting on the Wall. Daniel
interprets it to him, and is thereupon advanced.

Belshazzar slain.

Darius takes on him the Kingdom.

Cyrus Marries his only Daughter.

Darius sets over the Provinces an 120 Governors, and makes Daniel chief of
them all. The Princes, out of Envy to him, move the King to make an Edict, That
for 30 days no Petition should be made to any God or Man, but himself. Daniel
thereupon cast into the Lions Den.

The 70 years of the Captivity of the Jews draw to an end; Daniel Prays for the
promised Deliverance. The Angel Gabriel is sent to inform him, not only
concerning that, but also the 70 Weeks.

Darius dies, Cyrus is made thereupon, Emperor of the East.

The Jews show him the Prophesy of Isaiah, That He should be their Deliverer,
with which he is much pleased.


The Seventh Age, from the Return out of Babylon, to the Death of Christ; Or,
from the end of the Seventy years Captivity, unto the end of the Seventy Weeks
in Daniel.
3478 THE 70 Weeks in Daniel containing 490 years.

The Persian, or Second Monarchy. See the Kings thereof in the Appendix.

Cyrus makes an Edict for the Return of the Jews, and that they should go and
build their Temple.

He appoints Zerubbabel Chief Captain over those that returned, and gave into
his hands the Vessels of the Temple.

In the 7th. Month of the first year of their Return, they built the Altar, and
thereon offered; and on the 15th. day kept the Feast of Tabernacles.

In the 2d. Month of the 2d. year of their Return, they laid the Foundation of
the Temple, the Old men weeping, the Young men rejoicing.

The Samaritans offer to join with them, but being refused by their Interest in
the Court, they gave a stop to the Work.

Cyrus dies. Cambyses succeeds.

The Samaritans now frame an Information against the Jews.

Cambyses dies. Darius Histaspis (called Ahashuerus) succeeds. He marrys Atossa
or Vashti, Cyrus's Daughter.

In his 2d. year Haggai Prophesies, and reproves the Jews for their negligence
in not going on to build the Temple; whereupon Zerubbabel and Joshua took the
work in hand afresh.

In the 8th. month of the same year Zachary began to Prophecy.

In the 9th. month of the 2d. year of Darius the Temple began to be reared by
Zerubbabel and Joshua.

Tatnai and Sether-boznai, and other Samaritans seek to hinder them.

Cyrus's Decree being found, Darius forbids the Samaritans from hindering them,
and that they should furnish them with money out of the Kings Treasury for the
work.

Darius in the 3d. year of his reign makes a Royal Feast for his Princes.
Vashti refuses to come when he sent for her: She is thereupon divorced.

In the 6th. year of Darius the Second Temple was finished, and dedicated.

Upon the 14th. day of the first month they celebrate the Passover in this new
Temple.

In the 7th. year of Darius, Esther made Queen.

The History of Queen Esther.

Ahasuerus dies. Zerxes succeeds him. He makes Wars upon the Grecians.
Artaxerxes succeeds him.

Ez^a obtains a large Patent from him to settle the Jewish Commonwealth.

Ezra with a great number of Jews return out of Babylon, having first kept a
Fast, to seek a Blessing from God.

When they came to Jerusalem, Ezra Mourns and Fasts, because he found that many
of the Jews had Married Stran^-Wives.

In the 20th. year of Artaxerxes Nehemiah his Cup Bearer comes with a
Commission to be Governor of Judea, and to build the Walls of Jerusalem.

He going about it, Sanballat and Tobiah at first scoff at it, then being
angry, conspire to come and fight the Jews. Nehemiah arms the people that so
they might be ready for them.

Sanballat and Tobia, and their Accomplices strive now by false Rumors, and
false Prophesies to terrify Nehemiah from the Work. And some false Brethren
also join with them.

The Wall in 52 days was finished, and after solemnly dedicated.

Nehemiah makes a Collection for the Rebuilding of the City.

On the Feast of Trumpets the Law of God was read by Ezra and others to the
People, and Expounded; at which they were much affected.

They keep a solemn Fast, and make a Covenant with the Lord. Ezra's Prayer
thereupon.

Nehemiah goes back to his Master Artaxerxes, and returns and governs the Jews
many years. In the 12th. year of his Government he reformd'd some things in the
State, and some things to Religion.

The End of the Old Testament.

3608 The Grecian, or Third Monarchy. See the Kings thereof in the Appendix

The History of the Maccabees.

3899 The Roman, or Fourth Monarchy.

Julius Caesar.

3903 Octavius Caesar.

Herod made King of Judea by the R^mans.

3934 Jesus Christ born. 3949 Tiberius Caesar. 3964 Jesus Christ Baptized. 3968
Jesus Christ Crucified.


map of Canaan A MAP of CANAAN. With the Adjacent COUNTRIES Very Useful for
the Understanding of the Old Testament.
Sold by Tho. Simmons in Lud-gate Street.


THE HISTORY OF THE Old Testament METHODIZ'D.
CHAP. I. The First Age of the World, from the Creation to the Flood,
containing a Space of 1656 Years.
SECT. I.
THE Eternal and most Glorious God, the Incomprehensible and forever Blessed
Jehovah, being from all Eternity infinitely happy in the Enjoyment of himself,
when he was pleased to display his Wisdom, and communicate his Goodness, he did
by his Infinite Power create the World out of Nothing, and gave a Being and
Existence to Things that had none before. So the Apostle assures us, Acts
17.24. God who made the world, and all things therein, is Lord of Heaven and
Earth. And Heb. 11.3. Through Faith we understand that the Worlds were framed
by the Word of God, (that is, the Inferior, Middle, and Superior, as the Jews
distinguish them) so that things which are seen were not made of things which
do appear.

This glorious Work of Creation was begun (as many Learned Men conceive) at
that time of the Year which we call Autumn Mundum Autumni tempore conditum esse
censent, Scaliger, Nicolaus de Lyra, Calvisius, Helvicus, Usserius, aliique.
. And that which seems to give countenance to this Conjecture, is, because at
that time of the Year the several kinds of Fruits (in most places) are in their
maturity and ripeness, as in all probability they were at their creation, being
made in their perfection. So that all the Fruits of the Garden being now ripe,
Adam had liberty to eat of any of them, the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil
only excepted.

The World therefore began to be created (as we may suppose) on the first day
of the Month called by the Jews Tizri or Ethanim, which began about the middle
of the Month called by us September, and was at first the beginning of the
Year, and so it continued afterward for Civil Matters Duplicis anni mentio
apud Hebraeos; Politici, and Ecclesiastici. Politici Mensis primus Tizri;
Ecclesiastici, Nisan. Drusius Observat. l. 10. See chapter 8. v. 10. Richardson.
, (See Levit. 25.8, 9, 10.) But the beginning of the Year was afterward
changed by God's own appointment, as to Ecclesiastical Matters) upon occasion
of his bringing the Children of Israel out of Egypt in the Spring, in the Month
Abib, or Nisan, (which began about the middle of the Month called by us March);
and that Month in memorial thereof was made the first Month in the Year, Exodus
13.3. Remember this day in which ye came out of Egypt, in the Month. Abib.
Exodus 12.2. This Month shall be the beginning of Months unto you, it shall be
the first Month of the Year unto you. But thoug^ Abib upon this occasion was
made the first Month of the Year, especially as to Ec^lesiastical Matters, and
the regulating of their Annual Feasts; yet naturally the Year did begin from
Tizri, which is the seventh Month from Abib, (1 Kings 8.7.) and according to it
their Contracts and Bargains about Houses and Lands, and such Civil Matters,
were to be ordered. And it is observable, that the Feast of the New Moon in this
seventh Month was to be kept with more Solemnity than any other of the New
Moons, (yea, even than that of Abib) because it was their New-years-day: For
then, besides that they were to blow with Trumpets, and offer the special
Sacrifices, (as on other New Moons) they were on this to offer extraordinary
Sacrisices over and above, as we may see Numb. 29. from 1. to 7.

Upon the first day First Day.
therefore of the World God created the highest Heavens, and together with
them, (as it is probable) the invisible Host of Angels, according to that of the
Apostle, Col. 1.16. By him were all things created that are in heaven, and that
are in earth, visible and invisible, all things were created by him and for
him. The Psalmist also speaks to the same purpose, Psalm. 148.2. Praise ye him
all his Angels, praise ye him all his Hosts: let them praise the Name of the
Lord; for he commanded, and they were created. It Is true, Moses mentions not
the creation of Angels; and the reason thereof possibly may be, that he
intended (as it seems) to relate only the Creation of things corporeal and
visible. God having therefore finished (as it were) the Roof of this glorious
Building, he sell in hand with this lowermost Globe, consisting of the Deep,
and of the Earth, (all the Choire of Angels singing together, and magnifying
his most glorious Name, for this his wonderful Work, as we read Job 38.7. Then
the Morning-Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy.) The
Earth (that is, the whole confused Chaos of Earth and Water) was now without
form, and void of all Herbs, Flowers, and Trees, and all living Creatures; and
was indeed nothing but a great and deep miry Mass, covered all over with Waters
and thick Darkness: And the Spirit of God Spiritus Sanctus vitali infuso Calore
prolificam vim aquis largiebatur. Menoch.
the Creator and Vpholder of all Creatures ( Psalm. 104.3.) by his effectual
quickening Power, moved upon, and gave virtue to that great Mass and Heap,
whereby it was fitted and prepared for the subsequent Productions.

On the middle of the first day God created Light, 2 Cor. 4.6. God who
commanded Light to shine out of Darkness.
and severed it from the Darkness: so that whilst there was Light on one side
of the Deep, there was Darkness on the other: And he called the one Day, and
the other Night. And so Darkness being before Light, the Darkness or Evening In
that phrase of Moses, (Genesis 1.5.) The Evening and the Morning were the first
Day, there is a Synechdoche, by which the beginning of the Night and of the Day
is put for the whole Night and Day.
is reckoned the beginning or first part of the Natural day of Twenty four
Hours. Levit. 23.32. From Even unto Even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath, etc.
Genesis 1. from 1. to 6.

On the second day Second Day.
God created the Expansum, (commonly called the Firmament) stretching out the
Heavens as a Curtain, and spreading them out as a Tent to dwell in, Isa. 40.22.
By the Expanse or Firmament (taken in a large sense) we are to understand
whatever is contained in that vast Space from the surface of the Earth to the
uppermost Heavens. For there are three Heavens: First, The Heaven of Heavens,
the highest Heaven, called the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. I knew a man caught
up into the third Heaven. So Isa. 66.1. Thus says the Lord, Heaven is my
Throne, etc. Secondly, The Sky or Ether, where the Stars are placed, which is
called the second Heaven, or Coelum Stellatum. Thirdly, The Air under it, which
reaches from thence to the surface of the Earth and Water, whereof there are
three Regions. First, The highest or uppermost, which is clear and ethereal.
The second called the Middle Region, where God has placed the Clouds, [Job
26.8. He binds up the Waters in thick Clouds.] And the third or lower Region,
that wherein the Fowls do fly. Now part of those Waters of the Deep
forementioned, being lifted up by the Power of God, and spread above, and
bound up in thick Clouds, whilst others were disposed of here below, to make up
with the Earth one Globe, God was pleased to order that that Expanse or lower
Region of the Air, [called Genesis 1.20. The open Firmament of the Heaven,] should
divide and sep^rate those Clouds and Waters above, from those beneath. And
accordingly the Psalmist cries out, Psalm. 148.4. Praise him ye Heavens of
Heavens, and ye Waters that be above the Heavens. Thus God made a separation of
the Waters above, from the Waters beneath, which are enclosed in the Earth, and
with it make one entire Globe. But here is not added, (God saw that it was
good) which yet is doubled on the third day (possibly because the separation of
the Waters, begun on this day, was not perfected till the third day) and is
only once repeated on each of the other four days, with addition of very good
in the end of all. Genesis 1. from 6. to 9.

On the third day Third Day.
God commanded those Waters that were beneath to run together into one place,
and the dry Land to appear. This confluence of Waters he called a Sea, sending
out from thence the Rivers, which were to run thither again, as Solomon speaks,
Eccles. 1.7. All the Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full: unto the
place from whence they came, thither they return again. And he caused the Earth
to bring forth all kinds of Herbs and Plants, with Seeds and Fruits in
perfection, which before were not in the Earth, nor could have been, except he
had given power to the Earth to produce them: For there had not been as yet any
of those ordinary means whereby the Earth is now made fruitful, viz. Rain, and
the labor and help of Man (who was not yet made), neither had there so much as
a Mist Junius reddit ( non et) sed aut. Aut vapor ascendens ^ terra, etc. Genesis
2.6.
gone up to water the Earth. Thus we see that God made them all by his own
Almighty Power, and that before the Sun was created, that we might learn to
ascribe the Production of the Fruits of the Earth to God originally, and not to
the Sun. And thus he made ready all kind of Food, and Provision for the living
Creatures, which he intended to create on the sixth day. But above all, he
enriched the Garden of Eden A Country in Thelassar, the upper part of Chaldea,
as may be seen 2 Kings 19.12. Isaiah 37.12. (and is distinguished from another
Eden by Damascus in Syria, Amos 1.5.) and is Eastward from the Wilderness where
it is probable Moses wrote his History. Eden juxta Haran seu Charras.
with variety of Plants. This Garden is by the Greek Interpreters called
Paradise, and for the pleasantness of it made a Figure of Heaven, [Luke 23.43.
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. 2 Cor. 12.4. He was caught up into
Paradise.] In this Garden God planted the Tree of Life, and the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil: The one (as it should seem) to be a Sacramental
Sign annexed to the Covenant of Works (which he intended to make with Man)
assuring to him the continuance of his Life and Happiness, upon condition he
performed perfect Obedience to the Will of his Creator; as the other Tree,
namely, that of Knowledge of Good and Evil, should signify and assure unto him
death and damnation in case of his disobedience, [Gen. 2.8. And out of the
ground made the Lord God to grow every Tree that is pleasant to the sight, and
good for food. The Tree of Life also in the midst of the Garden, and the Tree
of Knowledge of Good and Evil.] The Garden being in the lower part of the
Country of Eden, a River ran down out of it to water it, and from thence was
parted into four Capital Streams or Rivers. The name of the first was Phasis
See D. More 's Triplex Cabala.
, or Phasi-Tygris, which compasses the whole Land of the Chaldeans, where there
is excellent Gold, and Bdellium, and the Onyx-stone. The name of the second is
Gihon, which encompasses the Arabian Ethiopia. The name of the third is Tygris,
that is it which goes toward the East of Assyria. And the fourth is Euphrates.

On the fourth day Fourth Day.
the Sun, Moon, and Stars were created, to make a difference between Day and
Night, and to garnish the World. They were made also for Signs of Weather, for
the causing variety and different temperature of Seasons, for setting Periods
to Days, Months, and Years, and also to exert their Influence, Virtue, and
Efficacy on things below, Psalm. 104.19. He appoints the Moon for Seasons, the
Sun knows his going down; that is, where and when he is to go down in all the
Seasons of the Year. The Sun is the greatest of all the heavenly Lights, and
the Moon is the least (except Venus and Mercury) of all the Planets, and is
made lightsom by the Suns shining upon it, and so by reflection shines upon the
Earth. Moses therefore here speaks of the Sun and Moon as they appear to the
Eye of Man, to which the Moon seems the greatest Light next to the Sun,
because it is nearest to the Earth of all the Planets. Genesis 1. from 14. to 20.

Fifth Day.
On the fifth day Fish and flying Fowl were created, and God blessed them, and
commanded them to be fruitful, and multiply. The Fowl were created out of the
Waters, and out of the Ground also, [Gen. 2.19. Out of the Ground the Lord God
formed every Beast of the Field, and every Fowl of the Air.] For though the
Waters did at first bring them forth, yet there was in those Waters of which
they were made a mixture of Earth, and in that regard it might be said that
they were also formed out of the Ground.

Sixth Day.
On the sixth day God commanded the Earth to bring forth all sorts of Creeping
things, and Four-footed Beasts. And last of all he made Man, the Masterpiece
and Chief of all his Creatures here below. His Body he made of the Dust of the
Ground, working it to such a Temper, that it was fit Matter whereof to make the
Body of Man: And by his Almighty Power he created and infused into that yet
liveless Body a living reasonable Soul, which being instantly united to it, (in
a wonderful manner,) his Body was quickened and enlivened, which soon appeared
by the Breath in his Nostrils; so Adam became a living Soul, that is, (by a
Synechdoche of the Part for the Whole) a living Man: and his name was called
Adam, because he was made of red Earth. Thus we see his Soul was not, as his
Body, made of the Earth, but created by the Insuffiation of God, and had its
immediate Original from the Father of Spirits, Heb. 12.9. Numb. 16.22. Eccl.
12.7. And to this purpose Elihu speaks, Job. 33.4. The Spirit of God has made
me, and the Breath of the Almighty has given me life. I have made the Earth,
and created Man upon it, says the Lord, Isa. 45.12. Moreover this is farther
to be remembered concerning the Creation of Man, That God created him after his
own Image, which consisted principally in the divine knowledge Col. 3.10.
Ephesians. 4.24. Genesis 1.26.
of his Mind, and in the natural sanctity of his Will, and in the Dominion, he
gave him over the Creatures here below. And in making of Mankind, he made not
only the Males after his own Image, but the Females also. Adam, presently after
he was created, had all living Creatures (by the Power of God) brought before
him, as to a Lord appointed over them, and he gave them Names either agreeable
to their Natures, or such whereby they might be fitly distinguished one from
the other. But though God had placed Adam in so delightful a Paradise, yet he
saw that his Happiness would be imperfect, except he had a fit Companion:
Therefore, to the high commendation of Matrimony, the Lord said, It is not good
for Man to be alone; I will make him an help meet for him: And accordingly
casting him into a deep sleep, and taking one of his Ribs out of his Side
whilst he slept, he fashioned it into a Woman, and gave her to him for a Wife.
Whereupon Adam said, This is Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh. Then God
establishing a Law of Marriage between Man and Woman, [Matth. 19.4, 5. He that
made them at first, made them Male and Female; therefore shall a Man leave
Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife, and they twain shall be one Flesh.]
He blessed them, and said unto them, Increase and multiply, and replenish the
Earth, and subdue it, Genesis 1.28. that is, Keep it in a State of subjection to
you: For he had given them Dominion over all living Creatures here below, and
for them he had provided a large proportion of Sustenance and Food That Food
they were to live upon at first: But after the Fall Beasts and Birds of Prey,
and Fishes, devoured one another.
to live upon, namely, the Fruits of the Earth; But to Man and Woman (as it is
probable) he allowed liberty to eat Flesh. For though, Genesis 1.29. only Herbs
and Fruits are mentioned as given them for Food, and Living things are not
mentioned as given for Meat, as after the Flood they were, [Gen. 9.3. Every
moving thing that lives shall be meat for you, even as the green herb have I
given you all things;] yet we may also take notice, that neither Corn, nor
Bread, nor other things are named, which no doubt were in use before the Flood:
And Abel being a Keeper of Sheep, surely he did not keep them that their Bodies
might only rot above or under ground. And Man's Body being in a decaying
condition since the Fall, stood in more need of nourishing Meats, than while he
abode in Innocence. Neither were the Herbs or Fruits of that virtue for his
nourishment after the Curse, as before. Neither is it likely that Man should be
barred so needful a nourishment as Flesh or Fish, for so long a time as till
after the Flood, because they were not (possibly) so necessary for him in the
time of Innocence, nor expressed by name for his Food at the time of his
Creation. Besides, seeing after the Fall the Creatures were killed that their
Skins might be for Clothing, and were offered in Sacrifice to God even by
Righteous Abel himself, it is not to be imagined but that they did eat of the
Flesh of them, as in Sacrifices was usual. And therefore for those uses the
distinction of them into clean and unclean was made, even before the Flood, and
seven of the clean reserved for Sacrifice and Food, whereas two sufficed of the
unclean, for preservation of the kind, as we see, Genesis 7.2. Moreover, had they
not made use o^ Cattle for Food in those 1600 Years before the Flood, the Earth
would have bin overburdened with their vast increase and numbers. And the words
of our Savior reflecting upon the Old World for their inordinate eating and
drinking before the Flood came on them, [Mat. 24.38.] implies rather an abuse
in the excess, than an abstinence from the use of Flesh, and other delicacies.
And so much by way of digression concerning that particular. But to return, Sin
being not yet entered into the World, God beheld all his Creatures that he had
made, and approved them all as very good.

Genesis 1. from 24. to the end.

Genesis 2. from 18. to the end.

On the seventh day Seventh day.
God having finished the Works which he intended to Create (the Generations and
Originals whereof have bin before described.) He then rested from all Labor,
and ceased from further creating any thing, and blessing that day and hallowing
it, (that is, exalting it above other days, and setting it apart to an holy
use) he appointed and consecrated it for a Sabbath, because therein he rested,
and (as it were) refreshed himself, as we read Exodus 31.16. Wherefore the
Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath to observe it, through out their
Generations; for a perpetual Covenant: It is a sign between me and them for
ever. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and on the seventh day he
rested, and was refreshed. This is spoken indeed of God in allusion to the
manner of men. ( For the Creator of the ends of the Earth faints not, neith^r
is weary, Isa. 40.28.) But yet this being alleged as the reason of the Sabbath
[Exod. 20.11.] shows it to be instituted before the Fall. Now if God thought
fit to injoin man to set apart one day in seven from the works of his Calling,
even in the state of Innocence (when he had no sin in him) that on that day he
might converse with his Creator more immediately in holy Duties and Exercises,
how much more needful is such an Ordinance to us now in this Corrupt Estate,
who have need of all helps to draw us nearer unto God? And accordingly we find
a Seven-days-Sabbath kept and observed before the giving of the Law on Mount
Sinai, as is plain from Exodus 16.

Genesis 2.1, 2, 3.

SECT. II.
AFter the first Week of the World was ended, God brought (as it seems) the
New married Couple into the Garden of Eden, giving them command to dress and
keep it. And having made them upright, holy and happy, and written his Law upon
their hearts, he was pleased to confer this further favor and honor upon them
to enter into the Covenant See more concerning this Covenant in my Supplement
to Knowledge and Practice, page 64.65, 66.
with them, promising thereby to continue them in this happiness which they now
enjoyed, provided they would forbear to eat of that one Tree in the Garden,
which he called the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil. Before this Covenant,
God had not promised to continue Man in this happy Condition wherein he had
made him, though he should never have sinned. And nothing hindered, before this
Covenant was made, but God might have annihilated man, though he had not
offended. But by this Covenant God was pleased freely and graciously to bind
himself to Continue man in his present happiness, provided he continued in his
Obedience. And thus the Lord was pleased to arm man's mutable Will against
falling, both by the great reward promised in case of his Obedience, and the
great evil threatened, in case of his disobedience, Genesis 2.16, 17. And the Lord
God commanded the man saying, Of every tree of the Garden thou may freely
eat, but of the tree of Knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it,
for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. But the Devil See
Joh. 8.44. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude v. 6. 1 John 3.8.
having himself apostatized from God, and fallen from his own happiness wherein
he was created, he envied our first Parents theirs, and presently contriving
and designing to draw them into Transgression against God, and so to ruin
them, he thereupon makes choice of the Serpent for his Instrument, of which,
it is probable there were diverse sorts created, and some of them of great
bigness, and specious and beautiful to the eye by a comely mixture of various
colors, and such as then (as it seems) did bear their bodis aloft, and went
upright, and were of great subtilty and cunning, and possibly of much more at
that time than since the Fall. This Instrument the Devil makes choice of, and
(as it seems) opened his mouth and caused him to speak articulately (as an
Angel did the mouth of Balaam's Ass, Numb. 22.28.) or else he spoke in him to
Eve. And at the first onset he asked her whither God had forbidden them to eat
of any tree in the Garden? Eve not knowing now (as it is probable) the fall of
Angels, nor suspecting any evil to be in the World, did without any
apprehension entertain conference with the Serpent. And accordingly she tells
him, They might eat of the trees of the Garden, but one tree God had expressly
forbidden them; that tree they might not eat of nor touch (so she heightens the
prohibition, to put the greater obligation on her self to forbear it) under the
severe penalty of Death, which would certainly be inflicted on them, if they
did transgress. The Devil tells her no such thing would ensue, And so he was a
liar, and the Father of it, Joh. 8.4.
but contrarily upon the eating of this Fruit, their eyes would be opened, and
they should suddenly attain to a high degree of Divine Knowledge and Wisdom, in
a manner equal to that of God himself. And therefore he insinuates as if God
out of envy to them had forbidden them the use of this tree. And wresting to a
wrong sense the name of the Tree, He represents knowing good and evil as a
state of Perfection, but well knew that upon the eating thereof they should
soon have a woeful experimental knowledge of good and evil, and that they should
know good by the loss of it, and evil by the sense and feeling of it. It Is
possible the Serpent being subtle by Nature, and instigated by the Devil to do
it, might as a very officious Instrument of his, pluck some of the fruit of
this Tree, and eat of it in the presence of Eve, thereby to show her that the
eating of it did not hurt or bring death upon Him, and why then should She fear
it would do so upon Her? And possibly he might pluck some of the Fruit and
offer it to her, and tempt her to eat thereof. But howsoever it was, Eve (being
Won upon by these fine insinuations) began to doubt of the truth of Gods
threatening, concerning eating of this tree, and possibly being tickled also
with a secret desire, and affectation of an higher estate and greater
knowledge, which she hoped to attain unto thereby, and seeing also the tree to
bear a pleasant Fruit to look upon, she did venture to eat of it (without
consulting her husband first as she should have done) and then having eaten her
self, it is like she was very importunate with her husband to eat also (as
appears from Genesis 3.17.) which He (out of his great affection to Her) did at
last comply with Her in. But presently after they had thus eaten, their Eyes
were opened (as the Devil The Devil having made this great and fatal Conquest
of our first Parents by the Serpent, it seems he much applauded himself
therein, and therefore would be worshipped among the Heathens in that shape.
Hence that direful Custom that the Priests of Bacchus must at their Initiation
Serpentibus Coronati, Evam, Evam, ingeminare. Whence Bacchus is by the Poets
called Evios. So also Aesculapius was worshipped under the shape of a Serpent
at Epidaurus. Salutifero mitis Deus incubat angui, says the Poet. Much more
might be brought out of Clemens Alexandrinus in Exhortatione ad Gentes, and out
of Eusebius de praeparatione Evangelii upon this Argument, to show the Devils
Tyranny over the poor Pagans, in this very shape, the shape of a Serpent. But I
do not wonder so much that the Heathens were so deluded by him. Since I read
what Austin in his Book de Haeresibus reports of certain ancient Heretics
amongst the Christians called Ophitae, who (says he) adorant Serpentem (per
quem Eva fuit decepta) tanquam is esset Christus; Et panem Caenae Domini non
prius Sanctificatum esse putant, quam Serpens ille evocatus lambat, and
attingat eum sive degustet. See more in Danaeus's Notes upon him.
told Eve they should be) but after another manner then he had suggested. For
now their Consciences were enlightened, and they saw the enormity of their sin,
and the woeful misery into which they had brought themselves and their
Posterity. Now they saw they were naked both in Soul and Body, and that they
were bereaved of the Image of God, deprived of the glory in which they were
created, and subjected to inordinate Lusts. Now their bodily Nakedness was
shameful to them, which was not so before, Chapter 2.25.
and they were fain to ty together Figg-Leaves, and so make themselves Aprons
to cover their nakedness. Our first Parents having thus woefully transgressed,
the Lord now came and walked in the Garden toward the cool of the Evening, and
whither appearing in a visible shape (as our Savior did often in the Old
Testament, as a praelude of his Incarnation) or otherwise without it, yet he
made his Voice to be heard by them. They being Conscious of their sin, and
fearing the Majesty of God, and being stricken with horror and amazement, knew
not what to do, and therefore ran and hid themselves among the trees of the
Garden. God calls to Adam, Adam where art thou? He comes trembling, and says he
heard his voice indeed, but he hid himself because he was naked. Observe here,
how he begins to shuffle at the very first. He imputes his hiding himself to
his nakedness. He should have said, they had grievously sinned, and so as
guilty persons were afraid to appear in the presence of a righteous and
powerful Judge. The Lord answers him, Thou were naked before without fear or
shame, [Gen. 2.25.] whence comes it that thou art now ashamed? Have thou eaten
of the Tree I forbad thee? Adam shifts it off from himself to the Woman,
saying, The woman which thou gave me persuaded me to it, and I did eat. Then
the Woman was called and examined; she shifts it off from herself to the
Serpent, saying, The Serpent beguiled me and I did eat. They having no more to
say for themselves. Then the Lord gave Sentence upon all three. First, He
sentences the Serpent because he had been so officious an Instrument of the
Devils in the seduction of our first Parents, that He should be cursed above
all Cattle, and whereas before his natural gate was otherwise, and the green
leaves were appointed to him for food as well as to the other Cattle, [Gen.
1.30.] now he should go on his belly, and breast, and that with more pain and
difficulty then other creeping things, and should feed on the dust of the
earth. And beside the natural antipathy that should be between Mankind and
Serpents, there should a more remarkable enmity appear betwixt Christ (who
should in the fullness of time be born of a Woman, [Gal. 4.4.] and all true
believers that should be Members of him) and the Devil, and his Angels,
together with all the wicked, who are His Seed and Offspring, (Joh. 4.44. You
are of your Father the Devil, etc. [And that the M^ssias, the promised Seed of
the Woman should bruise the Devils Head, that is, d^stroy his Kingdom, and
through the merit of his Death and efficacy of his Spirit dispossess the Devil
of all his power, and tread him under his Churches feet, [Heb. 2.14. 1 John
3.8. Joh. 12.31.] And that the Devil should bruise his heel, that is, assault
Christ himself with temptations, and his Members with various troubles, which
to Him and them should be but as the brusing of the heel. So that the Devil and
his Seed should persecute Christ and his Church and Members, but never be able
to extirpate or destroy them. 2dly, He Sentences the Woman, that she should
have many troubles and sorrows accompanying her Conception, viz. faintness, and
sick fits, and perils of abortion, and should have many troubles and sorrows,
in breeding, bearing, bringing forth, and bringing up her Children. And
further, that her desire should be subject to her husband, and upon his will
and pleasure it should depend, and she should be obliged to bend to her
husbands will, and he should have Dominion over her, and power to command Her,
which would be now, (by reason of the corruption of her nature) oftentimes
troublesome and irksome to Her, whereas in the state of Innocence, it would
have been pleasing and delightful.

3ly, He passes Sentence on the Man, because he had hearkened to the voice of
his Wife, the Earth should be accursed for his sake; so that he should not
sustain himself upon it, but with a great deal of toil and trouble; Thorns and
Thistles it should bring forth to him in abundance, and he must now eat of such
herbs and fruits as the Earth by tillage and husbandry would produce, but not
any more of the herbs and fruits of Paradise. With labor and the sweat of his
brows, he must eat his bread, and get food and nourishment, till he die, and
his body return to dust out of which it was at first formed. Thus we have seen
how God was pleased to relax his own Law, and to reprieve our first Parents,
and not to execute the Sentence of Death immediately upon them. For our
infinitely-wise and gracious God foresaw how he could bring good out of this
great evil, and make this fall of our first Parents tend to the manifestation
of his own justice and mercy; whereas had he instantly destroyed them, He had
put an end to the World as to mankind, and must have made a new new stock and
race of men if he would be glorified by them. God therefore in his infinite
Wisdom and Goodness immediately made another Covenant with our first Parents,
viz. a Covenant of Grace, giving them this glorious promise, That the seed of
the Woman should bruise the Serpents head, which imported that all repenting
Sinners, who should unfeignedly believe in this Seed of the Woman, should not
perish, but have eternal life; And all that would desperately go on in their
sins, not regarding this Savior, should be damned and perish everlastingly.
These Sentences being passed, Adam called the name of his Wife Evah, because
she was then ordained to be the Mother not only of all Men and Women that
should live a natural life, but of those that should live a spiritual life by
faith So Sarah was afterward called the Mother of the faithful, 1 Pet. 3.6.
in her Seed, namely, the promised Messiah.

Now the day on which our first Parents fell, seems to have been the 10th day
after the Creation of the World; which day (probably in Remembrance of so
remarkable a thing, which brought so much misery on Mankind) was appointed
afterward by God himself for the most solemn yearly Fast, and the day of
Atonement, wherein all Strangers as well as Home-born people of the Jews, were
commanded to afflict their Souls, under this severe threatening, that every man
who did not afflict his soul that day, should be destroyed from among the
people, Levit. 16.29. and Chapter 23.29.

SECT. III.
SIn being now come into the World, God teaches Adam and Eve the Rite of
Sacrificing, and how to cloth themselves with the Skins of the sacrificed
Beasts; so that the first thing that dies in the World is a Sacrifice or
Christ in a Figure. Thus He was a Lamb slain from the beginning of the World,
Rev. 13.8. not only in Gods decree, but in a Type.
Then the Lord upbraiding our first Parents for their vain Imagination and
thinking by eating of the forbidden fruit, to become like unto God, in an
ironical way. He says, Behold the Man is become like one of us, to know good
and evil, meaning that by their sin they were become most unlike Him. And
upbraiding them also in like manner, for the certainty of Death they had
brought upon themselves, and lest they should flatter themselves that they
might now take of the tree of Life, and eat and live for ever (as they had
flattered themselves about the other tree.) He ejects them out of the Garden of
Eden, and set Cherubims with a fiery flaming Sword to keep the way leading to
the Tree of Life, to show them they had now no right to it, nor might meddle
with that Sacramental Seal of Life, having by their Disobedience and Sin made
themselves justly liable to Death.

Genesis 3. from 21. to the end.

SECT. IV.
ADam being now expelled Paradise, and appointed to till the ground, begat of
his Wife Cain and Abel, though in what Year of the World is not expressed. Cain
was the first of all Mortal Men that was born of a Woman, And next to him Abel.
Cain was a tiller of the Ground, and Abel a keeper of Sheep. In Cain evidently
appeared the poison the Devil had breathed into fallen Man. And in Abel the
Grace which is given to Gods people in and through Jesus Christ. In process of
time they both Sacrifice. Cain of the fruits of the Earth, Abel of the
firstlings of his Flock, and of the fat and best thereof. And by Faith Abel
offered a more excellent Sacrifice then Cain. By which he obtained witness that
He was Righteous, Heb. 11.4. For God showed by some outward visible sign, that
he had respect to Abels Sacrifice, (either by firing See Levit. 9.24. Judge.
6.21. 1 King. 18.38.
it from Heaven, as some conceive, or some other way) but depised wicked Cains.
This much incensed Cain. Whereupon the Lord tells him that he had no reason to
be thus angry, For if he did well he should surely be accepted; but if he did
ill, the punishment of his sin would lie watching at his door to seize upon
him. And further to allay his anger toward his Brother, He tells him that
Abels desire should still be subject to him as to the first born, and He should
be content that He should be preferred before him. See Chapter 2.16.

But Cain notwithstanding being implacably angry with his Brother, meeting him
one day in the Field, He slew him. Having committed this Execrable Murder, God
calls to him, and asks him, Where his Brother was? He answers, I know not. Am I
my Brothers keeper? Then the Lord tells him that the Voice of his Brothers
blood cried unto Heaven for vengeance against him, and that He had drawn down
upon himself by his heinous transgression this punishment, that the Earth that
received his Brothers blood should plague him, by being unfruitful under all
his pains of husbandry, and that he should be a Fugitive and a Vagabond on the
Earth. Cain being thus sentenced was presently seized with a great terror and
fear, and vented the anguish of his Soul in such expressions as these; My
punishment is greater then I can bear. Behold, O Lord, thou have driven me out
this day from the face of this Earth and Land where I now dwell with my
Parents, and Kindred; and I shall be hid, as it were, and shut up and excluded
from thy Grace and Favor, so that thou will not vouchsafe any gracious glance
toward me, nor accept of any oblation from me; and I shall be in a continual
fear that every one that meets me will slay me. And indeed Seth being born soon
after the murder of Abel, and in the 130th Year of Adam, in that space of time
so many might be born as might justly occasion Cain's guilty Conscience, to
suspect that every one that met him would kill him. But God tells him, He might
be secure as to that, for he would have him preserved alive as a miserable
Spectacle, to terrify others from that heinous Crime of Murder. And
accordingly he would set a mark upon him (possibly some strange trembling of
his head, or some frightful ghasty look) which would make him a horrible
Spectacle of Divine Vengeance to terrify others from so detestable a Crime.
And whosoever should slay him thus marked, and do unto him as he had done to
his Brother, more then a single Vengeance should be taken of him, Genesis 4.15.
Sevenfold, that is manifold according to the usual expression of the
Scripture. See Psalm. 12.6. and 79.12. Job 5.19. Prove. 26.25.


The Lord having (and probably in a visible Apparition) thus sentenced Cain, as
soon as he was got out of the place where God manifested his presence, He fled
as a banished man from his Native Soil, and the Land where his Father dwelt, to
a Land East of Eden, which afterward (from his wandering there) was called the
Land of Nod. Sometime after his Wife bare him a Son, whom he named Enoch, and
in process of time He and his Posterity If Abraham's Posterity in less then 400
years amounted to six hundred thousand persons, how many might Cain's Posterity
be ere he built this City?
beginning to build a City in that Country, He called it by his Sons Name.

Unto this Enoch was born Irad, unto Irad Mehujael, unto Mehujael Methusael,
and unto M^thusael Lamech.

This Lamech (being a Branch of that wicked root of Cain) brings into the
World the Abomination of Polygamy, or having more Wives at once than one. For
He took to himself Ada and Zillah. By the former he had Jabal, who first
invented (at least among Cain's Posterity) the use of Tents, and taught the
right ordering of the Flock; and Jubal who invented Musical Instruments, such
as the Harp and Organ. By the latter, viz. Zillah, He had Tubal-Cain, Ex quo
Gentibus Dei Vulcani nomen.
who wrought in Brass and Iron; and Naamah who (they say) Hartman.
found out the way of ordering Wool, and of Carding and Weaving.

This Lamech presuming possibly upon the strength of his Family, and priding
himself in the Arts invented by his Sons (especially by Tubal-Cain, who was an
Artificer in Brass and Iron, and possibly made Swords and such Instruments of
War.) He thought himself able to resist, and oppose any that should offend Him.
Therefore in a boasting vanting fashion he speaks thus to his wives (who seemed
afraid of him, lest his fierce and boisterous humor should expose him to
danger,) Fear ye not (my Wives) concerning me. For if any man should attempt to
set upon me, I would slay that man by my wounding him, and though a young man,
I would dispatch him by my hurting him. Vide Frid. in loc. page 36.
And if Cain a Fratricid shall be avenged sevenfold, surely Lamech (that kills
a man in his own defense) shall be avenged seventy times sevenfold.

Genesis 4. from 1. to 25.

SECT. V.
AFter the death of Abel, Adam begat Seth in his own likeness, and after his
own Image, Yet God was still the Father and Creator of the Spirits of all
Flesh, Heb. 12.9. Numb. 16.22.
that is, such as he himself now was, namely sinful, and not such as he was
created. Seth was born in the 130th Year of Adam. In the Race of Seth the
account of Years is carried on from the Creation to the Flood. And among these
(as it seems) principally the true worship of God was maintained, which by the
Race of Cain was very miserably corrupted. To Seth at the age of an 105 Years a
Son was born, whom he called Enoch, that is, sorrowful, intimating thereby the
woeful and lamentable condition the World was in at that time by reason of the
corruption and wickedness that was found in the Progeny of Cain. However Seth
and his Offspring did then more openly and solemnly set up and establish the
Worship of God than formerly it had been. Whence it came to pass that they that
persisted in that way of Worship were known by the Name of the Children of God,
Deuteronomy. 14.1.
and they who forsook God, and his sincere Worship were called the Children of
Men, Genesis 6.2.

Genesis 4.25, 26.

SECT. VI.
ENoch being ninty years old begat Cainan: Cainan when he was 70 begat
Mahalaleel, Mahalaleel at 65 years old had Jared born to Him. Jared at 162
years old had Enoch born to him. Enoch at 65 years old had Methusalah born to
him.

Methusalah at 187 had Lamech born to him.

Now Adam the Father of Mankind died, when he had lived nine hundred and thirty
years. Seth the Son of Adam died when he had lived 912 years.

Noah, the tenth from Adam, was born when his Father Lamech had lived 182. And
his Father prophesied of him, that he would be a man of eminent Piety, and such
a Son as would much comfort his Parents, notwithstanding all the miseries,
labors, troubles and sorrows which Sin had brought upon Mankind, and
notwithstanding the many Evils they met with in that wicked and uncomfortable
time.

Enos, the third from Adam, died when he had lived 905 years.

Mahalaleel, the fifth from Adam, died when he had lived 895 years.

Jared, the sixth from Adam, died when he had lived 962 years.

As for Enoch, the seventh from Adam, He was a very holy person, one that
walked with God, and followed not the wickedness of that Age, but with great
courage set himself against it, and being a Prophet (as we read Jude v. 14,
15.) He plainly told them of, and set before them the day of Judgment. Behold
the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon all,
and to convince all that are ungodly of all their ungodly deeds which they have
ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him. I say this holy Person, God was pleased to translate
immediately into Heaven Per Enochi migrationem beatam patet nimium eos falli
qui in hujus mundi caeno spem universam defigunt, ut aeternitatis cognitione ex
animis omnino deleta. And besides this instance before the Law we have a like
example of the translation of Elias after the giving of the Law, etc. 2 Kings
2.11.
(not suffering him to die as other men ordinarily do) when he had lived as
many years as there are days in our Year, viz. 365. Thus it pleased God to show
to that Age that there was a future Celestial State of Bliss and Happiness
that good men both in Soul and Body shall enjoy hereafter.

Genesis 5. whole Chapter.

SECT. VII.
IN the 480th Year of the life of Noah, the Lord seeing that the generality of
the World had corrupted their ways, and that the Professors of his true Worship
(namely, the Posterity of Seth) without any regard to their Profession, had
scandalously and promiscuously Gods Law afterward forbad such Marriages with
such as were out of the Church, Deuteronomy. 7.3, 4. Exodus 34.16. 2 Cor. 6.14.
married with the Daughters of the profane Race of Cain (who were mere natural
unregenerate men) and that they had taken to them Wives according to the liking
of their Eyes, without any regard to Piety or Virtue. God being highly provoked
with this Generation for this and their other great Enormities, He declares
that having now a long time strove with them both by outward Preaching and
Admonitions of the pious Patriarchs, as also by the inward Convictions, and
blessed motions of his own Holy Spirit, He should not now continue to strive
with them, for he perceived they were fleshly (walking after their own lusts
(Jud. v. 16.) and not like to reform and amend. However of his Mercy he would
try them once more, and would allow them the space of an 120 Years to repent
in. 1 Pet. 3.19, 20.
If no amendment appeared in that time, He determined by an Universal Deluge to
destroy from the Earth Men and Beasts, and creeping things, and the Fowls of
the Air. It Is also recorded, that there were in those days Men of huge stature
and strength far beyond others (such as Og, and the Anakims afterward in
Moses's time, Numb. 13.33. and Goliath, and Isbi-benoth in David's, 2 Samuel
21.16.) who being admired for their bodily strength, presumed to oppress
others. For the Curse of God following those unequal Matches of the Children of
Seth with the Children of Cain, many of their seed became such Giants, namely
fierce and cruel men, and played the Tyrants over those among whom they lived.
God therefore seeing the wickedness of Man to be so exceeding great on the
Earth, and that his mind was a Mint of evil Imaginations, and his Heart a Sink
of evil Affections (whereby they evidenced the great depravation of man's Nature
by the Fall) it repented the Lord that he had made Man; that is (speaking of
himself after the manner of men) He declares He intended now to do what men
that repent, and are grieved for what they have done, are wont to do; namely,
to destroy the works of his own hands from off the Earth, Therefore he speaks
thus of himself to the men of that Generation, both that he might stoop to
their Capacity, as also show unto them the height and hainousness of their sins
which had provoked Him to destroy so great a part of those Creatures, which he
had made for his own Glory, and particularly Man, from whom he expected more
eminent Honor and Service. But though God was so highly offended with the
generality for their wickedness, yet Noah being a just man, and upright in his
Generation, and one that walked with God, found Grace in his sight, and being a
Preacher of Righteousness 2 Pet. 2.5.
to that wicked Age, the Lord was graciously pleased to make choice of him and
his Family to be a remnant and a seed out of which Mankind and his Church
should be increased and propagated.

Genesis 6. from 1. to 14.

SECT. VIII.
NOah first began to set his mind to the propagation of an Offspring, when he
was 500 years old, Genesis 5.32. To whom was born first of all Japheth, Genesis
10.21. His second Son was Sem, being two years after the Flood, an 100 years
old, Genesis 11.10. His third Son was Ham. God seeing that all Flesh, that is, all
mankind had corrupted their ways, and that the Earth was filled with violence,
through the wickedness of the Children of men, he tells Noah, that the end of
all Flesh was come before him, that is, that the time of their destruction was
at hand, and he would destroy them from off the Earth.

And accordingly he now commands Noah to build an Ark of Gophir-wood, and to
make it 300 Cubits Understand Sacred Cubits, which were double to the common,
as appears by comparing the 1 Kings 9.15. with 2 Chronicles. 3.15. some understand
hereby the geometrical Cubit six times as long as the common Cubit. And thus we
may easily conceive the capacity of the Ark to be fully sufficient to hold
whatsoever was to be contained in it. And no doubt God instructed Noah as to
the quality and quantity of Provisions, that he was to provide, for all that
were to be in the Ark.
long, 50 broad, and 30 in height, appointing him to make it three stories
high, with several Rooms in it, pitching it within and without. So that the
length was to be ten times more then the height, and six times more than the
breadth, resembling something (as to the fashion of it) a man's Coffin. Into
this Ark Noah was commanded by God to take his Wife, and his three Sons, and
their wives, with some of all living Creatures, which should by his instinct,
and moving, come unto him of their own accord, without his Care. The clean
Beasts, Here is a distinction of clean, and unclean Beasts, and Fowls in Noah's
time, and was instituted in all likelihood soon after the Fall of Man, long
before Moses's time. The use of the seventh of the clean Beasts and Fowls was
for Sacrifice, Chapter 8.20. Of the other six either four must be for meat, and the
other two for preservation of seed. Or four of those seven might be for
increase of those Beasts and Fowls, which were of most use and comfort to
Mankind, and the other two for present food, and the seventh for Sacrifice.
and Fowls should come by seven, and the unclean by two: And with Noah God
makes a Covenant to preserve Him in case he trusted in Him, typifying thereby
the spiritual preservation and salvation of true Believers by Christ from the
Deluge of Gods wrath, 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. Heb. 11.7.

But the old World in the mean time (void of all fear and sense of danger)
followed their old Course, and went on eating and drinking, marrying, and
giving in Marriage, Math. 24.38.

Genesis 6. from 14. to the end.

Genesis 7.1, 2, 3.

SECT. IX.
MEthuselah, the eight from Adam, died in the 969th Year of his Age, and so
out-went all men in length of life, Genesis 5.27. Lamech, the ninth from Adam died
when he had lived 777 years, Genesis 5.31. On the 10th day of the second month, in
the Year of the World, 1656. and in the six hundredth year of the life of Noah,
God commanded him, that he should provide himself to enter into the Ark, and
take the living Creatures into it that should be preserved in it.

Upon the 17th day of the same month Noah, Ferunt eum duabus columnis uni
lateritiae, alteri lapideae coelestium rerum scientiam inscripsisse, e quibus
lapideam suo tempore superfuisse narrat Josephus in Syria.
and his Wife, and Children, and the living Creatures of all sorts being entered
into the Ark, the Lord shut him in, that is, either by the ministry of Angels,
or his own immediate power caused the door on the outside to be made sure and
safe against the rain, and violence of the waters, and so what could not be
done by outward means, he himself was pleased to supply. And thus all vain
Cavils, and Imaginations, which the Curiosity of men may suggest about this
whole matter, may easily be answered by a serious consideration, and belief of
the infinite power and wisdom of God. Noah being thus shut up in the Ark, the
Flood began with the bursting of the Fountains of the great Abyss from benath,
and a continual showring of rain from above 40 days, and 40 nights together.
The waters increased and prevailed on the Earth 150 days, and rose to such a
height that they covered the Mountains, and all things that had life on the
Earth perished.

Genesis 7. whole Chap.

SECT. X.
UPon the 17th day of the seventh month the Waters abated, and the Ark rested
on one of the Mountains of Ararat in Armenia the greater, not far from the
Caspian-Sea; and on the first day of the tenth month, the tops of the Mountains
were seen. And 40 days after, namely, upon the eleventh day of the eleventh
month, Noah opening the Window of the Ark, sent forth a Raven, who flew hither
and thither, fluttering about the Ark, and resting on the top of it, the waters
being not yet dried up. For the Raven being accustomed to live at large, was
weary of the straightness of his Cage, and finding (as it is like) dead bodies
on the Mountains, he was ravenous after such prey, and would be no more
confined to the Ark. Seven days after Noah sends out a Dove, to try if the
waters were abated, but the Dove finding no rest for the sole of her foot (the
Mountain-tops, though bare, being yet very muddy) returned to him again. After
seven days more, he sent her forth again, and in the evening she brought in her
mouth an Olive-leaf, which was a sign the waters were low, and thereby God
comforted Noah, assuring him that his deliverance out of the Ark was near at
hand; And herein also the especial providence of God is to be observed in
preserving the Olive, together with the seminal virtue of other Trees, Plants
and Herbs (though soaked so long under waters) for the replenishing the World
with these kinds of Vegetables again, there not being any seed of them
preserved in the Ark that we read of.

Noah then staying yet seven days more, he sent forth the same Dove Of the
sending forth of the Dove, and her returning to Noah (called by the Heathens
Deucalion) there is express mention in humane Writers, particularly in
Plutarch's Dialog. de Solertia animalium.
again a third time, which returned not to him any more, having found food (as
it seems) now for her self upon the Earth, and taking content in the free Air,
and liberty. This Dove no doubt soon after by the providence of God found her
own Mate.

Genesis 8. from 1. to the 13.

CHAP. II. The second Age of the World from the Flood to the promise made to
Abraham in Vr of the Chaldees, containing the space of 422 years, and ending in
the 2078th year of the World.
SECT. I.
ON the first day of the first month of the six hundredth and first year of
Noah's life, he opened the Window that was in the covering of the Ark, and
looked about him, and found that the waters were dried from off the face of the
Earth; yet so as it still remained moist and dirty, having been so long a time
soaked with such a quantity of moisture. Therefore he stayed yet 55 days more,
namely, to the 27th day of the second month, and then he and all that were with
him (by the Commandment of God) went forth out of the Ark, having continued
therein 375 days, or a full The solar year exceeds the lunar 11 days, and
consists of 365 days, commonly, though every fourth or leap-year, consists of
366 days.
solar year, and ten days more.

Genesis 8. from 13. to 20.

SECT. II.
NOah, when they were come out of the Ark, built an Altar Here is the first
mention of an Altar, and Burnt-Offerings long before Moses, or the Levitical
Law. See Levit. 6.9.
(probably of Earth or Turf) and offered Sacrifices and whole Burnt-Offerings
thereon to the Lord, of clean Beasts and Fowls (according to that form of
Worship which the Lord had before prescribed) in a grateful acknowledgment of
Gods great Goodness and Mercy to them in their preservation from the Flood. And
God smelled a sweet savor therefrom, that is, did graciously accept this
Service Noah had performed, and was highly pleased and delighted with his Faith
and thankfulness. And the Lord said, He would not again Curse the Ground for
man's sake, nor destroy every living Creature thereon by a general deluge; For
he saw, That the imagination of man's heart was evil from his youth, and though
that (among other things) justly provoked him before to destroy the World, yet
he saw that the Children of men being so corrupt by Nature, if he should
proceed against them according to their deserts (and not according to the
riches of his own Mercy) he must be continually punishing and destroying of
them; therefore though he would deal as he thought fit, with particular
sinners, yet he would not at one stroke destroy all Mankind any more. And to
confirm this his gracious Decree, He promises that while the Earth remains,
Seed-time and Harvest, Cold and Heat, Summer and Winter, Day and Night should
not fail or cease; that is, generally it should be so; but yet this did not
hinder, but that he might execute particular Judgments upon particular Places
or Persons to the contrary. Further God now declares, That he was resolved to
restore and repair the natures of things corrupted by the Flood. And then
blessing Noah, and his Sons, he bad them be fruitful and multiply and replenish
the Earth. And he tells them, That the fear and dread of them shall be upon all
bruit Creatures, even to the taming and over-awing the fiercest and strongest
of them, either by force or cunning. Whence it is that the most savage of them
do fear the face of man, though sometimes by the just judgment of God they do
(as it were) rebel, and rise up against him and hurt him. God also now
permits to Noah and his Posterity, to eat Flesh as freely for their food as
Herbs, which grew out of the ground. So that now the Lord restores to Noah and
his Children, the lawful use of those things which were (in a manner) taken
from them by the Flood; yet there was this exception made to his general Grant,
that though they might freely eat of any of the Creatures that were fit for
meat, yet they might not eat Flesh with the blood, or in the blood, but the
Beast must first be killed and cleansed of t^ blood; Which restraint was in all
probability made to deter them from cruelty, and shedding one another blood.
And to enforce the observance of this Command the more upon them, he tells them
that as to their own lifeblood, if it were at any time shed by a Beast, of a
Beast it should be required, that is, the Beast should be put to death for it.
See Exodus 21.28. And if it were shed by man, of man it should be required, let
the Murderer be of what quality or condition soever. He further declares, That
whosoever sheds man's blood (that is, wittingly, wilfully and unlawfully,) by man;
(that is, by the Magistrate) See Numb. 35.19, 21, 27. Romans 13.4.
shall his blood be shed; For God made man in his own Image, and though that
Image be much impaired by the Fall, yet there are still some remainders of it
in man, which God cannot endure should be defaced. And further, God was now
pleased to make a Covenant with Noah and his Posterity, and with every living
Creature (which as for man's sake they were at first created, so for man's sin
they had been in the Flood destroyed) that he would not any more destroy Man
and Beast by an Universal Deluge which should cover the whole Earth with
waters, though he might punish particular Countries with Floods and
Inundations. And as a sign and pledge of this Covenant, He would give them the
Rainbow, which though it was naturally in the Clouds before, yet now it should
be a particular token of this Covenant, and of Gods Oath See Esaias 54.9.
annexed to it, and should assure the truth and performance of it.

Genesis 8. from 20. to the end.

Genesis 9. from 1. to 18.

SECT. III.
NOah now began to fall to Husbandry, and planted a Vineyard. But (it seems)
not knowing at first the Property, Quality, and Virtue of the Wine (which was
the fruit of his Vineyard, and possibly being over-joyed when he tasted such
excellent and delicious Fruits of his own Labors, and allowing himself a
little more freedom in drinking thereof then in all likelihood he would have
done, had he known the power and strength of the Wine; He did (it seems) drink
something too liberally of it, and was thereby so disordered, that in his
drunken-sleep he unawares uncovered himself; which his wicked Son Cham seeing,
in a way of derision spoke of it to his Brothers. But they were so far from
joining with him in this his ungracious behavior toward his Father, that they
took a Garment, and laying it upon both their Shoulders, with their faces
turned from their Father, they went backed toward him, and when they came at
him let it fall upon him, and so covered him. However, this base behavior of
Cham coming to Noah's knowledge, He does as a Prophet (by the inspiration of
Gods Spirit) denounce a Curse upon him. And though he names him not, but Cainan
his 4th Son Genesis 10.6.
(who possibly might join with his Father Cham in this wicked fact) yet he
denounces a Curse upon him, and his Posterity, and particularly and most
remarkably on the Canaanites, who were afterward conquered and subdued by the
Israelites (called here Cainan's Brethren, because they were the Posterity of
Shem, who was Brother of Cham and Father of Cainan) yea and by those Western
Nations also that were the Posterity of Japhet. So that Cainan should be a
Servant of Servants, and his lot should be a servile and slavish condition.
Noah having thus cursed Cham, He in the next place solemnly and prophetically
blesses Shem, out of whose Loins the Messiah was to spring: He declares by the
Divine Illumination of the Spirit, that God would enter into a special Covenant
with the Posterity of Shem, This Shem lived to the 50 year of Isaac, Genesis
11.10. and is the only person mentioned in the Scripture that lived to see his
Posterity of the 10th Generation.
taking them for his peculiar people, and binding himself to be their God. And
therefore speaking of this Extraordinary Privilege belonging to Shem, He
breaks forth into a solomn thanksgiving to God for it, saying, Blessed be the
Lord God of Shem, intimating that Shem must needs be blessed, to whom God would
be a God in Covenant; see Psalm. 144.15. Having thus blessed Shem, he comes then
to Japhet, Frequent mention of Japetus among the Heathen, Son of Titan, and
Terra.
concerning whom He prophesies, That God would persuade Japhet to dwell in the
Tents of Shem, that is, that the Gentiles (the Posterity of Japhet) after they
had bin a long time separated from the Church of God, namely, the Israelites
(Shem's Offspring) should at last be persuaded by the preaching of the Gospel
to join with them in the worship of the same God, and in the profession of the
same Faith, and so should become Fellow Members of the same Church. See Ephesians.
2.13. So that this Prophecy was not to be fulfilled till the Gentiles became
converts to Christ, and so came into the Tents of Shem, that is, into the
Communion of the true Church and people of God.

Genesis 9. from 18. to the end.

SECT. IV.
NOah Noah is thought to be the person whom the Heathens meant by Saturn under
whom they say was the Golden Age. From Noah's being once overtaken with Wine,
the liberty of Saturnalia might take rife. A feast of five days, and a time of
great revel^ing and lib^^ty kept in Dece^^^r.
from the Flood to the Division of the Earth, had a natural Dominion over all
Mankind, and in that Age there was but one Language.

Two years after the Flood Shem being an hundred years old begat Arphaxad, who
is thought to be his eldest Son [see Genesis 11.10.] though Elam and Assure be
named before him, [ Genesis 10.22.] the Scripture in Genealogies not always
observing the Order of Birth. Arphaxad at the age of 35 begat Salah, Genesis
11.12. [Between these is inserted Cainan as the Son of Arphaxad, and Father of
Salah. Luke 3.35, 36. The Evangelist herein following the Translation of the
Septuagint, See my H^rmony of Four Evangelists, page 20. where much more is
spoken to this particular.
which was then much in use, and possibly more known then the authentic Hebrew
Text] Salah at the age of 30 years begat Heber, Genesis 11.14. When Heber had
lived 34 years He had a Son born whom he called Peleg, foreseeing that in his
days the Earth would be divided [Gen. 11.16. and 10.25. and 1 Chr. 1.19.) About
the time of Pelegs birth, about an 100 years after the Flood (the whole Earth
being then of one Language) the Grandchildren of Noah went from those Eastern
Parts whither they first repaired from the Mountains of Ararat unto the plain
of Shinar or Chaldea, where they impiously laid their Heads together to do
something remarkable that might get them a Name, and be a Monument of their
Prowess to after Ages. And whereas hitherto the Heads of Families did in a mild
and gentle way order the rest, (and rather by the voluntary submission of those
that were governed, then by the compulsion of power) now at the instigation of
Nimrod He is thought to be the Bacchus celebrated by the Poets, being Bar Chus,
the Son of Chus.
Son of Chus, and Grandchild of Cham (who was a great Tyrant, Oppressor and
Hunter of men. [See Jer. 16.16.] and that openly without fear, or regard of God
(insomuch that a Tyrant was by a common Proverb called another Nimrod.) They
went in hand to build the City of Babel, and a Tower in it which they designed
should reach to the Skies, and should be not only a standing Monument of their
prowess, but should secure them from danger in case another Deluge should
overwhelm the Earth. And accordingly in order hereunto they fall to making of
Brick, and had a kind of natural pitchy slime (that was plentiful in those
parts) for mortar. And they thought to do this memorable Hence the Fable took
its original of the Giants fighting against the Gods, and making way to Heaven
by heaping Mountain upon Mountain, which attempt was blasted by Jupiters
Thunderbolts. Omnis Fabula sundatur in Historia. Verulam.
thing whilst they were together, lest if they should be afterward, dispersed
abroad upon the face of the Earth into several Colonies, they might not have
opportunity to do it.

The Lord taking notice of their Attempts, and laughing at this their arrogance
and folly, by way of irony and derision, he says, Surely this people mean not
to be restrained from any thing they have a mind to do. I will go down
therefore and confound their Language. Which accordingly he did, and so they
could not understand one another, nor go on with their Work. From which
confusion of Languages, the place derived its name of Babel. Hereupon those
among them that could make shift to understand one another agreed to go, and
dwell together. And so that great Company was forced to disperse, and were
scattered from thence upon the face of the Earth, in several Companies and
Colonies. And the Language before used of all continued with Heber the Father
of Peleg, which did give occasion to his Posterity to be distinguished from all
others by the Name of Hebrews, and that Language to be called the Hebrew.

But notwithstanding this dispersion, Nimrod (it seems) was a mighty man among
those that adhered to him, and having got Babel, Erech, Accad and Chalne in the
Land of Shinar, He was not therewith content, but coveting more and larger
Dominions, he advanced further into the Land of Assyria, and there he built
Nineveh with three Cities more, as we find Genesis 10.11. For out of that Land
(viz. of Shinar) went out [Nimrod] into Assure [ or Assyria] and built Nineveh.
And that which confirms this reading is that in Mich. 5.6. where Assyria is
called the Land of Nimrod. And thus Nimrod laid the Foundation of the first
Monarchy, The beginning of the first Monarchy in the year of the World, 1788. In
the 132 year after the Flood, and 290 years before the promise made to Abraham
in Ur of the Caldees.
namely the Assyrian. Concerning which it will be requisite I speak something
(though briefly) for the clearing of many passages that we shall afterward
meet with in this Sacred History.

Genesis 10. from 8. to 13.

Genesis 11. from 1. to the 10.

In the Year of the World, 1788. ( juxta Bucolzerum, p. 3.) Nimrod began the
Assyrian or first Monarchy, in the 132 year after the Flood, and 290 years.
before the Promise made to Abraham in Vr of the Caldees.

This Monarchy ended in Belshazzar, Anno Mundi, 3477. and so the continuance of
it was 1689 years.

Of these Monarchs.

The first was Nimrod as we showed before.

His Successors are said to be,

2. Belus.

3. Ninus his Son, who set up his Father Belus his Statue to be worshipped,
which gave (as it is said) the first occasion to Idolatry and Image Worship;
which Image of his, some say continued until Daniels time, when it was
destroyed by Cyrus, upon the discovery of the Imposture of Bells Priests. See
the History of Bell.

4. Semiramis, wife to Ninus, who obtaining of him to have all the power of
Royalty put into her hands for five days, in that space of time made him away,
and reigned in his stead. After her death she was feigned to be turned into a
Dove (not sure for her innocence) whence it was that the Babylonians carried a
Dove in their Banners.

5. Ninyas.

As for the rest that follow from hence to Sardanapalus, there is little
mentioned of them in History, save only their bare Names, and the years that
they reigned.

6. Sardanapalus, who giving himself up to all shameful dissolutions, Two of
his great Commanders, viz. Belochus (Governor of Babylon) and Arbaces
(Governor of Media) conspire against him and overthrow him, and force him at
last to burn himself in a pile of wood. Upon his fall the Empire was divided
into two Principalities. Belochus possessed himself of Assyria and Chaldea. And
Arbaces of Media. His Posterity (that were eminent) were these, Cyaxares,
Astiages, Darius.

The Posterity of Belochus, This is He that is said to have humbled himself at
the preaching of Jonah, and afterward invaded Israel in the time of Menahem.
that were of note were these:

Phul.

Tiglath-pilesax.

Salmanassar.

Senacharib.

Esar-haddon.

Merodach-Baladon, who being Governor of Babylon under Esaraddon, destroyed
his Master, and seized upon Babylon for himself, and made that the Seat of the
Empire, whereas before from Sardanapalus his time to Esaraddon, Nineveh had
been the Royal Seat. He is thought to be Nabulazzar or Nabopollassar. It Is like
he was a famous Astronomer, and in honor of him an Epoch or account of Time
was instituted and observed, which began on the 26th day of February, A. M.
3258.

Nabuchodonasar the Great, who brought this Monarchy to its highest pitch.

Evilmerodach.

Belshazzar, who was Conquered by Cyrus, and so this Monarchy was swallowed up
by the Persian.

SECT. V.
HAving showed how Nimrod began the first Monarchy, it will be requisite before
we proceed any further to give a short Narration how the Earth was at first
divided among the Sons of Noah, and those that descended from them, though it
has since (in several parts of it) changed its Inhabitants. And the scope of
this account is princially to show from which of them the Messiah was to
spring, and among which people in the mean time the Church of God was
maintained. As also to make known the Original of several Nations, and the
several Countries they inhabited, which will serve very much to the clearing of
many places in the Scripture, as will appear in the Sequel.

Noah had three Sons, Sem, Japhet, and Ham.

De his omnibus vide Bocharti. Phaleg. lib. 2.
The Inheritance of the Sons of Sem was the choicest of all, and contained
within Asia.

Sem had five Sons, Elam, Assure, Arphaxad, Lud, Aram, Genesis 10.22.

Elam. Of Elam descended the Elamites or Persians, Neighbors to the Medes.
Susan the Metropolis of the Susians, is by Daniel placed in the Province of
Elam, Dan. 8.2.

Assure. From Assure descended the Assyrians, and from him Assyria took its name.
The Metropolis of which was Nineveh.

Arphaxad. From him Arphaxitis, a part of Assyria, seems to have received its
denomination.

Lud. From him came the Lydians in Asia the less, where Croesus was King.

Aram. Of him descended the Aramaeans or Syrians. Hence Padan-Aram, Genesis 25.20.
Aram-Naharaim, Chapter 24.10. Aram-Damasar, 2 Samuel 8.5, 6. Aram-Zobah, Psalm. 60.
Aram-Maachah, 1 Cron. 19.6. Aram-Beth-Rehob, 2 Samuel 10.6. are spoken of as
several Provinces of Syria.

Aram had four Sons, which in the 1 Chronicles. 1.17. are reckoned among the Sons of
Sem, viz. Huz, Hul, Gether, and Mesech.

Hur or Vz. He by the general consent of the Ancients built Damascus. There
were two besides of this Name. Vz the Son of Nachor the Brother of Abraham,
Genesis 22.21. Whose Land is called the Land of Vz, [Job 1.1. There was a man in
the Land of Uz, whose name was Job.] This probably was in Arabia the desert.
And Vz of the Posterity of Esau, or Edom, Genesis 36.28. who fixed in Arabia the
stony, on the borders of Canaan, from whom Idumaea is called the Land of Vz,
Lam. 4.21. Rejoice and be glad O daughter of Edom, that dwell in the Land of
Uz.

Hul. His Posterity are said to inhabit that part of Armenia, which is called
the Palmyrenians.

Gether. He was the Father of the Bactrians, a people of Scythia, according to
Josephus.

Mesech, or Mash, whose Posterity inhabited (as some think) the upper part of
Syria Cilicia, and Mesopotamia about the Mountain called Masius.

Now Arphaxad, the third Son of Sem, begat Salah, and Salah begat Eber, and
Eber, besides Peleg, had another Son named Joctan, whose thirteen Sons Moses
mentions as the Founders of so many Nations. Their Seat Arabia the happy, as
the great Bochartus conjectureth.

Of Sheba (one of them) came the Sabaeans, who dwelt by the Red Sea. This Son
of Joctan lived on Robbery. The rest by Commerce with other Nations. Ophir his
11th Son seems to have given name to that part of Arabia near the Sabaeans,
where there was much gold. Another Ophir there was in India in the Island
Taprobane. And from this man's Land it is probable Solomon's Ships fetched Gold, 2 Chronicles. 9.10. called also Gold of Parvaim, 2 Chronicles. 3.6. And thus much of the
Inheritance of the Sons of Sem. Japhets portion was this; To Japhet fell a
considerable part of Asia, and all Europe. His Posterity did spread themselves
(having first sat down in Asia the less) mostly toward the Northern and
Western parts.

Moses reckons seven of his Sons, and as many Nephews.

Gomer. This man's Posterity inhabited the North quarter of Asia the less.
Wherefore Northern Nations, Ezekiel. 38.6. And therefore to them we may assign
Phrygia, Pontus, Bythinia, and part of Galatia. And whereas they spread
themselves Westward also, they are withal held to be the Progenitors of those
people, whose Countries the Gallo-Grecians afterward inhabited.

Magog. From him descended the Scythians, or Tartarians. Gog and Magog being
Sythia about Caucasus; which the Colchi, and Armenians (whose Language was half
Chaldaean) called Gog-Hasan (i. e. the Fort of Gog) and thence the Greeks
Caucasus.

Madai. From whom the Medes descended.

Javan. From him descended the Jones (or all that inhabited Greece from Thrace
Isthums of Corinth, the Macedonians being included.) Alexander is signified by
Daniel under the Name of the King of Javan, Chapter 8.21.

The Sons of Javan were four.

Elisha. From him Elis is denominated, the most ancient, and ample Region of
Peloponnesus.

Tarshish. From whom Tarsus the great City in Cilicia took its name. Some
understand Tartessus a City of the Iberians, or Spaniards. Besides this there
was another Tarsis in the Indian-Sea, whither Ships went from Ezion-Geber, 2 Chronicles. 20.36.

Chittim. He according to Josephus possessed himself of the Island Cyprus,
where Citium, the Native place of Zeno the Stoic. And from hence, according to
him, the Hebrews called all Islands, and Maritime places by the name of
Chethim. The Romans are by Daniel signified under this name. And Chittim
imports the same thing with Latium betokening to lie hid. The opinion therefore
of Josephus is very probable, that those Islands and Coasts of the
Mediterranean might be known to the Hebrews under the name of Chettim.

Dodanim, or rather Rhodanim. The descendents of him. Bochartus places in Gaul
Rhodanus, now called Rhene. Rhodanim, he says, signifies yellow or
Saffron-coloured, which agrees well with the color of the hair of the hair of
the ancient Gauls. Wherein the Britans also showed themselves descended of the
same stock as Jornandes judges.

Tubal and Mesech (the fifth and sixth Sons of Japhet) are joined in Scripture
most Bochartus understands by Tubal and Mesech the Moschi and Tibareni.

Tubal and Mesech are noted by Ezekiel to abound in Slates, and Brass, which by
the consent of Authors fitly agrees with the Regions of Cappadocia.

Thiras. From Thiras most Authors derive Thrace. By these were the Isles of the
Gentiles divided in their Lands, Genesis 10.5. Thus the Sons of Japhet, according
to their several Languages, did plant several Colonies in all their Regions and
Countries of Europe, and those that border the Mediterranean-Sea, which are now
called the Isles of the Gentiles, not properly, but because they so lay along
the Sea, that they might seem to be Islands.

And thus we have seen what was Japhets portion, which was very large. For unto
it belonged all Europe, besides Asia the less, Media, part of Armenia, Iberia,
Albania, and those vast Tracts toward the North, inhabited of old by the
Scythians, and now by the Tartars. To say nothing of the new World, into which
it is probable the Scythians passed by the Streights of Anian. To his Posterity
also belong the Northern parts, which by Jornandes (a Gothish Historian) are
deservedly called the Workhouse of people, and sheaths of Nations. We come now
to consider Chams portion. Cham's portion.
Cursed Cham was not excluded from earthly blessings.

To his lot fell Egypt, and all Africa, a great part of Syria and Arabia,
besides Babylonia, Susiana, Assyria, and other Countries, which his Grandson
Nimrod possessed himself of. David often calls Egypt the Land of Cham, or
Ham. In Arabia and Africa the name of Ammon (the aspiration being taken away)
was universally known, as appears by Amon a River there, and from the
Promontory Ammonium, and from the people being called Ammonij, and from the
Ammonian Country, where was the famous Oracle of Ammon, nay all Africa was
called Ammonia.

Cham had four Sons, Chus, Mizraim, Phut, and Canaan.

Chus. By the Land of Chuz in the Scripture is meant part of Arabia inhabited
by the Chusaeans, called also Chuthaeans; of whom were the Madianites, and
Sephora the wife of Moses. They inhabited above Egypt, upon the Persian-Gulf,
in part of Arabia the Stony, and the happy, and are thought by some to be the
same with the ancient Scenites, from their dwelling in Tents.

Chus had six Sons, Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, Sabtocha and Nimrod. And
Raamah had two, Sheba, and Dedan. All these inhabited about the Persian-Sea,
except Nimrod, whom Moses affirms to have fixed his Seat at Babel.

Mizraim. He was the Father of those that inhabited Egypt. From Mizraim Moses
deriveth seven people, or Nations, Ludim, Anamim, Lehabim, Naphtuhim,
Pathrusim, Casluhim (out of whom came Philistim) and Captorim. Josephus says
the Sons of Mizraim possessed all the Country lying between Gaza and Egypt,
though the Philistim only gave name to it, from whom the Greeks called it
Palaestina.

By Ludim, Bochartus proves the Ethiopians to be meant, whom he will have a
Colony of the Egyptians. By Andmim the Nomades of Africa, who inhabited about
Ammonis. Lehabim are thought to be the same with the Lybians bordering upon
Egypt, from whom this denomination might pass to those that inhabited the
greater part of Africa. Naphtukim he places in Marmaria upon the
Mediterranean-Sea. Parthrusim he places in Thebais, a Province of Egypt called
Pathros, and by many distinguished from Egypt though peopled from it. Captorim
seem to be Neighbors to Casluhim, from both which the Philistines seem to have
descended, as appears from Amos 9.7. Are ye not as Children of the Ethiopians
unto me, O Children of Israel, says the Lord? have not I brought up Israel out
of the Land of Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Assyrians from
Kir?

Phut. The third Son of Cham, who divided Africa with his Brother Mizraim. To
Mizraim fell Egypt, and so much of Africa, as reached to the lake Tritonis,
which divides Africa into two equal parts. To Phut fell all from the Lake as
far as the Atlantic Ocean, as may be gathered from Herodotus, lib. 4.

Cannan. The fourth son of Cham. His Posterity were Sidon (his Firstborn) and
Heth. From him descended the Jebusite, the Emorite, the Girgasite, the Hivite,
the Archite, the Sinite, the Arvadite, the Zemarite, and the Hamathite. By
Canaan was inhabited the Land, which afterward bore his Name, and was conquered
by the Hebrews. His Family was propagated as far as the Sea, the Phaenicians
being descended of him. The Scripture calls Phaenicia the Land of Canaan.

Sidon was the Father of the Sidonians, whose City was more ancient then Tire,
Mother of it. For the Sidonians led a Colony thither, and founded Tire two
hundred and forty years before the building of Solomon's Temple, as Josephus
reports. Antiq. lib. 8. c. 2.

The Children of Heth dwelt in the Land of Canaan about Hebron, and Barsheba
South, and from them the Anakims descended.

The Jebusites held Jerusalem, and the Castle or Fort of Zion until David's

The Amorites passed the Mountains of Judea, and passing over Jordan made War
Moabites. And they seized upon Basan, Hesbon, and all the Country lying between
the River Jabbek and Arnon. In memory whereof one of their Poets wrote a Poem,
which Moses has inserted into his Writings, Numb. 21.27. Wherefore they, that
speak in Proverbs, say come into Heshbron, let the City of Sihon be built, and
prepared.

The Girgasites seem to have continued about Gadara over against Galilee beyond
Jordan till Christ's time, Matthew. 8.28. And when he was come to the other side,
to the Country of the Gergesens.

The Hivites dwelt in Mount Hermon toward the East of the Land of Canaan, from
Gibeonites (living nigh to Jerusalem) and the Sichemites (dwelling near to
Samaria) more toward the West.

The Archites inhabited Area a City in Libanus.

The Sinites had a City called Sin, not far from Area.

The Arvadites or Aradites possessed the Island Aradus on the Coast of
Phaenice, at Eleutherus.

The Zemarites dwelt (as it is thought) about Tinesa, a notable City of
Coelosyria, Orontes, and built Zemarajim in the Tribe of Benjamin.

The Hemathites were seated about Epiphania a City of Syria.

This was the Inheritance of the Sons of Canaan, whose Border was from Sidon as
thou come to Gerar unto Gaza, as thou go unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and
Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha or Lysa a City of the Arabians in the mid
way between the dead, and the Red Sea.

Thus was the Earth (as far as we can understand) anciently divided, and
possessed after the Flood, though it has since in several parts of it changed
its Inhabitants.

Genesis 10. whole Chapter.

SECT. VI.
THe years of man's life Man's life was halfed or thereabout at the time of
Flood, as we may see by comparing Genesis 11.11. with Genesis 5. And again shortened
about another half at the building of the Tower of Babel, Chapter 10.25. and 11.29.
And well nigh the third time between the Times of Abraham and Moses, Chapter 25.7.
Psalm. 90.10.
were now cut shorter by one half then they were before, as we may see Genesis
11.19, etc.

We showed Sect. 4. that Sem begat Arphaxad, and Arphaxad Salah, and Salah
Heber, and Heber Peleg, and unto Peleg Reu was born, when he was 30 years old,
Genesis 11. 18, 19.

Serug was born to Reu when he was 32 years old, Genesis 11.20.

Nahor was born to Serug when he was 30 years old, Genesis 11.22.

Terah was born to Nahor, when he was 29 years old, Genesis 11.24.

When Terah had lived 70 years, there was born unto him Haran his eldest Son.
For though Abram be set first, Genesis 11.26. yet that was not because he was
eldest, but because he was worthiest. The like we read before of Sem, Chapter 5.32.
and Chapter 10.1.
For he came not into the World till 60 years after; His Brother Nahor being
between him and Haran. As for Haran he died at Vr of the Chaldees in his
Fathers life time, and presence, and left three Children, to wit, one Son named
Lot, and two Daughters, viz. Milchah, who was afterward married to his next
Brother (and her Uncle) Nahor, and Sarai after married to his third Brother
(and her Uncle) Abram, Genesis 11. from 26. to 30.

SECT. VII.
PEleg, the sixth from Noah, died 209 years after the Birth of Rue, Genesis 11.19.
Nahor, the ninth from Noah, died 119 years after the Birth of his Son Terah,
Genesis 10.25.

Noah died when he had lived 950 years in all, and 350 of them after the Flood,
Genesis 9.28.

In the two thousand and eighth year of the World was Abram born, and in the
130th year of his Father Terah's life. For he was 75 years old when Terah his
Father died, who lived two hundred and five years, Genesis 11.32.

In the year of the World two thousand and eighteen Sarai (who was also called
Iscah, the Daughter of Haran, Abram's eldest Brother) was born, being ten years
younger then Abram, see Genesis 17.17.

Reu, the seventh from Noah, died two hundred, and seven years after the Birth
of Serug, Genesis 11.21.

Serug, the eighth from Noah, died two hundred years after the Birth of Nahor
Genesis 11.23.

SECT. VIII.
NEar about this time Chedorlaomer King of Elam, or Elamais, a Country in
Persia, with the assistance of three other petty Kings (whereof one is called
the King of Nations, because (as it is probable) his Subjects were of several
Nations) subdued the Kings of Pentapolis, to wit, Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah,
Seboim, and Bela or Zoar, all which served him twelve years.

Genesis 14. from 1. to 5.

SECT. IX.
TErah with Nahor, and Abram (his two Sons) now living at Vr of the Caldees,
and there (according to the custom of that place) being Idolaters, and serving
other Gods, [Joshuah 24.2.] God was pleased of his free Grace, and mercy to
choose Abram to be the Father of his peculiar people, when there was nothing in
him to move the Lord to show him such special favor. And accordingly God was
pleased to call As he raised this righteous man from the East, so he called him
to his foot, to follow him, and his direction, Esaias 41.2. Genesis 15.7. Neh. 9.7.
Acts 7.2, 3, 4.
him about the 70th year of his age to leave that Idolatrous place, and to go
into a Land which he should show him, promising to make of him a great Nation,
and to bless him, and in him That is in his Seed Christ, Genesis 18.18. Acts 3.25,
26. Gal. 3.18, 14. Thus the Gospel was preached to Abram.
all the Families of the Earth. Abram obeying He went out by faith, not knowing
whither he went, Heb. 11.8.
this Call, persuaded his Father Terah to go along with him, and also his
Brother Nahor, and so with Lot his Nephew (the Son of Haran) and Sarai his
Wife, they came from Vr This Ur, which they left, was the habitation of the
Priests and Mathematicians, who from their Art were styled by the name of
Chald^ans. By which name even in Chaldaea it self those Genetbliaci, or Casters
of Nativities were distinguished, and known from the rest of the Magi, or wise
men of that Country, Dan. 2. v. 2, 10. Chapter 4.7. Chapter 5.11. And from these Terah,
and his Sons seem to have learned their Idolatry, Joshua 24.2.
to Charran a City in Mesopotamia, Mesopotamia is not to be taken only for that
Region, which lies between Euphrates and Tygris, but in a large sense, as
comprehending Chaldaea under it, Acts 7.2, 3, 4.
and there made their abode by reason of the great infirmity and sickliness of
Terah, who about five years after, (when he had fulfilled 205 years) there
died, Genesis 11.31, 32.

Genesis 12. from 1. to 5.

CHAP. III. The third Age of the World from the Promise made to Abraham in Ur
of the Chaldees, unto the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, containing
a space of four hundred and thirty years, and ending in the 2508th year of the
World.
SECT. I.
THe Lord having called Abram (as we showed in the foregoing Chapter) when he
lived at Vr of the Chaldees to leave that Country, and to go to a place that
he should show him, promising to bless him, and that in his Seed all the
Nations of the Earth should be blessed. Abram readily obeyed this Call, and
accordingly removed from thence, and went to Charran. From which Promise and
Abrams departure (which immediately followed) are to be deduced the 430 years
which Abram and his Posterity were to spend in foreign Lands. See Exodus 12.40,
41. And from this Promise and Covenant to the giving of the Law (which was
three months after the Israelites departure out of Egypt, and which could not
disannul this Covenant, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.17, 18) were 430 years.

At Charran Abram stayed about five years till his Father died; and then
following the Call of God (being 75 years of age) he took Sarai his Wife, and
Lot his Nephew, with all the substance they had gotten, and the Menservants
and Maidservants they had acquired Animas quas sibi comparaverant vel Emerant,
and quas de idololatria converterant. Tenent Hebraei Abram viros, Saram
mulleres in Dei cultu instituisse, atque ita eos Deo procreasse. Non enim alios
servos habere voluerunt praeter cultores Dei. Hic primum fit servitutis mentio.
Vatablus.
in Charran, and journied on till at last they came into the Land of Canaan,
(the Canaanites a cursed Idolatrous people being now the Inhabitants thereof)
through which they passed till they came to a place called Sichem, and the plain
of Moreh, where God appearing to Abram, promised him that to his Seed he would
give that Land. Hence called the Land of Promise, Heb. 11.9. The Lords Land,
Hos. 9.3. The holy Land, Zach. 2.12. The Land of Emmanuel, Isa. 8.8. And this
was a Type of Heaven which Abram looked for, Heb. 11.9, 10.
Whereupon in that place he built an Altar See Genesis 8.20.
to the Lord, that He might offer up his Sacrifices, Prayers and Thanksgivings,
and perform the outward Worship God required of Him among his own Company, in
opposition to the Idolatry of the Canaanites. From thence he removed into the
Hill-Countrey called Luz (and in aftertimes known by the name of Bethel, Genesis
28.19.) where again he built an Altar, and called upon the Name of the Lord.
And from thence holding on his Journey he came at last into the South part of
the Country which looks toward Egypt.

Genesis 12. from 4. to 10.

SECT. II.
IT pleased the Lord now to put Abrams Faith upon a new Trial. For not long
after this God visited this Land of Canaan (which of it self was very fruitful)
with a sore Famine, being provoked thereunto by the Iniquity of the Inhabitants
thereof. See Psalm. 107. v. 33, 34. Hereupon to avoid this Calamity, Abram was
forced to go down from thence into Egypt, where (as Josephus tells us) he
taught the Egyptians Astrology and Arimethick, which before they were ignorant
of. When he came near unto Egypt, he began to be in great apprehensions of the
danger his life was in by reason of Sarai, if the Egyptians should take her to
be his Wife. For though she was at this time 65 years old, yet she was very
fair and beautiful in her self, and much more if compared with the swarthy
Complexions of the Egyptian-Women. Hereupon, to prevent danger to himself, he
desired her to say, if she were asked, That she was his Sister. Nepotes
Neptesque ab Hebraeis fratres and sorores vocantur, Genesis 13.8. and 14.14.16.
Now though this was in a sense true (as Abraham afterward told Abimelech upon
another occasion, Genesis 20.12.) because she was his Brothers Daughter, (and such
in those days were usually called Brothers and Sisters,) yet by her saying, She
was his Sister, Abram intended the Egyptians should understand that she was not
his wife, but free to be married to another. And so through his over great fear
and solicitude for himself, and too much distrusting Gods Providence and Care
over him. He exposed her to great and evident danger. For Pharaoh King of Egypt
being informed of her by his Courtiers, He sent for Her to his house, In Domum]
non ad stuprum sed ut esset uxor saltem secundaria. Ad se Reges non statim
admittebant nisi prius purgatas and praeparatas, ut patet ex lib. Ester.
that is, (as it is probable) ordered Her to be brought to the Royal Seraglio of
his Women, to be fitted and prepared there for some time, according to the
custom of those Countries, that the King might afterward take her to wife (see
Ester 2.9.) In the mean time Pharaoh was very kind and munificent to Abram for
her sake, and much enriched him by many great Gifts and Presents. But now on a
sudden God plagued Pharaoh and his House. What those Plagues were he inflicted
on them, the Scripture being silent, it is a foolish Curiosity too nicely to
enquire, but they were such Plagae immissae quaecunque fuerunt, ardorem ejus
represserunt.
as by the overruling Providence of God preserved the Chastity of Sarai, and
brought Pharaoh to understand that she was Abrams wife. Whereupon He restored
her to him again, and quietly dismissed them, giving his Servants charge to see
them safely conducted out of his Dominions.

Genesis 12. from 10. to the end.

SECT. III.
UPon this Abram with Sarai his Wife and Lot his Nephew return again into the
Southern parts of Canaan; And here let us observe the wonderful and gracious
Providence of God to Abram. Abram intended by going down into Egypt only to
keep himself from starving, but behold he Returns very rich in Cattle, and
Silver, and Gold; so early did he experience the truth of Gods Promise to him.
Being entered now again into Canaan, he marches on to the Place between Bethel
and Ai, where before he had pitched his Tent, and had built an Altar, and there
again called upon the Name of the Lord. And Lot also (who had still accompanied
him) being now returned into Canaan, was very rich in Cattle, so that they
wanted Pasture and Water for so many Herds and Flocks as they had between them.
And thence arose a strife and quarrelling (as is usual in such cases) among
their Herdsmen about Pastures and Water. And they were the more straightened,
because the Canaanites and Perizzites that dwelt thereabout had taken up the
greatest and best part of the Pasture for their own Cattle. This matter being
like to make a difference between them, Abram though the Uncle and Superior,
yet amicably spoke to Lot, desiring him there might be no strife between them,
for they were Brethren; and that not only after the Flesh (He being the Uncle,
and Lot his Nephew) but after the Spirit, they both sincerely serving one and
the same true God. And it is like He set before Him how by such a contention
they might give scandal to the Neighboring Canaanites, and draw a Reproach
upon the true Worship of God, and their own Profession. Upon all which
considerations Abram represents to him that he judged it convenient they should
now separate one from the other, and offers him his choice, whither he would go
to the right hand or to the left. Not that Abram could give to Lot any title to
the Land at that time, (For he himself had not then so much as to set his foot
on, Acts 7.5. and was afterward forced to buy a Burying-place for his Family,
Chapter 21.11.) But he desires Lot to choose which quarter he pleased, upon
supposition that he could obtain the use of it upon fair and reasonable terms,
and with the consent of the Canaanites. Then Lot taking notice, and observing
that all the plain of Jordan, even unto Zoar was exceeding fruitful, pleasant,
and well-watered, even like to Paradise, and to Egypt, (which by the
overflowing of Nilus was ever esteemed a fruitful Country.) He chose that
place, and marching thither, pitched his Tent near Sodom. But thinking possibly
to find the Place a Paradise he found it a Hell; For the Sodomites were
abominable Sinners before the Lord, see Ezekiel. 16.49, 50. Abram being now left
alone with his Family, the Lord appeared to him, and comforted him, and gave
him a new Promise of that Land to him and his Seed for ever. Now as the
Heavenly Canaan is hereby typified, so that clause for ever will be verified to
the true seed of Abraham, by whom it will be possessed for ever and ever. But
as the Promise has respect to that Canaan which Abram now beheld with his eyes,
so it is promised to the Israelites conditionally, Or [for ever] may be thus
understood, viz. to the coming of the Messiah, where the promises of the Old
Testament end. Christ bringing in a new Age, and beginning a date of new
Blessings to the faithful Children of Abram, usque in seculum.] Semini quidem
Carnali quamdiu durabit politia Mosaica, videlicet usque ad Christi
exhibitionem, Pisc. vel quamdiu durabit respublica Hebraeorum. Vox Olim non
significat hic absolutam aeternitatem sed longum tempus, soll. usque ad
adventum Messiae. Et haec promissio erat limitata, si Deo obtemperarent.
Cessante condition cessat res ipsa. Ipsi prius renunciaverunt. Deus quod
Justitia ejus imparubat, fecit. See Sect. 7. Note (o).
provided they did obey and keep the Covenant God made with them, but if they
did degenerate, and proved an unfaithful Seed, then he would be no longer tied
to his Promise, see Deuteronomy. 4.25, 26. Levit. 26.27, 32, 33. Ezekiel. 33.25, 26.
Levit. 18.28. God also further promises Abram that He will multiply his Seed as
the dust of the Earth, which may be understood both of the Children of his
Body, and of his Faith. After this Abram went and dwelt in the plain of Mamre
near unto Hebron, where he built an Altar unto the Lord, to Sacrifice
thankfully to God for all his Mercies to Him.

Genesis 13. whole Chapter.

SECT. IV.
ABout this time Bera King of Sodom, with the rest of the Petty Kings of
Pentapolis shook off the Yoke of Chedorlaomer King of Elam, to which they had
been subject for 12 years. Chedorlaomer hereupon, and some other Confederate
Princes that dwelt about the River Euphrates, joined their Forces together, and
resolved to Chastize those Kings that had revolted. And having first overcome
the Rephaims, (a people descended from Canaan, [Gen. 15.20.] that dwelt in
Astaroth-Carnaim, a City beyond Jordan [Deut. 1.4.] and those people that
inhabited all that Region which was afterward possessed by the Moabites,
[Deut. 2.9.10.] and Edomites, [Deut. 2.22.] and the Amalekites, and the
Amorites) in the Vale of Siddim, Which was afterward turned into a Lake or Sea
of putrid and unsavory Waters, and was therefore called the Salt Sea [Josh.
3.16.] the whole tract of that plain abounding with salt or brackish
Slime-pits, verse. 10. or the dead Sea, because no Fish could live in it, or
Asphalites, from its bituminous and pitchy Nature.
they gave battle to the Revolters, and the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah, and
their Forces were vanquished, and overthrown there, and many of their Soldiers
slain, and many probably in the Rout fell into the Slime-pits; but the King of
Sodom himself escaped, verse. 17. Then they plundered Sodom and Gomorrah, and
seized upon Lot also, who dwelt there, and carried him away with the rest of
their Prisoners. The tidings of this coming to Abram the Hebrew (he is the
first in the Scripture so called) he instantly (doubtless by the special
instinct of the Spirit of God) armed his own Servants ( viz. such as had been
trained up in his own Family in the use of their Arms to the number of three
hundred and eighteen) and took along with him his three Confederates, God moved
them to join with Abram. The Prosperity of Gods people makes those that observe
it, desirous to be in League with them: Upon that ground did Abimelech and
Phicol desire to enter into Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 21.22, 23. And the like
motion, for the same reason, was made to Isaac his Son, Genesis 26.27, 28, 29, etc.
Haner, Escol, and Mamre, with the Forces they could make, and marching
speedily after Chedorlaomer, he overtook him and his Army (laden with the Prey
and Spoil) at Dan Moses seems by a Prophetical inspiration, and by way of
Prolepsis or anticipation, to call these places by the Names whereby they were
afterward known and called.

Hinc conjectant quidam (nec levis est suspicio) pentateuchum ut modo extat,
non esse a Mose conscriptum; putantque Esdram aut alium divinum scriptorem,
interjectis hinc inde Clausulis, opus illustrasse, and explicatius reddidisse.
Mas.


in the North Border of Canaan. And having first with a Military Prudence and
Policy divided his Men, to make a show as if he had a great Army dispersed
diverse ways, He there fought them and defeated them, and show many of them, and
pursued them to Hoba on the left hand of Damascus, and rescued Lot and the rest
of the Prisoners out of their hands, and brought them back again, together with
the prey they had taken. Abram thus returning triumphantly, is met by
Melchizedec See Apostolical History, page 375. 376.
King of Salem, Afterward called Jerusalem.
who seems to be some eminent man in Canaan, raised up by God in that Corrupt
Nation, who was both King and Priest, (of whose Father and Mother and Pedigree
there is no mention in the Scripture neither of his Birth or Death, or that he
had any Successor in his Priesthood. This Melchizedec in Congratulation of
Abram's Victory, brought forth Bread and Wine to refresh Him and his Soldiers,
and being a Priest of the most high God, Thus we see that though the Church was
to be continued in the Posterity of Abram, yet there is little question to be
made, but that as yet there were some few of other Families that were the true
Servants of God, as Job afterward, and his friends were among the Edomites.
by the authority of his office, and in the Name of God, he blessed Abram (as
the Priests in the Law did the people, Numb. 6.23, 24, 25.) and he blessed the
most high God in his behalf, who had given him this Victory; so that he offered
a gratulatory Sacrifice of Praise, but no expiatory Sacrifice, for that
required blood, Numb. 9.22. Abram on the other side presented Melchisedec with
the Tenth part of the Spoil he had taken from the vanquished Army. Which Tithes
So that the payment of Tithes is ancienter than the Levitical Law [See Genesis
28.22.] and being paid to Melchisedec a Type of Christ, they may be continued
as a Maintenance to Gospel Ministers, who exhibit Sacramental Bread and Wine,
and bless the people as Melchisedec did.
probably he Him gave by way of homage and thankfulness to God; For what was
given to Melchisedec in regard of his Office, as a Priest, was given to God.
But as a King Melchisedec had no need of them. Abram was also met by the King
of Sodom in the Valley of Shaveh (in aftertimes called the Kings Dale, where
Absolon set up his Pillar, 2 Samuel 15.28.) who congratulating his Victory,
offered him that He should keep to himself if he pleased, all the prey and
spoils recovered by him that were lately taken from and belonged to his City,
only he desired to have those of the prisoners again that were his Subjects.
But Abram told him that he had sworn unto the Lord and vowed when he went forth
in this War, (and implored Gods aid and assistance therein) that none should
have occasion to say that a Covetous desire of the Prey drew him into this
Engagement, and therefore he would not accept any thing of His from a thread to
a shoo-latchet, lest he should say He had made Abram rich. Thus Abram preferred
the Glory of God, and the honoring of his Religion, before the Prey, which by
the right of War belonged to him; and having been bountifully enriched by the
Providence of God, he would not have it said he was enriched by such wicked
people as the Sodomites were. Yet He excepted from this his general refusal
(wherein He said He would have nothing of His) that which the young men (his
Soldiers) had spent of the Enemies prey, or taken to themselves, and desired
also that his three Confederates might have a share and portion in the spoils.

Genesis 14. whole Chapter.

SECT. V.
ABram having thus vanquished the Forces of these forementioned Kings, lest he
should fear they would at some time or other be revenged of him (as possibly
they might threaten) God appears to him in a Vision, or open apparition, which
he (being awake) beheld with his bodily Eyes, and tells him, That he would be a
shield to him, to defend him against his Enemies; and seeing he had with so
much piety refused the Reward offered him by the King of Sodom, He assures him
that He Himself will be his exceeding great Reward, blessing him with the
blessings of this life, and rewarding him with the transcendent glory of his
own Kingdom hereafter. But notwithstanding this Abram in a bemoaning manner
expresses the great perplexity of his mind, that (growing now in years) He did
not yet see the fulfilling of that Promise of giving Him a Son from whom the
Messiah was to spring: And therefore He cries out, Lord what will thou give me,
seeing I go Childless. Intimating his great and ardent desire that the Lord
would please at length to remember his Promise made unto him concerning that
particular. And besides He saw, that wanting Issue he wanted the comfort that
other Parents had: He saw he had not a Son to be (under Himself) the guide and
stay of his Family, but was forced at present to put his concerns into the
hands of Eliezer his Steward, Whose Ancestors were of Damascus.
and for ought He saw His Estate would be enjoyed by him (when he was dead) for
want of an Heir. God tells him his Servant should not be his Heir, but One that
should come out of his own Bowels; and further assures him, that his Seed (how
improbable soever it seemed to him at present) should be as the Stars of Heaven
for multitude, especially his spiritual Seed, the Children of his Faith: He
might assure himself they should be innumerable, as the dust of the Earth, [Ch.
13.16.] and as the Sand on the Seashore, [Ch. 22.17.] See 1 Kings 4.20. Then
Abram believed Here is belief, or faith first mentioned in the Old Testament,
whence Abram is called the Father of all B^lievers, Romans 4.11, 12, 13.
and firmly rested on this great Promise of God, and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness, that is, God of his free Grace accepted him as Righteous and
justified (who had no Righteousness of his own whereby he could stand before
Gods Judgment Seat) upon his Faith in Gods Promises, and especially the
promised Messiah. God also renewed to him the Promise of the Land of Canaan,
which his Posterity after 400 See Apostolical History, page 38.
years sojourning and affliction in Lands that were not theirs, [ viz. in
Canaan and Egypt] should possess; namely, in the 4th Generation, when the Sins
of the Amorites and other Inhabitants of Canaan (this only by a figurative
Speech being put for all) should be full, then the Lord would judge that Nation
that afflicted them, and bring them out with great substance. Abram desiring
(and possibly by some special motion of Gods Spirit) to be further assured
hereof, God was pleased hereupon to make a solemn Covenant with him for the
performance of it, and to confirm it with a sign and a Vision. And seeing it
was the manner of men when they made a solemn Covenant to cut Beasts in twain,
and to pass between the parts of them, wishing (as it were) that they might be
cut in pieces if they broke the Covenant, See Jer. 34.18.
so God here was pleased to appoint Abram to take Beasts and divide them,
laying each piece one against another, with a Turtle Dove on one side, and a
young Pigeon on the other, which accordingly he did; and when the Birds
Aegyptiorum symbola qui erant Hebraeos oppressuri non secus atque aves
carnivorae in humanis corporibus insidentes.
came down upon the Karkasses, Abram drove them away, and when the Sun went
down, Abram fell into a deep sleep or Trance, and a great horror seized him,
shadowing out possibly the great distresses his Posterity should be in, through
the vexations of their Enemies. And then a smoking Furnace and a burning Lamp
passed between the pieces of the Beasts, intimating the Majesty of God passing
between them. Then did God make a Covenant with Abram to give to his Seed the
Land of Canaan (now possessed by the Kenites, Kenissites, and other Nations)
Here are reckoned ten sorts of people in Canaan, whose Land was promised to
Abrams Posterity, which by mixture or diminution of some of them were
afterward reduced to seven, as they are distinctly named, Deuteronomy. 7.1.
Canaanites are here taken for a particular sort of them, who for something
notable above the rest, retained the Name of the whole Nation.
from the River of Egypt, viz. Sichor, Qui dividit Aegyptum a Cananaea and
Arabia and in Sirbonidem paludem refluit. Bochart.
[ Numb. 34.5. Joshua 13.3.] unto Euphrates. If they possessed not all that was
promised, the cause was in their breach of Covenant with God, not Gods with
them.
And accordingly those Lands (so far off) became Tributary in David's and
Solomon's days, 2 Samuel 8.3. 1 Kings 4.21. 2 Chronicles. 9.26.

Genesis 15. whole Chapter.

SECT. VI.
SArai who had a great while earnestly desired and longed for that blessed
promised Seed, and seeing now ten years gone since their coming into the Land
of Canaan, and her self still barren, and despairing almost (as it seems) of
any from her own Body, she (without advice from God, of her own head) counsels
her Husband to endeavor the fulfilling of the Promise by such a means, which
though by many then practiced, yet was contrary to the first Institution of
Marriage, namely, to take Hagar her Servant, an Egyptian born to be a kind of
Secondary wife or Concubine to him; which he accordingly did. But Hagar being
with Child by him, began to be proud thereof, and to despise her Mistress, who
was barren. Sarai (though otherwise of a sweet and meek spirit, and for her
obedience to her Husband propounded as a pattern to other Wives, 1 Pet. 3.6.)
was so transported at this insolent carriage of her Servant, that she flies out
upon Abram himself (who possibly might be a little too indulgent to Hagar,
being now with child by him) and challenges him as if He were the Cause V. 5.
Injuria mea super te est, h. e. injuriae quam patior tu Causa es quod
insolentiam ancillae non Corrigis. LXX (...).
of this wrong and injury she sustained, and desires the Lord to judge between
him and her, and to do Her right. Abram patiently tells her, He left Hagar to
her, to take what course she pleased with her to humble her, and make her
submit. Hereupon Sarai used her with much severity and hardship, which she not
willing to endure, ran away, and thought (as it seems) to go down into Egypt
her own Country. And accordingly traveling through the Wilderness (which was
the rode thither) and sitting down wearied, and full of grief and sorrow, by a
Fountain of Water, the Angel of the Covenant [Mal. 3.1.] the Lord Christ the
Son of God (called Jehovah, verse. 10.) appears to her, and advises her to
return, and to submit her self to her Mistress, telling her that she should
bear a Son, and call his Name Ishmael (signifying God will hear.) For God had
taken notice of her affliction, and heard her Cry. He further tells her, That
her Son would be a fierce and wild man, and a great Warrior, and his hand would
be against every man, and every man's hand against him, De Ishmaele haec vera
sunt, and de ejus posteris, Saracenis Arabibusque.
but yet he should have a numberless Offspring, and he and his Posterity
should exceedingly enlarge the bounds of their Habitation even unto and among
their Kindred, See Genesis 25.18.
of whom they shall not be afraid, but shall stoutly face them every where.
Hagar thereupon called the Name of the Lord that spoke with her, Thou God
seeing me, magnifying his Mercy for having so favorable a regard to her in her
great affliction, and giving her a clear sight of Himself in that place, and
directing her what to do. And she then falls into an admiration that she should
live, and see the light after she had seen the Lord. V. 13. Nonne etiam video
post videntem me,] i. e. lucem hanc aspicio and vivo. Miratur Hagar se post Dei
visionem vivere; quia a conspectu Dei aut Angeli mortem sequi putabant, ut ex
cap. 32.30. Jud. 13.22. patet.
So that hereupon she called the Name of the Well Beer-lahai-roi, that is, the
Well of one that lives, after she has seen Puteus videntis Dei and viventis
Hagar.
and been seen by the Lord. And possibly she intended also there to leave a
Memorial to Posterity of the watchful Eye of God over her, in the time of her
affliction. So she returned to her Mistress, and afterward brought forth a
Son, and Abram called his Name Ishmael (according as the Angel had appointed)
in the 11th year after He came into Canaan, In the year of the world, 2094.
and in the 86th year of his Age.

Genesis 16. whole Chapter.

SECT. VII.
THirteen years after this, namely, when Abraham was 99 years old, God appeared
to him again in a visible manner, and said to him, I am God Almighty, able to
do all those great things for thee which I have promised, how unlikely soever
they may se^m in the eye of Reason. Therefore trust in me; Be sincere and
upright before me, and do all that I command thee, and let thy whole
Conversation be always as in my sight; And I will renew and establish my
Covenant with thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly. And accordingly out of
his Loins came not only the Israelites but the Ishmaelites, the Edomites, and
many other Nations by the Children of Keturah.
Then Abram fell on his face, and God further talked with Him, saying, Behold
my Covenant is with thee, and thou shall be a Father of many Nations. Neither
shall thy Name be any more called Abram (signifying an higher Father, but it
shall be called Abraham, signifying a Father of a great multitude. By inserting
H the first letter of Hamon signifying a multitude. This is the first name God
changed, and hence the custom of giving Names at Circumcision.
And I will multiply thee exceedingly, and will make Nations of thee, and Kings
shall come out of thee, and I will establish my Covenant between me and thee,
and thy Seed after thee in their Generations for an everlasting Covenant,
Everlasting] so called, in respect of the long continuance of the outward
Ceremony of Circumcision; but for the spiritual part of it literally
everlasting in Christ, Heb. 13.20. and 9.15.
to be a God to thee, and to thy Seed after thee. Which words comprehend all
the blessings of the Covenant of Grace.
And I will give to thee, and to thy Seed after thee, the Land of Canaan
(wherein thou art now a stranger) for an Everlasting possession. Tempus pro
temporis part aliquando accipitur. Et (...) perpetum tempus de part quasi
quadam, subjectae materiae convenienti dicitur. Sic v. 8 in possessionem
perpetuam, scil. quamdiu politia Judaica futura est, ad advent^m usque Messiae
sic Circumcisio, and alia Ceremonialia in foedus Olim, i. e. perpetuum se^vanda
Judaeis data fuerunt, h. e. semper and continuo done es^rvanda essent and non
ulterius. Glass.
And this I appoint as the Token, Sign and Seal of the Covenant between me and
you, that all the Males among you shall forthwith be circumcised, and that
every Male-Child among you that shall be hereafter born, either of Natives or
Proselites, Existiment vi^i docti nullum adultum servum obligari ad
Circumcisionem sui aut prolis, nisi sponte consentiat. Nec talis Circumcisio
Sacramentum esset foederis Dei nisi volentes complectimur.
shall be Circumcised on the eighth day. And this Circumcision (which figures
or represents a putting off, and mortifying of the old man with its affections
and lusts) shall be in your Flesh for a sign of that Everlasting Covenant
Foedus, i. e. foederis signum, ut frustra sint Pontificii qui jubent a
Sacramentis exulare tropos. My Covenant shall be in the Flesh.] that is, the
token, sign and seal of my Covenant. For Circumcision was not the Covenant it
self. And so God speaks of other Sacraments. Of the Passover, Exodus 13.9. Of
the holy Supper, 1 Cor 11.28.
I have made with you. And that man among you (being of the Jewish Race) who
being not Circumcised Patres ante diluvium habuerunt idem foedus quoad
substantiam, h. e. promissionem gratiae per Christum, semen mulieris. Non autem
iis imposita fuit circumcisio. Satis erat fidem in Messiam testari per
Sacrificia.

Data est circumcisio ut sit signum foederis, 1. Memorativum pacti Abrahami cum
Deo. 2. Distinctivum fidelium ab infidelibus. 3. Demonstrativum peccati
originalis. 4. Praefigurativum Baptismi.

Adultus qui ritum hunc neglexerit ab Ecclesia Eliminabitur, si natus inter
Hebraeos fuerit Infantulus non posuit se Circumsecare. Sed adultus negligentiam
Parentum supplem debuit.


in his Childhood, shall afterward wilfully neglect to take on him that sign,
he shall be cut off from among you as a Violator of my Covenant. I will not own
him as one of my peculiar people, and by you he shall be reckoned as an
Heathen, and cast out of the Communion of the Church. Further God tells Abraham
that he should not call his Wife any longer Sarai, which signifies a Lady or
Princess of one Family, but Sarah, Addita nimirum eadem litera, quae nomini
Abrahami accessit, ut idem esset utrobique earundem promissionum symbolum.
Antea dicebatur Sarai, i. e. Princeps mea, unius tantum Domus matter familias.
Postea vero dicitur absolute princeps, i. e. (...).
a Princess absolute. For she was to be a Mother of many Nations, by the
spreading of Isaac's Posterity, her natural Son (and even Kings to spring from
Her) and Her pre-eminence was to be of much larger extent upon the account of
Her spiritual Daughters, 1 Pet. 3.6. Abraham hearing these things, fell on his
face before the Lord, in an humble expression of reverence and thankfulness,
and he was so transported with these welcome tidings, (which he firmly
believed) that he even laughed for joy. However, though he now believed he
should have a Son by Sarah, yet he forgets not Ishmael, but humbly prays to the
Lord for him, O that Ishmael might live before thee. O that thou would please
to have a gracious Eye upon him, to protect and bless him. God tells him, He
would bless Ishmael with Temporal Blessings, and would multiply him
exceedingly, insomuch that 12 Princes should spring from him (whose Names we
have set down Genesis 25. v. 13, 14, 15, 16.) but his Covenant he would establish
with Isaac, whom Sarah should bear unto him next year at this time; which
Covenant comprehends not only outward but spiritual blessings also. Then the
Lord left off speaking to Abraham, and went up to Heaven in the same form and
shape he had appeared to Him. Abraham now embracing these Promises, and resting
on them by a lively Faith, caused himself (being now 99 years old) and his Son
Ishmael (being 13 years old) and all the Males of his house to be Circumcised
that very day. Hinc liquet quantus in erudienda Familia fuerit Abrahamus qui
eodem die quo institutus est adeo tristem ritum admiserit. Monym. in loc.


Genesis 17. whole Chapter.

SECT. VIII.
THe Son of God and two holy Angels Thus he entertained Angels unawares, Heb.
13.2.
accompanying him, appear now unto Abraham in the shape of three men in the
plain of Mamre, as he sat in the door of his Tent at Noon tide. He apprehending
them to be Strangers traveling that way, (who possibly might be weary and
faint) and they seeming to him to be persons worthy of respect, he addresses
himself to them with great Reverence, and one of them appearing with greater
signs of excellency and dignity than the rest, He directs his Speech to him: My
Lord (says He) if I have found favor in your sight, stay with me and rest your
selves under that Tree for a while, and let a little water be brought to wash
your Feet, According to the Custom of those Eastern Countries.
and accept of a little refreshment from me to strengthen you in your Journey,
seeing Providence has led you this way. They intimate their willingness to
accept his kind offer. Hereupon he hastens to Sarah, and orders her forthwith
to make ready some Cakes to be baked on the Hearth, and he orders one of his
Servants presently to kill a Calf and dress it, and that it should be made
ready. These things being done, He then set these Provisions before them with
Butter and Milk, and he himself stood by to wait upon them and serve them. And
they did eat, [see Chapter 19.3.] having true Bodies for that time, and for the
present dispensation of that Service. For though a Spirit has not Flesh and
Bones, [Luke 24.39.] yet Spirits may, and by Gods appointment sometimes do
assume humane Bodies, which are erewhile to be dissolved again by the power of
God, when the work and service is done for which they were assumed. V. 9. They
said, i. e. one of them said.
When therefore they had eaten, then One of them, viz. the Lord asked him where
Sarah his Wife was. By naming her, he showed he was more than a Man. Abraham
said she was at hand in the Tent. The Lord said I will certainly return unto
thee, not by a New Apparition, but by accomplishing the thing promised, viz.
that thou shall have a Son by thy Wife Sarah, and it shall be accomplished so
many months hence as is usual according to the course of Nature for a Woman to
go from her Conception, to the bringing a Child into the World. Sarah hearing
this in her Tent-door, laughed within her self, [not out of Faith and Joy, as
Abraham had done before, Chapter 17.17.] but thinking it a thing very unlikely (by
reason of her great age) if not impossible. But though she laughed only within
her self, and did not break out into a loud and open laughter, yet the Lord
discerned it, and took notice of it, and asked her, Why she laughed? Did she
look more upon her own and her Husbands decayed Natures and age than upon the
power of God? Sarah being thus reproved, she out of shame and weakness in that
sudden disturbance of her mind denies that she laughed. But though she did not
openly, yet she did within her self, and she began now to be ashamed, because
she perceived the person that spoke to Her was more than a man, because he
could discern her inward affections. But she did presently (as it seems)
recollect her self when she understood who it was that spoke, and made this
Promise, and accordingly believed it, and therefore her Faith is commended,
Heb. 11.11. Through Faith Sarah her self received strength to conceive Seed.
And afterward she laughed for joy, as we find Chapter 21.6. These things being
done, These three Persons that were in the shape of Men, arose, and Abraham in
civility accompanying them some part of the way. The two holy Angels went on
directly toward Sodom, but the Lord staid communing with Abraham, and tells
him he would not hide Amos 3.7.
from him what Judgments he now intended to execute upon Sodom, and those
Neighboring wicked Cities. For he had appointed him to be the stock of a great
and mighty Nation, (his peculiar people) yea the stock out of whom the blessed
seed should spring, in whom all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed. And
he knew that he would instruct and command his Children Deuteronomy. 6.7. Deuteronomy. 32.46.
and his Household after him to keep the way of the Lord, and to do justice and
judgment. Then the Lord speaking to him after the manner of men, as one that
had no mind to punish without first inquiring into the matter of Fact, He tells
him He will go down and see whether their wicked deeds were answerable to the
Cry that was come up into his Ears concerning them. Then Abraham drew near unto
the Lord, and began to plead for these Cities, especially for Sodom, (as being
in likelihood touched with a greater concern for his Nephew Lot who dwelt
therein) entreating the Lord that the Righteous should not be dealt with as the
Wicked, (that is, taken away in wrath and Vengeance) The Righteous are
sometimes taken away by the same public Calamity that the wicked are, but the
one is taken away in mercy, the other in judgment.
but that the City might be spared for the sake of the Righteous therein. And
to urge his plea further, He humbly represents to Him that possibly there might
be to the number of fifty Righteous persons found therein. God tells him he
would certainly spare them, if such a number could there be found. Then Abraham
said, Behold now I have taken upon me to speak to the Lord, who am but dust and
ashes, peradventure there may be 45 found there. The Lord answered, He would
not destroy it if 45 were there found. Then Abraham descends to 40, to 30, to
20, and at last to 10; and if there had been but so many to be found there God
would have spared them; Sometimes God forbids his Prophets to pray for such,
Jer. 15.1. Ezekiel. 14.14.
but seeing there were not so many, He intimates to Abraham that they must not
expect to be spared. Then God departed from Abraham, and he returned to his own
Place.

Genesis 18. whole Chapter.

SECT. IX.
THe two Angels (before mentioned) in humane shape, that went toward Sodom
came thither in the Evening, and Lot sitting in the Gate of the City, and
seeing of them, and supposing them (by their outward appearance) to be
Strangers of quality, he went toward them, and giving them civil honor and
respect by bowing to them with his face toward the ground (after the manner of
those Eastern Countries) he courteously invited them to his house, and to Lodge
with him that night. They seemed unwilling A slight invitation may be seriously
refused, and yet that which is pressing be afterward accepted [see Luke 21.28,
29.] and this without Popish Equivocation, or mental reservation.
at first to accept his kindness, and proffered to lodge in the Streets all
night, which possibly they intended to have done (to observe the manners and
behavior of that people) had he not been so importunate with them to turn in
to him. Therefore upon his importunity they accepted his courteous offer, Thus
both Abraham and Lot entertained Angels unawares, Heb. 13.2.
and did go with him to his house, and there he made them the best
Intertainment he could, and for have baked unleavened-Bread for them, and they
did eat. [See Chapter 18.6.] But the appearance of these two Angels now entertained
by Lot, being, as it is like, of young men of rare and extraordinary beauty,
notice hereof was taken by some of the wicked Inhabitants of that City, and the
Report thereof soon spread abroad, and so they presently flocked together from
all quarters of the City to Lo^s house, requiring to have these Guests brought
out to them, intending abominably to abuse them. Lot goes out to them to
entreat them and to dissuade them from so detestable an attempt, but they
seeming bent upon it, to take them off from so horrid a villainy, in that great
and sudden disturbance of his mind he profers (very unwarrantably and sinfully)
to yield up his two Virgin Daughters Thus Lot to prevent one sin, gives way to
another. Magis filiarum pudicitiae debuit consulere quam indemnitati
peregrinorum.
to their Lusts, rather then his Guests should be violated, who had taken
shelter under his Roof, and according to the Laws of Hospitality ought to be
kept safe and free from all harm and violence. But these wicked Sodomites were
so far from being persuaded by what Lot said unto them, that instead of
desisting they fall upbraiding and twitting him, that he that was but a
Stranger in their City, should take upon him to be a Judge, and Censurer of
them and their actions. And therefore (it seems) he had not only inwardly
grieved and vexed his righteous Soul with their unclean Conversation, but as
occasion was offered, had often reproved them for their wickedness, and had
done what lay in him to dissuade them from their abominable courses. But they
nothing moved either by what He had before or at this present said unto them,
began to press hard upon Him, intending to break open his door. Hereupon the
Angels pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut the door, and presently
smote that wicked Crew with such a blindness, that they could not see the door.
Then the Angels commanded Lot that whomsoever he had there nearly related to
him, whether Sons in law, or Daughters, he should bring them out of that place,
for God had sent them to destroy it, and the other Neighboring Cities to it,
for their great and crying abominations. Lot accordingly went out to his Sons
in law (the Husbands as it seems of his other Daughters that were married into
the City) to persuade them to come away with him; but he seemed to them as one
that jested or talked idly: so supine and secure usually are carnal men, when
Gods Judgments are ready to fall upon them. When the Morning approached, the
Angels urged Lot and his Wife and two Daughters that were in the house with
him, to get them going, lest they should be involved in the common Calamity.
But yet Lot (it seems) lingered, as loath to leave his other Children behind him
to be destroyed. Thereupon the Angels laid hands on him and his Company, and
hurried them out of the City, the Lord therein showing himself very merciful
unto them. Then the Angels charged them to make have, and escape for their
lives, and not so much as to look behind them, nor to stay in all the Plain,
but to fly to the Mountain, nor so much as to mind or regard House, Cattle, or
Riches, or what ever they had left behind them. Lot tells the Angels that the
Mountain was so far off, that he feared lest the destruction would overtake
them before they could get thither, and therefore he earnestly desires that
Zoar (formerly called Bela) might be the place they might be permitted to fly
unto (which was near at hand) and that God would please to spare that place for
his sake. The Angel (undoubtedly by Gods direction) grants his request, but
bids him have away, for he could not do any thing against Sodom till he was got
thither, for God had decreed in mercy to save him. It was break of day when the
Angel hasted Lot and his Company away, and by that time the Sun was well risen,
the Lord V. 24. Jehovah from Jehovah, that is, the Son from the Father, who
works by the Son, Joh. 5.17.
rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah, Admath, and Zeboim, [Deut. 29.23. Hosea 11.8.]
fire and brimstone from Heaven. This is a Type and forerunner of the
everlasting punishment of the wicked in that Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone for ever, Rev. 21.8. And so the Apostle says, Jud. v. 7. That Sodom
and Gomorrah suffered the Vengeance of eternal fire, viz. that temporal
destruction was as a forerunner of those eternal torments in Hell which they
now suffer, and so may well be a terrifying Example and warning to all that
fall into the like sins. See Apostol. Histor. page 422.
But it seems while Lot and his Company were hastening toward Zoar, his Wife
(either doubting whether any such Judgment would fall upon Sodom as was
threatened, or lingering in her desires after those Friends, and the Wealth and
Estate they had left behind them) looked back, against the express Command of
the Angel before given; whereupon she was immediately turned into a Pillar or
Statue of a rocky mineral Salt (which will endure all weathers) as a standing
Monument of her Infidelity and Disobedience, and to season others with more
wisdom. Abraham getting up early that Morning, and looking toward Sodom and
the Cities of the Plain (whose destruction the Lord had acquainted him with
before) he saw the smoke from that Country go up as the smoke of a Furnace; and
God remembered the Intercession of Abraham for Lot, neither did he forget the
Piety and Righteousness of Lot himself, which we find mentioned 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.

Lot quickly finds that it had been better for him to have followed the advice
of the Angel at the first, and gone immediately to the Mountain, for now he was
afraid to stay any longer in Zoar. Possibly the wickedness he saw among them
might make him afraid that a like Judgment to that of Sodom would fall upon
them; or it may be he feared lest the people of that place would fall upon him,
as the Cause of the overthrow of those Neighboring Cities, seeing he and his
Family only had escaped. So he and his two Daughters left that Town, and betook
themselves to the Mountain and dwelt there in a Cave, where being in a manner
immured up, his Daughters began to think that by that solitary life they were
deprived of all hope of Marriage; and living there in that manner without the
society of any but themselves, it seemed all one to them as if there were not a
man upon the Earth besides their Father. Hereupon being blinded with fear and
passion, and desirous to have Children of their own Kin, and not of the
faithless and cursed Nations, they resolve upon a very wicked and detestable
course, viz. to make their Father drink Wine (more than was fit) of that they
had brought with them from Zoar (which possibly they persuaded him the rather
unto, to drive away his sad thoughts) that so being drunk he might lie with
them, which else they knew he would never do. And here observe the just
Judgment of God, Lot had at Sodom rashly offered to prostitute his two
Daughters Chastity to the Rabble there, to prevent the violation of his Guests,
and now here in the Cave His own Chastity is violated by the contrivance of His
two Daughters. This was just as from God, but 'twas very wickedly done of these
two young women thus to draw their Father to commit Incest with them. However
from this incestuous Copulation came Moab and Ammon, Fathers of the Moabites
The Moabites were afterward Idolaters and Enemies to the Israelites, yet from
Ruth a Moabitess our Savior Sprang.
and Ammonites, two great and populous Nations.

Genesis 19. whole Chapter.

SECT. X.
ABraham now (his Wife Sarah having (as it seems) newly conceived) removed from
the Plains of Mamre, toward the South, and sojourned in Gerar, the Metropolis
of the Philistines that dwelt in that Country. Here He began to be afraid of
himself again, because of Sarah his Wife, who though now near 90 years old, yet
was still very beautiful. He therefore now (as before in Egypt, see Chapter 12.
13.) apprehended that these people would kill him, if he were known to be her
Husband; that so He being taken away she might be free to be married to one of
them. Hereupon Sarah (by his appointment) going again under the name of his
Sister. Abimelech King of that Place hearing of her, took a liking to her, and
took her from her Husband, intending shortly after to make her his Wife (though
he had a Wife before, see verse. 17.) thinking, as it seems, Polygamy to be no
sin. Upon this God immediately smote him with a dangerous Sickness, and plagued
his Court with a strange Disease. And in his Sickness God informed him by a
dream Dreams are sometimes supernatural, and sent of God, and bring their own
evidence and assurance with them. God thereby signifying what he will do, or
have men to do. And thus God sends dreams upon extraordinary occasions to
wicked men, as here to Abimelech, and afterward to Laban, Pharaoh, and his
Bulter and Baker, and to the Midianite, Judge. 7.13. To Nebuchadnezzar, to
Pilat's Wife. And all these for the good of his own Servants and People, but
Principally God sends them to his choice Servants, as to Jacob, to Solomon, to
Daniel, to Joseph the Son of Jacob, and to Joseph the Husband of Mary, and this
was one of the ordinary ways wherein God revealed his Will to his Prophets,
Numb. 12.6. Joel 2.28. Under which color, Saul complains of the want of them,
1 Samuel 28.15.
of the Cause why He had laid his hand upon Him, telling him he was a dead man,
if he restored not unto Abraham his Wife. And further, He tells Him that
Abraham was a Prophet, one in especial favor with Himself, to whom he did
often reveal his Will, and by whom he did teach and instruct others, [see Psalm.
105.15.] and He should pray for him, if he did restore his Wife to Him again.
Abimelech being thus restrained and prevented (by Gods immediate hand) from
touching of Sarah, he pleads his own Innocence before the Lord, that in this
matter his heart was clear from any adulterous purpose, and his body from any
unchaste action. And seeing this sickness on his Family, and fearing possibly it
to be on the rest of his Subjects (who sometimes smart for their Princes sin,
see Genesis 34.26, etc. 2 Samuel 24.17. and here verse. 18.) he entreats the Lord not
to proceed to punish his people that were innocent and guiltless as to this
matter. Then Abimelech expostulates with Abraham that he should by dissembling
his Wife, expose Him to so great a sin as Adultery was, and consequently bring
upon him and his people the dreadful punishment due thereunto. See Dutch
Annotat. in loc.
So that we see this Heathen King by the light of Nature (even in those days
before the Law was given) did hold Adultery in a King such an abominable sin as
might justly bring a Plague or great Judgment on a whole Nation: Abraham
excuses himself as well as he could. He confesses he was afraid of himself
there, because he thought the fear of God was not among them, and so they would
not care what they did. And besides, it was not altogether false what he had
said. For Sarah was his Sister in one sense, being the Daughter, that is, the
Grandchild of his Father, though not the Daughter or Grandchild of his
Mother, Terah having Haran (her Father) by another Wife than he had Him. And he
confesses ever since God called him to leave his Fathers House, and wander in
several Countries, thinking he should find little of the fear of God in the
places where he was to travel, and apprehending danger to himself in respect of
the great beauty of Sarah, he had desired Her that in all Places where they
came, (and apprehended any such danger) she should always say, She was his
Sister. Abimelech then not only returned Sarah to him again untouched, but
presented him with large and great Gifts, and offered him to live in any part
of his Country, where he pleased; to so much Civility and Kindness did the Lord
dispose the heart of this Heathen King. Moreover Abimelech tells Sarah, That he
had given her Brother (as she called him) a 1000 pieces of Silver (amounting to
about 56 l. 5 s. of our money) but intimates to her that she ought always to
own her Husband in all Companies, and he ought to be as a Veil to her, to cover
her from the Eyes and Desires of all others, and a Guardian of her Chastity;
whereas by denying him, she (as it were) unveiled her self, and laid her self
open to the unlawful Desires of others. Thus was Sarah reproved by an Heathen
King, and taught and instructed to carry her self better for the future. Then
Abraham prayed for Abimelech, and the Lord was graciously pleased to take off
his hand from him and his Family, and so that disability Some think this was
more than mere barrenness, which was a thing that could not in so short a time
either be perceived as a Judgment, or discerned as a Cure upon Abraham's
prayer, therefore they think it was some unusual closing of the Womb for that
time. Existimo plagam fuisse talem ut viri and mulieres inhabiles essent ad
Concubitum, illudque fuisse omnibus manifestum. Notum est etiam Daemones
ligamine conjuges saepe fraudasse, ut se mutuo potiri non possent. Forte
muliebria loca obserata erant, aut Coarctata. Rivet.
they lay under, was removed.

Genesis 20. whole Chapter.

SECT. XI.
GOd having now visited Sarah with so much mercy, as to give her power and
strength to conceive (upon her belief of his gracious Promise, Hereupon Isaac
is said to be born by Promise, Gal. 4.23, 28.
Heb. 11.11.) and her full time being come, she brought forth a Son to Abraham,
he being an 100, and she 90 years of age. And as God had appointed, Abraham
Circumcised him on the eighth day, and called his Name Isaac, Chapter 17. 19. and
Sarah greatly rejoiced, and said, God has made me to laugh, and others that
hear of this thing will laugh also, and rejoice with me. For (says she) Who
would have thought that I should have born a Son, or given suck V. 7. Given
Children suck] the plural number for a singular sometimes used in Scripture,
see Chapter 46.7, 23. Numb. 26.8.
in my old age. So the Child grew, and at a fit time was weaned, and at his
weaning Abraham made a great Feast, a properer time for it (as may be supposed)
than at his Birth or Circumcision. At this Feast Sarah espied Ishmael (now
about 17 or 18 years old) Compare Chapter 17.24, 25. and 21.5.
mocking and jeering at Isaac and possibly calling Him their young Master, who
(forsooth) must be heir of all, whereas by right of Primogeniture He supposed
the Inheritance belonged unto him; and possibly his Mother Hagar might have
some hand in it also, by encouraging him therein. And this mocking ('it is like)
was accompanied with some expressions of hatred and bitterness of Spirit, so
that the Apostle calls it a Persecution, Gal. 4.29. Sarah at this was so
incensed, that she said to Abraham, (doubtless by the motion of Gods Spirit,
for God himself afterward confirms the Sentence) Cast Her saying was not only
passionate, but prophetical.
out this Bondwoman and her Son, for he shall not be Heir Under this
Inheritance Heaven was figured.
with my Son. This was very grievous to Abraham, who was very loath to part with
Hagar and Ishmael. But God by a vision in the night commanded him to hearken to
Sarah in this thing, and the rather no doubt that Hagar and Ishmael by the
misery of being cast out might be brought to a sense of their sin, who in
mocking at Isaac had in a sort despised the blessed Seed promised in him. And
the more to dispose Abraham to a willingness hereunto, God tells him, That in
Isaac his Seed should be called, In Isaaco, i. e. per Isaacum vocabitur, h. e.
existet tibi semen nempe illud numerosissimum quod tibi promisi, and praecipue
Christus.
that is, from Isaac, (not from Ishmael) shall spring the Messiah, and that
numerous seed he had promised to him, who shall be called the true Seed of
Abraham, and Gods own peculiar people with whom he will establish his Covenant.
Abraham therefore giving Hagar some bread and victuals, and a bottel of Water
to refresh her in her travel through the Wilderness toward Egypt, he dismissed
her and her Son. When she came into the Wilderness she lost her way, so that
the bottel of Water being spent, and her Son sick and fainting for thirst, and
she not able to supply him, despairing of his life, she left him under a bush,
and went and sat her self at a small distance from him, as being loath to see
him die, and she lift up her voice and wept. Upon this an Angel of God called
unto her, and asked her what she meant to take on in that sort, having had
experience of Gods Fatherly Care over her before, and he bad her not to fear or
be discouraged, for God had heard the voice of the Youth (who doubtless cried
no less than his mother in this their great extremity) and bad her lift him up,
and hold him in her hand, for God would make of him a great Nation. Then the
Angel showed her a Well of water hard by, which she did not see before, and
there she filled her bottel, and gave her Son to drink. He being refreshed
thereby, and rescued from this present danger of perishing by thirst, God was
afterward very favorable to him, and blessed him according to his promise
with temporal things, and He grew up and became an Archer, that is, a valiant
Hunter, and a Warrior, shooting with the Bow used in War. And he dwelt in the
Wilderness of Paran, next adjoining to the desert of Sinai, and his Mother
chose Observe the right of Parents, yea of Mothers alone in bestowing their
Children in Marriage.
an Egyptian Woman, as her self was, for a Wife for him.

About that time Abimelech spoke to Abraham, saying, I perceive God does
wonderfully bless thee, and therefore I desire to make a Covenant with thee,
and that thou will swear to me to deal kindly with me, and my Children, and
Childrens Children, and the Inhabitants of this Land wherein thou sojournest,
according to the kindness thou have here received. Abraham readily consented to
it, knowing that it was his Posterity only that was in time to come actually to
enjoy that promised Land, and that he himself was to live there only, as a
Stranger and Sojourner; therefore he was willing to give him his Oath, that as
for himself, he would no way hurt either him, or his Son, or his Sons Son. But
before he did it, he expostulates with Him about a Well of Water (of great use
in that dry Country) which he had dug, and Abimelech's Servants had by
violence taken from him. Abimelech protests himself wholly ignorant thereof.
Then Abraham made a great Present to him of Sheep and Oxen, by way of gratitude
for the great kindness he had received from him. And so they made a Covenant
one with another. And to prevent future Controversy about this Well, Abraham
gave him seven Ew-lambs, as a valuable consideration, and desires that they
might be as a testimony So an heap of stones made a witness, Chapter 31. 48.
that the Well (though before taken from him) was now acknowledged to be His;
And because at this Well they both swear, and made a Covenant, Abraham called
the Place Beersheba, As Abraham dwelt here, and made this Covenant, and dug
this Well, so Isaac afterward dwelt here, and made a Covenant, and dug this
Well again, and renews the Name, Chapter 26.23, 33. And Jacob dwelling there with
his Father, went thence to Laban in Haran, and going into Egypt, with all his
Family, comes thither, and here Sacrifices, and has a Vision; afterward it
was a Seat of some Solemn Idolatry, Amos 8.14.5.5.
that is, the Well of the Oath. Abraham now looking upon himself as like to
settle here, he planted a Grove, intending it for a place of Prayer and
Religious Worship, that under the shade of those Trees they might more
commodiously call upon the Name of the Lord, the everlasting God, and perform
all other public Duties of His Worship and Service, which within their Tents
they could not so conveniently do. So that at this time the use of Groves was
not unlawful. But afterward when men began superstitiously to think that God
was better worshipped in them than in other places, and possibly did it in
imitation of the Idolatrous Nations, (who set up their Idols in Groves, and
there sacrificed to false Gods) the Lord did thereupon forbid his people all
planting of Groves for Religious Uses, Deuteronomy. 16.21. Thou shall not plant thee a
Grove of any Trees near the Altar, etc. And this planting of Groves was
afterward one of the Abominations for which God was angry with the Children of
Israel, 1 Kings 14.15. God will root up Israel out of his good Land which he
gave to their Fathers, because they have made their Groves, Gods people were
hardly kept from planting Groves, and placing their Idols in them, and serving
them, even as the Canaanites and the other Heathens did, Deuteronomy. 12.2. Thus it
was in the times of the Judges, Chapter 3.7. In the times of the Kings of Israel
throughout. 2 Kings 17.16. especially in the Reigns of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14.15.
and of Ahab, whose Queen Jezabel had 400 Prophets of the Groves that did eat
meat at her Table. Yea and in the Reigns of the Kings of Judah, especially of
Ahaz and Manasseh. But the godly Kings of Judah cut them down and burnt them:
as Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah. And Asa put down his Grandmother Maachah
from being Queen because she had made an Idol in a Grove.
provoking him to anger.

Genesis 21. whole Chapter.

SECT. XII.
SOme time after this, when Isaac was well grown up (but of what age is not
certain) God was pleased (though he knew the heart of Abraham perfectly, yet to
manifest the strength of his Faith, and the unfeignedness of his Obedience,
both for his own Glory and the benefit of his whole Church in after Ages) to
put Abraham upon an extraordinary trial. Wherefore he commands him (and in such
a manner that he could not but be assured it was the Command of God, and no
Satanical illusion) to take Isaac his only Son by Sarah his lawful Wife, the
Son whom he had so long expected, whom he so dearly and tenderly loved, the Son
by whom God had promised to multiply his Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and from
whom the Messiah was to Spring, in whom all the Nations of the Earth should be
blessed, (which could not be if Isaac died without Issue) yet notwithstanding
God commands him to take this Son, this dearly beloved Isaac, and to go to the
Land of Moriah, and upon one of the Mountains there which he would point out to
him, ( viz. the very place where Jerusalem, and the Temple were afterward
built, 2 Chronicles. 3.1.) to slay him first with his own hand, and then to burn his
dead body to ashes on the Altar, as a Burnt-Offering unto Him. See the Law of
Burnt-Offerings, Levit. 6.9, 10.
Here all that was in Abraham, either as a Man, or a Father, or an Husband, or
a Believer, or Professor of true Religion, were put to it. And he must not do
it presently neither, but must go three days journey with Isaac, before he did
it, during all which time surely he found many strange struglings and workings
of affection in himself. However, being well assured it was God that commanded
him to do it, and Grace in him having got the upper hand of Nature, and firmly
believing that God would raise him up from the dead, if he did sacrifice him,
Non haesitavit, quia sibi reddi possit immolatus, qui dari potuit non speratus.
Divino intonante praecepto, obediendum est, non disputandum. August.
[ Heb. 11.17, 19.] I say, Abraham beliving this, rose up early in the morning,
(without acquainting Sarah therewith, who in all likelihood would have strove
with all her might to divert him from it) and taking Isaac and two Servants
with him, and as it is probable some lesser quantity of dry Wood to begin the
fire (which was carried on the Ass, (resolving to furnish himself with the rest
upon the Mountain) they travailed three days, and at last came within sight of
the place. At which, nothing appalled, he bad the young Men his Servants stay
with the Ass, at the bottom of the Hill, telling them, that he and Isaac would
go to the Mountain to worship, and then return to them again. Abraham intended
really to offer up his Son; the special Issue of this work was unknown to him.
However He believed God was able to restore Him his Son again. And thus without
knowing what should be done, He foretold what would come to pass.
Then laying the Wood of the Burnt-Offering on Isaac, and taking fire in his
hand, and a knife, they went toward the Mountain. As they went along, Isaac
said to him, My Father, here is Fire and Wood, but where is the Lamb for the
Burnt-Offering? Abraham answers, My Son, God will provide a Lamb. Hereupon it
is likely Abraham by degrees began to acquaint him with Gods Command, and
showed him the necessity of Obedience and submission thereunto, and set before
him the Promises and Power of God, and whatever else might dispose him to yield
Obedience. Isaac meekly submits, and suffered his Father to proceed, without
making any resistance, and therein was an eminent Type of Christ, who went
forth bearing his Cross, Joh. 19.17. Acts 8.32. When they were come to the top
of the Mountain, Abraham built an Altar (probably of Turf and Stones which he
found there and having laid the Wood in order, he bound Isaac, and laid him
thereon. Then stretching forth his hand to have slain and sacrificed him, (
Jam. 2.21, 22, 23.) Christ the Angel of the Covenant Who swears by himself, and
promises as God, and is called Jehovah, v. 16.
calls to him, and bids him hold his hand, telling him, Now I know Cognovi] i.
e. certissimo experimento deprehendi, vel cognosci seci, scil. a te and aliis.
Nec propter se Deus, sed propter alios tentat ut probat. Vires enim dilectionis
suae hominem latent, nisi divino experimento, eidem innotescant. More hominum
loquitur, qui cujus rei periculum fecerunt, id se novisse perfect putant.
that thou truly fear Me, seeing thou have not withholden thine only Son
from me when I required Him of thee. As if He should have said, Now I know this
by a visible experiment (though I know the integrity of thy heart before) and
by this extraordinary Trial, have given occasion to have the same made manifest
unto others. Abraham hearing this Voice from Heaven, looked about him, and
behind him he espied a Ram caught by his Horns in a Thicket, which he took, as
sent by God to supply the room and place of Isaac, and accordingly offered him
up for a Burnt-Offering instead of his Son. The main thing hereby signified was
this, That God the Father would in the fullness of time, give his only begotten
Son to be a Sacrifice for the sins of Men. And till that time came he would
accept of Rams and Lambs, and such like Sacrifices, which should prefigure and
typifie this death of his Son.
And Abraham called the Name of that place Jehovah-jireh, that is, the Lord
will see or provide. And thence came afterward that Speech to be used
proverbially, In the Mountain of the Lord it shall be seen; that is, in due
time God will provide help for his Children, though they be for the present
brought into great straits and difficulties; and He will help them in such a
manner, that they shall plainly see his Hand therein. After this the Angel of
the Covenant called to Abraham a second time, and said, By my self have I
sworn, because thou have done this thing (for I accept of thy Will for the
Deed) I will greatly bless and multiply thy Seed even as the Stars of Heaven,
and as the Sand upon the Seashore, and they shall possess the Gates of their
Enemies, that is, shall subdue them, and bring both their strength and policy
under their Command, (the Gates of Cities being the places of greatest
strength, and places commonly of Consultation, where the Magistrates used to
meet, [see Deuteronomy. 32.15. Math. 16.18.] and in thy Seed shall all the Nations of
the Earth he blessed. Then Abraham and Isaac and the Servants returned to
Beersheba, where Abraham dwelt a good while after.

Genesis 22. from 1. to 20.

SECT. XIII.
AFter this Sarah As Abraham is Registered for the Father of the Faithful, Romans
4.11. So is Sarah for the Mother of them, 1 Pet. 2.3.
upon some occasion, as it seems, went to Kirjath-arba, (afterward called
Hebron) A City afterward allotted to the Tribe of Judah, not far from the
Okefield of Mamre, where Abraham had formerly lived.
being 127 years of Age, and there she fell sick and died. She is the only
Woman whose full and entire Age is recorded in Scripture. Abraham hearing of
it, came thither to weep and mourn for her, and having sat sometime (as it is
like) on the Earth, in token of the great sorrow and affliction he was under by
reason of her death; he at length rose up and took order to have her honorably
interred. Accordingly he applies himself to the Governors and Elders of the
Hittites, the Inhabitants of Hebron (of the Progeny of Cham, Genesis 10.6, 15.)
and told them that he being a Stranger among them, did humbly desire this
favor of them, that he might be permitted to buy of them a small piece of
ground. Namely so much as would make a burying-place, that he might bury his
dead out of his sight. For though he had now lived 62 years in Canaan, yet he
never went about to purchase a foot of Land in it before. The Children of Heth
answer, That he was a mighty Prince among them, and he might freely make use of
any of their Sepulchers, even the choicest Faviliis erant sua singulis
distincta seorsim Sepulchreta. Ita mortem in vita meditati sunt and Ethnici,
simile quid est Math. 27.60. Anonym. in loc.
of them upon this occasion. Abraham would not by any bounty of theirs enjoy
one foot of that Land which God had given him entire for his possession, but
the time of possession according to the grant and promise being not yet come,
without any distrust of Gods promise, or renunciation of his own Right, he buys
a parcel of the Land, for his own present necessity.
But Abraham being willing rather to pay for a piece of Ground that might be
his own Propriety, than to hold any in Common with the Heathens (though it were
but by burying his dead among them) he humbly bowed himself to them, (as
acknowledging their kindness) and requested them that they would intercede with
Ephron a chief person among them (who sat at that time in their Assembly,
though Abraham knew it not) that he might purchase of him the Cave of Machpelah
for a burying-place, and he was willing to give him as much money for it as it
was worth. Ephron being there present, V. 10. sic read, And Ephron sat among
the Children of Heth.
told Abraham in the audience of the Inhabitants of the City, that he did
freely give him that Cave, and the Field belonging to it. Abraham bowing
himself again in token of thankfulness, told him, The like striving in kindness
is between David and Araunah, 2 Samuel 24, 21, etc.
That if he were that Ephron, of whom he had before spoken, he would willingly
pay him for it, and did not desire to have it on any other Terms. Ephron told
him the Land was worth about 400 Shekels The common Shekel was about 1 s. 3 d.
of our money.
(amounting to about 25 l. of our money) and that was but a trifle between them
two. Abraham however resolved to pay him a just value for it, and accordingly
paid him by weight (not by tale, as is now usual) the 400 Shekels, and so the
Field with the Trees growing thereon and the Cave was made sure to Abraham by
payment of the money, the Inhabitants of the City being Witnesses, without
Deeds or Writings, which were not then, as afterward in use. See Jer. 32.9,
10. Abraham having thus bought this Field and Cave, he therein buried
Afterward he himself was buried there, and Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and Leah,
Genesis 25.9. and Chapter 49.31. and 50.13. They testifying thereby their Faith in
Gods Promises, for the Inheritance of this Land, and of the heavenly Canaan
figured thereby. This made Joseph also give charge to have his bones carried
thither.
the body of his beloved Sarah.

Genesis 23. whole Chapter.

SECT. XIV.
ABraham being now 140 years old, and the Lord having blessed him in all
things, he began to think of providing a fit Wife for Isaac his Son, who was at
this time 40 years of age. And understanding that his second Brother Nahor
(whom he had left at Haran in Mesopotamia, when he first came into Canaan) had
by Milchah his Wife eighth Sons (whereof one was Bethuel Father of Rebecca) and
four by Reumah his Concubine, I say hearing these tyding of his Brother, and of
his numerous Offspring, he had a mind to send his chief Servant and Steward
(supposed to be Eliezer, who had the Charge of all his Concerns) to his Kindred
there, to seek a Wife among them for his Son. Therefore calling him to him, and
acquainting him with the business, he required him to swear A practice used by
Masters of Families in taking an Oath of any of their household, in token of
homage, subjection and faithfulness; so Jacob required of Joseph, Chapter 47.29.
to him, by putting his hand under his thigh, Though the usual custom of
swearing was by lifting up the hand to the most high God.
that he would not take a Wife for his Son of any of the Daughters of the
Canaanities (because he would not have his Seed mix themselves with that
profane and Idolatrous people, whose blood his Posterity was to shed without
pity, and to succeed in their room) but should go to his own Country to Charran
to seek for a Wife there, where was the truest Worship of God, next to that in
his own Family, though indeed very much corrupted, as we may see in Laban, Chapter
31.30, 53. The Servant very discreetly objected, that possibly a Woman of that
Country would not be willing to come along with him so far, nor would marry his
Son on such Terms, as to leave her own Relations, and come and dwell in
Canaan. Therefore if his Son would have a Wife from thence, in all likelihood
he must consent to go and dwell there. And if they in Mesopotamia should insist
on such terms as these, he desires to know what his Oath should bind him to.
Abraham tells him, that by no means he must consent that Isaac should go and
dwell there, both because they were too Corrupt in Religion, and because
Isaac's going to dwell there would be in a sort to renounce the Land of
Promise. He must rather live here as a Stranger and Sojourner, by Faith as he
himself had done. But he bids the Servant not to be over-careful in that
matter, for God would send his holy Angel to guide and direct him, and show him
what he was to do. And if the Woman he should choose for a Wife for his Son,
would not be willing to come along with him, he should be free of his Oath. On
these terms therefore the Servant undertook the business, and swear to him to
perform what he enjoined him. Then providing himself of all things needful for
such an undertaking, that he might set out in a Port and Equipage agreeable to
the greatness and wealth of his Master, he took 10 Camels and Servants
answerable, and furnished himself with Provisions for so long a Journey, and
carried with him many rich Presents of all sorts to present his Masters Kindred
with, as there should be occasion, and to show what a mighty man of Wealth his
Master was. Thus furnished, he began his Journey, and after several days travel
he came to Haran where Nahor his Masters Brother dwelt. And coming thither
about eventide, the time that the young women of the City used to go out to a
Well hard by to fetch Water, he caused his Camels to kneel down, and be
unloaded near that Fountain, that so they might bait and be watered, and rest
themselves. This done, he betook himself by solemn prayer unto God, humbly
entreating him to prosper him in the business he came about. And then (as it is
like) by the special motion of Gods Spirit, Without the like warrant we may not
attempt the like.
he humbly desired of the Lord to give him a sign whereby he might know the
person that his Providence had appointed for Isaac, and that this in particular
might be the sign, namely, that that Damosel among those that came out to draw
Water, who when he entreated her that he might drink of her Pitcher, should
answer, Drink thy self, and I will give thy Camels drink also, might be the
person, whom He should look upon as designed for His young Master. For that
thing would argue her to be of a good ingenuous, friendly, hospitable nature
and disposition. Immediately upon this, Rebecca, Daughter of Bethuel, and
Grandchild of Nahor Abraham's Brother, came with her Pitcher to draw Water,
being a Virgin of great beauty and comeliness. The Servant seeing Her,
addresses himself immediately to her, and desires to drink of her Pitcher; she
readily gave it him, and freely offered to draw water for his Camels also. The
man wondering at her Civility and Courtesy, began silently to consider with
himself, whether this was not a clear evidence that God had heard his prayer,
and made his Journey successful, and had now pointed out the Damosel to him
that was pointed for Isaac. And then asking her whose Daughter she was, she
told him Bethuels, the Son of Nahor by Milca his lawful Wife. He then
acquainted her (as it is like) whose Servant he was, and from whom he came, and
presented her with a Jewel for her Forehead, and two Bracelets for her Hands.
Then secretly worshipping God, and praising of him that he had dealt so
mercifully with his Master, and had led him His Servant in the right way to
take his Brothers Grandchild for his Son; he asked her if they had any room in
her Fathers house for him and his Company. She told him, They had. And then
immediately she ran to tell them of her Mothers house what had happened; For it
seems it was the custom of those times and places for the Women to dwell in
Tents and Houses by themselves apart. See v. 67. Rebecca had a Brother whose
Name was Laban, who hearing these things, and seeing the Jewel and Bracelets on
the Forehead and Hands of his Sister, by the appointment (as it is like) of his
Father and Mother, (who were both ancient) he went to the Man, and saluting him
kindly, said, Come thou blessed of the Lord, thou art welcome unto our house,
which is ready to receive thee. Eliezer readily and thankfully accepted his
kindness, and went along with him unto his House. When they were come thither,
Laban ungirded his Camels, and gave them Provender, and gave water to Eliezer,
and the other Servants that were with him to wash their Feet, (after the manner
of those Eastern Countries) and then they set Meat before them. But Eliezer
(like a faithful Servant that was more intent upon his business than his belly)
told them, That he would not eat till he had acquainted them with his Errand.
And then he declared unto them that he was Abraham's Servant, that God had
extraordinarily blessed his Master with great Riches, that his Wife Sarah had
born him a Son when she was very aged, that this Son was to be his Heir, that
his Master had made him swear to him that he should not take a Wife for his Son
of the Daughters of the accursed Canaanites, but of his own Kindred, That he
had objected to his Master that peradventure such a Damosel would not be
willing to come with him so far from her own Relations, that his Master had
answered, That God would send his Angel with him to direct and prosper him, and
he should find a Wife for his Son among his own Kindred; and if he could not
find such an one among them that would be willing to come, he should be clear
of his Oath. Upon these terms he undertook this Journey, and when he came to
the Well without their City, he prayed unto the Lord to prosper him in his
business, and that by such a sign he might know the Damosel God had appointed
for his Masters Son, and this sign he found pointed him clearly to Rebecca.
These things being all true and real, he desired them that they would please to
deal kindly and uprightly with his Master, and to let him have a direct answer,
concerning this great and weighty matter, that he might know whether to turn to
the right hand, or to the left, that is, that if they consented not, he might
somewhere else look for a Wife for his young Master. Then Laban (who as it is
like had the managing of all their affairs, his Father being old) spoke in the
Name of them all, and told the Servant that the thing seemed to proceed from
the Lord, and from his all-wise Providence, and therefore they could not speak
unto him either good or bad. Good reasons they had none against this motion,
and bad they would not urge, so that they had nothing to say against it. And
therefore he should have their free consent to have Rebecca for his Masters Son
(provided she were willing) seeing God had declared his good pleasure therein
by pointing Her out to him by that sign. When Eliezer heard this, he worshipped
God, bowing himself to the ground. Then he presented Rebecca with some rich
picces of Gold and Silver plate, and with rich Suits of apparel, and presented
her Mother also and her Brother with rich Gifts. All things having thus
prosperously succeeded, Eliezer and his Company were now willing to eat and
drink with Laban, which having done, they reposed themselves there that night.
Then rising early the next Morning ( Eliezer like a man that seriously minded
his business) desired them to hasten him away with his young Mistress. Her
Mother and Brother were not willing so soon to part with her, but desired that
she might stay with them at least ten days before she went. But Eliezer was
impatient of so long a stay, and therefore entreated them that seeing the Lord
had so eminently prospered him in his business hitherto, he might now hasten
home to his Master. They replied, They would call Rebecca, and see what she
said to it. Rebecca expressing a modest willingness to go (provided it might be
with their good liking.) They said, They saw the thing was of God, and
therefore she should go. Then solemnly blessing her, and praying that she might
be the Mother of thousands of Millions, (that is, of an innumerable Posterity,
who might possess the Gates of their Enemies) they forthwith sent her away with
Deborah her Nurse, and some young Maids to attend her. Rebecca with Her
Attendants being thus committed to the Care of Eliezer, they began their
Journey toward Canaan; and after some days travel, they drew near to Beersheba
where Abraham and Isaac dwelt. It being now Eventide, Isaac was walking in the
Fields to pray and meditate. His walk was in the way Veniebat ea via qua itur
ad puteum.
that leads to the Well Lahai-roi, where on a sudden lifting up his eyes, he
saw the Camels coming toward him. Rebecca seeing him at some distance, asked
Eliezer who He was; and he telling her it was Isaac his young Master, she
immediately lighted off from her Camel, and took a Veil and covered her face in
token of modesty and subjection. When they met, the Servant told Isaac all that
had happened, and presented Rebecca to Him. Isaac joyfully received and
welcomed Her, and forthwith conducted her into his Mother Sarahs Tent, Women it
seems had their Tents apart, see Chapter 31.33.
which it seems at her death (about three years before) had been reserved with
its Furniture for his Wife: And soon after He took her for his Wife, by solemn
marrying of her, and loved her exceedingly, and was highly pleased with Her. So
that the great grief he had before lien under for his dear Mothers death, was
now well mitigated and abated by the Comforts he had in his new Wife.

Chapter 24. whole Chapter.

SECT. XV.
ABraham having thus happily dispatched that weighty business of his Sons
marriage, he took to himself another Wife, Non libidine motus, sed amore
prolis, and ex divino instinctu, ut ex eo semen inter gentes quoque
multiplicaretur.
by name Keturah, when he was about 140 years old. For though forty years
before that time his body was as it were dead, [Rom. 4.19.] as to any humane
likelihood of begetting Children, yet God who strengthened him then to beget
Isaac, did (it seems) now renew that Masculine vigor and strength to him (to
make good his Promise of multiplying his Seed, Chapter 17. 5. in others also,
though principally in Isaac) that he enabled him to beget six Sons of Keturah
in his old age. To these he gave portions, (as he had done before to Ishmael
the Son of Hagar, being his Children by his Concubines) By this it appears that
not only they were called Concubines, who (as Hagar) were taken after a man was
married, to be as it were partner-wives, or by-wives, for the right of the Bed,
and propagation of Children, though not solemnly betrothed, nor taken with
Dowry, nor to be partners in the Government of the Family, but to be subject to
the lawful Wife, and their Children were not to inherit except the Father
pleased (as Bilhah's and Zilpah's did extraordinarily becoming heads of Tribes)
I say not only such as these were called Concubines, but second Wives taken
after the first was dead, were so called because their Children had no right of
Inheritance.
and before his death sent them away into the East-Country, into part of
Arabia, a good way off from Isaac, the Heir of the Promise, whom he made the
sole and full heir of all his remaining Estate; thus testifying his Faith that
only Isaac and his Seed should enjoy the Land of Canaan.

Chap. 25. from 1. to 7.

SECT. XVI.
REbecca continued 19 years barren after her Marriage, but at last upon Isaac's
prayer, (who had prayed many years for her) the Lord was entreated to bless her
with power to Conceive, and she conceived Twins, who struggling in her Womb, she
said, If it be so, why am I thus? that is, if it be so that I am indeed with
child, why am I thus? what is the reason I feel such a strange, and
extraordinary and painful struggling in my Womb more than other women do that
are in my Condition? Hereupon she betook her self either by her own private
prayer, or by some Prophet to inquire of the Lord what the meaning of it should
be. The answer she received was, That she had two Sons in her Womb, that should
be the heads of two several Nations, [viz. Edomites and Israelites] that these
two Nations should differ very much one from the other. They should be divided
in habitation, and should differ very much in their Laws, Religion, and
Manners; that Esau for some time should be greater than Jacob [see Chapter 27.43.
and Chapter 32. and 33.] and the Edomites should be more potent than the
Israelites, [see Numb. 20.18.] yet in conclusion the Elder should serve the
Younger, that is, the Israelites should subdue the Edomites, [2 Samuel 8.14. 1
Kings 22.47. Obadiah v. 17, 18.] And the younger should have a great
pre-eminence above the Elder in respect of Spiritual privileges; he should
have the Birthright, and the Inheritance of the Land of Promise; out of his
Loins the Messiah should come; and the blessing of the Adoption and Covenant
should be conferred on him and his Posterity. All these blessings seem
contained in that Oracle, v. 23. The Elder shall serve the Younger. See Romans
9.12. But yet it is probable, Isaac did not rightly understand this Prediction,
as Rebecca did, which made the one seek so much to favor Esau, the other
Jacob. And it is likely that this was the very reason why Rebecca believing it
to be thus decreed of God, did so confidently afterward plot and contrive to
have the blessing conferred on the younger, contrary to the mind and intention
of Isaac. When the time of her delivery came, the first that came forth was Red
and all over hairy, and they called his name Esau, which signifies made or
perfected, as if he were born a Man rather than a Child. Then came forth the
other, taking hold on Esau's heel, [Hosea 12.3.] as if he would have pulled him
back; that he might be born before him; which was doubtless purposely so
disposed by the Providence of God, as a sign presaging what should afterward
come to pass, to wit, that he should overthrow and supplant his Brother, and
get the Birthright and Blessing from him; and accordingly his Name was called
Jacob, that is, an holder by the heel, or a Supplanter.

Chapter 25. from v. 20. to 27.

SECT. XVII.
ABraham lived after the birth of Jacob fifteen years, with whom he is said to
have lived in Tents, Heb. 11.9. By Faith he sojourned in the Land of Promise as
in a strange Country, with Isaac and Jacob, the Heirs with him of the same
promise. And now being 175 years old, (an 100 years after his first coming into
Canaan) he gave up the Ghost, and was gathered to his people, that is, the
Society of the Just, such as he was. He was buried in the Cave of Machpelah
with Sarah his Wife, by his Sons Isaac and Ishmael; which latter, though never
received again into his Fathers Family after his first dismission, yet dwelt
not so far off, but that he heard of his Fathers death, and came to his Burial.
Isaac after his death dwelt by the Well Lahairoi [see Chapter 16.14.] and there the
Lord exceedingly blessed him.

Chapter 25. from 7. to 12.

SECT. XVIII.
ABout this time Heber, the 5th from Noah, died, 430 years after the Birth of
his Son Peleg, (Genesis 11.17.) This man lived the longest of any that was born
after the Flood, and outlived Abraham himself, and from him Abraham came first
to be surnamed the Hebrew, Genesis 14.13. And in aftertimes all the Posterity of
his Grandchild Jacob, were called by the same Name, Genesis 40.15. I was stolen
away (says Joseph) out of the Land of the Hebrews; whence observe, that Canaan
was called the Land of the Hebrews while the Canaanite was still living in that
Land.

SECT. XIX.
ESau and Jacob being now grown up, discovered themselves to be of very
different tempers, and different ways of life. Esau was a cunning Hunter, and a
man of the Field, like Nimrod or Ishmael, valorous and fierce, and following
his Pleasure: Jacob a good plain man dwelling in Tents, living a plain
Shepherds life, keeping home, and looking to household affairs, a man of little
Note in Comparison of his Brother. Now Isaac's affection was most to Esau,
because he observed his officiousness, care, and diligence to please him, and
to provide such meat for him as he loved, which he took as a sign that he did
greatly reverence, respect, and love him. And He thought of the Two He would
prove the most able and active, and fittest for great Employments, and the best
and stoutest stay and support of His Family. Yet in all this Isaac did not so
well consider (as he should have done) the divine Oracle concerning Jacob,
recorded verse. 23. And it is like on this account Rebeccas affection was most to
Jacob. But to proceed on in the story of these two Brothers, Jacob one day had
provided for himself red pottage made of Lentils, (a kind of pulse) and
possibly had put some Cordial Ingredients into it, which not only colored it,
but made it seem very desirable to the palate. This, though a small matter, yet
conduces (as we shall see) to the fulfilling of a great Promise, Chapter 27.29.
Esau comes in from hunting with an Hunters stomach, extreme sharp set, and
ready to faint, and seeing this Broth, and having a strong Appetite to it, he
earnestly desires Jacob to give him some of it. Jacob (as it seems)
apprehending the Birthright [according to the Oracle, verse. 23. The Elder shall
serve the younger] to belong to him, he makes use of this his Brothers present
necessity, and asks him to sell him his Birthright for the pottage. Esau
feeling himself faint, and ready to die with hunger, said, What will my
Birthright (with all the Privileges belonging to it) profit me if I instantly
die? Therefore relieve my present necessity, and take it. But Jacob would not
take his bare word for it, but requires that he should swear to him that He
should have The Privileges of the Birthright were these: 1. Lordship over his
Brethren, Chapter 4.7. and 49.3. 2ly, A double portion of goods, Deuteronomy. 21.17. 3ly,
The right of Preisthood after the Fathers decease, until the Preisthood was
transferred on the Tribe of Levi, Numb. 8. from 16. to 20.
it. Esau does so, and thereupon Jacob gave him bread and pottage. And his so
greedily desiring red pottage, and so ungraciously despising and selling his
Birthright for it, [see Heb. 12.16.] got him the Nickname, and brand of Edom,
which signifies red. And when he had eaten and drunk his fill, he went away
like one that had despised his Birthright. Yet possibly afterward he did
think of recovering it again by force, or some other way from his Brother; for
we find him after this, pleading his Birthright to his Father, Chapter 27.32.

Chap. 25. from 27. to the end.

SECT. XX.
ABout this time there was a Famine, or great scarcity of Provisions in that
part of the Land of Canaan where Isaac dwelt, and he had thoughts of going down
into Egypt, as his Father had done on the like occasion, Genesis 12.10. But God
appearing to him, bad him he should not go thither, but stay in Canaan, and he
would be with him and bless him, and give to him that Land [by way of Promise]
and to his Posterity [by way of actual Possession;] and the Inheritance of all
those Countries possessed by so many several Nations, should be Theirs; And He
would perform the Oath which he swear to Abraham his Father, and would make his
Seed to multiply as the Stars of Heaven, and in his Seed all the Nations of the
Earth should be blessed; For the Messiah should come of him. For he did not
forget Abraham's Faithfulness and sincere Obedience to him, and would
recompense it by blessing his Son. The Piety of Parents is very bencfieial to
their Children, provided they walk in the steps of their Religious Parents.
Hereupon Isaac went to Gerar, a City of the Philistines, where he was born,
Genesis 21.2. The men of the place asking him concerning Rebecca, and he being
afraid they would kill him, that some of them might have her, (being a
beautiful woman) if he owned himself her Husband, he (as his Father Exempla
Patrum liberos in utramque partem potenter trahunt.
Abraham had twice done before, Chapter 12.13, 19. and 20.2.) said, She was his
Sister, which though true in a sense (she being his Kinswoman) yet it was not
so to their understandings. After some time Abimelech King of the Place looking
out at a Window, saw Isaac using some free, though innocent familiarity with
Rebecca (which between any that were not Man and Wife He thought would not have
been decent) and thereupon he told Isaac that certainly she was his Wife; which
he immediately confessed, and declared the reason of his not owning it before.
Abimelech expostulates with him for this, telling him that some of his Subjects
might possibly have taken Rebecca to himself, and have lain with her, and so
brought great guilt upon them. By which we see that dissimulation, but much
more Adultery (before the giving of the Moral Law) were condemned by the very
light of Nature, and Heathen-Morality. Abimelech further charges his Subjects,
That none of them should injure Isaac upon pain of Death. Isaac now falls to
Husbandry, and has (by the blessing of God) an hundredfold increase, and grew
to so great Riches and Wealth, that it drew the envy of the Philistines upon
him, insomuch that they stopped up the Wells that had been dug there formerly
by his Fathers Servants. This injury was great, both because of the scarcity of
Water there, as also because it was done against their Covenant and Oath
formerly made with his Father Abraham, Genesis 21.30. But Isaac, without making
any further disturbance about it, set his Servants to dig them again, and to
call them by the Names his Father had formerly given them. Abimelech gives him
notice how some of his Subjects envied him, and therefore advises him to remove
from thence; which he accordingly did, to the valley or lower ground of Gerar.
There his Servants digging, found another Well. But the Herdsmen of Gerar
strove with his Servants, and got it from him. So he called it Esec, signifying
contention. Then his Servants dug and found another Spring, and that also
these men of Gerar strove for, so that he called it From this word Satan has
his name.
Sittah, signifying hatred. Then they removed further, and digging again, found
another Well, and for that the Philistines strove not, and therefore Isaac
called it Rehoboth, intimating that God had now made room for them, that they
might grow in the Land. The Famine being ended, he returned to the Place from
whence he came, viz. Beersheba; where the Lord appeared to him, and comforted
him against the envious dealings of the Philistines, and promised to bless him,
and to multiply his Seed, for his Father Abraham's sake. Here he builds an
Altar to Sacrifice thankfully unto God, and here he calls upon his Name and
worships him in a public and solemn manner, declaring hereby that he would
worship no other God, than the God of his Father Abraham. Abimelech with some
of his chief Courtiers follow him hither, and tell him, That they saw the Lord
was with him, and did eminently bless him, and therefore they desired to make a
Covenant with him, whereby He should be engaged that he should not hurt them,
as they had not done him any considerable injury, the small annoyance about the
Wells being a thing not worthy to be remembered. Isaac consenting hereunto, did
thereupon make them a great Feast, and the next morning they did confirm their
Covenant mutually by their Oaths, and so he sent them away in peace. The same
day Isaac's Servants came and told him of the Well they had found thereabout.
And he called it Sheba, signifying an Oath. This Well was formerly so called by
Abraham, Chapter 21.31. but having been stopped (as it seems) by the Philistines, and
now opened again by Isaac's Servants, the old name is again imposed upon the
like occasion.

Chapter 26. from 1. to 34.

SECT. XXI.
ESau being now 40 years old, contrary to the consent and will of his Parents,
took two Wives of the Stock of the Hittites (one of the accursed Nations of the
Canaanites) viz. Judith Esau's Wives, and their Fathers had several Names, as
appears, Genesis 36.2.
the Daughter of Beeri, and Bashemath the Daughter of Elon, who by reason of
their being bred up in Idolatry, and their averseness to the true worship of
God, and other ill qualities, were very displeasing, troublesome, and uneasy
to Isaac and Rebecca.

Chapter 26. v. 34, 35.

Chapter 27. v. 46.

Chapter 28. v. 8.

SECT. XXII.
IShmael, Abraham's Son by Hagar, at the age of 137 died, and was gathered unto
Abraham dicitur congregatus ad populum suum, i. e. ad societatem iustorum,
qualis ipse erat. Haec phrasis etiam male morientibus attribuitur, quia scil.
illi congregentur ad malos tanquam ad populum suum. Ians.
his people; that is, such as were like him, 12 Princes being descended from
him, and their Castles and Towns were called after their Names.

Genesis 25. from 12. to 19.

SECT. XXIII.
ISaac was now arrived at the age of 136, and his Eyes Isaac was 60 when Jacob
was born, and Jacob was now 76.
were very dim. Blindness indeed is incident to old age; yet this seems to have
happened to Isaac by the special Providence of God, that Jacob might be blessed
by him. For Isaac lived after this above 40 years, as may be collected from Chapter
35.28. The Patriarchs having received the promise of Grace for themselves and
their Seed after them, were wont before they died, in the Name of God, and by
the spirit of Prosphesie to fore-shew with which of their Seed this Covenant
should continue, and so did as it were by way of Will and Testament pass over
the right of the Covenant and the promise of Grace to those their Children who
were to be heirs thereof, and in whose Families the Church was to be continued
till the coming of Christ. Whence that phrase, Heb. 12.17. of inheriting the
blessing. And thus Isaac now intended to bless his Son Esau, not understanding
(as it is probable) the Will and purpose of God herein, so plainly as Rebecca
did from that Oracle. Genesis 25.23. where the Lord said unto her two Nations are
in thy Womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels, the
one people shall be stronger than the other, and the elder shall serve the
youger. And being her self persuaded thereby that God intended the blessing to
the younger, without doubt she did labor to persuade Isaac thereof. But though
God enlightened his understanding by a prophetical illumination, as concerning
the blessing he was to pronounce, yet withal he did not so clearly show him
the right person on whom it was to be conferred, but left him therein to his
own spirit, which carried him to consider Esau's Prerogative in being his
Firstborn; and having a great affection for him (as we have seen Sect. 19.) he
intended to transmit the blessings and promises made to his Father Abraham unto
him. But the Providence of God serving it self upon the better illumination and
Faith of Rebecca, by her means does disappoint Isaac's purpose, that it might
appear that it was not by the will of Man, but of Gods free Grace, and singular
favor that Jacob had the blessing. But to return, Isaac now intending to bless
Esau, he bad him go out into the Field and take him some Venison, and to make
him some savoury meat, such as he loved. For being aged and feeble, it is like
he desired this refreshing meat to cheer his Spirits, that he might be the
fitter Instrument of the holy Spirit of God in pronouncing this Prophetical
Blessing. Rebecca understanding this, and being strongly persuaded that the
blessing belonged to Jacob, 1. By Gods declaring to her when the Children
strugled in her Womb, That the elder should serve the younger. And 2ly, By
Jacob's holding his Brother by the heel when he was born. And 3ly, By Esau's
selling his Birthright to Jacob. And lastly, By Esau's profaneness and Jacob's
Piety, and perceiving that Isaac was now ready (through mistake) as much as lay
in him to cross the Counsel and purpose of God, she resolves to endeavor to
disappoint her Husband; And though the subtilty and deceit she instructs Jacob
to use therein, be not justifiable, yet thus far she is praiseworthy, that
understanding rightly the Oracle of God, she sought to prevent the Error of her
Husband, and to procure the blessing for him to whom God had appointed it.
Hereupon she calls Jacob, and bids him fetch her two young Kids from the Flock,
and she would of them make savoury meat for his Father, which he should
speedily carry to him, and so receive the blessing from him. Jacob humbly told
her, That there was a great deal of difference between Him and his Brother as
to their persons; For his Brother was an hairy man, and He himself was not so;
and possibly his Father would feel him when he went to carry the meat, and so
being discovered, he should (in all likelihod) bring a Curse upon himself
instead of a blessing. His Mother being confident (as it seems) of a good
issue, answered, Upon me be thy Curse, only obey my voice, and do as I command
thee. Hereupon he fetched the Kids, and gave them to her, and she made savoury
meat of them, such as Isaac loved. Then she took a Suit of Raiment that
belonged to Esau, (which was there in the house with her) and was well sented
with Odors, and put it upon Jacob. Then she put some part of the skins of the
Kids upon his Hands, and the smooth of his Neck, and so gave him the savoury
meat to carry to his Father. When he had brought it to him, Isaac asked him,
Who he was? He answered, I am Esau thy Firstborn; I have done according as
thou did command me; Arise I pray thee, Eat of my Venison, that thy Soul may
bless me. Isaac replies, How is it that thou have found it so quickly my Son?
Jacob answers, Because the Lord thy God has brought it to me. Mendacii peccato
Jacobum voluit implicari Deus, operibus ne tribueretur aut Electio aut
Benedictio. Isaacum porro falli ac stupore perstringi, ut amoris ipsum puderet
in Esau praeposteri, tum ut constaret quam frustra obsisteretur Deo. Anonym. in
V. T.
And thus out of fear of being discovered he is further ensnared. Isaac (as it
seems) being yet something doubtful, calls him to him, that he might feel him,
and having felt him, said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the
hands of Esau. Yet notwithstanding having some mistrust, he asks him, Art thou
my very Son Esau? He answered, He was. So then Isaac bad him bring him his
Venison, and he did eat thereof, and he brought him Wine, and he drank thereof.
Then being refreshed, he bad him come near unto him and kiss him, and smelling
the smell of his Raiment, he said, The smell of my Sons Garment is as the smell
of a Field which God has blessed, namely, with Flowers and Fruits. Then in a
way both of prayer and prophecy, he said, The efficacy of the blessing here
did not depend upon the intention of Isaac, no more does the efficacy of the
Sacrament depend upon the intention of the Minister.
God give thee of the dew of Heaven, and the fatness of the Earth, Which
Promises of temporal good things were also types of spiritual blessings
extending to all that were within the Covenant made to and with Abraham. And
though these Promises according to the letter were not fulfilled so much in
Jacob's person, as in his Posterity, nevertheless the spiritual benefits
typified thereby were common to him with all believers.
and plenty of Corn and Wine. Let people serve thee, and Nations bow down unto
thee. Be thou Lord over thy Brethren, and let thy Mothers Sons bow down unto
thee, cursed be every one that curses thee, and blessed be every one that
blesses thee. Isaac had no sooner made an end of blessing Jacob, but Esau came
with his Venison, and desired his Father to eat thereof and bless him. When
Isaac heard this, he trembled exceedingly, and in a kind of Consternation
asked, Where is he that has taken Venison and brought it me, and I have eaten
thereof before thou came, and have blessed him, yea, and he shall be blessed.
Esau hearing this, burst out into a bitter cry, and said, Bless me, even me
also, O my Father. He desires a shate in the Birth-right-blessing, though he
could not have it alone. But He did not consider that he had freely of his own
accord sold his Birtht-right to his Brother, and consequently the blessing
belonging to it. Isaac answers, His Brother came with subtilty, and had taken
away the Blessing. Esau replies, My Brother may well be called Jacob (a
Supplanter) for he has twice supplanted me; first in getting away my
Birthright, and now in taking away my Blessing. But O my Father (says he) Have
thou never a blessing reserved for me? Isaac answered, Behold I have made thy
Brother thy Lord, and all his Brethren have I given to him for Servants, and
with Corn and Wine have I plentifully furnished him, that he shall have enough.
And now the chief and principal blessing, viz. the Divine Covenant, and the
Inheritance of the Land of Canaan, being settled on thy Brother Jacob, what
shall I do for thee my Son? Alas all other blessings are comparatively nothing
to this. Esau answered, What, my Father, have thou but one blessing to bestow?
Then weeping bitterly, he cried out, O I beseech thee bless me, even me also.
But all his crying and weeping could not move Isaac to repent of what he had
done, or to recall the blessing which unwittingly he had conferred on Jacob,
see Heb. 12.17. However Isaac tells Esau that plenty of earthly blessings
should be his portion. Canaan also was a Type of the heavenly Canaan.
Thy dwelling (says he) shall be the fatness of the Earth (Mount Seir was such
a place, though much inferior to Canaan) and thou shall be blessed with the dew
of Heaven from above, and by thy Sword shall thou live (that is, by thy valor
shall defend thy Estate and Country) and shall serve thy Brother, viz. in thy
Posterity. For when the Children of Jacob shall inherit the Land of Canaan,
they shall make the Edomites Tributaries to them, [see 2 Samuel 8.14. and Obad.
v. 18, 19.] but it shall come to pass when thou shall have the Dominion, thou
shall break his Yoke from off thy Neck, that is, after the Edomites thy
Posterity shall have been a long time in subjection to the Israelites, they
shall at length become more mighty than they had been, and shall then Cast off
the Yoke of the Israelites, which was accomplished in the days of Jehoram King
of Judah, 2 Kings 8.20. In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah.
[See 2 Chronicles. 21.8.]

Things thus happening between these two Brothers, Esau hereupon hated Jacob,
This hatred continued in his Posterity. See Obad. v. 10.11, 12, etc. Herod was
an Idumaean, and exercised his Tyranny in Judaea for 38 years.
because of the blessing wherewith his Father had blessed him. And at first he
secretly determined in his own mind, but afterward (not being able to contain
himself) he uttered it in so many words, that the days of mourning for his
Father were at hand, that is, his Father could not in likelihood live much
longer, and as soon as he was dead he was resolved to kill See how wicked men
do harden themselves against the known will of God, as we see an instance in
Saul, 1 Samuel 18.28, 29. Saul saw and knew that the Lord was with David, and yet
he became David's enemy continually.
his Brother Jacob. These threatening words coming to Rebeccas ears, she
immediately sent for her Son Jacob, and told him what Esau intended against
him, and how he comforted himself with the thoughts of killing him, not only
because revenge (yea the very purpose of it) is sweet to enraged wicked men,
but because he flattered himself with hopes by this means to recover his
Birthright again. Therefore she advises him to flee presently to her Brother
Laban, who dwelt at Haran in Mesopotamia, and to tarry there a few days, But it
proved to be above 20 years, as we see Chapter 31.38.
till the wrath and fury of his Brother was appeased, and then she would send,
and fetch him home again. And she further intimates to Him, that she plainly
foresaw that if they continued together, they would in all likelihood quarrel
and fight, and possibly one of them might kill the other. And if Esau killed
him, they could then account no better of Esau then as of a dead man, seeing
Divine Vengeance in all probability would follow him, because of that Fact; or
the Sword of Justice would cut him off; or he would withdraw himself from her
presence, as not daring to look her any more in the face, and so she should be
deprived of them both in one day. And Rebecca, that she might dispose Isaac to
be willing that Jacob might go to Padan-Aram, tells him not of what she heard
of Esau's bloody intention to kill his Brother (lest she should grieve him
thereby in his old Age, or inrage him against Esau) but she tells him, that she
was weary of her life by reason of Esau's Wives, and therefore lest Jacob
should marry among the Canaanites as Esau had done, (to their continual grief
and vexation) she desires that Jacob might go and seek a Wife among her Kindred
at Haran. Isaac hereupon calls Jacob to him, and charging him to go to
Mesopotamia, and to take a Wife of the Daughters of Laban, he now wittingly and
willingly confirms the blessing which he had before given him unknowingly. He
desires the Lord to bless him, to make him fruitful, and to multiply him, [see
Chapter 35.11, 12. and Chapter 48.4.] and to confer on him all those blessings, both
Spiritual and Temporal, which were promised to Abraham and his Seed, and
especially the blessing of the promised Messiah. And that he might inherit the
Land given to Abraham by promise. For though he Himself should be only as a
Stranger in this Land, wandering here and there, yet to him it should be given,
and to his Seed after him. Jacob having thus received his Fathers blessing,
stole away privately, lest Esau should lie in wait for him by the way; and
began his Journey from Beersheba, toward his Uncle Laban, with his Staff in
his hand. Vacuus dimissus est, ut tutius latitaret, and emineret divina
benedictio.
[ Chapter 32.10.] As he traveled on he came to a Place near Luz, about 50 miles
from Beersheba, and about eight miles North of Jerusalem, but being overtaken
with the night, He was fain to lie all night in the Field; and he took one of
the stones of the place, and put it for his pillow, and so lay down to sleep.
And he dreamed and had a vision of a Ladder, the foot of which stood upon the
Earth, and the top of it reached to Heaven, and the Angels of God ascended and
descended on it. By which Vision probably was represented to Him how the
Providence of God reached from Heaven to Earth, and governed the World by the
Ministry of the holy Angels; and particularly Gods provident Care over Him, and
that through the mediation of the promised Seed, Christ hereby typified, The top
of the Ladder reaching to Heaven, represented Christ's Deity, the foot of it
touching the Earth, his Humanity, Joh. 1.51. Christ reaches to Heaven in his
Divine Nature, and to Earth in his humane. In his two Natures personally
united, Heaven and Earth are as it were joined together. By him alone God is
reconcil d to Man. To him the Angels minister. By his Merits and Intercession
the Saints obtain the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, the Guardianship of the holy
Angels, and all spiritual blessings, Psalm. 91.11, 12. Heb. 1.13, 14.
he should enjoy the Guardianship of the holy Angels, and be by them defended
both in his going out and returning. And in this Vision Jacob saw Jehovah
standing on the top of this Ladder, and saying to him, I am the God of Abraham
thy Father, and the God of Isaac; the Land whereon thou lie, to thee will I
give it, and to thy Seed; and thy Seed shall be as the dust of the Earth, and
shall spread and multiply exceedingly, East, West, North, and South, and in thy
Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. Thus he renews the promise
to him, and states it in him which was formerly made to Abraham and Isaac, Chapter
12.3. and 22.18. Acts 3.25. Further the Lord says to him, I am with thee, and
will keep thee in all places whether thou go, and will bring thee again into
this Land. For I will not leave thee until I have done all that which I have
spoken to thee of. Jacob awaking and considering the glorious Vision he had
seen, cried out, Assuredly God is in this place in a more peculiar manner,
though I did not apprehend, or imagine to have met with such a glorious
manifestation and Revelation of Himself to me here; and being struck with a
Reverend aw and fear of the Majesty of God, who had thus appeared to him, he
cries out, How dreadful is this place? This is none other but the House of God,
the very Gate of Heaven. As if he should have said, This seems to be a place
where God manifests himself in a more especial manner to the Children of Men,
and whence they may by praying unto him, and worshipping of him as by a Gate
ascend up into Heaven, and Converse with him above. And upon this account he
thinks this a fit place for the building an House to God, as we may see verse.
22. Rising up therefore early in the Morning, he takes the stone which he had
laid under his head, and set it up as a Pillar, This in likelihood being af
erwards demolished, he erects about 30 years after a new Pillar of stone upon
another Apparition in the same place, Chapter 35.14, 15. This Pillar was a
religious Sign and Monument as Altars were, Esaias 19.19. There were also Pillars
for civil use, as Rachels Pillar on her Grave, Chapter 35.20. And Absolon's Pillar,
2 Samuel 18.18. The Pillar Galeed, Genesis 31.45, 47, 52. But when the Law was given
by Moses, Pillars for religious use were forbidden, Levit. 26.1. Deuteronomy. 16.22.
And the Pillars of Idolaters commanded to be broken down, Deuteronomy. 12.3. and Chapter
7.5.
and as a memorial of that Vision, and then poured out a little of the oil upon
it (which he had taken with him for his provision by the way) as an Oblation
and Offering of thanksgiving to God, having no other Sacrifice at hand. And he
did the same thing afterward at the same place again about 30 years after,
[see Chapter 35.14.] and called the Name of the place Bethel, that is, the House of
God, whereas the City near to it was before called Luz. Then Jacob made a Vow
unto the Lord, That if he would please to be with him, and to keep him in the
way wherein he was now to go, and to give him Food and Raiment, [1 Timothy 6.8.]
and bring him back again to his Fathers house in peace, it should be a new and
strong Obligation, and Engagement upon him to worship and serve the Lord
faithfully all his days, and that stone or pillar now erected by him should be
Gods House, See the performance of this, Chapter 35.7.
viz. that place should be consecrated to his Worship and Service, for him and
his to worship him in; and that he would give the tenth Thus we see Tithes paid
by Abraham and Jacob before the Law of Moses. Decimas non sacerdoti pendendas,
sed in usus pios, aras, holocausta, etc. Levit 27.30. Numb. 18.24. Anonym. in
loc.
of all that he should have to God, that is, for the maintenance of the true
Worship of God, and for pious and charitable Uses.

Genesis 27. whole Chapter.

Genesis 28. from 1. to 6. and from 10. to the end.

SECT. XXIV.
ESau understanding that his Father Isaac had blessed Jacob, and that he had
sent him away into Mesopotamia, there to take a Wife of his own Kindred,
(expressly forbidding him to marry any of the Daughters of the Canaanites,) and
that Jacob had expressed his readiness to obey his Father and Mother therein;
He to pacify his Fathers mind (who was much offended with him for taking for
his first Wives, the Daughters of the Hitties, see Sect. 21.) went to the
Ishmaelites, (Ishmael himself being now dead) and took another Wife, viz.
Mahalatha, the Daughter of Ishmael the Son of Abraham; And it seems he did this
either to please his Father by matching into his Kindred, or else to strengthen
himself by this new alliance with the Israelites against his Brother Jacob.

Genesis 28. from 6. to 10.

SECT. XXV.
JAcob being now comforted and strengthened by the late heavenly Vision, went
on cheerfully in his Journey, and at length came near to Haran in Mesopotamia,
where at a Well in the Fields (which was guarded by a great stone) he saw a
great many Flocks of Sheep which were brought thither to be watered, as soon as
the Shepherds should have rolled away the stone. Jacob asks them civilly,
Whence they were? They answered, They belonged to Haran. He inquires if they
knew Laban the Son of Bethuel, and Grandchild of Nahor? They tell him, They
knew him very well. He inquires of his Health. They tell him he was in very
good health. And one of his Daughters, viz. Rachel was hard by coming with his
Sheep to be watered. Jacob tells them it was yet too soon in the day, as He
apprehended, to gather the Flocks together in order to their folding; therefore
he advises them to water the Sheep, and to go and feed them again. They tell
him, They might not (their custom or agreement among themselves being
otherwise) or could not water the Sheep till all the Flocks were come together,
and all the Shepherds joined their strength to remove the Stone. But Jacob
seeing Rachel coming with her. Fathers Flock, he being strong with the help of
these Shepherds there present, rolled away the Stone, and watered her Sheep.
Then saluting her, he acquainted her that he was Son to Rebecca, (her Father's
Sister, and wept for joy that he had so soon, and so opportunely met his Cousin
Rachel. She running and acquainting her Father therewith, he presently came
forth to Jacob, and embraced and kissed him, and brought him to his house. Then
Jacob related to him the state and condition of his Father and Mother, and what
was the reason and occasion of his Journey, and his coming so privately, else
Laban might have wondered to see him come so unfurnished, he having seen
Abraham's Servant Eliezer come so richly provided, when he fetched thence
Rebecca. Laban replies, That he was satisfied that he was his Nephew (his very
bone and flesh) and whatever was the occasion of his Journey, he should be
welcome to him. Jacob it is like presently after his coming to Laban, acquainted
him that He had been bred up in the way of Shepherdry, and in ordering of
Cattle; and if he pleased to employ Him, He would stay with Him a month, in
which time He might make trial of his Skill therein. Laban accordingly imploys
Him, and during that time Jacob being wondrous active and able for business of
that Nature, did his Uncle excellent service. Laban observing it, began to cast
in his thoughts how he might procure his stay. And accordingly tells him it was
not fit that he should suffer Him, though he was his Nephew V. 15. My Brother]
i. e. Kinsman or Nephew, see Genesis 13.8.
to do him service for naught. Therefore if he inclined to stay with Him, he
desires to know what wages would content him. Laban having two Daughters, viz.
Lea (who had weak and defective Eyes) and Rachel (who was very comely and
beautiful.) Jacob began to have a great love and kindness for Rachel, and being
in a strange place, and having nothing else More priscouxores emebant. David
Michalem centum praeputiis, 1 Samuel 18.25. 2 Samuel 3.14. vid. Genesis 34.11, 12.
Hos. 3.2. Ita apud Graecos and Romanos, ut fuse declarat Brissonius. Jacob
inops erat, nec emere poterat, itaque pro pretio septennium servit.
to profer, he proffered to serve his Uncle seven years, if he would please to
give him his Daughter Rachel to Wife. Laban accepts the proffer, saying it was
better he should give her to him than to another. This Agreement being made,
Jacob desired to have his designed Wife given unto him, presently There are two
Opinions concerning the time of Jacob's marrying. One is, that He did not marry
till the end of his first seven years service. And then having Leah
fraudulently put upon Him instead of Rachel, He Contracts anew to have Rachel
for other seven years service, but marries Her a week after He had taken Leah,
and performs that seven years service for Her after He had married Her. The
other is that Jacob in the first year of his coming to Laban married both Leah
and Rachel at the beginning of his 14 years service, keeping a weeks Feast at
the Marriage of the one, and so again presently after at the Marriage of the
other, and then performed his two seven years service for them. To this latter
opinion my judgment inclines. But because there are some words in the Text that
seem to favor the first opinion (which yet I think may receive a commodious
Interpretation) I will therefore first paraphrase upon them, and then give my
Reasons against the former Opinion, and for my own.

Jacob coming to Laban for a Wife, and falling in love with Rachel, it is like
he treated with Him about Her from his first coming, and made that proffer to
him. Verse. 18. I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger Daughter.
Laban having for one month tried his ability about ordering Cattle, and his
diligence and faithfulness, agrees thereunto. And Jacob did accordingly
afterward serve seven years for Rachel, verse. 20. and they seemed but a few
days to him, because of the entire love he had for Her, and the true content
and comfort he took in Her. If He had not enjoyed Her at present as his wife,
seven years would have seemed a longsome and tedious time. For amantibus omnis
mora longa and gravis. Love makes men think every day a year till they enjoy
the person loved. And if you would understand how this came about, you must
know that Jacob presently after his coming to Laban, having agreed with Him to
serve him seven years for Rachel, and having gone through his month of probation
and trial, He said to Laban at the end of it, verse. 21. Give me I pray thee my
designed wife, for my days of probation So Lidiate understands it of that month
or portion of time complete wherein Laban from the beginning intended to make
proof of Jacobs industry and sufficiency in the managing of the affairs
committed to him, before he would bestow his Daughter on him, which no doubt
was moved presently after his arrival there, seeing 'twas the chief cause of
his coming thither.
are fulfilled, that I may go in unto Her. Then Laban invited the chief men of
the Neighborhood to a Feast, pretending to marry his Daughter Rachel to Jacob,
but at night secretly and fraudulently conveyed Leah to his bed.

In the Morning Jacob highly Expostulates with Laban, saying. V. 25. (...)
Nonne pro Rachele servivi tibi, i. e. incepi servire. Canon est apud Glassium
verba Completiva inchoative intelligenda esse, Et quae actum Complectum
significent accipienda quandoque inchoative sic, 1 Reg. 6.1. anno
quadringentesimo, etc. aedificavit Solomon domum Domino, i. e. aedificare
coepi, page 233.
Verse. 25. Have not I served thee, that is, begun to serve thee, and agreed to
serve thee for Rachel? Why have thou then beguiled me? Laban to excuse himself,
tells him, It was not the custom of the Country to give the younger in
marriage before the elder. But this Custom was only pretended. For He seemed
all that day of the Wedding to Celebrate the Nuptials of Rachel, whom they all
knew to be the younger Daughter. But seeing things were as they were, He
desires Jacob to keep this weeks Feast according to Custom for Leah (and
thereby Confirm his taking of Her to be his wife) and then he should do the
same for Rachel, and have Her for his wife also, provided He would serve him
other seven years over and above those before Covenanted for, which Jacob
agreed unto. Having thus paraphrased the words, I now come to give the Reasons
why I think the former Opinion cannot stand.

The former Opinion supposes that Jacob had 12 in the last seven years of his
Service, viz. Reuben, Simon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Napthali, Gad, Asher, Issacher,
Zebulun, Dinah, Joseph. Now Leah after she had born Judah her fourth Son, left
off Childing for some time, Chapter 29.35. and Chapter 30.9. And then gave her Maid
Zilpah to Jacob, who bare unto him Gad, and after that she bare him another
Son, and called him Asher. So that allow two years or near it for Leahs resting
to bare Children, how could she have at several Births three Children more
before those seven years expired? Besides, immediately before she was with
Child of Issacher (her ninth Son) Her eldest Son Reuben was old enough to go
into the Fields to gather Mandrakes for Her. Which how it could be, if all
those Children were born within the compass of the last seven years I cannot
comprehend. And last of all, ( viz. in the last year of the 14) Rachel bore
Joseph, all which, according to that opinion, must be done within the space of
one seven years; which how it can consist with truth, and the course of the
History, is difficult to imagine. But if we allow Jacob to be married at the
beginning of the first seven years, and so to have several of his Children
within that space of time, then the current of the History will run clear. A
second Argument against that former opinion, may be taken from the
consideration of Judah's age, and the birth of Hezron and Hamul his
Grandchildren, unto which Jacob went down into Egypt, Chapter 46.12. To open this,
we must first know that Jacob was 76 years old when he went first to Laban,
which appears thus: He was 130 years old when he stood before Pharaoh, Chapter
47.9. And then Joseph was 40 years old, viz. 30 when he was advanced by
Pharaoh, Chapter 41.46. After which passed seven years of plenty, and three of
Famine, when Jacob came down into Egypt. It appears also that he was born in
the 14th year after Jacob's coming to Laban, Chapter 30.25. Take then those 14
years before Joseph was born, and the 40 years of his age (when his Father
stood before Pharaoh) out of his Fathers age at that time, which was 130, and
it will be clear that Jacob was 76. years old when he first came to Laban. Now
this being so, Judah the fourth Son of Jacob by Leah, must needs be, according
to them who are for the first opinion, but three or four years older then
Joseph, Jacob not marrying Leah (as they suppose) till after his first seven
years of service were ended; and so Judah must be but 43 or 44 years old at
most when He and his Grandchildren Hezron and Hamul came with Jacob into Egypt.
To compass this, they must cast their reckonings thus, viz. that Judah married
at 12 years old, and had Er at 13; that Er married at 12 years old, and Onan
his younger Brother married at 12 years old, Chapter 38.4. that Tamar remained a
Widow, and waited till Shelah was grown, and during that time Judah's wife
died, and Tamar bears to Judah Pharez, and all this within the compass of three
years; That Pharez married at 12 years old, and begat Hezron and Hamul, and
(supposing them to be Twins) that at a year old they were carried into Egypt.
For thus the reckoning will rise to the 43 or 44th year of Judah's age. But
these supposed reckonings seem very harsh; whereas the addition of the former
seven years gives fair way to the birth of all the 12 Children, and gives
further scope for the birth of Hezron and Hamul in the 50th year of Judah's
age. And that opinion which makes Judah to be born in the fourth year of the
first seven of Jacob's Service (and so to be ten years older than Joseph) does
give fairer way to the course of the History than the other does. And so the
reckoning may be cast thus, viz. Judah at 16 years old comes into Canaan, and
speedily marries the Daughter of Shuah. In the next year has Er. Er marries
Tamar at 14. After which suppose four years spent in the matters relating to
Onan, Er and Shelah, and till the birth of Pharez begotten by Judah, after the
death of his wife, upon the body of Tamar. And Pharez at 13 years old to marry,
and in two years to have Hezron and Hamul, and then all go down into Egypt; and
all these things to come to pass by that time that Judah was 50 years of age.
See Dr. Richardson's Notes on Chapter 38. verse. 1.

If any acquiesce not in these Reasons for the latter opinion, I leave them to
the fraud of their own Judgments.


alleging that his days were fulfilled, [vers. 21.] that is, the days of his
probation and trial; or his days were full, that is, he was of full days, being
75 years old, and therefore it was high time he should marry, as Tremellius
interprets it. Laban hereupon invited his Friends and Kindred, and the
principal men of the City, and made a great Feast, and at night he took Leah
being Nuptiae a nubendo, i. e. velando.
veiled, (as it seems the manner was in brining Brides to the Bridegrooms Bed)
and so gave her to Jacob instead of Rachel Peccavit Leah obtemperando Parenti:
consensit enim in stuprum, imo adulterium. Menoch.
having first instructed her (as it is probable) either not to speak at all to
Him, or else only softly to whisper, which Jacob might impute to her modesty.
In the morning Jacob perceived it was Leah that had been put to bed to him.
Then Jacob highly expostulates with Laban for Thus He who had deceived His
Father by personating his Brother, was now Himself deceived by Leah personating
her Sister.
thus beguiling him, telling him, He had covenanted to serve him for Rachel,
and not for Leah. Laban to excuse himself, pretends to him that it was not the
Custom of the Country to give the younger in marriage before the Elder. But
Custom was only here pretended, for else why did he call so many together to
the Solemnization of the Marriage, pretending to marry Rachel to him, who they
all knew was the younger Daughter; However Laban desires him to continue these
seven days Judge. 14. verse. 12, 15, 17.
of Leahs Wedding-Feast, and to keep her with him, that so by this his
voluntary consent the Marriage might be confirmed, Polygamy God tolerated in
the Patriarchs, which He simply allowed not, being not so from the beginning.
and then he promises to give him Rachel at the weeks end, on condition to
serve him seven years more, See Genesis 31.41. I served thee fourteen years for
thy two Daughters.
which Jacob consented Noluit ob errorem personae repudiare Leah, quod etsi
licuerat, scandalum tamen perinde voluit atque peccatum devitare.
unto. And the seven years he served for Rachel, after he had married her,
seemed short to him, because of the great content and comfort he took in her.
Laban having now married his two Daughters to Jacob, he gave to his Daughter
Leah Zilpah for her Handmaid, and to Rachel he gave Bilhah. But Leah was less
loved So hate is sometimes used for less to love, see Luke 14.26. Job. 12.25.
by Jacob than Rachel, whereupon the Lord was pleased to make Leah fruitful,
but Rachel was barren. For Leah conceived and bare a Son, and gave him a Name
according to the sense she had of that mercy, calling him Reuben, Reuben,
Jacob's first Son.
which signifies, Behold a Son; as if she would have said, though I am less
cared for and beloved than my Sister, yet behold how graciously the Lord has
dealt with me; He has given me a Son in my affliction, therefore I hope now my
Husband will love Liberi sunt vincula Parentum. Children are a chain to bind
Husbands to love their Wives, and this Chain is strong with all good men.
Bishop Babington in loc.
me more than he did. Then she conceived again, and bare a second Son, and
remembering how God had heard her Prayers, and regarded her sighs, she called
his Name Simeon, Simeon his second Son.
signifying that he was a Son whom God had given her, upon his hearing Simeon
q. filius exaudientis Dei, a (...).
of her prayers. Then she conceived again and bare a third Son, and called his
Name Levi Levi q. adjunctus copulatus.
(that is joined Levi his third Son.
) for now she hoped her Husbands heart (she having born him three Sons, and
Rachel none,) would cleave to her with more cordial love and affection. After
this she conceived again and bare Jacob a fourth Son, and called his Name Judah
Judah his fourth Son.
(signifying Praise) for now says she, I will in an open and solemn manner
praise the Lord for all his great Goodness and Mercy to me. And then for some
time she ceased bearing any more.

Genesis 29. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXVI.
RAchel continuing barren, envied her Sister, and possibly grew jealous of her
Husband, and therefore in a Womanish impatience said to him, Give me Children,
or else I die, that is, let me have Children by thee as well as my Sister, or
else I shall die for grief and vexation. Then Jacob's anger was kindled, and he
said, Am I in Gods stead? It is He alone can make thee fruitful, and not I.
[See 1 Samuel 1.5, 6. Psalm. 113.9. and Psalm. 127.3.] Then Rachel (being
inordinately desirous of Children) after the example of Sarah, [Ch. 16.2.]
gives her Maid Bilhah to her Husbands Bed, to be as it were a secondary wife or
Concubine to him, [see Genesis 35.22.] intending that the Children she should have
by him should be brought up and nursed on her knees as her own: And so she made
account that some part of the reproach of her barrenness should be put away,
and some part of her Husbands good will should be turned from her Sister to her
self. Hereupon Bilhah conceived and bare Jacob a Son. At this Rachel greatly
rejoiced, and said, God has heard my prayers and judged me; that is, judged
and determined the Cause on my side, and to my advantage against my Sister,
(who upbraided me with barrenness As Peninnah did Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.6.
) in that he has given me a Son, and she called his Name Dan Dan his fifth Son.
signifying a Judge. Then Bilhah conceived again, and bare Jacob another Son;
Upon this Rachel said, I and my Sister have had many wrastlings and contentions
about Children (she twitting me for my barrenness) but now by my prayers to
God, and by this means of giving my Maid to my Husband, I have prevailed
against her. Therefore she called his name Naphtali, Naphtali his sixth Son.
signifying my wrestling. Unde perspicuum est Rachelis desiderium non ex
libidine sed ex amore prolium fluxisse, ut in iis promissa Dei quae a Marito
audierat, complerentur. Jans. in loc.
Leah now finding that she had not for a good while been with Child, and that
her Sister had by giving her Handmaid to Jacob, raised up Children to her
self; she also out of emulation (not being content with her former number) gave
her Maid Zilpah to her Husbands Bed. Zilpah hereupon conceived and bearing
Jacob a Son, she called his name Gad, Gad his seventh Son.
signifying a Troop, intimating that this Son added to her own four would make
a Troop. After this Zilpah conceived again, and bare him another Son, and Leah
said, This is an happy birth also; and now women in general will call me
blessed for the multitude of my Children, and she called his name Asher, Asher
his eighth Son.
that is, blessed. Reuben the eldest Son of Leah being now as it is probable
about eight or nine years old, (having seven Brethren at this time born after
him, viz. three of his own Mother, and four by the two Handmaids, whilst his
Mother left off bearing) went into the Fields in the time of Wheat-Harvest, and
found Mandrakes and brought them to his Mother, that is, some rare beautiful
and sweet Flowers, Mandragora planta est ferens pomula crocci coloris. Notant
Dioscorides and Aristotels, lib. 2. de generatione animalium, habere vim ciendi
menstrua, and consequenter purgandi, and ad Conceptum praeparandi; quod cum
fortasse sciret Rachel, prolis avida, fructum illum ardenter appetiit. Jansen.
which possibly were thought to have a virtue to procure love, therefore by
ancient Writers were called Circea. (See Canticles 7.13.) But whatever these
Dudaim or Mandrakes were, it seems they were much esteemed among them, and
therefore Rachel desired her Sister to give her some of her Sons Mandrakes.
Leah snaps her up; what says she, Have thou taken away my Husbands affection
from me, so that he does in a manner estrange himself from my Bed through thy
procurement, and would thou have my Sons Mandrakes also? Rachel making an ill
use of Jacobs great affection to her, takes upon her as if she had the disposal
of his person, and therefore she tells her Sister, If she would give Her some
of the Mandrakes, her Husband should lie with her that night. Leah agreeing
hereto, goes out to meet Jacob returning from the Field, and acquaints him with
what had past between her and her Sister, and how she had hired him with her
Sons Mandrakes to accompany with her that night. Jacob accordingly did so, and
God hearkening unto Leahs prayers, she conceived again and bare Jacob a fifth
Son, and called his name Issachar, Issachar his fifth Son by Leah, and in order
of his age his ninth Son.
that is, an hire; for said she, God has given me my hire, that is, has
abundantly rewarded me for my Mandrakes. Pro Dudaim sive Mandragoris accepit
filium; In memoriam igitur hujus mercedis, qua maritum conduxerat, filium suum
vocavit Issachar, h. e. filium mercedis.
For when I had left off bearing, and had given my Handmaid to my Husband to
raise up Seed for me, (not hoping to bear any more my self) he has been
pleased, beyond my expectation, to give me also this Son of my own body. And
Leah conceived again, and bare Jacob a sixth Son, and called his name Zebulun
Zebulun his sixth Son by Leah, and in order of age His tenth Son.
signifying dwelling; For now said she, Will my Husband dwell with me, and will
not neglect me, seeing I have born him six Sons. Last of all, she bare him one
Daughter, and called her name Dinah. Prophetice forsan sic dicta ab
altercatione quae secuta est infra, Cap. 34.24.
After these things, Porro hinc palam est utramque sororem Jacobo nuptum datam,
anno primo non septimo completo: Nam Leah liberos septem peperit ante annum
decimum quartum exactum, vide v. 25. puerperium tamen intermisit, Cap. 29.35.
ut annis 14 liberi 12 editi, non nisi biennium vacuum reliquerint. Anonym. in
loc.
it pleased the Lord to remember Rachel, and to hear her prayers, and to open
her Womb, so that she conceived, at which she much rejoiced, and said, God has
now taken away my Reproach. Reproach lay upon barrenness in those times, as we
may see 1 Samuel 1.6. Isa. 4.1. Luke 1.21. and that principally for two Reasons:
1. Because they that were barren did seem to be excluded from the promise made
to Abraham, touching the multiplication of his Seed. 2ly, Because they were
without hope that the Messiah, who was to proceed out of the Loins of Abraham,
should be one of their Posterity.
And bringing forth a Son, she called his name Joseph, Joseph his eleventh Son.
Natus hic anno 14 ad adventu Jacobi ad Labanem.
intimating hereby her hope and trust that God would add to her another Son.

Chapter 30. from 1. to 25.

SECT. XXVII.
JAcob having now served his Father-in-law fourteen years, and having eleven
Sons Whereas it is said Jacob had twelve Sons born to him in Mesopotamia, Genesis
35.22. they are there reckoned in the round number, though Benjamin was
certainly born afterward in the Land of Canaan, not far from Bethlehem. So the
Apostles are counted twelve (1 Cor. 15.5.) though Judas was wanting.
and one Daughter, he desired he might with his good leave depart and go home
to his own Country with his Wives and Children. Laban with very kind
expressions desires him to tarry longer with him, for he observed that the Lord
had blessed him for his sake; And for wages he would give him whatever he
desired. Jacob tells him, He could not be insensible what Service he had done
him, and how much He had thriven and prospered since his coming to him; For
thou had (says He) but little at my coming to thee, but now by Gods blessing
upon my painful and diligent labor for thee, thy Stock is vastly increased;
and it is time for me being now 90 years old, to provide for my own Family.
Laban asks him again, What he should give him to stay with him. Jacob tells
him, He would not desire any set or determined wages from him, nor would
require any thing out of his present Estate, or that which he had already
gotten, but would receive his wages out of the future increase of his Flocks,
and that in such a way, as in humane probability was not like to be very
advantageous to him; however therein he would depend on the Providence of God.
And the way he propounds was this, viz. That he would separate all the speckled
and spotted Cattle, and the brown among the Sheep, from those that were all of
one color, (whether black or white, and not at all spotted) and those only he
would take under his Charge, and he would have for his wages only those that
should prove speckled and spotted, bred of the old ones that had neither speck
nor spot in them. And he desired (doubtless by the direction of God) only to
have such as these, for his share; If he took any other to his own use, he
would be content it should be accounted as if he had stolen them. But he hoped
his righteous and faithful dealing herein should answer for him at any time
hereafter. Laban greedily imbraceth the condition, and consents to the Terms.
For according to the ordinary course of nature Cattle are wont to bring forth
such as themselves are, and therefore this was like to be very advantageous to
Laban, and to be but a poor bargain for Jacob; whose service Laban was like to
have for very little. These Terms being agreed on, Laban with the help of Jacob
separates all the ringstreaked, speckled and spotted from the rest of the
Flock, and gave them to his Sons to keep, committing those of one color to
Jacob's charge. And he set a distance of three days journey between the Flocks
of Jacob, and those his Sons were to keep, lest the white ones might come to be
mixed with the spotted or brown. Jacob now having this Flock of Labans under
his charge, (by direction from God, as appears, Chapter 31.9, 10, 11, 12.) He used
this policy for his own benefit, He took rods of green poplar, hasel and
chesnut-tree, and peeled part, and left part unpeeled, (so that they were
parti-colored, partly white and partly green) and laid them before the Flocks
in the Gutters, and in the Watering-Troughs, in the ramming-time, that so by
the strength of Imagination they might conceive and bring forth a
particoloured-breed, which accordingly happened, by the Divine blessing, on
Jacob. And because all the Flocks would not conceive just at watering-time,
having gotten some spotted Lambs by his first policy of the peeled Rods, he set
those spotted Lambs before the faces of Laban's Flock that he had under his
Charge at the coupling-time, that a greater Impression might be made on their
fantasy, and that by the sight of these that were speckled, the Cattle might
bring forth speckled also. This was a second policy he used. A third was this,
his own Cattle that were ringstreaked, speckled and spotted, when they were
like to conceive he would not let them be amongst Laban's Cattle, lest looking
upon them that were all of one color, their imagination might work to a
resemblance of them, and so should bring forth young ones like them, (viz. all
of one color) and so they would be Laban's, and not his. And a fourth policy
of his was this, When the stronger Cattle did Conceive he laid the Rods before
their eyes in the Gutters, that so their Offspring might be his. But when the
Cattle were feeble, he put them not in, that so their young ones being all one
color, might fall to Laban's share; For so he contrived that Laban might have
some increase, Hanc autem servabat aequitatem Jacob, ut in art illa nova, ipse
sui laboris praemium acciperet, and Laban non penitus spoliaretur. Jans.
else he would have been impatient. Thus Jacob by the concurrence of the Divine
blessing increased in Stock and Riches exceedingly.

Chapter 30. from verse. 25. to the end.

SECT. XXVIII.
JAcob having now served Laban 20 years; during the last six years, the Sons of
Laban envied him exceedingly, and murmured and repined, saying, That of what
was their Fathers he had gotten all his Glory, that is, all his Wealth, which
procures men honor and esteem, and which worldly men count their Glory; And
they were ready to slander him, as having unjustly gotten what was graciously
bestowed on him by the Providence of God. Jacob also observed that Laban's
Countenance was not toward him as formerly it used to be, but in his very
looks he showed the displeasure of his heart. The Lord hereupon warns Jacob to
return to his own Country, and promises to be with him. Jacob upon this sends
for his Wives Rachel and Leah into the Field to him, and acquaints them with
Gods appearing to him, and with his purpose of departure. He tells them, That
they could not but know how he had served their Father with all his power, and
yet their Father had dealt most injuriously with him, and had changed his Wages
and the Conditions made between them many times, Ten times may be here put for
many times, as it is elsewhere, Job. 19.3. Numb. 14.22. Levit. 26.26. Zach.
8.23.
though the Providence of God did not suffer him to hurt him thereby. At first
(says he) your Father agreed that I should have all the speckled, spotted, or
brown Cattle, for my wages, but when he saw that most of the Cattle bare such,
then he would restrain me only to the ringstreaked, such as had a round streak
like a ring of a different color about their legs. And when that hard
Condition was imposed upon me, then it pleased God that most of the Cattle
brought forth ringstreaked. And that it may appear to you that this is so come
to pass by the immediate hand and blessing of God, and that is is He alone that
has given me this great increase, and has taken from your Father, and given
to me; I shall acquaint you with a Vision I had in a Dream several years ago, I
saw the Rams and He-goats, that at the ramming-time leaped on the Cattle to be
all ringstreaked, and the Angel of the Covenant (the Lord Christ) called me to
him, and bad me take notice of it, telling me, He had observed how unjustly
Laban had dealt with me, and therefore he would by his own Hand do me right,
and to Him alone I owe these Riches I have gotten. And now this good God has
appeared to me again, Stiling himself the God of Bethel, and thereby putting me
in mind of my Promise and Vow there made unto him, and intimating his
acceptance and approving thereof, [see Chapter 28. v. 18.] I say, This God has
appeared to me again, and commanded me forthwith to arise and return into the
Land of my Nativity. Then Rachel and Leah answered, What Portion or Inheritance
can we expect from our Father, seeing he does grudge us the Wages he agreed to
give thee, and has so often changed and altered the Conditions? He has dealt
with us as Strangers rather than Children. He has not disposed of us like
Daughters, giving us fitting Dowries, but has sold us to thee for 14 years
service, and the money and profit which he has gotten by the sale of us he
has quite devoured, that is, converted to his own use, whereas of right he
should have given it to us in portions. He has very little reason therefore to
complain of the Riches God has taken from him and given to thee for thy last
six years service. Therefore do as God has commanded thee, we are very ready
to comply with thee therein. Then Jacoh setting his Wives and Children on
Camels, went away privately V. 20. Furatus est Cor Labanis, i. e. fefellit
clandestina fuga, videtur hic quaedam esse Hypallage: furare aliquem est furari
se ab aliquo.
with all his Family, Cattle, and Substance which he had there gotten,
intending to go to his Father Isaac in the Land of Canaan. His Wife Rachel out
of some kind of Superstition (in which she had been bred in her Fathers house)
took along with her (without her Husbands knowledge) her Fathers Teraphim Deos
penates. This is the first place where the Scripture makes mention of Idols,
though they were in use before. See also Judge. 17.5. Ezekiel. 21.21.
or Idols, or Houshold-gods, viz. some Images in the shape of Men or Angels, of
which they used to inquire concerning things to come, and received from them
the Devils answer, see Zach. 10.2. Jacob having thus privately stolen away, and
passing over Euphrates, he had gone three days journey ere his departure was
known to Laban, who was then shearing his Sheep; but hearing of it, he gathered
together some of his Friends and Kindred, and pursued after him, and after
seven days journey overtook him in the Mount Gilead, A tract of Mountains
eastward of Jordan, running through the Kingdoms of Sibon and Ogg, and having in
several Parts several names, as Gilead, Seir, Hermon, and Libanus; here called
Gilead by anticipation.
which took its Name from the event of this their meeting there. Before Laban
quite overtook Jacob, God warned him in a Dream that he should not hurt him,
nor seek to divert him from his intended journey, neither by flattering
Speeches nor Threatenings. However Laban being come up to Him, expostulates
highly with him, that he had stolen away so privately from him, and carried
away his Daughters, as if they had been Captives taken in War, and so carried
away by force against their Wills, (whereas they went away very willingly, as
may be seen, verse. 14.15, 16.) He tells him, If he had acquainted him with his
purpose of departing, he should never have gone away in such a pitiful manner.
He would have sent him away with Mirth and Songs, with Tabret and Harp. Thus
dissemblingly he speaks, though he had no such mind or willingness to part with
him, had not God overpowred him. Further Laban tells him, That in stealing away
so secretly, he had not given him opportunity so much as to kiss his Sons and
Daughters at their departure, nor bid them farewell, which was very ill done of
him. And he had power now in his hands to have hurt him, and to make him feel
his resentment of these his ill carriages, but God had the night before warned
him to the contrary. However he asks him, Why to all the rest of his unhandsome
dealings, he would add Possibly Laban's Idolatry might not go so far as to
worship the Pagans false Gods, but to worship the true God by certain
Representations and Remembrances. See Exodus 32.4, 5. 2 Kings 10.28, 29.
that also of stealing away his Gods. Summa caecitas! Deos vocat quos furtim
auferre posse agnovit.
Jacob answers, That He had indeed stolen away from him privately, and he did
it because he was afraid if He had been acquainted with his intention, he would
have taken his Daughters from him by force, and so done what lay in him to
hinder his departure. But as for stealing away his Gods, knowing his own
innocence, and detesting Theft, and much more Idolatry, and presuming that none
of his Family would be guilty of so vile an act, he (more rashly than wisely)
says, With whomsoever thou find them let him not live; not imagining in the
least that his beloved Rachel had stolen them. Further says Jacob, Here before
our Brethren, I give my full consent that thou should search us all; If thou
can find any thing that is thine, take it with all my heart. Laban hereupon
searched their Tents, one after another, and at last came to Rachels Tent, who
perceiving her Father intended to search there for his Images, she put them in
the Camels Saddle-furniture, and sat upon them, and excusing her self for not
rising to him, and paying him the duty and respect she owed him, because the
Custom Non tam menses simulat ac ventriculi dolores.
of women was upon her, [Levit. 15.19.] he did not disturb Her, but searching
in other places found none. Then Jacob's anger was kindled, and he could not
but express his great resentment of Laban's injurious dealing with him; and
accordingly asked him, What Trespasses he had been guilty of, that he had so
hotly pursued after him? Thou have (says he) searched all my stuff, and what
have thou found of thine? I have served thee 20 years, and that with great
diligence and faithfulness. I have carefully kept thy Cattle, thy Ews and
She-goats have rarely cast their young; Thy Rams I have preserved. That which
was torn of wild Beasts, I brought it not in account to thee, but made it good
my self, though strict justice would not oblige me to it. [See Exodus 22.10, 11,
13.] How painful my Service has been is not unknown to thee. In the day the
drought consumed me, and in the night the fr^st; and my sleep departed from
mine eyes. And in this manner have I served thee 14 years for thy two
Daughters, and six years for such a portion of thy Flock as by Providence
should fall to my share, according to the Conditions agreed on between us; and
yet these terms have thou very injuriously changed several times; And truly
except God, even the God of Abraham, and the God whom my Father Isaac serves
with so much fear and reverence, (as the only God, who is to be feared and
worshipped) had been with me, and had extraordinarily blessed me, thou had
sent me away empty. But the Lord has taken notice of thy hard dealing with me,
notwithstanding all my faithfulness and diligence, and painful labor in thy
Service, and accordingly did yesternight rebuke thee for thy evil intendment
toward me, Laban being something melted with these words, said, Well, these
Women thy Wives are my Daughters, and their Children they have born unto thee,
I account them as my Children, (my self being their remote Parent) and thy
Cattle thou had all from me; (He takes no notice of what Jacob had deserved
of him, or of what God had so wonderfully given him,) and all that thou have is
mine. Thus He boasts.
But yet notwithstanding it were a foolish thing for me to go about to hurt
thee, or thy Wives or Children; for in so doing I should but hurt my self. But
he was not of this mind, when he first went out to pursue Jacob, and therefore
Jacob may thank* God for all, who had thus bridled, if not altered him.
Therefore let us make a Covenant one with another, and raise an heap of stones
on this Mountain, to be a Monument thereof, that I shall not pass over this
place to hurt thee, nor thou to hurt me. If either of us do so, he shall
forfeit his fidelity, and be liable to divine Vengeance for his perjury. Jacob
readily agreed hereto, and immediately spoke to his own Company, and to Laban's
also to join in gathering an heap of stones, which might serve as a Memorial
hereof. And this heap of stones Jacob in the Hebrew Neque annis viginti
mutavit, vel religionem Jacob, vel dialectum.
Tongue called Galeed By a litt^e change afterward was framed the word Gilead.
and Laban in the Syrian Tongue called it Jegar-Sahadutha, both signifying an
heap of Witnesses, that is, an heap to be a witness and to be a memorial of
this Covenant here made. And Jacob also called it Mizpah, q. d. Deus intutatur.
that is, a Watchtower, whereupon Laban said, The Lord watch between me and
thee, that we may keep this Covenant inviolable, and that when we are absent
one from another, neither of us may design any hurt to each other. And Laban
further said, If thou shall afflict my Daughters, or take other Wives besides
my Daughters, then God who knows and rewards Wickedness (especially
Treachery) punish thee as thou deservest. Thus He who had been a very unkind
Father whilst his Daughters were with him, now pretends great tenderness of
affection to them, and conditions with Jacob against that whereunto his own
covetousness had forced him before. Then they swear the Covenant agreed on
between them, Laban swear by the God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, and the
God of Terah there Father. Thus he intermixeth the God of Abraham (the only true
God) with the Idols which Terah, Nahor, and Abraham himself before God called
Him had served in Chaldea, Jos. 24.2. But Jacob swear only by the fear of his
Father Isaac, that is, the only true God, whom his Father Isaac feared and
worshipped. Then Jacob killed Beasts, and provided a Feast (such being usual at
the making of Covenants, see Genesis 26.30.) and invited Laban and his Company to
eat with him, who tarried all night upon the Place. Early in the morning Laban
Thus God overrules the hearts of wicked men, so chapter 33.4. So he turned
Balaam's Curse into a Blessing, Numb. 23.11. Deuteronomy. 23.5. so the minds of the
Barbarians toward Paul, Acts 28.4.
took an affectionate farewell of Jacob, kissing his Sons and Daughters, and
blessed them, wishing to them all happiness and prosperity, and so departed to
his own place.

Genesis 31. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXIX.
JAcob being sent away by Laban in peace, continued his Journey toward Canaan;
and as he went on, he had a Vision of an Army of holy Angels, appearing in
Humane shape, that met him, to encourage him against his future fears and
dangers; whereupon he called the name of the place Mahanaim, that is, two
Hosts; intimating how two Hosts there met, viz. one of the holy Angels, the
other of his own Company and Followers: And here afterward was a City built,
called by that Name. And being to pass through the Country that was at present
inhabited by his Brother Esau Called here the Land of Seir, not from Esau, but
from Seir an Horite, chapter 14.6. and chapter 36.20, 21. which Horites Esau drove
thence, Deus. 2.22. And there now Esau dwelt, and through which Country Jacob
must pass.

Est Idumaea una orientalis (de qua hoc loco agitur) alia australis. Has
Regiones non simul sed vicissim Idumaei habitarunt. Tandem orientalem
deseruerunt, and australem occuparunt, ante exitum Israelitarum ex Aegyto: nam
ingressis Israelitis in terram promissam non ibi erant Idumaei sed Sihon and
Og, etc. His add quod Job erat Idumaeus, and de stirpe Esau, and habitavit in
terra Hus quae erat trans Jordanem non procul a monte Galaad. Ergo tum ibi
habitarunt Idumaei, indeque postea migrarunt. Tantum difficultas esse potest ex
Thren. 4.21. Edom quae habitas in terra Hus. Sed verisimile est Idumaeos mutata
habitatione nomina priorum locorum multis locis indidisse. Bochart.


(though he and his Posterity afterward removed to the Southern part of
Canaan, and there dwelt) he sent Messengers before to him to give him notice of
his coming, charging them to address themselves to him in a very respectful and
submissive manner, and to tell him, that his Servant Jacob had sojourned with
Laban in Mesopotamia for 20 years, and God had now blessed Him with Flocks and
Herds, and with Menservants and Maidservants, and therefore He did not come
to beg any thing of him, but only desired his favor, that he might quietly
pass through his Country. The Messengers having dispatched their Message, return
and tell him, that his Brother Esau was coming to meet him, attended with 400
men, and it is like they possessed him that they apprehended he came with no
good intention toward him. Jacob hearing this, was greatly afraid (his Guard
of holy Angels in likelihood being gone) and contriving to secure himself as
well as he could, he divided the people that were with him, and his Flocks into
two Bands or Companies, thinking that if Esau fell upon the one, the other
might possibly have time to escape. And being in this distress he set himself
to call not upon the Angels (that had lately appeared to him) for their help
and mediation, but upon the true and ever living God, praying unto Him after
this manner, O God of my Grandfather Abraham, and Father Isaac, to whom thou
have made many great and glorious Promises, and to their Seed. Thou commandedst
me to leave Mesopotamia, and to return to my Fathers house, See Chapter 31.13.
and did promise to deal well with me, and Lo, I am now obeying thy Command.
I acknowledge I am altogether unworthy of the great Mercies thou have bestowed
on me, and of that Faithfulness thou have expressed toward me. For when I came
from my Fathers house, I was in a mean and poor Condition; I passed over the
River Jordan that I have now in mine eye, only with my Staff in my hand, and
now behold I am become two Bands. And seeing thou have hitherto been so
gracious unto me, I humbly pray thee now help me, and save me from my Brother
Esau, who I fear (without thy Interposition) will come upon me and slay me with
my Wives and Children. Lord, thou have promised to do me good, and to keep me
in all places, [Ch. 28.14, 15. and 31.3. and to make my Seed as the Sand of the
Sea. Therefore I pray thee of thy great mercy, make good these thy gracious
Promises unto me.

Jacob having thus prayed, and reposed his Trust in God, yet He judged it fit
to use all good and fair means for his own Preservation. And therefore resolved
with himself to send a Present to his Brother to propitiate and atone him. And
accordingly he culled out some of all his Cattle for this purpose, but the
approaching of the night, and his have to prevent his Brothers coming, would
not suffer him to make any curious choice. However he took out of his Flocks
200 She-Goats, and 20 He-Goats, 200 Ews, and 20 Rams, 30 Milch-Camels with
their Colts, 40 Kine and 10 Bulls, 20 She-Asses and and 10 Foles, in all 580
Head of Cattle; a rich and noble Present, being an excellent and large Stock
for breed. These several sorts of Cattle he delivered into the hands of so many
several Servants, and charged them to pass over the Ford of Jabbok with them,
and to put a good distance and space between Drove and Drove, that so his
Present might make the fairer show, and that by degrees the heat of his
Brothers Rage might abate and cool. Then he charged the first Servant that went
with the first Flock, that when he met Esau, and he should ask him, Whence he
came, and to whom he belonged, he should say, This is a Present of thy Servant
Jacob, sent to my Lord Esau, and behold he himself is behind coming to wait
upon my Lord. And he charged the rest of the Servants that went with the other
Flocks to do accordingly. And he thought with himself that by this means (in
all likelihood) he should appease his Brother, and melt his Rage, and dispose
him to be kind and favorable to him. The Present being sent away, His next
care was to pass his Wives and Children, and his Company, and his Flocks and
Substance over the River Jabbok, but he himself stayed behind, that he might
spend the night in private prayer unto God. And having wrestled with the Lord
several hours by fervent prayer, not without many tears, [as we read, Hos.
12.4. He wept, and made Supplication, etc.] at last the Son of God, the Angel
of the Covenant appeared to him in an humane shape, and set upon him, and
wrestled with him, and he was pleased not to prevail over him with that measure
of strength which in that assumed Body he did take and use at that time, to
intimate to him, and to assure him, that though he was to wrestle with many
Difficulties, and many Afflictions, yet he should be Victor in them all;
However to keep him humble, and that he should not be exalted above measure,
but know by whose Indulgence he did prevail, he touched the hollow of his
Thigh, and put it out of joint, and the Sinews shrank, so that he halted of it
for the present; to intimate to him that it was not the hand of a mere man that
strove with him. Then the Angel speaking to him after the manner of men, said.
Let me go, for the day breaks; but Jacob now perceiving the Person he
wrestled with to be more than a mere man, said, I will not let thee go except
thou bless me. Then the Angel asked him his Name (which he knew well enough)
but to take occasion for what he meant to say concerning the change of his
Name. He answers, Jacob. The Angel replies, That his Name should henceforth not
only be called Jacob but Israel; The Jews are never called Jacobites but
Israelites.
that is, One that has Princely Power with God, [Gen. 46.2. and Chapter 35.10.]
and should also prevail over men. Then Jacob desired the Angel to tell him his
Name, Some Angels had names as Gabriel. Luke 1.19. Christ the Angel of the
Covenant is called Michael, Dan. 10.21. Jude v. 9. Apoc. 12.7.
hoping he would have given him some peculiar Name, whereby he might have the
clearer knowledge of Him, and might better remember and honor him. The Angel
refused to satisfy his curiosity in that, (as likewise He did, Judge. 13.17,
18.) but he blessed him. So Jacob called the name of the Place Peniel, because
he had there seen the Son of God in an humane shape, face to face, who had
there manifested himself more clearly to him than ever before, and he had
escaped death, notwithstanding this glorious sight, which the Godly used to
fear when they saw Visions of God. See Exodus 20.19. Judge. 6.22, 23. and 13.22.
And now he looked upon his life as safe, and that God would preserve him from
Esau. Then the Sun rising, Jacob passed over to his Company, and he halted upon
his Thigh. But it is probable he was suddenly cured of it by the Angel before he
came at his Brother Esau. Therefore the Israelites to perpetuate the memory of
this Honor which God vouchsafed to Jacob in this Conflict, did forbear (even
till Moses time, and after) to eat of that Sinew in the Thigh of any Creature,
which in Jacob was Sinew-shrunk.

Genesis 32. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXX.
JAcob now approaching near to his Brother Esau, he marshalled his Company in
this manner: In the Forefront he placed the Handmaids and their Children,
next Leah and here is, then Rachel and Joseph, (placing that which was dearest to
him furthest off from danger): and before all he marches himself in Person,
trusting in God. Coming now in sight of his Brother (who came magnificently
attended with a Train of 400 men) he bowed himself seven times Ut tam inusitata
humilitate animum ferocem frangeret.
to the ground, at several distances, and coming up near to him, Esau (whose
heart now God had wonderfully altered) ran to meet him, and embracing him, fell
on his Neck and kissed him. They both wept for joy Chapter 29.11. and 56.29. Luke
15.20. Prove. 16.7. V. 5. Sine dubio uxores etiam indicavit, licet brevitatis
Causa, ut multa taceat scriptura.
to see one another after so long an absence. After their mutual embracings
were over Jacob's Wives and Children came near, bowing themselves to the
ground. Esau asked him, Whose those were that came with him? He answered, They
are my Wives, and the Children that God has graciously given thy Servant. He
asked him then, What he meant by these great Flocks he had met? Jacob tells
him, He sent them to testify his Respects to him, and that he might find grace
in his sight. Esau replied, alas, My Brother, I have much wealth; I have
enough; Observant quidam in Esaui sermon laconismum imperiosum nec ullam Dei
factam mentionem, contra quidem in Jacobi. Esau owns not God as the giver of
it, as Jacob did.
why should thou deprive thy self of what thou have gotten? But Jacob
answered, nay I pray thee accept my Present, for I have seen thy face as though
I had seen the face of an Angel; Vox Elohim interdum pro Angelis usurpatur.
Vid. Ps. 8.5. Ita sensus est, vultus tuus tam serenus and graciosus mihi
apparuit quam vultus Angeli.
that is, It is unspeakably comfortable to me that thou art pleased with me,
and so kind and friendly unto me; therefore I pray thee accept of what I have
presented thee with, it being of that wherewith God has graciously blessed me.
Esau owns not God as the giver of all, as Jacob did.
For he has dealt very graciously and bountifully with me, and of his goodness
I have all Omnia mihi suppetunt nulla re indigeo. Vat.
things needful, and am abundantly supplied. Esau after much entreaty accepts
of his Present, and offers with his Company to Conduct him on in his Journey.
But Jacob civilly refused that kindness, representing to him that his Children
were tender, and many of the Cattle with young, and therefore they must not be
over-driven for fear of danger to them. Therefore, says he, let my Lord be
pleased with his Train to go before, and I will softly follow after, as my
Company and my Flocks are able to bear; and as soon as conveniently I can I
will come and wait upon my Lord at Seir. And it is probable that Jacob with a
few of his Servants, did shortly after give him a visit at Seir, and staid
there a while; for it is not like that he would so soon by so manifest a
contempt or neglect, provoke afresh his new reconciled Brother.
Esau then offered to leave some of his men with him, to guard him. But Jacob
humbly told him there was no need of it, and therefore he would not give him or
his people that trouble. Esau thereupon took his leave of him, and marched to
Seir, the place where he dwelt, and Jacob kept on his way till he came to
Succoth, (as it was afterward called) where he built But before He did this,
it is probable He went to visit his aged Father Isaac, and then returned to
Succoth.
him an House, (that is, some slight building for present use) and made Booths
for his Cattle; and then passing over Jordan, he pitched his Tent before
Shalem, a City of the Sychemites, afterward called Sychar, [John 4.5.] And
here he bought a piece of Land for his present use (as Abraham did the Field of
Machpelah, Genesis 23.17, 18.) of the Children or Subjects of Hamor, Shechem's
Father, (the Prince of the Country) for an 100 Lambs, or an 100 pieces of
Silver, (bearing the Figure or Impression of a Lamb. Pecunia a pecude.
See Jos. 24.32. Acts 7.16.) and here This was the portion of Land which Jacob,
on his Deathbed in Egypt, gave to his Son Joseph, Genesis 48.22. and here it was
that Christ had a Conference with the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4.5. And here was
Jacob's Well near Mount Gerizim.
he built an Altar and called it The Altar of God, the God of Israel, which he
erected in a pious and grateful Memorial of Gods favor in giving him
(according to his new Name) power not only to prevail with Himself for a
Blessing, but with his Brother Esau also, to divert his wrath. And this Altar
was built in the self same place where Abraham before had built his first
Altar, Genesis 12.6, 7.

Genesis 33. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXI.
DUring Jacob's abode here, his Daughter Dinah about 15 years Sic Cornelius A
lapide.
of Age going forth out of Curiosity to see the Daughters of the Land,
(probably at some Feast Quae tunc ad Festum convenerunt, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1.
c. 27.
or Fair, or Public Solemnity,) and to please her fancy by gazing on Foreign
Fashions, was seized upon by Shechem (Son of Hamor, Prince of the Country) and
defiled. This young Prince was so greatly inamoured of Dinah, that his Soul
clave to her, and he spoke very kindly to her, to appease her for the injury he
had done her, and the Rape he had committed upon her, and strove by all the
fair words he could use to draw her to Consent to marry him. And that he might
succeed in his Design, he prayed his Father to procure that Damosel for him to
be his Wife. So that even among Heathens we see it was usual for Children to
marry with the Consent and Direction of their Parents. Jacob understanding by
some that went out with Dinah how it had fared with her, was exceedingly
troubled at it, yet he vented not any passion, but in silence ruled his spirit
till he could speak with his Sons (who were then in the Field with the Cattle)
and could advise with them what was fit to be done on so sad an occasion. The
Sons of Jacob when they heard of it, were greatly vexed, and very wroth that
Shechem had committed so great folly and iniquity, and thereby offended God,
and brought such a stain and blot on their Family. Notwithstanding Hamor the
Father of Shechem (who should have expressed his high Displeasure against his
Son for so great a Transgression) comes to Jacob and his Sons, and Communes
with them, and Requests them, That Dinah might be given to his Son to Wife; And
further desires, That they might freely make Marriages interchangeably between
them, and so grow into a Kindred and Friendship the one with the other. He
further tells them on these Conditions, the Land should be free for them to
dwell in, and to Trade in, and therein to get Possessions. Shechem also
seconded his Fathers motion, and told them, If he might find so much favor in
their eyes as to obtain their Sister for his Wife, he would do any thing they
should desire of him; Whatever Dowry they required he should give Her, or
whatever Gift in recompense of the Injury he had done her, he was willing to
give her, provided he might have her. Jacob permitting his Sons to give the
Answer, they having laid their Heads together, and being not only averse to the
Match, but designing Revenge, answered cunningly and deceitfully, and which was
worse, they covered their deceit with the color of Religion. They tell Hamor
and Shechem, That they could not without dishonor to their Religion give their
Sister to a Person Uncircumcised. But if they would consent that all the Males
among them should be Circumcised, and so become like unto them, then they would
make Marriages with them, Similis praetextus, 2 Samuel 15.7. Judah enim and
Simeon Canaanitidas postea duxere, c. 38. 2. and 46. 10.
and dwell with them, and they would become one People. (l) Thus they would
have this holy Sacrament of Circumcision (the Seal of Gods Covenant) profaned,
and obtruded upon Unbelievers; and all to accomplish their wicked design of
Revenge. But if they would not consent to this, they would take the Daughter of
their Family, and depart from them, and would have no more to do with them.
These hard Conditions Hamor and Shechem agree unto, and Shechem out of the
great love and kindness he had for Dinah, immediately applies himself to get
his Peoples consent also. And being a young Prince greatly esteemed and
honored among them, He with his Father came to the Gate of their City, (where
their Civil Affairs were usually transacted, and where were their Public
Assemblies and Courts of Justice) and there spoke to them after this manner:
These Israelites that are lately come among us, are for ought I perceive, very
peaceable and quiet Men. I see no reason therefore but that they should be
permitted to dwell in the Land, and to trade with us. Nay, I think it for our
Interest to make a straight League with them, and to make Marriages
interchangeably with them, taking their Daughters to us for Wives, and giving
our Daughters to them; And so by Commerce and Trafficking with them, and by
making Marriages with them, in time their Cattle and Substance will come to be
our. So that there is a fair Prospect of great profit that will accrue to us by
thus associating with them. But there is one Difficulty in the Case; These men
being Jews, and so by the Rite of their Religion being all Circumcised, will by
no means associate with us, except we Consent to be like them, and that all the
Males among us will be Circumcised. This I confess is something hard for us to
submit unto. However go alone, consider of the matter among your selves, and
speak your minds freely. This Condition undoubtedly could not but seem very
hard to the Shechemites, but the honor and respect they had for Hamor and
Shechem, and the Prospect of Profit that was before them so prevailed upon
them, that they consented to it; and accordingly all the Males of their City
(that used to go in and out at the Gates of it) were forthwith Circumcised. On
the third day after this was done (when usually Wounds are most sore and
painful) two of the Sons of Jacob, viz. Simeon and Levi (to whom Dinah was
Sister both by Father and Mother) taking their Swords in their hands, Simeon
about 21, Levi about 20 years of age. Hinc palam est ^eam Jacobo Nuptam anno
primo quo venerat ad Labanam, non septimo. Neque enim Simeon si tunc natus
esset id atatis esse poterat ut hoc patraret. Anonym. in loc.
and being attending, (as it is like) by some of their Brethren, and other
Assistants, fell boldly and fiercely upon the City, and slew all the Males, Non
omnes Masculi aut Circumcisi, aut intersecti erant, sed ii tantum, q^i per
portam egrediebantur ac nubiles erant. Walther. God might justly suffer this
for the Shechemites own sins, though he took occasion to do it from the sin of
their Prince. See 2 Samuel 24.1, 15, 17. Quod unus fecit Civibus in genere
imputatur, quod hoc flagitium nec impedirent, nec punirent, sed de eo potius
gloriati sunt.
( viz. that were of riper years and lately Circumcised, and who by reason of
their Soreness were not able to make Resistance, and among them Hamor and
Shechem) and took away their Sister Dinah out of Shechem's House, where she had
been kept since the day he had seized upon her till now. Then they plundered
the City, and carried away not only their Goods and Household Stuff, but what
was in the Fields, their Sheep, Oxen, and Asses, and took also their Wives and
little Ones Captive. It Is very like that many of the Captive Women and Children
were by Jacob sent back to the City, with a proportion of the Spoil for their
necessary Maintenance, keeping what he thought fit to serve as a Recompense for
the wrong done to his deflowred Daughter.
Jacob understanding this, was highly incensed against his Sons, and told them
that which they had done, did exceedingly trouble him, and vex him at the very
heart. They had rendered him odious, and made him even stink among the
Inhabitants of the Land. And his Family bring but few in comparisom of them,
they had exposed him and all that belonged to him to that eminent danger of
being fallen upon and destroyed by them. And it is likely he showed them also
the hainousness of their Sin against God, and the odiousness of their Treachery
For this Fact it is like he deprived them of their Birthright, as he did Reuben
for his sin, and conferred it on Judah, Genesis 49.
and Cruelty, which he afterward solemnly Cursed, Genesis 49.5, 6, 7. Cursed be
their wrath, for it was fierce; and their anger, for it was cruel, etc. But
they gave him a stubborn and churlish Answer, That they were not able to bear
that their Sister should be so dishonored and abused, and upon that account
they had done what they did.

Genesis 34. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXII.
JAcob being now perplexed with fear, by reason of that which his Sons had done
to the Shechemites, and perhaps thinking to remove to some other place, the
Lord appeared to him (whither by Vision or Dream is uncertain,) and appointed
him to go to Bethel, which was distant from Shechem Southward about 30 English
miles, and to build there an Altar unto God, who appeared to him when he fled
from the face of his Brother Esau, Chapter 27.43.
thereby calling to his remembrance the gracious Promises which God had there
made to him, and the Vow which he had there made to God, and possibly he had
delayed to perform it, Chapter 28.22. And this Stone which I have set up for a
Pillar shall be Gods House, etc. Then Jacob being quickened by the late danger
he was in, as likewise by the Lords appearing to him, and commanding him to go
to Bethel to perform the Vow he had there made; He spoke to those of his own
proper Family, and as it is like, to those who appertained to him, and were of
his Retinue, and pitched their Tents with him, to put away the strange Gods
This He did in performance of that most material part of his Vow, Genesis 28.21.
Then shall the Lord be my God.
that were among them, that is, the Idols which other Nations worshipped, but
might not be endured among them that worshipped the true God. Whether hereby he
meant Laban's Gods, or Teraphim stolen by Rachel, and possibly not before this
time known to him, or any other brought by some of his Retinue, when they came
from Laban and Mesopotamia, (whom he perceived too much addicted to the
Superstitions of that Country) or some of the Shechemites Idols, possibly of
Gold or Silver which they had lately plundered, and secretly kept, is
uncertain. He commands them also to purify or wash themselves, and to change
their Garments, putting on others, or washing those they had on; which external
Rite or Ceremony was afterward enjoined by the Law in diverse Cases, as we may
see Levit. 15.13. Numb. 31.23. and imported a change of Mind and Manners, and a
cleansing themselves from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit; which he
intimates to them they stood in need of more especially, not only by reason of
their defilement by Idolatry, but in regard of their late base murder committed
on the Shechemites. And having exhorted them to prepare and sanctify
themselves for that solemn Worship of God which he was to set up and exercise
with his Family at Bethel; he now incourages them to go up with him thither,
where he intended to perform his Vow formerly made in that place, [ Chapter 28.17.]
and to build an Altar to God, where before he had only erected a Pillar, about
27 years ago. Jacob's Family yielded a ready compliance to this his Injunction,
and brought to him such Idols as they had among them, and the Ear-Ornaments
Insignia haec erant alicujus superstitionis dicata, scil. alicui fictitio
numini, vide Exodus 32.2.
or Rings, which probably they had plundered from the Shechemites, who had worn
them in honor of their Idols, see Hosea 2.13. And Jacob buried them under an
Oak by Shechem, from the knowledge of his Family and People, that they might
never be found or used again. Then he and his Company marched toward Bethel
(formerly called Luz, Chapter 12, 8.) and the terror of the Lord was upon the
Cities that were round about them, that they did not pursue after them, nor
destroy them, as they might have done. And he built there an Altar to sacrifice
thereon, where God appeared to him, when he fled from the face of his Brother
Esau. Jacob being now not far from his Father Isaac's House (whom in all
likelihood he had often visited before this, having been seven years at least
in Canaan since his return from Laban, and had frequent intercourse with him.)
I say, being near his Fathers House, as it seems Deborah Haec foemina annum
saltem pertigit 162.
Rebeccas Nurse (see Chapter 24.59.) came from Isaac's House to visit him, and
there died, and with great mourning was buried under an Oak. God now appeared
to Jacob again after he was come from Padan-Aram, (and this is the Seventh time
that he had revealed himself to him in an especial manner) and confirms the
Name Israel to him a second time [see Genesis 32.28.] And God said unto him, I am
God Almighty [see Chapter 17.1.] Be fruitful God does here ratify his Father
Isaac's blessing, which he gave him when he fled into Mesopotamia, Chapter 28.3, 4.
and multiply. A Nation, yea many Nations shall spring from thee; yea even
Kings shall come out of thy Loins. The Land which I promised to Abraham and
Isaac, to thee will I give it, and to thy Posterity, and not to Esau. Then the
Lord ascended up to Heaven, vanishing out of his sight. And Jacob set up a
Pillar in this Place where the Lord had talked with him, as a perpetual
Memorial of Gods goodness to him; The former which he set up there near thirty
years before, being (in all likelihood) demolished; and he poured a
Drink Offering and Oil thereon [see Genesis 28.18.] So that these were in use for
Consecration before the Ceremonial Law of Moses. And he a second time called
the Name of the Place Bethel, or the House of God. Jacob stayed not long here,
but travailed from hence to Ephrath, or Bethlehem-Ephrata, [Mich. 5.2.] where
our Savior afterward was born. His beloved Rachel, when they had almost
reached the Place, fell in travail, and having exceeding hard labor (though
the Midwife comforted her that she should have another Son, which she
accordingly brought forth, Joseph was now about 13 years of age when Benjamin
was born.
but immediately after finding her self dying, and her Soul departing from her
Body, she called the Name of her Son Benoni, that is, the Son of my sorrow. And
thus she died by bearing a Child, who before quarrelled with her Husband, and
said, Give me Children or else I die. But Jacob would not suffer such a Name to
be given to his Son, that might continually renew his sorrow for the loss of
his dear Wife, and therefore called him Benjamin, that is, the Son of my right
hand, intimating that he should be his beloved Son, tenderly regarded by him,
and always, as it were at his right hand. Jacob had now 12 Sons, all which are
said to born to him in Padan-Aram; that is, all besides Benjamin by a
Synechdoche. Afterward when the 12 Tribes were accounted and settled, Ephrahim
and Manasseh (the Sons of Joseph) were put in, and Joseph and Levi (in a sort)
left out, that is, Levi was left out as to having any Land by lot in Canaan.
They are called the 12 Patriarchs, Acts 7.8. and the 12 Tribes, Acts 26.7.
Their Names were engraven on 12 precious Stones on the High Priests
Breast Plate, Exodus 28.21, 29. And on the 12 Gates of the New Jerusalem, Ezekiel.
48.31. Apoc. 21.12. Jacob buried Rachel in the way to Bethlehem-Ephrata, and
set a Pillar Pyramidem perelegantem fuisse ait Bochardus.
or Monument upon her Grave, which continued unto Moses's time, yea it stood in
the time of Samuel and Saul, 1 Samuel 10.2. About this place many Infants were
murdered by Herod, Math. 2.16. Jer. 31.15.

Then Israel Here Jacob is called Israel the first time, according to Gods
Command, v. 10.
journeyed forward, and set up his Tents beyond the Tower of Edar, Turrim
gregis hic Pastores excudebant. Luc. 2.8.
a mile from Bethlehem Where afterward the Angels appeared to the Shepherds.
toward the South, and there Reuben defiled his Fathers Bed, lying with So
Absolon sinned with his Fathers Concubins, 2 Samuel 16.22. And as David abstained
from them afterward, 2 Samuel 20.3. so it is likely Jacob did from Bilhah.
Bilhah his Concubine. And Israel heard thereof, and was grieved at the very
heart for it, because thereby God was highly offended, his own Family
dishonored, and Cause was given to the Heathen of great Scandal and Reproach.
So that Jacob had reason on his Deathbed to complain of this foul
Transgression, and to deprive Reuben of his Birthright for it, 1 Chronicles. 5.1, 2.
Genesis 49.4.

Genesis 35. from 1. to 23.

SECT. XXXIII.
ELeven years after Jacob's return into Canaan, V. These are the Generations of
Jacob] viz. these mentioned, Chapter 35. v. 23.26. The Historical Narration of whom
being interrupted by a relation of Esau's Posterity, Chapter 46. he now resumes.
when he was now about 108 years old, He sent his Son Joseph (being 17 years of
age) to the Sons of his Handmaids (that were feeding the Flock) that he might
he trained up in the knowledge and skill of ordering Cattle; And he the rather
sent him to them than to his Sons by Leah, to avoid envy and emulation; and
possibly he hoped that the Sons of Bilhah (Rachels Handmaid) would for Rachels
sake be more kind to him. Jacob loved him more Benjamin was now but three or
four years old, and not come yet to any proof to gain so much of his Fathers
affections.
than all his Children, being the Son of his beloved Rachel, and the Son of his
old age; and possibly he saw in him, besides the comeliness of his Person, some
Presages of more than ordinary Wisdom, and a great Mind. And to testify his
love to him, he made him a Coat of diverse colors [such a Coat Tamar had, and
such Kings Daughters used to wear, who were Virgins. See 2 Samuel 13.18.] But
because of Jacob's singular love to Joseph, his Brethren hated him, and could
not speak peaceably to him. Joseph relates to his Father their injurious usage
of him, and their evil Conversation among themselves, which could not but be a
great trouble to the good old Man. Joseph after this dreamed a Dream, which was
to this purpose, viz. That as they were binding Sheaves in the field, his
Sheaff rose up and stood upright, and that his Brothers Sheaves stood round
about it, and made obeisance to it.

This Dream he himself being much affected with, out of an youthful simplicity
told it to his Brethren. This much enraged them that he should dream such a
Dream, as if he should Reign and Rule over them, and they hated him for it. He
dreamed again another Dream, to wit, that the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars made
obeisance to him; and telling this also to his Father and to his Brethren, his
Father rebuked him for it, not knowing that these dreams were of God, but
fearing that they proceeded from his own ambitious thoughts, and the effect of
them would be to stir up the envy of his Brethren against him; What (says he)
shall I and thy Mother Leah was his S^p-mother, who afterward bowed down to
him in her Sons, and Rachel in Benjamin, and Jacob himself in his Sons.
Leah, and thy eleven Brethren come and bow down to thee? This he said at
present to prevent the exalting of Joseph's mind, and to abate the envy of his
Brethren. But afterward when he came to consider that his Dream was doubled,
and both tended to signify the same thing, he began to think there might be
something more in it than he yet perceived, and so laid it up in his heart.
Having therefore as it is like for a while kept Joseph at home with him at
Hebron where he now dwelt, (to prevent all discord between him and his
Brethren) some time after he sends him to visit his Brethren that were feeding
their Flocks at Shechem, about 16 miles off, the place where about four years
ago they had committed that Massacre upon the Shechemites, and ever since, as
it is like, the less inhabited, and so more fit for Pasturage. I say, he sends
him to see how His Brethren did, and whether all things were well with them,
and possibly Jacob thought hereby to oblige them, and to procure to Joseph some
kindness among them. Joseph accordingly goes to seek his Brethren, and being
directed by a Stranger, he found them in Dothan, about eight miles distant from
Shechem. As soon as they saw him coming toward them, they said in derision
among themselves, behold This dreamer comes, Come let us kill him, and cast
him into some Pit, and then tell our Father that some evil Beast has devoured
him, and so we shall see what will become of his Dreams. But Reuben (the eldest
of Jacob's Sons by Leah who had most cause to be jealous of this eldest Son by
Rachel) designing to save him from their fury, and to deliver him to his Father
again, advised them by no means to lay violent hands on him themselves, but
rather to put him into a Pit that was there in the Wilderness, and so they
might more handsomely rid themselves of him. But this he advised not with any
intent to let him lie there, but to take him out secretly afterward, and so to
restore him to his Father. They agreeing to what Reuben advised, forthwith
stripped Joseph of his fine Coat, and cast him into the Pit (notwithstanding all
his ernest entreaties and tears, and the anguish of Soul they saw him in, Genesis
42.21.) In which, though very deep, yet there was no water. See Jer. 38.6. and
Zach. 9.11.
When they had done this, without any remorse for their cruel Fact, they sat
down to eat bread, and make merry, not at all regarding the afflictions of
Joseph, Amos 6.6. Immediately whilst they were eating, they see a Caravan of
Merchants, that were partly Ishmaelites (descended of Ishmael, Hagars Son) and
partly Midianites (descended of Midian, Keturahs Son, Genesis 25.2.) who dwelling
both in Arabia, it is like did Traffic together; and having bin at Gilead to
buy Balm and Spicery, were now traveling that way toward Egypt to sell their
Merchandise there. Reuben (it seems) before they sat down to eat, had, upon
some pretense, slipped away from them, intending, without their knowledge, to
take Joseph out of the Pit; but he being absent, and these Merchants coming by,
Judah said to them, What profit would it be to us to kill our Brother, and then
conceal his death? we should remember that he is our own Flesh and Blood; In my
opinion we had better sell him to these Merchants, and so rid our selves of
him. To this motion they readily agreed, and accordingly drawing Joseph out of
the Pit, they sold him to these Merchants (for 20 pieces of Silver Joseph
herein a Type of Christ, sold for 30 pieces of silver. See Acts 7.9.
amounting to about 1 l. 5 s. of our money) who carried him down into Egypt,
and there sold him to Potiphar Ps. 105.17.
an Officer of Pharoahs, and Captain of his Guard. Reuben not long after Joseph
was gone (knowing nothing of what they had done) came to the Pit, and not
finding him there, he rent See v. 34. of this Chapter and Chapter 44.13. 2 Samuel 3.31.
his Clothes (as they used to do in cases of great and extreme sorrow (to
intimate how their hearts were rent and torn with grief) and came to his
Brethren, and told them their Brother was not in the Pit, and he supposed they
had slain him in his absence, as at first they intended. But when they had told
him that they had only sold him to the Ishmaelites, and had not killed him, he
consented with them to Conceal this their Fact from their Father, and to
deceive him with a forged Tale. For they killed a Kid, and dipped Joseph's Coat
in the blood of it, and sent it to their Father by Messengers of their own
appointing, who bringing it to Him, told him, They had found it, and desired to
know of him whether it was his Son Joseph's Coat or no. Old Jacob immediately
knew it, and cried out, O my Son Joseph is dead! doubtless He is rent in pieces
by wild Beasts. Then He rent his Clothes, and put Sackcloth upon his Loins, and
mourned for him many days. And all his Sons and their Wives with Dinah his
Daughter rose up to comfort him, but he refused to be comforted; that is, his
Passions did so far prevail over him, that he minded not what they said, but
gave way to the extremity of his sorrow. He told them, He should carry this
sorrow with him to his grave, and should go mourning into the state of the
dead, to his dear Son; All which did much aggravate the wickedness of his Sons,
who had brought this great sorrow upon their aged Father, yea and upon Isaac
their Grandfather also, who lived some years after this, and therefore had his
share doubtless in this great Affliction.

Genesis 37. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXIV.
NOt long after this Jacob goes to the Valley of Mamre near Hebron to visit
his Father, who shortly after died, and was gathered unto his People, that is,
to the society of the Just, such as he Himself was, aged 180 years, and was
buried in Hebron by his two Sons Jacob and Esau Genesis 35.19.
as Isaac and Ishmael buried Abraham, Genesis 25.9. See Sect. 17. When the Funeral
was over, Esau removed out of that Land, with his Wives and his Substance, to
Mount Seir See Sect. 29.
(so called from a man of that Name) in the Southern Border of Canaan, which
Land God gave to Esau, Deuteronomy. 2.5, 12. Jos. 24.4. partly because His and his
Brother Jacob's Riches and Stock were so increased, that they could not
conveniently dwell together in the same Land; and especially God in his
all-wise Providence thus disposed and inclined Esau's heart to it, that he
might leave Jacob in the Possession of Canaan, which was appointed for his
Posterity, and that when the Israelites should come afterward to inherit that
Land, Esau's Posterity might neither be destroyed, nor displaced. Esau was
called Edom, as we have seen before, Genesis 25.30. and from him Idumaea took its
Name. The Dominion of this Land was first in the hands of Seir the Horite,
(whose Race is set down) among whom Ana is reckoned, ( Esau's Father in law)
who first found out or devised the joining of a Mare and an He-Ass together,
whence issued a kind of beast half-Ass and half-Horse, This after was
forbidden, Lev. 19.19. Thou shall not let thy Cattle gender with a diverse kind.
called Mules, that never bred of themselves, and are only thus begotten. And
thus the Temporal blessings promised unto Esau by his Father Isaac, [Gen.
27.39.] had their full accomplishment in due time; As likewise the Promise to
Abraham, [Gen 22.17.] I will multiply thy Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and as
the sand upon the Seashore: As also the Oracle given to Rebecca, Genesis 20.22.
Two Nations are in thy Womb, and two manner of People shall be separated from
thy bowels, etc. Esau had a great Posterity: Many Dukes descended from him, as
we find Genesis 36. from verse. 15. to 20. and after Dukes there were eight Kings
of his Posterity, verse. 31. which bare successively a golden Scepter (while
Jacob's Posterity was in bondage in Egypt, and before there reigned any Kings
over the Children of Israel,) and after Kings, Dukes again. So that we see the
accomplishment of the Promise made to Abraham, Genesis 17.16. That Kings should
proceed from Sarah.

Genesis 36. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. 1. from verse. 35. to the end.

SECT. XXXV.
JVdah having showed himself very unnatural (as we have seen before, Sect. 33.)
toward his Brother Joseph, we come now to observe how he was punished in his
Children; He had at that time, Facta haec erant paulo post venditionem Josephi
eodem ipso anno, and intra spatium 23 annorum omnia ista peragi poterant. Erat
tum Judas 19 vel 20 annorum. Tribus primis annis genuit tres filios: potuit Er
uxorem ducere anno 17 and Onan 18 (qui revera multi dies possunt dici) Tamar ex
Juda concipere and parere anno 21 post venditionem Josephi. Quod spectat ad
filios Pharez, dicendum natos eos (quemadmodum and december filios Benjaminis) in
Aegypto, nempe intra annos 17 quibus Jacob in Aegypto vixit, ideoque in
Aegyptum ingressi dicuntur. River.
namely, since Jacob's return out of Mesopotamia, and coming into Canaan
(contrary to Gods Command, and the good example of his Progenitors, and
doubtless without, if not against his Fathers advise and consent) married a
Canaanitish woman, who bare him three Sons, Er, Onan, and Shelah: The eldest of
these he married to Tamar, but He being very wicked, the Lord by some
remarkable judgment slew him. Then He spoke to his second Son Onan to marry
her, and to raise up Seed to his deceased Brother, For the condition of such a
Marriage was, that the firstborn was to be counted the deceased Brothers Son.
according to the use and custom of that time, which it is like was at first
prescribed to them by God, (but when it was prescribed does not appear) and was
confirmed afterward by an express Law, [see Deuteronomy. 25.5, 6. Ruth 1.11. Math.
22.24.] and this was to preserve the Pre-eminence of the Firstborn, as a Type
of Christ, otherwise, and in any other case, the Brothers marrying of the dead
Brothers Widow was forbidden, Levit. 18.16. Thou shall not uncover the
nakedness of thy Brothers Wife: it is thy Brothers nakedness. And this Law
seems to be of a moral nature, and perpetually binding; and hereupon Herod was
reproved by John Baptist, for marrying his Brother Philips Wife; but the former
was prescribed to the Jews only upon that particular reason before mentioned,
and being only a temporary exception or dispensation from a perpetual Precept,
concerned only their peculiar state, and with it, it is at an end. But Onan
though he married her as his Father enjoined him, yet wickedly envying the
honor of his dead Brother, he resolved not to be the Father of any Child, that
should be reputed His Brothers, and not his own, and therefore rather than he
would raise up seed unto his Brother, he spilt his seed on the ground. For
which great wickedness God cut him off with sudden Vengeance. Onan being dead,
his third Son Selah was to marry her, but Judah (it seems) fearing the like ill
hap to him which had befallen his elder Brothers, and suspecting (perhaps) some
fault in her, or that some unluckiness followed her, he persuades her to go to
her Fathers House, and there continue till his Son Shelah was grown up,
pretending to her, He should then marry her, but intending no such thing.
Shortly after Judah's own Wife the Daughter of Shuah died; and when his
mourning for her was over, he went up to his Sheep-Shearers at Timna, at which
time they used to feast and rejoice with their Friends. Tamar understanding
this, and perceiving how Judah had dealt with her as to Selah, she putting off
her Widows Apparel, and putting on a Veil, and disguising her self, she sat in
an open place, in the way to Timna, where Judah was to pass, both to tempt and
be tempted. Judah not knowing her thus veiled, and taking her for an Harlot, he
applies himself to her accordingly, and promises to send her a Kid from his
Flock for a Reward. She (as it seems whispering or changing her voice and tone,
that he might not discern who she was) consents to him, on condition he would
give her a Pledge, viz. his Signet, his Bracelets, and his Staff, that he would
perform what he promised. Hereupon He lay with her, and she conceived by him,
and went her way, and took her Widows Apparel again. Judah sends the Kid to her
by his friend, intending to take up his Pledge; But he not finding her, Judah
said, Let her take it, and keep it to her self, lest by overmuch inquiry after
her, my folly with her be discovered, so much are men more afraid of shame
before men than of sinning against God. About three months after it was told
Judah that Tamar was with child by Whoredom. When He heard this, He was very
angry, and said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt; that is, let her be
carried before the Magistrate, that so she may be punished as an Adulteress
with burning, according to the Law of the Country. It seems it was either law
or practice even among the Canaanites to punish Adultery with death, and
sometimes with fire. In such detestation have some Heathens had that sin, see
Jer. 29.22 23. So Moses's Law after, Deuteronomy. 22.22, 23. condemned them to be
stoned, and a Priests Daughter for Fornication to be burnt, Levit. 21.9.
For in regard of the promise that Judah had made of his third Son Selah to her
for an Husband, and she had accepted of it, she was in the case of a betrothed
Woman, and so her fault was to be reputed Adultery, for which Crime no less
punishment was thought fit even before the Law was given. Judah herein bewrays
his own partiality in his own sin, and inhumane cruelty, in thus judging her to
fire, and the fruit of her Womb yet unborn, and that before he had heard what
she could say for her self, never minding how unjustly he had dealt with her,
in not giving Shelah to her, and possibly being willing to rid her out of the
way, because he was unwilling to match Shelah to her. But Tamar being brought
forth, sent to her Father-in-law the Signet, Bracelets and Staff, affirming,
that by the Man to whom those belonged, she was with Child. Judah being thus
convicted, did not shuffle as many would have done in such a case, but being
conscious of his Crime, he acknowledges those things to be His; and thus she
convicts by his own Seal, entangles him with his own Bracelets, and beats him
with his own staff. He now acknowledges she was more Righteous than himself,
because he had failed to give his Son Shelah to her, which if he had performed,
her Chastity might possibly have bin preserved; And thus the cause fell, when
the Prosecutor was turned from charging her, to accuse himself, wherein he
testified his Repentance, and as an evidence thereof he ceased from offending
in that kind again with her, and wherein he had done amiss, resolved to do so
no more, see Job 34.32. Shelah was after married, and probably to Tamar. See
Numb. 26.20. Tamars time of travail now drawing nigh, behold Twins were in her
Womb. Her travail was very painful and perilous by the strife of the Twins in
her body; and by that God seemed to Chastize her for her great offense. One of
the Children putting forth his hand, (which was not according to the ordinary
course of Nature) the Midwife bound a Scarlet thread upon it, by that mark to
discover him from the other, saying, This comes forth first; for so she
persuaded her self it would be. But He drawing in his hand again, behold his
Brother came out. Then she said, How is it that thou art first broken forth?
This breach is thine, (or thou art first broken forth into the World, and have
put back thy Brother,) and thou shall bear the name of it, and shall be called
Pharez, which signifies a breach. Then came forth the other with the Scarlet
thread, whom they called Zarah, Zarah signifies risen or sprung up, as the Sun
is said to rise.
from a word signifying to appear, because he first appeared, and in part came
forth first, All these things seem here so punctually related to show the birth
of Pharez, who was one of our Saviors Progenitors, and to intimate to us that
it is of mere Grace, that one of Judah's Family, the fruit of Incest, was
chosen to be the Stock from whom the Messiah should Spring; as also to assure
us that Christ will not reject great Sinners, who repenting of their Sins fly
unto him for pardon, seeing he would (as to his humane Nature) descend of such
as were guilty of so great Transgressions.

Genesis 38. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXVI.
JOseph (as we have showed, Sect. 33.) being carried down into Egypt, and sold
to Potiphar, an Officer of Pharaohs, and Captain of his Guard, the Lords
blessing so eminently went along with him, that he quickly found favor in the
eyes of his Master, and he employed him first as an ordinary Servant in his
house, then to attend his own Person, as Groom of his Chamber, and finding by
the effects the blessing of God to follow what he did, and that he was a
prosperous man, he made him Overseer, or Steward over his whole house; And it is
like Joseph being a young man of great ingenuity, quickly learned the Egyptian
Language, to enable him for his Masters Service: And 'twas evident to Potiphar
that God blessed his House, and blessed all that he had in the House, or in the
Field, for Joseph's sake. So great is the benefit of having religious Servants.
Potiphar hereupon committed the Care of all his Affairs and Concerns to Joseph,
minding nothing himself, save only to eat and drink, and follow his own
contentments. Nec quidquam aliud noverat nisi pane quo vescebatur,] i. e. Herus
omnia fideli Ministro committebat, de nulla re alia sollicitus quam de edendo,
and bibendo.
Joseph going on to serve his Master after this manner with all fidelity, and
being a goodly person, and well-favoured, about 10 or 11 years after he had
been brought down into Egypt, and about the 27th year of his age, Nunc anno
tricessimo liberatus est carcere in quo amplius biennio fuerat, Genesis 41.1.
There is no certainty how long Joseph was in Prison, nor in what Year first put
in. He waited patiently on God in long Afflictions for Deliverance.
his lustful Mistress cast her wanton Eyes upon him, and enticed him to commit
folly with her. He refused the motion with indignation, telling her how great a
Trust his Master had reposed in him, having put all he had into his Hands but
his Wife only, and therefore (says He) How can I do this great Wickedness and
Sin against God? And how can I be so base, so ungrateful, so disloyal and
unfaithful to my kind Master? But she impudently plied him with fresh
Solicitations, which he by the Grace of God as strongly resisted, and shunned
(as much as He could) coming nigh her, or being in her company. Shortly, upon a
time coming home to perform the business of his Place, this impudent Woman
observing most of the Servants of the House to be absent, thought that a fit
opportunity for her wicked purpose, and so laying hands on him, said, Come and
lie with me. O the prodigiousness of Lust, which breaks through all the bands
of Conscience and Modesty, and instigates a Woman (who should be modest and
shamefac't) impudently to offer to commit a Rape upon a Man! Joseph seeing
himself in this danger, stays not Contra libidinis impetum apprehende fugam si
vis obtinere victoriam. Ians.
to parley with her, but struggling to get away from her, He leaves his upper
Garment (which she had taken hold of) in her hands. She seeing that he had thus
escaped from her, runs out, and making a Noise, calls to those Servants that
were about the house, and showing the Garment, See (says she) how my Husband
has brought in an Hebrew (so she speaks of him in contempt) among us, who by a
dishonest and lewd attempt upon me, has endeavored to bring Disgrace and a
Reproach upon us; and so she laid up the Garment to produce it when her Lord
came home. Thus, seeing Joseph will not satisfy her Lust, she will now
satisfy her Revenge upon him; her raging Lust being now turned into raging
hatred. Accordingly when her Husband came home, she tells him how Joseph had
made an attempt upon her Chastity, and though she her self was the only guilty
Person, yet she deeply and vehemently accuses the Innocent; Necesse est ut
veniant tentationes: Quis enim coronabitur, nisi legitime certaverit? Tu ergo
accedens ad servitutem Dei, sta in timore, and praepara animam tuam ad
tentationem. Bernard.
and as an evidence of his attempt and Crime, she produces his Garment. Nimium
credulus Maritus, non animadvertit vestem esse indicium violentiae, sed
muliebris, modestiae vero adolescentis. Ians.
Her Husband hearing this, falls into an extreme rage, and without examining
the matter, or hearing Joseph speak for himself, or at jest not believing him,
casts him immediately into Prison. It Is wonder he did not presently kill him,
considering how violently the rage of jealously is, and especially in an
Heathen, not awed by the fear of God; But God so overruled his heart, that he
was only cast into Prison, which his Providence intended afterward should be
the means of his advancement. Yet at first (it seems) Potiphar ordered him to
be laid in Irons, and thrown into the Dungeon. See Chapter 40.15. and Psalm. 105.18,
19. His feet they hurt with Fetters, and he was laid in Irons. But there also
the Lord was with him, and comforted him with his own Consolations under these
his sore Afflictions; and the Prison was not so much a Prison as a School of
Virtue and Patience to him, and after a time, gave him favor in the eyes of
the Keeper of the Prison, or chief Jailer, (who probably was an Officer under
Potiphar the Captain of the Guard, see Chapter 40.4.) to whom it is like he declared
the whole matter, and cleared his Innocence; and Potiphar by his Officers
relation might possibly at last begin to be better persuaded of him. But the
chief Jailer was so confident of his Innocence, that he committed to his Care
all his Prisoners, and he had the Rule of the whole Prison, and all things were
under his ordering and direction. So that the chief Jailer took care of
nothing, seeing how careful Joseph was, and observing how God prospered and
blessed all that he did. Thus though the Archers hated him, shot at him and
sorely grieved him, yet his Bow abode in strength, and his Hands were strong by
the mighty God of Jacob, Genesis 49.23, 24.

Genesis 39. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXVII.
DUring the time of Joseph's Imprisonment, it happened that two of Pharaoh's
great Officers, viz. his chief Bulter or Cupbearer, and his chief Baker, for
some Crime committed against their Lord and Master were cast into the same
Prison, and the Captain of the Guard who it seems had the chief Command of the
Kings Prison, (being now as we showed before, better persuaded of Joseph's
Innoceny) committed them to his Care: After they had continued (as is supposed)
about a year in Prison, they both of them in one Night dreamed a Dream, and
each of them had a dream congruous to his condition, presaging somewhat to come
to pass, and which seemed not to be idle and vain Dreams. Joseph coming to them
in the Morning found them very sad; For dreams sent of God do usually much
affect Men, as we may see Chapter 41.8. and Dan. 2.1. They tell him they had each
of them dreamed a Dream, which did much trouble them, and they being Prisoners
could not go to the Magicians and Southsayers to have them interpreted, whom,
in such cases, they used to consult. He tells them they were deceived if they
expected the Interpretation of their Dreams from such Wizards; the true
Interpretation of Dreams belonged only to God, and to those to whom he is
pleased to reveal them. And finding by a present instinct of Gods Spirit that
he should be able to interpret them, He desired them to impart their Dreams
unto him. He was before a Dreamer, he becomes now an Interpreter.
The chief Butler hereupon tells him what his Dream was; namely, in his Dream
he saw a Vine with three Branches, which budded, and its bunches brought forth
ripe Grapes, and Pharaoh's Cup being in his Hand, he pressed the Grapes into
the Cup, and gave it unto Pharaoh. Joseph considering this Dream, told him this
was the Interpretation thereof; viz. the three Branches signified three days,
Which Interpretation Joseph had not by conjecture from the three Branches (for
Branches have no reference to days, and the three Branches might have been as
well so many weeks, or months, or years,) but by Divine Revelation.
and within that time he should be lifted up again, and restored to the Office
from which he was deposed, and Pharaoh when he shall take a survey of his
Family, shall reckon and account him in the number of his Court-Officers as He
was before. And (says Joseph) when it shall be thus well with thee, think on
me, and make mention of Me to Pharaoh, and bring me out of this Prison. For
indeed I was stolen and conveyed away from my Father without his knowledge out
of Canaan, (wherein the Posterity of Abraham the Hebrew dwelt, See Chapter 14.13.
See Joseph's faith in Gods Promises.
and to whom, by the Divine Promise, it belongs) and since I came hither have I
done nothing whereby I deserved to be put into Prison, much less into the
Dungeon. Thus we see, Joseph, who could tell when the chief Butler should be
released, could not tell the time, or manner, or means of his own Deliverance,
God having not revealed that unto him. And though he patiently submitted to the
Providence of God, yet we see he is careful to use lawful means for his own
Preservation; and though he pleads his own Innocence, yet he flies not out in
any reviling or railing words against those that had so ill used him. The chief
Baker hearing what a benign Interpretation Joseph had given of the chief
Butler's Dream, he was encouraged to tell him His also; and accordingly told
him that in his Dream he thought he had three white Baskets on his bend, in the
uppermost there were all manner of bake-meats for Pharaoh, and the Birds did
eat them out of the Basket upon his head. Joseph tells him the Interpretation
of his Dream was this; The three Baskets signified three days in which time
Pharaoh would cause his head to be cut off, and lifted up as the head of a
Traitor, and for the greater Ignomy would cause his body to be hanged on a
Tree, The Jews were to bury the Person that was hanged the same day, Deuteronomy.
21.22, 23. but the Egyptians and many Gentiles suffered them to hang many days.
so that the Fowls of the air should eat his Flesh. Thus Joseph faithfully
forewarns him of his danger, that he might the better prepare himself for it.
And as Joseph told him, it accordingly came to pass. For the third day after,
being Pharaoh's Birthday, We find but two Examples in Scripture, and those not
of good Men, that celebrated their Birthday, viz. of Pharaoh here, and of
Herod, Math. 14.6.
he celebrated it with great Magnificence, and made a great Feast to all his
Servants, and so had occasion to take notice of his chief Officers; and among
them reckoning the chief Butler and chief Baker, and calling to mind their
Faults, he freely forgave the first, and restored him to his Place, so that he
gave the Cup as formerly into the Kings Hand. But the chief Baker he caused to
be hanged, as Joseph had foretold Him. But notwithstanding the chief Bulter was
thus delivered according to Joseph's Interpretation of his Dream, yet He with a
wretched ingratitude forgot or neglected Joseph in Prison; And thus was the
Faith and Patience of this dear Servant of God further tried, that he might be
an Example to others to wait patiently upon God in long-continuing Afflictions;
and withal he was taught not to ascribe his Deliverance, when it came, to the
Favor of this Courtier, but to the watchful Care and Providence of God.

Genesis 40. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXVIII.
TWo years after Pharaoh himself dreamed a Dream, that much affected him. He
thought he stood by the River Nile, and saw seven fat and well-favoured Kine
come out of it, and feed in a Meadow, and behold seven lank and lean and
ill-favored Kine came up after them, and devoured those seven fat ones.
Nothing could be more fit to represent the plenty and scarciry of a Land, than
this Vision of Kine and Ears of Corn. Thus we see how God can scare the spirits
of Princes with Dreams, and terrify them with Visions. See Dan. 2.1, 2.
So he awoke. Then he dreamed again that he saw seven Ears of Corn come up out
of the Stalk, fair and good; and then seven lank thin Ears (like those blasted
with a strong and drying East Wind) come up after them, and they devoured the
former. In the Morning Pharaoh's spirit was mightily troubled about these
Dreams, and he sent for the Magicians and Southsayers of Egypt to Interpret
them to him, but they could not do it. Thus God sometimes causes the wisdom of
wise men to perish, Isa. 29.14. The King having tried these, and receiving no
satisfaction from them, the chief Butler then stepped in, and said, Sir, I do
remember my faults this day; some years since your Majesty being offended with
me and your chief Baker, you cast us both into Prison, and we there dreamed
both of us in one Night; each of us a different Dream, and of different Import,
as the Interpretation manifested. And there was with us in the Prison a young
man, an Hebrew, Servant to the Captain of the Guard, who did interpret our
Dreams to us; whose Interpretation proved exactly true. For by his
Interpretation he declared that I should be restored to my Place, and that the
chief Baker should be hanged; both which accordingly came to pass. Pharaoh
hearing this, presently sent for Joseph, who having before (as it seems) let
his hair grow in a neglected manner, in sign of sorrow, (as Mephibosheth did, 2 Samuel 19.24.) now being to appear before the King, he trimmed himself and shaved
his Beard, and changed his Raiment. When he came into the Kings Presence,
Pharaoh told him he had dreamed a Dream which much troubled his spirit, and he
could meet with no man among all his Magicians and Wisemen that could
Interpret it; and he had heard of him, that he could understand a Dream and
interpret it. Joseph humbly answered, That he durst not assume so much wisdom
to himself, Non mihi tribuo, a Deo expectandum est.
[see Dan. 2.30.] but doubted not but God (who is the Revealer of Secrets)
would give to Pharaoh such an Answer as should quiet his troubled mind
concerning his Dream. Then Pharaoh told him both his Dreams, viz. That of the
Kine, and that of the Ears of Corn. Joseph making as it is probable a little
Pause, told him, Both his Dreams signified one and the same thing, and that God
did thereby intend to show and declare unto him what he was about to do. The
seven fat Kine, and seven good Ears signified seven years of wonderful and
incredible plenty, and the seven lean Kine and seven lank Ears signified seven
years that should succeed them of very sore and extreme Famine; in so much that
the plenty of the former years should be forgotten, and it should consume many
both men and beasts in the Land; And for that the Dream was doubled, it was to
assure Pharaoh that the thing was firmly decreed of God, Quod firmissimum sit
coeleste decretum. Vatab.
and that he would certainly and shortly bring it to pass. Then (by the
guidance and direction of the Spirit of God) he humbly advises Pharaoh to look
out a wise and discreet man, and to set him over the Land of Egypt, and to
appoint faithful Officers under him, who in the seven years of plenty should
take up a fifth part of the Fruits of the Land, and of all manner of Provision
the Ground afforded, which might serve for Food, It Is like that other great Men
and private persons in the Land, did resolve to be Buyers and Storers in the
years of Plenty, and all little enough as appeared afterward.
which they should lay up in Granaries, at the Kings Charge, and sell it again
afterward to his Subjects in the time of Dearth, at a reasonable price, that
so the Land perish not throw Famine. What Joseph said was highly pleasing and
acceptable to Pharaoh and all his Court. And he said to his Servants, Where can
we find such another man as this is, Thus God wrought upon and disposed the
Heart of Pharaoh for the executing his own Counsel.
a man of such Wisdom, and Prudence, and Sagacity, which I perceive God by his
Spirit It is the same Spirit that makes holy that makes wise.
has bestowed on him in an extraordinary manner. Then turning to Joseph (he
said) Forasmuch as I see that God has endowed thee with extraordinary Gifts, I
know no man so wise and discreet as thou art. Therefore thou shall be over my
House, yea I set thee over all the Land of Egypt, and according to thy word and
direction shall all my People be governed, only in the Throne I will be greater
than thou. Then Pharaoh took off his Ring from his Hand, and put it upon
Joseph's, and arrayed him in Silk and fine Linen, and put a Gold Chain about
his Neck, and appointed him to ride in the second Chariot to His own, and they
cried before him, Bow the Knee, Mira Aulicorum modestia qui Juveni succumbant
Inquilino.
and so he was made Ruler As Dreams before were the occasion of his Bondage, so
now they are of his Exaltation.
under Pharaoh over all the Land of Egypt. He continued in his Government and
Honor 80 years.
Thus Joseph was made the second Man in the Kingdom, as Daniel was the third
Man upon something a like occasion, Dan. 5.29. Further the King said, I am
Pharaoh, and as sure as I am King, so sure without thy advise and authority not
the least thing shall be done in matter of Government; no man shall do any
thing, or go any whither without thy Order; and Pharaoh gave him a new Name,
and called him Zaphnath paaneah; that is, a Revealer of Secrets, [see Dan.
1.7.] And he gave him to Wife Asenah the Daughter of Potipherah, Priest of On,
Called also Aven, Ezekiel. 30.17. and Heliopolis, the City of the Sun, now
probably Damiata.
and so matched him into an honorable Family. As for Joseph's marrying with
this Egyptian Woman, it must be considered, it was an extraordinary Case, there
being no other in the Land of Egypt to marry with, neither could he go
elsewhere to seek a Wife without deserting that great Office whereto (for the
benefit of the Church) God had advanced him. And besides he might possibly by
some special instinct or revelation from God be moved to accept Pharaoh's
favor therein, as the like might be in Hesters marrying with Ahasuerus, and
possibly by Joseph's wise and pious Instructions his Wife might soon become a
Proselyte to her Husbands Religion, as his Steward (in all likelihood) was, of
whom we read Chapter 43.23. And we see the Children of this marriage were
afterward by Jacob accounted as the Fathers of two Tribes in Israel, Chapter
48.16. Joseph being now instaled by Pharaoh in his Government over all the Land
of Egypt at the 30th year of his age, thirteen years after he was sold by his
Brethren, Chapter 37.2.) He now went forth from the face of Pharaoh, and went
through the Land in pursuance of the Kings Command, to appoint Officers every
where, and to prepare Storehouses to lay up Corn conveniently in. And the
seven years of plenty beginning, the Earth brought forth wonderfully, even by
handfuls; that is, they had instead of one grain (as it were) as many as would
fill the hand. During these seven years Joseph gathered together very carefully
the fifth part of all the Fruits of the Earth, and bestowed them in convenient
Granaries in the several Cities, and Places fit for receipt of them. And the
quantity of Corn that was gathered was so immense, that it was even like the
Sand of the Sea, not to be counted or numbered. Joseph had two Sons by his Lady
the Daughter of Potipherah, before the years of Famine began; the firstborn he
called Manasseh (that is, making to forget) for says he, God has made me now
forget all the Troubles and Hardships I have undergone, here in Egypt, and all
the Injuries I received from my Fathers House, which I do not now think of by
way of Offense, but as a merciful Dispensation to me, seeing they have been the
means of my Advancement. And he called His second Son Ephraim, viz. fruitful;
For says he, God has made me fruitful, even in this very Land where I have
been before much oppressed. That Joseph neither in the 13 years of his
Affliction, nor in the 8 years of his Exaltation, should ever send to his
Father, may seem strange, the City Memphis, where he abode sometime, not being,
as is computed, above fifty miles from Hebron, where his Father and his Family
dwelt; but we may probably conceive that Joseph having that extraordinary Gift
of interpreting Dreams, might so far understand the meaning of his own Dreams,
that his Brethren should at one time or other bow themselves before him, and
that he was to wait for the accomplishment of what God had foretold.
The seven years of plenty being ended, the seven years of Famine began. And
this Famine reached to the Neighboring Countries, viz. Canaan, Arabia, etc.
But in all the Land of Egypt, by reason of particular persons storing up great
quantities of Corn, there was bread sufficient for a good while; but yet at
last when the particular Provisions of the Inhabitants were spent, the people
cried to Pharaoh for Bread, [2 Kings 6.26.] and he sent them to Joseph. And the
Famine growing sore all over that Land. Joseph opened the Kings Storehouses,
and sold to the Egyptians. And the Neighboring Countries also being sore pressed
with the Famine, came down into Egypt to Joseph to buy Corn, not knowing where
else to be supplied.

Genesis 41. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXIX.
IN the second year of the Famine, Jacob and his Family in Canaan There was a
Famine in Canaan in Abraham's time, Chapter 12.10. In Isaac's time, Chapter 26.1. and
now in Jacob's time. Gods Servants are subject to common Calamities, yet God
provides for them.
being sore pressed with it, and seeing some of the Canaanites had gone into
Egypt, and bought and brought Corn from thence, he asked his Sons, Why they
stood like men amazed and helpless, looking one upon another, and did not go
down into Egypt to buy Corn to keep them alive. Hereupon ten of his Son resolve
to go thither, Jacob keeping Benjamin with himself, lest some mischief should
befall him, as had formerly befallen his Brother Joseph. They being come into
Egypt, applied themselves to the Governor of the Land, (viz. Joseph,) who it
is like sold to the Natives by his Officers, but to Foreigners himself, because
he would more particularly observe what Strangers came into the Land, and
whether there was any likelihood of danger from them. Being come before him,
they made a lowly Obeisance to Him, bowing themselves with their faces to the
ground, and so unwittingly fulfilled his prophetic Dream, [Ch. 37.7, 8, 9.] of
their Sheaves bowing down to His, which he could not but now call to mind.
Joseph seeing them, presently knew them, though they knew not him, his
Countenance ('it is like) in so long a time being much altered, and he appearing
now in the habit and attire of a Nobleman, and splendidly attended, which they
could not possibly imagine of him whom they had some years before sold for a
Slave, and thought was dead long ago. But though He knew them, yet he made
himself strange to them, and examined them strictly whence they came, and spoke
roughly This he did partly to understand the truth the better, how it fared
with his Father and Brother Benjamin, and partly to rouse them up to a sense of
their sin they had committed against him, and to make the kindness which he
intended to show them after seem the greater.
and harshly to them, and charged them to be Spies that were come to see the
nakedness of the Land, and to mark what parts of it were least defended. But
they humbly answered, Nay, my Lord, we are true men; we are no Spies, neither
ought we (being so many of a Company) to give thee any jealousy; for we are
Brethren. We were once twelve Brethren, the Sons of one man in the Land of
Canaan; The youngest is this day with our Father, and one is dead, and the rest
of us are come hither on no other design but only to buy Food. If our Father
had intended to have sent Spies hither, He would not have adventured so many of
his Sons together on such a Design. Joseph said unto them, By this I shall
prove whither ye be true men, and not Spies. You say you have another Brother
at Home, If you have, one of you shall go and fetch him hither, that I may see
him, and I will keep the rest of you in Prison till he comes, and thereby I
shall know that ye are true men, and do not lie unto me. But if ye have not,
and so have deceived me, as sure as Pharaoh lives A vehement Asseveration no
sufficient ground to charge on Joseph a sinful Oath, viz. By the life of
Pharaoh, Deuteronomy. 6.13. compared with Math. 4.10. Jer. 5.2.
ye are Spies, and shall be dealt with accordingly. Exploratores deputabimini
merito mendacii vestri.
Hereupon He put them all in Ward for three days. Nam suspicabatur Joseph ut
nota. Chrysostom. ne quod ipse expertus erat simile quid in Benjaminum, fratrem
suum uterinum, ex eodem livore commisissent.
When they were thus shut up, they began to speak one to another, O we may now
remember our cruel dealing with our Brother Joseph: we are verily guilty of his
blood; We saw the anguish of his Soul when we were about to sell him, and how
earnestly he beseeched us, and begged of us that we would not do it; but we
would not hear him, nor listen to him; therefore has God brought this Distress
now upon us. Ah, woe and alas! We sold our Brother into Bondage, and now we our
selves are brought into Captivity. We would not hear him, and now the Governor
of the Land will not hear us. We deluded our Father with a lie, and now we
cannot be believed though we speak the truth. Thus their guilty Consciences,
though they had lien still a long while, (about twenty years) yet now, like
sleeping Mastiffs, awake, and fly upon them, so that they could not but
attribute their present trouble to their former Sin. And to aggravate this
their Crime, Reuben Nec ipse Reuben erat omnino innocens quia tanquam
primo-genitus sortius resistere potuisset, minando delationem ad Patrem.
told them, They might remember how earnestly he spoke to them, and besought
them that they would not sin against the life of their Brother, but they would
not hearken to him, and so now (says he) his blood is justly required by God at
our hands. Hic est effectus afflictionis ut in se redeat peccator and causam
quaerat and ita ad paenitentiam perducatur. Oculos quos culpa claudit poena
aperit.
Joseph by some means overhearing this their Discourse among themselves,
(though they little thought that He had been so near them, or if they had, they
could not have imagined that He understood their Language, because he used to
speak to them by an Interpreter,) and being inwardly moved with this their sad
acknowledgment of their Fault, and especially with Reuben's sharp upbraiding
them for it, his natural affection so overpowred him, that he was forced to go
alone and give it vent in secret weeping. But that being over, on the third day
he sends for them again, and tells them, If they would do what he now intended
to require of them, they should save their lives, and not be taken for Spies.
And He was a man that feared God, (see Neh. 5.15.) and therefore would be true
and faithful in performing what he promised them. He tells them therefore, That
He would detain one of them in Prison, and passing by Reuben (remembering how he
had pleaded for him) He took Simeon his Fathers second Son (who was the eldest
of those that were most virulently bent against him) and commanded him to be
bound before their eyes, (intending possibly when they were gone to give him
some more liberty); then he tells them, That he permitted the rest of them to
go back to Canaan to carry Corn to relieve their Familes now distressed with
scarcity and Famine. But this He peremptorily required of them, that they
should bring down their youngest Brother with them when they came again, and
then He should account them true and honest men; They humbly submit to what He
enjoined them. Then He gives order that their Sacks should be filled with Corn,
and that they should have such Provisions as were needful for their Journey.
And he gave order to his Steward that he should privately put every man's money
(which he received of them for their Corn) into his Sack; which possibly he
did, fearing lest his Father might be in want, if he took their money: These
things being done, they laded their Asses with their Corn and Provisions and
departed, every one of them (as it is probable) having several Asses laden, some
with Bread-Corn, and some with Provender. As they journy'd, when they came to
the Inn, one of them opened his Sack to give his Ass some Provender, and there
he found the money which he had paid for his Corn: They seeing this, began to
be in great apprehension and perplexity about it, suspecting some Plot laid for
their ruin, or at least that some danger would come to their Brother Simeon
hereby; and they said among themselves, What has God done to us? For both by
this accident and what had lately happened to them, they feared God was sorely
displeased with them. When they came home to their Father Jacob, they told him
what had happened to them in Egypt, and how roughly the Governor of the Land
had handled them, and how he took them for Spies. But they told him they were
true men, and were once twelve Brethren the Sons of one man; that their
youngest Brother was now with their Father, and one was dead. And he told them
by this he would discover whither they were true men or no. They should leave
one of their number as an Hostage with him, and the rest of them should take
Food for the Relief of their Families, and should bring down their youngest
Brother to him that he might see him, and then he would deliver their other
Brother to them, and they might Traffic in the Land. When they had acquainted
their Father with these things, they went to empty their Sacks What Judah says,
Chapter 43.21. as if they had all opened their Sacks, and found their Moneys in
them at the Inn; we must understand it, that what happened to one of them, they
reckon as happened to them all. Quod uni in diversorio accidit de omnibus
affirmatur.
of the Corn that they had brought out of Egypt, and behold they found every
one his purse of money that he had paid for his Corn, in the mouth of one of
his Sacks. When they saw this, both they and their Father were greatly afraid,
apprehending they might upon this account be accused of Theft, or Cheating. But
old Jacob hearing that his dear Son Benjamin must go down into Egypt, could not
forbear expressing a great grief and resentment thereat. What (says He) will ye
thus bereave me of my Children? you know your Brother Joseph was lost long ago,
and now I look upon Simeon as in a manner lost also, it being very doubtful
whither He will ever get out of Prison again; and will ye now take away from me
my dear Benjamin also? woe and alas! all these things make against me, The good
old man did not see that all these things made for him.
and how shall I be able to bear up under them? I cannot be content on any
terms that my Son Benjamin should go down with you. Reuben said, If thou will
permit him to go along with us, if I do not bring him safe to thee again, slay
these my two Sons that are at present with me. By which passionate Speech he
thought to induce his Father to believe that he had some reason for his so
confident undertaking for Benjamin's return. However Jacob was very still
unwilling to it, alleging that Joseph was dead; and Benjamin was now the only
Son of his Mother Rachel, and if he should suffer him to go along with them,
and any mischief should befall him in the way, they would bring down his gray
hairs with sorrow to the Grave.

Genesis 42. whole Chapter.

SECT. XL.
THe Famine continuing sore in the Land of Canaan, and they having almost spent
the Corn and Provisions they had before brought out of Egypt, Jacob spoke to
his Sons to go down again thither to buy Food.

Judah told him, The Governor of the Country did solemnly protest to them they
should not see his face except they brought their youngest Brother with them,
and they durst not by any means go without him. V. 8. The lad Benjamin was now
about 27 years of age, being 12 or 13 years younger then Joseph, He had now
nine or ten Sons, Chapter 46.21. He is called a lad comparatively, being the
youngest of Jacob's Sons.
Israel asked them, Why they would deal so ill by him as to tell the Governor
of Egypt they had another Brother. They said, He examined them so strictly
about their Kindred, as whither their Father was yet alive, and whither they
had another Brother, etc. that they could not avoid telling him, little
imagining that He would require they should bring him down to Him. Judah
farther said, That in case his Father would let Benjamin go down with them, He
would be Surety for him, of his hand He should require him, and if he brought
him not safe again, he would for ever bear the blame thereof. Therefore (says
he) I beseech thee let him go down with us. For if thou had not staid us by
thy unwillingness to part with Benjamin, we might have made a Second return
with Corn by this time. Israel seeing there was no remedy, and that he had
better adventure one to an uncertain danger, than cast the whole Family upon
certain ruin, He consents that they should go and take Benjamin with them. And
having had before experience of the efficacy of Presents, [Ch. 32.20.] He
thought he would now also use prudent means, as subservient to Gods Providence,
for the preservation of his Children. And therefore appoints his Sons to carry
a small Present of the best Fruits of the Land, viz. a little Balm, a little
Honey, with a little Spice and Myrrh, and some Terebinthian-Nuts and Almonds,
such as the scarcity of that time would afford; And like a just man, he charges
them to carry double money with them, viz. the money that was brought back and
found in their Sacks-mouth, and money for more Corn to be bought in Egypt. For
(says he) it may possibly have happened through some oversight of the men that
should have received the money, that it was thus returned in your Sacks;
However mistake is no payment; the Corn becoming ours, the Money is theirs that
sold it; therefore take it with you and restore That saying of Austin is most
true, Epist 54. Macedoniae, without restitution (in deed or desire) that is no
remission. Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum.
it. And seeing it must be so, take your Brother Benjamin with you, and God
Almighty give you favor with the Governor of Egypt, that he may deliver to
you your Brother Simeon (whom he has in Custody) and that you may bring both
him and Benjamin back to me again. But however it shall fall out, I will
dispose my self to bear it patiently, and submit to the Providence of God
therein. [See Ester 4.16.] And the Sons of Jacob did as their Father commanded,
and went down into Egypt a second time. And being come thither, they presented
themselves before Joseph as he was going about some Affairs of State, who
seeing Benjamin with them, ordered they should attend Him at his House at Noon,
and then spoke privately to the Steward of his House to go home to make
provision for them, for he intended these men should Dine with him that day.
The Steward accordingly brings them to his Masters house at Noon. But they it
seems knew not that they should be there entertained at Dinner, and kindly
treated, but contrarily conceived they should be secured in the House, and
charged with, and punished for the money carried back, and that he would
thereupon take occasion to seize upon them, and take them for Bondmen, and
seize upon their Asses also: And accordingly being come to the door of the
House, before they entered, they began to make their excuse and apology to the
Steward about the money that was returned in their Sacks, V. 21. For have they
relate together what happened in the Inn, and what was discovered when they
came home.
protesting their innocence therein, and that they knew not how or by whom it
was put into their Sacks; but however it came about, they had (as became honest
men) brought it back again, and there had it ready to pay unto him. But the
Steward (who it seems was a Proselyte, and instructed in the true Religion and
Worship of God by his Master) said, Peace be unto you; fear not, Your God, and
the God of your Father has given you Treasure in your Sacks; that is, you are
to attribute it to the Providence of God, that you found that money in your
Sacks. As for me, I am sure I had your money; I acknowledge the Receipt of it,
there was no fraud nor deceit in you as to that matter. Then He brought out
(to their great joy) their Brother Simeon to them, who had been there detained
as a Prisoner. And bringing them in to his Masters house, he gave them water
that they might wash their Feet, to cleanse and refresh them (according to the
custom of those hot Countries, see Chapter 18. v. 4. and Chapter 24. v. 32.) He ordered
also that their Asses should have Provender given to them. These things being
done, they made ready the Present they had brought with them from their own
Country to present unto Joseph when he should come home. And by this time they
understood they should eat there that day. When Joseph came in, they bowed
themselves to the earth before him, and humbly tendered their Present to him. He
then friendly asked them concerning their welfare, and whither the old Man
their Father was yet alive, and they bowing down their Heads, and making an
humble Obeisance to him, said, Thy Servant our Father is yet alive, and in good
health. Thus was Joseph's Dream accomplished: concerning the Sun, and Moon, and
eleven Stars making Obeisance to him, Chapter 37.9. For this bowing of themselves
before Joseph, when they came with their Presents, was not only in their own
names, but also in the name of their Father, who had sent these Presents to
him; whom therefore they term his Servant.
Then seeing his Brother Benjamin, He said, Is this your youngest Brother of
whom ye spoke to me? And they answered, Yes; He said, God be gracious to thee
me Son. Joseph calls Benjamin his Son, as he was a Magistrate and a Father in
the civil State.
Then finding his Affections to be stirred, and his Bowels to yern upon his
Brother Benjamin, he withdrew himself to his Chamber, there to give vent unto
his passion in secret. When that was over, he washed his face and went to them
again, and commanded his Servants to bring in dinner. They accordingly first
furnish a Table for him apart, as became a Viceroy, 2ly, another for his
eleven Brethren. A third for such Egyptians and Persons of Quality of that
Nation that were to dine in the same Room with him, though not at the same
Table. For the Egyptians would not eat bread with the Hebrews, it being an
abomination to them so to do; because the Hebrews were known to be keepers of
Sheep, and so to kill and sacrifice such Cattle as the Egyptians worshipped.
See Genesis 46.34. Every Shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians. And Exodus
8.26. And Moses said, it is not meet so to do; For we shall sacrifice the
abomination of the Egyptians unto the Lord our God. And they sat down at the
Table every one according to his age and seniority, looking upon one another
with some amazement; and marvailing that the Governor of Egypt should show
them now so great favor, who had not long before treated them so roughly. Then
He sent portions See 1 Samuel 1.4, 5.
or Messes from his own Table to them (according to the custom and manner of
those times and that place) but to Benjamin he sent five times as much as to
any of them; which possibly He did, not only to testify his singular affection
to him, but also to make trial whither his Brethren would envy him for it. And
so they drank and were merry together, though in a decent and sober manner.

Genesis 43. whole Chapter.

SECT. XLI.
THen Joseph commanded his Steward to fill their Sacks with Corn, and to give
them as much as they could carry, and privately gave him order to put every
man's money in his Sack, and over and above that to put his own Silver Cup,
wherein he used to drink, into the Sack of the youngest. And this possibly He
did to try how they stood affected to his Father, and to his Brother Benjamin;
conceiving that if they envied Benjamin as formerly they envied Him, they would
be glad to see him apprehended for Theft, and cast into Prison. This being
done, early in the morning they began their Journey homeward. But they were not
gone far out of the City before Joseph's Steward follows after them and
overtakes them, and then begins to expostulate highly with them, and upbraid
them, that they had so ill requited his Master for his great kindness to them.
He charges them that they had stolen his Masters silver Cup, in which he
himself did drink, and by which he used to divine, It seems the Egyptians
thought that by reason of his Skill in Interpreting Dreams, He used
Divinations, as their Magicians and Wise men did; and possibly Joseph was not
unwilling it should be believ d He could do it to keep them in better awe,
though he only rationally guessed at things, and followed the guidance and
direction of the Spirit of God, whose assistance He had great experience of.
and discover and foretell secret and hidden things. The men were strangely
surpised and amazed at this unexpected Charge, and said to him, God forbid
that thy Servants should be found such manner of men as thou accusest us to be.
Thou know we brought again the money which we found in our Sacks when we
came home. And therefore surely we cannot with any reason be supposed to be men
that would steal ought from thy Master. We are so well assured of our innocence
in this matter, that let us all be searched, and if thy Masters Cup be found
among us, let him with whom it is found die for it, and all the rest of us will
be thy Masters Bondmen. The Steward replies, He would not deal so rigorously
with them, but according to their own offer he would search them, and He only
with whom the Cup was found should be his Servant, the rest should be
blameless. Hereupon immediately they all took down their Sacks, and the Steward
searched them all, beginning at the eldest and so going on to the youngest,
viz. Benjamin; And in his Sack the Cup was found. When they saw that they rent
their Clothes, and in great horror and amazement loded their Asses again and
returned back into the City. Then Judah and his Brethren came to Joseph, and
fell before him on the ground. He asks them why they had served Him so? Did
they not think that such a man as He could discover them? Judah answered, What
shall we say to my Lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear our selves?
For how innocent soever we think our selves as to this matter, yet we can no
way clear our selves before man, and therefore must acknowledge that God is
just in punishing us for our former Sins, Genesis 42.21, 22. We have therefore no
more to say, but that we are all my Lords Bondmen, both he with whom the Cup
was found, and all the rest of us also. Nay, says Joseph, That shall not be. He
only with whom the Cup was found shall be my Bondsman; as for the rest of you go
to your Father in peace. Then Judah approached near to him, and said, O my Lord
let thy Servant without offense speak a few words privately to thee, and let
not thine anger burn against thy Servant. Thou art even as Pharaoh, being
Second to him in Authority, and so thine anger to be dread'd even as His. My
Lord may please to remember that when we came first down into Egypt, thou did
ask thy Servants, Have ye a Father living, or any other Brother. And we said
unto my Lord, We have a Father an old man, and a Brother that is but a Youth,
Namely, in comparison of them, being about 24 or 27 years of age; being 12 or
13 years younger than Joseph, see Genesis 22.5. and having now nine or ten Sons,
Chapter 46.21.
born to our Father in his old age. His only Brother both by Father and Mother
is dead, and he alone is left of his Mothers Offspring, and his Father
tenderly loves him. And thou said unto thy Servants, Bring him down that I
may see him. We then told my Lord that the lad could not leave his Father
without extreme danger to his Fathers life; and thou toldst us peremptorily,
That except our youngest Brother came down with us, we should see thy Face no
more. And behold when we came unto thy Servant our Father, we told him the
words of my Lord. And he was extreme unwilling to let our youngest Brother come
down with us. Yet afterward, the Famine pressing sore upon us, He commanded us
to go down again into Egypt to buy Food. We told him we durst not go again
except our youngest Brother went down with us. He said, Ye know that my wife
Rachel (first in my choice, and dearest in my love,) bare me two Sons. The
Eldest went out from me when he was about seventeen years of age, and as it
seems was torn in pieces of wild Beasts. Hereby Joseph saw what they had told
his Father when they had sold him; namely, that some wild Beast had devoured
him.
[See Chapter 37.33.] So that I saw him no more. And if ye take this Son also from
me, and mischief befall him, you will bring my gray head with sorrow to the
Grave. I thy Servant engaged my self to my Father for the bringing the lad safe
home to him again. I told him, I would be surety for him, and of my hands he
should require him, Chapter 43.8, 9. Now therefore when thy Servants shall come
back to our Father, and he shall perceive that the lad is not with us, (his
life being bound up in the lads life) it will surely be his death, and so thy
Servants shall bring down the gray head of our Father with sorrow to the Grave.
Seeing therefore I thy Servant stand engaged to my Father for the lad, accept I
pray thee of me for thy Bondam instead of the lad, and let the lad go up with
his Brethren. For I dare not look my Father again in the face, except the lad
be with me; nor can I endure to see the woe and misery that will befall my
Father if the lad be left behind.

Genesis 44. whole Chapter.

SECT. XLII.
JOseph's heart was so melted with this pathetick Speech of Judah, that He was
able to refrain no longer, but commanding all besides his Brethren to withdraw,
He gave vent to his passion, and bursting out into tears, and weeping aloud, He
told them, He was Joseph their Brother, and asked them, Whether his Father was
yet alive? They were so astonished and amazed at the strangeness and
unexpectedness of the thing, and so terrified with the remembrance of their own
guiltiness and trespass against him, that they could not answer him a word. He
bids them come near him, and tells them again, He was Joseph their Brother,
whom they had sold into Egypt. He bids them not disquiet, or be vexed at
themselves for what was done, but look up to the Providence of God who had
turned their Sin to so much good. For (says he) God did send me hither before
you, that I might be a means in this sore Famine to preserve your lives, and
that you may be saved in this general Calamity, and to preserve your Posterity,
that they may remain after you. For there are five years more of the Famine to
come, wherein there shall be neither Ploughing nor Sowing, Earing nor Harvest.
Therefore it was not you that sent me hither, but God, and He has made me a
Father to Pharaoh, that is, His Principal Counselor of State, and I have the
Supreme guidance and direction of all his Affairs, and by my Advice Pharaoh
yields himself to be guided as a Son does by his Fathers; having made me Ruler
over all his House, and over all the Land of Egypt under Himself. Go up
therefore to my Father, and tell him, That Joseph his Son is yet alive, and
that God has made him Lord of all Egypt, and tell him, That I desire him to
come down speedily to me, both He and his Children, and his Childrens Children,
with their Flocks and Herds, and all that they have, and they shall live in
that fruitful part of Egypt called Goshen, a Province abounding with Pastures,
and so most commodious for them that deal in Cattle. On, that City whence he
married, and where he most resided was near to Goshen.
And so they shall be near me, This he says, presuming on Pharaoh's consent.
and there I will maintain and nourish them, that they perish not in the five
succeding years of Famine. A do not doubt but I will really perform what I say
to you; for the eyes of you all do see that it is my own mouth that speaks
these things to you in your own Language, and not by an Interpreter. And you
shall go and tell my Father of all this Glory and Splendour you have seen Me to
be in, that He may hasten down to me. Then He fell upon his Brother Benjamin's
Neck and kissed him, and wept See Chapter 33.4. of Esau and Jacob, and Chapter 46.29.
Joseph's meeting with his Father Jacob.
over him, and Benjamin wept upon his Neck, through the exuberance of joy, that
they should see one another after so long an absence. Then He kissed all the
rest of his Brethren and wept upon them, transported with the affection that so
flowed in Him. When his Brethren had a little recovered themselves from their
amazing astonishment and fear, and were satisfied that This was indeed their
Brother Joseph, and that He had a cordial and hearty affection for them; they
began to cheer up and to speak somewhat more freely and familiarly with him of
all things that He asked them. The News of this interview and meeting quickly
spread it self in Pharaoh's Court, [see verse. 2.] and Pharaoh and his Courtiers
were highly pleased with it; his Nobles not envying but heartily honoring
Joseph. Then Pharaoh called for Joseph, and commanded him to order his Brethren
to lade their Beasts with Corn, and to make have home to their Father, and to
invite Him from Himself to come down speedily with his Family into Egypt, and
He would give them of the good things of the Land, and they should eat of the
fat of it. Pharaoh further said unto Him, Seeing thou have full Authority and
Commission from Me to do it, Say to thy Brethren, Take ye Wagons out of the
Land of Egypt for your Father, your Wives and your Children, and come and dwell
here; And let it not be grievous to you to leave some of your Household Stuff or
lumber behind you, (which you may not be able to put off in this time of dearth
to the full value and worth) for the best and most fruitful part of the Land
should be yours, Chapter 47.6. And Joseph's Brethren did as He had ordered them,
and He gave them Wagons (as Pharaoh had commanded) and Provisions for their
Journey. Then he gave to them all Changes of Raiment Robes or upper Garments
which they used in those hot Countries often to change.
(probably two a piece) such as were used to be given for Honor or Reward,
[see 2 Kings 5.23. Judge. 14.12.] but unto his Brother Benjamin he gave 300
pieces of silver, and five Changes of Raiment. These, with other Gifts, he
gives them not only to show his love, but that they might confirm the truth of
his Message, and make both their Wives and others more willing to come down
into Egypt.
And to his Father he sent a noble Present, viz. Ten Asses laden with the good
things of Egypt, and ten She-Asses laden with Corn and such Provisions as would
keep, for his Fathers use in the Journey. Then kindly dismissing his Brethen,
he gave them this solemn Charge, See that ye fall not out by the way, viz.
about your selling of me, or any thing else. They return with all this
Furniture to Canaan, and when they came to their Father, they tell him in a
great transport of joy, Our Brother Joseph is alive, and Governor of all the
Land of Egypt. Jacob hearing them mention his Son Joseph (who he thought had
been dead above 20 years before) with the sudden astonishing News of his being
alive, his heart fainted, and he was ready to swoon away; For he could not
believe it to be true, it seemed to him so incredible. But when they had
related matters more particularly to Him, and the words Joseph Himself had
spoken to them, and when He saw the Wagons that were sent by Joseph to
conveigh him into Egypt, His spirits began to revive, and He said, It is
enough, abundantly enough for me that my Son Joseph is yet alive. I will go
down and see him before I die.

Chapter 45. whole Chapter.

SECT. XLIII.
JAcob being at this time in the 130 year of his Age, and having prepared
himself for this great Journey, He, with his whole Family, now set forth for
Egypt; And coming to Beersheba, (which was the South-border of the Land of
Canaan, Chapter 21.31.) he there offers Sacrifices to God, whom his Father Isaac
did solemnly adore and worship, thereby testifying his steadfast Faith in the
Promises of God, and his thankfulness for all his Mercies; and particularly for
the good tidings of his dear Son Joseph's being alive; humbly praying unto the
Lord for Counsel and Direction for his Blessing, and Protection, in this his
Journey. The Lord was pleased to answer him, and to speak to him in the Visions
of the Night, viz. by some kind of Dream; And calling him twice by his name
Jacob, Here Jacob is mentioned twice for Israel once. Therefore the name Jacob
was but comparatively sorbidden.
(to make him mind it the more) He says, I am God the God of thy Fathers: fear
Jacob might possibly have many grounds of fear. 1. Because in the like
necessity, Isaac was forbidden to go thither, Genesis 26.2. 2. Because this
removal, with his whole Family, was a kind of forsaking the Land of Promise,
which must needs be the more grievous, because the Land of Canaan was a
Sacramental Pledge of the heavenly Canaan. 3. He might remember what God had
foretold to Abraham, Genesis 15.13. That his Seed should be afflicted in Egypt
many years. 4. He might fear his Children might be infected with the Idolatry,
or other Sins of Egypt. However Gods bids him not to fear to go down thither.
not to go down into Egypt; I will there make of thee (which I have not
promised thee before) a great Nation. This was wonderfully fulfilled, in that
of 70 Souls that went down, in the space of 210 years there came out 600000
men, Exodus 12.37. Deuteronomy. 10.22.
I will go down with thee, and will guide and conduct thee; and will assuredly
bring thee up again; that is, thy dead body shall be brought out of Egypt, and
buried in the Land of Canaan, and I will afterward bring thy Posterity out of
that Land. Viz. By the Hand of Moses, Exodus 12.37. and by Joshua shall bring
them into Canaan.
And he further tells him, That his Son Joseph should close his eyes, and so he
should die in peace, in Joseph's life time, and presence, and in the presence
of his other Children. Jacob having received this Encouragement from the Lord,
with his Sons, and their Wives, and their Children, travailed toward Egypt;
They taking with them their Cattle, and the Goods No doubt but they had some
Servants, with them.
they had got in the Land of Canaan. Their Names, and number, are carefully set
down here, and elsewhere by Moses. 1. That he might show God's wonderful Power,
and Mercy, in multiplying the Seed of Abraham, as he had promised. 2. To
distinguish the Tribes, in regard of the Royal Dignity and Priesthood. 3. To
show the descent of the Messiah, according to the Flesh. All the Souls that
came with Jacob into Egypt, viz. that came out of his Loins, were 66, [ verse.
26.] But if we reckon in himself, and Joseph, and his two Sons, they were
altogether (when in Egypt) 70 Souls, as we read Deuteronomy. 10.22. Thy Father went
down into Egypt, with threescore and ten Persons. The Septuagint have added
five more, 1 Chronicles. 7.14. Namely the five Grandchildren that were born to
Joseph Hi hic numerantur propter honorem Josephi, and quia nati sunt, vivente
Josepho avo.
in Egypt; to wit, Shutelah, and Tachon, (the Sons of his Son Ephraim) and
Hadan, the Son of Shutelah, [Numb. 26.36.] And Machir the Son of Manasseh, and
Gilead, Manasseh's Grandchild, 1 Chronicles. 7.14. Which reckoning the Evangelist
Luke follows, and reckons them in all, seventy five Persons. Compare the Names,
in this Genealogy, with the Repetitions hereof, Numb. 26. 1 Chronicles. 6.7, 8.
Chapt.
Jacob being now come into some part of the Land of Egypt, he sent his Son
Judah to Joseph, to give him notice thereof, and to entreat Him to direct his
face; that is, to give him directions how he should set his face, and whether
he should next march. Joseph hearing of his being come, forthwith gave Command,
that his Chariot should be made ready, and so he hasted to meet, and wait upon
his Father. When he was come to the place where Jacob was, with a lowly
Reverence he presented himself to him; Jacob fell on his Neck and kissed Him,
and wept with tears of Joy and Ravishment to see his dear Joseph alive, who he
thought had been dead many years before. And now says the good old man, I am
willing to die, having seen the face of my beloved Joseph in the Land of the
living. When these endearing Caresses were over, and Joseph had stayed a
convenient time with his Father, and Brethren, he told them he would go and
acquaint Pharaoh that they were come: and would intimate to Him, that their
Trade had been about Cattle, and that they had brought their Flocks and their
Herds along with them. Thus we see that Joseph in all his height and greatness
was not ashamed of his Kindred, nor of their mean Trade and Condition. Joseph
also gave Instructions to his Brethren, that when they came before Pharaoh, and
he should inquire, What their Occupation was, they should say, Thy Servants
Trade has been about Cattle from our Youth, to this day. And this, he
intimates, would be a means to dispose and incline Pharaoh to order their
dwelling in the Land of Goshen, which was a fruitful Pasture-Country. And
further it is like he told them, that by their living there together they would
be less in danger of being corrupted with the Idolatry and Superstition of the
Egyptians, and less offensive to them by their Trade of Shepherdy; Every
Shepherd See Notes on Genesis 43.32. It is evident the Egyptians had Flocks of
Sheep, both the King and People. For Chap. 47.6. Pharaoh proffers Joseph to
make his Brethren Rulers over his Cattle, and among the rest, over their Sheep.
But it seems, they kept them rather for their Wool and Milk, than any thing
else; and happily those that kept them were Strangers rather than Egyptians.
(as the Hebrews generally were) being an abomination to the Egyptians, on the
account before mentioned, Sect. 39.

Genesis 46. whole Chapter.

SECT. XLIV.
JOseph being come to Pharaoh, he acquaints him, That his Father, and his
Brethren were come into Egypt; that their Occupation and Trade being about
Cattle, they had brought their Flocks and Herds with them, and for the present
they were ia the Land of Goshen, and whether they should stay there, or how
they should be disposed of, he humbly desires to know his Majesty's Pleasure.
Then he presents five of his Brethren to Pharaoh, who inquiring of what
Profession they were, They said, Thy Servants are Shepherds, both we, and our
Fathers; and the Famine being sore in Canaan, we had no Pasture there for our
Flocks, and so have brought them hither. Wherefore, we humbly beseech thee, Let
thy Servants dwell in the Land of Goshen. Pharaoh turning unto Joseph, told
him, That the Land of Egypt was before him; In the best of the Land he might
place his Father and his Brethren, and if they liked the Land of Goshen better
than any other, they might freely dwell there. And understanding they were
Shepherds, he gives order to Joseph, that if any among them were men of
activity, he should make them Rulers over his own Cattle. Shortly after Joseph
brought his Father, and presented him before Pharaoh. The good old man, having
made his lowly Reverence to the King, began to bless him, praying the God of
Heaven, to accumulate all manner of Mercies and Blessings upon him, who had
been so munificently bountiful to his Son Joseph, and so kind and gracious to
him and the rest of his Children. Pharaoh then asked Jacob, How old he was? He
humbly answered, That the years of his Pilgrimage were an hundred and thirty.
Abraham lived 175 years, Isaac 180, Jacob died at the age of an 147.
Few and evil (says he) have they days of the years of my life been; and full
of labor and toil, trouble and vexation; neither have I attained to the years
of my Fathers. And many more things it is like He said to Him, not here related,
and so humbly took his leave of Him. And as He had blessed Pharaoh at his first
coming to Him, so He does now again at his departure from Him. When Jacob was
gone from the presence of Pharaoh, Joseph gave to his Father and his Brethren
Habitations in the best part of the Land of Egypt, viz. in Goshen, Afterward
the Children of Israel multiplied and spread further, and had Egyptian Families
among them, and about them, so that their Doors were distinguished from the
Doors of the Egpytians, by the sprinkling of the blood, Exodus 12.7, 23. and
verse. 35, 36. and being near them, they soon borrowed Jewels of them.
where afterward their Posterity built the City Rameses, Exodus 1.11. And
Joseph nourished his Father, and all his Fathers Family with bread, and other
necessaries, expressing all manner of love and kindness to them, and a very
great Care of them.

Genesis 47. from 1. to 13.

SECT. XLV.
THe Famine now grew very sore in the Land of Egypt, and in the Land of Canaan
also, so that there was an extreme want of all kind of sustenance, especially
among the common people, who were forced (generally) to part with all the money
they Had to buy Corn for themselves, and their Families, of Joseph. These
moneys Joseph faithfully disposed into the Kings Treasury, not enriching
Himself thereby, nor converting any part of them to his own use, as some
unfaithful Courtiers would have done. When the Peoples money failed, Joseph
required they should bring their Cattle to Him, Pecora alibant Aegyptii, ut
patet, v. 16. Si non ad esum, saltem ad utilitatem ex lacte, lana, labor, and
venditione capiendam. Janson.
and He would give them Corn for them. And so for this year He fed them with
Bread for their Cattle, which He could maintain by the vast quantities of Straw
and Chaff He had preserved. When that year was ended (which seems to be the
sixth year of the Famine, and second of their extremity) they came to Him
again, viz. in the seventh and last year of the Famine, and told Him, they had
parted with their Money and their Cattle, they had now nothing left but their
Persons and their Lands, and why should they die, and their Land become barren,
wast, and desolate. They desire him therefore to buy them and their Land for
Food, and for Seed to sow their Land with: and they themselves would become
Servants, and their Lands should be tributary to Pharaoh. So Joseph bought
their Lands for Pharaoh's use. Then he transplanted them from one Place or Town
to another, Ut sese Pharaonis agnoscerent feudatarios.
not leaving them in that which was their own before, to gain the right of
Propriety and Possession, from the People, to Pharaoh. The people mutiny not in
all these Extremities, nor break open the Granaries of Pharaoh, but by Joseph's
Prudence, and God's overruling Providence, keep themselves quiet. But the
Lands assigned for the maintenance of the Priests, Some by Priests understand
Pharaoh's chief Officers of State. See Chapter 41. -- 45.
or such as were employed about their public Heathenish Worship, or were
Professors, or Teachers of Philosophy, or of the Wisdom and natural Knowledge
that then had the Vogue among them, he bought not. Hinc elicit Bellarminus
immunem a Vectigalibus esse clerum, Exer. 7.24. Verum pro lege, non est habenda
Principum beneficentia.
For though those Lands, in that extreme Dearth, failed of producing any thing,
as other Lands did, yet those Priests having a Portion assigned to them out of
the Kings Stores, were not necessitated to sell their Lands, as others were
that had no such Provision. Then Joseph told the People, he had now bought
them, and their Land for Pharaoh. But he would deal mercifully with them, and
not make his utmost Advantage of their Necessity. He would therefore furnish
them with Seed wherewith to sow their Land, and of the increase, they should
pay only the fifth part to Pharaoh: the other four parts should be their own.
And it is probable, he restored to them their Cattle also, else how could they
have tilled their Land. This being granted them, with a great Acclamation they
applaud his Generosity and Beneficence, declaring, That he had saved their
lives; and seeing they had found so much favor in his Eyes, they would
willingly serve Pharaoh, and be his Farmers and Tenants, on those conditions
before mentioned. Joseph hereupon settled it for a Law and Statute in Egypt,
(which remained still in force among them, when this was written,) That the
Land should be all the King's own (excepting the Land of the Priests) and that
the People should pay a fifth part, Moderate quintam donat, corporibus interim
liberatio; Regem prudenter locupletat ne Jacobi sumptus aegre ferat. Anonym. in
loc.
of the yearly Increase constantly to him, as a Tribute and Acknowledgment. And
thus Joseph showed himself a Prudent, Faithful, and very profitable Servant to
Pharaoh, by so greatly increasing his Revenue, and without the Regret or
Murmuring of the People; so that Pharaoh had no reason to think much of those
Lands and Possessions he had given to Joseph's Brethren in Goshen.

Thus Jacob dwelt very comfortably in the Land of Goshen, He and his Sons
having Possessions therein; and they grew and multiplied exceedingly. And Jacob
lived after his first settlement there seventeen years, so that his whole Age
was 147 years. The time of his Death now drawing nigh, which he perceived,
either by the decay of Nature in him, or some Revelation from God, he sent for
his Son Joseph, and desired him, as he loved him, to swear to him, by putting
his hand under his Thigh, (see Chapter 24. 2.) that he would not bury him in Egypt,
but carry him and bury him in Canaan with his Fathers, Abraham and Isaac, in
their burying place, in the Cave of Macpelah, in Hebron, see Chapter 23. 19. and
25. 8. and 35 29. Whereby he testified his Faith in God's Promises, that his
Seed should return thither, and possess that Land. And for this reason Joseph
also ordered his own bones to be carried thither, Chapter 50.25.
Joseph swears to him, that he would perform his desire. Then Jacob raising
himself up, and turning himself toward his Beds-head, (and to help himself
herein, possibly leaning upon the top of his Staff, which he had in his hand,
(see Heb. 11.21.) The LXX read it leaning upon the top of his Staff. The Hebrew
word without pricks may be read either Mitteh a Bed, or Matteh a Staff.
Scipione nixus Jacob, ad spondae caput, Deum moribundus adorat. Anonym.
he bowed himself to God by way of Thankfulness, both for those Promises of the
Land of Cannaan (in the expectation whereof he desired there to be buried) as
also because he was assured by Joseph he should be buried there.

Genesis 47. from verse. 13. to the end.

SECT. XLVI.
SOmetime after this Joseph heard that his Father was sick, and he went to
visit him, taking his two Sons Manasseh and Ephraim along with him, to receive
the Blessing of their venerable Grandfather. When Israel heard He was come, he
raised up himself, and sat upon the Bed, as if a new degree of strength had
been added to him. Then He spoke to his Son Joseph after this manner, God
Almighty appeared to me some years since at Luz, Or Bethel, and twice, see Chapter
28. 13, 19. Chapter 35.6.
in the Land of Canaan, and blessed me, saying, Behold I will make thee
fruitful, and multiply thee, and will make of thee a multitude Viz. 13 populous
Tribes.
of People, and will give this Land to thy Seed after thee for an everlasting
Possession. See Sect. 3. and Genesis 13.15. and Chapter 17.8. Hac locutione significat
Israelitas sore perpetuos terrae haeredes usque ad Christi adventum quo
renovatus fuit mundus.
The Lord was pleased there to renew and confirm to me the Blessing promised to
my Father and Grandfather, which is to go on still, and to descend on our
Posterity. And therefore thy two Sons Ephraim Jacob here prefers Ephraim.
and Manasseh, though by Birth they are only my Grandchildren, yet by Adoption
shall be my Sons, and accordingly in the division of the Promised Land, they
shall have the Privilege of my Sons. Each of them shall have a Twelfth share,
and they shall be Heads of Tribes no less than Reuben and Simeon, and in them
Two thou shall have a double portion, This giving to the Firstborn a double
Portion (as many other things beforementioned. See Chapter 38.) being in practice
among the Patriarchs before Moses's time, was afterward put into a Law, Deuteronomy.
21.17.
and so the Right and Privilege of the Firstborn, 1 Chronicles. 5.1. And if thou
shall beget any Sons after them, they shall be thine; that is, they shall be
counted thy Offspring, and accordingly shall be ingrafted into the Stock and
Tribe of Ephraim or Manasseh, as if they were their Sons, and not their
Brethren, and shall not make peculiar Tribes by themselves as these Two shall
do. Neither will any of thy Brothers have cause to complain that I give thee
this Privilege of the Firstborn. For had I been fairly dealt with, thy dear
Mother Rachel had been my only Wife, and so thou (being her eldest Son) had
had that Right unquestionably. And now I have mentioned thy dear Mother, I
cannot but remember with grief how soon she was taken from me, she dying in
Childbed of thy Brother Benjamin (Chapter 35.16, 19.) in the Land of Canaan near
Bethlem-Ephrata, as we came from Padan-Aram. And she dying in that manner, Her
body could not well be kept, so that I was forced to bury her there, and could
not carry her to the Sepulcher of our Ancestors, where I my self desire to be
buried. Then Israel, whose Eyes were dim, perceiving two young Youths to stand
before him, but not knowing them, he asked, Who these were? Joseph answered,
They are my Sons whom God has given me in this Place. Jacob said, Bring them
to me, and I will bless them; that is, I will in the Name, and by the Authority
of God declare how He will bless them; and this Blessing I will confirm to
them, by laying my Hands upon them. They being brought to him, and kneeling
down between his knees, He kissed them and embraced them, saying to Joseph, I
had not thought to see thy Face, and lo God has showed me thy Seed also. Then
Joseph took his two Sons from between his Fathers knees, that he might place
them in that order wherein he desired the Blessing should be given them. And
taking Ephraim in his right hand opposite to his Fathers left hand, and
Manasseh in his left hand opposite to his Fathers right hand, and bowing
himself before him in token of Reverence and Thankfulness for adopting his
Sons, he presented them unto him. Jacob thereupon stretched out his right hand
Here is the first express mention of the Imposition of ^ Hands, which was
afterward often used, 1. In Benedictions, Mat. 19.13. 2. In extraordinary
Collations of Gifts and Graces, Acts 8.17. 3. In miraculous Cures, Mark 6.5. 4.
In Ordination of Magistrates and Church Officers, Numb. 8.10. Deuteronomy. 34.9. Acts
6.6. and 13.3. 1 Timothy 4.14:
and laid it upon Ephraim's head who was the younger, and his left hand upon
Manasseh's head who was the elder, and he did it wittingly (not crossing his
Arms by chance) but purposely, as a sign and intimation of that which
afterward should come to pass; to wit, that Ephraim, though the younger,
should have the pre-eminence. Joseph seeing this, though he knew that his
Father, in this action, was guided by a Prophetic Spirit, yet supposing he
might be mistaken in this Circumstance of laying his hands, by reason of the
dimness of his sight, he sought to rectify his supposed Error, by removing
his right hand from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's, (being carried therein as
it is probable by that natural affection that Fathers use to bear to their
eldest Sons) and accordingly told him, That Manasseh was the Firstborn, and
therefore he desired him to lay his right The right hand is naturally more
strong, and so more honorable than the left. Jacob accordingly gives the
strongest and most honorable blessing to Ephraim, by this sign of the right
hand put upon him.
hand on him. But Jacob refused to do it, telling him, He knew very very well
what he did. For though Manasseh should be great, yet his younger Brother
should be greater than he, In Number, Issue, and Power, Numb. chapter 1. Eight
thousand and three hundred men more of Ephraim than Manasseh. See Deuteronomy. 33.17.
Of Ephraim came Joshua, and the Kings of the ten Tribes. The Tribe of Ephraim
is called The Tribe of Joseph, Numb. 1.32, 34. Apoc. 7.8. The name of Ephraim
is taken for the whole Kingdom of Israel, Isa. 7.2. They both had a double lot,
Josh. 17.17.
and his Seed should become a multitude of Nations. Then Jacob solemnly blessed
Joseph and his Children, saying, The God before whom my Fathers Abraham and
Isaac did walk in Uprightness and Integrity, The God which fed me all my life
long to this day, The Angel of the Covenant, the Son God, who has hitherto
preserved and delivered me from all Evil, Bless the Lads, This action of
blessing Joseph's Children Jacob is said to have performed by Faith, Heb. 11.21.
and let my Name H. e. Adopto eos in filios meos ut mei dicantur non tui licet
a te geniti.
be named on them, and the Names of my Fathers Abraham and Isaac; that is, let
them be accounted and called Abraham's, Isaac's, and Jacob's Children; let them
be esteemed among the Twelve Tribes of Israel as my own immediate Issue, and
let them grow into a Multitude There were eighty five thousand two hundred men
of War of these Two Tribes in Moses's time, Numb. 26.28.34.37. Thus Moses
blesses them, Deuteronomy. 33.17.
in the midst of the Earth. Jacob having thus blessed these young Youths, he
addressed his Speech to Joseph, saying, In thee shall Israel bless; that is,
when the Children of Israel shall bless their Children, they shall look upon
thee and thy Children as their Pattern, and shall say to them, God make thee as
Ephraim and as Hinc postea mos in Israele ut adducerentur putri ad viros
conspicuos pietate ut iis benedicerent and been precarentur. Hinc pueri illi ad
Christum adducti. Qui vero iis manus imponit and benedicit, dicit si filius
est, ponat te Deus sicut Ephraim and sicut Manassen. Si filia ponat te Deus
sicut Saram and Rebeccam. Vide Ruth 4.11. Fagius.
Manasseh. Then Israel said to Joseph, Behold I die, and am ready to go hence,
but God will be with you, and will assuredly bring your Posterity into the Land
promised to their Fathers, and wherein they sometime dwelt. And as a Sign and
Token that I do firmly believe this, I do give and bequeath to thee (and
therein do prefer thee above thy Brethren) that piece of Land nigh unto
Shechem, which I bought of the Children of Hamor, Shechem's Father, (see Sect.
30. and Genesis 33.19.) which though it be little in it self, yet was all I had by
purchase in the Land of Canaan; and therefore to thee I bequeath it as my Heir.
And accordingly this portion of Land became afterward the Inheritance of the
Ephraimites, Josh. 16.1. and 20.7. And thither afterward were Joseph s bones
carried and buried, Josh. 24.1.25.32.
This piece of Land was indeed seized upon, among the rest, by the Neighboring
Amorites Hevaei cum Amoraeis ita permixti erant ut unam and eandem gentem
fecerint.
after the slaughter of the Shechemites, and they would not by fair means
restore it to me, so that I was forced to recover it by the assistance of my
Sons and Servants out of their hands by force of Arms. This passage is not
elsewhere mentioned in the Scripture. Hoc clare dicitur licet alibi res gesta
non narretur. Menoch.
Therefore I do still account it as my own, Terram illam licet nunc abesset pro
sua habet ac ut suam dat Josepho. Adeo certus est de terrae possessione and
divisione ut jam nunc assignet. Mercer.
and do know assuredly, that hereafter it shall become the Inheritance of the
Offspring of the Ephraimites, Josh. 16.10.

Chapter 48. whole Chapter.

SECT. XLVII.
JAcob now being hear his end, commanded that his Sons should come all together
to him, that he might by the Spirit of Prophecy bless them, and tell them what
should be their future State, and what should betide them in their succeeding
Generations. And first he speaks to Reuben: He tells him, he was his
Firstborn, and the beginning and first effort of his strength, [ Deuteronomy. 21.17.
Psalm. 105.36.] and on that account in the ordinary course of Nature many
honorable Privileges belonged to him; Simpliciter sic accipiendum se in suo
gradu stetisset Reuben; privatus omnis excellentiae futurus esset penes eum.
Vatablus.
As headship of the Family, and a double portion to maintain that Dignity, and
the Priesthood. But it must now be otherwise with him by reason of his heinous
Sin and detestable Incest in going up to his Fathers Bed, and defiling Bilhah
his Concubine, Genesis 35.22. Now the Headship of the Family should be translated
to Joseph, who should have a double portion, and his two Sons should be Heads
of two Tribes. The Priesthood should be conferred on Levi, and the Kingdom
principally on Judah, and partly on Ephraim, viz. the Kingdom of the ten
Tribes. He tells him, His Lust had been like an impetuous stream of water that
cannot easily be kept within its own bounds, but violently breaks the banks
that should restrain it, and keep it in; His Lust had broke through all
restraints of duty and modesty, and therefore he should not excel; that is, his
Tribe should not excel either in number, valor, or any excellent
Achievements. So that this wicked Fact done above forty years ago (soon after
the birth of Benjamin) Chapter 35.22.
is here severely doomed, and that to humble Reuben for his Sin, and to teach
his Brethren to take heed of all such high provoking Transgressions against God.

2ly, He comes to Simeon and Levi, who he says are Brethren (and that not only
by Birth, being Children of the same Father and Mother) but in Manners,
Conditions, and wicked Practices. Thus Moses impartially sets a brand of Infamy
upon Levi, his great Grandfather, which shows that in writing this Story he was
not guided by his own private spirit, but the Spirit of God.
They were Instruments of great Cruelty in the Land of their Sojourning upon
the Shechemites, [Gen. 34.13, 25.] where, being Strangers, they endangered the
ruin of themselves and their Fathers House. Then by a pathetical Apostrophe he
shows his detestation of their outrageous Fact, and clears himself of all
suspicion of his favoring of it, and prevents all Aspersions which otherwise
after his death might possibly have been cast upon him for it. O my Soul (says
he) come not thou into their secret; as if he should have said, God forbid that
ever my Soul should join in such a Villainy. They did it secretly, without my
knowledge, and when they assembled together to contrive the execution of it, I
was not among them, neither did my Soul or my Tongue Q. d. Ex animo detestor
hoc scelus nec ullum assensum lingua praebuit.
( both which are man's glory) ever give any consent or approbation to that
barbarous Fact. The Author of the Apochryphal Book of Judith highly extols this
Fact, which shows that he wrote not by Inspiration of that Spirit of God that
the Patriarch Jacob was acted by, when he uttered this Prophecy.
For in their wrath they slew Hamor and Shechem, and the Citizens of their
City, and in their rage and wilfulness they dug We read not of this before
Chapter 34. yet it seems by this passage, it was then done, verse. 6. They slew a
man, that is, many men. The Hebrews do frequently use an Enallage of a singular
for a plural number. Jun. and Trem. Sic reddunt, pro via sua occiderunt viros
and pro arbitrio suo avulserunt, vel diripuerunt boves. Ita eos arguit Parens,
q. d. crudeles essent and avidi raptores.
down a Wall, viz. of Shechem's house (where their Sister was kept) to rescue
her out of their hands. He pronounces their anger to be detestable, which was
so cruel and violent, and which had like to have been the Ruin of him and his.
Then speaking in the Person of God (as Prophets used sometimes to do) He says,
He will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. And accordingly it
happened. For Simeon was not planted apart by himself as the other Tribes were,
but his Tribe had their Inheritance intermixed Yet out of their Lot, in several
places here and there, these Simionites had certain Cities and Villages, Josh.
19.9. And afterward upon their multiplying, they were forced to seek further
for new Habitations in Mount Seir, and Mount Geder, driving out the Amalekites,
1 Chronicles. 4.39. and so they were scattered in their Habitations.
with that of Judah, Josh. 19.1. And the Tribe of Levi was dispersed among all
the Tribes of Israel.

3ly, He comes to Judah. He tells him as his Name signified Praise, [Ch.
29.35.] so his Tribe should be renowned and praised, and should be famous and
eminent among the rest, not only in regard of external Power and Government,
but much more because out of him the Messiah should come, [Heb. 7.14. For it is
evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah.] He tells him, His hand shall be in
the Neck of his Enemies, that is, He should Conquer and subdue them. This
Prophecy of the prevailing power of Judah was fulfilled, when that Tribe
became the Leader, [Numb. 10.14. and 7.11, 12. Judge. 1.2. and 20.18.] As also
in those Worthies of this Tribe, Othniel, Jud. 3.9, 10. David, 2 Samuel 8.1.
Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22.9. But more eminently in Christ, who has vanquished all
the Powers of Darkness. He goes on, Thy Fathers Children shall bow down before
thee, whereby he intimates, that his Posterity shall be advanced to the
Sovereignty, and to a Regal Power, to which all the Israelites should sumbit.
Yet this was more fully to be accomplished in the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ,
to whom every knee shall bow, Phil. 2.10. He further adds, Judah is a Lions
Whelp; whereby he intimates the mighty strength and courage of this Tribe, and
how terrible they should be to their Eenemies, and how great and glorious their
Conquests. He further adds, For the Prey, my Son, thou art gone up. Leones
postquam in planis praedati sunt, Saturi ad montes redeunt. Test Zenoph. de
Venatione.
that is, having taken the Prey, thou shall go up to thy Habitation in a
triumphant manner. He stooped down, he couched. Here He varies the person as
the Prophetic Spirit moved him, sometime speaking as to his Son, and sometimes
of him. And as a Lion is the King of Beasts, and flies upon other Beasts, and
tears them in pieces, and returning from his Prey, coucheth down, and lies at
rest, and none dare disquiet him, or offer to rouse him, and take his Prey from
him; so should Judah's Kings Conquer, and subdue their Enemies, and then
returning with Victory should quietly and peaceably So it was in Solomon s
days, after David's Victories, 1 King. 4.25.
enjoy their Spoils and Conquests. See Numb. 23.24. But this is more especially
verified in Christ, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; Rev. 5.5. He further
declares, That the Scepter shall not depart from Judah, that is, from the
Nation and Kingdom of the Jews (so denominated from Judah) After the Royal
Dignity was once settled in this Tribe, viz. in David, 1 Chronicles. 5.2. there were
no more Kings of that Tribe after Jeconiah and Zedekiah, Jer. 22.30. After
their return from Captivity, the Principality was in Zerubbabel, and likely in
others of the Tribe of Judah for a time. But some while after the Maccabees of
the Tribe of Levi got the Rule, and continued therein by the choice and consent
of the people of Judah, till a little before the Birth of Christ, when Herod an
Idumaan was made King by the Romans.
which became a Kingdom apart by it self, after the ten Tribes were separated
from them; and although there were some of the Tribe of Levi and of Benjamin
mixed among them, and incorporated into them, yet the people were called by the
name of Judah, [the Kingdom and Commonwealth of Judah] and there was a
Government still in Judah, whereas the ten Tribes, after they were carried away
Captive into Assyria, did never return to be a Kingdom again, but those of
Judah, after 70 years Captivity, did return into their own Land, and became a
Kingdom and Commonwealth (though not so glorious The Jewish Scepter was much
weakened by Pompey, much shaken by Herod's Intrusion, but finally broken and
abolished at the destruction of Jerusalem, after which they had no force nor
face of a Commonwealth. Therefore it is evident against the Jews that the
Messiah is come.
as before) and did live under the Government of their own Laws, and Command of
their own Rulers. He further adds, That there should not cease to be a Lawgiver
between Judah's feet, [see Deuteronomy. 28.57.] that is, of the Seed and Progeny of
some belonging to that Kingdom till Shilo come; that is, the Prosperer and
Prince of Peace, the promised Messiah to whom, not only the believing Jews, but
the Gentiles also shall come in as to their King, and submit themselves to his
Scepter. Jacob further prophesies of the wonderful fruitfulness of Judah's lot
in the Land of Canaan, (which was the best and largest that fell to day of the
Tribes) viz. that it should abound with Vines and rich Pastures, and that they
should have such stout and well-grown Vines, that an Ass might be tied to them
as to other Trees, and that they should have such plenty of Wine, that they
might even wash their Garments in the juice of the Grape. Therefore He adds,
Judah's Eyes shall be red with Wine, and his Teeth white with Milk; whereby he
signifies the fruitfulness of their Vineyards, and richness of their Pastures,
insomuch that Wine and Milk should (in a manner) be as plentiful and common
among them even as Water.

4ly, He comes to Zebulun, whom though younger than Issachar, Genesis 30.18, 20.
yet he blesses before him, [so does also Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.18.] And his lot fell
to him in the Land of Canaan before Issachar's, Josh. 19. from 10. to 17. He
pronounces of Zebulun that he shall dwell at the haven of the Sea, and he shall
be for a Haven of Ships; that is, his Habitation shall be at the Seacoast; His
Border shall be the Ocean Westward, and the Sea of Galilee Eastward, and he
shall rejoice in his going out or trading, Deuteronomy. 33.18. And his Border shall be
unto Sidon, that is, not to the City, but Country of the Sidonians. For the
Land of the Sidonians or Phaenicians extended to Accho or Ptolemais, Bochart.
Georg. Sacr. p. 342.
a City thereof, on which the North bound of Zebulun did confine.

5ly, He comes to Issachar, and fore-sheweth how different the disposition of
his Tribe should be from that of Zebulun. For whereas Zebulun should be
altogether for Trading and Traffiqueing abroad, these of Issachar should be
wholly for a quiet life, and Country employments at home. Issachar (says he) is
a strong Ass, Yet some of Issachar were of a more noble and heroic Spirit, see
Judge. 5.15. 1 Chronicles. 12.32. when Thola of Issachar judged Israel they had rest,
Judge. 10.
couching down between two Burdens, by which allusion of a strong, lazy, and
ease-loving-Ass, he foretells that the Prosperity of Issachar should be
strong indeed as to the bodily labor of Husbandry; and by reason of the
goodness and fertility of their Soil, should love Husbandry, ease, and a quiet
life, and should rather submit to any Taxes or Tribute that should be laid upon
them, either from the Kingdom of Phaenicia Inter duo onera, i. e. hinc regnum
Phaeniciae illinc Samariae. Lightfoot. Solebant geminas sarcinas vel clitellas
a finis imponere ad ferenda utrinque onera. Glass.
or Samaria, (upon both which they confined) than be driven from that quiet
which at home they did enjoy. See Judges 5.16.

6ly, He comes to Dan, eldest Son of Bilhah, Rachel's Handmaid, and alluding
to his Name, pronounces this blessing upon him. Dan shall judge his people as
one of the Tribes of Israel, as if he should have said, though he was the Son
of an Handmaid, yet his Posterity should be one of the Tribes of Israel, and
enjoy all the Privileges of a Tribe, as well as the Posterity of his freeborn
Sons, of whom he had before spoken. And as other Tribes had their Heads and
Elders, Dan being the eldest of the Sons of the Handmaids, by expressing that
he should enjoy this Privilege, the like is employed concerning the rest.
to judge and decide Causes among them, so should They, [Numb. 1.4, 16.]
Further he declares, That Dan shall be a Serpent in the way that biteth the
Horses, so that his Rider shall fall backward; that is, shall prevail more by
cunning than force. Thus we find that Sampson (who was of this Tribe) used
craft as well as strength, Judges chapter 15. and 16. So did this Tribe also deal
with Laish, Judges 18.27. So that it is a Prophecy of this Tribe, That what
they wanted in strength they should make up in subtilty and sudden surprisal.
Moses compares him to a Lions whelp, Deuteronomy. 33.22. possibly for the suddenness
of his leap, when ^e sees the advantage of his Prey. Dan is omitted in the
sealing of the Tribes, Apoc. 7. So is Simeon omitted in Moses's Benediction,
Deuteronomy. 33. Likely Simeon for his cruelty against the Shechemites, and Dan for
his notorious Idolatry, Judge. 18.19. 1 King. 12.29.
Then Jacob foreseeing by the Spirit of Prophecy the great dangers that his
Posterity, and this Tribe in particular would be exposed to, both in regard of
their Inheritance, [Judges 1.34. Josh. 19.47.] as also the true Religion and
pure Worship of God, (which they would soon forsake and turn to Idolatry,
Judges 18.17.) He breaks out into this pious Ejaculation, Lumen Propheticum est
Lumen raptum.
O Lord, I earnestly pray for, and humbly expect thy gracious Deliverance of
them out of all their Dangers.

7ly, He comes to God, his eldest Son by Zilpah, of whom he Prophesies, That a
Troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at last; where alluding to his
Name (which signifies a Troop, see Genesis 30.11.) he intimates, he shall be
subject to the Incursions of bordering Enemies. And so indeed he was, his lot
falling beyond Jordan Eastward, [see Judge. 10.7, 8. Jer. 49.1.] He was sorely
annoyed with the Ammonites, Moabites, and Others who did by Troops make Inroads
upon him. But at length he foretells that the Gadites should gather their
Forces together and overcome their Enemies, and drive them out of their
Country, and then should peaceably enjoy their Possessions. See Deuteronomy. 33.20. 1 Chronicles. 5. from 18. to 23. 1 Chronicles. 12.8.

8ly, He comes to speak of Asher, his youngest Son by Zilpah, (who carried
blessedness in his Name) of whom he Prophesies, That out of the excellent
portion allotted to him, he should have plenty of Corn, and of Wheat
especially. So that His Bread should be fat, (fat signifying the best of any
thing, Genesis 4.4.) and his lot should yield Royal Dainties; namely, excellent
Oil, [Deut. 33.24, 25. Josh. 19.24, 25.] and other rare and delicious Fruits.
Such as may grace any King's Table, and please his Palate.

9ly, He comes to Napthali, second Son of Bilhah, of whom he Prophesies, That
Naphtali is as an Hind let loose. Wherein he foretells how this Tribe should
be blessed with liberty and plenty, and live in choice Pastures; as also that
they should be active and nimble in dealing with their Enemies, and
light-footed to pursue them, and escape danger, [ Psalm. 18.33. Judge. 4.10, 15,
16.] He further adds, He gives goodly words, Whereby he intimates, That this
Tribe should be fair-spoken, courteous, and of friendly behavior, and
therefore greatly beloved, Deuteronomy. 33.23.

10ly, He comes to Joseph, Of whom he says, He shall be like a fruitful Stock
or Stem of a Vine placed by a Fountain, whose Branches shall run upon the Wall,
and so have benefit of the reflection of the Suns heat; by all which he
intimates how fruitful he should be, and of him should come two Tribes, viz.
Ephraim and Manasseh, which multiplied and increased exceedingly. He goes on,
The Archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him, that is,
many have bent themselves against him (as an Archer does his bow to shoot at a
mark) viz. His Brethren that sold him, his Mistress that accused him, his
Master that imprisoned him, and possibly some of the Courtiers of Pharaoh that
did strive to do him ill Offices. But his Bow abode in strength, that is, his
Innocence, Patience, Faith, Chastity remained inviolable, and his Power and
Prosperity remained entire through the help of the mighty God of Jacob. And
from thence it was, namely, from the Power and Providence of God that Joseph
became a Shepherd to Israel, to feed and nourish them in a time of Famine, and
a Stone to Israel; that is, a Rock of Refuge for them to fly unto in that their
great Distress. And from this God, even the God of his Father, He tells him, He
shall be blessed with the blessings of Heaven from above; that is, with Rain
and Dew to make his Land fruitful; and with the blessings of the Deep, Deuteronomy.
33.13.
that is, with Springs of Water out of the Rock, and with the blessings of the
Breast and of the Womb; that is, with many and well nursed Children, ten
thousands of Ephraim, and thousands of Manasseh, Deuteronomy. 33.17. Lastly, he tells
Joseph, That the blessings with which He, his Father blessed him, and his
Brethren, did surpass the blessings wherewith his Progenitors Abraham and Isaac
were blessed; namely, because they should be sooner accomplished and fulfilled.
It should not now be long ere the Promises made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
concerning the multiplying of their Seed as the Stars of Heaven, should be made
good. He further intimates, That the blessings on Joseph should be eminent and
excellent, in that the portion of Land in Canaan by lot fall to Ephraim and
Manasseh (his two Sons) should be a blessed portion. His blessing should extend
to the desirable Fruits of the lasting hills; Verse. 26. (...) ad desiderium, i.
e. ad desiderabiles fructus collium.
that is, as his portion should abound with all other desirables, so
particularly with the chief things of the ancient Mountains, and the precious
things of the lasting hills; As Moses afterward prophesied to the same
purpose, Deuteronomy. 33.13, 15. All these blessings (He tells them) shall fall on the
head of Joseph, even on the head of him whom the Lord has separated, and set
apart from the rest of his Brethren, advancing him to a high and singular
degree of honor above them.

Lastly, He comes to Benjamin, of whom he Prophesies, That He shall raven as a
Wolf, in the Morning he shall devour the Prey, and at Night shall divide the
Spoil; that is, this Tribe shall be like a ravening Wolf, which goes forth
usually Mornings and Evenings to seek his Prey. Whereby he intimates they
should be a very strong, courageous, and warlike people, and that they should
with admirable celerity vanquish and destroy their Enemies, and return from the
battle laden with Spoils. Which warlike disposition appeared afterward in the
bloody battles they fought, see Judge. 20.15, 16, 17. 1 Samuel 11.11.

These are the Heads from whom descended the twelve Tribes of Israel. Indeed
there were thirteen in all, counting Ephraim and Manasseh instead of Joseph;
but the Levites had no share among them, because the Lord was their Portion,
Deuteronomy. 10.9. And this is that which their Father spoke unto them, and foretold
what several blessings God had allotted for them. Which prophetical Blessings
were to have their accomplishment not so much in the persons of Jacob's Sons,
as in their Posterity. Indeed what he said to Reuben, Simeon and Levi might
seem rather a Curse than a Blessing, but the greatest part of his Speech
contained blessings, and the denomination is to be taken from the greater and
the better part. And Jacob's severe reprehension of these three might also be a
great blessing to them, by bringing them to Repentance. Certain it is, that he
comprehends them within the number of the Tribes, and so within the Covenant of
God, and gives them a right to Canaan, the Type of Heaven. And it is like He
dismissed them all with a general Benediction, praying for them. Then he told
them the time was now come when he must be gathered to his People; that is, to
the Souls of and society of the Just, such as he was. And as for his Body, he
enjoins them to bury it in the Land of Canaan; namely, in the Field of Ephron
the Hittite, in the Cave of Macpelah, (see Chapter 23.16.) where Abraham and Sarah,
Isaac and Rebecca were buried, and where he had buried Leah. And when he had
made an end of commanding his Sons, He gathered up his Feet into the Bed, and
quietly gave up the Ghost.

Genesis 49. whole Chapter.

SECT. XLVIII.
JAcob thus expiring, Joseph fell upon his face and wept upon him, and kissed
him, and doubtless closed his eyes, according as God had promised unto Jacob,
Genesis 46.4. Then he commanded the Physicians to Embalm him, his Body being to be
kept long, and to be carried far. And accordingly forty days were spent in the
embalming This embalming was either by putting fragrant Herbs and odoriferous
Spices into the dead Body, and anointing it within and without with Ointments
made of the same, or by putting Spices upon them and about them, see Mark 14.8.
of him (according to the custom of the Country) that those fragrant Herbs,
Drugs, Spices and Ointments they used therein might the better diffuse
themselves, and penetrate into all the parts of the Body. And the Egyptians
mourned for him 70 days; The Hebrews time of mourning was 30 days, Numb. 20.29.
Deuteronomy. 21.13. and 34.8.
that is, after 40 days had been spent in embalming him, not only Joseph and
his Brethren, but the Court and chief men of Egypt did mourn for him 30 days
more before he was carried to be buried. Then Joseph not being willing (as it is
probable) to show himself publicly in those days of his mourning, or because
it was not the manner or custom for Mourners to come into the presence of the
King, [see Esther 4.2.] desired some of the Courtiers to procure the King's
Leave and Consent that he might go into Canaan to bury his Father there. For
his Father had long since (even before he came into Egypt) dug So spacious
was the place, that they might dig themselves several Repositories or cells for
their dead bodies.
a Grave for himself in that place where his Ancestors were buried, and made
him swear that he would bury him there, see Chapter 47.29. Pharaoh very readily
consented to it. Hereupon Joseph, attended with a great many of Pharaoh's
Courtiers and Officers of State (whom by his Prudence and sweet Disposition he
had obliged) and with all his own Brethren, and his Fathers Family went up with
many Chariots, and Horsemen, and a great Train into Canaan to bury his Father.
But the Hebrews left their Children, Flocks and Herds behind them, as a pawn
that they intended to return. When they came to the Valley of Arad in Canaan,
not far from Hebron or Macpelah (which was beyond Jordan, if we consider where
Moses was Being then in the Plains of Moab.
when he wrote this History, [see Deuteronomy. 1.1. and 3.25.] Joseph chose this place
as most convenient to perform the Funeral Solemnities for his Father, and there
He and his Company made a sore and great Lamentation for seven days together.
When the Inhabitants of the Land saw this, they said, This is indeed a grievous
mourning to the Egyptians, and in memory thereof that place was called Abel
mizraim. Which signifies the mourning of the Egyptians.
Then Joseph and his Brethren honorably buried their Father in the Cave of
Macpelah, which Abraham bought ( with the Field belonging to it) for a
Burying-place, of Ephron the Hittite, Chapter 23.16. The Funeral Solemnity being
over, Joseph with his great Train returned into Egypt again. His Brethren
seeing their Father was dead, began to fear (so unquiet is a guilty Conscience)
that Joseph would now deal with them, according to their Deserts, for the evil
usage he had formerly received from them. Hereupon they send a Message to him
to entreat (as it seems) that they might be admitted into his presence. Which
being granted, they acquaint him that it was their Fathers Command, before he
died, that they should humbly beg his pardon and forgiveness of them, and
accordingly they did earnestly beg it at his hands, and they hoped he would not
deny it them, seeing they were his Brethren, and served the same God that He
did, (namely, the God of his Father,) and were truly penitent for their former
heinous Transgression against Him. Then falling down at his Feet, they told
him, They were his Servants. Joseph could not forbear weeping at this their
behavior toward him, and pitying their Perplexity, and being grieved that
they should in the least doubt of his kindness toward them; He told them, It
was true, He was in great Power there, yet he was under God, Masius sic reddit
v. 19. Annon sub Deo sum.
under His All-seeing-Eye, and bound to give an account of his actions unto
Him, who had forbiden him all Revenge, and had wonderfully raised him up, not
only that he might do good to the Egyptians, but especially to them that were
his own Flesh and Blood. And he had no cause to be offended at what they had.
For whatever their intent was, God meant it for good both to him and them. And
therefore bad them be of good courage, and not at all to fear any hurt from
him. For he would be so far from hurting them, that he would nourish them and
their Children. And accordingly He did so for 54 years after his Fathers death.
All which time, even unto his own death, he continued his kindness to them, and
continued in his Authority and Government, and saw his Son Ephraim's Children
to the third Generation; To wit, Shutelah and Tachon the Sons of his Son
Ephraim, and Haden the Son of Shutelah, Numb. 26.36. And Machir the Son of
Manasseh, and Gilead, Manasseh's Grandchild. From whence it is that the Greek
Expositors speaking of the Families of Jacob and Joseph, which were said to
consist of 70 Souls, Genesis 46.27. Deuteronomy. 10.22. have added thereunto these five
that were born to Joseph in Egypt, 1 Chronicles. 7.14. which reckoning Luke follows,
Acts 7.14. reckoning them in all 75 Persons.
and the Children of Machir the Son of Manasseh (his other Son) were also
brought up upon his Knees; that is, he took pleasure in their Infancy to let
them sit upon his Knees, and to dandle them, see Chapter 30.3. Joseph having now
arrived at the age of an 110, and having Governed Egypt under several Kings 80
years, and finding his death approaching, he told his Brethren, That God would
surely visit them in mercy, and would bring them out of that Land into Canaan,
which he had promised to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that He would give it them.
And therefore to testify his Own, and confirm their Faith concerning the
Promises of Canaan (which was a Type of Heaven) he commanded that his body
should be kept and carried into Canaan, when God brought them out of Egypt, and
carried them thither, see Heb. 11.20. He took also an Oath of them to perform
it, which Oath as it is like was Recorded, and transmitted to succeeding
Generations, that they in whose time that Deliverance should be brought to pass
should perform it. And accordingly his Body was embalmed and kept in a Chest
until the time it might be carried into the Land of Canaan, and was afterward
carried thither and buried at Shechem, [see Josh. 24.32.] Jacob's Purchase, and
Joseph's Inheritance. And there also (as it is probable) the Bodies of the other
Patriarchs Jacob's Sons and Joseph's Brethren were buried, [see Acts 7.16.]
their Bodies being carried up into Canaan with His.

Thus died Joseph in Eusebius in his Chronicle has this passage concerning
Joseph. Joseph (says he) was made Governor of Egypt in the 30th year of his
age, when his Father Jacob was 122 years old; which Government he held 80
years. After whose decease the Hebrews were held in Bondage by the Egyptians
144 years. So that the whole time which the Hebrews spent in Egypt was 215
years, reckoned from the time that Jacob and his Sons went down into Egypt.
the 2369th Year of the World, 16 years before the Death of Levi, 60 years
before the Birth of Moses, 140 years before the Israelites coming out of Egypt.
As may be gathered from Genesis 15.13. and Exodus 12.41.

Chapter 50. whole Chapter.

SECT. XLIX.
WIth the Life of Joseph ends the First Book of Moses's History called
Genesis, which contains a space of Two thousand three hundred sixty nine
years from the Creation of the World. The next to it in order of time is the
Book of Job, as Learned Men conceive. It Is likely that Job lived when the
Israelites were in Egypt, and that he lived in the Land of Vz in Idumea, or
Arabia bordering upon it. [See Lam. 4.21.] Where he had such bad Neighbors,
the Chaldeans on the one side, and Sabeans on the other. The Book of Job is
undoubtedly a true History, and accompanied fully with all the Circumstances
requisite to a true History from first to last, and attested so to be by the
Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 14.14. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job
were in it, they should deliver but their own Souls by their Righteousness
says the LORD. And by the Apostle James, Chapter 5.11. Behold we count them happy
which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of
the Lord: that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. This Book is
written, in the judgment of the Learned, in Prose to verse. 3. of Chap. 3. And
in Verse from thence to Chap. 42. verse. 6. and then it concludes in Prose. The
Penman of it seems to be Elihu, one of the Speakers in it, as may be gathered
from Chap. 32. verse. 15. They were amazed, they answered no more, they left off
speaking. Verse. 16. When I had waited (for they spoke not, but stood still, and
answered no more.) Verse. 17. I said I will answer also my part, I also will
show mine Opinion. So that he seems here to speak of himself as the Writer of
this History.

Job was the Son of Nahor, Abraham's Brother, descended from him by his Son
Huz, Genesis 22.21. Huz his Firstborn, and Buz his Brother, etc. Three of his
Friends most likely were of the Posterity of Abraham, viz. Eliphaz and Zophar
of the Posterity of Esau, [Gen. 36.10. These are the Names of Esau's Sons,
Eliphaz the Son Adah, the wife of Esau.] Bildad of Abraham's Race by Keturah.
And Elihu the fourth of the Race of Nahor, Abraham's Brother. The Book consists
of these general Parts:

1. A Description of Job's Vprightness. He was an upright man, fearing God, and
eschewing evil.

Verse. 3. Orientalium, i. e. in genere, neglecto Judaeae situ ad quam erat haec
austrina Regio.
2. Of his Prosperity.

1. He had a numerous Issue, seven Sons, and three Daughters. 2. For Estate He
was the greatest man in the East, having 7000 Sheep, 3000 Camels, 500 Yokes of
Oxen, 500 She-Asses. 3. He had a great many Servants. 4. There was great Unity
and Love among his Children, they feasting one another in their Courses. To
which may be added Job's Piety, and paternal Care in offering Sacrifices for
them.
3. Of his wonderful Afflictions; Satan obtained a Commission to have Power
over his Possessions, over his Children, and over his own Person (yet so as not
to take away his life) and his own Wife mocked at him. Hereupon He curses the
day of his Birth, and wishes he had died before or immediately after his coming
into the World, Chapter 1. and 2. to the 11 verse. and Chapter 3.

4. Of his four Friends coming to him to visit him in this his sad Condition.
Whereof the three first, viz. Eliphaz, Bildad and Zophar argue and debate the
matter with him; and pretend to maintain that he that was so extraordinarily,
and extremely afflicted by God as Job was, must needs either be a great and
open Sinner, or a Close Hypocrite, from verse. 11. of Chapter 2. to the end.

Eliphaz begins, and is the first Opponent in this Disputation, whose Argument
is contained in the 4th and 5th Chapter

Job's Answer to him is contained in the 6th and 7th Chapter

Bildad is the second Opponent. His Discourse is contained in the 8th Chapter And
it is mainly a Confutation of Job's Reply to Eliphaz.

Job's Answer to him is set down in the 9th and 10th Chapter In which, like an
ingenuous Disputant, he grants that which is true in Bildad's Argument, and
denies what is false.

Zophar is the third Opponent, whose Discourse and Argument is contained in Chapter
11.

Job's Answer to him is set down, Chapter 22, 13, 14. and it is framed not only as
an Answer to Zophar's Argument, but also to what Eliphaz and Bildad had
alleged before; and he concludes with an humble Supplication to God for a
mitigation of his Afflictions.

Eliphaz speaks again, and rejoyns, Chapter 15.

Job Replies to him, Chapter 16, and 17.

Bildad also Rejoyns, Chapter 18.

Job Answers him, Chapter 19.

Zophar Rejoyns also, Chapter 20.

Job Answers him, Chapter 21.

Eliphaz undertakes him a third time, Chapter 22.

Job's Answer to him is couched in Chapter 23, and 24.

Bildad also undertakes him a third time, Chapter 25.

Job Answers him, Chapter 26. and that puts an end to the Disputation, which Job
closes with two Speeches:

The first is contained in the 27th and 28th Chapter wherein he professes his
Integrity, and his Resolution to hold it to the end.

The second is contained in the 29, 30, 31 Chapter wherein he speaks of his former
great Happiness, and laments his present miserable Condition, both in respect
of outward and inward Temptations; and asserts the Vprightness and
Inoffensiveness of his Carriage.

The Disputation being ended, Elihu who takes upon him to be as it were
Moderator, begins to speak, and he makes four distinct Speeches:

The first is contained in Chapter 32, and 33. In the close of which he gives Job
leave to make his Defense, who not Replying, he proceeds to

His second Speech, contained in Chapter 34.

His third is set down in Chapter 35.

His fourth in Chapter 36, and 37.

Then the Almighty Himself spoke out of the Whirlewind, and gave the final and
decisive Sentence between Job and his Friends.

And first the Lord Reproves the Ignorance of Job, and shows him how unfit he
was to contend with his Maker, Chapter 38. and 39.

Job hereupon humbly abases himself before the Lord, and yields the Cause, and
promises Silence, and not to Complain any more, Chapter 40. v. 3, 4, 5.

Then the Lord Reproves Job for not being brought to a full acknowledgment of
the Exact Justice of his Creator, and his own Sinfulness. The Lord also
manifests and declares his own Power, and Job's Weakness, Commanding Job, by
way of Irony, to do that which none but God can do.

Then he Exemplifies his own infinite Power, in his having created at first,
and still having the Government over those two vast Creatures, viz. Behemoth
and Leviathan, from verse. 6. of Chapter 40. to the end of 41.

5ly, The Conclusion of the History, which is contained in Chapter 42. where Job
confesses himself Guilty, and humbles himself before the Lord, repenting in
Dust and Ashes. God then Reproves his Friends for not speaking of him the
things that were right. He Charges them to offer Burnt-Offerings for
themselves, and to get Job to Intercede for them; for him he would accept.

Job is now delivered from his Affliction, and blessed with double as much
Estate as he had before, and in time with as many Children as He had before,
viz. with seven Sons and three Daughters. His Friends and near Relations visit
him, and present him with Gifts. The years of his life are doubled. For he
lived an 140 years after his trouble, and so was 70 years old when his troubles
began, and died 210 years old, the longest liver born since Terah.

SECT. L.
Anno Mundi 2385.
ABout this time died Levi in Egypt, aged 137, Exodus 6.16. being Grandfather by
the Mothers side to Moses and Aaron, and great Grandfather by the Fathers. For
when he had begotten Kohath in Canaan, and a Daughter called Jochebed in Egypt,
Amram the Son of Kohath took to wife Jochebed the Daughter of Levi his own Aunt
(doing therein that which was then customary, though afterward it was expressly
forbidden, Lev. 18.12. and 20.19.) and by Her He had Miriam, Aaron, and Moses;
and having attained to the age of 137. (the just age of His Grandfather Levi)
He died a little before the Departure of the Israelites out of Egypt. See Exodus
6.18, 20.

SECT. LI.
THe Children of Israel being, now by the especial blessing of God, increased
in Egypt from 70 Souls to At Genesis 46.25, -- Numerantur solum sexaginta sex,
Resp. Tot descenderunt cum Jacobo. At in Egypto 70. Add enim duos Josephi
silios in Egypto natos, and ipsum Josephum and patrem Jacobum sicque sunt 70.
a vast multitude, after the death of Joseph and the twelve Patriarchs, by
degrees fall into great Enormities and Abominations. As 1. Many of them began
to be Corrupt in their Religion, and committed Idolatry with the Idols of
Egypt, as is intimated, Josh. 24.14. Put away the Gods which your Fathers
served on the other side of the Flood, and in Egypt, and serve you the Lord.
See also Ezekiel. 20.8. 2. Some of them joined in Marriage with the Egyptians, as
may appear from Lev. 24.10. And the Son of an Israelitish woman, whose Father
was an Egyptian. For these and their other great Sins and Transgressions, the
Lord now casts them into a Furnace of Afflictions, partly to punish them for
their Sins, and partly to keep them from setting their hearts on Egypt, and to
make them long after Canaan the promised Land. And accordingly now there arose
a new King in Egypt (who knew nor Joseph, nor the Services he had done for that
Crown) who fearing the number and strength of the Israelites, did resolve to
keep them under. Wherefore calling together his Senators and Counselors of
State, He Represents to them the vast increase of the Israelites, and their
swarming in the Land, and then speaking vehemently and overlashing (as men in
passion use to do) he tells them, They were more and mightier than themselves,
at least (he intimates) it would be so quickly, if some course were not
speedily taken to prevent it. Therefore (says he) let us consider of the
matter, and deal wisely with this people. For if we suffer them to go on, and
to multiply after this rate, we may assure our selves, that if we should have
Wars with any Nation, they will join with our Enemies, and fight against us, or
at lest will get up out of this Land into Canaan (as it seems there is a talk
Ex his verbis colligitur hinc apud Egyptios famam fuisse vagatam quod Hebraei
ad terram Canaan essent reversuri. Menoch.
among them they shall in time do) and so we shall loose the commodity and
benefit of their Tribute and Service. The King, and his Counselors having
considered of the matter, at last come to this Resolution, and made this
Decree, That Taskmasters should be set over the Israelites, who should force
them to work in the King's Service; namely, to build for him Magazines and
Storehouses for Arms and Ammunition, and Granaries for Corn, and should be
employed in raising many and great Buildings for the Kings use, particularly in
builing for Him two Frontier Cities, Pithom and Rameses, Duae urbes erant in
Regni limitibus ne aut Israel egredi posset, aut aliquis exterorum ingredi.
by which he would keep them from getting out of the Kingdom. Accordingly these
Taskmasters being appointed, did impose such hard and unreasonable Services on
them, as did exceedingly afflict them. But the more they afflicted them, the
more they multiplied, by the special blessing of God, which the Egyptians
perceiving, were grievously vexed at it, and hereupon used all Rigor toward
them, and made their lives bitter with hard Bondage, employing them in making
Mortar and Brick, So that Egypt might be justly called The House of Bondage,
Exodus 20.2. and an Iron Furnace, Deuteronomy. 4.20.
in Tillage, and the work of the Field, and probably in scouring Ditches, and
other vile Works, and slavish Services.

Exodus 1. from 1. to 15.

SECT. LII.
ABout this time Aaron was born, namely, three years before his Brother Moses,
and 83 years before the Departure of the Israelites out of Egypt. See Exodus 7.7.

SECT. LIII.
PHaraoh seeing himself crossed in his first device, and perceiving that the
more they afflicted and oppressed the Israelites, the more they increased; He
now seeks to bring his purpose to pass another way, and that was by enjoining
the Hebrew-Midwives to smother or strangle all their Male-Children in the very
birth. But Siphra and Puah (two Principal Midwives of the Hebrew Women to whom
this Injunction was given) fearing God, did not obey the King therein, which he
understanding, sent for them, and asked them, Why they had not obeyed his
Command? They answer, That the Hebrew-women were more lively than the
Egyptian-women, and very frequently were delivered before the Midwife could
come to them. And we suppose (say they) they have heard of your Majesty's
Command to us, and therefore choose rather to make use of their Neighbors and
Friends, than to send for professed Midwives. The Lord was well pleased with
the carriage of these Midwives in this matter, and therefore he dealt well with
them; and in Recompense of their fearing of Him more than the King, and of
their tenderness toward the Israelitish Infants, He built them houses, Domos
eis fecit, i. e. dedit illis familiam numerosam, egregiam, longaevam, devitem.
Sobolem earum auxit quod Hebraeae soboli pepercissent: Ambr. Fecit iis domos)
i. e. ita foecundavit, ut plures ex iis domus ortae sunt. Vide Glass. V. 21.
(...) Enallage generis pro (...) ut Exodus 15.21. Vel (...) respicit obstetricum
maritos quos Deus prole foecundavit ita ut plures domus orta sint ex iis.
that is, so increased their Offspring (because they had spared the Offspring
of the Israelites) that many Families sprang from them. See Ruth. 4.11.

Pharaoh finding his Project to fail, viz. of bringing about his Design
secretly by the help of the Midwives, he now openly discovers his Rage, and
sets out a most barbarous Edict, whereby he enjoins his Subjects, the
Egyptians, to take by force the Israelites Male-Children away from them as soon
as they were born, and to drown them in the River. And it seems at first the
Egyptians were forward to execute this bloody Edict, though afterward it is
probable the rigor of it did by degrees abate. For that it continued not all
the time of the Egyptian Bondage, appears by this, because there were found so
many under twenty years old when they went out of Egypt. Perhaps this Pharaoh
within some few years after died, and so the Decree was not so violently
executed as before.

Exodus 1. from 15. to the end.

SECT. LIVE.
THis bloody Edict beforementioned seems to have come out in the time which
intervened between the birth of Aaron, and the birth of Moses. For about this
time Iochebed the Wife of Amram (see Section 50.) brought forth a Son, So Moses
was a Levite both by Father and Mother.
and she and her Husband out of their natural affection to him, quickened by
the rare beauty they beheld in his Countenance, [ Acts 7.20.] resolved to do
what they could to save him (being not afraid of the Kings Commandment, Heb.
11.23.) but trusting in God, that He would assist them therein, they hid him
three months, and when they could hide him no longer, because possibly some
notice was taken of it, or some stricter search was made, they laid him in an
Ark of Bullrushes, (daubed over with slime and pitch) in the Flags by the
Riverside, setting his Sister Miriam (a young Maid of about twelve years of
age) at a convenient distance to see what became of him. The Kings Daughter (by
Josephus called Thermutis) coming down hither with her Maids to wash her self,
finds the Child, and though she supposed him to be one of the Children of the
Hebrews, yet moved with Compassion toward the Infant (who wept) she sends for
a Nurse to take care of him, and through the procurement of Miriam (who offered
her self to fetch one) but especially through the overluing Providence of God,
Jochebed his own Mother is sent for, and commanded by Pharaoh's Daughter to
nurse up this Child for her, and she promised to pay her for it. Accordingly
Moses's Mother nursed up her own Son for this Lady, who after he was grown up,
adopted him for her Son, Thermutis unica erat Pharaonis filia and sine prole,
licet diu nupta, test Philone. Unde Moses regio more educatus.
(calling him Moses, because he was drawn out of the water) and as he grew up,
and was capable, she gave him such Princely Education as was suitable to her
Son, training him up in all the Learning and Wisdom of the Egyptians, [Acts
7.22.] viz. In Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Astrology, natural Philosophy,
etc. And thus the Lord, by his secret Providence, fitted Moses for those high
Services, which in aftertimes he intended to employ him in; his rare
abilities, his known Wisdom, and singular Learning being afterward (no doubt)
a special means to make him more respected and honored both among the
Egyptians and his own People, and every way the more able and fit for the
Government of the Commonwealth of Israel. He continued about forty years in the
Court of Egypt, as the adopted Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, and became famous
among them, mighty both in Words and in Deeds, as Stephen speaks, Acts 7.22.
that is, of great Abilities both for discoursing and giving Counsel concerning
any business propounded, and for the wise and successful managing of any
Affairs that he undertook.

Exodus 2. from 1. to 11.

SECT. LV.
MOses being now come to the age of forty years, began to think of abandoning
his Honors in Pharaoh's Court, and accordingly refused to be called The Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter any longer, choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the
People of God, then enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a season; and having a
lively Faith in the Promises of God made to his People, He esteemed the
Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures in Egypt, for he had
respect to the recompense of Reward; that is, He preferred the afflicted
Condition of the people of God, and esteemed the Reproaches that the Members of
Christ's Mystical Body unjustly suffer greater Riches than the Treasures of
Egypt. For such Reproaches, he knew, would be recompensed with an exceeding
great Reward, and to this he had an Eye, Heb. 11.24.25, 26. Looking upon
himself therefore as one of God's Israel, he resolved to forsake the Honors
and Pleasures of the Court, and to join himself to the poor oppressed People of
God of his own Nation, and to afford them what help he possibly could for their
Deliverance, finding himself inwardly, and by an especial instinct of Gods
Spirit called thereunto. Going therefore to visit his Countrymen, he saw (to
his great grief) the excissive Burdens and Oppressions they groaned under; and
among other displeasing Sights, he saw one of those rigid Egyptian-Taskers
Philo dicit fuisse unum ex Praefectis opprimentibus Israelitas.
smiting, and cruelly beating one of his Brethren, an Hebrew; and He beat him
so much, that (as it is probable) he almost killed him. Moses seeing this (and
having doubtless some extraordinary Impulse, Warrant, and Call from God to do
it,) and observing there was no other Egyptian by to take notice of it, he fell
upon this Egyptian and slew him, Interfecit eum non tantum ob percussionem, sed
and adulterium quod ex iis altercantibus Moses novit. Dicunt enim Hebraei
haebraeum percussum ab Aegypto fuisse maritum Salomish mulieris pulcherrimae
quam vitiavit. Lightfoot.
and having killed him, buried him in the Sand. By which act he meant to
intimate to his Brethren, the Hebrews, that God intended to make Him in due
time their Deliverer from their Egptian-Bondage, though (it seems) at this time
they understood it not, Acts 7.25. This thing (though done privately) yet
quickly came to be more known than Moses thought it had been. For going forth
the day after to visit his Brethren again, he saw two Hebrews striving and
fighting one with another. He was much troubled at this, and would have
reconciled them, and set them at one again. Wherefore he said to him that did
the wrong, Why do thou such a vile and wicked thing as to quarrel and fight
with one of thy own Brethren. He that was the Aggressor and the injurious
Person malepertly replied, Who made thee a Prince, and a Judge This refusal of
Moses by one is imputed to the rest of the Israelites, Acts 7.35. And God for
their unthankfulness withdrew Moses from them 40 years, before he sent him
again to them. Ainswor.
over us? What, do thou intend to slay me as thou did the Egyptian
yesterday. Moses then perceived the thing he had done was blown abroad, and in
a short time it came to Pharaoh's ears, who being greatly Incensed at it,
resolved to have his life for it, if he could catch him. Hereupon Moses thought
it needful to consult his own safety, and accordingly betook himself into the
Land of Midian. That place, Heb. 11.27. By Faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing
the wrath of the King, must be understood of his leaving Egypt, when he carried
away the Israelites with him, and not of his first leaving of it.


Exodus 2. from 11. to 16.

SECT. LVI.
BEing come into Midian (a Country so called from Midian, a Son of Abraham by
Keturah, Genesis 25.2. lying in Arabia Petraea near the Red Sea,) he came at last
to a Well, where he sat down to refresh himself, being (as it is probable)
attended with two or three Servants, as became a Person that had been so great
a Man in Egyt. An eminent Priest in Midian (whose Name was Jethro) It seems he
had three Names, Revel, v. 18. of this Chapter, Jethro, Chapter 3.1. and Hobab,
Judge. 4.11. and that Raguel the Midianite, mentioned, Numb. 10.29. was his
Father.
lived thereabout, and had seven Daughters, who (according to the simplicity of
that Age) came to the Well to draw Water, and fill the Troughs to water their
Fathers Flocks, and used great diligence that it might be done first before
others came, which possibly in that hot Country they did the more strive for,
because they that came last, were sometimes scanted of water. Presently some
Shepherds came, who rudely and uncivilly drove these Virgins, and their Flocks
away, and with the water they had drawn, sought to water their own Cattle, and
so to make them wait till they had done. Moses seeing this injurious dealing,
withstood the Shepherds, and stood up in the defense of the Virgins (though a
Stranger) and helped them to water their Flocks. See the like of Jacob, Genesis
29.2, 10.
When they came back to their Father, he asked them, How it happened that they
had dispatched so soon. They told him, That a Stranger (who by his habit seemed
to be an Egyptian) had been so Civil to them as to withstand the Shepherds, and
to draw water for them, and had helped them to water their Flocks. He asks
them, Why they had not brought him home with them? and bids them go presently
and invite him to come and eat bread with them. Moses upon this Invitation
comes, and being admitted into Jethro's Family, in a short time by their
Converse together, they were very well pleased the one with the other, insomuch
that Jethro afterward gave him Zipporah, Patriarcha ex cognatione sua filiis
uxores capiebant, ne illae filios a religione averterent. Sed Joseph and Moses
illo metu liberi ex Gentilibus uxores duxerunt, nec ab illis aversi sunt a
religione, sed eas converterunt.
his Daughter to wife, who bare him a Son whom he called Gershom, whereby he
intimated that he was a Stranger in that Land, and yet God had comfortably
provided for him. Another Son he had also afterward by her whom he called
Eliezer, Chapter 18. 4. by which name He signified, that God was his helper. In
process of time that cruel Tyrant Pharaoh (of whom Moses was so much afraid)
died, but though the Tyrant was gone, yet the Tyranny remained; for another
Pharaoh arose who made the Burdens and Afflictions of the Children of Israel as
heavy, or heavier than they were before. They sighed and cried unto the Lord by
reason of their Oppressions, and God heard their groaning, and remembered his
Covenant which he had made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to own them for his
People, and accordingly resolved to deliver them in such ways as were most for
the Honor of his Great Name, and for their profit and advantage.

Exodus 2. from verse. 16. to the end.

SECT. LVII.
ABout this time Caleb the Son of Jephunneh was born, viz. forty years before
he was sent by Moses to spy out the Land of Canaan. See Josh. 14.7, 10.

SECT. LVIII.
MOses since he came into Jethro's Family had (as it seems) betaken himself to
the Pastoral Employment, as an exercise that allowed great liberty, and
opportunity for Contemplation. And keeping his Father-in-laws Sheep in the
Desert, that he might provide fresh Pastures for them, he drove them to the
further side of the Desert nigh to Mount Horeb. This Mountain seems like
Parnassus to have had two tops, one called Sinai, the other Horeb. Called in
this place by anticipation the Mountain of God, because here God afterward in
so wonderful a manner appeared to Moses, and gave him the Law, and made a
Covenant with the people.
Here Christ, the eternal Son of God, the Messenger or Angel Magni concilii
Angelus Dei voluntatem nobis nun^iavit.
of the Covenant (Mal. 3.1.) appeared to him out of a burning Bush, (which
though it burnt, yet it was not consumed.) Moses being stricken with admiration
at the sight, and not knowing at first what to think of it, he determined to
approach nearer to it, hoping thereby better to inform himself. The Lord calls
to him out of the midst of the Bush, Moses, Moses. Moses hearing himself called
by his Name, answered, Here I am. The Lord then charged him not to draw too
nigh to the Bush, but to put off his shoes; that is, that he should in all
humility present himself before Him as a poor Caytiff, not worthy to stand in
the presence of so great a Majesty. He further tells him, That the place
whereon he stood was holy Ground; that is, made holy at this time through the
presence and apparition of God, without which it was but like other Ground. And
therefore by that outward expression he should testify the inward reverence of
his mind. Moreover the Lord said, I am the God of thy Fathers, the God of
Abraham, The Lord expressing this as in the present Tense, I am the God of
Abraham, etc. speaking of men long since dead, it was doubtless not only in
regard of the Immortality of their Souls, but also in regard of the certain
Resurrection of their Bodies too. And therefore our Savior alleges this place
to prove the Resurrection of the Body against the Sadduces, Mat. 22.31, 32.
Isaac, and Jacob, to whom I promised to be their God, and the God of their
Seed after them. Moses hearing this, hid his Face So Elijah wrapped his face in
a Mantle, 1 King. 19.13. See Esaias 6.3.
out of an awful Reverence of so great a Majesty, being afraid, through a sense
of his own vileness, to look up toward God. The Lord further said unto Moses,
I have seen the Affliction of my People in Egypt, and heard their Cry. Then
(speaking of Himself after the manner of men) He tells him, He was come down
See Genesis 11.7. and 18.21. and 35.13.
to deliver them out of their Bondage, and to bring them into a good and large
Land, Though Judea contained in length from Dan to B^ersheba but an 160, and in
breadth from Joppa to Jordan but 60 miles, yet it may be called large in
respect of Goshen where the Israelites for the most part dwelt. See Genesis 13.14,
15.
a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; and He intended to send him to speak to
Pharaoh to let his People go. So that the secret Inspiration which Moses had
before from God, Exodus 2.11. is here now advanced to an open Call, and full
Commission. At his first Call he was very forward, and killed the Egyptian, but
since his flight out of Egypt he was become more cautious. Therefore he said
unto the Lord, Who am I (a mean man) that I should go to Pharaoh (a great proud
and tyrannical Prince) and should think to deliver a distressed People out of
his Power. The Lord answered, I will certainly be with thee; so that thou
needst not fear either thy own Weakness, or the Power of them to whom I send
thee. And this present Apparition of mine out of the burning, but not burned
Bush, shall be a Token and Evidence to thee, that at this time I have sent
thee. And hereafter, when thou have brought the people out of Egypt, this may
further serve to strengthen thy Faith in my Power and Providence over them; I
do now foretell thee, Ye shall serve me upon this Mountain. Moses conceiving
himself now, after so many years absence, in a manner unknown to the Children
of Israel, he begins to think that they might question, Whither indeed he was
sent of God or no, and might demand of him under what Name or Title God had
made known Himself to him. If that should so happen, he humbly desires to know
by what Name or Title the Lord would please to be mentioned to them, seeing
many of his Names were abused by application of them to Idols. The Lord
answers, If thou inquire concerning my Name, I am that I am. Therefore go and
tell the Children of Israel, That I AM has sent thee unto them; and further
tell them, That the Lord God of their Fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, has sent thee unto them, and tell them, This is my Name for ever, and
this is my Memorial unto all Generations; that is, by this Name shall all
Generations remember Me. Go then therefore and call the Heads of the Tribes of
the Children of Israel together, and deliver this Message to them, that they
may acquaint their Brethren of the several Tribes here-with, and tell them,
That I have by the watchful Eye of my Providence mercifully visited them, and
have observed what has been done unto them in Egypt, and that I do intend
assuredly to deliver them out of the House of Bondage, and will bring them into
Canaan, a Land abounding with all things serving both for Necessity and
Delight. And the Elders of the People shall hearken unto thee, and shall go
along with thee to Pharaoh, The denial of this will make Pharaoh the more
inexcusable, and the Justice of God more manifest upon him.
and you shall say unto him, The Lord God of the Hebrews has appeared to us,
and commanded us to offer to Him a Sacrifice, and to celebrate to Him a Feast
thereon, and has commanded Us to come to thee, and to request of Thee so much
liberty that we may go three days Journey Viz. To Horeb, v. 12. which was but a
three days Journey from Egypt, had they gone the direct way. But because of
troubles and fears they were led about, Exodus 13.17, 18. So that they came not
thither till the third month, Exodus 19.1.
into the Wilderness to perform this Sacrifice In Egypt they could not do it
without danger from the Egyptians, to whom their Sacrifices were such an
abomination, that to offer them before their eyes, might provoke them to stone
them, Exodus 8.26.
to the Lord our God. The Lord further adds, I know Pharaoh will be so
obstinate, that he will not let you go, no not by a mighty Hand; that is, no
not though diverse great and heavy Plagues be inflicted on him. For I will
stretch out my Hand upon Egypt, and will smite them with all those great and
smarting Plagues which I intend to bring upon them, and I know that not till
after the last and tenth Plague (viz. the slaying of their Firstborn) will he
let you go. And I will, before I bring you out of Egypt, give you favor in the
eyes of the Egyptians, and they shall be willing to lend Annon dolo malo usi
sunt qui haec petebant cum aliud, in animo haberent. Non est mendacium sed
silentium integrae veritatis. Non dixerunt se hoc tantum facturos: partem
consilii aperit Deus Tyranno, partem celat, quia est liberrimus, Deuteronomy. 2.30. 1 Samuel 16.1.
you any thing you shall desire of them, viz. Jewels of Silver, and of Gold,
and fine Raiment, and you shall put them upon your Sons and upon your
Daughters, and so you shall come forth with great Substance, as I have
promised, Genesis 15.14. This was no Theft or Sin, God having commanded it, who is
Lord Paramount of all, and likewise intended hereby to recompense his People
for the Injuries they had received from the Egyptians, and that by these Spoils
they might be furnished with precious Materials for the Tabernacle.
and shall spoil the Egyptians. Moses Replies, That he feared his Countrymen,
the Hebrews, would be very difficult at first to believe him, or that God had
indeed appeared to him, and humbly desires to know what he should do in that
case. The Lord, to encourage him against his fears, furnishes him with Power to
work Miracles, which might be an Evidence of the Divine Presence with him, and
a Seal to the Israelites that he came with Commission from God, and that God
had sent him. Accordingly first he bids him throw down his Rod or Staff, which
he had in his hand, upon the ground, and suddenly it became a Serpent, To
change one Creature into another, not in appearance only, but really, requires
a Divine Power.
so that Moses was ready to fly from it out of fear. But God Commands him to
take it by the tail, which he accordingly did, and it became immediately a Rod
again. Then God commanded him to put his hand into his Bosom, which when he
plucked it out again, it was become as white and leprous as Snow. Then God
commanded him to put it into his Bosom again, and when he drew it out this
second time, behold it was as whole and sound as his other hand. Then the Lord
tells him, That if the Children of Israel were not wrought upon, nor did
incline to believe him for the first Sign, possibly they would for the second.
But if it should so happen that they should not be brought to believe him for
either of these, when he came into Egypt he should take of the water of the
River Nilus and pour it upon the ground, and it should presently become blood
upon the dry Land, which should be a further Demonstration to them that God had
sent him. Moses being still fearful, Replied, Ah Lord, I am not Eloquent,
Indeed Stephen said of him, Acts 7.22. That he was mighty in words, that is, He
was an excellent Speaker as to the substance of what he spoke, yet some defect
he had as to his utterance. Some think he had a stammering Tongue, which made
him say, Chapter 6.12. How shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips.
I am not a man of a free and ready Speech, as those should be who are employed
to speak to Princes. I am slow of speech; I was so formerly, neither do I find
the matter much mended with me since thou did vouchsafe to speak to me, and
Call me to this great Service. The Lord answered, Who has given to man the
faculty of Speech? or who deprives him of that faculty? and so of Hearing or
Seeing. Do not I the Lord give these Abilities, and take them away at my
pleasure. Now therefore Go, I will be with thy mouth, and will teach thee what
thou shall say. But Moses being still under great fears, and deeply
apprehensive of his own unfitness for so difficult a Service; He cried out, Ah
Lord, I pray thee send by the Ministry of such an one whom thou will find
fitter for this great Service than I am, whoever he be, and send not by me who
am so unfit and so unable. Then the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses
for this his distrustful Despondency, Modeste renuentem passus est Mosen Deus,
non obstinatius reluctantem.
and He said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy Brother? I know that he is a good
Spokes-man, and he shall be joined in Commission with thee, and I will by an
inward motion of my Spirit cause him to come forth to meet thee, and he will be
heartily glad to see thy face again, and thou shall instruct him concerning
this your common Commission; and I will teach you both what you shall do. He
shall speak to the people as from thee, and thou shall give Direction and
Counsel to him as from Me; revealing my Mind and Will unto him, and acquainting
him what he shall say to Pharaoh. Chapter 7. 1. And thou shall take this Rod of
thine in thy hand, and with it thou shall do Signs and Wonders before Pharaoh
and the Egyptians.

Chapter 3. whole Chapter.

Chapter 4. from verse. 1. to verse. 18.

SECT. LIX.
MOses being now confirmed partly by Miracles, partly by the promise of Divine
assistance, and having his Brother Aaron given him for his Partner, he
undertook the Work. Returning therefore to his Father-in-law Jethro, and
concealing (as it is probable) from him the glorious Vision he had seen, and the
honorable Employment he was called unto, lest Jethro should by proposing
Difficulties and perils in the undertaking discourage him; He in a respectful
manner desires him to permit him to go into Egypt to visit his Brethren, and
see how they did. Jethro readily consents to it, and bids him go in peace.
Notwithstanding, Moses (it seems) after he had obtained leave of Jethro, made
not such have as he ought to have done. Therefore God appears to him a second
time in Midian, and quickens him to the Journey, assuring him, that all those
in Egypt that sought his life were dead. Then Moses took his Wife and his two
Sons Gershom and Eliezer, (Exodus 18.3, 4.) and setting them upon Asses,
intended to carry them with him into Egypt; and he took his Rod (with which God
appointed him to work Miracles) in his hand, and the Lord appointed him, when
he came into Egypt, to do all those Wonders and Miracles before Pharaoh which
he should put into his hand; that is, give him Power to do. But the Lord tells
him, That he will harden Pharaoh's heart; that is, he will withdraw and
withhold his Grace from him (as by withholding Light he causes Darkness) and
would permit Satan to excite and spur on his corrupt Nature; so that
notwitstanding the many things that should be offered to him for his
Conviction, he should more and more harden his own heart against God, and
should refuse to let the People go. However he commands him to speak thus unto
Pharaoh; Thus says the Lord, The People or Posterity of Israel are my
Firstborn, being chosen of my free Grace first, out of all Nations, to be my
peculiar People, and are as dear to me as the Firstborn are to their Parents.
Therefore let them go, that they may serve me. If thou refuse to let them go,
behold I will slay thy Son, even thy Firstborn; and not thine only, but the
Firstborn of all the Egyptians, thy Subjects also, and so accordingly it
afterward came to pass.

Chapter 4. from verse. 18. to 24.

SECT. LX.
AS Moses was now upon his Journey toward Egypt, with his Wife and Children,
the Lord (as it seems) visibly appeared to him; and either by a Sword drawn in
his hand, or by inflicting some sudden violent Sickness upon him, put him in
great danger of his life, and revealed to him the Cause thereof to be, because
he had neglected to Circumcise his youngest Son, (see Genesis 17.14.) there being
a great Incongruity in it, that He should take on him the Government of God's
Circumcised People, who had neglected to impose this Badge of the Covenant on
his own Son. It Is like the reason why Moses neglected to Circumcise this his
younger Son, was, because his Wife had been so highly displeased at his
Circumcising of the elder. But however it was, Zipporah seeing the danger her
Husband was now in by reason of this neglect, and that he was at this time,
through sickness, so disabled, that he himself could not do it, she took a
sharp Knife (possibly made of Flint) and Circumcised him her self, and then
cast the Foreskin, newly cut off, at her Husbands feet, saying, in a
discontented humor, Surely thou art a bloody Husband to me. For, for thy sake,
and for the sake of thy Religion, I am forced thus to shed the blood of my Son.
This being done, the Lord let Moses go, and released him from his Sickness. And
it is like upon this occasion and trouble, Zipporah with her Children was sent
back from thence to her Fathers house again, as appears Exodus 18.2, 3.

Chapter 4. from verse. 24. to 27.

SECT. LXI.
MOses being now freed from all Encumbrance, went on his Journey toward Mount
Horeb, where his Brother Aaron (being before warned of God to come thither) met
him, and at their meeting kissed and embraced him. Then Moses acquainted him
with all these wonderful Passages, and with all that the Lord had said unto
him, and what Miracles he had empowered him, and commanded him to work, and
what Service he had employed him about, and how Aaron was appointed to join
with him therein. This done, they went on, and when they came into Egypt, they
called together the Elders of the Children of Israel, and Aaron spoke to them
what Moses had directed him to say from God, and Moses wrought (as was
appointed him) those three Miracles before mentioned, Sect. 57. for the
confirming their Faith. See Chapter 4. from verse. 2. to the 10. The people of
Israel, when they heard and saw these things, they greatly rejoiced, and
believed that God had now in mercy visited them, and had looked down with Pity
and compassion on their Afflictions, and they bowed their heads, and worshipped
God with great Reverence, Humility, and Thankfulness.

Chapter 4. from 27. to the end.

SECT. LXII.
SHortly after this, Moses and Aaron make their first Address to Pharaoh,
several of the Elders of Israel accompanying them therein. See Exodus chapter 3.18.
They Represent to Him that the God of their Fathers had appeared unto them, and
commanded them to offer a Sacrifice, and to celebrate a Religious Feast Part of
the Sacrifices were to serve for a Feast, and both for the honor of God. This
Feast they should have celebrated to the Lord, but they performed it to an
Idol, the work of their own hands. Exodus 32.6, 19.
to him in the Wilderness. Therefore they humbly beseech him that they may have
liberty to go three days Journey in the Desert; namely, to the Mount Horeb, to
perform this which the Lord required of them, lest if they should neglect to
obey Him therein, he should punish them with the Pestilence or Sword, or some
such dreadful Judgment, for their Disobedience. Pharaoh, like a proud and
imperious Prince, answers, Who is the Lord that I should obey his Voice to let
Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Then looking upon
Moses and Aaron with Indignation, He asks them, What they had to do to seduce
the People, and take them off from their work? And then looking upon the People
with anger, Get you to your Burdens (says he) and see that you perform your
daily Task, or I will take a course with you. I understand very well that you
are a great and numerous People (indeed too many) and these two men Moses and
Aaron design to get ease and rest for you from your Burdens, that so you may
increase more, and possibly may then think of rebelling against me. But I shall
take Care to prevent that. And accordingly that very day he charged the
Taskmasters that were Egyptians, and the Officers under them, which were
Israelites, (appointed to take the Oversight of their Brethren in their
Labors) that they should no more give the people Straw to make Brick withal,
as heretofore they had done, but they should gather and provide Straw for
themselves, and yet notwithstanding they should exact the same tale and number
of Bricks of them which they made before, and not abate them any thing of it.
For, says he, They are idle, and therefore they Cry, Let us go Sacrifice to the
Lord our God. I Command you therefore to impose more work upon them, that they
may have enough to do, and may not be at leisure to regard lying words, such as
this Moses and Aaron tell them, who flamm them with stories of their being sent
from God. The Taskmasters and Officers acquaint the people with this strict
and severe Injunction of the King. Whereupon a considerable part of them were
forced to scatter themselves through all the Land of Egypt to provide Straw,
and Straw failing, they were fain to gather Stubble instead of it. And the
Taskmasters pressed them on notwithstanding to finish every day as much work
as when they had Straw allowed them. And when there happened any failure in the
Work, the Israelitish Officers or Overseers (that were set over their Brethren)
were beaten for it. Whereupon these Officers addressed themselves to Pharaoh,
and humbly Remonstrated, That the Egyptian Taskmasters that used to furnish
the Israelites with Straw, now did not do it, and yet they required of them to
make the same number of Bricks daily as before, which was in a manner
impossible for them to do. And when they did it not, they their Overseers were
beaten for it, though the fault was not in them, but in the Egyptian
Taskmasters. Pharaoh answered them roughly and tyrannically; You are idle, You
are idle, therefore you say, Let us go and do Sacrifice to the Lord. Get you
gone, and see that you finish the Task that is every day required of you, and
yet you shall have no Straw furnished to you. The Officers of the Children of
Israel seeing themselves in this very ill condition, and having no hope of
remedy, they go to Moses and Aaron (who possibly came out to meet them, to see
what answer they had from the King) and like ignorant passionate men, who
mistake Occasions for Causes, they charge the Injuries of their Enemies upon
their best Friends, and in an angry and discontented Mood say to Moses and
Aaron, The Lord look upon you; that is, the Lord take notice and consider what
you have brought upon us, and judge you for it. You have made us to stink, and
to be abhorred of Pharaoh, and his Servants, and have put a Sword into their
hands to slay us. You have by this your Address to Pharaoh stirred up Him and
His Courtiers to tyrannize more over us than they did before. Moses being
greatly grieved at this their Complaint, betook himself to some retired place,
where by prayer and deep sighs he might present his own and the peoples
distress unto the Lord, and he said, Ah Lord, why have thou thus dealt with thy
people against whom Pharaoh's Rage is not at all mitigated, but much increased
since I mediated for them? Why have thou sent me on such a Message as this,
which has not been a means to deliver thy people, but much more to afflict
them? The Lord answered, Thou shall quickly see what I will do unto Pharaoh; My
Hand shall be so strong and heavy upon him, that he shall not only be content
to dismiss you (as Exodus 3.20.) but shall be ready with all his Power to drive
you out, rather than hold you any longer. See Exodus 12.31.33. And the Lord to
encourage Moses the more in his Work, repeateth his Name to him, and the
Covenant which he had made with the Fathers. He says to him, I am theLord; I
appeared unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, by the Name of Elshaddai, God Almighty;
that is, such a God as is All-sufficient, and able to perform all my Promises,
Genesis 17.1. but by my Name Jehovah, This cannot be meant of the letters and
syllables of that name, as if the Patriarchs had never heard of that Name. For
God called himself Jehovah long before, and by that Name confirmed his
Promises, as appears Genesis 2.4, 7, 8, 9. and 15.7. and 28.12. Genesis 22.14. Chapter
26.24. Chapter 27.20.
and that which it imports, Jehovah signifies God's eternal Being in himself,
his giving being to other things, and the performance of his Promises, and in
regard of this he says, He was not known to their Fathers by this Name. They
being sustained by Faith in God's Almighty Power rested upon the Promise, not
enjoying the thing promised. But now to their Children the Promise should be
performed, and so they should have full knowledge and experience of the
efficacy of that Name Jehovah. But withal we must know that this is only
spoken comparatively, as the glorious ministration of the Law is said to have
had no glory, in respect of the excellent glory of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.10. So
the Fathers are said not to have known God by his Name Jehovah, in comparison
of what their Posterity knew.
have not I been made know to them; that is, so fully as I intend now to be
made known to their Posterity, to whom I shall really fulfill, and give a Being
to my Promises, by my wonderful Deliverance of them out of Egypt, and bringing
them at length into the Land of Promise. For I made a firm Covenant with those
my Servants Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and confirmed it by an Oath to give that
Land of Canaan (wherein they were but Strangers and Sojourners) to them and
their Posterity for an Inheritance. And I have heard the groaning of the
Children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage, and I have remembered
my Covenant. Therefore go to them and tell them, I am the Lord, and I will
deliver them from that cruel Servitude under which they groan, and will with an
outstretched arm, and inflicting terrible Judgments on the Egyptians, bring
them forth. And I will take them to my self for my peculiar people, and will be
to them a God, and they shall assuredly know, that it is I the Lord, and none
else, who did all these great things for them. Moses, as God had commanded him,
went to the Children of Israel with this Message, but through the anguish of
their Spirits, and the extremity of their Sufferings, they regarded not what he
said, nor were disposed to believe any thing that he spoke concerning their
Deliverance. So greatly prejudicial are the immoderate passions of men not only
to God's truth, but to their own welfare. Then God commands Moses to go and
speak to Pharaoh again, and to require him to let the people go out of his
Land. Moses answered, That the Children of Israel would not hearken to him, how
then should he think that Pharaoh would hear him, or mind or regard his words;
and especially seeing he was a man of uncircumcised lips, Because Circumcision
was with the Jews a Badge of God's people, Therefore those that were not
Circumcised were counted profane, and their Uncircumcision was counted a
grievous blemish. Hence it was, that in a Figurative Speech they counted those
things that had any natural or moral blemish uncircumcised, as a Heart, or
Mind, or Tongue uncircumcised. Hinc homines viles and ad aliquam rem inepti
incircumcisi ea part vocantur.
and had an imperfection in his speech and utterance, and was very unfit to be
sent to Pharaoh on such a Message as that was. However God bids Him and Aaron
go again to the Children of Israel, and to encourage them with expectation of
Deliverance, and to go to Pharaoh to require him, in his Name, to let them go.
Moses and Aaron being thus to be employed as Instruments in the Hand of God of
this great Deliverance, their Stock and Lineage is here set down, to show that
they were both descended of Levi; and this might possibly be so ordered by the
Spirit of God as an Antidote against the fabulous Reports of Heathen Writers
(such as Justin and Tacitus) who tell false Stories of the Original both of
Moses and of the people of the Jews. Which things though they happened not till
many years after, yet were now foreseen by the Spirit of God who assist^^
Moses in penning this History. And Moses being to set down his own and Aarons
Descent from Levi, for orders sake he begins with the Stock of Reuben and
Simeon, Levi's elder Brothers. And possibly in this place he mentions only
those three, and not the Heads of the other Tribes, that it might appear that
they were not rejected of God, notwithstanding Jacob's severe Commination, Genesis
49.3, 5. As also to show that though Reuben and Simeon were elder then Levi,
yet God had freely chosen out of the Tribe of Levi, Moses to be the first
Captain of his people, and his Brother Aaron the first High Priest, to whom his
Posterity should succeed in that Office. And these are that very Moses and
Aaron whom the Lord commanded to bring forth the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, who were increased now to many thousands, so that they might be called
the Hosts of the Lord, Exodus 12.37, 41.

Chapter 5. whole Chapter.

Chapter 6. from verse. 1. to 28.

SECT. LXIII.
MOses being now 80, The reason why Moses's age is here set down seems to be,
to show how long God in his wise Providence had suffered the Egyptians to
oppress the Israelites with such cruel bondage, even before the birth of Moses,
till he came to be 80 years of age. And the reverence and respect due to the
venerable age He and Aaron were of, rendered them the more fit to undertake such
a service.
and Aaron 83 years of Age, they are commanded by the Lord to go again to
Pharaoh, to require him to dismiss the people. Moses would have excused himself
again, because he was not Eloquent; but the Lord tells him, Behold I have made
thee a God Quia adversus Pharaonem divinam quandam potestatem exercuit dum ab
eo timetur, dum oratur, dum punit, dum medetur, dum verbo animalia quasi creat
and destruit, coelum denique ac terram commovet, ut explicat Hilarious, lib. 7.
de Trin.
to Pharaoh; that is, one to whom the Word of God shall come, and by whom it
shall be made known to Aaron, and by him to Pharaoh, For Aaron shall be thy
Interpreter and Spokes-man. But I know that Pharaoh will not hearken unto you,
but will harden his heart against all that you shall say. However be not
discouraged thereat, for I will multiply my Signs and Wonders in the Land of
Egypt, and will bring forth my Hosts; that is, my people the Children of
Israel, by inflicting great Plagues and Judgments on the Egyptians, and they
shall know that I am the Lord, by the Judgments that I will execute upon them,
and by which I will at last deliver my people. Moses and Aaron did as the Lord
commanded them, and went again unto Pharaoh, requiring him in the Name of the
Lord to let the Children of Israel go out of his Land. Pharaoh asks them, How
he shall know that they were sent of God? What Miracle could they work to
induce him to believe it? Moses hereupon gave Aaron his Rod, and bad him cast
it upon the ground, and said, It should become a Serpent, and Aaron did so
before Pharaoh and his Servants, and accordingly it became a Serpent. It seems
the change wrought before Pharaoh was not into an ordinary Serpent called
Nehash, but into some greater Creature here called a Dragon. Tavin.
Then Pharaoh called for his Magicians and Sorcerers (wherewith the Land of
Egypt abounded, and whereof the chief at that time were Jannes and Jambres, 2 Timothy 3.8.) and they did the like in outward show and appearance, but not in
reality, the Devil (by whose Power they did work) casting a mist before the
peoples eyes, whereby they thought they saw that which indeed was not. I say
these Magicians cast down their Rods, and they seemed to be turned also into
Serpents Dici potest veros dracones, sive Serpents aliunde adductos open
Damonis virgarum loco fuisse substitutos, ita fallendo oculos ut nemo
praestigias istas animadverteret.
or Dragons. Some aerial Representations possibly of them being there made by
the art of the Devil; or possibly the Devil might bring thither some true
Serpents unperceiveably from other places, and might remove the Rods from the
peoples eyes. But the Dragon or Serpent into which Aarons Rod was turned
swallowed Notandum praestigias Magorum non obfuisse Mosi sed magis profuisse.
Semper enim aliquid adsuit quo divina signa praecellerent. Nam Serpens Moysis
devoravit eorum Serpents. Aquam illi in sanguinem mutare potuerunt, non rursum
sanguinem in aquam; ranas afferre non tollere; Nempe ut per eas plagae augeri
possent non minui. Post devorationem Virga Aaronis in statum pristinum reversa
est.
up theirs; God hereby showing that the Power whereby Moses and Aaron had
wrought their Miracle was infinitely above that of Satan, whereby the Magicians
had endeavored to equal the Work which Moses had done. Yet notwithstanding
this Miracle, Pharaoh's heart was still hardened, so that he would not let the
people go, as God had foretold.

Exodus 6. verse. 28, 29, 30.

Exodus 7. from 1. to 14.

SECT. LXIV.
PHaraoh continuing still obstinate, God sends Moses and Aaron again to him,
and by their Ministry inflicts ten Plagues successively upon the Eyptians, from
which the Israelites (as it is probable) were wholly exempted. See Exodus 8.22.
and 9.26. and 10.23. All which are reckoned Psalm. 78. and 105. which Plagues
were all sent within one month in this Order.

1. God Commands Moses and Aaron to go and meet Pharaoh the next Morning, First
Plague, Their waters turned into Blood for seven days together.
who would then come to walk by the side of the River Nilus, and to tell him,
That seeing he had refused to obey the Voice of the Lord, he would bring a
grievous Plague upon Him and his People. They had shed the blood of the
Israelites Children, and drowned them in that River; Therefore God had
commanded him to give order to Aaron with his Rod to smite the waters of the
River; and he accordingly stretched forth his Hand over the Rivers, Streams and
Ponds, (probably over some of them in the Name of the rest) and striking those
Waters, they were immediately turned into blood; Yea by the influence of God's
Almighty Power upon that percussion all their other Streams and Rivers, Ponds
and Pools, yea Cisterns of water (whether of Wood or Stone) were turned into
blood for seven days together. By which Plague the Fish that were in the River
died, whereby the Egyptians were deprived of that which was their chief Food,
The Egyptians abstained from the flesh of many Beasts of Superstition,
especially such as the Hebrews used in Sacrifice.
as may be gathered from Numb. 11.5. We remember the Fish that we did eat in
Egypt freely, and Isa. 19.8. God threatens this as a great Judgment to Egypt,
The Fishers shall mourn, and all that cast Angles into the Brooks shall lament,
and they that spread Nets upon the Waters shall languish. So that this was a
sore Plague on the Egyptians who fed much on Fish, and traded much with them,
and maintained themselves by them. And one great evil followed this also; for
hereupon the River stank so horribly, that they could not drink of the waters
of it (which used to be their ordinary Beverage, see Jer. 2.18.) but were fain
to dig Pits near the River, that they might have some water to drink. But all
this did not work upon Pharaoh's obdurate heart. For his Magicians and
Sorcerers getting some water either from the Sea, or out of the
new-digged-Wells, or from the houses of the Israelites dwelling here and there
intermixed with them, did by their Enchantments, and the Devil's help, get some
blood whereby they tinctured the waters, or else unperceiveably removed the
water, and substituted blood in the place thereof. Which when Pharaoh saw done
by them, he went away to his own house, and heeded not, nor laid to heart the
foregoing Plague inflicted on him by Moses.

Exodus Chapter 7. from 14. to the end.

2. God Commands Moses and Aaron to go to Pharaoh again, Second Plague, Frogs.
and to require him to let his People go; and to tell Him, That if he refused
to do it, He would smite all his Borders with Frogs. They accordingly
resolutely pursue their Commission, and evidence their Courage and Fidelity in
God's Cause, notwithstanding the ill success they had had before. But Pharaoh
would not give ear to them. Hereupon Aaron stretched forth his Rod The Rod is
called sometimes the Rod of Moses, sometimes of Aaron, sometimes of God, to
show that it was the Instrument they all used in working these prodigious
things.
over the Rivers, Non singulos adiit fluvios, sed virga eminus eos intenta
designavit, extendit eam versus Nilum and intention versus omnes aqas Aegypti.
over the Streams, and over the Ponds, and the Frogs came up in great abundance
upon the Land, (namely, not only those that were in the Rivers before, but an
innumerable number of new ones were produced,) and they crawled into Pharaoh's
house, and into his Bedchamber; How easily can God cast contempt upon Princes,
and how favorable is he to men, who, by his ordinary Providence, makes such
Creatures loath to come where man has to do, which are so loathsome to him.
yea upon his Bed, and into the Houses of his Courtiers, and the rest of his
people; yea into their Ovens and Kneading-Troughs, so that they were grievously
annoyed with them. Pharaoh calls for his Magicians to see if they could imitate
this Miracle, and they, by stretching forth their Rods over the River, did by
the Power of the Devil The Devil it seems much delights in their monstrous
shape. For we find in the Scripture three unclean Spirits like Frogs coming out
of the mouth of the Dragon.
bring forth some true Frogs by unperceptible Conveyance to the place where the
Contest was, (which possibly at this present was not covered with Frogs by
Moses's Working) though it is like they were but very few in comparison of
those Moses and Aaron had produced. And when they had brought them, they could
not remove them again. Pharaoh and his people being thus grievously distressed
with this Plague, he began to stoop a little, and to acknowledge God whom
before he would not know, and therefore desires Moses and Aaron to entreat the
Lord to remove these Frogs, and he would let the people go that they may
Sacrifice unto the Lord their God. Moses knowing that he was constituted as a
God to Pharaoh [Ch. 7. verse. 1.] to bring Judgments upon him, and romove them
at God's appointment, and having in him the Faith of Miracles, and being
directed by the Spirit of God, He told Pharaoh, He would do him the honor
Honorem tibi sum ut des mihi tempus in quo orem pro te.
to let him appoint the time when he should pray to the Lord for him, and by
his power deliver him from this Plague. And (says he) if my prayer take no
effect, then do thou glory over me, and say, I am no better than one of thy
Magicians; but if I do deliver thee, then own and obey the great God of Heaven,
whose Servant I am. Pharaoh desires the Frogs may be removed by the next
Morning. Moses Replies, Be it according to thy word, that thou may know, that
there is none like unto the Lord our God. Moses then cried unto the Lord to
remove this Plague from Pharaoh, and the Lord heard him, and immediately the
Frogs died that were in the Houses, Villages, and Fields; only some remained in
the River; and they gathered the dead Frogs together and cast them upon heaps,
so that the Land stank by reason of them. But when this Plague was removed, and
Pharaoh saw there was some respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not to
Moses and Aaron as the Lord had foretold.

Exodus Chapter 8. from verse. 1. to 16.

Third Plague, Lice.
3. Pharaoh having thus mocked God (promising and not performing) the Lord to
manifest his Indignation against him, Commands Moses now to strike him with a
new Judgment, without giving him any warning, as at other times he had done.
Aaron therefore is commanded forthwith to stretch out his Rod, and to strike
the dust of the Land, that it may become Lice through all the Land of Egypt.
Which Aaron accordingly doing, abundance of Lice came on Men and Beasts; the
dust in very part of the Land; that is, a great deal of it turning into that
Vermin. V. 17. All the dust of the Land became Lice. An hyperbolical Speech.
The Magicians also try their Skill again, and accordingly they smote the dust
of the ground with their Rods, as Aaron had done, and endeavored to do the
like, but all in vain. Non potuerunt Deo eos impediente ut se ostenderet
maximum in minimis.
For here God confounded their Enchantments in a thing most vile, wherein yet
he honored himself. For he so restrained the Devil, and disabled these
Magicians, his Servants, that they could neither make Lice, nor make a show of
them. So that they were forced to acknowledge to Pharaoh, That this was the
Finger of God, Fuit haec non productio naturalis, sed divina Creatio qualis
hominis ex pulvere.
and that this Miracle was wrought by the Power of the Almighty, and not by Art
or Sorcery, which they should have acknowledged of all the rest of the Miracles
wrought by Moses and Aaron, but their Master the Devil would not permit them to
do it. However, though the Lice continued both upon Man Such little Creatures
armed with Power from God, can punish the greatest Tyrant, as Herod, Acts 12.23.
and Beast; yet Pharaoh's heart was still hardened, so that he would not
hearken unto Moses, as the Lord had before told him.

Exodus Chapter 8. from 16. to 20.

Fourth Plague, Flies, Wasps and Hornets.
4. It being usual with Pharaoh to walk in the Morning by the Riverside, Moses
is sent again to meet him there, and to require him in the Lords Name to let
the people go, and to acquaint Him, That if he refused to do it, God would send
upon him, and his people, swarms of Flies, Wasps and Hornets, and such noisome
Insects which should fill their Houses, and vex and sting them, and they should
swarm in all the Land where the Egyptians dwelt, but should not come into
Goshen where the Israelites dwelt, and then they should know, to their Cost,
that the Lord Jehovah was the only Ruler in the whole Earth, and that he would
put a difference between his own People, and the Egyptians, and would deliver
them from that Judgment which should be the portion of the Egyptians. And he
tells him, This thing should come to pass the next morning. Pharaoh not
regarding this threatening, the very next morning there came a grievous swarm of
diverse sorts of Flies, We read not of any use made of Moses s Rod to bring this
Plague, and it is like it was not used, that it might appear the power of those
Plagues was not in the Rod, but in the Hand of God.
[see Psalm. 78.45. Psalm. 105.31.] into the house of Pharaoh, and his Servants,
and into all the Land of Egypt. So that the people of Egypt were wonderfully
annoyed with them, and (as it seems) several of them destroyed by them. Pharaoh
being now terrified with this Plague, He yields thus far, That the Israelites
should have liberty to Sacrifice to the Lord their God, provided they went not
out of Egypt to do it. So that it seems they were not suffered, during their
bondage in Egypt, openly to offer Sacrifice to the Lord. What they did this way
was done in a private manner.
This Moses would not accept of, but requires they may have liberty to go three
days Journey into the Wilderness to offer this Sacrifice. For (says he) if we
should in Egypt offer unto our God Oxen, Cows, Calves and Bullocks, which the
Egyptians exhibit Divine Honor unto, it would seem an abominable thing unto
them, and they would be ready to stone us. Pharaoh tells them, They shall then
go into the Wilderness, provided they would not go very far, and would pray for
him that this Plague may be removed. Moses promises that they would pray for
him, but entreats him to be true and faithful to his word and promise, and not
to deal any more deceitfully with them. Moses goes out accordingly, and and
entreats the Lord to remove this Plague from Pharaoh, and his People, and the
Lord was pleased presently to do it. So that the next day this dreadful host of
Flies, Wasps and Hornets, was quite gone. But though the Plague was removed,
yet Pharaoh's obstinacy was not; for he would not yet let the People go.

Exodus Chapter 8. from 20. to the end.

5. Fifth Plague, Murrain on Beasts.
Upon the first day of the seventh Month (which was shortly after made the
first month of the Year) God Commands Moses to go to Pharaoh again, and to tell
him, That if he would not let his People go, but did obstinately keep them
still, he would smite all sorts of his Cattle with a grievous Murrain, viz.
Horses, Asses, Camels, Oxen and Sheep, and this Judgment (he tells him) shall
be inflicted the very next day. And so accordingly it was, by which the
generality V. 6. All his Cattle died] all is here to be taken Communiter, not
Universaliter, viz. for the greater or most considerable number. For some
Cattle were assuredly killed by the Hail, as we find Exodus 9.25. And in the
tenth Plague, the Firstborn of Beasts were destroyed by the Angel.
of the Cattle of the Egyptians died, but of the Cattle of tne Children of
Israel, died not one. And Pharaoh sent into Goshen to see whether the Cattle of
the Children of Israel had escaped, and he found it was so. Yet notwithstanding
his heart was hardened, and swelled with pride and malice against the Children
of Israel, so that he would not let them go

Exodus Chapter 9. from verse. 1. to 8.

6. Sixth Plague, Blains and Boils.
About the third day of this Month God intending to bring a Sixth Plague upon
Pharaoh and the Egyptians, He Commands Moses and Aaron to go to him, and to
take handfuls of ashes out of the Furnace, and to sprinkle the ashes toward
Heaven, to intimate to Pharaoh that the Plague came from the God of Heaven, and
that as he and his people had oppressed the Israelites with Furnace-work, in
forcing them to burn Brick for them, so they now should be punished with
burning Sores, Ulceribus calore and sani^ turgidis.
caused by ashes taken out of the Furnace. And Moses and Aaron did as God
commanded, and they sprinkled handfuls of ashes toward Heaven, which
miraculously, by the mighty Power of God, became a Cloud of small dust
over-spreading the whole Land of Egypt, and so fell down both upon Man and
Beast. And this dust, where it fell, caused Blains and Boils, and, as it seems,
of an extraordinary nature, for they are thus described Deuteronomy. 28.27. The Boils
of Egypt which cannot be cured. And the Magicians themselves (who it seems
continued to harden and embolden Pharaoh not to be moved with the things done
by Moses, telling him (as it is probable) that they were done by Magic) and
were still at hand to resist Moses and Aaron as far as they could, were now
smitten with these Boils and Blains breaking out upon them. So that they were
forced to go away, and cease fighting against God. But yet Pharaoh's heart was
so hardened, that he would not let the people go for all this.

Exodus Chapter 9. from 8. to verse. 13.

Seventh Plague, Hail.
7. Some few days after, God sends Moses again to Pharaoh, to require him to let
his people go, that they may serve him; and to let him know, that though his
Hand had been already heavy upon him, yet there were far sorer Plagues still
behind, which he had determined to bring upon him and his people, if he
continued obstinate, and which should sting him to the very heart. And these he
would presently pour forth thick and threefold upon him, that he might know
there is no God like to the great Jehovah in all the World. Moses is further
commanded to speak thus to Him from the Lord, I have stretched out my Hand and
destroyed a great part of thy Cattle by Murrain and Pestilence, and I should
have destroyed thee and thy people thereby also, Sic ergo vertendum, v. 16.
Modo enim cum extendi manum meam, percussissem non tantum pecus, sed te etiam
and populum tuum; veruntamen seci ut restares, etc. J. T.
(as you well deserved) but that I have raised thee up for this very purpose,
that the World might see my Justice in punishing of thee, and my Power in my
Conquest over thee. And do thou yet so impudently exalt thy self against Me
and my People? Behold about this time to morrow I will cause it to rain a very
grievous Hail upon Thee, such as has not been in Egypt since it became a Land
inhabited by Misraim Son of Cham, who gave Name to that People and Country. And
Moses the more to set forth the terror of this Plague that was coming upon
them, advises the Egyptians to send for, and get home their Cattle and
Servants, and all that they had in the Field; For all that was found there,
would be destroyed by the Hail. Some of Pharaoh's Servants believed this
threatening of the Lord, and got their Servants and Cattle into houses, and so
had them preserved; but Others regarded it not. On the morrow Moses stretched
forth his Rod toward Heaven, and the Lord sent Thunder, and Hail mixed with
Fire, that ran upon the ground, which destroyed not only a great part of their
Corn, viz. the Barley V. 32. But the Wheat and the Rye were not smitten, for
they were not grown up; that is, so much as the Barley. It seems in Egypt they
sowed their Barley at the same time with their Wheat (which we do not) and
there the Barley would be by far the forwardest. Hordeo laeso incolume mansit
triticum, quippe cum hordei culmus aliquantum arefactus adeoque induratus non
cederet grandini, sed obniteretur itaque frangebatur. Triticum autem tenerum
adhuc and in herba velut abditum (licet non sub terra) lenta flexilique sua
mollitia procellae impetum devitavit. Drufius.
that was eared, and the Flax that was boll'd, and in the Stalk, and their
Herbs, but brake a great part of their Trees, and killed both Man and Beast
that were in the Storm, verse. 25. (so says the Psalmist, Psalm. 78.47, 48.) He
destroyed their Vines with Hail, and their Sycamore-Trees with Hailstones. He
gave up their Cattle also to the Hail, and their Flocks to the Thunderbolts.
And this dreadful Hail fell on all the Land of Egppt, only in the Land of
Goshen there was none. Pharaoh terrified with this dreadful Judgment, sent for
Moses and Aaron, and told them, He did now plainly see, and accordingly did
acknowledge, That he The Wicked do sometimes confess their sins to God's Glory,
but will not truly repent and reform, that they may be received to Mercy.
had sinned against God, and confessed, That God was Righteous, and he and his
people wicked. He desires them therefore to pray unto the Lord to remove this
Judgment, and that there might be no more such dreadful Thunder and Hail, and
he would let them go, they should stay no longer. Moses promises as soon as he
should be out of the City, he would stretch forth his hands in prayer to the
Lord. He knew, by Inspiration from God, that then the Thunder and Hail should
immediately cease; and Pharaoh might hereby be instructed, that the Earth is
the Lord's, and the whole Creation is at his disposal. But as for thee, and thy
Servants, (says he) I know beforehand that ye will be never a whit the better
for the removal of this Judgment. And the event proved it to be so. For when,
upon Moses's prayer, the Thunder and Hail seized the heart of Pharaoh, and his
Servants were hardened as before, and they would not let the people go.

Exodus Chapter 9. from 13. to the end.

Eighth Plague, Locusts.
8. About the seventh day of this Month God sent Moses to Pharaoh again, telling
him, He had hardened See Sect. 58.
his heart, and the hearts of his Servants, that he might glorify his Power
and Justice in bringing more signal Judgments on him. However, though Pharaoh
be obstinate, yet thou Moses (says God) shall for a remembrance of my Power and
Justice declare to thy Children, and Childrens Children the Wonders I have done
in Egypt upon Pharaoh and his people, that so you, in your several Generations,
may know and be assured that I am the Lord. Then Moses and Aaron went to
Pharaoh again, and expostulating with him, asked him, How long he would refuse
to humble himself before the Lord, and keep his people from going to serve him?
They tell him, If he continued still obstinate, on the morrow the Lord would
send Grasshoppers and Locusts into all his Quarters, and they should be sent in
such vast numbers, that they should in a manner cover the face of the Earth
from man's sight, and should devour the residue of the Grass, Herbs, and what
was green on the Trees, and the Wheat, and Corn which had escaped the Hail, and
they should fill his house, and the houses of his Servants, and of all the
Egyptians in such a manner, that neither he nor his Ancestors, nor any that
lived in Egypt before him did ever see such vast numbers of Locusts, nor any
that did did so much mischief as these should do. And Moses and Aaron when they
had delivered their Message, came away and left him. Then Pharaoh's Courtiers
and Servants said to him, How long shall this man Moses be a Snare to us? that
is, an Instrument, and means to bring Ruin and Destruction upon us? We beseech
thee let these people go; See thou not that the Land is already almost ruined
by the Plagues and Judgments that have been brought upon us? Then Pharaoh sent
for Moses and Aaron again to him, and told them, He was content they should go,
and serve the Lord their God. But then recalling himself, He asks, Who among
them, and how many of them, did they desire should go? Moses tells him, They
would go up All; with their Old, and with their Young, with their Wives, Sons
and Daughters, with their Flocks, and with their Herds; For they must make use
of some of them for Sacrifice, and of part of these Sacrifices they must keep a
Riligious Feast unto the Lord. Pharaoh being angry at this motion, that they
should desire their Children should go also (whom he intended to keep as
Hostages for their coming back) he said in a passion, I wish you might find no
more savor from God than you are like to find from me, in this your Suit, to
let your Children go also. Look to it, if you will presume to go in this
manner, at your own peril be it. I shall never consent that you should All go.
But as for you that are men grown, I care not if I permit you to go. For that
was all (as I understood) Pharaoh either mislook or perverted the words of
Moses and Aaron. For they demanded they might all go, but they desiring at
first that they might go to Sacrifice to the Lord, it seems Pharaoh thought
that only the men meant to go, and not the Women and Children also.
that at first you desired. Moses and Aaron not accepting of this, Pharaoh
caused them to be driven out of his presence. Then Moses stretched forth his
Rod over the Land of Egypt, and the Lord sent an East Wind which blew very
fiercely all day upon that Land, and the next morning it brought a vast Army of
Caterpillars, and Locusts very grievous, such as had never been seen there
before, nor are like ever to be again; and they were so many that they in a
manner covered the face of the Earth where there was any Herbage, and by flying
so many together like a Cloud, they in a manner darkened the Air, and they
devoured all the Corn, and Grass, and Herbs that the Hail had left. See Psalm.
78.46. and Psalm. 105.34. Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in have, and
said to them, I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you, in
using you as I have done. However pardon the wrong that I have done you, and
once more entreat the Lord to be favorable to me, and remove this deadly
Plague from me, which consumes and destroys all, and is like to bring a
grievous and general Famine upon us. And Moses went out, and entreated the Lord
for Pharaoh, and the Lord sent a strong West-wind that carried the Grasshoppers
and Locusts away, and cast them into the Red Sea, where they all perished. But
though this dreadful Judgment was removed, yet Pharaoh's hardness was not, for
he would not yet let the people go.

Chapter 10. from verse. 1. to 21.

The Month Abib, otherwise called Nisan, (answering to part of our March, and
part of our April,) which before had been the seventh Month (as we showed
before) was from this time forward made the first Month In rememberance of
their miraculous Deliverance out of Egypt, they were appointed to begin the
Year with this Month. Yet this account was afterward kept only in
Ecclesiastical Affairs. For the Jubilees, and such other Civil affairs, it
began as it had done before, Lev. 25.8, 9, 10.
of the year; and upon the tenth day of this Month, or a little before, was
instituted the Feast of the Passover, In Commemoration of God's passing over
them, and not involving them in the Common Plague that smote the Houses of the
Egyptians. Touching which Passover several Laws and Directions are given to
Moses. 1. Concerning the Sacrifice it self, or the matter of the Feast, viz. a
Lamb, or Kid of the first year, a Male without blemish. 2. This must be set
apart on the tenth day No mention made of separating the Paschal Lamb from the
Flock, four days before the Feast, in other places where the Passover is
commanded.
of this Month. Thus it was ordered at this time, that it might be in
readiness, and not to seek when they were encumbered with business about their
going away. 3. If one Household was too little for a Lamb, they were to join the
next Household to them, and they were to make their account proportionably to
the Lamb, and to the persons that were to eat of it, taking care that there
might not be too few, nor too many for it. Which number Josephus reckons to be
ten men, besides women and children.
4. They were to keep the Lamb to the 14th day of the same Month. 5. Every
Master of a Family of all the Congregation of Israel (whom it especially
concerned) was appointed to kill it on the 14th day between the two Evenings;
About that time our blessed Savior, the true Paschal Lamb, was put to death,
Mat. 27.46.
that is, between our three a Clock in the Afternoon and Sunset. The natural
day from Sun to Sun, the Jews divided into four parts. The first from
Sunrising to nine in the fore-noon, called the third hour. The second from
nine to twelve, called the sixth hour. The third from twelve to three in the
afternoon, called the ninth hour. The fourth from three in the afternoon to
Sunsetting, called the twelfth hour.
6. They were to strike, and sprinkle with a bunch of Hyssop, dipped in the
blood To direct the Faith of the Israelites to the blood of their great
Redeemer.
thereof, the two side-posts, and upper door-posts of the door of the House
where they did eat it. This seems peculiar to the Passover in Egypt.
7. None of them were to go out of the House where they did eat it till the
morning. 8. They were not to break a bone of it. 9. They were not to eat it raw
or sodden, but roasted with fire. And they were to roast it whole, Head, and
Legs with the appurtenance; that is, the inwards being first taken out, and
washed. 10. They were to eat it with unleavened Leaven haing two Properties to
sour, and puff up, might well signify malice, and pride which must be laid
aside.
Bread and bitter Herbs. 11. They were to eat it with their Loins girded, their
Shoes on their feet, and their Staff in their hand, like men in have, and
ready to be gone, and march out of Egypt. These Ceremonies were peculiar to
that Passover in Egypt.
12. They were to let nothing of it remain unto the morning; but if any thing
were left after they had eaten, it was to be burnt with fire. These things
being observed by them, Moses tells them, The Lord intended to pass by all the
Houses of the Israelites where the Paschal-Lamb was thus eaten, and the doors
thus sprinkled, but He would smite by his holy Angel all the Firstborn of the
Land of Egypt, both of Men and Beasts that remained. And he would then execute
Judgment on all the Gods of Egypt; that is, either some such notable Judgment
or Stroke should befall their Idols as did the Philistines Dagon Dicunt Hebraei
nocte illa idola lignea subito putrefacta, and metallica resoluta, and lapidea
comminuta. Artapanus apud Eusebius. lib. 9. Praepar. dicit motu terra concidisse
pleraque Templa Aegyptiaca.
before the Ark, 1 Samuel 5.3. or else perhaps he intended hereby to signify,
That he would make it appear that their Idol-Gods were vain, and unable to
preserve themselves against his Hand, who was the true and only God. 13. This
Passover was to be observed by them afterward in succeeding Generations, for a
Memorial of this great Deliverance, and they were to observe it for ever; that
is, all the time that that Ceremonial Service should last; namely, till Christ
(who is the true Passover) shall be sacrificed, who fulfilling all the Figures,
shall abolish the use of them, and bring in a new Age and State into the
Church. 14. A Feast of Unleavened Bread must be observed the seven days
immediately following. The first of these seven days was the 15th day of this
Month, and began at the Evening immediately after the eating of the Passover,
which they were to eat at the latter end of the 14th day, as is said before,
and every person, whether stranger or born in the Land, that did eat leaven
during that time, was to be cut off from Communion with the Church, and in case
of contumacy and contempt, was liable to Capital Puniments from God, or the
Magistrate. See Genesis 17.14. Exodus 31.14. The first and last days of this Feast
were to be holy Convocations, and to be observed in the manner of Sabbaths, and
no servile-work to be done in them. Yet with this difference, that on these
days meat might be dressed, but not on the Sabbaths. And on these days the
people were to meet for the Public Worship of God. Lastly, They were to
acquaint their Children from Generation to Generation with the meaning of this
Passover, and upon what occasion it was Instituted. Moses having received these
Directions from God, Communicates them to the people, commanding them to draw
out their Lambs according to their Families, and to set them apart on this 10th
day, to be in readiness against the 14th, as was prescribed. And further, He
injoyns them, that when they were to march out of Egypt (for which they should
now prepare themselves) they should borrow of the Egyptians Jewels, and Vessels
of Silver and of Gold, Nempe eo pratextu quasi ad Sacrificia and solemnitatem
Domini usui essent futura. Jans.
and precious Vestments, and possibly rich Furniture, and such kind of things,
and that God would dispose the hearts of the Egyptians to lend them any thing,
rather then that they should stay. The people of Israel when they heard these
things, bowed the head, and worshipped, in token of their ready submission and
reverent acceptance of these Commands from God, and their willingness to obey
them.

Chapter 12. from verse. 1. to 29.

9. God now Commands Moses, by stretching forth his hand toward the Heavens,
Ninth Plague, Three days Darkness.
to bring a ninth Plague on Pharaoh and his people. Which was three days of
Palpable Darkness; thick Clouds, gross Mists, and moist Vapors, as it is
probable so thickening, and condensating the Aer, that it might be felt, and in
likelihood by their moistness extinguishing all Fires, and artificial Lights,
as Candles use to be put out by a damp. Neither, it seems, had they any light
from Sun, Moon or Stars from above, but the darkness was so thick they could
not see one another for three days together, and with the terror thereof they
durst not so much as move from the places where they were. And being under the
arrest of this hideous Darkness, they sat still, not seeing whether to go, or
what to do. And as some gather from Psalm. 78.49. they had at that time many
frightful Apparitions of Devils, and evil Spirits among them. Horrifica tum
spectra Daemonum viderunt; quod idcirco memoratur, Psalm. 78.49. loco plagae
tenebrarum quae ibi nec nominantur. H^nc Pharaonem plurimum commovet hac plaga
qui ad priora obduruit.
But the Israelites had all this while light in their Dwellings as at other
times, and might have in these three days time gone away with all that they
had, but God would not suffer them to go away as Fugitives, but to march out in
a way of honorable and triumphant Victory over their Enemies. When the three
days darkness was over, on the 14th day of this month Pharaoh sent for Moses in
great have, and offered that they should all go, Men, Women and Children, only
their Flocks and Herds should be left there as a Pledge and Pawn of their
Return. But Moses Replied, Thou must not only give way that we our selves may
go, but must permit us to take our Cattle also, that we may have wherewith to
sacrifice to our God. For we know not what sort, or what number of Cattle we
shall be ordered to sacrifice to the Lord, till we come thither; therefore our
Cattle must go with us, there shall not an Hoof be left behind. But Pharaoh's
heart was so hardened, that he would not consent to this; But falling into a
great Rage and Passion with Moses, he bids him get him out of his sight, and
never see his face more. If he did, he should die for it. Moses tells him, He
had spoken right in that, for he should see his face no more. But God having
revealed to him what he intended to do to Pharaoh, and his people. He acquaints
him boldly with a Tenth Plague (and a very dreadful one) that the Lord would
bring upon them. He tells him, That very night, about midnight God would by his
Most usually the wicked are destroyed by good Angels, and the godly are
chastised by the bad, as we see in the case of Job.
holy Angel (see Exodus 12.23.) slay the Firstborn in all the Land of Egypt,
from the Firstborn of Pharaoh that sits upon the Throne, to the Firstborn
of the Maidservant that is grinding Or behind the Mill] Those that thus worked
at these Hand-Mills were said to be behind them, because they used to thrust
the Mill before them as they wrought. The meanest Servants were used to be put
to this work, wherefore Mills were often in Prisons where Prisoners and
Captives were wont to be set to work at them, thrusting and turning them about
with the main strength of their Bodies, and so driving them before them.
at the Mill, and the Firstborn of their remaining Cattle. And there shall be
such an hideous Outcry in all the Land of Egypt, as never was before, nor
shall ever be again. But in the Habitations of the Children of Israel all shall
be so still, and quiet, that the very Dogs, who are usually roused by the least
noise, shall not so much as once bark, or move their tongues, or make any
disturbance either to Man or Beast. And when all this shall come to pass, then
(says he) you shall know how great a difference the Lord does put between the
Israelites and the Egyptians. And then shall these thy Servants and Courtiers
be sent by thee unto me, and shall bow themselves unto me, saying, Go forth
thou, and all the people that follow thee, over whom thou have the Government,
and after that I will go forth, with all the people of Israel with me, and with
all that we have. Moses having thus spoken, went out from Pharaoh in a great
anger, (i) his zeal for the Glory of God heightening his indignation against
the obstinacy of Pharaoh.

Chapter 10. from verse. 21. to the end.

Chapter 11. from verse. 4. to the 9. See Numb. 12.3. Ephesians. 4.26.


Tenth Plague, The destruction of the Firstborn.
10. The Israelites when they first came down down into Egypt, being but few,
part of the Province of Goshen was sufficient for them, but afterward they
multiplied so much, that they spread all over that Country, and besides had
many mixed Habitations in other parts of Egypt. Habitant Egyptii Hebraeis
permixti.
The evening therefore of this 14th day of this Month being come, Moses called
for the Elders of Israel to draw out their Lambs, according to their Families,
and to kill the Passover, and to sprinkle with a bunch of Hyssop the Door-posts
of their Houses with the blood of the Lamb, and that none of them should stir
out of the doors where they did meet to eat the Passover till the morning. The
Children of Israel doing as the Lord had commanded them by Moses; at Midnight
the Angel of the Lord smote all the Firstborn Ica nullus Pater alii possit
esse solatio, cum clades omnibus communis esset.
in the Land of Egypt, from the Firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on the Throne to
the Firstborn of the Captive that was in the Dungeon, and all the Firstborn
of their remaining Cattle.

Pharaoh, upon this, and his Servants, and the Egyptians rose up in the night,
and there was a great and hideous Cry through out all the Land; for there was
not an house in Egypt (which had a Firstborn in it) where there was not one
dead; and in houses where there were no Children, probably the eldest and chief
of the Family was slain. Pharaoh hereupon presently sent his Servants that were
about him to Moses and Aaron, and commanded them to speak to them in his Name,
That they should presently go away, and should take their Wives and Children,
Herds and Flocks, and all that they had along with them; and he desires they
would bless him, and pray for him at their departure, that He might not perish
by this Plague. He had desired their prayers for him several times before,
Exodus 8.8. and 9.28. and 10.16, 17.
And the Egyptians were very urgent with the Israelites, and used humble and
earnest Entreaties to them to be gone (see Exodus 11.8.) saying among
themselves, that if they did not hasten them away, they were all dead men; that
is, in extreme danger of death, and like to perish. The Egyptians being in this
dreadful Consternation, the Israelites (as Moses had commanded them) borrowed
of them Jewels, Solebant Idololatrae in colendis idolis se gemmis and in
auribus decorare. Credebant autem Egyptii hoc petentes Israelitas suis Diis
sacrificaturos (prout antea fecerant) ideoque nec abituros e terra. Nam Moses
hactenus tridui tantum itineris mentionem fecerat.
and Vessels of Silver, and Vessels of Gold, and fine Raiment, V. 35. Et
Vestem] i. e. pretiosiores vestes, tapetes and similia. Jans.
and rich Furniture, and such like precious things for their use in keeping the
Festival. And God thus disposed their hearts through the great and pannick fear
they were in; For it seems they thought that if the Israelites were not sent
away presently, the next Plague would destroy them all. And besides, that the
Lord gave the Israelites favor in their eyes, so that they very readily lent
them, and furnished them with any thing they desired of them. And possibly they
thought the Israelites intended only a three days journey into the Wilderness,
there to sacrifice unto the Lord, and then would return, and so they should
have their rich things again. And that which in likelihood inclined their
hearts the more to favor the Israelites, was the high opinion that both
Pharaoh's Courtiers, and the people of Egypt had generally of Moses. For him
they much honored and feared, in regard of his Wisdom and Conduct: and the
manifold Miracles that had been wrought by his Ministry, both in bringing
Judgments, and removing them. So that whasoever he should ask or require of the
Egyptians for himself, or the people of Israel, was not like to be denied him.
And thus was fulfilled that which God promised to Abraham, Genesis 15.13, 14. Thy
Seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not theirs 400 years, and that
Nation whom they shall serve will I judge, and afterward they shall come out
with great substance. And the same was also promised Exodus 3.22. and all now
exactly performed. For now the Israelites carried away a great deal of the
riches of the Egyptians, and that not only by Gods permission, but express
Command, (Chapter 11.2.3.) who is the Supreme Lord of all, and all that is in the
World is his, and He may do what he will with his own, Mat. 20.15. And just it
was with the Lord thus to recompense the Israelites for the hard Service,
Injuries, and Oppressions they had suffered in Egypt, and as it were to pay
them their wages which the Egyptians, had most unjustly detained from them.

Exodus 12. from 29. to verse. 37.

CHAP. IV. The Fourth Age of the World, from the coming of the Israelites out
of Egypt, to the laying the Foundation of Solomon's Temple in the Fourth Year
of his Reign, containing a space of 480 Years, and ending in the 2988th Year of
the World.
SECT. I.
THe Egyptians being now in great distraction, and filled with sorrow for the
death of their Firstborn, pressed the Israelites to depart. The very next day
therefore after the Passover See Numb. 33.3.
(the term of 430 Years from the first Promise made to Abraham, and his
removing from Vz of the Chaldees being just now completed) See Gal. 3.17.
the Israelites carring away with them their unleavened Dough (which was not
well seasoned, nor made up, by reason of their have, even lumps of Dough bound
up in Clothes upon their Shoulders,) together with the Spoils of the Egyptians,
began their Journey, and marched away with an high hand in the sight of all the
Egyptians (Numb. 33.3.) from all Quarters to Rameses their general Rendezvous;
and there they all met, who either dwelt mixed among the Egyptians, (see Exodus
3.22.) and were scattered up and down in Egypt, or else dwelt in Goshen near
Rameses, where they were at first placed by Joseph, (Genesis 47.11.) they being in
all six hundred thousand men of the Israelitish Race, besides Women and
Children; and to them a mixed multitude voluntarily joined themselves, viz.
Servants and Strangers, who were willing to go away with them; and doubtless
the rather, because Egypt must needs be now in a sad condition, by reason of
the many Plagues God had lately inflicted on them; And (which speaks the
wonderful Providence of God over this people) in that vast multitude there was
not one sick or feeble person among them, as we read Psalm. 105. verse. 37.

Exodus 12. from verse. 34. to 43.

SECT. II.
FRom Rameses, this vast multitude with their Flocks and Herds, and much
Cattle, remove to Succoth (which signifies Booths) because here they made
themselves Booths of the Boughs of Trees; in remembrance of which, the Feast of
Tabernacles was afterward appointed, as we may see Lev. 23.42, 43, Here Moses
receives some further Commands and Directions concerning the Passover. (1.) No
Stranger or Forreigner was to eat thereof, unless he were first Circumcised,
and so incorporated into the Jewish Church. (2ly,) Servants that were Strangers
after they were well instructed and circumcised, might eat thereof; and that no
Forreigner or Hireling might on other terms oat thereof. (3ly,) Every Lamb was
to be eaten by one Company in the same house, and none of it to be carried out,
to be eaten abroad. (4ly,) No bone of it was to be broken. A Figure of Christ,
whose bones were not broken, as the two Thieves bones were Joh. 19.33. to show,
that no man had power to take away his life, but that he voluntarily laid it
down, John 10.18.
(5ly,) All the Congregation of Israel were to prepare themselves, and to eat
the Passover as the Lord had Commanded, and he that neglected it was to be cut
off, Numb. 9.13. (6ly,) The circumcised Stranger shall enjoy the same right and
benefit with the native Jews, one Law shall be to them both; God also Commands,
That all their Firstborn males of Man and Beast shall be consecrated unto him,
in a thankful Memorial that he saved their Firstborn, when he destroyed the
Firstborn of the Egyptians, and therefore such might not be given as a Vow or
Free-will-Offering being before the Lords by a peculiar Right, Lev. 27.26. Yet
the Firstling of an Ass (and so of all other unclean Beasts, Numb. 18.15.) they
might redeem with a Lamb, But if they would not redeem it, they were to b^eak
its neck, because it was not fit that that which of right belonged unto God,
should be put to any other ordinary use.
and the Firstborn of Man they might redeem with five Shekels of Silver, Numb.
18.16. He Commands also, That the day of their going out of Egypt shall be had
in perpetual Remembrance, and that the Feast of Unleavened Bread shall be
yearly kept in the Land of Canaan, that so that Deliverance may never be
forgotten, and that they shall acquaint their Children from Generation to
Generation with the Story, and the wonderful manner thereof, and shall instruct
them in the meaning and signification of this Paschal-Solemnity, which was
Instituted upon that occasion; telling them, That this Passover Which was
Oommemorative f their Deliverance, and Prefigurative of the Death and Passion
of Christ.
ought to be such a kind of remembrance unto them of Gods extraordinary Mercy
in delivering their Fathers out of the Bondage of Egypt, as if they wore any
Signet or Token upon their Hands, or any Frontlet or Jewel upon their Foreheads
between their Eyes, Vide Deuteronomy. 6.8. and 11.18. Pharisaei, qui haec carnaliter,
and crasso modo intelligebant, alligabant Brachiis, and Fronti sua Phylacteria,
quae carpit Christus, Math. 23.5.
to put them in mind of some important thing which they ought by no means to
forget. And so it will come to pass that they will delight to think and speak
of the Law, and Commandments of God, to the Observance of which this admirable
Deliverance will be a strong engagement.

Exodus 12. from verse. 43. to the end.

Exodus 13. from verse. 1. to 17.

SECT. III.
FRom Succoth they march on in good array; that is, as it is probable in five
Bodies, Verse. 18. Quini ascenderunt, i. e. in quincurias dispositi, Rivet.
Quinque turmis ascenderunt. Munsterus. See also Dutch Annotations in loc.
or Brigads toward Etham, in the edge of the Wilderness, where was their next
Encamping, the Lord conducting Here it is said, v. 21. that the Lord led them by
this Pillar, Chapter 14. 19. it is said the Angel of the Lord went before them. This
therefore was the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. the Eternal Son of God, 1
Cor. 10.9.
them by a Pillar of a Cloud by day, which was also a Pillar of Fire to them by
Night, and a Sign of his gracious Presence with them; This Sign of his Presence
was like a Pillar ascending round, and straight from the Earth toward Heaven;
by Night it had the appearance of Fire, Numb. 9.15. In the day time, it seems,
it dispersed it self abroad when need was, like a Cloud, and so shaddowed them
from the Sun, (see Psalm. 105. verse. 39.) when they were to rest or stay in any
place it removed back into the midst of the Camp, and after the Tabernacle was
made, it rested upon that, and when it was taken up, and moved, whether by day
or night, they were to march, see Numb. 9.18, 21. And out of this Cloudy Pillar
the Lord spoke to them, Psalm. 99.7. Numb. 12.5, 10. Deuteronomy. 31.15. The Lord
therefore (as we said before) by this Pillar conducted the Israelites to Etham;
from whence through the Land of the Philistines was the nearest and directest
way to Canaan. But the Lord was not pleased to lead them that way, foreseeing
the Philistines were like to deny them passage through their Country, so that
they must fight their way through them (who were a Warlike People) if they
intended to pass. And the Lord foresaw, that the meeting with so formidable a
difficulty at the first, might possibly discourage the Children of Israel, and
make them repent that they left Egypt, and might dispose them to return thither
again. For this, and other reasons, the Lord was pleased to order the people to
march back from Etham to the Wilderness of the Red Sea. And they carried
Joseph's bones with them, according to the Command given them, Genesis 50. And
it is probable they carried the bones of the other Patriarchs (the Sons of
Jacob) along with them also, according to what Stephen relates, Acts 7.15, 16.

Exodus 13. from verse. 17. to the end.

SECT. IV.
FRom Etham the Lord Commands them to turn back again, and to Encamp before
Pihahiroth, between Migdol and the Sea over against Baal-Zephon. This was a
narrow passage between two ledges of Mountains, with the Sea before them. It
seems it was now told Pharaoh, that the people of Israel were fled from Etham,
and it was so represented to Him as if they had run away from thence being
terrified, whereas they marched back with an high Hand, and with displayed
Banners. Pharaoh hearing this, and that they were pitched at so inconvenient a
place as Pihahiroth, He and his Courtiers said among themselves, They are
entangled in the Land, and the Wilderness has shut them in; Let us therefore
pursue after them. Pharaoh accordingly with his Horses and Chariots Of old they
used Chariots with Sithes at their sides to mow down men in their way. They had
other Chariots out of which they fought as men do now out of Ships. But where
had Pharooh horses? seeing it is said, Chapter 9.6. All the Cattle of Egypt died.
Answ. All here is taken for many. See the Notes on that place.
of War (to the Number of 600, all that could be got together on the sudden,)
with his Horsemen and Army pursues after them, and found them Encamped in
those Streights near the Sea. When Pharaoh with his Army drew nigh, the
Children of Israel were dreadfully affrighted. Fly they could not, having the
Sea before them, the Egyptians behind them, and steep and unpassable Hills on
either side of them; Yet God so ordered it, that the Egyptians overtook them
not, their Camps being parted by the Pillar of Cloud, which from going before
the Camp of Israel now removed and went behind them, and it cast a great
darkness on the Egyptians, but gave light to the Israelites; However the people
being in great Consternation, they Cry unto the Lord for help, and cry out in a
high discontent against Moses. What, say they, were there no Graves in Egypt,
that thou have brought us forth to die in the Wilderness? Did we not desire
thee to let us alone with our Bondage in Egypt, rather then expose us to such
dangers as these? Moses desired them to be quiet; fear not (says he) but stand
still, and see the Salvation of the Lord, which he will show you this day. For
the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them no more for ever. The
Lord will fight for you, you need only to be quiet, and hold your peace, and to
keep your selves from doubting or murmuring, and humbly to trust in God, whose
help is readiest when the danger of his people is greatest. However Moses
though he firmly relied on God, yet sent up many strong Cries and Ejaculations
to the Lord, mixed with some perturbation of Mind, upon the peoples Clamor
against him. The Lord hereupon calls to him, not to employ himself further in
praying to him at that time, but to march on directly with the people to the
Red Sea, which he does accordingly; and coming thither, the Lord bids him
Stretch forth his Rod over the Sea, and upon that action of his, the Sea should
divide it self Moses does as he was commanded, and a strong East Wind blew, and
the Sea miraculously divided it self, standing on heaps on each side; Then the
Israelites, by God's Command, Moses leading the way, passed through it safe, as
upon dry ground, and the Waters were a Wall unto them on the right hand and on
the left, The Apostle says, Heb. 11.29. That by Faith they passed through the
Sea, and 1 Cor. 10.2. That they were all baptized to Moses in the Cloud, and in
the Sea. See Apostol. History, page 169. the explication hereof.
Pharaoh and his Host coming to the Sea, and seeing it thus divided, they
thought they might pass through it as well as the Israelites, and accordingly
entered the passage Quos excidio destinat, occaecat Deus.
to follow them; but they were much hindered in their march after them, by the
falling off of their Chariot wheels. For the Lord in the Morning-Watch
Anciently the nights in stead of hours were divided into many Watches, 1 Samuel
11.11. the number of which is not certainly known, and the day into Morning,
Midday, and Even.
looking out of the Pillar of Fire and Cloud upon the Egyptians, testified his
Displeasure against them by Lightnings, and Thunder, and Rain, with which he
much distressed and disordered them, as David more largely relates, Psalm.
77.18, 19. Insomuch that many of the Egyptians themselves were now sensible
that God appeared against them, and for the Israelites, and therefore desired
to retreat, and not to pursue after them any further. The Israelites at last
got all safe to the other side of the shore, viz. to the Desert of Etham, and
then God commanded Moses to stretch forth his Hand again over the Sea, which
being done, the Waters came together again, and so overwhelmed This was a just
Judgment of God upon the Egyptians, who had cast the poor Infants of the
Israelites into the water, and had drowned them without remorse.
the whole Host of the Egyptians, not one of them escaped. The Israelites saw
some of their Carcasses floating upon the Sea, and cast upon the shore. Thus
God with an outstretched Arm saved the Israelites that day out of the hands of
the Egyptians, and the people feared the Lord, and believed in him, and
believed the word which Moses spoke unto them in the Name of the Lord.

Genesis 14. whole Chapter.

SECT. V.
THe Israelites being thus Miraculously delivered from the Egyptians, Moses See
Rev. 15.3.
composed a Song of Praise and Thanksgiving to God for this wonderful and
transcendent Mercy, and He and the Children of Israel sang it before the Lord.
This Song is the first of that kind Canticum, (...).
we find any where in the Scripture. It Is partly Historical setting forth a
triumphant Narration of Gods admirable Mercy in destroying his and their
Enemies; partly Prophetical, containing Prophesies of future Bessings assured
to Israel, set down not only in the Future, but often in the Preter-tense, for
the greater Certainty.

First, It Is Historical; It begins, I will sing unto the Lord for he has
triumphed gloriously; the Horses of the Egyptians, and their Riders has he
thrown into the Sea. The Lord is my strength, and my Song; that is, we being
weak in our selves He fought for us, and subdued our Enemies; It Is the Lord,
therefore of whom we will sing, and whose Praise we will set forth in our Song.
It Is by him that we are saved and delivered out of the hands of our Enemies. He
is our God, and we being his people. He has by the Spirit of Prophecy
fore-shewed us, that we shall build a Tabernacle for his Worship and Service.
He is our God, and the God of our Fathers, therefore we will lift up his high
Praises, and exalt him. He is a mighty, and all-powerful, Warrior indeed,
Jehovah See Annotations on Chapter 3.14, 15.
is his Name. Pharaoh's Chariots, and his Host has he cast into the Sea, his
chosen Captains also are drowned in the Red Sea: The Depths have covered them,
they sank into the bottom as a stone. Thy right Hand, O Lord, is become
Glorious in Power, Thy right Hand has broken and destroyed the Enemy, and by
thy glorious and excellent Power thou have overthrown the Egyptians, who in
rising up against thy people, did rise up against thee. Thou did send forth
thy Wrath, which consumed them utterly and speedily, even as stubble is
consumed by the fire. With the blast of thy Nostrils the Waters were gathered
together; that is, by a mighty Wind raised by thine Almighty Power, accompanied
with a great Noise, To this the Prophet seems to have reference, Hab. 3. -- 10.
the Sea was divided, and the Waters were heaped up on either side, and stood
like congealed or compacted Walls in the heart of the Sea. The Enemy said, I
will pursue, overtake, and divide the Spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon
them, I will draw my Sword, my Hand shall destroy them. But thou, O Lord, did
soon confound their vain Imaginations. For thou did blow with a mighty Wind,
and immediately the Waters came together again, and the Sea covered them, they
sank as lead in the deep Waters. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods?
who among all the false Gods of the Heathen, or the mightiest men on the Earth
is in any degree worthy to be compared to Thee? who art glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, (that is, to be praised with a great measure of filial fear
and awfulness) doing Wonders. Thou stretchedst out thy Hand, and the Earth
swallowed them, that is, those of them whose bodies were cast up by the Waves
upon the shore, were thrown into Pits by us, and there buried. Thou in thy
great Mercy have brought forth thy people, whom thou have redeemed out of the
Land of Egypt, and have thus far led them by thine Almighty Power and Strength
toward the Land of Canaan, where thou have determined to set up thy holy
Temple, thy resting Place, [Psal. 132.14.] The Place which thou have chosen
where thy holy Worship shall be set up and established, and where thou have
promised to dwell; that is, to afford thy special Presence. See 1 Kings 9.
verse. 3.

The Second Part of this Song is Prophetical, beginning at v. 14. The people
shall hear, and be afraid, sorrow shall take hold on the Inhabitants of
Palestina; That is, the report of this dreadful overthrow of Pharaoh shall so
amaze and astonish the Inhabitants of Palestina, the Dukes of Edom, and the
mighty men of Moab, See this Prophecy fulfilled Numb. 22.3. Josh. 2.9. and 5.1.
and the Inhabitants of Canaan, that their very hearts shall faint, and melt
with fear as wax does before the fire, insomuch that they shall be as still as
a stone, and Israel shall pass over Jordan into Canaan without opposition. Thou will bring them in, and plant them in the Mountain of thine Inheritance; that
is, in Canaan a mountanous Country, Deuteronomy. 11.11. and particularly thou will
bring them to Mount Moriah, which thou have chosen as thine Inheritance, and
where by thy own Hands and Power thou intendest to establish thy Sanctuary, and
where thou have promised to dwell, and to afford thy gracious Presence. The
Lord will Reign for ever and ever in spite of all his Enemies.

Miriam She was the Sister of Moses also, but her reference to Aaron was best
known, by reason of Moses's absence. She is said to be the wife of Hur by the
Hebrews.
the Sister of Aaron (who had the Spirit of Prophecy, Numb. 12.2. and was one
of the three Principal Guides which God gave his people, Mich. 6.4.) took a
Timbrel in her hand, and the Women followed her, playing on their Timbrels also
(according to the Custom in public Rejoycings, Judge. 11.34.) and they
expressed their exultation and rapture of Mind by lively motions, and
tripudiations of their Bodies; and when the Men had sang a Verse of this Song,
then She with the Women sung it over again, at least they repeated the first
Verse of it. Sing to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, the Horse and
his Rider has he thrown into the Sea. And possibly they added, For his Mercy
endures for ever, as it is Psalm. 136. 2 Chronicles. 5.13.

With this Song of Moses, for Victory over the Egyptian-Pharaoh, the Holy Ghost
compares the Song of them, that shall be Victorious over the Spiritual Pharaoh,
viz. the Beast and Antichrist, Rev. 15. from 1. to 5.

Exodus 15. from 1. to 22.

SECT. VI.
THe Israelites being now come on the other side of the Red Sea, they marched
three whole days through the Wilderness of Shur, Called also the Wilderness of
Etham, Numb. 33.8. one might be the general name of the whole Wilderness, and
the other of some part of it. It seems the Wilderness on both sides of the
Red Sea was called the Wilderness of Etham.
but found no water all the way. As for Food it is probable they were sustained
with that unleavened Bread, and other provisions they had brought with them out
of Egypt. At last they came to Marah, their fifth Encamping, where they found
water indeed, but it was so bitter they could not drink it; hereupon they
murmur against Moses, asking him in a discontented mood, What they should
drink? Moses upon this Cries unto the Lord, who showed him a Tree, which when
he had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet. But the changing of
the nature and taste of the waters was to be attributed to the Power of God, and
not to any virtue in that Tree. After God had thus tried them, and proved them,
not only by their want of water, but by his present favorable dealing with
them, in not punishing them for their murmuring, as he might justly have done;
He then admonishes them by Moses to take heed of this sin of murmuring against
Him, or distrusting of Him, and to carry themselves more obediently toward Him
for the future. And so he made this a Statute and an Ordinance, That if they
would do that, which was right in his sight, and would obey his Commandments,
and keep all his Statutes, he would bring none of those Diseases and Plagues
upon them, which he had brought on the Egyptians. For He was their Healer, V.
26. Medicus, quia ex omnibus periculis, and malis tam animarum quam corporum
(quae morbis, and morti saepe comparantur) homines sibi confisos liberat, Psalm.
103. v. 3. Glasius.
and could heal not only their Bodies, but their Souls also, by forgiving their
sins, and sanctifying their natures.

Exodus 15. from 22. to 27.

SECT. VII.
FRom Marah they removed to Elim their sixth Station, famous for twelve Wells
of water and 70 Palm Trees. And here it seems they stayed many days, because
the Place was so pleasant, and convenient by reason of the waters, and the
shade.

Exodus 15. verse. 27.

SECT. VIII.
FRom Elim they turned back again to the Red Sea (which was their seventh
Station) as appears from Numb. 33.10. the Lord so ordering it (as it is
probable) that he might try them again, and might make them take a second View
of that Sea, that so their Deliverance thereat might make the deeper impression
on them.

SECT. IX.
THey came now on the fifteenth day of the second month to the eighth place of
their Encamping in the Wilderness of Sin, which lies between Elim and Sinai,
where, for want of Food, they murmured against Moses and Aaron, and wished in a
desperate discontent, That they had died by the Hand of the Lord in Egypt
(where they sat by the Fleshpots, V. 2. Murmurabant] piscibus in Aegypto,
volatilibusque assueti. At unde Carnium inopia? Multa enim illis erant pecora:
nisi p^percisse dicantur, vel quia minus foecunda ab inopiam pascuorum; vel
quod in sacrificia servarent. Sed verisimile est alias eos Carnes desiderasse;
Quales in Aegypto habere poterant. Unde Deus noscens quid desiderarent, to
genere Carnium eos satiat. Aug. quaest. Exodus 62. They had Cattle in the
Desert, but if they should have eaten of them, they might soon have killed them
all up. It Is probable they longed not for such kind of Flesh as they had at
hand, but for the Flesh of Fowls, such as they used to eat in Egypt, and wanted
now. Willet.
and did eat bread to the full,) rather than that they had been brought into
that Wilderness to die there by hunger. The Lord took notice of these their
murmurings, and was highly offended at them. Therefore he said to Moses, I have
heard the murmurings of the Children of Israel; I will yet prove them, whether
they will walk in my Law or no; and therefore tell them, at the Evening I will
give them Quails, and they shall eat Flesh; and in the Morning I will rain
Bread from Heaven for them, and they shall see that glorious Work of mine which
I will work for them. [See Joh. 11.40. Numb. 14.21, 22.] Moses and Aaron
acquaint the people herewith, and tell them, They shall now see that it was the
Lord that brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and that He and Aaron were but
his Instruments, and had not done it of their own heads, but did only what He
commanded them; and therefore their murmurings against them were indeed against
the Lord Himself. Then the Congregation of the Children of Israel being charged
to come near before the Lord, and there being at that time (before the
Tabernacle was built) no another visible sign of his Presence among them, but
only the Pillar of Cloud, which was now in the front of their Army, leading
them toward the Wilderness, they turned their faces toward that, and
perceived that God did in a more glorious manner than ordinary manifest the
brightness of his Presence: For from thence the Lord tells Moses, That He had
heard the murmurings of the people, and might justly Chastize them for it;
however he would give them Quails Here God gave them Quails for that one time
only; but at Kibroth-Hattavah, Numb. 11.31. they had them for a whole month
together.
in the Evening, and Manna in the Morning. And accordingly at Even the Quails
came and covered their Camp, and in the Morning the dew lay round about their
Camp, and when the dew was gone, there lay a small round thing, as small as the
Hoar-Frost, Unde patet fuisse Manna instar grani grandinis vel sacchari minuti.
on the ground. It was a substance so solid, that it would endure grinding in a
Mill, or pounding in a Mortar, yet so friable and brittle, that it melted at
the rising of the Sun. It was little and round like Coliander-seed, but of a
whitish color like bdellium, Quod est genus gummi pellucidi.
Numb. 11.7, 8. It was ready meat to eat when gathered, and so eaten, the taste
of it was like Wafers made with Honey, It was a different thing from (...), or
the honey-dew called Manna at this day by the Apothecaries which is not Food
but Physic. The Book Of Wisdom says, Chapter 16.20, 21. That it was able to
content every man's pallat, and agreed to every taste; and tempered it self to
every man's liking. But if God had given this miraculous Bread such an
extraordinary gift to satisfy every appetite, and to relish according to every
man's desire, and to taste like any meat they longed for, why did the Israelites
murmur against Moses that they had no Flesh? and repine because they had not
the Cucumbers, and Melons, and Leeks, and Onions, and Garlic of Egypt, Numb.
11.4, 5.
verse. 31. but if they baked it in Pans, the taste of it was like fresh Oil.

But to return, In the Morning when the Israelites saw it lying on the ground,
they said one to another, Man-hu, Man pro Mah dialecto Aegyptiaca, vel Man
ipsum, hoc est praeparatum a (...) praeparare, scil. cibus praeparatus a Deo,
vel quod cibus in s^ipso praeparatus fuit non indigens alia praeparatione; fuit
enim in scipso bonus, and esui aptus. Vatablus.
What is this? as if they should have said, this is a strange Food prepared and
given us from above, but we know not particularly what it is, or what to name
it. Moses tells them, It is the Bread that God had given them to eat; It is
Man, that is, a prepared portion. Then Moses gives them some Commands from God
concerning it.

1. Every man might gather according to his eating; that is, proportionably as
he had more or fewer in his Family. The quantity of an Omer (the tenth part of
an Epha, which is thought to be about a pottle of our measure) is allowed to
every single person as his proportion for a day. And the Children of Israel,
according as their Families were, gathered some more, some less. And when they
had brought home what they had gathered, the Head of the Family measured it
out, and gave every one his Omer, An Omer is the ten^h part of an Epha or
Jewish bushel containing about three of our pecks.
as his share and proportion, and no more. So that they that gathered much had
but their Omer for their daily allowance, and the rest it is like they gave to
them that gathered less, that they might have their Omer also. Hence it is that
the Apostle by this Example of the Israelites helping one another, exhorts the
Christian Corinthians in like manner to supply the necessities of their
Brethren, 2 Cor. 8.13.14, 15.
And though every one had an Omer allowed him; which shows how liberal an
allowance God did make them for their daily Food, yet it cannot be imagined
that every one did eat their whole allowance every day; but though they did
not, yet they might not reserve any of it till next day, but what they left
they were either to burn or cast forth, God intending hereby that they should
live in daily dependence on his Providence, (see Mat. 6.11.) However some of
them were so Disobedient, that they reserved some of it till next morning, and
it bred Worms and stank; which Disobedience of theirs much provoked Moses to be
angry with them.

2. They were to gather it in the morning betimes. For when the Sun waxed hot
it melted.

3. On the sixth day they were to gather twice as much as on other days;
namely, two Omers for one person; which order, when the people observed, the
Elders and Rulers came and told Moses thereof, doubting whether they did well
therein, seeing an Omer and no more was their fixed allowance for one day.
Hereupon Moses tells them, That the next day was an holy Sabbath to the Lord,
and on that day From whence some infer the antiquity and morality of the
Sabbath, this happening before the giving the Law on Mount Sinai.
no Mannah should fall; and therefore on the sixth day they had a double
allowance, and on that day they were to bake or sees of their Mannah what they
thought fit to eat thereof that day, and to reserve the remainder for the
Sabbath Day, and though reserved to that day it should not stink or breed
Worms, as one other days if kept it would do. Yet some of the people were so
unbelieving and disobedient, that they went out on the Sabbath Day to seek
Mannah, but found none, for which God was angry with them, and charged them not
to go out on the Sabbath Day any more to seek it, but to observe that day unto
him, which the people accordingly did. On this kind of bread they lived
afterward by the space of forty years, Comederant Man 40 annis tanquam cibum
ordinarium, cui non erat vetitum carnes, vel cibos alios adjungere si quos, vel
venatu, vel emptione a vicinis gentibus consequebantur, ut apparet ex Deuteronomy.
2.6. Janson.
even till they came to the borders of the Land of Canaan. And a Pot,
containing the quantity of an Omer, was afterward by Gods Command filled
therewith, and reserved by the Ark of Testimony, Or Ark of the Testimony,
because in it were the Tables of Gods Law, which testified his Will to his
people. See Heb. 9.4. See Apostolical History, page 380.
( viz. which testified Gods Presence among them) to be kept as a Memorial of
Gods goodness in thus miraculously feeding of them.

Exodus 16. whole Chapter.

SECT. X.
THeir ninth Remove was to Dophka, their Tenth to Alush, Numb. 33.12, 13, 14.
and their Eleventh to Rephidim, a place in the Wilderness near Mount Horeb.
Here they wanted water again, and this want drove a great many of them into an
high discontent and murmuring, insomuch as they said, Is the Lord among us or
not? verse. 7. Thus they tempted the Lord, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 78.41.
and limited the holy One of Israel. Then they fell a chiding with Moses,
saying, Give us water that we may drink; wherefore have thou brought us out of
Egypt to kill us, and our Children, and our Cattle with thirst? Moses asked
them, Why they chid with him? was it in his power to help them? why did they
tempt the Lord by their distrust and murmuring? And from this distrustful
murmuring of the People, the place was afterward called Massa and Meriba,
signifying Temptation and Chiding. Then Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, What
shall I do to this people? they are almost ready to stone me. God Commands him
to take some of the Elders of the people with him, and to take his Rod in his
hand (with which he commanded Aaron to strike the River Nile, Chapter 7.20.) and to
go to Mount Horeb (where he would appear to him in the Cloudy Pillar) and there
to smite the Rock with his Rod, and it should give forth water. Moses and the
Elders accordingly going to Horeb, He there in their sight struck the Rock and
immediately the waters gushed forth, The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.4. The Rock
followed them, and that Rock was Christ.
see Psalm. 78.15, 16, 20. And the Streams issuing thence trailed after them
through the Wilderness [see Psalm. 105.41. Deuteronomy. 9.21.] The Cloudy Pillar (it
seems) conducting them in such by-ways, in such Levels and Valleys in that
Mountainous Country, that the water might conveniently be derived after them.

Exodus 17. from 1. to 8.

SECT. XI.
THe Amalekites (descended from Timnah, Concubine to Eliphaz, Esau's eldest
Son, Gen 36.12. whose Country lay hereabout) having an inveterate malice
against Jacob and his Posterity, fell now upon the Rear of the Israelites (they
being much spent and tired with their long march) and slew some of the feeblest
That is, of such as were feeble through travel, not sickness, see Psalm. 105.37.
and hindermost of them, Deuteronomy. 25.17, 18, 19. Moses hereupon sends Joshua with
a chosen Party to fight with them in the Valley, and betakes himself to the top
of Mount Horeb, where with the Rod of God in his hand, as a Signal to
strengthen the faith of the people in God's Power and Help, He lifts up his
hands toward Heaven, earnestly praying unto the Lord, and imploring his Aid
and Assistance against their Enemies. And whilst Moses's hands were help up
Israel prevailed, but when they flag'd, and fell down, Amalek prevailed. He
therefore being weary with standing so long, as well as with lifting up his
hands, they put a stone under him to sit on, and Aaron and Hur See James 5.17.
Quare precum comites adhibendi qui nos labantes fulciant.
supported his hands, whereby they were steady to the going down of the Sun,
and so they obtained a great Victory over the Amalekites. And God commanded
Moses to write See Exodus 34.27.
this for a Memorial in a Book; that is, in the Chronicles and Annals of time,
that the wickedness of Amalek, in assaulting the people of God, may be
remembered, and to Inculcate it in the ears of Joshua, who was to succeed him,
that He and all his Successors, who shall be Generals to the Israelites at any
time hereafter, may put this his Command in Execution, when He shall give them
occasion to do it. For (says God) I have determined utterly to put out the
remembrance of Amalek from under Heaven; Deuteronomy. 25.19. See this Command executed
by Saul, 1 Samuel 15.3, etc.
that is, I have determined that their Honor and Greatness shall be so broken
and brought down, that they shall not be remembered or made mention of as a
flourishing State or Kingdom any more. And Moses, in thankfulness to God for
this great Victory, built an Altar in that place, and called it Jehovah-Nissi,
as a Memorial to Posterity, that there Jehovah had, as with a Banner displayed,
gone forth and fought against the Enemies of his people. And because Amalek had
lifted up his hand against the Throne of the Lord, V. 16. Quia manus Amalec
fuit contra solium Domini. Sic Jun. Tremel. and Piscator, reddunt hunc versum.
in fighting against his peculiar people (whose King and Sovereign he had
undertaken to be) therefore the Lord would have his people maintain a truceless
War with Amalek from Generation to Generation.

Exodus 17. from verse. 8. to the end.

SECT. XII.
THis Story of Jethro, contained in the next Chapter, ( viz. the 18th) seems
not to lie in its proper place, but ought to come in between the 10th and 11th
verses of Numb. 10. For in Exodus 18. verse. 12. It Is said, Jethro took
Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices for God, whereas the Law for Burnt-Offerings and
Sacrifices was not yet given. And verse. 13. and 16. it is said, Moses sat to
judge the people, and to make them know the Statutes of God, and his Laws,
whereas the Statutes and Laws of God were not yet given to Moses. And further,
the choosing of Judges and Elders which was upon Jethro's Counsel, was not till
after their departing from Sinai, Deuteronomy. 1, 7, 8, 9, See Lightfoot, page 95.
etc. whereas it is here set as before their coming thither. Therefore we shall
reserve this History till we come to the 10th of Numbers.

SECT. XIII.
FRom Rephidim, which was over against Horeb, in the third month after their
coming forth out of Egypt, they removed to the Desert over against Sinai, It
seems these were either two Mountains near together, or else two tops of the
same Mountain, one called Horeb, the other Sinai.
(which was their Twelfth Encamping) where they continued for the space of
almost an whole Year. The Cloudy Pillar now resting on the top of the Mountain,
God out of it calls Moses to come up to Him, and Commands him to set before the
people what great things He had done for them, and how he had born them on
Eagles wings, and carried them as an Eagle does her young ones on her back,
viz. speedily and safely out of Egypt, and had now brought them unto Himself;
that is, to this place of his Presence, and convenient for them to serve him
in. If therefore they would carefully observe the Covenant which he now
intended to make with them, they should be his peculiar Treasure (his Segullah)
Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 135.4.
above all people. (For all the Earth is His, and he can choose what Nation he
pleases to be his peculiar People to serve him,) and they should be to Him a
Kingdom of Priests; that is, among them he would Reign, and set up his Kingdom
[1 Samuel 8.7.] and they should not be a profane State, such as other Kingdoms
were, but a Kingdom of Priests to Worship Him according to his own Will, and to
offer the Sacrifices to Him which He should appoint, and they should be
separated from all other Nations unto Him and his Service. Moses comes down and
acquaints the people herewith, and they readily, and with one accord, answered,
That All that the Lord had spoken they would do. Moses returned their Answer
unto the Lord, who tells him, He would now speak to him speedily out of a thick
Cloud upon the Mount, and the people should hear Him speak to him, that they
might never after doubt or disbelieve that God had sent him to them. Then he
Commands Moses to go down, and to sanctify and prepare the people two days for
their reverend receiving his Law on the day after, and that he should give them
Orders and Directions how they should behave themselves at that time. Moses
accordingly commands the people to sanctify themselves, to wash their Clothes,
and to forbear the company of their Wives [vers. 15.] till the time appointed,
signifying how careful they should be to keep their Minds from being distracted
with carnal affections, and to cleanse themselves from all filthiness both of
Flesh and Spirit; especially when they were to present themselves so solemnly
before the Lord. Then he sets bounds and limits round about the bottom of Mount
Sinai, showing them how near they should approach to the Mount, and no further,
declaring that whatever Man or Beast passed those bounds, and touched the
Mountain, should be stoned or shot to death. This was commanded, to strike
their hearts with the greater Reverence of God, and to bridle their Curiosity
from searching into Gods Secrets, and to teach them to be content with the
bounds that he had set them. On the third day in the morning after Moses had
given them this Charge concerning sanctifying and preparing themselves (which
as some think was the Sic Jansenius. Masius autem quarto die mensis.
sixth day of the month, and fifty days after the Passover, on which the Feast
of Pentecost was afterward kept,) by the ministry of Angels, the Trumpet
sounded exceeding loud, and the people trembling, advanced under the Conduct of
Moses toward V. 13. Tunc ascendent in montem, i. e. adversus montem, alioquin
repugnaret, v. 12.
the Mountain, so far as their limits and bounds extended. Then the Air being
filled with dreadful Thunderings and Lightnings, and the Mountain quaking and
trembling, and smoking like a Furnace, [Psal. 68.8.] and the Trumpet sounding
louder and louder, the Lord V. 20. Descendit Dominus s^u Angelus Dominum
repraesentans; descendit ex loco aeris celsiore in ipsum montis verticem.
descended on the Mount; that is, He there manifested his Glory in a flame of
Fire. The fight was so exceeding terrible, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear
and tremble, Heb. 12.21. The Lord hereupon answered him by a Voice (and so in a
less terrible manner than by Thunder) yet so loud that the people might hear
him speaking to him, see verse. 9. By that Voice the Lord commanded Moses to
come up to Him to the top of the Mount, And Moses did so. The Lord Commands him
to go again to the people, and to Charge them that they did not break through
the bounds set them to see and gaze (as Moses himself was ready once to do,
Exodus 3.3. till He was stayed of God, lest many of them should thereupon
perish, [see Sam. 6.19.] and to Charge the Priests more particularly, who used
to come near to minister before the Lord, (that is, the First-horn, the young
men of the Children of Israel whom God had hallowed to himself, and who before
the separating of the Tribe of Levi for the Priesthood, used to administer that
Office in their several Families, Numb. 8.16. Exodus 13.2. Lev. 3.12. and Exodus
24.5.) that they especially take care to sanctify themselves, and to be
devoutly and holily prepared for this great appearance of God, and to keep
themselves from being defiled with Sin by touching the Mount, presuming too far
by reason of their Privilege, lest the Lord break forth in wrath upon them.
Moses humbly Answers, O Lord, the people by reason of thy former Prohibition
dare not come up to the Mount; For thou said, Set bounds to the Mount, and
Hallow it, that is, let the people know that they are to account this Mountain
holy, by reason of the manifestation of my glorious Presence here, and
therefore they must not presume to come to up to it. However, the Lord charge
him instantly to go down to them, and to urge the same again upon them; after
which He himself should come up again, and should bring Aaron Aaron quoque
advocari debibat, ut sacerdotium ejus quoque divinit^s institutum Constaret.
Jans.
with him.

Exodus 19. whole Chapter.

SECT. XIV.
THe Lord now with an audible Voice, and with great Majesty and Terror,
Proclaimed and Promulgated his Moral Law, Which nevertheless disanull'd not the
promise of Grace made to Abraham 430 years before, Gal. 3.17.
or Ten Commandments, containing the prime Dictates of Natural Reason, the
chief Rules of Piety toward God, Equity toward our Neighbor, and Sobriety,
Chastity, and Temperance in the government our Selves. This Law is expressly
called a Covenant with that people, He declared unto you his Covenant (says the
Text) which he commanded you to perform, even Ten Commandments, Deuteronomy. 4.13. and
accordingly was reposed in the Ark; hence as it seems named the Ark of the
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 10.2. He wrote upon the Tables the words of the Covenant, the
Ten Commandments, Exodus 34.28. The end and design of these Precepts was to
ground them in the true notions of Piety and Religion, and to dispose them to
the practice of universal Righteousness. Our Savior did not derogate from this
Law, but declared his intention only to expound it, or to ampliate and extend
it. There is no Commandment herein (howsoever accoding to its immediate sense
seeming peculiar to that people) which according to good analogy or parity of
reason does not concern us also.
And therefore it is said, Nehem. 9.13. Thou came down upon Mount Sinai, and
gave them right Judgments, and true Laws, good Statutes, and Commandments.
And the Apostle, Romans 7.12. says, The Law is holy, the Commandment holy, just,
and good. We shall therefore set down these Laws particularly, and give a short
Paraphrase of them. God spoke all these words saying; that is, God Himself
declared his own Mind and Will, by a loud Voice distinctly audible, and
intelligible miraculously formed by himself, Deuteronomy. 5.24. Behold (say the
people) the Lord our God has showed us his Glory and his Greatness, and we
have heard his Voice out of the midst of the Fire; we have seen this day that
God does talk with man, and yet he lives.

I am the Lord (or I am Jehovah thy God) which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.

I am Jehovah, who indeed am what this my Name imports, the only true, and
real God, Eternal, Independent, Indefectible in Essence; I am that Jehovah to
whose words upon all accounts thou owe Submission, Attention and Obedience. I
am Thy God, having chosen thee to be a peculiar people to my Self above all
people that are upon the face of the Earth, and who, in pursuance of my
singular Favor toward thee, and of my Covenant made with thee, have brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage. I then being
Jehovah, the only true God, and thy God by Covenant and particular Engagement,
do now propound my Will unto thee, and upon all accounts of Reason, Justice and
Gratitude, do require thy regard and observance of the Precepts I now intend to
give thee.

I. Commandment. Thou shall have no other Gods before me.
THis Precept (as most of the rest) is Negative and Prohibitive, but supposes
and implies some thing Affirmative, and Positive as the rest may also be
conceived to do. It implies this Affirmative Precept, Thou shall have me for
thy God, and shall Serve, Worship, and Love Me with all thy Heart, Soul, Mind
and Might, and shall trust in Me as a Being endued with Attributes and
Perfections superlatively excellent; and thou shall not own nor acknowledge any
other for God besides Me. Take heed therefore of imitating them who acknowledge
not nor Worship any God at all, (and such are Athiests) or acknowledge and
adore many Gods (and such are Polytheists.) Take heed also of framing in your
Minds any untrue Idea of Me, disagreeable to my most excellent Being and
infinite Perfections. Take heed also of inordinately loving or relying upon any
Creature, and so making that your God.

II. Commandment. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, etc.
THe First Commandment determined the right and true Object of our Worship. The
Second directs, and limits the manner of expressing and exercising it, and
forbids the manner practiced by Heathens, of Worshipping their false Gods by
Images and Corporeal Shapes and Representations. To worship an Idol instead of
God is Idolatry forbidden in the First Commandment. When the true God is
worshipped in, or by an Image, it is Idolatry forbidden by the Second. Inward
Idolatry is opposed to the First Commandment, and Outward to the Second.
We ought not to think, says the Apostle, Acts 17.29. that the Godhead is like
unto Gold, or Silver, or Stone graven by art, or man's device. Most reasonable
therefore is this Prohibition of making any resemblance of what kind soever by
Picture, Sculpture or Tusion, to represent God, or for Religious use, The civil
use of Images is not forbidden, but Images made and used for Divine Worship.
Neither are those Images only forbidden which are the Images of false Gods, but
of the true also. Papists by worshipping Saints and Angels, offend against the
first Commandment. By making Images of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and
worshipping these Images, or worshipping God by these Images, they offend
against the Second.

As for the Cherubim made by Solomon, and the brazen Serpent by Moses, they
were made by God's special Command, but not to be worshipped. The Cherubim seem
intended as an Emblem, to represent the natures and services of the holy
Angels, and not any likeness of God, they being full of zeal, and always upon
the Wing (as it were) and ready to obey God's Will. The brazen Serpent was made
not to be worshipped, but as a Type of Christ; and now Christ is come, all
Types are to vanish.


and to bow down or Prostrate our selves before it. For there being but one
true Object of our Worship, the Eternal, Invisible God, whose glorious
Excellencies infinitely transcend our Comprehension, and consequently of whom
we cannot devise any resemblance not infinitely beneath him, unlike to him and
unworthy of him. It must needs be therefore a great profaneness to pretend the
representing Him by any Image. Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.15. reports to the people of the
Jews the ground of this Prohibition, Take good heed to your selves (says he)
for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke to you in
Horeb, out of the midst of the Fire, lest you corrupt your selves, and make you
a graven Image. No shape representing God did then appear at his uttering of
these Laws to prevent their framing any resemblance of Him, and practicing this
sort of Idolatrous Worship. For God foresaw that men would be very prone to be
pleased with, and to dote upon sensible Representations, and averse from
raising up their minds to Him, as endued with pure, intellectual, and spiritual
Perfections. So that He expressly forbids making any Images, or Similitudes in
order to worship Him thereby. Neque tantum imagines faciebant multorum Deorum
Cultores, sed and magico ritu existimabant spiritum quendam aetherium in eas
deduci imagines. Tertullianus libro de spectaculis, Daemones ait operari in
simulacris. Minutius Foelix, isti impuri spiritus sub statuis, and imaginibus
consecratis delitescunt. Et huc pertinet ni failor locus Zach. 10.2. Grotius in
explicatione Decalogi.
And in this Prohibition we may conceive this positive Precept to be also
implied and intended, viz. that in our Devotions and Religious Services which
we perform to God, we should raise our minds above gross sense and fantasy,
and should labor for high and worthy Conceptions of God, and should apprehend
Him incomparably superior to all things which we do see and know; and we
should direct our minds to him as to a Being transcendently perfect in Wisdom,
Holiness, Goodness, Justice, and Power, and should (as our Savior Commands)
Worship him in spirit and truth, Joh. 4.24. and perform such Worship to him as
is agreeable to his spiritual Nature, and is commanded by Himself. And the Lord
was pleased to add this reason to this Prohibition, For I the Lord thy God am a
jealous There is great danger in Idolatrous Worship, lest the heart of the
Creature be thereby drawn away from God. Therefore the breach of this
Commandment is called Scortatio, Persidia, Violatio foederis conjugalis. God is
angry for the breach of any Commandment, but he is jealous lest his Worship be
corrupted, and his Glory given to Creatures.
God; that is, a God very tender of my Honor, and of my Right, impatient of
any Competitor or Sharer with Me in the Duties and Services which properly and
incommunicably are due unto Me. I am the Lord; (says God by the Prophet
Isaiah) that is my Name, and my Glory I will not give to another, nor my Praise
to graven Images, Isa. 42.8. This jealousy does imply not only a great
dislike, but a fierce displeasure against the Infringers of this Law.

Visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and
fourth Generation of them that hate Populus, Dei sponsa vocatur, foedus
conjugium, Idololatria scortatio. Quemadmodum amoris signum est fidelitas
conjugalis, sic fidei violatio odii testimonium est. Riv. Deum odisse, in
sacris literis peculiariter, imo unice ait Maimonides, illi dicuntur qui falsos
deos colunt.
me.
God hereby intimates, that he shall look upon those that transgress this Law,
and commit this kind of Idolatry here forbidden as Enemies, and haters Populus,
Dei sponsa vocatur, foedus conjugium, Idololatria scortatio. Quemadmodum amoris
signum est fidelitas conjugalis, sic fidei violatio odii testimonium est. Riv.
Deum odisse, in sacris literis peculiariter, imo unice ait Maimonides, illi
dicuntur qui falsos deos colunt.
of him, because their actions signify a disposition of mind in them repugnant
to his Mind and Will. When a man loves God less than his Idol, that may well
be esteemed hatred of God. 2ly, He declares, That He will not only punish these
persons themselves who commit this Idolatry, (whereby He is so much wronged and
dishonored) but to deter men the more from it, He declares, That it shall go
ill with their Posterity for their sakes. Their Children to the third and
fourth Generation shall be more strictly and severely dealt with, and upon this
score shall receive less of Favor and Mercy from him than otherwise they might
have received. Not that God will arbitrarily inflict undeserved Punishments
upon the Children of bad men for the Faults of their Ancestors. He disclaims
such kind of dealing, Ezekiel. 18.20. Deuteronomy. 24.16. Jer. 31.30. The Son shall not
bear the Iniquity of the Father; the Soul that sins it shall die. Every one
shall die for his own Iniquity. Every man that eats sour Grapes his own
teeth shall be set on edge, etc. But notwithstanding God may justly, for the
Sin of the Parents, withhold his free Favors from their Children, which else,
according to the general course of his goodness, they might have been capable
of. As particularly He may withhold that measure of Grace from them that might
have effectually retained them from Sin, and consequently have prevented their
Guilt, and so their Punishment. But if such Children do fall into personal
sins, God may (without Impeachment of his Justice and Goodness) severely visit
them, and sharply punish them for them, and that not only upon their own, but
their Fathers account also. And therefore the Lord is pleased to add this
Commination the more to deter and restrain men from committing this sin of
Idolatry, it being like to bring damage to their Children and Posterity,
Examples of which proceeding do in the Divine History often occur; As in
Solomon, in Rehoboham, in Baasha, in Ahab, in Jehu.
of whom Parents (of all things) use to have the tenderest regard, and are
afraid to be the causes of their Ruin and Calamity.

Showing mercy unto Thousands of them love me and keep my Commandments.
And as God deters from violation of this Precept, by threatening a long train
of Punishments to the Transgressors of it, so he encourages to yield Obedience
to it, by a Declaration of his intention, not only graciously to Reward the
obedient Persons themselves, but their Posterity also, unto a thousand
Descents. God will show mercy and deal more favorably with the Children of
good Parents, for a long tract of time, for their Father's sake. And though God
will punish the offending Children of good Parents, yet their Misdeeds shall
not interrupt his kindness toward the rest of their Posterity, or quite
abolish the remembrance of their Fathers So we may see that God dealt with
Abraham and the Patriarchs passing by (in memory of their faithful Obedience to
him) the manifold Provocations of their Cildren.
goodness. And here we may take notice how the expressions of God's Mercy do
exceed those of his Justice. He will visit the Iniquities of disobedient
Fathers unto the third or fourth Generation, but He will show Mercy to a
thousand Generations of them that love and obey Him. And further we may
observe, That loving God, and keeping his Commandments are conjoined as terms
equivalent: They are indeed inseparably connected; Love being a certain cause
of Obedience, and Obedience an infallible sign of Love. See Joh. 14.21.

III. Commandment. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain,
for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.
HEre is first a Precept. 2. A Reason deterring from Disobedience thereunto.

1. The Precept, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, or
as some render it, Thou shall not bring the Name of the Lord thy God to a
vanity, or to a lie, So the word Shaveh frequently signifies, see Lev. 19.12.
or thou shall not swear in the Name of God to a falsehood. Our Savior
Himself, Math. 5.33. seems to point at this Law, when He says, Ye have heard it
was said to the Ancients, Thou shall not forswear thy self. So that the prime
intent of this Law seems to be to prohibit Perjury; that is, invoking God, or
attesting God to a lie, and appealing to him as a Witness and Judge that what
we assert is true, when we know it is not. And it seems also to enjoin that in
promisory Oaths, what we promise or covenant in the Name of God, we should
sincerely intend to perform, and not deal falsely therein, as those do who never
intend to perform what they promise. Swearing Of Swearing see more in the first
Chapter of the second part of the Supplement to Knowledge and Practice.
is in its own nature imediately an act of Religion, and imports a firm
belief and persuasion of God's chief Attributes and Prerogatives, viz. of his
Omnipresence and Omniscience (extending to the knowledge of our most inward
thoughts and secret purposes) of his Justice in maintaining Truth and Right,
and avenging Iniquity and Falsehood. He therefore that knowingly and willingly
is guilty of Perjury, seems to despise the Justice of God, and to defy his
Vengeance. This seems to be the first and direct meaning of this Law. But it
may be extended further, so as to prohibit all light and vain swearing in
ordinary Communication, all irreverent, unnecessary using and introducing the
great and dreadful Name of God, which we should not without great awe of
spirit, and high veneration ever mention or speak of. It Is an argument
therefore of horrible Impiety and Profaneness, without any Reason or
Temptation, without any Profit or Pleasure arising thence, to abuse the
glorious Name of God, and lightly to toss it in our mouths, and so to provoke
his dreadful Vengeance, who will in no wise hold him guiltless that takes his
Name in vain.

IV. Commandment. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, etc.
GOd ushers in this Precept, above all the rest, with a Remember, intimating
how much it imports man to observe it. The Sabbath was a sign of the Covenant
that God made with that people, Exodus 31.16, 17.
The Jews so highly valued this Precept, that it was a saying among them, The
Sabbath weighs against all the Commandments. In the Learned Dr. Barrow's
Exposition of the Decalogue.
Because if the Sabbath be duly and carefully observed, all the rest of the
Commandments will be made known, and frequently inculcated upon the people; and
so the right Observance of this one Precept will tend to procure all the rest
to be observed. This Commandment, as some observe, is Morale positivum; that
is, somethings commanded in it are naturally moral, and have an innate
rectitude in them, arising from the nature of the things themselves, and some
are only positively moral, and have their obligation only from the positive
sanction of the Lawgiver.

As particularly,

To contemplate with a grateful and joful Et haec causa est Cur ab Ecclesia
Vetustissima introductus mos fuit, ne Sabbato jejunaretur, quod laetitiae is
esset dies. Grotius in Explicatione Decalogi.
sense God's glorious Work of Creation, wherein his Goodness, Wisdom, and Power
are so illustriously displayed, wherein so great Accommodations and Benefits
are generally dispensed to all the Creatures, and to Mankind more especially.

To remember God's Favors and gracious Providence over our selves, our
Relations, our Country; as the Israelites were bound more especially to
remember their great and remarkable Deliverance out of Egypt; To allot some
competent time seriously to attend to the great concernments of our Souls, and
not to spend our selves, and all our time in perpetual carking, and laboring
about affairs that concern only our Bodies, and this present life; To set some
time apart wherein God our Creator should be solemnly and publicly worshipped
by those that own Him for their God, and live in a Vicinity and Neighborhood
together.

To give some time of rest, relaxation, and refreshment to our Servants, and
those whom Providence has disposed into that mean Condition to minister to us,
that their lives may not, by incessant labor, be grievous to them, but that
they may with some comfort serve us, and that they may have convenient leisure
also to serve God, and mind the welfare of their Souls.

To show some mercy and pity even to the poor Beasts that labor for us,
allowing them some ease and rest from their painful Drudgeries in our Service.
These are all of them things very reasonable, and there seems to be an
obligation to them dictated by natural light, and grounded in the very nature
of the things themselves. And Reason must needs approve of them as Duties of
Piety, Justice, and Humanity.

But now as to the determination of the proportion or quantity of time that
should be allotted for these Duties, and that the Seventh day, or one day in
seven should be particularly assigned for these purposes, and that a cessation
from labor both of Man and Beast should be so strictly enjoined, (except in
cases of necessity or mercy) this can be resolved into no other ground than the
Will and pleasure of the Lawgiver, who saw what was most needful and convenient
for man, and fit to be enjoined him. It would not therefore be for the good of
the World, or the benefit of Mankind to be dispensed with, as to the
observation of the Sabbath, or those forementioned Duties. We may also further
take notice of the reason which the Lord is pleased to give, why He did
especially choose this Day Ut perpetua ejus observatione imprimeretur omnium
animis firma notitia mundum non ab aeterno fuisse, quae ad impietatem via est,
sed a Deo conditum. Grotius in Explic. Decalog.
to bless and sanctify it, and appoint it to be set apart for his own Service;
namely, because He himself rested on that day, and was refreshed, as it is
expressed Exodus 31.17. which is spoken of God after the manner of men, that we
might be more apprehensive of his Rest, for our imitation. And that this very
time might instruct and excite us gratefully and religiously to meditate on the
great and glorious Structure of the World. But from our Savior's Resurrection
the day was changed to the first day of the Week, in Commemoration that he had
finished the great Work of our Redemption on that day. And so though not the
same day, yet the same proportion of time is still to be observed by us
Christians. See more of this Subject in Knowledge and Practice, page 117.


V. Commandment. Honor thy Father and Mother, that thy days may be long in the
Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.
CHildren are enjoined by this Precept to honor their Parents in their hearts,
The subsequent Precepts contain the prime Rules of justice toward Man, and of
Temperance, Sobriety, and Chastity in the government of our Selves.
and highly to love their Persons as the Instruments under God of their being.
And they are hereby obliged to yield to them Reverence, Obedience,
Thankfulness, and Requital as they are able They are bound highly to honor and
esteem them, and to use due expressions of Respect and Observance toward them
in word and deed. Parents are presumed to be always full of tender affection,
and good will toward their Children; full of desire and care for their good,
full of pity and compassion toward them. Which dispositions do in reason and
equity require answerable Inclinations in Children toward their Parents.
Children receive from their Parents, under God, their being and life, their
maintenance and protection, it being a long while ere they are able to provide
for, or defend themselves. The goods acquired by the Parents industry do
usually devolve upon their Children. And all good and pious Parents think
themselves obliged to take care of the Souls, and spiritual Welfare of their
Children, and to instruct them in the fear of God, and to set them in the right
way to Eternal Happiness. And this they do most frankly and freely, without
regard to any profit that may thereby accrue to themselves. It is abundant
satisfaction to them to see their Chirldren do well. Their chief delight and
contentment in this world is usually in their Childrens well-doing. Therefore
justice and ingenuity do oblige Children to pay to their Parents dutiful
Respect and Observanc. And they will be no loosers in so doing. For to the
observance of this Precept is added a very encouraging Promise, viz. of length
of days. The Apostle injoyns Children to be obedient to their Parents in all
things that are lawful and pleasing to the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. And He presses the
Observance of this Precept, 1. From the equity of it, because the Law of God
and Nature requires it. 2. Because this is the first Commandment of the second
Table, which has a particular Promise annexed to it, viz. length of days;
which Promise is either actually fulfilled by God to obedient Children, or else
by changing of the Benefit, He gives them a much better life in his own Kingdom
for it. And there seems a great congruity in the Reward promised to the Duty to
be performed, viz. that they who are grateful to those from whom, under God,
they received their life, should by God's Dispensation enjoy that life long,
and with much Comfort; and that they who neglect the Authors of their life,
should soon be deprived of it, or of the Comforts and Contentments that others
enjoy. And we may by analogy and parity of reason reduce unto this Commandment
the Obligation we have to honor all those who perform to us beneficial
Offices, like unto those we receive from our Parents. Particularly such Persons
from whom we have Protection, as Governors and Magistrates. Such who watch
over us for the good of our Souls, as Ministers and Pastors, Such who afford us
Maintenance and Education, as Benefactors, Schoolmasters, Tutors, etc.

VI. Commandment. Thou shall not Kill.
MAn's life being his most precious enjoyment in this World, no man may take it
away but by Commission or License from God. God indeed does allow Magistrates,
upon reasonable cause, (for the preservation of the public Peace, Safety and
Welfare,) in a regular Course of Justice, to dispose of men's lives, who have
forfeited them to the Law. For the Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain,
[Rom. 13.4.] but is the Minister of God, an Avenger to execute wrath upon him
that does evil, 1 Pet. 2.14. And he that kills a man in a way not irregular;
namely, as a Minister of Justice, or in a lawful War, authorized by a just
Commission, or in his own just and necessary defense, cannot be said to violate
the true intent of this Precept. For such a person cannot be justly said to
kill, but rather God himself, the Lord of Life and Death, does then kill.
Vengeance is his, and He in this manner by his Ministers does repay it. But in
this Commandment is forbidden all voluntary and irregular taking away our
Neighbor's life, without just and necessary cause, upon what motive, principle
or pretense soever it be, either by direct violence, or fraudulent contrivance,
either by our selves, or by others; and all advising, encouraging, or any wise
becoming instrumental or accessory thereunto; This is the Crime here expressly
forbidden. But a Positive Duty is also here included, and accordingly should be
understood, viz. That we should endeavor, as far as we are able, to preserve
our own life, in the first place, and then our Neighbors, by relieving him in
extreme need, and by succouring him in extreme danger, by admonishing him of
any destructive mischief He seems unawares running into. The contrary, is in
reasonable esteem, and in God's sight, a killing of him. And to kill a man has
this great guilt in it, that He that does it, does thereby violate, and destroy
God's Image in his Neighbor. He that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed; for in the Image of God created he him, Genesis 9.6. And this further is
to be observed, That the taking away a man's life does infinitely surpass all
the evil or injury which any man can sustain from another in his estate or
fame. For these things are capable of some reparation, but the other is
altogether irreparable, and therefore includes in it the greatest injury and
iniquity. For hereby all temporal good is at once ravished from a man, and the
Soul also of the person killed may possibly incur a great damage and hazard in
respect to its future State, by being thus suddenly snatched away. So that the
Slayer oftentimes not only robs his Brother of his temporal life, but of his
time of Repentance, and opportunity of making his peace with God. Therefore to
hate a man to death must needs be accounted the utmost pitch of hatred. Such is
the direct intent and importance of this Law. But our Savior in his Comment
hereon, Math. 5.21. has explained, and extended it further, so as to interdict
all things that any way approach or tend unto this hateful evil, as rash,
causeless outrageous anger, contumelious and despiteful Language, secret
grudges or malice in our hearts against our Neighbor. For these, as they do
commonly produce the act of murder, so they argue Inclinations thereunto, which
if fear and self-respect did not restrain, would presently produce it; and
consequently in moral account (which regards not so much the act as the will)
are of the same quality therewith. The Apostle tells us, 1 John 3.15. He that
hates his brother is a murderer, and no murderer has eternal life abiding in
him. So that all malice, spite, envy, hatred, rancor, immoderate anger, and
animosity, are here also forbidden.

VII. Commandment. Thou shall not commit Adultery.
THis Commandment injoyns Chastity of Mind, Heart, and Body, and the
preservation of it in our selves and others. Whosoever shall attempt the
Affection or Chastity of another man's wife highly sins against God, commits
a great trespass against his Neighbor, and defiles himself with the foulest
turpitude. He violates an Institution to which God has affixed especial marks
of respect and sanctity. He wounds his Neighbor's Honor, and ruins Him in
that wherein the great content of his mind, and comfort of his life is wound
up. He offends against the welfare of Families, breeding horrible Confusions
and Dissentions in them. Adultery therefore is a loathsome Unrighteousness, most
odious to God, and a fire that consumes unto destruction. Further, this
Commandment forbids all sorts of unlawful, and irregular satisfactions to
lustful Appetite, and all kinds of Impurity and Lasciviousness, not in act
only, but in thought, in desire, Our Savior extends this Commandment to forbid
all unlawful lustings, or desires, or Inclinations of the heart, Mat. 5.28. I
say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed Adultery with her in his heart.
in speech, or in gesture, and what ever tends to foment the fleshly
Concupiscence, which we ought to endeavor, by all good means, to quench and
suppress.

VIII. Commandment. Thou shall not Steal.
THis Commandment injoyns, that every man should quietly enjoy those supports
and conveniences of his life, which, in any honest way, he has right unto, or
is possessed of. And it prohibits all Invasion or Usurpation by any means what
ever (either by open Violence, or by clandestine Fraud) of our Neighbor's
Goods, or Rights. Many sorts of Unrighteousness are reducible to this
Commandment, as fraudulent Dealing, false Weights and Measures, overreaching
in Contracts, unfaithfulness in matters of Trust, Exaction, Oppression,
Extortion, and not making Restitution of ill-gotten Goods when there is
ability. The Positive Duties to be understood are Diligence and Industry in our
Callings, whereby (with God's blessing) we may support our selves, and prevent
the importunate Temptations of Want and Need, and may be able to relieve others
that are in want, and may be well content with our own estates, trusting in
God, and relying on his Providence, to take care of us.

IX. Commandment. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.
BEaring false Testimony against our Neigbour, especially in matters Capital,
and wherein his life is concerned, is here prohibited; And not only that, but
also defaming him, or unjustly detracting from him, and breeding in the minds
of others an ill opinion of him. We are therefore here forbidden to wrong our
Neighbor in his Credit and good Name, as well as in his Estate. We are
forbidden to hurt him either in word or deed. Charity obliges us to think the
best of our Neighbor, to be candid in our Opinions, and Discourses concerning
Him, to forbear all rash and harsh Censures of Him, and to abhor affixing any
faults upon Him of which He is not guilty. To walk Uprightly, and to work
Righteousness, and speak the truth from our hearts, are the good man's
Character, Psalm. 15. v. 2.

X. Commandment. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, nor his Wife, nor
his Manservant, nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing
that is thy Neigbours.
THis Law is very Comprehensive, prescribing universal Justice toward our
Neighbor, and that not only in outward deeds and dealing, but in inward
thought and desire, prohibiting us unlawfully or irregularly to desire any
thing that is his, to his detriment. We are to be so far from depriving our
Neighbor of any good thing belonging to him, that we are not so much as
irregularly to wish or desire it. We are not only to abstain from injurious
Actions, but to repress in our selves all covetous and injurious Inclinations.
And the Positive Duty here implied is, That we should have a delight and
complacency in our Neigbour's good, not envying him any of his Enjoyments;
being, in our minds, well content with the portion God is pleased to vouchsafe
to us, and entirely trusting in Him that he will supply us with what is needful
and fitting for us, without the damage of our Neighbor.

Thus we see that God's Law is, as St. Paul observes, Spiritual; not only
restraining exterior Acts, but regulating our inmost Thoughts, quelling all
inordinate Appetites and Affections of Heart within us. And all these Precepts
both of the first and second Table are reduced to these two Heads of loving God
with all our Hearts, Souls, and Spirits, and loving our Neighbor as our selves.

SECT. XV.
THus was this Law promulgated and proclaimed. At the dreadful manner whereof
of the people were so greatly terrified, that they removed, and stood afar off
from the Mount. Then the Heads of the ^ribes and Elders came to Moses, and
said, Behold the Lord our God has showed us his Glory, and his Greatness, and
we have heard his Voice out of the midst of the Fire, and have seen this day
that God does talk with Man, and yet he remains alive. This is matter of
great wonder to us. But yet we are afraid that if we should hear the Voice of
the Lord our God again, speaking to us in such a dreadful manner, the very
terror of it would kill us. We are afraid we should be consumed by that great
and dreadful Fire out of which we heard the Lord speaking to us. For what man
is there that ever heard God speaking out of the midst of the Fire, as we have
done, and yet lived. Since therefore the Lord has hitherto been so gracious
and propitious to us, we humbly entreat him to regard our Infirmity, which
makes incapable of enduring his terrible Presence. Go thou therefore near unto
him, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou This is still
the work of the Law, to scare men, and drive them to seek for a Mediator
between God and them. And by this Interposition of Moses was figured the
necessity of the great Mediator between God and Man, Gal. 3.19. Who was also
promised on this occasion, Deuteronomy. 18.15, 16.
unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it,
and do it. But let not the Lord speak to us any more, immediately by Himself,
lest the terror of his Presence kill us. Moses encourages them, and tells
them, They should not be so much dismayed and affrighted. For God had spoken to
them with so much terror to prove them; that is, to try whether this terror
would produce in them a holy fear and reverence of his Majesty (which is the
true spring of Obedience) that so they might be afraid to sin against Him. Then
the people standing aloof off, Moses drew near to the thick Darkness on the top
of the Mount (where God manifested his glorious Presence) and the Lord said
unto him, I have heard the words of this people which they have spoken unto
thee, viz. That thou should be a Mediator between Me and them (and therein a
Type of the promised Messiah) and they have done well in what they desired. And
O that there were such an heart Humanitus optanda non speranda designat.
in them that they would fear me always, and keep my Commandments, that it
might go well with them, and with their Children, from Generation to
Generation. Then commanding that the people should return into their Tents, He
tells Moses, He will speak unto him all the rest of his Commandments, Statutes,
and Judgments, and he shall impart them unto the people. So that God spoke no
more than these Ten Commandments, immediately by Himself, unto the Children of
Israel, and in an audible Voice, [ Deuteronomy. 5.22.] the rest He spoke unto them by
Moses.

Exodus 20. from verse. 18. to 22.

Deuteronomy. 5. from verse. 22. to 32.

SECT. XVI.
GOd further Commands Moses to tell the Children of Israel, That they had heard
Him speak to them out of Heaven; that is, from on high, in the Air, but they
saw no Image nor Similitude of Him. Therefore they should take heed of
corrupting themselves in making any Similitude See Deuteronomy. 4.15.
or Figure of Him, or any Image. or Idol of Gold or Silver to represent Him, or
to be worshipped with Him, 2ly, For such Altars as they should be appointed to
make as they were upon the way (whereon to Sacrifice their Burnt-Offerings,
Genesis 8.20.
and Peace Offerings, Lev. 3.1.
their Oxen and Sheep) or upon any extraordinary occasion (before they should
come to the place which He should choose to settle his Worship there) they must
make them either of Earth, Such as Samuel and Elias made. Afterward the Altar
of the Tabernacle was made of of Shitimwood to be overlaid with Brass, Exodus
27.1. and for the Temple of Brass, 2 Chronicles. 4.1.
or of rough unpolished Stone, (for if they lifted a tool upon them to polish
them, they polluted Curiosity in God's Service against his Command, is not an
Ornament, but a Defilement, verse. 25. Non ex politis lapidibus cujus nulla
ratio dari potest a natura rei desumpta sed tantum ex ordinatione Dei, contra
quam si quis eat etiam in levissimis, and per se indifferentibus, ea profana
fiunt. Rivet.
them, by transgressing the Commandment of God,) and so instead of making them
holy, they profaned them. And the reason of this Injunction seeming to be, that
the meanness of the matter might show that God did not intend those Altars
should be places of his constant Worship, but only for the present time; And
that the people should not have any superstitious conceit in time to come of
the places where these Altars had been raised, which might divert their hearts
from the only Altar upon which he delighted to be ordinarily served, [ Deuteronomy.
12.5.] which was a Figure of the Cross of Christ. And that they might not think
strange at the meanness of these Altars, He promises that in all places
indifferently where he shall appoint them to build an Altar, and where He shall
cause his Name to be remembered, and called upon, He will accept of their
Sacrifices and Service, and hear them, and bless them, even in one place as
well as in another. Lastly, He Commands that these Altars should not be so made
that the Priests must go up by wide and far distant Stairs V. 26. Ascensus non
erit intercisus per gradus long distantes, ut cogeris magnos facere passus, ne
nudentur verenda tua, usus enim foemoralium nondum introductus erat. Lyra.
and Steps, or by Ladders unto them, This Institution was in part changed and
revoked afterward. For Solomon's Altar was 10 Cubits high, 2 Chronicles. 4.1. and
the Priests went up by some steps and stairs to it, and accordingly were
ordered to wear linen Breeches, Exodus 28, 42, 43. And the Altar which Moses
made for the Tabernacle was three Cubits high, Exodus 27.1. But this was for the
perpetual use of the Tabernacle, and not for a time only, and suddenly to be
dissolved again as these occasional Altars were.
lest their nakedness should be discovered thereby, which might impair the
Honor of those Sacred Rites, and would symbolize, and agree too much with the
lewd and shameful behavior which the Idolatrous Heathenish Priests used in
their Sacrifices.

Exodus 20. from 22. to the end.

SECT. XVII.
NOw the Lord gives unto Moses the Judicial or Political Laws, the civil
Constitutions, Ordinances and Statutes (contained in the three next Chapters)
according to which the Magistrates and Judges were to Govern the people. The
chief Heads of which are as follow:

1. Concerning buying Menservants. A man might not buy an Israelite, but
either first when he willingly sold himself through extreme Poverty [see Deuteronomy.
15.12. Exodus Chapter 21.
Levit. 25.39.] or when he was sold against his Will by the Magistrate for
Theft, which he was not able to make satisfaction for. Or 3ly, For Debt, which
he was not able to pay; In such a Case they and their Children might be sold as
Servants for satisfaction of the Debt, see 2 Kings 4.1. Math. 18.25. Now if it
should so happen that an Israelite became a Servant upon any of these accounts,
here is a Law given concerning the time of his Service; namely, that he should
serve him that had bought him only six years, and that in the seventh he should
be set free for nothing, except the Year of Jubilee fell within the compass of
these years, and in that Case, he should be set free at that time, Lev.
25.40.41. Now the reason why the Lord would not have the Israelites serve any
longer, is expressed Levit. 25.55. namely, because they were his Servants, and
so the Lord would teach the Jews to put a difference between his people, and
others that were not his people. Furthermore the Lord Orders, That if the
Servant came into Servitude unmarried, he shall so go out: if he were married,
his Wife (if she were an Israelite) shall go out free with him. See Deuteronomy.
15.12. for only H^athens might be kept in Bondage, Lev. 25.44, 46. but with an
Heb^ew-woman they could not do thus, as ap-appears, v. 7.
But if his Master have given him a Wife in the time of his Service, viz. an
Heathen Bondwoman, and she have born him Sons and Daughters, in this case the
man was to be set free alone, and his Wife and Children were to continue
Servants to his Master. For the Children born of the Bondwoman are Bondmen, and
Bondwomen also; as the example of Ishmael whom Abraham begat of Hagar shows,
Genesis 21.9, 10. Yet no man by this Law was forced to leave his Wife; for by
continuing in his former Service he might still enjoy her. But the Lord Orders,
That when himself was set free, he should not think, under that pretense, to
deprive his Master of her that was his lawful Servant, but should rather endure
the continuing of his own Bondage, than part from his Wife. And this liberty
given to a Servant set free to go away, and leave his Wife behind him, was not
an approbation of his forsaking of her, but at most only a part and branch of
that scope wherein this people were left to themselves for the hardness of
their hearts, as our Savior speaks in another Case, Math. 19.8. And it was
also a great fault in an Israelite if he married a Wife of another Nation and
Religion; For such Marriages were never pleasing to God. But if the Servant
shall declare that he loves his Master, his Wife, and his Children, and
therefore he will not go free; Then his Master shall bring him to the Judges,
V. 6. before the Gods, [see Psalm. 82.1, 6.] that is, before the Magistrates.
and prove it fairly and openly, that it was his Servants free and voluntary
act to continue with him; And then he shall bring him to the door of his House,
and bore his Ear thorough with an Awl, to show thereby, That he was made fast
to that House, and tied to serve and obey the Master of it all his life, unless
the Year of Jubilee fell in the mean time, and then all Hebrew Servants were
absolutely set free, together with their Children, [Lev. 25.40, 41.] Exodus 21.
from 2. to 7.

2. Concerning buying Women-Servants. If an Israelite, through extreme Poverty,
should s^ll his Daughter under age, with intention that she should marry him
that buys her; if He that buys Her shall afterward dismiss Her without
marrying of Her, it shall be upon better terms then he may dismiss an ordinary
Servant. If she please not her Master, so that he does not betroth Si exosa
fuit in oculis heri sui, ita at non ducat eam. The true reading is, so that he
does not betroth her to himself. Dr. Willer.
her to himself, then shall he suffer another, (viz. one of her friends) to
redeem her, but he shall not have power to sell her to a Stranger, seeing he
has dealt deceitfully with her, failing her in that which she expected at his
hands. And if he shall betroth her to his Son, he shall deal with her after the
manner of Daughters; that is, he shall give her a Dowry convenient, and all
other Privileges of a freewoman. But if (having betrothed her to himself) he
do not in dislike cast her off, but yet takes to himself another Wife besides
Her, however he shall not deny Her Food and Raiment, and C^njugal Conversation.
Debitum conjugale, 1 Cor. 7.3.
If he perform none of these three things unto Her, viz. Neither to betroth her
to himself, nor to his Son, nor suffer her to be redeemed, she shall go out
free without paying any thing at all, from verse. 7. to 12.

3. He that smites a man willingly, and maliciously so that he dies, shall be
surely put to death: but if he did not lie in wait for him, nor had any
intention to kill him, but God by his secret Providence delivered Quae putant
homines casu fieri providentia Dei fiunt. Where a man intends not to kill,
and yet kills, God may be said to deliver him into his hand.
him into his hand, so that he show him unwittingly and unwillingly; then the
Lord appointed a place whether he should flee, viz. while they were in the
Desert, to the Altar of Burnt-Offering, which was in the outward Court of the
Tabernacle, but when they came into Canaan to the Altar, and Cities of Refuge.
But if a man came presumptuously upon his Neighbor, to slay him with guile, he
shall be taken from the Altar (if he flee thither) and put to death. See 1
Kings 2.25, v. 12, 13, 14.

4. He that smites his Father or Mother, and so likewise he that curses, or
maliciously revileth his Father or Mother, shall be surely put to death, See
Prove. 30.17.
Verse. 15, 17.

5. He that steals a man, See Deuteronomy. 24.7.
and sells him; or if he be found in his hands, he shall be surely put to
death, verse. 16.

6. If two men strive together, and one smite the other with a Stone, or with
his Fist, yet so as he presently dies not, but only keeps his Bed, if he rise
again and walk abroad with his Staff; then he that smote him shall not be put
to death, but he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall satisfy him for
the damage he sustained by being disabled to go about his business, and
employment so long, and shall take care that he be perfectly healed and cured,
and shall pay for it, verse. 18, 19.

7. If an Israelite shall so strike his Manservant or Maidservant, (namely,
such as were Strangers For Hebrew-Servants there is another Law given, Lev.
25.39.
of another Nation, and bought with his money) that either of them die
immediately under his hand, he shall be left to the wisdom of the Judges to be
punished as they shall see cause. But if the Servant so stricken continue a day
or two alive, it is to be presumed Si virga castigavit praesumitur non eo animo
percussisse ut occideret, at si telo aut gladio percussisset habitus erit
homicida. Rivet.
his Masters intention was not to kill him, seeing he was purchased with his
money, and no man would willingly be the occasion of his own loss. And if he
die afterward, the loss of the Servant shall be deemed sufficient punishment;
His Master shall not be further punished, seeing he had power to Chastise him
(being bought with his money) and make him obey him by force, verse. 20, 21.

8. If a Woman with child come in to help her Husband, or Friend, when another
is fighting with Him, or to part them, and do casually receive some hurt, and
by that means miscarries, yet so as neither the Woman, nor the Child, dies, or
is maimed; in this case the party that was the cause of the Woman's miscarrying
shall pay or suffer what the Woman's Husband shall lay upon him, provided it be
judged fit by the Judges, in whose power it shall be to determine, whether his
demand be reasonable or no. But if any great mischief have happened either to
the Mother or Child thereby, then Life shall go for Life, Eye for Eye, Tooth
for Tooth, Hand for Hand, Foot for Foot, Burning for Burning, Wound for Wound,
Stripe for Stripe So that this Law directs Magistrates, in the ordering of
public Punishments, to proceed according to the Law of Retaliation, Lex
Talionis permissa est duro populo, sed charitas fidelium mitigatrix est hujus
legis. Lippoman.
and to punish those who had voluntarily done any hurt to their Neighbors,
according to the hurt they had done, and that Punishments should be
proportioned to the Faults, though not always in the same special kind of
Suffering; but it gives no permission to particular persons to take a private
Revenge themselves. So our Savior, Math. 5.39. having repeated this Law, adds,
but I say to you, Resist not evil; Whereby he enjoins his Disciples rather to
bear patiently any wrong done unto them, then to be Judges and Avengers in
their own Cause. Yet very probable it is, that it was in the Judges Power, in
some Cases, to allow a Change or Commutation of the Penalty, and instead
thereof, to award a pecuniary Mulct, or Fine of Money, verse. 22, 23, 24, 25.

9. If a man smite out the Eye, nay if he smite out only the Tooth of his
Manservant or Maidservant, he shall let them go free Injuriae peccatum
beneficio est dissolvendum.
for that damage done them. The like is to be understood of maiming or laming
any other parts of the Body, verse. 26, 27.

10. If an Ox And by proportion any other Beast that kills, by pushing wirh
his Horns, or biting, etc,
gore a Man or Woman, that they die, then the Ox shall be stoned, and his Flesh
shall not be eaten, but the Owner shall be quit. But if the Ox were wont to
push with his horn in time past, and that has been testified to his Owner, and
he has not kept him in, and so he has killed a Man or Woman, the Ox shall be
stoned, and the Owner put to death. Or if the Judges having examined all
Circumstances, do find cause to save his life, and to fine him, then he shall
give for the ransom of his life whatever is laid upon him. And this punishment
shall be laid upon him; not only if his Ox have gored a Man or Woman of grown
years, but also if a Boy or Girl be killed by him. But if the Ox gore a
Manservant or Maidservant that are Aliens, the Owner of the Ox shall give
unto the Man's or Maids Master thirty Shekels of Silver (the price at which our
Savior was valued, who became a Servant for our sakes, Math. 26.15. and so
shall be quit, verse. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.

11. If a man shall dig or open a Pit, viz. in the common or public way, For
in the Fields, or private Grounds, Pits were to be kept open for the Cattle to
drink at.
and shall not cover it again, so that an Ox or an Ass There is the same reason
of other Cattle, as of Sheep or Goats.
fall therein, and die, then the Digger of the Pit shall make it good unto the
Owner of the Ox or Ass, viz. shall pay him so much as the Judge shall estimate
the Beast at, and the dead Beast shall be his who opened the Pit, verse. 33, 34.

12. If a man's Ox (which was not known before to be hurtful) hurt another, so
that he die, then they shall sell the live Ox, and divide the money he was sold
for between them, and the dead Ox shall in like manner be divided also. The
reason of this Law seems to be, because it could not be certainly known which
of the Oxen first assaulted the other, the one of them not being known to push
more than the other; and therefore it is just that both the live and dead Ox
should be equally divided. But if it be known that one of the Oxen has used to
push in time past, and his Owner has not kept him in, he shall surely pay Ox
for Ox, and the dead Ox shall be his, whose Ox did kill the other, verse. 35, 36.

Exodus Chapter 22.
13. If a man shall steal an Ox or Sheep, and kill it, or sell it, he shall
restore five Oxen for an Ox, and four Sam. 12.6.
Sheep for a Sheep. But if the Ox or Sheep be found in his hand alive, he shall
only restore double; Double Restitution was the ordinary penalty for Theft,
except in the case here mentioned of Cattle stolen and killed, or sold. Whereas
it is said, Prove. 6.31. He shall restore sevenfold, that is, he shall
abundantly satisfy, as the phrase is elsewhere used, not for a set quantity,
but for the abundant or manifold doing of a thing. See Ps. 79.12.
that is, pay two for one. Because of the great profit, use, and service the
Owners might have of this sort of Cattle (particularly for Sacrifices to God)
the damage was to be recompensed five and four fold; and therefore this kind of
theft was restrained with the greater penalty, Chapter 22. verse. 1. and 4.

14. If a Thief be found breaking up, or digging through an House in the Night,
and he be smitten that he die, he that killed him shall not be put to death for
it. But if the Sun be risen, and so there be sufficient light to know the party
by, and to take him, and so to bring him to Judgment, then to kill him was to
be esteemed murder (except in a man's own just and necessary defense) and in
such case the Thief being taken shall surely pay, and make full restitution, if
he be able. If he have nothing to pay, he shall be sold for a Servant by the
Magistrate, that by his price, satisfaction may be made to the person he has
wronged, verse. 2, 3.

15. If a man shall put in his Beast, and shall feed in another man's Field or
Vineyard; of the best of his own Field, and of the best of his own Vineyard, He
shall make Restitution, verse. 5.

16. If Fire break out and catch in Thorns, so that stacks of Corn, or standing
Corn, or the Trees, and Fruits of the Field be consumed thereby, He that
kindled the Fire shall surely make Restitution, verse. 6.

17. If a man shall deliver to his Neighbor Money or Stuff to keep, and it be
stolen out of his House; if the Thief be found, he shall pay double. But if he
be not, then the Master of the House shall be brought unto the Judges to clear
himself if he can, either by Witnesses, or his own Oath, that the Goods left
with him were indeed stolen from him, and that he himself made them not away,
verse. 7, 8.

18. Here a general Law is inserted concerning the Power of the Magistrate, in
deciding Controversies of this nature. And it decrees, that for all manner of
Trespass, whether it be for Ox, Ass, Sheep, Raiment, or any thing lost (which
another challenges to be his) the Cause of both Parties shall come before the
Judges, and whom the Judges shall condemn, he shall pay double to his
Neighbor, verse. 9.

19. If a man deliver to his Neighbor an Ass or Ox, or any Beast to keep for
him at a price, and it die, or be hurt, or driven away by a sudden Incursion
of Enemies, Casus fortuitus non imputatur depositorio.
so that the Keeper cannot retreive it, neither knows what is become of it; in
such a Case an Oath (whereby God is called upon as a Witness) shall be between
the Parties; and if the Keeper do swear that he has not put his Hands to his
Neighbor's Goods, neither knows what is become of them; then the Owner must
rest satisfied with that Oath, and he to whom the Cattle were entrusted shall
not make them good. But if they be stolen from him, through his own negligence,
he shall make them good to the Owner. And if any of them be torn in pieces, he
may bring some part of them to witness it was so, and then he shall not make
them good, v. 10, 11, 12, 13.

20. If a man borrow ought of his Neighbor, and it be hurt or die, (the Owner
thereof being not with it) he shall surely make it good. And the reason of this
Law seems to be, to make them the more circumspectly careful of things
borrowed. But if the Owner thereof be with it (as sometimes the Beast and its
Owner might be hired together, and the Owner being by might see that the
Mischief which happened could not be prevented,) he shall not make it good. If
it were hired, it came for its hire; that is, if it were not borrowed gratis,
but hired, he that hired it shall be free, paying the conditioned hire, verse.
14, 15.

21. If a man entice a Maid, who is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall
surely endow her; that is, he shall give her such a Dower, or sum of Money, as
is used to be given with Maids of her condition, and so shall marry her. But if
her Father utterly refuse to give her unto him in marriage, He shall pay her so
much as may serve to marry her to another of a suitable Condition to Her, verse.
16, 17.

Further the Lord gives them these subsequent Laws.

22. Thou shall not suffer a Witch, or Sorceress, The Devil's Craft most
prevails with women's weakness in that kind, though he prevails with some men
also, Deuteronomy. 18.10.
to live. The same is decreed concerning men that had familiar Spirits, Lev.
20.27. viz. That they should be stoned, verse. 18.

23. Whosoever lies with a Beast shall be surely put to death; [And the Beast
also was to be put to death, Lev. 20.15.] verse. 19.

24. He that Sacrifices to any God, save to the Lord, the God of Israel, the
only true God, shall be destroyed as a person execrable and accursed, verse. 20.

25. You shall neither vex a Stranger, nor oppress him, for you your selves
were Strangers in the Land of Egypt, Lev. 19.33. verse. 21.

26. You shall not afflict any Widow, or Fatherless Child. If thou afflict them
in any wise, and they Cry unto Me (says the Lord) I will surely hear their
Cry, and my Wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the Sword, and your
Wives shall be Widows, and your Children Fatherless, verse. 22, 23, 24.

27. If thou lend money to any of my people Unto Strangers they might lend upon
Usury, Deuteronomy. 23.10.
that is poor by thee, thou shall not be to him as an Usurer, nor an exacting
Creditor, neither shall thou lay upon him Usury; The word is Nesheck, which
signifies a biting Usury.
that is, a biting, consuming Usury. To such as these our Savior Commands us
to lend freely, not expecting so much as the Principal, if they be not able to
pay, much less the Use. See Luke 6.34, 35. verse. 25.

28. If thou take such of thy Neighbors Garments and Coverlids to pledge,
which he uses to lie in by Night, and which he needs to cover him, thou
shall restore them to him before the Sun goes down. For if he Cries unto Me
(says the Lord) I am gracious, I will hear him. So that this Prohibition seems
to forbid, in effect, the taking any such thing to pawn. See Deuteronomy. 24.12.
For it were in vain to take such a thing for a Pawn, in the Morning, which,
without paying the money, must be restored ere night, verse. 26, 27.

29. Thou shall not revile the Gods; Psalm. 28.16. I have said ye are Gods, but
ye shall die like men. See Acts 23.5.
that is, those that fit in the place of Judgment, nor curse the Ruler of thy
people, verse. 28.

30. Thou shall not delay to offer the first of thy ripe Fruits, and of thy
Liquors, (that is, thy Oil and Wine) unto the Lord. For it is fit that He that
gives All should be acknowledged as Lord of all, by having this Tribute paid
unto Him, and that He should be presented first to procure his blessing upon
the rest. And the firstborn of thy Sons thou shall give to me (says the Lord)
or redeem him with five Shekels of Silver, which shall be given to the Priests
my Servants, Numb. 18.16. The like shall thou do with the firstborn of thy
Bullocks, and thy Sheep. Seven days shall they be with their damm; on the
eighth day Lev. 22.27.
thou may present them unto Me. Thus the Law prescribed, yet doubtless when
they saw cause they might keep them something longer. So that they did not
delay to bring them out of an unwillingness to give them to the Lord, verse. 29,
30.

31. Ye shall be a holy people unto Me, (says the Lord) ye shall not eat any
Flesh that is torn of Beasts in the Field, but ye shall cast it to Dogs. This
was enjoined them, to teach them not only to abhor to eat the flesh of Beasts
thus killed, but to abhor all Rapine and Cruelty, as sins most odious in the
sight of God, verse. 31.

32. Thou shall not raise, nor readily receive, Exodus Chapter 23.
nor maliciously spread a false Report against thy Neighbor, nor join nor
combine with the Wicked to be an unrighteous Witness, and so to carry on their
wicked design, and enterprise. Thou shall not follow the multitude to do evil,
neither shall thou so speak in a Cause as to decline after the mighty Rabbim
signifies the mighty as well as the many.
to wrest Judgment. Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his Cause, any
further than the merit and desert of it requires. For Right is to be regarded
in Judgment, and not either Poverty or Riches. Thou shall not wrest nor
overthrow the Right of the Poor in his Suit. Thou shall not strive against the
Evidence of Truth, to condemn the Poor in a just Cause, or acquit him when his
Cause is bad and unjust. Keep thy self far from a false matter; that is, if
thou be a Judge be mavelous shy either to admit of a false Testimony from
others, or to give false Judgment thy self; especially against the life of a
man. The Innocent and the Righteous see thou slay not; For God is a just God,
and will not justify such wicked Judges. And thou shall take no Gift or Bribe.
For Gifts blind the eyes of the wise (that is, of those that seemed to be so,)
making them judge otherwise than they should do, (being biased by the love of
lucre) and make those that should be righteous in Judgment to pass a perverse
Sentence. Neither shall thou in Judgment, or otherwise, oppress a Stranger. For
ye know the heart of a Stranger, and how it uses to be affected, having been
your selves Strangers in the Land of Egypt, Chap. 23.1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9.

33. If thou meet with thy Enemies Ut hac ratione odientis animum tibi
concilies. This Law shows us how we should do good to our Enemies. It was no
Precept of the Law, but the Pharisees corrupt gloss, That they should love
their Friends and hate their Enemies.
Ox or his Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him, and so any
other thing of his that is lost] Deuteronomy. 22.3.] If thou shall see the Ass of him
that hates thee lying under his burden, or any other of his Cattle endangered,
would thou forbear to help him? Number desines sublevare, vel juvare eum?
Minime. Vatab.
Surely thou shall help with him; that is, set to thine helping hand with thine
Enemy, to relieve his Ass, and raise him up again, that so thou may thereby
oblige him, and dispose him to be reconciled to thee, verse. 4, 5.

34. Six years thou shall sow thy Land, and gather in the Fruits thereof, but
the seventh year The fruits of the sixth year were by God's promise so
abundant, that they served almost for three years for the 6th, 7th, and good
part of the 8th. See Notes on Lev. 25.20.
thou shall let it rest, and lie still, and neither plow it, nor sow it, that
the poor of thy people may eat with thee; namely, that which shall grow in the
seventh year of it self, without any humane labor, by the especial blessing of
God. (See Lev. 25.6, 7.) and the remainder the Beasts of the Field shall eat.
And so thou shall deal also with thy Vineyard and Oliveyard. So that the fruit
of Trees, and whatever the Earth brought forth of its self, this seventh year
( viz. of the grains scattered in the former Harvest) was to be indifferently
common to all, verse. 10, 11.

35. Yet in this seventh, or Sabbatical Year, they were not to think themselves
exempted from the peculiar sanctifying of the Seventh-day Sabbath, but were
bound religiously to keep it, in this as well as in other years. And the Lord
adds this reason for it, That thine Ox and thine Ass may rest, and that the
slave born in thy House, and thy purchased Stranger, or hired Servant may rest
also, and be refreshed as well as thy self, verse. 12.

36. The Lord further says, In all things that I have said unto you be
Circumspect, and make no mention of the Names of other Gods, with any
approbation of them, nor let their Names be heard out of your Mouths, so as to
swear by them, or to any to such purpose, verse. 13.

37. Three solemn Anniversary Feasts shall thou keep unto Me, says the Lord,
viz. The Feast of the Passover, See Exodus 13.3.34.18. Deuteronomy. 16.13, 14, 16.
of Pentecost, or Weeks, Exodus 34.22.
and the Feast of Tabernacles or Booths, or in-gathering of all thy Fruits, not
only of Corn (which was before inned) but of Wine and Oil, etc. At which three
Feasts all thy Males Though the Males only were obliged to attend at these
Feasts, yet the Women might, if they pleased, go up with them also. And
doubtless some of them did. See 1 Samuel 12.19.
(that are able) from 20 years old to 60, shall appear before Me in the place
Luke 2.41. The place where they met was first the Tabernacle, then the Temple.
which I shall choose. And none shall appear before Me empty; that is, without
some Gift or Offering, verse. 14, 15, 16, 17.

38. Ye shall not offer the blood of my Sacrifice, viz. of the Paschal Lamb
with leaven; that is, having any leavened bread in your houses, nor eating any
such bread with it; neither shall ye leave the fat, Adeps recens statim
adolendus erat, quia facile corrumpitur; and ne Sacerdotes comederent quod Dei
erat. De Agno Paschali nihil pra^ter adipem Deo offerebatur, quippe is totus
excepto adipe ab offerentibus erat comedendus. Vide 2 Chronicles. 35.12, 14.
or any part of the Lamb until the Morning. See Exodus 34.25. verse. 18.

39. The First Fruits of thy Land thou shall bring into the House of the Lord
thy God, viz. first to the Tabernacle, then to the Temple. See Deuteronomy. 26. from
1. to 12. verse. 19.

40. Thou shall not sees a Kid in its Mothers milk; Videtur crudelitatem
sapere si lac matris quod datum ei est pro nutrimento, adhibeatur ad
consumptionem. Lyranus.
that is, thou shall not be so cruel as to sees a Kid in the milk of its Dam,
and so make that which was given to it for its nourishment to be a means to
wast and consume it. Or thou shall not imitate the Ishmaelites, who, through
overmuch delicacy, use to sees a Kid in the Dams Milk. Non coques haedum dum
adhuc pendet ab ubere matris suae, and illius lacte eget, nempe primo septiduo
a partu. Sunt qui sentiunt hujusmodi praeceptorum non esse nimis anxie
indagandam rationem. Multa quippe a Deo sapienter esse instituta quorum causae
vel sapientissimos mortalium latent. Nam quid humanae mentis acits ad
immortalis and aeternae mentis consilium. Muis.

In lacte matris suae] dum scil. adhuc eget lacte matris suae, ut ejus Caro
corroberetur, and cibo idoneus reddatur, nempe primo septiduo a partu. Vide c.
22. 39. Pisc.




Exodus 21. whole Chapter.

Exodus 22. whole Chapter.

Exodus 23. from 1. to verse. 20.

SECT. XVIII.
GOd now promises that he will send the Lord Christ, the Angel of the Covenant,
Mal. 3.1.
the Lord of Angels, Heb. 1.3.
in the Cloudy Pillar, to guide and lead them to the promised Land, but charges
them to obey his Voice, and to take heed of provoking him, for He will not
pardon 1 Chronicles. 10.9. The Israelites in the Wilderness tempted him, and so were
justy destroyed by him.
their Transgressions, if they persist in them without Repentance. And they
should be very careful of offending Him; For (says God) my Name is in Him, Joh.
10.38. My Father is in me and I in Him.
that is, He is of the same Nature and Essence, of the same Authority and Power
with my Self, being my Eternal Son, and with that Nature He has my Name
Jehovah, Jer. 33.6. And further to encourage them to Obedience, He tells them,
That if they would obey his Voice, He would be an Enemy to their Enemies, and
an Adversary to their Adversaries, and would afflict those that did afflict
them. And this glorious Angel should go before them, and by an outstretched Arm
destroy those Nations of the Amorites, Hittites, and Perizzites, Canaanites,
Hivites and Jebusites, and should bring them into the possession of their Land.
But when they came to enjoy that good Land, they must be especially careful not
to bow down to their Idols, nor Worship them, nor to imitate the Idolatry of
that Heathenish people, Lev. 18.3.25.
but contrariwise, with detestation, to overthrow and break down their Images,
Lev. 7. And if they were careful to worship the Lord their God, and Him only,
then He would bless their bread and their water, and their food to them, so
that it should nourish them, and would give them health, and keep evil Diseases
from them, and would make them very fruitful, and preserve their Women, and
Cattle, from miscarrying, and abortive Births, and would prolong their life, so
that they should fill up the number of their days, which by the course of
Nature they might live. And He would strike their Enemies with such terror and
fear, that they should turn their backs upon them, and fly when they came to
Encounter them. And he would send Hornets De his agitur, Deuteronomy. 7.20. ubi Vespa
eos in angulos pellit ibique latentes sodicat, quod de terrore animi dici non
potest. Non dubito veros snisse Crabrones and hanc plagam similem ei
Aegyptiacae, Exodus 8.21. Impletum hoc quamvis scriptum non meminit quo loco,
aut tempore factum. Numerantur hic tantum tres gentes, quia hae solum videntur
hoc incommodum sensisse. Rivet. Masius.
before them to expel the Canaanites out of the Land, viz. Great Venomous Flies
See Josh. 24.12.
that should sting them to death. So that those of their Enemies that should
endeavor to hide themselves from them, and think thereby to escape, should be
destroyed by these Hornets, see Deuteronomy. 7.20. But He tells them, He would not
drive out these Heathenish Nations all in one year, lest the Land should grow
to a Wilderness, if it should be all at once dispeopled, and the wild Beasts in
the solitary places would increase, which would be a great annoyance to them.
But he would drive out the Heathen Nations by degrees till Israel were
increased, and become enough to fill the Land. And that they might know how large
a Possession he designed for them, he tells them the bounds of it should be
these. The East bound should be the Red Sea; not that that Sea should bound all
the East side of it, but because the East side of the Land of Canaan should
reach to some part of the Red Sea. The West bound should be the Sea of the
Philistines, or the great Ocean, the Mediterranean-Sea. The South border should
be the Desert toward Egypt, which was the Wilderness of Shur or Paran. The
North bound should be the River Euphrates, But of this larger extent of land,
the Israelites, by reason of their sins, were not possessed, except for a short
time under David and Solomon. See 2 Samuel 8.10. 1 Kings 4.21. 2 Chronicles. 9.26.
which extends toward the North. Lastly, He charge them to make no
Covenant with these Heathenish Nations, nor to yield to Worship their Idols,
nor to permit them to dwell in the Land, lest, if they lived among them, they
might infect them with their Idolatry, which would be a great Snare to them,
and a cause of their fall and ruin.

Exodus 23. from verse. 20. to the end.

SECT. XIX.
GOd having Himself given to the Children of Israel his Moral Law, (which is
expressly called a Covenant, Deuteronomy. 4.13.) and Moses having received these other
Commandments and Ordinances from the Lord, and having written them in a Book,
He proposed them unto the People, and they readily consented to them, saying,
All the words that the Lord has said we will do. Hereupon the next Morning he
rose early, and built an Altar (see Exodus 20.24, 25.) at the foot of the Mount,
to represent God, and He set up twelve Pillars, according to the twelve V. 4.
Duodecem] adnumerato Levi. Neque enim ante Numb. 1.10. in Tribus distincta
binas erat Josephi prosapia. Anonym.
Tribes, to represent the People. Then he appointed twelve young Young men do
not always signify men young in years, but men fit for Service or Ministry to
the Elders. These were some of the Firstborn, and were chief Assistants to the
Father of the Family in offering Sacrifice, and when their Fathers were dead,
succeeded in their Office.
men of the Firstborn (whom the Lord had consecrated to Himself as Ministers
of holy things before the Levetes, who came in the place of the Firstborn,
[Numb. 3.41.] were set apart for the Priestly Function,) to offer
Burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings of Oxen, Calves and Goats [Heb. 9.19.] unto
the Lord; which they did accordingly. Then he took half the blood of these
Sacrifices and put it into Basins, and the other half he sprinkled on the
Altar, and so also on the Book (which it seems was laid on the Altar) making
use of a Sprinkler See more of this in the Apostolical History, page 382. and
383. Because it was an usual thing in all their legal Expiations to use Hyssop
and Wool to sprinkle with. The Apostle received this from the usual custom of
the legal Rites, as being himself trained and brought up under the Law. To this
custom of using Hyssop the Psalmist alludeth, Psalm. 51.7. Purge me with Hyssop,
and I shall be clean, etc.
made of Scarlet wool, and a bunch of Hyssop, Heb. 9.19. (the legal
sprinklings being usually so performed, Levit. 14.6, 7. though Moses here
mentions not all these particulars,) and there was Water also (as it seems)
intermingled with the blood, because otherwise the blood growing cold would
have been thick, and so unfit to be sprinkled. By all which was signified and
sealed God's Favor and Grace to the People if they would be obedient. Then
reading again to them the Book of the Covenant (that is, the Book containing
those Laws before mentioned, which they had covenanted to observe,) and they
promising a second time Obedience thereunto, He took the other half of the
blood and sprinkled it on the People; that is, either on the twelve Pillars
representing the twelve Tribes, or on the Elders as representing the rest, or
on all the people promiscuously that in circuitu stood about him, saying,
Behold the blood of the Covenant which the Lord has made with you concerning
all these words, and things contained in this Book; As if he should have said,
This blood is a sign of the Covenant between God and You, and a Seal to confirm
it, and a Ceremony whereby it is established. The sprinkling of this blood upon
you may also signify that the transgression of the Covenant cannot be purged
but by the blood of the Messiah.

Exodus 24. from 3. to 9.

SECT. XX.
THe Lord having commanded Moses, after he had delivered these Ordinances to
the people, to come up again into the Mount, and to bring Aaron with Nadab and
Abihu (his two eldest Sons) and the 70 Elders They had when they were in Egypt
certain Elders in every Tribe which were the principal men among them. And it
seems God appointed that these 70 should come up with Aaron and his Sons into
the Mount. And these were chosen now as Witnesses, that they might by the sight
of Gods presence be confirmed in the Covenant lately made with them, and might
confirm the rest therein. And afterward at Kibroth Hattavab 70 were chosen for
helpers to Moses in his Government. And it is thought God appointed 70 rather
than any other number, as a Memorial of the 70 Souls that went down into Egypt,
and consequently of God's great blessing in bringing them within a few years to
so great a multitude.
along with him, They accordingly came up into the Mount, that is, a little way
up, and there, as they were commanded, worshipped at a distance, and afar off
from the top of the Mount. And they saw some illustrious Signs of God's
glorious presence, Not that the Lord showed Himself in any humane shape, Deuteronomy.
4.15. For never man saw God, nor can see him, 1 Timothy 6.16 Forma ipsius Dei
nulla describitur, sed basis in qua stabat. Calvin.
and at the lower part of that brightness there was a clear shining blew
pavement, as it were of Saphir, and like to the Sky when it is clear. And
though these Nobles and Elders saw the Glory of God in these extraordinary
signs of his Presence, yet it pleased the Lord that they received no hurt
thereby, but returning again unto the people, did there feast together with
them on their Peace Offerings, Burnt-Offerings were wholely consumed, but of
the Peace Offerings part was reserved, that they did afterward feast upon.
rejoicing in the goodness of God to them, and the honor he had done them. But
Moses with his Servant and designed Successor Joshua Joshua was not before
mentioned, verse. 1. perhaps because he was Moses's Minister and constant
attendant, therefore it was not necessary he should be expressed by name.
abide there still, having advanced to to the higher part of the Mount, but yet
not so high as the Cloud. Moses, before he ascended, gave order to the Elders
to tarry there below, and to expect his and Joshua's return, and that Aaron and
Hur in his absence should determine the Affairs of the people. Moses waited six
days Ut animum sex diebus ab omni cogitatione and sorde terrena serenaret, and
praepararet ad colloquium Dei Jans.
more on the top of the Mountain (which the Cloud now covered, and the signs of
God's glorious Presence appeared upon it) that his mind in that time might be
prepared for Converse with the great God; and on the Seventh day God called him
up into the Cloud, and the sight of the Glory of the Lord on the top of the
Mount was like devouring Fire in the eyes of the Children of Israel. And there
God spoke with Him, and he continued there forty days The like number of days
Elias fasted, 1 Kings 19.8. and our Savior when he was to enter upon the
Ministry of the Gospel, Matthew. 4.2. God could have dispatched Moses sooner, but
this stay was to give the greater Authority to his Law. Some think that the six
days that Moses waited are to be reckoned into the 40. Sic Usserius and alii.
and forty nights without eating or drinking any thing, Deuteronomy. 9.9. And so his
Condition was a shadow of the life of the glorified Saints in Heaven. During
which time he was employed in beholding the Glory of God's Presence, and in
receiving Instructions from him about all things that concerned his people, and
in viewing the Pattern of the Tabernacle, and all things belonging thereunto,
which was shown him in the Mount. Joshua, as it seems, stayed all this while
upon the Mount, though below the Cloud,) waiting for Moses, and sustaining
himself as it is probable with the Manna that fell from Heaven, and the water of
the Brook mentioned Deuteronomy. 9.21. that descended out of the Mount. For there
Moses found him when he came down from God, neither did he know what the
Israelites had done in the Camp, as appears from Exodus 32.17.

Exodus 24. verse. 1, 2. and from 9. to the end.

SECT. XXI.
MOses during this His long abode in the Mount, received from the Lord those
Commands and Instructions mentioned in 25, 26, 27, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31
Chapters of Exodus. The Particulars whereof are these following:

First, Touching the framing of a Tabernacle, that is, a moveable and portable
Temple (after the model and pattern that was showed him in the Mount) for the
solemn Worship and Service of God; in which He would dwell among them, and
manifest his gracious Presence, and there He would meet with them, and declare
His Mind unto them, verse. 22. In order to which,

1st. He Commands that the people should make a voluntary and
free-will-Offering unto Him of Gold, Silver, Brass; and of Blue, Purple,
Scarlet, fine Linen, Goats Hair, Rams Skins dyed red, and Badgers Skins; also
of Shittim wood Isa. 41.19. It Is called the Shittah-Tree. It being a precious
wood, the Israelites might bring it with them out of Egypt, as appears from
Exodus 35.24. Some think they had it from Abel-Shittim, Numb. 33.49. Shittim
wood was very durable, very portable and light of Carriage, and very precious,
used in most of the utensils of the Tabernacle.
and Oil for the Lights, and Spices for the anointing Oil, and for sweet
Incense; also of Onyx Stones and other precious Stones to be set in the Ephod
and Breast Plate of the High-Preist.

Chapter 25. from 1. to the 10.

2ly, He gives Directions concerning framing the Ark The Ark was a sign of Gods
Presence among them, as He was their Lord and Lawgiver, ordaining and requiring
Obedience to these his Commandments, and threatening death to the Transgressors.
The Ark is the first and chiefest of all the Holy things, and for it
principally was the Tabernacle made, Exodus 26.33. and 40.18, 21. and it
sanctified the Tent or House wherein it rested, as Solomon said, The Places are
holy where into the Ark of the Lord has come, 2 Chronicles. 8.11. Imitati hoc
Gentiles Deorum mysteria in capsulis portantes. Et levis occultis conscia cista
Sacris. Tibul.
or Sacred Chest, wherein only the Testimony Exodus 31.18. and 38.21. called the
Tables of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 9.9. And so the Ark called the Ark of the
Covenant, Numb. 10.33. and the Book of the Law is called the Testimony, 2 Kings
11.12. and so the Gospel the Testimony of God, 1 Cor. 2.1.
(that is, the Ten Commandments written upon Tables of Stone, which were a
Testimony of the Covenant between God and them, and testified what God required
of them) was to be kept. This was to be made of Shittim wood, two Cubits A
Cubit among the Hebrews is supposed to be a Foot and half of our measure. The
Ark was therefore a Yard and nine inches long, and three quarters of a Yard
high and broad, Genesis 6.15.
and half in length, and a Cubit and half in breadth and in height. It was to
be overlaid with plates of pure Gold, within and without, and they were to make
a golden Garland, crown or border round about it. And two gilt Rings were to be
made on each side of it, and Staves of Shittim-wood gilt to be put into the
Rings, by which the Levites, and none else, were to carry it on their
Shoulders, see Numb. 7.9. And they were to make a Lid or Covering for it
(called the Mercy-Seat or Propitiatory,) This Mercy-Seat was a Type of Christ,
by whom we are covered from the Wrath of God and Curse of the Law.
of pure beaten Gold, and two Cherubims His Angeli designantur assistentes Deo,
Mat. 18.10. Christo morem gerentes, Mat. 4.11. Heb. 1.6. atque in Ecclesiae
subsidium parati, Heb. 1.14. confer 1 Samuel 4.
of Gold at the ends of it, stretching forth their Wings, and with their Faces
looking one toward the other. And there God promises to meet with them, There
especially did God speak to them, though not there only. See Chapter 29.42. Numb.
12.5.
and from between the Cherubims on the Mercy-Seat to Commune with them, and
give them his Oracles and Commandments in an audible Voice.

Exodus 25. from 10. to 23.

3ly, He gives Directions concerning framing the Table of Shewbread, which was
to be of Shittim-wood (and according to our measure) a Yard long, half a Yard
broad, and three quarters of a Yard high. It was to be overlaid with pure Gold,
and a Border or List of an hands-breath to be made about it; and a golden
Garland, Crown or Fringe to go about that, rising from the edge of the Table,
and bounding it on every side. And four gilded Rings on the four corners of the
feet thereof, and gilded Staves of Shittim-wood to be put into those Rings to
carry it by, that so it might be born on the Priests Shoulders. Four kinds of
Vessels belonging to this Table were also to be made of pure Gold. 1. Dishes to
hold the Cakes or Loaves of Shewbread, which were to be twelve in number,
according to the twelve Loaves, [see Levit. 24.5.] that were to be set therein;
and some of these Dishes possibly were to hold Frankincense, which was to be
put upon each row of the Shewbread, Levit. 24.7. to intimate to them that they
ought to send up Praises to God for their daily Bread. 2. Spoons to put the
Frankincense into the Dishes, and to take it out again when it was to be burnt
upon the Altar of Incense. 3. Covers or Plates for the covering of the Loaves.
4. Bowls for the covering of the Dishes of Frankincense, or which might serve
for the burning of the Frankincense. Shewbread was to be set upon this Table
before the Lord always. 'Twas called Shewbread, because it was to be set upon
the Table, and so showed and set in view, and presented before the Lord. There
were every week twelve Per hos panes duodecim Tribus pulchre significabant se a
Deo continuo ali, and gratitudinis ergo perpetuum quasi Sacrificium illi
offerre. Haec Christi mensam indicat, Sanctorum communionem, item coeleste
Grandium, verbique variam (...). Anonym. in loc.
Cakes Every Cake was to contain two homers or tenth deals of an Epha (or
Bushel of fine Flour) enough to serve two men for one day, every one containing
eight pounds, as Ribera thinks.
thereof to be made according to the number of the twelve Tribes of Israel.
These with pure Incense were to be set every Sabbath day new upon the Table in
two rows, six on a row, and the old bread was then to be taken away and eaten
by the Priests, Levit. 24.5, 9. The Bread on this Table was tendered to God as a
Quit-rent, or acknowledgment that they held all their Food from his Providence
and Bounty.

Exodus 25. from verse. 23. to 31.

4ly, Concerning the framing of the golden Candelstick, which was to be made
with a shaft, and six branches coming out of the sides of it, three on one side
(one above another) and three on the other side, all of beaten Gold. And seven
Sookets were to be made, one on the top of the Shaft, and the other on the six
Branches, whereinto the Oil was to be put, to feed the Lamps, that they might
give light round about it. See Numb. 8.2. And the Tongs and Snuffers (that were
appointed to raise up the Wick of the Lamps, and make them burn brighter) were
all to be of Gold; and a talent of Gold was to be spent in the making of this
Candlestick, and the things appertaining to it, which amounts to 120 pound
weight.

From 31. to the end.

5ly, The Children of Israel were charged to bring pure By this pure Oil was
signified the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, whereby the Ministers of God are
fitted to be as lights among the people.
Oil-Olive beaten, viz. such as ran from the Olives when they were first beaten
or stamped, which was clearer and purer than that which was crushed out with a
Press. With this the Priests were to maintain the Lamps, and to cause them to
burn always; that is, every night. It Is conceived that the Lamps burnt only in
the Night, and were put out in the Morning, which some infer from 1 Samuel 3.3.
where it is said, The Lord appeared to Samuel ere the Lamp of God went out in
the Temple, to wit, before break of day.
For they were to light them in the Evening, and in the Morning to put them
out, and cleanse them, and trim them to be lighted again at Night.

Exodus 27.20, 21.

6ly, Concerning the Altar of Incense The Incense did signify how the prayers
of the Saints through Christ are acceptable to God. See Rev. 8.3. Psalm. 141.2.
Rev. 5.8.
to be made of Shittim-wood foursquare, a Cubit in length, and a Cubit in
breadth, and two Cubits in height, with Horns or little Pyramids at the four
corners thereof; and it was to be overlaid with Gold, therefore called Numb.
4.11. the golden Altar; but Ezekiel. 41.22. it is called the wooden Altar; and so
it shadowed Christ in both his Natures, his Deity giving glory to his Humanity.
And it was to have a gilded Garland round about the edges of it, and two gilded
Rings on each side at each corner, and Staves of Shittim-wood to be put through
those Rings to carry it with, when the Tabernacle was to be removed, Numb.
4.11. And it was to be placed in the holy Place before the Veil that was to
separate the most Holy from the holy Place, just before the Mercy-Seat. And
Aaron was appointed, not in quality of High Priest, but only as a Priest (for
to this Office the inferior Priests were afterward admitted, as appears Luke
1.) when he had dressed and trimmed the Lamps of the golden Candlestick in the
Morning, Mane mundabantur, vesperi accendebantur. Vatab.
and made them ready to be lighted again at Night, to burn sweet Incense upon
this Altar, and when he lighted the Lamps at Night to burn Incense again upon
it; Luke 1.9, 10. when Zachary burned Incense in the Temple, the whole
multitude were without at prayer while the Incense was ascending.
possibly to intimate to them how God's people should daily and constantly pray
unto the Lord, and that the prayers of his faithful people are very acceptable
unto him while Jesus Christ does incense them by his Merits and Intercession.
And this Ordinance was to be perpetually observed by The Incense seems to be
burnt in Chasing-dishes upon this Altar. Numb. 29.7.
them in their Generations while that Dispensation lasted. Further they were
enjoined to offer no strange Incense thereon, that is, made of any other
materials than what is enjoined, verse. 34, 35, etc. where the Ingredients are
prescribed to be sweet Spices with pure Frankincense beaten small, and mixed
together, and to be applied by the Priest only to this holy use and no other.
They were not to make any like to it to smell to, or for their own private use.
Whosoever should contemptuously offend against this Ordinance are threatened to
be cut off by Divine Vengeance. And Aaron once a year as High Priest (viz. on
the great day of Expiation, on the tenth day of the seventh month, see Levit.
16.18.) was appointed to put the blood of the Sin-Offering upon the Horns of
this Altar, to make Expiation for such Errors and Failings as might have been
committed in the administration about it. And this Rite was to be religiously
observed by them in their Generations, till Christ the Substance of these
Ceremonial shadows should appear.

Exodus 30. from 1. to 11. and from verse. 34. to the end.

7ly, He gives Directions concerning framing the Tabernacle. Now the Tabernacle
taken in the largest sense contained two parts, one that was covered, which was
properly called the Tabernacle, and one that was open, viz. the Court belonging
thereunto. Concerning the first, these Directions are given. It was to be 30
Cubits long, (accounting a Cubit a Yard) ten Cubits high, and ten broad. The
walls of it were to be 20 boards of Shittim-wood, gilt all over, standing
upright, each a Cubit and half in breadth (so that the breadth of the boards
joined together made the length of the Tabernacle) the height thereof being the
length of the boards, that is, ten Cubits, and the breadth thereof of the same
proportion. Each board was to have two Tenons fastened in silver Sockets or
moveable Footstalls, having hollow Mortaises for the Tenons of the boards to
fall into. These boards were also to have gilded Bars of the same wood running
along their breadth in an even proportion through golden Rings to strengthen
their Conjunction. And these boards were to be as the walls of it. But the
Tabernacle it self was to consist of curious Curtains of fine twined Linen,
Blue, Purple, and Scarlet, with Cherubims curiously embroidered in them
(representing the Ministry of Angels in the Church) and a threefold Covering
over it; one of Goats hair spun and woven into Stuff, (possibly like our
Chamlet) another of Ram Skins died red, a third of Badgers Skins. This covered
Tabernacle was to consist of two parts; The one to be called the Holy of Holies
at the upper end of it, taking up ten Cubits, or one third part of it. In this
were to be placed the Ark with the two Tables of the Law in it, and by the Ark
the Pot of Manna before the Testimony, Exodus 16.33, 34. and Aarons Rod, Numb.
17.10. and the golden Censer, Levit. 16.12. See Apost. Hist. on Heb. 9.4.
And the Book of the Law This seems to be the Book that was found in Josiah's
time, and to be lost in the days of wicked Manesseh and Amon. The matters of
that Book, when read to Josiah, and the people, seemed so strange unto them, as
if no Copy of it at all, or wondrous rare, had been extant among them.
in the outside of the Ark, Deuteronomy. 31.26. that is, the whole Law, Writings and
inspired Books of Moses. Into this Holy of Holies none but the High Priest (and
He but once a year) was to enter, Levit. 16. The other part of the Sanctuary
was called the Holy, containing 20 Cubits. In this was to be placed the Altar
of Incense, on the right side whereof was to stand the golden Candlestick, and
on the left the Table of Shewbread. Into this part of the Sanctuary the
ordinary Priests were to enter, and there to Minister. These two parts were to
be divided by a Veil, to be made of Blue, Purple and Scarlet, with embroidered
Cherubims, and 'twas to be a partition between the Holy and Holy of Holies, and
this was the inner Veil. There was also an hanging to be made for a door or
entrance into the Tabernacle, or holy Place to be made of Blue, Purple and
Scarlet, and hung on Pillars of Shittim-wood overlaid with Gold, which was to
be the outward Veil.

Exodus 26. whole Chapter.

And so much of the covered Tabernacle; now for the outward Court belonging
thereunto, It was to be in length an 100 Cubits, and in breadth 50, and to be
enclosed with Hangings of fine twined Linen hung upon Pillars of Shittim-wood
five Cubits high, and filleted with Silver, and set in Sockets of Brass and
moveable Footstalls. And for the Gate of this Court Eastward was to be an
Hanging of 20 Cubits of Blue, Purple and Scarlet, and fine twined Linen
wrought with Needle Work, and to be hung on four Pillars.

8ly, Concerning the Altar of Burnt-Offering, which was to be made of
Shittim-wood five Cubits long and five broad, and so to be four square, and
three Cubits high. It was to have Horns or little Pyramids on the four Corners
thereof, to which they were to bind their Sacrifices, see Psalm. 118.27. They
were to make for it a Grate of Network all of Brass, with four brazen Rings in
the corners thereof, to take it out upon occasion. It was to be overlaid with
Brass, to defend it against the heat of the fire, the widness and length being
such that the fire might be kept within the compass of the Grate, which was to
be set even to the midst of it. They were also to make several Instruments
belonging to this Altar, as Panns to receive ashes, Shovels, Basins,
Flesh-hooks, Fire-panns, all of Brass: There was no Iron to be used about the
Tabernacle.
and Staves of Shittim-wood, overlaid with brass, to be put into the Rings on
the sides of the Altar to bear it withal. And it was to be made hollow with
boards, without either bottom or cover, according to the Pattern showed to
Moses in the Mount.

Exodus 27. from 1. to 9.

9ly, Concerning the daily Sacrifices to be offered on this Altar constantly
(besides all other occasional Sacrifices) which were to be two Lambs of the
first year, one to be offered in the Morning, A Pattern for our Devotion
Morning and Evening.
the other in the Evening, Or between the two Evenings, see Chapter 12.6. that is,
from the beginning of the declining of the Sun, viz. three in the Afternoon to
Sunsetting. Hoc juge Sacrificium singulis diebus nullo intermisso, sive Sacro,
sive prosano osserebatur, scil. agnus unus mane ante omnia Sacrificia, alter
vespere post alia Sacrificia.
for a Burnt-Offering to the Lord, with an Omer or Pottle See Notes on Exodus
16.36.
of Flour mingled with the fourth part of an Hin An Hin containing six Pints,
so the fourth part of an Hin is a Pint and half.
(or a Pint and half) of pure Oil, and a Pint and half of Wine Which was to
signify that Christ by the Oblation of Himself for Us becomes not only
Redemption, but also Food, Gladness, and chearing Comfort.
to be poured upon it, and all to be consumed by fire upon the Altar. Upon
their performance of these things, God promises to meet with them there at the
door Duobus ergo locis Deus loquebatur, primo super Arcam in Sto Storum,
secundo ad ostium Tabernaculi. Utrique loco propinquum erat altar, illi
thymiamatis, huic holocausti. In utroque offerebatur juge Sacrificium mane and
vespere ad colendam illam dignationem praesentiae divinae. Jans.
of the Tabernacle, (before which the Altar stood) and to manifest his gracious
Presence, and reveal his will to them. And by such manifestations of his Glory,
He would declare that He had made choice of the Tabernacle and Altar for holy
Services to Himself, and that He had set apart Aaron and his Sons to minister
to Him in the Priests Office. And He would by such evident Tokens of his
Presence dwell Quia Tabernaculum erat quasi tentorium Dei tanquam Principis in
medio populi sui habitantis.
among them, and would be their God, and manifest his especial Favor to them,
in directing and protecting them.

Exodus 29. from verse. 38. to the end.

10ly, Concerning the brazen Laver, which was to be made with a foot or base of
Brass, This was made of the Women's brazen Looking-glasses, Exodus 38.8. It Is
like the Women did set a piece of shining Brass, or burnished Metal before
their Faces when they dressed themselves.
on which it was to stand, and Aaron and his Sons before they ministered, were
to wash their Hands and Feet Hence some collect that the Priests ministered in
the Tabernacle being barefoot, or in slight Sandals.
out of it. Probably it had spouts for the water to issue forth at, and at the
bottom some Vessel to receive the water, which the Priests made use of. For
being lifted up upon its Foot or Base the Priests could not put their Feet into
it, but probably they were to wash in the water drawn from it, and they were to
be careful constantly to do it, being threatened (in case they omitted it) with
destruction by the Hand of the Lord.

Exodus 30. from verse. 17. to 22.

11ly, Touching the setting apart of Aaron and his four Sons for the Priests
Office, and concerning the particular Ornaments and Vestments they were to use
in their Ministration, for their Glory and Honor, and to make them more
Venerable among the People, and to be a sign of their Consecration and
Sanctification unto God. And these Garments were to be made by such as were
wise-hearted, and whom God had filled with the Spirit of Wisdom for such a
purpose.

And first, Concerning the sacred Attire and Ornaments of the High Priest which
are methodically ranked, Levit. 8.7, 8, 9.

1. Linen Breeches, or Drawers next his Flesh.

2. A Coat of fine Linen (embroidered) over them.

3. An embroidered Girdle to gird it withal.

4. Over this Coat and Girdle, a Robe all of blue, which was to have Bells and
artificial Pomegranates intermingled in the hem of it, that the sound of all
the Bells being heard when he went into the holy Place to minister, the people
might second him with heart and mind in his Sacred Offices, and the Lord
threatens death to him if he should enter otherwise into the most holy Place
then thus apparalled, and so through his disobedience and neglect of Gods
Command should be an occasion of the peoples Irreverence and want of Devotion
toward God.

5. Upon this Robe He was to wear the Ephod, which was to be made of Gold, of
Blue, of Purple, of Scarlet, of fine twined Linen, and to have on the
Shoulders thereof two Onix Stones set in ouches of Gold, and graven with the
Names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, to intimate to them that God seeing their
Names upon the Shoulders of the High Priest, would remember the Covenant He had
made with their Fathers, and accordingly would do them good.

6. To the Ephod, with Chains of Gold and golden Rings, was to be fastened the
Breastplate of Judgment, So called because the High Priest did put it on when
he inquired of the Lord for the people in doubtful cases, to give a right
judgment, and he could not give Sentence in Judgment without that on his
Breast: and the Judgment given thereby was called the Judgment of Urim, Numb.
27.21.
wherein were to be set four rows of precious Stones (three in a row) in which
were to be engraven the Names of the Tribes of the Children of Israel, which
Aaron was to bear upon his Breast when he went into the Sanctuary; and in this
Breast Plate was to be the Vrim and Thummim, signifying Light and Perfection,
Ut significarent in Doctore duo requiri Scientiam and vitae puritatem. Grot.
by which some understand those rows of precious Stones in the Breast Plate
before mentioned; and so called not only in regard of their brightness and
perfection, but with respect unto their use, which was that by them the High
Priest might inquire of God for the people in doubtful Cases, and might by the
special Inspiration of the Spirit of God be enabled to return them an answer
from God. Hence it is (they say) that in the 39. Chapter of Exodus where Moses does
exactly relate how all things were made according to Gods appointment, there is
no mention made of Urim and Thummin, but only of the twelve precious Stones set
in the Breast Plate, because those Stones were usually called by the people the
Urim and Thummim.
For it is thought that he earnestly looking upon those rows of precious Stones
(with respect to the Divine Institution) and thereby inviting the Spirit to
come upon him, his understanding was suddenly so illuminated, that he gave a
satisfactory Answer in all particulars to the Question propounded, and in
doubtful Cases gave a right Judgment Whereas David desiring to consult with the
Lord called for the Ephod, 1 Samuel 23.9. the reason was, because the
Breast Plate was fastened to the Ephod. So that if he had one, he had both,
Exodus 39.21. 1 Samuel 23.6. Abimelech the High Priest being dead, Abiathar his
Son escaping that danger, as he fled took the Ephod out of the Tabernacle at
Nob, and brought it with him to David, wherein Gods Providence appeared that
the right Ephod should be preserved and kept with David the true King, that he
might have means to Consult with God in all his Difficulties. See Willet in loc.
from the Lord when it so pleased him. For 1 Samuel 28.6. the Lord would not
answer Saul neither by Dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by Prophets. Further, the
Answers which the High Priests received from the Lord when he consulted the
Vrim and Thummim were sometimes made by an audible Voice, sometimes secret
Inspiration; which Answers when He had acquainted the people with the Stones in
the Breast Plate (as is conceived) gave forth an extraordinary luster and
brightness, to assure the people that he spoke to them the Mind of the Lord,
like as the extraordinary shining of Moses's face, when he came down from the
Mount, was a Demonstration to the people that He had been with God, and what he
brought to them came from God. Some think that these very words Urim and
Thummim were written in some precious matter, not made by humane art, but by
the Almighty Power of God, and so were given by God to Moses, and by him put
into the Pectoral, Levit. 8.8. And he put into the Breast Plate the Urim and
Thummim; and therefore this is not mentioned among those things that were made
by the Artificers, because this was, as the Tables of the Law, the Work of God
and not of men. But this is but a Conjecture. Neither can we (the Scripture
being silent) certainly determine what they were. When the Jews returned out of
Babylon they were lost, and therefore some businesses hung in suspense, see
Ezra 2.63. and could not be determined till there stood up a Priest with Urim
and Thummim. We do not find in any of the Jewish Rabbis that they themselves
did certainly know what they were. Quid fuerint Scriptura proculdubio non sine
certo consitio reticuit. In that place Levit. 8.8. no mention is made of the
twelve precious Stones. Causa utriusque quod eadem res fuit variis nominibus
significata. Rivet. Minime omisisset Moses Urim and Thummim in Exodus 39.10. Si
aliud quam 12 Lapides intellexisset, cum alia long minora and abjectiora
diligentissime recenseat. Brentius.

The Urim and Thummim was lost in the Captivity of Babylon, as also the Ark,
Tables of Stone, Aarons Rod, and the Pot of Manna. After the Captivity they had
no Priest with Urim and Thummim, Ezra 2.63. The Priest which met Alexander in
his glorious Apparel might have precious Stones on his Breast, without the Urim
and Thummim.


This Breast Plate of Judgment V. 30. Judicium] i. e. pectorale judicij, ut
arca dicitur Testimonium, i. e. arca Testimonij. Metonymice.
(whereby Answers of right Judgment were given to the Israelites) Aaron was to
wear upon his heart continually, when he went to minister in the Tabernacle,
and he was thereby (as it were) to present the Children of Israel before the
Lord, to be graciously remembered by him.

7. Aaron was to wear on his Head a Mitre of fine Linen.

8. In the forefront of the Mitre was to be placed a plate of pure Gold two
fingers broad (which made it show like a Crown, Exodus 29.6. Levit. 8.9.)
wherein was to be graven Holiness to the Lord, as a signification that Aaron,
as a Type of Christ, did bear the Iniquities of the People, and did make
atonement for them, and that as for their other Sins, so for the Iniquities
committed in their most holy Oblations which they offered, and sacrified to the
Lord. And this Mitre with this Plate was always to be on his head when he
ministered before the Lord, as a sign that the people are accepted of God for
the Holiness, Obedience, and Sufferings of the Messiah.

Exodus 28. from 1. to 40.

2. Concerning the Attire and Vestments to be used by the ordinary Priests. 1.
Coats of fine Linen for their uppermost Garment (called linen Ephods, 1 Samuel
22.18.) with Girdles and Bonnets of the same, and secondly, Linen Drawers.
These Garments Aaron and his Sons (being first anointed with holy Oil, Of which
see the Composition afterward, Exodus 30.23.
and consecrated to their Office,) were to wear when they served in the holy
Place, and not to neglect them, lest they thereupon be forced to bear the
punishment of their Iniquity, and die for it.

Exodus 28. from verse. 40. to the end.

12ly, Touching the Sacrifices and Ceremonies to be used in the Consecration of
Aaron and his Sons. 1. They were to be washed with water out of the brazen
Laver before the door of the Tabernacle, to signify the Holiness that God
requires in those that were to be Types of Christ. 2. Aaron and his Sons were
to be clothed with their particular appointed Robes and Ornaments. 3. The
anointing Oil was to be powered upon the Head of Aaron and his Sons. See Exodus
30.30. and Chapter 40. 14, 15. And the Priests Office was to be continued in the
Line of Aaron and his Sons, and of their Successors by a perpetual Statute, as
long as this Dispensation was to last, and till the Messiah should come, who
was to fulfill what they typified. 4. The blood of the Ram of Consecration (of
which afterward) was to be put upon the tip of their right ear, The ear was to
be sanctified for holy hearing (and against the hearing of corrupt
Communication) the hand for Sacrificing, the foot for Walking, that their
Conversation might be holy, and their Persons sanctified from head to foot.
and on the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right
foot, and they were to sprinkle some of the blood and the anointing Oil The
spots occasioned in the Priests Garments by the sprinkling of blood and oil,
it is like were very small, and so magis ad honorem quam horrorem.
upon them, and their Garments, to signify that by the blood of Christ they
were cleansed, and by the Oil of his Grace they were sanctified for the Work of
their Ministry.

The Sacrifices to be used at this time were these: Moses having first provided
a Basket of unleavened Bread, and Cakes unleavened tempered with Oil, and
Wafers unleavened anointed with Oil, he was to take a young Bullock, which was
to be a Sin-Offering, and Aaron and his Sons were to put their hands upon the
head of it, signifying that they deserved to die like that Sacrifice; but did
thereby disburden themselves of their Sins, and laid them upon the head of the
Sacrifice, typifying Christ. See Isa. 53.6. And Moses himself (who was a
Levite) till Aaron and his Sons were fully consecrated for the Service of the
Priesthood, was by extraordinary Warrant from God to perform the Work of the
Priest in offering these Sacrifices. See Psalm. 99.6. And he was to take of the
blood of the Bullock and put it upon the Horns of the Altar of Burnt-Offerings,
(which stood in the Court of the Tabernacle) to purify, consecrate, and
sanctify the Altar it self, and make it holy to the Lord, and so to set it
apart for holy Uses, that whatsoever was offered thereon, according to Gods
Institution, might be sanctified, made holy, and accepted as holy by the Lord.
See Chapter 30.29. and Matthew. 23.19. And the flesh of the Bullock, and his skin and
dung were to be burnt without the Camp, to show how destable the sin was that
was laid (as it were) upon this Bullock, and that the true Sacrifice for our
Sins should suffer without the Gates of Jerusalem, Heb. 13.11, 12, 13. 2ly, The
Sacrifice for Sin being thus first offered, he was to offer one Ram for a
Burnt-Offering, By the Burnt-Offering some understand the ardent love of
Christ, quo totus in cruce conflagravit; and as the Burnt-Offering ascended up
in fire, so Christ ascended into heaven to make Intercession for us.
as a savor of rest; that is, that God being thereby appeased, might cease
from his anger. Not as though the Lord was affected with Smells, but it is said
to be an acceptable Savor to Him in regard of their Obedience and willing
mind, and God is is said to be delighted with it, when they offered it with
Faith and true devotion. 3ly, He was to take another Ram for a Peace Offering.
These were to be offered either to obtain some Blessing, or to give thanks for
some Blessing already received. In both these respects this was offered at the
Priests Consecration, both by way of thankfulness for the honor done them in
calling them to this Dignity and Office; as also by way of Supplication, humbly
to entreat the Lord that he would prosper them in the execution of it. Thus at
the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons, diverse sorts of Sacrifices were to be
offered, because they were ordained to offer them all. In this Eucharistical
Sacrifice that was now to be offered, Moses was only to have the Breast, Exodus
29.26. but the right Shoulder, and the fat, and one loaf of Bread, and one Cake
of oiled Bread, and one Wafer out of the Basket [ verse. 3.] were to be waved
(or shaken toward all the four Quarters of the World, to signify that God is
the Lord of the whole Earth) and then to be burnt by Him upon the Altar of
Burnt-Offering for a sweet savor before the Lord. And upon this occasion an
Ordinance is inserted, that in Eucharistical Sacrifices (namely, such as these
whereby Aaron and his Sons were to be consecrated,) for the future the Priests
were to have the shaken Breast, and the right Shoulder Hinc humerus pectusque
populo destinent Sacerdotes. Anonym.
that was lifted up, The rest of the Peace Offering besides what was the
Priests belonged to the Offerer.
(namely, to God as his Right,) and assigned by Him as a Portion to the
Priests, Levit. 7.31. whereby possibly they were taught that with all their
Heart, and all their Strength they should give themselves to the Service of the
Lord. Another Ordinance is also inserted, That the holy Garments of Aaron shall
be his Sons after him, that He may be anointed and consecrated in them. Thus
though the High Priest died, yet his Son was to appear before the Lord in the
same Garments. And as the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons continued seven
days verse. 35. (during which time they were to abide at the door of the
Tabernacle day and night to keep the Watch of the Lord, Levit. 8.33, 35.) and
as on each day of the seven the same Sacrifices and Ceremonies were to be
observed as had been on the first day. So this Order of Consecration was to be
practiced toward their Successors when they came into the Land of Canaan, and
had a settled state there. Lastly, It is appointed that that part of the Ram of
Consecration which should be left, after part had been burnt, and Moses had had
his portion, should be sodden in the Court of the Sanctuary, and should be
eaten there by Aaron and his Sons with the bread that was left in the Basket,
verse. 2, 3. Levit. 8.31. And no Stranger, viz. None but a Priest was to eat of
it, whereas in other Peace Offerings the Offerer did partake. And if any part
of the Bread or Flesh remained until the Morning, they were to burn it with
fire. This was required, lest by reserving any part thereof, either they might
grow into contempt of holy things, making no difference between them and their
ordinary Food, (which they might reserve at their pleasure) or lest that which
remained might be abused to Superstition. And whereas in ordinary
Peace Offerings they might eat of them the next day, but not upon the third
day, see Levit. 7.18. no part of this must be eaten the second day. This was to
show that this Ram of Consecration was a more holy thing than their ordinary
Peace Offerings.

Exodus 29. from 1. to 38.

13ly, Touching the holy anointing Oil and the Ingredients of which it was to
be made, viz. of principal Spices, Myrrh, Cynamon, sweet Calamus, Those sweet
Odours signified the joyful Graces of Gods Spirit, and the anointing therewith,
the pouring out of the holy Spirit upon Christ, his Church, and Ministers.
and Cassia, and of Oil-Olive. And the things to be anointed therewith (to
Consecrate them to Gods Service, and to separate them from common uses,) were
the Tabernacle, the Ark, the Table, the Candlestick, with all their Vtensils,
the Altar of Incense, the Laver, the Altar of Burnt-Offerings; so that
whatsoever was brought as an Oblation, if it touched any of the hallowed things
of the Sanctuary, it should be holy to the Lord. Aaron also, and his Sons and
Successors were to be anointed with this holy Oil; but upon no man's flesh else
was it to be powered. It was not to be used for any civil use, as for delight,
or the like, even by the Priests themselves, nor any of it to be powered upon
Strangers, nor any to be made like unto it, for any such purposes, under
penalty of being cut off.

Exodus 30. from verse. 22. to 34.

14ly, Touching the half Shekel, that all the Children of Israel from 20 years
old and upwards (when they were numbered) were to pay, for the ransom of their
Souls, acknowledging thereby that they held their lives of God, and that he had
redeemed them out of the House of Bondage. And this they were to do, that so
the Lord might not be provoked for their Ingratitude, to send a Plague among
them. This Didrachma, or half Shekel The Standard of all Weights and Measures
being kept in the Sanctuary, hence it is called the Shekel of the Sanctuary.
See Exodus 38.26. The common Shekel is but 1 s. 3 d. The Shekel of the Sanctuary
2 s. 6 d. Nehem. 10.32. the rate is but the third part of a Shekel, but here
the rate is more upon this extraordinary occasion. Some think this Contribution
was annual; Others only occasional, as there was cause to call the people to it.
[see Matthew. 17.24.] amounted to 15 d. of our money, and it was to be employed
for the Service of the Tabernacle, and the Rich were not to give more, nor the
Poor less; And this equality seems to be enjoined that the Rich might not
despise the Poor, and to show that the life of a poor man is as precious in the
sight of God, as a rich man's, and both are equally bound to praise God for it.
And this was also to be done, that it might be a Memorial before the Lord of
their Obedience, and so might move the Lord to be propitious unto them.

Exodus 30. from verse. 11. to 17.

15ly, These Commands and Injunctions being given to Moses by the Lord, it is
like Moses begain to think with himself where he should find Workmen fit to
undertake such curious and difficult Works, and that would make them exactly
according to the Pattern given. Wherefore the Lord tells him, He had furnished
Men with extraordinary gifts of his Spirit So that quick apprehension and skill
in honest Handicrafts and Manufactures is to accounted as a Gift of God.
(consisting in Wisdom, Knowledge, ready conceiving, and skill for the
performance of all these things) and particularly Bezaleel and Aholiab, who
should be the principal Workmen, and Directors of others, and He had put into
the hearts of all those that were apt for these businesses a greater
apprehension Sapienter excogitare, and excogitata operari.
to conceive and contrive, and a greater dexterity (then they had before) to
work all these things that He had commanded.

Exodus 31. from 1. to the 12.

16ly, Lastly, Though the Work of the Tabernacle was with all care and
diligence to be followed, and speedily to be done, yet the Lord would not have
any of it to be done upon the Sabbath Day, and therefore he renews his Command
about the Observation of that Day, telling Moses, It was a Sign between Him and
them, that He had taken them for his peculiar people, and they Him for their
God; whom they had bound themselves withal faithfulness to serve; And by his
enjoining them diligently to keep his Sabbath, they might know that he intended
it as a means to promote their Sanctification. Then He urges the Observation of
the Sabbath upon them by diverse reasons:

1. Ab utili: It is, says He, holy unto you; that is, Ordained for your benefit
and profit, Mark 2.27. The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath.

2. A necessario. If they did not keep it, He tells them, They should surely be
put to death. [See Numb. 15.35. Videtur Moses ignorasse speciem mortis, aut
sceleris gradum: sola enim profana contumaxque Sabbathi violatio capitalis est.
Anonym. in loc.
It Is observable, That death is thrice here threatened to those that defile the
Sabbath by doing any profane or unnecessary work thereon.

3. From the dedication of this Day unto God; It is a Sabbath of Rest
consecrated unto God.

4. From the Command of God. He Commands them to keep the Seventh-day Sabbath
perpetually; that is, as long as that Dispensation should last, the Observation
thereof being one Article of the Covenant He had made with them.

5. A facili. The Lord appoints but one day in seven for Holy Rest, and
allows Six for labor in our worldly businesses.

6. From the Example of God Himself, who created the World in six days, and
rested on the Seventh, and was refreshed. This is spoken of God after the
manner of men.


Exodus 31. from 12. to 18.

SECT. XXII.
THe people seeing that Moses stayed so long in the Mount, and that the Cloud
did not move; and perhaps conceiving that Moses had forsaken them, or
despairing of his Return, a great number It Is manifest that all the people did
not join herein; for some of them afterward at Moses his command were employed
to put the Idolaters to death, v. 26. 1 Cor. 10.7.
of them (as it seems) pressed Aaron with great Importunity to make them an
Image or visible representation of God V. 1. Gods] the plural for the singular,
by an Hebrew Idiotism. Declarant se velle very unam effigiem Dei, divinae
symbolum praesentiae, sed erat Carnalis Aegyptiorum imitatio qui vitulum
colebant. Anonym. in loc.
going before them, and manifesting his Presence among them; and this Image
they would have made in the form or shape of a Calf, according to the Idolatry
they had seen practiced in Egypt. Aaron (to divert them, as it is probable, from
this wicked Intendment) requires the golden Earrings from the Ears of their
Wives, Sons and Daughters, to make it with, hoping that this demand would make
such a mutiny in all their Families that they would have chosen rather to
desist from their wicked design than part with those Ornaments wherein they
were wont to take so much delight. But herein he was much deceived: for their
Superstition was, at this time, above their Pride or Covetousness, insomuch
that they presently broke off their golden Earrings and gave them to Aaron,
who appointed Workmen first to melt the Gold and cast it into the form of a
Calf, and then to polish and finish it with a graving Tool. It seems they
desired their Idol should be made in this form in imitation of the Idol Apis,
the Ox or Calf Thus the Israelites borrowed not all Gold and Silver, but some
dross from the Egyptians, borrowing their Idolatrous Worship from them, 1 King.
12.28. Ps. 106, 19, 20. Puller.
the Egyptians used to worship. Then encouraging one another, and being much
pleased with their Idol, they said, This is thy God, O Israel, which brought
thee out of the Land of Eypt, pretending still to worship the true God in and
by the Calf. Aaron seeing the people thus violently bent on their Idol, upon
their motion, He yields to build an Altar for it, and to proclaim an Holy Day,
and to dedicate a Feast to it. To morrow, says He, is a Feast to the Lord
Jehovah, pretending all was still intended for the Worship of the true God; And
accordingly the people rose early the next morning, and sacrificed unto their
Idol Burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings, and upon the Altar they feasted
together, and then rose up to play; that is, to sing, and dance, and play about
their Idol, shouting and making a great Noise [vers. 17.] according to the wild
custom and manner of the Heathens in their Idolatrous Feasts.

Exodus 32. from 1. to 7.

SECT. XXIII.
WHen 40 days and 40 nights were now expired, and God had made an end of
Communing with Moses on the Mount, He gave him two Tables of Stone made by his
own Hand, and wherein He had written with his own Finger the Ten Commandments;
Commanding him to get him down quickly, telling him what the people had done in
his absence. Thy God seems to disown them now as His people.
people (says He) which thou broughtest out of the Land of Egypt have corrupted
themselves; They have turned aside quickly, (after their entering into Covenant
with Me, and promising to keep all my Precepts,) They have quickly turned out
of the way which I commanded them, and have made them a molten Calf, and have
worshipped it, and sacrificed unto it. Thou see that this is a very wicked,
and stiff-necked people; therefore interpose not for them, nor hinder Me by thy
Intercession, that I may in mine anger Consume them; and I will make of Thee a
great Nation, yea a greater and mightier than they, Deuteronomy. 9.14. Moses was
wonderfully surpised and astonished at the hearing of this, and humbly adoring
the Lord his God, he said, Lord, why does thy Wrath wax hot against thy people
which thou have brought forth out of Egypt with a mighty Hand? Wherefore should
the Egyptitians say, For mischief did He bring them forth, to slay them in the
Mountains? O Lord turn I pray thee, from thy fierce Wrath, and let not the Evil
and Punishment, which this people have deserved, fall upon them. Remember thy
Covenant and Promises made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to whom thou swarest by
thine own self to multiply their Seed as the Stars, and to give them the Land
of Canaan for an Inheritance. Thus Moses stood before the Lord in the Breach to
turn away his Wrath, Psalm. 106.23. So that the Lord was entreated not to
destroy them at this time, as he had threatened. Then Moses descending out of
the Cloud with the Two Tables in his hand, and coming to that part of the
Mount, where Joshua (as it seems) had waited all this while for him, [ verse.
17.] Joshua hearing the Noise and Shout of the people, and not knowing what it
meant, He said to Moses, Surely there is a noise of War in the Camp. But Moses
told him, It was no such noise, but rather of singing and merriment. When they
came to the Camp, and Moses saw the Calf, and the people piping, and dancing,
and sporting about it, after the manner of the Heathen, His anger waxed hot,
and in an holy Indignation (not unadvisedly, but by the motion of Gods Spirit,
see Deuteronomy. 9.16, 17.) He cast the Tables out of his Hands, and broke them before
their eyes; as a sign that the Covenant between God and them was broken by this
their heinous Idolatry; Then He took the Idol and melted it, and made it
brittle, and fit to be broken, or ground to powder, and He cast the dust
thereof into the water, whereof they drank daily, and made them drink thereof
for the greater detestation, that they might understand the variety of such
Gods, that could be thus swallowed by them; as also to intimate to them that
they deserved to drink of the Cup of Gods Wrath, for so a great Provocation.
Then He sharply expostulates with Aaron about this horrid Miscarriage. What did
this people (says He) do to thee that thou have brought so great a Sin upon
them? Aaron humbly deprecates his Anger, and excuses Himself as well as he
could, upon the mischievous disposition of the people, and by a poor slender
and imperfect Narration, seeks to extenuate his Fact, speaking of the Calf as
if it had been produced rather by accident than by any design of his. I cast
the Gold, says he, into the fire, and there came out this Calf. Moses seeing
that the people had now deprived themselves of Gods protection, and were as so
many naked, and unarmed, and dispirited men, exposed to be devoured by their
Enemies (to which Aaron, by consenting to their wicked desire, had much
contributed) He stood in the Gate of the Camp, and said, Who is on the Lords
side? Let him come unto me; summoning thereby all that had not consented to
this wicked Fact, to take Gods part against the Offenders, and to do in this
Case what he should require of them. Whereupon the Sons of Levi, who had kept
themselves innocent from this Fact (as it seems most of them had, though not
all, as appears from Deuteronomy. 33.9.) came unto Moses, who, according to Gods
appointment, Commands them to take their Swords in their hands, and to go
throughout the Camp, and slay all the Ringleaders and principal Offenders in
this Rebellion and Transgression that they should meet with, not sparing for
favor or affection either Brother, Companion or Neighbor, or any other that
were nearest or dearest to them. And it is probable, God so ordered it by his
Providence, that none but the guilty came in their way. And Moses told them
that hereby they should so Consecrate themselves to the Lord, and offer a
Sacrifice so well pleasing to him, that he would immediately set them apart as
his peculiar portion, to be his Ministers in the sacred Service of the
Tabernacle. The Children of Levi did as Moses commanded them, and there fell
that day of the people by their hand about three thousand.

Moses, though he had already so far prevailed with the Lord, that he would not
presently destroy all the people, as He had threatened, verse. 14. yet
considering that the Lords Anger might still be great against them, and that he
might still proceed further in punishing of them, He tells them, That on the
morrow he resolved to go up again to the Lord, and further to intercede for
them, and to endeavor to atone him, that He might not proceed in wrath against
them. And accordingly going up again into the Mount, and humbly prostrating
himself before the Lord, he acknowledges the greatness and hainousness of their
sin, and earnestly entreats the Lord freely to forgive them out of his own
abundant Mercy, which if He would please to do, they should always retain a
deep sense of that transcendent favor. But if he would not forgive them
freely, Moses out of the exuberance and greatness of his love to that people,
desires the Lord that he would accept of his life as an atonement for them,
Dele me de libro vitae, v. 32.
and blot him out of the Book of the living; that is, cut him off by his own
Hand, and so take his life as a Satisfaction for their Sin. And in this Moses
showed himself a Figure of our blessed Savior, who laid down his life for his
Sheep, Joh. 10.15. and redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a
Curse for us, Gal. 3.13. But the Lord was not pleased to accept this his Offer,
but told him, That they that had sinned against him should suffer themselves
for their sin, yet He would spare them at this time; but when He began to
punish them for other Provocations, He would reckon with them for this Sin
also, which accordingly He did in aftertimes, see verse. 35. But though He
spared them for the present, yet He declares, That He himself will not go with
them as before He had promised; but bids Moses go before them and lead them,
and He would send a Created Angel to go before them, and to be their Conductor,
and to lead them to Canaan, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; but He himself
would no longer Conduct them, lest (speaking of Himself after the manner of
men, who are most provoked when they are affronted to their face,) He should
consume them for their Rebellions and Disobedience in the way. Moses descending
from the Mount, acquaints the people with these sad tidings, further telling
them, That if they did not repent of their great wickedness, God would come
among them, and Consume them in a moment; therefore He commanded them to put
off their Ornaments, and to mourn before Him; and according as their Repentance
should be true or false, He would either spare or punish them. When the people
heard these things they mourned exceedingly, and stripped themselves of their
Ornaments and gorgeous Apparel, and put themselves into a habit more suitable
to true Penitents.

Moses now removes his Tent or Tabernacle (which He had formerly erected as it
seems both for the Worship of God, and for matters of Civil Judgment) afar off
from the Camp, signifying thereby Gods departure from them as a polluted
people. And those that desired Counsel of the Lord by him, went forth to this
new erected Tent of the Congregation. And when Moses went out of the Camp to
the Tent, the Cloudy Pillar descended from the Mount to the door of the Tent,
and out of it the Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his
friend; that is, present to present, by an articulate and audible Voice, so as
He never spoke to any Prophet, Deuteronomy. 5.4. and 34.10. Numb. 12.8. All which the
people beholding from their Tent-doors, bowed themselves and worshipped; And
when at any time, Moses returned into the Camp, Joshua stayed behind in the
Tabernacle or Tent, possibly as his Deputy, to judge the People in his absence.
Moses now humbly bemoans before the Lord, that He had imposed that hard
Province upon him, to lead that people, but had not let him know, whom He would
send with him, and yet he had declared he knew him by Name; that is, had chosen
him above many others, and out of many for his Service, and had taken special
notice of him, and had a peculiar regard to him. He therefore humbly desires of
the Lord that (if He had found Grace in his sight) He himself would please to
show him his way in which He would have him lead the people; and that He
himself would be their Guide, as before he had been, and not turn them over to
a created Angel, that so he may know by experience that He is good to them that
seek him, and be assured that he had found Grace in his sight, and that He did
still remember that this Nation was his people. The Lord was pleased upon this
prayer of Moses, and the peoples Repentance, to recall his former Paenitentia
commutat Comminationes Dei in promissiones. Cajetan.
Sentence passed, verse. 3. and now promises that his Presence shall go with
them, and He would bring them into the Land of Promise, where they should have
rest from their Enemies. Moses thankfully embracing Gods Promise, shows that
nothing else but his gracious Presence could have contented or satisfied him.
For (says He) if thy Presence go not along with us, I pray thee carry us not up
hence; As if he should have said, We had as good never stir a foot further as
to go without thy gracious Presence, and favor accompanying of us, though we
were sure to come to Canaan at the last. For how else (says he) shall it be
known, that we are thy peculiar people, and separated from other Nations, but
by thy gracious Presence accompanying of us?

Moses having found the Lord ready to grant his Desires, proceeds further to
make one Request more to Him; namely, That He would please to show him his
Glory. Possibly this holy man conceiving that God when he spoke to him had put
on some Corporeal and visible shape full of great Majesty and Glory, though
overshadowed, as it were, with a Cloud, so that He could not discern it, He
humbly desired to see the lightsome brightness of His Majesty, the Cloud being
removed; and a glimpse of that blessed Vision of Him, which is reserved for
another life. The Lord answers him, That he will reveal his Goodness to him so
far as is profitable for him to know, and will Proclaim his great Name, and
glorious Attributes before Him, declaring, When He passes by, that He is the
Lord Jehovah, who will have mercy upon whom He will have mercy, and is free in
communicating his Grace and Mercy where He pleases, without wrong to any. But
to see his Face, that is, his pure Essence, and being in his Spiritual Majesty
and Glory, He tell him cannot be granted him but to his hurt; seeing no man, in
that manner, can see the Face of God and live: Man's weakness being such that
he is not able to behold the brightness of such an Apparition, till this Mortal
has put on Immortality. Therefore the Lord tells him, That He will put him in
the cleft of the Rock that was near, and cover him with his Hand, that he may
not be swallowed up, when he passed by in such Brightness and Glory as was
never shown to mortal Creature, and He should through this Cleft have a glimpse
of His Back Parts (that is, a transitory Vision, and imperfect sight of his
Glory, such as he was now capable of) as we are said to see or know men but
imperfectly, when we see only their back parts, and not their faces. For if He
should manifest his Glory to him to the full, it would be too much for defiled
Infirmity and Mortality to subsist under. A man that would see God face to face
must put off his mortality, and die before he can see Him in his Glory.

Exodus 31. verse. 18.

Exodus 32. whole Chapter.

Exodus 33. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXIV.
THe Lord now Commands Moses to frame and prepare two new Tables of Stone like
to the former, wherein he would write his Law anew. And it seems from Deuteronomy.
10.1. that he gave him in charge at the same time to make an Ark or Chest of
Shittim-wood to keep these Tables in, till that more curious and glorious Ark
of the Tabernacle should be made. Moses having done as God commanded him, went
up with the new Tables next morning into the Mount, no man going up with him,
neither was any man to be seen in all the Mount. Then the Lord descended in the
Cloud, and in some sensible signs of his Presence passed before Moses, and
proclaimed before him (now hid in the hollow Cleft of the Rock) The Lord, The
Lord merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth,
keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, (upon
man's hearty repentance) and that will by no means clear the Guilty; visiting
the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, and upon the Childrens Children,
unto the third and fourth Generation, if they continue in their Fathers
transgressions. Moses hearing these things, instantly bowed his head toward
the Earth and worshipped.

Exodus 34. from 1. to 9.

SECT. XXV.
MOses now staying again 40 days and 40 nights in the Mount without Meat or
Drink, [ verse. 28.] He humbly and earnestly besought the Lord with many
pressing arguments [see Deuteronomy. 9.18, 19. and from 25. to the end] to pardon the
people, and to own them still for his Inheritance, See Ps. 33.12. and Zach.
2.12.
and to go along with them, and to manifest his gracious Presence among them,
for they were (He ackowledges) a stiff-necked people, and had need both of his
Mercy and Conduct.

The Lord, being now appeased, renews his Covenant with them upon certain
Conditions; and promises that his Presence with them should work more
powerfully then ever, and show it self in more stupendous Miracles then ever
it had done before; and that He would do terrible things by them (his Almighty
Power and Providence accompanying of them) and would give them possession of
the Land of Canaan, and would drive out the Inhabitants thereof before them.
The Conditions he requires of them to perform were these: (1. Not to make a
League or Covenant with the Inhabitants of the Land, See Chap. 23.32.
(whom He had determined to destroy for their sins) nor to make Marriages with
them, lest it should ensnare them, and draw them to be Partakers in their
Idolatries, and so in their Punishments; but should destroy their Altars,
Images and Groves, and should not eat of their Sacrifices, and should
especially be careful not to make to themselves any molten Gods, such as the
golden Calf was. For the Lord was a jealous God, and would not endure that any
false God should share with Him in the Worship that was peculiar to himself.
(2) That they should observe the Feast of unleavened Bread, See Chapter 23.15.
the Feast of Weeks or Pentecost, and the Feast of Booths or Tabernacles. At
which three Feasts All their Males should appear before him with an Offering to
be given to the Priest, (which He would account as given to Himself) and He
would take care that none should desire their Land in their absence. (3) That
the firstborn Males both of Men and Beasts should be consecrated unto Him,
[see Chapter 22.29, 30.] but the firstlings of an Ass should be redeemed with a
Lamb, [see Exodus 13.13.] (4) That they should carefully observe the weekly
Sabbath, See Chapter 23.12.
and not violate it either in Seed-time or Harvest. (5) That they should not
offer the blood Certe removebis fermentatum, cum immolas Pascha. Vatab.
of the Paschal Lamb with Leaven, and that nothing thereof should be left till
the morning. (6) That the first of their Frist-fruits should be brought to the
House of the Lord. (7.) That they should not sees a Kid in its Mothers milk.
Which Laws were all enjoined, Chapter 23. and were now repeated. These were the
Laws that Moses was to write down in a Book, and to enjoin the people to
observe. Then the Lord wrote the Ten Commandments on the Tables Moses had
brought up, and gave them unto him, who brought them, and the other Laws which
himself had written, unto the people; and having seen Gods Glory in so great a
measure and degree, there was a dazeling brightness imprinted by God on his
face while he talked with him; so that the skin of his Face The glory of Moses
face signified the glory of the Law which he brought, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8. His
Ministration was Death and Condemnation, because the Law gives the knowledge
of Sin, but no pardon for it.
shone (which he himself was not sensible of) Sic Humilitas propriam jubet
ignorare excellentiam.
by the reflective rays and beams (...) signifies to shine, from whence (...)
an Horn is derived; which gave occasion to the Papists to paint Mose's face
with two Horns like an Ox. The Vulgar Latin says Mose's Face was horned.
of the divine Splendour, which might assure the Israelites he had been with
God, (who taught and instructed him) and that thereupon they might the more
reverence him, might fear breaking this Law again. Aaron and the people were
not able to bear the splendour of his Face, but being afraid fled from him as if
he had been some Angel. But Moses called them back, and put a Vail on his Face
Ut ipsum Mosaicae facici splendorem Israelitae non viderunt ob impositum
velamen, sic Carnales Judaei spiritualem Mosis splendorem, hoc est, Scriptorum
ejus summum finem atque scopum, qui est Jesus Christus, non intelligebant ob
sponte attractam mentis Caecitatem quae instar Velaminis est inter corda eorum
and verum legis intellectum quasi obducti: neque hoc tolli potest nisi per
praedicationem Evangelij, and per veram conversionem ad Dominum, etc. Vide 2
Cor. 13.14, 15, 16.
whilst he spoke with them, and then delivered to them all that the Lord had
given him in Charge. But Moses when he went to the Lord for the people, took
the Vail off. And it is like that this brightness on his Face continued not all
his life after, but only during the time of his going to and fro between God
and the people.

Exodus 34. from 9. to the end.

SECT. XXVI.
MOses now injoyns them again a strict Observation of the weekly Sabbath, and
that they should not kindle a fire But it is probable to kindle a fire to warm
themselves by in the extreme cold of Winter, or when any other exigencies of
necessity or mercy required it; was allowed them.
thereon to dress meat, or to do any work by (though for the framing of the
Tabernacle) threatening death to them that disobey. Then He injoyns the people
to bring their free will Offerings toward the framing of the Tabernacle (which
was now forthwith to be gone in hand with) according to the Directions given
him by God, Chapter 25. The people very readily agree hereunto. And to the end that
this good Work might the more effectually be promoted, all the Males were
numbered from twenty years old and upwards (who were found to be 603550) who
every one (according to the Law prescribed, Exodus 30.12, 13.) contributing half
a Shekel, the total Sum of the Poll-money amounted to an hundred Talents A
Talent among the Jews amounted to 3000 Shekels, or 50 l. sterling, every pound
containing 60 Shekels. See Bishop Usher's Annals.
and 1775 Shekels of Silver [See Exodus 38.25, 26.] And besides this Poll-money,
the people both men and women brought in their free will Offerings very
cheerfully, and presented what was agreeable to their Condition, viz. The
Princes and Rulers brought precious Stones for the Ephod and Breast Plate;
Those that were rich offered Gold and Silver; the middle sort fine Linen, and
Brass, and Spices; and the meanest, Goats Hair and Badgers Skins. And all of
them contributed these things as willingly now (after their Repentance) for the
Service of the Tabernacle, as before they had contributed for the making the
golden Calf. So that the voluntary Offerings amounted to the Sum of 29 Talents
and 730 Shekels of Gold, and to 70 Talents and 2400 Shekels of Brass, Exodus
38.24, 29. And the most skilful and most ingenious of the Women spun Blue, and
Purple, and Scarlet, and fine Linen, and Goats hair, for this Sacred use. In
so much that for materials requisite for the framing of the Tabernacle there
came in more than enough, so that the people were forbidden to bring in any
more, [ Chapter 36.5, 6, 7.]

Exodus 35. from 1. to 30.

SECT. XXVII.
NOw that all things appertaining to the Tabernacle might be exactly framed
according to the Pattern given to Moses in the Mount; the Lord was pleased (as
was said before) to call and appoint Bezaleel and Aholiab to be the chief
Artificers for the performance of all things belonging thereunto, filling them
with extraordinary Wisdom and Understanding for that great undertaking; so that
they knew how to devise all curious Works, and to work in Gold, Silver and
Brass, to cut Stones, to carve Wood, to engrave, to embroider. So that being
skilful in all Handicrafts to Work, and Headcrafts to Contrive (and that by
divine Inspiration) they were able to teach and instruct others that were
ingenious how to work and assist in this great business. And accordingly the
Artificers now fall to work, and in the last six months of this year they
finished all things belonging to the Tabernacle, viz. the Curtains with the
Cherubims, the Curtains of Goats hair, the Covers of Rams skins and Badgers
skins, the boards with their Sockets, and the bars, the Vail, and the Ark of
the Covenant, and the Mercy-Seat with the Cherubims, the Table of Shewbread
with its Furniture, the Candlestick with its Lamps and Vessels, the Altars of
Incense, the Anointing Oil, the sweet Incense, the Altar of Burnt-Offering, the
Laver of Brass, the Hangings for the Court, the Clothes of Service, or
Coverings to wrap up the holy things in, and the Priests Garments, and holy
Vestments. This is the sum or particular of the holy things belonging to the
Tabernacle, which were Inventoried (as it were) by Ithamar, at the Commandment
of Moses, and so delivered into the Custody of the Levites that nothing might
be lost. All these were finished in the Desert, at Mount Sinai, and brought
unto Moses, who upon viewing of them approved them all, as made according to
Gods appointment. And he blessed the people for their forwardness in this Work,
and the Artificers for their care and exactness in the Workmanship of every
particular, and as Gods Minister pronounced a blessing on them for it from the
Lord.

Exodus 35. from 30. to the end.

Exodus 36. whole Chapter.

Exodus 37. whole Chapter.

Ezod. 38. whole Chapter.

Exodus 39. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXVIII.
ON the first day of the first month of the second Year after their coming out
of Egypt, the Lord commanded Moses to set up the Tabernacle, and to put all
things in order belonging thereunto, and to anoint the Tabernacle, and all the
Vessels and Furniture thereof with Oil, and so Consecrate them to his Service.
Also he commanded him to wash Aaron and his Sons, and to apparel them, and to
anoint and Consecrate them for their Ministry, so that the Children and
Successors of the ordinary Priests should not need to be anointed, but should
execute their Office by virtue of this first Unction of their Fathers. Only the
High Priests were to be anointed in their following Generations. See Levit.
4.3, All which things Moses set himself immediately to perform; and the
Tabernacle being set up, He, for the present executed the Priests Office, [see
Exodus 29.10, 11.) and Psalm. 99.6.] and offered Burnt-Offerings and
Peace Offerings, and burnt Incense. Then the Cloud, the Testimony of Gods
Presence covered the Tent of the Congregation, and, as it were, took possession
of it, [see Exodus 25.8.] and the Glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle; And
it seems the manner of the Clouds abode, and the Lords appearing in Glory at
this time was extraordinary; insomuch that Moses could not for the present,
through the dazeling brightness thereof, enter into the Tabernacle. But usually
and ordinarily it was not so, else the holy ministration in that place could
not have been performed. And whilst the Cloud stayed upon the Tabernacle, the
people were not to stir; but when it removed, they were to remove also, and to
go that way in which it guided them.

Exodus 40. whole Chapter.

Numb. 9. from 15. to the end.

SECT. XXIX.
FRom the Mercy-Seat, out of the Tabernacle, God now at several times uttered
his Will, and gave to Moses those Commandments and Ordinances concerning the
the Levitical Sacrifices, and Offerings, and the Rites appertaining to them,
contained in the seven first Chapters of Leviticus. Leviticus, so denominated,
because it sets down the Laws, Sacrifices, and Services of the Levitical
Priesthood, and the whole form of the Levitical Worship appointed by God to
Israel, and given in one months space, viz. the first month of the second year
after their departure out of Egypt, whilst they stayed at Mount Sinai. These
Laws were delivered by God to Moses out of the Tabernacle when it was newly
reared up. Compare Exodus 40.17. with Numb. 1.1.
And this is the first Oracle given from the Mercy-Seat.

1. Laws are given to him concerning the Holocaust or Burnt-Offering, with the
form or manner of offering it, called in the Hebrew (...), that is, Ascension:
because it was all to ascend up in flames; and the matter of it was to be
either Bullocks, Sheep or Goats out of their Herd or Flock, and a Male without
blemish, and to be wholly burnt on the Altar, excepting the Skin (which the
Priest was to have, Levit. 7.8. excepting only in the Case mentioned, Levit.
4.11.) and the inwards and guts which were to be cast away; That only of the
flesh which is usually eaten by men being to be offered on Gods Altar, which is
called his Table, Mal. 1.2. Or else the matter of this Sacrifice might be
Turtle Doves or young Pigeons, which seems to be appointed in mercy to the
poorer sort, who could not offer one of the other kind. This was the chief of
all their Sacrifices, and was offered to make atonement for all Sins in
general, whereas for special Sins there were special Sacrifices and
Sin Offerings appointed.

Levit. 1. whole Chapter.

2ly, Laws concerning the Meat Offering called Minchah, signifying an Oblation
or voluntary Offering. The matter of it, (1.) Fine Flower, There is not any set
quantity appointed of these voluntary Meat Offerings, but it was left free to
the Offerer to bring what he pleased. But for the Meat Offering that was always
to be joined with the Burnt-Offerings, there is an express Law how much there
should be of it, Numb. 15.4.
or Cakes baked either in an Oven, or on a Plate, or in a Drying Pan. (2ly,)
Oil mingled with the Flower. (3ly,) Frankincense. Oil and Frankincense
signified how sweet and acceptable their Services were in and through the
Messiah.
Leven This is to be understood of those voluntary Oblations or Meat Offerings,
part whereof was to be burnt upon the Altar. For in such Oblations as were
given to the Priests toward their Maintenance, and now only for Food to be
eaten by them, Leven was allowed [see Levit. 7.13.] it being a sign that this
Oblation was before prepared, and not suddenly offered. But L^ven in Scripture
ordinarily signifies what ever is distastful to God either in Doctrine or
Manners.
and Honey Honey was also forbidden, because God would not have them imitate
the Heathens, who used honey in their Sacrifices. Mel est symbolum deliciarum,
and significat dulcedinem ex actionibus illicitis perceptam. Hanc ut Deus long
a suis Ministris, ita a Sacrificiis abesse voluit. Freidlibius in loc. Honey
might be offered as a First-fruit that was not to be burnt on the Altar, see 2 Chronicles. 31.5.
are prohibited in this Sacrifice. Salt was to be mingled with this, and all
Meat Offerings, and they were bound, as by a Covenant, A Covenant of Salt,
Numb. 18.19. 2 Chronicles. 13.5. signifies an invisible, incorruptible, and
perpetual Covenant.
to use it in all their Sacrifices, Ezekiel. 43.24. Mark 9.49. The Salt possibly
was to put them in mind that they were always to endeavor after uncorruptness
of Life and Conversation. Further in this Sacrifice the Priest was to take a
handful out of the Meat Offering, and to burn it upon the Altar as a Memorial
that the Offerer acknowledged all the store he had to be from God, and the
remnant was to be eaten by the Priests only in the Sanctuary. Other Rites
concerning this Sacrifice, see Levit. 6. from 14. to 19 Levit. 7.9, 10. Levit.
10. v. 12, 13. Numb. 18. v. 9, 10.
There are also Laws given concerning the Meat Offering of the First Fruits,
which was to be of Corn beaten out of the green Ears, and dried by the fire,
and so ground, and Oil and Frankincise to be put upon it, and the Priest was to
burn part of it on the Altar, as a Memorial that the Offerer acknowledged (as
was said before) all his store to be from the bounty of God, Primitiae ter in
anno reddebantur. 1. In Paschatu, de spicis virentibus. 2. In Pentecoste, de
novis panibus. 3. In Festo Tabernaculorum, de collectis frugibus.
verse. 14.

Levit. 2. whole Chapter.

3ly, Next to the Meat Offerings, we shall speak of the Drink Offerings, though
not here mentioned, but else where. The matter of that was to be Wine. The Laws
concerning it, see Levit. 23.13. Numb. 6.17. Numb. 15. v. 5, 7, 10. Exodus
29.40. Meat and Drink Offerings were usually joined together, and joined almost
to all other Sacrifices, see Numb. 28. from 7. to the end, 1 Chronicles. 29.21. ^
Chron. 29.35.

4ly, Laws concerning Peace Offerings called Zebach Shelamim; that is, a
Sacrifice of things pacifying. The matter of this Sacrifice was to be either
Male or Female, (without blemish) of the Herd or Flock. This kind of Sacrifice
has some thing like, some thing unlike to the Burnt-Offering. It was to be
brought to the door of the Tabernacle as that was, and the Offerers hand to be
laid upon the Head of it, and the blood of it to be sprinkled about the Altar,
as was to be done in the Burnt-Offering: but it was unlike in these
particulars; In that only a Male might be offered; In this either Male or
Female; In that the whole was to be burnt, in this only a part; namely, the
fat. In that no part went to the Priest but the Skin, but this Peace Offering
was to be divided into three parts; one was for the Altar, viz. the Fat; the
other for the Priest, viz. the Shoulder and Breast; See last particular of this
Section.
the third for the Offerer and his Friends, who joyfully feasted thereupon. In
that Turtle Doves or young Pigeons were allowed for the poorer sort, but not in
this, because it was to be divided into three parts (as is before said) and
such a division could not conveniently be made in so small Sacrifices. In this
Sacrifice the fat which covered the inwards (which we call Suet) was to be
burnt upon the Altar, and neither Priest nor Offerer to eat of it; and so
neither of the rump This was peculiar to the Peace Offerings of a Sheep, Lamb
or Ram; If the Peace Offering were an Ox or Goat it was not so. Cujus praecepti
ratio a nonnullis affertur haec, ^il. quod Syriae ^ibus ( ut ^ste Plinio ^.
oct. not. ^st.) Caudae (...) cubitales ^^^^^us plurimum pinguis est. Pisc. in
loc.
of Sheep and Lambs, nor of the blood which was to be sprinkled round about
upon the Altar, and not to be eaten by them in any case, Levit. 7.26. So that
of the fat of Beasts, appointed for Sacrifice, and of blood, they might not
eat; not of the fat, because fat being reckoned the best part of the Beast, was
fittest to be presented to God, and burnt on his Altar; neither is that kind of
fat good for the stomach of man to be eaten alone: nor of blood; probably for
these Reasons: 1. To distinguish them from the Heathens, who used to drink the
blood of their Sacrifices. 2. For moral admonition to them against Cruelty.
3ly, For a mystical imitation to them of reverence to the blood of the Messiah,
prefigured by the blood of the Sacrifices.

Levit. Chapter 3. whole Chapter.

5ly, Laws concerning the Sin-Offering, called in Hebrew Cataah. Here the Lord
begins his Directions for those Offerings whereby Expiation was to be made for
some particular Sin which the Offerer found himself guilty of, and those in
some cases were called Sin Offerings, and in some Trespass-Offerings. The
Sin-Offering was to make atonement for sins committed through error and
inadvertency, through infirmity and weakness, not daringly and presumptuously,
for there was no Sacrifice appointed for such Sins, see Numb. 15.30, 31. Heb.
10.26. And of the Sin Offerings there were four sorts:

1. For the High Priest. The matter of it was to be a young Bullock without
blemish, which he was to bring to the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and laying his hand upon it to kill it, and then to bring the
blood thereof into the Tabernacle, and with his Finger to sprinkle thereof
seven times Symbolum plenariae peccatorum per Christi sanguinem remissionis.
Anonym. in loc.
before the Veil of the Sanctuary, and put some of the blood upon the Horns of
the Altar of sweet Incense, and to pour the rest of the blood at the bottom of
the Altar of Burnt-Offering, and then to burn on that Altar the fat of the
Bullock that covered the inward, as was to be done in the Sacrifice of
Peace Offering; and the rest of the Bullock was to be wholly carried forth
without the Camp, and to be burnt there, which was only to be done in the
Sin-Offering for the Priest, It Is shows how detestable the sins of sacred
persons are, and the common sins of a whole Church, which here were laid (as it
were) upon the Bullock that was carried forth out of the Camp, and signified
that Christ should be carried out of Jerusalem to suffer, as the Apostle
explains the meaning of this Ceremony, Heb. 13.11, 12.
and for the whole Congregation.

Levit. 4. from 1. to 13.

2ly, For the whole Congregation. Here the Sacrifice was the same, as likewise
the manner of offering it, whereby the Priest was to make atonement for them,
and so their sin should be forgiven.

Levit. 4. from 13. to 22.

3ly, For a Ruler. The matter of the Sacrifice, a male Kid without blemish. The
blood of this Sin-Offering for the Ruler (as likewise for any one of the common
people) was not as in the former to be carried into the Tabernacle, and
sprinkled upon the Altar of Incense, but the Priest was to take some of the
blood of it, and with his Finger put it upon the Horns of the Altar of
Burnt-Offering, and to pour the rest of it at the bottom of the said Altar, and
to burn the fat upon the Altar, and the remainder was to be eaten by the
Priests, who were therefore said to eat the sins of the people, Hosea 4.8. that
is, of the Sacrifices offered for their Sins.

Levit. 4. from 22. to 27.

4ly, For any private person of the Congregation. The matter of this Sacrifice
a female Kid, or Lamb without blemish. The manner of offering it like that of
the Sin-Offering for the Ruler.

Levit. 4. from 27. to the end.

6ly, Laws concerning the Trepass Offering, called in Hebrew Asham. The
difference between Sin Offerings and Trespass-Offerings seems to lie in this,
that for some particular sins a Sin-Offering was appointed differing from the
ordinary Sin Offerings mentioned before, which because it was for such Sins
wherein some trespass was committed either upon their Neighbor, or upon God,
(in respect of the holy things which by his appointment belonged unto the
Priest) therefore they were more particularly called Trespass-Offerings. So
that all Trespass-Offerings were Sin Offerings, though all Sin Offerings were
not Trespass-Offerings, the word Trespass seeming to intimate a greater guilt.
For Sin may be immanent in us, but Trespass intimates a transient guilt, which
has an offensive operation upon others, and accordingly becomes so much the
more faulty, by how much it is more extensive.

There are several particular instances here given of such Trespasses as
required a Trepass Offering for their Expiation. (1.) If any man shall hear
another swear that he has not had, or has not done what he (upon his own
knowledge) knows he has had or done, if he testify not his knowledge (being
called to be a Witness) and reveal not the iniquity of the other (that has so
falsely sworn) He is guilty of a Trespass against his Neighbor, and must
accordingly offer a Trepass Offering, because his Neighbor suffers damage
through his silence. (2ly,) If any person being for the present unclean by
touching of such things as make him legally unclean, shall yet eat of the
Sacrifices (which he ought not to do) as soon as that his sin shall be kown
unto him, he must offer the Offering here prescribed; not so much to cleanse
him from his legal uncleanness (which was otherwise to be purged, see Numb.
19.11, etc.) as from his moral uncleanness and guilt, because through want of
Care He had so defiled himself, and had meddled with holy things whilst His
uncleanness was upon him, and so had trespassed against God, Levit. chapter 5. v.
2, 3. (3ly,) If a man do rashly and unadvisedly swear to do some good to his
Neighbor which is not in his power to do, or if he swear to do some mischief
Such an Oath was that of David against Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.22
to his Neighbor through passion and anger, not considering that he sinned in
so swearing; when he is convinced that he sinned therein, he must confess his
sin, and for his atonement bring a Trepass Offering, Levit. 5. v. 4, 5. The
matter of the Sacrifice for the Trepass Offering in any of these three Cases
was for the Rich, a female Lamb or Kid; for the Poor two Turtle Doves or two
young Pigeons; for the very poor So that in no case Poverty was to excuse any
man from making his peace with God.
an Omer or tenth part of an Epha of fine Flower, No Oil Oleum laetitiam
indicat, thus suavem odorem quorum utroque caret peccatum; est enim abominabile
coram Deo, and animum implet tristitia; quam rationem textus tacit indicat cum
adjungit quia pro peccato est. Jans. in loc.
or Incense were here to be used as in the Peace Offerings, because they
intimate delight and pleasure, which were not so suitable to a sorrowful
Confession of Sin, Levit. 5. from verse. 6. to 14. (4ly,) If a man sin through
ignorance or negligence in the holy things of God, by detaining the
First Fruits or Tithes, or any other thing due to the Priests or Levites (which
must be understood of ignorant and unadvised, not presumptuous For presumptuous
sinning there was no Sacrifice appointed, Numb. 15.30.
defrauding God of what belonged to him,) then he shall bring a greater
Sacrifice than was appointed for other Trespass-Offerings (to show the
greatness of the Sin of defrauding God) viz. a Ram without blemish, with as
much money as the Priest shall value the Trespass at, according to the
proportion of the Shekel of the Sanctuary, and He shall add a fifth part See
Levit. 27.13, 15, 19.
thereunto, to make him more careful for the future how he offends in the like
kind, Levit. chapter 5. from verse. 14. to the end. (5ly,) If a man wittingly injure
and wrong his Neighbor in things committed to his Trust, or in Fellowship and
Partnership, or violent taking away any thing from him, or fraudulent detention
of that which he has found, (which Sins though immediately committed against
man, are also Trespasses against God, because against his Law,) if this person
were convicted by the Law, he was by virtue of those Judicial Laws, Exodus 22.
to pay double; but if, as the case is here supposed, out of Conscience he
confessed what the Law could not convince him of, only a fifth part was to be
added to the Principal, according to the estimation of the Priest, and given to
him to whom it appertained. And then the Transgressor shall offer for his
atonement a Ram without blemish for his Trepass Offering. So that upon the
whole matter where either God in the external Duties belonging to his Worship,
or their Brethren in civil affairs were any way damaged by the Offender, there
a Trepass Offering See further concerning Trespass-Offerings, Levit. 7. from
1. to 9.
was to be offered; for other Transgressions the Sin-Offering sufficed. All the
remainder of the Sin and Trepass Offering, besides what was offered to the
Lord, the Priest was to have, Skin and all, whereas in the Burnt-Offerings he
had only the Skin.

Levit. 6. from 1. to 8.

Hitherto the substance and matter of the several sorts of Sacrifices has been
prescribed, now the several Rites belonging to each of them are set down more
particularly. And (1.) concerning the daily Burnt-Offering which was to be
offered first every Morning and last every Evening [see Exodus 29.38, 39. and
Numb. 28.3.] The Priest was to burn it with a slow fire, and by so many pieces,
one after another, that it might last all night, which required his intentive
care and vigilance upon the Service, and the fire of the Altar was to be
nourished continually, and never suffered to go out. The Priest also putting on
his linen Garment, was to carry forth the ashes without the Camp unto a clean
place. (2ly,) Concerning the Meat Offering, whereof the Priest was to burn an
handful upon the Altar, and the remainder Aaron and his Sons were to eat
unleavened in the Court of the Sanctuary. And upon this occasion we have the
Offering set down that Aaron was to offer to God in the day of his anointing,
and which his Sons successively (who shall come to be High Priests after him)
shall offer to the Lord in the day of their Consecration, viz. the tenth part
of an Epha of fine Flower, half in the Morning and half at Night, and it was to
be wholly burnt on the Altar. (3ly,) Concerning the Sin-Offering, of which the
Priest that offered it might eat, (except of such Sin Offerings whereof the
blood was to be carried into the Tabernacle, viz. for the Transgression of the
High Priest, or of the whole Congregation, [Levit. 4. v. 5.16.] or the yearly
Sin-Offering on the day of Expiation, [Levit. 16.17.] for these were to be
burnt without the Camp,) but of other Sin Offerings the Sons of Aaron might eat
Nihil cedebat offerentibus ex hostiis pro peccato, and delicto.
if they were free from legal uncleanness. And if any of the blood of the
Sin-Offering was casually sprinkled on any of the Garments of the Priest, they
were to be washed clean again in the Court of the Tabernacle where the
washing-Laver stood. If the flesh of the Sin-Offering was boiled in an Iron or
Brass-pot it was to be rinsed or scoured, but if in an Earthen pot, because the
liquor might possibly soak into it, it was to be broken; all which things seem
to be appointed to shadow forth the Contagion of Sin. Levit. 6. from 8 to the
end. (4ly) Concerning the Trepass Offering, of which every male among the
Priests might eat in the holy Place. The Text says, As is the Sin-Offering, so
is the Trepass Offering, there is one Law for them both; that is, the Priest
was to have of this as He had of the other. As to the Meat Offerings they were
to accompany those Sin and Trespass-Offerings, if they were baked or fried, and
so to be eaten hot, they were the Priests portion that offered them, who might
eat them presently; but if the Meat Offerings were mingled with Oil, or were
dry Flower not mingled with Oil (such as was the Meat Offering for Sin, Chapter
5.11.) these might be reserved to be dressed afterward at their leisure, and
were equally to be divided among all the Priests. (5ly,) Concerning the
Peace Offerings, of which there were three sorts: First, Thank-Offerings for
particular Mercies received, which were to be accompanied with unleavened Cakes
mingled with Oil, and unleavened Wafers anointed with Oil, and Cakes mingled
with Oil of fine Flower fried. And besides these Cakes the Offerer was to offer
with his Sacrifice leavened bread. For because this Meat Offering was only for
food to be eaten, and no part of it to be burnt upon the Altar; leaven is here
allowed, though otherwise forbidden, as we may see Levit. 2.11. And it was
allowed possibly that it might be a sign and intimation that this Oblation was
before thought upon, solemnly prepared, and not suddenly offered. And out of
the whole Oblation the Offerer is appointed to offer one leavened Loaf for an
Heave Offering to the Lord, and it was to go to the Priests that sprinkled the
blood of the Peace Offerings; the rest was for the Offerer and his Family, as
the remainder of the Flesh (after the Priest has had his share) was to be
also, Deuteronomy. 27.7. and Deuteronomy. 12.6, 7. But the flesh of the Sacrifice of this
kind of Peace Offering was to be eaten the same day whereon it was offered both
by Priest and people, and not any of it to be kept until the next Morning. 2ly,
Peace Offerings that were offered by way of Vow, that is, which men vowed that
they would give unto God, if He would please to grant them such or such a
Mercy, and which, when God had satisfied their desires, they were to pay unto
Him accordingly. For these they had two days allowed them for the eating of
them, and what was left to the third day was to be burnt with fire; God
possibly might intend hereby to teach them that He would be worshipped as He
himself appointed, and not as they in their own reason might think fit.
which if they did not observe, their Sacrifice should not be imputed or
reckoned to them as an acceptable Sacrifice by the Lord, but rather as an
abomination, and such persons should be punished for their Iniquity. (3ly,)
Such Peace Offerings as were brought as a voluntary offering by way of
acknowledgment of the Lords goodness to them in the general. Now the flesh of
the Peace Offerings not being to be eaten in the holy place, but carried out
thence (after it had been killed at the Tabernacle, and the fat burnt upon the
Altar,) and eaten elsewhere, [see Levit. 10.14.] if it were casually touched by
any unclean person or thing, order is here given that it should not then be
eaten as an holy Sacrifice, but burnt with fire, because being so defiled it
was not fit to represent Christ, who was perfectly holy and pure. But as to the
flesh of the Sacrifice which remained clean and fit to be eaten, all both
Priests and Owners (that were clean themselves) might eat of it. But if any
being unclean either by reason of any natural uncleanness that was then upon
them, or by touch of any unclean thing, did yet wittingly If they did it
ignorantly and unwittingly, a Sacrifice of atonement was appointed for them,
Lev. 5.2. But those that hate to be reformed, God will not reckon them among
his people. In like manner those that partake of the Signs and Seals of Grace
unworthily, eat and drink judgment to themselves, 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29.
and presumptuously eat of the Peace Offerings, such persons shall be
Excommunicated and cut off from the Communion of Gods people, or (as some
understand it) by Divine Vengeance.

Further God Commands Moses to charge them to forbear eating the fat of any of
those Cattle that were appointed for Sacrifice; but the fat of such Beasts if
they died of themselves, or were torn in pieces, might be employed to any other
use; but that kind of fat which we call Suet they might not eat, though other
fat that was mixed with the flesh they might eat of. And as they were to
forbear eating fat, so also blood, for the Reasons mentioned before, Chapter 3.
verse. 17. see also Genesis 9.4. and Levit. 17.14.

Lastly, Moses from the Lord gives them this Command, that whosoever offered a
Peace Offering should bring it himself, in his own person, and not another for
him, and He shall himself, with his own hand, present that part which is to be
an Oblation to the Lord, viz. the fat with the Breast and right Shoulder; then
the Priest shall burn the fat upon the Altar, but the Breast being waved before
the Lord, and the Shoulder elevated or lifted up shall be his Portion. See
Exodus 29.22. For this (He tells them) is the portion and reward appointed by
God to Aaron and his Sons by virtue of their Unction to the Priestly-Office,
and to be paid them by the Children of Israel from the day of their anointing.

Levit. Chapter 7. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXX.
MOses now by direction from God gathering the Children of Israel together,
spends seven days in consecrating Aaron and his four Sons, observing the manner
and Ceremonies prescribed for their Consecration, Exodus Chapter 28. and 29. See
Sect. 21. partic. 12.
viz. 1. He washes them with water. 2ly, He puts the High Priests Vestments and
rich attire upon Aaron. 3ly, Anointeth the Tabernacle with the Altar and Laver,
and sprinkles the Altar seven times with the Oil of Consecration, because it
was consecrated to a more special use than other parts of the Tabernacle. 4ly,
He anointeth Aaron. 5ly, He puts the holy Garments upon his Sons. 6ly, He
offers for them all a Bullock for a Sin-Offering, one Ram for a Burnt-Offering,
and another Ram for a Sacrifice of Consecration. 7ly, With the blood of the Ram
He sprinkled certain parts of their bodies, and their Garments as was
prescribed, Exodus 29. 8ly, He offered a Meat Offering for them, as a
Thanksgiving to God for that great favor vouchsafed to them, in setting them
apart to this holy Function. 9ly, He charges them to boil and eat their portion
of the Sacrifice at the door of the Tabernacle, and to continue there seven
days and nights to consummate the time of their Consecration. All which they
performed accordingly.

Levit. Chapter 8. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXI.
ON the very next day after the seven days of the Priests Consecration were
ended, Aaron and his Sons entered upon the Execution of their Office. And Aaron
first offered for himself a young Calf for a Sin-Offering, and a Ram for a
Burnt-Offering, which intimated that the High Priest was Himself a Sinner, and
not fit to stand as a Mediator between God and the people. 2ly, He offered for
the people a Kid of the Goats for a Sin-Offering, and a Calf and a Lamb for a
Burnt-Offering, to which was added the Meat Offering, and a Bullock and a Ram
for a Peace Offering. Then Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people, and
blessed them, see Numb. 6.23. Moses now goes with Aaron into the Tabernacle
that He might instruct him concerning the Service he was there to perform, viz.
about the Lights, the Table of Shewbread, and the Altar of Incense, etc. And
Moses and Aaron when they came out blessed the people again. The Glory of the
Lord now appeared to all the people, and ratified the Priests Consecration and
entrance into their holy Function by sending Fire Moses at the Consecration of
Aaron and his Sons sacrificed with common fire, as appears Chapter 8.20, 21. But
upon Aarons first sacrificing, Chapter 9.24. Fire came out from the Sanctuary, or
from Heaven, which was not to be suffered afterward to go out, according to
Gods appointment, Ch 6.13. And therefore, as some conceive, this Fire was
charily carried in some Vessel for the purpose when they journied in the
Wilderness, and so it continued until the Temple of Solomon was built, and then
Fire came down again from Heaven, 2 Chronicles. 7.1. which continued unto the
Captivity of Babylon, and is said to be miraculously renewed, 2 Maccab. 1.18.
but whither it was or no, is uncertain.
from his glorious Presence; that is, either from Heaven, 2 Chronicles. 7.1. or out
of the Tabernacle which consumed the Burnt-Offering, and the fat on the Altar;
which the people seeing shouted for joy, and fell on their Faces, giving thanks
to the Lord for this great Sign of his favor and acceptance of their
Sacrifices.

Levit. Chapter 9. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXII.
THe day following Nadab and Abihu, the two eldest Sons of Aaron (who went up
with their Father to the Mount, and had there seen the Glory of God, Exodus
24.1, 9, 10.) having undoubtedly been instructed by Moses, that when they went
to burn Incense in the Tabernacle, they should make use only of fire taken from
the Altar of Burnt-Offering, which had been kindled by Fire from Heaven, The
Devil is Gods Ape, and accordingly He imitated God in his Prescriptions
concerning the continual burning of the Fire upon the Altar, and that in diverse
places among the Heathens, as among the Persians, who made a God of it, and
among the Grecians, who at Delphi worshipped it in the Temple of Apollo; and
among the Romans who worshipped it under the Name of Vesta, committing the
Charge of it to the Vestal Virgins, where if it went out, it was held fatal to
their City, Rhodig. Antiq. c. 14.
they it seems rashly and inconsiderately forgetting or neglecting their duty
in this particular, took some other fire in their Censers (that perhaps with
which they dressed the Flesh of their Sacrifices) and putting Incense thereon,
set it upon the Altar of Incense, and so offered strange Fire before the Lord;
that is, Fire which he commanded them not. For this their great Transression
they were immediately struck dead Tantae vindictae severitate nova disciplina
merito sanciri potuit, in exemplum aliorum. Sanctificatus autem est D^us hac
poena quia tali exemplo commendatus est timor ejus, inquit Augustinus. Rigor
hic sub initia necessarius in terrorem posteris, tum carnis Laetitia turgeret
Aaron, Anonym. in loc.
in the place by Fire from the Lord (possibly with Lightning) yet so as neither
their Bodies nor their Clothes were burnt to ashes, verse. 5. Moses justifies
God before Aaron in this his severe and tremendous stroke, declaring that He
will be sanctified by them that come nigh him, and before all the people He
will be glorified, [see Exodus 19.22.] thereby presenting unto Aaron two
arguments against Murmuring: 1. Because the punishment was just. 2. Because God
would be glorified thereby, and both the people in general, and Aaron's
Posterity in particular, should thereby receive great good and benefit.
Hereupon Aaron held his peace, and laying his hand upon his mouth gave a
notable instance of his Piety, and quiet submission to the holy will and
pleasure of God. Then Moses commanded Mishael and Elzaphan, Aaron's
Cosin-Germans, to carry forth their dead Bodies without the Camp, and to bury
them there. And He charges Aaron, and his two surviving Sons Eleazer and
Ithamar, not to mourn for them, nor uncover their Heads (by taking off their
Miters or Bonnets which they wore in the execution of their Priestly-Office)
nor rend their Clothes, nor go out from the door of the Tabernacle upon this
sad occasion, lest they die for it, and thereby also bring wrath upon the
people. For this was an extraordinary Judgment of God that had befallen their
Brothers, and they were to testify their submission thereunto, by not openly
lamenting their death. And they being newly anointed, and now at this time
prepared for their first entering upon the execution of their Priestly Office,
they might not break off their Service to attend the burial of their Brothers.
Yet the whole House of Israel were commanded to lament and bewail this burning,
which the Lord in consuming Nadab and Abihu had kindled among them, and thereby
threatened them all if they sinned presumptuously. Moses upon this occasion
gives to Aaron, and his Sons, and their Successors, a Command to abstain from
Wine and strong Drink, when they went to minister before the Lord, lest they
should through any distemper or indisposedness From this Ordinance made on this
occasion, some conclude that Nadab and Abibu were raised up to this presumption
through the fume of Wine or strong Drink.
that might arise therefore be disabled from the execution of their Function in
the two main parts of it, viz. in discerning betwixt Holy and Unholy, Clean and
Unclean, and in teaching the Law to the people. And that this severe stroke Non
satis probari potest eos aeternum damnatos. Peccatum enim ipsum quod attinet,
ex infirmitate videtur commissum non prae ebrietate ut vult R. Solomoh.
Quicquid igitur peccati huic inadverientiae inerat, id omne temporali poena
plectitur ut post nihil poena id propter iis luendum restare videatur,
Freidlibius.
upon Nadab and Abihu might not so cast down Aaron and his Sons, as to make
them neglect their meat, or intermit their Service, or be less lightsome in it
then before; Moses encourages them to their duty, by inviting them to
participate of the Provisions of the Lords Table, and to eat of the
Meat Offerings, and of the Shoulder and Breast, of the peoples Peace Offerings,
according to the manner that God had prescribed. It so happened at this time
that Eleazar and Ithamar, upon the sudden and dreadful death of their two
Brothers, had, as it seems, being under extremity of grief and sorrow, burned
the Goat of the Sin-Offering (mentioned before, Chapter 9. verse. 15.) without the
Camp, which should not have been done, (the blood thereof not being carried
into the Tabernacle, see Levit. 4.16, 17.) but it should have been eaten by the
Priests, see Levit. 6.26, 30. Moses not knowing what was become of it,
diligently sought after it, out of a care that Gods Ordinance should be exactly
observed, and the Priests Rights duly maintained, and understanding what
Eleazar and Ithamar had done, He chides them for their failing therein. But
Aaron extenuates his own and his Sons fault as occasioned through grief, and the
pressure of those doleful things that had befallen them, intimating that if
they had then eaten of the Sin-Offering it would not have been acceptable to
the Lord: For that great heaviness and sorrow they were now under, made them
unfit to eat those holy things as the Lord required, who would have them eaten
with joyfulness in his Presence, see Deuteronomy. 12.7. and Moses allows their excuse,
and so passes the matter by.

Levit. Chapter 10. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXIII.
HItherto we have seen the Laws that concerned the Sanctification of the
Priests, and the Rites and Ceremonies of the Sacrifices; Now general Laws are
given concerning the Sanctification of the people; and first for avoiding that
uncleanness which they might contract from things without them. And in giving
these Laws God spoke both to Moses and Aaron, because it belonged both to the
Magistrate and the Priest to see them put in execution; the Priest being to
teach the difference between things clean and unclean, see Ezekiel. 44.23. and the
Magistrate to take care that this difference be observed; and hence is that
Numb. 9.6. And certain men that were defiled by the dead body of a man, that
they could not keep the Passover on that day, came before Moses, etc.

First, Then here are Laws given what Creatures were to be accounted clean and
unclean, and how they must not defile themselves either with eating or touching
As a moral admonition that they ought to refrain from all fellowship in evil,
see Isa. 52.11.
any unclean thing, but must walk as an holy people of the most holy God. The
Laws concerning Creatures which are to be accounted clean No doubt but this
distinction of clean and unclean Beasts was by revelation made known to the
Fathers from the first; whence that direction is given to Noah immediately
before the Flood, Genesis 7.2. but this seems only in respect of Sacrifices, for
as to eating or not eating, it seems they had no distinction then of clean and
unclean Beasts, Genesis 9.3. Every moving thing that lives shall be meat for you,
even as the green herb have I given you all things. But now by this Law the
Israelites are forbidden the eating of diverse meats, both Flesh, and Fowl, and
Fish, as unclean, and that possibly to inure this stubborn people to an
absolute dependence on Gods Word and Will in all things; as also to restrain
them from that which was usually eaten among the Gentiles, and to mind them of
the difference God had put between them and all other Nations, and the special
purity He required of them above all other people, see Levit. 20.25, 26. And
therefore the Apostle reckons this among the the legal shadows, Acts 2.16, 17.
Let no man judge you in meat or drink, etc. which are a shadow of things to
come, but the body is of Christ. See also Acts 10.15.
or unclean, as to Food, may be reduced to these three heads: First, Concerning
fourfooted-Beasts; Those are to be accounted clean that part the hoof, (that
is, into two parts, as Oxen, Cows, and Sheep do, and not into many, as Dogs,
Cats, etc.) and that chew the Cud, and those to be accounted unclean that do
neither; or that chew the Cud but do not divide the hoof, as the Camel, Coney
and Hare; or divide the hoof but do not chew the Cud, as the Swine. These they
might not eat nor touch their dead Carcasses. 2ly, Concerning Fishes; the clean
are all that have Fins and Scales; the unclean, those that have not. 3ly,
Concerning Fowls; the unclean are expressed some of them by their Names, as the
Eagle, Hawk, Kite, Vulture, and such Birds of prey, etc. some by their manner
of going; all Fowl that creep, going upon all four, being of a mungrel kind,
such as the Bat, were to be an abomination to them; yet the Locust, bald
Locust, Beetle and Grasshopper being flying creeping things were excepted, and
were all to be accounted clean. But for the other, who ever touched the
Carcasses of any of them was to be unclean to the end of that day, and though
not his Flesh, but only his Clothes touched them, they must be washed. Then
three sorts of Beasts are mentioned, by touching of whose Carcasses a man was
made unclean; 1. Such as divide the hoof, but not into twain, as Lions, Wolves,
Apes, Bears, Dogs. 2ly, Such as these, the Weesel, Mouse, Tortoise, Ferret,
Snail, Mole, etc. and the very utensils and other things that touched their
dead Carcasses were thereby defiled. 3ly, The dead body of any clean Beast that
dies of it self, or is strangled, or torn by a wild Beast was neither to be
eaten nor touched, yet it might be sold and eaten by a Stranger or Alien that
lived among them, see Deuteronomy. 14.21. and the fat of it in such cases might be
used to ordinary purposes, of which see the Law, Levit. 7.24. And no manner of
creeping thing might they eat, whither it went upon the belly as Snakes or
Worms, or crawled on all four, as Frogs, or had any feet to creep withal, as
Caterpillars. And God gives them these Laws concerning Ceremonial Purity, and
avoiding any unclean thing, as documents to them that their God (whose Nature
is transcendently holy) required real holiness both of Heart and Life from
them, and had separated them to Himself, that they might be an holy people.

Levit. 11. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXIV.
SEcondly, Laws concerning Women's separation, and purification after
Childbirth. After the birth of a Man-Child she was to be unclean seven days,
according to the days of her separation for her infirmity, [Levit. 15.19.] and
on the eighth day her Child was to be Circumcised, and she was to continue
unclean V. 4. In Sanguine purificationis suae] hypallage pro in purificatione
sanguinis sui, i. e. donec se perfect sanguine, and sordibus partus
liberaverit.
33 days more. After the birth of a Female, both the time of her uncleanness,
and the days of her cleansing were to be doubled. When the days of her
purifying were fulfilled, she was to offer for her purification, if she were
rich, a Lamb of the first year for a Burnt-Offering, and for a Sin-Offering,
either a young Pigeon, or a Turtle-Dove. If she were poor, she was to bring
either two Turtle-Doves or two young Pigeons, one for a Burnt-Offering, and the
other for a Sin-Offering, and the Priest was thereby to make atonement for her.

Levit. 12. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXV.
THirdly, Laws concerning Leprosy, and the different kinds thereof. (1.) Aaron
and his Sons were appointed Judges to discern whither it be a Leprosy in man,
or any other thing. (2ly,) The signs or tokens whereby they were to judge of
Leprosy growing upon a man, were first a white bright spot rising in the skin.
2. If the natural color of the hair were changed. 3. If it were in sight
deeper than the skin, the nature of that Disease being to eat and consume the
flesh. 4. If the Scab did spread in the skin. But if these signs did not
concur, then the Priest shall shut the man up seven days for further trial, and
seven days after that, and if the malady spread not in the skin, the Priest
shall pronounce him clean. (3ly, The evident signs or tokens of an infectious
Leprosy were these: 1. If it were a white rising. 2. If it had turned the hair
in it white. 3. If there was a quick raw flesh in the rising, then it was the
Leprosy, and the Priest shall pronounce him unclean, and shall not shut him up
to make any further proof or trial of it. But if the Leprosy have covered all
his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean, because the strength of nature having
expelled the inward Corruption, and spread it all over his body, it proved not
then Infectious, except there were here and there any raw flesh appearing; and
if so, that was a sign that the poison of the Disease was not wholly driven
out, and in that case he shall be pronounced unclean; but yet if this raw flesh
afterward turned again to white, like the rest of his body, then he shall be
pronounced clean. (4ly,) The signs of a Leprosy springing out of a Boil
healed, or the Scab of an healed Sore, or a fiery Inflammation, of which the
Priest was to judge much after the Rules before given. (5ly,) Signs of Leprosy
in the Head or Beard; the Leprosy of the other parts was notified by a white
Hair, this of the Head and Beard by a yellow thin hair; black hair was a sign
of soundness and strength of nature. (6ly,) The Leper was to rend his Clothes
(to express his great sorrow for his sins, that had provoked God to send that
Judgment upon him,) and put a covering or muster upon his upper Lip, [see Ezekiel.
24.17. and Mich. 3.7.] and to cry Unclean, Unclean, as bewailing his Condition,
and giving warning to others to avoid him; And He was to dwell alone As Miriam
was put out of the Camp, Numb. 12.14. This was during their journying in the
Wilderness; when they were settled in Canaan the Lepers were shut out of the
Cities, 2 Kings 7.3. at least were confined to a house by themselves, (though
Kings) as Azariah, 1 Kings 15.5. 2 Chronicles. 26.21. yet upon necessary occasions
they were permitted to come into the Streets and Highways, observing a due
distance, that they might neither give offense, nor others take offense from
them. See Luke 17.1, 12.
without the Camp. (7ly,) Directions are given for discerning when the Leprosy
had infected Garments, Haec Lepra nobis (Deo gratias) incomperta est and quae
parietes adium perrepsit, Chapter 14. v. 34.
and Skins, This argued a strong and strange Infection either of the Air or
breath of the Leper, which is so much the sitter to set forth the Infection of
Sin, whereof Leprosy is both an effect and type.
and for burning those that were deeply infected.

Levit. 13. whole Chapter.

Fourthly, Laws are given concerning the cleansing of a Leper, and the solemn
Rites and Ceremonies that are to be used therein. 1. The Priest was to take two
live Sparrows, and with a Scarlet-thread or lace (see Heb. 9.19.) to bind a
sprinkler of Hyssop to a Cedar-stick, and to kill one of the Birds over an
Earthen-Vessel that had running-water in it, and to dip the other living Bird,
and the sprinkler in it, and so to sprinkle him that was to be cleansed seven
times, and so pronounce him clean, and then to let the living Bird fly away,
and so the cleansed person was to wash himself, and his Clothes, and to shave
off his hair, and then to be admitted into the Camp, Town or City, but to
continue apart by himself in some place or house appointed for the purpose
seven days; and on the seventh day he was to reiterate and repeat these
Ceremonies again. And on the eighth day (if he were a rich man) he was to offer
two He-Lambs, one for a Trepass Offering, verse. 12. the other for a
Burnt-Offering, verse. 19, 20. and an Ewe-Lamb for a Sin-Offering, and three
Omers or Pottles of fine Flower as accessory Meat Offerings to the three
Sacrifices aforementioned, mingled with a Log or half a pint of Oil. And the
Priest was to put some of the blood of the Trepass Offering upon the tip of
his right Ear, and Thumb of his right Hand, and great toe of his right Foot,
and to do the same with the Oil upon the same parts where the blood was
sprinkled, and to pour the remainder of the Oil upon his Head, after He had
sprinkled some of it with his Finger seven times before the Tabernacle, and so
the Priest shall make atonement for him. If he were poor, his cleansing for the
form and manner of it was to be the same, only the matter of his offering was
to be less, and of less value.

Levit. 13. from 1. to 33.

Lastly, Laws are given concerning the Leprosy that might happen to be in an
house, Aedes non habebant ante ingressum in Canaan. Hanc Lepram and vestium and
domorum non naturae, sed Dei immissioni tribuunt, voluntque; eo fine incussam,
ut ab his veluti admoniti resipiscerent. Muis.
and the signs and marks whereby it might be known to be in the walls thereof,
viz. hollow strakes, greenish or reddish, which in sight are lower than the
wall; and if it spread in the walls of the house, then it is a fretting
Leprosy. For the cleansing of it, the House was to be scraped within round
about, and that which was scraped off was to be carried out of the City into an
unclean place, and the stones were to be pulled out, and new ones put in, and
the walls to be new plaistered. And if the Plague came again, and brake out in
the House after this, then the Priest was to pronounce it to be a fretting
Leprosy, and the House to be broken down, and Stones, and Timber, and all
carried out of the City into an unclean place. The manner of cleansing of it,
if the Plague were healed and stopped, was with Birds and running-water, and a
sprinkler of Hyssop tied with a Scarlet-thread to a Cedar-stick as before.

Levit. 14. from 33. to the end.

SECT. XXXVI.
FIfthly, Laws concerning the Ceremonial uncleanness in men, by reason of their
Issues, either through weakness and disease, or in their sleep, and how they
make other things and persons unclean; and concerning the way of their
cleansing by washing their Clothes, and bathing their Flesh, and on the eighth
day offering two young Pigeons, one for a Sin-Offering, and the other for a
Burnt-Offering. Also concerning the uncleanness of women in their Flowers, and
how they make other things and persons It Is not like the Infants that lay in
the arms, and suckled on the Breasts of their Mothers (when they were in this
condition) or those that performed a necessary and charitable ministration to
them (when they were in this condition) were thereby rendered unclean.
unclean, and the way of their cleansing by the like Sacrifices.

Levit. 15. whole Chapter.

SECT. XXXVII.
ON the 14th day of this month at evening the Passover was celebrated according
to Gods express Command. It seems they would not have kept this Passover
without special warrant, because by the first Institution they seem bound only
to keep it in the Land of Canaan, Exodus 12.25. and after this we find not that
they kept any till they came into the Land, Joshua, Chapter 5. And now they kept it
according to all the Rites of it, excepting those special Rites which belonged
only to the first Passover in Egypt, as sprinkling of the door-posts, and the
eating of it standing, etc.
On which day it seems some of the people complained to Moses and Aaron that
they could not keep the Feast at that time with the rest of their Brethren,
because they were become unclean by touching a dead body; and by a Law given,
Levit. 7.20. (since the first institution of that Passover) if they meddled with
holy things, they were to be cut off. Hereupon a Law And by warrant (it seems)
of this Law in Hezekiah's time there was a Passover kept on the 14th day of the
second month, when there were other occasions than those here mentioned, that
disabled them from keeping it at the usual time.
was made, That all such persons that were so defiled, or were in a journey, or
possibly under any other unavoidable hindrance, should keep their Passover on
the 14th day of the second month, because they could not keep it on the day
appointed.

Numb. 9. from 1. to the 15.

SECT. XXXVIII.
AFter the death of Nadab and Abihu, Moses seems to have received all those
Laws from the Lord, which we find recorded in the XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX,
XXI, XXII, XXIII, and to the 10 verse of the XXIV Chapters of Leviticus.

1. Laws concerning the High Priests coming into the most holy place once
Figuring the Sacrifice of Christ once made in the time of his life and no more,
Heb. 9.7, 8, 10, 12. He was to enter into the most holy but once a year to
minister, and by way of Priestly ministration and expiation, yet upon other
occasions he and his Sons probably might enter at other times, as at the taking
down and setting up of the Tabernacle in their removals and journeys in the
Wilderness; and when they took thence the Ark upon several occasions, as Josh.
6.4. 1 Samuel 4.3.
a year, to make an atonement on the tenth day of the seventh month. See Exodus
30.10. Heb. 9.7. At which time Aaron was to be clothed not with the glorious
Garments Some Expositors conceive that those linen Garments here spoken of,
verse. 4. were those mentioned, Exodus 28.39. which the High Priest wore under
his other rich attire, and that together with these here mentioned, all His
other rich Garments are to be understood also. But others by comparing the 4th
verse and 23th together, conclude that He performed the peculiar Service of
this day, viz. his entering into the Holy of Holies in his white, and not his
golden Garments, as the Jews distinguish, And that it was so ordered to
prefigure the low estate of the Messiah here on Earth, and that He should
without outward glory perform the work of our Redemption, but with Purity,
Innocen e, and Holiness. See Ainsworth in loc.
that were peculiar to the High Priest, but with those which were common to him
with other Priests. 2. He was to offer first a young Bullock for a Sin-Offering
for himself and his Family. 3. Then he was to take two Goats for the people, on
which lots were to be cast, for the one to be killed for a Sin-Offering, and
the other to be let go as a Scapegoat. 4. He was to take of the blood of the
Bullock and Goat for the people, and with the smoke of Incense ascending from
his Censer to go into the Holy of Holies, and sprinkle the blood on or toward
the mercy Seat seven A number often used in legal Services. It signified a full
and perfect purging by the blood of Christ. See Levit. 4.6.
times to make an atonement for the people. 5. During his being in the Holy of
Holies all others were to be secluded out of the Tabernacle, 6. He was to make
atonement also for the most Holy place, and the Altar of Incense in the holy,
and the Tabernacle of the Congregation as being defiled by the sins of the
people. 7. He was to lay his hands upon the Scapegoat, The Goat that was
killed, represented Christ dying for our Sins; the Scapegoat, that God laying
our Sins on Christ, had removed them far away from us.
confessing over him all the Iniquities of the people, and putting them (as it
were) upon his head, and then to send him away into the Wilderness by a fit
person, who was to wash himself before he returned again into the Camp; and the
Goat was in this manner typically to bear away their Iniquities. 8. Then he was
to put off those Garments which he wore when he went into the most Holy, and
put on the Garments peculiar to his Office, and then to offer the
Burnt-Offerings, These are the peculiar Sacrifices that had reference to
Aaron's entering into the most holy place. The other extraordinary Sacrifices of
the day, see Numb. 29.7, 8, 11. On this day the Jubilee was proclaimed, of
which Chapter 20.
and fat of the Sin Offerings on the Altar, and to cause the Bullock and Goat
(with whose blood he entered into the most Holy) to be carried out of the Camp,
and burnt there; and he that burnt them was to wash his Clothes and bathe his
Flesh with water, and so to return into the Camp. And this day of atonement was
to be a solemn annual Feast, The Solemnity began the ninth day at Even, Chapter
23.32. but the tenth day was most observable for the Sacrifices of expiation
and atonement.
wherein they were to abstain from all sorts of work, and to afflict their
Souls by fasting and abstinence from all fleshly delights, and by inward
humiliation and contrition. And this Ordinance was to continue as long as the
Levitical Priesthood was to be in force.

Levit. 16. whole Chapter.

2. Laws prohibiting the killing and offering Sacrifices any where but at the
Tabernacle, We find indeed many of the Worthies of God did after this offer up
Sacrifices in other places. As Manoah, Judge. 13.19. Samuel in Mizpeh, 1 Samuel
7.9. and in Gilgal, 1 Samuel 11.15. David in the floor of Araunah, 2 Samuel 24.18.
and Elias in Mount Carmel, 1 King. 18.32. but that was by extraordinary
dispensation from God. Ordinarily they were tied to bring their Sacrifices
(which they used to offer in the open Field) to the Tabernacle; whereas now
under the Gospel we have liberty to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices to God every
where, John 4.21, 24. Mal. 1.11.
to the door of which all their Sacrifices were to be brought (though formerly
they used to offer Sacrifices abroad, sometimes in Fields, sometimes on
Mountains, and in Groves,) and there killed by the Priests (and not by any
other, except in some extraordinary cases by the Levites, as the Priests
Ministers,) whose Office God would not allow any to usurp. Whoever did
otherwise, was to be reputed as guilty, and as worthy of death, as if he had
killed a man, Isa. 66.3. (2.) They were enjoined to offer their Sacrifices to
none but unto God, by no means to Devils. For to Devils did all those Jews and
Gentiles Sacrifice, that Sacrificed not to the true God, and in such sort and
in such place as God appointed, Deuteronomy. 32.17. 1 Cor. 10.20. So Israel had done
in Egypt, as we read, Ezekiel. 23.8. Neither left she her Whoredoms brought from
Egypt, etc. and also now lately in the Wilderness, Exodus 32. when they
sacrificed to that Idol, the golden Calf, and in other secret Idolatries, which
we find mentioned Acts 7.43. Amos 5.26. Now Idolatry is called Spiritual
Whoredom, because of the Covenant betwixt God and his people, which is broken
on their part, when they join themselves to Idols. (3. This Law is extended to
Strangers also, and such as were proselyted to the Religion and Church of the
Jews. (4.) They are prohibited to eat blood, V. 11. In Sanguin:] Siquidem ex
temperie sanguinis anima brutorum nasci creditur.
which was to be employed not for Food, but to make atonement for their Souls,
as being a Type of the blood of Christ, [ Romans 3.25. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14.20.
Heb. 9.12, 22.] which seems to be the principal cause of the Prohibition of it,
though other reasons likewise are rendered thereof, as to restrain men from
Cruelty, and from Communion with Idolaters, who used to eat blood in their
Idol-Sacrifices. See Chapter 19.26. God threatens to set his Face against those
that offended herein, and to cut them off from among his people. Proselytes
were also bound to observe this Law. And if by hunting or otherwise they did
catch any Beast or Fowl that might lawfully be eaten, they must let out the
blood thereof, and cover it with dust, before they did eat the flesh thereof;
and much more when at home they killed any beast for their own private use. And
he that did ignorantly For if he did it presumptuously, He was liable to great
punishment.
eat any thing that died of it self, or was torn by Beasts [see Deuteronomy. 14.21]
was to wash his Clothes, and bathe himself with water, and to be unclean unto
the evening. If he did not, he was to bear the punishment of his Iniquity,
Levit. Chapter 17.

3. Laws enjoining the Israelites not to live after the Customs and manners of
the Egyptians, which they had seen in Egypt, nor of the Canaanites which they
should see in Canaan, but to keep Gods Statutes and Judgments, which if a man
do he shall live Qui perfect legem impleverit adipiscetur vitam aeternam. At
quis hoc praestat? non ergo vitam possumus consequi justitia operum seu legis,
sed fidei.
in them. See Romans 10.5. that is, the man that does all things prescribed in
the Law, exactly and perfectly, without ever failing in any one particular,
shall live thereby; that is, shall obtain eternal life. And on these, and no
other terms, does the Law promise eternal life, which now are not possible to
be performed by any mere man since Adam's Fall. But this Obedience God required
of them as a due debt, and to direct them whether to have recourse, viz. from
the Law to the Messiah, See Gal. 3.24.
by whose Merits and Mediation they may be acquitted, when by the Law they are
condemned.

That therefore they may walk in the Statutes and Ordinances of God, and not
conform to Idolaters, they are commanded first to beware of Incestuous
Copulations and Marriages, or approaching to such of their near Kindred as are
here forbidden.

1. A man must not marry or lie with with his Fathers wife, his Mother in law,
or his own Mother, Levit. 18. v. 7. See 1 Cor. 5.1. Genesis 35.22. Deuteronomy. 22.30.
and 27.20. 2. Nor with his Sister, whether she be Daughter both of Father and
Mother, or of his Mother only; and whether born in Marriage, or out of
Marriage, i. e. by Fornication before Marriage, v. 9. 3. Nor with his
Granddaughter by Son or Daughter, v. 10. 4. Nor with the Daughter Hoc
probibitum erat, v 9. Sed vel claritatis, vel inculcandi gratia more Scripturae
repetitur, ut nota Aug. quaest. 59.
of his Fathers wife, begotten by his Father, for she is his Sister, though
begotten of a Mother in law: but if his Father marry another wife, and she has
a Daughter by another man, that Daughter is lawful for him, v. 11. 5. Nor with
his Aunt, the Sister of Father or Mother, v. 12, 13. 6. Nor with his Uncles
wife, Wherefore it seems more unlawful for the Uncle and Neice to marry
together.
v. 14. 7. Nor with his Daughter in law, his Sons wife, v. 15. 8. Nor with his
Brothers wife. From this Law was excepted See the reasons for it, Sect. 35. Chapter
3.
afterward the case of a Brothers dying without Male-Issue, for then the next
Brother or Kinsman was to marry the Widow of the deceased, v. 16. and Levit.
20.21. 9. Nor with his wives Daughter, viz. Step-Daughter, nor Step-Sons
Daughter, or the Daughters descending from her, verse. 17. 10. A man ought not
to take one wife to another, Polagamy seems here forbidden, so Deuteronomy. 17.17.
(that is, to have two wives together in marriage,) that the one may not be a
vexation See 1 Samuel 1. the case of Elkanah a Levite having two wives.
to the other, which is like to be more where two Sisters are so conjoined, as
may be seen in Jacob's case, Genesis 30. And though some of the Fathers did
practice Polygamy, and God bore with them, yet it was not so from the
beginning, as our Savior tells us, Mat. 19.8. out of Genesis 2.24. and in the N.
T. it is quite abolished, verse. 18.
2. A man was not to lie with his own wife, when she was to be separated, by
reason of her uncleanness, verse. 19. See Chapter 12.2. and Chapter 15.24, 25. and Chapter
20.18.

3. Adultery is forbidden, or defiling another man's wife, verse. 20.

4. Offering their Children to Molech, the Idol of the Ammonites, [called also
Milcom, 1 Kings 11.5, 7.] for whose honor and worship the besotted Parents
caused their own Children to be burnt alive: or, (as some write) to pass
betwixt two great Fires to be cleansed or purified thereby, (as they conceived)
and as a sign of their Consecration to that Idol. And it was a horrible
vilifying of the Lord, thus to forsake him, and to yield such honor to such a
base Idol-god. See Amos 5.26. It Is thought to be the same Idol that in
Scripture is ordinarily called Baal, as may appear by comparing 2 Kings 23.10.
and Jer. 19.5. together. See Psalm. 106.37, 38. Levit. 20.3, 5.

5. All unnatural Lusts and Copulations. From all which sins God dehorts them,
by telling them that these were the Abominations which He intended to visit
upon the Land of Canaan, and for which she should vomit and spew out her
Inhabitants. Therefore they must take heed to themselves that they do not
provoke Him by the like sins. [See Levit. 20.22, 23, 24.]

Levit. 18. whole Chapter.

4. Sundry Laws are repeated and reinforced, Chapter 19. with directions how the
Violators of them shall be punished, Chapter 20. Some relating to the Moral Law, as
particularly to the 1. Com. Viz. Not to use Enchantments, nor superstitiously
to observe times, counting some days lucky, others unlucky, Chapter 19. verse. 26.
Not to go after Wizards, or such as have familiar Spirits, Chapter 19.31. Chapter 20.6.
for such were to be stoned to death, Chapter 20.27. See Exodus 22.18. Not to offer
their Children to Molech, for such as did so were to be stoned, [ Chapter 20.2, 3,
4, 5.] And those that connived at their Idolatry, God threatens to set his Face
against, and to destroy those men and their Families.
2. Com. Not to turn to Idols, nor make to themselves molten Gods, or any
Images of Stone to bow down to them, Chapter 19.4. See Chapter 26.1.
3. Com. Not to swear by Gods Name falsely, nor profane His holy Name, Chapter 19.12.
4. Com. To keep the Sabbath, and reverence the Sanctuary; that is, to come
thither with an inward awe and fear of Gods Presence, and not to approach it in
their uncleanness, or any other way to pollute it, Chapter 19.3, 30. and Chapter 26.2.
5. Com. Ye shall fear and reverence every man his Mother The Mother is set in
the first place, because Mothers are usually most despised.
and his Father, Chapter 19.3. Thou shall rise up before the hoary Head, and honor
the Face of the old Man, Chapter 19.32. He that curses Father or Mother shall
surely be put to Death, Chapter 20.9. See Exodus 21.17. Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20, 21.
6. Com. Thou shall not curse or speak evil of the Deaf, nor put a
Stumbling Block before the Blind; that is, do Injuries to men in confidence
that the injured persons shall not know who wronged them, nor be able to right
themselves, Chapter 19.14. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart; thou shall
in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Chapter 19.17. See 1
John 3.15. Thou shall not stand against the blood of thy Neighbor; that is,
stand up in Courts of Justice to take away his life, either as a false Accuser,
or as a false Witness, Chapter 19. v. 16. Thou shall not avenge thy self, nor bear
any grudge against thy Brother, but love thy Neighbor as thy self, That is, in
the same manner, heartily, sincerely, constantly, as thou love thy self,
though not with the same degree of love; As our Savior prays, Joh. 17.21. that
all true Believers might be one with Him and his Father, not with the same
union, but with a likeness of union.
Chapter 19. v. 18.
7. Com. we are forbidden. Fornication with a Bond-Maid betrothed, the
punishment scourging; the way of Expiation, by bringing a Ram for a
Trepass Offering, Chapter 19.20, 21, 22, 29. Adultery. The punishment Death by
stoning, as may be gathered from Deuteronomy. Chapter 22. v. 22, 23, 24. and Joh. 8.4.5.
Levit. 20.10. Incest, as if a man lie with his Fathers wife, or his
Daughter-in-law, or if he marry Mother and Daughter, if all be guilty they
shall be burnt; or if a man lie with his Sister he shall be immediately put to
death, and that openly for a warning to others; or if a man lie with his Aunt,
they shall die Childless; that is, shall be presently put to death, that so the
Land may not be filled with the Issue of so unclean a mixture, Chapter 20.11, 12,
14, 17, 19, 20, 21. Sodomy, or lying with Mankind. Both are to be put to death,
Chapter 20.13. Bestiality, or lying with Beasts. Both Man and Beast to be put to
death, Chapter 20.15, 16. Lying with a woman having her Sickness, which if a man
did knowingly, and the woman consented, both were to be put to death.
Intelligendum est autem de casu quo vel public constabat, vel ad judices res
deducta erat. Nam pro casibus occultis decernitur supra [Cap. 15. v. 24.]
immunditia semptem dierum post quos ab ea purificandus erat. Jansenius.
But if he knew her not to be in that condition, He was only rendered unclean
thereby for seven days, and to be purified according to the directions given,
Chapter 15. Levit. 20.18.
8. Com. Ye shall not steal, nor deal fasly, nor lie one to another, Chapter 19.11.
Thou shall not defraud thy Neighbor, nor rob him; The wages of him that is
hired shall not stay with thee all night till the morning; The reason of which
Law seems to be because they that work for hire are many times so poor, that
they have not provision for a day beforehand, Chapter 19.13. See Jer. 22.13. Job
7.2. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment, in Meteyard, in Weight, or in
Measure, but shall have just Balances, just Weights, and a just Epha, An Epha
answered to our Bushel, and an Hin contained six of our Pints.
and a just Hin, Chapter 19.35, 36.
9. Com. Thou shall no go up and down as a Talebearer among thy people, Chapter
19.16. See Ezekiel. 22.9. In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood.



Some Injunctions are also added relating to the Judicial Law; as particularly,

First, That all Justice be impartially administered, without respect of
persons, or considering whither they be Poor or Rich, Strangers or of their own
Country, Chapter 19.15. Chapter 24.22. yea, the Strangers sojourning with them were to
be used as those born among them; and they were to love them as themselves,
remembering that they themselves were once Strangers in the Land of Egypt, Chapter
19.33, 24.

2ly, To leave the Corners of their Field when they reap, and the gleanings
thereof, and of their Vineyards for the Poor and Stranger, Chapter 19.9, 10. See
Chapter 23.22.

3ly, Not to permit promiscuous Ingendrings among Cattle; nor sow their Fields
with mingled seed; nor wear Linsiewolsie Garments; intimating possibly how all
mixtures in Religion (of man's devising) with Gods Ordinances, and all
hypocrisy, contrary to the sincerity and simplicity which God requires, were
abominable to Him, Chapter 19.19. Deuteronomy. 22.11.

4ly, Fruits of Trees now planted to be accounted uncircumcised, and for the
first three years to be cast away, as an unclean thing, even as the Fore-skins
of men in Circumcision were cut off, and cast away as unclean. In the fourth
year they were to be holy, to praise the Lord withal, and given to the Priests
as First Fruits, who did eat the food, prepared for and dedicated unto God.
Then on the fifth year they might gather the Fruits, and eat of them
themselves, and by Gods blessing, this their Obedience should tend to their
profit; For God would thereupon bless them with increase, Chapter 19.23, 24, 25.

5ly, Not to round Radulphus asserit Gentiles cum se daemonibus consecrabant
capita sua in rotundum totondisse: censebant enim Deos gaudere figura rotunda
utpote perfectissima. Hic Diis Templa rotunda extruebant, Numa vestae Augustus
omnibus Diis. Bochartus Deus, ut suos quam remotissime ab impiis and profanis
Gentilium ritibus abstraheret opposita praecepit, ut in multis aliis, ita ut in
capillorum and barbae figura. Nam and Nazaraeatus, i. e. intonsio a Deo idcirco
videtur probata. Jansen.
the corners of their Heads and Beards after the superstitious manner and
custom of the Heathen, who offered to their Idol-gods not only their Locks, but
their Beards also, especially the first down of them, as Plutarch in Theseo,
and Sueton in Nerone, relate. Or possibly they were not to shave off the hair
of their Heads and Beards when they were in mourning and extreme heaviness, as
was the custom of the Heathen, Isa. 15.2. and Jer. 48.37, Neither were they to
make cuttings in their Flesh for the dead, as the Heathens used to cut and
lance themselves in their mourning, Deuteronomy. 14.1. Jer. 16.6. 1 King. 18.28. Nor
to imprint Marks upon their Flesh, by cutting themselves, and then filling up
the place with black, or some other color, that the Marks thereof might
remain, which were tokens of Idolatry and Superstition, and desperate effects
of immoderate mourning, Chapter 19.27, 28. Chapter 21.5.

6ly, Laws concerning the Priests mourning for the dead.

1. The inferior Priests were not to defile themselves by touching the dead,
Which was an admonition of an especial purity required in the Priests, as being
Types of Christ.
or lamenting, or being at their burial, or within the place or Tent where any
dead body lay, by which was contracted a Ceremonial uncleanness for seven days
(see Numb. 19.14, 16.) yet the Priest, though he might not mourn for any of the
people, he might mourn for his Mother, Father, Son, Daughter, Brother, Sister
being a Virgin. Nevertheless for these he was not to mourn after the Idolatrous
manner of the Heathens, by cutting his Hair, Beard and Flesh as they used to
do; He being a chief man among his people, and appointed to offer Sacrifices on
the Altar, and Shewbread on the Table of the Lord, therefore a more especial
degree of holiness was required of him, Chap. 21. from 1. to 7.

2ly, They were not to marry a Whore, or a profane Woman, or one divorced from
her Husband; yea it seems they might not marry a Widow, except it were a
Priests Widow, Ezekiel. 44.22. This was enjoined to maintain the dignity of the
Priesthood, that they might be fitter to be Types of Christ; and the people
accordingly are enjoined to account and esteem them holy, they offering the
Bread of God, and being his Ministers, who is holiness it self, verse. 7, 8.

3ly, The Priests Daughter if she played the whore was to be burnt, because she
dishonored the Priesthood, For which cause the Connivance and Indulgence of
old Eli to his wicked Sons was the more displeasing to God; and it may well be
thought by the parity of reason that the same punishment was to be inflicted on
the Priests wife and on his Sons, if guilty of the like Crimes.
and the sacred Office of her Father, whereas other persons were not to be put
to death for simple Fornication, neither the man nor the woman, ( Exodus 22.16,
17.) Levit. 21. verse. 9.

4ly, The High Priest The High Priests refraining from mourning at Funerals,
was apishly followed by the Devils Priests, Gell. Noct. Attic. Lib. 10. Cap. 15.
must not defile himself by mourning for any dead whatsoever, though of his
nearest Kindred; for the Crown This may have respect to the golden Plate
fastened to his Miter which was upon his head when he was anointed, and is
called the holy Crown, Exodus 29.6, 7. Unctus est oleo quod et est vice Coronae
and diadematis, quibus Reges insigniantur.
of the anointing Oil of God is upon him, and he is to be noted and observed
rather for qualifications of Grace and Holiness, than for natural Affections,
being a Type of Christ's Royal Priesthood; therefore he shall not forsake the
Sanctuary when he should serve there, or uncover his head after the manner of
Mourners, or endanger himself to be defiled by any such mourning, and so
profane the Sanctuary, verse. 10, 11, 12.

5ly, The High Priest was to take only a Virgin So his wife was a figure of the
Church, which is to be Chaste, pure and holy, 2 Cor. 11.2.
to wife; no Widow, or divorced Woman, or Harlot might he take, because any
blemish in his wife would tend to the reproach and dishonor of his Children
born of her. And thus profaning his seed, he would render them unfit to succeed
him in that sacred Office; to which being advanced by God, she should be carful
no way to dishonor it, verse. 13, 14, 15.

6ly, They of the Sons of Aaron that had any bodily blemishes, deformities or
defects, were to be excluded from the Priests Office, To signify the
perfection of Christ, of whom the Priests were Types, and to signify how pure
they should be that are employed in sacred Functions from any thing that may be
a blemish to their Profession and Ministry. Under the Gospel bodily blemishes
do not disable from the Ministry, but blemishes in the mind or manners will
render them unfit to be Teachers or Examples to the Flock.
yet they were allowed to eat of the holy things, and to eat the bread of God,
both the most holy and the holy; that is, of the Shewbread and Meat Offerings,
and part of the Sin Offerings and Trespass-Offerings, (Levit. 2.3.) and of the
First Fruits, Tithes, and Thank-Offerings; but they were not to serve in the
Tabernacle, from verse. 16. to the end.

7ly, Laws injoyning the Priests when they were unclean to abstain from holy
things; whether that uncleanness happened to them by Leprosy, Issue, touching
of the dead, or eating any thing that died of it self, or was torn with Beasts;
in which cases they were to be unclean until the evening; and then to wash
their Flesh, and so to eat of the holy things, Chap. 22. from 1. to 10.

8ly, No stranger that is not a Priest, Herein was the difference between the
portion of the Priests and of the people, though in the same Sacrifice, that
the Priests portion was only to be eaten by them of his own Family; but the
portion which belonged to him that brought the Offering might be imparted to
any Israelites, if they were not debarred by some lega^ uncleanness.
nor of the Family of the Priests, (though living in the same house) no
Sojourner, or Guest, or Servant hired by the day, was to eat of the holy things
belonging to the Priest, but the bought Servant, and he that was born in his
house might eat of them. The Priests Daughter married to a stranger might not
eat of them; but if she be a Widow, or divorced, or without Children, and
returned to her Fathers house to live there as she did in her youth, she may
eat of her Fathers meat. See Levit. 10.14. Levit. 22. from 10. to 14.

9ly, If a man (who ought not) did unwittingly, and through mistake eat of the
holy things belonging to the Priest, he was to repay the full price of what he
had eaten, and to add a fifth part over and above, as a forfeiture for the
offense, and a Caveat against offending in the like kind for time to come.
There was also a Ram to be offered for his sin, see Chapter 5.15. And the Priests
were to take all the care they could that the people did not bring upon
themselves guilt, by eating what they ought not, and so make themselves liable
to bear the punishment of their trespass, verse. 14, 15, 16.

10ly, Laws concerning the Sacrifices that were to be brought for a Vow, or a
Free-will-Offering (which they might offer at their own discretion) how they
were to be conditioned. 1. They must be always males In other Sacrifices a
female was sometimes accepted, but not in this.
of Beeves, Sheep or Goats. 2ly, They must be without blemish, neither blind,
nor lame, or scabbed, etc. yet in Peace Offerings that were not for a Vow, but
for a Free-will-Offering, though no blemish was allowed, yet the Sacrifice,
which had something superfluous, or lacking in his parts, was accepted: but a
blemished Sacrifice, that was bruised or broken, would not be accepted either
for an Israelite, or a Proselite. V. 25. The bread of your God,] bread is taken
for an Oblation, see Levit. 21.6. Panis, i. e. Sacrificia. Menoch.
3ly. The Beasts to be sacrificed were to be eight days old, at least before
they were offered, because till then they were not fit to be eaten by men,
being too tender and waterish, see Exodus 22.30. 4ly, The Dam, and the young One
were not to be killed in one day. By this, as by the Ordinance against blood,
God intended to admonish his people of Mercy, and to restrain them from
Cruelty, see Deuteronomy. 22.6. Lastly, When they offered a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving
it was all to be eaten the same day, none of it to be reserved to the morrow,
which might make them the more willing to call the Poor to eat with them,
because the remainders were not to be reserved for themselves, but to be burnt.
These things they were commanded carefully to observe, and to take heed of
profaning the Name of God, or causing it to be blasphemed by the Nations about
them by their ill lives. For God declares, That He will be hallowed among the
Children of Israel; that is, He will have all those that profess themselves his
people to carry themselves as those that serve a holy God, with all possible
care, fear and reverence, or else He will manifest his Holiness and Justice in
punishing of them, see Ezekiel. 28.22. And He having given them holy Laws as a
means of their Sanctification, He expects they should walk answerably
thereunto, and to the great Mercies He had vouchsafed to them, Levit. 22. from
17. to the end.

11ly, Laws concerning the holy days and festival times to be observed by them.

1. The weekly Sabbath, which was to be observed in all their dwelling, [see
Acts 15.21.] Levit. 23. from 1. to 4.

2ly, The Passover to be kept on the 14th day of the first month at Even, or
between the two Evenings; that is, between our Three a Clock in the Afternoon
and Sunset; At the latter of these (which was the beginning of the fifteenth
day) the Feast of unleavened bread began, and continued seven days. The first
day of which and the last were to be holy Convocations, and they were to do no
servile On the rest they might work, unless the Sabbath fell on any of them.
work therein. What the Sacrifices were that were to be offered on each of
these seven days, see Numb. 28. from 18. to 26. On the second day of this Feast
they were to bring a Sheaf of the First Fruits of their Barley-Harvest (which
is first ripe See Exodus 9.31, 32. Ruth. 2.23. Their Wheat-Harvest was at
Pentecost.
in that Country, being ready about the end of our March, or beginning of our
April,) to the Priest, who was to wave it before the Lord, and then, and not
before, they might reap their Harvest, and dress of the Corn of it for
themselves. And an He-Lamb was appointed peculiarly to accompany this Sheaf,
besides the daily Sacrifice, and those appointed for every one of the seven
days; and the Meat Offering was to be double to the usual proportion in all
other Sacrifices of Lambs, See Numb. 15.4.
perhaps because this was a gratulatory Sacrifice for the Fruits of the Earth.
And this is enjoined to be always observed by them as long as the Levitical
Worship was to last. From verse. 4. to 15.

3ly, The Feast of Weeks or Pentecost. For from this second day they were to
number seven complete Sabbaths or Weeks which made 49 days; then on the morrow
after the seventh Sabbath, or Week (which was the 50th day, reckoning the day
on which they began their account inclusively,) they were to keep the Feast of
Weeks or Pentecost, and to offer a new Meat Offering unto the Lord, viz. two
wave-Loaves of two tenth deals of fine Flower to be made in some of their
Habitations, of the new-wheat of their Land, and to be offered as the
First Fruits of their Wheat-Harvest, which were to be waved by the Priest,
together with the Peace Offerings. And these Loaves were to be baked with
leaven. For though the Meat Offerings which were in part to be burnt upon the
Altar were always to be without leaven [see Levit. 2.11.] yet these of the
First Fruits (which were wholly for the Priests food) were allowed to be
leavened. They were also to offer with the Bread seven Lambs of the first year,
and one young Bullock, and two Rams for a Burnt-Offering, and one Kid for a
Sin-Offering, and two Lambs of the first year for a Peace Offering. To these in
this Feast were to be added other Oblations, as we may see Numb. 28.27. And
whereas ordinarily the Priest had but the right shoulder and breast of the
Peace Offering, Levit. 7.31, 32, 33.
here he was to have all, because this was offered in general for the whole
Congreation, and no man in such a common concernment having right to challenge
a singular portion to himself, all was assigned to the Priest. This Feast was
to be kept as an holy Convocation, and no servile work to be done thereon,
partly by way of thankfulness for the Fruits of the Earth, and partly in
remembrance of the giving of the Law, See Sect. 13. of Chapter 4.
at this time of the year, at Mount Sinah, Levit. 23. from verse. 15. to 22.

4ly, The Feast of Trumpets on the first day of the seventh month, so called
because solemnized with blowing of Trumpets, by way of rejoicing (as it is
thought) through all the Cities of Israel, see Psalm. 81.3. It was to be a
Sabbath, or an holy day, and solemn Feast unto the Lord, [ Numb. 29.1.] and
they were to do no servile work thereon, and it was to be a Memorial to them
that this was the first day of their new Year as to civil affairs. For
Ecclesiastical matters God appointed the month Nisan or Abib which answers to
part of our March and part of our April, to be the first month of the year; and
that in remembrance of their coming then out of Egypt, Exodus 12.2. The seventh
month from thence was called Tizri, and began about the middle of our
September, and had been formerly the first month of their year; yea, and so
continued still for civil affairs. See Sect. 1. of Chapter 1. Therefore the Year of
Jubilee began still at this month, and was on the tenth day thereof, viz. on
the day of Expiation, proclaimed, Chap. 25.9. The first day of every month
which was their new Moon, they kept as an holy day; a day of special Solemnity,
and thereon the Priests did blow with their Silver Trumpets over their
Sacrifices, see Numb. 10.10. But the first day of this seventh month was kept
as a far more solemn Festival; the reason thereof was, because this was the
beginning of their new Year, as to civil affairs. And it was also to put them
in mind of the special holiness of this month; For as the Seventh day of every
week was a Sabbath, and every seventh Year a Sabbatical Year, so God would have
the seventh month of every Year to be holy to Himself in some singular manner
above the rest of the months.
What the Sacrifices appointed for this Feast were, see Numb. 29. from 1. to 7.
Levit. 23. from verse. 23. to 26.

5ly, The day of atonement on the tenth day of this seventh month; on which day
they were to afflict their Souls by fasting and abstinence from all fleshly
delights; as also by the inward duties of Humiliation and Contrition, and that
under the severe penalty of being cut off in case of presumptuous neglect. The
Solemnity began on the Evening, or foregoing the tenth day, [Levit. 23.32.] but
the tenth day to the evening was chiefly allotted for this Service; on which
there was to be offered to the Lord just as much as on the first day, [see
Numb. 29. from 7. to the 12.] on this day was the Jubilee to be proclaimed, [
Levit. 25.9.] Levit. 23. from verse. 26. to 33.

6ly, The Feast of Tabernacles, which began on the fifteenth day of this month,
and lasted seven days. On this day it seems they made their Booths or
Tabernacles, some upon the roof of their Houses, and some in the Streets and
Courts of Jerusalem, and with boughs of Trees they either made or adorned their
Booths, and carried boughs and branches in their hands (as some think) in token
of joy and rejoicing. There were peculiar Offerings appointed for seven days
together; On the first day was to be an holy Convocation to the Lord, and no
servile work to be done thereon; and on the eighth day, another, whereon just
as much was to be offered as on the new Moon; so that this Feast lasted eight
days, the last whereof was a very solemn Assembly called, Joh. 7.37. the last
and great day of the Feast, and was rather an Appendix to the Feast, then
properly any part thereof, see Numb. 29. from verse. 12. to the end. This Feast
was to be kept first in remembrance of Gods Protection over them for forty
years together, during their traveling through the Wilderness, see Sect. 2. of
Chapter 4. (2ly,) To testify their thankfulness to God for the Fruits of the
Earth, viz. the latter fruits of Vines and Olives which this month they
gathered in, Deuteronomy. 16.13, 14. (3ly,) As a figure of Christ's Incarnation, who
about this time of the year (as learned men conceive) came into the World,
Calvisius, page 193. Lightfoot in his Harm. page 4. see Sect. 10. of Chapter 1. of
my Harmony.
and dwelt in the Tabernacle of our Flesh, Levit. 23. from 33. to the end.

7ly, To these Feasts here mentioned, may be added the Feast of the New Mons,
Besides these, we do not read of any more anniversary Feasts, but only that of
Purim, Ester 9.17. and the Feast of dedication, Joh. 10.22.
which was constantly to be observed; The Sacrifices appointed for this Feast
are set down, Numb. 28. from 11. to 16. Numb. 10.10.

These are the Feasts the Lord appointed, and if any of these Solemnities did
fall on the weekly Sabbath, the Oblations belonging to the Sabbath did not
excuse the Oblations required for the concurrent Festival, but were to be
performed as if it had happened on another day; no voluntary Oblations whither
given by vow, or without, did discharge the Sacrifices due to the solemnity of
any special Festival, see Levit. 23.38.

12ly, Laws concerning the Oil to be prepared for the golden Candlestick, Chapter
24. from 1. to 5.

Lastly, Laws concerning the Shewbread, of which there were 12 Cakes to be
made, each containing two Homers, or two tenth deals of fine Flower, which
were to be set in two rows upon the Table, with Incense put upon them, and to
be changed every Sabbath Day, and after they had stood a week before the Lord,
they were to be eaten by the Priests. The Flower was to be provided at the
common charge of all the twelve Tribes by a perpetual Statute, and brought to
the Priests, but the Cakes were to be made and baked by the Levites, of the
Family of Cohath, as appears from 1 Chronicles. 9.32. The Incense Vice panis, thus
adolebatur tum gratum Domino ac si esset holocaustum. So that the Bread may be
said to be offered with fire, because the Incense laid upon it was so offered,
and reckoned most holy, as if it had been of the offerings made by fire, see
verse. 9.
that was put upon the Cakes was to be burned upon the Altar, when they took
away the Bread, as a Memorial that God would through Christ's Merits and
Intercession remember his people with thoughts of favor and gracious
acceptance, Levit. 24. from verse. 5. to the 10.

SECT. XXXIX.
AT this time the Son of Shelomith, whose Father was an Egyptian, though his
Mother an Israelite, falling into contention with one that was an Israelite by
both Parents, wickedly blasphemed the Name of God, and cursed. Possibly the
Israelite upbraided him with his Idolatrous Father, and denied him to be a true
Israelite, or a Member of the Church of God; whereupon, in his rage, (as it
seems) he spoke scornfully and opprobriously of the God of Israel, and slighted
the Privilege of being one of his people. Hereupon they brought him to Moses,
to know how they should punish such an abominable Blasphemer as He was, and
having secured him for a time, God Commands Moses that he should be brought out
of the Camp; and that the Witnesses should lay their hands upon his head, to
testify that they laid this sin of Blasphemy truly to his Charge, and that he
being really guilty thereof deserved to be punished, and as a Sacrifice to be
offered up to the Justice of God for his sin, that so the whole people might
not be punished for it. And then it was ordered that the whole Congregation
should stone him; which was done accordingly, Levit. 24. from 10 to 15. and
verse. 23. After this, and on this occasion, Moses receives from the Lord
particular Laws concerning the punishment of Blaspheming, and cursing God, viz.
that such Offenders should be stoned to death, verse. 15, 16. Also Laws
concerning the punishing of Murder with Death; and that he that kills a Beast
belonging to another man shall make it good. Also the Law of requital or
retaliation for blemishes, (called Jus talionis) as if a man cause a blemish in
his Neighbor, as He has done, so it shall be done unto Him, viz. an Eye for
an Eye, a Tooth for a Tooth, which was not to be executed by the particular
persons that were hurt or injured, but by the Magistrate upon due Process. And
though in Ceremonials, Strangers had neither privilege by the use (except they
were Proselytes) nor hurt by the omission of them; yet in Capital Crimes, if
they and the Israelites sinned alike, they were to be punished alike. See Exodus
12.49. Levit. 24. from verse. 17. to 23.

SECT. XL.
MOses now receives Laws concerning the Sabbatical Year, viz. that when they
came into the Land of Canaan every seventh year should be a year of rest to the
Land, which they should observe in sign of Homage to the Lord, whose the Land
was: and in this year the Land should neither be tilled nor sowed, [see Exodus
23.11.] neither might they prune their Vineyards, or gather in the Fruits
thereof; and whatsoever Fruits the Land brought forth they were not to look
upon as any ones peculiar Goods, (as in other years) but were to leave them in
common for all, only taking of them what might serve for their own use, and for
food for their Cattle. And Moses tells them, That if they truly observed this
Law, God would command such a blessing on the sixth year, that it should bring
forth Fruit for three years, viz. from the sixth to the ninth; not for three
years complete, but for part of three years; for the increase of the sixth year
served them first for part of the sixth year, to wit, from Barley-Harvest that
year, which was about the Passover till the seventh month, when the Sabbatical
Year began. 2ly, For all the Sabbatical Year. 3ly, For the eighth year till
both the Barley and the Wheat of what they had sown that year was gathered in,
and ready for their use, which was not till the ninth year was well nigh come,
and thus the increase of the sixth year served in good part for three years,
Levit. 25. from 1. to 8. and from 18. to 23.

2ly, Concerning the year of Jubilee, which was to be celebrated every fiftieth
year, and proclaimed by the sound of the Trumpet or Cornet on the tenth day of
the seventh month, viz. the day of Expiation. In this year (1.) They were to
proclaim liberty throughout the Land to their Brethren that had been sold to
them for Servants. (2ly,) All the Land that had been sold returned to the
Owners that had sold it, or to their Heirs; for man might sell his Land for
ever, verse. 23. but only for so many years as were from the sale to the year of
Jubilee, and then the Owners were to enter upon it again; and in the mean time
the Seller, or his Kinsman, had liberty of Redemption, paying for the years to
come according to the sum received at the first Contract. For the Lord
declares, That the Land is His, and they were but Strangers and Sojourners
before Him. (3ly,) During this year there was to be an intermission of sowing,
and reaping, and gathering Grapes, for all was to be left free for every one to
eat what they would; so that for that year no man's Interest was to be more than
another, and therefore they were to eat the increase thereof out of the
Fields, where any one might take what he needed (no man being debarred.) (4ly,)
In buying and selling of Land, they were to have regard to the year of Jubilee,
and the price was to be proportionable, more or less, according to the distance
or nearness of the year of Release, and so they should not oppress one another.
And if they should object how should they live if they did neither sow nor reap
for two years together, to wit, the 49th, which was the seventh Sabbatical
year, nor the 50th, which was the year of Jubilee, what is before said
concerning the seventh year, the like must be conceived concerning this also,
namely, that God would give such a blessing to the sixth year at this time,
that the increase thereof should serve for part of four years. (5ly,) Whereas
they had liberty at all times before the year of Jubilee to redeem their Lands;
yet their houses which they sold in walled Towns they might not redeem unless
they did it within a year, neither did such houses return to the former Owners
in the year of Jubilee; but if they were not redeemed within a year, they were
alienated for ever. The reason might be, because upon these houses (if not
redeemed in so short a time) much cost might be bestowed by him that bought
them, and therefore it was not fit they should be redeemed as Lands were. And
the alienating of these houses in walled Cities did not make such confusion in
the Tribes, as the alienating of their Lands would do, because it cannot be
supposed but that in Cities men of different Tribes did dwell. But as to houses
in Villages the case was different, because the Lands could not well be used
without such Farm-houses.
But houses out of walled Towns were to be accounted as the Fields of the
Country, and had the same privilege, either to be redeemed at any time before
the Jubilee, or to be free at the Jubilee as their Lands were. (6ly,) If the
Levites sold any of their houses in the Cities allotted them, they had liberty
to redeem them at any time, or to receive them back again at the year of
Jubilee; but the Fields of their Suburbs appointed for the keeping of their
Cattle might not be sold at all (see Numb. 35.4, 5.) least wanting that
necessary help, they might be forced to leave their dwellings, to the great
damage of the people, God having dispersed them in several Cities in every
Tribe, that they might watch over the Souls of the people, Levit. 25. from
verse. 23. to 35.

3ly, Concerning Compassion and Kindness to be exercised toward poor Hebrews
fallen into decay, or Strangers become Proselytes; to both which they are
commanded to lend freely, and are forbidden to take usury To strangers they
were allowed to lend upon usury, see Deuteronomy. 23.20. but not to the Israelites if
poor, Exodus 22.25.
or increase, from verse. 35. to 39.

4ly, The poor Hebrews were not to be compelled to serve as bondmen, nor used
basely and hardly, or to be ruled over with rigor. The ordinary time of their
Service was but six years, Exodus 21.2. but in case their Ears were bored they
were to serve for ever. As their serving for ever had an end at the year of
Jubilee, so all other legal Ordinances, which were enjoined as Statutes for
ever, had their period at the Evangelical Jubilee, of which this was a Type.
[ Exodus 21.6.] that is, to the year of Jubilee; then they and their Children
were to be set free, and their Wives also if they were married when they entered
into this bondage, [ Exodus 21.3.] but the Israelites might have bondmen of the
Heathen that were round about them, or Strangers that sojourned among them, and
these (yea though they were Proselytes) were not to be set at liberty at the
year of Jubilee, but to abide in bondage as long as they lived, Levit. 25. from
verse. 39. to 47.

5ly, If any poor Israelite sold himself to a Stranger grown rich dwelling
among them, he might be redeemed at any time before the Jubilee, either by
himself, his Brother or Kinsman, deducting so much money in paying his
Redemption as he has spent time in his Masters Service, and in case that was
not done he was to be set at liberty in the year of Jubilee. And during his
Service, they were not to permit him to be used harshly by his Master, they
looking on and conniving at it. For God declares, That the Children of Israel
were peculiarly his Servants, whom He brought forth out of the Land of Egypt
with an outstretched Arm, Levit. 25. from verse. 47. to the end.

SECT. XLI.
GOd having given these Statutes, and Judgments, and Laws to the people of
Israel by the hand of Moses, and again particularly forbidden Idolatry, and
commanded the keeping of his Sabbaths, together with his whole instituted
Worship, to encourage his people to Obedience, He makes first many excellent
Promises to them if they will observe his Precepts; as particularly, (1.) To
give them Rain in due season, and abundance of increase, so that they shall
have such plentiful Harvests, that before they shall have threshed out their
Corn, the Vintage shall come; and they shall have such great and rich Vintages,
that before they have done gathering in their fruits their Seed-time shall
come. (2ly,) He promises them peace and a secure Habitation, and to remove
ravenous wild Beasts, and Sword away from them. (3ly,) If any Enemies did
assault them, to give them Victories over them, yea signal Victories, insomuch
that five of them shall chase an hundred, and an hundred put ten thousand to
flight; that is, a few Israelites shall chase many of their Enemies. (4ly,) To
bless them with fruitfulness, He intending by real Performance to make good his
Covenant to them, and to give them such great plenty that they shall be forced
to empty their Barns of old Corn, that they may have room to lay up their new.
(5ly, To set his Tabernacle in the midst of them, [ Ezekiel. 37.26. 2 Cor. 6.16.]
that is, cause his Word and Worship to abide among them, and by his gracious
Presence to dwell and walk in the midst of them, and to be their God, and they
shall be his people, having delivered them from the Egyptian Yoke, under which
they were bowed down; so that now they should walk uprightly, being freed from
their Yoke and Bondage. Secondly, He threatens dreadful, and terrible, and
manifold Judgments to them in case they were Disobedient, and to multiply their
Plagues as they multiplied their Sins: particularly, (1.) He threatens to
inflict Corporal Diseases on them, yea terrible Diseases, such as the
Consumption and burning-Ague, that shall weaken and darken their very sight,
and cause in them great sorrow of heart, (2ly,) Depredation by Enemies, and
falling before their Enemies, and falling into the hands of their Enemies, so
that they that hate them shall Reign over them. (3ly,) Terror and causeless
astonishment, so that they shall flee when none pursues. (4ly,) Weakening, and
breaking the pride of their Power. (5ly,) Making the Heaven as Iron, and the
Earth as brass, and rendering their labors in their Husbandry fruitless. (6ly,)
Ravenous Beasts to devour their Children and Cattle. (7ly,) The Sword that
shall avenge their breach of Covenant with Him. (8ly,) Sending Pestilence into
their besieged Cities, so that they shall be as sticks bound up in a Faggot to
be burnt together. (9ly,) Captivity. (10ly,) Breaking their staff of Bread;
that is, depriving them of their Bread, which is the Staff of Life, and
bringing such scarcity upon them, that one Oven shall bake the bread of ten
Families, and the Baker shall deliver them their bread by weight, (see Ezekiel.
4.16.) (11ly,) Such a dreadful Famine, that they should eat the flesh of their
own Children. (12ly,) To cast down their high places whereon they sacrificed to
Idols, and to destroy their Idols, and to cast their Carcasses upon their
broken Idols, and his Soul should abhor them. (13ly,) Desolation of their
Cities and Country, and of all places of public Worship, refusing and
rejecting their Offerings and Oblations. (14ly,) Exile and dispersion among the
Heathen, so that their Land shall be desolate, and their Cities wast, and their
Enemies that shall take possession of some parts of it shall be astonished at
the desolation thereof. And further the Lord threatens, That He would scatter
them among the Nations, and the Sword should there also pursue them, and then
the Land shall enjoy her Sabbaths, and resting from Tillage from which it
should have rested on the Sabbatical years, and years of Jubilee, but could not
be permitted because of their Covetousness. (15ly,) Faintness of heart, so that
the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them, yea they shall flee as from the
Sword, when none pursues, and through weakness or have fall one upon another.
(16ly,) Death in Captivity. They shall perish, and pine away in their
Iniquities, and the Iniquities of their Fathers (whom they imitated in their
Transgressions) in the Land of their Enemies. Thirdly, Notwithstanding all
these Comminations, He promises if they shall repent, and their carnal, impure,
and uncircumcised Hearts be humbled, and shall confess their own Iniquities,
and the Iniquities of their Fathers, and accept of the punishment of their
Sins, as justly deserved on their part, and justly inflicted by God; then He
will remember his Covenant made with their Fathers, and be gracious unto them,
and will remember the Land He gave them for an Inheritance; and though it shall
be left of them for a time, and shall enjoy its rest, yet he will cause it to
be inhabited and tilled by them again; and when they are in the Land of their
Enemies He will not utterly cast them away, nor wholly abhor them, but for
their good will remember the Covenant He made with their Ancestors. Levit. Chapter
26. whole Chapter.

In the last place, Moses receives Laws and Directions concerning persons Some
hold that the end and intention of these personal Vows was only that they
should pay the price of their Redemption to the Priests, which was to be
employed either for their maintenance, Numb. 18.14. or for the reparations of
the Sanctuary, 2 Kings 4.5. Jackson.
and things devoted by Vow unto God, and how these Vows might be redeemed, in
case the person that made them had no mind to stand to them. (1.) A person For
these Vows of persons they were usually made in some time of affliction or
distress, as when married persons had no Child, they did sometimes Vow, That if
the Lord would please to give them a Child, they would give that Child unto the
Lord, which was Hannahs Vow, 1 Samuel 1.11. And these persons vowed, being not of
the Tribe of Levi, were vowed to such Service of the Tabernacle as they were
capable of, as for drawing of water, or hewing of wood, which the Gibeonites
afterward did, Josh. 9.27. Or if they were women, they were devoted to
spinning Cloth to make the Priests Garments, and to provide those things that
were necessary for the repair of the Tabernacle, and other such like services,
which accordingly they did perform, or else paid the price of their Redemption
here prescribed.
vowed was to be the Lords, or else to be redeemed according to the estimation
of the Priest, who was to set the value. This estimation was to vary according
to the difference of Sex and Age. (1.) The Redemption of a Male from 20 years
to 60 was to be 50 Shekels of Silver, according to the Shekels of the
Sanctuary: of a female of the same age but 30. (2.) Of a Male from five years
old to 20, 20 Shekels; of a Female 10 Shekels. (3.) Of a Male from a month old
to five years old five Shekels, of a Female three Shekels. (4.) Of a Male from
60 years old and upwards, fifteen Shekels of a Female ten Shekels. But in case
any person be grown poor (who possibly was of ability when he vowed) so that he
be not able to pay the ^rate set according to this Law, then it was left to the
discretion of the Priest to set a reasonable rate upon him, according to his
ability, Chap. 27. from 1. to 9.

(2.) Concerning Beasts devoted to God: 1. Clean Beasts devoted were to be
given as they were to God, and not changed for others; which if any man
attempted to do, both the Beast that was changed, and that which was put in its
place shall both be consecrated to God. 2. Unclean Beasts devoted might be
redeemed at such a price as the Priest should value them at, the person
redeeming them adding a fifth part to the price and estimation; the Lord laying
this penalty that men might learn to be stable-minded in such voluntary Vows,
Levit. 27. from verse. 9. to 14.

3. Concerning houses This was done as designing to obtain from God safe,
healthful, and prosperous Habitations in them.
devoted, which might be redeemed, paying the value of them set by the Priest,
and adding a fifth part more to the price set upon them; but if they did not
redeem them before the year of Jubilee, the Priests were to have the perpetual
possession of them, verse. 14, 15, 21.

(4.) Concerning Fields This was usually done in expectation of having their
Fields yield the greater increase.
or Lands devoted, (1.) Such as were part of the Votaries Inheritance, the
Priest was to set an estimation or price upon according to the quantity of seed
that would sow the Land so devoted, and that price he that would redeem the
Land was to pay to the Priest, and a fifth part over and above, and he was to
pay according to the rate of fifty Shekels for so much Land as required an Omer
of Barley to sow it, if it was devoted immediately after the year of Jubilee
was past, that is, reckoning from Jubilee to Jubilee a Shekel for a year. If it
required two Omers to sow it, then they were to pay an 100 Shekels, and so
proportionably according to the quantity of seed that would sow it. But if he
devoted it sometime after the Jubilee, then the Priest shall rate it according
to the years that remain unto the Jubilee; and if the former Owner would not
redeem it when the Priest had set a price upon it (so that the Field was by the
Priests order sold to another) then the Owner afterward could not redeem it,
but it was to be for ever alienated from him. And though he that bought it of
the Priest might enjoy it to the year of Jubilee, yet then it was not to return
to the first Owner, but to the Priests (by whose order it was sold) yet so as
the Priests were at the Jubilee to sell it again to some of the same Tribe; and
first of all to the nearest Kinsman of him that vowed it, if he would buy it,
because the Land of Canaan was to be divided among the other Tribes, and not
among the Levites, who were to have no part or Inheritance alloted to them
therein, [see Numb. 18.20.] and the portions of the Tribes were not to be
confounded, Levit. 27. from verse. 16. to 22.

(2.) Such Lands as were purchased by the Votary, might be devoted by Him till
the year of Jubilee, and no longer; for then they were to return to him of whom
they were bought. And if the Devoter would redeem it for that term, the Priest
was to set the value according to the remainder of years to the Jubilee, Talis
ager redimendus erat pro rata annorum restantium usque ad Jubilaeum.
and in such a case he was not to add a fifth part, as in the redemption of his
Inheritance, Levit. 27. from verse. 22. to 26.

(5.) The Firstborn of clean Beasts were not to be devoted to God being His
before, [ Exodus 13.2.] but if any devoted any unclean Though an unclean Beast
might not be offered in Sacrifice to the Lord, yet the price of it might be of
use for the repair of the Sanctuary and maintenance of the Priests.
Beast it might be redeemed according to the Priests estimation, adding a fifth
part over and above to the price set. If it were not redeemed, it was to be
sold, verse. 26, 27.

(6.) Any person or thing absolutely devoted V. 28. Omne quod Domino
consecratur] i. e. Omnia quae Deo voventur eo genere voti quod Cherem hic
appellatur, and Graece dicitur (...) vendi, aut redimi non potuerunt. Nam haec
est peculiaris hujus voti natura ut quod per illud vovetur absolute, perfect,
and irrovocabiliter Deo consecretur. Freidlib. A Devotement was more than a
single Vow, whereof there might be redemption, but a thing absolutely devoted
could not be redeemed. Concerning Men, some were devoted by God, as the
Inhabitants of Jerico, the Amalekites, Deuteronomy. 25.19. Some by man in special
Vows, as the Canaanites, Numb. 21.2, 3. and some were adjudged to death for
sin, Exodus 22.20. and to the latter the Hebrews do apply this Law. Ainsworth.
to God was neither to be sold nor redeemed. Neither any from among men so
devoted were to be redeemed; that is, if any persons abhorred of God, as
Enemies to Himself and his People, were devoted to destruction, as the
Canaanities, [Numb. 21.2.] the Inhabitants of Jerico, [ Joshua 6.17.] the
Amalekites, [1 Samuel 15.3.] then they might not be redeemed, but were
unavoidably to be put to death, verse. 28, 29.

(7.) The Tithe of the Land, both of the Seed and of the Fruit, was holy to the
Lord, and might not be redeemed, except a fifth part were added to the value
thereof. Which was probably so ordered to make sure that the Levites should
lose nothing by the cunning of the Owners that desired to buy or redeem their
Tithe. And as to the tithe of Cattle, he that was to pay it was not to give
what he would himself, but that which in numbering the Cattle (as they came
forth) happened to be the tenth, and was marked with the red Rod of the
Tything-man, that Beast he was not to change, whither it were good or bad. If
he offered to change it, both it and the change thereof were to be holy to the
Lord, and not to be redeemed. Which penalty was inflicted (as it seems) to
prevent fraud in the Owners. These are the Statutes, and Judgments, and Laws
which the Lord made between Him and the Children of Israel in Mount Sinai,
verse. 30. to the end, and gave them unto them by the hand of Moses.

Levit. 27. from v. 30. to the end.

SECT. XLII.
WE are now come to the Book of Numbers. It contains an History of thirty eight
Years and nine Months, viz. from the beginning of the second Month of the
second Year after Isreal's coming out of Egypt, to the beginning of the 11th
Month of the 40th Year after their marching out. This may be evinced by
comparing, Numb. 1.1. with Deuteronomy. 1.3.

The Book was so called The Book of Numbers.
because at the beginning of it, the numbering of the Tribes and Families of
Israel is enjoined, and their several Journies from Egypt to Canaan are
numbered. It contains a Narration, 1. Of Isreal's preparation for their March
from Mount Sinai through the Wilderness to the Land of Canaan. 2ly, Their
Journey it self, with the several stations of it. And in order to prepare them
for their Journey, on the first day of the second month Answering to part of
our April and part of our May.
of the second year, after their departure out of Egypt, God commanded Moses
and Aaron, and the Heads of the Tribes, which were twelve, to take the number
of all the males of the Children of Israel that were fit for War (except the
Levites) viz. from 20 years old to 60, mustering them according to their Hosts
or Tribes, and according to their Kindreds and Families: which was accordingly
performed, and the numbers of each Tribe are expressed in particular, and of
all in general, which amounted to 603550, being just the same number Compare,
Exodus 30.11.12. and Exodus 38.26.
which was taken seven months before when they were sessed for a Contribution
to the building of the Tabernacle. But the Levites God commanded should not be
numbered or reckoned in this account, being not appointed for War, but for the
Service of the Tabernacle, It Is called V. 50. The Tabernacle of the Testimony,
in regard that therein was kept the Testimony of Gods Will, viz. the Law
written in two Tables, and lying in the Ark of the Covenant, Heb. 9.4. and
Exodus 25.21. it is called the Testimony.
viz. some of them to set it up, and take it down, and others of them to remove
and carry it from place to place, as occasion required. And none that were not
of the Tribe of Levi might meddle with it, or help to take it down or set it
up, upon pain of death.

Numb. 1. whole Chapter.

SECT. XLIII.
GOd now prescribes the Order of the Tribes encamp^^g about the Tabernacle with
their Standards, and how the Levites should Encamp nearest to it, and the Order
to be observed by them all in their Marches; and to cut off all matter of
contention, the Lord Himself appoints to every Tribe their several place.

The Order prescribed for their Encamping was according to this Scheme.

The Tabernacle.
Moses, Aaron, and the Priests. Warriors in all 186400. Eastward
Judah, 74600. Issachar, 54400. Zabulon, 57400.
Levites of Cohath. Warriors in all 151450. Southward.
Reuben, 46500. Simeon, 59300. Gad, 45650.
Levites of Gershon. Warriors in all 108100. Westward
Ephraim, 44500. Manasses, 32200. Benjamin, 35400.
Levites of Merari. Warriors in all 157600. Northward
Dan, 62700. Asher, 41500. Naphthali, 53400.

Thus we see in what excellent Order the twelve Tribes were disposed in their
Encamping about the Tabernacle. The Priests and Levites were to pitch their
Tents round about it. But the Tribes at some distance from it, possibly at the
distance of two thousand Cubits, which is an English mile; for such a space we
find was between the Ark and the people when they passed over Jordan, Josh.
3.4. The Lord commanded that three Tribes should quarter together under one
Standard, which the Chief of the Three carried, and so the whole Host consisted
of four great Brigades or Battations. The Tribe of Judah (out of which the
Messiah was to spring) has the Pre-eminence, and is to March foremost as
Captain of the rest, and so Judah has the dignity of the Firstborn, which was
taken from Reuben, neither can Reuben withstand it, because God has so ordered
it. And thus we may conceive what a glorious sight it was to behold the Tribes
thus orderly disposed in their several places, and therefore it is no wonder
that Balaam was stricken with admiration to behold it, Numb. 24.5, 6. and that
He cried out, How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel,
etc.

Numb. 2. whole Chapter.

SECT. XLIV.
IN the next place we have set down the Families and Kindreds of Aaron and
Moses. Aaron is mentioned in the first place, because his Sons as being Priests
had the Pre-eminence of Mose's Posterity, who were but ordinarily Levites. And
though there be no particular mention of Mose's Sons, yet they are included
among the Cohathites, of which Family Moses was, verse. 27. The Lord orders
Moses to give the Levites to Aaron and his Sons, to assist them in their
Ministration at the Sanctuary, and in that Service and Worship which God had
given in charge to Aaron and the whole Congregation to perform, and they were
to have the Sacred things of the Tabernacle under their Custody and Charge,
which the Children of Israel must have been charged with, had not the Levites
been separated to take that Charge upon them in their behalf. But though the
Levites were given to the Priests to be helpful, and subservient to them in
things that were fit for them to do, yet in those things that peculiarly
belonged to the Priests Office V. 10. The Levite in respect of the Priests
peculiar Office was a stranger.
they might not intermeddle upon pain of death. The Lord further declares, That
He had taken the Levites to be His in stead of all the firstborn Males of the
Children of Israel, That is, in stead of all the firstborn Males that were now
at present among them. For all the firstborn Males after this both of Man and
Beast were to be redeemed or given to the Priests, Numb. 18.15.
[ Exodus 13.2.] and therefore orders Moses to number all the Male-Levites from
one Month old and upwards; which was done according to their Families. For the
Sons of Levi being Gershon, Cohath and Merari, of them the three Families of
the Levites descended. The whole number of the Male-Levites thus reckoned, was
found to be 22300. So much those three sums make, mentioned Numb. 3. v. 22, 28,
34.
But taking out their firstborn (namely, such firstborn as were born to them
from the time of their coming out of Egypt, when God did first Challenge the
Firstborn to be His, in remembrance of his slaying all the Firstborn among
the Egyptians, see Exodus 13.2.) which were upon that account the Lords as they
were the Firstborn, and were not therefore to be reckoned among those that
were to be given to Him in stead of the Firstborn of the other Tribes; I say,
taking out these Firstborn, which were 300, then the number of the Levites
given to the Lord amounted only to 22000. The number of the Male-Levites
reckoned from 30 years old to 50 was but 8580. Numb. 4.48.
All which were assumed to the Service of God in lieu of the Firstborn of all
the rest of the Children of Israel. V. 41. It Is said the Cattle of the Levites
shall be taken in stead of all the Firstlings of the Cattle of the Children of
Israel, that is,] As the Levites were taken for the firstborn of the
Israelites, so the Levites Cattle were taken in exchange for the firstborn of
the Israelites Cattle.
And because the number of the First-born-Males of all the Children of Israel,
in the twelve Tribes, exceeded this number of the Male-Levites 273, see Numb.
Chapter 3. verse. 43. therefore was there laid upon them for every of those
supernumerary Heads, five Shekels a man by way of Redemption, (which was the
price they afterward paid for the Redemption of the Firstborn, Numb. 18.15,
16.) and it was given to Aaron and his Sons. And it is like that it was either
decided by lot who among them should pay this Redemption-Money, and who not, or
it was paid in common by them all.

The Levites being thus numbered, and their Places and Order how they should
pitch about the Tabernacle being prescribed, now the time when they should
enter upon their Office is appointed. At the age of 25 years they were to enter
as Novices and Subservients in some inferior Offices and Ministrations of the
Tabernacle, [ Chapter 8.24.] but they were not to enter into a full execution of
their Office till the age of 30, and then they were to continue in it till 50:
and though after 50 they were to be exempted from the harder and most laborious
Services of the Tabernacle (such as removing and carrying the holy things
thereof); yet still they were to be assistant to their Brethren as Overseers,
to see that the Work was done; and besides they were still to be employed in
teaching and instructing the people; And in their several Cities (as being well
experienced in the judicial Laws) they Were to judge of matters brought before
them. See Numb. 8. from 23. to the end.

The time of their entering upon their Office being thus ordered, in the next
place to prevent confusion and ambition among them, each Family of the Levites
has its particular Service V: 3. All that enter into the Host,] i. e. qui
ingrediuntur in coetum vel turmam mimistrantium in Tabernaculo, nempe ut
operentur in eo.
appointed.

1. The Charge of the Sons of Gershon were, (1.) The ten Curtains of fine
twined Linen, blue, purple and scarlet. (2ly,) The eleven Curtains of Goats
hair that were laid over them. (3ly,) The covering of Ram-skins died red.
(4ly,) The covering of Badgers-skins which lay over all, and the Hangings for
the door of the Tabernacle, and for the Courts, Chapter 3.25, 26. and Chapter 4.25, 26.

2. The Charge of the Sons of Kohath was the Ark V. 6. Shall put in the staves
thereof,] viz. into the Cases or Coverings prepared for them, that so the
Levites might not touch so much as the Staves of the Ark uncovered. For the
Staves were not to be taken out of the Rings of the Ark, Exodus 25 15.
and the Table of Shewbread, V. 7. And the continual bread shall be thereon,]
intellige, cum ad quietem terrae promissionis pervenerint. In deserto enim
sicut non fiebant Sacrificia in Festis aut Sabbatis, ut clare dicitur Acts
7.42. and Amos 5.25. ita nec offerebantur panes, quod erat genus quoddam
Oblationis aut Sacrificij, nec thus, aut vinum, quod adjungi solebat: illa enim
omnia deerant in deserto, ut conqueruntur, Numb. 21.5. Nam multis annis
manserunt in locis prorsus inhabitatis ab omnibus gentibus seperati. Jansen.
and the golded Candlestick, and the Altars, and all the most holy things. When
the Tabernacle was to be taken down and removed, the Priests only were to do
it, and wrap up the most holy things in coverings of blue or scarlet, and to
put coverings of Badgers-skins over them (which are called the Clothes of
Service, Exodus 31.10.) and then to deliver them to the Kohathites to bear them
on their Shoulders, The Ark indeed was sometimes carried by the Priests, see
Deuteronomy. 31.9. so when they passed over Jordan, Josh. 3.6. and compassed the Walls
of Jerico, Josh. 6.6. but ordinarily this Service was performed by the Levites,
see Deuteronomy. 31.25. especially till the number of the Priests was more increased.
who might not otherwise touch them upon pain of death. So that though their
Office was most honorable, because they had the charge of the most holy
things, yet it was also perilous and burdensome, Chapter 3.31. Chapter 4.15.

3. The Charge of the Sons of Merari were the boards of the Tabernacle, the
Bars, the Pillars, the Scockets, Pins, Cords and Vessels thereof, and the
Pillars of the Court, etc. Chapter 3.36, 37. and Chapter 4.31, 32.

Eleazar, the eldest Son of Aaron, was to be Chief over the chief of the
Levites, viz. the Kohathites that had the Charge of the most holy things, and
his Brother Ithamar over the Gershonites and Merarites. To the inspection and
care also of Eleazar was committed the Oil for the Lights, the sweet Incense,
the daily Meat Offering, and the anointing Oil, and the oversight of the
Tabernacle, and to appoint the Kohathites, every one to his several burden. And
Moses and Aaron are charged that all the holy things of the Sanctuary should be
so covered that the Kohathites might neither see nor touch what they should
not, which if they should do, they would be in danger of being cut off, and to
die for it. Uzzah, though a Levite, for such a transgression was smitten dead,
2 Samuel 6.6, 7.


For the holy fire, that was always to be kept alive upon the Altar; it is like,
when the Tabernacle was removed, 'twas put into some Pot or Vessel, and so
preserved still with supply of wood.

Numb. Chapter 3. whole Chapter.

Numb. Chapter 4. whole Chapter.

SECT. XLV.
THe Levites thus set apart, were with all due Solemnity consecrated to God and
his Service. But lest they should think themselves equal to the Priests, they
are neither Consecrated at the same time, nor with the same Ceremonies. The
Consecration of the Priests took up seven days, [see Exodus 29.35. Levit. 8.33.]
but this of the Levites was done in one day. The manner of it was thus, 1.
Moses was to take the Levites, and to cleanse them, which was to be done by
sprinkling the water of purifying upon them, (which was made with the ashes of
the red Heifer, Therefore directions for making this water were given before
this time, though not mentioned by Moses till the 19. Chapter of this Book.
mentioned, Chapter 19.) and then to shave off all their hair, which was another
sign of Purification, [see Levit. 14.8, 9. and Numb. 6.9.] and to wash their
Clothes. By which Rites was signified what great holiness and purity God
requires in those that are to be employed in Sacred Functions. 2ly, The whole
Congregation being there assembled, and the Levites being brought before the
Lord, some of the chief Non omnes, sed omnium nomine Principes; vel sort
primo-geniti, in quorum loco erant Levitae.
of the Children of Israel, in the Name of the rest, were to put their hands
Which Rite was observed in the Ordination of Officers both in the Old T. and
the N. Numb. 27.23. Act. 6.6. and 13.3. and in Benedictions, Genesis 48.17.
upon them, thereby testifying that they did now freely offer them to the Lord,
to be wholly set apart for his Service. 3ly, Then Aaron was to present them V.
11. And Aaron shall wave the Levites before the Lord] Hac elevatione
significabatur eos totius orbis Domino offerri a populo in munus, ut scil. loco
totius populi Deo ministrarent. Vide Jansen. Jubentur Levitae se convertere ad
omnes mundi plagas ut indicarent se illi Deo servituros, qui in omnibus mundi
plagis erat Potens. Freidlib.
to the Lord, which possibly he did by making them turn themselves toward the
four Quarters of Heaven, thereby signifying they were offered up to the Service
of the great God of the whole World, see Exodus 29.24. (4ly, Aaron and his Sons
were to offer two young Bullocks, one for a Burnt-Offering, the other for a
Sin-Offering, to make atonement for them. The Levites themselves were also to
lay their hands on the heads of the Bullocks, by that Rite, testifying their
Faith in the M^ssias, prefigured by those Sacrifices, by whom they expected
forgiveness of sins, and Sanctification for the work of their Ministry. 5ly,
Then Moses was to present the Levites unto Aaron, giving them unto him, and his
Sons the Priests, for perpetual Assistants and under-Ministers. These things
being performed, the Levites were to go into the Court of the Priests, (for
into the Tabernacle it self they might not enter) and to do there the Service
V. 19. And do the service of the Children of Israel,] that is, the Service
which else they themselves must have performed by their firstborn, if God had
not taken the Levites in their stead.
belonging to them; and to be subservient to the Priests, when they offered
those Sacrifices, whereby atonement was made for the sins of the people: that
so all things being done according to the appointment of God, he might be
pleased with the people, and send no Plague See an example of such a Plague, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. in Uzziah.
upon them, which otherwise he would do, if they themselves intermeddled with
these holy Services. All these things were done according as here enjoined. And
so the Levites entered upon the actual execution of their Office.

Numb. Chapter 8. from verse. 5. For the four first Verses of this Chapter. See the
Paraphrase on Exodus 25. v. 37, etc.
to 23.

SECT. XLVI.
MOses having now fully finished the erection of the Tabernacle, and ordered
all things thereunto belonging, and having since numbered the people, and placed
the Tribes and the Levites in their several stations about the Tabernacle; and
having Consecrated the Levites, and appointed them to their particular Charges,
the Princes before mentioned ( Chapter 1.4.) that were set over the numbering of the
people brought their Offerings for the carriage of the Tabernacle in their
Marches and Removes; viz. Every two of these Princes offered one covered
Wagon, six in all; and every Prince an Ox, twelve in all. Moses hereupon gave
two Wagons and four Oxen to the Gershonites for their Service, and four
Wagons and eight Oxen to the Merarites for theirs, because under their Custody
and Charge were the boards and heavy things of the Tabernacle [see Chap. 3.36.]
and therefore twice as many Oxen and Wagons were allotted to them. To the
Cohathites, because the Charge of the most holy things belonged unto them
(which they were to carry upon their Shoulders) they had no Wagons assigned
them. These things being done, the twelve Princes, the Heads of their Tribes
brought their great and splendid Offerings for the more solemn and magnificent
dedicating of the Altar. Indeed Moses first offered Burnt-Offerings and other
Sacrifices thereon seven days together, for the Consecrating of the Priests
[Levit. 8.] which was in the first month of the second year, and the next day
after Aaron and his Sons offered Sacrifices thereon for himself and the people
in general, see Levit. 9.7. But now in the second month of the second year,
when the Tribes were all placed about the Tabernacle, the Princes brought their
Offerings twelve days together. And because these were the first Offerings that
were offered for any particular Tribes, they were said to be offered for the
dedicating of the Altar; that is, for the more solemn dedicating of it to those
holy Uses and Services to which it was at first ordained; and they were said to
be offered not on the day it was first, but on the day it was most fully and
completely anointed and dedicated. These Offerings being to be offered not
altogether, but on twelve days successively, upon the first day Nahshon (from
whom David, and according to the Flesh our Lord and Savior came) made his
Offering for the Tribe of Judah, which was one Silver Charger of an 130 Shekels
for the use of the Altar of Burnt-Offering, one Silver Bowl of 70 Shekels, both
full of fine Flower mingled with Oil for a Meat Offering, one Spoon of ten
Shekels of Gold full of Incense, one young Bullock, one Ram, one Lamb of the
first year for a Burnt-Offering; one Kid of the Goats for a Sin-Offering, and
for a Sacrifice of Peace Offerings two Oxen, Of these the Princes with the
Priests did eat, and so kept a Feast of joy before the Lord for his great mercy
to them.
five Rams, five He-Goats, five Lambs of the first year. This was the noble
Offering of Nahshon, and every one of the Princes of the other Tribes, each one
on his day in his order offered the like Offering both for kind and quantity.
After all these things were thus done, Moses went into the Tabernacle to
receive further Directions from the Lord; and the Lord spoke unto him from the
Mercy-Seat according as he had promised See Exodus 25.21.
to do.

Numb. Chapter 7. whole Chapter.

SECT. XLVII.
CErtain Laws are now given them which did concern the whole Congregation.
First, Touching removing those that were defiled by Leprosy, or had a running
Issue, or had touched a dead body, out of the Camp, till they were cleansed and
purified according to the Order prescribed in that case. For seeing the divine
Presence was among them, and they encamped round about the Tabernacle, it was
fit they should keep themselves from all uncleanness, Numb. Chapter 5. from 1. to 5.

2ly, When any man or woman shall commit any sin whereunto by reason of humane
frailty they are subject to fall, to wit, in regard of any wrong done to their
Neighbor, (which is a sin highly displeasing to God) then they shall confess
their fault and make satisfaction, not only by restoring the whole Principal,
but by adding a fifth part Exodus 22. The Thief that had stolen was appointed to
restore double what he had taken away, yea in some cases fourfold and
five-fold. But those Laws were enacted for such against whom the Crime was
proved by witnesses in a legal way. But this is for those that did voluntarily
confess the wrong they had done, in which case the Lord imposes a lighter
penalty.
thereunto. But if the party were dead to whom the wrong was done, then the
recompense must be made to his Heir or next Kinsman, This the H^brews
understand of trespasses done to strangers. For they say there is no man in
Israel without an Heir or Kinsman, either Child or Brother, or other of his
blood.
and if there be no such Kinsman to be found, then must the recompense be made
to the Lord; that is, to the Priests whom the Lord had appointed to be his
Receivers. And it is no otherwise ordered in this than in other things.

For God had appointed the Priests to receive in his Name whatsoever was due
unto Him; all the Offerings, Heave-Offerings, and whatsoever was not burnt for
his Service upon the Altar, the Priest was to have, with the First Fruits, and
things vowed. So that whatsoever any man gave the Priest as due to God, the
Priest was to have for himself, for to him God See Ez^k. 44.30.
has given it. Numb. Chapter 5. from 5. to 11.

3ly, Concerning the Husbands jealousy, and suspicion of his Wives honesty,
and the means how to clear her. There is a strict Order Why there was not such
a Law appointed for the trial of the Husband if his Wife were jealous of him,
these reasons are given; 1. Because women, by reason of their subjection to
their husbands, were not fit to have this liberty to call their Husbands to
such a Trial. 2ly, Because the Adultery of the Wife is more mischievous to that
particular Family than the Adultery of the Husband, in regard that a
Bastard-issue is brought in thereby to inherit the Estate. Yet we find that the
woman could divorce her Husband, Mark 10.12.
appointed by the Lord for her Trial in this case. And possibly it was
prescribed the rather at this time both to prevent the defiling of the Camp by
such Uncleanness, as also to keep Wives in awe with the fear of this Trial, and
to prevent the inconveniences that might arise by the jealousy of men, where
their Tents and dwellings were so near together. And possibly God allowed them
to bring their Wives whom they suspected to this Trial, partly for the hardness
of their hearts, and partly least their Wives should be subject to a greater
mischief for want of such a Trial, to wit, of being cast off or killed, or
otherwise injured by their Husbands in the rage of their jealousy. The jealous
Husband was therefore to bring his suspected Wife to the Priest, and the Priest
was to bring her to the door of the Tabernacle, that so perceiving her self, as
it were, before Gods Tribunal, the very fear of Gods all-seeing Eye, and the
shame that would fall upon her in the eyes of all the Congregation now gazing
upon her, might deter her from submitting her self to this Trial if she knew
her self guilty. Then the Priest was to offer an Offering for her, viz. the
tenth part of an Ephab of Barleymeal. The intent of this Offering seems to be
that it might be a testimony that she did willingly offer her self to be tried
by the Lord, to whom she presented this Offering by way of atonement for her
other sins, desiring thereby mercy from the Lord for them, for the sake of the
Messiah promised; but as to this particular, she left her self to him to be
dealt with according to her deserts. And whereas other Meat Offerings were of
fine Wheat Flour, and to be accompanied with Oil and Frankincense, (signs of
joy and gladness of heart) this was to be of Barley-meal without either of
them, to express the sad and doleful condition of this suspected woman; and it
being an Offering of Jealousy, occasioning iniquity to be remembered, therefore
nothing implying sweetness or joy was to be joined to this Offering; And the
Priest was to take water out of the holy Laver, and to put it into an earthen
Vessel, and to mix with it the dust of the floor of the Tabernacle. The drink
was in this manner to be made distastful, to put her in mind of the bitter
Curse that would follow upon her drinking of it, if she were guilty. No doubt
all these things were thus to be done, to strike a greater terror into her, and
that if she were guilty, she might not dare to put her self upon this severe
Trial. Then the Priest was to set her before the Lord, and to uncover her head,
not only thereby to expose her to the view of all the people, but to make other
women also carful not to give their Husbands occasion of jealousy; as also to
signify to her that it was in vain for her any longer to hide her sin if she
were guilty, for God would now lay open, and discover what she was to the eyes
of all Israel. Then the Priest putting the Offering of Jealousy into her
hands, and taking the bitter water that causes the Curse into his own; He was
to adjure her upon her Oath to declare, Whither she were innocent or no? saying
to her after this manner, If thou be innocent, thou shall be free from the
bitter effects of this water thou art to drink; but if thou be guilty, the Lord
make thee a Curse and an Oath among thy people; that is, make thee a fearful
example of his wrath and indignation, by causing thy Thigh to rot, and thy
Belly to swell, that in time to come when any of the people are so ill disposed
as to use a fearful Curse and Imprecation upon any persons whatsoever, they may
make mention of thee, desiring that such a Plague may fall upon them as fell
upon thee, [see Jerem. 29.22.] The Priest having thus spoken, the Woman was to
answer hereunto Amen, Amen; that is, be it unto me as thou denouncest. Then the
Priest was to write these Curses in a scroll of Parchment, and sprinkling some
of the bitter water upon the writing, He was to scrape it off into the water
which the woman was to drink, thereby to assure Her that the Curse threatened
would certainly fall upon her, if she were guilty; and as sure as she saw the
writing of the Scroll scraped off into the Cup, so sure the water and the Curse
with it would pass into her bowels. Then the Priest was to take the Offering of
Jealousy out of her hand, and to wave it before the Lord, and then to offer it
upon the Altar, having first taken an handful out of it to burn Pars Sacrificii
farinacei fuit Deo cremata, reliquo cedente in usum sacerdotis. Janson.
upon the Altar as a Memorial to the Lord to be gracious to Her, if she were
innocent, These things being done, the Priest was to give the bitter water to
the woman to drink, and she was to drink it accordingly. And if she were
innocent the water did no way hurt her, nay, if she had been barren before it
made her fruitful, God thereby recompencing her for the shame she had undergone
by being suspected, and thus severely tried. But if she were guilty the
dreadful punishment before threatened certainly fell upon her, and her Husband
was held guiltless and blameless in putting Her upon this Trial; though it is
probable that Husbands were not allowed to bring their Wives to this dreadful
Trial, unless they could show that their Wives had given them some just cause
of Jealousy.

Numb. Chapter 5. from 11. to the end.

SECT. XLVIII.
THe Lord having thus ordered the things that concerned his people in the
general, He now gives directions concerning such persons who desired by a
particular Vow to separate themselves from the ordinary course of men, that
they might more freely and wholly dedicate themselves unto him, and that in a
more strict and pure course of living than other men used. Such persons as
these were hereupon called Nazarites, that is, separate from others, as being
bound to a peculiar Profession and course of life. And the Lord was pleased to
allow of them, first, That their example might allure others to a strict course
of holiness, these being indeed the Mirrors of their times, and admired among
the people, Lam. 4.7. Her Nazarites were purer then Snow, they were whiter then
Milk. 2ly, That they might be Types and Shadows of Christ, who was indeed the
true Nazarite, even holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, Heb.
7.26. and was therefore by the Providence of God (though upon another ground,
namely, his dwelling in Nazareth) called a Nazaren or a Nazarite, Matthew. 2.23.
Concerning the Nazarites these things are observable,

1. The persons that might separate themselves by this Vow were either men or
women.

2. Being to give themselves wholly to the Service of God during the time of
their separation, they were to vow to abstain from Wine, strong Drink, Vinegar,
or any Liquor of Grapes or Raisins dried or moist, or any thing that came of
the Vine. And this and other Laws that concerned these Nazarites they were to
observe only during the days of their separation, as is expressed, verse. 4, 5,
6. There were indeed some Nazarites perpetual during their whole life, such as
were Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.28. and Sampson, Judge. 13.7. and John Baptist, Luke 1.15.
But these Nazarites concerning whom these Laws here are given, were such as did
of their own accord take on them the vow of a Nazarite for some certain time,
See Acts 18.18. and 21.24.
some for a longer, and some for a shorter, as they pleased themselves.

3. The man during the time of his separation was to keep his hair uncut, that
it might be a Memorial to him of his separation and consecration to God. For
the chief thing that God required of these Nazarites was inward purity and
holiness, these outward Ceremonies being only signs and remembrances to them of
it. This Law of not cutting the hair is to be understood only of men, and not
of women-Nazarites, because their hair was always kept uncut, and so could not
be to them a Memorial of their Consecration. But for men-Nazarites this was
enjoined, 1. As a sign of their cleanness from pollutions; for when they were
casually defiled, verse. 9. and were cleansed from their impurity, their hair
was to be shaven off, and therefore keeping their hair uncut, was a sign that
they had kept themselves from being defiled. 2ly, That it might be a sign of
their special subjection to God, as the woman's long hair was a sign of her
subjection to her Husband, 1 Cor. 11.5, 10. 3ly, That the neglect of trimming
their hair might be a sign of their mortification to the World, and the neglect
of the outward adorning of their Bodies might be a sign how wholly they were
intent upon the Service of God, and the adorning of their Souls.

4. He was to keep himself from being defiled with any dead body; He was not to
touch, mourn for, or bury his own Father or Mother, Brother or Sister when they
died, whereby we may see that as much exactness and freeness from legal
impurity was required of the Nazarite as of the High Priest, Levit. 21.11.
Hereby he was taught what spiritual purity and holiness God required of him,
and how he ought to moderate his sorrow and natural affections for his nearest
Relations, who had a sign of his Consecration to God upon his head, (viz. his
long hair,) which ought to be a Memorial to him that He ought to endeavor
after a great and singular degree of holiness. And therefore if any one
casually died by him whereby he became legally defiled, his hair was to be cut
off that new hair might come in the room of it, whereby was intimated how
strict God is in exacting purity in those that Consecrate themselves to his
Service. And this was to be done on the seventh day, for that day was the usual
day of cleansing for those that were defiled by the dead, as we may see Numb.
19.11, 12. And though it was no fault in the Nazarite that a man died suddenly
by him, yet because He was in a condition disagreeable to the Law that enjoined
Him not to come nigh unto any dead body, therefore He was on the eighth day to
bring an Offering for his cleansing, viz. two Turtles or two young Pigeons, the
one for a Sin-Offering, and the other for a Burnt-Offering, and a Lamb of the
first year for a Trepass Offering, and the Priest was by these Sacrifices to
make atonement for him. This being done, He was to Consecrate his head again;
that is, renew his Vow of Nazariteship, and to begin again to observe the very
same number of days of separation which before his defiling He had vowed to
God; and the former days He had observed before his Nazariteship was defiled,
were to be reckoned as lost, and not to come into the account of the days that
were vowed. 4ly, When the Nazarite has fulfilled his Vow, and is to be
discharged thereof, this Law must be observed; He must be brought to the door
of the Tabernacle and there must offer. 1. A Lamb of the first year for a
Burnt-Offering. 2ly, An Ewe-Lamb of the first year for a Sin-Offering. 3ly. A
Ram without blemish for a Peace Offering. 4ly, A Basket of unleavened-bread,
Cakes of fine flower mingled with Oil, and Wafers of unleavened-bread mingled
with Oil, and the ordinary Meat Offerings and Drink Offerings appointed for
appendences to all Sacrifices, see Numb. 28. 2ly, He shall shave off his hair,
This Law ['tis conceived] the Apostle Paul was persuaded to observe to decline
the offense of the Jews, Acts 21.24.
[which was the sign of his separation] and put it into the fire under the
Sacrifice of Peace Offering, that is, not the fire on the Altar of
Burnt-Offerings, [for there only the fat of the Peace Offering was to be burnt]
but the fire under the Chaldrons or Pots wherein the Peace Offerings were
boiled. And whereas the right shoulder of all the Peace Offerings was due to
the Priest raw [see Levit. 7.32.] here he was to have the left shoulder also
when sodden, and this was his peculiar portion of the Nazarites Ram, which in
other Oblations was not his due. This left shoulder therefore the Priest was to
take with one unleavened Cake, and one unleavened Wafer, and putting them upon
the hands of the Nazarite, and putting his own hands under the Nazarites hands,
He was to wave them before the Lord, and so they became his portion with the
wave-breast and heave-shoulder; the rest of the flesh and bread was to be eaten
by the Owners that presented them. These are the Offerings which a Nazarite,
who is to be discharged of his Vow, is to offer, besides what of his own free
will he shall vow to give out of the estate which he has gotten, and wherewith
God has blessed him. The former Offerings were prescribed by God, and so
necessarily to be offered both by Poor and Rich; but if the Nazarite being rich
vowed any more Offerings, He must perform his vow accordingly. These things
being performed, the Nazarite was discharged of his vow, and had liberty to
drink Wine again, if he thought good.

Numb. 6. from 1. to 2^.

SECT. XLIX.
THe Lord now prescribes to Aaron and his Sons how they should solemnly bless
the people, viz. lifting up their hands, See Levit. 9.22.
they should say unto them, The Lord bless you and keep you, the Lord make his
face shine upon you, and be gracious unto you; The Lord lift up his Countenance
upon you, and give you peace. Thus they were to put Gods Name upon the people;
that is, to bless them in his Name, and the Lord promises thereupon to bless
them.

Numb. 6. from 22. to the end.

SECT. L.
God now Commands two At first there were but two Trumpets appointed, viz. for
Aaron's two Sons. But the number of Priests increasing in Solomon's time, there
were an 120 Priests sounding with Trumpets, 2 Chronicles. 5.12. These Trumpets were
signs of the ministry of the Word, and the Office of Teaching discharged by men
called and fitted.
silver Trumpets to be made for Aaron's two Sons, Eleazar and Ithamar. The
Priests are appointed to be Trumpeters, that the people might entertain the
sound thereof, as given by the direction of God, and accordingly conform
themselves thereunto, see Numb. 31.6. 2 Chronicles. 13.12.
The use of these Trumpets was, (1.) To assemble the Congregation before the
Lord in his Sanctuary. (2ly,) To give warning and direction for their marching
toward the Land of Canaan. (3ly,) To encourage the people when they went forth
to War. (4ly,) To excite their joy and rejoicing at their solemn Festivals.
They were to blow with both Trumpets when all the people were to assemble at
the door of the Tabernacle, and to blow but with one Trumpet when only the
Princes and Heads of the people were to come together unto Moses. And when the
Camps were to remove they were to blow an Alarm or Taratantara, V. 7. Clangetis
and non Tarantarizabitis] Hic distinguit inter Clangere and Taratantizare.
Freidlib.
and so the Camps that lay Eastward or Southward, Northward or Westward, were
to move according to the several soundings of the Trumpet. But when the
Congregation was to be gathered together they were not to sound in that manner.
And only the Priests were to blow with Trumpets as long as the Priesthood and
this Dispensation was to last. And wheh the people were to go out to War, the
Priests were to sound an Alarm, which was to be a sign to them that the Lord
remembered their danger, and would help them against their Enemies. They were
also to blow with these Trumpets on their solemn Festivals V. 10. In their
solemn days] wherein honest cheerfulness was not only allowed, but enjoined,
Deuteronomy. 16.14.
and days of rejoicing, and on their new Moons over their Burnt-Offerings and
Peace Offerings, and this was to be to them for a Memorial before the Lord;
that is, as a sign and token that if they performed this Service in faith of
Gods mercy, and with joyful and glad hearts, the Lord would remember them and
would hear their prayers, and accept their Sacrifices.

Numb. 10. from 1. to 11.

SECT. LI.
ABout this time Jethro Prince of Midian (a Country lying south from hence
toward the Red Sea) Father-in-law to Moses, repaired hither to give his
Son-in-law a visit, and brought with him Zipporah his Daughter Mose's wife, and
his two Sons Gershom and Eliezer, which were left with him when Moses went into
Egypt. See Sect. 60. of Chap. 3. Moses hearing of his coming, went out to meet
him, and did Obeisance to him, and kissed him, and bringing him into his Tent,
He acquainted him with all the wonderful things the Lord had done for them.
Jethro blesses God, and Congratulates to Moses and the whole people of Israel
their Deliverance out of the Egyptian Bondage; he openly declares both by word
and deed his Faith and Devotion toward the God of Israel; Now (says he) I am
assured the God of Israel is greater then all Gods, for in the thing wherein
the Egyptians were proud and haughty, he was above them. And Jethro after the
manner of the Patriarchs Forsan obtulit non immediate sed per sacerdotes. Sic
David sacrificasse fertur, 2 Samuel 24.25. and Solomon, 1 Reg. 8.63. nempe
mediantibus sacerdotibus.
offered Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices of Thanksgiving Ex quibus maxima pars
cedebat offerentibus.
unto God; and Aaron and the Elders of Israel came to pay their Respects to
him, and to Feast with him upon those Sacrifices before the Lord; See Deuteronomy.
12.6, 7. 1 Chronicles. 29.21,
that is, in the fear of the Lord, and having the Lord in their eyes, and being
sensible of the Majesty of God appearing in the Cloudy Pillar. On the morrow
after Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood by him from Morning
to Evening. Jethro observing this, and how the people came to Moses to inquire
of the Lord for them, both concerning religious and civil Affairs, he fairly
Chides him for his wearing out himself with continual employment, and the
people with continual attendance, and therefore advises him to take a better
Course, which he doubted not but by the blessing of God would be much for his
own and the peoples ease. Be thou (says he) for the people Godward; that is,
in matters of greater difficulty, and importance (where there is need of one to
inquire of God) there do thou still employ thy self in seeking to the Lord for
them, and in returning answers from the Lord to them, and show them the way
wherein they should walk, and the work that they should do. But as to other
matters of lesser moment, and easily to be decided, choose out from among the
people able men, men fearing God, and men of truth and fidelity, and hating
Covetousness, and make some of them Rulers over Thousands, others over
Hundreds, others over Fifties, and others over Tens, and let them Judge the
people at all seasons in matters of less difficulty; but matters of greater
moment let them bring to thee. And so these Rulers will bear some part of the
burden with thee, and all will not lie on thy shoulders as now it does, and the
people hereby will have their matters sooner determined and dispatched, without
so long attendance, and so will go to their several Tents and Dwellings in
peace, having their minds quieted. Moses consulting with the people about this
Proposal, they liked it very well, [see Deuteronomy. 1.13, 14.] and so he immediately
put it in practice, substituting such Governors under himself; so that every
Tribune appointed to Judge over a thousand Families, had under him ten
Centurions or Judges that were over an hundred Families a piece; and every
Centurion had under him two Rulers that were over fifty Families a piece; and
every Ruler over fifty had under him five Rulers, which were set over ten
Parallel to this was the original Institution of our English Tything-men, a
word still in use in the West-Country, being an Officer to oversee ten men with
their Families. This Tythingman is the same Officer which in other places is
called the Petty Constable.
Families a piece. And so it is like the inferour Officers gave account of
those under their Care to their immediate Superiors.

Deuteronomy. 1. from 9. to 19.

Exodus 18. whole Chapter.

SECT. LII.
ON the 20th day of the second month of the second year, after their coming out
of Egypt, the Cloudy-Pillar arising from off the Tabernacle, and going in the
forefront of their Camp, the Israelites removed from Sinai (where they had
staid in that their 12th station a whole year They came into the Wilderness of
Sinai in the beginning of the third month of the first year, see Deuteronomy. 1.6, 7,
8. and Sect. 13. of Chapter 4th.
within 13 days, see Exodus 19.1.) toward the Wilderness of Paran. In this
Wilderness they journied a long time, and in several places of it pitched their
Tents.
They marched in such order and array as God had appointed by the direction of
Moses. Their Camp was divided into four Squadrons, every Squadron consisting of
three Tribes. In the Van marched the Tribe of Judah with its associate Tribes,
Issachar and Zebulon under their respective Commanders of Thousands, and
Hundreds with a Standard having the figure of a Lion. Immediately after them,
marched the Gershonites and Merarites, who had the charge of the outward
Tabernacle. They marched foremost of all the Levites, that so they might be
ready when the Army stayed to set up the Tabernacle against the Ark and the
other holy things came, that were carried by the Kohathites. The Tribe of
Reuben led the second Squadron (in like manner) with its associate Tribes
Simeon and Gad with a Standard bearing the figure of a man, as the Jewish
Writers tell us. Next to this Standard, and so in the middle of the Camp
marched the Kohathites bearing the Ark and the most holy Vtensils of the
Tabernacle on their shoulders. The Tribe of Ephraim led the third Squadron with
their associate Tribes Manasseh and Benjamin, with a Standard bearing the
figure of an Ox. The Tribe of Dan with their associate Tribes Asher and
Naphtali made up the fourth Squadron, and brought up the Rear with a Standard
bearing the figure of an Eagle. The Army being thus set in Order, and ready to
march, Moses desires Jethro Called also Hobab, see Sect. 56. of Chapter 3.
his Father-in-law to go along with them, telling him, They would do him good,
and no hurt, for God had promised to be gracious unto them, and to own them for
his people; But Jethro refused to go, telling him, He would return to his own
Country. Moses presses him again to go with them, telling him, He might be in
stead of Eyes to them in that howling Wilderness, through which they were to
march; that is, his prudent Counsel (of which they had newly had experience)
might very much advantage them, especially in things not particularly directed
by God. And if he would please to go along with them, what goodness and bounty
the Lord should show to them, he should share in and partake of. But it seems
he refused to go along with them, being desirous to return to his own Country,
see Exodus 18.27. However either He or some of his Family returned afterward
unto the Israelites; For his Posterity in aftertimes dwelt among the
Israelites in the Land of Canaan, as we may see Judge. 1.16. and Judge. 4.11, 17.
and 1 Samuel 15.6.

Numb. Chapter 10. from 11. to 33.

SECT. LIII.
MOses and the Children of Israel now depart from the Mount of the Lord, viz.
from Sinai and Horeb, where He had appeared so Eminently to them, and given
them his Law; and the Ark Profecta est in conspectu eorum, i. e. arca in mediis
castris a sacerdotibus gestata versabatur in oculis omnium. Malvenda. Pro uno
reputantur arca and columna, cum arca semper sub Columna procederet. Bochart.
went before them, or in their sight, and the Cloudy-Pillar over that, for
three days together, (when they marched) to find out a fit place for them to
pitch their Tents in. And when the Cloud was lifted up, and the four Squadrons,
with the Ark, set forward and marched, Moses said, Arise, O Lord, and let thine
Enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee before thee. And when
the Ark rested according to the direction of the Cloud, he said, Return,
Revertere respondet (...) surge. Nam qui surgit quasi abiturus surgit. Certo
Nubes cum se attolleret abire videbatur. Dr.
O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel; that is, Return I pray thee and
remain among thy people, for in thy presence their chief joy and safety
consist, see Exodus 33.14, 15, 16.

Numb. 10. from the 33. to the end.

SECT. LIVE.
THe people being now wearied with their three days march, it seems some that
were in the rear of the Camp began to murmur that they were forced to so long
and tedious marches; whereupon the anger of the Lord was kindled against them,
and He either poured down fire upon them from Heaven, or caused it to break
forth upon them from the Earth, and it consumed many of them [see Psalm. 78.21.]
The Israelites not knowing what to do, run to Moses, having a great opinion of
his holiness, and especial interest in the favor of God, and entreat him to
intercede with the Lord for them; which he accordingly does, and so the fire
ceased. The place where this Judgment was executed, was hereupon called
Taberah, signifying a burning, because the fire of the Lord here brake out upon
them, and consumed many among them.

Numb. Chapter 11. from 1. to 4.

SECT. LV.
THe people not having now any other Food but Manna to eat, the mixed multitude
among them [of which see Exodus 12.38.] not being sufficiently warned by the
former Judgment, began to loath it, and to murmur that they had nothing else to
eat. And the Israelites it seems soon joined with them in this their Complaint
and murmuring, saying in a discontented humor, Who shall give us flesh to eat?
as if they had said, we had plenty of Flesh in Egypt, and great variety of
Fowl; We remember also the great store of Fish which we had there, whereof we
did eat very freely; we had also Cucumbers and Melons, Leeks and Onions, and
Garlic in great abundance; but now our Soul is dried away; that is, our Life
languishes and pines away for want of that change and variety of diet wherewith
we were there refreshed: now our eyes see nothing but this Manna, neither have
we any thing else wherewith to satisfy our Appetites. And what was this Manna
they thus loath, and speak so disdainfully of? why, it was like Coriander-seed,
and for the color it was white like Bdellium, it was as sweet as Honey-wafers
unbaked, but when baked it had the taste of fresh Oil; it might be dressed
several ways, and always was a delicious food. So that these unthankful
Wretches had little reason thus to complain. However Moses heard them openly
complaining in the doors of their Tents, That they had nothing but Manna,
nothing but Manna to eat. Hereupon the anger of the Lord was kindled against
them, and Moses was greatly troubled, so that complainingly he said to the
Lord, Wherefore do thou thus afflict thy Servant, to lay the burden of all
this people upon me? why have not I found so much favor in thine Eyes as to be
exempted from this great Charge, who am so unfit to bear it? [See Exodus 4.13.]
Have I begotten all this people, that thou should say to me carry them them
in thy Bosom (as a Nursing-Father bears the sucking-Child) unto the Land
which I have sworn, unto their Fathers to give them? Alas! whence should I have
Flesh to give unto this vast multitude, who murmur and complain, and Cry to me
for it? I am not able alone to undergo the burden of Governing, Conducting, and
Providing for all this people; it is too heavy for me. And if thou will thus
deal with me, and still thus employ me, I pray thee rather take me hence, then
let me live to see and feel my misery and wretchedness thus daily growing and
increasing upon me. But though this Speech of Moses was so full of distemper
and passion, yet the Lord graciously passed it by, and pitying his infirmity
and weakness, Commands him to choose out 70 men of the Elders of Israel, whom he
knew to be Elders, not only in respect of their years, but in respect of their
singular gravity and wisdom, and who had been on that account chosen to be
Officers and Governors over the people, and these he should bring and present
before the Tabernacle, as persons fit to be helpers and assistants to him in
governing of the people, that so the burden might not lie wholly on his
shoulders. Indeed as we have seen before, Sect. 51. upon Jethro's counsel,
there were certain men chosen to be Rulers and Judges over the people for the
ease of Moses, [see Exodus 18.25, 26.] But those were only chosen to judge and
determine of lesser matters: But these now chosen were to be Judges in the
greater and most difficult Cases, either of religious or civil Concernment,
which were formerly wholly referred to Moses. And they were therefore chosen
out of those that had been already in those inferior places of Government, as
being fittest by reason of their former experience in governing, to be employed
in weightier matters.

And it seems from hence in after-ages the Jews took their rise of Constituting
their Synedrion or Sanhedrin, their Senate and Supreme Court of Judicature in
that Nation, consisting of 70 V. 16. Septuaginta] in memoriam Septuaginta qui
descenderant in Aegyptum, Exodus 1.5. Quidam aiunt e singulis Tribubus sex
electos ut summa fuerit LXXII, numerumque hic rotundari. Confer Exodus 24.9.
Anonym. in loc.
Elders, which was continued among them to the days of Herod. God further tells
Moses, That when he had chosen these 70 men, and prsented them before the
Tabernacle, He would reveal Himself to him there in the Glory of His Majesty,
and would confirm their Election, by giving them such Gifts and Graces of his
Spirit Spiritus hoc loco Propheticus est ut satis patet ex v. 25. quo and
populum regere and dubia explicare, and occulta cognoscere, and futura
praevidere, and Dei lauds eodem spiritu dictante exequi potuerunt.
as he had given unto him, and by these extraordinary Gifts He would fit them
to be Coadjutors to him in the governing of the people. God further Commands
Moses to speak to the people to prepare V. 18. Sanctificate vos] Commissi
peccati paenitentia. Cajet.
themselves, that so they may be fit to receive that great and mavelous
blessing which He intended to give them the next day; For he intended then to
give them Flesh, and to continue it to them for a whole month together; But he
foresaw that they would eat so greedily of it, and so fill themselves with it,
that the offensiveness of their full and loaded Stomachs would fume and steam
up with an unsavory scent into their Nostrils, or it would come up by vomit
through their mouths and nostrils, as a just punishment of their Rebellion
against Him, and despising the Manna He had provided for them. Moses hearing
that they should eat Flesh for a whole month together, distrustfully asks the
Lord, Whither all the Flocks He thought not (it seems) of any supply by Fowls
or Birds.
and Herds they had brought with them out of Egypt should be killed for their
use, or whither all the fish 1 Cor. 15.39. There is one flesh of Beasts,
another of Fishes, another of Birds, etc.
of the Sea should be gathered together to satisfy them, they being six
hundred thousand men, besides women and children. God here winks at Moses's
distrust, and bears with his weakness; but when he was not better instructed by
His patience, and the continual experience he had of his All Sufficiency, He is
afterward punished, Numb. 20.12. His passion was before too strong, and his
faith is now too weak.
God tells him, His hand was not shortened, and therefore what he had promised,
they should see exactly performed. Moses now appoints those 70 The name of the
whole number is given, to the greater part, though there were two wanting, as
we shall see afterward.
persons before mentioned to come before the Lord at the door of the
Tabernacle, that it might appear to the people that they were set apart to this
work of Government, and that the people might acknowledge them in their places
as set over them by God, who now came down in the Cloud to the door of the
Tabernacle, and there bestowed the Gifts of his Spirit upon them, to make them
fit for their Office and Charge.

They having now received the gift of Prophecy, their Minds were thereby
supernaturally enlightened, and their Hearts filled with spiritual raptures, and
their Tongues stirred up to set forth the high Praises of God in Songs and
Psalms, [see 1 Samuel 10.5, 10. 1 Chronicles. 25.1, 3.] and possibly they foretold
things to come, and declared to the people the Word of God to their great
Edification and Comfort; and all in such a manner, that they might easily be
discerned to speak as men inspired by the Spirit of God. Thus these men
prophesied, and did not cease; that is, continued all that day prophesying
without intermission; and this seems to be added, because their continuing so
long in this supernatural Exercise, did much confirm their Call to their
Office. But two of these Elders that were chosen for this Employment, and
enrolled by Moses among his seventy Assistants, did not come to the door of the
Tabernacle as they were appointed to do. It Is probable they did forbear to
come, not out of contempt of Gods Command (for then it is not likely they would
have had the same Gift of the Spirit bestowed upon them, as the others had,)
but out of modesty See a Case something like this, 1 Samuel 10.22.
and distrust of their own sufficiency for so great a Charge. However these two
(whose names were Eldad and Medad) received the same Spirit of Prophecy with
the rest of the Seventy, and accordingly prophesied in the Camp, (out of
Moses's sight, and without his knowledge) as the others did at the door of the
Tabernacle in his presence. A report of this being brought to Moses, and
Joshuah his Servant suspecting it might be prejudicial to the Dignity and
authority of his Master, seeing these two seemed to do it without any
dependency on him, (which the others had manifested in coming at his
appointment to the door of the Tabernacle, and there receiving this Gift and
Authority from God,) he desired him to forbid See a parallel Instance to this
in the Disciples, Mark 9.38. Luke 9.49. John 3.26.
them. But Moses meekly replied, Envyest thou these men this Gift for my sake?
I am so far from envying or grudging at them for it, that I could even wish, if
it so pleased the Lord, that all his people had the same Gift.

Moses and the Elders of Israel now returning into the Camp, God by his
Almighty Power causes a strong Wind to blow from the Sea-ward, (viz. the
Red Sea which lay Southward of the Israelites Camp at this present) and
therewith brought a vast number of Quails among them, and round about their
Camp, a days journey in circuit or compass; insomuch that in many places they
lay in heaps two Cubits high. The Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 78.27. He rained
Flesh upon them as dust, and feathered Fowls as the sand of the Sea. The people
seeing this, in all have rose up and fell to gather them, and the gathering
continued all that day, and the next night, and the day after. And that Master
of a Family, with his Company, that gathered least gathered ten Homers or
heaps, whereby possibly is to be understood a very great many; And when they
had gathered them, they spread them abroad round about their Camp, and laid
them thin that they might not putrify. But it seems they were as miraculously
preserved, as they were sent, else they would never have lasted good a whole
month together.

About a year ago [see Exodus 16.13.] God gave them one meal of them at their
eighth station in the Wilderness of Sin, before they come to Sinai, but now
they eat of them a whole month together, and having satisfied their greedy lust
and appetite ( feeding without fear, Jude, v. 12.) so long together with this
kind of food, at last the Wrath of the Lord brake out upon them, and he smote
them with a very great Plague, while the flesh was between their teeth. The
Psalmist says, He slew the wealthiest and the fattest of them, Psalm. 78.31.
It Is like He permitted them to surfeit by their greedy feeding, and so thereby
many of them died; and therefore the place was called from thence
Kibroth-Hattaavah; that is the Graves of these men of lust, and inordinate
appetite. See Psalm. 78. from 26. to 32. and Psalm. 106. v. 14, 15.

Numb. 11. whole Chapter.

SECT. LVI.
FRom Kibroth-Hattaavah they removed to Hazeroth. At this place some emulation
or contention arising (as it seems) between Miriam, Moses's Sister, and Zippora
his Wife, Miriam first and then Aaron (stirred up by her) spoke against Moses,
because he had married a woman of Ethiopia (so they seem to call her in
contempt) because she was of Midian, a part of the Eastern Ethiopia, otherwise
called Arabia, and was not one of Abraham's holy stock. But seeing she had
submitted her self to the Law of God, she was to be held as an
Israelitish-woman, as Rahab and Ruth were. However upon this occasion they
quarrel with Moses, and would equal themselves unto him. What (say they) has
God only spoken by Moses? has he not spoken also by us? Am not I (says Miriam)
a Prophetess, [see Exodus 15.20.] and has not God promised to be with Aaron's
mouth, and that he should be a mouth to his Brother Moses, [ Exodus 4.15, 16.]
and has not he been employed by God together with Moses in bringing the
Israelites out of Egypt. What reason then that Moses should be all in all, who
has matched himself to one that is a stranger to the holy Seed of Israel?
Moses being a very meek It may seem strange that Moses should thus commend
himself. But let it be considered that either he did it by the immediate
inspiration of the Spirit of God, that his meekness might be a Pattern to the
Church in all Ages, as he does, elsewhere relate his sins and weaknesses for
the Instruction of the Church, or else it may be conceived without wronging the
authority of Moses's Writings, that here and there by Joshuah or some other of
the sacred Writers after him, some passages were inserted which Moses himself
wrote not, such as that, Deuteronomy. 34. concerning his death and burial. See Mr.
Jackson's Notes on the place.
and humble man, was content to put up all this, bearing it patiently, and
making no Complaint, but the Lord would not let it so pass. Therefore
commanding Moses, Aaron and Miriam to come all three together to the Tabernacle
of the Congregation, and the Cloud descending to the door thereof, the Lord now
calls to Aaron and Miriam to stand forth, and then declares to them that he did
not manifest his Will to Moses in Dreams Visions were Revelations to such as
were awake, Dreams to those that were asleep, Dominus aliquando apparuit
Prophetis in Ecstasi, aliquando per somnium and dormientibus, aliquando
vigilantibus in aliqua similitudine sed sine locutione ut Jeremiae and
Ezekieli. Somnia plerumque erant aenigmatica ut scala Jacobi, etc.
and Visions, as to other Prophets, but he spoke to him with an audible Voice
out of the Cloud, and out of the Tabernacle very plainly and clearly, as one
Friend uses to speak to another, and had at times discovered to him more of his
Glory than ever he did to any mortal man, [see Exodus 33.20.] And when he spoke
to him he did not make known his mind to him in obscure figurativ expressions
as he did to some of the Prophets (see Ezekiel. 17.3.) but plainly and clearly,
and seeing he had manifested so great favor to Moses, How comes it to pass
(says the Lord) that ye were not afraid to speak against my Servant Moses? And
the anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and the Cloud (the sign of his
presence) removed from the door of the Tabernacle, and possibly for some time
disappeared, God intending thereby to testify his Indignation against them.
And immediately Miriam became Leprous, and white as Snow. See Deuteronomy. 24.9.
God was pleased to spare Aaron though Partner with his Sister in this Sin,
lest in his Dishonor the Priesthood should suffer. Aaron entreats Moses to
Intercede with the Lord for them, that the punishment of this sin (wherein they
had done foolishly) may not be laid upon them. He begs that Miriam may not (by
the continuance of this white Leprosy upon her) be as a Child dead in the
Womb, whose flesh, when it comes into the World, looks white and putrified, as
if it were sodden and half consumed. And though (says He) she is for the
present alive, yet as one dead she is to be excluded from the Communion of the
Church; [see Numb. 5.2.] and this fretting Plague, if it continue upon her,
will in the end utterly consume and kill her. Moses was prevailed with to pray
for Her, and upon his prayer the Lord was pleased to heal her of her Plague,
yet gives order that she should be carried out of the Camp for the present. For
(says God) if her earthly Father had in great displeasure spit in her face,
surely she would have been ashamed to show her self for a time, and therefore
much more fit is it that in such a Case as this she should be secluded from the
Congregation, to instruct all the people to take heed of being corrupted with
Her example. The people upon this Sentence mourned for Her, and journied not
till she was brought into the Camp again, which argued the great honor and
respect they had for Her, being a Prophetess and the Sister of Moses and Aaron.
After this the people removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in another place in
the Wilderness of Paran called Rithmath, see Chapter 33.18.

Numb. 12. whole Chapter.

SECT. LVII.
THe people being now come near to the Mountain of the Amorites, upon the
Borders of Canaan, Moses encourages them to go up, and take possession of the
Land which God had promised them, [ Deuteronomy. 1.20, 21.] but they fearing the
Event, desire that they may first send some Spies to search the Land. Moses not
knowing their distrustful hearts, likes well their motion, [ Deuteronomy. 1.23.] and
seeking Counsel of the Lord about it, the Lord was pleased to permit it,
(though in displeasure) and accordingly Commands that at the time when Grapes
first grew ripe they should send twelve Principal men, such as were of
authority and esteem among them, of every Tribe one (of which Caleb was for the
Tribe of Judah, being then forty years old, see Joshua 14.7. and Hoshea Hoshea
signifies a Savior, but by adding Jah the Contract of Jehovah, which is the
proper Name of God, [ Psalm. 68.4.] thereby was signified that He should by the
help and assistance of God be a Savior of the people.
the Son of Nun, whom Moses called Jehoshua or Joshua, for the Tribe of
Ephraim,) to discover and spy out the Land. These men accordingly went, entering
into Canaan by the Desert of Zin lying on the South, and so went quite through
it to the very North part thereof, even to Rehob. It Is probable they divided
themselves, else it is like they would have been suspected; neither could they
otherwise have viewed the whole Country in so short a time.

Numb. 13. from 1. to 23.

SECT. LVIII.
THese Spies after forty days return from searching the Land, and come to the
Camp at Kadesh, bringing with them one branch of a Vine with one Cluster or
Bunch of Grapes upon it (which was so big that they carried it between two of
them upon a staff) with some Pomegranates and Figgs of the Land. Ten of these
twelve Spies that were sent praised indeed the goodness of the Land, but
magnified also the strength of the Cities thereof, and the Giant-like stature
of the Inhabitants, thereby disheartning the people from marching any further
toward it. At Hebron, a City in the South-parts of it, (which was one of the
ancientest Cities in the World, being more ancient then Zoan, the chief City of
Egypt, which vaunted it self to be of very great Antiquity, see Isa. 19.11.)
they tell them they met with Giants, the Sons of Anak, men of mighty stature,
in comparison of whom they seemed but like Grasshoppers. They tell them, The
Cities of the Canaanites were great, and walled up to Heaven, Deuteronomy. 1.28. They
further tell them, That the Amalekites dwelt in the South Country, the
Hittites, Jebusites and Amorites in the Mountains nigh unto the Wilderness
where the Israelites now lay; so that there would be no entering the Land on the
South because of those mighty Nations that would be there ready to oppose them.
And in case they should think to fetch a compass about, and to enter in on the
East Side, there they would be kept out by the River Jordan, which ran along on
that side and the dead-Sea, and by the Canaanites who dwelt by the Sea, and by
the Coast of Jordan; and they being a valiant and a strong people would improve
those advantages for the best defense of their Country. Thus these ten Spies
discouraged the people, bringing an evil Report upon the Land, telling them, It
was a Land that eats up the Inhabitants thereof, by reason of the Civil Wars,
and frequent intestine Commotions that arose among them; and by reason of the
Tyranny of the Giants, who oppressed those that were less powerful than
themselves. And if several of the Natives of the Land were exposed to so much
danger, how much more had they need to fear that were Strangers, and were held
their Common Enemies, and what could they expect but to be eaten up with
continual Wars?

The people at this Relation being greatly terrified, Caleb and Joshua rose up
and contradicted this false Report, and encouraged the people, telling them
they might easily by Gods assistance Conquer the Land, [see Chapter 14.6, 7.] They
said all that they could to still and quiet them, and to hearten them to go on;
but all in vain; For they now fall into an high rage and discontent, and murmur
against Moses and Aaron, and wish they had died in Egypt or the Wilderness.

Nay their discontent and impatience grew so high, that they said, [ Deuteronomy.
1.27.] Because the Lord hated us, he has brought us out of the Land of Egypt,
to deliver us into the hand of the Amorite to destroy us, and that our selves,
our Wives and Children should be a prey to their Sword. And therefore like
persons almost distracted, they said one to another, Come, let us chose to our
selves a Captain, and under him let us march back again into Egypt, see Nehem.
9.17. But they did not consider the difficulties they must needs meet with, had
they proceeded in such a resolution. They could not reasonably expect to be fed
with Manna from Heaven in their return (being in Rebellion against God) nor to
have the Red Sea divided for them again. And if they should, though very
unlikely, ever get back into Egypt, what scorn and cruel Bondage must they
there expect? If the Egyptians oppressed them before, how much more hardly and
severely would they deal with them now, remembering the death of their
Firstborn, and the drowning of Pharaoh and his Army in the Red Sea. But men in
passion usually lose all consideration. Moses and Aaron seeing them in such a
rage and mutiny, fell down on their faces before them, entreating them to
desist from such a desperate purpose. Moses earnestly persuaded them not to
dread the Canaanites, for God would go before them, and fight for them, Deuteronomy.
1.29, 30, 31. and Caleb and Joshua rent their Clothes, testifying that their
hearts were rent with Grief and Indignation at those blasphemous Speeches the
people had uttered against God. They tell them the Land they went to search was
an exceeding good Land, and if the Lord delighted in them, He would bring them
into it. Therefore they should take heed lest by their Rebellion they provoked
him to deprive them of it. As for the people of the Land, they tell them, They
need not be afraid of them, for they were but as bread for them; that is, their
Sword should easily eat and devour them; for their defense was departed from
them; that is, God who had hitherto preserved them from being destroyed,
because their Iniquity was not then full, [Gen. 15.16.] had now upon their
great Provocations withdrawn his defense from them, and would certainly give
them up to destruction; And alas! (say they) what are strong Cities or high
Walls to defend a people whom God has forsaken? These Discourses of Caleb and
Joshua, though very rational, nothing pacified the enraged multitude, but
instead thereof, like mad men they cried out, Stone them, stone them, see Exodus
17.4. The Lord seeing what danger his faithful Servants and Witnesses were in,
suddenly caused the Cloud (the usual sign when He meant to speak to Moses
concerning the people) to descend upon the Tabernacle, and possibly in a more
glorious manner then ordinary, thereby to astonish the people, and to stop them
in their furious attempt. And the Lord said unto Moses, How long will this
people provoke me, and how long will it be ere they believe me, notwithstanding
all the signs and wonders I have showed among them? I am even ready to smite
them with the Pestilence, and quite disinherit them, and deprive them of this
good Land I promised to their Fathers, and in their stead to make of thee a
greater Nation than they. Moses humbly intercedes for them, and makes use of
several Arguments to prevail with the Lord for them. First, He says, Lord if
thou should destroy all this people as if they were but one man, the
Egyptians will hear of it, and will take occasion thereupon to reproach thy
Name: They will say, because thou could not bring them into the Land which
thou swarest to give them, therefore thou have slain them in the Wilderness,
though they know thou broughtest them by thine Almighty Power out from among
them; however they will talk insultingly thereof to the Nations who have heard
the fame of thee, and know that thou art among this people, and have manifested
thy presence frequently and apparently among them, and that thy Cloud stands
over them, and that thou go before them in the daytime in a Pillar of a
Cloud, and in a pillar of fire by night. 2ly, He humbly desires of the Lord,
that the greatness of his Power and Mercy may be manifested in pardoning this
people, who by so many and great sins had so highly provoked him, according to
what he himself had spoken, Exodus 34.6. saying, The Lord is long-suffering, and
of great mercy, forgiving Iniquity and Transgression, and by no means clearing
the Guilty, visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children unto the
third and fourth Generation. By which words, whilst Moses sues for mercy to
many of them, he seems to intimate an assent to the justice of God, If He
please to execute it upon some principal Offenders among them, which if cut off
there would be more safety for the rest. Only he desires he would in the midst
of Judgment remember Mercy, and would manifest as great a willingness and
readiness to pardon them now, as He had done from Egypt until that time. The
Lord was pleased to give a gracious Answer to Moses's prayer, and accordingly
said to him, I have pardoned them according to thy word, I will not destroy
them all as one man at this present, I will not cut off the whole Nation as at
first I threatened. He further tells Moses, That He intended to get unto his
Name great Glory, by the miraculous things that he would do for his people in
carrying them into the Land of Canaan; and yet withal He would magnify his
Justice and Severity in cutting off those who having seen the Miracles He did
for them in Egypt, and in the Wilderness, had yet tempted Him ten times, 1. At
the Red Sea, Exodus 14.11.

2. At Marah, Exodus 15.23.

3. In the Wilderness of Sin, Exodus 16.2.

4. When they kept Manna till it stank, Exodus 16.20.

5. When they went out to gather Manna on the Sabbath day, Exodus 16.27.

6. At Rephidim for want of water, Exodus 17.2.

7. When they made the golden Calf, Exodus 32.1.

8. At Taborah, Numb. 11.1.

9. At Kebroth-Hattaavah longing for Quails, Numb. 11.4.

10. At this time after the return of the Spies.


and therefore they should not enter into the Land, but all of them that were
twenty years old and upward should die in the Wilderness, excepting only Joshua
and Caleb who were acted by a better spirit, and had followed him fully, and
done what he required of them, see Numb. 32.12. These two should enter into the
Land, and their Seed should possess it, but as for the rest of the Murmurers
and Mutineers their Carcasses should fall in the Wilderness, and their Children
that they said would be a prey to the Amorites, these He would bring in, and
they should know and enjoy the good Land which their Fathers had so
reproachfully rejected. Yet he tells them, Their Children should wander in that
Wilderness forty years; that is, till they have made up the years of their
wandering in the Wilderness, from their coming out of Egypt, full forty years;
and he tells them that during this time, These Children should bear their
Fathers Whoredoms; that is, their Fathers Unfaithfulness, Disloyalty and
Disobedience to God should bring this punishment of forty years continuance in
the Wilderness upon their Children. And He says, They shall know to their Cost,
what a dangerous thing it is to withdraw themselves, or break off V. 34.
Scietis abruptionem meam] i. e. abruptionem a me, Pisc.
their Obedience to Him: They shall find that it was their own Infidelity and
Disobedience to him, and not his breach of Promise with them, that kept them
out of that good Land, to the borders of which he had now brought them. They
ought to have considered that his Promise was Conditional, and the performance
of it was to be expected only by those that performed the condition of it, and
toward them it shall never fail.

Numb. 13. from 23. to the end.

Numb. 14. from 1. to 36.

Joshua 5.6. Numb. 32. from 8. to 14.

Deuteronomy. 1. from 26. to 40.

Deuteronomy. 9.23, 24.

Psalm. 95. from 8. to the end.

Psalm. 106. from 23. to 27.

SECT. LIX.
THe ten Spies who had caused this meeting among the people were smitten by God
with an extraordinary Plague, and died presently, (see 1 Cor. 10.10.) With this
Judgment the people were grievously terrified, and mourned exceedingly; And in
remembrance thereof the Jews keep a Feast upon the seventh day of the sixth
month called Ebul.

Numb. 14. from 36. to 40.

SECT. LX.
THe people being much terrified with this Judgment, and more especially with
Gods Decree against them, which Moses had acquainted them with, and being very
sensible that they had greatly provoked the Lord, they would needs now in all
have gird on their Swords, and go forward to take possession of the Land God
had promised them, resolving to fight all Enemies in the way. But Moses charges
them from the Lord that they should not stir, see Deuteronomy. 1.42. He tells them
that the Amalekites and Canaanites had pitched in the Valley beyond the
Mountain, (at the foot whereof they were now encamped) and lay there with their
Forces to hinder their passage. He tells them, If they went up, the Lord would
not be with them, but they would be smitten before their Enemies. However some
of them presumptuously would march up to the top of the hill (though Moses and
the Ark The Ark removed not, but at the removal of the Cloud, Numb. 9.15. which
God not taking up, now showed thereby his dislike of their Enterprise.
staid behind.) And the Amalekites and Canaanites, as had been foretold them,
came out against them, and chased them as Bees (which being angered, use to come
out in great Swarms, and to fight with great eagerness and fury, see Psalm.
118.12.) and killing many of them, pursued the rest even unto Hormah, a place
so called afterward upon another occasion, see Numb. 21.3. And such of them as
escaped cried and wept before the Lord, but he regarded not their prayers, and
had as little respect to their tears as they had before to his Preceps. And so
they abode in the large Wilderness of Kadesh many days, as the days they stayed
there did sufficiently manifest. For they were made to wander about 38 years
longer in the Wilderness.

Numb. 14. from 40. to the end.

Deuteronomy. 1. from 40. to the end.

SECT. LXI.
UPon this Calamity, and the continual dropping away of the Israelites in the
Wilderness, God having sentenced to death all above twenty years old, but
Joshua and Caleb (as is before related.) Moses composed the 90th Psalm, in
which he shows that the ordinary age of man was reduced to 70 or 80 at the
utmost. Therefore the age of man was now a third time contracted, and cut short
a third part of what it was before.

SECT. XLII.
THough the Lord had thus manifested his Wrath and Severity against those
disobedient Israelites, whom he had sentenced to die in the Wilderness, yet
that he might show that He intended to bring their Children into the good Land
he had promised, he now enlarges and explains those Laws he had formerly given
concerning the Sacrifices which he would have them offer to him when they came
thither; as particularly what Meat Offerings and Drink Offerings should be
offered together with their Sacrifices (whereof part was to be burnt upon the
Altar) as accessories and appurtenances thereunto; And according as the
Sacrifice was greater or less, so must also the Meat and Drink Offerings be
more or less; And He appoints particularly what shall be prepared for a Lamb or
a Kid, and what for a Ram or a Bullock, that there might be a proportion
observed betwixt them, Numb. 15. from verse. 1. to 13. 2ly, He injoyns that the
Stranger that is brought to embrace the same Religion with them, shall be under
the same Laws and Ordinances that they were under. One Law and one manner shall
be for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you, from verse. 13. to
17. 3ly, He injoyns them to offer a Cake of the first of their Dough for an
Heave Offering; that is, about the same quantity that they offered of their
first Corn they should offer of their Dough, and both to be offered with the
same Ceremonies. These they were to offer to the Lord, that is, to the Priests
the Lords Receivers; for the First Fruits were their portion, Ezekiel. 44.30. The
first of all the Fruits of all things, and every Oblation of all of every sort
of your Oblations shall be the Priests, from verse. 17. to 22. 4ly, Laws are
given concerning Sacrifices to be offered when either the whole Congregation,
or a single person, had sinned through ignorance, Levit. 4.13. There is a Law
given concerning Expiation of Sins ignorantly committed, but that seems to be
made in reference to Errors and Faults committed in common course of life, and
this to be meant of those only which are committed in things which belong to
the external Worship and Service of God, from verse. 22. to 30. 5ly, A Law is
given for the cutting off those who sin (not of ignorance, inadvertency or
infirmity, but) wilfully, boldly and presumptuously, in contempt of the Laws
which God has enacted concerning his public Worship. From verse. 30. to the
31. 6ly, To deter presumptuous Sinners, a relation is made of a bold and
presumptuous Sinner, who refused to conform himself to the Law which God had
made concerning his outward Worship and Service. It seems whilst they were in
the Wilderness, one of the Congregation went out presumptuously to gather
sticks on the Sabbath Day. This being a direct violation of the Law given
concerning the Sabbath, they put the man inward till they had inquired of the
Lord what should be done to him. See Levit. 24.12.
That a Sabbath breaker was to be put to death they know, see Exodus 31.14. and
35.2. but what kind of death he should die, or whither this gathering of sticks
made him obnoxious to that Sentence they were not fully resolved, though it was
evident enough to them he had done it presumptuously. Moses not willing to take
away his life without certain direction, inquires of the Lord concerning the
matter, and by Gods own Sentence he was adjudged to be stoned Prudens est
Cajetani observatio, severius semper Deum animadvertisse in primos legum snarum
transgressores.
by the Congregation without the Camp, which was done accordingly, from 32. to
37. 7ly, A Law is given, injoyning them to make Fringes with blue Ribbands or
Laces on the borders of their Garments, that by looking on them, they might
remember all the Commandments of the Lord, and do them. These Fringes were to
mind them that they ought to be content with what was commanded, enjoined and
limited by the Law of God, and must not run out into any superstitious
Inventions, Additions or Devices of their own in his Worship. Which Inventions
being delightful to their eyes and hearts, He knew they were very prone to go a
whoring after them, and therefore more strictly forbids. And another reason why
He enjoined these Fringes was, that they might be distinguished in their habit
from strangers, and those that were Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
and might remember that they were a people federally holy, and peculiarly
devoted to God.

Numb. 15. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXIII.
COrah, Dathan and Abiram, and On with 250 others of prime note and authority
among the Israelites, rise up now against Moses and Aaron, envying Moses the
Government, and Aaron the Priesthood.

Corah it seems was the Ringleader, and first Mover of this Sedition, which is
therefore called the gainsaying of Corah, Jude v. 11. and 23. He was a Levite,
and Cosin-German to Moses and Aaron. For Amram the Father of Moses and Aaron
and Izhar the Father of this Corah were Brothers, the Sons of Kohath, Exodus
6.18. The Jewish Writers say, That this Corah had long since taken offense that
Elizaphan was by Moses preferred to be Prince of the Families of the
Kohathites, see Numb. 3.30. whereas Elizaphan was descended of the youngest
Brother Vzziel, and He was of Izhar who was elder than he: which grudge, though
it lay buried for a time in his breast, yet now it brake forth, and nothing
less than the Priesthood will content him and his Abettors. As for Dathan,
Abiram and On they were all descended from Reuben, and therefore possibly under
the pretense of Reuben's Birthright, they were the more easily drawn to oppose
Moses, as supposing that the Government belonged to them, and not to him. These
Conspirators now come to Moses and Aaron, and in an high and proud manner tell
them, They took too much upon them, seeing all the Congregation were holy, and
therefore might approach to God, and offer their own Sacrifices themselves, as
well as they; and they saw no reason that the Priesthood should be tied to
Aron's Posterity only. Then the Reubenites, under pretense of Reuben's
Birthright, seeking (as it is probable) to wrest the Supreme Magistracy from
Moses to themselves; they also Charge both Moses and Aaron for taking too much
upon them, and ask them, Wherefore they lifted themselves above the
Congregation? Moses at this carriage of theirs was exceedingly troubled, and
withdrawing himself (as it seems) into privacy, He fell down on his face before
the Lord in prayer, seeking direction from Him what he should do on this
important occasion, and there it was revealed to him what he should say unto
Corah and his Accomplices. Moses accordingly coming out to them, tells them,
That on the morrow God would decide this Controversy, and show who were His,
and who were the Men that He had separated to the Priests Office, and would
allow to come near, and to minister unto him. He bids them therefore to come to
morrow with their Censers, and to put fire in them, and Incense upon them, and
come with them before the Lord (seeing they thought themselves so fit for the
Priesthood) and then they should soon see who it was that God had chosen to be
a Priest V. 7. Erit sanctus] i. e. segregatus ad sacerdotium.
unto him, by accepting his Incense, and they should know to their Cost that
not He and Aaron, but that they (the Sons of Levi) had taken too much upon
them, in aspiring to the Priesthood. What (says he) seems it a small thing to
you, Ye Children of Levi, that God has separated you from the rest of the
people of Israel, to bring you near to Himself to do the Service of the
Tabernacle, as Assistants to the Priests, to stand before the Congregation to
minister for them; that is, to do in their name and stead what they themselves
were otherwise bound to have done in the Service of God? What! is all this so
small a thing in your eyes, that it will not content you, but you must have the
Priesthood also? And what is Aaron (I pray you) and what has he done, or what
has he assumed to himself that the Lord has not freely given him? Therefore
if you murmur against him, you murmur against God himself. See Exodus 16.7, 8.
After this first attempt of theirs was over, it seems, Moses sent for Dathan
and Abiram, possibly thinking to deal with them privately, and to persuade them
to desist from this wicked undertaking. But they do not only refuse to come,
but return him a bitter and scornful answer. They scoff at his promise of
bringing them into a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, and giving them Fields
and Vineyards. They tell him, He had indeed brought them out of such a Land as
did really flow with Milk and Honey (which was Egypt) and had brought them into
a dry and barren Wilderness, and here He had made himself a Prince and a Ruler
over them. And did he now think to put out their eyes, and the eyes of those
that joined with them in this Complaint, that they should not see and perceive
the wrongs and injuries he had done them? Moses at this was very wroth, and
prayed unto the Lord, saying, I pray thee, O Lord, accept not the Incense which
these wicked Conspirators shall offer before thee to morrow; but declare by thy
refusing of it, that thou disallowest this their rebellion. As for me, thou
know I have not usurped Authority over them; neither have I abused my
Authority in the least by doing them any manner of wrong. I have not taken the
vilest Beast, no not so much as an Ass from any of them, neither can they
justly Charge me with any injury I have done them.

On the next morning Corah having gathered together not only his 250
Accomplices, but the people in general to be Spectators of the business in
hand, (persuading them it is like that God would own their Cause, and give
Judgment on their side) and these 250 having (as it should seem) got such
Consers as they could provide, since the time Moses had appointed this way for
the deciding of this Controversy, they came with them to the door of the
Priests Court, whither the people used to bring their Sacrifices. It Is true the
appointed place for the Priests to burn Incense was within the Tabernacle, at
the Altar of Incense; but this was an extraordinary occasion, and a means
enjoined for the discovery of the Lords will, whither these men or only Aaron
and his Sons (as formerly) should enter into the Tabernacle to execute the
Priests Office. Corah having assembled his Confederates, and the generality of
the people before the Tabernacle, and not finding Dathan and Abiram there, as
it should seem, went to their Tents to talk with them, [see Chapter 26.10.] and
probably from them He went to his own Tent, before Moses and the Elders came to
the Tabernacle, as presently they did. In the mean time the 250 Conspirators on
the one side, taking fire from the Altar, and putting it into their Censers,
and laying Incense thereon, and Aaron (near to whom Moses stood) doing the like
on the other, God now signifies his approach, and the actual manifestation of
his Presence, by the descending of the Cloud which used to hover over the
Tabernacle to the door See verse. 42. of this Chap. and Chapter 12.5.
thereof. And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron saying, Separate your selves
from among this Congreation, that I may consume these Conspirators, and all
that join with them in a moment. Then Moses and Aaron fell upon their faces
before the Lord, and said, O God, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, who
formest the spirit of man within him, [Zach. 12.1.] and see and know the
spirits and hearts of all men, and art able to discern between those that sin
obstinately, and those that are only seduced by others, and drawn hither only
to see what would be done. Shall one man sin, (viz. Corah the chief Incendiary)
and will thou be wroth with the whole Congregation? Upon this intercession the
Lord was pleased to spare the people that would depart from these Rebels. And
then imparting to Moses what He intended to do, commands him to warn the
Congregation to get away from the Tents of Corah, Dathan and Abiram. Moses
accordingly rose up (many of the Elders of Israel accompanying him) to denounce
the Judgment of God against these Conspirators; and he warns the Congregation
to depart from the Tents of these wicked men, and to get far from them, and to
touch nothing of theirs (as judging all that they have execrable and accursed)
lest they perish V. 26. Lest you be consumed in all their sins] that is, lest
you be destroyed in the Judgment that will fall upon them for all their sins;
the cause is here put for the effect.
in the Judgment, which was ready to fall upon them for their great Sins and
Provocations. The people accordingly did so, and fled from the Tents of these
men, but Dathan and Abiram impudently came out, and stood in the doors of their
Tents with their Wives and Children, as if they intended to outface Moses, and
scorned the Judgment he threatened against them. Moses then said, Hereby ye
shall know that the Lord has sent me, and has appointed me to take upon my
self the Government of this people, and has conferred the Priesthood on Aaron
and his Sons, and that I have not done these things on my own head; If these
men die the common and ordinary death of other men, then the Lord has not sent
me. But if the Lord by his Almighty Power do work a new and hitherto-unheard of
Miracle, so that the Earth open her mouth and swallow them up quick, then you
must needs acknowledge that I am innocent, and that these men have highly
provoked the Lord. Moses having made an end of speaking, the Earth immediately
opened her mouth and swallowed up An undoubted evidence of Gods concurrence
with the ministry of Moses, and withal an undoubted assurance of the divine
truth of Moses's Writings.
these Rebels, and all that appertained to them that were there present. And
the same (it seems) happened (and probably at the same time) to Corah and his
Family, as appears Numb. 26.10. only some of his Children (who as it is like
joined not in their Fathers sin, or if they did, soon repented of it, and gave
over, and departed from their Fathers Tent, at Moses's warning,) were spared.
And of their Race came such as either composed some of the Psalms, or at least
were famous Singers in the Temple, and Samuel also the great Prophet and Judge
in Israel was of that Race, see 1 Chronicles. 6.33. to 38. Thus perished the
Ringleaders of this Rebellion. All the Israelites that were near them, fled at
the Cry of them, fearing lest the Earth should swallow up them also. And as a
further addition to the dreadfulness of this Judgment, there came fire out from
the Lord and consumed their 250 Confederates, who had offered Incense, and
usurped the Priests Office. They are punished with fire, as by fire they had
offended, see Levit. 10.2. Moses now by Gods Command appoints Eleazar the Son
of Aaron to gather up the Censers from among the ashes of the dead bodies of
these men that were burnt and consumed, and to scatter the fire that was in
them without the Court of the Tabernacle, as showing that God rejected it and
their Service, and abhorred their Sacrifice. And he tells him, That the Censers
of these Sinners against their own Souls were now hallowed, Sanctificata
dicuntur quia ex deputatione Dei servire deinceps debebant divina gloriae
illustrandae.
having been presented before the Lord by his Commandment, and he orders him to
make broad Plates of them for a covering of the Altar A part anteriori altaris
ponebantur ut a populo conspici possint.
of Burnt-Offerings, which was covered with Plates of Brass before, see Exodus
27.2. And the less need there was of them, the fitter they were to be a sign of
Gods Judgment against presumptuous Conspirators, and of his vindicating and
clearing the innocence of his faithful Servants, and to be a Memorial to the
Children of Israel, that all Israelites and Levites, excepting Aaron's Sons,
are to be reckoned as Strangers in respect of the Priests Office, and may not
aspire to it lest they perish, as Corah and his Confederates did. However the
very next morning after those dismal Judgments had been executed, all the
Congregation of the people that were inclined to this Faction (whose lives
Moses had saved the day before, by praying to the Lord for them,) murmured
against Him and Aaron, and peremptorily told them, That they had killed the
Lords people. Moses and Aaron being thus injuriously charged, looked up to God,
as having no other Refuge or Shelter to fly unto; and immediately behold the
Cloud descended upon the Tabernacle, as a sign of the approach and actual
manifestation of the glorious Presence of God, and that he intended to speak
something unto them. Moses and Aaron presenting themselves before the Lord, the
Lord bad them get them up presently from among this rebellious Company, that he
might consume them in a moment. But they fell on their faces, and interceeded
with the Lord for them. God by his Spirit informs Moses, That he had sent a
Plague among them, and directs him what course to take for the stopping of it.
Hereupon he calls to Aaron to take his Censer, and to put fire into it from off
the Altar, and to put Incense thereon, and to run quickly and make atonement
for the people, and to stand between the living and the dead, Incense was only
to be offered upon the Altar of Incense in the Tabernacle, but this was done
upon an extraordinary occasion, and by an extraordinary warrant of divine
Inspiration.
for he tells him, Wrath was gone out from the Lord, the Plague was begun. And
Aaron did as Moses commanded him, yet the Plague ran so swiftly among the
people (like fire in a field of Corn) that before Aaron could interpose himself
to make atonement [wherein he was a Figure of Christ's Intercession] there fell
fourteen thousand and seven hundred of those rebellious Murmurers, [see 1 Cor.
10.10.] and then the Plague was stayed, and Aaron returned to Moses to the door
of the Tabernacle, to acquaint him how he had sped, and to return thanks unto
the Lord, who had so graciously accepted the work of his hands.

Numb. 16. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXIV.
THat none might for the future presume to usurp the Office of the Priesthood,
or aspire to it besides Aaron and his Sons; God was pleased to enjoin Moses to
take of each Prince, of the twelve Tribes, a Rod or Staff, such as they did
usually carry in their hands (which were it seems according to the Custom of
those times made of Almond-Tree) and to write every Princes Name on his Rod,
and to write Aaron's Name upon the Rod of the Tribe of Levi. He tells him, That
the man's Rod whom he did choose to serve him in the Priesthood should blossom,
and the rest remain dry. And God orders Moses to lay all the Rods up in the
Tabernacle, in the most holy place, before the Ark of the Testimony, where the
Lord did use by glorious signs to testify his Presence, and make known his
Will unto them, see Exodus 25.22. For upon such extraordinary occasions we need
not doubt but Moses used to go into the most holy place. Accordingly next
morning Moses went in thither, and he found that the Rod of Aaron had shot
forth branches, and some of them had buds on them, and some blossoms, and
others yielded Almonds; but all the rest of the Rods remaining dry as they were
before. Then Moses brought out all the Rods, and showed them to the Children of
Israel, and the Princes took every man his Rod, and found them dry sticks as
before, but Aaron's Rod flourished, and had brought forth Buds, Blossoms and
Fruit; by which Miracle they were convinced that God had chosen Aaron and his
Sons to be the only Priests that should serve Him at the Altar. And hereupon
God orders Moses to lay up Aaron's Rod again in the most holy place, before the
Ark, to be kept there See Apostol. Hist. on Heb. 9.6.
as a Testimony against any such Children of Rebellion as should ever after
presume to usurp the Office of the Priesthood: And by this means also he might
prevent the murmurings and complainings of the people, which if they went on in
they would thereby bring certain destruction upon their own heads. The people
hearing these things, and being exceedingly terrified with this threatening, and
the remembrance of those late dreadful Judgments that had carried away so many
among them, they cry out unto Moses, Alas we die, we perish, we all perish;
that is, we see we are in continual danger of being swept away with terrible
Judgments. And as men terrified are wont to conceive their danger to be greater
than indeed it is; they now apprehend that it would be exceeding dangerous for
them to come near the Tabernacle, or to be present at any Worship or Service
there performed; and seem to fear that God would not withdraw his Indignation
from them, until he had destroyed and consumed them all.

Chapter 17. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXV.
THe people being under such a fear and consternation, the Lord hereupon takes
order for the guard of the Sanctuary, and injoyns that every one should remain
within the Verge and Limits of his duty, and so they should be safe, and he
tells Aaron, That He and the Priests and Levites shall bear the iniquity of the
Sanctuary; that is, if any pollution, Thus the Lord shows himself reconciled,
and makes the Priests watch a ground of appeasing both the fear and envy of the
people.
came to it by the people they should answer for it, and bear the punishment
thereof if they did not take care to prevent it; and the Priests should bear
the punishment of all Iniquity committed about their Priests Office, if they
did carry themselves amiss in it, or suffer a stranger or Levite to meddle
therein. He tells them he had joined Here is an allusion to Levies name which
signifies joined.
the Levites to them to minister to them in the outward Services of killing and
slaying the Sacrifices, etc. but they themselves only should serve at the
Altar, and within the holy place before the Ark of the Testimony, and the
Levites shall observe the Precepts and Charge which he has given them
concerning their Ministry, and concerning the sacred things of the Tabernacle
which are committed to their Care, that so every one keeping his station, and
doing his duty, there may be no wrath any more upon the Children of Israel;
only they shall not meddle with the Service of the Sanctuary and Altar lest
they die. And if the Priests did not endeavor to prevent any such Error or
Miscarriage in their Brethren the Levites, they should also incur the like
danger. Thus he appoints the Levites to minister to the Priests, and orders
that he that is not of the Tribe of Levi shall not be admitted to serve and
minister unto them. For God having taken the Levites instead of the firstborn
of the Children of Israel to himself, he had given them unto Aaron and his Sons
for his own Service, and the Service of the Tabernacle. Therefore he and his
Sons should exercise their Priests Office in all things that concern the Altar
of Burnt-Offerings; and in all things which are to be done within the outward
Veil (whereby the holy place is divided from the Court); the High Priest in the
most holy place, and inferior Priests within the Sanctuary or holy place. And
God tells Aaron and his Sons, That it is his free Gift and favor to them, that
he had made choice of them before others for the Priestly Office, and that He
had ordained, That whoever is not of Aaron's Line, and goes about to meddle
with the Priestly Office, shall be put to death, from verse. 1. to 8.

The Lord having thus set down the Office and Work of the Priests and Levites,
he comes now to set out their portion which they should have as a reward of
their Service. And first, He tells Aaron that for the sake of his Office to
which he was anointed, and because He and his Sons were separated from worldly
Employments, to attend upon holy things, therefore they should have a part in
every Meat Offering, Sin-Offering, Trepass Offering, and in the Court See
Levit. 6.16.26. and Lev. 7.6. Ezekiel. 42, 13, 14.
of the Tabernacle or Tents round about it [called here the most holy place
comparatively, in respect to the Camp of Israel, and the great Court for the
people which was without the Priests Court,] they might eat of them. 2ly, They
should have the Heave-Offerings and Wave-Offerings; that is, the right Shoulder
and wave-breast of the Peace Offerings, with all other Gifts that were heaved
and waved, no part thereof being burnt upon the Altar. And of these the Priests
Daughters might eat whilst they remained in their Fathers house; but being
married to strangers they might not eat of the holy things, [see Levit. 22.12,
13.] Neither might any unclean person eat thereof. 3ly, They should have the
first fruits. Some of the first fruits of the Land were brought to the Lord at
their three great Feasts, as a sheaf of their Barley, at the Feast of the
Passover, Levit. 23.10. And two loaves of their new-Wheat at the Feast of
Pentecost, verse. 17. And the first of their Wine and Oil at the Feast of
Tabernacles. But these were brought in the name of all the Inhabitants of the
Land in general. Besides these, particular men were of their own Corn and
Fruits to bring the first fruits unto the Lord, as is enjoined Exodus 22.29. and
23.19. concerning which there is no other direction given, but that they should
be of the first, and of the best; the quantity being left to the liberty and
discretion of the Owner, to bring according as he had found the blessing of God
upon his Grounds. 4ly, They should have all things devoted, that is, all votive
and freewill-Offerings, see Levit. 27.28. except such things as were devoted as
a Sacrifice unto God. 5ly, The firstborn of men and beasts. The firstborn The
firstborn of men, before they were redeemed, were to be presented before the
Lord in the Temple, Exodus 13.12. Levit. 2.22. And that could not be done before
the Mother was purified, which required forty days time, Levit. 12.4. The
firstborn of the Tribe of Levi were free from this Redemption.
of men they were to permit to be redeemed at a month old V. 16. Secundum
aestimationem seu ordinationem tuam] Refero ad illud post mensem: q. d.
Constitues diem quando velles eum redimi. Hic dies Communi usu erat 40 a partu,
ut eadem opera and matter purificaretur, and filius redimeretur. Bonfrerius.
for five Shekels, [see Levit. 27.6.] and the firstlings of unclean Beasts they
were to permit to be redeemed after eight days at a lower price; but the
firstlings of Cows, Sheep and Goats were not to be redeemed, they must be
sacrificed, and their blood sprinkled, and their fat burnt on the Altar, that
they may be a sweet savor to the Lord, but their flesh should go to the
Priests. God tells them, He had allotted them these things for their
Maintenance The Hebrew Doctors write of 24 Gifts which God bestowed on the
Priests, with the order and use of them. See Ainsworth, page 113.
for ever, (that is, whilst this Dispensation lasted) by a perpetual and
unchangeable Covenant, called a Covenant of Salt, because firm and
incorruptible; Salt having a virtue to preserve any thing from corruption. God
further tells Aaron, That when the Land shall be divided by Lot, there shall be
no lot for the Levites. They should have no Inheritance in it; He himself would
be their part and portion. Indeed they had Cities Concerning the 35 Cities and
Suburbs of the Levites, and 13 Cities and Suburbs of the Priests. See
Richardson, page 32.
and Suburbs, but they were given them by the other Tribes.

The Lord further tells Aaron, That He had given the Levites all the Tenths or
Tithes of the Children of Israel V. 24. Which they offered as an
Heave Offering, that is, an Oblation to the Lord, and a sign of their homage
and subjection, and thankfulness to him for his blessings.
as a reward of their Service, Levit. 27.30. And straightly charges that no
Israelite that is not of that Tribe presume to come nigh to the Tabernacle to
do any part of the Service belonging to the Levites, lest they die for it. And
He tells him, That the Levites should bear the punishment of their own
Iniquity, if they should transgress, yea and of the peoples too, if by their
not watching over the holy things, they suffered the people to transgress about
them. He further injoyns that the Levites shall offer as an Oblation to the
Lord, and pay a tenth of all the Tithes they receive unto the Priests, and this
the Lord would accept at their hands no less than if having Lands as others
had, they should pay Tithe of the increase of them, as the rest of the people
did to them, and hereby they should testify their homage and thankfulness to
God. And they were to offer and separate out of the Tithes paid to them for the
hallowed part to be paid to the Priests that which was of all the best. And the
Priests might eat of these Tithes indifferently in any place. And He further
declares, That if the Levites do heave or separate a tenth part of the best of
their Tithes for the Priests use, they shall not expose themselves to
punishment, which they would else do if they neglected it. In conclusion here
is added a general warning, that both Priests and Levites should take heed of
polluting or profaning the holy things, or suffering them to be profaned by
others, (which might be done many ways) that so they might prevent wrath from
falling on themselves and others.

Chapter 18. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXVI.
THe Lord having appointed the Priests and Levites to do the Service of the
Tabernacle, and to watch over the people, that they might not trangress about
any of the holy things, He here appoints a water of separation to be made, that
so if any of the people had contracted any legal uncleanness, by the sprinkling
of this water upon them, they might be cleansed, and so might come freely again
to the Service of God in the Tabernacle, without fear of those Plagues, which
otherwise their pollutions might bring upon them. For the making of this water
a red Heifer was to be provided, and that by the common charge of all the
Children of Israel, because it was to be for the common good of them all, and
for the cleansing of any one among them that was by any accident legally
unclean. It must be an Heifer without spot, and upon which never came yoke. For
they used in those times to plow and draw their Carts with Heifers and Cows, as
well as with Oxen, see Judge. 14.18. This Heifer was to be given to Eleazar,
because by doing this Service, that was now to be done, he was to be unclean,
and 'twas fit that he rather than Aaron should be defiled. She must also be
carried out of the Camp as an accursed thing, figuring Christ's being made a
Curse, and suffering without the City, Heb. 13.12. And Eleazar was to sprinkle
of her blood seven times, turning his face toward the Tabernacle of the
Congregation. And her skin and her flesh, her blood and her dung were all to be
burnt in his sight. And Eleazar was to take Cedar-wood and Hyssop, and Scarlet,
and to cast them into the midst of the burning of the Heifer, to signify that
these things should be used for a sprinkle in sprinkling the unclean with the
water of separation, see Levit. 14.4. And Eleazar was to wash his Clothes, and
bath his flesh, and to be unclean unto the evening. The like is enjoined to him
that burnt this Heifer, v. 8. and to him that gathered up the ashes, v. 10. and
to him that sprinkled an unclean person with the water made of those ashes, v.
21.
This might intimate to them that it was not so much the water made with the
ashes of this Heifer, as the thing signified thereby, that had virtue in it to
purify those that were spiritually unclean, and consequently to show the
imperfection of the legal Priesthood, because they that were employed in
preparing this water, which was for the cleansing of others, were themselves
defiled. 'Twas further enjoined, That the ashes of this Heifer should be
gathered up by a man that was clean, and laid up without the Camp in a clean
place, As for the place where those ashes were kept when they came into the
Land of Canaan, it is not expressed. Some hold that those ashes were dispersed
into all the Cities, that those who were unclean might have wherewith to
purify and cleanse themselves.
because they were now conseerated to an holy use. However the man that
gathered them up was thereby made unclean, because they were the remainders of
an Heifer slain for the sins of the people. And the Statute of making and
reserving of these ashes, for a water of separation, was to bind both the
Israelite and the Proselyte, or Stranger that sojourned with them as long as
this Dispensation lasted. By this Law it was further enjoined, That he that
touched the dead body of a man was to be unclean seven days, and he was to
purify himself with this water on the third day, and on the seventh day,
[vers. 19.] and then he was to be clean, else not.

And whoever having contracted this kind of uncleanness, and does not make use
of this way to purify himself, but comes in that state into the Court of the
Tabernacle, he shall be cut off by the Sentence of the Judge, if it be proved
that he did it presumptuously, because he despises not only the Ceremonial
purifying, but the thing signified thereby, viz. the spiritual cleansing through
the blood of the Messiah. Otherwise if he did it ignorantly, he was to bring
such a Sacrifice as is enjoined, Levit. 5.3, 6. Further, if any man came into
the Tent of a dead man, it rendered him unclean, yea and all that was in the
Tent; Every open Vessel that takes in the air of the Tent was ceremoniously
unclean. Or if a man touched a dead body, or the bone of a dead man, it rendered
him unclean. And thus hereby was figured the spreading and infectious nature of
sin. And one of the Priests that was clean was to put running water to the
ashes of the burnt-Heifer, and with a bunch of Hyssop tied to a Cedar-stick
with a Scarlet-thread to sprinkle the person, or Tent, or Vessels that were
unclean, and then to be himself unclean until the evening, because he had
touched the water of separation. And whatsoever any unclean person touched, was
to be held unclean, to signify the contagion of sin, spreading from one to
another.

Numb. 19. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXVII.
THe Camp now advanced to Kadesh in the Wilderness of Zin, which was near to
the Land of Edom, in the first month of the fortieth year, after their coming
out of Egypt, and there Miriam died and was buried, four months before her
Brother Aaron, and eleven months before her Brother Moses. She was the eldest
of the three, she attained to the age of 130, [see Exodus 2.4, 7.] she was a
Prophetess, and by her also God guided the Israelites in their Travels, [see
Mich. 6.4.] she (in all likelihood) was the Girl that was set to watch what
would become of Moses when he was exposed in an Ark of Bulrushes on the River
Nile, see Exodus 2.4, etc.

Numb. 20. verse. 1.

SECT. LXVIII.
AT this Kadesh So that in their Travels from Kadesh-barnea, where the Spies
came back to Moses to this Kadesh in the Desert of Zin, there were about 38
years spent, and most of their Fathers, that were numbered at their coming out
of Egypt, were in this time dead.
the people for want of water murmur again against Moses and Aaron. With the
same want God had tried their Fathers in the first year after their coming out
of Egypt, Exodus 17.4. and they murmured then as their Children do now, and they
had water given them out of a Rock. But these their Children were worse than
their Fathers, because the supply their Fathers had from God in that extremity
should have been an argument and encouragement to them to rely on his
Providence now, and not to have distrustfully murmured, or wished so
desperately as they did. Would God (say they) we had died with our Brethren,
whom God suddenly destroyed in the Insurrection of Corah, and at other times,
thereby (as it were) slighting that fearful Judgment of being cut off in Gods
firery Indignation, in comparison of being pinched with a present want of
water. They highly expostulate with Moses and Aaron for bringing them into that
barren Wilderness, which was no place to sow seed in, or plant Figg-Trees,
Vines or Pomegranates, but a Land of Deserts, a Land of Drought, and where
there was no water, a Land through which no man passed, and where no man dwelt,
see Jer. 2.6. Moses and Aaron hereupon betake themselves unto the door of the
Tabernacle to intercede with God as formerly for this rebellious people. And
the Lord immediately signified his approach and the actual manifestation of his
glorious Presence, by the descending of the Cloud to the door of the
Tabernacle, [see Chapter 14.10. and Chapter 16.19.] And here He Commands Moses to take
the Rod, (viz. Aaron's Rod which budded) out of the Tabernacle, See Numb. 20.
v. 9. and Chapter 17.10.
and with that Rod in his hand to speak to the Rock before the Children of
Israel, and it should give forth water. Moses indeed with his miraculous Rod,
at their eleventh station at Rephidim by Mount Sinai, struck the Rock in Horeb
as God commanded Him, and water came forth; And he named the place Massah or
Meribah. But here at this their 33th station (38 years after) with Aaron's
budded Rod (having his spirit provoked by these rebellious people) He smites
the Rock twice without any such Command or Commission from God to smite it at
all. And he and Aaron likewise as it seems speak unadvisedly with their lips,
See Psalm. 106.33.
uttering words of passion and distrust, possibly to this purpose; Hear now ye
Rebels, must we fetch you water out of this Rock? Never imagine that God will
work such a Miracle for such a rebellious Crew as ye are. However the Rock gave
forth water abundantly. God was very angry with Moses and Aaron that they had
thus distrusted him, and had not sanctified V. 12. Ut sanctificaretis me]
alloquendo Petram, Et miraculum cum fiducia praedicendo. Ita mortem His
interminatur ut populus intelligeret sibi non parciturum Deum qui viris tantis
non pepercerit. Porro haec Feri allegoria, uti non Moses Hebraeos sed Joshua
perduxit in Palestinam, ita non Lex in caelum nos, verum Christus evehit. Demum
hinc palam est quo spiritu haec Moses scripserit, qui vitia net celet sua, nec
suorum. Vide Cap. 12.1. Anonym. in loc. Public peccarunt ideoque severius cum
iis egit Deus, quam alibi cum Moses infidelitatem proderet, Numb. 11.22, 23.
quia tum primum peccavit.
him inwardly in their hearts, by trusting in Him, [1 Pet. 3.15.] nor glorified
him outwardly, by ascribing to him the glory of his truth and power before the
Children of Israel; and therefore He tells them, They shall not bring that
people into Canaan, [see Deuteronomy. 3.25, 26.] And as the former place at Rephidim
was called Massah and Meribah, viz. a place of Strife and Contention (because
the people there strove with the Lord, that is, contended with Moses his
Servant, which he accounts as contending with Himself,) so shall this also be
called. And thus the Lord was sanctified in them or among them; that is, among
the Israelites by giving them water, and thereby manifesting his Almighty
Power, Faithfulness, and his Goodness and Compassion toward them,
notwithstanding their great Provocations.

Numb. 20. from 1. to 14.

SECT. LXIX.
MOses now by Gods direction sends Messengers to the King of Edom, to desire
Him that He would please to permit them (who were His own flesh and blood, as
being descended from Jacob Brother to Esau,) to pass through his Country, that
being the nearest and most convenient way into Canaan. And they amiably desire
this, because God had charged them that they should not meddle with the Sons of
Esau, or their possession, [ Deuteronomy. 2.4, 5.] He tells him, He cannot but have
heard of their sore and long Troubles and Oppressions which they suffered in
Egypt, and how (upon their crying unto the Lord) he sent his Angel, viz. his
own eternal Son, the Angel or Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, [see Exodus
3.2. and Mal. 3.1.] who conducted them in the way by a Cloud and Pillar of
fire. He tells him, They would not turn aside into their Fields or Vineyards to
do them any damage, and would drink only of their Rivers that were common, and
not meddle with their Wells dug for their private use (which were very
precious in those hot and dry Countries) without paying for it. But the King of
Edom would not consent to it; so they were forced to fetch a compass through the
Wilderness which lay about the Land of Edom. Notwithstanding as they went along
their Coasts, in the out-skirts of their Country, the Edomites afforded them
Victuals for their money, [ Deuteronomy. 2.29.] though they did not come forth to meet
them with bread and water, as men use to do who wish success and prosperity to
those to whom they bring it, see Deuteronomy. 23.3, 4.

Numb. 20. from verse. 14. to 22.

SECT. LXX.
FRom Kadesh the Camp removes to mount Hor. A hill in Mosera, Deuteronomy. 10.6. or
whose other top was called Moscra. From this Mount Hor the people that were
driven out of this Country by Esau were called Horims, Deuteronomy. 2.12. and Esau is
called the Horite, Genesis 36.20.
Here God tells Moses, That Aaron should be gathered unto his people; that is,
his godly Forefathers that died before him, see Genesis 25.8. Heb. 12.23. He
commands him to bring Aaron and Eleazar his Son up to the top of Mount Hor. And
they accordingly went up in the sight of all the Congregation. Here Aaron being
attired in all his glorious Vestments, Moses strips him of them, and puts them
upon Eleazar his Son, to show that God had appointed him to succeed in his
Fathers Office, and that the High Priests eldest Son, Eleazar's Sons did
succeed him to the time of the Judges. Then the High Priesthood was translated
to the Posterity of Ithamar, the other Son of Aaron; for Eli was of the stock
of Ithamar.
or the next Heir of their Family (unless rendered incapable by some blemish)
was still to succed in that Office. Thus on the first day of the fifth month,
in the fortieth year after their coming out of Egypt, Aaron, being an 123 years
old, See Numb. 33.38.
died, (seven months and seven days before Moses) and was there buried, and the
whole Congregation mourned for him 30 days. So long they mourned for Moses,
Deuteronomy. 34.8.


Numb. 20. from verse. 22. to the end.

SECT. LXXI.
AT this time King Arad the Canaanite (whose Country lay in the South of
Canaan) understanding by the Spies he had sent forth to observe the course of
the Israelites, V. 1. By the way of the Spies,] it might be a way so called,
and well known by that name at that time.
that they were turned back again from the Red Sea, and marched directly upon
the South of Canaan, (not knowing of Moses's purpose to compass the Land of
Edom) he immediately marched forth with his Army as far as Mount Hor, in the
edge of the Desert, where the Israelites now lay, and there fought with them,
and took some of them Prisoners. The Israelites intending to renew the battle,
and again once more to encounter Arad and his Army, they called upon the Lord
for help, and vowed unto Him, that if he would please to deliver these Enemies
into their hands, they would utterly destroy and burn their Cities, and that
nothing of their Goods should be reserved for their own private use. The Lord
was pleased to hear their prayer, so that in the second battle they vanquished,
and overcame them. But how could the Israelites being so far off in the
Wilderness destroy their Cities lying in Canaan, [Numb. 33.40.] into which they
came not till after Moses's death? It seems the performance of this Vow was
long after made, viz. when they were come unto the Land. For the King of Arad
is reckoned for one of those whom Joshua destroyed, [ Joshua 12.14. Judge. 1.16,
17.] so that they now conquered the Canaanites Army that came out against them,
and devoted the Spoils which they took; and afterward Therefore this clause
seems here inserted either by Moses prophetically, or some other holy men
afterward.
when their Cities came into their possession, they utterly destroyed them, and
so paid their Vow which now they made. From whence the place was called Hormah,
that is, the place where the Vow of utterly destroying these Canaanites was
performed.

Numb. 21. from 1. to 4.

SECT. LXXII.
LEaving Mount Hor, they fetch a compass about the Country of Edom (the people
being much vexed that they were forced to go so far about) and on the East Side
of it at Zalmona So called from the Effigies or portraicture of a Serpent there
set up.
they make their 35th station. Here, loathing Manna again as light bread, and
wanting also water, they in a great discontent Expostulate with Moses, and
murmur against God By God in this place, Christ is meant, see 1 Cor. 10.9. who
is of the same divine Essence with the Father. He it was that led the
Israelites by day in the pillar of Cloud, and by night in the pillar of fire,
see Exodus 20.21.
Himself; This was their wonted carriage in all their straights and
difficulties. See Exodus 14.11. and Exodus 15.24. and Exodus 16.2, 3. and Exodus
17.2, 3. Numb. 11.1, 4, 5. Numb. 16.13, 14. and Numb. 20.3, 4, 5.
The people murmuring in this manner, the Lord sent fiery Serpents among them,
whose venomous biting caused a grievous burning in their bodies, insomuch that
multitudes of them, by this Judgment, perished. Thus God with the venomous
biting of fiery Serpents punishes the virulent and fiery Tongues of these
murmuring Israelites. The people hereupon come to Moses to beg of him that he
would interceed with the Lord for them. The Lord was pleased to appoint Moses
to make an Effigies, a Figure or Representation in Brass of one of those fiery
Serpents, wherewith they were stung, and then to set it upon a pole in the
Camp, so that every man that was stung with those fiery Serpents might look
upon this brazen Serpent, and so be healed. And this was an eminent Type of the
promised Messiah, as our Savior himself shows, Joh. 3.14, 15. The Israelites
carefully kept this brazen Serpent unto the days of Hezekiah; but then in that
age, because the people burnt Incense to it, that good King brake it in pieces,
2 King. 18.4.

Numb. 21. from verse. 4. to 10.

SECT. LXXIII.
THeir 36th incamping was at Punon, [Numb. 33.42.] their 37th at Oboth, [Numb.
21, 10. and Chapter 33.43.] their 38th at Ije-abarim. Upon the borders of Moab,
[Numb. 33.44.] to wit, in that Desert which lies over against the Land of Moab
toward the East, [Numb. 21.11.] and is called the Coast of Moab, Deuteronomy. 2.18.
And when they removed thence to pass by the Valley or Brook of Zared, God
forbad them to make War upon Moab, Deuteronomy. 2. from verse. 8. to 13. And in the
time since they encamped at Kadesh-barnea In Kadesho annos 37 cum dimidio
commorati sunt; dimidium vero anni in itinere a Kadesh ad Zered insumpserunt.
Jun. viri belli vocantur qui 20 aetatis annum expleverant.
(38 years ago) to this time, the whole Race of those that mutined and rebelled
against God, from twenty years old and upwards, were wholly extinct and dead,
see Deuteronomy. 2. from 13. to 16. Their 39th Encamping was at Dibon-Gad, [Numb.
33.45.] Their 40th at Almon Diblathaim, verse. 46. in the Wilderness of Moab.
The Israelites now coming to pass the borders of Moab at Ar, and approaching
the Country of the Ammonites, God also forbad them to make any War upon them,
or to distress them, or to seize upon their Land, for He had given it unto the
Children of Lot for a Possession, Deuteronomy. 2.19. Then God commanded them to pass
over the River Arnon, which at that time divided the Country of the Amorites
from the Land of the Moabites. Indeed the Country beyond Arnon toward Jordan
had been in the Possession of the Moabites, but Sihon had taken it from them.
Which Moses notes to let us see how God by this means had provided this Country
for the Israelites, who might not else have meddled with it, if it had been
still in the Moabites possession, but not being so now, the Israelites are
commanded to take it from the Amorites, Deuteronomy. 2.24. Moses also further to show
that the Israelites had good right to this Country, cites a writing or Relation
called the Book of the Wars of the Lord, Which probably was one of the
Israelitish Annals, and then passed among them, but is since lost, see Joshua
10.13. 2 Samuel 1.18.
wherein (it seems) the Victories which God gave the Israelites over their
Enemies were largely described. In that writing Moses shows it was related what
God did at the Red Sea, and at the Brook of Arnon, at the stream of the Brook
that goes down to the dwelling of Ar, and lies upon the border of Moab. So
that Arnon was at this present the border between the Land of Moab and the Land
of the Amorites, though formerly the Land beyond Arnon belonged also to the
Moabites.

Numb. 21. from verse. 10. to 16.

SECT. LXXIV.
FRom thence they departed to Beer, which signifies a Well. Here the Lord did
again miraculously supply them with water, and that in the sight of all the
people. He stayed not now till they murmured again, but of his own accord did
appoint Moses to gather the people together, and to set the Princes of the
Tribes to dig with their Staves, having (as it is probable) little Spades or
Paddles at the end of them, promising them that a Well should thereupon
miraculously spring up, in that dry and barren place, which accordingly came to
pass. And thereupon the people sang that gratulatory Song wherein with much joy
and thankfulness to God they acknowledged the miraculous manner of the Wells
springing up, saying, Spring up, O well, sing ye unto it; that is, sing Praises
unto Him who gives it. This it seems was that renowned Well called Beer-Elim;
Isa. 15.8. that is, The Well of the mighty Ones.

Numb. 21. from 16. to 19.

SECT. LXXV.
FRom the Wilderness of Kedemoth Moses sent Messengers to Sihon the Amorite,
King of Heshbon, praying him to permit them quietly to pass through his Country,
which was a shorter cut to the Fords of Jordan; And they promise him they will
not do any injury to him or his people by the way; they would not turn into
their Fields or Vineyards to do them any damage, nor drink of their private
Wells of water without paying for them. See paraphrase on Deuteronomy. 2.
This possibly they did to make him the more inexcusable. But he denying them
passage, and making War upon them, He himself was slain, and his Host
discomfited, and so the Israelites possessed themselves of all their Cities,
utterly destroying all the Inhabitants thereof, and his Country, unto the
borders of the Amorites, which was strong, and therefore Sihon had not
encroached upon their Country as he had upon the Moabites, at least not beyond
the River Jabbock. Among other Cities which they took, Heshbon was one, which
Sihon took from the former King of the Moabites, who was King before their
present King Balak, and so both Heshbon and the Country adjoining was the
possession of Sihon when the Israelites took it. To prove this, Moses alleges
the proverbial or aenigmatical Song which (it seems) was first made and used by
the Amorites, by way of triumph over the vanquished Moabites: Come into
Heshbon, let the City of Sihon be built, and prepared; implying, that though
Heshbon perished, Verse. 30.
being in Moabs hands, yet now it should be more fairly built and fortified,
being in Sihons hands. For there is a fire gone out of Heshbon, a flame from
the City of Sihon, it has consumed Ar of Moab, and the Lords of the high
places of Arnon; that is, the fury of War which was kindled and began in the
subversion, and laying waste of Heshbon, brake out from thence, and consumed
the Country of the Moabites as far as Ar, a chief City of theirs, and the Lords
of the high places of Arnon; that is, their great men and Priests that
sacrificed in their high places: Woe unto thee, O Moab! thou art undone O
people of Chemosh; In this clause of their Song the Amorites scoff at Chemosh
the God of the Moabites, See Jer. 48.7, 13. The Ammonites god was Milcom, 1
Kings 11.5.
[1 Kings 11.7.] because he was not able to help them, but had permitted those
of them that escaped the Sword to be taken Captives by Sihon. They further
triumphantly add, We have shot at them; that is, all their Country between
Heshbon and Dibon (one of their high places in the Land of Moab) we have taken
from them; And we have wasted their Country even unto Nophah, which reaches
unto Medeba, See Isa. 15.2. and Jer. 48.18, 22.
another City in the Land of Moab.

Numb. 21. from 18. to 31.

SECT. LXXVI.
AFter this Moses sent his Spies to Jaazer, a City also that had been Moabs,
[Jer. 48.31, 32.] but now was the Amorites, which they took with the Towns
thereunto belonging, and cast out thence the Amorites from the River Arnon
(which is the bound of Moab) to the Brook of Jabbock which parts it from
Arnon, yet meddled not with the Country lying upon the River Jabbock, neither
with any of the Lands belonging at that time to the Children of Ammon or Moab,
as God commanded them. After this the Children of Israel marched to Bashan, a
rich Country, famous for its huge Oaks, [Ezek. 27.6.] and rich Pastures which
nourished strong and great Cattle, [ Deuteronomy. 32.14. Amos 4.1.] Og King of this
Country being a remnant of the Giants, whose Bedsted was of Iron nine Cubits in
length and four in breadth, [ Deuteronomy. 3.11.] came out against them and fought
with them at Edrei, and was there with all his people utterly vanquished and
destroyed by Moses and the Israelites (whom God encouraged to go out against
him) and they possessed themselves of all his Country, to wit, sixty Cities,
and all that Coast as far as Argob, Deuteronomy. 3. from verse. 1. to 18.

Numb. 21. from verse. 31. to the end.

SECT. LXXVII.
AFter these Victories the Israelites encamped in the plains So called, becase
they had been sometimes Moabs, though since the Amorites, and now the
Israelites by Conquest.
of Moab, on this side of the Ford of Jordan, right over against Jerico, at
Abel-Shittim, which was their 42d Encamping: Here they continued till after
Moses's death, and till under the Conduct of Joshua they passed over Jordan
unto the Land of Canaan. In which time many notable things fell out, even all
recorded from this place to the end of Deuteronomy.

Numb. 22. verse. 1.

SECT. LXXVIII.
THe Moabites had no reason to be afraid of the Israelites, because God had
commanded them not to meddle with them, and accordingly they had peaceably
passed by their Country. Yet their minds were stricken with such a terror from
God, that all this could not quiet them. They saw the Israelites were a
numerous and mighty people; They had already vanquished two Kings, they were
still upon their borders. Thus God made good his Promise to his people, Exodus
15.15. As for the mighty men of Moab, trembling shall take hold upon them, all
the Inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away, and Deuteronomy. 2.25. This day will I
begin to put the dread of thee, and the fear of thee upon the Nations that are
under the whole Heaven, who shall hear report of thee, and shall tremble and be
in anguish because of thee. Balak King of Moab and his people being under these
fears, they send to the Elders of the Midianites to join with them against the
Israelites, telling them, That this vast Company were like to lick up all about
them, as the Ox licketh up the grass of the field. It Is very plain, that the
Midianites had no manner of reason to join with them. For first, They were
allied to the Israelites being the Posterity of Midian, who was the Son of
Abraham by his wife Keturah, [Gen. 25.12.] Secondly, The Israelites had not
hitherto meddled with them. Thirdly, The Israelites Conquest of the Amorites was
an advantage to them, because they were by this means freed from Sihons
Tyrannical Yoke, under whom (as it appears) they were before in bondage.
However, after Consultation (it seems) they joined together in this business,
and Balak and they sent for Balaam a Southsayer, who was at that time famous
for his Enchantments and Divinations (and dwelt at Pethor, a City in
Mesopotamia, his native Country, In Mesopotamia or Aram Abraham first dwelt, [
Acts 7.2. Genesis 24.4, 10.] and there he served strange Gods, Josh. 24.2. In this
Country all the Patriarchs, the Sons of Jacob except Benjamin were born, and
brought up, Genesis 35.26. till Jacob their Father fled the Land, Genesis 31.21.
Jacob's Posterity hereupon professed their Father to be an Aramite, Deuteronomy. 26.5.
And from Aram is now Balaam sent for to curse them. The Eastern-Country was
infamous for Divination, and such like Arts, Isa. 2.6.
situate upon the River Euphrates,) to come and curse the Israelites,
purposing afterward to make War upon them. The Messengers (carrying with them
large Presents to satisfy him for his Divinations, called by the Apostle the
wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15.) come to Him and tell him, That there
was a mighty great people come out of Egypt, which covered the face of the
Earth, and they were now encamped over against Moab; They tell Him, they came
to him from Balak King of Moab, and from the Midianites, to desire him to come
over and curse this people; For they were confident he was able by his Curses
and Enchantments very much to weaken them; nay they believed that those whom he
blessed were blessed, and those whom he cursed were cursed. Balaam having
received their Message, desired them to stay with him that might, and he would
acquaint them next morning what the Lord Jehovah the true God (of whom probably
he had some knowledge, and professed to worship, though it seems he being an
Idolater and Southsayer worshipped other false Gods also,) did speak unto him.
The Lord was pleased not by the force of Baalams Enchantments, but of his own
free will to speak to him, as he has often (for his peoples sake) revealed his
Will to wicked men, as particularly to Pharaoh, Genesis 41.15. and to
Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 2.45. God charges Baalam he should not go with these
Messengers, much less should He presume to curse the people of Israel, for they
were blessed. Balaam in the morning tells the Messengers, That God would not
give him leave to go with them, but he conceals from them the other part of the
Lords Injunction, viz. That he should not presume to Curse the Israelites, for
they were blessed. The Messengers returning with this Message, Balak sends
again to him, and sends more honorable Persons than the former, importuning
him to come, promising to promote him to great honor if he would come and
curse this people for Him. These new Ambassadors coming to make this second
Address to Balaam, He plainly tells them, That if King Balak would give him his
house full of Silver and Gold, he durst do neither less nor more than God
enjoined him. However if they pleased to stay with him that night, he would see
what the Lord would say unto him. God now permits Balaam to go with these new
Ambassadors, not that it was pleasing to Him he should do so, (as appears verse.
22.) but the more to discover the evil disposition of Balaam's heart, and to
manifest his own Glory in constraining him to bless those whom he intended to
curse. Balaam attended with two Servants goes along with these new Messengers,
but God was angry with him for it, because he saw he had a great desire to
curse the Israelites, and went with a purpose to do it, if he could be
permitted. Whilst he was upon the way, the Angel of the Lord, (viz. the Angel
that redeemed Jacob from all evil, Genesis 48.16.) sets himself as an Adversary
against him. The Angel appearing in a visible shape, with his drawn Sword in
his hand (a sign of wrath and vengeance) the poor Ass Balaam rod upon had her
eyes opened to see him, and turned aside out of the way. Balaam hereupon smote
her to bring her into the way again. The Angel meets him a second time in
another place, where there was a wall on both sides. The Ass seeing him,
thrust her self unto the wall, and so crushed Balaam's foot; he thereupon
smites her again. The Angel meets him a third time in a narrow way where there
was no turning to the right hand or to the left, then the Ass fell down under
Balaam, who being extremely enraged, smote her again with his staff. God
herupon by his Almighty Power opened the mouth of the Ass, and caused her to
speak articulately and understandingly, and to rebuke the madness of the
Prophet, 2 Pet. 2.16. Jude verse. 11. She said unto him, What have I done unto
thee, that thou should smite me these three times? Balaam being inured as
Sorcerers and Witches are to hear evil Spirits speak in the shape of bruit
Beasts, was not so much astonished at it as other men would have been, but
briskly replies, I beat thee because thou have abused me; If there were a Sword
now in my hand, I would kill thee. The Ass answered, Am not I thine Ass, upon
whom thou have ridden ever since I was thine? Did I ever use to serve thee so
before? Then the Lord opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the Angel of the
Lord standing in the way with a drawn Sword in his hand, and he bowed down his
head and worshipped. And the Angel said, Wherefore have thou smitten thine
Ass, behold it was I that withstood thee, because thy way is perverse before
me, in that thou have so earnestly desired to go to Balak notwithstanding I did
so absolutely charge thee to the contrary. And now thou go with a purpose to
curse my people, though I have commanded thee again and again that thou
should not curse them: 'Twas well for thee that the Ass turned from me, else
I had saved her alive, and surely slain thee. Balaam said unto the Angel, I
have sinned, I knew not that thou stoodst in the way against me. Then he
faintly proffers to go back again to his own house, but yet loving the wages of
unrighteousness, he was not willing to do it, except necessity did constrain
him. The Angel seeing him so desirous to go, bids him go on, only he should be
sure to speak nothing but what He enjoined him. When Balaam came to Balak,
Balak began to expostulate with him that he did not come to him sooner, telling
him, He was a Prince that had power to have preferred him. Balaam tells him,
That now he was come, he had no Commission to speak any thing to Him, but what
God should put into his mouth. Then Balak offered Sheep and Oxen in Sacrifice,
and sent part of them (as the custom was) for Balaam and his own Princes and
Nobles to feast upon. On the morrow he brought him to the high places
consecrated to the Worship of Baal; for Idolaters thought their high places
fittest to obtain their Requests in from the hands of the Gods whom they
worshipped. And he carried him to those high places also, that from thence he
might have a full sight of the people of Israel, who were encamped in the
Plains of Moab, whom he would have him to behold, that his Curses might be the
more powerful and effectual.

Numb. 22. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXXIX.
BAlaam now appoints Balak to cause seven Altars there to be built, and to
prepare him seven Oxen and seven Rams to Sacrifice to Jehovah, that he might
obtain leave to Curse his people. Seven was a number sanctified by God for many
msteries, [see Levit. 4.6.] and particularly in Sacrifices (see Job 42.8. 1 Chronicles. 15.26. 2 Chronicles. 29.21.) wherefore the Aramites, and Moabites, and other
Nations having learned from their Ancestors the manner of sacrificing unto the
true God retained it to Moses's time, and long after, though they corrupted it
with their own Superstitions, and abused it to much Impiety. Seven Altars
therefore being prepared, they offered on every Altar a Bullock and a Ram.
Balaam bids Balak stand by the Burnt-Offerings, and there to pray for good
success, whilst he himself would betake himself to some solitary place in the
top of that hill to exercise his feats of Divination and Enchantments, [see Chapter
24.1.] and to observe Signs if any appeared. And the Lord was pleased there to
meet Balaam, not for the sake of his Enchantments, but voluntarily for the
manifestation of his own Glory, and the good of his people. God not regarding
his Sacrifices (which he seemed so much to depend upon) told him what he should
say, and forced him to bless the Israelites instead of cursing them. And Balaam
lifted up his Parable, Parabolum, h. e. Sermonem propheticum quod frequentes
sint parabolae in Prophetis. By a Parable is usually meant a grave Speech
containing excellent matter of Instruction, especially when delivered in an
high strain of Language, figurative expressions, and a certain splendour of
words more than usual, which carry a kind of majesty in them, yet withal they
are usually dark and obscure, see Ezekiel. 20.49.
that is, declared his Prophetic Vision, and the Answer which he had received
from the Lord, pronouncing it with an high and audible Voice, saying, Balak
sent for me from Mesopotamia to come hither to Curse this people; But how can I
Curse those whom God will not have cursed? I have seen this people from the top
of the Rocks, and indeed the very sight of them is full of majesty and terror.
This I must Prophecy of them, That God will cast out the Inhabitants of
Canaan, and place them in their stead, and so they shall dwell alone, in a Land
of their own, under the Government of their own Laws and Princes; and no Nation
shall be worthy to be compared with them, and that chiefly because they shall
be Gods peculiar people (see Ezod. 19.5.) and separated from other people of
the World by their Religion, Laws and Manners. And who can look upon the vast
and miraculous increase of this people without admiration? an express sign of
Gods great blessing upon them. They are even like the dust of the earth for
multitude, [see Genesis 13.10.] who can number one Squadron, or fourth part of
them as they are now encamped. I am so far from endeavoring to bring any
unfortunate death or ruin upon this people, who are Gods chosen Ones, and
directed by his Laws to walk in ways of holiness and righteousness, that I, for
my part, desire to die the death of the righteous among them, and that my last
end may be like unto theirs. Here Balaam testifies his belief of the Souls
immortality, and the different future state of good and bad. Othe^wise what
were the death of the righteous better than that of the wicked?
Balak hearing this, angrily replies, I sent for thee to Curse mine Enemies,
and behold thou have blessed them altogether. Balaam answered, He must speak
what God had put into his mouth. Balak then desired him to remove to another
place, hoping possibly that that might prove a more lucky and successful place
than the first had been. For Idolaters used in their conceits to attribute much
to the luckiness of times and places. Balak had carried him before where he saw
the whole Army of the Israelites, and possibly he thought that the sight of
their vast multitudes did something dismay and damp his spirit, that he durst
not curse them. He resolves therefore to carry him where he should only see the
outermost part of them, and should not see them all. And accordingly carries
him to the field of the Spies or Scout-watches, so called (as it seems) because
there they kept the watch of the Country. Here also they build seven Altars,
and offer Sacrifices, and Balak stood by the Burnt-Offerings, and Balaam betook
himself to a solitary place again to practice his Enchantments as before. God
meets Balaam and appoints him what return he shall make, And coming to Balak,
He utters again his Parable or Prophetic Vision, saying, Hearken, O Balak, to
the Message that I have brought thee from the Lord. The word of God is not like
the Speeches of the Sons of men; They oftentimes promise, but do not or cannot
perform. But all such falsehood and variableness is far from God. The Strength
of Israel will not lie, nor repent; See 1 Samuel 15.29.
He has commanded me to bless this people, and I shall not turn away the
blessing from them. There is no hope that God will ever be induced to give way
that they should be cursed. For He has not, V. 21. Deus non videt] h. e. non
probat, non fert non tolerat, etc. Aliqui verba sic reddunt non aspexit
injuriam adversus Jacobum, nec vidit vexationem adversus Israelem, h. e. non
vidit ixjurias illis allatas quin vindicavit ut in Pharaone, etc. vel per
futurum non videbit quin aut suos proteget, aut inimicos puniet vel in tempore
praesenti, sed modo potentiali non far potest videre vexationem Israeli
illatam, etc. vel haec omnia simul conjungi possunt, non vidit, non videbit,
non far potest, etc. (...) and (...) non solum peccatum sed afflictionem,
injuriam, and vexationem significant. Et ^ non subjective sed objective
sumitur, scil. adversus Jacobum, adversus Israelem.
nor will He at any time see wicked injuriousness practiced against Jacob, or
perverse Counsels and vexation against Israel, so as to approve of it, but will
show himself in their defense by opposing those that do oppose and oppress
them. The truth is, the Lord their God is present with them, and reigns as
King among them, and the joyful shout of a King and his people encouraging one
another to battle is found among them. God, that brought them out of Egypt is
an Almighty God, He has the strength of an Unicorn, his Power is irresistible,
[see Job 39.10, 11. and Numb. 24.8.] surely there is no Enchantment (that will
prevail) against Jacob, nor no Divination against Israel that will hurt Him.
And as at this time, V. 23. Sicut hoc tempore ita and in posterum.
so hereafter it shall be published and declared what great things God has
done for this people, and what things He shall hereafter do. For these
Israelites will be wonderfully Victorious, Behold this people shall rise up as
a great Lion, and lift up himself as a young Lion, he shall not lie down until
he eat of the prey and drink of the blood of the slain; that is, till he have
gotten a full Victory over his Enemies.

Balak was extreme angry to hear these words, and told him, If he would not
curse this people (for which end he sent for him) he should not however have
blessed them. Balaam replies, He must do as God commanded him. Balak hearing
this, resolves however to try a third time what could be done against Israel,
and therefore now carries Balaam to the top of Mount Peor, where the Moabites
used to sacrifice to their Idol called Baal-Peor, [Ch. 25.3.] having there an
House or Temple built for him, called Beth-Peor, Deuteronomy. 3.29. Here they build
Altars, and offer Sacrifices as before. Formerly when Balaam left Balak
standing by his Altars, and went himself aside to see what God would say to
him, he used by Enchantments (that is, some of those magical Arts and
diabolical ways which Sorcerers use) to seek liberty and beg leave of God to
curse the Israelites, but having found that it pleased the Lord still to bless
them, and that there was no hope by his Enchantments to get leave to curse
them, he resolved now to give over that course, and suddenly to curse them
before he had any charge from God to the contrary. And accordingly he turned
his eyes toward the Wilderness where the Children of Israel were encamped,
intending now to do it; but the glorious and goodly sight of their multitude,
and order appalled and astonished him, and suddenly the Spirit of God came upon
him, casting him into a trance, See Genesis 15.12. Dan. 8.18. Revelations by
Visions were when their eyes were open, and they were awake, see Chapter 24.16.
Revelations by Dreams, when their eyes were shut, and they asleep.
and by his mighty overruling Power constrained him to bless those whom he
resolved to curse. Balaam therefore declaring how God had in a supernatural
manner opened his eyes to see things to come, he utters another Parable or
prophetic Vision concerning Israel, saying, How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob,
and thy Tabernacles, O Israel! what a goodly sight do they yield, being ranked
in such admirable Order, under their several Ensigns and Standards? This people
may be compared to large and fruitful Valleys and Gardens enclosed, set with
pleasant and wholesome Plants, and kept always fresh and fruitful by the
watering of Rivers; yea they may be compared to the Trees of Lign-aloes which
the Lord has planted, which prosper above the ordinary course of nature, and
above that which by mere skill and industry of men they are wont to do. And as
this Tree is of a sweet Odor, so shall a sweet fame and report be spread of
this people; yea lastly, they may be compared to Cedar-Trees planted by the
water side, which are great, tall, and very durable; so great shall the growth
of this people be, and so stable and flourishing the glory of their Kingdom. He
shall pour water out of his Buckets; that is, he shall so water them, that
Israel shall have a numerous Offspring, Ita benedicit ipsi Deus ut copiosam
sobolem habeat and in posteritatem magnam excrescat. Gloss. Hebraismus est,
erit foecundus, multos procreabit liberos, i. e. proles ejus vehementer
crescet, ut arbores in humida terra sicut situla plena copiosam dat aquam ita
prosapia Israelis erit foecunda, propagatio liberorum saepe per aquas
significatur ut Psalm. 68.26.
and his Posterity shall wonderfully grow up, and increase as seed in moist
grounds, and among many waters.

His King shall be more Potent than Agag, the King of the Amalekites, whose
Kingdom was then the most potent and flourishing. This was fulfilled in Saul,
[1 Samuel 15.7, 8.] and in the glory of Isreal's Kingdom in David and in Solomon's
days, but especially in Christ, Psalm. 89.23. He goes on, God that brought them
out of Egypt is an Almighty God; His Power is irresistible, He has as it were
the strength of an Unicorn, [see Chapter 23.22.] He further shows, That Israel
shall eat up the Nations his Enemies, (that is, the seven Nations of Canaan,)
and break their bones; And like as a Lion (the King of Beasts) returning from
his Prey coucheth down, and lies at rest, and none dare disquiet him, so safe
and secure shall the peace of this people be; blessed is he that blesses them,
and cursed is he that curses them.

Balak hearing this, was exceedingly enraged against Balaam, and smiting his
hands together, told him, He had sent for him to Curse this people, but behold
he had blessed them, and that three several times; He bids him therefore be
gone; He had thought to have preferred him, but his God had deprived him of
that honor and preferment he intended for him. Balaam replies, That He had no
cause to blame him, for this was that which he told his Messengers at the
first, viz. That if he would give him his house full of Silver and Gold, he
could not go beyond the Commandment of the Lord. However, says he, I will
counsel thee what thou shall now do; and will show thee also what this people
shall do to thy people in the latter days. I counsel thee therefore for the
present to entice them to Idolatry, and to join with you in your Idol-Feasts,
and let the Daughters of Moab and Midian entice them to commit Fornication with
them, [see Chapter 31.16. Rev. 2.14.] and this is the only way to provoke God to
leave them, and to be against them. And for the present thou need not fear
them; for God has commanded them not to set upon you, [see Deuteronomy. 2.9.] but
hereafter, viz. many years hence there shall arise a Prince out of them that
shall subdue thy people, [see 2 Samuel 8.2.] And I Balaam being one whose eyes
God has in a supernatural manner opened to see things to come, do now utter
another Parable or prophetic Vision unto thee, which is this; I shall see him,
All the branches of this Prophecy are in the first sense to be meant of David,
though in the sublimer sense of Christ, of whom David was a Type. V. 17. Videbo
cum; non modo, and non prope] Hebrai exponunt i would Davide, quia subjugatio
Moabitarum, and Idumaorum ei convenit, ut patet, 2 Reg. 8. sed unanimiter
Christiani de Christo accipiunt; illum enim direct spectant cum quadam
allusione ad Typum ejus Davidem and ad gesta e'us, sicut a Prophetis fieri
solet. Balaam ergo vidit eum, non oculis suis sed posterorum, and successorum
suorum. Jans.
but not now, I shall behold him but not nigh. There shall come a Star out of
Jacob, and a Scepter shall arise out of Israel; that is, a King of the Seed and
Posterity of Jacob, who shall shine as a Star in the Firmament in regard of the
glory of his Person and Government; and this King was David, in whose days the
Kingdom of Israel was raised to an exceeding Splendour and height, and this King
did vanquish the Moabites, 2 Samuel 8.2. and was a Type of Christ, who was
discovered to the wise men by a Star, Matthew. 2.2. Now this David, he says, he
should see, though not now, viz. in his Posterity He should see Him after many
Generations. And this King (he says) shall smite the Corners or Princes of this
Country, who were the Corners or chief strength of the Kingdom, as the corners
of an house are the chief strength of the building; and he shall destroy all
the Children of Sheth; so the Moabites were called because some one of their
Progenitors (famous in his time) was called Sheth. And further he foretells
that the Edomites that inhabit Mount Seir shall also be subdued by the
Israelites, which was literally fulfilled in David, 1 Chronicles. 18.13. and
thereupon he sung that triumphant Song, Psalm. 60.8. Moab is my washpot, that
is, I have so subdued them, that I use them in my meanest services as a vessel
to wash my feet in; over Edom will I cast my shoe, that is, I will trample
upon the Edomites as a vanquished people. He says therefore, Out of the house
of Jacob shall come one that shall have the Dominion, and shall destroy the
Edomites, and not only those that are found in Arms in the Field, but those
also that remain in the several Cities and fortified Places that shall oppose
him. Then looking toward the Country of the Amalekites (the Posterity of Esau,
Genesis 36.12.) He uttered this Parable or Prediction concerning them. Amalek was
the first of the Nations that warred against Israel, [see Exodus 17.] but he is
appointed to be destroyed, till he be rooted from the face of the earth. This
was fulfilled in part by Saul, [1 Samuel 15.] and after in Mordecai's time, see
Esther 7. Then he looked toward the Country of the Midianites, (called here
Kenites from one principal Family or People among them, which is put for the
whole Nation,) and predicted this of them, Thy dwelling is strong, thou
buildest thy Nest or Habitation like Eagles among the Rocks, yet thou shall
endure much at the hand of several Enemies, (which was in part accomplished
when the Midianites were vanqished by Gideon, Judge. 7.2.) and shall at length
be carried away Captive by the Assyrians, who, with the Jews, carried away all
the Nations round about them, [compare Jer. 25.9. with 1 Chronicles. 2.55.] And he
further added, Alas! who shall live; that is, who almost can escape, when God
shall do this, intimating the grievous Calamity of that time, when the
Assyrians shall make this havoc. And Ships shall come from the Coast of
Chittim, and shall afflict Ashur, and shall afflict Eber, and he shall also
perish for ever; that is, the great Empire of Asia first held by the Assyrians,
afterward by the Chaldeans, and last of all by the Persians,) shall be
destroyed by the Greeks and Macedonians (properly called Chittim, Chittim was
one of the Sons of Javan the Son of Japhet, who seated themselves in Macedonia
and the Greek Islands: Afterward the Greeks passing over from thence into
Italy, and planting themselves there, even Italy was also called Chittim.
Genesis 10.4. Isa. 23.1.12.) under Alexander the Great, and afterward by the
Romans who came into Asia out of the Harbors of Greece, Dan. 11.30. And the
Jewish Nation and their Country shall be much infected and evil entreated by
the Grecians of Syria and Egypt, [Dan. 8.11. and 11.31.] and much more by the
Romans under Vespasian and Titus. The Greeks also at last shall be ruined by
the Romans, and their Empire shall be overthrown by them. As for the Roman
Empire it self, it is now much fallen, and the usurping State thereof under the
Papacy God will at last consume with the breath of his mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
Thus Balaam as he began with the blessing of Israel, so he ends with the
destruction of their Enemies. Then he went away with a purpose to return home,
but was stayed (as it seems) by the Midianites, and among them was afterward
killed by the Sword of Israel, Numb. 31.8.

Numb. 23. whole Chapter. Numb. 24. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXXX.
ISrael now being encamped at Abel-Shittim [see Chapter 33.49.] in the very borders
of the promised Land, the Women of Moab and Midian were set on work (according
to the wicked Counsel of Balaam, see Numb. 31.16. Rev. 2.14.) to turn the
people to Idolatry, and to allure them to commit folly with them, that so the
Favor of God being thereby turned away from them, they might be exposed to
mischief from their Enemies; And accordingly a great number of the people did
commit Whoredom with them, and being invited by them to their Idolatrous Feasts
(made upon Sacrifices offered to their Gods) at length were drawn to open
Idolatry also [see Exodus 34.15.] and to bow down to their Gods, and worship
them. Thus a great many of the Israelites worshipped Baal-Peor, See Hosea 9.10.
(which was the Idol-god of the Moabites, so called from Mount-Peor, where this
Idol was worshipped,) and the anger of the Lord was greatly kindled against
them for it. And he commanded Moses to call the Heads and Princes of the people
together, and by their assistance to take all the Ringleaders of this disorder
and to hang them up before the Sun; that is openly in the sight of all men,
that as they had sinned openly, they might be punished openly, for the terror
of others; and this was accordingly done. Then Moses gave order to the Judges
and Rulers to put to death all such of them that were under their several
Commands whom they found to have joined themselves to Baal-Peor. And last of
all, God sent a Plague among them, whereof there died 23000 men in one day,
[see 1 Cor. 10.8.] which added to them that were hanged and killed by the Sword
amounted in all to 24000. During these dreadful Judgments and Executions, Zimri
a Prince of Renown in the Tribe of Simeon openly, and impudently in the sight
of Moses and all the Congreation (who were weeping before the door of the
Tabernacle, under a sense of the wrath of God, whereby so many of their
Brethren had been cut off,) carried Cozbi the Daughter of a Prince of Midian
into his Tent to commit folly with her. Phineas the Son of Eleazar
understanding this, being stirred up with an holy zeal for God, and by the
special motion of his Spirit, he took a Javelin in his hand, and ran into the
Tent, and slew them both in the very act of their Villainy; and by this heroic
act of Phineas the wrath of God was appeased, and the Plague stayed, see Psalm.
106.30. And God was so well pleased therewith, that he commands Moses to make
known for Phineas's encouragement, that he had given unto him his Covenant of
peace, for the settling of the Priesthood in his Posterity, and to be continued
in his Seed as long as ever the Levitical Priesthood should continue, V. 13.
Sempiternum id dicitur quod diutu^num admodum. Nam post pronepotem Phinees,
translatus erat Pontificatus ad Eli, qui erat de familia Ithamari ut patet, 1
Paralip. 24.3. Foedus ergo hoc conditionatum fuit, nempe si posteri in fide
perseveraverint. Ad tempus interruptum orat, sed post quatuor Pontifices vi
hujus foederis resipiscentibus posteris Phineas rediit (tempore Davidis and
Solomonis) ad Sadoc ex Eleazari and Phinees familia, in qua deinceps postea
mansit ad Herodis tempora, usque ad Christum.
provided they walked in ways pleasing unto God. And he call it his Covenant of
Peace, First, Because they should peaceably enjoy it. 2ly, Because the work of
the Priest was to make peace between God and the people: Now though the Dignity
of being High Priest should have come to him, and his by descent, because he
was the eldest Son of Eleazar, (Aaron's eldest Son) yet that it should not be
removed to another Family for want of Issue, that was of Gods special goodness,
and is here promised as the reward of Phineas's zeal. Yet we must not
understand this Promise so absolutely, but that his Posterity might by their
sins, for a time, deprive themselves of this Dignity, as it afterward fell
out, when Eli was made High Priest, who was of the Family of Ithamar, see 1 Chronicles. 24.3.

God having thus manifested his favor to Phineas for this heroic act of zeal,
(which was counted to him for righteousness, Psalm. 106.31.) and having punished
his own people for their sins, he now decrees Vengeance against their Enemies.
And accordingly he commands the Israelites forthwith to vex the Midianites,
that is, to make War upon them, which Command employed also a promise of
Victory. For their newly professed Friendship toward them was but feigned, and
they plotted their ruin according to the Counsel of Balaam, and distressed
them with their wiles and devices, though not with War; neither need it seem
strange that the Israelites are not commanded to War against the Moabites
Nondum completa erat mensura Moabitarum.
as well as the Midianites, because God had expressly forbidden them, Deuteronomy. 2.9.
And 2ly, Because the Midianites seem to have had the chief hand in this
mischief, as seems probable from Balaam's stay among them.

Numb. 25. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXXXI.
GOd now to show unto Moses how tender he was of his own people, and how severe
against all those that did seek to hurt them, he commands him to make War, and
to avenge his Quarrel upon the Midianites, Scopus enim Midianitarum fuit ut a
Domini culta per filias suas avellerent Israelitas, and in Idololatriam
impingerent, quae vero Du^ maxim injuriosa. Jans.
who had been the occasion of so much mischief to them. And when that was done,
he tells him, He should be gathered to his godly Forefathers long since dead;
that is, to the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23. Moses hereupon
having received (as it seems) particular directions from God that he should
send out but 12 thousand of the Israelites against them (that the hand of God
in the Victory might more eminently appear, see Judge. 7.2.) and should take
them equally out of every Tribe one thousand (that no one Tribe might exalt it
self above another for this Victory) He accordingly did so, and appointing
Joshua (as it is probable) for General, he likewise sent Phineas with them, to
encourage them (who had lately manifested his zeal against that Midianitish
Harlot, Chapter 25.6.) with one of the holy Instruments; that is, a silver Trumpet
in his hands, [see Chapter 10.2.] Hereupon these twelve thousand of the Israelites
engaging with the Midianites, they slew all the Males of them that they could
lay their hands on, Many of them running for ^efuge into other Countries
escaped for the present, and afterward in the time of Gideon returned, and
vexed the Israelites, see Judge. 6.
and among them five Kings of Midian who were formerly (as it seems) Vassals to
Sihon, and therefore are called only Dukes of Sihon, Josh. 13.21. but Sihon
himself being sometime before slain (it seems) they became now absolute Kings;
among whom was Zur the Father of Cozbi whom Phineas slew, Chapter 25.15. Balaam
also fell with them in this battle, who being their Counselor in sin, became
now a Partner with them in their punishment. As for the Midianitish-Women and
Children, the Israelites took them Captives, and burning their Cities and
Castles, they carried away great Spoils of their Goods and Cattle. All these
Captives and Spoils they brought to Moses and to the Camp of Israel now
encamped in the Plains of Moab. Moses was angry with the Officers of the Army
for saving the Women alive, who had before ensnared the people, and therefore
above all others should have been slain. He thereupon gives order (undoubtedly
by Gods special direction) that all the male Children Etiam parvulos ad majorem
detestationem facinoris and Parentum in ipsis punitionem, and ne parvuli
Parentum necem ulciscerentur.
should be put to death, as also all the Women that were of years fit for the
knowledge of Man; only the Women-Children should be spared, to wit, to make
them Servants or Wives, if they would learn the knowledge of the true God.
Moses also injoyns the Soldiers to abide out of the Camp seven days to purify
themselves, their Captives and Spoils, and shows them the manner how it must be
done; namely, Gold and Silver, and such things as could pass through the fire,
Duo credita vim habere purgandi: ignis exurendo, aqua eluendo. Grot.
should be purified by fire, and they themselves should be cleansed with the
water of separation, see Chapter 19.11, etc. And Eleazar tells them, That God had
given Moses an express Commandment concerning these things, which himself as
the Lords High Priest was to make known unto them, and to see them observed
accordingly. Moreover the Lord Commands Moses, That the Prey taken in this
Expedition (which was very great, viz. of Beasts and Women-kind 800 and 40
thousand,) should be divided into two equal parts; the one for those that went
out to the War (which were twelve thousand) and the other for the rest of the
people that stayed at home, which were a vast multitude, as appears, Chapter 26.51.
And further, that he should levy a Tribute for the Lord out of both parts,
which He (being the Inheritance of the Priests and Levites intended for them,
see Genesis 14.20.) orders him to take out of their part that went to War, but one
in 500 either of Persons or Cattle, but out of the other part, one in 50. And
accordingly the smaller levy out of their half that went to War was given to
Eleazar; that is, to him and the rest of the Priests, who being but few had
therein a liberal share. But the greater levy out of the peoples half was given
to the Levites, because they were many. So that the Levites had one in 50, the
Priests only one in 500; the same proportion being observed here, that was
observed in their Tithes; the Levites having the Tithes or Tenths of the
people, and the Priests but the tenth of their Tithes, see Numb. 18.21.

These things thus done, the Captains of Israel numbered their Soldiers, and
found that they missed not a man, which might sufficiently show them, that it
was the Lords doing that the Midianites were thus vanquished, and might be a
great encouragement to them resolutely to go on and to fight the residue of the
Lords battles. They therefore having besides the Cattle above mentioned (which
were brought to a common Stock) gotten every man for himself very rich spoils
of Jewels, Bracelets, and Chains of Gold, etc. in testimony of their great
thankfulness to God, who had graciously spared their lives, and thus
wonderfully assisted them in gaining this great Victory, and that they might
make an atonement for their Souls, (having sinfully spared the Women alive, for
which Moses reproved them, verse. 14.17.) they out of these their particular
Spoils offer a voluntary Oblation to the Lord. And Moses and Eleazar took the
Gold and the Jewels of them, which they offered, (amounting to 16 thousand, 700
and 50 Shekels, Understand golden Shekels whereof the common contained an 160
barley-grains or a quarter of an once, the holy one as much again, viz. 320.
grains, or half an ounce, one once of Gold was valued at ten times that
quantity in Silver, see Dutch Annot. on Genesis 24.22.
) and brought them into the Lords Tabernacle, where they were kept as a
Memorial of Gods favor to them in giving them this great Victory.

Numb. Chapter 31. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXXXII.
GOd Commands Moses and Eleazar now to number the people. There had been two
numbrings of them before. The first was when they were sessed for a
Contribution to the building of the Tabernacle, compare Exodus 30, 11, 12. with
Exodus 28.26. The second was on the first day of the second month of the second
year after their departure out of Egypt at Mount Sinai, and now they being in
the Plains of Moab near Jordan over against Jerico, in the 40th year of their
wandering in the Wilderness, they are commanded to be numbered again from twenty
years old and upward. And possibly the Lord enjoined it now, to make way for
the more equal dividing of the Land (which they were presently to go about)
according as they found the Tribes more or less in number, see Exodus 26.52, 34.
as also to manifest Gods Power and Goodness in so wonderfully increasing them,
and preserving so many of them, though he had destroyed the old Stock (as he
had threatened) for their great Rebellions against him; As Moses therefore
received Gods Flock by tale when he came out of Egypt, so he must now before he
dies deliver them up by tale again.

Upon the numbering 'twas found, First, That the Tribe of Reuben was decreased
since the last numbering (see Numb. 1.21.) two thousand seven hundred and
seventy, which some ascribe to the Conspiracy wherein Dathan and Abiram, two
Princes of this Tribe, joined with Corah, which brought so great a Plague upon
them, and yet many of the Sons of Corah escaped, possibly because they
consented not to their Fathers Rebellion, or at least soon repented of it upon
the warning given by Moses, Numb. 16.5.

2ly, The Tribe of Simeon was more decreased than any of the rest; Moses
reliquis benedicens hujus Tribus mentionem omittit. Deuteronomy. 33.
For when they went out of Egypt they were fifty nine thousand and three
hundred, [Numb. 1.22.] now but two and twenty thousand and two hundred. The
impudence and punishment of Zimri See Chapter 25.14.
(who being a Prince of this Tribe, was probably abetted by many of his
Brethren,) is conceived to be one cause of the diminution of this Tribe, many
of them possibly perishing in the last Plague. Videtur plaga ista maxim
saviisse in Tribum Simeon ex qua erat Zimri. Nam ex Cap. 26. v. 14. Constat
nullam Tribum fuisse ita diminutam numero virorum post primam numerationem
atque Simeonis. Desiderati enim sunt in secunda numeratione 37 millia ex illa
sola Tribu. Castrametabatur enim ad meridiem, i. e. versus terram Moabitarum
and Midian. Jansen.


3ly, The Tribe of Gad was fewer by five thousand and one hundred and fifty.
Thus all the Tribes under Ruben's Standard were greatly diminished.

4ly, The Tribe of Judah was increased one thousand nine hundred,
notwithstanding two of his five Sons [ Genesis 38.] viz. Er and Onan (who might
have been Heads of Families) died Childless in Canaan.

5ly, The Families of Issachar were increased nine thousand and nine hundred.

6ly, The Families of Zebulun were increased three thousand and one hundred, so
the Tribes under Judah's Standard were all increased. And thus Judah prevailed
above all his Brethren, Genesis 49.8. his Camp being increased fourteen thousand
and nine hundred.

7ly, The Families of Manasseh were increased twenty thousand and five hundred
men of War. None of the other Tribes had half so much increase.

8ly, The Families of the Sons of Ephraim were diminished eight thousand.

9ly, The Families of the Sons of Benjamin were increased ten thousand and two
hundred. Thus though Ephraim's own Tribe was diminished, yet the other two
Tribes joined with him were augmented twenty two thousand and seven hundred.

10ly, The Tribe of Dan was increased seventeen hundred. Though there was but
one Family in this Tribe, viz. Shusham's, yet none of all the Tribes save Judah
have the like multitude, viz. sixty four thousand and four hundred.

11ly, The Tribe of Asher was increased eleven thousand and nine hundred.

12ly, The Tribe of Naphtali was fewer than before by eight thousand. But
though this particular Tribe under Dan's Standard was diminished, yet his whole
Camp was increased five thousand and six hundred men of War. So that upon the
whole, though Judah's, Ephraim's and Dan's Camps were all more in number now
then when they marched from Sinai; yet by reason of the great decrease of
Reuben's Camp, which was forty five thousand and twenty fewer than before, the
total here is less than the total there by eighteen hundred and twenty. God
Commands Moses that unto these Tribes the Land should be divided by lot, which
would prevent dissension, and teach them to acknowledge God for their chief
Lord, by whose immediate Providence they were disposed of to those dwellings.

The Levites were numbered by themselves, because they were to have no share in
the Land. They were found to be (reckoning them from one month old and upwards)
twenty three thousand, and so were increased a thousand. Thus as God had
threatened, of all those that were numbered at their coming forth out of Egypt,
from twenty years old and upward, there was not a man left at this time (when
they were numbered again) but only Caleb and Joshua. Yet we must observe the
Levites as it is probable were not included in this threatening; for of them
there were left Moses, and Eleazar, and Ithamar, and perhaps many more.

Numb. 26. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXXXIII.
THe Daughters of Zelophehad, of the Tribe of Manasseh, (their Father being
dead without Sons) come now to Moses and Eleazar, desiring that that share or
portion of Land might be assigned to them which should have been their Fathers
had he then been living. They plead, That their Father was one of those whom
the Lord carried out of Egypt, to go and take possession of the Land of Canaan.
And though he died in the Wilderness, yet he was not taken away by any special
Judgment, for having his hand in any Insurrection or Rebellion against the
Lord, (such as was that of Korah) but he died in his own sin; that is, he died
a natural death, when his time was come, as being by sin liable to death as all
other men are. They further urge, that except this be granted them, the Name of
their Father will be quite extinct. Moses inquiring of the Lord concerning this
Case; it pleased the Lord to grant these Daughters of Zelophehad their desire,
which was afterward punctually performed Joshua, as we may read Josh. 17.4.
According to the Command of the Lord he gave them an Inheritance among the
Brethren of their Father. Yet withal there was afterward a Caution added, to
wit, that they might not marry out of their own Tribe, Hence some conclude,
that when a man died without Issue, and his Brother married his Widow, to raise
up Seed unto his Brother, (whose Estate he inhetlted) his first Son in their
Genealogies was reckoned to be the Son of him that died without Issue. So it
was in this case. The first Sons of those that married the Daughters of
Zelophehad were accounted the Sons of Zelophehad, and so under his Name did
inherit his Land.
see Chapter 36.6. And upon this occasion was the Law for succession in
Inheritances made and ordained.

Numb. 27. from 1. to 12.

SECT. LXXXIV.
GOd now signifies to Moses that he should die, and accordingly Commands him to
go up to that Tract of the Mountains of Abarim, See Chapter 33.47. Deuteronomy. 32.49. and
34.1.
(which are in the Land of Moab over against Jerico) and on one of the highest
of them called Nebo, whose top was called Pisgah, he should see that good Land
into which he might not enter; And when he had seen it, his Soul should be
gathered unto the Souls of his pious Ancestors who died before him. For He and
Aaron had rebelled against his Commandment, [see Chapter 20.12.] which was, that
they should by Faith sanctify We sanctify the Lord, when we conceive aright
of his Nature and Attributes, and when we speak so reverently of Him, as to
cause his Name to be praised and magnified among men.
him in the eyes of the people at the Wilderness of Zin, but they sanctified
him not. Moses humbly and earnestly begs of the Lord that he might be permitted
to go over and see that good Land, [Deut. 3.23, 25.] but the Lord was not
pleased to grant his Request: Humbly therefore submitting to his holy Will, he
now earnestly prays to God, Who is the God of the Spirits of all flesh, and not
only the Creator, but the Searcher and Trier of men spirits, and knows what is
in man, and can frame and fashion men's spirits as he pleases, and give them
Gifts and Graces requisite for the Places he calls them unto, to appoint a
Successor to him that might, as a good Shepherd go out and in before the
Flock. God, upon his prayer, appoints Joshua to succeed him, a man in whom was
the Spirit; that is, the Spirit of Wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of
Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge and the fear of the Lord. God
Commands him therefore to lay his hands The like Ceremony was afterward used
in the days of the Gospel, when men were separated and set apart to Preach the
Gospel, 1 Timothy 4.14.
upon Joshua, to intimate to Him, by this Ceremony, that the hand of God should
be upon him to defend and prosper him in all his ways, and that he would confer
upon him a great measure of the Gifts of his Spirit answerable to the Dignity
whereunto he had advanced Him, and accordingly it is said, Deuteronomy. 34.9. That
Joshua the Son of Nun was full of Wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands on him.
Moses was also to set him before Eleazar and the Congregation, and to give him
a Charge concerning what he was to do, and what to forbear in the
administration of his Office. And Moses was further commanded to put some of
his own honor upon him; that is, admit him into some Partnership of Authority
and Dignity with himself, and so cause the people to give him that Honor that
was due unto Moses's Successor, and the Judge Elect of Israel. And Moses tells
him further, That upon occasion he shall present himself before Eleazar, that
he may inquire of the Lord for him after the Judgment of Vrim; that is, putting
on the Ephod to which the Pectoral See Pharaphrase on Exodus 28.30.
was fastened, wherein was the Vrim and Thummim. And at Eleazar's word,
speaking from the Lord, He and the people shall go out to War, or return from
it, and so in all weighty Affairs (which were extraordinary) by his direction
they should govern themselves. And Moses did all these things which the Lord
commanded him.

Numb. 27. from 12. to the end.

SECT. LXXXV.
THe Children of Israel having, as it seems, omitted their Sacrifices and
solemn Feasts, the most part of the 38 years last past, by reason of their
travels, wherein the Sanctuary, the Alar, and other holy things were made up
fit for removal from place to place; And the most part of the Generation from
twenty years old and upward that had been mustered in Sinai being now dead,
[see Chapter 26.64.] The Lord hereupon causes the Law of sacrificing to be again
here repeated, thereby intimating to them that when they came into the Land
which he promised them, they must not any longer neglect his Ordinances, as
they had done in the Wilderness, [see Deuteronomy. 12.8.] And therefore first in the
general he charges them, that they be sure to give Him all the Sacrifices and
Offerings which he had at several times appointed them to offer. And then 2ly,
He sets down particularly what they were to offer. First, For their daily
Sacrifice, from verse. 3. to 9. Secondly, For their weekly Sacrifice every
Sabbath The Sacrifices appointed for every Sabbath Day are full double to those
appointed for every day. And yet the daily Sacrifice, the continual
Burnt-Offering, was not then to be omitted.
day, from verse. 9. to 10. Thirdly, For their monthly Sacrifice every new Moon,
from 11. to 16. And fourthly, For their yearly Sacrifices. First, At the
Passover, from verse. 16. to 26. 2ly, At Pentecost, from 26. to the end. 3ly, He
mentions the Offering appointed at the Feast of Trumpets, Chapter 29. from 1. to 7.
4ly, The Offering on the day of Expiation, from 7. to 12. 5ly, On the eight
days of the Feast of Tabernacles, from verse. 12. to 39.

Numb. Chapter 28. whole Chapter.

Numb. Chapter 29. from 1. to 39.

SECT. LXXXVI.
BEsides those set and solemn Sacrifices which God Himself had enjoined, there
were other Sacrifices which were to be offered to the Lord, namely, such as men
voluntarily offered, or upon a particular Vow, Chapter 29. v. 39. And upon this
occasion (it seems) several Precepts concerning Vows were added, to show who
were necessarily obliged to perform their Vows, and who not. And Moses made
known these Laws to the Heads of the Tribes, because they were the men that
according to these Laws were to judge the people, and either to bind them to
their Vows, or free them from them. Now Vows were either Obligatory, or
reversible, according to the condition of the person that made them. 1. If the
Votary were a man of grown years, having power over himself, and had
strengthened his Vow with an Oath, he must not fail to perform what he had
vowed and sworn to do, and that without delay, [Deut. 23.21.] provided the
thing in it self were lawful and honest, otherwise not, as in the Case
mentioned, Acts 23.21. 2. If the Votary be a young Woman, under the power of
her Father; if her Father by his silence seemed to consent to it (though in
words he did not expressly approve it) her Vow stands firm; But if he disallow
it, it is void, and the Lord will not impute it as a sin to her, seeing her
Father refuses to let her keep it. 3. If the Votary were a married Wife, her
Husband had power either to ratify or make void her Vow. 4. If the Votary were
a Widow or a divorced Woman, her Vow must stand. And because married Women
might be apt to make large Vows what they would do if they came to be free
again, and then being free might make light of performing their Vows, under
pretense that those Vows were made while there were under the power of their
Husbands; To prevent that the Law does here direct that in case a Woman vowed
in her Husbands house, if her Husband held his peace, then all her Vows should
stand, viz. after her Husband is dead, or after she is made free by Divorce for
every Vow, and every binding Oath to afflict the Soul, her Husband may
establish, or make void. But if any Husband having heard his Wives Vow, and not
contradicted it, shall afterward refuse to let her perform it, he shall bear
her Iniquity, and the Sin shall be imputed unto Him.

Numb. Chapter 30. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXXXVII.
THe Rubenites and Gadites now petition Moses to give them their Possession on
this side Jordan, in the Land already Conquered, ( which the Lord smote before
the Congregation of the Children of Israel, according to the Promise made to
Abraham, Genesis 15.21.) alleding how convenient it would be for them, in regard
it was a Country very fit for the keeping of Cattle, whereof they had the
greatest store. Moses not apprehending (as it seems) their drift (which was
plain and honest) accuses them of great injustice, that they should desire to
enjoy peaceable Possessions at present, whilst their Brethren must fight for
theirs, which would in all likelihood tend to discourage the hearts of the
people from going over into the Land which the Lord had given them. And herein
he tells them, They would be like the Spies See Chapter 13.24.
their Ancestors, who brought up an evil Report on this good Land, and so
disheartened the people, that the Lords anger was kindled against them for it.
And if you should do thus (says he) you will show that you are risen up in your
Fathers stead an increase of sinful men to augment yet the fierce anger of the
Lord toward Israel. And assure your selves, if ye turn away from following the
Lord, He will leave Israel yet to wander in this Wilderness, as their Fathers
did, until they all be consumed; And by this means you will occasion them to
sin, and so to be destroyed. The Reubenites and Gadites humbly reply, That it
was far from their thoughts to desert their Brethren on this occasion. It Is
true (say they) we meant to leave our Cattle, our Wives and Children behind us,
and to that end we purposed to build Sheepfolds here for our Cattle, and Cities
for our Wives and little Ones; that is, to repair and fortify those Cities of
the Amorites in this Country which lie now ruinated. But for our selves, we are
ready to go armed along with our Brethren, yea before them, and if it be
thought fit to go in the forefront, and to expose our selves to the greatest
danger. But when they say they were ready to go along with their Brethren, we
must understand it so, that their meaning was only that so many of them should
go as should be thought requisite for the Aid of their Brethren against the
Inhabitants of Canaan. For it is plain they meant to leave Garrisons behind them
for the defense of their Wives and Children, and for the guarding of the
Country in case any of the neighboring Nations should invade the Land when
they were gone. And therefore [ Joshua 4.13.] it is expressly said, That there
went of those Tribes along over Jordan, with their Brethren, only about forty
thousand armed men, whereas in the Tribe of Reuben alone there was above forty
thousand fighting men, see Chapter 26.7. Moses tells them, That if they will go
armed before the Lord to War; that is, before the Ark, the sign of his
Presence, and so aid and assist their Brethren in their Wars against the
Canaanites, and will continue with their Brethren till they have subdued the
Land, then they shall have this Land on this side Jordan (as they desire) for
their lot and portion, see Deuteronomy. 3.18. But if they will not do so, he tells
them, Behold ye have sinned against the Lord, and be sure your sin will find
you out. However (He acquaints them) that these two Tribes must not think to
have all this Land to themselves, but part of it must be reserved for half the
Tribe of Manasseh, and that because they by a particular Expedition had
vanquished that part of the Land particularly. Iair had conquered Argob and the
Towns belonging to it, and called it Bashan-Havoth-Iair, after his own Name, as
Nobah did Kenah, and called it also after his own Name, having driven from
thence the Amorites, as is expressed, verse. 39.

Numb. 32. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXXXVIII.
MOses now by the Lords Commandment wrote this following Journal of the
Israelites Travels from Egypt to the Land of Canaan, wherein are set down all
the several Stations or Places where they pitched their Tents, and abode for
some time. And this was done the better to assure Posterity of the wonderful
Deliverance of the Jews out of Egypt, and of Gods leading them through the
Wilderness to the Land of Promise, and that by this express Description of
their several Stations, not only the certainty of this story might be
evidenced, but that they might be put in mind of the Rebellion of their
Forefathers, and of Gods severity in Chastizing them for it; as also of his
Goodness and Faithfulness manifested to the Seed of Abraham, notwithstanding
their many Provocations. Their most remarkable Stations were these: First,
Rameses, See Sect. 1. of Chap. 4.
whether they resorted by Moses's Direction from all parts of the Land of
Goshon. And the reason is intimated why they went out with an high hand in the
presence of the Egyptians, (they not opposing them) namely, because God had
pulled down their pride, by slaying their Firstborn; yea upon their Gods also
He had executed Judgment, causing possibly some such notable accident to befall
the Egyptian Idols as did the Philistines Dagon, which fell down before the
Ark, see Exodus 12.12. Their second Station was Succoth, their third Etham,
where the Lord began first to go before them by day in a Pillar of Cloud, and
by night in a Pillar of fire. From Etham they turned unto Pihahiroth, a narrow
passage between two ledges of Mountains, into which being entered, Pharaoh
overtook them with a great Army, and thought they could not have escaped him;
but God divided the Red Sea, which the Israelites passing through, the Egyptians
assayed to follow them, and there were miserably drowned. The Israelites having
past through the Sea, went three days journey in the Wilderness of Etham without
any water, and pitched in Marah. Here they found the Waters very bitter,
insomuch that they began to murmur against Moses; but God sweetened the Waters,
by the casting in of a Tree, Exodus 15.23. From Marah they came to Elim, where
were twelve Fountains of Water. From Elim they encamped by the Red Sea, See
Sect. 8. of this Book.
and from thence removed to the Wilderness of Sin, so called from Sin, a City
in Egypt, over against which this Wilderness lay. Hither they came just a month
after their departure from Rameses: Here they murmur grievously for want of
Food, and God gave them Quails for one meal, and Manna from Heaven, which was
continued till they came into Canaan. From Sin, they came to Dophkah, and from
thence to Alush, and from thence to Rhepidim, See Sect. 10. of this Book.
where wanting water again they were ready to stone Moses; but water was
fetched for them miraculously out of a Rock in Horeb. Here they had a Victory
over the Amalekites who set upon them. From Rephidim they came to the
Wilderness of Sinai. Hither they came at the beginning of the third month,
(Exodus 19.1.) and stayed till the second day of the second month of the second
year, Numb. 10.11, 12. Here the Law was given, and the Tabernacle framed, and
the people punished for making and worshipping a golden Calf, and Nadab and
Abihu smitten dead for offering strange fire. Here the people were first
numbered, and then ordered as to their Encampings about the Tabernacle, and in
their Journeys toward the Land of Canaan. From Sinai they marched by Taberah
(signifying a burning) because there the fire of God (till quenched by Moses's
prayer) consumed the hindermost in the Camp, for their murmuring; and so they
came to Kibroth-Hattavah. Here the people fell a lusting for Flesh again. And
God now gave them Quails for a whole month together in great abundance, whereon
they surfeited, and died miserably with the flesh between their teeth. Then
they came to Hazeroth. Here Aaron and Miriam murmured against Moses, and she
was smitten with Leprosy, Numb. 12. Then they came to Rithmath in the
Wilderness of Paran near Kadesh-barnea, whence Spies were sent to search the
Land. Upon the evil report of ten of them the people horribly murmur. God was
very wroth with them for it, and appoints Moses to return again to the Red Sea,
and declares, That not one of that Generation save Caleb and Joshua, should
enter into Canaan. Then they came to Rimmon-Parez: and from thence to Libnah
called Laban, Deuteronomy. 1.1. and then to Rissah, then to Kehelatha, thence to Mount
Shapher, thence to Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth (signifying Assemblies) so
called as some think, because of the mutinous Assemblies of Corah, Dathan and
Abiram in that place. Thence to Tahath, and pitched at Tarah; thence to
Mithcah, and pitched at Hashmonah, and encamped at Maseroth, and then came to
Bene-Jaakan, and encamped at Hor-gidgad, from thence to Jothathah a Land of
Rivers of waters, Deuteronomy. 10.7. Here the Rock Rephidim-water (as it seems)
stopped its course, See Dr. Fuller's Pisgah-sight.
(God suspending Miracles when he affords means) and as it is probable the
Israelites drank of the water of the Country till they came to Kadesh. Then
they encamped at Ebronah, from thence they marched to Eziongaber, a place by
the Red Sea, where was a Harbor for Ships in Edom's Land, 1 Kings 9.26. From
thence to Kadesh in the Wilderness of Zin. Here Miriam died. The people in this
place wanting water, murmur again, and had water again given them out of a
Rock. Here God was very angry with Moses and Aaron for their unbelief, and here
they had the Sentence of Death passed on them, though reprieved for a time, and
rendered incapable of entering into Canaan. They came hither in the beginning of
the 40th year, and hence they sent to crave a passage through Edoms Land, but it
was denied them; God Commands them not to force it, but to find another way.
From Kadesh they removed to Mount Hor in the edge of the Land of Edom, where
Aaron died. Then they came to Zalmonah, so called possibly of Zolom an Image.
For this is thought to be the place where the Israelites, for murmuring again
for want of water, and loathing Manna, were stung with fiery Serpents, and the
brazen Serpent was by God's direction erected for their Cure and help. As for
their five following Stages, viz. Punon, Oboth, Jie-abarim, and Dibon-Gad, (so
called, because it was repaired and possessed by the Tribe of Gad, Chapter 32.34.)
and Almon-Diblathaim, we find no memorable accident happening at them. Thence
they came to the Mountains of Abarim, and then to the Plains of Moab. And here
God commanded Moses to charge the Israelites to drive out the Inhabitants of
the Land, viz. by destroying them, Deuteronomy. 7.22, 23. and to destroy their
Pictures, and molten Images, and High Places, and to divide their Land by lot
among themselves. But if they did not take care to drive them out, then he
declares, The Canaanites should be pricks in their Eyes, and thorns in their
Sides, and a continual Vexation to them, and He would bring that destruction on
them for their Disobedience, which he thought to bring on the Canaanites, viz.
root them out of the Land.

Numb. 33. whole Chapter.

SECT. LXXXIX.
THe Lord now by Moses declares unto Israel the Bounds V. 3. The Wilderness of
Zin lay at the very East End of the South-border, in the corner whereof it
joined with the East-border, right against the South-end of the Salt-Sea; that
is, the Lake of Sodom called also the Dead-Sea, see Genesis 14.3.

V. 7. This was not that Mount Hor where Aaron died, which was South-w^rd in
the edge of Edoms Land, Chapter 33.37, 38. but another Mountain on the North-side
of Canaan, by some supposed to be Libanus, and by other Mount Hermon.


and Limits of the Land of Canaan lying within Jordan, which he intended to
give them, that they might be assured they should possess it, and might know
how far they were to proceed in their Conquests, and where to stay, and
according to these Bounds and Limits might make a division of the Land among
the nine Tribes, and half the Tribe of Manasseh; the Tribe of Reuben, Gad, and
the other half Tribe of Manasseh having their lot on the other side Jordan. The
persons that were to make the division were Eleazar the High Priest, Joshua,
and one Prince of every Tribe who are particularly named. The Tribes are here
named in their particular Order, in which they should inherit the Land, their
Inheritance abutting one upon another, as their Names are here joined together,
to make it the more evident to them that they were alloted their Portions by
the Wisdom and Providence of God.

Numb. Chapter 34. whole Chapter.

SECT. XC.
THe Lord further Commands the Israelites to give 48 Cities to the Levites for
their Possession. He appoints the Suburbs of them to reach a thousand Cubits
from the wall of the City on each side, so that measuring the length from one
end of the lines to the other end opposite against it, as from East to West, or
from North to South there were two thousand Cubits, that made the perfect
square. God also appoints six of these Cities for Cities of Refuge, Three in
the Land of Canaan, and three There was no inequality in this, because the
portion of the two Tribes and an half without Jordan reached as far in length
as theirs in the Land of Canaan, though it were nothing so broad. Besides, if
the Lord enlarged their Coasts, and gave them all the Land, they were to add
three Cities more, Deuteronomy. 19.8, 9.
on the other side Jordan. And those Cities were (as we may see afterward,
Deuteronomy. 4. and Joshua 20.) 1. Bezer, a City of the Reubenites. 2. Ramoth of
Gilead of the Gadites. 3. Golan in Bashan of the Manassites. These three Moses
separated, Deuteronomy. 4.41, 43. 4. Kadesh in Galilee in Mount Napthali. 5. Shechem
in Mount Ephraim. 6. Kirjath-arba (which is Hebron) in the Mount of Judah; and
these Joshua separated, Joshua 20.7. Before these Cities of Refuge were
appointed, it seems the Altar only was a kind of Sanctuary to those that fled
to it, see Exodus 21.14. But afterward these Cities were the chief Sanctuaries
to the Children of Israel, and the Sojourners and Strangers among them; and yet
they were such only to those who had killed a man unwittingly. And therefore
they were not to receive any man till he had professed his Innocence as to this
particular, see Josh. 20.4. And such Cities were purposely appointed as lay at
an equal distance in the several parts of the Land, that no man driven to make
use of them might have too far to go, and so might be overtaken by the Avenger
of blood, who was the next Kinsman to the man slain, and might lawfully slay
him, who had slain his Kinsman, if he took him out of the City of Refuge, and
before he could recover the Sanctuary. And the way to these Cities was always
to be prepared and made even and plain, that the Manslayer might flee thither
without hinderance, see Deuteronomy. 19.3. When the Manslayer came thither, he was at
the entrance of the Gate to show his Cause to the Elders of the City, who were
to take him in, till he was sent for, and fetched to the City where he had done
the Fact, and there he was to stand before the Congregation, [Joshua 24.4, 6.]
who if they found him worthy of death, were to deliver him to the Avenger to
kill him; if not, they were to return him to the City of Refuge again, where he
was to live in a kind of exile and imprisonment until the death of the High
Priest, and might not come out before, If He went out before, He forfeited his
Privilege and Protection, and the Avenger might lawfully slay him.
and then He was to have liberty to return to his own house, and former
dwelling place; the High Priest being a Type of the Messiah, our High Priest
and Savior Jesus Christ, who by his death has blotted out the handwriting of
our Sins, and reconcileth us to God. But these Cities of Refuge were not
intended to be any Protection or Asyle to willful Murderers, and such as of
malice-prepence slew a man, and struck him with an Instrument of Iron, or with
a Stone or Hand-weapon, wherewith (in probability) a man that is smitten must
needs be killed. Moreover, no man was to be put to death on the single
testimony of one man alone. And no Redemption-money, no Bribe or Present was to
be taken to spare a murderers life. For blood defiles the Land, and the Land
cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him
that shed it. And lastly, no Redemption-money was to be taken for granting him,
that was fled to a City of Refuge, a Dispensation or Liberty to return to the
place of his former abode or habitation before the death of the High Priest.

Numb. 35. whole Chapter, and Deuteronomy. 4. verse. 41, 42, 43.

SECT. XCI.
THe Lord having formerly ordered that Zelophehad's Daughter should have that
portion of Land in the Tribe of Manasseh, which their Father should have had
for his share had he lived, the Children of Gilead (who were of that Tribe)
considering that if these Daughters married into any other Tribe, this portion
of their Land would be quite alienated from their Tribe, therefore they made it
their suit that some order might be taken to prevent this mischief. For by like
accidents the portion of every Tribe might in time be changed, and so at length
all may come to confusion, and the very end of Gods appointing every Tribe to
have their portion apart by themselves might be quite made void. And further,
whereas by the Law of God it was appointed that at the year of Jubilee (which
was every fiftieth year) what ever Land was alienated from any Tribe should
return to that Tribe again, by such marriages as these, Inheritances would pass
over from one Tribe to another, without possibility of restitution at the year
of Jubilee, and so this Law would become void, which seemed purposely intended
to prevent the confusion of the Inheritances of the Tribes. Moses having asked
Counsel of the Lord, answered them as God had commanded, viz. That the
Daughters of Zelophehad should marry only in the Tribe of their Father, (which
they accordingly afterward did) and further orders, That every Daughter that
possesses an Inheritance in any Tribe should marry only unto one of that
Tribe. But if she was not an Inheritrix, she might marry into any other Tribe.
And thus Inheritances would not be removed from one Tribe to another.

Numb. Chapter 36. whole Chapter.

SECT. XCII.
WE are now come to the Book of Deuteronomy, which contains Moses's dying
Speech, and pathetical Exhortation to the Children of Israel; He had brought
them to the Plains of Moab, and to the very borders of Canaan: He knew by
divine Revelation he must not go over thither, but must die on this side
Jordan. Having therefore now but a little time to live, [ viz. about five
weeks,] like a man in whom was the Spirit of God, and an extraordinary measure
of Grace, he employs that short time in faithfully instructing the people, and
earnestly exhorting them to walk steadfastly in the ways of God. He rehearses
to them several remarkable Occurrences, and passages of divine Providence which
had happened to them during their forty years travels in the Wilderness, (not
binding himself always to exact order as to times and places in his Narration)
that they might remember them for their benefit. And this being for the most
part a new Generation, (the old rebellious Stock having perished in the
Wilderness) He sets himself to instruct them in the Laws and Statutes of God,
not only repeating them to them, but explaining and amplyfying many of them,
and adding some new ones Hence this Book is called Deuteronomy, or a second
Declaration of the Law. (...), quasi secunda vel secundaria Lex. Repetitio est
praecipuarum Legum ac monitorum in eorum gratiam, qui tempore promulgatae Legis
aut nondum nati, aut per aetatem intelligendi incapaces erant. Cum quibus Moses
hic instaurat foedus; praeterea quaedam hic nova addita.
to them. He causes them to enter into a solemn Covenant to serve the Lord
faithfully. He Predicts and foretells what would befall them hereafter, and
solemnly blesses them before his death.

first, He reminds them of Gods calling Israel from Horeb, to march toward
Canaan. He tells them how when they had continued well nigh a full year at
Horeb, In journying from Egypt to Kadesh-barnea they spent about two years, and
from thence to the fields of Moab about 38 years, whereas from Horeb or Sinai
to Canaan it was but about 11 or 12 days Journey, had they not provoked God by
their sins to keep them wandering in the Wilderness so long.
God commanded them to march toward Canaan, the borders of which he describes
toward the South, West, North and East, Deuteronomy. Chapter 1. from 1. to 9.

2. He reminds them how about that time, by the advice of Jethro his
Father-in-law, he set Judges and Officers over the people. For (says he)
finding my self not able to bear the weight and burden of governing so great a
people alone, I said unto you, The Lord has multiplied you as the Stars of
Heaven, and the Lord God of your Fathers make you a thousand times so many more
as you are, and bless you; choose out therefore from among you wise and
understanding men, and I will make them Heads over you; I will Constitute some
of them to be Rulers over Thousands, others to be Rulers over Hundreds, others
Rulers over Fifties, and others to be Rulers over Tens. And I charged the
Judges at that time that they should judge right^ously between man and man, and
not respect persons in Judgment, but should hear the small as well as the
great, that they should not be afraid of men, for the Judgment is Gods; that
is, it is ordained by him, and to be executed in his Name, and the Judges
representing his Person, and sitting in his Seat, should in judging follow the
Rule by him prescribed, and should judge justly, as God Himself would do, see 2 Chronicles. 19.6. And I further said, If ye find any Cause too hard for you to
determine, bring it unto me. And many other things I delivered, and taught the
Judges their duty in a more full and ample manner than now I express, Deuteronomy. Chapter
1. from 9. to 19.

3. He shows them, that when they left Horeb, they marched through all that
great and terrible Wilderness, (a Land where no man dwelt, and wherein were
fiery Serpents and Scorpions, [Deut. 8.15.] a Land extreme barren, and
destitute of all things necessary for the sustenance of man, except by
miraculous supply,) and came to Kadesh-Barnea. Then (says he) I said unto you,
Ye are come to the Mountain of the Amorites, the border of the Land which the
Lord our God has given unto us. Go ye up therefore and possess it, as God has
commanded you, fear not, nor be discouraged. But ye desired that Spies Atque
hic certum est Exploratores esse exigente populi incredulitate missos. Deum
Ducem sequi d^bebant, and Cananaeos fidenter aggredi. Sed Dei promissis fidem
non habebant, Deuteronomy. 9.23.
might first be sent to search the Land, and to inform you concerning it, and
concerning the way wherein you must go up to take possession of it, and what
Cities you must first assault. And I having inquired of the Lord concerning it,
[ Numb. 13.3.] and the Lord giving way to it, or at least permitting it, I was
content with it, and took twelve men, one of a Tribe, and they went up into the
Mountain, and came to the Valley of Eshcol. And the Spies brought back some of
the fruits of the Land, namely, Grapes, Pomegranates and Figgs, and said, The
Land was a very good Land. But ye refused to go up, and so rebelled against the
Commandment of the Lord. And ye murmured in your Tents, and said, Because the
Lord hated us, he has brought us forth out of Egypt to deliver us into the
hands of the Amorites, and to destroy us. You further said, Our Brethren (whom
we sent as Spies) have discouraged us, viz. all of them but Caleb and Joshua.
They tell us, The people of that Land are greater and taller then we, their
Cities are great and walled up to Heaven; moreover they tell us, That the Sons
of the Anakims those great Giants are there. Then (said I) dread them not, nor
be afraid of them. For the Lord your God goes before you, and will fight for
you, as he did in Egypt, and as he has hitherto done for you in the
Wilderness; there you have seen how the Lord by his Almighty Power has born
you as a Father takes up and carries his Child in his arms, and has born with
your manners and perverseness, as a tender Father does with a froward Child.
Yet notwithstanding this encouragement you did not believe This unbelief the
Apostle notes to be the cause why they entered not into the Land of Promise,
Heb. 4.6.
in the Lord your God, who went before you to search out a place for you to
pitch your Tents in, in a Pillar of Cloud by day, and a Pillar of Fire by
night. And the Lord was angry at your Murmurings and Unbelief, and swear there
should not one of that evil Generation see that good Land, [ Numb. 14.23.] save
Caleb the Son of Jephunneh (who followed the Lord fully) and Joshua the Son of
Nun, Numb. 14.6, 30, 38. And (says he) the Lord has since that time, at the
other Kadesh, been angry with me for your sakes; For being moved with your
Provocations, I offended both in unadvised Speeches and distrust, and thereupon
the Lord said, I should not go into the Land, [Numb. 20.1, 2, 12.] But Joshua
(who is continually about me to minister unto me) He should go into it,
therefore I am to encourage him, for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.
Moreover the Lord said, Your little Ones which ye said would be a Prey to the
Amorites, and which had then no knowledge between Good and Evil, they shall go
in thither and possess it. But as for you the Lord said, Turn you back again
into the Wilderness, into the way that leads toward the Red Sea, ye shall
not go forward directly toward Canaan, [see Sect. 60.] Then ye said, We have
sinned against the Lord, we will go up and fight as the Lord has commanded us.
And when ye had girded every man his Sword upon his thigh, ye were ready to go
up to the Hill to fight with your Enemies. But the Lord forbad you to go up,
saying, He would not be among you with his blessing and gracious assistance if
ye did; yet you would not hearken, but went up presumptuously unto the Hill,
and the Amorites (which dwelt in the Mountain) came out against you, and chased
you (as Bees See Psalm. 118.12.
use to do, who being angered come out in great swarms against them that
disturb them,) and the Amorites killing many of you, pursued the rest unto
Hormah. And when you repented and wept the Lord would not hearken to you. And
ye abode in the Wilderness of Kadesh many days, as the number of the days you
abode there does sufficiently manifest. For ye were made to wander near 38
years after this in the Wilderness, from verse. 19. to the end.

Kadesh-Barnea, and their compassing Mount Seir Mons Seir, i. e. Idumaea;
Idumaea dicitur mons quia Regio est Montosa.
many days, and how they were forbidden to meddle with the Edomites, Moabites
or Ammonites.

He goes on with his Speech. After this (says he) we turned into the Wilderness
of Kadesh, where after we had wandered a long time (almost 38 years, going
forward and backward) in that mountainous Country of Seir, we returned, by Gods
Command Northward, toward Canaan to pass between the Coasts of Edom on the one
hand, and of Moab and Ammon on the other, and so we came to Sihon the Amorites
Land. And God commanded us, seeing we were to pass by the borders and
out-skirts of the Land of the Edomites, and they would be afraid of us, that we
should not meddle with them, Though afterward when their Posterity had filled
up the measure of their sins, they might be expelled out of their Possession,
see 1 Chronicles. 18.13. And this present Charge seems limited to those Edomites
that lived about Mount Seir. For the Amalekites were the Children of Esau, Genesis
36.12. and those God commanded them to destroy, Exodus 17.14.
for He would not give us any part of their Land, no not so much as a
foot-breadth. He declared, He had given Mount Seir to Esau for a Possession, [
Joshua 24.4. Genesis 36.8.] and at this time he would secure their Possession to
them, that we should not invade it. But he said to us, Ye shall buy meat of
them for money that ye may eat, Hereby it is evident that the Israelites did
not eat only Manna in the Wilderness, but other meat also when it could be
gotten.
and ye shall buy water of them for money that ye may drink. For the Lord has
blessed thee in all the works of thy hands, and prospered thee, so that thou
art able to pay for what thou have occasion for. The Lords eye has been upon
thee to take care of thee in all thy travels through this Wilderness, and these
forty years He has been with thee and supplied thee, thou have lacked nothing,
therefore thou need not seek to supply thy self in an unlawful way. And
(says He) when we had passed by (as God had commanded us) from our Brethren the
Children of Esau, (who were unkind to us, Numb. 20.14, 18.) we turned and
passed through the Wilderness of Moab; then the Lord charged us we should not
distress the Moabites, nor contend with them in battle, for He would not give
us their Land, having given the City Ar Ar was a chief and Royal City of the
Moabites, and so it is here put for the whole County.
and the Country belonging to it to the Children of Lot for a Possession. And
he had driven out of it the Emims (that tall and mighty people, and of a
Gigantick stature, like the Anakims, whom the Ammonites call Zamzummims, verse.
20. that is, presumptuous wicked ones, who dwelt there in time past,) and had
given it to them, and therefore it was not to be taken from them by the
Israelites. And the like He had done for the Children of Esau driving out the
Horims by them out of Mount Seir, that they might dwell in their Land; And as
the Edomites had done to the Horims, so (says He) has Israel done to Sihon
and Og, whose Lands they have already taken, as part of their possession which
the Lord has given them. And thus the Caphtorims, that is, the Philistines [see
Genesis 10.14.] destroyed the Auites, the former Inhabitants of their Country,
verse. 23. By all which you may understand that as God has cast out great and
warlike People out of several Countries and Places, and given their Lands to
others, so He can and will do for you, if ye will trust in him and obey him.
And further (says He) when we came to the Brook Zered, [see Numb. 21.12.] I
exhorted you to go over, and we passed over. And the time we spent since we
came from Kadesh-Barnea and in our marches from thence to the River Zered is 38
years. In which time all that Generation of men that were fit for War (who were
numbered by Gods appointment, Numb. 1.3. from twenty years old and upward) have
been destroyed for their Murmurings and Disobedience, as God had sworn. Further
(says he) when we came to the River Arnon, I encouraged you to pass over,
telling you, That God had given into your hands Sihon King of the Amorites and
his Land, therefore you should fight with him, and gain it from him. And to
encourage you the more hereunto, I told you, That God would from that day
forward put the fear and dread of you upon all the Nations that are under the
whole Heaven unto whom the Report of what He has done for you shall come. And
(says he) you know that before we made War upon Sihon, I sent Messengers with
words of peace to him, [see Deuteronomy. 20.10.] desiring him that we might pass
quietly through his Land, promising that we would go directly along the
Highway, and not turn out of the Rode into the Fields or Vineyards to the
right hand or to the left, and that we would pay for the meat and water we had
of him and his people, and that we would ask nothing more of him, but that we
might pass through his Country on our feet, and herein we desired no more of him
than the Children of Esau, and the Moabites afforded us, viz. Meat and Drink
for our money as we passed through the out-skirts of their Country. But Sihon
would not let us pass, for the Lord hardened God cannot be the Author of Sin, or
the rebellion of the heart, but he may (being debtor to no man) withhold his
grace, He may leave men to themselves, He may permit Satan to work effectually
in them. See Sect. 59. of Chapter 3. on Exodus 4.21.
his Spirit, and made his heart obstinate that he might deliver him into our
hands, as appears by the event. For Sihon coming out against us with his
people to fight us, the Lord delivered him into our hands, and we smote him and
all his Host, and we took all his Cities, and utterly destroyed Men, Women and
Children, [see Deuteronomy. 20.14, 15, 16.] as God had commanded us. Only we took the
Cattle and the Spoil of the Cities to our selves for a Prey. But the Land which
was on the outside of the River Jabbock which belonged to the Ammonites,
[Josh. 12.2.] and those Cities of the Ammonites that lay in that mountainous
Country beyond Jabbock, and whatever else was in the possession of the
Ammonites did we not at all meddle with, or with any thing else that God had
forbidden us.

5. He reminds them how after they had conquered Sihon, they conquered Og Giant
King of Bashan the other King of the Amorites. When we marched up toward
Bashan, then (says he) Og the King thereof with his Army came out against us at
Edrei. And the Lord commanded us not to be afraid of him though he was a Giant
of such a formidable stature. And accordingly the Lord delivered him, and his
people, and his Land into our hand, and we took all his Cities, even threescore
Cities, all the Region of Argob, a Province in Bashan; we took all those
Cities, which were fenced with high walls, gates and bars, and many unwalled
Towns also. And we destroyed Men, Women and Children, as we had before done
unto King Sihon and his Subjects, but the Cattle and the Spoil of the Cities we
took as a Prey to our selves. So we took at this time from those two Kings of
the Amorites the Land that was on this side Jordan from the River Arnon to
Mount Hermon (called by the Sidonians Sirion, And Chapter 4.48. Sion.
and by the Amorites Shenir,) and all the Cities of the Plain, and all Gilead.

And (says He) there now remained of that Gigantick Race in the Kingdom of
Bashan but this Og only, whose Bedstead The Cubit of a man being usually a foot
and an half, according to this measure his Bedstead was four yards and an half
long, and two yards broad.
was of Iron, and nine Cubits (according to the Cubit of an ordinary man) was
the length thereof, and four Cubits the breadth thereof, and it was now kept in
Rabbah Possibly this Bedstead was taken in some War between the Ammonites and
this King, and so kept in Rabbah as a glorious Trophy of their Victory.
the chief City of the Ammonites, from 1. to 12.

6. He shows how he distributed those Countries taken from the two Kings, to
Reuben, Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasseh, [see Numb. 32.19.] enjoining them
nevertheless to go over Jordan before their Brethren armed, and to fight for
them, and help them against the Canaanites, till God had given them that Land
quietly to possess, and then they should return to their own Possessions on
this side Jordan again. And (says He) I appointed in this new Conquest three
Cities of Refuge, viz. Bezer in the lot of the Reubenites, and Ramoth-Gilead in
the lot of the Gadites, and Golan in Bashan in the lot of the Manaesites, from
12 to 21. and Chapter 4. from 14. to 44.

7. He further tells them how he encouraged Joshua (who was to be his
Successor) from what he had seen the Lord do to those two Kings of the
Amorites, and that consequently he should not fear the other Kings he was to
fight with, for the Lord would fight for Israel. Then he tells them how
earnestly he besought the Lord to permit him to go into Canaan. I prayed (says
he) O Lord God, thou have begun to show thy Servant thy greatness, and thy
mighty hand; For what God is there in Heaven or Earth that can do according to
thy Works, and according to thy Might? I pray thee let me go over and see the
good Land that is beyond Jordan, and that goodly Mountain Lebanon. But the Lord
was wroth with me for your sakes. Your murmurings made me sometimes too rash in
speaking, and sometimes too slow in believing in the Lord, which provoked Him
against me, so that He would not grant my Request, but said to me, Let it
suffice thee, speak no more to me of this matter. Get thee up to the top of
Pisgah, and lift up thine eyes Westward and Northward, Eastward and
Southward, and behold it with thine eyes, for thou shall not go over this
Jordan. But give Joshua in Charge what I Command thee, and encourage and
strengthen him. For he shall go over before this people, and shall cause them
to inherit the Land which thou shall only see with thine eyes. Chapter 3. from 21.
to the end.

8. From all these Experiences of Gods signal Goodness to them, He comes now to
exhort them to keep and obey the Statutes and Commandments of the Lord, and to
teach their Children also to observe them; and especially to take heed of
Idolatry, which was a very provoking sin. And that he might excite them the
more to the observance of these Precepts, he bespeaks them in this wise;
Hearken, O Israel, unto the Statutes and Judgments which I am now to teach you,
and be careful to practice them, that ye may live, and go in and possess the
Land which the Lord God of your Fathers has given you. You shall not add
Improbatur hic (...) and cultus proprio arbitrio excogitatus. Confer Deuteronomy.
12.8, 32. Numb. 15.39, 40. Prove. 30.5, 6. Gal. 3.10.
to the words which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it;
but you must keep close to the Commandments of the Lord, which I from Him
command you. Your eyes have seen the Judgments of God executed upon those that
committed Idolatry with Baal-Peor, unto which many of Israel declined by the
counsel of Balaam. But you that did cleave unto the Lord, and kept your selves
from that Transgression, were saved from that destruction. Behold I set before
you the Statutes Some by Statutes understand Ornances of divine Worship, and by
Judgments Laws that concern their duty toward men, and the punishment of
Transgressors.
and Judgments which God has commanded observe them will be a great evidence
of your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the Nations that shall hear,
and rightly consider these Statutes, and they will say, Surely this great
Nation is a wise and understanding people. For what other great Nation is there
which has God so nigh unto them, and always dwelling among them, as these
Israelites have, as is evident by the miraculous signs of his Presence among
them, and his readiness always to hear their prayers, and to defend and protect
them from all evils. And indeed what other Nation is there that has Statutes
and Judgments so righteous Ex legibus de populis fit juditium.
as is this Law which I am to set before you this day. You ought therefore to
take heed lest you forget the great things God has done for you, and that they
may never be forgotten, I exhort you to teach them your Sons, and your Sons
Sons. And especially remember the day when you stood Most of those that stood
then at Horeb were dead, see Chapter 2.14, 15, 16. But many that were then young
were now alive.
before the Lord in Horeb, when God commanded me to gather the people together
to hear his words, that they might learn to fear Him all the days of their
life, and might teach them unto their Children. And ye came near and stood
under the Mountain, and the Mountain burnt with fire unto the midst of Heaven,
Per hyperbolen significat quod vehementer and altissime flammas evomeret.
and there were great Tempests and thick darkness. And the Lord spoke unto you
out of the midst of the fire. Ye heard the voice of his words but saw no
Similitude of Him at all. And he declared unto you his Covenant, viz. the
Condition required on your part, namely, Obedience and Observance of his ten
Commandments, which He wrote upon two Tables of stone. And besides those ten
Commandments which the Lord himself gave you; He not long after that time gave
me other Statutes and Judgments, viz. the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, which
he commanded me to teach you. Take heed therefore unto your selves, lest you
corrupt your selves by Idolatry, or by making any Image of God; for remember
you saw no manner of similitude of Him at Horeb, or any figure of Man, Beasts,
Birds, creeping things or Fishes to represent Him. Take heed also of
worshipping the Host of Heaven, the Sun, Moon and Stars, which are so far from
being Gods, that God has created them for the common use of man, and the
service of all Nations. And you Israelites ought above all people to be careful
not to dishonor God by such gross Idolatry, because He has brought you forth
by an outstretched Arm out of the Iron-Furnace of Egypt, and has taken you to
Himself as his own peculiar people, and as his own Possession, as you see this
day. Furthermore the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, and swear that I
should not go over Jordan, but should die in this Land. However ye shall go
over and possess Moses being sure of Heaven envies not those that should
inherit the earthly Canaan.
it. Take heed therefore lest ye forget the Covenant of the Lord your God, and
especially take heed of Idolatry, or making any graven Image to represent God,
which he has so severely forbidden. For God is a jealous God, jealous of
having the Worship due only to Himself given to any Creature; He is a consuming
fire to those that provoke him by their Rebellions. Furthermore I advise you
that when you are settled in the Land of Canaan, and are mightily increased,
that you be not secure, nor think it a small matter to corrupt your selves by
Idolatry; for if you do, I call Heaven and Earth to witness against you this
day, that I faithfully admonished you of your danger, and told you that upon
such Provocations God would destroy many of you, and drive the small remnant
that shall be left out of the Land he has given you to possess, and would
scatter you among Heathen Nations, where you shall serve their Gods, Quod in
patria fecistis ultro, facietis attoniti pudore atque inviti exules.
(or at lest those that did serve them) viz. such Gods as are the work of men's
hands, and made of Wood or Stone, which neither see nor hear, eat nor smell.

But yet even then when you have thus transgressed, and are thereupon under
great tribulation, if ye shall humble your selves before the Lord, and shall
seek his Face, and turn to him with all your Heart Some think those verses from
27. to 32. to be a Prophecy of the calling of the Jews.
and all your Soul, He is so gracious and merciful, that he will have pity upon
you, and will not forget the Covenant which he made with your Fathers. And that
you may remember the extraordinary engagements the Lord has laid upon you,
look back upon ancient times and consult the Histories of all things that have
happened since the Creation in any part of the world, from the one side of the
Heavens to the other, and from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof,
and inquire whither there was ever such a thing in the world before, That a
people should hear the Voice of God speaking unto them out of the midst of the
fire, and yet live and escape as ye did; yea further inquire whither ever God
assayed at any time in such a manner to take unto Himself a Nation from the
midst of another Nation by Temptations, God propounding his Will to the
Israelites, tried their Obedience whither they would trust in Him. They were
also temptations to Pharaoh, to try whither he would be won to yield to God,
and let the people go.
Signs, Wonders by War Against Pharaoh whom with his Host He destroyed in the
Red Sea.
and by a mighty Hand, and outstretched Arm, and by great Terrors, as he has
done you when he brought you out of Egypt. Before your eyes were those great
things done, that you may know that the Lord he is God, and there is no other
besides him. Out of the Air from on high he made you to hear his Voice, to
instruct you, and upon Mount Sinai he made you see his great fire, and you
heard his words out of the midst of it. And because of his own free Grace and
Love (and not for any desert of theirs) he chose and loved your Fathers, and
chose their Seed after them for his peculiar people, therefore he brought you
by his Almighty Power out of Egypt in his sight; that is, the eye of his
Providence being still fixed upon you, even as a Father causes his Child to go
before him that he may preserve him from danger, Exodus 14.19. Ante se] in exitu
ex Aegypto retro se posuit ut eos intueretur.
And he brought you out of Egypt, that you might drive out other Nations
greater and mightier than you, and take their Land to your selves for an
Inheritance, as you have in part experienced already in your having conquered
Sihon and Og Kings of the Amorites, and gained their Countries. Which Conquests
may be an earnest to you of further Victories over your Enemies. Know you
therefore this day, and consider it well in your hearts, that the Lord He is
God both in Heaven above, and in Earth beneath, and there is none besides him.
Therefore diligently keep his Statutes and Commandments which I command you
this day, that it may go well with you, and your Children after you, and that
you may live long and happily in the Land which the Lord God gives you, from
verse. 1. to 41.

9. He comes now to set before them the Law of God, viz. the ten Commandments
Testimonies; that is, the particular Articles or Points of the Covenant which
God made with them at Horeb, whereby he testified his mind to them, and the
particulars in which he required Obedience from them. He shows how they were
terrified at the dreadful manner wherein the Law was delivered, and desired Him
to mediate between God and them.

Then calling all the Elders and Chief of the people of Israel together, He
said, Hear, O Israel, the Statutes and Judgments which I speak in your ears
this day, that you may learn them, and keep and do them. The Lord our God made
a Covenant with us in Horeb. He made not this Covenant with our Fathers in
Egypt, nor with the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; for though he made the
same Covenant with them for substance, and they were obliged to believe in the
Messiah, and to keep the Law so far as it was revealed to them, yet this
Covenant was not revealed to them with all its Circumstances and particular
Laws, nor in that form and manner wherein it was revealed to us on Mount Horeb,
with whom God entered into Covenant as with a Body Politic, and a People whom
he had separated from all other Nations unto his own Worship and Service. You
Plurimi eorum qui tempore Legislationis in Horeb fuerunt infra 20 annos,
poterant eorum meminisse quae ibi gesta, and dicta fuerunt.
may remember (says he) how God when he gave you the Ten Commandments talked
with you face to face; V. 4. Facie ad faciem loquutus est nobis] i. e. praesens
praesentibus fine ullo internuncio.
that is, immediately by himself, and not by an Internuncio or Messenger. But
after God had spoken to you the Ten Commandments out of the fire, I was fain to
stand as a Mediator between the Lord and you, for you were afraid to hear the
Voice of the Lord immediately any more.

Now the Ten Commandments the Lord spoke to you in Horeb, you may find recorded
in the 20th Chapter of Exodus. Some words are here added by Moses in this fifth
Chapter of Deuteronomy to those uttered by God on Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. as an
explanation of them. In the fourth Commandment, as it was there delivered by
the Lord, the Worlds Creation, and Gods resting on the seventh day was
mentioned as a main ground of it, Exodus 20.11. But here Moses omits that, and
presses their deliverance out of Egypt as a chief reason of Gods injoyning
them to sanctify this day, Deuteronomy. 5.15. because by their redemption out of
Egypt they were bound to Consecrate themselves wholly to Gods Service as his
peculiar people, whereof the holy employment of the Sabbath might be a notable
memorial and sign: and secondly because of that particular charge of suffering
their Servants to rest on the Sabbath Day, their former Bondage in Egypt being
a strong inducement to move them to it, ut requiescat servus tuus, etc. Exodus
20.17. God forbids the coveting of our Neighbors house, and then next the
coveting of his wife. Here the coveting of our Neighbors wife is first
forbidden, and then afterward the coveting of his house, etc, so that they
that would divide this last Commandment into two as the Papists do, cannot
justly say which is the ninth Commandment, and which is the tenth, because one
branch of it is first in Exodus, and another is first in Deuteronomy; and we
cannot reasonably think that Moses would pervert the order of the ten
Commandments. Paul makes but one Commandment of both branches, Romans 7.7.
These are the Precepts God spoke immediately by himself to you, and he added
no more moral Precepts; and He wrote them in two Tables of stone, and delivered
them unto me. And after this dreadful delivery of the Law the Elders of your
Tribes came to me, and said, Behold the Lord our God has caused us to see his
Glory and Greatness, and we have heard his Voice out of the fire, and we have
seen that God does talk with man, and yet he remains alive. But you intimated
that your present safety was a matter of great wonder to you, and though you
had escaped that danger for the present, yet you were not willing to be exposed
to the like danger again. For the very terror of it you apprehended would kill
you, if God should speak to you again immediately by himself; and you said,
What man is there that ever heard God speaking out of the fire (as we have
done) and yet lived. Therefore you desired me to receive from the Lord all that
He should command you, and to deliver it unto you, and you would hear it and do
it. And the Lord approved of your motion, and further said, O that Humanitas
optanda, non speranda designat.
there were such an heart in them that they would fear me, and keep all my
Commandments always, that it might be well with them and with their Children
for ever. Therefore God commanded you to betake your selves unto your Tents
again, and commanded me to stand before him, and to receive from him all the
Commandments, Statutes and Judgments which I should teach you, and which you
should observe in the Land which He intended to give you, that you may walk in
them, and that it may be well with you, and that you may prolong your days, and
that you may increase mightily as the Lord God of your Fathers promised you
should do in that good Land that flows with Milk and Honey.

Moses now enters upon the explanation of the first Commandment, Hear, O
Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord, (one Eternal, Almighty, and divine
Essence, one in substance, though three in persons,) and alone to be adored and
worshipped. And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all
thy Soul, and with all thy might. And these words which I command thee this day
shall be in thy heart, and so imprinted in thy mind and memory, that upon all
occasions thou may know what thou art to do. And thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou fittest in thine
house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up. And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine head, and they
shall be as Frontlets Scopus hujus praecepti est non ad hujusmodi Ceremonias
praecisas obstringere, sed continuam Legis recordationem inculcare. Jans. vide
Exodus 13.9. The Pharisees followed the literal sense in their Phylacteries,
which were some written Schedules of Parchment which were fastened to their
Foreheads and Arms, to keep the Law of God in remembrance, see Matthew. 23.5.
between thine eyes; that is, thou shall use all means to keep them in
continual remembrance, and to set them before the eyes of thy Children, that
they may live according to them. And thou shall write them on the posts of thy
House, and on thy Gates, [see Chapter 11.18, 19, 20.] And when the Lord shall have
brought thee into that good Land which He swear unto thy Fathers to give thee,
and into great and goodly Cities which thou buildest not, and into Houses full
of all good things which thou filledst not, and to Wells dug which thou
digedst not, and to Vineyards and Olive Trees which thou plantedst not; when
thou have eaten and art full, then beware lest thou forget the Lord that
brought thee forth out of the Land of Egypt, from the house of Bondage. Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and swear by his Name; that is,
when thou have a lawful Call to swear, thou shall perform this religious act by
the Name of the only true God, and not of any Idol, nor by any Creature
whatsoever; Ye shall not follow after other gods, nor worship or serve the gods
of other Nations that are round about, lest the anger of the Lord (who is a
jealous God) be kindled against thee, and He destroy thee from off the face of
the Earth. Take heed also lest you provoke the Lord by your distrust and
murmurings, and limiting the holy One of Israel, as you formerly did at Massah,
[Exod. 17.2. Psalm. 78.41.] And see that ye diligently observe the Commandments
of the Lord, that ye may go in and possess the good Land which he promised to
your Fathers to give you. And when your Children shall ask you in time to come
what mean the Testimonies, Statutes and Judgments which the Lord our God has
commanded us? you shall say, We were bondmen in Egypt, and the Lord brought us
out with a mighty hand, and the Lord showed Signs and Wonders great and sore
upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh and his Household before our eyes, and the Lord
commanded us to observe all these Statutes, and to fear Him for our good
always, that he might preserve us alive, as he has done to this day. And if we
carefully observe these Laws as he has commanded us, it shall be our
Righteosness; that is, an evidence and manifestation of our Integrity and
Vprightness before the Lord, and though our Obedience be weak and imperfect,
yet if it be sincere, God in and through the Messiah will accept of it, and will
mercifully reward us for it.

11. He goes on to give them some further explanation of the first Commandment,
Canaanites, and their Idolatry, and to have no Communion with them, lest they
should be seduced by them to the worship of other gods. They should remember
they were a people holy to God, whom he freely chose, and will severely punish
if they prove unfaithful; but if they be faithful, he will give them victory
over their Enemies. He further says to them, When the Lord shall have brought
you into the good Land he has given you, to cast out the seven Nations of the
Canaanites that are greater and mightier than you, and has delivered them into
your hands, then you shall smite them, and utterly destroy them; you shall make
no Covenant with them, nor show mercy unto them, unless they become Proselytes
and Converts to the true Religion which I have established among you. Neither
shall you make Marriages with them; your Daughters you shall not give to their
Sons, nor their Daughters shall you take to your Sons, for they will be apt to
turn them away from following after the Lord your God, and entice them to serve
other Gods; so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, that he will
destroy you suddenly. But you shall destroy their Altars, and break down their
Images, and cut down their Groves, which they have planted for Idolatrous uses,
and burn their graven Images with fire. For you are an holy people unto the
Lord your God; the Lord has chosen you to be a peculiar people to Himself,
above all people that are upon the face of the Earth: And the Lord did not set
his love upon you, and choose you because ye were more in number than any other
people, (as in worldly Kingdoms Dominion over a great and populous Nation is
more desired than over few.) For the truth is, you were very few till God made
such a miraculous multiplication of you in Egypt. The Lord loved you freely,
and chose you of his own free Grace, not finding any thing in you more than in
others to move him so to do. And because the Lord loved you, and intended to
keep the Oath which He had sworn unto your Fathers, He has brought you out of
the house of Bondmen, out of Egypt with a mighty hand. Know therefore that the
Lord your God, he is the only true God, the faithful God, which keeps
Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, and keep his Commandments to
thousand Generations, and repayeth them that hate him to their face; that is,
will so apparently take Vengeance on them, (and will not be slack or slow to do
it) that they shall plainly perceive (as men do a thing set before their face)
that he does it for their wickedness. Wherefore if you shall carefully observe
the Commandments, Statutes and Judgments which I command you this day from the
Lord, then will He keep and perform unto you the Covenant and Mercy which he
swear unto your Fathers, and will love you and bless you, and exceedingly
increase you. Will bless you in the fruit of the Womb, and your Corn, Wine and
Oil, and the fruit of your Cattle shall be increased. You shall be blessed
above all people; There shall not (except very rarely) be any Male or Female
barren among you, or among your Cattle. And the Lord will take away from you
all sickness, and will not inflict upon you any of those dangerous and noisome
Diseases wherewith (as it is well known to you) he punished the Egyptians for
your sakes, [ Exodus 9.10.] and wherewith the Inhabitants of that Country were
usually troubled, [ Deuteronomy. 28.27.] but will lay them upon all them that hate
thee. You shall therefore destroy all the Nations that the Lord your God shall
give into your hands; you shall have no pity upon them, neither shall you serve
their Gods, for that will be a snare to you, and a cause of your ruin, and
will bring Judgments upon you from which you will not be able to free your
selves. But possibly you will say, These Nations are more than we, how can we
then dispossess them? I say to you therefore, Be not afraid of them, but
remember what the Lord your God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt. Remember
the great Miracles, Signs and Wonders the Lord did in Egypt, and the great
Trials and Temptations whereby He exercised, and proved Pharaoh and the
Egyptians to see whither they would be obedient to Him; and how at last by a
mighty Hand and an outstretched Arm he brought you out. Be of good courage; so
shall the Lord do to these Nations of which you seem now to be afraid. Moreover
the Lord will send the Hornet among them, [see Exodus 23.28.] that is, venomous
Flies that shall sting them to death, so that they that shall hide themselves
from you, and think thereby to escape, shall be destroyed by them.

Be not therefore afraid of them, for the Lord your God is among you, a mighty
God and terrible. He will cast out these Nations before you by little and
little; He will not employ his Omnipotence to destroy them all at once, but
according to the quality of humane means He will do it by degrees; you shall
not destroy them all at once, lest the Land become a Wilderness, and the wild
Beasts of the Field increase upon Another reason is rendered, Judge. 3.1, 2.
you, see Exodus 23.29. But the Lord your God will deliver them into your hands,
and you shall destroy them by degrees, and that with a mighty destruction. And
he shall deliver their Kings into your hands, [see Josh. 10.24. and 12.7, 9,
etc. Where 31 Kings were reckoned whom Israel conquered.
] and you shall destroy their Names All this is promised upon condition of
their obedience to God. For when they obeyed not Gods Command, we read
afterward of many of those Nations that were too strong for them, see Joshua
15.63. and 17.12. and Judge. 1.34.
from under Heaven, so that their names shall be buried in Oblivion, or if they
be mentioned, it shall be to their Reproach. There shall none stand before you
if you continue obedient to the Lord your God. The carved Images of the Heathen
Gods you shall burn with fire. You shall not desire the Silver and Gold that is
on them, and with which they use to adorn them, nor take it unto your own use,
but utterly consume it, with the Idols themselves, lest you be ensnared
thereby; that is, lest by doing otherwise you should provoke God (who forbids
you this, to work in you a greater detestation of Idolatry,) to send down
Judgments upon you. And further, the Gold and Silver that has been used about
Idols, and has served for Idolatrous uses, being an abomination to the Lord,
you shall not bring it into your houses, lest you be accursed for having
appropriated that to your selves which God would have you detest, abhor and
destroy. See Joshua 7.1, 12, 21.


Canaans blessings. Remember (says he) O Israel, what happened to thee in the
way, and how the Lord led thee these forty years in the Wilderness to humble
thee, and to prove thee whither thou would keep his Commandments or no; and
by this trying of thee, He intended to discover and make known to thy self and
others what was in thy heart, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. And he humbled thee, and suffered
thee to hunger, and then fed thee with Manna, which neither thou nor thy
Fathers had ever known before; and He did this, that he might make thee know
that man does not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God; that is, by any thing that God shall please by his Command to
give the power of nourishing unto. He further mentions two other effects of
Gods Providential Care over them: First, That their Garments Those that
out-grew their Garments might be supplied with the Garments of such as died in
the Wilderness, and then the Garments they left off might serve those that grew
to their stature. Besides the provision of Apparel they had of their own, they
were furnished with many Suits of several sizes for themselves and their
Children by borrowing of the Egyptians, Exodus 3.22. and 12.35. Many of
different ages and statures dying, it is like their Garments were kept for, and
used by such as succeeded, that were of the same stature.
waxed not old; that is, were not worn out nor decayed in forty years wearing,
neither did their shoes wax old upon their feet, Deuteronomy. 29.5. 2ly, Their feet
did not swell notwithstanding their continual travels in the Wilderness, Nehem.
9.21. Further (says he) thou shall consider in thy heart that as a man
chasteneth his Son, so the Lord thy God chastened thee, namely, out of love,
and with a gentle hand; and this ought to work in thee a filial fear of
offending Him, and an earnest desire in all things to obey him, and to walk in
his ways and keep his Commandments. And moreover, consider the excellency of
the Land into which the Lord thy God brings thee, viz. a Land of Brooks of
Fountains, and deep Springs in Valleys, and which issue out of Hills; A Land of
Wheat and Barley, of Vines, Figg-Trees and Pomegranates, a Land abounding with
Oil and Honey, a Land wherein thou shall eat bread without scarceness, and
wherein thou shall not lack any thing, a Land whose Stones are Iron, and out of
whose Hills thou may dig Brass; that is, a Land wherein there are abundance
of Mines, and Iron mingled with the Stones, or as plentiful as Stones and Brass
to be dug almost out of every hill. Beware therefore when thou have eaten,
and art full, and have built goodly houses and dwelt therein, and when thy
Herds and thy Flocks multiply, and thy Silver and Gold is multiplied, I say,
beware then lest thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, who
brought thee out of Egypt, and led thee through that great and terrible
Wilderness wherein were fiery Serpents and Scorpions, and Drought, who brought
thee out water out of a Rock of Flint, and fed thee with Manna in the
Wilderness, and did exercise thee with many Afflictions that he might humble
thee, and prove thee, and do thee good at the latter end, viz. after he had
humbled thee. When therefore thou art grown rich, and things go so well with
thee, take heed left thou say in thy heart my power, and the might of my hand
has gotten me these great riches. But thou shall remember that it is the Lord
thy God that gives thee power to get Wealth, that he may establish and make
good his Covenant which he swear unto thy Fathers, as it is this day. And it
shall be that if thou do forget the Lord thy God, and walk after other Gods,
and serve them, and worship them. I testify against you this day, that you
shall surely perish, because ye would not be obedient to the Voice of the Lord
your God.

13. He admonishes them to walk humbly with God, laying aside all conceits of
worth and righteousness. To this end they should remember their many rebellions
against God.

Hear, O Israel, (says He) thou art now shortly to pass over this Jordan, to go
in and possess the Lands of Nations greater and mightier than thy self, whose
Cities are great and fenced up to Heaven, [Ch. 1.28.] and the people great and
tall, the Children of the Anakims, of whom, thou have heard it spoken by way of
Proverb, Who can stand before the Children of Anak understand this therefore,
thou must not expect to Conquer these great and potent Nations by thy own
strength or power, but the Lord thy God will go over before thee, as a
consuming fire to destroy them before thy face, and thou shall drive out
quickly, and destroy those people whom thou shall fight with immediately upon
thy entrance into Canaan, though all the Inhabitants of the Land shall not be
quickly destroyed, but by little and little, see Deuteronomy. 7.22. And when thou have
by the miraculous power and assistance of God thus cast them out, take heed of
saying in thy heart for my Righteousness the Lord has brought me in to possess
this good Land; For know that not for thy righteousness, or the uprightness of
thy heart, the Lord will do this; but to punish the wickedness of the
Inhabitants of the Land, and that he may perform his Word which he swear unto
thy Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Remember thou art a stiff-necked people,
and did highly provoke the Lord thy God in the Wilderness, yea from the day
you came out of Egypt even unto this place, ye have in many things been
rebellious against the Lord. Remember how in Horeb ye provoked the Lord your
God, so that he was ready to have destroyed you, when I was gone up into the
Mount to receive the Tables of Stone, even the Tables of the Covenant which the
Lord made with you. I abode there 40 days and 40 nights, and did neither eat
bread nor drink water; And the Lord delivered to me two Tables of Stone, on
which were written with his own Finger the ten Commandments, word for word, as
he spoke them from the Mount out of the midst of the fire, on the day when ye
assembled at the foot of the Mount to hear the Law from his mouth. At the end
of 40 days and 40 nights God gave me these two Tables, and said unto me, Arise
get thee down quickly from hence; for thy people which thou have brought forth
out of Egypt have corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned aside out of
the way which I commanded them; They have made unto themselves a molten Image.
Further the Lord said unto me, I have seen this people that they are a
stiff-necked people; Let me alone that I may destroy them, and blot out their
name from under Heaven. Intercede no more for them, and I will make of thee a
Nation mightier and greater than they. Then I prayed unto the Lord for you,
that ye might not be destroyed, Exodus 32.11, 14. And I came down from the Mount
with two Tables in my hands, and the Mount burned with fire, the terror of
which sight (one would think) might have kept you from Idolatry, but I beheld,
and lo you had made you a molten Calf, and I took the two Tables, and cast them
out of my hands, and brake them before your eyes. And I took your Sin, that is,
the Calf wherein you had so hainously sinned, (Idolatrously worshipping it
instead of the true God, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, and ground it
very small, even until it was as small as dust, and I cast the dust thereof
into the Brook that descended out of the Mount, and made the people to drink
thereof, to make them loath and detest so great an abomination. And I went up
into the Mountain a second time, and fasted 40 days and 40 nights more by
reason of this great sin of the people; and I fell down before the Lord as at
first, and interceeded for them, being much afraid of the great anger which the
Lord had conceived against them. And I prayed unto the Lord, and said, O Lord
God destroy not thy people, and thine Inheritance, which thou have redeemed by
thy great Power, and brought forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand. Remember
thy Servants Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; look not unto the stubbornness of this
people, nor unto their wickedness, nor to their sin. Lest the Land whence thou
broughtest us out say, because the Lord was not able to bring them into the
Land which he promised them, and because he hated them, he has brought them
out to slay them in the Wilderness. Remember, O Lord, they are thy people, and
thine Inheritance which thou broughtest out of Egypt by thy mighty Power, and
by thy stretched-out Arm.

The Lord was pleased to hearken unto me at that time also. And the Lord was
very angry with Aaron who made the Calf for them, and was ready to have
destroyed him, but I interceded for him also and prevailed. But though I insist
chiefly on this sin at Horeb, because it was a most transcendent and grievous
Transgression, yet alas! many other Rebellions of yours I might reckon up, as
particularly at Taberah, Numb. 11.1, 3. at Massah, Exodus 17.7. at
Kibroth-Hattaavah, Numb. 11.34. likewise at Kadesh-Barnea, when the Lord
commanded you to go and take possession of the Land that He had given you, you
would first send Spies to search the Land, and ten of them discouraged you from
entering into it. Whereupon you rebelled against the Lord your God, and believed
him not, nor hearkened to his Voice, see Numb. Chapter 13. and Chapter 14. You have been
a rebellious people all along since I had the Charge and Government of you.

many Rebellions, he comes now to show them Gods great Kindness to them
notwithstanding, and especially in renewing the two Tables of the Law; In
leading them on toward Canaan; in continuing the Priesthood; in separating the
Tribe of Levi, and in hearkening unto his Prayer not to destroy them. He
further tells them, How upon his earnest intercession for them the Lord was
pleased to be reconciled to them, and this he proves to them by several
instances: As 1. That the Lord gave him charge to hew out two new Tables of
Stone, Herein they differed from the first Tables, which were the work of God,
Exodus 32.16.
and to come up with them into the Mount, and He would write on them the words
of the first Tables which he had broken; and He commanded him also to make an
Ark or Chest of Shittim-wood to keep those Tables in, viz. the Ark of the
Testimony, which he took care to have made by Bezaleel, and there he placed
them, and there (he tells them) they were at that day. Further he shows them,
That the Children of Israel having gone many Journeys forward and backward in
the Wilderness as the Lord commanded them, at last they went from Beeroth
Contentus and hoc loco Moses recitatione historiarum seu rerum, neque
superstitiose circumstantias locorum tractavit. Non fuit illi propositum
mansiones recensere, sed beneficia Dei in certis mansionibus praestita
celebrare. Gerar.
of the Children of Jaakan to Mosera Abulensis duo distincta loca conjectat
Mosera and Moseroth; Illum, locum quendam in monte Hor; hunc, mansionem
Israelitarum (vide Numb. 33.30.) quae solutio videtur probabilis.
which was a part of the same Mountain with Hor, though it had different names)
and there Aaron died, and was buried; and this might humble them for the sin of
the golden Calf, whereby God was so displeased with Aaron, that he would not
permit him to go into Canaan. Yet that God permitted Eleazar his Son to succeed
him in the Office of the High Priest was a proof of his being reconciled to
them upon Moses's prayer. Moreover he shows how they removed from Gudgodah, and
God brought them to Jotbath a Land of waters, which was a great mercy to them
in their travels through the Wilderness, and another proof of his grace and
favor to them; and that he had regard to their Infirmity, that they might not
have occasion to murmur against Him for want of water as formerly they had
done. Then returning to the history of things done at Mount Sinai, He instances
in the separating the Tribe of Levi (wherein not only the Levites, but the
Priests also are comprehended,) to bear the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, to
stand before the Lord, to minister unto him in divine Offices, and to bless the
people in his Name, as a special sign of Gods having received them into Favor
again upon his prayer and intercession. And because the Tribe of Levi are thus
to be employed, He shows they are to have no part of the Spoils taken in War,
no Inheritance in the Land of Canaan (which was to be divided among the other
Tribes, see Numb. 18.20. and 26.53, 57. and 35.2. and Deuteronomy. 18.1.) but the Lord
himself would be their Inheritance, maintaining them by the First Fruits,
Tithes, Vows and Oblations made unto Himself. These Gifts the Lord has given
him, they are his Inheritance, see Numb. 18.8, 9, etc. Deuteronomy. 12.19. And Moses
further shows them, That God did manifest he had received them into Favor
again, in that He said unto him, Arise take thy journey before the people, that
they may go in and possess the Land which I swear unto their Fathers to give
them; whereby the Lord intimated that he was willing they should presently have
entered into the Land, had not they by their murmuring excluded themselves for
many years after, Chapter 10. from 1. to verse. 12.

15. He now presses them with many pathetical Arguments, sincerely to love and
obey the Lord.

And now, O Israel, (says he) what does the Lord require of thee, but to fear
the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, to love him and serve him with all
thine heart, and with all thy Soul, to keep his Commandments and Statutes which
I command thee this day for thy good. Behold the visible Heaven, and the
Empiraean or third Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, is the Lords, thy God, and
the Earth with all that therein is; He is Lord of all, and he needs not any
of his Creatures. And he set his love on thy Fathers, and chose their Seed
after them out of his free Grace, above all other Nations, to be his peculiar
people. Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your hearts, that is, put away
from your heart all that opposes his holy Will, and be no more stiff-necked
and disobedient to his Will. For the Lord your God is Lord of Lords, a great,
and mighty, and terrible God, who regards not persons merely for their
outward Condition, nor takes Reward; that is, will not pervert Judgment by
condemning the Innocent, or acquitting the Wicked for Gifts or Rewards, as
unrighteous Judges use to do. He does execute righteous Judgment to all that
are oppressed, Psalm. 103.6. particularly to the Fatherless and Widow, and
loves the Stranger, and gives him Food and Baiment. Ye shall therefore in
imitation of Him love Strangers, for ye your selves were sometime Strangers in
the Land of Egypt. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and cleave
to him, and swear by his Name, Chapter 16.13. He is thy praise, that is, He it is
whom thou ought to praise continually, and in whom thou art to glory. And
this shall be thy chief glory and praise among other Nations, that this great
and mighty Jehovah is thy God, and that thou art his people. He is the God that
has done for thee these great and wonderful things (so terrible to thine
Enemies) which thine eyes have seen. Remember thy Fathers that went down into
Egypt were but threescore and ten See Notes on Genesis 46.27.
persons, and now the Lord has made thee as the Stars of Heaven for multitude.

16. He addresses his Speech to the ancienter sort, who being under twenty
years Egypt, and of capacity then to observe, had seen how miraculously God
delivered them out of that house of Bondage, and whose Eyes had seen all the
great things the Lord had done for them in the Wilderness.

And to you (says He) of the ancienter sort I now direct my Speech. To you I
speak, and not to your Children who have not known nor seen all that the Lord
did for his people, nor the Miracles and wonderful things which He did in Egypt
by his mighty Hand and outstretched Arm, and how he destroyed Pharaoh and his
Host in the Red Sea, so that you enjoy the benefit of that destruction that
fell upon the Egyptians even to this day, their Power being thereby so
sweakened that they have not been able since to attempt any thing against you.
You also have seen what He has done for you in the Wilderness till you came
even to this place. You have seen also what he did to Dathan and Abiram, the
Sons of Eliab, the Son of Reuben, how the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed
them up, and their Households and their Tents, and all the substance that was in
their possession in the midst of Israel. These glorious Acts that God did in
the Wilderness you have seen, and therefore have great reason to be obedient to
his Commandments, that ye may be strengthened both in body and spirit to go
into the good Land that flows with Milk and Honey, and may fight against your
Enemies, and subdue them, and may possess it and prolong your days in it. And
further, to press them to Obedience, He tells them, The Land they were going to
possess was not like the Land of Egypt whence they came out (which having but
little rain, Zach. 14.18. and being watered with the overflowing of Nilus)
occasioned the people to put their feet to the Spade to dig Trenches and
Channels to derive water to their grounds, (when they had sown their Seed) to
which the overflowing of Nilus did not reach, so that they took pains to water
them, as if a man should water a Garden of Herbs: But they were going to a Land
which was continually watered with rain from Heaven, a Land of Hills and
Valleys, (commodious, healthful and fruitful) and a Land not watered as Egypt
by the art and industry of men, but by the special Care and Providence of God,
whose eyes are upon it all the year long to send rain at all times when it
needs it. And when they came into that good Land, if they would be obedient
unto God, He V. 14, 15. Moses having hitherto spoken to the people in his own
name, here he speaks to them as in the person of God.
would give them rain in due season, the Sub quibus extremis omnis pluvia
opportuna comprehenditur.
first rain after the sowing of their Seed to bring it out of the ground, and
the latter a little before Harvest for the plumping and ripening of the Corn:
and He will send grass in the Field for the Cattle, that so they may have
plenty and abundance. Take heed therefore (says he) to your selves that your
hearts be not deceived, and that ye turn not aside and serve other gods and
worship them, and so the Lords wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the
Heavens that there be no rain, and make the Land not to yield her fruit, and so
you may perish quickly through scarcity from off the good Land which the Lord
has given you.

Further he exhorts them to lay up these his words in their hearts, and to bind
them as a sign upon their hands, and set them as frontlets between their eyes,
to write them upon the door-posts of their Houses and upon their Gates, See
particular 10. and Chapter 6.8.
that is, to use all due means to keep them in continual remembrance, and to
teach them diligently to their Children, speaking of them when they sit in
their house, and when they walk by the way, when they lie down and when they
rise up; that so their days and the days of their Children may be multiplied,
as the days of Heaven upon the Earth; that is, that they and their Posterity
may continue in that good Land as long as the Heavens shall continue in their
place over the Earth, namely, as long as the world shall last, Had not the Jews
provoked God by their Disobedience, to cast them out of that good land, this
Promise should have been made good to them. And from this Promise some conceive
and hope that upon the Repentance of the Jews, and their embracing of Christ,
they shall be again re-established in this Land, and therein continue with
great glory to the end of the world.
see Psalm. 89.29. (He tells them) if they shall diligently keep the
Commandments of the Lord, and walk in his ways, and cleave unto him, then will
He drive out all these Nations before them, and they shall possess the Lands of
greater and mightier Nations than themselves. Every place (within the compass
of the promised Land) whereon the soles of their feet shall tread shall be
theirs, from the Wilderness of Paran the Southern border, unto Lebanon the
Northern, from the River Euphrates the Eastern to the outermost Sea, or main
Ocean the Western bound of the Inheritance promised them. See this Promise
fulfilled, 2 Chronicles. 9.26. in Solomon's Reign.
There shall none be able to stand before them, for the Lord will put the fear
and dread of them upon all the Inhabitants of the Land, they shall tread upon,
as He has promised.

Further he tells them, He sets before them this day a Blessing and a Curse;
that is, He shows them what are the Promises of God to them on the one hand if
they will be Obedient, and what are his Threatenings on the other hand in case
they be Disobedient, and follow after other gods which were Strangers to them,
and of whose godhead they never had any proof or experience. And by showing
them both the one and the other he instructs them in the Choice which they
should make. Moreover he gives them in Charge, that when they came into Canaan
they should cause the blessings which the Lord had promised to them that keep
his Laws, to be pronounced on Mount Gerizim, Two Hills near together in the
Tribe of Ephraim.
and the Curses which He had threatened against the Disobedient to be pronounced
on This is afterward enjoined again, Deuteronomy. 27.12, etc. where it is more fully
expressed how it was to be done, and Josh. 8.33. how it was accordingly done.
And it seems from this Commandment given to Moses concerning Mount Gerizim, the
Samaritans, many Ages after, took occasion to build a Temple there, as taking
that Hill to be a blessed place, compare Joh. 4.3, 20. with Judge. 9.7. 2 Macc.
6.2.
Mount Ebal, and so should make these two Mountains to be as it were continual
Remembrancers to the people, that when they see Mount Gerizim they may think of
the Blessings set before them, and when they see Mount Ebal may think of the
Curses. Those two Mountains he tells them are on the other side Jordan
Westward near unto Shechem, see Genesis 12.6, 7.

17. Having spoken so much by way of explanation of the First Commandment,
expound and dilate upon the Second, Second Commandment.
exhorting them to abolish all false Worship, and all Monuments of Idolatry,
and to apply themselves to worship God only according to his own Will. In order
hereunto he informs them of some particular Statutes and Judgments which the
Lord required them to observe when they came into the Land of Canaan.

1. They must utterly destroy all places wherein the Nations, whose Lands they
should possess, served their Idol-gods, viz. all places reared up, and fitted
for Idol-Temples, and all places they used for their Idolatrous Worship either
upon high Mountains and Hills, or under green Trees; and this was enjoined them
to show how God detested Idolatry, and to prevent the Israelites from being
tempted to worship Him in those places. Further he tells them, They must
overthrow their Altars, and break their Pillars or standing Statues, and burn
their Groves, and hew down their Images, and destroy their very Names and
memory out of the Land. Ye must remember (says he) that ye must not so serve
the Lord your God as the Heathens served their gods, who practiced their
Idolatry in all places where they lived; but you shall come to the place Now
these places were first Shilo, Josh. 18.8. where the Ark continued to the days
of Samuel, viz. 243 years. Then Nob, 1 Samuel 21.6. lastly Jerusalem.
which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your Tribes, namely, the place
where the Ark of the Covenant by his appointment shall rest, where he will
manifest the signs of his powerful Presence, and will make known his Name; that
is, his Glory to you; which place shall be called by his Name, viz. the House
of God, and shall be consecrated to his Worship and Service. And ye shall come
to this His Habitation or Dewlling Place The reasons why the Lord appointed his
people to offer Sacrifices in one place only were, (1.) Because he would teach
them that there was but one only way to obtain pardon for their Sins, and
acceptance of any Service they performed unto God, and that was by Christ their
promised Messiah, of whom the Tabernacle and Temple was a Type. (2.) Because
hereby they might be kept to an uniform way of Worshipping God, that
corruptions in his Worship might be prevented, whereinto they might easily fall
had they been allowed to offer their Sacrifices some in one place and some in
another. For this cause it was that the Kings of Judah were so often blamed,
because they did not remove the high places, but suffered the people to
Sacrifice there.
to serve Him, and ask Counsel of Him. And hither ye shall bring your
Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices as Sin Offerings, Trespass-Offerings, etc. and
your Tithes, viz. your second Tithes, the Tithe For that or the money for which
they sold it they were to carry up yearly to Jerusalem, and therewith to keep a
holy Feast before the Lord, see Chapter 14. verse. 22, 27.
of that which remained after the first Tithe was paid to the Levites, see
Deuteronomy. 14.23. see also verse. 17. of this Chapter, and the Heave-Offerings of
your hands, that is, the several first fruits which you are to bring in your
hands, and heave them before the Lord, and then leave them to the Priests for
their portion; and your Vows or Free-will-Offerings, that is, all such
Sacrifices and Offerings as you shall extraordinarily bring either upon some
Vow you have made, or freely and on your own accord, and the firstlings of your
Herds and Flocks, see Numb. 18.17, 18. And when you have carried your
Sacrifices and Offerings to the place the Lord shall choose, there shall you and
your Households Though the Males only were bound thrice a year to appear before
the Lord, Exodus 23.17. yet at these times the Masters of Families were wont of
their own accord to carry their Wives, Daughters, and Maidservants with them,
as Elkanah did, 1 Samuel 1.4.
Feast with your holy things, and rejoice before the Lord, praising of him; and
ye shall rejoice in all the good things which you have gotten through the Lords
blessing upon your labors. Furthermore you must know, That God will be served
after a more exact manner when you come into Canaan than you serve him now. For
now many Sacrifices, Rites and Feasts cannot be observed by reason of your
unsettled state, so that every man does in a manner what seems right in his own
eyes; but when you come to be settled in the Land of Canaan you must not think
to do thus. For ye are not yet come to the place of Rest, and the Inheritance
which the Lord your God intends to give you. But when the Lord has brought
you thither, and has given you rest from all your Enemies round about, then
there shall be a Place which the Lord will choose, and shall be called his House
or Dewlling Place, the place where he will manifest his Name Nomen quod
implorant illic orantes. Tum si qui sint alibi praecati, mentem tamen huc atque
oculos oportebat inflectere, 1 Reg. 8.29, 44.
and Glory, and thither shall ye bring all your Sacrifices and Oblations, and
your choice things that you freely vowed to offer unto the Lord. And ye shall
rejoice before the Lord your God, ye and your Sons and Daughters, your
Menservants and Maidservants, and ye shall make the Levite that dwells within
your Cities or Habitations to rejoice also in the participation of the
Offerings, forasmuch as he has no part nor Inheritance with you in the Land,
but must live upon what is offered to the Lord as he has appointed, [see Chapter
10.9.] Take heed therefore of offering your Burnt-Offerings, Sacrifices and
Oblations in any other place than that which God shall choose. But in your own
private dwellings you may kill and eat of those kinds of Beasts which are
appointed for Sacrifice, as freely as of the Roe-buck and Heart which are not to
be sacrificed, yet allowed to your Table. Neither shall there be any difference
of persons observed in those private meals in respect of legal cleanness or
pollution, but all may partake of any of them, according as through the Lords
blessing they can provide for themselves. Only ye shall not eat the blood, This
restraint possibly was laid upon them, to make them the more fearful of
shedding man's blood.
ye shall pour it upon the Earth as water, and cover it with dust, Levit.
17.13. Further he shows them, That they may not eat within their Gates the
Tithe Non sunt hic intelligendae decimae Levitis and Sacerdotibus debitae, sed
aliae quas post solutas decimas ordinarias solv^bant, Deuteronomy. 14.22, 23. Ex illis
instituebant ^pulas. Fridlib.
of their Corn, or Wine, or Oil; that is, the second Tithe of those things, the
first being paid to the Levites,) nor the firstlings Quae deo osterre debueris
vel volueris ad locum constitutum deferas, vel ea vel pecuniam qua ea
commutaveris.
of their Herds and Flocks, by which he means not those firstlings spoken of
Numb. 18.17, 18. which as holy things consecrated to God, were allotted for the
Priests portion, but either the Female firstlings (the Male-firstlings being
only challenged by the Lord as his own, Exodus 13.12.) or the Firstborn after
those first (which were given to the Lord) which indeed were the first that
were the owners own, or the chief and best of their Lambs, Kids and Calves
called here the Firstlings by way of excellency. Nor any of their vowed or
free-will-Offerings, or Heave-Offerings, but must eat them before the Lord in
the place which he shall choose, they and their Households and the Levite
together, and there they should rejoice in all that the Lord allows them to put
their hand to, and to eat and partake of. Further he cautions them to take heed
of forsaking the Levite, by withholding their Offerings and Oblations Decimarum
varia erant gen ra, (1.) Decima Levitica quae tota Levitis cedebat. (2.) Decima
secundaria quae post primam separabatur absumenda in his epulis, Deuteronomy. 12.12,
17. and praecipue 14. 22. (3.) Decima de decima quae ^at sacerdotum. (4.)
Decima trieterica tertio quovis anno.
from him, which were to be the means of his livelihood all the time they
should live upon the Land. He shows they might kill and eat for their own
refreshing whatsoever they desired at home, and when they had a purpose to
offer Peace Offerings, and by way of thankfulness to God for some eminent mercy
to rejoice together; if the holy place were too far from them, they might feast
together upon their Cattle which they might kill for food, only then they must
be sure not to eat them as holy things, but even as they would eat the Roe-Buck
or Heart. Only, (says he) as I said before, be sure you eat not the blood; for
the blood is the vehicle of the animal life, and therefore you may not eat it
with the flesh. And you must observe this Precept, that it may go well with you
and your Children A man cannot better bless his Children than by his own
Obedience to his heavenly Father.
after you continually. As for their Burnt-Offerings, He shows them, they must
offer the flesh and blood together upon the Altar, and the blood of their other
pacifick Sacrifices and Peace Offerings must be poured out upon the Altar, and
then they might eat of the flesh of For only the fl sh of these Sacrifices was
to be eaten by the Owners, Levit. 15.
them. Further he shows them, That when the Lord their God shall have destroyed
the Nations before them, whose Land they go to possess, then they must
especially take heed that they be not ensnared by following their Idolatry;
Therefore (says He) I advise you not to inquire after their gods, or how they
worshipped them, thinking to serve the true God as they served their Idols. For
they use to perform such Rites and Services to their Idols which are most
abominable to the Lord; particularly they burn their Sons and Daughters Of this
abomination practiced by the Heath^n, and imitated by the backsliding Jews, see
Jer. 7.31. and 19.5.
in the fire to their gods. Take heed therefore of following them in these or
any other of their abominations; do what I command you from the Lord, neither
add it to it nor diminish from it.

18. He comes now to expound and dilate upon the Third Commandment, The Third
Commandment.
by prohibiting Lords Name, which was profaned by false Prophets, Revolters and
Inticers to Idolatry.

Having given the people warning to take heed of being seduced to Idolatry by
Strangers of other Nations, here he gives them the like warning to take heed of
being seduced by any that should arise among their own Brethren. If there shall
arise (says he) among you any that shall pretend himself to be a Prophet, and
shall say that God has appeared to him a Vision, or a Dream, and he gives you
a sign or wonder; Such as the cleaving Jeroboam's Altar which the Prophet told
them of before hand, 1 Kings 13.3. as a sure sign that God had sent him.
that is, labors to confirm what he says he had by Vision or Dream, by
foretelling some wonderful and supernatural thing that shall come to pass,
though this sign and wonder come to pass, yet if withal he shall persuade you
to worship false gods, or to worship the true God in a false manner, you shall
not because of his signs and wonders regard what he says, if his Doctrine be
not according to the truth which God has taught you. For the Lord may by the
Spirit of Prophecy reveal things to come to wicked men and false Prophets (as
he did to Balaam and Caiaphas.) He knowing how thereby to bring Glory to
Himself, though they intend only to corrupt and seduce thereby; For the Lord
may suffer the Devil and false Prophets thus to abuse men, to try and make
known whether they love the Lord their God with all their Hearts and Souls, and
will cleave to him. For those whose hearts are upright toward God, will not be
drawn away from the true Doctrine he has taught them by such delusions, see
Gal. 1.8. Therefore he injoyns them to put to death every Dreamer or false
Prophet that shall endeavor to seduce them from the true Worship and Service
of God unto Idolatry, and in so doing they shall not only justly punish evil
doers, but prevent the hurt which they would do among the people. And He tells
them, That not only the false Prophet, but all others whatsoever were to be put
to death that should seduce them, though secretly, to Idolatry; and they were
not to spare those that were dearest to them in this case. If thy Brother (says
he) or thy Son or Daughter, or the Wife of thy bosom, or thy Friend (which is
as thine own Soul) entice thee secretly saying, Let us go and serve other gods
of what Nation soever, thou shall not consent, and hearken unto him, neither
shall thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare or conceal him, thou shall
certainly procure his death, by declaring the thing to the Magistrate, and
informing and bearing Testimony against him, and procuring justice to be
executed upon him according to this Law, and as his just Accuser thou shall
throw the first stone at him, see Deuteronomy. 17.7. and then the rest of the people
shall stone him. And all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do no more any
such wickedness as this is among you. Further, that he may manifest Gods
extreme hatred and detestation of Idolatry, he tells them, That if in any of
their Cities they shall hear of the revolt of any other of their Cities,
through the instigation of some wicked men, Sons of Belial that went out from
among them, separating themselves from Gods people in point of Religion, they
must first inquire diligently concerning the truth of the thing, and if they
find it certain that such abomination is wrought among them, then they shall
smite the Inhabitants of that City with the edge of the Sword, destroying it
utterly, and all that is therein, and the Cattle thereof; and they shall gather
all the spoil of it into the midst of the street thereof, and shall burn with
fire the City and all the spoil thereof every whit, for the honor of God and
in Obedience unto his Command, thereby offering it up as a Sacrifice to Him;
and that City shall be a ruinous heap for ever, and shall not be built again.
They must not take to themselves, or their own use, any part of the accursed
goods of the City, [see Josh. 6.17.] that so the Lord may turn from the
firceness of his anger, which oftentimes is kindled not only against the
Sinners themselves, but all Israel for their sakes, [see Joshua 7.1, 11, 12.

holy, and therefore they should not hold Communion with Idolaters, nor conform
themselves to them, in their Rites and Vsages. Ye are the Children of God (says
he) he has chosen you to Himself for his peculiar people above all the Nations
of the Earth, therefore you shall not, as the Heathens do, cut themselves, or
make any incision in your flesh at the death of any of your dearest Friends,
Levit. 19.28. nor make any baldness between your eyes, nor mourn so
inordinately as they do who have no hope of a blessed Resurrection, or eternal
life. These customs God forbids them to take up, not only because they were the
desperate effects of immoderate mourning, but also because they were the
customs of Idolaters, and He would not have his people to conform themselves to
them in these things, lest they should from thence grow to a conformity to them
in their Idolatrous worshipping of false gods. In the next place he shows them,
That they may not eat any abominable thing, namely, such as God has forbidden
them. And therefore here he sets down what may, and what may not be eaten of
Beasts, of Fowls, of Fishes; of all which see Sect. 33. and Levit. 11. If any
clean Creature died of it self, it might be sold to or eaten by a stranger, but
not by themselves; which restraints were to mind them of the difference God put
between them and other Nations, and the especial purity he required of them
above other people. Further he tells them, They shall not seethe a Id est, cum
matre lactante, q. d. satis tibi sit comedere haedum, abstine a matre. Hoc enim
prae se f^rt crudelitatem quandam. Sic praecepit pullas avium comprehendere in
nido, matre dimissa, Deuteronomy. 22.6.
Kid in its Mothers milk; that is, they shall not be cruel as to seethe a Kid
in that milk of its Dam which was given it for its nourishment, see Sect. 17.
of Chapter 4. Further he injoyns them to tithe all the increase of their Seed that
the Field brings forth year by year, and that not only the first tithe which
they were to pay yearly to the Levites in the several places of their
Habitations, Numb. 18.24. but the second Tithe, taken after that which they
should spend in holy Feastings, before the Lord in the place which he shall
choose, together with the firstlings of their Herds and Flocks; that is, either
the Female-firstlings, or the firstborn after the Male-firstlings were paid to
the Priest, see Chapter 12.17. And the reason he gives why they should go up to the
place the Lord had chosen, and there feast together with these their holy
things, is, that they might learn to fear the Lord their God always, because
the presenting themselves thus yearly before the Lord with their Sacrifices and
Offerings, must needs be of it self a good means to keep their hearts in a
continual awe and reverence of God, and at that holy place, and in those holy
Convocations, the Priests were to instruct them in the Law and the Promises
concerning the Messiah; and in their Sacrifices they might behold a shadow of
their Redemption by him; all which must needs conduce to teach them the fear of
the Lord. But in case they dwelt very far from the House of the Lord, and their
Tithes and Firstlings were so many that they could not well carry them so far,
then they might sell those things and carry the money with them, and buy
Praetextu Legis hujus irrepsit improba cons^etudo, Joh. 2.14.
therewith what they were to use there, namely, Oxen, or Sheep, or Wine, or
strong Drink, or what else they desired to make a cheerful Feast, that they
might rejoice together before the Lord. And (says he) remember that thou
forsake not nor neglect the Levite, that is, not only pay him the first Tithes,
but communicate to him also of these second Tithes, that he may be sufficiently
provided to eat and drink and rejoice before the Lord as well as thy self,
seeing he is to have no Land of Inheritance among you to supply this unto him.
And every third year after the Sabbatical (when the Land is to rest) and so in
the sixth year after that thou shall bring forth all Da decimas ut ditescas;
proverbium Judaeorum.
the Tithe of thy increase that year, that is, separate a third Tithe, So that
every third year they separated three several Tithes. The first was the Levites
yearly livelihood. The second they carried up with them to Jerusalem therewith
to feast before the Lord. The third was laid up for the Poor.
which shall be laid up in some public place in the Towns and Cities where
they dwelt, and that not only for the Levite but also for the Stranger, the
Fatherless and Widow, [Deut. 26.12.] that they may eat, and be satisfied. And
in so doing they might expect the Lord would please to bless them, and prosper
the works of their hands.

Fourth Commandment, dilating upon the Rites and Observances required in the
seventh or Sabbatical year. At the end of every seventh year, reckoning
inchoative from the Sabbatical year (says he) thou shall make a release; that
is, every Creditor that lends ought unto his Neighbor shall release it; He
shall not exact it of his Neighbor or his Brother, that is, of any Israelite
whatsoever, because the Lord has ordained it to be a year of Release. But of a
Foreigner or Heathen (not proselyted) thou may require what is thine with
him. And the end why ye shall so release is this, that there may not be through
your exacting debts of your Brethren, any of them brought to extreme poverty.
And if in this and other things they were obedient to Gods Laws, He tells them,
God would so abundantly bless them, that they should be well able to forbear
the exacting of their debts, and it should be no prejudice at all to them. He
would so bless them that they should have enough to lend See Deuteronomy. 28.12.
to many Nations, and should not need to borrow of them; and as otherways so
particularly in lending to them (says he) thou shall reign over them, (for the
Borrower is Servant to the Lender, Prove. 22.7.) but they shall not reign over
thee. If there be a poor man of thy Brethren within any of thy Gates thou shall
not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from him, but shall open it wide unto
him, and shall lend him sufficient for his need. Beware therefore lest there be
such a wicked thought in thine heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of
Release is at hand, and thy eye be evil against thy poor Brother, so that thou
look doggedly upon him, and give him naught, and he Cry unto the Lord
against thee, and it be sin unto thee; that is, a great sin for which thou
shall be punished. No, on the contrary thou shall surely give him, See Esaias
58.10, 11.
and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him; and for this
thing the Lord shall bless thee in all thy Works, and in all that thou put
thy hand unto. For the Poor shall never cease out of the Land, Mark 14.7.
Matthew. 26.11. Joh. 12.8.
(for God will suffer it so to be, to make trial of the Charity and Compassion
of the Rich toward them,) therefore the Lord commands thee to open thy hand
wide unto thy poor and needy Brother. And if an Hebrew-man or woman be sold
unto thee, and serve thee six years from the year of Release, in the seventh
year thou shall let him go free, and thou shall not let him go away empty, but
shall furnish him liberally out of thy Flock and out of thy Floor, and out of
thy Wine-presses, and with such things as the Lord has blessed thee with. And
to make thee the more willing hereunto, thou shall remember that thou thy self
wast once a Bondsman in Egypt, and the Lord thy God graciously redeemed thee out
of that miserable Servitude, and did not send thee away empty, and therefore
it is fit thou should imitate the Mercy and Compassion of God which he
manifested toward thy self. But if this Servant shall say unto thee, I am not
willing to go away from my Master, for I love him and his house, and it is well
with me, [see Exodus 21.6.] then thou shall take an awle and thrust it through
his Ear, and fasten it unto the door, and this shall be a signification that he
yields himself to be a perpetual Servant in thy house all the days of his
life. And to thy Maidservant Some think that her Ear was to be bored for a
perpetual Servant, if she refused to go out at the six years end.
that is an Israelite and sold unto thee, thou shall do likewise, setting her
free at the six years end, and shall furnish her liberally at her going from
thee. And he tells them, That this kind usage which they were enjoined to use
to a Servant that was sold to them, and had served them six years, ought not to
seem a hard Injunction, because such an one had been worth to them double Among
us the Service of an Apprentice is counted more profitable than that of an
hired Servant.
to what an hired Servant was: For hired Servants had great wages (besides meat
and drink) which Servants that were sold to them had not, from 1. to 19.

Having given them these Laws concerning the poor and the Israelitish Servants,
he now reinforceth a Law which concerned the relief of the Priests that served
the Lord and his people. He injoyns them to sanctify unto the Lord (that is,
to set apart for his use) the firstling-Males that came of their Herd and
Flocks, [see Deuteronomy. 12.6.] The ground of this Law was, because God smote all the
firstborn of Egypt from man to beast, but spared the Israelites. Thou shall
therefore (says he) do no work with the firstling of thy Bullock, nor shear the
firstling of thy Sheep; because these Beasts were the Lords, they were not to
use them as their own, for their own profit or service. These being the
Priests, they were to eat them, they and their Households year by year in the
place that God shall choose to put his Name and place his Sanctuary there. But
if any of these firstlings be lame or blind, or otherwise blemished, they were
not to sacrifice them to the Lord, [see Levit. 22.19.] but in such a case the
Priests V. 20. Is not spoken to the Owner, but to the Priest to whom God gave
all the firstlings of Israel, Numb. 1.15, 17, 18.
may eat them in any of their ordinary Habitations, as freely as any ordinary
meat, the unclean and the clean may eat of them together. Only the blood they
must not eat, but must pour it out as water upon the ground.

several Ordinances concerning the three solemn Feasts, and the several
Offerings to be then offered. And first he charges them to observe the month
Abib, When the Barley-Harvest began to be ripe, and the first Ears were to be
offered on the second day of the Feast of unleavened-bread, Levit. 23.10. viz.
on the 16th day of that month.
answering to part of our March and part of our April, and the Feast All which
Festival time is called the Passover, and so Joh. 18.28.
of the Passover then to be celebrated; for in that month God brought them out
of Egypt by night; Noctu surgebant (occisis media nocte primogenitis) and
profectionem anspicabantur, licet Egypto non exierint ante diem. Vide Exodus
12.29, 30, 41, 42.
and after they had eaten the Paschal-Lamb they were to keep a Feast for seven
days with other Sacrifices of the Flock and Herd, such as are appointed, Numb.
28.18, etc. and this they were to do in the place, Id est, In loco Tabernaculi
aut Templi ubi stabiliter coli and invocari voluit.
which the Lord should choose to place his Name there, and no where else. And
for these seven days they were to eat only unleavened-bread, (the bread of
affliction) viz. which should be a Memorial to them of their great affliction
in Egypt, (this being usually the bread of those that lived in affliction and
poverty, not being toothsome or pleasant to the Palate or taste,) and of their
hasty coming out from thence before their bread had time to be leavened, Exodus
12.15. During this Feast they were not to have any leaven in their houses. They
were to kill the Passover (that is, the Paschal-Lamb,) at the even of the
fourteenth day of this month, at the going down of the Sun, at the time they
were preparing to come out of Egypt, V. 6. Egresti sunt, i. e. inchoative quia
vespere egressum praeparabant.
and that only at the place which the Lord should choose (as he did Jerusalem
There in any private house they might kill and eat the Passover, Matthew. 26.18.
only their Sacrifices that they offered at that Feast might only be offered in
the Temple.
afterward) and they were not to reserve any part of the flesh of it till the
morning. And the morrow after this Feast (which was to continue seven days) was
ended, they might depart to their several dwellings. Yet they were to observe
that the last day of the seven was to be an holy Convocation to the Lord,
wherein they were not to do any servile or unnecessary work. Chapter 16. from verse.
1. to 9.

2ly, He comes now to speak of the Feast of Weeks, Called the Feast of Weeks,
because it was seven weeks after the bringing of the sheaf at the Passover, and
it was on the fiftieth day after, and so called Pentecost, Acts 2.1. The Moral
Law was given at this time of the year, see Sect. 13. of Chapter 4. Exodus 23.16.
or Pentecost, [see Levit. 23.10, 15.] which was to be reckoned from the second
day of the Feast of unleavened-bread, (see note [a]) and from thence they were
to reckon seven complete Sabbaths or Weeks, which made 49 days, then on the
morrow after the seventh Sabbath or Week, which was the fiftieth day (reckoning
the day on which they began their account inclusively) they were to keep the
Feast of Weeks or Pentecost. This Feast they were to keep unto the Lord with
the Tribute of a free-will-Offering of their Fruits (according as the Lord had
blessed them) over and above the Sacrifices appointed for the day, [Levit.
23.17, 20.] and with those they were to rejoice together before the Lord in
cheerful feasting, they and their Families, and the Levite, Stranger, Widow and
Fatherless, in the place which the Lord should choose, remembering how their
Fathers were Bondmen in Egypt, and how wonderfully God had delivered them from
thence, from verse. 9. to 13.

Next he comes to the Feast of Tabernacles or Booths made with the boughs of
Trees, Levit. 23.34, 40. which they were to observe seven days after they had
gathered in their Corn and the fruit of their Vines; and this Feast they were
to Celebrate not only with inward joy, but with the outward expressions
thereof, viz. by Sacrifices of Thanksgiving unto the Lord, with sober and
religious feasting of the Poor and the Levites, the Stranger and the Widow
rejoicing before the Lord, in contemplation that he had so eminently blessed
their increase. Three times a year, viz. at these three solemn Feasts He tells
them, All the Males shall appear before the Lord in the place which he shall
choose, and they must not appear before Him empty, but every one must come with
such a Gift and Oblation as he was able and willing to give, from verse. 13. to
18.

He comes now to show them, That they must appoint Judges to sit in the Gates
(the usual places of Judicature) in all their Towns and Cities, who must judge
the people with just Judgment, and not wrest or pervert Judgment, nor partially
respect Persons in Judgment, nor take Bribes. For a Gift blinds the eyes of
the wise, that is, of those that seemed so to be, making them judge otherwise
than they ought to do, being biased by the love of lucre, and makes those
that should be righteous in Judgment to pass a perverse Sentence. But it must
not be so with their Judges, but they must follow that which is altogether
just, that they may live and inherit the Land which the Lord shall give them.

Further he tells them, They must not plant Groves Notwithstanding the
Israelites corrupted themselves herein several times, as Judge. 3.7. and 6.25.
and 1 Kings 14.15, 23. and there were Prophets of the Groves, 1 Kings 18.19.
They planted Groves, placed Idols in them, served them as the Canaanites and
other Heathens did, Deuteronomy. 12.2. Thus it was in the times of the Judges, Chapter
3.7. In the times of the Kings of Israel throughout, 2 Kings 17.16. This was in
them gross Idolatry. Yet the Patriarchs did formerly worship God in Groves, and
that without sin.
near to the Altar or Temple, which might seem in sanctity to vie with them,
and be an occasion of Idolatry, and would be an imitation of the Heathens, who
used to have their Idols in Groves. V. 21. Non plantabis lucum] Ne in ritibus
colendi very Dei Idolatras imitari videamini. Illis enim familiare erat in
l^cis Sacra sua, mixime obscaena, peragere. Eadem de causa vetat ne constituant
sibi statuam qum instar Idoli more gentilitio colant. Jans.


And further, that they should not set up any Image or Statue to Worship, as
the Heathen did, which thing the Lord hates, from verse. 18. to the end.

He now comes to show them that the things sacrificed to the Lord must be
without blemish. Thou shall not (says he) sacrifice to the Lord thy God any
Bullock or Sheep wherein is any blemish, or any ill-favouredness, for that is
an abomination to the Lord, see Levit. 22.20, 21. and Deuteronomy. 15.21. He shows
that if any among them were found guilty of Idolatry, in that they had
worshipped the Sun or Moon, or any of the Host of Heaven, (and consequently any
other Creature) they must be stoned to death, whether it were Man or Woman,
because they had wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord, and transgressed
his Covenant, whereby they had bound themselves in Obedience unto God, and did
openly as it were renounce God and the true Religion, and choose unto themselves
other gods. If he be convicted by the testimony of two or more credible
Witnesses (one not being sufficient) the Witnesses shall throw the first stones
at him (which was to make them more afraid to bear false witness, and to bring
the guilt of innocent blood on their own heads,) and then the rest of the
people assembled were to have a hand in the execution of him, hereby to inure
them to be fervent and zealous in Gods Cause against all those that should
despise and disregard his Laws, and so they should put away evil from among
them.

He further shows them, That when in their Towns or Cities any difficult matter
did arise, as in the case of bloodshed, (it being doubtful whether it were to
be reckoned Murder or only Chance-medly) or concerning any plea about their
Estates, or any stroke given, or any thing of the like nature, in that case
they were to go to the place which God should choose, (which in the aftertimes
was Jerusalem) and there resort to the Priests as Expounders of the Law, and to
the Judge or Judges, as the civil Magistrates, who were to show them the
Sentence of Judgment; that is, what is just and right in this matter, that so
the thing in question might be decided, see 2 Chronicles. 19.8, 9, 10. and they were
to do according to the Sentence which the Priests and Judges should give,
because in cases of greater difficulty the Priests were to inquire of the Lord,
that they might not give wrong Judgment. And death was to be inflicted on him
that would not hearken to the Priest so expounding the Law, or the Judge
passing Sentence according to it, especially if he stubbornly and presumptuosly
opposed their Judgment, though they proved it never so clearly out of the Law,
and the Priest had inquired of the Lord about it. And all the people shall hear
and fear, and do no more presumptuously.

Further, when they were come into Canaan, and should desire to have a King
over them like other Nations, he prescribes certain Laws and Rules to them
concerning their electing of him, and His duty. And first he injoyns that they
set only such an one to be King over them who is one of their Brethren and
Nation, an Israelite, not a Stranger, lest he change their Religion into
Idolatry, and so bring them into Sin and Slavery, and only such an one whom the
Lord should choose. Which was observed accordingly in Saul, but fully in David
and his Progeny. And this was thus appointed, because the Kings of Judah were
to be Types of Christ.
2ly, The King thus chosen was not to multiply horses to himself, viz. in a
greater proportion than the state of a King requires, lest he should put
confidence in worldly strength (whereof horses for War were a principal part)
and not in God. And that he might not hereby be puffed up and exalted in mind
to the despising, and perhaps oppressing of his Subjects, and might not by the
excessive Charge thereof be burdensome to his people. Herein Solomon did not
keep so close to this Rule as he ought to have done, in that he had forty
thousand stalls of horses for his Chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, 1
Kings 4.26. and in that he fetched his horses out of Egypt, 2 Chronicles. 1.16.
He shall not cause his Subjects to go down into Egypt to buy horses, (where
there was great plenty of them, and they counted the strength of their
Country,) lest they be corrupted with the Idolatry and other sins of the
Egyptians; So Jeremy from the Lord dissuaded the Jews from going into Egypt,
Jer. 42.15, etc.
For God would have them to have such a sense of their former Deliverance out
of that Bondage, as to abhor the very thought of going thither again. For
besides all former intimations from the Lord to the same purpose, See Exodus
13.17.
the Lord had now commanded him to say unto them, That they should henceforth
return no more that way, viz. which leads down to Egypt. Further he injoyns,
That their King shall not multiply Wives Si ne Regi quidem permissa sit
polygamia quid aliis indultum credimus? Confer, Lev. 18.18.
to himself, that his heart turn not away from the Lord to sensual pleasures,
nor to Idolatry, by the allurement of his Wives, as Solomon's did, 1 Kings 11.4.
Neither shall he too too excessively desire to multiply to himself Silver and
Gold, lest by such an extraordinary greediness after riches he oppress the
people, and heap up Gold and Silver by rapine and unjust exactions, and so his
mind be pufft up with pride by reason of his wealth.

Further he was to send for the Original Copy of this Law (which was to remain
with the Priests, and to be kept in the Sanctuary, Deuteronomy. 31.26.) and to write
or cause to be written a Copy of it for his own use, and he was to read therein
all the days of his life, that he might learn to fear the Lord, and to keep all
the words of this Law, and these Statutes, to do them. That his heart be not
lifted up above his Brethren, and that he turn not aside from the Commandment
to the right hand or to the left, and that he may prolong his days.

Priests are to have no part nor Inheritance with the rest of the Tribes, they
shall eat of the Offerings made by fire on the Altar, as the Meat Offering,
Sin-Offering, and Trepass Offering, [Numb. 18.9.] and of all other things Of
these, see Numb. 18. where (as some reckon) 24 Gifts were bestowed on the
Priests.
which the Lord challenges to himself as his Right and Inheritance, and has
reserved for his Service, and the sustenance of his Servants the Priests; for
God would not have them cumbred with the affairs of this life, lest by them
they should be hindered from doing their duties. Therefore he declares that He
himself will be their Inheritance, and will supply all their wants out of his
abundance. And this shall be the Priests due from them that bring a Sacrifice
of a Peace Offering. They shall give to Him the Shoulder, the two Cheeks and
the Maw. The wave-breast mentioned elsewhere, is here left out, possibly as
comprehended under the Shoulder to which it is joined in the Sheep, being both
parts of the same quarter. But the Maw and two Cheeks added here are no where
else mentioned. Further he tells them, They were to give to the Priest the
first fruit of their Corn, of their Wine and Oil, and the first of the fleece
of their Sheep, [see Exodus 22.29. and Numb. 18.12.] Because the Lord has
called them to stand and minister in his Name, that is, by authority received
from him, see Deuteronomy. 10.8.

Further he orders, That when ever any of the Tribe of Levi, out of his own
voluntary devotion, had an earnest desire to come and serve in the Tabernacle
or Temple, they should be admitted to live of the holy things there even as the
rest did that in their turns There seems some order observed in this at first,
though by David afterward this was more exactly contrived when they were
divided into 24 Courses, 1 Chronicles. 23.
did serve in that place. For such as out of singular devotion to the Service
of the Sanctuary did go up to serve there, God would have them to live of the
Altar, and not be put thereby to spend their own private estate what ever it
was, or that money which came of the sale of their private Patrimony, Forte
Levitae morantes in loco Tabernaculi negarent illi partem suam, quod secum
haberet pecuniam sive pretium rei (domus vel agri) venditae: Statuit ergo Lex
sive habeat pretium, sive non, habiturum tamen portionem suam, q. d. Ne
exluditor a part commodi quod habeat unde se alere possit; Fruatur ea pecunia
propria and insuper portione ei ex ministerio debita, quia qui Sacris ministrat
is debt ex Sacris non ex bonis paternis vivere, and quia rem venditam redimendi
jus perpetuum habet, Levit. 25.32. redimere autem non possit si absumeretur
pretium rei venditae.
from 1. to 9.

In the next place he exhorts them to take heed of doing after the abominations
of the Canaanites. Let not there be found among you any one (says he) who makes
his Son or Daughter to pass through the fire to Saturn or Moloch, Haec hostia
petita est partim ab exemplo Abrahami, partim quod audierint non nisi sanguine
humano humanum scelus olim expiandum. Inde Galli test Caesare, lib. 6. de
bello Gallico, Diti suo quam maxim innocuos immolabant.
see Levit. 18.21. 2 Kings 16.3. or that practices Divination, This sin was
common among the Heathen, practiced among the wisest of them, Numb. 24.1. 1
Kings 20.33.
[see 1 Samuel 6.2. Ezekiel. 21. 21, 22.] by making use of familiar Spirits, [1 Samuel
6.2. 1 Samuel 28.8.] or an Observer of Times, crying up some days for lucky,
others unlucky, or an Inchanter, using Songs or Verses, or other words or
Ceremonies to produce supernatural Effects, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a
Consulter with familiar Spirits, or a Wizard, or a Necromancer, who by raising
the dead did consult with them about secret things, see 1 Samuel 28.7. These
Nations whose Land thou art going to possess hearkened to these, but thou shall
be upright and sincere before the Lord, and devote thy self entirely to him,
who will not suffer thee to imitate them in these abominations. And he shows
them, they should have no need to seek to such Enchanters and Diviners, because
God would still raise up Prophets from among themselves of their own Brethren
to reveal his Will to them, and at last about 1400 years after this would send
them the great Prophet, Per hunc Prophetam aliqui intelligunt Joshuam, alij
omnes Prophetas Mosen secutos. Hic locus aliquo modo ad omnes Prophetas referri
potest, maxim tamen and imprimis ad Christum referri debet.
the Messiah, see Acts 3.22. and 7.37. Joh. 1.45. Joh. 5.46. And though the
Prophets sent to Israel were not equal to Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.10. yet they were
like him, being men sent from God as he was, and raised up from among their
Brethren as he was. And so Christ was an High Priest taken from among men, Heb.
5.1. and like unto Moses, yet above him. As Moses brought them the Law from
God, so Christ the Gospel out of the bosom of the Father, Joh. 6.40. And he
shows how faithful these Prophets would be that he should send to them, to
deliver what ever he gave them in Charge, and nothing else but what he should
put into their mouths. And this was most eminently verified in Christ, Joh.
15.15. All things that I have heard of my Father have I made known unto you. He
further shows, That God will severely punish those that will not hear his
Prophets speaking to them in his Name. And this was principally to be fulfilled
upon the Jews, who would not hearken to the words of Christ, for which God
destroyed their City and Sanctuary, as was prophesied, Dan. 9.26. And further,
lest false Prophets should arise and come to them in the Lords Name, he gives
them a Rule how they should discover them. If any of them should predict or
foretell any strange and miraculous thing Referendum ad ea quae per naturam
fieri non possunt, ut virgam in colubrum converte^e. Talia enim si praedicantur
in Dei nomine non permittet ea fieri Deus, ne tentationem inferat insuperabilem.
that should come to pass as a proof that they were truly sent of God, if these
things did not accordingly come to pass, they might be sure they were false
Prophets. And they might know them also by this, if they strove to turn them
from the true God and his Law. But in other Predictions, as in foretelling some
Judgment that should befall men, that which they foretold might not come to
pass, and yet they that foretold these things might be the true Prophets of God
for all that. For thus it was with Jonah who prophesied, Forty days and Nineveh
shall be destroyed, Jon. 3.4. And so Isaiah, Who told Hezekiah that he should
die of his sickness, 2 Kings 20.1. For in all such Predictions the people might
know that those things were conditionally foretold, though the condition were
not always expressed, and therefore that in case they repented, God would not
inflict the evil denounced against them.

But as for false Prophets that prophesied presumptuously, fathering their own
Fantasies and wild Conceits on the true God, they should not need to fear them
nor their Predictions, nor fear to put them to death when they found them upon
clear proof so to be.

Having before assigned them three Cities of Refuge in the Land without Jordan,
Deuteronomy. 4.41.] now he gives direction that when they had possessed themselves of
the Land of Canaan within Jordan, they should there also set apart three Cities
of Refuge more, and they should take care that from all parts of the Country
round about these Cities there should be a direct, plain, broad, fair Highway
or Cawsey leading to these Cities, setting up marks whereby the way might be
known leading thither, to the end that the Manslayer might not be hindered in
his flying thither. And because the Land within Jordan was much more long than
broad, it was to be divided into three equal parts, and the Cities of Refuge
(which were afterward Kadesh, Shechem and Hebron) were to be in three places
equally distant, and so commodious for men to fly unto. The persons that were
to enjoy the Privilege of those Cities, were only such as killed a man
unwittingly By the rule of proportion we may probably conceive that the like
Privilege was afforded to him that killed a man in his own defense, when he
had no quarrel with him, but only sought to secure his own life.
by Chancemedly (as we call it) and not out of malice, or on purpose. And they
were to appoint these Cities of Refuge in the three several divisions of the
Land, lest if the person that had killed a man unwittingly had too far to fly
ere he could come to one of them, the Avenger (that is, one of the Kinsmen of
the dead,) while his heart was hot might pursue him, and overtake him before he
could get thither, and so slay him, though he had not deserved death, inasmuch
as he hated him not in times past. And though they were at first commanded to
set apart only three Cities of Refuge within Jordan, yet he commands them that
if afterward the Lord should enlarge their Coast, viz. by giving them the Land
from the River of Egypt to the great River Euphrates, Conditionally promised to
them, Genesis 15.18. if they continued in obedience to God. The Jews by their
disobedience and breach of Covenant with God, never got possession of the
utmost bounds of those Lands conditionally promised them.
then they should separate three Cities of Refuge more in those Quarters, that
innocent blood might not be shed in the Land which the Lord would give them for
an Inheritance, and so blood be upon them. But on the other side, if any man
did hate his Neighbor, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and
smite him mortally so that he died, and then fled unto any of these Cities, in
such a case the Elders of the City or place where the slayer dwells, and unto
which he belongs, should send and fetch him thence, viz. from the City of
Refuge (yea or from the Altar of the Lord, Exodus 21.14.) and deliver him into
the hands of the Avenger of blood that he might slay him; In such case they
must not pity him upon any pretense whatsoever, and so they should put away the
guilt of innocent blood from among them, that it might go well with them, from
1. to 14.

And to prevent occasions of quarrelling and bloodshed, in the next place he
charges them that no man should remove his Neighbors Landmark, See Prove.
22.28. Hos. 5.10. V. 14. Non transferes terminos] i. e. lapides vel alia signa
quae fixa fuerint ad distinguendos agros tuos ab agris proximi hoc enim genus
furti infame quod difficulter convinci potest.
[see Deuteronomy. 27.17.] which would be a piece of great injustice, and might
occasion quarrels about the bounds of their Lands and Possessions. Next he
declares, That the testimony of a single man rising up as a witness against
another shall not be admitted as sufficient to prove the Crime laid to his
Charge, and to cause him to be condemned for it. But by the testimony of two or
three witnesses matters shall be established, settled, confirmed, and stand
good, [see Joh. 8.17.] And in case two or more witnesses did rise up against a
man, and only one of them spoke home as to the proof of that whereof he was
accused, if here the party accused did allege that this man bare false witness
against him, then both these men (between whom the Controversy is) shall stand
before the Lord; that is, shall be brought to the place which the Lord shall
choose, and shall be set before the Ark or Sanctuary, and there the witness
shall be examined as in the presence of God, and possibly if they could not
find out the matter by examination, then the Priest was to inquire of the Lord
according to that, 1 Kings 8.31, 32. And if the Judges find that the man has
testified falsely against his Brother, then they shall do unto him as he thought
to have done to his Brother; that is, the civil Magistrate Indeed the Pharisees
in Christ's time expounded this of private revenge, viz. that a private person
might take life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc. this is that which
our Savior condemns, Matthew. 5.38, 39.
shall without tenderness or pity inflict such punishment on him as should have
been inflicted on the party accused, had he been found guilty, [according to
that Law, Exodus 21.23.] And so they should put away evil from among them, and
those which remain should hear and fear, and should no more commit any such
abominable thing.

War, and how it should be managed: 1. The Priests Ordinarily some of the
Priests went along with the Army with the holy Trumphets, to animate them to
the battle, see Numb. 10.9. and 31.6.
should encourage the people when they drew nigh to battle with their Enemies,
exhorting them not to be afraid though they were more than they. And they
should say to them, Hear, O Israel, you approach this day unto battle against
your Enemies; Let not your hearts faint, fear not neither be ye terrified
because of them; For the Lord your God is with you, and goes forth with you to
fight for you against your Enemies, and to save you. 2ly, The Officers should
proclaim to the people before the battle, That if there were any man there that
had built a new house, and had not dedicated Dedicari res dicitur quando cum
solenni aliquo ritu, vel convivio usus inchoatur. Menoch. See Title of Psalm
30. and Neh. 12.27.
it or initiated it; that is, taken possession of it, and begun to use it and
dwell in it, (which was to be done with praying, singing Psalms, and feasting,)
he might go home if he would; Ratio hujus legis, 1. Ne quis otiosus fruatur
alienis laboribus. 2. Ne desiderio eorum remissius agerent in praelio, sibique
parrentes, vel etiam fugam capessentes aliis and scandalo essent and damno.
God in this and the two next particulars manifesting a special Compassion,
that men should not suddenly be taken off from those Comforts which they had
long labored for, even when they were first entering upon the fruition of them;
that being threatened as a Curse, Chapter 28.30. Thou shall build an house and shall
not dwell therein. Or if any man had planted a Vineyard, They might not in the
Land of Canaan eat of any Trees they had planted, till they had consecrated the
fourth years fruit unto the Lord. The fruit of the first three years was lost
as uncircumcised. The fourth years fruit was holy to be given to God, and then
the fruit of the fifth year was free for the Owner and others to eat, Levit.
19.23, etc.
and it was not yet made common; that is, such as himself and others might
freely eat of (which he could not do by the Law till the fifth year from the
planting of it) he might also return to his house, lest he should die in the
battle and another enjoy his Vineyard. Or if any man had betrothed a Wife, The
ancient custom was to have some time interposed between betrothing and
marriage, see Deuteronomy. 22.23. Matthew. 1.18.
whither Maid or Widow, and had not yet taken her to himself, he might have
liberty to go home also and take her to wife. And lastly, If any were fearful
and faint-hearted they might also depart if they would, lest by their fear and
faint-heartedness they should infect their Brethren also; God hereby testifying
how much he disliked a timorous fearful spirit in those that serve Him, whom he
would have by faith to trust in him, and to rest secure of his Protection, see
Judge. 7.3. The Officers having proclaimed these things, they were then to order
the battle, and appoint every Captain in his place to lead the several
Companies of Soldiers, from 1. to 10.

Further he injoyns them, that when they went to besiege any City out of the
Land of Canaan, they should first proclaim peace See Richardson's Notes on
verse. 10.
to it; And if it did accept of the conditions of peace proffered to them, then
they should spare that City, and only make them Tributary to them. But if they
refused the Conditions of peace tendered to them, then (if God delivered them
into their hands) they should kill every Male they found there, but the Women,
little Ones, and Cattle, and all the Spoil of the City they should take unto
themselves, and so they should eat and enjoy the Spoil of their Enemies which
the Lord had given them. But when they went to besiege any of the Cities of the
seven Nations Unto which the Hebrews add from Deuteronomy. 25.19. the Amalekites.
in the Land of Canaan [see Chapter 7.1.2.] which God had commanded them to
destroy, then they were not to spare Man, Woman or Child, lest (being left
alive) they should teach them to do after their abominations which they had
practiced toward their gods, and so occasion them to sin against the Lord.
Further he injoyns them, that when they besieged a City they should not cut
down the Fruit Trees that grow about it, for their use in the siege, except
upon unavoidable necessity, because those are very useful for man's food, and
with these the Land could not be suddenly stored again. Therefore they must
take heed that in their rage they did not so wast the Land as to prejudice
Posterity. But with other Trees that were not Fruit Trees they might build
Bulwarks about a City which they besieged, till it was subdued, from verse. 10.
to the end.

He now gives directions concerning uncertain Murder, how it is to be expiated.
Elders and Judges of the Towns and Cities round about shall, for the better
satisfaction of them all, come forth and see the measure taken between the dead
body and the Cities round about it (if it be doubtful what City is nearest)
because the next City is to make expiation for the Murder in manner following,
viz. The Elders of that City shall take an Heifer that has not been wrought
with, and which has not drawn in the Yoke, and they shall bring down the
Heifer unto a rough and obscure Valley that lies neglected and uncultivated, to
make the thought of Murder more horrible and dreadful, and there they shall
strike off the Heifers neck, signifying that the Murderer ought so to be used,
could he be found out, and that if they had him in their hands they would so
serve him. And the Priests, the Sons of Levi, shall come near (whom the Lord
has chosen to minister unto Him, and to bless the people in his Name,) to show
by their presence that this was an extraordinary Sacrifice, and that the Elders
might before them, as in Gods presence, protest their Innocence, and to see
that all things were done according to Law, and to satisfy the Elders in any
thing that might seem doubtful; For by their word and Sentence, as Expounders
of Gods Law, any thing in Controversy, or any Stroke, must be judged or tried.
And all the Elders of that City which was nearest to the slain man shall wash
their hands over the Heifer, thereby intimating that they were innoce^^ of the
blood of the slain man, [see Matthew. 27.24.] and they shall solemnly declare and
protest, That their hands have not shed that blood, neither have their eyes
seen it shed by any other. Then the Priest shall say, Be merciful, O Lord, unto
thy people Israel whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto
their Charge; Impute not that to them which has not been done by them, and lay
not the punishment thereof upon them. And so they shall put away the guilt of
innocent blood from among them; that is, they shall be discharged from the
guilt of this murder, and shall not be punished for it, they performing all
these things which are here commanded by God, from verse. 1. to 10.

2ly, He gives direction, that when they go out to War with a foreign Nation,
and among the Captives see a beautiful Woman, It was not lawful for them to
contract any alliance by marriage with the Amorites, see Exodus 34.16. Deuteronomy. 7.3.
which one of them has a desire to make his wife; In such case he shall bring
her home to his house, and she shall shave her Head, and pare her Nails, and
shall put off the Heathenish Garment wherein she was taken, and shall bewail
her Father and Mother a full month, (as if they were dead) she being to bid
farewell for ever to them; by all which things was intimated that she must
renounce her Heathenism, and all the corrupt Customs and Superstitions thereof,
and forsaking her Fathers house, must be ingrafted into the Israel of God, and
must worship God as they did. These things being performed, she might become
his wife. But if after he had consummated the marriage This liberty for
Israelites to marry Heathenish Captive-women is like that of Divorce, Deuteronomy. 24.
which was only suffered for the hardn^ss of their hearts, and is only to be
understood of the Captives of foreign Nations, not of the Canaanites, who were
all to be destroyed.
with her, he should find no content in her, and was desirous to put her away,
he might do it, but must then freely set her at liberty to go whether she
would, because he had humbled her; He must not sell her for money under
pretense that she was his Captive and Servant, from verse. 10. to 15.

3ly, If a man have two wives (which though contrary to God's first
Institution, Genesis 2.22, 23, 24. yet He for a time suffered, but approved not,
as appears Mal. 2.15. Matthew. 19.4, 5.) and one of them was better beloved by
him than the other, and he have Sons by them both. He commands that the Son by
the first wife, though less beloved, shall not lose his right of Primogeniture,
but he shall enjoy the right of the firstborn, which by the Law of Nature
belonged unto him, and his Father shall give him a double portion of all that
he has, For he is the beginning of his strength, from verse. 15. to 18.

4ly, If any man have a stubborn and rebellious Son which will not obey the
voice of his Father, or the voice of his Mother, and that when they have
chastened him will not hearken unto them, then shall his Father and Mother
bring him to the Elders of the City, and shall say unto them, This our Son is
stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice; he is a Glutton and a
Drunkard. Then the Elders of the City shall examine the matter brought against
him, and if they find it true, the men of the City shall stone him with stones
that he die. So shall ye put away evil from among you, and all Israel shall
hear and fear. By the severity of this Law Children were taught to be more
obedient to their Parents, and Parents were taught to be more careful in a
right Education of their Children, from verse. 18. to 22.

5ly, If any man have committed some notorious Offense, that deserves the
judgment of death, and being condemned for it, be hanged on a Tree, His body
shall not remain all night upon the Tree, but they must in any wise bury him
that day (for he that is hanged is accursed of God) that the Land be not
defiled. This kind of death was usually the punishment only of those who had by
some notorious wickedness provoked God to pour out his Wrath upon the whole
Land, and so were hanged up to appease his Wrath, as we may see Numb. 25.4. and
2 Samuel 21.6. And it was esteemed the most shameful and accursed, Hence it was
that God would have his dear Son, our blessed Lord and Savior, suffer this
kind of death, that even hence it might be more evident, that in his death he
bare the Curse due to our sins, according to that of the Apostle, Gal. 3.13.
because the very manner of this death did intimate that such men as were thus
executed, were such execrable and accursed Wretches that they did (as it were)
defile the Earth with treading on it, and would pollute it more if they should
die upon it, and were therefore to be trussed up in the Air as not fit to be
among men, that others might look upon them as Spectacles of Gods Indignation
and Curse, (because of the wickedness they had committed) which was not so
legible and apparent in other kinds of death. And therefore they were to bury
them that were hanged that very day, that the Land might not be defiled, which
otherwise it might be, by such a monument of Gods Curse remaining so visibly
upon it; And the burial was to abolish the Curse from appearing in the Lords
Land, from verse. 22. to the end.

He now prescribes love and faithfulness in one Neighbor toward another,
which When thou see, says he, thy Brothers Ox Hinc and nostra Lex de
proclamandis ut vocant pecudibus erraticis.
or his Sheep go astray, thou shall not demean thy self as not concerned, or as
if thou had not seen them (yea though he be thine Enemy, Exodus 23.4.) but
shall bring them again to him. And if the Owner dwell afar off, or be
altogether unknown to thee, then thou shall drive the Cattle home to thine own
house, and keep them there till the Owner does seek them, and then thou shall
restore them. And thus they were to do by any thing else of their Brothers that
was lost, whither Raiment or any such thing, they were not to conceal it, but
restore it. And so if they saw their Brothers Ox or Ass fall by the way, they
were not to refrain from helping him up again, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Further he injoyns, that the difference of Apparel, to distinguish the Sexes,
should be constantly observed, This Precept concerns natural honesty and
seemliness, which has a perpetual equity in it; and it is enjoined to prevent
many evils which might arise if men and women were clad alike.
and never altered, except in case of necessity, and to avoid some present and
sudden mischief. The woman, says he, shall not wear that which appertains
to a man, nor a man put on a woman's Garment; for all that do so are abomination
to the Lord, verse. 5.

In the next place he injoyns them, that when they find a Birds-nest they
should not destroy the Dam with her young ones, or with her Eggs in
breeding-time, but should let the Dam go, taking only the young ones, because
she might ere long have other young ones, and so might still continue the store
of Birds for the good of men. This Law might intimate unto them how well
pleasing it was unto God that his people should be merciful and pitiful, and in
so doing it should be well with them, and they should prolong their days, verse.
6, 7.

Furthermore the houses of the Israelites being usually built flat on the tops
(on which they used to walk and recreate themselves, and sometimes to pray, see
Acts 10.9.) they are here enjoined to make battlements round about their house
tops, to prevent the casual falling of any from thence, and so to prevent all
occasions of bloodshed, and other evils that might redound to their Brethren
through their default, verse. 8.

In the next place he tells them, they must not sow their Vineyards with diverse
Seeds, Agrum vintae non seres alio aliquo semine ut oriatur mixtura quaedam ex
jacto semine and vitibus.
that is, with Seeds different and diverse from that of the Vine, [see Levit.
19.19.] for that is the way to have the Seeds, and consequently the Fruits to
be mixed, and not pure, and so defiled and rendered unfit to be offered to the
Lord in the first fruits or otherwise, verse. 9.

Further they must not plow with an Ox and an Ass together, God hereby seems
to intimate how simple and sincere he would have the state of the Church to be.
God would not have his Church mixed with profane and unbelievers. He seems also
hereby to warn them against mixtures in Religion and Manners with other Nations.
the one being a clean Creature, the other unclean; hereby God seems to
intimate that ye would not endure the unequal yoking of his people with
Infidels, [see 2 Cor. 6.14.] verse. 10.

Further they must not wear a Garment of diverse sorts, See Levit. 19.19.
as of Woollen and Linen together. This Law seems also to be figurative, and
to intimate to them what simplicity and sincerity God required in them that
were his peculiar people, verse. 11.

In the next place he injoyns them to make Fringes upon the four quarters of
their Vestures and Garments. The end of those Fringes was to put them in mind
of the Commandments of God, [see Numb. 15.38, 39.] and that they might
remember, by looking on them, that they were Gods peculiar people, and by these
Fringes distinguished in their habits from other Nations, verse. 12.

He comes next to show how that man shall be dealt with that slandereth his
wife, pretending he found her not a Virgin when he married her. In that case
the Parents of the Damsel shall produce the Cloth containing the Tokens of her
Virginity (and attested by good witnesses to be so, as the Hebrews say,) which
they carefully kept for their own honor, and the honor of their Daughter.
Then the Elders of the City shall Chastise that man, and amerce him at an
hundred Shekels of silver, to be paid to the Father of the Damsel, because he
has defamed her; and she shall continue to be his wife all her life; He shall
not send her away by a Bill of Divorce, as other men were permitted to do,
Deuteronomy. 24.1. But if she be guilty, and no Tokens of her Virginity were found
when he married her, then she shall be stoned before the d^or of her Fathers
house, because she has wrought folly in Israel, and has played the whore in
her Fathers house. So, says He, shall ye put away evil from among you, from
verse. 13. to 22.

Next he injoyns, That Adultery both in man and woman shall be punished with
death, [see Levit. 20.10.] verse. 22.

Or if a man lie with a Damsel in the City betrothed to another man, they shall
both be stoned to death; she, because she cried out not; He, because he has
humbled his Neighbors wife; For so she is to be reckoned after betrothing,
which was done by mutual promise in the presence of witnesses before marriage,
Matthew. 1.18.

But if a man find a betrothed Damsel in the field and force her, and she Cry
out, then the man only shall die.

If an unmarried man find a Damsel that is a Virgin, which is not betrothed,
and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and this be discovered, then the man
that lay with her shall give to the Damsels Father fifty Shekels of silver, and
she shall be his wife, because he has humbled her; He may not put her away all
his days, from verse. 22. to 28.

A man must not take his Fathers wife, nor discover his Fathers skirt; that is,
which his Father only might uncover, and not he, [see Levit. 18.7. verse. 30.

who shall not be admitted to bear Office in the State or Commonwealth of
Israel, who shall not enter into the Congregation Venire in Congregationem
Jehovae est venire in Senatum seu concessum Judicum, i. e. per Synecdochen
membri, gerere officium magistratus. Eunuchi a Magistratu exclusi, qui alienos
eos esse voluit a moribus gentilium apud quos Eunuchi publica officia
administrabant. Ger.
of the Lord; that is, the assembly of Judgss and Magistrates, [see Psalm.
82.1.] nor be capable of the Privileges of other Israelites. 1. He that is
wounded in his Stones, or has his Privy-member cut off. 2. A Bastard, or one
born illegitimate, shall be excluded to the tenth Generation. The reason of
these Injunctions seems to be, because such persons are usually of a sluggish
cowardly spirit, and liable to be scorned and despised by others, and therefore
not fit to be in any place of Authority; and possibly God intended to show them
hereby how free from all stains and blemishes he required his people should be.
And He laid this mark of Infamy and Dishonor upon a spurious Issue, Judaei
spurij non excludebantur a populo Dei ut Pharez: agit hic igitur de alienigenis
ex scorto natis, qui etiam inter suos viles erant.
to show unto them how detestable all uncleanness was in his sight, so that not
till after ten Generations this stain should be blotted out. And possibly the
Lord also intended hereby that the Commonwealth of the Jews should, upon this
account, be more respected and honored by foreign Nations. 3. Neither the
Ammonites nor Moabites, that became Proselytes, and embraced the Religion of
the Jews, were to be received into full Communion with the Commonwealth of
Israel, nor any of their Posterity to the tenth Generation. But this is not to
be understood of the Israelites Children born of Ammonitish and Moabitish
Mothers (as the Stories of Orpah and Ruth do evidence) but only of the Children
of Ammonites and Moabites that became Proselytes, who because they were of
those Nations might not be incorporated into the Commonwealth of Israel unto
the tenth Generation, see Nehem. 13.1. And this Law was to be for ever
inviolably observed, and not to be dispensed with upon any pretense whatsoever;
and the reason of this severe Injunction was twofold: 1. Because these
Ammonites and Moabites, being the Posterity of Lot (who was so near of kin to
Abraham, from whom the Israelites descended) met not the Israelites when they
came out of Egypt with bread and water. This must not be understood of all the
Moabites (for those of Ar did furnish the people with Victuals, see Deuteronomy.
2.29.) but we do not read that the Ammonites did so.
And 2ly, Because the Moabites hired Balaam to Curse them, [see Numb. 22.]
though the Lord turned his Curse into a Blessing, because He loved them. Upon
these accounts He injoyns them, that they shall not seek peace with the
Moabites, nor endeavor their Prosperity, Non hac lege vetantur ea quae salutem
animae spectant sed civiles Praerogativae, propter decorem and honorem populi
Judaici.

Non licuit cum his soedera inire, connubia contrahere, and ad publica officia
eos promovere, cum illis non ambias foedus, quod bono esset illis and tibi
damno.


but rather be at perpetual enmity And herein therefore if David offended in
making peace with the Ammonites, 2 Samuel 10.1, 2. no marvel if the Lord suffered
his Messengers to be so basely used by them.
with them; because they made Israel to sin, [see Numb. 25. and upon that score
they were to abhor them. But they were not to abhor the Edomites Except only
the Amalekites, see Chapter 25. verse. 17. for though the Edomites used them as
discourteously as they passed along to go into Canaan, as the Ammonites or
Moabites did, (for they refused to let them pass through their Land, and came
out armed against them, Numb. 20.20.) yet God would have them show the Edomites
more favor than they did to other Nations, teaching us hereby what love men
ought to bear to their Brethren, and how we ought to bear the injuries of
Brethren, because of their near relation to us.
descended from Esau (their Father Jacob's Brother) and so the nearest kin to
them of all people of the Earth; nor an Egyptian, because they were once
Strangers in that Land, and kindly used in Joseph's time; God teaching men
hereby rather to remember good turns than injuries. These in their third
Generation after they became Proselytes might be endenized, and made free among
the Jews as well as if they were native Israelites, from 1. to 9.

Another direction he gives them is this, When the Host goes forth against
their Enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing; to show them that they
had need at that time in a more especial manner to be careful to keep
themselves to the exact rules of holiness and righteousnesr. Solet licentiae
militaris extra fines aequi and boni effundi.
For first, They go out then to execute Vengeance upon others for the evils
they have done, and they are not fit to punish others that are wicked
themselves. 2ly, Because a clear Conscience is one of the best means to make
men truly valiant. 3ly, They have then more especially need of Gods assistance,
and are most in danger of mischief if the Lord should abandon them. Therefore
when they went out to War they had need be very careful to keep themselves from
all misdemeanors and transgressions either of the Moral or Ceremonial Law, that
they might not provoke the Lord to forsake them.

Further He shows, That if there were any among them in the Camp that were
unclean, by reason of nocturnal pollution, they should voluntarily go forth
from among their Brethren, till having washed themselves with water they might
at evening return again to their Tents, [see Levit. 15.4.] verse. 10, 11.

He injoyns also, That they should have a place without the Camp, appointed by
public Order, whether they should go for the ease of Nature, Hac externa
pedagogia illos de vitae and morum immunditie cavenda commonefacit.
and then with a paddle (which they were to carry with their Armor) to dig a
hole in the earth, and cover it; and this not only to prevent annoyance, but to
teach them, by reason of Gods presence among them, to keep themselves both from
all spiritual and outward pollution and uncleanness. For the Lord thy God (says
He) walks in the midst of thy Camp to deliver thee, and to give up thine
Enemies before thee: therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean
thing in thee, and turn away from thee, from verse. 12. to 15.

Another Law He gives them concerning Servants, Thou shall not deliver to his
Master the Servant that is escaped from his Master unto thee. This is to be
understood of Servants that fled from Heathenish Masters, who tyrannized over
them, and oppressed them, and so they fled to the Israelites, and were willing
to embrace the Jewish Religion. For it was more Charity to keep them among the
true worshippers of God, then to return them to their cruel, tyrannical and
idolatrous Masters. Therefore, says He, when thou have, upon examining the
matter, found that the Servant had a sufficient and warrantable ground to leave
his Master, thou shall permit him to live in any of thy Cities or
dwelling-places, where it likes him best, and thou shall not oppose him, verse.
15, 16.

In the next place He prohibits tolerating of Whoredom or Sodomy among them,
and by consequence permitting such filthiness to be practiced by any of other
Nations that should live among them, verse. 17.

An Harlot was by no means to offer to God the hire or wages of her Whoredom;
nor was the price of a Dog (which was an unclean Creature) to be offered to
Him, God intending hereby to teach them to reverence his Sanctuary, and not to
offer to him any thing that had been sinfully gotten, or was base and unworthy,
or that might make his Worship vile and contemptible, verse. 17, 18.

In the next place He commands them to lend to their poor Brethren freely, See
Exodus 22.25. Levit. 25.36. Psalm. 15.5.
and not to take again any thing more than what was lent. Thou shall not lend
upon usury to thy Brother neither Money nor Victuals. But to Gentiles that were
Infidels they might lend upon Usury. And this they were to observe that the
Lord might bless them in all that they set their hand unto, verse. 19, 20.

Another Law He gives them concerning Vows, When thou vowest a Vow to the Lord,
(viz. of a thing possible and lawful) thou must not be slack to pay it. Far the
Lord thy God will surely require it of thee; and to neglect to pay it would be
sin in thee, and consequently would be inquired into, and punished by God. But
if thou forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee. That which is gone out of
thy lips thou shall keep and perform, and pay thy free-will-Offering which thou
have vowed unto the Lord thy God, verse. 21, 22, 23.

Another Law He gives them concerning Trespasses, When thou art hired to work
in thy Neighbors Vineyard, Lex generalis est non ad conductitios restringenda.
Fertilior ibi agrorum and vinearum proventus and minori labor partus quam in
nostris terris.
thou may eat of the fruit thereof. Or when thou occasionally travellest
through his Vineyards and Cornfieldsd, thou may, for the refreshing thy self
in time of need, gather and eat, but thou may not carry any home for thy self
or any other. When thou come into the standing Corn of thy Neighbors, thou
may pluck the ears See Matthew. 12.1. The Pharisees charged not our Saviors
Disciples for doing what ought not be done, viz. for plucking ears of Corn, but
for doing it on the Sabbath Day.
with thy hand, but thou shall not move a Sickle into thy Neighbors standing
Corn, verse. 24, 25.

Divorce. If a man have married a wife, and afterward finds something in her
person or qualities which before was unknown to him, upon which he grows into a
dislike of her, and resolves to put her away, in that case he must write her a
Bill of Divorce, Yet this which was thus tolerated was sinful in the Husband,
and displeasing unto God, see Mal. 2.16. and only permitted by Moses for the
hardness of their hearts, Matthew. 19.8. and for preventing greater
inconveniences to the wife. And yet even this toleration of causeless Divorces
was abrogated by our Savior, Matthew. 5.31, 32. Dicuntur Hebraei Polygamiam a
Majoribus, sed repudia ab Aegyptiis didicisse. Anonym.
and give it into her hand, and so send her out of his house, that she may have
this as a Testimony for her that she had not of her own accord forsaken her
Husband, but was put away by him, and so being now free, might lawfully marry
another. And if it should so happen that her second Husband should put her away
also, or should die, her first Husband notwithstanding may not take her to wife
again, after she has been another man's wife, V. 4. Quia polluta est] non
absolute, sed quantum ad primum maritum, per concubitum cum altero marito.
for this is an abominable thing in the sight of God, and brings guilt upon the
Land, and so makes it liable to punishment, Chapter 24. from 1. to 5.

2ly, Concerning a man that had newly married a wife. Such an one was not to be
sent out to War the first year, nor charged with any public Employment that
would necessarily cause him to be absent from his wife; But he was to be free
See Chapter 20.7. and Prove. 5.18, 19.
for one year, that He might live at home, and cheer up his wife, who being
newly taken from her Fathers House and Family, and transplanted into a new
stock, might be subject on that account to Melancholy, and so had need have the
Company of her Husband to cheer her up. And besides, by living lovingly
together the first year, their love to each other would (in all likehood) be so
firmly settled, that there would be no great danger but that it would so
continue afterward, verse. 5.

3ly, He injoyns that no man shall take his Neigbours nether or upper Millstone
See Exodus 22.26.
to pledge; for one of the Millstones being gone, the other is unuseful; And by
consequence the taking of any thing as a Pledge that is of like necessary use
for the exercise of a man's Calling, or support of his life, is here forbidden.
For he that does so, takes a man's life to Pledge; that is, that by which he
lives and maintains his life, verse. 6.

4ly, If any man be a plagiary, that is, steal away any of the Children of
Israel, and sell him, that man shall die for it, see Exodus 21.16. The reason
why this kind of theft was only punishable with death among the Hebrews was
this, because it was a debasing of man (made after the Image of God) to be sold
like a beast, and much more was it a great indignity to sell one of their
Brethren (that were Gods people); and the selling them to Heathens (for none of
their Brethren in likelihood would buy them) was an evident exposing their
Souls to extreme danger, besides the miseries they were like to endure in such
cruel bondage, verse. 7.

5ly, In the Plague of Leprosy he shows them, they were to observe diligently
what the Priests and Levites should teach them to observe and do, lest God
should smite them with Leprosy, as he did Miriam, who was by Gods special
Command shut out of the Camp seven days, until she had been purified according
to the Law. And if she could not be exempted, none of them must hope for
exemption in that case from what the Law required, verse. 8, 9.

6ly, When a man did lend any thing to his Brother upon a Pledge, he was not to
go into his house, and pick and choose what Pledge he pleased, but should be
content with that which the Borrower brought out to him, poor men being
unwilling that strangers should see their penury and want. And if the man were
very poor, so that he gave his Covering or Garment wherein he lodged to Pledge
(see Exodus 22.26) the Lender was to return it to him again before the Sun went
down, that he may sleep in his own Raiment, and so may bless the Lender, and
pray for him for his mercifulness to him, and it should be esteemed as a
righteous See Psalm. 106.31.
thing, and a good work in him before the Lord, who will reward him for it,
from verse. 10. to 14.

7ly, They were not to oppress an hired Servant, whither of their own Brethren
or a Stranger, that was poor and needy, but to pay him his wages See Levit.
19.13.
at the day appointed, and not put him off further. For being poor he sets
his heart upon his hire as that by which he must maintain himself. If they did
otherwise the poor man might Cry unto the Lord against them, and God might
thereupon be provoked to punish them for their unmercifulness, verse. 14, 15.

8ly, Neither the Fathers Ad judices haec dici patet ex sequentibus. Regula
haec ordinaria est. Interim in casibus quibusdam extraordinariis Magistratibus
mandatum fuit filios cum Parentibus occidere, vide Deuteronomy. 13. Jos. 7. Judic.
20.21. 2 Samuel 21.
shall be put to put to death for the sin of the Children, nor the Children for
the sin of the Fathers, but every man shall suffer for his own sin, verse. 16.

9ly, They were not to pervert the Judgment of the Fatherless or Stranger, or
take a Widows Garment to Pledge, but should remember how they themselves were
Bondmen in Egypt, and how God delivered them thence, and therefore they should
be merciful to others, verse. 17, 18.

10ly, In time of Harvest if they have forgotten a sheaf in the Field, they
shall not go and fetch it, but leave it for the Stranger, Fatherless and Widow,
that God may bless them in all the works of their hands, Levit. 19.9. and
23.22. And so when they gather their Grapes and Olives they shall leave the
gleanings for the poor, verse. 19. to the end.

11ly, The Judges are appointed to judge righteously in all cases that shall
come justify the Righteous, and condemn the Wicked. And if a wicked man or
Malefactor deserve to be beaten, they shall order him to receive forty stripes
and no more, lest if they should proceed to what extremity they listed, their
Brother should seem vile in their eyes, and fit to be used with no more regard
than if he were a beast. The Jews were so superstitiously careful not to
transgress this Law, that their custom was to stay at 39 stripes, even when
they meant to go as high as they might, and that for fear they should exceed,
from verse. 1. to 4.

12ly, They were not to muzzle the Ox when he treads out the Corn. The
Israelites used not to thresh their Corn with Flails, (as we do) but trod it
out with the feet of Beasts, Hosea 10.11. yea sometimes with Cart-wheels, see
Isa. 28.27, 28. By this Law the Lord taught them to be merciful to the bruit
Beasts they had occasion to make use of; and by necessary consequence to beware
of depriving their Brethren of that which was due to them for the service they
did them, but to let them eat and enjoy the fruit of their Labors, see 1 Cor.
9.9.

13ly, If a man die leaving no Child, his wife may not marry out of her
Husbands Family, but her Husbands next Brother or next Kinsman shall marry her,
and the firstborn which she bears him shall be counted the legal Son of his
Brother Hence Obed, whom Boaz begat of Ruth, is said to be Naomi's Son, Ruth.
4.17. because he was counted the legal Son of Elimelech, her deceased Son,
Ruths former Husband, though he was withal counted the natural Son of Boaz,
Luke 3.32. See Sect. 35. of the third Chapter of this History.
that died without Issue, that so his name may be continued in Israel. But if
the next Brother refuse to marry her, she shall complain to the Elders, and if
he still persist in it before them that he will not take her to wife, she shall
loose his shoe In all resignations of House or Land from one man to another
this Ceremony was used, so that He that did resign the House or Land, pulled
off his shoe, and gave it to his Neighbor to whom he passed it over, Ruth.
4.7. thereby signifying that He passed it over, Ruth 4.7. thereby signifying
that He would from thence forward be disabled from going any more upon such
Land, or into such a House, or any part of the Estate.
from off his foot, (as intimating thereby that he was unworthy to enter upon
and possess his Brothers Estate) and shall spit in his face This was only done
when the woman did claim and press her right before the Elders, and the next
Kinsman did obstinately refuse her. For when by free agreement the next Kinsman
did resign his right to another, the Widow also consenting, then this note of
Infamy was not put upon Him, as we may see, Ruth 4.8. where no spitting on the
face of the next Kinsman is mentioned, but only by pulling off his shoe he
resigned his right to Boaz, and so he married Ruth.
by way of disgrace and contempt, thereby declaring him a man unworthy to show
his face among his Brethren, and shall say, Thus shall it be done to the man
that refuses to build up his Brothers house. And when in aftertimes this man's
Family shall be spoken of, they shall speak of it as the House or Family of a
man that had his shoe loosed, and so a note of Infamy shall rest upon him and
his Family, that men may thereby be made the more careful to submit to the
directions of Gods Law, from verse. 5. to 11.

14ly, If a woman see a man beating her Husband, and run in to help him, she
may not take him that strove with her Husband by the Secrets (thinking thereby
to make him give over smiting him); if she do, her hand shall be cut off by the
Magistrate without pity; God thereby intimating to them how much he abhorred
all bold, shameless and impure behavior in those that professed themselves to
be his people, verse. 11, 12.

15ly, He forbids all fraud in buying and selling, and commands that they
should not have diverse Weights and Measures, to wit, great ones to buy with,
and small ones to sell with; or great ones to show to the Officers when they
come to view and try their Weights and Measures, and less to sell their Wares
by. They are commanded to do just things, that so their days may be lengthened
in the Land which the Lord gives them. For all that do such things, and deal
unrighteously, are an abomination to the Lord, from verse. 13. to 17.

16ly, He puts them in mind of executing what God had declared against Amalek,
who smote the hindmost and feeblest of them when they came out of Egypt, [see
Sect. 11. of Chapter 4.] which was a great act of inhumanity and cruelty to seek to
hurt them that had been lately so horribly oppressed in Egypt; and it was a
sign the Amalekites feared not God (who had so visibly owned that people) and
so in fighting against the Israelites they fought against God Himself.
Therefore when they were peaceably settled in the Land which God intended to
give them, they should blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under Heaven.
This Judgment God appointed Saul to execute, 1 Samuel 15.2, 3. but he failed in
the performance of it, as we may see verse. 9. Afterward God stirred up the
Simeonites in Hezekiah's days to do it, who smote the rest of the Amalekites, 1 Chronicles. 4.42, 43. And what befell Haman and his Sons is largely related in the
third Chapter of the Book of Esther, from verse. 17. to the end.

Canaan, every man should every year bring a Basket of his first fruits at the
Feast of Tabernacles [Exod. 23.16.] to the Priest, to be by Him presented to
the Lord as an acknowledgment that the Lord had freely given them this Land, as
He had promised to their Fathers, and that of Him they still held it; and
therefore to Him as Lord in Chief (by way of Tribute) they brought these
first fruits, testifying also thereby that to him they owed the yearly
fruitfulness of their Land. And when the Priest has set down the Basket before
the Altar, the Offerer shall make this solemn Profession; Our Ancestor Jacob
was forced to fly into Syria, and in respect of his long abode and continuance
there with his Uncle Laban he may well be called a Syrian, though born in the
Land of Canaan. There he was near lost, and ready to perish, by reason of the
wrongs he received from his hard Father-in-law. When he returned thence into
the Land of Canaan, after a few years, by extremity of Famine, he was
constrained to remove into Egypt, and there sojourned with a few, who
afterward became a great, mighty and populous Nation. Then the Egyptians evil
entreated us, and laid upon us hard Bondage, but when we cried unto the Lord,
He looked down with pity upon our Affliction, and Labor, and Oppression; And
brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty Hand, and an outstretched Arm, and
with great terribleness, and with Signs and Wonders, and has brought us into
this good Land flowing with Milk and Honey. And behold I have brought to thee
the first fruits of the Land which thou, O Lord, have given me. Then leaving
his Basket before the Altar for the use of the Priest, (who, with the rest of
his Brethren, was afterward to eat of them; all first fruits by Gods
appointment appertaining to them, Deuteronomy. 18.4.) and humbly worshipping the Lord,
He shall depart; and after he has thus testified his thankfulness, and done
this Service, he shall go and feast with the Levites and Strangers upon the
Peace Offerings He had brought thither, even as they used to do at all other
Feasts, rejoicing in every good thing which the Lord has given them, [see
Deuteronomy. 16.11, 15.] from verse. 1. to 12.

18ly, He comes now to show what profession and prayer that man was to make
that paid his third years Tithes. In the two first years after the Sabbatical
year there were only two Tithes to be separated from their Estates; The first
for the Levites, the second to be spent in their Journeys to Jerusalem, and in
holy feasting there before the Lord. But in the third year they were to
separate a third Tithe which was for the Poor in the places where they dwelt.
The first of these Tithes was wholly the Levites Out of this the Levit^s paid a
tenth part again to the Priests, Numb. 18.24. to 29. Neh. 10.37, 38.
portion, and therefore often called the Lords Inheritance; the second or the
price of it was to be carried up by the Owners to the Lords dewlling place, and
there spent in holy feasting before the Lord; but this third Tithe Therefore
this third year was peculiarly called the year of Tything, because this year
they separated three Tithes from their Increase, one more than in other years.
The first was the Levites yearly livelihood, the second was to be expended in
their Journey to Jerusalem, and feasting before the Lord there. The third was
to be laid up for the Poor, see Deuteronomy. 14.28.
was to be laid up in some public place in the Towns and Cities where they
dwelt, and was not only for the use of the Levites, but also of the Stranger,
Fatherless and Widow, as is said, verse. 12. that they might eat also within
their Gates and be filled. He that paid this third years Tithe was to make such
a profession as this; O Lord, I have brought away the hallowed things out of my
house, and have given them to the Levites, the Stranger, the Fatherless and the
Widow, according to thy Commandments; I have not transgressed thy Commandments,
nor forgotten them. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, that is, in my
greatest wants and necessities, and when I was in the greatest straits I have
not ventured to supply my self from them; Neither has it caused any mourning
Scil. pressus dolor^ and luctu quod tantum deberem auferre bonis meis and aliis
elargiri. Jansen.
or repining in me that I was bound to part with so much of my Increase to the
Poor. Neither have I taken ought thereof for any unclean use, that is, for any
use besides that for which they were appointed, nor given ought thereof for the
dead; that is, for the burying of the dead, or to be provisions for a Funeral
Feast. Non expendi in rem Funebrem, Pompum vel Convivium de quo Jer. 16.7.
Ezekiel. 24.17. Hos. 9.4.
Having made this solemn Protestation that He had not failed in paying his
Tithes exactly according to the Law, He was then to add this Prayer, Lord look
down from thy holy Habitation, from Heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and
this Land which thou have given us, as thou swearest to our Fathers, from verse.
12. to 18.

19ly, He exhorts them to observe all the Statutes and Judgments which the Lord
had given them, and that with all their Hearts and Souls. Which if they really
consented to do, then they should consider that, that day they did in effect
renew their Covenant with the Lord, and avouch Him to be their God, promising
to hearken unto his Voice, and to obey Him. And the Lord did avouch them to be
his peculiar people, separate from all others, and devoted to walk in his
Statutes (through his Grace working in their Hearts) and would make them high
above all Nations in praise, in name and in honor, and an holy people unto
Himself, from verse. 16. to the end.

20. Having now again assembled the Elders and people of Israel together, He
Canaan, at their first opportunity, they should build a Monument of great
stones, plaistring them with mortar, on Mount Ebal, and to write the Law of God
thereon, viz. the ten Commandments very plainly, that it might be a Monument
Joshua 8.30. We find this Monument was erected after their taking of Ai.
to put them in mind of keeping Gods Law. Together with this Monument they were
to build an Altar To teach them that Righteousness and Salvation is not to be
attained by the works of the Law, but to be sought by Christ, of whom this
Altar was a Type.
of whole stones, and not to lift up any iron Tool upon it, [see Exodus 20.24,
25.] and thereon to offer Burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings, and to eat there
and to rejoice before the Lord their God. And because they had at this time
renewed their Covenant with God, Moses together with the Priests and Levites
advise them to take heed unto themselves, and to obey the Voice of the Lord
their God, and to observe his Commandments and Statutes, from verse. 1. to 11.

21. Moses now injoyns the people that when they had set up this Monument of
stones on Mount Ebal, and written the Law plainly upon it, and had built the
Altar before mentioned, and had offered Sacrifices thereon as God had commanded
them, they should then afterward give their consent to the Blessings See Deuteronomy.
11.29.
and Curses that should be pronounced by the Priests upon those that should
keep, and upon those that should break Gods Laws; and the manner enjoined for
the doing thereof was this, viz. six of the Tribes were to stand upon Mount
Gerizim, to wit, Simeon and Levi, Judah and Issachar, and Joseph and Benjamin,
(where by the Tribe of Joseph are meant the two Tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh,
who are here joined together as one, because Levi is reckoned as one of the
twelve,) and all these were the Posterity of Leah and Rachel; and then the
other six Tribes were to stand on Mount Ebal, to wit, Gad and Asher, Dan and
Napthali, (who were the Sons of their Handmaids) and with them the Tribe of
Reuben (who for his sin lost his Birthright) and Zebulun the youngest of Leahs
Sons. And the Tribes being thus divided, the Priests V. 14. Pronunciabunt
Levitae] i. e. aliqui sacerdotum qui and erant Levitae. Caeteri enim erant in
monte Gerizim ad benedicendum, see Joshua Chapter 8. v. 32, 33, 34.
were to come with them into the little Valley that was between these two
Mountains, and there first they pronounced the Blessings, (turning their faces
as it is like toward Mount Gerizim) and then all the Tribes that stood on that
Mountain answered Amen; and then turning their faces toward Mount Ebal, they
pronounced the twelve Curses here mentioned, and then all the Tribes that stood
on Mount Ebal answered Amen. Moses omits the Blessings possibly because they
might be easily enough gathered from the contrary Curses which are here
expressed. First, Cursed be the man that makes any graven or molten Image
(though he keep it never so secret) for it is an abomination to the Lord. 2ly,
Cursed be He that sets light by his Father or Mother, [see Exodus 21.17.]
3ly, Cursed be He that removes his Neighbors Landmark. 4ly, Cursed be He
that makes the Blind to wander out of the way; and much more those that
mislead the people into pernicious Errors, or give them knowingly pernicious
Counsels. 5ly, Cursed be He that perverteth the judgment of the Stranger,
Fatherless and Widow. 6ly, Cursed be He that lies with his Fathers wife. V.
20. Quia retexit oram Patris sui] i. e. oram vestimenti Patris sui. Per
vestimentum Patris intelligitur vestimentum quod est in potestate Patris ut
possit illud retegere. Piscator.
7ly, Cursed be He that lies with any manner of Beast. 8ly, Cursed be He that
lies with his Sister, the Daughter of his Father, or the Daughter of his
Mother; that is, his half-Sister, (see Levit 1.8, 9.) 9ly, Cursed be He that
lies with his Mother-in-law; that is, his Wives Mother. 10ly, Cursed be He
that smites his Neighbor secretly, either by secret practices procuring his
blood to be shed, or smiting him secretly with his Tongue. 11ly, Cursed be He
that takes a Reward to slay an innocent person, [see Ezekiel. 22.12.] 12ly,
Cursed be He that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them. To every
one of these the people were to say Amen. And so subscribe to the justice of
Gods Law, as it were wishing that the Curses might fall on them, if they should
in any of these things transgress Gods Commandment, from verse. 11. to the end.

many blessings would follow and overtake them, from verse. 1. to 13.
particularly these: 1. God would set them on high above all Nations, both in
respect of temporal and spiritual blessings, and they shall be the head and not
the tail, verse. 13. that is, shall be highly esteemed above other Nations, and
not scorned and despised as a base and contemptible people. 2. They shall be
blessed in the City and in the Field; that is, whither they dwell in the City
or the Country, and manage business belonging either to a Citizen or a Farmer.
3. They shall be blessed in the fruit of their Bodies, their Children, in the
fruits of their Grounds, and the fruits of their Cattle, so that they shall
abound in all these, verse. 11.4. They shall be blessed in their Basket wherein
they put the fruits of their ground; it shall not be empty; and in their store;
they shall have plenty of Provisions, they shall be blessed in their Barns and
Storehouses, verse. 8. and God will command his blessing on all that they set
their hands unto. 5. They shall be blessed when they come in and when they go
out, [see verse. 19.] that is, at home and abroad, and in all their employments
and businesses public and private. 6. They shall be blessed with Victory over
their Enemies, who shall flee before them many ways. 7. The Lord will establish
them for an holy people unto Himself; that is, will establish them for a people
that may be His in a peculiar manner, and may appertain to Him as his peculiar
Treasure, to serve him faithfully, and to enjoy the blessings of his Covenant,
[see Chapter 7.6.] And all Nations shall see by the singular blessings that shall
be heaped upon this people, that God did indeed own them for his peculiar
people, and that they were called by his Name, and so owned as his Children,
and thereupon called the Children of God, upon which account other Nations
should be afraid of them. 8. They shall be blessed with rain. The Lord will
open to them his good Treasures; the Heavens shall give them rain in due
season. The Heavens are called the Lords Treasure, because He keeps therein
those things wherewith He causes the Earth to be fruitful, as rain to water
the ground, and snow to make it fertile, and the heat of the Sun and influences
of the Moon and Stars to make all things therein to grow and prosper. 9. They
shall so increase in riches, that they shall lend unto many Nations, and shall
not borrow of them, Chapter 15.6. These blessings he shows would follow and
overtake them, if they walked faithfully in Gods Statutes, and did not turn
aside from them either to the right hand or to the left, nor did decline to
other gods, from verse. 1. to 15.

But if they were Disobedient, then he tells them, Such Judgments and Curses
should pursue them and overtake them as were directly contrary to these
Blessings. First, God would send upon them cursing, vexation and rebuke in all
that they set their hands unto. He would send the Pestilence into their Cities
and Towns, and would command it to cleave to them, and to continue long among
them. 2ly, He would smite them with the Consumption, Fever, Inflammation, and
extreme burning; and with Drought, Blasting and Mildew. 3ly, The Heaven should
be as Brass, and the Earth as Iron, and the Lord would make the rain of their
Land powder and dust; that is, instead of rain the dust being driven by the
wind in time of drought should fall upon their Grounds, Trees and Plants, etc.
4ly, They shall flee before their Enemies, and shall be scattered into the
several Nations of the Earth, and those of them that should be slain by the
Enemy, their Carcasses should lie unburied, and should be meat for the Fowls of
the Air, and Beasts of the Field, none fraying them away. 5ly, God would smite
them with the botch of Egypt; that is, with Boils breaking forth with Blains,
[see Exodus 9.9.] and with the Emrods or Piles with the Scab, and with an
incurable Itch. 6ly, With madness, blindness, and astonishment of heart; that
is, God would deprive them of the use of their understandings, that they should
stand like blind men, or men amazed and astonished, not knowing which way to
turn themselves, and should do such things which if they were not blind or mad
they would never do. And as an effect of this brutish stupidity they should
grope at noonday; that is, should not apprehend their danger, nor discern the
right ways of helping themselves; they should be oppressed and spoiled, and
none should succor them. 7ly, He threatens to deprive them of things very dear
to them, even then when they were in expectation to enjoy them. They should
betroth wives and others should enjoy them; they should build Houses, but not
dwell in them, plant Vineyards, but not gather the Grapes of them; their Oxen,
Asses and Sheep should be violently taken away from them. 8ly, Their Sons and
Daughters should be led into Captivity, and their eyes should look earnestly
and even fail with longing for their return, and there should be no might or
power in their hands to rescue or recover them again out of the hands of their
Enemies. They should be oppressed and crushed by a Nation they knew not, who
should eat the fruit of their Land, and of their labor, so that they should be
even mad and distracted by reason of the dreadful Calamities which they should
be constrained to behold with their eyes. 9ly, The Lord would smite them with a
sore and incurable Botch, from the crown of the Head to the sole of the Foot.
10ly, They and their King (as it happened to Manassah, Jehoiachim and
Zedekiah,) and their Sons and their Daughters should be carried into Captivity,
and there they should be either enticed or forced to serve other gods, (viz.
Wood and Stone,) and their Calamities should be so great that their very
Enemies should be astonished at them; and they should be flouted and scorned,
and made a laughing stock in those places where they should be Captive, [1
Kings 9.7.] 11ly, Hurtful Vermin, such as Locusts and Worms, should devour the
fruits of their Fields and Vineyards; and their choice Trees should cast their
fruit. 12ly, The Strangers that were left among them should prevail against
them, and be Lords over them, and should be in a far better state than
themselves. And all these Curses which should overtake them, should be upon
them and their Seed as a sign of Gods great Indignation against them, and for a
wonder that a people who were once so high in his Favor, should be so unwise
and wicked as to provoke Him to bring such a Change upon them. And because they
served not the Lord with joyfulness and gladness of heart, with delight and
thankfulness, for the abundance of all good things he gave them, that therefore
they should be forced to serve their Enemies in hunger and thirst, nakedness,
and want of all things; and that their Enemies should put a yoke of Iron upon
their Necks, and keep them in bondage till they were destroyed, see Neh. 9.25,
26, 27. Jer. 28.13, 14. 13ly, God would suffer them to be invaded by a powerful
foreign Enemy, who should come as swift as an Eagle; that is, suddenly,
unexpectedly, and with irresistible Violence, viz. the Babilonians Described
Dan. 7.4. to be a Lion with Eagles wings, see Ezekiel. 17.3, 12. Forsan ad Romanos
allusit aquilis suis notissimos a quibus haec passi sunt. Tremel.
whose Language they understood not, and so would be extremely troubled how to
speak to them, or beg any favor of them. A Nation of a fierce Countenance,
which should not regard the person of the Old, nor show favor to the Young,
who should wast their Country, and eat up the fruits of their Cattle, and of
their Land, and should besiege them in all their Cities, V. 52. In omnibus
portis tuis] i. e. civitatibus, Synecdoche membri.
and batter down their high and fenced Walls wherein they trusted, and then all
the Evils and Calamities incident to places straightly besieged should fall upon
them; Parents should eat the fruits of their own Bodies, the flesh of their
Sons and Daughters. The man that was tender among them, and very delicate,
dainty and voluptuous, should grudge V. 54. Malignas erit oculus ejus] i. e.
invidebit fratri, etc.
his Brother, nay the Wife of his bosom, and his remaining Children, any share
of the Child he shall eat, having nothing else left to feed upon in that
Extremity. The tender and delicate woman Contigerunt iis ad literam in
obsidione Samariae, 4 Reg. 6. v. 29. and in obsidione Jerusalem per Babilonios,
Threnorum 2. v. 20. and in Romana apud Josephum. Threnorum 2. dicuntur parvuli
ad mensuram palmae comesti, i. e. etiam imperfecti and per aborsum abjecti: Et
tales videntur vocari hic illo versu 57 illuvies secundarum nempe proles adhuc
secundis, seu secundinis and sordibus involuta and ideo immundissima and
abominanda potius quam ad cibum expetenda. Jans.
among them that would not adventure to set the sole of her foot on the ground
for delicateness and tenderness, she should grudge the Husband of her bosom,
and her Children grown up, any share of her young Children which she should eat
in secret in that extreme Famine, from verse. 15. to 58.

He further tells them, That if they did not set themselves to fear the
glorious God, V. 58. That thou may fear this glorious and fearful Name, the
Lord thy God] by the Name of God, is to be understood the Lord Himself.
whose Name is Jehovah, He would make their Plagues wonderful, and would bring
upon them and their Children great Plagues and Sicknesses, and of long
continuance, yea the strange evil Diseases wherewith God plagued the Egyptians
(of which they were so much afraid) should cleave unto them; yea more Plagues
should fall on them then are written in this Book. And whereas they were as the
Stars of Heaven for multitude, they should be so wasted and destroyed, that
they should come to be but few in number. And as the Lord formerly rojoyced
over them to do them good, and to multiply them, so now He would rejoice in
their destruction, and the execution of his Justice upon such Despisers of his
Mercy; and they should be plucked off from the Land which God gave them for an
Inheritance, viz. Canaan, and so should lose the Pledge of their Adoption,
which would be a sad sign to them that their heavenly Father had disinherited
them, and cast them off. And they should be dispersed and scattered abroad into
many Nations, and in their exile they should be enticed or forced to worship
Wood and Stone; and among those Nations they should find no ease or rest, but
should be hurried from place to place, so that their hearts should tremble,
Judaea tremen. Juv. Satyr. 6.
and their eyes fail with extreme weeping, and their minds be filled with
sorrow and vexation. And they should be in continual doubt and fear both day
and night of losing their lives, which must needs make their condition
exceeding grievous to them. In the morning they should wish it were even, and
at even they should wish it were morning through the terrors of their minds, and
by reason of the dismal things they should see with their eyes. And the Lord
would cause them to be carried again by Ships into Egypt, whither he had said
they should return no more, God promised they should not return again thither
on condition they were Obedient.
[see Chapter 17.16. The Lord has said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no
more that way, that is, into that Country.] This was verified when the Jews,
after the destruction of Jerusalem, were carried in Ships to Egypt, and there
fold for Slaves, There were then 97 thousand Captives of the Jews.
but they were so vile and contemptible, that many would not proffer any money
for them, even to be their Slaves; and none would buy them with an intent to
set them at liberty, from verse. 58. to the end.

in their exile they shall reflect upon the experience they had of Gods
blessing them so eminently while they continued Obedient, and how severely He
punished them when they were Disobedient, and shall thereupon truly repent, and
seriously turn unto the Lord, both they and their Children, and shall serve the
Lord with all their Heart and Soul, then the Lord will have compassion on them,
and will turn their Captivity, and gather them from all the Nations under
Heaven, whither he had scattered them, and from thence will fetch them back to
their own Country, see Neh. 1.9. And He will Circumcise Promissio haec est
spiritualium beneficiorum per Christum. Conser Romans 2.29. and Col. 2.11, 12.
their hearts, and the hearts of their Children; that is, will purge them of
their Corruptions by the Grace of his Spirit, and renew them, and incline them
to a ready Obedience to his Will, that it may go well with them. And his Curses
shall fall on their Enemies, and on those that persecuted them; But they shall
be blessed in the fruit of their Bodies, of their Cattle, and of their Land,
and these blessings shall be given them in mercy, and shall tend to their good,
and not their hurt; And the Lord will rejoce over them to do them good, as he
rejoiced over their Fathers. And lest any of them should object and say, they
would willingly obey the Commandments of the Lord if they knew them, He tells
them, That the directions he had given them concerning the way and means of
Salvation by Faith in the Messiah, and the moral Law which he had given them,
as the rule Loquitur de tota in genere Dei Doctrina quae Evangelium sub se
Comprehendit, ut clare ostendit Paulus, Romans 10.8.
of their Obedience, they could not pretend to be ignorant of. Neither were
those things hidden from them, so that the knowledge of them need be fetched
down from Heaven, or from some remote Country for them, for they were
sufficiently revealed to them; the word was very nigh them, in their mouths,
and in their heart. It was plainly revealed to them, frequently read and
expounded to them by the Levites, so that they could not but talk of it, and
remember it. And if they were obedient to this Law they should be happy, but if
they turned from the Lord to worship other gods, and serve them, they should
not prolong their days in the Land which they were now going to possess. He
calls Heaven and Earth to witness that he had dealt faithfully with them. He
had on the one side set life before them, with all manner of blessings
attending it, if they would be Obedient; and on the other side death and
misery, if they were Disobedient. He exhorts them to choose the one, and to
avoid the other, and to cleave to the Lord with all their hearts, for He was
their life, and the length of their days; that is, as He is the giver of life,
so He is the maintainer and prolonger of it. And that they might enjoy the
forementioned and escape the Curses, He calls them now to renew their Covenant
which their Fathers made with God at Horeb, and to bind themselves more firmly
thereby unto the Lord. And possibly the same Ceremonies were observed now in
this renewing of the Covenant which were before observed at Horeb [see Exodus
24.] when their Fathers first entered into it. And to prepare them the better
for it, 1. He repeats the great and manifold Favors God had bestowed on them.
He tells them, That many of them who were then young might remember what God
did to Pharaoh and his Servants in Egypt, and the great Plagues whereby He
tempted and tried whither he would let Israel go or no. But though they had
seen all those great Signs and Wonders with their bodily eyes, yet by reason of
their great perverseness, and manifold Provocations, it was not given V. 4. God
has not given you a heart to perceive] simul ostendit hic Moses, and sine
adjutorio Dei eos intelligere, and obedire non posse; and tamen si illud
adjutorium Dei desit, non ideo esse excusabile hominis vitium; suo enim
demerito caret. Augustine.
unto them to understand Gods meaning in them, [see Matthew. 13.11.] neither had
those great Wonders and Deliverances made such Impressions upon them as they
should have done, nor inclined them to turn to God, and yield sincere Obedience
unto Him. And so God punished the wickedness of their hearts with the blindness
of their minds. And the Lord by Moses further spoke unto them saying, I have
led you forty years in the Wilderness; your Clothes waxed not old upon your
Backs, nor your shoes upon your Feet, [see Deuteronomy. 8.4.] Ye have not eaten common
and ordinary bread, for I have fed you with Manna; Doubtless ordinarily they
had no other bread, though at sometimes they might, see Deuteronomy. 2.6.
you have not drunk Wine or strong Drink, for your drink has been as miraculous
as your bread, viz. water fetched out of the Rock, [Numb. 20.11. Psalm. 78.15,
16.] and these things I have done for you, that you might know that I am the
Lord your God, and yet how little have you considered it? Moses further tells
them, That they might remember how since they came hither they had conquered
Sihon King of Heshbon, and Og King of Bashan, and how He had given their Land
to the Reubenites, Gadites, and half the Tribe of Manasseh. Therefore (says he)
considering all these great Mercies God has bestowed on you, you ought to be
very careful to observe the (...) ^ditions and Articles of the Covenant which
you are now to enter into, and to confirm with an Oath, that so it may go well
with you, and that you may prosper in all that you do. Attend therefore all of
you, with all seriousness to this solemn business you are now about. Behold you
all stand this day before the Lord your God, the Captains of your Tribes, your
Elders and Officers, you, your Wives and little Ones, and the Strangers that
are in your Camp, even from the Hewer of Wood unto the Drawer of Water, ye are
all met together, and stand here before the Lord your God to enter into
Covenant with Him, and to confirm it with an Oath, whereby you bind your selves
to perform it, that so He may establish you for a people unto Himself, and that
He may be your God as He promised your Fathers. Neither do I bind only you who
are here present to the observance of this Covenant, but your Posterity also,
who are not yet born. And there is great reason you should now enter into this
Covenant, because having dwelt in the Land of Egypt (at least many of you in
your younger years) and having gone through the Confines of some Idolatrous
Nations in your Journey toward Canaan, and seen their several Idolatries and
Abominations, there is some cause to fear lest some of you may be tainted with
their evil Manners. And therefore to prevent this, it is fit that ye should all
solemnly enter into Covenant with God, lest there be found among you any Man,
Woman, Family or Tribe whose hearts are inclined to serve the gods of these
Nations, and lest there be found among you any Root that bears Wormwood; that
is, any root of Idolatry or Rebellion against God, which is as displeasing and
distastful to Him, as Gall and Wormwood is to us, and which will prove to the
Sinner, and who ever is infected therewith, bitterness in the latter end, [see
Heb. 12.15, etc.] And he tells them, If there shall be found any such
evil-spirited and infectious persons among them, who when they shall hear the
words of this Curse, yet shall bless themselves in their own hearts, saying,
They shall have peace though they walk in the evil imaginations of their own
hearts, and so add drunkenness to thirst; that is, being wicked already do yet
encourage themselves to be more wicked, (as Drunkenness increases thirst, and
so draws on another Drunkenness,) the Lord will not spare such persons, but his
anger and jealousy will smoke against them, and all the Curses in this Book
will light upon them, and the Lord will blot out their names from under Heaven,
and will separate them out of all the Tribes of Israel unto punishment,
mischief and destruction, answerably to the threatenings that are denounced
against the Breakers of this Covenant, and are written in this Book of the Law.
So that when your Children that shall be born hereafter, and the Strangers that
come from a far Country, shall see the Plagues and Sicknesses that the Lord
will bring upon the Inhabitants of the Land for these Transgressions, and how
the Land, by Gods just Curse, is so defaced and altered, that it is become (in
a manner) like Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, (which Cities the Lord
overthrew in his wrath and anger) they and other Nations also that shall hear
of it shall say, Wherefore has the Lord thus punished this Land? what means
the heat of his great anger against it? Then men shall answer, It is because
they have forsaken the Covenant of the God of their Fathers, which He made with
them when he brought them forth out of Egypt; For they went and served other
gods, and worshipped them, viz. gods of Gold and Silver, Wood and Stone whom
they knew to be no gods, nor to have given them any thing, nor could or would
do them any good. And they knew also that the Lord had forbidden them to
worship Him by such Idols and Images, and thereupon his anger was kindled
against them, and he was provoked to bring upon them all the Curses denounced
in his Law against the Violators of his Covenant. And hence it was that after
those great Judgments He had sent upon them in their own Nation, He was
provoked to root them out of their own Land in wrath, anger and indignation,
and to scatter them into other Nations, as you see it is now come to pass. But
(says he) if you shall ask me, When will these things be? when will our
Posterity by their Rebellions thus provoke God, and bring such heavy Judgments
on themselves and the Land? I answer, That is only known to God Himself; secret
things belong to Him, but things revealed belong to us and our Children; and
therefore we may safely conclude, That if they do thus provoke God, then all
this Misery and Calamity will certainly befall them, except by true and timely
repentance and turning unto God they prevent this ruin. This (says He) God
has revealed; and what he has revealed it becomes us and our C^^ldren always
to consider and lay to heart, that we may not provoke Him by transgressing any
of his Commandments.

Moses now calling the people together, He tells them, He was at this time an
120 years old, and therefore by the course of Nature it could not be expected
that he should be able much longer to go in and out before them, and to lead
and govern them as before he had done. And besides the Lord had told him, He
should not go over Jordan. However he bids them be of good courage, for the
Lord Himself would go before them, and by the Conduct of his Servant Joshua
would subdue their Enemies for them, (as he had already done Sihon and Og Kings
of the Amorites) and they should destroy them as he had commanded; and
therefore he bids them not to be afraid of them, for the Lord would go along
with them, and would not fail them nor forsake them. Then he addresses his
Speech to Joshua, and in the sight of them all, bids him be strong and of a
good courage, trusting in Gods Providence and Assistance, who would not fail
him nor forsake him; He tells him, He must lead the people over into Canaan,
and cause them to inherit it.

Then Moses having put into writing Videtur Scripsisse, tu^^ Deuteronomium, tum
Canticum sequens antequam ea populo pronunciaret.
this Law; that is, this Book of Deuteronomy, he delivered it solemnly unto the
Priests (who upon some extraordinary occasions did carry the Ark as well as the
Levites, see Joshua 3.17. and. Josh. 6.12.) and unto all the Elders of Israel,
thereby giving them to understand that they were the men to whom it did
especially belong to see that this Original Copy of the Law were safely kept,
and that the Laws therein commanded were duly observed both by themselves and
the people. And Moses commanded the Priests to read this Book, this Original
Copy of the Law every seventh year (which was the year of Release) among the
people at the Feast of Tabernacles. It Is like some part of the Book of the Law
was read among them by the Levites every Sabbath Day, [see Acts 15.21.] and
it is like the people had Copies of the Law for their own private use, in the
reading whereof they did daily exercise themselves. If this were required of
their Kings, Chapter 17, 18, 19. much more may we think it was required of them.
But yet once in seven years God would have this Book to be read by the
Priests, from the beginning to the end, among the people, both that it might
make the deeper impression on them, and cause them to fear the Lord their God,
and to observe and do all the words of this Law; and that it might appear to
them that those Copies of the Law which they had among them, and were read to
them every Sabbath Day, did agree with this Original Copy which Moses had given
them. And God appointed this to be done in the year of Release, because then
they had most liberty to mind and attend that Service, the Land lying that year
at rest, themselves being freed from the danger of having their Debts exacted
of them. It was also an holy year, the Sabbath of years, and so the fitter for
this extraordinary duty. And it was appointed to be done at the Feast of
Tabernacles, because all Israel used then to appear before the Lord. For though
the Males only were bound to appear at the three solemn Feasts, [Exod. 23.17.]
yet at this Feast (it seems) they carried their Wives and Children and the
Strangers within their Gates along with them, as appears verse. 12. and Neh.
8.3. And hereby their Children who had not seen the Wonders and Miracles that
God had wrought for them, as their Fathers had done, might by hearing this
Original Book of the Law read openly among them, learn to fear the Lord their
God, and to serve him faithfully as long as they lived.

Then the Lord tells Moses, That the day of his death did now approach, and
therefore he should call Joshua, and they two should present themselves before
Him in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, that there he might give Joshua his
Charge. They accordingly went to the Tabernacle, and the Pillar of Cloud stood
over the door of it, and the Lord said unto Moses, Behold thou shall lie down
to sleep in the dust as did thy Fathers, but I know that after thy death this
people will go a whoring after the gods of the Canaanites, and will forsake me,
and break my Covenant. Then my anger will be kindled against them, and I will
forsake them, and hide my Face from them, and withdraw my Favor, Blessing and
Help; and then they shall be devoured by their Enemies as by wild Beasts, and
many evils and troubles shall befall them, so that they will say in that day,
Are not these evils come upon us because our God is not among us? The Lord
therefore commands Moses to write this following Song (set down in the next
Chapter) containing a Prophecy of their falling off from God, and his just
Judgment upon them for it. And the Lord was pleased to give it to them in the
form of a Song, that it might be the better remembered by them, and might work
more upon their affections; and the Israelites were to learn it and sing it,
that in time to come when they should so provoke God by their sins, as is there
set forth, and God should thereupon punish them with those very evils that are
there foretold; this Song (as out of their own mouths) might be a Witness for
God against them, viz. that He had given them sufficient warning, and yet
notwithstanding by their willful and heinous Provocations they had brought
these Miseries on themselves. For (says the Lord) I know their secret
Imaginations, and the base apostatizing thoughts, and purposes which some of
them already have in their hearts, even now before I have brought them into the
Land, which I swear unto their Fathers to give them, [see Amos 5.25. and Acts
7.43.] and I do foresee what they will do hereafter. Moses accordingly wrote
this Song the same day, and taught it the Children of Israel.

God then gives Joshua his Charge, saying to him, Be strong, and of a good
courage, for thou shall bring this people into the Land of Canaan, V. 23. Hoc
loco primum alloquitur Dominus Joshuam, ut ei authoritatem coram populo
Conciliet.
and I will be with thee. Moses now commands the Priests (the Sons of Levi) to
put this Book of the Law which he had written in some safe Repository or Chest
on the outside of the Ark, where was the Pot of Manna, and Aaron's Rod, see
Heb. 9.4. Indeed in the Ark it self were only the two Tables, [1 Kings 8.9.]
but on the outside of it, and by it was this Volume of the Law to be kept. This
Book was many years after found in the Treasury of the Temple in Josiah's
Reign, 2 Kings 22.8. and 2 Chronicles. 34.14. and therefore it seems it had been
removed from the Ark, and kept elsewhere; wherein seeing they transgressed the
directions that God here gave to the Priests, no marvel if this precious
Treasure was for some years lost, and not looked after. Moses having commanded
them to place this Book on the outside of the Ark, He said to them, O Israel,
if thou art disobedient, this Book shall be a witness against thee wherein thou
art sufficiently warned to the contrary, and showed the Judgments that will
thereupon ensue. But alas I know thy rebellious Disposition, and thy stiff
Neck. Ye have been rebellious against the Lord while I was with you, how much
more will ye be so when I am dead. Gather therefore unto me all the Elders of
your Tribes, and your Officers, that I may speak unto them, and call Heaven and
Earth to witness against them. For I know that after my death you will corrupt
your selves, and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you, and evil
will befall you in the latter days, because you will do evil in the sight of the
Lord, and thereby provoke Him to anger. The Elders and Officers of the people
being met, Moses spoke in the ears of all the Congregation of Israel the words
of this following Song.

Give Ear O ye Heavens, See Isa. 1.2.
and I will speak, and hear O Earth the words of my mouth. He begins this
Prophetical Song with a Rhetorical Scheme, calling the Heavens and Earth, and
all the Creatures in them, to be witnesses of his word, the more to affect the
hearts of the people, to reprove their hardness, and to excite their attention.
I wish (says He) my Doctrine (which I have received from God) might so fall
upon your hearts, as the sweet and gentle Showers and fruitful Dew falls upon
the Herbs, and Flowers, and Grass of the Earth, and causes them to spring
forth and flourish, [ Isa. 55.10.] Hear therefore for I will now publish unto
you the Name of the Lord; that is, his glorious Excellencies, viz. his infinite
Power, Wisdom and Goodness, and therefore see that ye ascribe Greatness and
Majesty to Him, and that ye magnify Him as ye ought to do, saying, Thine, O
Jehovah, is the Greatness and the Power, and the Glory, 1 Chronicles. 29.11. and
that ye attend to what is spoken with all humility, and lay it to heart, and
yield Obedience thereunto. Know ye therefore, that God is the Rock, In times of
danger men use to fly to Rocks to shelter themselves, 1 Samuel 13.6.
He is an All-sufficient stable, and sure Refuge for all those that fly to Him;
neither is there any sure Shelter any where else but in Him. His Work is
perfect, for all his ways are Judgment.

All his Works are perfect, Even in those works of God that seem to have some
imperfection in them as Children that are born blind or lame, etc. yet as they
are acts of Providence there is a perfection of Wisdom, Holiness and Justice in
them, and there is nothing at all in them for which God can justly be blamed.
and without any blemish, there is no defect or fault to be found in any of
them; All his ways are Judgment, his dealings with his people have been always
right and just; He is a God of truth and without Iniquity, just and right is
He. But as for this people, they have corrupted themselves by their Idolatry,
their spot is not the spot of his Children, for it proceeds not of weakness
and infirmity, (to which all are subject) but of wilfulness and perverseness,
and an impenitent heart. They are a perverse and crooked Generation, for both
their hearts and ways are evil, and turned aside from the right Rule of Gods
Law. Do you thus requite the Lord O foolish people and unwise? Is not God thy
Father that made thee? Is not He thy Father that has bought thee; that is,
ransomed and brought thee forth out of Egypt with a mighty Hand, and the power
of Miracles? Has not He made thee his people, and established thee by Covenant
to continue so, if thou art not wanting to thy self, and thy duty? Remember the
days of old, and consider the years of many Generations; ask thy Father, and he
will show thee; thy Elders, and they will tell thee, how God when by his
Providence He disposed the several Nations that came out of the Loins of Adam
into several parts of the Earth (allotting to one Nation one Country, and
another to another) did then set the bounds of the people according to the
number of the Children of Israel; that is, did then choose the Children of
Israel to be his peculiar people and Inheritance, and where they were, there it
might be said was his people, and where their bounds ended, there was the end
and utmost bound of his people, and the bounds of the Heathen then began; and
according to his secret purpose he gave and allotted to the Canaanites such
bounds and limits as he knew would serve for the number of the Israelites. For
the Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his Inheritance; that is,
the Israelites are that portion of Mankind whom he was pleased to make his
peculiar people; they are his Inheritance, and therefore dear to Him as
Inheritances use to be to men, which are divided to them by lot; and they were
to acknowledge no other Lord over them but Himself, and they and their Children
after them were to be His successively. He found them in a desert Land, in a
wast howling Wilderness inhabited only by wild howling Beasts of Prey; He found
them there in desperate danger, but came in seasonably to their succor, when
they were ready to perish; He led them about, he instructed them both by his
Word and Works, by his Spirit, and the several Dispensations of his Providence;
He kept them as the apple of his eye, with tender care and love. As an Eagle
stirs up her nest; that is, awaketh her brood or young ones in her nest,
rousing them up with the Cry that she makes, to signify to them that she
intends to teach them to fly, and spreading abroad her wings takes them up,
and bears them thereon; so did the Lord carry Israel toward Canaan, leading
them Himself thither, and there was no strange god with him; that is, no
strange God had any hand in it. He made him ride on the high places of the
Earth; that is, he enabled them to subdue and conquer the mountainous places
and the high-walled Cities of their Enemies, and to possess a Land far
excelling others in all Commodities whatsoever. He made him to eat of the
increase of the Earth, to suck Honey out of the Rock; that is, of Bees nestling
in the holes of Rocks, and Oil of Olive Trees that grow in stony places. He
made him to eat of Butter of Kine and Milk of Sheep, with the fat of Lambs and
Rams of the choice breed of Bashan, and Bread made of the finest, plumpest and
largest kernels of Wheat, resembling Kidneys in shape, and to drink the pure
blood of the Grape; that is, the choicest red Wine. But Jeshurun Jeshurun
(derived from Josher, signifying Righteousness,) intimates that by their
calling they ought to be a righteous people, and to walk uprightly in Gods
ways, but Moses here by giving them this Title, seems to upbraid them that they
were so unlike the people they should have been.
being waxed fat, kicked; that is, has behaved himself wantonly, forsaking God
that made him, contemptuously and lightly esteeming the Rock of his Salvation,
in whom alone was his help. They provoked Him to jealousy, and made him
exceeding angry by their spiritual Fornication, and worshipping strange gods;
They sacrificed unto Devils; that is, unto Idols wherein the Devil was served
and not God, [Levit. 17.7. 1 Cor. 10.20.] They sacrificed to gods whom they
knew not, nor had any knowledge or experience of any good from them, to new
gods, newly come up; for though they had continued many hundred years in the
World, yet if compared to the Eternal ever-living God they might be said to be
newly come up, and to be mere up-starts, and such as their Fathers slighted as
Vanities. Of the Rock, that is, of the strong God that created them and begat
them they were unmindful, and forgot Him that formed them and made them his
people, Isa. 43.21. When the Lord saw this he abhorred them, because of the
provoking of his Sons and Daughters; that is, of those that professed
themselves to be his people. And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will
see what their end will be; that is, I will let them see what a miserable end
they will come to, when I forsake them. For they are a very froward Generation,
Children in whom there is no faithfulness, or fidelity, or stedfastness to keep
their Covenant with me. They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not
god, that is, provoked me to Displeasure, by giving that worship which is only
due to me to Idols which are no gods, and so preferring mear Vanities, viz.
Stocks and Stones before their Creator. Therefore (he says) he would move them
to jealousy, that is, vex and disquiet them with those that are not a people,
The Jews understand this of the Chaldeans, who carried them Captive, and so
grieved them. But the Apostle understands it of the Jews rejection for refusing
Christ, and of the calling of the Gentiles, at which the Jews were very angry,
see Romans 11.14. Completum hoc cum ab Ethnicis infesterentur Judaei, deinde and
in Gentium vocatione. Confer Hos. 1.10. Romans 10.19. Anonym.
even with a foolish Nation; that is, by calling the Gentiles who were not now
his people, and were despised by the Jews for their blindness and folly, Romans
10.19. For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest
Hell, and shall consume the Earth with her increase, and set on fire the
foundations of the Mountains; that is, the Judgments which God in his anger
would bring upon them should be most vehement and dreadful, and should utterly
destroy the Land, and therefore this desolation and destruction is set forth in
expressions resembling the Conflagration of the World at the last day. He
further adds, I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon
them; that is, I will strike them with many Plagues, and they shall be wounded
with them, as with Arrows, suddenly and unexpectedly. They shall be burnt with
hunger; that is, consumed with Famine, [see Lam. 4.8.] and devoured with
burning heat and bitter destruction; that is, with burning Carbuncles and fiery
Ulcers on their Bodies. I will send the teeth of Beasts upon them, with the
poison of Serpents of the dust, viz. that hide themselves in the dust, and feed
on the dust; and assault suddenly. They that are abroad shall be slain by the
Sword, and they that are within shall die with terror and fear, and this
misery and calamity shall fall on all sorts, old and young. I said I would
scatter them into Corners, and make the remembrance of them cease from among
men, were it not that I feared the wrath of the Enemy, lest the Adversaries of
my people should behave themseves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand
is high, and the Lord has not done this. God here speaks of Himself after the
manner of men, who oftentimes desist from doing what otherwise they intended to
do, for fear of encouraging the pride and insolency of wicked men. And
therefore God would not bring his people so near to utter destruction as their
sins deserved, lest their Enemies should thereupon exalt themselves as if by
their own power alone, or the help of their Idols, they had vanquished Israel,
and done all that they had done, [see Psalm. 140.8.] And the reason why God was
so far provoked as to be ready almost utterly to destroy the Israelites, had
not respect to his own glory restrained him, was, because they were a Nation
void of Counsel, neither was there any understanding in them; that is, they
went on blindly and desperately in wickedness, without considering what would
be the issue of it. O that they were wise (says God) that they would consider
what will befall them in the latter end, if they go on in their Rebellions
against me, that so by true Repentance they may prevent these miseries. For if
they had not by their frequent and high Transgressions extremely provoked me,
their Enemies should never have had that power over them that they have had;
seeing I had promised them, in case they were obedient, that an hundred of them
should put ten thousand of their Enemies to flight, [Josh. 23.10. Levit. 26.8.]
and this they have found true in many strange Victories which they have gotten,
wherein a few of them have defeated whole Armies of their Adversaries. And how
could it come to pass quite contrary, that one of their Enemies should chase a
thousand of them, and that two of their Enemies should put ten thousand of them
to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up; that
is, except the Lord who is their Rock, and their only Stay and Strength had
delivered them up into the hands and power of their Enemies to be captivated
and imprisoned by them at their will, and to be made their Slaves and Vassals,
see Psalm. 31.7, 8. And the Israelites may well say, If our God had not done it,
the Idol gods of the Heathens could never have made them so Victorious over us.
For their Rock is not as our Rock; Our God is of infinite Power, and therefore
able to make his people Victorious over their Enemies when He pleases, but
their Idol-gods (on which they rely) cannot make them to prevail over us,
except our God withdraw his help, and give us up into their hands. And this is
so clear, that our Enemies themselves cannot deny it. But if any shall ask, How
came the Lord to be so incensed against Israel, as to give them up into the
hands of their Enemies? The reason was, because their Vine is the Vine of
Sodom, and of the Fields of Gomorrah, their Grapes are Grapes of gall, their
Clusters are bitter; that is, they are of like nature and disposition, and
their lives and doings are like theirs of Sodom and Gomorrah; and therefore no
wonder if God be so highly offended with them, their Wine is This may have
respect to their bitter and deadly malice against the Prophets, and other
faithful Servants of God in future times, but especially against Christ and his
Apostles.
the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Asps; that is, their Works are
distastful to God, and deadly to themselves and others. And (says the Lord)
though for a time I forbear to punish these cursed Works of theirs, yet let
them not therefore think totally to escape; For all their Transgressions are
laid up in store with me, and I keep them sealed up among my Treasures; that
is, a Memorial of them is kept among the unsearchable Treasures of my Wisdom
and Knowledge, [see Col. 2.3.] To me belongs Vengeance and Recompense; that
is, the work of punishing wickedness, they shall not stand steadfast in the
prosperous Estate they now are in, their foot shall slide in due time; they
shall certainly fall when my time is come, and the day of their Calamity is at
hand; that is, after they are grown thus desperately wicked, it shall not be
long ere this Calamity here threatened shall overtake them, and the things that
shall come upon them make have. But if they shall repent of their evil deeds,
and turn unto me, I will take pity on them in the height of their misery, and
will change the course of my Administration toward them, and will take
Vengeance on their Oppressors and Adversaries; And especially when I see their
power is gone, and there is none shut up or left, viz. in Garrisons or Cities
to defend themselves, but all are in a manner overthrown and ruined, then will
I arise and help them for my great Name sake. Then will I say to the Heathen,
Where are your gods (your Rocks in whom ye trusted) which did eat the fat of
your Sacrifices, and drank the Wine of you Drink Offerings; that is, where are
your Idols to whom ye burned the fat of your Sacrifices, and poured out the
Wine of your Drink Offerings? let them now rise up, and help you, and be your
Protection if they can. You shall know, That I am the true God, and there is
none besides me; I kill and I make alive, I wound and I heal, [1 Samuel 2.6.]
neither can any deliver out of my hands. I lift up my hand to Heaven, and swear
by my Self, As sure as I live for ever, I will do what I now say. If I whet my
glittering Sword, and my Hand take hold on the Weapons of Judgment, I will
render Vengeance to mine Enemies, and will reward them that hate me. I will
make mine Arrows drunk with blood, and that with the blood of the slain, and of
the Captives; that is, both with the blood of those that are slain in the
field, and of those that are hurt in battle, and thereupon taken Captive, and
my Sword shall devour much flesh from the beginning of revenges upon the Enemy;
that is, from the time that I begin to take Vengeance on mine and my peoples
Enemies, and I will revenge all the wrongs that my people have suffered from
their Enemies, even from their first beginning to oppress them. And seeing it
shall be so, Rejoice O ye Nations with this people; that is, both Jews and
Gentiles rejoice and praise God together for his great goodness to his people
in taking Vengeance on their Enemies, and being so propitious and favorable
unto them; and hereby possibly is intimated that the time should come when both
Jews and Gentiles should join together in praising the Lord, namely, when they
shall be both his Church and people; and therefore the Apostle alleges this
place to prove the calling of the Gentiles, Romans 15.10.

This was the Song that Moses spoke in the ears of the Children of Israel,
Joshua standing by, and as it were assenting to what he spoke. Moses further
said unto them, Set your hearts to all the words which I testify among you
this day, and command your Children also to observe all the Precepts of this
Law, for it is not a vain thing for you so to do; it is your life; that is,
it is the best way and means to prolong your days in the Land which you are
going to possess.

God now gives Moses a Charge to go up to Mount Nebo, to view the Land of
Canaan, telling him, That there he should die, and be gathered unto his people;
that is, his godly Forefathers, and the society of the Souls of just men made
perfect, as Aaron his Brother died on Mount Hor. And he gives him a reason why
they both were excluded the Land of Canaan, namely, because they trespassed
against Him at the waters of Meribah-Kadesh, and sanctified Him not in the
midst of the people, see Numb. 20.11, 12. that is, they did not at that time
publicly show before the people such an affiance in Him, nor did so glorify
his great Name as they should have done.

Moses the man of God He is so styled that the Is^aelites might assure
themselves that what he spoke to them in these Prohetical blessings, he spoke
by the authority of God. Samuel is so styled, 1 Samuel 9.6, 7. see 1 Timothy 6.11.
( viz. the Prophet of the Lord) having received that Charge Nebo, where he was
to die: He now immediately before his death solemnly blesses the twelve Tribes,
pronouncing such Prophetical blessings upon them as might allay in good part
the bitterness of the foregoing Predictions. Indeed the Tribe of Simeon is not
at all here mentioned, but the reason of it seems to be because this Tribe was
to have their Inheritance within the Inheritance of the Sons of Judah, Jos.
19.1. Whence it was that they went jointly together to fight against the
Canaanites, [Judg. 1.3.] and consequently this Tribe was blessed with that of
Judah, among whom they were to dwell.

And first as an Introduction or Preface to his Prophetic Benediction, he sets
before them the Lords great goodness to them, and the several gracious
manifestations of his favor toward them, as he conducted them along from
Egypt to Canaan. First, He came and appeared to them from Sinai, where he gave
them his Law. 2ly, He further manifested Himself to them from Mount Seir, when
He commanded the brazen Serpent to be set up, by which those among them were
cured that were mortally bitten with fiery Serpents, and thereby He gave them a
notable Type of the promised Messiah. 3ly, He shined forth from Mount Paran;
that is repeated and explained the Law to them by the Ministry of Moses in the
Wilderness of Paran, who exhorted them to yield Obedience to it. And when the
Lord gave them his Law at Sinai. (He tells them) He came attended with Royal
Majesty, with an infinite number of glorious Angels, who are here called
Saints, because of their purity and holiness, see Acts 7.53. From his right
hand went a fiery Law for them; that is, He spoke it to them out of the midst
of the fire, Deuteronomy. 5.22. And yet that giving them his Law was a singular effect
of his special love to them; He thereby testified his great kindness to them,
and so he did also in His protecting of them from their Enemies; and therefore
we may truly say, All Isreal's Saints are under thy Care and Protection, O Lord.
They sat at thy feet, they attended upon thee at the foot of Mount Sinai, as
Scholars at the feet of their Master, and all that are true Israelites will
receive instruction from thy words. And such Israelites will readily declare,
That God gave them his Law by the ministry of Moses, even the Inheritance of
the Congregation of Jacob; that is, which is as dear to them as an Inheritance
is to any man. They will declare, That He gave it them as a rare and precious
Treasure, and not for their use only, but for the use and instruction also of
their Posterity after them. And they do acknowledge, that Moses was King in
Jeshurun; that is, chief King and Magistrate in Israel by Gods own appointment,
when the Heads of the people and the Tribes were gathered together to receive
the Law at Mount Sinai. And they acknowledging Him to be a person so
extraordinarily favored, guided and assisted by God, could not but receive
what he delivered unto them, as spoken by God himself, from verse. 1. to 6. He
comes now to bless the Tribes particularly. He begins with Reuben, Let Reuben
live and not die, and let not his men be few. Jacob had prophesied of this
Tribe, that they should lose the Dignity of the Birthright, and should never
come to any eminency among the Tribes, either for number of people, or any
other excellency, and that because of Reuben's Incest with his Fathers
Concubine, see Genesis 49.4. Now therefore for the comfort of this Tribe, Moses
pronounces this blessing upon them, Let Reuben live; that is, though Reuben by
his Incest brough that Curse upon him, pronounced by his Father, yea though by
the sin of the Reubenites in adhering to Corah, they deserved that God should
utterly destroy them, yet, says he, the Name and Tribe of Reuben shall still
continue among the people of God, and though for his sin he lost the glory of
excelling the other Tribes in number of men, which as the firstborn he might
otherwise have expected, however he shall continue a numerous Tribe. 2ly, He
comes next to Judah, because the honor of the Birthright was partly given
from Reuben to Judah, and in his Tribe the Regal Power was afterward settled.
Hear Lord (says he) the voice of Judah, Audi Domine preces Jehudae, scil. cum
egressus fuerit ad bellum, and reduc eum, scil. a bello incolumem ad fratres
suos. Oleaster.
that is, the Prayers that this Tribe shall make to thee; particularly that the
promised Messiah may according to thy Promise come of their stock, and that
they may have Victory over their Enemies; and grant them, O Lord, sufficient
strength to stand in the day of battle, thou being their Helper; and when thou
shall suffer this Tribe, with that of Benjamin, to be carried by the
Babylonians into Captivity, bring them back again in thy due time to their
people; that is, to the poor that were left in Judea to husband the Land, Jer.
39.10. and 40.7. and 52.16. 3ly, He blesses Levi, Let thy Vrim and thy Thummim
be with thy holy one; that is, let the High Priesthood (to which appertained
the Breast Plate in which was the Vrim and Thummim, Exodus 28.30.) be continued
in Aaron's Posterity, and let them be furnished with those Gifts and Graces,
with that Knowledge and Piety which is requisite for their high Calling, and
signified by Vrim and Thummim. Whom thou did prove at Massah, and with whom
thou did strive at the waters of Meribah; that is, whose Faith thou did try
at Meribah-Kadesh, [see Numb. 20.] and sharply reprove both Moses and Him for
their Infidelity. Who said to his Father and his Mother, I have not seen him;
This may have reference either to the Law, forbidding the High Priest to defile
himself by mourning for the dead, [see Levit. 21.11.] Neither shall he go into
any dead body, nor defile himself for his Father or Mother. Or else to that
notable fact of the Levites, [Exod. 32.] who were so impartial in Gods Cause,
as not to spare any though nearly related to them, who they found had
worshipped the golden Calf. For they observed thy Word, and kept the Covenant
which they made with thee, Exodus 24.8. Let them therefore teach Jacob (that is
the Posterity of Jacob) thy Judgments or Statutes, and Israel thy Laws; Let
them put Incense before, and whole Burnt-Offerings upon thy Altar. Bless Lord
their substance, and accept the work of their hands; that is, bless them in
their outward Estate, and accept in good part the Work and Service they do for
thee and thy people. Smite through the loins of those that rise up against them,
and hate them; that is, break the Power of those that oppose them in the
faithful discharge of their Duty and Office, see Jer. 15.10. 4ly, He comes to
Benjamin, of whom he says, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by
him; that is, as Benjamin was his Fathers darling (when Joseph was supposed to
be dead) so he is much beloved of the Lord, and therefore shall dwell safely by
him; that is, near his Temple, which was built in his portion, and the Lord
shall cover him all the day long; that is, protect and defend him, and he shall
dwell between his shoulders; that is, God will choose for Himself an Habitation
in the chief City of this Tribe. For though the South part of Jerusalem where
was Mount Sion, God is said to dwell in Mount Sion, and thence some conceive
his Temple was situate upon it; but where it is so said, the word Sion must not
be taken strictly for the hill Sion, but by a Synecdoche for the whole City of
Jerusalem, and therewith for the Temple founded on Mount Moriah.
(called the City of God in a more especial manner) was in the Tribe of Judah,
yet the Northern part, with Mount Moriah, where the Temple stood, was in the
Tribe of Benjamin, and being set upon that Hill, it was conspicuously eminent,
as the Head placed above, and between the shoulders, and in that sense God may
be said to dwell between his shoulders. 5ly, He comes now to Joseph (whose two
Sons Ephraim and Manasseh were Heads of two Tribes) of whom he says, Blessed
of the Lord be his Land, and let it be blessed with the most excellent things
of Heaven; that is, with Rains and Dews that fall from Heaven, and let it be
blessed with the deep that coucheth beneath; that is, with springs arising from
the deep; let it be blessed with precious Fruits brought forth by the heat and
influence of the Sun, and the kindly moistures of the Night, and the influence
of the Moon. Let it be blessed with the chief things of the ancient Mountains,
and with the precious things of the lasting Hills; that is, with the choicest
Trees, and Fruits, and Herbs that grow on Hills, such as are Vines, Olives,
Cedars Pines, Cypress, and other useful Trees; and with Mines of Gold and
Silver, and other metals which are usually found in Hills See Genesis 49.26.
and Mountains. And let the Posterity of Joseph be blessed not only with the
good things of the Earth, and with plenty of them, but with the good will of
Him that dwelt in the Bush. In the Bush God appeared to Moses as the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and the good will of God thus manifested (viz. as a
God in Covenant with them) was that which alone could make them truly happy,
see Psalm. 106.4. Let this blessing (says he) come on the head of Joseph; that
is, on his Posterity, whose Father was separated from his Brethren, and
advanced by the Lord to an high and singular degree of Honor above them. His
glory shall be like the firstling of his Bullock, (that is, of a fair young
Bullock in his best strength) and his horns like the horns of Unicorns; that
is, his Power shall be great and irresistible, wherewith he shall Conquer far
remote Nations. Now these horns of his, he shows are the ten thousands of
Ephraim and the thousands of Manasseh. 6ly, He comes to Zebulun, of whom he
says, Rejoice Zebulun in thy going out, and Issachar in thy Tents. Here he
blesses two Tribes together. Of Zebulun he Prophesies, That they shall be happy
in their going forth to Trade, and in their merchandising by Ships, agreeable
to what Jacob prophesied of them, Genesis 49.13. Zebulun shall dwell at the
harbor of the Sea, he shall be for an Haven of Ships. And of Issachar he
Prophesies, That they should be happy in their Tents; that is, in their quiet
life at home, and in their Husbandry and Tillage, and breeding and feeding of
Cattle. Both their ways of living should yield them matter of rejoicing in the
goodness and bounty of God to them. Issachar shoul be happy in their Husbandry,
Zebulun in following their Merchandise. They should suck of the abundance of
the Seas, (that is, of the Riches and Wealth brought over the Seas,) and of the
Treasures hid in the sand, that is brought from such Cities as were seated upon
the Seashore in sandy-ground. They shall call the people unto the Mountain,
there they shall offer Sacrifices of Righteousness; herein he Prophesies of
their religious thankfulness to God for his great blessings to them. They
should duly go to Mount Sion to worship the Lord, and should invite their
Brethren, and possibly strangers of other Nations to go along with them, though
they were seated by the Seaside in the outmost parts of the Land, and so far
off from the Temple of Jerusalem; yet at times appointed they should readily go
up to the House of God, and there offer the Sacrifices and Thank-Offerings
which were justly due to God, and agreeable to what his Law prescribed. 7ly, He
comes to Gad, of whom he says, Blessed be He that inlargeth Gad, namely, the
Lord, who has bestowed upon Gad a large and spacious Country, and though it
lay upon the Frontiers, and therefore was liable to frequent Incursions of
Enemies, yet they should have heart and courage to defend themselves. Therefore
he Prophesies of Gad, That he shall dwell as a Lion that is bold and undaunted,
and as a Lion teareth sometimes the Arm, sometimes the Crown of the Head; that
is, sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, so this Tribe should diverse
ways spoil their Enemies. He provided the first part for himself; that is, the
first part of the conquered Land, which was the Country of Sihon; and this
Tribe may be said to have provided for themselves, because they desired it of
Moses for their Inheritance; and this part of the Country of Canaan being
without Jordan was that alone which God permitted Moses the Lawgiver to come
into, and allowed him to give unto them for their Inheritance; and being thus
provided they went with the Heads of the people armed Moses here speaks of a
thing to come, as if it had been already done, foreseeing by the Spirit of
Prophecy that it would be so.
before their Brethren, and executed the justice of the Lord, and his judgments
upon the accursed Canaanites. 8ly, He comes to Dan, of whom he says, Dan is a
Lions whelp, he shall leap from Bashan. Bashan was a place where were many
Lions, though not in Dan's possession, but Manasseh's, see Deuteronomy. 3.13. The
Danites are therefore here compared to Lions, rushing suddenly out of the
Forests and Dens of Bashan, who seize upon those that pass by ere they were
aware. Thus the Danites should leap unexpectedly out of their Forts, and
fastnesses, and secret places (where they lay in ambush, and should seize upon
their Enemies when they least expected them. see Genesis 49.17. Josh. 19.47. Judge.
18.27, 29. 9ly, He comes to Naphtali, of whom he says, O Naphtali satisfied
with favor, and full with the blessing of the Lord, wherein he Prophesies of
the fruitfulness of the Soil wherein this Tribe should have their portion.
Therefore Jacob compares them to a Hind let loose that has a large walk, and
so in choice Pastures finds plenty of feeding, Genesis 49.21. He therefore here
breaks out into an admiration of the great plenty and abundance of blessings
which their Inheritance should yield them, but intimates that their blessings
should not consist so much in their having such plenty and fullness of outward
blessings, as in their being fully satisfied and contented therewith, and that
the thing which should yield such satisfaction to their Souls was not so much
the blessings themselves, as the singular love and favor of God whereof to
them these Blessings were Pledges. He further adds, Possess thou the West and
the South, intimating to them thereby that their lot should fall to them
South-West in reference to Dan's Inheritance, which was in the North. And their
Inheritance reaching to the Sea of Tiberias, this might also imply, that
besides the other rich Commodities of the Land they should enjoy the advantage
of Merchandising also. Lastly, He comes to Asher, saying, Let Asher be blessed
with Children, (that is, with many and good Children, who for their amiable
disposition should be exceedingly beloved of all about them,) and let him dip
his foot in Oil; that is, let his Country exceedingly abound with Oil, Ita
abundabit oleo ut eo pedem lavare possit. Vide Genesis 49.20. Job 29.6. Jansen.
and other good things. And under his shoes shall be Iron and Brass; that is,
his portion should be full of Mines of Iron and Brass, and other metals, and as
his days so should his strength be; that is, all his days his strength should
continue.

Moses having thus blessed the several Tribes particularly, He now in the close
of his Speech sets forth the happiness of all the people, and all the Tribes in
general, and that for the special Interest they have in God, who has all the
Creatures at his Command for their help. There is none (says he) like unto the
God of Jeshurun, who rides upon the Heavens for thy help, and in his
Excellency on the Sky, intimating that as a man turns and winds his Horse which
way he pleases, so does the Lord rule the Heavens, and all the Host of them,
making them serviceable to the good of his people. For from thence he sends
help unto them against their Enemies, smiting and destroying them with terrible
Tempests, with Hail, Lightning and Thunder, see Psalm. 18. from verse. 7. to 20.
The eternal God is thy Refuge, and underneath thee are the everlasting Arms of
his Omnipotency to support thee, and he shall thrust out the Enemy from before
thee, and shall give thee Commission and Power to destroy them. Israel shall
dwell alone in safety, that is, shall cast out the Cannanites, and have the
Land to themselves, not living now as formerly in Egypt only as Sojourners, and
mixed with other Nations, but they shall live as a Nation and people of
themselves, and in a Land of their own, under their own Laws and Government,
and shall dwell in safety not fearing other people. The fountain Fountain is
here used for a River or Stream issuing out of a Fountain, Psalm, 104.10. Waters
often signify people, Rev. 17.15. see Psalm. 68.26.
of Jacob (that is, the people which flowed out of Jacob as out of a Well or
Fountain, viz. the Posterity of Jacob,) shall dwell upon a Land of Corn and
Wine, and the Heavens that are spread over their Land shall drop down dew and
make it exceeding fruitful. He concludes all with this Acclamation, Happy art
thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee! O people, saved by the Lord, who is the
Shield of thy help, and not only a Shield or Buckler to defend thee, but the
Sword of thy Excellency to fight for thee against thy Enemies. It Is He that
makes thee famous and renowned above others for Marshal Exploits, and thine
Enemies who prophesied of their Victories over thee, and how they should
overcome thee by the help of their Idol-gods, shall be found Liars unto thee,
for thou shall tread upon their High Places; that is, triumphantly prevail over
their fenced Cities, whose Walls and Towers are raised very high.

SECT. XCIII.
MOses now having spoken all that he intended to speak to the Children of
Israel, last blessing upon them, This last Chapter of of Deuteronomy was
written after Moses's death, but whither by Joshua, or Eleazar, or what other
holy man is uncertain. So the conclusion of the Book of Jeremy was written
after his death, see Jer. 51.64.
and (as it is like) taken his solemn leave of them, went up from the Plains of
Moab to Mount Nebo, the highest top whereof called Pisgah, lay over against
Jericho, Joshua and Eleazar (as some Mos^ morituro adfuisse Joshuam and
Eleazaram traedit Josephus, Antiq. lib. 4. Cumque post mutuos Complexus
Eleazaro, and Joshuae ultimum vale diceret, interloquendum repentina nube
circundatus (...), ex oculis illorum in quandam vallem est ablatus.
think) accompanying him. And as a weary Labourer at night goes to his Chamber
to take his rest, so this holy man, after all his great and wearisome Labors
in the Governing this people, at the Commandment of God went up to Mount Nebo
there to die, and so to rest from his Labors. But before he died, the Lord was
pleased to give him a sight of the promised Land. And first, He showed him all
the Land of Gilead unto Dan. Gilead was on the outside of Jordan, Dan Formerly
called Leshem, Josh. 19.47. or Laish, Judge. 18.27.
was a City in the furthest part of the Land within Jordan Northward; Then He
showed him the portion of Naphtali which was near unto it; Then the Land of
Ephraim and Manasseh which was in the midst of Canaan; Then the Land of Judah
which was the Southern part of the Country, and then the Plain and Valley of
Jericho which was on the East-Coast, and the Midland-Sea (called the
Outmost-Sea) which was the Western-Coast. This view therefore that Moses had of
the whole Land was by the miraculous power of God strengthening his sight so
wonderfully; for by the ordinary power of Nature, it was not possible that from
one place he should have beheld so large a Country, therefore verse. 4. it is
said, God caused him to see it with his eyes, and told him, This was the Land
which he swear to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give it unto their Seed. Moses
having had a full prospect of this earthly Canaan, there died, and his Soul
went to the heavenly, being an 120 years old, his eyes not being dim, nor his
radical moisture abated. Of this time he had spent near a full third part in
his Government of this people, departing this life in the last month of the
Year called Adar, and the seventh day For Aaron dying in the 40th year, 5th
month, first day of it, Numb. 33.38. and that compared with the months mourning
for Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.8. and three days preparation to pass over Jordan, Chapter 3.2.
and their coming out of Jordan on the first month, tenth day, Josh. 4.19. do
show that Moses died in the twelfth month, and seventh day of it, and so seven
months and seven days after Aaron.
of it. Moses's Soul being gone to Heaven, Jehovah or Michael the Son of God [
Jude, v. 9.] translated his body out of the place where he died, into a Valley
of the Land of Moab That Land was so called, because it did formerly belong to
the Moabites, and was lately taken from them by Sihon King of the Amorites, as
we showed on Numb. 21.26. and was now possessed by the Israelites.
over against Beth-Peor, and there buried it; Neither does any man know the
place where he laid it to this day. And this the Lord seems to have done, that
the Israelites might not in a preposterous Zeal give superstitious honor
either to his dead body or Sepulcher. Indeed it is said, Jude, v. 9. That
Michael the Archangel contended with the Devil, and disputed about the body of
Moses, whereby it appears that the Devil would have had the place of his burial
made known, that it might have been the occasion of Idolatry, as Chrysostom in
his First Homily on Matthew and Theodoret upon Deuteronomy. quest. 43. with others do
conjecture, but the Lord prevented the Devils design herein. And possibly God
foresaw that if the Israelites had known the place where the body of Moses was
buried, they would in an unwarrantable way have taken it up, and carried it
with them into the Land of Canaan (as they did Joseph's bones) whereas God had
declared, He should not come thither.

Moses being dead, the Israelites mourned for him 30 days. So long they mourned
for Aaron, Numb. 20.28.
And there was great reason for it; for there arose not a Prophet since in
Israel like unto Moses whom the Lord knew face to face; that is, spoke to in a
wondrous familiar manner, with an audible articulate Voice as one friend
speaks to another, and discovered to him more of his Glory than ever he did
to the eye of mortal man, see Exodus 33.20. There was none like unto him, if we
consider the great Miracles which the Lord enabled him to do in the Land of
Egypt, before Pharaoh and his Servants, and the wonderful Works of mighty Power
which he since performed in the Wilderness in the sight of all Israel, whereby
the Lord magnified his own Majesty and Power, and put a great honor on his
Servant Moses, and his Ministry. But though this great Moses was gone, yet God
left not his people without a Governor, for He had beforehand appointed
Joshua to succeed him, who was a man endued with a great measure of wisdom,
which the Holy Ghost had given him, for the right execution of his Office. For
Moses had laid his hands on him according to Gods Command, Numb. 27.18. by that
Ceremony consecrating him unto God, and engaging him faithfully to administer
the Charge and Office He was appointed unto. And the Children of Israel
hearkened unto him, and obeyed him as the Lord commanded Moses to enjoin them.

SECT. XCIV.
WE are now come to the Book of Joshua, The Book of Joshua.
which was not probably written by himself, If we should suppose this Book for
the main to be written by Joshua, yet some passages might be inserted
afterward by some other holy Penman. So in the Books of Moses we find some
passages which could not be written by Moses himself, but were afterward added
by some other holy men, as Deuteronomy. 34.5. Qui hanc historiam ex Sacris Annalibus
conscripsit usus est sui seculi nominibus. Masius.
at least not all of it, though it contains his Acts and Achievements. Indeed
Joshua either wrote himself, or ordered some of the Priests to write the words
of the Covenant (which he caused the people to enter into) with all the
Circumstances of it [ Chapter 24.26.] in the Book of the Law of God which was
written by Moses, and put in the side of the Ark, that so it might be a Witness
against them if they transgressed it. But there are some things contained in
this Book which are thought to be done after Joshua's death, as the conquering
of Leshem or Laish by the Danites; [Ch. 19.47. Judge. 18.7. to 29.] and Chapter 24.
from 29. to 32. his death and burial are mentioned; Some other things seem to
argue that it was written by some Prophet A Propheta aliquo collectus videtur
hic liber ex antiquis diariis, and annalibus. Masius.
long after his death, as that phrase See Chapter 4. 6. and 6.29. and 7.26. and
8.29. and 9.27. and 10.27. and 13.13. and 14.14. and 15.63.
[remains unto this day] so frequently used does intimate. And the Book of
Jasher See Sect. 102.
is here named, Chapter 10.13. which seems written at soonest in David's time, as
recording an Act of his, 2 Samuel 1.18. unless we should suppose (which is not
improbable) that this Book of Jasher was begun in Moses's time, and continued
on, and enlarged afterward by adding several memorable Acts and Passages unto
it.

Joshua was of the Tribe of Ephraim, Numb. 13.8. He was six full years in
Conquering the Land, and in the seventh divided it by lot among the nine Tribes
and an half. And diverse years he lived and governed after that time, but how
many is uncertain; yet it is supposed to be about ten years. And so this Book
contains an History of seventeen years from the beginning of Joshua's
Government to his death, which happened when he was an hundred and ten years
old, Chapter 24.29. And so much by way of Preface. We now come to the History it
self.

After the death of Moses the Lord spoke to Joshua, Moses's Minister, who had
for many years daily and continual conversation with him, and so could not but
have learned much thereby to fit him for this great Service.

But whither the Lord spoke to him by audible Voice, or the secret instinct of
his Spirit, or in some Dream, or by the High Priests inquiring for him by Vrim
and Thummim, we cannot determine. But however it was he spoke to him, and
commanded him to arise and lead His people over into the Land of Canaan, which
he had before promised them, and intended now actually to give them.

He tells him, That every place in the Land which the sole of their foot should
tread upon, from the Wilderness of Zin, which was the South-bound, to Lebanon
which was the North-bound, and the great Sea, or Midland-Sea, which was the
Western-bound, and the River Euphrates That the Israelites did never extend
their bounds thus far is evident. For though in the days of David and Solomon
all the Nations as far as Euphrates became Tributary to them, 1 Kings 4.21. yet
they never destroyed the Inhabitants there, and planted themselves in their
Country as they did in the Land of Canaan. And the reason of this was because
the Israelites failed of keeping Covenant with God, and it was only upon
condition of their Obedience that God promised thus to enlarge their borders.
which was the Eastern-bound, even all the Land of the Hittites (which seem
here mentioned by a Synecdoche for all the seven Nations) should be their
Coast. The Lord tells him, That not a man should be able to stand before him
all the days of his life, but as He was with Moses, so He would be with him,
and would never leave him, nor forsake him. He bids him therefore be strong and
of a good courage, for he should divide the Land of Canaan to the people of
Israel for an Inheritance. Only that he should be careful to observe the Law
that Moses gave him, and not turn from it to the right hand or to the left.

He commands him to read over diligently the Copy The original wrote by Moses
was laid up by the side of the Ark, Deuteronomy. 31.25, 26.
of this Law, and to meditate thereon day and night, that his heart being
filled with the knowledge thereof, in all his Judgments he might be able
readily to judge and pronounce as it is in that Law determined, and in all
things might order himself according to the directions there given, and this
would be the way to prosper and have good success in all that he went about.

Joshua having received these Commands from God, He sent out two Spies from
Shittim, where the Camp now lay, to view the City of Jericho, and the Country
about it, to see how the City was fortified, and in what posture the people
thereabout were. The Spies passing over the Fords of Jordan, and coming
thither, betook themselves to the house of Rahab an Hostess or Victualler. See
Apostol. History, page 392. on Heb. 11.13.
The news of this being brought to the King of Jericho, he presently sent
Messengers to Rahab, charging her to bring forth the men that were come into
her house. But she having some intimation (possibly by the muttering of her
Neighbors) that her house would be searched, she presently took the two men
and carried them to the roof of her house (that was flat) and there hid them
under stalks of Flax. It seems she had heard of the great things the Lord had
done for the Israelites, and by a special and extraordinary persuasion of Gods
Spirit she did verily believe that God had determined that this people should
destroy the Inhabitants of Canaan, and dwell in their room; and therefore
resolved to do what she could for the preserving of these Spies (with whom it is
like she had had some Conference before, and had been instructed about these
matters) though it were with the hazard of her self. When the Kings Messengers
came to her, the told them, There had been indeed two men in her house, but
whence they came she knew not. They went away from her house a little before
the shutting of the Gates when it was dark. They were but newly gone, and if
they immediately pursued after them, Her seeking to hide the Spies was an act
of faith very pleasing to God, but the manner of doing it with a Lie cannot be
defended.
she supposed they would quickly overtake them. The Messengers accordingly went
presently in pursuit of them toward the Fords of Jordan. Rahab, before the
Spies had been long laid down among the Flax, came up to them, and told them
what had passed. Then she said As for their talking thus together, being of two
several Nations we need not wonder at it, for the Language of the Canaanites
and other Neighbor-nations was not in those times much different from that
of the Hebrew, as by many Names both of Men and Cities among the Canaanites is
very evident.
unto them, I am persuaded that the Lord has given you this Land; your Terror
is fallen upon us, and the hearts of this people faint before you. We have
heard how the Lord dried up the waters of the Red Sea for you when you came out
of Egypt, and what you did to the two Kings of the Amorites Sihon and Og. The
Report of these things has made our hearts melt within us. For the Lord your
God He is God in heaven above, and in the earth beneath, and there is none like
him. Now therefore I pray you swear unto me by the Lord, that since I have
showed you kindness, you will show kindness to my Fathers house, and that ye
will save alive my Father and Mother, my Brethren and Sisters, and all that
they have, and deliver our lives from death. And give me a sign or token
whereby we may make our selves known to you when you shall take this City, and
upon sight whereof you will be true and faithful to us, and will save us from
the general destruction. The men answered, Our life for yours; This they spoke
(as it seems) by way of Oath or Execration, as Rahab had desired of them, verse.
12. As if they should have said, May destruction light upon us if we take not
such order that you and yours shall be preserved, provided none of you reveal
this our business; that is, this our agreement and compact with you to spare
your lives. Rahab having obtained these terms of them, she let them down by a
Cord or Line made of Scarlet-thread through the Window (her house being upon the
City-Wall) and bad them to get them to the Mountain, lest the Pursuers should
meet them, and to hide themselves there three days. These Spies thus let down,
giving Rahab (as it is like) many thanks for her kindness to them, told her,
That they would faithfully observe this Oath she had made them swear to her,
when they came to besiege the City, provided she performed these three
Conditions: 1. The Line of Scarlet-thread, whereby she had let them down,
should be tied to the Window of her house, as a Token by which the house should
be known from others. 2. Her Father, and Mother, and Kindred, should come to
her house, and abide there, and not stir out of doors. 3. She should not
discover this Agreement or Compact to any others whatsoever, lest the
Israelites should be deluded by others hanging out Scarlet-lines at their
Windows as well as they. She agrees to all, and says, According to your words
so let it be. Thus these two Spies escaped, and came to Joshua, and told him
all that had happened to them, and farther said, Truly the Lord has delivered
into our hands all the Land of Canaan, for the hearts of the people faint for
fear of us.

Joshua hearing these things, He commands the Officers to go through the Camp,
and to tell the people, That within three days they should pass over Jordan,
and therefore they should prepare themselves Victuals, viz. all provisions fit
for such a Journey excepting bread, for Manna was yet continued to them, and
ceased not till after they came into Canaan. He puts the Reubenites, Gadites,
and the half-Tribe of Manasseh in mind of their promise made to Moses, That
they would assist their Brethren in the Conquering of the Land; They promise a
ready compliance with his Commands, telling him, That as they had hearkened unto
Moses, so they would hearken unto him, and prayed unto the Lord to prosper him
in all his proceedings, as he prospered Moses. And they tell him, That if any
man refuse to obey his Commands he shall be put to death, therefore they
entreat him to be of good courage.

Joshua, Chapter 1. whole Chapter.

Joshua, Chapter 2. whole Chapter.

SECT. XCV.
THe next morning after this preparation they removed from Shittim, and marched
near to the River Jordan, and there Encamped that night. Joshua commands them
to sanctify and prepare themselves, by bringing their hearts into an holy
frame, that with reverence they might observe the great things God would do for
them the next day. He also gave Orders to the people that when they saw the Ark
of the Covenant (born by the Priests) to remove, they should then prepare to
follow it, but yet so as there should be a space of about 2000 Cubits
interposed between it and them, to teach them to fear the Lord their God, of
whose presence among them the Ark was a sign, and that the Lord by the Ark that
went before them might show them a safe way for them to go in, before they set
one foot in the Channel; and intimates to them they needed this Guidance,
having never passed this way before.

Now the Lord tells Joshua, That He would that day magnify him in the sight of
all Israel, that they might know that He was with him as He was with Moses.
Joshua then commanded the Priests to take up the Ark, and when they came to the
brink of the waters of Jordan, they should make a little stand upon their first
setting their feet into the waters which then overflowed By reason probably of
the melting of the Snow from the neighboring Mountains.
the Banks, verse. 15. (it being the time of Barley-Harvest, It Is very
observable that the Lord brought his people into Canaan in Harvest-time, when
the Land was ready furnished with the Fruits of the Earth, that were to be for
their provision and store the following year.
which in that Country was in the month Abib,) namely, till of the Lord had
miraculously divided the waters, and opened a passage for them, and the people
to go through. Then Joshua called the people together, and said to them, Hereby
ye shall know that the living God is among you, and that he will without fail
drive out from before you the Nations that now possess this Land of Canaan;
behold the Ark of the Covenant, even the Ark of the Lord of all the Earth
passes over before you into Jordan. And take ye twelve men out of the Tribes
of Israel, out of every Tribe a man, that they may go along with the Priests,
and may be present and Eyewitnesses of this miraculous Work of Gods dividing
the River of Jordan. For as soon as the soles of the Priests feet (that bear
the Ark) shall rest in the waters of Jordan, the waters that are above shall
stand upon an heap, firm as a wall, swelling continually and rising higher and
higher, even as far backward Psalm. 114.5. What aileth thee, O Jordan, that thou
art driven back?
as from the City Adam, that is besides Zaretan unto the place where you are to
pass over. And by reason of the successive coming down of the waters from
above, and their stay in that place, you will discern that they were bounded
and barred up by the Almighty Power of God. And as for the waters below,
according to their ordinary course, they shall pass away, and run toward the
Dead-Sea, and so shall fail, being cut off as it were from, and not supplied by
the waters from above. And accordingly it came to pass, as Joshua foretold
them. And on the tenth day of the first month the Israelites by the leading of
Joshua (a Type of Jesus Christ) went up out of the River of Jordan into the
promised Land of Canaan (a Type of Heaven.) In this passage the people hasted
and passed over immediately to the other side, right against Jericho. But the
Priests (that bare the Ark) stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan,
till all the people were passed over; which commends the strength of their
Faith, Patience, and Obedience, in that they stirred not till Joshua called
them to come up out of the River, notwithstanding the dreadful sight of those
hideous Mountains of water which were every minute ready to overwhelm them,
unless they had been miraculously stayed by the Hand of God. When the people
were all passed over, Joshua, by Gods direction, appoints the twelve men
(before mentioned, verse. 12.) to take out of the River of Jordan (where the
Priests feet stood) twelve great stones, and carrying them upon their Shoulders
to Gilgal (where they were to Incamp that night) there to set them up in that
place. He also ordered twelve great stones to be set up in the midst of Jordan
where the Priests stood, which possibly at a low Ebb might be seen afterward
on the Shore. Both these were to be a Monument to the Children of Israel, that
when their Children in aftertimes should ask their Fathers the meaning of
them, they should tell them, These were a Memorial of this great Miracle which
the Lord was pleased to work, when he divided Jordan before the Ark, that the
twelve Tribes might pass over. And they should say to them, The Lord dried up
the waters of Jordan before you, verse. 23. until ye were passed over, as the
Lord did formerly at the Red Sea; that is, in as much as he did it for your
Ancestors he did it for you, who were then in their Loins. And He did it that
all the Earth might know his Almighty Power, and that ye might fear the Lord
your God for ever. Thus as Moses had commanded Joshua to see that all things
should be done according to the direction of the Lord, so Joshua in this their
passage over Jordan did all things as the Lord commanded. The Children of
Reuben and Gad and the half-Tribe of Manasseh passed over armed before the
Children of Israel as they had promised Moses they would do, Numb. 32.27. About
forty thousand of them ready armed for battle passed over, which were but few
more than one third part of their military men, see Numb. 26.7, 18, 34. The
rest stayed behind to defend their Wives and Children, and to look to their
Cattle. In that day the Lord magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel, and
they feared and reverenced him as they did Moses all the days of his life. All
these things being done, Joshua commanded the Priests (that bare the Ark) to
come up out of Jordan, which as soon as they had done, the waters that were
before restrained and kept back by the power of God, flowed down according to
their ordinary course, and at last flowed over all the Banks as they did
before. When the Kings of the Amorites and Canaanites heard that the Lord had
dried up the waters of Jordan for the Children of Israel to pass over, their
hearts fainted, neither was there any more spirit or courage in them.

Joshua, Chapter 3. whole Chapter.

Joshua, Chapter 4. whole Chapter, and Chapter 5. v. 1.

SECT. XCVI.
THe next day Joshua is commanded by God to renew the use of Circumcision,
which had been forborne and intermitted these forty years last past, and to
Circumcise Sensus est, revoca consuetudinem circumcidendi longo tempore in
deserto intermissum. Non jubetur idem homo iterum circumcidi, sed idem populus.
those that were born in their Travels through the Wilderness, who had not been
hitherto circumcised. And the Reasons why it was now enjoined (as we may
suppose) were these: 1. That this might signify to them that it was by virtue
of that Covenant which God had made with their Fathers (whereof Circumcision
was an outward Seal) that they were now put into the possession of the Land of
Canaan. 2ly, That they might more courageously Encounter the Canaanites, having
upon them this Badge of their Adoption. 3ly, Because on the fourteenth day of
this month at even they were to eat the Passover, of which none might eat that
were not circumcised, Exodus 12.48. 4ly, When they came into the Land of Canaan
they were to observe all the Precepts of the Ceremonial Law, [ Deuteronomy. 12.8, 9,
10.] and therefore this of Circumcision among the rest. 5ly, Circumcision was
now enjoined them, that hereby God might make trial of their Faith and
Obedience. And indeed a very hard trial it was, if we consider that those that
were the very flower and strength of their Armies were now to be circumcised,
(viz. all that were under forty years of age) and when they lay sore, how easy
had it been for their Enemies to have overcome them, as may appear from the
slaughter Simeon and Levi made upon the Sechemites, when they lay in the same
condition, Genesis 34.25, 26. So that nothing could be more dangerous in the eye
of reason than that which God now enjoined them. But thus God was pleased to
try their Faith, viz. whither in confidence of his Protection they would do
what he enjoined them, though it seemed in it self so exceeding perilous.
Joshua therefore in Obedience to Gods Command, and for these Reasons
beforementioned, renewed now this Sacrament of Circumcision, and it is probable
that all that were before circumcised were employed in this Service, that it
might be the sooner dispatched; and so the place where this was done was upon
this occasion called the Hill of Fore-skins, because there they did cast away
or bury the Fore-skins of those that were that day circumcised. The Israelites
thus circumcised abode in their places in the Camp till they were whole, no
Enemy attempting any thing against them, or once offering to molest them; no
not so much as to scare them, or put them in any fright. This being done, the
Lord said to Joshua, This day have I rolled away from you the Reproach of
Egypt; as if he should have said, Had these Israelites continued in their
Uncircumcision, they would rather have seemed to be uncircumcised Egyptians
than the Israel of God, but now being circumcised, this Reproach of Egypt is
rolled away from them, [see 1 Samuel 17.26. Genesis 34.14.]

Josh. Chapter 5. from 1. to 10.

SECT. XCVII.
UPon the fourteenth day of this first month in the evening the Israelites
celebrated their first Passover Which was likewise intermitted in the
Wilderness, saving only the second year, see Numb. 9.1, 2.
in the Land of Canaan, and on the morrow after did eat both unleavened Cakes
of the old Corn, and parched Corn of the new, even the very same day whereon
the Sheaf of the first fruits of their Harvest was offered to the Lord; after
the offering whereof they might lawfully eat of the new Corn, and not till
then. And Manna ceased the very day after they began to eat of the Fruits of
the Land, so that after that they saw it no more. By which it was evident to
them, that Manna came not all that time they had enjoyed it, from any natural
Cause in the Clouds, but was provided for them in an extraordinary way by the
Almighty Power of God.

Josh. Chapter 5. verse. 10, 11, 12.

SECT. XCVIII.
JOshua now approaching nearer to Jericho, possibly to observe the Country
about it, and to contrive how he might best assail it, and perhaps retiring a
little alone to pray unto the Lord for direction in this matter, on a sudden he
beheld a man standing over against him with his Sword drawn in his hand; Joshua
went to him and said, Art thou for us or for our Adversaries? The man said, Nay
but as a Captain of the Host of the Lord am I come unto thee. Then Joshua fell
on his face to the Earth, and worshipping him, said, What says my Lord to his
Servant. And he said, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot, for the place whereon
thou stand his holy; and Joshua did so. This Captain of the Lords Host was
not Gabriel, or any other created Angel, but Michael the Archangel, [Jude v.
9.] the great Prince of Gods people, [Dan. 10.21. and 12.1.] the Angel of the
Covenant, [Mal. 3.1.] Christ, the eternal Son of God, who appeared here and
sundry other times in the shape of a man, as a foregoing Presage and
pre-signification of his future Incarnation, and this appears by Joshua's
adoring him as the Lord Jehovah, [Ch. 6.2.] and his acceptance of it, which a
created Angel would have refused, [ Rev. 19.10.] and by his commanding Joshua
to put off his shoes, because the place was holy, [like to that, Exodus 3.5.]
not that the place was capable of any inherent holiness in it self, but
hallowed by Gods holy presence in it, and in relation to that only to be so
esteemed, and which ceased to be so when his appearance was withdrawn from it.
This Captain instructs Joshua about the manner of besieging and conquering
Jericho. He commands him for six Thus God loves to try the says and patience
of his people, to see whither they will wait for the accomplishment of his
Promises, when they are not presently fulfilled.
days together to march his Army round about the City, that the Priests should
carry the Ark about it, and seven Priests with Trumpets of Rams-horns should
blow before it, and on the seventh day to do it seven several times; At the
last of which when the Priests blew with a long blast, all the people should
give a great shout, at which the Walls of Jericho should fall down, and so the
Israelites should enter into it, and destroy it. Joshua having received these
Directions from the Lord, acquaints the people with them, who believed the Lord
would work this Miracle for them, (as he had newly divided the waters of
Jordan) and therefore the Apostle says, Heb. 11.30. By Faith the walls of
Jericho fell down. Joshua tells them, That the Lord would give the City into
their hands, but it should be accursed, or devoted, See Levit. 27.28.
(even it, and all that was therein) to the Lord, (except Rahab and her Family
who hid the Spies) that is, shall be offered to divine Justice as a kind of
First Fruits, thereby intimating that the whole Land was his, but that he was
pleased to give it them. He tells them, All the Silver, and Gold, and Vessels
of Brass and Iron were to be consecrated to the Lord, and brought into his
Treasury. Therefore (says he) keep your selves, all of you, from the accursed
thing; Take none of the accursed, banned things to your own use, lest you bring
a Curse upon your selves, and upon the Camp of Israel thereby. Joshua having
given the people these Instructions, he gave order to the Army to march round
about the City seven days, in the manner that was prescribed, the Sabbath Day
being one of them, and that by Command of him who is Lord of the Sabbath. The
armed-men marched before the Ark, and the remainder of the people that were in
the Rear (not armed) followed after; and thus they did six days; on the seventh
day they rose early, and compassed the City after the same manner seven times;
and at the seventh time when the Priests (that blew with the Trumpets) made a
long blast, Joshua bad them shout, for the Lord had given them the City. The
people hereupon gave a great shout, and the wall of the City fell down flat,
viz. all that part of it, over against which the Israelites in a long train
marched, and so all the armed men went up every man right from the place where
they were, and entered in at the breach into the City. And they utterly
destroyed all that was in the City, Men, Women, young and old, and the Oxen,
and Asses, and Sheep, and what ever they met with, excepting Rahab and her
Family, whom Joshua sent the two Spies unto (whom she had preserved) to bring
them forth, and to leave them without the Camp, till they were cleansed from
their former pollutions (according to the Law, Numb. 31.19.) and were
instructed in the Israelites Religion, and admitted into the Congregation; and
so they and their Posterity continued among the Israelites, and Rahab was
afterward married to Salmon, a Prince of the Tribe of Judah, one of Christ's
Progenitors, Matthew. 1.5. Luke 3.32. Then they burnt the City with fire, and all
that was therein, excepting only the Silver, and Gold, and Iron, and Brass,
which were reserved to be put into the Treasury of the House of the Lord, none
of them offering to meddle with one jot of the Spoil, save only Achan, of whom
more presently. In the judgment of reason one would have thought it must needs
be grievous to the Israelites to destroy so brave a City, and so goodly Houses
(wherein they might so conveniently have settled themselves) and the Prey and
Spoil of so fair and rich a City, whereby they might have so greatly enriched
themselves. The more remarkable therefore and commendable was their ready
Obedience herein to Gods Commands. And Joshua by a special Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost adjured them not to go about to build that City again, and
pronounced a Curse upon that man that by rebuilding it, should (as it were)
endeavor to blot out the memorial of this miraculous Work of God in giving
this Idolatrous City, after so strange a manner, into their hands. Whosoever
shall go about to do it (says He) he shall lay the Foundation thereof in his
Firstborn, and in his youngest Son shall he set up the Gates thereof; that is,
it shall cost him the loss of his Children; of the first when he begins it, of
the other as he goes forward with the work, and of the youngest when he
finisheth it, and hangs up the Gates thereof. This Curse afterward fell upon
Hiel the Bethelite, who in Ahab's Reign built this City again, 1 Kings 16.34.
This man was very ignorant if he knew not of this Curse, but if he did know of
it, he was very audacious, and impudently profane in not regarding it. But
though he was in his own particular severely punished for thus transgressing
Gods Command, and neglecting this Curse, yet the City being rebuilt, it was
afterward allowed for a fit Habitation even for good men to lodge in, as Elijah
and Elisha, 2 Kings 2.4, 18. yea our Savior himself did honor this City with
his presence, and Miracles, Luke 19.1, 5.

Josh. Chapter 5. from 13. to the end.

Josh. Chapter 6. whole Chapter.

SECT. XCIX.
JOshua now sent Spies to Ai, not to go into it (as those sent to Jericho did)
but to bring him Intelligence in what posture the City and Country thereabout
was. The Spies return, and make a Report as if the place were of no great
strength, and might easily be taken by a few of the Israelites; and therefore
there was no need to carry up the whole Host of Israel against it. Let only
about two or three thousand (say they) go up and finite it. Joshua accordingly
sent up about three thousand against it. But the men of Ai courageously
sallying out upon them, the Israelites fled presently before them, which
plainly showed that God being offended with them for something amiss among
them, did in an extraordinary manner strike them with fear and astonishment.
The men of Ai chased them from their City Gates to Shebarim, and killed 36 of
them in the going down of the Hill, so that it seems the Israelies fled at the
first Onset, and were slain only in flying. The whole people of Israel were
extremely terrified and dismayed at this. For God seemed to have withdrawn his
supporting Hand from them, and in such a case the most stout and valiant will
soon shrink and be afraid. Joshua and the Elders of Israel hereupon rent their
Clothes, A Ceremony used in great Mournings, see 2 Samuel 1.11. Job 2.12. Ezekiel.
27.30.
put dust upon their Heads, and fell to the earth on their faces before the
Ark. Neither was it their loss so much as the apprehension of Gods displeasure
that so much afflicted them. God had promised that no man should stand before
them, [Ch. 1.5.] and that they should drive out the Inhabitants out of the
Land. Their flying therefore now before the Enemy, especially in such an
inglorious manner, was a plain Demonstration that God was offended with them,
and had withdrawn his gracious presence from them. And the smallest Affliction
if it be looked upon as an effect of Gods anger, is very dreadful. Joshua lying
thus prostrate before the Lord, said, Alas, O Lord God, wherefore have thou at
all brought this people over Jordan to deliver us into the hands of the
Amorites to destroy us. I wish we had been content to have staid and dwelt on
the other side Jordan. Joshua seems here a little too much transported through
humane frailty.
O Lord what shall I say when Israel turns their backs before their Enemies.

For the Canaanites, the Inhabitants of this Land will hear of it, and will
inviron us round, and cut off our Name and Memorial from off the Earth, and
what will thou then do to thy great Name? How will thou preserve thy Glory,
when the Canaanites shall say, Thou had not power to subdue them, nor defend
us against them, and thou wast not able to give us this Land which thou had
promised us. See Deuteronomy. 33.27.

Then the Lord spoke to Joshua, saying, Get thee up, why lie thou prostrate
on thy face? Thou may be sure that something is amiss among you, that has
provoked Me to forsake you. Know therefore, that one of the Children of Israel
has committed a high Trespass against Me; He has reserved a part of the
Spoils of Jericho, which as accursed things should have been burnt; He has
taken of that which I reserved to my Self, viz. Gold and Silver, and has done
this closely, and cunningly, carrying the matter so, as if he had done no such
thing, or had not considered or regarded my Omniscience; and he has put what
he stole among his own stuff, the more to conceal it. And this is the cause why
the Children The people being considered here Conjunctim, as one entire body,
that which was done by one of the members, is here ascribed to the whole body
of Israel, see Josh. 22.20.
of Israel could not stand before their Enemies, because one of them has
transgressed in the accursed thing; And you must know, that I have always just
cause to punish any of my people for Sin in themselves, though I take occasion
to strike them sometimes for the sins of those among whom they live. Therefore
I tell you, there is an accursed thing in the midst of you, and you cannot
stand before your Enemies till it be taken away; I will not be with you any
more, except you destroy from among you the person that is found guilty of
stealing the accursed thing, and who is thereby become accursed himself. He
commands Joshua therefore to go and call upon the people to sanctify
themselves, by legal Purifications, washing their Clothes, Abstinence, Prayers,
Devotions, and much more by purity of Heart and Affections, [see Exodus 19.10.]
that they being thus prepared to appear in Gods presence, the Offender might be
discovered, and punished, and the people freed from the Curse which he had
brought upon them.

The Lord further directs Joshua how to find out the Offender, viz. by casting
lots, first to find out his Tribe; then to cast lots upon the several Families
in that Tribe, to find the guilty Family; then to cast lots to find the
particular Household in that Family; and lastly, to find out the particular
person in that Household that had offended, whom he orders, when discovered, to
be burnt with fire, (as the things anathematized and accursed were to be) after
he has been stoned as a presumptuous Transgressor of Gods Commandment, [see
Numb. 15.30, 35.] and that he and all that he has shall be so served, because
he has trangressed the Covenant of the Lord, viz. the Commandment that he gave
them, [Ch. 6.18.] and which they accepted of with a voluntary submission to the
punishment therein threatened in case of Transgression, and because he had
wrought folly and wickedness in Israel. And possibly the Lord was pleased to
appoint this long way of trial, to try whither Achan would come in voluntarily,
and confess his sin; and therefore by his holding out so long, even till the
lot fell upon his own person, there was a notable discovery made, how hardly
men are brought to confess their secret sins, and how prone they are to flatter
themselves, that their secret sins shall not be discovered. Hereby also the
Lord made known how the most casual things, even casting of lots, are governed
by his Providence, [see Prove. 16.33.] a truth the fitter to be cleared to this
people, because the Land was shortly to be divided to them by lot. Joshua the
next morning calling the Tribes together, and proceeding in the way and method
before prescribed, Achan He is called Achan, 1 Chronicles. 2.7. which signifies a
Troubler, and the place of his Execution is called the Valley of Achor, v. 26.
that is, the Valley of Trouble. He was the Grandchild of Zabdi, otherwise
called Zimri, 1 Chronicles. 2.6.
the Son of Carmi, the Son of Zabdi, the Son of Zerah, of the Tribe of Judah
was taken.

Achan being thus taken, Joshua said unto him, My Son give I pray thee Glory to
the Lord God of Israel, in acknowledging his Omniscience, and make an humble
and penitent confession to him of thy sin, and tell me truly what thou have
done, hide it not from me. Achan said, I have sinned against the Lord; when I
saw among the Spoils of Jericho a goodly Babylonish-Garment, and two hundred
Shekels of Silver, and a Wedge of Gold of fifty Shekels, then I coveted them;
and took them, and behold they are hid in the earth, and the Silver under the
Garment. Joshua sent Messengers to the Tent, and they found the things which
Achan had confessed, and brought them to Joshua and the Elders of Israel, and
exposed them to the view of all before the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
where the Ark was the Emblem of Gods presence among them. Then Joshua and the
Israelites took Achan with the things he had stolen, together with his
Children, and his Oxen, From hence we may see that he had before a good Estate,
and did not steal for want, but out of covetousness.
Asses and Sheep, his Tent, and all that he had, and carried them down to the
Valley, (called afterward upon this occasion) the Valley of Achor. And Joshua
then said to him, Why have thou troubled us; the Lord shall trouble thee this
day. Then they stoned him and his Children, (who it is probable Gods judgments
are many times unsearchable, but always just, see Deuteronomy. 24.16. see Josh. 22.20.
Verisimile est Domesticos ejus fuisse Criminis Conscios. Estius in loc. Besides
his Children had sin enough in them otherwise for Gods justice to work upon,
though they had no hand in this sacrilegious act.
either assisted him in what He did, or living in the same Tent with him, knew
what he had stolen, and hidden, and concealed it, and so tacitly consented to
it,) and afterward burnt him, and his Children, and his Cattle, and all that
he had stolen, and all that he had, and they raised over him a great heap of
stones, as a Monument to warn Posterity not to provoke God by transgressing his
Commandments, as Achan had done; which Monument remained when this History was
written. And thus the Anger of the Lord was turned away from Israel.

Chapter 7. whole Chapter.

SECT. C.
THe Lord now encourages Joshua, and commands him to take the whole Army with
him, (for the better heartning of the people) and to go against Ai, for he
would give the City and the Land belonging to it into his hands; And he should
utterly destroy it, and the King, and the Inhabitants thereof, as they did to
Jericho, only the Spoil thereof, and the Cattle thereof they should take to
themselves. And possibly the whole Army was commanded to go up; because they
were all to participate in the Spoil of the City: But God would not have them
as yet possess any fortified Towns or Cities, lest they should put confidence
in the strength of those places, and not wholly rest and rely on his Providence.

Joshua hereupon marched with all the men of War from Gilgal, till they were
come so near Ai, that they might the following night go up to it. Then he sent
from thence that night thirty thousand of his choicest men with a Charge, that
taking the advantage of the night, they should lay an Ambush of five thousand
in the West part of the City, between Bethel and Ai, and the other 25 thousand
should stay somewhere near them, that they might assist them, in case the
Inhabitants of the City should discover them, and come out with all their Power
against them. Joshua lodged that night with the rest of the Army, and early
next morning before it was day, he went up after this thirty thousand, and
joining (as it is probable) with the 25 thousand, pitched on the North-side of
Ai, but in a place where the men of Ai could not yet discover them, there being
a Valley between them and the City, verse. 10, 11. Having thus set the Ambush on
the West Side, and the body of the Army on the North-side of the City; Joshua
early in the morning Visitavit, v. 10.
visited his Army, to fee if they were all ready, and in good array, and then
went presently himself into the midst of the Valley with a small party with
him, purposing that as soon as it was day to show themselves to the men of Ai,
that they might thereupon be the more encouraged to sally out against them. The
King of Ai hearing of this small Party in the Valley, He gave Order, that all
the Garrison-Souldiers should be presently got ready at such a time, and
accordingly they all met, and together with their King sallied forth, and set
upon the Israelites. Joshua and the rest that were with him designedly fled
before them toward the body of their Army (left on the Hill beyond the Plain)
to draw them off from the City. It being once noised that the Israelites fled,
all that could bear Arms in Ai were instantly called to pursue after them,
there was not a Soldier left in Ai or Bethel (for it seems the Inhabitants of
that Town being near Ai had joined with them) but all ran eagerly after the
Israelites leaving the City open. Joshua with his Party being retired to the
body of the Army, he turned his face and stretched his Spear toward Ai, upon
which Signal his Soldiers (as it is probable) gave a mighty Shout, which the
Ambush of 5000 men hearing, knew thereby it was time for them to run, and take
the City; which accordingly they did, and presently set some one or more houses
therein on fire, that by the smoke ascending, the Israelites might perceive the
City was taken; the men of Ai that pursued Joshua looking back, and seeing the
smoke of their City ascending, were quite disheartened. Then Joshua and his Army
fell upon them, and the five thousand that had entered the City issued out upon
their backs, so that they were hemmed in behind and before, and so the
Israelites made a vast Slaughter of them, and spared none they could lay their
hands on, save only their King, whom they took alive, and brought to Joshua.
Then the Israelites went up to Ai, and smote it with the edge of the Sword, so
that all that fell that day, both in the Field and in the City, were about
twelve thousand. For Joshua drew not his hand back, but with his Spear
stretched forth, led them on in the Chase and Slaughter of their Enemies, till
they were destroyed. The Cattle and Spoil of the City the Israelites took to
themselves, as God had commanded. But Joshua burnt the City, and made it an
heap and a desolation for a very long time, V. 28. By this word for ever here,
as in many other places of Scripture a long time only is signified.
though afterward in the days of Nehemiah it was rebuilt, and inhabited by the
Benjamites, as we find Neh. 11.31. and then it was not called Ai, but Aijah,
above a thousand years after it was demolished. Joshua hanged the King of Ai
upon a Tree till eventide, and when the Sun was set, he commanded him to be
taken down, See Deuteronomy. 21.23.
and to be cast at the entrance of the Gate of the City, and that a great heap
of Stones should be raised over Him.

Josh. 8. from 1. to 30.

SECT. CI.
MOses having before his death charged the Israelites, that when they came into
the Land of Canaan, they should buid a Monument of great Stones, and write the
Law thereon, and at the same time should build an Altar of whole stones, and
offer Sacrifices thereon, and that on Mount Gerizim, and Mount Ebal, (where
this was to be done) the people should in a solemn manner give their consent to
certain Blessings and Curses, that should be read in their hearing; Therefore
Joshua after the taking of Ai, finding the way to these Mountains clear and
open, (by reason of the terror wherewith the Enemy was now stricken) took this
time to go up with the people thither to perform this Service, which upon the
first opportunity he knew they were bound to perform. And accordingly going
thither, He built there this Monument, and writ the Law thereon, and built the
Altar, and offered Sacrifices thereon, and the people of Israel, according to
Gods Command, having assembled themselves together with their Women, little
Ones, and Strangers, half of them stood over against Mount Gerizim, and half of
them over against Mount Ebal, (that is, not upon the top of these Mountains,
but upon their ascent near unto the bottom) that they might be the nearer one
to another, and both of them to the Ark, which was placed in the Valley between
them, and might the more conveniently hear the Blessings and Cursings
pronounced by the Priests at Joshua's appointment. These things being done
accordingly, the people gave their assent unto the Blessings and Cursings, and
performed all things according to Moses's direction given, Deuteronomy. 11.29. and
Deuteronomy. 27. from 2. to 9.

Josh. Chapter 8. from 30. to the end.

SECT. CII.
THe Kings of Canaan affrighted at this great Success of the Israelites, now at
last begin to combine together, and to make War against them. But the
Inhabitants of Gibeon Afterward allotted to Benjamin.
(which was a great and strong City, having other Neighbouring-Towns under its
Government,) hearing of the Israelites taking Jericho and Ai, and what they did
to them, yet their hearts were not so hardened as the hearts of the other
Canaanites were to fight against Israel, but they were willing to submit to
them, and to sue to them for Conditions of Peace; which plainly shows that it
was of God, and not of themselves that these Gibeonites were thus wise and
careful to provide for their own safety. They concluded there was no resisting
such a people for whom God himself fought, and therefore they determined to try
if they could by any means make Peace with them. And whence could this be but
from God, who taught them to make a better use of the Successes he had given
his people than their Neighbors did? Accordingly they sent some of their City
unto Joshua (as if they had been Ambassadors from a far Country) with old Sacks
upon their Asses, and old Wine Bottles patched and mended, with old clouted
Shoes on their Feet, and old Garments upon their Backs, and old moldy and dry
Bread; and they came to Joshua at Gilgal, and told him, They were come from a
far Country (for they had heard, as it seems, that God had forbidden the
Israelites to make Peace with the Inhabitants of Cannan, verse. 24.) to desire
him to make a League with them, which the Israelites might do with the
Inhabitants of remote Countries, provided they would submit to become
Tributaries unto them, see Deuteronomy. 20.11. The men of Israel replied, That
peradventure they dwelled near them, in that very Land that they were come to
take possession of, and then they might not make a League with them, nor let
them dwell among them, see Deuteronomy. 20.15, 16. The Gibeonites applying themselves
to Joshua (whom they discovered to be the General of the Army) said unto him,
We are thy Servants; We pray thee look upon us not as Enemies to thee as the
Canaanites are, but as those that are willing to be thy faithful Allies, yea
thy Servants, and wholly to submit themselves to thy pleasure, and to accept of
any Conditions thou shall please to impose on us. Joshua asks them, Whence they
came? They replied, They came from a very far Country, where they had heard of
the Glory of the God of Israel, and the mighty Works He had done in Egypt, and
to Sihon and Og (but they mention nothing of the taking Jericho or Ai, lest the
taking notice of these things might have discovered them to be near
Neighbors,) therefore (say they) our Elders V. 11. They mention their Elders,
but no mention of their King, so that they seem to have been at Commonwealth.
and the Inhabitants of our Country spoke to us to take Victuals for our long
Journey, and to come and address our selves to you, and to desire you to make a
League with us on what terms you please. And you may the rather be induced to
believe that we came from a far Country; for this Bread of ours that you see
now to be dry and moldy, we took hot out of our Houses on the day we came out;
and these leathern Wine-sacks or Bottles which we filled with Wine were new
when we came out, and behold they are now rent and torn; and our very Garments
and Shoes you see are become old by reason of our very long Journey. Then the
men of Israel took and looked on their Victuals, and through too much Credulity
judged by their moldy Bread, that they were indeed come from a far Country,
never inquiring of the Lord by the High Priest what Answer they should give
them. Hereupon Joshua made Peace with them, and a League, promising that they
should live, and not be destroyed by them, and the Princes of the Congregation
swear to them to perform this Covenant. This they might lawfully do (as we said
before) to Cities that were far off, and not of the Cities of the Canaanites.
But after three days they understood these Gibeonites were their Neighbors,
and that their Cities were nigh unto them: upon this the people murmured
against their Princes for this rash and hasty League. But the Princes told
them, They had sworn to them by the Lord God of Israel to perform that
Covenant, and therefore might not destroy them, lest wrath from the Lord should
come upon them, if they should violate their Oath, as it happened afterward in
the days of Saul, who 400 years after this slew some of the Gibeonites, and so
brake the Oath which their Fathers had made with them, upon which God sent a
Famine upon the Land, see 2 Samuel 21.1, 2. Joshua and the Israelites finding
themselves thus deceived by the Gibeonites, they marched up to them, but smote
them not. Joshua highly expostulates with them, and asks them, Why they had
thus beguiled them? They replied, It was certainly told thy Servants that the
Lord thy God commanded his Servant Moses to bring you to this Land, and to give
it you in his Name, and that you should destroy all the Inhabitants thereof
before you; therefore we were sore afraid of our lives, and upon that account
we have done what we have done. And now behold (say they) we are in thy hands,
being willing to submit unto thee; so that thou may do with us, and impose
upon us what Service thou please. Joshua tells them, They were cursed, that
is, of those cursed Nations whom God commanded them to destroy; but yet because
of the Oath they had made to them, this Curse should be upon them only in
bondage, and should not extend to the taking away their lives. He tells them,
That none of them should be freed from being bondmen; they should be Hewers of
Wood and Drawers of Water for the House of God. And so the Curse was literally
and particularly fulfilled on the Gibeonites, which Noah pronounced against the
Canaanites in general, Genesis 9.25. Cursed be Canaan, a Servant of Servants shall
he be unto his Brethren. But yet this Curse, through Gods mercy, became in some
respects a great Blessing to these Gibeonites, seeing by these Services (though
base in themselves) they had a near approach to God in the Service of the
Sanctuary, for the good of their Souls, and were in a sort given and
consecrated to God as the Name Nethinims (afterward given them) does import,
see 1 Chronicles. 9.2. and Ezra 8.20.

Josh. Chapter 9. whole Chapter.

SECT. CIII.
ADoni-zedek King of Jerusalem, with the Kings of Hebron, Jarmath, Lachish and
Eglon hearing Gibeon was fallen off from them (which was a great City) and that
the Inhabitants thereof were among the Children of Israel; that is, had
incorporated themselves with them to be one people with them, and to live under
the same Laws and Government, and that the Israelites and Gibeonites had daily
free intercourse one with another, they joined their Forces together, and came
and besieged Gibeon, resolving to Chastize it for its falling off from them,
and thereby to prevent the like Revolt of other Cities. The Gibeonites
immediately dispatch away Messengers to Joshua, imploring him not to slack his
hand, but to come up speedily with his Forces to save and help them; for these
five Neighboring Kings (whose Cities were situate on Hills and Mountains) were
come up against them. The Lord appears to Joshua, and bids him not fear them,
for He had delivered them into his hand, they should not be able to stand
before him. Joshua accordingly made have, and marching his Army all night, came
upon them suddenly, and the Lord discomfited them before Israel, and they slew
them with a very great Slaughter near to Gibeon, and chased them along the way
that goes to Bethhoron There were two Cities of this Name. One fell to the lot
of the Ephraimities, and the other to the Benjamites. So that it seems there
were an upper and nether Bethhoron, which were afterward rebuilt, beautified
and fortified by Sherah, a famous woman of the stock of Ephraim, 1 Chronicles. 7.24.
and smote them unto Azehah and Makkedah. And as they fled some toward the
upper, and some toward the nether Bethhoron, the Lord cast down great and
prodigious Hailstones upon them, which destroyed more of them, than the
Israelites had killed with the Sword. This storm of Hail was miraculous, not
only in regard of the exceeding greatness of the stones, but in that they fell
only on the Canaanites, and not on the Israelites who pursued after them.
Joshua being now with his Army in the heat of pursuit, and execution of their
Enemies, and fearing he should want daylight to finish his Work, His spirit
was excited humbly to beg of God that the Sun and Moon might stand still in the
Heavens, and give them light, till they had done their work. The Lord was
pleased by some special instinct of his Spirit to assure him that his Request
was granted; whereupon in the presence of his Soldiers, and for their future
Encouragement, looking up to Heaven, He said, Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon,
and thou Moon in the Valley of Ajalon. This was a Plain into which men
descended from Beth-horon, v. 11. and in respect of the small distance between
it and Gibeon, it is by the Prophet who alludeth to this story called the
Valley of Gibeon, Isa. 28.21.
And accordingly the Sun and Moon stood still, and the whole frame of the
Heavens by the space of almost an whole day, till they had avenged themselves
on their Enemies. So that both these great Lights beginning and ending their
standing still together, the Astronomical Account was no way confounded by this
stay, even as in Music the Harmony is not in any sort broken if all the Voices
rest at the same time, and then begin again every man in his own part going on
until the end of the Lesson, as Laurentius Codomannus observes. This is written
in the Book of Jasher, Fuit hic liber quasi Sanctorum Catalogus de Heroum and
Sanctorum gestis-script^s metrico versu. Bonfrerius.
which seems to be some continued Chronicle of the memorable Acts of Gods
Worthies in those times; which Book is since lost, though it is mentioned again
2 Samuel 1.18. see also Numb. 21.14. And there was no day like this either before
it or after it wherein God at the prayer of a man made the Sun and Moon to
stand still, and made the day twice as long as it should have been. Indeed in
Hezekiah's time the day was miraculously lengthened by the Suns going backward,
2 Kings 20.11. and Isaiah the Prophet cried unto the Lord, and he brought the
shadow ten degrees backward by which it had gone down in the Dial of Ahaz; and
yet it was not lengthened so much by far then, as it was now; to wit, not above
two hours and an half; Neither was that done in such a manner as this was, viz.
upon Joshua's prayer to God, first desiring it, and then commanding in his Name
that it should be done, see Hab. 3.11. Joshua having the day thus miraculously
lengthened out for him, and following the Chase, those five Kings fled to a
Cave in the Country belonging to Makkedah, and there hid themselves. Joshua
being informed thereof, commanded that the entrance into the Cave should be
rammed up with great stones, and a Guard set upon it, but that the rest of the
Army should pursue after their Enemies, and smite the hindmost of them, and not
suffer them to get into their fenced Cities, lest they should put them to a new
trouble. For (says he) God fights for us, and has delivered these our Enemies
into our hands, therefore let us not by sloth and negligence lose this
opportunity of destroying them which he now affords us. Accordingly Joshua
and his Soldiers made that day a great Slaughter of their Enemies, so that
only a few of them escaped, which got into their fenced Cities. [For though he
at present destroyed the Enemy in the Field, yet (it seems) he did not take
their fenced Cities till some time after, though they are related in this
Chapter as taken presently, because the Writer of this Book did resolve to give
(as it were) one short Draught of the War.] Now those whom Joshua had sent
forth to pursue the Enemy returned to him in peace, (that is, sound and safe,)
to Makkedah where his Camp was at present. And now the Canaanites were very
quiet, and durst not offer the Israelites the least Disturbance, no not so much
as a Dog barked against them, to allude to that proverbial Speech, Exodus 11.7.
Then Joshua caused the five Kings to be brought out of the Cave to him, and He
called for his Captains and chief Commanders, and bad them put their feet upon
their Necks, not in a proud insulting manner, but to teach them that they were
to show no mercy to this people, and to intimate to them that thus they should
tread all their Enemies under their feet. Then Joshua commanded that these five
Kings should be slain, and hanged Quia Regum stagitia plurimis exemplo nocent,
ideo acerbiore supplicio merito debebant Expiari. Masius.
on five Trees, where they hung till evening, and then they took them down and
cast them into the Cave where they had been hid, and laid great stones in the
Caves mouth, which remained when this History was written. See Josh. 8.29. and
Psalm. 91.13. and Psalm. 149.8. and 110.1.

Joshua 10. from 1. to 27.

SECT. CIV.
JOshua like a prudent General pursues his Victory, while the Canaanites were
under so great a terror and consternation, upon the defeat of the five Kings
and their Armies. And therefore now He resolves to set upon their Cities. And
first He took Makkedah, A City in the uttermost Confines of the Tribe of Judah
toward the West, see Chapter 15.41.
and destroyed all the people therein, Men, Women, and Children, reserving the
Cattle to themselves for a Prey, see Chapter 11.14. And he did unto the King
thereof as he had done unto the King of Jericho; that is, He hanged Hoc non
indicat Scriptura, ex caeterorum tamen Regum. exemplo colligunt eum suspensum
fuisse. Bonfrerius.
him. From Makkedah he marched the whole Army that was with him to Libnah, A
City situate in the Tribe of Judah, Chapter 15.42. and given to the Priests, Chapter
21.13.
and the Lord delivered that City also into his hands, and he put all to the
Sword he found therein, and did unto their King as he did unto the King of
Makkedah. From Libnah he marched to Lachish A strong City in the Confines of
Judah restored, Chapter 15.39. whose King was one of those that made War against
Gibeon.
and besieged it. Horam King of Gezer (a City near to Lachish) understanding
this, comes forth with his Forces to relieve it, but Joshua utterly routed and
defeated him, and then the day after the Lord delivered Lachish into his hands,
whose Inhabitants he utterly destroyed, as he had done those of Libnah. Then he
marched to Eglon A City in the Tribe of Judah, Chapter 15.39. five Leagues
Southward from Jerusalem.
and took it the very day he encamped against it, and put all to the Sword he
found there. From thence he marched to Hebron, A famous ancient City, see Numb.
13.23. in the Tribe of Judah called formerly Kirjath-jearim. The King hereof
was one of those hanged at Makkedah, but He being dead, either his Heir
succeeded him, or they chose another. How this City is afterward said to be
taken by Caleb, see Notes on Chapter 15.13, 14.
and took it with the new King thereof, (for the old one was lately hanged at
Makkedah) and all the Cities it had under its Jurisdiction, and utterly
destroyed all the Inhabitants thereof. Joshua then bending his Course toward
Gilgal, he took Debir, A City in the Confines of Judah, butting upon Simeon,
before called Kirjah-sepher, Josh. 15.15. five or six miles Southward of Hebron.
and the King thereof, and all the Towns belonging to it, utterly destroying
all the people therein; and as he had done to the King of Libnah, so he did to
the King of Debir. All these Kings and their Land did Joshua take in one
Expedition, because the Lord fought for Israel. He subdued also all that part
of the Country which lay to the South, both those Cities that were built on
Hills, and those that were seated in the Plains. He subdued and vanquished all
from Kadesh-Barnea, the utmost Southern bound, unto Gaza upon the Seacoast,
and all the Country of Goshen in the mountainous parts of Judah, even to
Gibeon, and destroyed their Inhabitants to a vast number, doing therein
according to what the Lord God of Israel had commanded him, Deuteronomy. 20.16, 17.
Then Joshua returned with his Army to the Camp at Gilgal.

Joshua, Chapter 10. from 28. to the end.

SECT. CV.
FRom the Autumn of this year (wherein after the failing of Manna, they began
to till the Ground, and sow it,) is to be reckoned the first year of their
Tillage, and the rise of the Sabhatical year is hence to be taken, Exodus 23.10,
11. Levit. 25. from 2. to 7.

SECT. CVI.
THe five Southern Kings being thus destroyed, all the rest of the Northern
Kings combined together against the Israelites, and with them Joshua had a long
War, [see verse. 18.] which lasted till about the end of the sixth year of his
Government, by which time He subdued them. Very observable was the Providence
of God, that he did not suffer all the Kings of the Canaanites at once to join
their Forces together against the Israelites, but ordered it so that only some
of them fought against Israel at one time, and some at another; by which means
the Israelites were heartned with frequent Victories, and had leisure to
refresh themselves between them. And though Joshua's wonderful Successes and
Victories are succinctly related in this Chapter one after another, yet these
Wars lasted a great while after the Battle of the waters of Merom; and there
were about six years spent in the subduing these Nations, as may appear by
considering Caleb's age, of which more afterward, see Chapter 14. from verse. 6. to
15. It Is true, God could have subdued these Nations in a shorter time, but he
was pleased to have it done by degrees, that the greater Opposition and
Difficulty the Israelites met with in the Work, the more they might own his
Power and Providence in carrying them through All. The Lord also hereby
exercised their Faith and Patience, and stirred up the Spirit of prayer in
them, and drew forth their Dependence and Reliance on Himself. And hereby also
He discovered the obstinacy of the Canaanites, which rendered them the more
inexcusable. The Lord also had determined that they should drive out these
Nations by little and little and not consume them all at once, lest the wild
Beasts might increase upon them for want of people to inhabit the Land, see
Deuteronomy. 7.22. And we may add this as a reason to all the former, why the War
continued so long; namely, God leaving these Canaanites to the hardness of
their own hearts, none of them besides the Gibeonites desired to make Peace
with the Israelites, but desperately and obstinately resolved to fight with
them, and to oppose them to the uttermost; and God did judicially thus suffer
them to harden their hearts more and more, that so they might have no favor,
but be utterly destroyed, verse. 20.

But to return. The Northern Kings that had combined against Israel were Jabin
King of Hazor (a City lying in the upper Galilee, not far from Kadesh,) who
sent to Jobab King of Madon, A City near Dan.
and to the King of Shimron, A City in Zebulun near Mount Carmel, called
Shimron-meron, Chapter 12.20
and to the King of Ackshaph, In Asher near Accho or Ptolemais.
and to the Kings that were toward the North on the Mountains, and those that
were in the Plains, that lay on the South Side of the Country of Cinneroth,
called afterward Tiberias and Genne-sereth, and in the Valley or low Grounds,
and in the Borders of Dor, A City and County in the Tribe of Manasseh, on the
Coast of the Mediterranean-Sea.
on the West, and to the Canaanites that dwelt both on the East and West, and
to the Amorite, Hittite, Perizzite, and Jebusite in the Mountains, and to the
Hivite under Hermon (a Hill in the North of Canaan) which were another sort of
Hivites much differing from those of Gibeon, who had submitted to Joshua. All
these upon Jabin's Solicitation combined together, and went out against Israel
with a mighty Army, (even like the sand that is upon the Seashore for
multitude; that is, with such a vast number as was not easily to be numbered,)
and they had Horses and Chariots very many. They pitched together at the waters
of Merom to fight against Israel. Joshua might possibly be now in some
apprehension how the Israelites that were all Foot should be able to encounter
so vast an Army as this, which consisted so much of Horse, and had so many
Iron-Chariots. But the Lord bad him not be afraid of them, for on the morrow by
that time he would deliver them up into his hands, and He should hough their
Horses, (that is, cut their hamstrings, and so make them unserviceable, either
in War, or for any other use,) and burn their Chariots. Accordingly Joshua very
early next morning fell upon them with his whole Army, probably before they
were in any Order, and made a vast Slaughter among them, and chased them to
Zidon The Metropolis of Phaenicia. Tire is called the Daughter of it: Isa.
53.12.
the Great, and to Misrephothmaim, a place near Zidon, and to the Valley of
Mizpeh near Mount Hermon, and they smote them till they left none of them
remaining in the Field. And Joshua did unto them as the Lord commanded him,
both as to houghing their Horses, and burning their Chariots. In future times
the Israelites made use of Horse and Chariots in War, and that without sin; but
God would not allow it at this time, that the less provided they were for the
Conquest of these Nations, the more his Power might appear in the subduing of
them, and the less cause would they have to glory in themselves.
Then Joshua turned back with his Army and took Hazor the Head of all those
Kingdoms, and slew the King thereof, and the Inhabitants thereof, and burned
the City. Concerning the rebuilding of this City, and another, Jabins reigning
in it, and mightily oppressing Israel, see Judge. 4.2.
And the rest of the Cities of those Kings that combined against him Joshua
took them, and utterly destroyed them, as Moses the Servant of the Lord had
commanded, Numb. 33.52, 53. Deuteronomy. 7.2. and 20.16, 17. But as for those Cities
that yielded themselves, or were not beaten down and ruined by the violence of
War, in the taking of them the Israelites burned not, but reserved for their
own use. So Joshua in the compass of about six years took all the places of
Canaan beforementioned, and the Hills, and all the South-Country, and the Land
of Goshen, (situate in the mountainous parts of Judah, famous for the Land
about it,) and the Valley and the Plain, and the Mountain of Israel, and the
Valley of the same, that is the Mountain where old Jacob once lived (and so
called from Him) and the Valley thereunto belonging. He took all the Land from
the Mountain Halak that goes up to Seir (which is the Frontier of Edom) unto
Baal-Gad in the Valley of Lebanon, which lies under the Hill Hermon.

Joshua, Chapter 11. from 1. to 21.

SECT. CVII.
JOshua having now so far subdued the Land, that none of the Inhabitants durst
any more take up Arms against them, though there were some Places that the
Canaanites had still in their possession, (as is shown, Chapter 13.) yet they
durst not stir against the Israelites. So that now the Land had rest from open
Wars, therefore in the Twelfth Chapter there is presented briefly as in a Table
or Map the several Countries and Kings vanquished by Moses, Joshua, and the
Israelites, that so beholding them all together, Gods goodness and faithfulness
to his people might the more eminently appear. In that Chapter it is said, That
Moses took two Kings on the East Side of Jordan, viz. Sihon and Og, and
disposed of their Countries to the Reubenites, Gadites, and half the Tribe of
Manasseh; and that Joshua took 31 Kings on the West Side. Of these some were
not mentioned in the Victories before related, which shows that not every
particular, but only the general Heads of things were touched before. Now
whereas here are mentioned 31 Kings subdued by Joshua, many of which reigned
over diverse Towns, besides their chief Cities; this may show us the wonderful
fertility and fruitfulness of this Soil, that in so small a compass of Land,
which was but an 160 miles in length from Dan to Beersheba, and only 60 in
breadth from Joppa to Jordan, there should such a vast multitude of people so
plentifully be provided for.

Josh. Chapter 12. whole Chapter.

SECT. CVIII.
JOshua having so far conquered the Land, as we have showed, and being now well
in years, God calls him to divide the Land by lot among the nine Tribes and an
half, for he had promised he should do it, Chapter 1.6. And therefore he commands
him to go about it now, and not to defer it till they were possessed of all, as
possibly Joshua thought he must have done. He commands him to divide those
parts that were not subdued, nor should be in his life time, as if they were
already conquered. He tells him, He had not promised him that he should Conquer
the whole Land which he had given to his people, but only that he should bring
them into it, [Deut. 31.23.] and divide it for an Inheritance among them. He
tells him how much of the Land remained yet unconquered, which notwithstanding
he intended should be divided among them, and they should have it in their
Charter, and it should be given them in the division; and this might be a spur
to them to endeavor the gaining of it, and to drive out the old Inhabitants.
Now the Land yet unconquered He tells him was this, first the Land of the
Philistines that lay a long the Coasts of the Midland-Sea from Sihor, which
divides Palestine from Egypt, and the Land of Geshuri in Syria, and bordering
on the Northern part of Canaan. This Land of the Philistines He shows him
belongs to Canaan, and consequently to the Israelites, though as yet they have
not taken it. For the Philistines (called Caphtorim, because they came from
Caphtor, Amos 9.7.) entered upon this part of Canaan, drove out the old
Inhabitants, and dwelt in it themselves, Deuteronomy. 2.23. and now this Land was
under five Lords of the Philistines yet unsubdued. There were also the Avites,
who being expelled out of their Land by the Philistines, did yet (it seems)
continue in some portion of their Land, adjoining to the Philistines. All this
Land lying along the Seacoasts from the South unto Mearah, or the Cave which
is by the Sidonians and Aphek (a Town not far from Sidon) and so to the Borders
of the Amorites; for there were Amorites on both sides of Jordan. And the Land
of the Giblites, a people that inhabited Gebal, Psalm. 83.7. a Promontory near
Sidon, and all Lebanon toward the East was not conquered, and so easterly as
far as Hamath, where even in David's time there was a Canaanitish King, 2 Samuel
8.9. All these God promises to drive out before the Children of Israel,
provided they continued faithful in keeping Covenant with Him. But they failing
herein, never came to possess the Lands of all those Nations, though in David's
and Solomon's time they brought them to be Tributary to them. However God
injoyns Joshua to divide that Land before spoken of (though not yet conquered)
among the nine Tribes, and the half Tribe of Manasseh on the West Side of
Jordan; for the Reubenites and Gadites with the other half Tribe of Manasseh
had already received their Inheritance on the other side, which Moses had given
them. And having mentioned their Inheritance, he first describes the whole Land
without Jordan from Arnon to Lebanon, and then shows what each of them
severally had. The border of the Geshurites and Maachathites are here mentioned
as a part of the Land without Jordan, belonging to the two Tribes and half
planted there, because given to them by Moses with the rest, but they did not
drive them out. For these Geshurites and Maachathites dwelling in the
out-skirts of their Country, and they having Land enough for their present use,
out of an act of base sloth suffered them to roost among them, and did not
endeavor to drive them out. Moses in the division of that Land without Jordan
gave no part to the Tribe of Levi; that is, no Regions or Parts of the Country
as he did to the other Tribes upon which they might live by Tillage and
Husbandry, but only some Cities to dwell in, and the Suburbs belonging to them
with some circuit of Ground for the feeding of their Cattle, because God
himself was to be their Portion, and the Sacrifices, and other Oblations due
unto God, were to be for their Maintenance. Now the bounds of the Lands given
to each Tribe beyond Jordan by Moses, are particularly set down to prevent all
strife and division among them for the future.

Joshua 13. whole Chapter.

SECT. CIX.
JOshua now with Eleazar the High Spirit, and the Elders of the Tribes (who
were expressly chosen and named by the Lord for this purpose, Numb. 34.17, etc.)
at Gilgal set upon this great Work of dividing the Land on this side Jordan
among the nine Tribes and an half. And accordingly first they cast the Land
into so many several Portions or Provinces as were the number of the Tribes
that were to inhabit it, yet so as the certain bounds of each Portion or
Province were not certainly limited, and appointed till they knew which Tribes
the Lord would by the designation of the lot settle in each of them; and then
they were to enlarge or lessen the Portion, according as the number of the
Tribe that was there to be settled was greater or less; so that the lots were
only to determine in what part of the Country each Tribe should be planted, and
afterward the quantity of the Land which each Tribe was to enjoy, was to be
set out by Joshua, Eleazar, and the Heads of the Tribes as was appointed, Numb.
26.55, 56. What manner of Lottery they used in this business is no where
expressed. The common Opinion of the Hebrew Writers is, That there were two
Pots or Vrnes set before the Tabernacle, the one having the Names of the Tribes
in it, that were to have their portion of Land assigned to them; the other had
just so many lots, in each of which such and such a part of the Land was
described, and that some man appointed to that Service (probably Eleazar the
High Priest) drew out first out of one Pot, one of the Tribes, then out of the
other Pot, one of the lots there, and so that Tribe had their portion assigned
them in that part of the Land, described and set forth in that lot, and
accordingly they did by the rest. And though this way and method be not any
where particularly expressed in this Book, yet the phrase that is often used in
the following Chapters, that such a lot came out, and such a lot came up, may
seem covertly to imply it, see Chapter 19.1, 10, 17. And herein the Hand of God in
ordering the lots was the more wonderful, and the Prophesies of Jacob and Moses
concerning the several Inheritances of the Tribes were more evidenced to be of
God. Joshua therefore and the Elders now setting upon this Work, the first lot
came out for the Tribe of Judah, and his lot fell out in the richest and best
part of the Kingdom, whereby the purpose of God in exalting this Tribe above
the rest was made very apparent. The largeness of Judah's lot, and the bounds
of it, and the Cities thereof are set forth, Chap. 15. The next two lots that
were drawn were for Ephraim and Manasseh, the Sons of Joseph, immediately one
after the other, upon whom God transferred a part of Reuben's Birthright, as
is expressed, 1 Chronicles. 5.1, 2. The Writer of this Book first shows jointly
where the Inheritance of those two Tribes lay, and then afterward shows
severally what each of them had for their portion, Chap. 16. at verse. 5. He
begins the Description of Ephraim's lot, which came out before the other. For
though he was younger than Manasseh, yet he was preferred before him by Jacob's
appointment, Genesis 48, 19. and besides the Cities that stood within his own lot,
he had many Cities allotted him within the portion of Manasseh, verse. 9. The
lot that fell to Manasseh is described Chapter 17. and it is said to be for Machir,
the only Son of Manasseh, whence the whole Tribe bears the Name of Machir,
Judge. 5.14. and because Machir, that is the Machirites his Posterity, were a
Warlike people, they had Gilead and Bashan allotted to them; that is, half of
it, which they did win by dispossessing the Enemy of it, see Numb. 32.39, 40.
Therefore half of the Posterity of Machir being settled on the East Side of
Jordan, the other half were according to Gods appointment to have their portion
and lot on the West Side. And there fell ten portions to Manasseh; that is,
their Land was divided into six parts, according to the number of the Sons of
Gilead, mentioned verse. 2. And Hepher's part (who was one of them) was divided
into five parts or portions, and given to his Son Zelophehad's five Daughters,
and so they were ten portions in all, see Numb. 26.33. The Cities and Country
of Ephraim and Manasseh were much intermixed one with the other. These two
Tribes complained to Joshua, that the quantity of Land assigned to them for
their portion was not sufficient for them; They alleged that it was no more
than might have been well assigned to one Tribe; Why have thou (say they) given
us but one lot, and one portion to inherit, seeing we are a great people? But
Joshua and the rest of the Commissioners had not given them too little circuit
of Land to inhabit, but indeed part of it was overgrown with Woods, and a
great part of it was yet in the possession of the Canaanites, who had the
advantage of Iron-Chariots to fight with; Also in their portion there were the
Perizzites (a wild and savage people much given to Spoil and Prey) and the
Rephaims or Giants with whom they were not very willing to encounter: These
things considered, these two Tribes thought they had reason to allege, That
they had no more given them than would well serve for one populous Tribe.
Joshua retorts the strength of their argument upon themselves. If (says he) ye
be so great a people as you allege, then you are the more able to drive out
the Canaanites out of those places allotted to you for your portion, and the
greater will be your shame if you let them alone, and yet complain of the
narrowness of your lot; If you are so great a people, get you up to the
Wood-Country and cut down the Woods, and make the ground fit for Tillage, and
build Houses and Cities upon it, and drive out and destroy the Canaanites that
lurk there; and so you may have Land enough to dwell in, and need not complain
that your portion is too straight for you. The Children of Joseph reply, That
if those woody Hills and Mountains were made fit to inhabit, and were added to
their portion, yet there would not be Land enough for them. And as for the
Canaanites that dwelt in the Valleys and Champion-Countries, they were not so
easily to be conquered, for they were a formidable people, and used
Iron-Chariots in their Wars, which having Hooks and Sythes fastened to them,
did usually do great Execution in a Fight, and mowed down all before them.
Joshua tells them, He could give them no other Answer than he had done. They
were a great people, and had great Power, they excelled in number and strength,
and had no cause to complain that they had but only one lot, or that their
portion was too straight for them; for if their own Sloth, Cowardice and
Diffidence of Gods Power and Providence did not hinder them, they might enlarge
it when they would; If they were not wanting to themselves, they would find the
portion allotted to them was more than one lot; for if they took the course he
prescribed them, the mountainous Country would be theirs, they might plant it
and possess it from one end to the other, and all the adjacent Valleys and
Champion-Country would be theirs also, seeing if they did with Courage and
Faith in God attempt to gain it, God would surely enable them to drive out the
Canaanites, notwithstanding all their strength, and the advantage they had by
their Iron-Chariots. Thus we see how uprightly Joshua carried himself in this
matter, being no ways partial to his own Tribe, (the Tribe of Ephraim) nor to
that of Manasseh, so nearly allied to him.

Joshua 14.1. to 6. Chapter 15. from 1. to 13. and from 20. to 63. Chapter 16. from 1.
to 10.

Chapter 17. from 1. to 12. from verse. 14. to the end.

SECT. CX.
WE return now to the Tribe of Judah, whose lot (as we have shown) falling to
them in the richest and best part of Canaan, an eminent Person of this Tribe,
namely, Caleb (descended of Kenaz, 1 Chronicles. 4.13, 15.) attended with the chief
Men and Elders of Judah, made his Address to Joshua, and spoke to him after
this manner; Thou may remember the thing that the Lord spoke to Moses, the
Man of God, at Kadesh-Barnea concerning thee and me, when we returned thither
from searching the Land; namely, that we only of all those that were above
twenty years old at that time should see this good Land, [Numb. 14.30.] I was
forty years old when I was sent by Moses to spy out the Land, The Israelites
after this wandering 38 years in the Wilderness, this must needs be the seventh
year since they came into Canaan.
and I brought him word again as it was in my heart, I told him faithfully what
I thought of the Land, and did neither for fear nor favor of any man speak
otherwise than I thought in my Conscience. My Brethren that went up with me (
viz. ten of them,) made the hearts of the people melt and faint within them, by
telling them of the invincible strength of the Canaanites; but I wholly
followed the Lord my God (as thou also did) and showed my Obedience to him
faithfully, and persuaded the people without fear to enter into the Land,
resting upon the Promises and powerful Assistance of the Almighty. And Moses
swear to me on that day, (to wit, by the motion and direction of God,) saying,
Surely the Land whereon thy feet have trodden shall be thine Inheritance, and
thy Childrens for ever, (namely, some special part of it, and particularly that
wherein Hebron And this place of the Land was given him rather than any other,
because when the other Spies had seen those Giants, the Anakims, Numb. 13.23.
near Hebron, and had thereupon discouraged the people, Caleb resolutely opposed
these his faint-hearted Brethren, and when they objected the invincible
strength of the place and people, He encouraged the Israelites, and told them
they might (with God's help) easily vanquish them. And hereupon it seems there
was some particular promise made to him concerning this Inheritance, Josh.
15.13.
is situate,) because thou have wholly followed the Lord my God. Thus Moses
swear to me. And now behold the Lord has kept me alive these forty and five
years since He spoke this word unto Moses, so that I am now fourscore and five
years old, and yet I am as strong this day as I was on the day Moses sent me;
As my strength was then, so is it now, both for War, or any other business.
Thus the Lord has wonderfully preserved my life and strength, and reserved me
as it were to enjoy that portion of Land which was then promised me. Give me
therefore I pray thee this mountainous Country where Hebron and Debir are
situate, and if the Lord will please to be with me (as I trust He will) I make
no doubt but that I shall be able to drive out these Anakims, and get this
portion for an Inheritance to me and my Children, as the Lord graciously
promised me. Joshua readily granted his Request, and blessing him, gave him
Hebron for an Inheritance; that is, the Country and Territory in which Hebron
and Debir were situate with the Towns belonging to them. It is plain that
Hebron and Debir were taken by Joshua and the Israelites in their Expedition
against those five Kings that had joined their Forces together to besiege
Gibeon, as we may see Chapter 10.36, 37, 38. He then took Hebron, and cut off many
of the Anakims from the Mountains about it; but in process of time (the
Israelites as it seems not leaving Garrisons in those Towns) the Inhabitants
that got away, and especially the remaining Anakims did again sieze upon
Hebron, and repossess it. Wherefore Joshua would not permit Caleb alone,
without the assistance of some of his own Tribe, to go up and assault it, but
he himself went with his Army and took it, and he utterly destroyed the
Anakims, and their Fortresses, and cleared the Country of them, saving only
that there remained some of them in Gaza, Gath and Ashdod, Cities of the
Philistines. There these Giants remained many years after. For Goliath was of
Gath, [1 Samuel 17.14.] and those four huge Giants mentioned 2 Samuel 21.16, etc.
were all of the Philistines. Joshua having taken Hebron, gave it to Caleb,
namely the Land and Villages thereunto adjoining, reserving the City it self
and the Suburbs thereof for the Priests, and to be a City of Refuge, Josh.
21.11, 12. Hebron being thus retaken, it is probable Joshua sent a great Brigade
of his Army under the Command of Caleb (who had been very active with the
assistance of those of his own Tribe, as it seems before in slaying the three
Sons of Anak, Sheshai, Ahiman and Talmai, and driving their Adherents out of
the Coasts of Hebron,) to take in Debir, where He, to excite the valor of his
Soldiers, promised to give his consent, See Judges 1.12. We cannot hence infer
that he might lawfully force upon his Daughter what Husband he pleased. But
this He speaks as taking it for granted that his Daughter would be guided by
him.
that he that took it should have his Daughter Achsah to wife. Hereupon Othniel
the Son of Kenaz, (younger Brother to Caleb) took it. It was surely by some
special instinct and direction of Gods Spirit that Caleb gave unto Othniel this
occasion of innobling his Valor and Virtue in the sight of the people, He
intending afterward to raise him up after Caleb's death to be their Judge and
Deliverer, see Judges 3.9. Othniel thus obtaining Achsah for his wife, Caleb
gave with her a good Dowry of Land. It Is true Caleb had Sons, [see 1 Chronicles.
4.13.] and they might not give away any part of their Inheritance from their
Sons to their Daughters, see Numb. 27.8, 9. therefore the Land which Caleb now
gave his Daughter was given her only as a Dowry for term of life, or till the
year of Jubilee. But it seems she was not content with the portion her Father
now gave her, and therefore moved her Husband (as they were riding away from
her Father's house) to make suit to her Father for another Field to be added to
what he had already given her. But when she perceived that he was loath to do
it, or persuaded her rather to do it her self, she went back, and alighting off
from her Ass, addressed her self to make that Request to her Father, who asked
her, What she would have? She answered, Give me, I pray thee, a Blessing; that
is, another Gift or Boon with thy fatherly blessing upon it, Genesis 33.11. Thou
have given me a Southland, give me also I pray thee Springs of Water,
intimating that the portion he had given her was dry, and not well watered; the
Southern-parts of Judah's portion being dry and barren, or at least the
Southern parts of Caleb's portion were such. And therefore she desires him to
give her Springs of Water; that is, some portion of Land that was well watered.
Hereupon out of his great love to her, He gave her some Springs, or watered
Grounds on each side of the Land he had before given her, both above it and
below it.

But though Caleb thus cleared his particular portion, yet the Children of
Judah though they took some part The Northern and greatest part of the City of
Jerusalem was in Benjamin's lot, but the Southern (wherein was the Fort Sion)
was in Judah's lot.
of the City of Jerusalem and burnt it, Judge. 1.8. yet the Fort of Sion (which
was the chief strength of the City) was not then taken by them; but the
Jebusites forced the Israelites to let them there dwell with them, for a long
time after, and there they were when this story was written, Whereby it appears
that this story was not written by Ezra, seeing he lived many years after David.
and were not cast out till David's time, 2 Samuel 5.6, 7. Had the Children of
Judah done their endeavor, and not been wanting to themselves, they might have
cast them out sooner; but failing in their duty, and growing slothful and
faint-hearted; by these and their other sins they provoked God to withdraw his
gracious assistance from them, and so then indeed they could not drive them
out, according to that, Judge. 2.20, 21. because this people has transgressed my
Covenant, therefore I will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the
Nations which Joshua left when he died. And it was not only thus with the
Children of Judah, but the Ephraimites also did not drive out the Canaanites
out of Gezer, a City in their Tribe, [Josh. 16.10.] but suffered them to live
there, only paying them some Tribute (expressly against God's Command, Deuteronomy.
7.2.) and there they continued till Solomon's time, when Pharaoh King of Egypt
expelled them out, and gave the City for a Present to his Daughter, Solomon's
wife, 1 Kings 9.16. And thus it was also with the Manassites, Chapter 17.12, 13.
who could not for the same Reasons drive out the Canaanites out of their lot,
but they would dwell with them; yet they afterward made them Tributary, and
with that they contented themselves through Sloth, Cowardice, and Covetousness,
as their Brethren the Ephraimites had done.

Josh. Chapter 14. from 6. to the end.

Josh. Chapter 10. verse. 21, 22.

Josh. Chapter 15. from verse. 13. to 20.

Josh. Chapter 1. from verse. 9. to 16.

SECT. CXI.
THe Israelites having drawn these three lots beforementioned, which fell upon
Judah, Ephraim, and half the Tribe of Manasseh, they drew no more at this time.
It seems the other seven Tribes, that were yet to have their lots, perceiving
what a large circuit of Land was given to Judah, they began to apprehend that
there would not be left an equal share for them; and therefore pretending there
could not be any equal division made till the remote parts of the Land which
were yet in the Enemies possession were better known to them, they desired some
stay of the Work till they had further prevailed, and might know the Land they
were to divide better then yet they could do.

SECT. CXII.
THis Year being the seventh from the first, wherein they began to till the
Ground in Canaan, was the first Sabbatical year which was kept among them, they
being by Joshua [who was a Type of Christ] now brought into this place of Rest,
which was a Type and Figure of that eternal Sabbath and Rest which the true
Jesus was to bring the people of God into, Heb. 4.9. And from hence also the
Year of Jubilee, which happened every fiftieth year, is to be reckoned, see
Levit. 25. from 8. to 14.

SECT. CXIII.
UPon the fifteenth day of the seventh month the Israelites kept the Feast of
Tabernacles in Booths made of boughs of Trees, according to the Law, Levit.
23.39, 40. and much more solemnly than was afterward used in the times of the
Judges or Kings, see Neh. 8.17.

SECT. CXIV.
HItherto both Camp and Tabernacle had remained at Gilgal; Now by God's
appointment they remove to Shiloth, a City in the South of Ephraim's lot. This
was the Place that God chose to place his Name there, [ Deuteronomy. 12.5. and from 8.
to 12. Jer. 7.12.] that is, his Tabernacle where he would be worshipped, and
have his Name solemnly called upon. And therefore marching to Shiloh, there
they fixed the Tabernacle of the Congregation after the Land thereabout was
wholly subdued to them, and the Canaanites that dwelt further off were so
stricken with terror from the Lord, that they durst not molest them. At
Shiloth the Tabernacle and Ark of the Covenant continued 328 years, till the
death of Eli, 1 Samuel 1.3, 9, 24.

Joshua, Chapter 18. verse. 1.

SECT. CXV.
THere remained now among the Israelites seven Tribes which had not yet
received their Inheritance; and (as it seems) being weary of the War [which had
lasted long] and being full of Spoil, and wanting nothing, they did not press
to have their Inheritances allotted to them; which negligence Joshua reproves
them for, showing them there was no let on God's part, but they might enter
into their Inheritances; and those persons whom he had appointed to divide
their Inheritances to them by lot were ready to do their duty therein. He
therefore requires them to choose out from among them three men of every Tribe
[that the matter might be carried on impartially] and he would send them to go
through the Land, and to take a Survey not only of the parts of the Country
already subdued, but of those that remained yet in the Enemies hands, that they
might describe the largeness of every Region and Province, and set down how
many Cities and Villages were in each of them. That so having as it were a Map
of the Land that remained to be divided before them, they might justly divide
it into seven parts, and so give proportionable Shares and Inheritances to
every Tribe, according as they were in number fewer or more. He tells them,
That the Tribe of Judah and the Sons of Joseph Ephraim and Manasseh should
continue seated, the one in the South, the other in the North, according as
their lots fell to them at Gilgal; but yet he seems to intimate that if their
Shares were found to be too large, then some other Tribes might have a share
with them, as it afterward happened; for the Tribe of Simeon had their portion
assigned to them out of that which was at first the lot of Judah, Chapter 19.9.
When these Surveyors had gone through the Land, and divided it into seven
parts, (for the Levites were to have no part among them, the Priesthood of the
Lord being their Inheritance, and the other Tribes had had their lots before,)
then He orders that the Description of it should be brought to him, and he
would cast lots for them before the Lord at the door of the Tabernacle. The men
thus appointed, went out accordingly, being secure and confident of Gods
Protection, and dividing themselves (as it is probable) and going under pretense
(possibly) of Negotiation or Traffic, they spent seven months in this Survey,
as Josephus tells us, Antiq. lib. 5. and so made a Description of it in a
Volume or Map, with all the Cities and Towns belonging to each Province, and
divided it into seven parts, and so presented it to Joshua, and the Elders at
Shiloh. Then Joshua cast lots for them, according to the divisions of their
Tribes. And the first lot came up for the Children of Benjamin, whose lot fell
between the Children of Judah and Joseph, and the bounds of their lot, with the
Cities belonging thereunto, are described Chapter 18. from verse. 11. to the end.
Thus Benjamin had the honor to have the first lot among the seven Tribes, and
was by providence seated the very next to his Brethren, Ephraim and Manasseh,
and had also part of the Royal City of Jerusalem within his Borders, whereby
was fulfilled what Moses prophesied of this Tribe, Deuteronomy. 33.12. And of Benjamin
he said, the beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him, and the Lord
shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his Shoulders. The
next lot came forth for Simeon, and their Inheritance was within the lot of the
Tribe of Judah. It seems they that were sent to search the Land not yet divided
(that they might part it into seven lots for the seven Tribes remaining) found
that the portion which Joshua and Eleazar, and the other Commissioners, for
dividing the Land, had formerly assigned to Judah, was too large, considering
what was left for the other Tribes; and therefore they agreed unanimously, that
a whole portion for one of the Tribes (which had not yet their Inheritance
assigned to them) should be taken out of that which was formerly given to
Judah, and some Cities also they took from Judah to be as part of another lot,
see Josh. 19:40, 41. And thus by the Providence of God there being one Tribe to
be provided for within the portion of the Children of Judah, the lot fell upon
this Tribe of Simeon, that was fewest in number of all the Tribes, see Numb.
26.14. And by this Tribes being intermingled with Judah, and not having a
portion by themselves apart, that Prophecy of Jacob was fulfilled, Genesis 49. I
will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. The bounds of this
Tribes portion are not described, only the chief Cities and Towns are named
that were in their lot, and that because their Inheritance was within that of
Judah.

The third lot came up for the Children of Zebulun. Their Borders are described
Chapter 19. from verse. 10. to 17.

The fourth lot came out to Issachar. Their Borders are described from verse.
17: to 24.

The fifth lot for the Tribe of Asher. Their Borders are described from verse.
24. to 32.

The sixth lot came out for the Children of Naphtali. Their Borders are
described from verse. 32. to verse. 40.

The seventh lot came out for the Children of Dan. Hence it appears, that this
Book was not written by Joshua, except we shall say that some particulars in it
were af^erwards inserted by some other holy men.
Their Borders are described from verse. 40. to 47. Their lot fell to them in
the Southern parts close by Judah's portion, and they being not able to drive
out the Philistines out of their Land, in aftertimes, viz. after Joshua's
death, they were straightened, and so went out, and took Laish a City in the
North parts, Judge. 20.1.
in Naphtali's lot (see Judge. 18.) though then in the Zidonians possession, and
transplanted a Colony thither, calling it Dan, from Dan their Ancestor, Son of
Jacob.

Chapter 18. from 2. to the end.

Chapter 19. from 1. to 49.

SECT. CXVI.
WHen they had made an end of dividing the Land among all the Tribes, and the
distribution thereof was fully finished, then the Children of Israel gave
Joshua an Inheritance in Timnah-serah in Mount Ephraim. And herein was the
modesty of this great General remarkable, that he was content to stay till all
the other Tribes had their portion, ere he made any motion for that which by
special Prerogative was to be conferred on him, according to the Word of the
Lord spoken to Moses not only concerning Caleb, but also Joshua. Chapter 14.9. 2ly,
He was content to receive what the Lord had promised him as by way of Gift from
the people. 3ly, Whereas he might have chosen the fairest and goodliest City in
all their Tribes; He chose his Seat in a mountainous Country, and it seems a
City that was ruinated, so that he was fain to build it, ere he could dwell in
it.

Josh. Chapter 19. from verse. 49. to the end.

SECT. CXVII.
THe Levites now come to Joshua and Eleazar, and the rest of the Commissioners,
for dividing the Land, to receive from them the Cities which God appointed to
be set apart for their dwellings. And they accordingly set apart forty eight
Cities for them, as God had commanded, Numb. 35.7. The Commissioners it is like
chose these Cities out of each Tribe some, according as their number was
greater or lesser, and chose such Cities as they in their Wisdom thought most
convenient for the Levites and the people. And then dividing the Cities they
had chosen into four parts, one for the Priests, a second for the Levites of
the Family of Cohath, a third for the Gershonites, a fourth for the Merarites;
it was decided by lot in which of these the Priests should be placed, and in
which the three Families of the Levites. The Priests who were of the Family of
Cohah, by the special Providence of God, were seated partly in the Tribe of
Judah, and partly in the two neighboring Tribes of Simeon and Benjamin, that
so they might be near the Temple: Thirteen Cities fell to their lot, and herein
respect was had to future times, when the Posterity of Aaron should be
increased, for all present there were but a few Priests, not enough to inhabit
the half part of one City. The Levites that were of the Family of Cohath had by
lot their Cities in the Tribe of Ephraim and Dan, and the half-Tribe of
Manasseh, viz. ten Cities. Others no doubt besides the Levites did inhabit
these Cities, and dwell with them.
The Gershonites had by lot their Cities in the Tribe of Issachar, Asher and
Naphtali, and out of the half-Tribe of Manasseh beyond Jordan, viz. thirteen
Cities.

The Merarites had by lot their Cities in the Tribe of Reuben, Gad and Zebulun,
viz. twelve Cities. These Cities with their Suburbs the Children of Israel gave
unto the Sons of Levi, as God had commanded. In all 48 Cities. The particular
Cities that fell to each division are set down, Josh. Chapter 21. from verse. 9. to
43. Of these six were appointed for Cities of Refuge, and Sanctuaries for such
as had killed a man unwittingly, and not of malice prepense.

The Cities of Refuge on this side Jordan were Kadesh in Galilee in Mount
Naphtali, Sechem in Mount Ephraim, and Hebron in Mount Judah. On the other side
Jordan Bezer in the Tribe of Reuben, Ramoth-Gilead in the Tribe of Gad and
Golan in Bashan, in the Tribe of Manasseh, see Numb. 35. Deuteronomy. 19.2, etc.

Joshua Chapter 20. whole Chapter.

Joshua 21. from 1. to 43.

SECT. CXVIII.
THus God gave unto the Children of Israel all the Land which he had promised
to their Fathers to give them. For though there remained some part of the Land
out of which the Canaanites were not yet expelled, yet he had given it them
all, and by lot had divided it among them, which was a kind of actual instating
them in it. 2. He had put them into the possession of the greatest part of it,
neither had he promised them otherwise that they should possess it than by
degrees, see Exodus 23.29. He had actually given them the whole Land, and they
possessed it, and dwelt therein, that is, in as much of it as they had subdued,
and was needful for their present use, and by degrees they came to possess the
rest; and they might have enjoyed it sooner than they did, had it not been for
their sins. And the Lord now gave them rest round about, and there stood not a
man of all their Enemies before them; that is, they were Victorious in all
their Wars, and none of their Enemies, whom they encountered, whilst Joshua was
their General, were able to stand before them. Not any good thing that God had
promised them, and which he knew to be good for them, failed of coming to pass.

Josh. 21. from 43. to the end.

SECT. CXIX.
THe Land being thus conquered, and the Children of Israel settled in a peaceful
possession of it, Joshua now calls the Companies of the Reubenites, Gadites,
and half-Tribe of Manasseh (who came over Jordan to help their Brethren in this
Achievement, and had left their Wives and Children so long, and had stuck to
their Brethren till they had seen them peaceably settled in their Inheritances,)
and commended them for their great faithfulness, and obeying of the Lord
therein. He therefore now permits them to return to their own possessions, but
first gravely and religiously exhorts them to love the Lord their God, and to
walk in his Ways and Commandments, and to cleave to Him, and to serve Him with
all their Hearts and Souls, and that they be very careful and watchful over
themselves, that they be not drawn away from doing what he had enjoined them.
Then He tells them, They had got very much Spoil in the War, and would return
to their Tents laden with Riches, with Silver, and Gold, and Brass, with Iron,
and very much Raiment, and with much Cattle; Therefore when they came home they
should divide the Spoil they had gotten with their Brethren; that is, that they
that had been engaged in the War should have one half, and the rest of their
Brethren that stayed behind should have the other, as Moses had before ordered
it in that War, when they went out against the Midianites, Numb. 31.27. and
it is probable Joshua followed the example of Moses in this direction. Then
earnestly praying to the Lord to bless them, he kindly dismissed them. They
having taken their leave of Joshua and their Brethren, began their March
home-ward, and when they came to the Fords of Jordan, they thought fit, before
they passed the River, to build a great Altar there, after the pattern of that
in the Tabernacle, not with any intent to offer Sacrifices thereon, but only
that it might be in future times a Memorial that those Tribes that dwelt
without Jordan were of the stock of Israel, as well as those that dwelt within,
and had a right to come to the Tabernacle, and to offer their Sacrifices on
Gods Altar there, as well as they, and that in succeeding Generations it might
be known that that Altar was built by the Tribes without Jordan, when they
returned that way home, from helping their Brethren against the Canaanites at
the first conquering of the Land. The Children of Israel within Jordan hearing
of this Altar which their Brethren had built on the banks of Jordan, and
supposing they had done it with a purpose to offer Sacrifices thereon (which
would have been a manifest Rebellion against Gods Law, whereby all the Tribes
of Israel were enjoined to bring all their Sacrifices to that one Altar that
was in the Tabernacle, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6.) And considering that God had enjoined
them, that in case any of their Brethren, of any City in Israel, should fall
off from the true Worship of God, to the Worship of false gods, (and
consequently to any Idolatrous Worship whatsoever) they should then gather
themselves together, and utterly destroy the Inhabitants of that City, Deuteronomy.
13.13, etc. In pursuance of this Command the Israelites within Jordan
unanimously gather themselves together at Shiloh, with an intent (if they found
the matter as they supposed) to make War immediately against those Tribes that
had built this Altar. But they thought it requisite first to send Messengers to
enquire concerning what had been done, and the reason of it. And accordingly
they sent Phineas, the Son of Eleazar, and ten Princes, of each chief House a
Prince unto them. When they came to them, Phineas, in the name of the rest,
spoke to them after this manner; What Trespass is this (Brethren) that you have
committed against the God of Israel, in building you an Altar that you might
rebel this day against the Lord? Is it not enough, and too much, that we did
many years since highly provoke God to Displeasure against us, by suffering our
selves to be drawn by the Daughters of Moab, to the Worship of Baal-Peor? and
shall we now afresh provoke Him against us by a new Rebellion against his Law,
and by a new way of Idolatry? The stain and infamy of that sin of Peor still
lies upon us, and we have all cause to blush at the remembrance of it even now
at this day. And I am afraid the Infection of that Idolatry does still cleave
to some particular persons among us. And seeing ye have now rebelled against
the Lord, this I tell you beforehand will be the fruit and effect of it, He
will immediately and forthwith be angry with the whole Congregation of Israel;
and we must expect a dreadful punishment to fall upon us all for this your
Transgression, as you may remember when Achan transgressed in taking the
accursed thing, [Ch. 7.1.] wrath fell on the whole people for it, and that Man
perished not alone for that Sin, but several others with him. If you think the
Land without Jordan unclean, because you have not Gods Tabernacle and Altar
with you, as we have, then pass over to us; We had rather diminish our own
Inheritances to give you a share of them, than that you should fall off from
the true Worship of God; Gods Glory and your Salvation obliges us to make this
kind motion to you. The Children of Reuben, Gad, and the half-Tribe of Manasseh
having heard these words, made this reply, First, They appeal to the great God,
the Searcher of all Hearts, that they had not built this Altar with any such
intent as their Brethren suspected. The Lord God of Gods (say they) the Lord
God of Gods, he knows how hateful the very thought of any such thing is unto
us, and you our Brethren shall know by our constancy in the Worship of God, how
far we were from building that Altar with any intent to Sacrifice thereon. If
we did it in rebellion against the Law of God, we desire the Lord should not
spare us, but punish us according to the hainousness of so great a Sin. Alas!
(say they) our true and only intent in doing it was this, for fear lest in time
to come your Children might say to our Children, What have you to do with the
Lord God of Israel? The Lord has made Jordan a border between you and us. You
have no part in the Lord. And thus in Generations to come, your Children may
come not to suffer our Children to offer their Sacrifices on God's Altar,
alleging, They were not of the Church and People of God, nor of Abraham's
Seed, and so shall your Children make our Children cease from fearing and
serving the Lord. Therefore we agreed to build this Altar not to offer any
Sacrifice thereon, but only to be a Memorial and Witness between you and us,
and our Generations after us, That we were the people of God as well as you,
and had liberty to come and offer our Sacrifices on the Altar that is before
the Tabernacle equally with you, and that your Children might not in after Ages
bar our Children from this Privilege. Phineas and the Princes that were sent
with him hearing this, were very glad, and much pleased therewith, and Phineas
replied, This day we perceive the Lord is indeed among us, in that He has kept
you from falling into that scandalous Sin, which we feared you had committed.
Now we perceive that you have delivered the Children of Israel out of the Hand
of the Lord, by having kept your selves from that Sin which might have drawn
some heavy Judgment not only upon your selves, but upon the whole body of the
people, had you fallen into it. Then Phineas and the Princes took their leave
of them, and returning to Shiloh, made their Report hereof to the Elders of
Israel there met, who were exceedingly well satisfied therewith, and blessed
God, who had hereby prevented them from going against their Brethren. And so
the Altar was called Ed, that is a Witness or Token that they did all on both
sides Jordan acknowledge and own Jehovah for the true God, and their God, whom
they would Worship in no other way than that which He Himself had prescribed.

Josh. Chapter 22. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXX.
JOshua rebuilt the City of Timnath-serah in Mount Ephram, in which he dwelt
several years, after God had given rest to the Israelites. And having lived 110
years [which was the age of Joseph] and finding his death to approach, He
called for all Israel; that is, the representative body of the people, viz. the
Elders of each Tribe, with their Magistrates, Judges, and Officers to come to
him. He tells them, He was now old and stricken in years: They had seen the
great things the Lord had done for them, and how he had fought for them, and
vanquished the Canaanites. It Is true, they were not all yet subdued, but yet He
had divided the Inheritances of those that remained unto them by lot; and
though he died and left the Work unfinished, yet they might assure themselves
if they continued steadfast to the Lord, He would in due time perfect the Work
He had begun, and perform all that He had promised, and drive out the Nations
that were not yet driven out. He bids them therefore to be of good courage, and
carefully to observe the Commandments of the Lord, not turning aside from them
to the right hand or to the left. He exhorts them to take heed of any familiar
Converse with those Nations that remained among them, or to make Marriages with
them, or to have any thing to do with their gods; He would not have them so
much as to take the Name of their false gods into their Lips with any liking of
them, [see Psalm. 16.4.] nor cause the men of these Nations to swear by their
Idols, to justify their Sayings, or confirm their Promises. Neither should the
Judges admit of an Oath by their Idols in the trial of any Cause, much less
should they bow down to them and serve them; but they should cleave to the Lord
their God, as they had done since they came under his Government. Since that
time we read not of any notable Rebellion of this people against God, see Judge.
2.7.
The Lord [says He] has driven out for you great and potent Nations. None of
them that you encountered were able to stand before you; And He will still be
with you, if you will be faithful unto Him. He will so Arm you with Courage and
Strength, and will so dispirit and weaken your Enemies with fear, that one of
you shall chase a thousand of them; that is, a few of you shall vanquish great
numbers of them, see Deuteronomy. 32.30. Levit. 26.8. Judges 15.15. 2 Samuel 23.8. But
know ye for certain, That if ye Revolt from the good way of your Obedience to
God, wherein you have formerly walked, and cleave to the remnant of these
Nations, and join your selves with them in Leagues or Marriages, then the Lord
will not drive them out before you, but they shall be Snares and Traps unto
you, and Scourges in your Sides, and Thorns in your Eyes; that is, they will be
continually by their allurements drawing you into Idolatry and other Sins, and
so will catch you with their Wiles, and by their Baits draw you to commit
spiritual and corporal Whoredom with them; and then by their Injuries will vex
and disquiet you, until you be cast out (for your sins) from this good Land
which the Lord has given you. And now behold I am going the way of all the
Earth. I must die as all other men that live upon the Earth must do. And seeing
my death approaches, I thought good to tell you beforehand what will become
of you, if ye transgress the Covenant of the Lord your God. You know there has
not any of the good things failed of coming to pass, which the Lord promised
you, see Chapter 21.45. And as the Lord has hitherto been very good to you in
performing all that He had promised you; so if ye transgress his Covenant, He
will bring upon you all the Evils which He has threatened against the
Transgressors of it, and even at last will cause you to be carried Captive out
of this good Land.

Josh. Chapter 23. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXXI.
JOshua now calls an Assembly of the Representatives of the Nation to Sechem,
in-intending (as it seems) there solemnly to inter Joseph's bones, see verse.
32. of this Chapter. And upon this occasion he removes the Tabernacle and Altar
thither, as upon extraordinary Occasions they sometimes did, see 1 Samuel 4.4.
And there the Elders and Heads of the Tribes, their Judges and Officers
presented themselves before the Lord; that is, before the Tabernacle where God
was pleased to manifest his gracious Presence among them; Joshua now speaks
unto them, and gives them his solemn farewell Exhortations, pressing them to
continue constant in their Obedience unto God after his death. He sets before
them God's free Goodness in rescuing their Father Abraham out of that way of
Idolatry, wherein he had been bred in his Father Terah's House, when they lived
beyond Euphrates, and choosing him [of his free Grace] to be the Father of his
peculiar people, when there was nothing in him to move the Lord to show him
such special favor. He tells them how God led Abraham through the several
quarters of Canaan; and preserved him in a strange Land among so many barbarous
people, and blessed and prospered him, and caused him to be highly esteemed
among them; And multiplied his Seed, giving him Ishmael, and six Sons by
Keturah, but He especially blessed him, in giving Him Isaac, whom He made the
Heir of Promise: And though Isaac had two Sons, Esau and Jacob, yet he passed
by Esau (though He made his Posterity great, and gave them Mount Seir to
inhabit,) and established his Covenant with their Father Jacob, his younger
Brother. And Jacob and his Children went down into Egypt, and in process of
time being grievously there oppressed, He delivered them miraculously by the
Hand of Moses and Aaron. Then He led them through the Red Sea, putting Darkness
between them and the Egyptians that pursued after them with Chariots and
Horsemen, and drowned the Egyptians who ventured to follow them, bringing the
Sea upon them. He tells them, That many of them that were under twenty years
old when they came out of Egypt, might remember the Wonders He did for them in
Egypt, and the Plagues He brought upon the Egptians till they did let them go.
They might also remember how He sed them and preserved them during their long
Travels through the Wildness; They might remember how He at last brought them
to the Borders of Canaan, and destroyed Sihon and Og, the Kings of the
Amorites, on the other side Jordan, and gave them their Lands for an
Inheritance. When they were come thither, they might remember how Balak King of
Moab prepared to make War against them, intending to have set upon them, if he
could have got Balaam to curse them; but the Lord would not permit him to do
it, but forced him contrarily to bless them, and so they were delivered out of
his hands. They might remember how from hence they passed over Jordan, and laid
siege to Jericho, and how the men of Jericho prepared to resist them, shutting
up their Gates against them, though afterward they had not (as it seems) an
heart to lift up a Weapon in their own Defense, when they saw their Walls so
miraculously to fall down. They might remember how in the succeeding War the
Lord delivered the Amorites, Perizzites, Canaanites, Hittites, Girgashites,
Hivites and Jebusites into their Hands; And they prevailed not against them by
their own Sword or Bow, but by the Power of God who sent the Hornets See Exodus
23.28. Deuteronomy. 7.20. Wisd. 12.8.
among them, great Venomous Flies that stung many of them to death, as He had
by them before annoyed the Subjects of Sihon and Og, upon which Judgment many
of them ('it is like) fled out of the Country. He tells them, The Lord had given
them a fruitful Land, whose fruitfulness they had not procured by their own
labor; He had given them Cities They destroyed only Jericho, At, and Hazor,
see Josh. 11.14. and reserved the rest for themselves to dwell in.
to dwell in which they built not; He had given them Vineyards and Oliveyards
which they planted not. By all which great and signal Mercies they were
strongly engaged to fear the Lord, and to serve Him in sincerity and truth all
their days. He advises them to forsake and abominate all the Idols which Terah,
Nahor, and even Abraham himself (before his Calling and Conversion) worshipped,
whilst they lived beyond Euphrates, in Vr of the Chaldees; as also the Idols
which some of their Father^ had worshipped in Egypt. Hinc liquet (quod alibi
nuspiam proditum) etiam Israelitas non paucos in Aegypto Idola coluisse.
Indicat tamen hoc ipsum non obscure, Ezekiel. 23.3, 8, 19, 21, 27. Amos 5.25. and
Actor. 7.42.
It Is like he feared there were still some such secret Worshippers of Idols
among them, as it is manifest in the Wilderness there were, [see Amos 5.25, 26.
Acts 7.42, 43.] He shows them there was so vast a difference between the true
God (that brought them out of Egypt, and had done so many and great Wonders for
them,) and Idols, that were mere vanity and nothing, that one would scarce
think it possible that they should forsake the Lord to follow them, though it
were left to their own choice. He intimates to them, that except they chose the
Lord for their God, and served Him out of judgment and their own choice, V. 15.
Eligite] Tenta vita dictum, ut Ruth 1.15. Joh. 6.67.
and willingly and freely, without any constraint, God would not regard their
outward compliance. Well (says he) whatever you shall determine for your
selves, and your own practice, I do declare to you, That this is my firm
Resolution, That as for me and my house we will serve the Lord. The Elders of
the people hearing these things, said, God forbid that ever we should forsake
the Lord that brought us and our Fathers out of Egypt, and has done such great
things in our sight, and has hitherto preserved us, and driven out the Amorites
and Canaanites for us; God forbid that ever we should be so wicked as to
forsake Him, and serve Idols. No, the Lord is our God, and Him we are resolved
to serve.

Joshua advises them them to consider well what they said; He tells them, They
cannot serve the Lord, if they retained Idols in their Houses, or in their
Hearts, and mingled false Worship with the true. For God (says he) is an holy
and jealous God, and will no more admit of mixture of true and false Worship,
than a jealous Husband will of a Corrival in his love, or that his Wife should
divide her self between him and a stranger; I tell you plainly, God will not
forgive your Transgressions, nor your Sins, if you continue in them; and if you
turn from Him, and serve other gods, He will turn from doing you good, and will
severely punish and chastise you. The people answered, Nay, but we are firmly
resolved to serve the Lord, and Him only; Then Joshua said, You are ^itnesses
against your selves this day, if you do otherwise; For ye have freely chosen
the Lord to be your God, and have faithfully promised to serve Him. They said,
We do acknowledge it, and if we do otherwise, we are Witnesses against our
selves, and our own Consciences will convince and condemn us. Well (says he) if
ye be willing to renew your Covenant with God this day, then let me in the
first place strictly charge you, if there be any Idols secretly kept, and
worshipped among you, that they be put away presently, and let them have no
place in yours hearts and affections, but incline your hearts faithfully to
serve the Lord God of Israel. The people answered, The Lord God will we serve,
and his Voice alone will we obey. Then Joshua, as God's Servant and Minister,
caused the people to renew their Covenant with God (and probably it was done in
a very solemn manner, being accompanied with Sacrifices, and the usual Rites of
that sacred Service,) and He established and confirmed it as a standing and
perpetual Law for them and their Posterity, that they should constantly
continue in the Service of the Lord God alone, as became his peculiar people,
and utterly renounce all Idols, and all Idolatry whatsoever. And Joshua either
wrote himself, or caused some of the Priests to write in the Book of the Law
(which was written by Moses, and put on the side of the Ark,) these Promises of
the people, and the whole carriage of this business, and how solemnly they
renewed their Covenant with God, that the people knowing there was such a
Record kept of this matter, and the circumstances thereof in God's Tabernacle,
might be the more careful to keep their Covenant. Then Joshua took a great
stone, and set it up there under an Oak, that was by the Sanctuary of the Lord,
as a Memorial of this Covenant now thus solemnly renewed between God and this
people. Some think this was the very Oak under which Jacob had many years since
buried all the Idolatrous trash, which he found among those of his Family, Genesis
35.4. and that Joshua did purposely for that cause set up this Stone under that
Oak; Hic Abrahamo Deu^ apparuisse creditur, Genesis 12.6, 7.
In future times this place, where this Stone was set up, was from hence called
the Oak of the Pillar, Judge. 9.6. And Joshua said, This stone shall be a
witness unto you, for it has heard Hyperbolica Contestatio, vide Deuteronomy. 4.26.
all the words of the Lord; that is, of the Covenant between the Lord and you,
and it shall serve as a Witness to convince you of your Sin, if you do not keep
your Covenant, seeing all men in future Ages will take notice that it was
purposely erected to be a Monument and Memorial thereof, and this stone, when
you see it, shall represent to your Minds and Consciences the Covenant which ye
have now made, as if it could both hear and speak; so that if in aftertimes
you deny your God, and fall into Idolatry, this very stone will witness against
you. See a like expression to this, Jer. 2.12. These things being done, they
now solemnly interred the bones of Joseph (which they had brought with them out
of Egypt) See Sect. 48. of Chap. 3.
in that parcel of ground here at Shechem, that Jacob Whereas it is said Acts
7.15, 16. that the Fathers were laid in the Sepulcher that Abraham bought, etc.
the meaning is, which one of the Posterity of Abraham, viz. Jacob bought of the
Sons of Hamor. See Apost. Hist. on the place.
bought of the Sons of Hamor, [see Genesis 33.19.] and which He upon his deathbed
gave to Joseph as a special Legacy, [Gen. 48.22.] and was now within the lot of
the Sons of Joseph. And it seems from Acts 7.15, 16. That the bodies of all the
rest of the Patriarchs, the Sons of Jacob, were brought up also out of Egypt,
and here likewise buried. When these things were done, Joshua dismissed the
people to their own Inheritances.

Shortly after this, the great Joshua dies, aged an 110, about ten years (as is
conceived) after the Conquest of the Land. He had approved himself a faithful
Servant of God all his days, living in his Fear, and dying in his Favor, and
was buried in his own Inheritance in Timnath-serah Timnathserah vox imaginem
solis denotat, quae Joshua Sepulchro erat imposita, ob celebris illius
solstitii Memoriam, Josh. 10.13.
in Mount Ephraim. Some say the Israelites placed upon his Monument the Figure
of the Sun, as a Memorial of the great Miracles of the Suns standing still at
his prayer; And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua, Non autem multo
diuitius ut patet ex Jud. 2.8, 9, 10. Hinc patet quantum sit in unius hominis
probitate positum qui in republica dominatur. Masius.
and of the Elders that outlived Joshua, who had known all the Works of the
Lord which he had done for them.

Not long after Eleazar the High Priest died also, and they buried him in an
Hill in Mount Ephraim, which by special and extraordinary Gift was given to
Phineas his Son, with whom it is probable his Father lived: For though the
Priests had their Cities by lot in other Tribes; namely, Judah, Simeon and
Benjamin, [see Chapter 21.4.] yet that the High Priest might be near to Joshua the
Governor, (who dwelt in Mount Ephraim) and that he might enquire of the Lord
for him upon any special occasion, and that he might be near to the Tabernacle,
which at this time was in Shiloh; it is like Eleazar Donarunt forsan hunc locum
honorarium Eleazaro, ut Joshuae contiguus habitaret, qui tamen est a Filio
cognominatus in posterum, Anonym. in loc.
here lived, and was now here buried.

Josh. Chapter 24. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXXII.
WE are now come to the Book of Judges, The Book of Judges.
which comprehends an History of the Commonwealth of Israel, from the death of
Joshua to the days of Eli, containing the space of 299 years, during which time
they lived under the Government of certain Judges, whom God successively and
extraordinarily raised up, and endowed with a Spirit of Wisdom and Courage to
Rule over them as His Deputies and Vicegerents. There are twelve of these
mentioned in this Book, viz. 1. Othniel, whose Government from the death of
Joshua is reckoned to be 40 years. 2. Ehud 80 3. Deborath 40 4. Gideon 40 5.
Abimelech 3 6. Thola 23 7. Jair 22 8. Jephtha 6 9. Ibzan 7 10. Elon 10 11.
Abdon 8 12. Sampson 20 299


Within which space of time we are to comprehend the Six Oppressions of the
Israelites, mentioned in this Book, and not to reckon them apart, but as
included within the years of the Judges, and the Rest of the Land, viz. Under
Cushan 8 years. Eglon 18 Jabin 20 Midian 7 Ammonites 18 Philistines 20


To the twelve Judges beforementioned, Eli and Samuel succeeded, whose Acts
are not here set down, but in the First Book of Samuel. Now there being 480 to
be reckoned from the coming of the Israelites out of Egypt to the building of
Solomon's Temple, 1 Kings 6.1. we may compute them thus; 40 years spent in the
Wilderness. 17 in Joshua's Government. 299 in the times of the twelve Judges.
40 in Eli's time. 40 in Samuel and Readiness. 40 in David's. 4 in Solomon's; in
the Fourth Year of whose Reign the Foundation of the Temple was laid. 480


As to the Penman of this Book of Judges, it is very uncertain who it was. But
it seems to be gathered by some Prophet of God out of the Public Records and
Registers that were kept of their Affairs. Some think Samuel was the Compiler
of it.

SECT. CXXIII.
JOshua being now dead, and having a little before his death encouraged the
people to expel the Canaanites that remained out of the Land, though they had
no man at present chosen of God, and set over them to Command them in chief, as
Moses and Joshua did; and finding that it was fit for them to go on with the
War, they assembled together [as it seems] at Shiloh to consult about this
matter. And because the success of their first Attempts would be of great
consequence, either to encourage or dishearten their Enemies, they thought fit
that Phineas the High Priest should enquire of the Lord for them by Vrim and
Thummim, which of their Tribes should first begin and set upon the Canaanites
that still remained among them; and the Lord appointed that the Tribe of Judah
[the Royal Tribe, and the strongest and most populous of them all,] should
begin the War, and first clear his portion of the Enemy. Caleb the Son of
Jephunneh is chosen General for the Tribe, and the Simeonites [who had their
lot within theirs] being invited to join with them, they readily agreed to it,
the Tribe of Judah promising to assist them afterward in clearing their lot.
In this Expedition, they took the City of Bezek, Bezek a City in the Tribe of
Judah, not far from Jerusalem.
and after they had taken it, in the pursuit [when the King thereof, with many
of his people, fled to save his life,] they killed ten thousand men. They also
took their King Adonibezek, and cut off his Thumbs and his great Toes, having
[as it seems] when they took the City found some of those poor Captive Kings
that had been thus inhumanely used by him, or else had heard of the Tyranny he
had exercised upon them in that kind, and therefore thought fit (according to
the Law of Retaliation, Exodus 21.24.) to serve him after the same manner.
Adonibezek could not but acknowledge the justice of God upon him herein. For
[says He] threescore and ten Kings Reguli diversarum urbium. Ante Ninum (test
Justino) quisque Rex terminis civitatis suae contentus erat.

Petty Kings of particular Cities, not that he had so many at once under this
base slavery, but in the whole course of his life, some after others; it is like
he did it in a base sporting cruelty, or else thereby to unfit them for War,
unde homines viles and defides, Italis and Gallis Poltroni vocantur, id est,
pollice trunci.


(having their Thumbs and great Toes cut off) gathered their meat under my
Table; as I have done to them, so God has requited me. Then the men of Judah
carried this great Tyrant, and showed him before Jerusalem, to strike the
greater terror into the Jebusites, and there they killed him, and then sacked
and burnt that City, viz. that part of it which was in their Tribe: For though
the former King of it had been slain in the Field, Josh. 10. yet was not the
City taken, nor it, nor any other City fired in Joshua's time, but only
Jericho, Ai and Hazor, and therefore the eighth verse should be read, And the
Children of Judah warred against Jerusalem, and took it, and smote it, etc. not
as if it had been taken before.

Judges 1. from 1. to 9. For these Verses from v. 9. to 16. see Sect. 108.
because the Author of this History was here to relate the memorable Exploits
that were done by the men of Judah, therefore together with those noble Acts
which they did after the death of Joshua; He repeats also those which were done
by them whilst Joshua lived, under the command of Caleb, both against Hebron
and Debir, that He might set forth the glory of this Tribe more fully.


SECT. CXXIV.
JEthro's Family called Kenites, that had come up with Joshua and Israel into
the Land of Canaan, and dwelt in their Tents (which was ever their way of
living) about Jericho, the City of Palm Trees, among the people of the Tribe of
Judah; and Judah having now cleared his portion in so good a measure that they
began to spread into new Plantations; These Kenites went along with them, and
settled themselves with them in the South, upon the Coasts of the Amalekites,
and so in Readiness time were mingled among them, see 1 Samuel 15.6. These Kenites
were the root of the Rechabites, of whom more is spoken, Jer. Chapter 35. Judge. Chapter
1. verse. 16.

SECT. CXXV.
AS Simeon had before assisted Judah in clearing his lot, so now Judah assists
Simeon in clearing his. And joining together, they first Conquer Hormah, and
utterly destroy it, and the reason hereof seems to be because of the Vow which
the Israelites had made long since, when Arad a King of the Canaanites had made
War against them, see Numb. 21.3. They took also Gaza, and Askelon, and Ekron,
with their Coasts, though it seems the Philistines soon recovered these three
Cities again, and drove out the Israelites before they had well settled
themselves in them, [see Chapter 3.1, 2, 3. 1 Samuel 6.17.] and the reason hereof
was, because the Israelites soon provoked the Lord by their Sins. As for Ekron
it was in Dan's lot, Josh. 19.43. Therefore it seems the Tribe of Judah joined
with those of Dan as well as with those of Simeon, to help them to clear their
Coasts. The Lord being thus with Judah, they drove out the Canaanites that
dwelt in the mountainous Country, but their own fears disabling them, and God
for their sins withdrawing his help from them, they could not drive, them out
of the Valleys and Plains, not daring (it seems) to set upon them because of
their Iron-Chariots, of which see Josh. 17.16. Whereas this was no just cause
to deter them, seeing they had God's Promise of Victory. It was therefore their
own sinful fear and want of Faith in Gods Promises that hindered them from
driving them out.

Judges 1.17, 18, 19.

SECT. CXXVI.
THe several Tribes are now working themselves into a settlement in their
several lots, but are not careful to root out the Canaanites, but suffered them
to live among them, notwithstanding Gods Command which enjoined them utterly to
destroy them, and root them out. And particularly the Children of Benjamin did
not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited that part of Jerusalem which was in
their lot, viz. The Castle and Fort, [Josh. 15.63.] so that the Jebusites dwelt
there unconquered till David's time, 2 Samuel 5.6, 7. And the Tribes of Ephraim
and Manasseh went up against Bethel to take it, because it belonged to their
lot, Josh. 16.2. And their Spies caught a man that came out of the City, and
they told him, If he would show them how they might enter the City, that is,
some weak place thereof where they might make their Entry [the Gates being
locked and bar'd] they would show him mercy, and not only spare his life, but
the lives of those that belonged to him. The man hereupon did show them where
they might enter the City, and they entering accordingly, smote it with the edge
of the Sword, but let the man Non ut Rahab se ex fide Hebraeis adjungit, sed
avaritia ductus, aut pavore, prodidit Patriam, and Civitatem, cujus tamen
excitat memoriam; sic Salamina posuit Teucer in Cypro. Nov.
and all his Family go; so the man and his Company went among the Hittites,
[who inhabited on the North-side of Mount Ephraim] and there (being as it seems
a rich man) with his Family, Friends and Allies, (who were spared for his sake)
built a City and called it Luz, after the name of the City in which probably he
was born and bred, that the memory of it might not perish, but be preserved to
Posterity. Further, that half-Tribe of Manasseh that dwelt in Canaan having
disabled themselves by their Sins, and so deprived themselves of God's
Assistance, drove not out the Canaanites out of Bethshean, Taanach, Dor,
Ibleam, and Megiddo, but they would dwell there, either by Force or by
Composition, see Josh. 17.11, 12. And when the Israelites were grown strong,
and so by God's assistance might easily have driven them out, (if they had had
an heart to set about it) they out of Sloth, Cowardliness or Covetousness let
them alone, on condition they would pay them Tribute. Neither did the Children
of Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer, viz. out of the City,
but they possessed it till Pharaoh took it, and burnt it, 1 Kings 9.16. Neither
did Zebulun drive out the Canaanites out of his lot, but only made them
Tributary, which shows that they might have subdued them, seeing they could
force them to pay them Tribute; Neither did Asher drive out the old Inhabitants
out of his lot, but they were forced to live intermixed with them. Neither did
Naphtali drive the Canaanites out of his portion, but only made them Tributary.
And though the Children of Dan had at first prevailed against the Amorites, and
possessed themselves of their Country, yet afterward the Amorites getting more
strength, recovered the best part of it; namely, the Valleys, and forced the
Danites into the Mountains, (where being much straitened, they took occasion to
enlarge their possessions, by making that Expedition unto Laish, mentioned Chapter
18.) but the more fruitful Mountains of Here Is they would not be driven out of,
till the House of Joseph assisting the Danities, they so far prevailed, that
they made them Tributary. And thus the Israelites, by their own sloth, suffered
themselves to be hemmed in with those accursed Canaanites, contenting
themselves if they would pay them some small Tribute. And this was the first
step of their defection from God, which did afterward lead them into greater
and grosser Enormities.

Judge. 1. from 21. to the end.

SECT. CXXVII.
THe people of Israel now finding themselves sorely annoyed by the Canaanites
in several parts of the Land, there was [it seems] an Assembly called of the
Heads of all the Tribes to Shiloh, that they might Consult what was fit for
them to do in this case. The Lord was pleased to send the Angel of the Covenant
to them in an Humane shape, (the same Angel that appeared to Joshua at Gilgal,
Josh. 5.14. and therefore is here said to come up from Gilgal) who sharply
reproves them for their remisness and carelessness in executing the Commands of
God. He tells them He brought them up out of Egypt into that good Land, and He
would never break his Covenant with them, if they did not first break their
Covenant with Him. He had commanded them, That they should make no League with
the Canaanites, Deuteronomy. 7.2. but should throw down their Altars, Deuteronomy. 11.3. but
they had not obeyed his Voice therein. Therefore (says he) I said I will not
drive out the Inhabitants of the Land before you, but they shall be as Thorns
in your Sides, and their gods shall be a Snare unto you, to entangle you in
their Idolatry to your perdition, Exodus 23.33. and 34.12. The people being
convinced by the Angel's words of their great Sin, they lifted up their Voice
and wept, and they called the place upon that occasion Bochim, Called so v. 1.
by anticipation, and here from the event, because the Israelites did weep
abundantly in this place.
viz. the place of Weepers. And here they offered Sacrifices to the Lord, to
make Atonement for their sins.

Judge. 2. from 1. to 6.

SECT. CXXVIII.
JOshua being now dead, and all that Generation who with Joshua had seen the
Wonders God had wrought for them; there arose a new Generation who knew not the
Lord; that is, had not such effectual and experimental knowledge of God upon
their hearts as the former Generation had; Neither had they seen his miraculous
Works with their Eyes as their Fathers had done; so that now things began to
run into Anarchy and Confusion, every one doing what seemed good in his own
Eyes. And then all those Disorders seem to have been committed, which are set
down in the five last Chapters of this Book.

As first the Idolatry of Micah (a man of Mount Ephraim) who made an Idol, and
set it up in his own House for his own use, and possibly for the use of the
Neighborhood. It seems Micah's Mother had eleven hundred Shekels of Silver
stolen from her, and she cursed those who had stolen it, and did not restore
it. Micah having taken it, and being touched in conscience for it, came to her,
and said, Wretch that I am, I had thy Silver, and have hitherto detained it,
but dare no longer lie under a Mothers Curse, and therefore am I now come to
confess my Sin, and restore again the money to thee. His Mother answered,
Blessed be thou of the Lord (my Son) that is, free be thou from my Curse, and
may thou be blessed of the Lord, because thou have repented of this Fact, and
do so ingenuously offer to restore what thou unadvisedly tookest from me. She
tells him, She had wholly dedicated this Silver to the Lord, to make a graven
Image Erat haec mulier cultrix very Dei simul and Idolorum quales Cuthaei, 2
Reg. 17. In honorem very Dei frabricavit Idolum volens per cultum Daemonis
honorare Deum. Sic verus Deus colitur non eo cultu quem ipse praecepit.
and a molten Image for Him; namely, to be Representations of Him. So that she
pretended, and possibly intended the Worship of the true God by these Idols.
She accordingly took two hundred Shekels of the silver and gave them to the
Founder, who made thereof a graven Image, Duplex Idolum fuit, alterum ex
marmore sculptum alterum ex argento art fulsoria. Menoch.
and a molten Image. The other nine hundred Shekels it is like were laid out in
providing an Ephod, rich and glorious, like Aarons, [Exod. 28.6:] and other
Ornaments for the Priest, and providing their Teraphim, Teraphim were certain
Images representing Men, Hos. 3.4, 5. which they made use of as Oracles, and
received Answers from them in doubtful Cases, Ezekiel. 21.21. Zach. 10.2. Erant
Teraphim Idola domestica, quae domi colebantur, and quasi Oracula consulebantur
de rebus arcanis, and futuris, quasi Penates and Lares.
and adorning the Chapel which her Son had built for these Superstitious Uses.
And Micah consecrated one of his own Sons (though of the Tribe of Ephraim, and
not of Aarons Lineage,) to be his Priest; all which he did as a gross Idolater,
contrary to the express Command of God. And it is no wonder that Idolatry began
thus to creep in among them, seeing at this time there was no Ruler, Governor
or Judge, no Supreme Magistrate King is not to be taken here properly; for such
there were none till Readiness Reign.
among them (such as Moses or Joshua were) to restrain them, to punish
Offenders, and keep them in Order.

There was a young Levite that sojourned in Bethlehem, in the Tribe of Judah,
but in those corrupt times (a great part of the Maintenance of the Levites
being as it seems detained from them) He was forced to seek out for a
Livelihood: where he could get it. And coming to Micah's house, Micah agrees
with him to be his Priest; for though he had consecrated one of his own Sons to
be his Priest in his Idolatrous Chapel before, yet (it seems) he thought it
would be a greater honor to his Idol-Worship to have one of the Tribe of Levi
to be his Priest. Micah promises to reverence him (though young in years) as a
Father, but yet he gives him but a very poor Salary, viz. ten Shekels of Silver
by the year, a Suit of Apparel, and his Victuals, whereas eleven hundred
Shekels were set apart by his Mother, as we have seen before, to make their
Idols and their appurtenances. However this poor Levite prostitutes himself to
this base Service, to be a Priest to their Idol-dunghil-gods, and that upon
these mean terms: But Micah loved him, and used him very well, and as if he had
been one of his own Children, and promised himself that the Lord would bless
him, seeing he had now gotten a Levite for his Priest. But he was herein much
deceived, as we shall show presently.

Chapter 17. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXXIX.
IN the next place we are to show how the Danites took Micah's Idol from him,
and set it up publicly in their own Tribe, and so the first public Idolatry
was begun among them, and therefore that Tribe is not named among the sealed of
the Lord, Rev. 7. The History of this matter was thus; The Danites by reason of
the Amorites (who had cooped them up in the Mountains, see Chapter 1.34.) were not
got into the possession of a good part of the Inheritance that fell to them by
lot. And so their present possessions being too scant and strait for them, they
began to think of enlarging their Borders. And accordingly sent out five men of
their Family as Spies to search the Land possessed by their Enemies, that they
might (where they could conveniently) drive them out, and so settle part of
their Tribe in their room. These Spies coming to Mount Ephraim, and near to
Micah's house, they meet with this Levite, whom (it seems) some of them knew,
and possibly upon His invitation they turned in thither to lodge. They ask him,
What he did there? He tells them, Micah had hired him to he his Priest. They
understanding that Micah had a Chapel, or House of gods there, and an Ephod
and Teraphim, (which used by Idolaters to be consulted, as Oracles and Answers
sometimes were given by the subtilty of the Devil or the Priests,) they being
(as it seems) addicted to Idolatry, desired him to inquire of God concerning
the Success of the business they were going about: He does so, or pretends to
do so, and encouragingly bids them go in peace, for the way wherein they went
was before the Lord; that is, his Eyes were upon their way, He saw what they
were going about, and would favor, direct, and prosper them in their way. The
Spies much encouraged hereby departed, and came to Laish or Leshem [Josh.
19.47.] in the utmost Northern Border of the Land, far remote from the body of
their own Tribe. Here they observed several things: First, That the people of
this place dwelt careless and secure after the manner of the Sidonians, (who by
reason of the great strength of their City, and their great Wealth, lived
voluptuously without fear of any Enemy,) and after the same manner lived the
Inhabitants of Laish. 2ly, They observed they had no Magistrate in the Land
that might put them to shame in any thing, and so restrain them from Vice; for
shame does oftentimes more restrain men from sin, than smart or corporal
punishment. 3ly, They observed they were far from the Sidonians (with whom
possibly they had a League, or had some dependence on them,) and therefore they
could not suddenly come to aid them. 4ly, They observed they had neither
League nor Commerce with their Neighbors; either of which might have obliged
them to afford them help in their need. Having taken notice of these things,
they return to their Brethren who sent them out, and tell them what they had
observed concerning this people. They tell them the Land was a very good Land,
a place where there was no want of any thing that is in the Earth, and if they
would go up they need not doubt of obtaining it; for (say they) God has given
it into your hands. This confidence of theirs possibly was grounded partly on
what they observed when they were among the people, and partly from the
encouragement that Micah's Priest had given them. Whereupon 600 men of them
well armed went up from thence upon this Expedition.

In their march they first pitched at Kirjath-jearim, in the Confines of Judah,
Dan, and Benjamin. Thence they passed to Mount Ephraim, and came near the house
of Micah. When they came thither, the five Spies told them there was in one of
those houses of Micah an Ephod and Teraphim, a graven and a molten Image. Now
therefore consider (say they) what ye have to do, consider whither this will
not be a good Booty for us, and whither we should not take all these along with
us, to use them in the Places where we shall come; as in our former Journey we
asked Counsel by them of God, and received an Answer, that our Journey should
be Prosperous. The Soldiers hearing these things, went presently to Micah's
house, and the 600 Men placing themselves at the Gate, the five Spies went in,
and saluted Micah, and probably acquainted him with their design, and then
brought out his Priest to their Brethren, whom He kindly saluted, and (as it is
probable) wished them good success in their Enterprise, and discoursed with
them. In the mean time the five Spies went back into the house, and took away
the Ephod and Teraphim, and the Images graven and molten. The Priest seeing
this, asked them what they did? They bid him hold his peace, and go along with
them, and be to them a Father and a Priest. They tell him, It was much better
for him to be a Priest to a whole Tribe than to one man. The Priest,
notwithstanding the kindness and respect Micah had shown him, hoping to have
more advantage by these Danites, than He had by Him, away he goes with them,
and immediately placed himself with this Idolatrous Trash in the midst of their
Army, either for the better defense of his Person and these Trinkets, or else
in a kind of Apish imitation of the Israelites, who carried the Ark in the
midst of their Host. When they departed from Micah's house, they ordered that
their Wives, The bringing of their Wives, little Ones, and Cattle with them,
shows with what assurance of success they went up against Laish.
little Ones, and Cattle, and their Carriages should march before their Army.
For they feared not any Enemy before them, but supposed that Micah, with all
the strength he could make, would pursue after them. Micah accordingly, with
what Company of his Neighbors he could get together, pursued after them, and
when He came up to them, the Danites asked Him, What ailed him? and why He came
after them with such a great Company? He cries out, Ye have taken away my gods,
and my Priest, and do you now ask me, What aileth me? Alas! I esteem all that
ye have left me as nothing, now my gods and my Priest are gone. The Danites
answered, Let not thy Cry be heard among us, lest some angry Fellows of our
Company run upon thee and destroy thee and thy Household. When Micah saw they
were too strong for him, he turned back; and so the Danites carried away the
Priest and the Images with them to Laish. When they came thither, they easily
took the City, and smote the Inhabitants thereof with the edge of the Sword,
there being none to deliver them out of their hands. And though in taking of
it, they burnt it, yet afterward they built it again, and called it Dan, in
honor of Dan, from whom they were descended. And then they set up the graven
Image there which they had taken from Micah, and established this Idolatrous
Worship of their false gods among them, and so this Levite (whose Name was
Jonathan, the Son of Gershom) and his Posterity were Priests unto these
Idolatrous Danites all the time the Tabernacle remained at Shiloh, till the
Captivity of the Land; that is, till the Ark was taken and carried away by the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 4.10, 11. which was at the death of Eli, at which time
there was a great slaughter of the Israelites, and no doubt many of them were
carried away Captive, together with the Ark; and all this befell them, because
of the Idolatry that was then practiced in the Land, Psalm. 78.58, 59. But
though this Idol was pulled down (as it is probable) in Samuel's time, or
Readiness, when the Tabernacle was at Nob, [1 Samuel 21.] yet these Idolatrous
Priests might (in secret especially) continue to do this impious Service for
the Danites unto the times of Jeroboam, and then might be employed as Priests
for his golden Calf, which he here erected, 1 Kings 12.29. and so they might
continue till the general Captivity of the ten Tribes.

Judge. Chapter 18. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXXX.
THe Israelites tolerating this Idolatry of Micah and the Danites, and never
stirring against it, this Toleration breeds all Iniquity, in so much that
Gibeah, a City in Benjamin, becomes as abominable as Sodom, as appears by the
story following. It happened in those days, when there was no Supreme
Magistrate to curb and restrain the Disorders and evil Manners of the people,
that a certain Levite that sojourned in Mount Ephraim had taken to himself a
Concubine from Bethlehem-Judah. Some Concubines there were among the Hebrews
that were esteemed lawful Wives as to the right of the Bed, and their Children
were accounted Legitimate, though they were not esteemed in the rank of other
Wives principally and most properly so called; For they had not the honor of
being accounted the Mothers of the Family, neither had they the Rule in the
Family, nor their Children any Inheritance, but only Gifts or Portions. The
case of Jacob's Sons by Bilhah and Zilpah was extraordinary. See Sect. 15. of
Chapter 3.
Other Concubines there were that were plain Whores or Harlots; but this
Levites Concubine was of the former sort, viz. a secundary Wife, for the Levite
is called her Husband, verse. 3. and Chapter 20.4. This Concubine (as it seems) was
false to the Levite her Husband, and played the Whore; whereupon a Quarrel
arising between them, she left him, and went home again to her Fathers house,
who was too ready to entertain her. Though it was usual for all sorts, even the
Levites themselves at that time to take Concubines, yet the sad effects that
followed hereupon showed that God was not pleased with it; From the beginning
it was not so, says our Savior, Matthew. 19.8. The Levite follows after her, to
see if he could by fair means bring her to repent and amend, and to return to
him again, He being willing to be reconciled to her, rather than forsake her,
if it were possible. When he came to her Fathers house, He received him, and
entertained him very kindly, and he stayed with him three days: On the fourth
day in the morning the breach being as it seems made up, and he ready to depart
with his Wife, His Father-in-law desired him to comfort his heart with a morsel
of bread, and so they sat down, and did eat and drink together, and upon his
further importunity he stayed with him that night also. On the next day he
entertained him again, and engaged him to stay till the Afternoon, and would
have had him lodged there that night also, seeing the Sun was then declining;
But he would not, but took his leave of him, and departed with his Wife and
Servant. When they came over against Jebus or Jerusalem (which was now in the
possession of the Jebusites) For though the Children of Judah had taken from
the Jebusites that part of the City which was in their Tribe, see Jud. 1.8. yet
out of that part which belonged to Benjamin (on which side the Levite was now
traveling) the Jebusites were not expelled, see Judge. 1.21.
his Man advised that they should turn into that City, and lodge there that
night; but the Levite said, We will not turn into a City inhabited by the
accursed Canaanites, estranged from God and his Laws, we will go to Gibeah, The
best Counsel sometimes may have the worst success to teach us that there is a
secret hand of God that overrules all Events.
not far from hencc, and in our way to Mount Ephraim. It was Sunset by the
time they came thither. When they came into the Street of the City, they met
with no man that had so much Humanity or Hospitality in him as to invite them
to his house. At last an old man of Mount Ephraim, a Sojourner in that City,
coming from his work out of the Fields, and seeing the Levite, asked him,
Whence he came? and whither he was going? He told him he dwelt in Mount
Ephraim, but he meant to go first to Shiloh (where the Tabernacle then was) to
perform his Service there, and then to go on in his Journey home-ward. But
(says he) here is no man (for ought I perceive) has so much kindness, as to
receive us into his house, though we should put him to little or no charge, for
we have brought from whence we came a bundle of Straw and Provender for our
Asses, and we have Bread and Wine sufficient for our selves. The old man said,
Peace be unto thee, let all thy wants lie upon me; that is, take no further
care either for Lodging or Provision; I will take the care of all upon my self
to provide all Necessaries for thee, and all that belong unto thee. Therefore
turn in unto my house; which accordingly they presently did, and there he took
care of their Asses, and then washing their Feet (according to the Rites of
Hospitality practiced in that hot Country) he entertained them, and they sat
down to eat and drink with Him. Now as they were making their hearts merry,
certain Sons of Belial (following the example of their good Brethren and
Predecessors of Sodom, Genesis 19.4.) beset the house round, requiring the old man
to bring forth the Levite to them, that they might abuse him by unnatural lust.
The old man came out to them, and entreated them not to do so abominable a
thing; He tells them, He had in his house a Daughter a Maiden, and there was
also the Levite's Concubine; He would bring them both out to them, and they
might humble them, and do what they would to them; but he desired them to spare
his Guest the Levite, and not make him the Subject of their base Villainy. But
though the old man was to be commended for his desire to observe the Laws of
Hospitality, yet the means he used are to be condemned as very sinful, seeing
we may not do evil that good may come thereof, Romans 3.8. Of the evils of
punishment indeed we may choose the less, that we may avoid the greater, but of
the evils of Sin we must choose neither, seeing the least sin is worse than the
greatest punishment. But these Sons of Belial were nothing moved with what He
said, therefore the Levite, to prevent evil to his courteous Host, brought
forth his own Concubine See Sect. 9. of Chapter 3. Suam Levita producit ut Hospiti
Consulat. Ita divinitus ordinatum ut scortando scortum intereat.
to them, and they took her and abused her all night, until the morning, in a
most inhumane and detestable manner. Thus the Providence of God rescued the old
man's Daughter (who was innocent) from the rage and lust of these wicked
Villains, and the storm fell on the Levites Concubine, who though her Husband
had pardoned, yet God now punished. Uncleanness was her sin, and uncleanness
was now the cause of her death. Culpa libido fuit, poena libido fuit. In the
morning she came and fell down at the old man's door. The Levite seeing her lie
all along with her hands on the Threshold, he bad her arise that they might be
gone. But she not answering, He perceived she was dead. Then carrying her upon
his Ass, he went home; and when he was come thither, he took a Knife and cut
her body into twelve pieces, and sent to each Tribe a piece of her, that so
horrible a Spectacle might incense their wrath, and stir up their spirits to
take sharper Revenge on the Actors of so detestable a Villainy, and that they
might not suffer those Pests to live, and poison the Air with their breath, and
so pull down Gods fearful Judgments on the whole Land. The Messengers
acquainting the Tribes with the cause why the Levite had done this, all that
heard of it cried out, That there was never such a horrid Villainy done, or seen
among them, since they came out of Egypt. Hosea 9.9. They have deeply co^rupted
themselves, as in the days of Gibeah.
And therefore stirring up one another not to let it pass unrevenged, they
said, Let us consider of it, take advice, and speak our minds, that we may take
the best course we can to bring these desperate Offenders to deserved
punishment.

Judge. Chapter 19. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXXXI.
THen all the Children of Israel, that is, the chief of them, viz, the Elders,
Officers and Captains, from Dan to Beersheba, together with those without
Jordan, met together as one man at Mizpeh, In the Tribe of Benjamin, or in the
Confines of Judah and Benjamin, and so reckoned among the Cities of both
Tribes, Josh. 15, 38. and Chapter 18.26.
(which was a place they usually held their public Assemblies in, 1 Samuel 7.5.
Judge. 10.15. as being in the heart of the Land,) excepting only the Benjamites,
who (it seems) refused to come to this meeting, or to send any Messengers to
them, resolving to defend the men of Gibeah against them. The Israelites came
together to act this weighty business as in Gods presence, and to ask Counsel
of Him, and to hear what He would give them in charge about it. No less then
four hundred thousand men now met, who expressed their Zeal to punish this
abominable Fact of the men of Gibeah. But though they were sensible of the
injury done to the Levite and his Concubine, yet it seems they took no notice
of the great and provoking Injury done to God, by tolerating the Idolatry of
the Danites, for which we shall see that God now intends to reckon with them.
This great Assembly being thus met, the Levite came and declared his Case to
them; He shows them how barbarously the men of Gibeah had used his Concubine,
and how they had abused her, even till they had killed her; and they thought to
have done the like to him also, which rather than he would have endured, he
would have lost his life. And therefore seeing they were all Israelites they
ought to take to heart that such and so foul an Abominaiion was committed in
Israel, and ought to revenge it accordingly. The people were so inflamed
hereat, that they vowed they would not so much as go home to their own houses,
till they had executed Judgment upon those that were guilty of so abominable a
Villainy. Then they sent Messengers to the Tribe of Benjamin, to desire them to
deliver up these Sons of Belial in Gibeah to deserved punishment, who were
guilty of this Crime, that so wrath might not be poured forth upon the whole
Land for it; and herehy they would prevent a Civil War, and great bloodshed,
which else was like to ensue. The Benjamites (it seems) thinking it a dishonor
to them that the other Tribes should intermeddle with punishing any within
their Territories, and being highly conceited of their own strength and ability
for Martial Affairs, and presuming possibly that they were able to make good
their part against all the other Tribes of Israel, they would not hearken to
their Brethren, but prepared to fight it out. The Israelites perceiving that
the Benjamites would not deliver the Malefactors into their hands, but were
resolved rather to defend them, they vowed that if they vanquished the
Benjamites [as they doubted not but they should] they would not give any of
their Daughters in marriage to any of them that were left alive, [see Chapter
21.1.] and likewise that they would destroy every Town throughout the whole
Land of Israel, that would not send some of their people to this Assembly, nor
help them in this War, Chapter 21.5. Then they determined to cast lots who among
them should go up to fight against Gibeah, and who should go forth to fetch in
Provisions for the Camp; For they thought that one in ten had need be set apart
for this Service, and who they should be, the lot should decide. Then they went
to Shiloh to inquire of the Lord by the High Priest (having on the Ephod, Numb.
27.21.) which of them should go up first to the battle against the Children of
Benjamin. They did not inquire of the Lord, Whither they should go up against
the Benjamites, or whither they should prevail; They did not pray to God for
his help, nor by Fasting and Humiliation, and true Repentance humble themselves
for their manifold Sins, nor by offering up Sacrifices of atonement seek to
make their peace with God; but relying on the justness of their Cause, and
their great Numbers, and strength like men, presuming of the Victory, to
prevent variance among themselves, and striving for the honor of the day. They
desire only to know which of the Tribes should go up first against Benjamin.
They concluded that having eleven Tribes against one, and four hundred thousand
fighting men on their side they must needs prevail. The Lord tells them, Judah
shall go up first. The Children of Benjamin also on the other hand prepared
themselves for the Encounter, and numbering their Forces, they found they were
twenty six thousand fighting men, besides the Inhabitants of Gibeah, which were
seven hundred chosen men; and in this their Army they had seven hundred choice
men, left handed, every one of them could sling a stone at an hairs breadth, An
hyperbolical expression, signifying they were exceeding skilful in slinging
stones, and could commonly hit a small mark.
and not miss. Matters being thus ordered on both sides, the men of Israel went
out to battle against Benjamin, and the Benjamites drew out their Forces out of
Gibeah against them; and they joining battle, the Benjamites prevailed, and cut
down to the ground, and destroyed twenty two thousand of the Israelites that
day. The Israelites upon this ill success retired to Shiloh, and wept before
the Lord, but it seems it was more for the shame of the defeat, and their loss
of men, than for their sins. They inquire of the Lord again whither they shall
go up a second time against Benjamin their Brother; but neither crave his
Assistance, nor inquire of the Success; whereby they intimate that they
supposed the cause of their ill Success before was because God was not pleased
with their warring against their Brethren; but they think not of their sins,
the true cause, and therefore God answers them accordingly. Go up (says He)
against Him; as if He should have said, though Benjamin be your Brother, yet
you may fight against him. So the Children of Israel encouraged themselves, and
went up against the Children of Benjamin the next day. The Benjamites drew out
again out of Gibeah, and defeated the Israelites a second time, and slew
eighteen thousand more of them. Upon this second overthrow, the Israelites run
to Shiloh again, and there fast, and mourn, and repent of their sins in good
earnest. Now they perceived that though God liked their Cause, yet he was
displeased with their persons. They saw that God did avenge his Own Cause upon
them, because they would not avenge his Cause against Idolaters. Therefore they
now afflict their Souls in a most solemn manner, and offer Burnt-Offerings and
Peace Offerings to make atonement for their Sins, that so they might obtain
Gods favor. They now inquire again of the Lord by Phineas the High Priest, and
by Vrim and Thummim, whither they should go up any more against the Benjamites.
The Lord bids them go up, for to morrow he would deliver the Benjamites into
their hands. The Israelites having this Promise from God, undoubtedly were much
encouraged thereby; however they resolved not to neglect any good means to
obtain the Victory, but by Policy and Military Stratagems to get all advantage
they could of their Enemies. Accordingly they divided their Army into three
parts, the one was laid in Ambush in the Medows of Gibeah, verse. 33. the second
was sent against Gibeah with Orders that they should presently fly before the
Benjamites, that so they might draw them far off from the City, verse. 30, 31.
and the third (which was the main body) was to stay at Baal-tamar, and to renew
the battle when the Benjamites came thither, in pursuit of the Israelites that
fled before them. Things being thus ordered, that part of the Army that was to
make the first Onset upon the Benjamites (and then presently to fly and give
back) See a like Stratagem in the taking of Ai, Josh. 8.
marched up against the City, and accordingly flying when the Benjamites came
out against them, the Benjamites eagerly pursued them, and killed about thirty
men, and thought they should have cut them down as they did before. But being
drawn a good way off from the City, the Ambush arose (being ten thousand men)
and suddenly took the City, and set it on fire, which when they had done, they
put themselves between the City and the Army of the Benjamites to hinder their
retreat. The Benjamites that pursued the Israelites little thought of this, or
that evil was so near them. For on a sudden the flying Israelites turned head,
and with the main body of the Army that stayed at Baal-tamar renewed the battle
with great Courage and Violence. The Benjamites looking back, saw the smoke of
the City ascending, at which being much terrified, they fled before the
Israelites, who destroyed eighteen thousand V. 15. The Children of Benjamin
were twenty six thousand and seven hundred. Of these the Israelites slew when
they prevailed against them twenty five thousand and one hundred, v. 35. six
hundred of them only saved themselves in Rimmon. It seems therefore that the
other thousand was slain in the two first battles wherein the Benjamit^s
overcame the Israelites, for it is not like they could conquer them in two
battles without some loss.
of them in the chase, those that came out of the Cities to assist the
Israelites hemming them in on every side, verse. 42. and verse. 44. and five
thousand more of them they killed in the Highways as they found them in the
pursuit scattered here and there, verse. 45. and two thousand more they slew at
Gidom, verse. 45. and the odd hundred, Verse. 46. Here the greater or round
number is only expressed, and not the odd 100.
which is not expressed in particulars, was slain [as it seems] some in one
place and some in another; so that of the Benjamites there fell that day twenty
five thousand and one hundred, six hundred of them only escaping, who fled to
Rimmon, a City built on a Rock betwixt Gibeah and Bethel, and abode there four
months. The Israelites not satisfied with the slaughter of the men of Gibeah,
and the Benjamites that came to fight in their Defense, they fell upon all
other Cities in that Tribe, because they had sent Aids, and had assisted their
Brethren in this War, and in their Rage slew Man, Woman, and Child, and even
the very Beasts, and setting fire on their Cities, spared no living thing that
came in their way, being transported with Fury that the Benjamites had
undertaken the Defense of so horrible a Villainy, and that they had slain no
less then forty thousand of the Israelites in this War. Thus when the Lord had
made use of Benjamin to execute his Justice upon Israel for not punishing
Idolatry, and for their other sins; He then uses Israel to punish Benjamin for
not delivering the men of Gibeah up to justice.

Judge. 20. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXXXII.
THe Israelites having thus destroyed all the Men, Women, and Children of
Benjamin, excepting only those six hundred that fled to Rimmon, they now began
to consider into what a strait they had brought themselves. For having slain
all the Women of Benjamin, and having made a Vow that none of them should give
their Daughters in marriage to the Men of that Tribe, either those six hundred
men must take themselves Wives from the Heathens, which was unlawful, (and the
holy Seed would be thereby polluted) or else a Tribe must perish from Israel
(and so their Body Politic, which God had formed, would be dismembered,) or
themselves must break an Oath which they had solemnly taken in the presence of
God. Being exceedingly perplexed about this matter, they thereupon went with
their whole Army to the House of God in Shiloh, there to bewail their Case, and
to inquire of the Lord what they should do in these Difficulties. They rose
therefore early the next morning and built there an Altar, and offered thereon
Burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings, because the Altar in the Tabernacle was
not sufficient for the Offering up such a vast multitude of Sacrifices as were
now brought in by the people after they had prevailed against the Benjamites
(see a like thing done 1 Kings 8.64. and the rearing Altars upon such
extraordinary Occasions was not unlawful, see Exodus 20.24.)

Then they began to consider what City or Town in all their Tribes had sent
none to help them against the Benjamites; For there had been a solemn Oath
sworn by them all at Mizpeh, before they engaged in this War (and it was taken
with a severe Execration against any that should break it) that whatsoever City
or Town did not come in to help and assist them in this Quarrel, should be
destroyed. Upon inquiry they found that Jabesh-Gilead, on the other side
Jordan, had sent none to their assistance. Hereupon they sent twelve thousand
valiant men to destroy that City, giving them order that they should destroy
all the Men and all the Women thereof that had known man, but the Virgins that
were marriageable they should spare, not doubting but of those there would be
enough found to make Wives for the six hundred Benjamites. But it seems there
were were only four hundred such found in that City. So that there being not
Wives enough for them, the Israelites much blamed themselves that they had in
their rage destroyed all the Benjamitish-Women, see verse. 22. These four
hundred Virgins being brought to Shiloh, the Israelites sent a kind Message to
the Benjamites at Rimmon to come to them, who accordingly coming, they gave to
four hundred of them these four hundred Virgins to make them Wives, wherein
they conceived that they broke not their Oath, because they were not their own
Daughters. But these being not enough for the remaining Benjamites, the
Israelites much repented their dealing with Benjamin, both that they had in the
heat of War slain their Brethren with so great a slaughter, and more especially
because they had killed the Women, and knew not how, in regard of their Oath,
to furnish those that remained of them with Wives. This made them bewail, that
the Lord, for their sins, had made such a Breach among them. They fell
therefore into consideration what they should do for these two hundred
Benjamites that yet wanted Wives. They said, Those that were escaped of
Benjamin must keep the whole Inheritance that was allotted to them; no part of
it might be given to any other Tribe, and their portion being so large, and
they that were to inherit it so few in number, they ought to be provided of
Wives, that the Tribe might continue in being, and that they might people their
Inheritance the sooner. They pitch therefore at last upon this way to supply
the two hundred remaining Benjamites with Wives. It seems it was a Custom at
the Feast of Tabernacles for the young Virgins of Shiloh to dance among
themselves at a place nigh the Town. They advise that these two hundred
Benjamites should come at that time and hide themselves in the Vineyards
thereabouts, and so when the Daughters of Shiloh came forth to dance, then they
should suddenly rise up and catch every man one of them, and so carry them
away. It Is strange they should satisfy their Consciences with such a shift as
this. For what difference was there between giving their own Daughters to the
Benjamites, and appointing them (with their consent) to go and take them
themselves by force? It Is strange they could satisfy their Consciences to
permit the Benjamites in a way of Rape (without the particular consent either
of Parties or Parents) thus to provide themselves Wives. But it was a rash and
unlawful Oath they had taken, and therefore could not bind them to that which
was evil. How much better had it been to have acknowledged their sin in making
this rash Oath, and to have repented of it, and so to have taken the liberty
which God gave them to free themselves from it. But men are naturally more
inclined to stop the mouth of Conscience with some device of their own, than to
see their own folly, or judge themselves for their former Error. However one
thing is remarkable in the Israelites, that they permitted not these Benjamites
to take any more than every one one Virgin to wife. Which shows that though
Polygamy was practiced by some among them, yet it was not publicly approved in
those times. And yet there was more than ordinary cause to have allowed it now
to these Benjamites, to increase and multiply their Tribe (reduced to so small
a number) and to replenish their Inheritances which were otherwise like to lie
wast and destitute of Inhabitants.

Things being thus contrived, the Elders of Israel acquaint the Benjamites with
this their Project, and to encourage them in it, they tell them, That if the
Parents or Brethren of any of the young Virgins whom they should seize, came to
them to complain thereof, they would say to them, Be favorable to these
Benjamites for our sakes, that you may free us from that Guilt which otherwise
will lie upon us. For we have brought this necessity upon them, by destroying
their women, and not reserving a sufficient number for them; and besides, it is
no breach of your Oath to permit it so to be; For you did not give your
Daughters to these Benjamites, but they themselves took them by force. The
Benjamites readily agreed hereunto, and accordingly took them Wives answerable
to their number of the Virgins that danced at Shiloh, and so returned unto
their Inheritance, and repaired their Cities and dwelt in them. Indeed these
seem to be strange kind of Matches. For what ground could the men have to
believe that they should love their Wives, it not being permitted them to choose
the fittest whom they liked, but being necessitated to catch the first they
could lay their hands on? Or what ground could they have to believe that they
should be beloved by their Wives whom they took by storm and force, and not by
a fair Treaty? And the case was much the same on the Women's part. But what ever
conditioned Husbands these new Brides met with, yet they had one thing to
comfort them, viz. they were all married to rich and great landed-men, seeing
the fair, large, and fruitful Inheritance of the Tribe of Benjamin was to be
shared among six hundred of them, as the sole Survivors, and absolute Heirs of
the whole Country.

Chapter 21. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXXXIII.
BY these preceding Disorders we may see how corrupt this new Generation was.
For they turned quickly out of the way their Fathers had walked in, and forsook
the Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth. Baalim was the common name of the
Heathenish gods, and Ashtaroth of their Goddesses, see 1 King. 11.5.
They ceased not from their own doings, nor from their stubborn way. They went
a whoring after other gods, basely and unlawfully joining themselves to Idols,
though they had formerly entered into Covenant with God, and therefore should
have kept themselves wholly to Him, as a chaste Wife to her own Husband. And the
anger of the Lord was hot against them, and he delivered them into the hands of
Spoilers that spoiled them of their goods, and he sold them into the hands of
their Enemies round about, see Psalm. 44.12. And his Hand was sore against them
(as he had threatened it should be upon such Provocations, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.)
and they were greatly distressed. In these their Distresses they cried unto
Him, and humbled themselves before Him; and upon their altering their course,
and returning unto Him by Repentance, He also altered his course of proceeding
against them, and showed them Mercy. And this was the course they usually held
with God, and God with them throughout this whole Book. In the time of their
Distresses God sometimes raised them up Judges to avenge them of their Enemies,
and to Govern them according to his Laws, endowing them with the Gifts of his
Spirit, and fitting them for those great Employments. And though for a time
they hearkened to their Judges, yet they soon returned to their former evil
ways, and relapsed to Idolatry. God being highly provoked by their breach of
Covenant with Him, would not drive out the Nations out of the Land which Joshua
left when he died, but suffered them to continue there to prove Israel by them;
that is, to try whither they would be drawn away by their Idolatries or no, and
suffering these Canaanites greatly to Vex and Oppress them; He thereby proved
them whether by these Afflictions they would be brought to repent and turn unto
Him. And further He left these Nations in the Land, that the present Generation
might be made careful to train up their Children in War and Martial Discipline,
that so they might be the better able in due time to perform what God commanded
them, in driving out the Canaanites out of the Land. Now the Canaanites that
were left in the Land, and not cast out, were these, viz. five Lords of the
Philistines, viz. the Lords of Ashdod, Gaza, Askelon, Gath, and Ekron; and the
Canaanites, Sidonians, and Hivites that dwelt about Libanus, and from Mount
Baal-hermon on the East of Libanus, to the entering in of Hamath, a City in the
North of Canaan, afterward called Antiochia. The Children of Israel dwelling
thus among the Canaanites, grew extremely corrupt, so that they served their
gods and the Idols which they set up, and worshipped in Groves, and made
interchangeable Marriages with them. Upon which great Provocations the Lord
gave them up into the hands of Chushan-rishathaim King of Mesopotamia. It Is
like he first brake in upon the Tribes that lay on the other side of Jordan,
and then incroached upon those within Jordan by degrees. And this was their
first Servitude First Servitude under Cushan eight years.

Othniel first Judge.


which continued eight years. Then returning unto the Lord, and crying unto Him
for Mercy and Forgiveness, He was pleased to raise up for them a Savior and
Deliverer; namely, Othniel the Son of Kenaz, Caleb's Nephew, and Son in law,
see Chapter 1.13. so that, to the great Honor of the Children of Judah, the first
Judge after Joshua was of their Tribe. Thus that Prophecy was made good, Genesis
49.8. Judah, thou art He whom thy Brethren shall praise, thy Hand shall be in
the Neck of thine Enemies; thy Fathers Children shall bow down before thee.
Othniel being thus raised up by God to this high Office, The Spirit of the Lord
came upon him; that is, he was furnished with those Gifts and Graces that were
requisite to make him a wise and valiant General in War, and a prudent
Governor in Peace; and the Lord gave Cushan into his hands, so that he
prevailed against him, and delivered the Israelites out of their Bondage under
Him. And so the Land had rest forty years; Not as if there were forty years of
Peace in the Land uninterrupted from this time, but the Land had Rest till
forty years were expired from the first Rest wherein it was settled by Joshua
before his death. And then Othniel died.

Judge. 2. from 11. to the end.

Chapter 3. from 1. to 12.

SECT. CXXXIV.
AFter the death of Othniel the Israelites again did evil in the sight of the
Lord, and He stirred up Eglon, King of Moab, and gave him Courage and
Resolution to go against Israel, and he joining with the Ammonites and
Amalekites overthrew them, and took Jericho; that is, possessed himself of the
Lands and Territories thereabout, where the City of Jericho once stood, and
possibly built some great Fortress there, that he might have the Command of the
Fords of Jordan, that being the passage over to his own Country. Second
Oppression under Eglon eighteen years.

Ehud second Judge.


And this second Oppression continued eighteen years. The Israelites then
crying unto the Lord for help, he raised up for them Ehud, Son of Gera, of the
Tribe of Benjamin (which was but a little before almost wholly destroyed) a man
left handed. By Him the Children of Israel sent a Present to Eglon; which
Opportunity he readily embraced, having a design to kill Him; And being stirred
up as it is probable by the Spirit of God to do it, He accordingly provided
himself of a Dagger fit for the purpose; Then going with the Present to Eglon,
and humbly presenting it to Him, He with those that brought it take their leave
and depart. When they were come as far back as the Quarries by Gilgal, He
himself returns again to the King (who was in his Summer-Parlour) and
addressing himself to him, tells him, He had a secret Message to him. The King
bids him forbear delivering his Message till his Servants and Attendants were
gone out of the Room. They being gone, Ehud tells him, He had a Message from
God to him. Eglon hearing this, rose up, (as if he would give some respect to
such a Message) Ehud then drawing out his Dagger, thrust it into his Belly,
and gave him such a deadly blow, that he left him (who had so long oppressed
the people of God) wallowing in his own blood and dung. Then shutting the door
after him, and locking it (having as it is probable a Spring-lock) he quietly,
and with a composed Countenance passed away. The Servants finding the door shut
and locked, they concluded that the King covered his feet in his
Summer-Chamber; that is, that He had laid himself down to sleep, because when
they did so, they used to cast some covering over their feet; as it is said of
Ruth, when she went to lie down by Boaz, as he lay sleeping at the end of his
heap of Corn, Ruth 3.7. That she uncovered his feet, and laid her self down. So
when Saul went into the Cave, where David and his men were, 1 Samuel 24.3. it is
said, Saul went in to cover his feet, that is, to lie down and sleep there for
a while, else how could David cut off the Skirt of his Garment, and not be
perceived, if he had not been asleep? The Servants having staid a great while,
and finding the King did not open the door, they began to be ashamed they had
stayed so long, and not looked after their Master sooner, fearing that some
evil had befallen him. Then taking a Key (it being usual in Kings Houses for
the Servants to have Keys to their Masters doors) and opening the door, they
found their Lord dead. Ehud thus escaping, He came to Mount Ephraim, and there
blew a Trumpet, and gathering the Children of Israel together, He tells them
what he had done, and that the Lord had delivered the Moabites into their
hands. Then bidding them follow him, he went down with them, and took the Fords
of Jordan, that neither the Moabites now in Canaan might escape to their own
Country, nor those in the Land of Moab pass over Jordan to aid their Brethren
in Canaan. Then he fell with his Forces upon the Moabites, and the Israelites
slew ten thousand of them at that time, even lusty and stout men. So Moab was
subdued that day under the hand of Israel, and the Land had rest fourscore
years, to wit, after the former rest, and Deliverance procured to them by
Othniel.

In the time of those 80 years, the Philistines making some Inroads into the
Lands of the Israelites, Shamgar the Son of Anath (who seems to be some
Countryman or Farmer of Note) did on a sudden raise the Country thereabouts,
and they Some think that this Victory of Shamgar's was miraculous, and that he
himself slew 600, as Sampson slew a 1000 of them with the Jawbone of an Ass,
Chapter 15.15, 16.
with their Ox-goads set upon the Philistines, and slew 600 of them. So that He
was a Deliverer though not a Judge.

Judge. Chapter 3. from 12. to the end.

SECT. CXXXV.
The Book of Ruth.
HEre the History Some think Samuel the Penman of this History.
of Ruth (according to the judgment of learned men) falls in, which serves
mainly to declare how Ruth being married to Boaz (Son to Salmon, a Prince of
the Tribe of Judah, who married Rahab that entertained the Spies at Jericho,)
bore unto him Obed, who was the Grandfather of David, of whom, according to the
Flesh, Christ came, Matthew. 1.5. As also to show that Christ deriving his
Humanity from the Gentiles as well as the Jews (Ruth being a Moabitess)
Salvation by Christ belongs not only to the Jews, but to the Gentiles also.

The History of Ruth is in brief this; God at this time (it seems) for the sins
of the people of Israel had sent a Famine among them. Upon this Elimelech of
Bethlem-Judah (or Bethlem-Ephrata, so called to distinguish it from another
Bethlem in Zebulun, Josh. 19.15.) with his wife Naomi, and his two Sons Mahlon
and Chilion went over into the Land of Moab to Sojourn there during the Famine.
Here Elimelech dies, and after his decease his two Sons married to two
Daughters of Moab, If they had embraced the true Religion before they married
them, doubtless they offended against the law, Deuteronomy. 7.2. Nehem. 13.23. That
Ruth had embraced the true Religion appears plain, v. 16. and Chapter 2.12. of
Orpah the case is doubtful, Chapter 1.15.
whose Names were Orpah and Ruth, and having lived there with them about ten
years, both these young men died without Children. Thus Naomi lost both her
Husband and her two Sons in this Country; She hearing at last that the Lord had
visited his people in mercy, and sent them plenty again, she resolves to return
to her own Country. It seems both her Daughters-in-law did intend at first to
have gone with her into the Land of Judah, and did both of them accompany her
part of the way thither. But she advised them both to return to their own
Mothers, for 'twas pity they should leave them, and go with a Mother-in-law
into a strange Country. Therefore she said to them, Return back, and the Lord
deal kindly with you, as you have dealt with your Husbands (my Sons) that are
now dead, and as ye have dealt with me. My prayer to the Lord is, that He would
please to provide you good Husbands, with whom ye may live comfortably, and who
may be able to defend you from Injuries, and provide things necessary for you,
that so your Husbands houses may be places of rest and true content unto you.
Then she kissed them to take her farewell of them, but they lifted up their
Voice and wept, and said, They would not leave her, but would go along with her
to her people. Naomi pressed them again to return. Alas! (says she) there are
no more Sons in my Womb that according to the Law [ Deuteronomy. 25.5, 6] might make
you Husbands. There is no expectation of any such thing from me, who am old.
Besides if it should be supposed that I should be married to an Husband this
night, and should have Sons by him, surely you would not stay for them, till
they were of age fit to make you Husbands. Therefore return to your own
Friends; For though the Hand of God is gone out against me, and is heavy upon
me, and He has brought me low; yet it grieves me not so much for my self as
for you, that I am not able to yield you any comfort or support at all. Then
they lift up their Voice and wept again, being much affected with these tender
Speeches of Hers to them. Quia non Religione, sed humanitate mota fuit ad
sequendum socrum.
However Orpah (thinking it best for her to return) kissed her Mother-in-law,
and took a final Farewell of her, but Ruth clave to her, and told Her, She would
not forsake her. Naomi told her, She saw her Sister was gone back to her
people, and the Country where the Possibly Orpah after her Husbands death had
fallen back to the Idolatry of the Moabites.
gods of the Moabites were worshipped; Go thou therefore (says she) after her.
V. 15. Tentative dictum non positive.
Ruth desired her not to press her to leave her, For (says she) whither thou
go, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy people shall be my
people, and thy God my God. Where thou die I will die, and where thou art
buried there will I be buried also. The Lord do so to me, A form of an Oath,
which not only the Jews, but other Nations used, by which they prayed God to
send some great evil upon them, if they did not speak truly, see 1 King. 19.2.
and 20.10. But they were naturally afraid to mention the evil they wished to
themselves or others, not daring to use such desperate particular Imprecations
as the prodigious Wretches of our Age do.
and more also, if ought but death part thee and me. Naomi perceiving her
stedfastness, left off pressing her further, and so they went on till they came
to Bethlem. When they came thither, the Inhabitants of that Town were amazed to
see her, who had lived in so good fashion among them, and went out with her
Husband and two Sons, return now in so poor a Condition with only a young Widow
hanging on her. And they asked with some admiration, Is this Naomi? She
answered, Call me not Naomi (which signifies Pleasant) but Mara (which
signifies Bitter) for the Lord has brought many bitter Sorrows and Afflictions
upon me. I went out full, but the Lord has brought me home empty. The Lord
has testified his Displeasure against me, and convinced me of my Sins, by
laying these sharp Afflictions on me, Ruth 1.

'Twas about the beginning of Barley-Harvest, in the Month Nisan (answering to
part of our March, and part of our April) when they came to Bethlem, and there
lived (as it seems) in a very poor Condition. Ruth told her Mother-in-law, She
had a mind to go out and Glean, if she could find a man's Field, who would so
much favor her as to give her leave. And herein she expressed her humility and
modesty, that she would not make use of the liberty allowed by the Law, [
Levit. 19.9.] without the leave and consent of the Owner. Her Mother bids her
go. She accordingly went, and it happened that she lighted upon a Field that
belonged to Boaz, a rich Kinsman of Elimelech's, and making suit to the
Overseer of the Reapers that she might have leave to glean after them; she
obtained her desire. Boaz coming to see his Reapers, said to them, The Lord
bless and prosper you and your labor; They answered, The Lord multiply his
blessings on thee. Boaz asked his Bailiff, Who that Damsel was who was there
gleaning? He told him, She was the Moabitess, that came back with Naomi out of
Moab, to whom he had given leave to glean, and she had followed her gleaning
hard from morning to that time, only now in the heat of the day she had rested
her self in the House or Hovel, where the Reapers did eat their meat. Boaz
hereupon spoke kindly to her, and bad her not go to any other Field but His to
glean in, and to abide fast by his Maidens, that followed the Reapers, and
gathered up the Corn. He tells her, He had charged his men that they should not
hinder her, nor do her any wrong. And (says he) when thou art athirst, go and
drink of the Vessels of water that my Servants have brought for themselves.
Ruth hereupon bowed her self, and fell on her face to the ground before him,
and said, What an extraordinary thing is this, that I being a Stranger should
find so much favor from thee? Boaz told her, He understood how faithful and
affectionate she had been to her Mother-in-law, and how piously she had
demeaned her self toward her in her old age, and how she had left her Father
and Mother, and the Land of her Nativity, to come to a people whom she knew
not. Now therefore (says he) the Lord Recompense thy work and labor of Love,
and let the God of Israel bountifully Reward thee (of his free Grace) under
whose Wings thou art come to trust, and to commit thy self to his Providence
and Care, having left thy own Country, and joined thy self to the Church and
people of God. She Replies, Though I be unworthy of the kindness thou have
already showed me, yet seeing thou art pleased of thy mere goodness to
vouchsafe it to me, I pray thee continue thy favor still to me, though I be
meaner than one of thy Handmaids. Boaz bids her at meal-times to come to that
Tent or Hovel where his Reapers did eat, and to partake of their Food and
Provisions, and to dip her Morsel in the sauce made with Vinegar, wherewith (in
those hot Countries) they were much refreshed. Or possibly he intends she
should freely eat of the morsels of meat that were provided, and dip them in
Vinegar, as others did. She accordingly came, and sat by the Reapers, but did
not boldly thrust her self in among them, but sat down somewhere besides them
to receive what they would give her. Boaz perceiving her modesty reached her
parched Corn; that is, new Corn dried over the fire, an usual Food in those
Countries, [see 1 Samuel 17.17. 1 Samuel 25.18. 2 Samuel 17.28.] and she did eat, and
satisfied her hunger, and what she left she carried to her poor Mother, verse.
18. Boaz then commanded his Servants, that they should permit her to glean even
among the Sheaves, and not rebuke her for it; yea to let fall some handfuls on
purpose for her. So she gleaned unto the Evening, and then beat out her
Gleanings, which came to about an Ephah or three pecks of our Measure, see
Exodus 16.36. which (with her reserved Provisions beforementioned) she brought
to her Mother, and told her in whose Field she had gleaned, and what great
kindness she had met with from Boaz, and how he bad her follow his Reapers and
his Maidens, (that gathered up the Corn] and to glean no where else but in his
Fields. Naomi hearing this, said, Blessed be Boaz of the Lord, who has not
left off his kindness to the living, nor to the dead, [see 2 Samuel 9.7.] He
seems to remember my Husband, and thine, (to whom he was near of Kin The next
Kinsman had Right by the Law to redeem any House or Land, which should be sold
by those of his Kindred, if they were not able to redeem it themselves, see
Levit. 25.25. And so also to marry the Widow of him that should die without
Cildren, that so he might raise up Seed to his Brother, Deuteronomy. 25.5. And thus
she gives Ruth an hint of what she afterward more fully imparted to her, viz.
how Boaz was by the Law of God to marry her, that he might raise up Seed to her
deceased Husband.
) and for their sakes to do us good. And seeing he has courteously invited thee
to glean in his Fields, and to go no where else; I advise thee that thou go out
with his Maidens, and only follow them, lest if they should see or meet thee in
another man's Field, and tell it to their Master, He should take it ill from
thee, and look upon it as a slighting of his kindness. So Ruth continued
gleaning in Boaz's Fields to the end of Harvest.

Ruth Chapter 2. whole Chapter.

Naomi now tells Ruth, that seeing Boaz was so near of Kin to her Husband, He
was bound by the Law of God to marry her, and no doubt would do so, if the
business were wisely managed. And (says he) shall not I do what I can to effect
it, that so thou may have rest, and live in plenty, whereas now thou art
exposed to many Hardships. Therefore take this course that I advise thee to.
Behold this night Boaz keeps his Winnowing-Feast, and uses to be merry at
it, and to lodge in his Threshing-floor, Their Threshing-floors in those times,
wherein they winnowed their Corn, and where probably they kept this their Feast
(which, as it seems, was at the end of their winnowing) were usually in the
open Fields, and the chief time of winnowing in those hot Countries was toward
the Evening, when the Wind begins to arise; and it seems Boaz did use at that
time to lodge in the Threshing-floor.

Moris tum fuit ut Patres-familias etiam divites urgentibus negotiis rusticanis
in areis etiam ipsis quietem caperent.

Ut usurpari poterit illud, Ovid. Fast. 1.
Non pudor in stipula placidam cepisse quietem,
Nec foenum capiti supposuisse suo.

(possibly in some straw there) so that thou may have the more easy and
private access to him. Dress thy self therefore handsomely in thy best Attire,
and perfume thy self, that thou may be the more pleasing in his eyes. Go down
to the Floor, but do not appear in his sight till after he is gone to take his
rest. And then go and lie down at his Feet The way she took in regard of some
circumstances seems unwarrantable, and savoured much of womanish weakness. 1.
It had an appearance of scandal, and therefore Boaz was loath to have it known,
verse. 14. 2. It might have been an occasion of sin. It seems an immodest thing
in Ruth to cast her self down at a man's feet in the night, and to uncover his
feet. 3. It might have been a means of allenating Boaz's affection from her,
and might have given him suspicion that she was not so modest and chaste, as she
seemed to be, had not God, by his secret Providence, turned it all to good.
and lift up the Clothes that lie on his Feet to cover them, that so he awaking
may look about and take notice who uncovered them. I confess this Counsel I
give thee, if I were not well assured of the Piety, Gravity and Wisdom of Boaz;
as also of thy modesty and inviolable Chastity, would not seem convenient, nor
decent, nor free from scandal. But being assured of both these, I am not
discouraged from giving thee this advice to draw on Boaz to marry thee, who by
the Law ought to do it. Ruth follows the advice of her Mother-in-law, and when
Boaz was gone to take his rest at the end of the heap of Corn, she came softly
and uncovered his Feet, and laid her down by him. At midnight Boaz awakes, and
being much surpised to find that a Woman lay at his Feet, He asks, Who she
was. She answers, I am Ruth thy Handmaid; Spread, I pray thee, thy Skirt A
proverbial Speech, signifying the taking of One into Protection.
over me; that is, accept me for thy Wife, and perform to me what so near a
Kinsman, as thou art, ought to do, viz. to marry me, and so to raise up Seed to
my deceased Husband. Boaz said, Blessed be thou of the Lord, my Daughter, for
thou have showed more kindness in the latter end, than in the beginning; as if
he should have said, Thou shewedst much kindness to thy Husband whilst he
lived, and since his death in leaving thy Country, and coming along with his
Mother hither; yet thy present Act of chaste love exceeds all the rest, and in
thy preferring me, an old man, before young men, who are more suitable to thy
age, and that out of love to thy deceased Husband, to revive his Name among the
people of God. Therefore, fear not, I will do what lies in me to satisfy thy
desire, according to God's Law, in procuring for thee such an Husband as it
requires; For this whole Town speaks thee to be a virtuous Woman. And I must
tell thee, though I be near of Kin to thee, yet there is one nearer than my
self, who ought to be preferred before me, and to marry thee, and to redeem the
Land thy Mother will sell. Therefore in the morning I will inquire whether he
will perform that part of a Kinsman to thee, and if not, then will I do it my
self. Lie down therefore and take thy rest until the morning, and then thou
shall know further concerning this matter. But let it not be known that thou
came hither, and layest at my Feet. For next to the keeping of a good
Conscience, we must be careful to keep and preserve a good Name. Ruth
accordingly reposes her self there till toward the morning, and then rising to
go away, Boaz bids her stay a little, and bring her Apron, and according to the
honest plain bounty of those Times he gave her six Measures of Barley, as a
Token of his love, and for a present supply of Hers and her Mothers wants. Ruth
coming to her Mother-in-law so very early in the morning, she hardly knew her
at first, and therefore asked who she was? Ruth relates to her all that had
happened. Then Naomi bad her rest satisfied with what was already done, and
quietly expect what issue God would give unto it, and to stay within, that she
might be in a readiness, if Boaz should send for her. For she believed He would
not be quiet till he had brought this business to some issue.

Ruth Chapter 3. whole Chapter.

Boaz the next morning went to the Gate of the City, and there sitting down, he
waited for his Kinsmans passing by [who was nearest of Kin to Ruths Husband,
and was like to go forth that way into the Field about his occasions,] as also
that he might meet with such Elders of the City (as did usually sit in that
place of Judicature) and were fit to be called together for the hearing and
determining that great and weighty business which he had in hand; of which
number He called together ten. And immediately, as he expected, this Kinsman
came by, to whom he applied himself, and told him, That the Widow Naomi, who
was lately returned out of Moab, had a piece of Land made over to her for a
Jointure or Dowry by her Husband Elimelech, which she was to enjoy for term of
life, and then it was to descend to Mahlon her eldest Son, but he was now dead.
He tells him, This Jointure Naomi (being poor) intended now to sell, to
maintain her self and her Daughter-in-law. He acquaints him that the right of
Redeeming it belonged to him as next Kinsman to Elimelech; but if he refused to
redeem it, then it belonged to himself, as next of Kin after him to Elimelech,
The Kinsman hearing this, said, He would buy it of Naomi. Boaz told him, If he
would buy it of Naomi, he must buy it of Ruth (the Widow of Mahlon, the Son of
Elimelech, who had also a Right in it,) and so coming in as next Kinsman to buy
her Husbands Land, he was bound as next Kinsman also to marry her, that he
might raise up Seed to her deceased Husband, and so continue his Name to his
Inheritance. For as Naomi had enjoyed this parcel of Land as Elimelech's Widow,
so it seems it was ordered that Ruth should enjoy it after her, as Mahlon's
Widow; and he that would Challenge from Ruth the Privilege of next Kinsman in
the purchase of her Land, was also to perform the duty of the next Kinsman to
her in marrying of Her. The Kinsman hearing this, and perceiving whither it
tended, told Boaz, He could not buy this Land clogged with such a Condition. If
he should, he might thereby mar his own Inheritance. For his marrying with Ruth
(a poor Widow) would be a great hindrance to his Estate, which might be much
advanced by a rich Wife; and besides if he should marry her, and have but one
Son by her, that Son of his would be called by the Name of Mahlon (Ruths former
Husband) and he should want an Heir (begotten by himself) to bear his own Name,
which was Onans fear, Genesis 38.9. Therefore he freely renounced his Right which
he had as next Kinsman unto Boaz, and in token thereof, as the manner was in
all other Alienations, he plucked off his own shoe, When the Widow complained
to the Elders, and the next Kinsman notwithstanding refused to marry her, in
that case the Woman was to pull off his shoe, and spit in his face, Deuteronomy. 25.9.
But here there was no such thing done, but the man pulled off his own shoe and
gave it to Boaz: The ground of which Custom was this, the shoe signified the
Right that a man had to go and walk at pleasure upon any parcel of Land as his
proper Demeans; for possessio is quasi pedum positio. And the pulling off his
shoe, and giving it to his Neighbor, intimated that he did forgo his own
Right, and resigned it to his Neighbor, and gave him power to go upon the
ground as his own, see Psalm. 60.8.
and gave it to Boaz, thereby signifying that he willingly resigned his Right
unto him.

Boaz (as it seems) hereupon bought of Naomi the Land beforementioned, and
called the Elders there present to be Witnesses thereof, and as a Consequent
thereof he tells them, He had purchased Ruth to himself for a Wife (the Widow
of Mahlon) to raise up the Name of the dead upon his Inheritance, that it may
not be cut off from among his Brethren, and from the Gate of his Place; that
is, from among the Inhabitants of Bethlehem, who daily go in and out at the
Gates of the City, and upon all civil Occasions resort thither, as to their
place of Judicature. Hereupon the Elders, and all the people there present,
declared that they were all Witnesses to these Transactions. And so they wished
Boaz all happiness with Ruth, whom he intended to take for his Wife, praying
unto the Lord that she might be to him, what Rachel Here Rachel is named before
Leah, because she was Jacob's true and lawful wife; Leah was fraudulently put
upon him.
and Leah (which two did build the House of Israel) were to Jacob, viz. that
she might be very loving and comfortable to him, and might bear him many
Children as they did, that thereby the Israel, or Church of God, might be
increased. Then speaking to Him, they said, As for thy self, we heartily wish
thou may do worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem. We heartily
wish thy House may be like the House of Pharez; See Sect. 35. of Chap. 3.
that is, as Pharez (of whose Stock thou art) was blessed in his Posterity
(though his Mother was a Stranger, and not of the Stock of Israel,) so that his
Children, and Childrens Children have been most honorable in the Tribe of
Judah; so we wish that thou may be blessed in thy Children begotten of this
poor Stranger, and that they may still uphold the Honor of that House. So Boaz
took Ruth to wife, and God gave her to conceive, and she bare him a Son. Upon
this the Women congratulated Naomi, saying, Blessed be the Lord who has not
left thee this day without a Kinsman, a pious Kinsman indeed who has raised up
Seed to his Kinsman thy Son deceased, and let his Name be famous in Israel for
it. He will comfort and revive thee, and restore thee (as it were) to a new
life; He will be a Nourisher of thy old age, and make thee as it were young
again; For Ruth thy beloved Daughter-inlaw [who is better to thee than seven
Sons] has now born him Verse. 15. (...) poterit verti peperit ei, scil.
vindici. Pronomen enim affixum saepe ponitur. Et exponendum est per dativum
separatum. Capel.
a Son, which must needs be matter of great joy to him. Then Naomi took the
Child, and laid him in her Bosom, and became a dry-Nurse to him. And the Women,
her Neighbors, said, There is a Son born to Naomi, because this Son of Ruth
was to raise up the Name of her deceased Husband [Mahlon the Son of Naomi] and
to be accounted his Son rather than the Son of Boaz. However they gave their
advice that his Name should be called Obed, importing that they hoped he would
be very serviceable to his Mother and Grandmother. Indeed every where in the
Genealogies Obed is reckoned the Son of Boaz, but that is because there it is
fit the line should be drawn according to the natural Descents, that we may
truly know the Ancestors of whom Christ came, without any respect to this legal
Ordination. This Obed was the Father of Jesse, who was the Father of David. The
principal end of setting down this Genealogy By the Genealogy of David set down
in the end of this Book, it is manifest it was written after David's time,
unless that were added to the Book in succeeding times by some other Author.
here, seems to be to show the truth of Jacob's Prophecy concerning Christ's
coming of the Tribe of Judah; and therefore it begins with Pharez Juda's Son,
and so descends to David, of whose Stock it was also known that the Messiah
was to come.

Ruth Chapter 4. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXXXVI.
WE return now to the History of the Judges. When Ebud was dead, the Children
of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord. Under none of the Judges did
they enjoy so long a peace as in the days of Ehud, as we may see Chapter 3.30. viz.
80 years. And now we shall show how ill they requited the Lord for so great a
Mercy. As standing waters are wont to putrify, so they were corrupted by their
long Peace, and by degrees fell off from God unto Idolatry, as they formerly
had done. Upon this God gave them up into the hands of Jabin King of Canaan,
(that is, of those Canaanites that dwelt in the Northern parts) Successor to
that Jabin slain by Joshua, whose chief City Hazor he burnt, Josh. 11.1, 10,
11, 12. yet this Son or Successor of his (it seems) re-inforcing himself,
recovered from the Israelites that part of Land and Territory that lay about
Hazor, and repairing the City, reigned there as his Predecessors had done. And
now at last, not contented with his own Kingdom, he made War against the
Israelites in general, and brought them into Subjection to him, and cruelly
oppressed them, in Revenge (no doubt) of what Joshua had formerly done against
that Kingdom and City. The Text says, He mightily oppressed them, verse. 3.
which Expression is no where used concerning any other Bondage the Children of
Israel were under; and he oppressed them a long while, viz. twenty years, Third
Oppression under Jabin twenty years.
and this Oppression must needs be the more grievous to them, because they were
brought under the Canaanites, that accursed Nation whom God promised to cast
out before them, and would have done it had not they, by their grievous Sins,
prevented their own Mercies. And observable it is, that whereas their first
Bondage under Cushan-rishathaim, King of Mesopotamia, continued but seven
years, the next under Eglon continued eighteen years, and this under Jabin
continued twenty years. Thus we see when lighter Corrections did no good, the
next were sorer, and of longer continuance; and because they abused God's
Mercy, and readiness to withdraw his Hand when they cried unto him, therefore
he continued the next Judgments longer upon them. But to go on. The Captain of
Jabin's Host was Sisera, who dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles [in the lot of
Naphtali] whither many of the Canaanites, in the tim^ of Isreal's prevailing,
fled as unto a place of Strength, and there fortified themselves. Jabin had a
great Army, and 900 Chariots of Iron, and continuing to Oppress Israel very
sorely, they cried unto the Lord, and humbled themselves, Deborah the Third
Judge.
and He was at length pleased to hear their Cry, and send them a Deliverer. It
seems at this time Namely, whilst Jabin oppressed them, so that those 20 years,
or within (...) those 40 y^ars of D^brorah, verse. 31. Populum judicabat, sine
Principatu tamen. Jus populo dixit, litesque composuit, sed absque
jurisdictione, sive potestate judiciaria. Quia Prophetissa and mulier prudens
erat, sponte populus ad eam controversias suas detulit. Judices ordinarios [ut
probabile est] Tyrannus Sabin e medio sustulerat.
Deborah a Prophetess judged Israel, not Governing chiefly and properly as a
Judge (whose Office was to hear and determine Causes, and in those times
especially to make War against their Enemies,) but as a Prophetess, counselling
and directing the people that came to her in hard and difficult Cases, and
revealing to them the Will of God by the Spirit of Prophecy, which God had
given her. It Is like the Tyrant Jabin would not have suffered any man to have
been Judge or Governor among them, but as for Deborah a Woman, possibly he
took no notice of her. Deborah (as it seems) used to give forth her Directions
and Counsel sitting under a Palm Tree that was between Rama and Bethel in Mount
Ephraim. Deborah now, by the special Direction from God, sends for Barak Son of
Abinoam, who dwelt at Kedesh-Naphtali, and imparts to him what God had revealed
to her either by the secret Inspiration of his Spirit, or perhaps by the
Ministry of an Angel. That some Angel did appear to her either before or after
the battle sought with Sisera, may appear from Chapter 5.26.
She tells him, God had commanded him to go and draw together to Mount Tabor an
Army of the Israelites, and to take ten thousand of the Children of Naphtali,
and of the Children of Zebulun (because they were nearest at hand) and those of
Naphtali were likely to be forwarder in this Work, because Barak was of that
Tribe, and they also were most oppressed by Jabin and Sisera, Hazor and
Harosheth being both in their Tribe. She tells him, When he had gathered this
Army together, the Lord would incline the heart of Sisera, Jabin's General, to
come with his Multitudes and Iron-Chariots to fight him at the River Kishon
that runs near to Mount Tabor, and would deliver him into his hands. Barak (it
seems) believed what Deborah told him, viz. that Sisera should be vanquished by
him, and therefore his Faith is commended, Heb. 11.32, 33. but yet his Faith
was assaulted with some doubts and fears; for he tells her, If she would go
with him, He would go, else not. It Is like he was desirous to have her at hand
(being a Prophetess) to give them Counsel and Advise upon every Emergency; she
readily yields to go with him, but withal shows him, that because of his fear
the Lord would deprive him of a great part of that glory he should otherwise
have had; And because he would not undertake this Enterprise without the
presence and encouragement of a Woman, therefore a Woman should carry away a
part of the Honor of the Victory, to wit, Jael the Wife of Heber, into whose
hands Sisera should fall, and by whom he should be slain. Deborah therefore
accompanying Barak, he went to Kadesh in Naphtali the place of his Birth, and
here gathering together an Army, mostly consisting of the Tribes of Zebulun and
Naphtali, (though some of the other Tribes did voluntarily join with them, as
appears Chapter 5.) he marched with ten thousand men following him toward Mount
Tabor, whither he was commanded to go. Near unto this City of Kedesh-Heber, the
Kenite had his Tent, The Kenites lived in Tents, and not in Houses.
who (for some Reasons not here mentioned) had severed himself from the rest of
the Kenites, who were seated among the Children of Judah, see Chapter 1.16. and now
lived in the Tribe of Naphtali. Sisera hearing that Barak had got together an
Army about Tabor, He gathers together speedily all the Forces he could make,
which were very many, and with them and his 900 Chariots he marches to Kishon
to encounter him. Deboral hearing of his approach, encourages Barak to go out
and fight him, telling him, That the Lord was gone out before him as General of
his Army to fight for him, and would certainly give him Victory over Sisera. So
Barak marched down from the hill with ten thousand men following of him. They
joining battle, Sisera was totally discomfited, insomuch that he himself
lighting out of his Chariot, he was forced to run away on foot. His whole Army
was routed, slaughtered or scattered, not a man left in the Field to make
resistance.

Those that fled, fled toward Harosheth, whom Barak vigorously pursued, but
Sisera himself fled to Hebers Tent the Kenite, who though joining with God's
people in the profession and practice of the true Religion, yet paying possibly
to Jabin some kind of Tribute, he had taken him under his Protection, and the
rather because he lived only as a Sojourner among the Israelites, and laid no
Claim to the Land, and lived a Peaceable and Pastoral kind of life, and so was
not like to rise up in Rebellion again. Jael the wife of Heber meeting Sisera,
desired him to turn into her Tent, and bids him fear V. 20. Timere quidem
probibet, nil tamen spondet.
nothing. He accordingly does so, and she gave him Water to drink, and Milk and
Butter to eat, and covered him with a Mantle, that he might repose himself,
being very weary. He desires her to stand in her Tent door, and if any came to
enquire after him, she should not acknowledge he was there. Jael seeing he was
fallen asleep, (by a special and extraordinary Instinct of the Spirit of God)
took a long Nail (such as they used to fasten their Tents with) and drove it on
a sudden into his Temples, and so fastened his head to the ground.

Barak pursuing Sisera, Jael went out to meet him, and told him. She would show
him the man whom he sought after; Barak coming into the Tent, found Sisera
dead, and the Nail driven through his Temples. So God subdued Jabin that day,
and his Host before the Children of Israel; And the Israelites prevailed so far
against him, that they brought him and his people to an utter and final
destruction. But however the Lord made use of Barak and his Army as Instruments
in obtaining this great Victory, yet He himself was the Principal Agent in it,
partly by taking away the Courage of the Enemy, and possessing them with fear,
and partly by fighting against the Canaanites from Heaven, and sending into
their very faces an impetuous storm of Hail, unto which Deborah alludeth, [ Chapter
5.20.]

Judge. Chapter 4. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXXXVII.
AFter this Victory Deborah being a Prophetess, composed (as it is thought) a
Triumphant Song, and She and Barak, and the Commanders of the Army, and the
Elders of the people, Sang it together, to the Glory of God, who subdued their
Foes before them. They begin thus, Praise ye the Lord for avenging of Israel,
when the people offered themselves willingly; principally hereby intending
Zebulun and Naphtali, who first appeared, and came in as Volunteers, at the
sound of the Trumpet, Barak having no Authority to press them to this Service.
But with them also some others joined in the day of Battle, viz. Ephraim,
Manasseh, Issachar, verse. 14, 15. Then in a Poetical strain she calls upon
Kings and Princes to hear what she had to say concerning this great Work which
God had done for Israel, and she addresseth her Speech the rather to them,
because they are wont oftentimes in their Pride to Oppress others, and
therefore she desires they might understand what God had done to Jabin and
Sisera, and so might take heed of provoking God, by Oppressing his people, as
these had done. And the better to express how terrible God had now been to
their Adversaries, she compares the Terrors of this day with those when the Law
was given on Mount Sinai. Lord when thou came out of Seir, when thou
marchedst out of the Field of Edom, the Earth trembled; that is, when the
Children of Israel stood at Mount Sinai, from the East (where was Edom and
Mount Seir) a divine Splendour from the fiery Cloud began first to appear to
them, and seeming to come from that Region, drew nigher and nigher to them,
till it rested on the Mountain [see Deuteronomy. 33.2. Psalm. 86.7, 8.] Then the Earth
trembled, and the Heavens dropped; that is, the Clouds seemed to be dissolved
into extraordinary Showers and Storms. The Mountains melted, and trembled, and
shook, even Sinai it self, Elegans poetica Hyperbole. Etiam Reges ferocientes
comparantur montibus, Psalm. 68.17.
and seemed to flow away at thy presence. And as thou did at that time
wonderfully appear at Sinai, causing those prodigious Effects of thy Presence
to be felt, so did thy Majesty and Power now at this battle no less appear for
us against our Enemies. She goes on, The Case was very sad with us before; For
from the days of Shamger (who was indeed a Deliverer of us from our Enemies)
unto this present time wherein Jael appeared, and showed her self a worthy
Instrument of our good; we lay under great Oppressions, insomuch that the
Highways being kept by Soldiers, all Trading was cut off, people not daring
to travel but in by-ways; nor to live in Villages, but only in walled-Cities,
whither they fled to secure themselves, till God was pleased by me (a poor
woman) to set on foot this glorious Work of our Deliverance, who as a
Prophetess teaching them God's Will, and what He would have them to do, (and
with no less care seeking their good, than a loving Mother does her dear
Childrens,) I encouraged them to this War, which has succeeded so well. If any
ask a reason of the Calamities we were under? Alas! we must needs acknowledge
the Israelites, by shameful Apostasy, fell away from God, and his true Worship,
and worshipped Heathen Idols; hereupon the Lord raised against them cruel
Enemies on every side, who made Inroads into their Land, and many times came up
to the very Gates of their Cities; And they were so dispirited with fear, and
faintness of heart, that not a man among the many thousands of Israel durst
take up a Shield or Spear against their Enemies, see Levit. 26.36. She goes on,
I cannot but highly honor the Heads and Rulers of the people, who (though
having great Estates) were as willing to hazard themselves in this War, as the
meaner sort, who have scarce any thing to lose; and such grave and ancient
Persons are not usually so fit for War as younger men; and therefore it argued
an Heroic Spirit in them to put to their helping hand among the meanest in
this Cause of God, and their Examples no doubt had a great influence to draw on
many of the meaner sort. And (says she) let all those men of honor and
eminency, viz. Magistrates and Judges, (that sit in the Seat of Judgment, and
use to ride up and down on white Asses, Riding on Asses was it seems a Note of
great and honorable Persons in that time, see Judge. 12.14. and it seems white
Asses were in principal esteem.
) and so likewise let all the common sort of people, that travel on foot from
one place to another, let them all in their several places speak of this great
Deliverance which God has wrought for his people. For whereas before all the
Highways of the Land were pestered with Soldiers, so that there was no
stirring with any safety from one place to another, and so all the whole course
of Justice was in a manner stopped; now the Judges might sit in Judgment as
formerly, and might ride up and down upon their white Asses, according to their
wonted manner, which before they could not do, and the common people of all
sorts might now pass to and fro, and travel safely about their occasions. Now
the Country People that used to be assaulted and surprised by their Enemies,
when they went to the Wells and Fountains to fetch water, are delivered from
this danger, and may freely go thither, and there declare the righteous Acts of
God in destroying their Enemies: and may also now freely frequent the Cities on
Court or Marketdays. Upon consideration of all these Mercies, Deborah rouses up
her self to praise the Lord with all her Soul and Strength. Awake Deborah,
awake, utter thy Song; Arise Barak, and lead thy Captivity Captive; that is,
now after thy Victory lead those Captive that kept us formerly in Captivity,
Psalm. 68.18. And after thou have led them in Triumph, let those of the
Canaanites (whom thou have taken) be slain, as God has commanded; and let
those of other Nations that are taken with them be reserved for Slaves. Thus
God made the poor despised remainders of his people, rescued by this Victory
out of the Tyranny of the Canaanites, to have Dominion over their Nobles, even
their great and mighty men. Yea the Lord has made me (says Deborah) though a
weak woman, to have Dominion over the Mighty, and by my Counsel and
Encouragement to subdue great Princes and Commanders. Then Deborah relates how
the several Tribes acquitted themselves in this Expedition, praising or blaming
them according to their Deserts. First, She begins with Ephraim; out of Ephraim
was there a root of them against Amalek; that is, one rising of the Israelites
against our Enemies did spring up from Ephraim, and those of this Tribe (that
armed themselves for the War) were assigned by Barak to go against the
Amalekites to Encounter them, and keep them from coming and joining their
Forces with those of Jabin's, whilst Barak with his Army went against Sisera.
Machir was the only Son of Manasseh, and so by the Children of Machir are meant
the Tribe of Manasseh.
And after thee, that is, after you of Ephraim were in Arms, some of Benjamin
came and mixed themselves among you to go against Amalek; And out of Machir,
that is, out of the half-Tribe of Manasseh, seated within Jordan, some of them,
yea even of their Governors came down to assist Barak; and out of Zebulun, even
some of their Doctors, Scribes and Lawyers, and others that were better at
their Pen than Sword, yet came among them to assist in this Cause. And both the
Princes and common people also of the Tribe of Issachar, did readily come in to
Deborah and Barak, with whom he marched on foot from Mount Tabor into the
Valley, (being so commanded by an Instinct from God) and willingly exposed
himself to great danger in that place, where Sisera had great advantage of Him,
coming against him with Iron-Chariots and Horsemen. She then declares how, For
the divisions of Reuben (whereby they were kept from sending any Aid to their
Brethren in this just War) there were great heart-burnings and discontents. O
Reuben (says she) why did thou desert thy Brethren, and stay at home upon so
poor a Pretense, as to look after thy Cattle? The Cries and Groans of God's
oppressed People had been more worthy thy regarding than the bleatings of thy
Flocks. For the divisions of Reuben great Exceptions were taken, and great
wondrings and musings, and strange Conjectures made, that they should desert
their Brethren in so just a Cause. As for the Gileadites, that is, the Tribe of
Gad, and the other half-Tribe of Manasseh (who had the Country of Gilead for
their lot, Josh. 13.14, etc.) she says, They abode beyond Jordan; that is, they
pretended they dwelt so far off, that they could not come in time enough to the
help of Barak. As for Dan, she says, He remained in his Ships; that is, the
Danites living by the Seacoast, pretended they were Seamen and Merchants, and
so could not, without neglecting their Traffic, engage in this War; and
possibly they thought that if the War did not succeed, they could most of them
get away in their Ships, and carry their Estates with them; and so they minded
their own private safety and profit before the Public Good. Asher also (that
dwelt nigh unto the Sea) pretended that the Breaches and Ruins in the walls of
their Cities were such, that they durst not leave them in such a weak
condition, lest in their absence the Neighboring Canaanites should seize upon.
These were weak Excuses to keep them from so necessary a Service which God now
called them to. But as for the Children of Zebulun and Naphtali, they showed
themselves brave men indeed; For they fought courageously against Sisera, and
jeoparded their lives in the high places of the Field, and beat the Enemy from
the Hills, and sought them also in the most open Valleys. But though several of
the Tribes of Israel were backward to help their Brethren, yet Jabin had many
Confederate Canaanitish Kings that joined with him, (either in their own
Persons, or by their Forces,) to help him against the Israelites. And Sisera
and his Forces being worsted at Tabor, and flying (as it seems) to Taanach,
Megiddo an eminent City, which Manasseh had in Issachar. Josh. 17.11. not far
from Jezreel, and the River Kishon. Taanach a Royal City near Megiddo, Josh.
12.21.
and there being re-inforc'd with the Soldiers of these Confederate Kings,
renewed the battle, but were there totally discomfited. And it is observable,
that these Confederate Canaanites came not to fight for gain or pay, but out of
love to the Cause, and out of enmity and hatred to the Israelites, from whose
overthrow they expected much spoil. But they got nothing by the bargain, but
lost all they had, and themselves too: Nay further (says she) we may truly say
that God himself fought for us from Heaven. For the Stars in their stations, by
extraordinary influences at God's appointment, raised stormy Meteors, and
prodigious Thunder and Hail, all which did help to ruin Sisera's Army. The
River Kishon also swept them away. For many of them in their flight attempted
to get over the River, and were drowned, and their dead bodies were carried
down by the stream. Then in a Triumphant Gratulation, she cries out, O my Soul,
thou have trodden down strength; as if she should have said, Oh my Soul, God
has heard thy prayers, and given the Army raised at thy Instigation Victory
over their proud Enemies, who gloried in their strength. Yea though they had
many Horses, high-fed and pampered, yet they proved unserviceable, and did not
hurt the Israelites, by reason that through their overmuch metal and spirit,
and their pawings and pransings, they brake their hoofs, and foundred their
feet in that hot, hard, and stony-ground. All these things (says she) declare
the wonderful goodness of God toward us, and call for high Praises and
Thansgivings from us. But the Angel of the Covenant (the Son of God) whose
Prophetess I am, has bid me to call for your Curses against Meroz, and the
Inhabitants thereof, who dwelling near to the place where this battle was
fought, and as it were within the noise of our Trumpets, yet came not forth to
the help of the Lords people against their mighty Enemies. What the effect of
this Curse was we do not find, but there is no more mention made of this City
any where in the Scriptures, which gives occasion to some to suspect that some
dismal Fate befell it. But though Meroz was cursed, yet Jael was blessed;
Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, that is, she
shall be highly extolled and applauded, and many blessings shall be wished unto
her, for her heroic Act in killing Sisera, and people shall pray that she may
be blessed above all women who live in Tents, as she and the Kenites do. Sisera
fled to her Tent to hide himself, and being very thirsty, asked a little water
of her. And she gave him not only water, but Milk and Cream (or possibly
Buttermilk) and that in a large great Bowl, suitable to his Greatness and
Dignity. He falling asleep, she gave him a deadly blow on the head with an
Hammer. He strove to rise, V. 27. Est haec pulcherrima (...) quares gesta
oculis perspicue quasi subjicitur, and describuntur motus qui proprij sunc
repent and violenta morte pereuntibus. Accepto quippe gravissimo vulnere
conabatur surgere, sed viribus distitutus rursum cadebat, ac inter pedes
Jahelis misere jacebat.
but could not, for having received his deaths wound, he fell down again, yea
he fell down dead at her feet; so she nailed his head to the ground with an
iron Pin or Nail, and then cut it off. This was a wonderful disappointment to
Sisera's Mother, who with impatience exspected his Return with Victory. She
looked out at the window, V. 28. Here we have another figurative amplification
befitting a Poetical Hymn, whereby is supposed how it was likely Sisera's
Mother, and her Maidens would behave themselves upon occasion of his not coming
when they expected him. We have here also a lively and ironical representation
of Pride and carnal Confidence, presuming of Success in Enterprises upon carnal
grounds, without regard to God's Power and Providence.
and asked why is his Chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his
Chariot? Her Women about her answered her, yea she was ready to give this
Answer to her self; They have undoubtedly sped, and now stay to divide the
Spoil, to every Man a Damsel or two, but to Sisera a prey of diverse Colors, of
diverse Colors of Needle Work, so wrought that both sides are alike, and of
equal beauty, and fit to be worn about the Necks of those to whom the best Prey
belongs, as great Officers and Commanders, and such as have done best Service
in the Fight. But alas, she will find her self miserably deceived, and her Son
to be in another condition. So let all thine Enemies perish, O Lord, but let
them that love thee become Prosperous, Glorious and Renowned, and let their
Prosperity grow and increase daily, as the Sun when it rises in a clear
Morning does shine brightly and gloriously, and that more and more, until it
show it self in its greatest strength and brightness at Noonday, Prove. 4.18.
And upon this Victory the Land had Rest until forty years were up since the
former Rest or Peace restored by Ehud.

Chapter 5. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXXXVIII.
Fourth Oppression under the Midianites seven years.
THe Children of Israel falling again to Idolatry, and doing evil in the sight
of the Lord, He delivered them into the hands of the Midianites, who oppressed
them seven years. We read not indeed that they brought them into such Bondage
as other Oppressors had done, but only made every year Inroads into their Land,
and so robbed and pillaged their Country. The Midianites (though the Posterity
of Abraham) were always deadly Enemies to the Israelites, and in the latter
days of Moses the Israelites had destroyed multitudes of them, as we may see
Numb. 31.17. Possibly the Midianites resolved now to take Revenge on them for
it. However when the Lord intends to punish a people for their sins, he can
raise up against them what Nation he pleases. And in this time that the
Midianites thus vexed Israel, many of those Dens, and Caves, and strong Holds
in Rocks, which were in the Land of Canaan, were made by the Israelites to hide
themselves, and their Goods from the Midianites. These Midianites having got
(as it seems) some of those Eastern Nations that bordered upon them, as the
Ishamelites, Arabians, etc. to join with them (who dwelt not in Cities or
Towns, but in Tents only, which they used to remove from one place to another,)
every Spring when the Israelites had sown their Corn, these Midianites and
their Confederates came with their Tents, and Camels, and Cattle, that they
might eat up the increase of the Land, and therefore are compared to
Grasshoppers or Locusts, verse. 5.

And they entered on the East passing over Jordan, and went quite through the
Land, even as far as Gaza, that lay on the Western-Sea, destroying all as they
went, leaving in a manner no sustenance for Israel, or very little, and driving
away their Cattle. So that the Israelites were hereby greatly impoverished. In
this their Distress they cried unto the Lord, and he sent a Prophet unto them
(his Name is not recorded) who said to them, Thus says the Lord, I brought you
out of Egypt, and delivered you from all those that oppressed you, and drove
out the Canaanites before you, and gave you their Land, and said to you, I am
the Lord your God; See that you Worship not the gods of the Amorites in whose
Land you dwell; Because Religious Worship is always accompanied with fear and
reverence of that God whom we worship; therefore fear is often put for the
whole Worship that we give to God.
but you have not obeyed my Voice, and therefore you need not wonder at what is
come upon you. Sometime after this the Angel of the Covenant (the Son of God,
called Jehovah, verse. 24. appeared unto Gideon, the Son of Joash, of the Family
of Abiezer, of the Tribe of Manasseh at Ophrath, where he dwelt, and not
desiring to seem to Gideon any other than some Prophet sent to him by God, He
sat down under an Oak, as a man wearied with travel, and that desired to rest
himself, having as a Traveller a Staff in his hand. Thus the Son of God did
often in the Old Testament take on him an humane shape, to prefigure his
Incarnation. And accordingly now he appeared unto Gideon, who was threshing
Wheat by the Wine Press, to hide it from the Midianites. By which it appears
that Gideon, though a man of Note, and having many Servants under him, verse.
27. yet was a man also of an humble spirit, and disdained not to employ himself
in any honest labor. The Angel salutes him thus, The Lord is with thee thou
mighty man of Valor; Gideon the Fourth Judge.
this He spoke as pre-signifying that great Courage and Valor the Lord
intended to endow him with. Gideon replied, Oh, my Lord, if the Lord be with
us, why then is all this befallen us? where are all the Miracles our Fathers
told us of? but the Lord has now forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands
of the Midianites. The Angel replies, Thus says the Lord, go in this thy might
which I have given thee, and rely on my Promise to assist thee in this great
Work which I call thee to, and thou shall save Israel from the hands of the
Midianites. Have not I sent thee? and therefore having both Authority from Me,
and a Promise of Success, thou may, without all scruple, undertake this
Service. And he said unto him, O Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel? These
words of Gideon seem to proceed from weakness of Faith, but do not argue a
total want of it, (for his Faith is commended, Heb. 11.32.) but as a man
apprehensive of his own weakness, he desires Direction how to carry on so great
a Work, and what means he should use for the atchieving so great a Design.
Alas! says he, the thousand that I belong to is poor in Manasseh; I am not only
weak in my self, but also in Friends and Allies. The Lord said unto him, I will
be with thee, and I am All-sufficient, and able to give thee such Wisdom and
Power as is requisite for thee to effect it. I will surely be with thee, and
thou shall smite the Midianites as easily as if thou had to do but with one
man. Gideon said, If I have found Grace in thy sight, I pray thee show me a
sign that thou talkest with me from God, and art sent of Him thus to speak unto
me; and tarry I pray thee a little that I may entertain thee with such
Provisions as I can on a sudden make. So Gideon went in, and made ready a Kid
and unleavened Cakes, of which he provided a large quantity, V. 19. Of an Ephah
of flour.
intending possibly to oblige this Stranger to take some of them with him to
sustain him in his Journey, see Genesis Chapter 18. and 19. and Judge. 13.15. The Flesh
and Cakes he put in a Basket, and the Broth in a Pot, and brought it out to Him
(sitting under the Oak) and presented it to him. For apprehending Him at
present to be only a Prophet sent of God to him; He desires to give Him such
Entertainment as was fit for him to give to a Stranger and a Traveller, as
Abraham, Lot, and Manoah in like Cases did. The Angel bids him take the Flesh
and unleavened Cakes and to lay them upon the Rock that was hard by, and then
to pour out the Broth upon them. Which being done, the Angel with the end of
his Staff that was in his hand, touched the Flesh and the unleavened Cakes, and
there arose up fire, Here fire comes out of a Rock as water formerly did, Exodus
17.6.
out of the Rock, and immediately consumed them, and then He presently vanished
out of his sight. Thus what Gideon intended for a Feast, was miraculously
turned by the Angel into a kind of Burnt-Offering or Sacrifice, that thereby
his Faith might be strengthened, and that he might be assured that the Service
God called him to should be accepted, and that he should have good Success in
it. Gideon perceiving now that it was an Angel that had talked with him, (both
by his miraculous consuming the Provisions he had brought, as also by his
sudden vanishing out of his sight,) he was sorely afraid. Oh (says he) because
I have seen an Angel of the Lord face to face, in that visible form which he
assumed, I shall surely die. In those days (it seems) it was a received Opinion
among the Jews, that if they had seen an Angel Vetustissimus hic hominum metus,
ne morte aut male aliquo gravi afficerentur, conspecto coelitus aliquo, quod
indignos se tali spectaculo crederent, ut docet Callimachus. Grot.
it was very perilous to their lives, see Judge. 13.22. and Deuteronomy. 5.24, 26. The
Lord seeing Gideon in so great a perplexity about this Vision, the next Night
comforts him, and bids him not be afraid, for he should not die. Then he
Commands him these three things: First, To take his Fathers young Bullock, the
second in order of those that were prepared and set apart to be sacrificed to
Baal [see verse. 28.] and of seven years old, and to offer her in Sacrifice unto
the Lord, intimating possibly that the Midianites Tyranny, that had lasted now
seven years, should have an end, and together with it there should be a
suppression of Baal's Worship in the Land. 2ly, He Commands him to throw down
Baal's Altar, which his Father had made for his Family, and the Inhabitants of
Ophrath, and to cut down the Grove by it. For before Gideon might go to fight
against the Midianites (the Enemies of God, and his people) he must first set
on foot the Reformation of Religion, and the Extirpation of Superstition and
Idolatry, which had provoked the Lord to Displeasure against them. And he must
begin at Home, viz. with his own Family and Friends. 3ly, When he had done
this, He must build an Altar to the Lord in that very place upon the top of the
Rock where the Lord had before ordered him to place the Provisions he had
brought, and given him a sign, by causing fire to come out of the Rock and
consume them. And on this Altar he must offer the Bullock beforementioned for
a Burnt-Offering, with the wood of the Grove which he should cut down. Gideon
having received these Commands, took ten of his Servants (who it seems were
ready to join with him in this Enterprise) and fearing lest those of his
Fathers house, or the Inhabitants of the City should hinder, or interrupt him
in what he had to do, he took the advantage of the Night to do it in, and
setting so many hands at work, the business was done before any of the City
knew it to make Opposition or Resistance. And having built an Altar to the
Lord, and sacrificed Here Gods special Command was a sufficient warrant for
what Gideon did, though otherwise it was not lawful for any but a Priest to
offer Sacrifice, or to do it any where but in the Tabernacle.
the Bullock thereon as he was commanded, he called it Jehovah-Shalom; as if he
should have said, The Lord send peace, which Name continued when this History
was written. The people of the City understanding next morning that Baal's
Altar was thrown down, and his Grove also cut down, and the second Bullock
offered upon a new Altar built on the Rock, they inquired who had done these
strange things? It was told them, That Gideon had done them. They hereupon run
violently to Joash, requiring him to bring forth his Son, that he may be put to
death for casting down the Altar and Grove of Baal. And this they require,
before they heard what he could say for himself; so unreasonable are men, when
transported with an Idolatrous Rage.

Joash though it seems before he had been himself a Worshipper of Baal, yet now
(his mind being extraordinarily changed, possibly upon Gideon's acquainting him
with the Vision he had seen,) He resolutely opposes them. What (says he) will
ye dare to plead for Baal? will ye go about to save him? For my part, he that
will plead for Baal let him be put to death, and that presently, without any
further delay. I wonder what aileth you? If Baal be a god, let him plead for
himself, and revenge the wrong that is done to him in throwing down his Altar;
but if he be not, he is not worthy to be defended by you, who is unable either
to defend you or himself. Having said these things in memory of that Heroic
Fact done by Gideon; and in honor of Him, Joash that day called Him Jerubbaal,
saying, Let Baal plead against him if he can.

Then the Midianites, and the Amalekites, and their Confederates came over
Jordan into Canaan, and pitched in the Valley of Jezreel, in the Tribe of
Manasseh, not far from Ophrah, where Gideon dwelt. And the Spirit of the Lord
came upon Gideon, and acting him above himself, he blew a Trumpet and Abiezer;
that is, those of his own Family gathered themselves unto Him, and he sent
Messengers throughout the Tribe of Manasseh, Asher, Zebulun and Naphtali, viz.
to all the Neighbouring-Tribes excepting Ephraim, (which occasioned afterward
a great Quarrel between them, as we shall see Chap. 8.) and many of those
Tribes came and joined themselves with the Forces he had got together. Gideon
being now shortly to engage in battle against the Midianites, He desires to be
further assured of God's Mind as to the event of the Fight, for the
confirmation of his own Faith, and for the Encouragement of his Followers. For
though the Apostle, Heb. 11.32. commends him for his Faith, yet he did not
attain to the strength of it all at once, but by degrees, as he was more and
more confirmed by God; In the mean time he needed all these helps to support
him against his Doubts and Faintings: Gideon therefore prays unto the Lord, and
beseeches him that if he intended to save Israel by his hand, He would please
to give him this sign thereof. He would put a Fleece of Wool in the Floor, and
if in the morning there were dew on the Fleece only, and the ground about it
were dry, then he would look upon it as a sign that God would save Israel by
his hand. The Lord grants his Request, without any reprehension of him at all;
and accordingly in the morning Gideon found the Fleece so wet, that he wrung a
Bowl full of water out of it, the ground about it being all dry. Gideon seeing
this, earnestly besought the Lord that his anger might not wax hot against him
if he humbly desired one sign Herein Gods great Condescension to Gideon was
manifested, working a Miracle forward and backward (as it were) yea many
Miracles for the strengthening of his Faith in his Vocation, and in Gods
Promises.
more, which was just contrary; namely, that the next morning the Fleece only
might be dry, and upon the ground about it there might be dew, which came to
pass accordingly, to the great Encouragement of Gideon.

Chapter 6. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXXXIX.
THen Gideon, and all the people that were with him, rose early and pitched
besides the well Harod, or the Well of Terror in the Tribe of Manasseh, (so
called either from the fear that seized on the twenty two thousand of the
Israelites, verse. 3. or on the Midianites, verse. 21.) and the Midianites
encamped at the Hill Moreh, on the North-side of them, and in the Valley. The
whole Army that Gideon had gathered together were in all but thirty two
thousand, and the Midianites were a hundred thirty and five thousand, For there
were an hundred and twenty thousand of them slain in their first overthrow, and
the remainder that were left with Zeba and Zalmunna, were fifteen thousand. Chapter
8.10.
so that they were above four times as many as the Israelites; and had the
Israelites vanquished the Midianites with these thirty two thousand, that were
now come to Gideon, one would think they should never have gone about to
attribute the Victory to themselves, or to rob God of the Glory of it. But the
Lord who foresaw how prone men would be to vaunt themselves upon any great
Success, told Gideon they were too many for him to Conquer the Midianites by,
lest Israel should say, Mine own hand has saved me. Therefore He orders Gideon
to make Proclamation, That all that were afraid (according as was enjoined,
Deuteronomy. 20.8.) might depart from Mount Gilead, The Mount Gilead here spoken of,
must needs be not the famous Mountain of that Name without Jordan, but another
Mount of the same name within Jordan. For a great many of this half-Tribe of
Manasseh within Jordan being descended from Gilead, the Son of Machir, the Son
of Manasseh, they might also call this Mountain Gilead in remembrance of their
Father.
(in the Tribe of Manasseh within Jordan) where they now were gathered
together. Hereupon twenty two thousand of them, seeing the power and strength
of the Enemy, their hearts failed them, and so they embraced the liberty given
them to depart. But their Trumpets (it seems) they left behind them by Gideon's
order; so there remained only ten thousand with Gideon. The Lord tells him,
They were too many yet. He bids him therefore bring those ten thousand down
unto the water, and there he would try them for him, and discover who among
them were fit for this Service, and who not. And accordingly those whom he
approved for this Service should go along with him, the others should depart.
When they were come to the water, the Lord tells him, That every one who coming
to the water, bended his body only a little, and snatched up a little water in
the palm of his hand, and so lapped it up for his present refreshment (as Dogs
lap a little water, and make have presently away) every such one should go with
him; but those that kneeling down on their knees, bowed their heads down to the
River, and so putting their mouths into the water drank, and sucked up their
fill, those should be dismissed. For this kind of drinking argued sloth and a
greedy desire of filling themselves, and impatience of thirst, whereas the
other argued strength and ability of body, and that they were content with a
little refreshing, being more intent upon the business they had in hand than on
filling themselves. This Experiment being made, the number of those Lappers
were found to be but 300, the rest were dismissed. The Lord tells Gideon, He
would save them by this small number, and by them vanquish the Midianites,
though for every Soldier Gideon had left there were four hundred and fifty of
the Enemy. The same night after Gideon had dismissed all his Army but these
300, the Lord spoke to him in a Vision or Dream, and said to him, If thou
fear to go down and set upon the Enemy, because of the smallness of thy
number, go down first privately in the night with thy Servant only, and get as
near to their Host as thou can, and there thou shall hear something that
shall further strengthen thy Faith. Gideon accordingly crept down with his
Servant to the first Sentinels of the Host, and the Midianites and Amalekites
lay along in the Valley like Grasshoppers for multitude, and their Camels were
innumerable. Gideon being got near to the Sentinels, he heard one of them tell
his Dream unto his Fellow; says he, Behold I dreamed that a Cake of
Barley-bread tumbled into the Host of Midian, and came into a Tent, and smote
it that it fell, and so over-turned the Tent, that it lay along. His Fellow
answered, This is nothing else save the Sword of Gideon the Son of Joash, for
into his hand has God delivered Midian and all the Host. When Gideon heard
this Interpretation of the Dream, he bowed himself by way of thankfulness to
the Lord, for bringing him to hear this comfortable News, for the strengthening
of his Faith, and hereby he perceived that God had alreadly stricken the Enemy
with a fear of Him. So returning to his little Army, he acquaints them with
what had passed, and told them, God had delivered their Enemies into their
hands. Then he gave to every one of his Soldiers a Trumpet and a Torch, which
being lighted, he was to carry, holding an empty Pitcher over it, that no light
might be seen till they had occasion to discover it. Then dividing his 300 into
three Companies (that so they might encompass the Camp of their Enemies in
several places, and appear as if they were a great Army,) He bids them to look
on him, and to do as He did; says He, When we are come to the outside of the
Camp of our Enemies, and you see me break my Pitcher, and discover my Light,
and blow with my Trumpet, do you likewise the same, and with a great shout cry
out, The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon. He would have them own God as the
chief Agent, but yet to name Him as an Instrument, because he perceived (by the
Interpretation of the Dream which he had heard) that his Name was terrible
among them. So Gideon and the three hundred men that were with him approached
the Enemies Camp about Midnight (when they had newly set the Watch) and
spreading themselves round the Camp (as far as their number could extend) and
breaking their Pitchers, and discovering their Lights, and blowing their
Trumpets, cried out, The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon. The Enemy in the dead
of the night, being terrified at the sight of so many Lights on a sudden
burning about them, and hearing so many Trumpets sounding, and so many men
crying out, The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon, could not but apprehend they
were encompassed with a mighty Army, and thereupon all the Host made an hideous
Outcry, and ran, and fled, and shifted for themselves as well as they could.
In this great Consternation the Lord, by his Providence, ordered it so, that
they fell one upon another, and slew their Friends instead of their Enemies.
See the like 1 Samuel 14.15, 20. 2 Chronicles. 20.23. And some of the Midianites fled
to one place, and some to another in the Tribe of Manasseh, where the
Overthrow was given. The men of Israel hearing of this great Defeat, and
routing of the Midianitish-Army, gathered themselves presently together out of
Naphtali, Asher and Manasseh, to assist Gideon in the pursuit. And Gideon sent
Messengers through all Mount Ephraim, to desire them to come in to his
Assistance, and especially to take care to stop the Midianites at all the Fords
and Passages of the River Jordan that reached down as far as Bethbarah. The
Ephraimites did as He desired them, and accordingly took at the Fords of
Jordan, Oreb and Zeeb, two of their Princes, with many others, so that there
were no less than an hundred and twenty thousand of the Midianites and their
Confederates destroyed within Jordan. And they slew Oreb on the Rock Oreb, and
Zeeb at the Wine Press of Zeeb, places so called in aftertimes upon this
occasion, and lying at the East End of Mount Ephraim near Jordan. Gideon
understanding that many of the Midianites, to the number of fifteen thousand,
together with their Princes Zeba and Zalmunna had escaped over Jordan (before
the Passages could be secured) He with his three hundren men went in pursuit
after them; and coming near to Succoth (a City in the Tribe of Gad) and his
Soldiers being faint, he desired the men of that City to give them some Loaves
of bread for their present refreshment; for they were very weary and faint, and
so it would be an act of mercy to relieve them, and they were in pursuit of the
Common Enemy, and so it would be but an act of Justice to strengthen their
hands in so good a Design. But the men of Succoth Which had its name from
Booths which Jacob made there at his return from Mesopotaemia, Genesis 33.17.
answered him Churlishly. What (say they) are Zeba and Zalmunna thy Prisoners?
Are they in thy Power that should respect thee as Victor over them; or rather
have we not cause to fear they will recruit their Army, and return and revenge
it upon us, if we show thee any kindness. Thus they incensed Gideon, by
refusing him Succor, and that with contemptuous Scorn, and in favor of their
Tyrannical Enemies, [see the like 1 Samuel 25.10.] Whereupon he told them, That
when the Lord had delivered Zeba and Zalmunna into his hands, he would for this
tear their Flesh with the Thorns and Briers of the Wilderness. Then he marched
up to Penuel, a City also in the same Tribe, and desired some Relief of them
for his Soldiers in this their extremity, and they answered him with the like
scorn and contempt that the men of Succoth had done. He told them, That when he
returned in peace; that is, safe and victorious, he would for this barbarous
Usage destroy them, and break down their strong Tower or Fort in which they had
so much confidence. Zeba and Zalmunna with those fifteen thousand that had
escaped were got to Karkor, a City on the other side of Jordan toward the
East. Gideon fearing he should be discovered if he followed right on toward
them, He fetched a compass about by the way of the Arabians that dwelt in
Tents, and so came upon them on the East Side, (viz. on the East of Nobah and
Jogbehah) from whence they feared no Enemy, and so were very secure, not
imagining that they had been pursued by the Israelites. Gideon being thus come
up to them, he fell upon them on the sudden (probably in the night) discomfited
all their Host, and in the pursuit took Zeba and Zalmunna. After this Victory,
carrying these two Kings along with him, he marched in the night toward
Succoth that he might surprise them; And coming near the City before the Sun
was up, he took a young man that was come out of the City, and examining him
strictly concerning the Elders of the City, he gave him their Names in writing,
which were 77 in all, and possibly told him where they dwelt, and how they
might be known. For Gideon knowing the Magistrates only to be in fault that he
was so scornfully denied a little refreshing for his Soldiers, therefore he
was the more careful to inquire after their Names, that none might suffer but
those that were guilty. Gideon having got this Intelligence, entered the City of
Succoth, and then told them, They might now behold Zeba and Zalmunna, with whom
they did before upbraid him, and asked him in scorn, Whether they were his
Prisoners? He should now teach them what it was to use their Brethren that were
fighting for them so scornfully and unworthily. So he took the Elders of
Succoth, and with the Briars and Thorns of the Wilderness (which lay between
Succoth and Penuel) he caused them to be scourged to death, For being equal in
guilt with the men of Penuel, in reason we cannot suppose that their punishment
was less than theirs, see verse. 17.
and by this severe Punishment inflicted on them, he taught the rest of the
people to take heed for time to come of committing any such heinous Trespass
against God and their Brethren, or slighting those whom God imploys. Then he
went to Penuel, and slew the Magistrates of that City also, as he had done
before at Succoth, and threw down their Tower or Fort. These Executions being
over, Gideon now calls Zeba and Zalmunna to account for what they had done. He
tells them, He had heard that in their last Invasion they had put many of those
Israelites to death, who had hid themselves in those strong Holds and Caves of
Mount Tabor; and (fearing lest his own Brethren were of the number of those
whom they had thus slain, because they had not been heard of since,) He asks
them, What manner of men they were that they had slain at Tabor? They answered,
As thou art, so were they; that is, they were of a goodly and comely Personage
as thou art, and such as might well beseem men of a Princely and Royal Stock.
He then perceived they were his Brethren. He tells them, If they had been
merciful to his Brethren, he would have spared their lives, which he might
lawfully have done, they being not Canaanites, though they were Enemies. But
now he could not do it, seeing by the Law of God he was bound, being next of
blood, and also a Magistrate, to punish them with death, that had murdered his
Brethren, see Numb. 35.19, 31. Whereupon he bad his young Son Jether to rise up
and slay them. And he imposes this work on him rather than another, that he
might train him up from a Youth to draw his Sword against the Enemies of
Israel, and that he might avenge the death of his Uncles, and that it might
add, if not to the pain, yet to the dishonor of their death to die by so young
an hand. But this young Boy had scarce courage enough to look them in the face,
so far was he from drawing his Sword against them. Zeba and Zalmu^na seeing
this, said to Gideon, Rise thou up and fall upon us thy self. For as the man
is; so is his strength. Do thou slay us with thy own hand, and dispatch us
quickly, and let us not fall ignobly by the hand of a Child. So Gideon slew
them with his own hand; and took away the Ornaments that were on their Camels
necks (which were very rich, being adorned with Gold-Chains and Jewels,) as
Ensigns and Memorials of his Victory. Now the Ephramites came over Jordan, and
brought the Heads of Orch and Zeeb, and presented them to Gideon. But then they
highly expostulated Thus they proudly quarrelled with Jephta, Chapter 12. and upon
the same account, see the like, 2 Samuel 19.41, 42, 43.
with him, that they were not called out as well as other Tribes, when he first
raised Forces to go against the Midianites. They looked upon this as a great
neglect and contempt of them, that other Tribes that were not so nearly allied
to him and the Manassites as they were, (being both of them of Joseph's
Posterity) should be called to the first Onset, and they left only to snatch
up here and there some of the flying Midianites. So that he and his Soldiers
had gathered in the main Vintage, and they were called in only to gather up the
Gleanings. Gideon mildly answered, That they had no cause to complain; For what
have I done (says he) in comparison of you? Are not the Gleanings of Ephraim
better than the Vintage of Abiezer? Gideon was of that Family.
Consider what vast multitudes of them you have had the killing and pillaging
of, at the Fords of Jordan, whilst we went in pursuit of only fifteen thousand
of them that fled with Zeba and Salmunna. Consider you have had the Honor to
take and kill Oreb and Zeeb, and therefore what cause have you to murmur or
repine? This mild Answer of his abated their anger, and so they rested
satisfied.

Judge. Chapter 7. whole Chapter, and Chapter 8. from 1. to 22.

SECT. CXL.
THe people of Israel were now so highly pleased with Gideon for delivering
them out of the hands of Midian, that they offered to make him their King, and
to settle the Kingdom successively upon his Posterity. He told them, He would
not Rule over them as a King, because the accepting of the Regal Power to
Himself and his Family, would seem (as it were) a taking of the Government out
of God's Hand, who set up whom He pleased to Rule over them. The Lord (says
he) shall Rule over you; Take ye heed of rejecting Him, [1 Samuel 8.6, 7.]
neither I nor my Son shall be your King. Thus he would not give any consent to
the Change of the Government without God's leave. But though Gideon refused
this profer of theirs, yet he told them, He had one Request to make to them,
which if they would grant him, he would take it very kindly from them; which
was, That every one of them would give him one of those Earrings Or golden
Ornaments, whither worn in the Ear, or on the Forehead. For the Hebrew word is
used for both, see Genesis 24.22. and 35.4.
which they had taken from the Ishmaelites, who used to wear such golden
Ornaments. They told him, They would willingly do it. And accordingly spreading
a Garment to receive them, every one cast in one of those Earrings or golden
Ornaments they had taken from the Ishmaelites, and the weight of them came to a
thousand seven hundred Shekels of Gold, which according to our account comes to
2380 pounds. And besides these, they added some Chains, and golden Boxes,
(wherein the Ishamelites carried sweet Perfumes) and purple Garments which the
Kings of the Midianites had worn. All these they added, besides the Collars
which had been taken from the Necks of the Camels, which Gideon had taken to
himself as his proper Prey. Gideon of part of this Gold now given him, made an
Ephod, like that of Aaron's, with a Breast Plate set with many precious stones
of great value, [see Exodus 28.15, 16, 17.] and made of Gold, Blue, Purple,
Scarlet, etc. It Is like his design in making this Ephod was, that it should be
a Monument of that great Victory he had obtained (after he had offered
Sacrifice to God) over the Midianites, [the Monument being made of the Prey
there taken] and possibly his purpose was to make use of this Ephod to enquire,
by the Judgment of Vrim, what the Will of the Lord was upon all Emergent
Occasions, not considering that this Privilege was only annexed to Aaron's
Ephod; or possibly he made this Ephod that the High Priest (being adorned with
it) should Sacrifice for him and the people at the Altar which he, by the
Command of God, had erected in Ophrah. But whatever was his intention, he
seems herein highly to have sinned against God, and to have ministered occasion
to the Israelites to commit Idolatry, to which they were before of themselves
too prone. For after his death the Israelites did grossly abuse this Ephod to
Idolatry and Superstition, either resorting to it to inquire concerning the
Will of God in their Doubts and Difficulties, or offering Sacrifices there by
occasion of it, or being taken with the glory of it, falling down before it,
and worshipping it, and at last abusing it to the grossest Idolatry, and making
use of (as it is probable) in the Worship of Baal, verse. 33. Be sure, some way
or other they Idolatrously abused it, and are therefore said to have gone a
whoring after it, and it became a Snare to Gideon and to his House; that is, it
ensnared his Posterity by degrees, drawing them to do that which was very
displeasing to God, and at last became the utter ruin of his Family. For all
the Tragical Accidents that afterward befell his House, may be looked upon as
the effects of God's Wrath for this Idolatry. However the Midianites were now
so vanquished, that they lifted not up their heads any more to vex Israel.
Gideon therefore after this Victory went and dwelt quietly in his own house,
and judged Israel many years. He had many Wives (by whom he had sixty nine
Sons) and one Concubine who dwelt at Shechem, [whom he took as a secundary
Wife, and in an inferior degree, having been before his Maidservant, Chapter 9,
18.] by whom he had Abimelech. At length Gideon died in a good old age, and was
buried in the Sepulcher of his Father at Ophra.

Chapter 8. from verse. 22. to the 33.

SECT. CXLI.
PResently after Gideon was dead, the Israelites fell to Idolatry again, and
went a whoring after Baalim, and worshipped Baal-Berith for their god, (the
Idol of the Shechemites) signifying the Lord of the Covenant, so called
possibly because when they made choice of him to be their Idol-god, they bound
themselves by Covenant to serve him (which possibly the Devil put them upon in
imitation of God) and so by adhering to him they broke their Covenant with God,
And they were now so besotted with Idolatry, that they forgot the only true
God, their great Deliverer, and wholly neglected his Worship and Service, and
worshipped only Idols. Neither showed they themselves grateful to Gideon (who
had deserved so well of them) neither did they show kindness or seek the good
and welfare of his Family. The people being thus generally corrupted, as the
Lord had formerly punished their Idolatry and Apostasy, by suffering some of
the Neighbour-Nations to Invade them, and sorely Afflict them, so now he
resolved to punish them by the Tyranny of One from among themselves, even by
Abimelech the Son of Gideon, their late Judge, who upon his Fathers death
attempted to get to himself the Regal Power which his Father had so lately
refused. To make way hereunto, he went presently to Shechem, and there began to
tamper with his Uncles, his Mothers Brothers, and the rest of her Kindred, and
employed them as his Instruments (being possibly of some Rank and Esteem in
Shechem) to see if they could draw the Inhabitants of that City to Aid and
Assist him in his Project, not doubting but if he could effect this, he should
be able well enough to accomplish the rest of his Design. And thus by the
Miseries which this Son of a Concubine brought upon his Fathers House, and the
whole Kingdom, we may see that God did even in those Times testify his
Displeasure against their having several Wives and Concubines, though for the
present He did permit it. But to proceed, Abimelech being come to Shechem, and
addressing himself to his Kindred, and acquainting them with his Design, He
desires them to persuade the men of Shechem to make him King. He tells them,
That though his Father had in modesty refused the Kingdom, yet it was fit now,
according to their Profer, they should settle it upon his Posterity. Secondly,
He persuades them that his Brethren had a Plot upon the Kingdom to divide it
among themselves (though it does not appear they had any such thought) and he
shows them, that it were better for them to settle the Government upon Him
alone, then to suffer themselves to be under the Command of all Gideon's Sons.
3ly, He tells them, He was bone of their bone, and flesh of their flesh, and
being of their own blood they might expect all kindness and favor from him;
and further, it would be a great honor and advantage to them to have a King so
nearly allied to them. Abimelech's Kindred seemed much pleased with what he had
said to them, and accordingly moved the business to the rest of the men of
Shechem, whose hearts readily inclined to favor Abimelech's design, because he
was their Kinsman. And in order to the carrying on thereof, they gave him
seventy pieces of silver out of the Treasure of their Idol-god Baal-Berith,
wherewith he hired vain and light persons to follow him, and these he armed
that he might by their Aid and Assistance accomplish what he had designed. And
thus the money that had been given to their Idol-god became the first fuel for
the kindling of that fire in the Land, wherewith the Lord intended to punish
the Idolatry, and other Sins of the people. With these Forces, and the
assistance of some of the Shechemites, V. 5. Being threescore and ten persons]
It Is usual in Scripture to put a perfect and round number for an imperfect, see
Genesis 42.13. Numb. 14.32, 33. 1 Cor. 15.5.
Abimelech went to Ophra, and there seizing all his Fathers Sons (excepting
Jotham the youngest) and pretending something against them, under a pretense of
Justice (as if they had had some Plot upon the State, tending to the ruin of
it,) he put them all to death, and executed them all in one place, upon one
Stone. This being done, the men of Shechem gathered themselves together, and
the Magistrates of the City (who were wont to meet in a Townhouse or
Common Hall called the House of Millo) and made Abimelech King, Abimelech the
Fifth Judge, if at least He may be so esteemed, seeing He was not set up by the
appointment of God.
and so proclaimed him in the Field near Shechem, where Joshua in former time
had erected a great stone under an Oak, Josh. 24.26. Indeed it may seem strange
that the Inhabitants of one City should dare to do this alone of themselves, it
being expressly also against the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. Thou shall in any
wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose. But though the
Shechemites possibly at first made him King only over their own City, yet
afterward it seems many other Israelites of other Towns and Tribes did come in
(moved by their Example and Persuasion) and joined with them, and accepted him
for their King, and the rather because they generally began to be weary of the
Government God had established among them, and longed to be like other Nations
in having a King to Reign over them; Abimelech therefore daily gathering more
and more strength, at last he usurped the Title of King over the whole Nation,
whence he is said to have reigned three years over Israel, verse. 22. The Lord
now intending to punish Abimelech and the Shechemites for changing the
Government which he had established among them, and especially for the
barbarous Murder committed upon the Sons of Gideon, by a special Instinct of
his Spirit He moved Jotham (who of all the Sons of Gideon had escaped the hands
of Abimelech) to go to the Inhabitants of Shechem, and to give them warning
beforehand of the Calamities and Judgments that were like to befall them if
they did not repent of this their great wickedness. Accordingly going to Mount
Gerizim (which was near Shechem) and at a time (as it seems) when the
Shechemites upon some public Festivity, or such solemn occasion were there
From the Mountain of Blessings, they now hear a Curse denounced against them.
met together, He lift up his Voice, and spoke to them, saying, Hearken to me
ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you; intimating to them that God
had sent him to them with that Message, and if they would not hearken to it,
God would not hear them in the time of their Distress when they cried unto Him.
After this Preface, He delivers to them what he had to say in way of a Parable
or Apologue, that he might the more effectually set before them in the first
place their Sin and Folly, in desiring to be under the Rule of a King. And
secondly, the modesty and piety of his Father, who would not accept to be their
King when they offered it unto Him. He tells them, The Trees on a time went out
to anoint a King over them; whereby he intimates to them their sin and folly,
in being weary of the Government God had established among them, and desiring
to be under the Rule of a King. And they said unto the Olive Tree, Reign thou
over us. But the Olive Tree refused, saying, He would not leave his fatness for
that Promotion, viz. his Oil, wherewith God is honored in the Sacrifices, and
Lamps of the Tabernacle, and men are also honored by it, seeing it is used in
the anointing of Kings, Priests and Prophets, and is many other ways useful and
profitable unto them both for Food and Medicine. Then the Trees said to the
Fig Tree, Come thou and Reign over us, but the Fig Tree refused, saying, He
would not leave his sweet and good fruit to be so promoted. Then they said to
the Vine, Come thou and Reign over us; The Vine also refused, saying, He would
not leave his Wine which cheareth God and man, to be so advanced; that is,
which is used in Oblations and Sacrifices (which God delights in, as being
Duties by Himself prescribed,) and man also is much cheared by it when
temperately used. By which similitudes of the Olive, Fig Tree and Vine, (which
are good, noble and useful Trees, and yield yearly sweet and pleasant fruit,
and refused to be promoted over the other Trees,) He seems to intimate to them
the piety and modesty of his Father, who refused to be their King, when they
offered it to him, and neither He nor any of his Sons (that were inhumanely
slain by Abimelech) aspired to any such Dignity. He further intimates to them,
that all wise and good men, and men of worth are content to be serviceable, and
to do good in their places, and are not ambitious of Domination and Sovereignty
over others; which high Dignities though they may seem more glorious, yet would
certainly bring upon them greater Cares, and deprive them of much of those
Comforts which in their private condition they did enjoy; and possibly through
the Temptations of those high Places they might become less fruitful in
goodness, and less serviceable than they were before. He goes on with his
Parable. At last the Trees said to the Bramble, Come thou and Reign over us.
The Bramble replied, If in truth ye anoint me King over you, then come, and put
your trust under my shadow; that is, come under my Government, yield subjection
to me, and expect Protection from me, whilst you continue constant in your
Loyalty and Obedience to me. But if you do otherwise, then let fire come of the
Bramble and devour the Cedars of Lebanon; that is, expect that I will use my
Power with all extremity against the greatest of you all, and will destroy your
Nobles, and men of greatest Wealth and Renown. By which he plainly signifies,
and sets before them, what they had done in choosing Abimelech King. Then
applying the whole Parable to them, he tells them, They should consider whither
they had done well by his Father and his Family (who had so well deserved of
them) in slaying his Sons, and making Abimelech, the Son of his Handmaid, King
over them, not for any worthiness in himself, but merely because he was of
their Kindred. If you have done well therein (says he) then rejoice in your new
King, and let him rejoice in you; But if you have not (as certainly you have
not) then let fire come out from Abimelech and burn the men of Shechem, and the
House of Millo; and let fire come out of the men of Shechem, and the House of
Millo, and devour Abimelech; that is, let a wicked Spirit of Hatred,
Dissension, and Revenge possess you on both sides, and so carry you on to seek
the Ruin and Destruction of each other. Jotham having delivered his Message to
them, hasted away, and fled to Baalath-Beer in the Tribe of Simeon, where he
saved himself either by living there unknown, or by the Aid of the Inhabitants,
who perhaps (with other Cities) had not yet stooped to this tyrannous Yoke.
When Abimelech had reigned about three years, then God sent an evil Spirit
between him and the men of Shechem; that is, God, according to the Imprecation
of Jotham, did permit the Devil to sow Jealousies, Discord, and Dissension
between Abimelech and the men of Shechem, and gave them up to the Lusts and
Corruptions of their own wicked Hearts, and ministering occasions of enraging
them, the one against the other; the men of Shechem at length dealt
treacherously with Abimelech, and sought to shake off his Yoke. And this God
permitted, that the just Revenge of that Cruelty executed by Abimelech, with
the assistance of the Shechemites, on the Sons of Gideon, might fall on them
both. The men of Shechem therefore resolving to cast off Abimelech from being
any longer their King, they first laid men on the Mountains by way of Ambush to
surprise his Person, if he came that way weakly attended. These Liers in wait
(as such men use to do) beyond their Commission, took liberty to Rob, and make
a Prey of others that came that way; by which means (it seems) their Design was
made known to Abimelech, who thereupon prepared to make open War upon them, and
sent some of his Forces to restrain them and keep them in; so that the
Shechemites durst not stir out into the Fields to gather their Vintage.
Hereupon one Gaal (some eminent Commander) with his Friends and Allies, either
came voluntarily, or was sent for by the Shechemites, to be their Leader in
this War against Abimelech; and they being now much encouraged, and putting
their trust and confidence in his Conduct and Valor, went out boldly into the
Fields, and gathered the Fruits of their Vineyard, and trod out the Grapes, and
made merry, and went into the House of their god Baal-berith to eat and to
drink, and in their Cups cursed Abimelech, and uttered all manner of Railing
and Reviling against him. Gaal perceiving the Shechemites in their Jollity to
express themselves with so much violence and scorn against Abimelech, he takes
occasion from thence to try if he could win them to put the Government of the
City into his hands, and to throw Zebul out, who (it seems) had been before
appointed Governor of it by Abimelech. Who is this Abimelech? Simile exemplum,
vide 1 Samuel 25.10. Quis est David? and quis est filius Ishai?
(says he) or who is this Son of Shechem? or what is his Family in Shechem that
we must serve him? is He not the Son of a Concubine? And what is this Zebul but
his Officer, his Creature, his Tool to tyranize by? And must such an ancient
and brave City as Shechem be enslaved to every domineering Officer, that this
Son of an Handmaid shall set over you? If you have a mind to give away your
Liberty, and be in Bondage, you had better call in the old Lords of this place,
the Descendents of Hamor the Father of Shechem, and serve them, than serve this
new, base, upstart Abimelech. Well! if you men of Shechem would all put your
selves under my Government, I would quickly ease you of this Abimelech; He
should not long King it over you. Then in a Bravado he cries out, O Abimelech,
make thy self as strong as thou can with all thine Allies and Friends, and
then come out and fight with me if thou dare. Zebul the Ruler of the City
hearing of these vaunting words of Gaal, was greatly enraged, and sent secret
Intelligence to Abimelech, How Gaal and his Adherents were fortifying the City
against him: He advises him therefore to come by night against Shechem with all
his Army, and having laid the greatest part of them in Ambush, He should the
next morning show himself with the rest before the City, against whom when Gaal
came forth (as undoubtedly he would) He would fall unexpectedly into the snare.
Abimelech accordingly marched with his Army in the night toward Shechem, and
divided his Men into four Companies, and laying three of them in Ambush, He
marched only with the fourth in the morning toward the City. Gaal going early
to the Gate of the City, and Zebul (the Major of the Town) being by, He said to
him, Behold there come people down from the top of the Mountains. Zebul
jeeringly replied, Surely thou take the shadows of the Mountains for Men.
Gaal presently in some consternation cries out, There was another Company
coming by the middle of the Land, and another by the Plain. Then Zebul
tauntingly asked him, Where is now thy mouth wherewith thou said, who is
Abimelech that we should serve him? where are thy great Brags and Boastings
now? Is not this the people whom thou did so contemptuously despise? Go out
now and fight with them, and show thy valor if thou have any: Show that thou
can fight as well as talk. Gaal upon this, got as many of the men of Shechem
together as he could, and marched out before them to fight with Abimelech. But
Abimelech quickly routed him, and slew and wounded many of his men, and chased
the rest even to the Gates of the City. Then Abimelech for the present withdrew
his Forces to Aramah (a place not far from Shechem) to refresh them after the
Fight, and to wait for some better opportunity of surprising the City. The
people of Shechem being now greatly vexed and enraged at their Defeat, it is
like Zebul suggested to them that the Cowardice and ill Conduct of Gaal and his
Brethren had been the cause thereof, and so he easily procured them to be
cashiered, and sent away out of the City. The Shechemites then choosing for
themselves a new Commander in whom they might more confide, and having
recruited their Army, resolved to march out the next morning to be revenged on
Abimelech for their former loss, and to drive him out of the Country. Abimelech
hearing they were come out against him, He marched toward them, and then
dividing his Army into three parts, He designed with one of them (which he kept
with himself) to lie in Ambush, and to surprise the City on a sudden, whilst
the Shechemites were engaged with the other two Brigades of his Army, or at
least to keep them from sallying forth to assist those that were engaged in the
Fight, and to prevent those in the Field from making any Retreat if they were
worsted. Accordingly whilst Abimelech, and those that were with him, ran and
got to the Gate of the City, his other two Parties ran upon the Shechemites in
the Field, and made a great slaughter of them. Having thus vanquished the
Field-Army, he fought against the City all that day, and at last took it, and
put to the Sword all that came in his way. Many of the Shechemites had (it
seems) got into the Tower of Shechem, or House of Millo to secure themselves,
but hearing the dreadful Cries and Shreekes of their dying Fellow-Citizens,
they forsook that, and betook themselves to the House of Baal-berith; either
trusting more to the strength of the Place, or else flying to it as to a
Sanctuary in this their great Extremity: Abimelech hereupon went to Mount
Zalmon, a Hill near Shechem, and cut down a Tree and laid it on his Shoulder,
and encouraged his Soldiers to do the like, and with those he fired the House
of Baal-berith, and there destroyed about a thousand men and women of the
Shechemites. He then rased the City of Shechem to the ground, and in
detestation, and for an exemplary Punishment, he sowed it with Salt, as a sign
of an utter Vastation, and perpetual Desolation. But herein he failed of his
end, for it was afterward rebuilt by Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12.25. and inhabited, 2 Chronicles. 10.1. Jer. 21.5. and afterward it was called Sychar, Joh. 4.5. Some of
the Inhabitants of Shechem had [it seems] during these Disasters betaken
themselves to Thebez, a Town near Shechem, which had a strong Fort or Castle in
it. Thither now Abimelech marches with his Army. The people of Thebez betook
themselves to the Castle as the only place of Security. Abimelech resolving to
set fire on the Gate of it, went so near to it himself, to give Orders about
it, that a woman from the top of the Tower cast a piece of a Millstone upon
him, and brake his Skull; Thus Phyrrhus was slain by a woman casting a Tile on
his head, at the taking of Argos.
He finding he had received his deaths wound, bad his Armor-bearer run him
through with his Sword, that it might not be said that a woman killed him. De
Abimelech verum erat illud, ingressus est ut vulpes, regnavit ut Leo, mortuus
est ut Canis.
Thus we see how Jotham's Prophecy was fulfilled, That a fire should come out
from Abimelech and devour the men of Shechem, and a fire should come out from
the men of Shechem and should devour Abimelech. Thus He who had slain his
Brethren all upon one stone, receives his own death by a stone. He that had
before managed this War politickly and successfully, now by one rash unadvised
Action (going too near to the Gate of the Castle) is ignominiously destroyed.
When the people that followed Abimelech saw he was dead, they departed every
one to his own home.

Judge. Chapter 9. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXLII.
AFter Abimelech, Tola the Son of Puah, a man of the Tribe of Issachar, Tola
the Sixth Judge.
was raised up by God to Judge Israel, and fitted with Heroic Gifts of Wisdom,
Courage, Fortitude and Zeal for the Execution of his Office. And indeed the
people at that time needed a wise and able Judge to reduce them to their former
Government overthrown by Abimelech, and to abolish Idolatry (which much
prevailed in his licentious Reign) and to restore God's pure Worship, which
it is like had been much corrupted. Though there is no mention made of Enemies
that invaded the Land during his Government, yet there might be some such
Invasions and Oppressions, though not so vexatious as the former. He dwelt in
Shamir, a Town bordering on Mount Ephraim, that so he might be near the
Tabernacle at Shiloh, and there was buried, having judged Israel three and
twenty years.

Judge. 10. verse. 1, 2.

SECT. CXLIII.
AFter Tola arose Jair, dwelling in Gilead, in the Tribe of Manasseh, Jair the
Seventh Judge.
beyond Jordan, and judged Israel twenty two years. It seemed he was a man of
great Quality before he was raised to be Judge; for he had thirty Sons (to wit,
by several Wives,) that rode on Asse-Colts, which was a token of Dignity and
Authority. He was descended (it seems) of that Jair, who having taken the
Cities of Argob, called them after his own Name Havoth-Jair; that is, the
Villages of Jair, Numb. 33.41. Deuteronomy. 3.14. Those Villages were at first only
twenty three, 1 Chronicles. 2.22. but this Jair coming to inherit these Towns which
his Ancestor had taken from the Amorites, divided them among his Sons, and they
were increased either by themselves, their Father or Grandfather to thirty, and
the old Name continued to them.

In this time it seems the Israelites were horribly corrupt, and their Apostasy
and Idolatry was far worse than that of their Forefathers. Israelitae admodum
proni erant in Idolatriam, cujus causae erant. 1. Quia finitimas gentes^
Idolatricas florere videbant, se autem inopia premi. 2. Multitudo Idololatrarum
collata cum ipsorum paucitate. 3. Cultus Dei severior erat, and tristior: Non
in eo Theatra, Saltationes, Comaediae, vel Tragaediae, qua omnia erant in
cultibus Idolorum, immo etiam saepe turpia and libidinosa. P. Martyr.
For now they worshipped all the Idols of the Nations round about them, Baalim
and Ashtaroth, the Idols of Syria, Zidon, Moab, Ammon, and the Philistines, and
so wholly gave themselves up to the Worship of false gods, that at length they
quite laid aside the Worship of the true God in the Tabernacle; And therefore
the Text says, They forsook the Lord, and served him not. It Is like Jair did
what he could to restrain them from this abominable Idolatry, but was overborn
by them. So that about the beginning of the fifth year of his Government, the
Lord being extremely angry with them, sold them into the hands of the
Ammonites, who oppressed The years of the Oppressions are not to be reckones
apart from the years of the Judges, see in Chap. 3.11.
them sorely on the other side of Jordan, and into the hands of the
Philistines, who invaded those Tribes that were within Jordan, so that they
were invaded both on East and West; on the West by the Philistines on the East
by the Children of Ammon. The fifth Oppression by the Ammonites.
The Ammonites having oppressed the two Tribes and half without Jordan for
eighteen years, and Jair dying, they proceeded further and passed over Jordan,
and oppressed the Israelites within Jordan also.

Judge. Chapter 10. from verse. 3. to 10.

SECT. CXLIV.
THe Children of Israel being now sorely distressed, they cry unto the Lord,
and acknowledge their Sin, and the Lord either by some Prophet, or by the High
Priest who inquired for them, returned them this Answer, Have I not delivered
you from the Egyptians, AmoritEs, the Children of Ammon, the Philistines, the
Zidonians, Diverse of these Deliverances we do not find mentioned before. So
that this people had received from the Lord many more Favors and Blessings
than are here recorded.
Amalekites, and the Maonites, Possibly hereby are meant the Canaanites that
inhabited the Wilderness of Maon, 1 Samuel 23.24.
and yet ye have forsaken me, and followed other gods; Go and cry unto the gods
ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your Tribulation. I will
deliver you no more. This Threatening was not absolute, but conditional, though
the condition be not expressed, but is thus to be understood, viz. except ye
truly repent, and forsake your Idolatry, and amend that which has been so much
amiss among you. They answered, O Lord, we humbly acknowledge that we have
hainously sinned against thee, and do thou punish us hereafter as thou
please, if we do not continue in thy true and pure Worship, utterly
renouncing all false gods; only make trial of us this once, by delivering us
out of the hands of our Enemies. Then they putting away their strange gods, and
setting upon a real Reformation, the Lord was touched with Compassion toward
them, and his Soul This is spoken of God after the manner of men, and by way of
comparison only affirmed of him.
was grieved for the miseries they suffered. About this time the Children of
Ammon gathered themselves together, and encamped in the Land of Gilead, which
now (it seems) they claimed as belonging unto them, see Chapter 11. verse. 13.

The Children of Israel gathered what Forces they could together to oppose
them, and encamped at Mizpeh, in Mount Gilead, in the Tribe of Manasseh, beyond
Jordan: Then they begun to consider who should be their Leader in this
Expedition against Ammon, and they declared, That who-ever (being able and fit)
would undertake it, he should be the Head or Judge over all the Inhabitants of
Gilead. But there were none there present willing to undertake it, (the Service
being very dangerous) therefore they resolved to send to Jephtah, being a
skilful Commander, and of known Valor.

Jephtah was a Gileadite, (his Fathers name being Gilead) and probably he was
born in the City of Gilead; His Mother was an Harlot. It seems in process of
time his Brethren (that his Father had by his lawful Wife) being grown up, did,
by the help and decree of the Magistrates of Gilead, [see verse. 17.] bar him of
any share of the Inheritance of his Father, and denied him any portion for a
Livelihood among them. Jephtah being thus used, betook himself into the Land of
Tob (a Country lying along Mount Gilead, not far from the Ammonites, at the
entrance of Arabia the Desert,) and a Company of idle Fellows that had no
Means, or took no Course for a Livelihood, listed themselves under him as their
Captain, and with them he used to Inrode, Prey upon, and Spoil the Ammonites.
And he grew to a great Fame for these Exploits, and was held a mighty man of
Valor. Upon this account the Elders of Gilead now came and entreated him to be
their Captain General against the Ammonites. For though the Law forbad that any
Bastards should be admitted to any Place of Magistracy among the Israelites
unto the tenth Generation, Deuteronomy. 23.32. yet their present necessity, or
possibly some warrant from God Deus hominibus non sibi legem praescripsit.
Dispensavit de lege sua.
made them dispense with the severity and rigor of this Law; the end and equity
whereof was to show how much God abhorred all Whoredom and Uncleanness, to make
the people more careful to avoid it, and not to inflict a punishment on the
person so begotten, if he abhorred his Fathers sin, and served God in holiness
and righteousness. Jephtah seems to wonder they should come to him upon such an
account; What (says he) did not you hate me, and expel me out of my Fathers
House? and do you come to me now in your Distress? The Elders of Israel
replied, They did acknowledge that what He had said was true, and therefore to
make amends for their former unkindness to Him, they desired his aid now upon
no other Condition, but that he should be Head over all the Inhabitants of
Gilead. Jephtah asks them, If they would be as good as their word to make him
Governor of the Land of Gilead, if the Lord enabled him to vanquish the
Ammonites. They replied, They would; and further said, Let the Lord be Witness
between us, and let Him, as a just Judge, punish us, if we do not keep Covenant
with thee, and make thee our Head. Hereupon Jephtah went along with them to the
Assembly of the Princes and people met at Mizpeh, and there He repeated all
that had passed between him and the Messengers that were sent unto him; The
Assembly of the Princes agreeing thereunto, both he and they solemnly bound
themselves to perform that which was agreed on, and probably they confirmed it
mutually by Oath, as in the presence of God. Jephtah the Eighth Judge.
And so he was made Head and Captain over them. Jephtah being thus instated in
the Government, he resolved first to try fair ways with the Ammonites, before
he ingages in a War against them, see Deuteronomy. 20.10, 11. Accordingly he sends
Messengers to the King of the Ammonites, to know what just Cause he had, or
could pretend, for invading their Country, and making War upon them. The King
of the Ammonites returned this Answer, That he did it because a great part of
that Land which the Israelites took from Sihon King of the Ammonites, and from
Og King of Bashan, had been before by those Kings taken from the Ammonites, and
especially from the Moabites, [Numb. 21.26. Josh. 13.25.] all which the King of
the Ammonites now Claims as belonging to Him, being also at this time (as it
seems) King of the Moabites. For Chemosh the Idol of the Moabites is called his
god.
Now therefore, says he, I require that those Lands be forthwith restored to
me, if you will have Peace with me. To this Jephtah made this Return, That
Israel took not away the Land of Moab, or the Land of the Children of Ammon, as
might plainly appear to him, if he would consider that when Israel came out of
Egypt, and traveled through the Wilderness unto the Red Sea, [Numb. 33.35.]
and came to Kadesh, bordering upon the Land of Edom, they sent Messengers to
the King of Edom to desire leave of him to pass through his Land, [ Numb.
20.14.] In like manner they sent to the King of Moab to desire the same favor
of Him, but they both denying them passage, they put themselves to the trouble
of fetching a great compass about the Land of Edom and Moab, rather than they
would be any way injurious to either of them; so that the Israelites were far
from offering Violence to any of the Nations that bordered upon Canaan; and
particularly they came not within the Borders of Moab. They sent also to Sihon,
to desire of him that they might quietly pass through his Land, but he gathered
all his people together, and came out and fought against them. And having
through the assistance of God conquered Him in a lawful War, they by the Law of
Arms justly possessed themselves of all those Lands which were His, which lie
within Arnon on the South, Jabbock on the North, the Wilderness of Arabia on
the East, and Jordan on the West. And God having thus dispossessed the
Amorites, and given their Land to the Children of Israel, why (says he) should
the King of the Ammonites now Claim them? Does not the King of Ammon think that
he may justly possess all that which his Idol Chemosh (as He falsely conceives)
has given him? It Is true, the Lord gave to the Children of Moab the Emims Land
for a Possession, as He gave the Land of the Zamzumminis to the Children of
Ammon, [see Deuteronomy. 2.9, 10, 19, 20.] but they ascribed their Victories to their
Idols, and possessed those Lands as their Gift. How much more may we Israelites
lawfully possess all that Jehovah the true God has given unto us? Further
(says he) I demand whither the King of Ammon has more right to this Land than
Balak had that was King of Moab; yet he would never fight against Israel to
recover this Land out of their hands, which they had taken from the Amorites.
Indeed he opposed the Israelites for fear they would have entered his Land, but
neither He nor any of his Posterity did ever make War with them, after they
were settled in the Land of the Amorites, under pretense that that Land was
theirs. Lastly, Jephtah pleads Prescription. He tells him, The Israelites had
peaceably enjoyed these Lands three hundred Non loquitur praecise, sed numero
rotundo, per annos trecentos. i. e. circiter. Nam ut doctissimi sentiunt
deficiunt aliquot anni; magis tamen ad trecentos quam ducentos accedebant.
years, and if they (viz. the Ammonites) had any Title to them, why did they
not seek to recover them all this while? Therefore (says he) we have not done
thee any wrong, but thou do us great wrong in making War now upon us. The
great God, the Judge of all the World, be Judge between you and us in this
matter. But notwithstanding this rational Plea of Jephtah, the King of the
Ammonites would not regard any thing he said. Jephtah having tried fair means,
and they not succeeding, a mighty Spirit of Wisdom and Fortitude from the Lord
came upon him, so that gathering his Army together, He marched with them
through Gilead and Mansseh, to fight the Ammonites. And before the battle he
made a Vow, that if the Lord would please to deliver the Ammonites into his
hands, when he returned from the Victory, whatsoever came first out of his
doors to meet him, should surely be consecrated to the Lord; and if it were a
thing which was capable The Law forbad that men, or any of mankind, or any
unclean beasts should be sacrificed to God, see Levit. 27.11, 12, 13. v. 31.
Summa loci est, aut Deo quovis modo sacrabitur, aut idoneum si fuerit erit in
holocaustum. Canis enim si fuerit obvia, nec immolari poterat, imo nec redimi
quidem.
of being sacrificed (according to the Law) he would offer it up for a
Burnt-Offering unto Him; Howsoever, if it were a thing fit, it should be
hallowed and consecrated unto Him. Jephtah having made this Vow, and now
engaging with the Children of Ammon, the Lord was pleased to deliver them into
his hands, and he smote them with a very great slaughter, and had the chase of
them a long way, and so the Children of Ammon were subdued that day before the
Children of Israel. Jephtah now after this great Victory returning to his own
house at Mizpeh, his Daughter (his only Child) accompanied with other young
Virgins, came out to meet him with Timbrels and Dances, and cheerful
Tripudiations, according to the Custom of those days, wherein Women and Maids,
after great Victories, used to sing Songs of Triumph, [see Exodus 15.20. Judges
5.1. 1 Samuel 18.6.] When Jephtah saw Her, he rent his Clothes, (expressing
thereby the bitterness of his Grief) and cried out alas! My Daughter, thou have
brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me. Thou art now
unwittingly a cause of much sorrow and affliction to me; For I have made a Vow
to God concerning whatsoever should first come forth to meet me, and I cannot
reverse it. This he speaks, not knowing (it seems) that the Law of God gave him
liberty in this case to have redeemed his Daughter with thirty Shekals of
silver, Levit. 27.4.
It Is probable he then told her more particularly the substance of his Vow. She
tells him, That if he had made such a Vow, and by that Vow she must be
consecrated to God, and live a Virgin all her days. She freely submitted to it,
and should do it the more willingly, because God had given him so great a
Victory over their Enemies. And this seems to be the meaning of this passage.
For we cannot rationally think that Jephtah (commended for his Faith, Heb.
11.32.) should offer his Daughter for a Burnt-Offering, seeing that would have
been much more odious to the Lord, than to have offered to Him Swines blood, or
a Dogs-head, [Isa. 65.4.] and was expressly forbidden by Him as most abominable,
Deuteronomy. 12.31. Jephtah's Daughter therefore being devoted to serve God in a state
of Virginity, she desires she might have two months time to go up and down in
the Mountains with some young Virgins her Companions, that in those
unfrequented and solitary places she might express her grief and lamentation,
that she must live and die a Virgin, She speaks not of bewailing her
approaching death, or being sacrificed, but her Virginity, and consequently
Barrenness.
(leaving no Posterity behind her) which was in those days esteemed one of the
greatest of earthly Infelicities. When the two months of her Lamentation were
ended, she returned to her Father, who did not redeem her according to the Law,
Levit. 27.4. but consecrated her to God to serve him as a Virgin in the single
life. And so she lived a Virgin as her Father had vowed, and she consented. And
the Daughters of Israel went four days in a year to Her, partly to Condole with
her, and partly to Comfort and Cheer her up in this her solitary Condition.

Judge. Chapter 10. from 10. to the end.

Judge. Chapter 11. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXLV.
AFter this great Victory obtained by Jephtah, the men of Ephraim having passed
over Jordan, turned Northward into the Land of Gilead, and envying Jephtah and
the Gileadites the glory of this Victory, they began to quarrel with Him, that
he had not called them to assist Upon the same account they quarrelled with
Gideon, Chapter 8.
him, when he went to fight against the Children of Ammon; And they were so
hot, that they threatened to burn his house over his head; and they gave the
Gileadites opprobrious Language, calling them Fugitives of Ephraim, as if that
half-Tribe of Manasseh beyond Jordan had been no better than Fugities that were
run away from them, and the mere Refuge and Scum of Ephraim and Manasseh within
Jordan. And (it seems) these proud Ephraimites told them, That they (viz. the
men of Gilead) were no way to be compared with them, and therefore ought not to
have undertaken a business of such Importance as this War was, without first
acquainting them with it, and desiring their assistance. Jephtah tells them, He
and his people were at great strife with the Children of Ammon about the Land
that the Israelites possessed on that side Jordan. And he had sent to the men
of Ephraim, as being their Brethren and Confederates, to desire their Aid and
Assistance, but they had not thought fit to grant it to them. Hereupon he
gathered together what Forces he could, and trusting in God, He put his life in
his hand, and resolved to expose it to the utmost danger in so good a Cause,
and so went out to fight against the Ammonites, and the Lord delivered them
into his hands. And this being the true state of this business, I pray you
(says he) what cause have you to come out in this Warlike manner against us,
who are your Brethren? But though Jephtah had reason on his side, yet it did
nothing move (as it seems) these haughty Ephraimites. Hereupon He immediately
gathered together all the men of Gilead that could, on so short warning, be got
together, and fell suddenly upon them, and gave them a great overthrow, and
then the Gileadites, to prevent those that escaped in the Fight from getting
into their own Country, took the Fords of Jordan before them, and when any
straglers came to those Fords, to get over, the Gileadites to try whither they
were Ephraimites or of other Tribes (as it is like they pretended to be) made
them pronounce Shibboleth. The Ephraimites could not pronounce the aspirate,
but said Sibboleth, which was a pronunciation (it seems) they were accustomed
and habituated unto. Thereupon they slew them, and many of them were here
slain. So that there were slain in the battle and chase, and at these Fords of
Jordan, forty two thousand of the Ephraimites. Jephtah having judged Israel six
years, died, and was buried in one of the Cities of Gilead.

Judge. Chapter 12. from 1. to 8.

SECT. CXLVI.
AFter Jephtah, Ibzan of Bethlem judged Israel. Ibzan the Ninth Judge.
He had thirty Sons and thirty Daughters by diverse Wives. His Daughters he sent
out of his own Family, bestowing them upon Husbands in other Families; and he
took in thirty Daughters for his Sons to be Wives to them. He judged Israel
seven years. About the fifth year of his Government the Israelites did evil
again in the sight of the Lord, and he gave them into the hands of the
Philistines, which Thraldom lasted forty years, The sixth Oppression under the
Philistines
Judge. 13.1. And indeed Jephtah's slaying forty two thousand of the Ephraimites
[Ch. 12.6. must needs be a great weakening to the Israelites in those parts, and
possibly encouraged the Philistines to invade their Land, soon after Jephtah's
death. At this time there was a certain man of Zorah, of the Family of the
Danites, whose Name was Manoah and his Wife was barren. Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel
the Wife of Manoah, Hanna, the Shunamite, Elizabeth, long barren Women had at
last notable Children.
To her the Son of God He is called by Manoah Elohim, verse. 22. by his Wife
Jehovah, verse. 23. Himself says his Name is Secret, or Wonderful, which is one
of the Names given to Christ, Isa. 9.6.
the great Angel of the Covenant appeared [who in those times often appeared in
humane shape] and told her, She should conceive, and bare a Son, but she must
not drink Wine or strong Drink, Non tam ad robur haec spectant quam ad
Sanctimoniam.
nor eat any unclean thing (such as were forbidden to the Nazarites) either
while she was with Child of him, or while she gave him Suck, because all that
time he was to have his nourishment from her; and God appointed he should be
from his Conception a Nazarite unto him, and no Razour should come upon his
head, and he should begin (h) to deliver the Israelites out of the hands of
their Oppressors. The woman came and told her Husband, That a Man of God had
appeared to her, whose Countenance was very Venerable, and full of Majesty,
like that of an Angel, and wrought in her a kind of astonishment and fear. But
he neither told her, Whence he came, nor what was his Name. Manoah hearing
this, earnestly prayed unto the Lord that this Man of God might come to them
again, The work of shaking off the Yoke of the Philistines was begun by
Sampson, and was carried on afterward in the days of Eli, Samuel, Saul, till
at length they were perfectly subdued by David.
and might teach them what they should do unto the child that should be born to
them. Shortly after the Angel appeared again unto the Woman as she sat in the
field. She ran and called her Husband, who coming to him asked him if he was the
man of God that had before appeared unto his Wife, and had told her those
things concerning the child that should be born to them. He said he was. Manoah
upon this cries out let thy words come to pass; and if it will be so, I pray
thee show us how we should order the child when he is born? The Angel answers,
let thy wife abstain from all those things which I forbad her, while she is
with child, and while she gives suck, viz. wine, strong drink, and eating any
unclean thing; and afterward let her take care that her son refrain from them
also, seeing God has extraordinarily called him, and appointed him to be a
Nazarite to himself, to whom by the Law all these things are forbidden.
Therefore what has forbidden to thy Wife, thy Son must also abstain from,
seeing they are forbidden to her only for his sake. Manoah not knowing he was
an Angel, desires him that he would please to stay a little while, till they
could make ready a Kid to entertain him, and express their respects to him.
[See Genesis 18.8. and 19.3.] The Angel tells him he should not eat with him: If
he would needs be at that cost to provide a Kid, he should bestow it in such a
way as would be more acceptable to God, and profitable to himself, namely by
offering it as a Sacrifice unto God, to express his thankfulness for so great a
benefit as God had now promised unto him. Then Manoah humbly desires to know
his name, that when that which he had told them should come to pass they might
do him honor, and might make report to others concerning his skill in
foretelling future things, that so he might be highly honored as a Prophet of
the most High. The Angel replies, Why ask thou after my name, seeing it is
secret, (that is, not to be searched into), or Wonderful and Incomprehensible,
Isa. 9.6. My name (says he) is not to be too curiously inquired into, but I
shall make known my self presently to thee by my wonderful actions. So Manoah
took a Kid, and a Meat Offering, and offered it upon a Rock that was hard by to
the Lord. It Is true, neither the person sacrificing, nor the place where this
Sacrifice was offered were warrantable by the Law, but the Angels command was
sufficient warrant for both. And it came to pass when the flame ascended from
off the Altar, the Angel ascended up to Heaven in the flame; which wonderful
sight discovered to Manoah and his Wife that he was the Angel of the Covenant,
the Son of God, who does present our prayers and services before the Lord, and
procures them to be graciously accepted by him. Manoah and his Wife seeing
this, fell on their faces to the ground, and he said to his Wife we shall
surely die because we have seen God. He fears [according to an ancient opinion
that ran among them, see Judge. 6.22. Exodus 33.20.] that they must die because
they had seen such a vision of which they were most unworthy. His Wife comforts
him, saying, If the Lord intended to kill us, surely he would not have received
a Burnt-offering, and a Meat Offering at our hands. And he has testified his
acceptance of it by ascending in the flame of it to carry it up (as it were) to
Heaven with him, and to present it unto God for us. Further she argues, if God
had intended to kill them, he would not have promised them a Son, (who should
begin to save Israel), nor would he have given her directions how she should
order her self, and the child when he was born. These arguments it is like
satisfied Manoah. So shortly after, the Woman conceived and bare a Son, and
called his name Sampson, and the child grew, and the Lord blessed him, and
endued him with admirable strength of body, courage of mind, and all other
gifts requisite for those high services he intended him for. And when he was
very young, in the Camp of the Danites (which they had formed to withstand the
incursions of the Philistines) the Spirit of God began at times to move and
excite him to strange and admirable exploits even beyond the ordinary courage
and strength of man.

Chapter 12. from 8, to 11.

Chapter 13. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXLVII.
AFter Ibzan, Elon a Zebulonite judged Israel ten years. Elon 10th Judge.
After him Abdon of Pyrathon Benaiah David's Worthy was born here, 2 Samuel 23.30.
Abdon 11 Judge.
, (that lay Westward of Samaria and Sechem on a high Mountain formerly
inhabited by the Amalekites, and called by their name) judged Israel eight
years. He had forty Sons, and thirty Grandsons that rode upon Ass-colts, which
showed them to be persons of Dignity and Estate.

Chapter 12. from 11 to the end.

SECT. CXLVIII.
SAmson being now about twenty years of age, Samson 12th Judge.
goes down to Timnah (a City in the Tribe of Dan, but at present in the
possession of the Philistines) and there sees a Daughter of the Philistines,
whom he likes, and acquainting his Father and Mother therewith, he desires them
to procure her for him to wife. They were much troubled that he should have
thoughts to marry with a Daughter of the uncircumcised Philistines, and
therefore sought to divert him from it; but it seems Samson had an especial
warrant from God either by revelation, or some extraordinary motion of his
Spirit for what he did. For hereby he sought an occasion against the
Philistines, though his Parents understood not that it was of the Lord, who
hereby intended to give Samson an opportunity to perform what he called him
unto. Samsons Parents being now persuaded by him, or at least yielding to his
desires, went down with him to Timnah, in pursuance of this business. When they
came to the Vineyards belonging to that City, Samson going aside upon some
occasion, a young Lion came roaring out against him, and the Spirit of the Lord
came mightily upon him, and he rent him with his naked hands, as if he had been
a tender Kid. Thus God by this victory over the Lion encouraged him against
those Encounters with the Philistines which he was afterward to be engaged in.
But he told not his Father and Mother what he had done. Samson and his Parents
being come to Timnah, they began to treat with the young Maid and her Parents
about this match: It seems they soon agreed on it, and the time was set when
the young persons should be married. Accordingly at the time appointed Samson
went down with his Father and Mother to solemnize the Marriage. And coming near
the place where he had before killed the Lion, he stepped aside to see what was
become of the carcass, and behold there was a swarm of Bees and honey in the
carcass, that is, in the bones * of it (as they lay fastened still together),
In corpore osseo.
the flesh probably being eaten or dried away. And he took of the honey and
came eating of it, and brought some of it to his Father and Mother, who did
also eat of it, but he told them not whence he had it. Samson being now come to
marry this young woman, he made a Wedding-Feast (that lasted seven days), as
young men (or their Parents for them) used to do in those times on such
occasions. See Genesis 29.22. When the Brides friends and kindred saw that Samson
was come to take his wife, they provided thirty young men Some think that the
Philistines brought these 30 companions to be with Samson under pretense of
respect, and the custom used at Marriage-solemnities, but indeed to be a Guard
upon him.
(according to custom) to be his Companions and Bridemen (called the children
of the Bride-chamber, or friends of the Bridegroom, Mark 2.19. Mat. 9.15.) to
attend upon him, and to rejoice with him. It seems it was the custom of those
times at Wedding-Feasts (especially for the exercise of their wits See 1 King.
10.1. Queen of Sheba come to prove Solomon with hard Questions.
, and to get the mastery) to try one another in resolving of dark and intricate
questions and riddles. Samson accordingly on the first day of his Wedding-Feast
propounds to his companions a riddle, agreeing with them that if they could
within the seven days of the Feast find out the meaning of it, he would give
them thirty shirts, and thirty changes of garments, that is, upper Vestments,
which they often changed, putting them on and off according to their occasions.
But if they could not within that time declare it, they should give him as
many. This being agreed on on both sides, he propounded his riddle to them,
which was this, Out of the eater came forth meat The more unexspectedly good
comes to us out of evil the more thankful to God should we be for it.
, and out of the strong came forth sweetness. They tried their wits in vain for
the three first days of the Feast, and could not find it out. On the fourth day
they began to deal underhand with his wife, earnestly pressing her to get out
of him the meaning of it; but when the seventh day was come, despairing to find
it out themselves they came again to his wife and threatened to burn her and her
fathers house, if she did not with her importunity wring it out of him. This
they spoke to terrify her that she might be the more importunate with her
husband. What (say they) have thou, thy father, and friends under show of love
and friendship to us invited us to your Feast, that you may make a prey of us
and take what we have? If we cannot find out the meaning of this riddle, we
shall pay dear for our coming hither. These men were to lose every one of them
but only one Shirt, and one upper garment, if they could not solve the riddle,
but if Samson lost, he alone was to pay thirty of them. And yet they pretend
they should be undone if they failed of solving the Riddle. Samsons wife with
all blandishments and importunity sought to get it out of him, and added tears
to her importunity, nay plainly told him 'twas a sign he did not love her in
concealing so pertinaciously from her such a small thing. He told her he had
not acquainted his own Parents with it, whom he ought most to reverence, and of
whose piety and care of him, and faithfulness to him he had had so long
experience; and therefore she need not wonder if he concealed it from her, with
whom he had been but a little while acquainted, and had small knowledge as yet
of her fidelity, and secrecy. But though she pressed him with great importunity
to reveal it to her, all the days of the Feast from the day that his companions
began first to employ her, (which was the fourth day) yet on the last day she
plied him with such intolerable importunity, and with such a flood of tears,
that he could conceal it no longer from her, but told her the meaning of it,
and she presently told it to the young men. So Samsons companions (that were
chosen out of the City to accompany him at his Wedding-feast) came to him on
the seventh day before the Sun was set, and told him they could expound this
riddle. What is sweeter (say they) than honey, and what is stronger than a
Lion? He tells them that if they had not plowed with his heifer, and made use
of the help of his wife, they had never by their own wit found it out. So the
Spirit of the Lord coming upon him, and inciting him to go down to Ashkalon, he
there slew thirty men of the Philistines, and gave their shirts and upper
garments to those that had expounded the riddle. What Samson did in this
matter, he did undoubtedly by the special motion of the Spirit of God, and
therefore he made no scruple, though a Nazarite, to take the garments off the
dead bodies of these slain men, with which he paid his forfeiture. But being
inwardly and heartily vexed at the fraud of his Companions, and the treachery
of his wife, he left them both, and returned to his Fathers house.

Judges, Chapter 14. from 1. to 20.

SECT. CXLIX.
SAmson thus going away from his wife, and her friends in a great discontent
(though he intended not finally to forsake her) it seems she was in his absence
very injuriously given in marriage to one of those his thirty Companions, or
Bridemen, and probably to him, that was chosen to be the first, and chief of
them, and to be nearest to the Bridegroom, and therefore called the friend of
the Bridegroom by way of eminency, Joh. 3.25. Possibly she suffered her self to
be given to him, apprehending that Samson would never be reconciled to her for
her treachery against him. Samson sometime after (knowing nothing of this, but
intending a reconciliation with her), went to visit her, and carried a Kid to
present her with, thereby to express his love and kindness to her. Being come
to the house, and meeting his wifes Father, he told him he would go into his
wifes Chamber to see her. But her Father would not suffer him, telling him that
he verily thought he had been irreconcileably angry with her, and had forsaken
her, and therefore (says he) I have disposed her in Marriage to thy Companion.
But her younger sister is fairer than she, I pray thee take her instead of her.
Samson being extremely enraged that he should be thus used, he said within
himself, Now shall I be more blameless than the Philistines if I do them a
displeasure; intimating that he had just cause to be revenged on them for so
great an injury. He contrives accordingly how to do it. It seems it was at this
time their Wheat-Harvest, Samson therefore resolves to burn their Corn; in
order hereunto, that Country being full of Foxes, [See Cant. 2.15. Neh. 4.3.]
it is probable he employed those of his own Tribe of Dan to assist him in
catching all the Foxes they could, and so three hundred were taken Samson is
said to have taken them, because what a man does by another whom he employs, he
may be said to do himself.
and brought to him. Neither will it seem incredible that such a great number
should be taken, if we do but suppose that the Providence of God (who suggested
to Samson the taking this kind of revenge on the Philistines) did remarkably
concur hereunto: For all the wild beasts of the field are his, Psalm. 50.11. He
by his overruling Providence caused all kinds of living creatures to come to
Noah to be preserved in the Ark, Gen 6.20. He brought a vast and unconceivable
number of Quails to the Israelites, all at one time, Numb. 11.31. He brought
such a great multitude of Fishes to Peter's Net, that the Net brake, Luk 5.6,
7. and therefore he could easily bring so many Foxes (in a land that abounded
with them) to Samsons and his friends Nets. These Foxes therefore being brought
to him, he tied two of them together tail by tail, and tied a lighted Torch
between their tayls (parr of which it is probable dragged on the ground) and so
let them loose into the standing corn now ripe, and so burnt that, and what was
cut and shockt, as also the Vineyards and Oliveyards. It Is true their corn
might have been set on fire other ways, but it pleased the Lord to direct
Samson to do it this way, that their punishment coming upon them in such a
ridiculous way, and by an act of such scorn, and contempt, might the more
incense them. And therefore we are more especially to look at the Providence of
God in this matter, who ordered and disposed it as was most fit for the
effecting of his own will. The Philistines whose corn was burnt, understanding
that Samson had done it in revenge, because his wife was so unjustly taken from
him, by his Father-in-law, and given to another, they came up and in a rage
burnt him and his daughter together; and thus she brought on her self and her
Fathers house that misery Prove. 10.24. The sear of the wicked shall come upon
them.
and mischief, which she thought by her treacherous discovery of her husbands
secret to prevent. [See Chapter 14.15.] Samson understanding what they had done,
said, that though they had done this, yet because they had done it with a
wicked mind, and in an unjust and tumultuous manner (having respect therein
only to their own losses) this should not serve their turn, he would proceed
further in executing vengeance upon them (who were the enemies of God, and his
people) and then he would cease for a time till he were further provoked by
them. All which shows that what Samson did, he did not by way of private
revenge, but as one raised up by God on purpose to be a scourge to the
Philistines. So Samson fell upon them, and smote them Hip and Thigh, that is,
some in one part of the body, and some in another, but where ever his blows
fell, they mauled them, and made them sure for stirring any more, and so he
made a great slaughter of them at this time, and then went and dwelt on the
Rock of Etam in the Tribe of Simeon, which it seems was a place of strength;
and possibly he retired thither, that he might not be suddenly surprised by the
Philistines, who (he knew) in all likelihood would seek to revenge themselves
upon him; and accordingly so it happened; for the Philistines soon after
invaded Judah with a great force, and spread themselves in Lehi a place
afterward so called upon the Exploit there done by Samson with the jaw bone of
an Ass, v. 17. The men of Judah sent to them to know why they were come up in
such an hostile manner against them, seeing they had not offended them, but
lived in quiet subjection to them, and paid them tribute. They tell them they
came for Samson, who had done them much wrong, and required he should be
delivered bound into their hands, that they might do unto him as he had done
unto them; viz. that they might put him to death, as he had slain many of their
people. Then three thousand of the men of Judah went up to Samson at the Rock
Etam, and told him he could not but know that the Philistines were at this time
their Rulers, and had them under their power; and therefore he could not be
insensible what a great mischief he had brought upon them, by thus provoking
them. He replied that as the Philistines had done to him, so he had done to
them. They had done him great wrong, and he had made them suffer for it. Then
the three thousand men of Judah told him, that though they had no quarrel
against him for any injury done to themselves, yet he having thus provoked the
Philistines, (which was like to tend to their great hurt) they must needs take
him, and bind him, and deliver him into their hands, to give them satisfaction,
and to appease their wrath, that so they might withdraw their Army from them.
Samson consents to it, provided they would swear to him not to fall on him
themselves, for then he should be constrained to resist them, and possibly hurt
some of them in his own defense. They promised him they would not.

So they bound him with two new cords, and brought him bound from the Rock
Etam, and delivered him to the Philistines at Lehi, where they were now
encamped; the Philistines shouted for joy when they saw their great enemy thus
brought bound to them. But as soon as he came among them, the Spirit of the
Lord came mightily upon him, and he snapt the cords (wherewith he was bound)
asunder as easily as if they had been threads of sindged flax, and catching up a
jaw bone of an Ass that lay there, he slew with it a thousand of the
Philistines, whereupon it is like the rest ran away.

Then he said by this weak and contemptible instrument (through Gods Almighty
power and assistance) I have slain a thousand of His and his peoples enemies,
laying their bodies heap upon heap; so he called that place Ramah-lehi, that
is, the lifting up of the jaw bone. This great labor and pains in this
execution made him extremely thirsty, so that through thirst and faintness he
was almost ready to die; thus God is wont usually to humble his servants when
they have done him any memorable service, that they may not be puffed-up
therewith, but seeing their own weakness may ascribe all the glory unto him.
Samson being thus extreme thirsty, prayed unto the Lord; saying, O Lord thou
have given this great deliverance to thy people by the hand of thy poor
servant, and shall I now die for thirst, and shall the Philistines triumph over
me? I will trust in thy power and goodness to help me now, as thou have done at
other times. See Heb. 11.32. So the Lord was pleased to cleave a hollow place
in this field called Lehi, and a fountain sprang up out of it, with which
Samson being refresht, his fainting Spirits revived, and he became strong and
vigorous as before; wherefore he called that fountain En-Hakkore, or the well
of him that cried unto the Lord. This name he gave it in memorial of Gods great
mercy to him, and to testify his thankfulness, and as a perpetual monument of
the efficacy of Prayer.

Thus Samson judged Israel twenty years, in the days wherein the Philistines
held them in subjection, and tyrannized over them, and in some degree he gave
them deliverance, though he did not fully free them from their Tyranny.

Judges, Chapter 14. v. 20.

Chapter 15. whole Chapter.

SECT. CL.
SAmson now going secretly to Gaza (but for what purpose is not mentioned) he
was on a sudden entangled with the fight of an harlot, and so drawn to commit
folly with her. The Gazites hearing that he was come into their City, they took
order that the Gates should be shut, and narrowly watched, intending in the
morning to surprise and kill him. Samson knowing (as it seems) by some instinct
from God, that they lay in wait for him, he rose at midnight, and finding the
Gate locked, barred and bolted, he pulled up the two posts upon which it hung,
and carried all away, posts, gate and bar upon his shoulders (the watchmen
probably running away) to the top of an Hill that lay Eastwards of Gaza, and
from whence Hebron might be seen.

Samson after this falls in love with a woman in the valley of Sorek Where
there were excellent Vines. The river or torrent of this name divides Dan and
Simeon.
, a Philistine Harlot, whose name was Dalilah; the Lords of the Philistines
understanding this, came to her, and promised to give her, each of them an
eleven hundred pieces of silver, (which at 2 s. 6 d. per shekel come to 687 l.
10 s. of our money) if she would entice him to discover to her wherein his
great strength lay, and by what means they might prevail against him, that so
they might bind him and humble him. She accepts the terms, and accordingly
applys her self to Samson, and allures him with all signs of her love, (and
probably in a way of sport) to discover to her (for the satisfaction of her
curiosity) wherein his great strength lay, and whither any thing could weaken
it, and make him like other men, promising (its like) most solemnly, and
swearing to him that she would keep it to her self as a great secret. Samson
tells her that if they bound him with seven green withes he should be as other
men; it is like he hoped this would have satisfied her without making any trial
thereof. But therein he was deceived, for the Lords of the Philistines having
furnished her with green withes she bound Samson with them, and having laid
some Philistines ready at hand to seize upon him if she found he could not
break his bands, she cried out (as if she had been in sport) Samson the
Philistines are upon thee, what will thou do now? and he brake the withes as
easily as if they had been a thread of tow; so where his strength lay was not
made known to her. Some time after (probably in a way of sportful dalliance)
she renews her desire to him, telling him he had before deceived her, and
mocked her, but she would not be so put off again. He tells her that if they
bound him with new ropes that never had been used, then he should be as weak as
other men. She accordingly bound him with such cords, and then to try the
experiment, and as it were in jest, cried out again, Samson, the Philistines
are upon thee, how will thou now help thy self? and he snapt the ropes in
sunder like a thread. She sets upon him a third time, and then tells him he had
hitherto deceived her with lies; but now she desires him to tell her truly how
he might be bound. He tells her if she weaved the seven locks of his hair with
a web, and did wind them both about the beam of the Loom, he should be then
unable to stir, and as weak as other men. She tryes this also, and for more
security fastened the beam with a pin, that when Samson arose it might not turn
or move; she cries again, Samson the Philistines are upon thee; and he awaking,
bore away pin and web and beam upon which his hair was wound. She set upon him
a fourth time, and told him that surely he did not love her whatever he
pretended, seeing he had deceived her now three times, and would not tell her
where his great strength lay; so urging him again, and following him with
incessant importunity, his mind was so perplexed he knew not what to do, being
extreme loath to discover to her a secret which so much concerned him, and yet
unwilling to displease her upon whom he so impotently doted. So that this
perplexity and distraction of thoughts was almost as bitter as death to him.
Hereupon being tired out with her importunity, he at length opened his heart
unto her, and told her that he had from his mothers womb been a Nazarite unto
God, and no razor had come on his head; therefore if he were shaven, and his
locks His strength did not lie in his hair, but was the free gift of God
conferred on him particularly and not upon another Nazarite; and it seems God
had bestowed it upon him, upon condition of his strict observing this Law of
the Nazarite in keeping his hair uncut, and probably God had some way or other
revealed this to Samson himself.
cut, his strength would depart from him, and he should be but like other men.
Behold here the weakness of man when left to himself. Samson one of Gods great
Worthies, commended for his faith, Heb. 11.32. and innobled by his Glorious
victories, who with his bare hands rent a roaring Lion as if he had been a Kid,
and slaughtered and routed an whole army of his enemies, is now become so weak
as to reveal a secret that concerned his life to a treacherous Harlot. Thus God
did justly leave him to fall into the following miseries that thereby he might
severely (yet deservedly) correct him for his former uncleanness, and relapsing
again into the same sin. But to proceed, when Dalilah saw by his serious
carriage in this relation that he had told her his very heart, she sent for the
Lords of the Philistines to come to her once again, assuring them that though
before they had lost their labor, yet they should not do so now, for Samson
had discovered his whole heart to her. Hereupon they came up and brought the
money with them they had promised to give her, to engage her to be faithful to
them. Then Dalilah getting Samson upon a time to lay his head, and sleep upon
her lap, she caused a man to cut off his seven locks; she might have suddenly
dispatched him by cutting his throat, but God did not permit her to take away
his life that he might have space to repent, and having his strength renewed
might destroy more of the Philistines at his death than he had done in his
life. Dalilah now jogging and rouzing him out of his sleep, and telling him the
Philistines were upon him, he suddenly awoke and thought to have gone out and
to have shaken up himself, and roused up his spirits to do as he used to do;
but he soon found the case altered with him, for his locks being cut, God had
withdrawn his supernatural strength from him, whereof his hair was a sign.
Being thus deprived of his strength, the Philistines (that lay in wait) came
and took him, and put out his eyes, and brought him down to Gaza, and bound him
with fetters of brass, and made him grind in their Prisonhouse. See Exodus
11.5. Herein the Philistines had their ends, and God had his, unto which he
made theirs subservient. Samson had by the wanton and lustful glances of his
eyes upon Harlots, highly offended God, and now God permits the Philistines to
put out his eyes; they carry him down in triumph to Gaza, and that must be the
place of his punishment, where he first acted his sin of uncleanness; and he
that had enslaved himself to an Harlot, is now condemned to that mean and
abject slavery, to grind in a mill. It seems it was a good while Per tres forte
aut quatuor menses in carcere fuit.
that Samson continued in this slavery before they brought him forth to make
them sport at Dagons Dagon was an Idol-god of the Philistines, his Image was in
the upper part like a man, and in the nether like a Fish, as may be gathered
from 1 Samuel 5 4: perhaps the Philistines whose land lay on the Seacoast,
worshipped him as the God of the Sea. As the Heathens did their Neptune, or
Triton. Dagon seems to be derived from the Hebrew word Dag signifying a Fish:
Feast. During which time reconciling himself to God by unfeigned repentance,
his hair (the sign of his strength) began to grow again. After some time the
Lords of the Philistines and their chief men met together at Gaza to offer a
great sacrifice to Dagon their god (for delivering Samson their enemy, and the
destroyer of their Country into their hands), and to feast and rejoice
together. When they were frolic and in their cups, they called to have Samson
brought forth to them out of the Prison to make them sport, and that they might
laugh at him. Samson being brought into that magnificent house, and
Idol-temple, where there were gathered together all the Lords of the
Philistines from the several Lordships of the Country, with a vast number of
other persons of note both men and women, and about 3000 people having got up
to the roof of the Temple that was flat Tecta in Palaestina Plana erant ut in
illis commode ambulare liceret, habebantque fenestras ita dispositas ut videre
possent quidquid erat in inferiori domus part: Menoch.
, that they might thorough the windows and lattices that were thereon see the
sport; Samson desiring the Lad that led him to suffer him to feel the Pillars
on which the house mainly leaned, he prayed unto the Lord and said, Remember me
now, O Lord, I beseech thee, and strengthen me this once that I may be avenged
on the Philistines for my two eyes; for they have not only done me a private
injury in my own person, but have thereby disabled me to fight in thy quarrel
for the deliverance of thy people. Then being moved by an extraordinary
instinct Ut patet a viribus ei a Deo subministratis ad patrandum hoc miraculum.
of the Spirit of God, (not to murder Quamvis direct, primario and per se suam
ipsius mortem deligere and procurare non liceat, Licet tamen indirecte,
secundario and per aliud quod per se bonum and honestum cum sit non potest nisi
morte nostra obtineri. Patet in quotidianis bellicae fortitudinis, and Martyris
exemplis. Lessius. Non eligitur (inquit Cajetanus) in hujusmodi casibus mors
propria in seipsa; sed per se eligitur mors hostium, and concomitans propria
mors toleranda admittitur propter bonum ultionis. Non proprie and physice
seipsum occidit Samson, sed tantum indirecte, and permissive se in eadem clade
quam evadere non poterat, involvit: quod sicut magnae fortitudinis fuit, sic
and magna pro praeteritis culpis poena fuit. A Lapid.
himself, but) to undervalue his own life, so he might thereby as a Judge and
public person execute Gods vengeance upon his and his peoples enemies, he took
hold on the two Pillars, by which the house was born up, of the one with his
right hand, and of the other with his left, and bowing himself with all his
might, and crying, let me die with the Philistines, the house fell upon the
Lords, and all the people that were therein, and killed them, and Samson
himself with them. So the dead which he slew at his death were more than those
he slew in his life. His Brethren and all the house of his Father (hearing of
his death) came down and took his dead body, and brought it up, and buried it
in his Fathers burying place, between Zorak and Eshtaol; the Philistines (by
the overruling Providence of God) not opposing it, whose pride and power by
this fatal blow given to their Princes, and so many of their people was much
abated and pulled down, so that they thought this was no fit time to provoke
the Israelites by denying them such a thing.

Judge. Chapter 16. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLI.
First Book of Samuel.
WE are now come to the first Book of Samuel, which contains an History of
eighty years, forty in the time of Eli [in the four first Chapters] and forty
in the times of Samuel and Saul in the rest of the Book; so that the History of
these three persons together with some part of the History of David is the
chief matter of this Book. The two Books of Samuel are thought to be written by
Samuel, Nathan, and Gad, one after another, 1 Chronicles. 29.29. yet some passages
in these Books may seem to intimate that they were written in latter times; as
1 Samuel 5.5. and Chapter 30.25. 2 Samuel 6.8. These two Books of Samuel are styled by
the Septuagint, and several others, the first and second Book of the Kings, the
first containing all the History of King Saul, and part of the History of King
David, both whom Samuel anointed by Gods appointment, and the second the
History of King Ishbosheth shortly, and of King David at large.

After Samsons death Eli the High Priest [in whom the High Priesthood was
translated from the stock of Eleazar the Eldest, Eli 13 Judge.
to the posterity of Ithamar the younger Son of Aaron] executed the Office of a
Judge in Civil causes, and judged Israel forty years. He was extraordinarily
both High Priest How he came to be High Priest we cannot say; that Eli was of
the posterity of Ithamar Aaron's second Son, appears from hence: Abiathar who
was deposed from being High Priest by Solomon, was of the posterity of Eli, 1
King. 2.27. and of Abimelech (who was the Son of Abiathar) it is expressly said,
1 Chronicles. 24.3. that he was of the Sons of Ithamar. How the High Priesthood came
to be transferred from the posterity of Eleazar to Eli, who was of the house of
Ithamar cannot be cleared by any place of Scripture; we may conjecture that it
so fell out because the Highpriests of Eleazars family had some way or other
highly provoked God by their evil courses in the days of the former Judges.

This was the Series of the Highpriests as appears 1 Chronicles. 6.4. Aaron,
Eleazar, Phineas, Abishua, Bukki, Uzzi; from Uzzi the High Priesthood was
translated to Eli; to whom succeeded Achitob, to him Achias, to him Ahimelech,
to him Abiathar, who was deposed from the Priesthood by Solomon, 1 King. 2.27.
that he might perform the word of the Lord that he spoke concerning the house
of Eli in Shiloh, 1 Samuel 2.31.35.


and Judge, a good and famous man, though faulty in being too indulgent to his
Children, as we shall see afterward. In his time, and under his Government
Samuel was born, whose History we come now to describe.

His Father was Elkanah a Levite of the family of the Kohathites of the
posterity of of Korah, 1 Chronicles. 6.22, 23. who dwelt in Ramathaim-Zophim in
Mount Ephraim. He had two wives, probably Hannah was his first wife, and she
being barren he afterward took Peninnah who was fruitful. Though the Lord
allowed not Polygamy, yet he was pleased to tolerate it for a time, and
possibly the Jews did conceive that Gods promise to Abraham of multiplying his
seed as the stars of the heaven did imply a dispensation for them to have more
wives than one. The Tabernacle was now at Shiloh, and there had continued since
the seventh year of Joshua, Chapter 18.1. thither went Elkanah yearly, that is at
those three solemn Feasts wherein all the males were bound to appear before the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 16.16. He might possibly go at other times as a Levite to do
service in his course, but he failed not to go up at those great Solemnities,
and it seems several of his family used to go up with him, yea the women also
(such was their devotion) though not bound thereunto by the Law. At those great
Feasts he gave to Peninnah and all her Sons and Daughters portions of the
Peace Offerings which he offered to the Lord, according to the ancient manner
of Feasts, of which see Genesis 43.34. but unto Hannah who was his best beloved he
gave a larger and better portion, and possibly of the choicest and best of the
Sacrifices. Peninnah was angry at this, and thereupon quarrelled with and
provoked Hannah, and upbraided her for her barrenness, as an effect of the
Lords displeasure against her; and as Elkanah did thus continually express his
great love to Hannah when he went yearly with his family to the House of God,
so Peninnah persisted from time to time to vex her with her provocations, and
possibly upbraided her with her fruitless seeking to God so earnestly at those
times for a child; this greatly troubled Hannah, in so much that she mourned
and wept, and did not care to eat as others did, especially not with any joy
and cheerfulness as they were bound to do at those solemn Feasts. Elkanah
perceiving it, asked her why she so grieved and wept, and so mourned in a time
when she ought to have rejoiced? It Is true (says he) the Lord has not afforded
thee Children, but am not I (who love thee so dearly) better to thee than ten
Sons In concord matrimonio plus boni est quam in ipsa faecunditate. Gr.
. But when Elkanah and his family had eaten and drunk together (with whom
Hannah sat) she being in bitterness of soul went out and prayed unto the Lord,
and wept sore, and she said, O Lord of Hosts, if thou will please to look on
the affliction of thy handmaid, and wilt give unto me a man-child, I will give
him unto thee all the days of his life As to the power of her Vow we must
understand that she only vowed to do what in her lay that it might be thus if
the Child had no defect either in body or mind, and was willing when he came to
the years of discretion to take upon him the Vow, and provided that her Husband
consented thereunto, without which the Woman's Vow was of no force, Numb. 30.8.
Indeed it is evident in the sequel of Samuels story that he did not always
continue in the Tabernacle, see Chapter 7.16. but went from year to year in Circuit
and judged Israel. And hence it seems probable that after he became Judge in
Israel, he was by special dispensation from God freed from this Vow of his
Mother.
. That is, he shall not stay till the usual years of other Levites (which was
25 or 30 years of age) but shall be brought to the Tabernacle and trained up
there, even from his Childhood, and all that while shall continue under the
strict vow of a Nazarite, which ordinarily the Levites were not bound unto. It
seems at this very time when Hannah poured forth her prayer to the Lord, and
made this Vow, that Eli the High Priest sat upon a seat by a post of the
Temple of the Lord, that is the Tabernacle, which possibly at this time had
some house built for it to preserve it from weather; for Chapter 3.15. we read that
Samuel opened the doors of the house of the Lord, whereas the Tabernacle had no
Gates but only a Vail that was hung up at the entering of it, Exodus 26.36. Eli
sitting upon his seat, and seeing Hannah stand a great while near him mumbling
with her lips after an unusual manner, and possibly expressing some
incomposedness in her gesture through the vehemence of her affection, he
thought she had been drunk, wherefore he said unto her, How long will thou
continue here in thy drunkenness, and profane this holy place thou art come
into; go home and sleep out thy distemper, and then come with a penitent heart,
and make thy peace with God. Hannah replys, No, my Lord, I am a woman of a
sorrowful spirit, and therefore very unlikely to be guilty of such an excess; I
have neither drunk wine nor strong drink this day, but have been pouring Psalm.
62.8. Lam. 2.19.
forth my soul before the Lord; count me not therefore I pray thee such a
daughter of Belial, nor imagine me guilty of so great a crime as drunkenness
is. I have only been opening my griefs and sorrows to the Lord, and have been
earnestly imploring help from him. Eli hearing this, said, Go in peace, and the
God of Israel grant thee thy petition which thou have asked of him. Hannah
desires him that he would always retain that good opinion of her, and would
still pray to the Lord in her behalf; so being encouraged by the Spirit of God
upon the prayer she had poured forth, and the gracious encouragement she had
received from the High Priest, she departed with inward joy, and did eat bread,
and her countenance was no more sad.

The next morning Elkanah and his family before they set forth on their journey
homewards, presented themselves before God in the Tabernacle, to worship him,
and to pray for a prosperous journey and success in all their other lawful
affairs, leaving therein to posterity a good precedent for their imitation.
When they were come home, Hannah conceived by Elkanah, the Lord remembering her,
and hearing her prayer; and when the time was come about for her delivery, she
bare a Son and called his name Samuel We read not that Samuel ever was
High Priest, but an extraordinary Prophet, and Judge in Israel. A Sacrificer,
though only a Levite, a rare and worthy person.
, that is, asked of God; rejoicing most in this, that this Son was given her in
answer to her prayer. Elkanah with several of his family went up to the
Tabernacle to offer unto the Lord the yearly Sacrifice and his vow, that is,
besides the yearly and ordinary Sacrifice some other oblation that he had
vowed, namely a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving for the birth of his Son. But Hannah
desired of her Husband that she might not go up till the child was weaned V.
22. Educatus, i. e. eo usque provectus ut ministrare possit. Nam (...) non
tantum est a mamma disjungere sed educare, 1 Reg. 11.20. donec maturescat sive
maturus siat puer ministerio and Nazaraeatui. Donec efformetur puer, ie. ut
satis membris and robore efformetur ad ministrandum in Tabernaculo. Mas. It Is
like she would not wean him, and so put him from her till he was of some age to
shift for himself among strangers, being also before that time unable to do
service in the Tabernacle. A like example we have in Sarah who would not wean
her beloved Isaac till he was of some more than ordinary years for a weanling.
See Genesis 21.8, 9.
, and educated, and fitted in some measure to do some kind of service in the
Tabernacle, and then she would carry him thither, and leave him there, that he
might continue in the service of the Lord for ever; that is, all the days of
his life. But it is plain that Samuel sometime dwelt in Ramah, and there judged
Israel, which happened either after the age of fifty, (which was the time
prefixed for the Levites service, Numb. 8.25.) or by Gods especial
dispensation, who dispensed with his Vow to make him a Magistrate. Elkanah
consents to what his wife desired, viz. that she should stay till the Child was
weaned and educated; Only (says he) let the Lord establish his word; whereby he
seems to mean that especial promise which God had made either to him or his
wife, before or after the conception and birth of the child, though it be not
expressed particularly what it was. When Hannah had weaned and educated her
Son, she took him with her to Shiloh, there to present him to the Lord
according to her Vow; and she took with her three Bullocks, one Ephah of flour,
and a bottle of wine; One of these Bullocks was offered when they presented the
child, and delivered him up to the service of the Lord; the other ('it is like)
were offered in other Oblations; or the one might be offered as a
Burnt-offering, the other two for a Peace Offering. The Ephah of flour
contained ten Omers, or tenth-deals; now the Law prescribing three tenth-deals
to be offered with a Bullock, [Numb. 15.9.] nine tenth-deals of this Ephah were
for the three Bullocks, and the other tenth-deal (which was overplus) might be
intended for a voluntary meat offering. The bottle of wine was to be used in
their meat and drink, and Peace Offerings. Then Hannah presenting her Son to
Eli, she said, O my Lord, as sure as thou art alive, I am the woman that stood
by thee here praying for this child, and the Lord having granted my petition, I
have lent him to the Lord as long as he lives: that is, I have dedicated him
to his service, having asked him of the Lord for that very end, that I might
return him to him again. As he was freely given, so he shall be freely devoted
to Gods service. And Elkanah Worshipped the Lord there, and thankfully praised
him for giving him this Son, and also prayed unto him for his blessing upon
him, and that he would sanctify him by his Spirit, and enable him in an holy
manner to perform that Religious service, unto which he and his wife had
devoted him.

1 Samuel Chapter 1. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLII.
THese things being done, Hannah now in a solemn manner praises the Lord for
giving her a Son, and prays Orandi gen^^ Eucharisticum ut Luc. 1.46.68
unto him to continue his life, and to bless him; she begins her Song There is
in many passages a great harmony between this Song and that of the Blessed
Virgin, Luke 1.46.
thus, My heart rejoiceth in the Lord, mine born is exalted in the Lord;
whereby she intimates that through the Lords goodness to her in giving her a
Son, she was become stronger and more renowned than before, (for children are
the strength and glory of their Parents), and that she had cause now to triumph
over her enemies who had before upbraided her for her barrenness. My heart is
enlarged over mine enemies; whereby she intimates that she had enough now to
say wherewith to stop the mouth of her insulting adversaries. There is none
holy as the Lord, for there is none besides thee; that is, there is none
essentially and perfectly holy besides the Lord, who is the fountain of all the
holiness that is in others. For there is no God besides thee, neither is there
any rock like our God: He is our only refuge in all our troubles, and he only
can deliver us out of them all. He is the rock (says she) on which I rested and
relied when I was ready to sink in the time of my trouble. Let not my
adversaries therefore (Peninnah or any others) talk any more so exceeding
proudly against me, let not arrogance come out of their lips; for the Lord is a
God of Knowledge; that is, He knows all that in your pride and arrogance you
think or speak, or attempt against his poor servants. And by him actions are
weighed; that is, He exactly ponders all the actions of men, and will therefore
as a just Judge recompense them as he finds them good or evil, yea according to
the degree of goodness or badness that he finds in them. Then she goes on to
show what strange and unexpected alterations God makes among men; By him (says
she) the bows of the mighty are broken; that is, God does many times break the
strength of the mighty, and blast their attempts, and makes them successless
just as when the bow of a mighty man breaks, all his endeavors to shoot come
to nothing. And on the other hand they that stumbled are girt with strength;
that is, He many times so strengthens the feeble that of themselves were ready
to stumble, or at least so prosper their weak endeavors that unexpectly they
bring mighty things to pass, and so those that were weak and feeble in
themselves, (being strengthened by the power of God) overcome great
difficulties, even such as by the power of nature they were not able to
overcome, as I my self can abundantly testify. They that were full have hired
out themselves for bread; that is, they that were rich he sometimes brings to
poverty so that they are fain to work like hired servants to relieve their
wants, and they that were hungry ceased to be so, and were plentifully provided
for. She that was barren has born many Seven in Scripture is usually put for
many, as Deuteronomy. 28.7.
children, and they that have had many children are either grown weak, and so
through feebleness have left off bearing, or else have buried the children they
have had, and so have lost their strength, as children are esteemed to be to
their Parents. Possibly Hannah had assurance by the Spirit of Prophecy that
God would give her many children more, as indeed we find, v. 21. of this
Chapter, that she had after this three Sons, and two Daughters. The Lord
kills and makes alive: He brings down to the grave and brings up: that
is, the Lord brings some into desperate dangers, into grievous and heavy
afflictions, and yet delivers them out of them, [See Chapter 20.3. Hos. 6.2. Isa.
26.17.] and Gods power is most manifested when men are recovered from such
desperate distresses. God does sometimes seem to kill men, and then revives
them again. He makes poor and makes rich: He brings low and raises up: He
raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the beggar from the dunghill,
to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory; that
is, He raises some from beggary to Sovereignty, and from the dunghill to the
throne. For the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world
upon them: that is, Though the earth hangs in the midst of the air having
nothing to support it but the Almighty power of God, yet it stands firm Habet
terra suos polos, quibus aut sustinet se, in quiet, aut (ut alii volunt) in
motu se librat. Gr.
and fast upon its center as if it were supported with pillars, and therefore
it is no wonder God should sometimes turn things upside down in the government
of the world, since he that made the world at first, must needs be of power
sufficient to do what he will; for with his own why should he not do what
himself pleases? He will keep the feet of his Saints: that is, He will guide
and protect his people, and keep them from falling. And the wicked shall be
silent in darkness; that is, overwhelmed with confusion and astonishment in the
great calamities that shall befall them, ( Eccles. 5.17. Zeph. 1.15. Jer.
8.14.) or cut off from the land of the living, for such are said to dwell in
silence, Psalm. 94.17. For by strength shall no man prevail: that is, by his own
strength. For if the Lord did not preserve his Saints, by their own strength
they could not keep themselves; neither can the wicked by their own strength
secure themselves against Gods hand. And if any man prevail in any of his
enterprises, let him not assume the glory of it to himself, but ascribe it
entirely unto God. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken in pieces, out
of heaven shall he thunder upon them. This clause seems to be a Prophecy, and
may have reference to that particular judgment upon the enemies of Gods people
in the time of Samuels Government, 1 Samuel 7.10. when the Lord thundered with a
great thunder on the Philistines, and discomfited them, and they were smitten
before Israel; yet it may be meant generally of the Lords pouring down
vengeance on his adversaries. See 2 Samuel 22.14, 15. And because God destroyed
his enemies often by thunder, it grew (it seems) into a Proverb, that the Lord
would thunder upon them, when he meant terribly to destroy them. The Lord shall
judge the ends of the earth, and he shall give strength unto his King, and exalt
the horn of his Anointed: This seems to be a Prophecy concerning the
Exaltation and Kingdom of the Messiah; and it is the first place in the Old
Testament where he is mentioned under that name. The Lord will rule the world,
and judge all the inhabitants of the world, and particularly those that are in
the uttermost parts of the earth by the Messiah his Anointed King; who though
he shall at first live in a low and mean condition, yet when he has finished
the work of man's Redemption, he shall then be exalted above all Principalities
and Powers, and shall sit down at the right hand of his Father, all power being
given unto him both in heaven and earth; he shall gather his people from all
Nations, and govern them by his Word and Spirit, and destroy his and their
enemies.

Hannah having ended her Song, Elkanah and she departed to their house at
Ramah, and left their young Son Samuel to minister unto the Lord before Eli the
Priest, to wit, in such services of the Tabernacle, as by degrees he grew able
to perform. The Levites indeed did not enter on that service till they were
twenty-five years old, as we showed before; but Samuels case was extraordinary,
because by the special vow of a Nazarite, he was even from his tender years
consecrated to the service of the Lord. And though by the Law there were no
linen Ephods appointed for the Levites, but for the inferior Priests only, (
Exodus 39.27.) either therefore afterward when the Tabernacle came to be settled
in the land of Canaan it was so ordered by the Lord that the Levites should
also wear such linen Ephods when they attended upon the service of the
Tabernacle, or else Samuel was by special dispensation, because of the
Nazarites vow, or some other reason, appointed to wear this holy vestment,
which yet seems not very probable, because the linen Ephod was so commonly
worn by all that were employed in holy services, that even David when he danced
before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.14. was girded with a linen Ephod. But however it
was, it is plain that Samuel in his younger years did attend upon the service of
the Tabernacle, viz. in such services as he could then perform, and that before
Eli the Priest, that is, as he was ordered and directed by him, who undertook
it training of him up, and upon whom he chiefly attended in the service he
performed. And his mother when she came to Shiloh with her husband to offer the
yearly Sacrifice used to bring him a new coat as a pledge of her motherly love
to him; and there Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said unto him, The Lord
give thee seed of this woman, for the Son thou have lent to the Lord. And the
Lord visited Visitare hic sumitur in bonam partem.
Hannah in mercy, and according to Eli's blessing made her fruitful, so that
for that one Son she had given to the Lord, he gave her three Sons and two
Daughters more; so powerful are the prayers of such good men as Eli was. And
the child Samuel as he grew in years, so he grew in grace and godliness,
whereby he became acceptable both to God and man, see Luke 2.52.

1 Samuel Chapter 2. from v. 1. to 12. and v. 18, 19, 20, 21.

SECT. CLIII.
ELI was at this time (as we have showed) Judge of Israel, and he was
High Priest also, but how he came to be so Quomodo ab Aarone oriundus sit Eli
nondum liquet, ut ejus ex industria videatur obliterata genealogia. Tantilla
est solius loci non doctrinae, morumque successio. Anonym in loc.
, we cannot give any certain account, the Scripture being therein silent. He
had two Sons Hophni and Phineas, who as Secondary Priests did the service of
the Sanctuary under their Father; but these were very wicked men, Sons of
Belial, that had no lively knowledge nor apprehension of God, nor did fear and
honor him as God. For though they did profess to worship God, yet in their
works they denied him, being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good
work reprobate. The sins and provocations of these Sons of Eli are set forth in
several particulars; they were not content with the breast and shoulder, and
the checks See Deuteronomy. 18.3.
with the tongue (which only were the Priests portion of the Peace Offerings,
Levit. 7.31, 32, etc.) but they used to challenge of that which was seething
for the Sacrifices, (as their just fees), all that their flesh-hook could take
out, (having no Law of God for it), and this they did not only now and then,
but constantly practiced it unto all the Israelites that came to Shiloh to
worship, v. 14. And sometimes they would have this their overplus-portion
before the flesh was put into the pot or kettle that they might roast it, yea
before the fat was taken off and burnt, and so before the Lord had his due,
directly against the Law, Levit. 7.31. which may be the reason why v. 29. they
are said to have made themselves fat with the chiefest of the offerings; and if
any denied to give them what they required, they threatened to take it by force
and violence, God was very angry at these miscarriages of these young men,
whereby they caused the people to neglect the Worship and service of God, and
even to abhor his Sacrifices, when they saw them profaned by such abominable
courses. Eli was very old, and heard of these great miscarriages of his Sons,
and of some other abominations that they were guilty of, viz. that they lay
with the women that came to the door of the Tabernacle to offer Sacrifices, and
to perform other duties of worship and service unto God; which wickedness was
the more abominable, because they had wives of their own, as we may see, Chapter
4.19. Old Eli did indeed reprove his Sons for these their scandalous
miscarriages, but he did it too mildly and gently, saying to them, Nay my Sons
it is no good report I hear of you, ye make the Lords people to transgress by
your wicked example, and to forbear bringing their Sacrifices to the Lord,
being so highly scandalized at your ill managing of sacred things. But Eli
being not only a Father, but also a chief Magistrate and Judge, should not only
have reproved them sharply, but should have punished them severely by casting
them out of the Priests Office which they had so shamefully profaned, yea
should have put them to death for their adultery according to the Law, Levit.
20.10. but he only mildly reproved them for such great enormities. He told them
that if one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; that is, an
umpire may come and take up the controversy, and the offending party may be
adjudged to make satisfaction, and so there will be an end of that quarrel; but
if a man sin against the Lord who shall entreat for him? that is, no mediation
or satisfaction of man can here make his peace with God; no reconciliation can
here be hoped for, but upon his repentance and turning to God, and resting on
the alsufficient merits and intercession of the Messiah. But let Eli say what
he would they hearkened not to the voice of their father, which plainly showed
that the Lord determined to destroy them; for being grievously provoked by
their sins, he resolved as a righteous Judge to leave them to themselves, and to
the wickedness of their own hearts, and therefore no wonder they minded not the
reproofs and counsel of their aged Father; whereupon there came a man of God
(some Prophet extraordinarily raised up) to Eli, and said unto him, thus says
the Lord, Did not I eminently appear unto the house of thy father, viz. Aaron,
(of whom thou art descended by Ithamar) joining him with Moses for the
deliverance of the Israelites when they were in bondage to Pharaoh in Egypt
Tota Aegyptus Pharaonis domus appellatur, quod ejus possessio erat. Mendoza.
? Did not I choose him out of all the Tribes of Israel to be my Priest to offer
Sacrifices upon mine Altar, to burn incense, and to wear an Ephod before me?
Did not I give unto the House of thy father some part of all the offerings
Partem ex victimis omnibus quas pertinere volui ad sacerdotes. Ex omnibus
sacrificiis aliquid; nam etiam ex holocaustis pellis cedebat sacerdoti. Levit.
7.8. Menoch.
made by fire, and offered by the children of Israel unto me? And are all my
special favors to thy Fathers family come to this? Thy Sons kick at my
Sacrifices, and at my offerings which I have commanded to be offered to me in
my holy habitation; they as it were despise and contemn them, and make a scorn
of them before the people, as though I had afforded them too little, and
therefore they will take from the Sacrifices for their own use what they please
themselves. And though thou did not do thus thy self, but thy Sons only, yet
because thou did not restrain them from these evil practices, and punish them
for these their great transgressions, thou art guilty as well as they. Nay thou
show by thy over great indulgence to them, that thou honor thy Sons
above me, and chusest to please them rather than me, not daring to provoke them
by sharply reproving them, much less by punishing them as thou ought to have
done, though thou know they have sacrilegiously incroached upon the fat of
the offerings that belonged unto me, and upon other parts also of the
Peace Offerings that belonged unto the people, and all this to pamper their own
greedy bellies. Wherefore thus says the Lord, I said When God made his promise
to Eli is uncertain, the Scripture being silent therein.
indeed that thy house and the house of thy father should walk before me for
ever; that is, should be perpetually established in the office of the
Priesthood; but this promise was only conditional, namely if you carried your
selves well in that high calling; but this condition being not performed by
you, the promise which I made unto you shall be reversed: For those that honor
me I will honor, but those that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. Further
thus says the Lord, Behold the days come that I will cut off thine arm, and
the arm of thy fathers house; that is, deprive thee of thy strength, and make
both thee and thy family weak and ignoble.

And this was done first by cutting off him and his two Sons, Chapt. 4.17. 2ly,
By cutting off his posterity in the flower of their age, which was partly
accomplished in the death of Hophni and Phineas slain in the field, and partly
by that bloody execution that was done upon Ahimelech and eighty-five of the
Priests of his family, Chapter 22.16, etc. And 3ly, by removing the dignity of the
High Priesthood from Eli's family unto Zadok (the faithful Priest spoken of, v.
35. of the stock of Eleazar) which was done at least eighty years after this in
the days of Solomon, 1 King. 2.27. And thou shall see It Is usual in Scripture
to speak that of the Father which shall be accomplished in his posterity long
after. See Genesis 27.29.
, viz. in thy posterity an enemy in my habitation; that is Zadok, executing the
Highpriests office in the Temple, whom thy posterity shall envy and malign,
because placed in the High Priesthood, and that in all the wealth which God
shall give Israel; that is, in those days when Israel shall flourish most in
wealth and glory, and when consequently the High Priesthood shall be most
desirable, to wit, in the days of Solomon. And there shall not be an old man,
or a man of dignity v. 31: Ut non sit senex in domo tua, i. e. vir dignitate
praeditus, vide v. 36.
in thy family v. 32. Haec severa comminatio non est extendenda ad omnes
Ithamaraeos sed tantum ad domum Eli. Alii senem hic ut prius accipiunt de
dignitate sacerdotali, qua in perpetuum abdicata est familia Eli. At in ea
familia senes aetate semper desecisse non est credibile. Mendoz.
. And the men of thy posterity whom I shall not quite cut off from serving at
mine Altar, shall live so miserably, (pining away with grief, and vexation to
see the adversary family enjoy their honor) that if thou should live to see
the misery they shall be in, it would make thee almost weep out thine eyes to
behold it, and it would grieve thee to the very heart. And most of thy family
shall die in the flower of their age. And that which I now foretell shall come
upon thy two Sons Hophni and Phineas may be a sign to thee, that all my other
threatenings shall in due time come to pass, viz. I do foretell thee that they
shall both die in one day. And I will raise me up a faithful Priest that shall
do according to that which is in my heart, to wit, Zadock He did faithfully
cleave to Solomon whom the Lord had appointed to succeed Dovid in the Throne,
when Abiathar who was of the posterity of Eli, conspired with Adonijah against
David, and against Solomon, 1 King. 1.7, 8.
, of the family of Eleazar, and I will build him a sure house, and he shall
walk before mine anointed for ever; that is, I will multiply his family, and
make it prosperous, and establish his offspring in the Priesthood.

And accordingly we find that the High Priesthood was continued in the line and
posterity of Zadock unto the time of the Babylonian Captivity, see Ezekiel. 44.15.
And so Zadock being of the posterity of Phineas the Son of Eleazar, that
promise was made good which the Lord made to Phineas, Numb. 25.13. He shall
have it and his seed after him, even the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood.
And he shall walk before mine anointed for ever; that is, Zadock and his
posterity shall perform such services as belong to the High Priest; for Solomon
and his Successors, viz. they shall inquire of the Lord for them, they shall
offer Sacrifices for them, and shall be ready to assist them with their counsel
and advice upon all emergent occasions. And those of thy posterity that shall
not be cut off shall come and crouch to Zadock and his successors to beg some
relief of them, and shall sue to them that they may be employed, though it were
but in some of the meanest services of the Temple, only that they may eat
bread, see Ezekiel. 44.13, 14.

1 Samuel 2. from 12. to 18. and from 22. to the end.

SECT. CLIV.
THE impiety and wickedness of the times was now so great that the word of the
Lord was precious, there was no open vision; that is, there was not a man
openly known to whom the Lord appeared in Visions, or whom he sent forth among
the people with a word of Prophecy in his mouth. So that the Lord did not now
reveal his mind to them by his Prophets, as he used to do at other times. See
Psalm. 74.9. And this is mentioned probably for the honor of Samuel to whom the
Lord was pleased to appear at such a time as this, and to re-establish in him
the Prophetic Office; See 2 Chronicles. 35.18. and Act. 3.24. And the particular
time when the Lord appeared to him is also set down, which was when Eli (being
very old and his eyes dim) was laid down in his place, that is, to take his
rest in that place and in that lodging which belonged to him as High Priest
near unto the Court of the Tabernacle, and it was toward the morning before
the Lamps that were in the Golden Candlestick in the Tabernacle were gone out,
or the oil spent. See Exodus 30.7. Samuel being laid down to sleep in a Chamber
near unto him, the Lord calls him, who awaking, and supposing his Master Eli
had called him, ran to him, but Eli told him that he did not call him, and
therefore bids him lie down again. The Lord calls Samuel a second time, and he
runs again to Eli, who tells him he did not call him, and bids him go to his
bed again. Samuel was not yet acquainted with that way whereby the Lord did use
to make known himself to his Prophets, viz. by Visions, neither had there been
as yet any such revelation made unto him. The Lord calls him a third time, and
he running again to Eli, supposing that he had called him, Eli then perceived
that the Lord had appeared unto him, he bids him therefore go and lie down
again, and if he heard the voice calling him any more, he should say, Speak
Lord, for thy servant hears. Samuel lying down again, the Lord came and stood
and called Samuel, Samuel, (appearing possibly in a visible shape), he answered
as Eli had bidden him, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears; then the Lord said
to him, Behold I will do a thing in Israel at which both the ears of every one
that hears it shall tingle, (See 2 King. 12.12.) meaning the discomfiture of
the Israelites, the taking of the Ark, the death of Eli's Sons, and Eli's
falling down backward, and breaking his neck; his daughter-in-law Phinehas's
wife falling presently into the pains of Travel, and dying; Judgments so
dreadful and hideous, that every one that heard of them must needs be filled
with horror, and astonishment. And then will I perform against Eli all things
that I have spoken concerning his house. And though it may be some time e're I
begin thus to visit him, yet when I have once begun I will not cease till I
have made an end. For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever,
(that is punish it till it be utterly ruined) for the iniquity which he knew
his Sons committed, and yet he restrained them not, neither chiding them
severely as he was a Father, nor deposing them from their office as he was the
High Priest, nor punishing them corporally as he was a Judge. Therefore I have
sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli 's house shall not be
purged with Sacrifice, nor offering for ever; that is, that the temporal
punishment denounced against them should not be kept off, or averted by any
Sacrifices or Oblations whatsoever, though by their unfeigned repentance they
may prevent their eternal misery.

Samuel having heard these sad words, rose in the morning and opened the doors
of the Tabernacle (which seems at this time to be housed as we showed before)
but he was afraid to acquaint Eli with the things revealed to him in this
Vision, because he knew that such tidings would wound his heart, and he feared
to offend him by bringing such a displeasing message unto him; Eli therefore
called him, and charged him to declare all that the Lord had said unto him; for
being conscious of his Sons leudness, and his own too great indulgence toward
them, he apprehended that some heavy sentence was denounced from the Lord
against him, and therefore he was so eager to know it, that he said, God do so
to thee and more See Notes on Ruth 1.17.
also, if thou hidest any thing from me. Hereupon Samuel told him all; Eli in
an humble submissive manner, replies, It is the Lord let him do what seems
him good. After this Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and suffered none
of his words to fall to the ground, but exactly performed what he had foretold
by him; and all Israel even from Dan to Beersheba knew that Samuel was
established to be a Prophet of the Lord, and effectually called and sent to
execute this office among them, and that God had firmly settled him in it by
making good his own word in his mouth. So that after the long intermission and
cessation of Prophetical Vision, (whereby the word of the Lord was become rare
and precious, as we have showed before) the Lord renewed this gift of Prophecy
by appearing in Shiloh unto Samuel, and revealing his mind and will unto him by
Prophetical Visions and Inspirations v. 21. By the word of the Lord, some
understand that God did by his Eternal and Essential Word, viz. Christ, the
Wisdom of the Father, reveal his mind to Samuel.
, that he might reveal it unto the people.

1 Samuel Chapter 3. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLV.
AS Samuel had before made known the word of the Lord to Eli, so he does now to
all Israel, reproving them for their sins, and telling them before hand what
Judgments would fall upon them if they did not speedily repent; but they not
reforming, the Philistines (who it seems during the forty years of Eli's
Government had been pretty quiet, possibly because of the great slaughter
Samson had made of their Lords and chief men at his death, see Judge. 16.30.)
now begin again to invade their Land, and being entered with an Army, the
Israelites gather themselves together to fight with them, and pitch their Camp
at a place which was afterward called Eben-ezer (the occasion whereof we may
see afterward, Chapter 7.11.) and the Camp of the Philistines was in Aphek, a City
in the Tribe of Judah. The Armies joining Battle, the Israelites were smitten
before the Philistines, and lost 4000 men. The Israelites having rallied their
scattered forces, the Elders of the people began to inquire with some
astonishment why the Lord had thus left them, and suffered the Philistines to
prevail over them; though they knew that Idolatry, and many other gross sins
were at this time rife among them, (as we may learn from the Psalmists words,
Psalm. 78.58. speaking of these very times) yet they were so blind and stupid
that because they were the seed of Abraham they wondered that God should take
part with the uncircumcised Philistines against them, not being sensible of
their own great wickedness which had provoked him to bring that calamity upon
them. And vainly they thought to mend the matter by fetching the Ark of God,
the sign of his presence to be among them. For not repenting of their sins
whereby they had forfeited their interest in God, nor seeking to make their
peace with him as they ought to have done, their confidence in the Ark was vain
and groundless. However without consulting with God, or advising with Samuel,
they resolve to fetch it into the Camp, by which in former times their
Ancestors had prevailed against their enemies, (as at the taking of Jericho,
Josh. 6.4, 5.) and they hoped it would now help them also. And thus they
trusted more in the visible presence of the Ark, than the gracious presence and
assistance of God, which they could not rationally hope for whilst they
continued impenitent and unreform'd.

The Ark being sent for, the two Sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas came along
with it, either to carry it, [as Numb. 4.15.] or to attend it. And when it came
into the Camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang
again with the rebound or Echo of their shout. The Philistines understanding
this, were sore afraid, for they said, God is come into the Camp; thinking (it
seems) the Ark to be some representation of the God of the Israelites, and
having the same opinion of it that they had of their own Idols; at least they
conceived some Divine power went along with it, which was the reason they were
so afraid. And they said, Woe unto us, there has not been such a thing
heretofore; that is, in former conflicts which we have had with them, they used
not to bring their Ark into the Camp, and by this unwonted shout of theirs we
may perceive how much greater their hope and confidence now is than it has
been formerly. Woe unto us, who shall deliver us out of the hands of these
mighty Gods? Thus they speak of the true God after their Idolatrous manner, who
worshipped many Gods or Idols. They further said, These are the Gods that smote
the Egyptians with all the Plagues which fell upon Pharaoh and his people in
Egypt, and at last drowned them in the Red Sea, which joined to the desert or
wilderness of Etham, Exodus 13.20. upon which many of their dead carcasses were
cast up; and hereupon they name this as the consummation of all the former
Plagues. Therefore they encouraged one another, saying, Let us be strong, and
quit our selves like men, and fight valiantly, that we be not servants unto the
Hebrews as they have been unto us, Judge. 13.1. Accordingly the Armies
encountering each other, the Philistines fought stoutly, and the Israelites were
discomfited, and there fell thirty thousand Footmen (for they had no Horse) and
the rest were miserably scattered, so that they fled to their own houses or
dwellings. See Chapter 13.2. 1 King. 12.16. And the Ark of God was taken The Ark
being in the Tabernacle at Shiloh, it was now taken thence, and never came into
it again: It was carried now to Ebenezer (a place ominous now, but a monument
of Gods help soon after) into the Camp, Chapter 5.1. that it might save them out of
the hands of their enemies, (as we read the Philistines themselves in the days
of David brought their Images into their Camp, 2 Samuel 5.21. 1 Chronicles. 14.12.)
The Ark being taken there by the Philistines, they carried it about to Ashdod,
into the house of Dagon, thence to Gath, thence to Ekron; and after they had
kept it seven months they sent it to Bethshemesh, a City in the Tribe of Judah,
and it was fetched thence to Kirjathjearim a City likewise of Judah. It was
there placed in the house of Abinadab a Levite, 1 Samuel 7.1. it abode there
twenty years till the time of the Repentance and Reformation wrought by the
Ministry of Samuel, 1 Samuel 7.2. And after in the days of Saul it seems to be
fetched thence to Gilgal, 1 Samuel 10.8. and after to Gibeah of Benjamin, compare
1 Samuel 13.9. and Chapter 14.2, 18. so that it seems it was fetched into
extraordinary assemblies upon extraordinary occasions, both in War and Peace.
But being returned to Kirjath-jearim to the house of Abinadab, it was fetched
thence by David, 1 Chronicles. 13.5. Sixty-seven years after it was first brought
thither. It was brought by him to the house of Obed-Edom a Lev^te, 2 Samuel 6.10.
the Ark was there three months, and then fetched thence by David with great
solemnity into the Tent which he prepared for it in Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 1.5.
and thence seems to be carried into Joab's Camp before Rabbah, 2 Samuel 11.11.
and began to be carried with David in his flight from Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.24.
And being returned to David's Tent prepared for it at Jerusalem, Solomon as
soon as he had built the Temple, brought it thence with great Solemnity, and
placed it in the Holy Oracle, 2 Chronicles. 5.2. about 112 years after it first left
Shiloh. What became of it at the destruction of the Temple by Nebuchadnezzar is
uncertain.
, and the two Sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas were slain according to the
Prediction, Chapter 2.34. and a man of Benjamin ran from the Army, and came to
Shiloh the same day with his Clothes rent, and with earth upon his head (see
Josh. 7.6. 2 Samuel 1.2.) to signify the sad news he brought, and Eli sat upon a
seat by the way-side near the Gate of the Tabernacle watching, and earnestly
expecting news from the Camp, and the success of the fight. For his heart
trembled for the Ark of God, lest that should fall into the hands of the
Uncircumcised Philistines, and be profaned by them, and lest the Israelites
should be deprived of the comfort of it Ante adventum arcae tantum 4 millia
occiduntur, post adventum ejus 30 millia. Tantum abest ut improbi ex praesentia
arcae adjuventur ut potius in majus exitium devolvantur. Mendoz.
.

And when the man had told his sad story in Shiloh, all the City cried out with
most bitter and loud lamentation; Eli who was ninety-eight years old, and
blind, hearing this dreadful outcry, inquires what the matter was; whereupon
they brought the messenger to him that came out of the Army, who told him that
Israel was fled before the Philistines, and that there had been a great
slaughter among the people, that his two Sons Hophni and Phinehas were slain,
and lastly that the Ark of God was taken; no sooner did the Messenger make
mention of the loss of the Ark, but old Eli's heart died within him, and being
old, heavy, and corpulent, and falling down backward, he broke his neck and
died, having judged Israel forty years. Samuel the 14th Judge.
His daughter-in-law Phinehas's wife was with child, and ready to be delivered,
who when she heard those dismal tidings of the taking of the Ark, the death of
her father-in-law, and husband, she bowed her self, and the pains of travel
came upon her, and being delivered, yet so as she was ready to expire, the
women about her sought to comfort her, telling her that she had borne a Son,
but she regarded it not, only named the child Iehabod, that is, where is the
glory? v. 22. Quod capta esset Arca Dei, illud imprimis eam cruciabat; nam
domesticam calamitatem publicae postponebat. Eliciamus hinc documentum
lamentandi potius spiritualia dona quam temporalia. Mendoz.
intimating that the Ark being taken (b), (which was the sign of Gods presence)
the glory was departed from Israel, and so she gave up the Ghost.

1 Samuel Chapter 4. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLVI.
THE Philistines having taken the Ark, they carried Illa lex de non tangenda
Area ad solos Israelitas spectavit, unde Philistini Arcam tangentes non
dederunt poenas quia culpam non contraxerunt. Mendoz.
it (undoubtedly with great Triumph) to Ashdod (since called Azotus, Act.
8.40.) and placed it in the Temple of Dagon their God, presenting it as a
captive before their Idol, by whose help possibly they persuaded themselves
they had overcome the Hebrews and their God; yet possibly they had some kind of
reverence for it, and therefore feared to offer any violence to it, or to open
it, or take forth the Tables of the Law that were in it; but however that was,
they placed it near unto Dagon. The Priests of Dagon rising early the next
morning, and coming to see how the Ark and their Idol had agreed together, they
found that Dagon was fallen on his face to the earth before the Ark, whereby
the Lord did discover to them what a vain Idol their Dagon was, and that the
God of Israel was the only true Almighty God, and that he had cast down their
Idol-god in his own Temple. The Priests took their Idol and set it up again,
and no doubt used all their skill to fasten it, and make it sure from falling
any more. But coming again the next morning they found their Dagon fallen again
upon his face to the ground before the Ark, and his head, and both the palms
of his hands Gravius secunda vice mutilatur Dagon, ut sic intelligerent Azotii
and very Numinis potentiam, and Idoli sui vanitatem. Fag.
cut off, and cast at the threshold of the House, only the stump and lower part
of him was left entire. Their Dagon being thus broken to pieces, the Priests
could not set him up again, nor conceal his ruin from the people, as possibly
before they had done; they might see now that it was not by any Casualty, but
by the will and power of God that he was thus thrown down. But though God had
cast the head and hands of Dagon to the threshold, that so they might as it
were be despised and trodden upon by those that came into that house, yet the
Priests and the people of Ashdod were so superstitious Nulla Miracula satis
magna sunt ad animum impium emendandum citra Dei spiritum. P. Martyr.
(even to the time when this History was written) that they would not so much
as tread on the threshold of that Temple, accounting it sanctified by the touch
of the head and hands of their Idol. And thus by the overruling Providence of
God, even their superstition became a means to perpetuate the memory of this
wonderful work of God in confounding their Idol, which otherwise might in some
short time have been forgotten. The Lord having thus clearly discovered to the
men of Ashdod that their Dagon was a vain Idol, and that the God of Israel
(whose Ark they had boldly surprised) was the only true God, which he had
sufficiently demonstrated, first by casting down their Idol before his Ark, and
at last by breaking it in pieces, yet notwithstanding they continued as
superstitiously devoted to their Idol as they were before, and were not afraid
still to detain the Ark of God in captivity. Therefore the Lord resolved to
punish them severely for it, and accordingly his hand was heavy upon the City
of Ashdod, and upon the Coasts thereof, and he destroyed and wasted their land
by sending multitudes of Mice among them, Chapter 6.5. and smote them with the
Emerods, a disease not only painful, but as the Psalmist intimates, ( Psalm.
78.66.) disgraceful also, and to many of them mortal, as appears from v. 10.
The men of Ashdod seeing in what a sad condition they were, they openly said,
the Ark of the God of Israel should not abide among them; for they plainly saw
that his hand was heavy upon themselves by inflicting this strange disease upon
them, and that it had been heavy also upon Dagon their God; wherefore they
convened the Lords of the Philistines to consult together what course was fit
to be taken in this case. These Lords agreed that the Ark should be carried
from thence to Gath (another of their five principal Cities, situate upon an
hill near unto the Sea, see Amos 6.2.) resolving thereby to try whither it was
the presence of the Ark that had caused those plagues, or whither they came by
any other accident. The Ark being brought to Gath, God smote the inhabitants
thereof both small and great with Emerods in their secret parts; hereupon they
sent away the Ark to Ekron, another of the principal Cities of the Philistines;
when it was come thither, the Ekronites cried out, they have brought the Ark of
the God of Israel to us to bring upon us the same plagues that they have been
plagued with because of it. And it fell out accordingly; for immediately there
was a deadly destruction throughout the City, (possibly some mortal contagion
reigned among them) and the men that died not of that plague were yet smitten
with the Emerods, so that the cry of the city went up to heaven; hereupon they
also convened the Lords of the Philistines, and desired them to send away the
Ark to its own place, viz. to the land of the Israelites, that they might not
be destroyed by reason of it. But these Lords being very loath to part with so
glorious a Trophie of their victory, desired yet to try a little further, and
therefore sent it after this to Gaza and Askelon (as appears Chapter 6.4, 17.)
which Cities felt the same plagues by reason of the Ark which the other had
done. Thus the Ark of the Lord was in the Country of the Philistines seven
months Miru^ hic stupor quod tam diu in suo consilio pertinaces haereant and
tot hominum funere suam insaniam tueri vellent. Sanctius.
; but they being at last convinced that the keeping of the Ark among them was
the true cause of their present calamities, they resolved to send it back, and
thereupon called for their Priests and Diviners to advise them in what manner
they should do it, that they might appease the wrath of the God of Israel, and
that he might heal their land, and remove their plagues. The Priests advise
them that if they did resolve to send it back, they should not send it without
some gift or present, or trepass offering, because they had trespassed against
the God of Israel by carrying away his Ark captive, and had not given it that
honor and respect that was due to it. And then (say they) ye shall be healed,
if his hand has been upon you by reason of your detaining his Ark; but if it
were upon you for any other cause, it will be upon you still after the Ark is
sent home. Thus the alwise-Providence of God causes these Idolatrous Priests
(who were enemies to him and his true Worship) to give such counsel as tended
to his honor, and the shame of their Idols, and false worship. The Philistines
ask their Priests what Trepass Offering they should send? They answer, five
golden Emerods, and five golden Mice, according to the number of the Princes of
the Philistines, and the five principal Cities, with their villages that were
under their command. For one and the same plague was on them all, (see v. 17,
18.) even on all the land of the Philistines which extends unto the great
stone of Abel, that is, mourning, (see v. 19.) so called from the peoples great
lamentation for the slaughter God made among them, upon an occasion which we
shall speak of afterward. By these presents they acknowledged that the God of
Israel brought upon them those plagues of the Emerods and Mice for their
detaining his Ark, and so by them they gave glory to his great name, see Josh.
7.19. It Is possible Satan might instigate these Diviners to send such absurd
and ridiculous gifts as these with the Ark in contempt of God; but if it were
so, that which Satan intended as a dishonor, the Lord by his overruling
Providence so disposed of as tended to his glory, seeing the Philistines
themselves were made to send into the land of Israel such things which would
there remain as perpetual Monuments and Memorials of those shameful punishments
wherewith God had humbled them. However this is the course these Priests advise
them to take at this time, and peradventure (say they) God will hereupon
lighten his hand from off you, and from off your Gods; so that it seems not
only Dagon, but several other of their Idol-gods were thrown down, and broken
to pieces by a secret hand of God in all their Cities whither the Ark was
brought, as it is probable the like was formerly done in Egypt, see Exodus 12.12.
and Numb. 33.4. But though many of the Philistines were for sending back the
Ark presently, yet it seems some of them were of a contrary judgment, and
stiffly opposed it, wherefore the Priests blamed them for thus hardening their
hearts against the means which God had afforded them to convince them of their
sin; why will you (say they) retain the Ark after you have suffered such great
and grievous punishments by it, herein resembling Pharaoh and the Egyptians who
held the people of Israel in cruel bondage, notwithstanding Gods hand was so
heavy upon them, till at last going on in their sin their whole Army was
drowned in the Sea? If you would avoid the like heavy Judgments, do not imitate
them in their sin. Now therefore take our advice, make a new Cart which has
never yet been put to any common use, and take two young heifers on which there
has come no yoke, and fastening the Cart to them, shut up their Calves at home
from them, and take the Ark and put it into the Cart, and put those Jewels of
Gold, viz. those Golden Images of Emerods and Mice (which ye return for a
Trepass Offering) in a little Coffer by the side thereof, and send it away
that it may go, and by this experiment ye shall discern whither the God of
Israel has inflicted these punishments upon us or no. If these young heifers
untamed, and untrained quietly bear the yoke, and carry the Ark directly in the
way that leads to Bethshemesh (a City belonging to the Priests Josh. 21.16.
of Judah), and if the kine do carry the Ark thitherward, not offering to go
out of the way, or to return to their sucking Calves shut up at home, it will
then be evident that their natural love and affection to their young ones is
restrained by a Supernatural power, and that the kine would never have done it,
if Gods hand had not been in the business, and so we may conclude that it was
he that smote us whilst we kept the Ark. But if things happen otherwise, then
we may conclude that it was not his hand that smote us, but it was only a
chance that happened to us. The Philistines agree to do as their Priests
directed them, and all things being prepared, the Kine went directly to
Bethshemesh, as if they had been sent thither by God to deliver the Ark into
their hands, to whom it belonged to take care of it. But yet by a natural
instinct they sometimes lowed after their Calves left behind them, but
notwithstanding went on directly in the way toward Bethshemesh, not turning to
the right hand or left into any cross, or by-ways, being moved to go on with
the Cart, and to carry the Ark thither, by the all-powerful Providence of God.
And the Lords of the Philistines went after them unto the borders of
Bethshemesh to observe the issue of this experiment, and then returned home, v.
16. The men of Bethshemesh were at this time reaping their Wheat-harvest
Wheat-harvest in that Country used to be in our May at the Feast of Pentecost,
Lev. 23.16. whence we may gather that the Ark was taken about November before,
seeing it was seven months in the custody of the Philistines.
, but lift up their eyes to their great astonishment and joy, they saw the Ark
coming toward them; and the Cart came into the Field of Joshua a Bethshemite,
and stood there where there was a great stone, and the Priests who were of the
Tribe of Levi came and took down the Ark of the Lord, and the Coffer that was
with it, and set them on the great stone, and they clave the wood of the Cart
and offered the Kine as a Burnt-offering to the Lord.

It Is true, the Law did command that only males should be offered in
Burnt-offerings, Levit. 1.3. but this seems to be an extraordinary act of
devotion whereunto the Priests were led by reasons grounded upon this strange
and extraordinary work which God had wrought, and perhaps by a special instinct
of his Spirit, and is not therefore to be judged of according to the rules of
ordinary Burnt-offerings. They considered possibly that these Kine had been
given up by the Philistines to the service of the Lord to bring home the Ark,
and having been employed in so sacred a service, it was not fit they should be
employed to any other use, and therefore they resolved by this way of an
extraordinary Burnt-offering to give them up to the Lord. And besides this
Burnt-offering of the Kine, the men of Bethshemesh brought their own Oblations
to the Priests, who offered Burnt-offerings and Peace Offerings to the Lord
that day for them, as an expression of their thankfulness to God for the return
of the Ark. But it seems some of the men of Bethshemesh were so presumptuous as
to open the Ark and to look into it, whereas it was not lawful for any but the
Priests (no not for the Levites themselves who carried it) to look upon it bare
and uncovered, see Numb. 4.20. yet it seems these bold Bethshemites not only
took liberty without any fear or reverence to gaze and stare upon it, but
proceeded further even to look into it; possibly to see whether the Philistines
had taken any thing out of it, or put any thing into it; which they should not
have done, but only the Priests. Hereupon God smote seventy v. 19. Textus sic
se habet percussit de populo 70 viros, 50 millia virorum, i. e. percussit de
populo in quo erant viri 50 mill, viros 70. Sir. and Ar. legunt 5 millia and
70 viros. Sic pro chamishim legunt duntaxat chamish. q. d. percussit de populo
Bethshemitico (in quo erant 5 mill) viros 70. ut sensus sit Deum, pro
indulgentia sua noluisse in omnes reos animadvertere, sed in partem tantum
eorum. Ergo supplenda est (...) ante (...) and reddenda (si sequamur Sir. and
Ar.) quinque mill. Quis enim creda^ ex oppido non admodum copioso 50 millia
mortuos esse, and plurimos relictos qui eorum funera lugerent. Secundum aliquo^
sensus loci est illos 70 viros tales fuisse ut a quipararentur 50 millibus de
plebeiis, vide 2 Samuel 18.3.
of them, (who it seems were most presumptuous) though there were many
thousands of them that had adventured to look upon it uncovered. He smote of
the people (the Text says) that were fifty thousand, (or as the Syriack and
Arabic read it five thousand These were not all probably the inhabitants of
Bethshemesh, but many of them such as ^^ooked from the neighboring Countries
to see the Ark when returned.
) seventy persons. And the Bethshemites bewailed this sad slaughter God had
made among them in a complaining manner, they said, Who is able to stand before
this holy Lord God, who manifests himself from between the Cherubims! and to
whom shall the Ark (which is the sign and pledge of his Presence) go up from us?
Intimating that people would be afraid to entertain it, seeing such direful
things following of it. So they went to the Inhabitants of Kirjath-jearim (a
City in the Tribe of Judah not far from them) to desire them to fetch the Ark
thither, pretending possibly it was a place of much more safety for it to be in
than their City was. The men of Kirjath-jearim were so far from opposing the
bringing of the Ark to their City, notwithstanding the sad calamity that had
befallen so many of the Bethshemites, that they themselves fetched it thither,
and undoubtedly with much joy, (the Priests of Bethshemesh carrying it) as
believing that it was not the presence of the Ark among the men of Bethshemesh,
but their irreverent carriage in gazing upon it, or looking into it, that was
the cause of their misery. When they had brought it to their City they placed
it in the house of Abinadab a Levite, and a man (as it is like) of singular
holiness, whose house was on a hill (and possibly fenced in, and called Gibeah,
2 Samuel 6.3.) a place of strength and safety for the Ark to be kept in. Having
carried it into his house, they sanctified Eleazar his Son to keep it, that is,
they chose him to be set apart to this holy employment, to give continual
attendance upon the Ark that he might keep others from coming near to pollute
or defile it, and they caused him to prepare himself for this Sacred charge by
washing his garments, and other such like Ceremonies of Legal purifying. It may
seem strange that they did not carry the Ark back to the Tabernacle in Shiloh,
but it seems the Lord would show his indignation against the former wickedness
of that place by not suffering the Ark to be carried thither again. So he
forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh, etc. Psalm. 78.60. And the Ark being thus
separated from the Tabernacle, they continued divided for ever after; for it is
said that David prepared a new Tent for it, 1 Chronicles. 15.1. and it remained at
Kirjath-jearim twenty years This cannot be meant of the whole time of the Arks
remainning at Kirjath-jearim; for tween the death of Eli (shortly after which
the Ark was brought to this place) and the beginning of David's reign when it
was removed thence, 2 Samuel 6.2, 3. there must needs be forty years allowed for
the Government of Saul and Samuel, Act. 13.21. all which time the Ark continued
in Kirjath-jearim, unless when it was for a while carried forth into the Camp
in the War against the Philistines, Chapter 14.18.
before the people could be won to that solemn repentance and conversion
recited in the following verses. But though the Ark was at Kirjath-jearim, yet
the Tabernacle and public worship of God was at Shiloh.

1 Samuel Chapter 5. wh. Chapter Chapter 6. wh. Chapter Chapter 7. ver. 1, 2.

SECT. CLVII.
FOR twenty years together after the Ark was removed to Kirjath-jearim, the
Isralites were grievously oppressed by the Philistines, but at length by the
exhortation of Samuel, and the troubles they had felt, they were brought to
repentance, and lamented after the Lord, that is humbling themselves, cried and
called unto him for help and deliverance. The Elders therefore of Israel
resorting to Samuel, he exhorted them to put away their strange Gods and
Goddesses, [see Judge. 2.13, 14.] and to prepare and compose their hearts to
serve the Lord entirely in, a settled course of new obedience, and then he
doubted not but he would deliver them out of the hands of the Philistines.
Accordingly they did abandon and cast away their Idols, and served the Lord
only as his Law required. Samuel hereupon summons the whole body of the people
to Mizpeh Situate in the confines of Judah and Benjamin, and therefore reckoned
among the Cities of both Tribes, see Josh. 15.38. and 18.26.
, that there they might together renew their Covenant with God, (which they had
so shamefully broken) and joining together in serious and solemn humiliation,
they might by fasting and prayer implore mercy and forgiveness from God, with a
return of his former favor to them; and might also consider and consult
together of the best means that were to be used to deliver themselves from the
Philistines Tyranny. And accordingly being met together at Mizpeh, they there
kept a solemn fast, and humbled themselves exceedingly before the Lord,
insomuch that they are said to have drawn water, that is, plenty of tears from
their contrite hearts, and to have poured them out before the Lord See Jer.
9.1. Job 16.20. Psalm. 6.6.
, using withal perhaps some external effusion, or pouring forth of water to
represent and signify their inward repentance, and mourning for their sins.
And after they had reconciled themselves to God, Samuel as a Judge composed and
arbitrated the controversies and private differences that were among the
people. The Philistines hearing that the Israelites were met together at
Mizpeh, they presently suspected that they were plotting some rising, and
contriving some means to deliver themselves from under their yoke; and to
prevent this, they presently raised their forces, and marched to suppress them
Habrei cum paenitentiam egerunt, gravius a Philistinis oppugnantur. Sic qui ad
meliorem frugem redire volunt acrius a Diabolo tentantur, and majores ab
hominibus persecutiones patiuntur. Samuel dum studet populum liberare, videtur
accersisse ei gravissimum periculum. Illum igitur imprudendentiae and
temeritatis accusare possent. Quare cum inimus consilia quae Deus approbat si
quid sinistri contigerit, ne paeniteat nos facti, neque a recta via
deflectamus, sed voluntati Dei acquiescamus. Calv.
. The children of Israel hearing of their coming, were very much afraid,
knowing the strength of their enemies, and their own present weakness and
unpreparedness, being met together to pray, and not to fight. In this extremity
they desire Samuel to be instant in prayer to the Lord for them, for they had
no hope but in his help and assistance, who is the Lord of Hosts, and giver of
victory. Samuel hereupon took a sucking Lamb, and either caused it to be
offered by a Priest, (not being of that order himself) or did it as a Prophet
immediately inspired by God, and warranted to do it by some special
dispensation as Elijah also did, 1 King. 18.31, 32, etc. see also Judge. 6.26.
Upon the same warrant likewise he offered his Burnt-offering here at Mizpeh on
an Altar of his own erecting, and not on the Altar in the Tabernacle. And
Samuel cried unto the Lord for Israel, and the Lord heard him as appears by
what followed; for the Army of the Philistines drawing near, the Israelites (as
it seems) put themselves into the best posture they could to resist them, and
the Lord thundered with a terrible thunder upon the Philistines, [see Chapter 2.10.]
striking them (as it is like) with dreadful Hailstones See Josh. 10, 11.
and Thunderbolts, so that they were discomfited that day before Israel; and
the rest of the Israelites that stayed at Mizpeh, upon the news of their defeat
came out and joined in the pursuit and slaughter of them; and they pursued them
till they came under Bethear, which it seems was a Rock where the Philistines
having a garrison, the Israelites were hindered from prosecuting their victory
any further. The Army of the Philistines being thus discomfited, Samuel as a
Monument of their victory, and in thankefulness to God for his gracious
assistance (by which alone they had obtained it) took a great stone Idem
fecerunt Jacob. Genesis 28.18. and 35.14. and Josh. 4.8, 9.
, and set it up between Mizpeh and Shen (which was a Rock over against it)
calling it Eben-ezer, that is, the stone of help, saying, hitherto God has
helped us. And it is remarkable that in the very same place where before the
Israelites were vanquished, and the Ark taken captive, [ Chapter 4.1.] they should
now erect a Trophy of victory by them obtained. The Philistines were so subdued
at this time, that they came no more into the land while Samuel governed alone
After Saul was chosen to be their King, it is plain they did often with their
Armies enter the Land.
, for they saw the hand of the Lord was against them, and they restored to
Israel the Cities they had formerly taken from them, reserving only some places
of strength, [see 1 Samuel 10.5.] wherein they kept Garrisons for the better
awing of the Israelites. And after this there was a cessation from open War
between the Israelites and the Philistines, and possibly the rest of the
Canaanites, who being terrified with this victory (which God had from Heaven
given the Israelites) ceased for the present from troubling of them.

1 Samuel Chapter 7. from v. 3, to 15.

SECT. CLVIII.
SAmuel from the time he was made Judge, judged Israel to the day of his death.
For though Saul after he was made King had the Supreme Power in his hands, yet
Samuel as long as he lived exercised the jurisdiction of a Judge, (which God
had called him unto), as appears by his killing of Agag, whom Saul had spared,
Chapter 15.32, 33. And also as a Prophet he directed him in his Government,
admonished him of his duty, reproved him when he did amiss, [ Chapter 15.23. and
13.13.] yea, threatened him when he rebelled against Gods command with the loss
of his Kingdom [ Chapter 15.28.] and anointed David King in his stead, Chapter 16.13.
Sometimes indeed they joined together in the Government, as in making War
against Nabash the Ammonite, and relieving Jabesh-Gilead when it was besieged,
[ Chapter 11.7.] and in this regard the years of both their Governments are joined
in the same account of forty years, as we may see Act. 13.20, 21. Samuel
therefore went as a Judge from year to year in circuit to Bethel, Gilgal and
Mizpeh to hear and determine the causes of the people, and as a Prophet to
teach and direct them. Neither was Samuel bound by his Mothers Vow, Chapter 1.11,
22. (whereby he was devoted to the service of the Sanctury) to continue his
residence there, and that not only because for the sins of the Priests and
people the Lord had withdrawn the Ark (the visible sign of his Presence) from
the Tabernacle at Shiloh, but also because the Lord himself had taken him off
from that Levitical service, and called him to another employment, namely to be
an holy Prophet, and a Judge over his people. When he had gone his Circuit, he
returned to Ramah, where his usual dwelling was, and his most ordinary place of
Judicature, and there he built an Altar Thus we read of diverse Altars erected
as by Joshua upon mount Ebal, Josh. 8.30. by Gideon, Judge. 6.24.26. by Samuel
here, and Chapter 11.15. Chapter 16.2, 5. by David, 2 Samuel 24.25. by Solomon, 1 King.
8.64. by Elijah, 1 King. 18.32.
to offer Sacrifices. Indeed God appointed but one Altar to be ordinarily used
for Sacrifices, as there was but one Tabernacle, but upon extraordinary
occasions he allowed holy men by a particular dispensation to build other
Altars, when it might be done without danger of Idolatry, yet with this
difference, that the one, viz. that in the Tabernacle was to be fixed and
permanent, the other to stand only so long as the occasion continued. Samuel
therefore (as it seems) by an especial Prophetical instinct built an Altar
here, which he might lawfully do, especially in this time, when it is very
questionable whether they were bound by that Law, Deuteronomy. 12.14. because the Ark
and the Tabernacle were now separated. Samuel being grown old, and unable to go
through the land to judge the people as formerly he had done, he made his two
Sons, Joel Called Vashni, 1 Chronicles. 6.28. it is usual in Scripture for one man to
have two names. This Joel though a corrupt Judge, was the Parent of a gracious
Son, viz. Heman a chief Master of the Singers, 1 Chapter 6.33.
and Abiah his Deputies and Substitutes, appointing them to judge the people in
some part of the land in his stead, and possibly this he did by Gods especial
direction. And though it is like they went in their circuits to judge the
people as their Father had done, yet they dwelt at Beersheba, and there for the
most part executed that office. The singular piety of Samuel, and the
experience he had had of Gods severity against Eli for his too great indulgence
to his Children, may well induce us to think that he did what he could to train
up his Sons in the ways of righteousness; nor can we rationally think that he
would have entrusted them with this power of judging the people under him, had
they not to that time regularly behaved themselves, and given hopes of managing
that trust well which was committed unto them; but however it was, being
advanced to these places of dignity and power (it seems) they soon degenerated
and proved the occasion of much grief to their Father; and much mischief to the
Commonwealth; for they walked not in the ways of their Father, neither executed
their office uprightly as their Father had done; but being covetous and
desirous of lucre, they took bribes (which blind the eyes of the wise, Deuteronomy.
16.19.) and perverted judgment.

1 Samuel Chapter 7. from 15, to the end. Chapter 8. from 1, to 4.

SECT. CLIX.
THE Elders of Israel now gathering themselves together, came to Samuel at
Ramah, and represented to him that he was grown old, and so unable to execute
the office of a Judge as he had done, and his Sons were very wicked, and walked
not in his steps, therefore they were not willing to be any longer under that
form of Government, but desired him to set a King over them. It seems they were
weary of that mild and Fatherly Government of Judges whom God immediately chose
and called to that office, and endued with extraordinary gifts and
qualifications for their places, and were ambitious that their Nation might
have the glory of being a Monarchy, and might enjoy all the Honors, Dignities
and Offices belonging to it; and that they might be like other Nations, most of
which had an absolute Sovereign, and pompous King. And besides there was
another thing that much disposed and induced them hereunto, viz. they
understood the great preparations which Nahash King of the Ammonites made
against them, see 1 Samuel 12.12. therefore they desired a King, and Captain to go
before them, trusting and relying (as it seems) more on his Conduct, than on
the Lord of Hosts, who had given them so many signal and miraculous victories.
Samuel understanding this was exceedingly troubled at it, not only because of
the ingratitude they hereby expressed toward himself in being so forward to
cast off his Government who had deserved so well of them, but because he knew
their desire was sinful, and highly displeasing unto God; for though God had
promised to erect a Regal Throne among them, and to give them Kings out of
whose loins the Messiah should come See Genesis 17.6. and 49.10. and Deuteronomy. 17.18.
, yet they were to wait his leisure for it, and to expect as well the time
when, as the person whom he would choose, and were not to attempt any alteration
in the Government themselves without his direction; especially they were not to
go about it in such a sinful manner as they now did, distrusting God, and
proudly affecting to be like other Nations. Samuel therefore being much
perplexed at it, he humbly besought the Lord to direct him what he should do in
this difficult and dangerous affair; the Lord bids him to hearken to them in
this matter, and seemingly condescends to their suit, yet not in mercy, but in
anger. Then speaking to Samuel, he says, Be not thou troubled at their
rejecting thee, for they have not indeed so much rejected thee as me, that I
should not reign over them. They will not (it seems) have me any longer to be
their only King, but they will have another, under whom they will be; neither
is their ingratitude to me or thee to be much wondered at, seeing they have been
an inconstant, discontented rebellious people against me and their Magistrates,
and horribly given to Apostasy and Idolatry, ever since they came out of Egypt
to this day. However hearken to them in the thing they desire, yet acquaint
them with the mischiefs they are like to bring upon themselves hereby, that if
they persist in their design, they may be without excuse, and may only condemn
themselves when they feel them. Show them therefore the way and manner of the
Kings of the earth He describes not here what Kings ought to do, or lawfully
may do, but what they used to do, see Deuteronomy. 17. from 15, to the end, see Ezekiel.
46.18. and 45.7.
, that is, how they usually treat and demean themselves toward their subjects,
that if they will have a King like other Nations, they may know what they are
to expect from him: First, he will take their Sons violently from them, and
against their wills put them to servile Offices, and base drudgery not
beseeming freeborn subjects How soon the Israelites began to feel these
grievances under their Kings we may see by that which is said of Solomon, 1
King. 12.4.
; namely he would put them to attend his Chariots of War to serve him as
Horsemen, or to run before his Chariots as Footmen. Secondly, he will appoint
him Captains over thousands, and Captains over fifties, (honorable Offices
indeed, and profitable to those that shall enjoy them) but very burdensome to
the people who under them must drudge and labor, and plow his fields, and reap
his harvest without any considerable wages for their pains. Thirdly, he will
appoint some to be his Smiths, others his Carpenters, or Chariot-makers, not
giving them for their labor sufficient recompense. Fourthly, he will take
their Daughters forcibly from them to do his work, viz. to be his
Confectioners, Cooks, and Bakers, not allowing them sufficient wages for their
work. Fifthly, he will take their fields, and their Vineyards, and Oliveyards,
(even the best of them) and give them most injuriously to his servants and
favorites. Sixthly, he will take the tenth of their seed, and of their
Vineyards, either that which of right belonged to the Levites, or another tenth
after theirs is paid, and give it to his Officers and Courtiers. Seventhly, he
will take their menservants, and and maidservants, and their goodliest young
men, their asses, and put them to his work. Eighthly, he will take the tenth of
their sheep as a tribute to himself, and they will he forced to be his servants
and vassals, not living like freeborn Israelites but in a servile and slavish
condition; and then they will cry out in that day by reason of the grievous
oppressions they are under, but the Lord will not regard their cries or
prayers, because by their own obstinate wilfulness they brought these evils
upon themselves. Samuel having received these words from the Lord, faithfully
represented them unto the people, but they notwithstanding like desperate
resolute fellows cried out, they would have a King, that they might be like
other Nations; they would have a pompous and royal Monarchy among them instead
of the mean Government of Judges, which made so little noise or show in the
world; they would have a King that should rule over them with Royal Authority
in time of peace, and should command their Armies as Generalissimo in time of
war; and they had now more especial need of such a King, seeing Nahash King of
the Ammonites was coming against them. Samuel hearing these words of the
people, he spread them before the Lord in prayer, humbly desiring directions
from him what he should do in this great and weighty business. The Lord
answered him saying, Hearken unto their voice, and make them a King, as if he
should have said, seeing no reasons nor warnings will prevail with them, let
them have their desire, though it will be to their cost. So Samuel having
commission from God to make them a King, he dismissed the Assembly for the
present to their own homes, that he might gain thereby some time to consider of
the manner and means how this weighty business might be best effected.

1 Samuel 8. from 4, to the end.

SECT. CLX.
THE people of Israel being so earnest for a King, King Saul.
and seeming to themselves so undone without one, the Lord now resolves to give
them one; but he gave him in his anger, and took him away in his wrath, Hos.
13.11. The History of this King we come now to set forth: There was a man of
the Tribe of Benjamin The Tribe of Benjamin thorough the desolation they
brought upon themselves, Judge. 26.46. was now become the least and most obscure
Tribe, yet yields to Israel her first King, and in the victories of this King,
Jacob's Prophecy was was in part fulfilled, Genesis 49.27. Benjamin shall ravine
like a wolf, etc. And this shows that the Kingdom was not to be settled upon the
Posterity of this first King, but on one of the Tribe of Judah.
whose name was Kish, a man of great authority and power, and (as it seems) of
great estate and substance among them Nulla hic mentio patriae Saulis quae erat
Gibeah, forte quia infamis erat propter illud stuprum, Jud. 19.
, who had a Son whose name was Saul, a goodly and comely person, taller by the
head and shoulders than any of the people, a man fit to make a Prince, and to
be honored of his Subjects when he was set over them. It happened at this time
that some of the Asses of Kish were gone astray, of which it is like he had an
excellent breed, and such as were of great value Asini in Syria sunt
praestantiores Europaeis unde filii Principum iis vehebantur, Jud. 10.4. and
12.14. Hebraei enim equis vix utebantur, idque ex Dei monitu, Deuteronomy. 17.16. non
ergo mirum si ad asinas quaerendas Saul a parente destinetur. Quemadmodum viri
Principes venatoriam nunc exercent, ita olim and exercere poterant Pastoritiam.
in that Country where persons of the greatest rank and condition used to ride
upon them, [see Judge. 10.4. and 12.14.] Kish bids his Son Saul to take a
servant with him, and to go and seek for them. Saul in obedience to his Fathers
command went in quest of them through the Mountainous Country of Ephraim, and
through Shalisha (a plain Country in the Tribe of Benjamin) and through the
land belonging to the City called Salim, Joh. 3.23. but he found them not; and
when they were come to the land of Zuph (namely the Counrry where Ramah,
Samuel's City was situate, which thereupon was called Ramahthaim-Zophim, Chapter 1.
1.] Saul said to his servant, come let us return, lest my Father leave caring
for the Asses and take thought for us. The servant replied, Sir, there is in
this City of Ramah a venerable person, highly esteemed for his supernatural and
wonderful knowledge of secret God gave the gift of Prophecy to his Servants to
be employed in directing them in weightier matters than such as these. But
perhaps he did permit them to exercise it in these also, that he might keep his
people from seeking to Witches, or to the Oracles of the Heathens, 2 King. 1.3.
God would not have his people think that he had less care of them as to their
private concerns than the Idols of the Heathen had, who being consulted with,
did by the Ministry of Satan (speaking in their Oracles) return them Answers,
though oftentimes very frivilous and ambiguous. v. 9. Credo hunc versum ab
Esdra huic loco insertum qui Prophetico spiritu afflatus erat.
things, insomuch that all that he foretells surely comes to pass; now let
us go to him, peradventure he can show us the way we should walk in for the
finding out the Asses we seek after. But Saul replied, If we go to him, what
shall we present him with, as a civil and honourary gratuity, to testify our
respect and thankefulness to him? See 1 King. 14.2, 3. 2 King. 4.42. For our
provisions that we brought with us in our Wallet are spent, and we have nothing
left that is fit or worthy to be presented unto him. The servant said he had
the fourth part of a shekel (which makes about seven pence halfpenny of our
money, (see Genesis 23.15.) a small present indeed to be presented to a Prophet or
Seer, who by special revelation is acquainted with the mind and will of God,
and foresees things to come, and from God reveals them to the people. However
(says he) let us present it as a token of our respect and thankefulness to him.
Saul agrees hereunto; so they went to Ramah where Samuel dwelt; as they drew
near to the City they met some young maidens going out to draw water, and
enquiring of them for the Seer, they told them he was newly returned to the
City, (having been out upon some occasion) and there was a sacrifice It was
lawful for Prophets immediately inspired to offer Sacrifices, especially
Peace Offerings upon Altars erected in other places besides the Tabernacle,
especially at this time when the Ark was separated from it.
to be that day in the high place Fuit haec domus quaedam in qua haec
Sacrificia fieri solebant, and boni viri illuc confluxerunt, pransuri cum
Samuele.
, that is, a Peace Offering, or Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, after which was to
follow a Feast to be made of the remainders of the Sacrifice, at which the Seer
would be present. It seems Samuel had purposely appointed this Feast, and
invited guests unto it, God having revealed to him by the secret inspiration of
his Spirit, [see v. 15.] that he would send that day to him the man who he
intended should be their King, and that he should anoint him to be Captain over
his people, and to save them out of the hands of the Philistines The Israelites
had not in all Saul's time a full deliverance from the Philistines, but he gave
them many defeats, and so blunted their strength that they could not keep the
Israelites under as they formerly did; therefore he may be said in some degree
to have saved them though their deliverance was not complete, but reserved till
David's reign.
, and therefore Samuel was willing to express his respects to him by providing
for him some honorable entertainment, though the rest of the guests knew not
so much. The maidens further tell them that if they made have, they might
possibly meet with him before he went up to the high place; for besure the
people would not eat before he came, for he used to bless Solebant Hebraei
epulas a precibus inchoare, and precibus claudere, juxta Deuteronomy. 8.10. vide Mat.
14.19. and 26.30. and Luc. 9.16. and 24.30. Act. 27.35. He that blessed the
Table did also divide and distribute the meat.
by prayer and thanksgiving the flesh that was offered, (whereof the Feast was
to be made) and afterward they did eat that were bidden. Saul and his servant
going accordingly to the City, Samuel met them just as he was going up to the
high-place. As soon as he set his eyes on Saul, the Lord by secret inspiration
told him, that was the man of whom he had before given him intimation that he
should reign over his people. Then Saul drew near to Samuel, (being within the
Gate and in the midst of the City, v. 14.) and (as it seems not knowing him)
asked him where the Seers house was? Samuel answered, that he himself was the
Seer, and was now going up to a Feast that was to be kept at the high-place,
therefore he desired him to favor him so far as to go up thither with him and
to eat with them, and if he pleased to stay with him that night, and on the
morrow he would be ready to tell him any thing that was in his mind to ask of
him. And (says he) lest thou should be unwilling to stay by reason of the
occasion thou came out upon, I tell thee that as for thy Fathers Asses (that
were lost three days ago) they are found again, therefore trouble not thy self
any more about them; thou have greater matters and of greater concernment to
mind, as I shall show thee before we part; thou art not ignorant that it is the
general desire of Israel to have a King to reign over them, and this royal
dignity is like to be placed (by Gods special Providence) on thee, and thy
fathers house, Saul was exceedingly surprised at these words, and as one
astonished at the strangeness of them, replied, Alas what am I? Am not I a
Benjamite When this Tribe kept faithful to the house of David in the days of
Jeroboam, as well as the house of Judah, the Scripture speaks but of one Tribe
that did cleave to the house of David, 1 King. 11.32. Benjamin not being
mentioned because of their paucity, but comprehended under the men of Judah:
, and of that small Tribe which not many years ago was almost utterly
destroyed? [Judg. 20.] and are not my family the fewest in number of all the
ten families in my Tribe, wherefore then do thou mention such a thing to me?
However when they were come to the high-place where the Feast was to be kept,
Samuel took Saul and his servant, and bringing them into the Parlour made them
sit down in the chiefest place among those that were bidden, who probably were
the Elders and chief of the City, and in number about thirty; and Samuel having
given order to the Cook to provide one special extraordinary Mess that should
be set by, and reserved as for some extraordinary guest, and not sent up till
he sent for it, he now accordingly calls for it, that it might be set before
Saul; and the Cook took up the Shoulder (which was accounted a chief Joint)
with some other meat that was laid upon it, or some sauce to make it more
acceptable and grateful, and set it before Saul; and Samuel said, Take this
dish that is provided for thee, set it before thee, and eat of it, for I gave
charge that this portion of meat should be reserved for thee, when I said unto
the Cook I have invited some to eat with me, make ready for them. So that Saul
might see hereby that God had revealed his coming to Samuel before hand. Saul
accordingly did eat with Samuel that day. And when they were come down from the
high-place into the City, the next morning Samuel communed with Saul about this
great matter upon the roof of his house, which being flat, as the manner of
their houses was, it was a fit place for them to be private in. After which
Saul and his servant departing, Samuel accompanied them some part of the way,
and as they were going out of the City, Samuel desired Saul to send his servant
before, that he might not hear what they said, nor see what they did, but that
he himself would stay with him, and he would then declare to him what he had in
commission from God further to say and do unto him. Samuel thought good to use
such secrecy in this matter that it might not be thought when Saul was chosen
King that there had been any plotting or contrivance between Samuel and him
about it, and that it might not be suspected to be Samuel's choice, but plainly
the Lords. Samuel and Saul being now alone, Samuel (as God had commanded him
See Chapter 15.1.
) took a viol of oil, and poured it upon his head It had bin a constant custom
among other Nations to anoint their Kings, whence it is that Cyrus King of
Persia was called the Lords Anointed, Isa. 45.1. It is thought that Saul was
anointed with ordinary oil (as was also Jehu, 2 King. 9 1, 6.) which Samuel
brought with him in a Viol from his own house, though David and Solomon, and
other Kings that succeeded them were anointed with the holy oil of the
Sanctuary.
, whereby he signified that God had chosen him to that high Office, and would
pour upon him an extraordinary measure of his Spirit (figured by oil) thereby
to enable him for that great service whereunto he had called him, which
accordingly Saul had soon experience of, as we may see v. 9. Then Samuel kissed
In times of Idolatry they kissed their Idols by way of adoration and religious
worship, 1 King. 19.18. Hos. 13.2.
him, not only to testify his great love and kindness to him, and to
congratulate his advancement to this high dignity, but to signify also his
willing homage and subjection to him, see Psalm. 2.12. And Samuel tells him he
used these Ceremonies toward him because it was not he but the Lord that had
chosen him to be King, and it was Gods inheritance over whom he was to reign,
see Deuteronomy. 32.9. These things being done, Samuel now by a Prophetical spirit
gives unto Saul certain signs Omnia sunt de rebus libere futuris ac proinde
quae a solo Deo praesciuntur, and a solo vero Prophaeta infallibiliter
evulgantur.
which should occur to him in his return homeward, that when he saw them
accordingly happen as he foretold him, his faith might be strengthened, that
other things likewise foretold him concerning his Kingdom would certainly come
to pass, and so he might be encouraged with confidence to undertake the Charge
which God had called him unto, trusting in his power and help, notwithstanding
the difficulties he was like to meet with in his way. First, he tells him that
when he came to Rachels Sepulcher near Bethlem in the border of Benjamin Or
near it, for these two Tribes, viz. Benjamin and Judah, bordered upon, and were
intermingled one with another.
, there he should meet two men, who would tell him that the Asses which he went
to seek were found, and that his Father was full of care and solicitude about
him, saying, what shall I do for my Son? Secondly, when going on he should come
to the Plains of Tabor, he should meet three men going up to sacrifice to God
at Bethel Either the place properly so called where Jacob saw the Vision, Genesis
18.19. or appellatively the house of God, and that either Shiloh where the
Tabernacle was, or Kirjath-jearim where the Ark was.
, one carrying three Kids, and another carrying three Loaves of bread, and a
third carrying a bottle of Wine; these men though strangers to him, would
salute him, and present him with two loaves of bread, which he advises him to
receive at their hands. The more wonderful this thing was which Samuel
foretold, the more it must needs confirm Readiness faith when he saw it come to
pass; and especially that Strangers should thus carry themselves toward him,
and their hearts should be thus secretly moved to honor him, and as it were to
do him homage, though they knew nothing of the dignity to which God had
advanced him. Thirdly, he tells him he should come at last to the hill of God
where is the Garrison of the Philistines In conditionibus pacis nuper inter
Hebraeos and Philistinos initae ita urbes redditae sunt Hebraeis ut praesidium
in Gabaa and fortasse in aliis locis relinqueretur. Meliores erant Philistini
quam nunc multi Christanorum. Parcebant enim iis locis in quibus degebant viri
studiis divinis dediti.
, that is to Gibeah; for there was a Garrison of the Philistines kept, see Chapter
13.3. 'twas called the Hill of God, because there was in that place a College
of Prophets consecrated to the service of God, as also because of the
high-place there wherein the people used to offer Sacrifices. He tells him that
when he was come thither he should meet a company of the Prophets coming down
from the high-place. There were as it seems in those times many Colleges
erected Licet ante Samuelem erant Prophetae, is tamen primus Prophetarum
collegia, fundavit secundum. Gerebradum.
, wherein many holy men lived, being consecrated to God, whose continual
employment was to study the Law, and other holy writings, to teach and instruct
others therein, to sing in a solemn manner Psalms and Hymes of praise to God,
and to train up other young Students (who studied this way of Prophesying)
under them. One of these Colleges was here, another at Bethel, and a third at
Jericho, 2 King. 2.3. a fourth at Naioth in Ramah (over which Samuel himself
was President, Chapter 19.19, 20.) and upon many of these Prophets the Lord also
bestowed that extraordinary gift of foretelling things to come Prophetae
proprie dicuntur qui futura praedicunt. Hic autem Prophetae sunt qui erant
Sacrarum literarum studiosi, vide Numb. 11.25. Prophetae hic dicuntur qui
laudibus divinis celebrandis vacabant, and quod quibusdam quasi canticis
vaticinati sunt; quod a Sibillis etiam factum and a Daemone in Oraculis, apud
Herodotum and alios; and ipsi Poetae Prophetae dicti. Hi Prophetae Hymnos and
Lauds Deo concinebant tum voce, tum instrumentis musicis. Horum autem
Prophetarum fuerunt quaedam collegia instituta, ut in illis ad Dei Lauds
concinendas exercerentur and ut in art Musica and Harmonica occuparentur, vid.
Cap. 19.20. 2 Reg. 2.3. and Cap. 6. pracedeban^ eos varia musica instrumenta
quod spiritus Dei non insiliat in eos qui maesto sunt cord, sed in hilares ut
Kimki docet. His utebantur pro incitamentis ut pacet ex 2 Reg. 3.15. and quando
Deo gratiae de beneficio aliquo agebantur, vid. Jud. 11.34. praeterea ea vis
est quorundam sonorum ut animum concitatum ^ranquillent, 1 Samuel 16.16.
, as appears 2 King. 2.3, and 5. and such as these were the Prophets that met
Saul, for they had a Psaltery, Tabret, Pipe and Harp, playing before them; and
possibly they made use of this Music to tune and rightly temper and excite
their hearts, and the hearts of the people before they Prophesied, as Elisha
did, 2 King. 3.15. and to make them more cheerful in Religious duties. Now
Samuel tells Saul that when he met these Prophets, the Spirit of the Lord
should come upon him, and he should Prophecy with them, that is the Spirit of
Prophecy should come upon him, inabling him to join with these Prophets in
singing Gods praises, though he had not been taught and trained up in those
Spiritual Exercises; and possibly he might also for that time Credo hoc donum
fuisse in Saul per modum actus transeuntis, non per modum habitus permanentis.
Ex Rustico scil. and pecudum custode Psaltes factus.
have the gift of foretelling things to come. See Numb. 11.25. Further he tells
him he should be turned into another man, that is, not only be endued with the
present gift of Prophesying, but with the spirit of wisdom and magnanimity and
courage, and other qualifications befitting his Kingly calling; so that he
should not as before set his heart on Husbandry and Cattle, etc. but upon such
things as tended to the good Government of his Kingdom, both in Peace and War.
And Samuel tells him that if he found all these things to fall out just as he
had foretold him, he might from thence assure himself that he was chosen of God
to be King over Israel, and when any occasion or opportunity was offered him of
doing any thing for the benefit of his Kingdom, he need not fear to undertake
it, for God would be with him, (while he walked in his ways) to assist and
prosper him. Samuel also injoins him that when he was to make war against the
Philistines, upon such a weighty business he should go down to Gilgal, and
there wait for him seven days, that he might offer Sacrifices for him, and
direct him from the Lord what he should do. And it is probable this seven days
waiting was injoined because Samuel might be hindered from coming sooner by some
necessary intervenient occasion, or rather for the trial of Readiness faith and
obedience to God in waiting his appointed time, upon which condition, and not
otherwise, he was to be established in the Kingdom, and possibly Samuel
expressed his Charge more fully and amply to Saul than is here related. These
things having passed between them, Saul now took his leave of him, and when he
was gone from him, God gave him another heart, that is, wrought in him a
sensible change, taking him off from his former thoughts and designs about
private Country-affairs, and endowing him with magnanimous thoughts, and
Heroical gifts fit for a King, and the Government of a Kingdom. And all the
signs Samuel foretold him of exactly came to pass; as particularly when he came
to the Hill of God before mentioned, he met a company of Prophets, and the
Spirit of God came upon him, and he prophesied among them, and spoke of Divine
matters above his former abilities, and sang the praises of God (as it is
probable) with musical skill as they did; and the inhabitants of Gibeah, his
friends and acquaintance, who had known him and his education were amazed to
see this sudden and extraordinary change in him, and said one to another, what
is this that is come to the Son of Kish? Is Saul also among the Prophets? How
comes Saul on a sudden to be furnished with such gifts and abilities of Music
and Prophesying, who has not been trained up among the Sons of the Prophets,
but in his Fathers Country-affairs. Unto whom one of the same place (who it
seems was wiser than the rest) made answer by asking another question, But who
is their Father? As if he should have said, wonder not at this, seeing all
these whom ye hear and see thus Prophesying have not these gifts from their
Parents, but from God, who is a free agent, and inspireth whom he pleases; and
having conferred these gifts on them, is alike able (if he please) to confer
them on Saul also; therefore it became a Proverb when they saw any man raised
to parts and abilities above his birth and breeding to say of him, Is Saul
among the Prophets? And when Saul had made an end of Prophesying, he went to
the high-place to praise God for his singular favor unto him, and his high
advancement, and to pray to him for the further assistance, and guidance of his
holy Spirit; and for his protection and blessing upon his endeavors. Next
Readiness Uncle (the Father of Abner, Chapter 14.15.) meeting him either in this place
of Religious worship, or else as he was coming down from it into the City, and
hearing how he had Prophesied among the Prophets, inquired of him where he had
been, and how he came to be endued with this extraordinary gift and
understanding? He had been with Samuel. He asked him what he said to him? He
told him that Samuel acquainted him that the Asses were found; but he forbear
to tell him what he said to him concerning his Election to be King, being
unwilling (as it is like) to give to his Uncle or any of his kindred any
occasion to envy him the honor to which God had advanced him; and Samuel
having been so private in the carriage of the business, it was an intimation to
him not to discover it till God should himself openly make it known.

1 Samuel Chapter 9. whole Chapter. Chapter 10. from 1, to 17.

SECT. CLXI.
SAmuel now calls the people together to appear before the Lord at Mizpeh in
order to the choosing of a King; when they were met he spoke to them after this
manner: Thus says the Lord, I brought you up out of Egypt, and delivered you
out of the hands of the Egyptians, and out of the hands of all Kingdoms and
Nations that oppressed you. And you have this day rejected your God who himself
saved you out of all your adversities and tribulations, and you have rejected
his Prophet, and said unto him, Nay but set a King over us; so that by asking a
King you have as it were shaken off Gods Government over you. Well therefore
seeing you are so bent upon it, and resolved to have a King, present your
selves before the Lord by your Tribes and your Families The Tribes of Israel
were divided into certain companies, each company consisting of a thousand men.
Mich. 5.2.
this day, that by casting lots it may be known whom God will make choice of
for this purpose. Accordingly they casting lots the Tribe of Benjamin was
taken, then the Family of Matri, then the household of Kish, and lastly the
person of Saul. Saul (as it seems) understanding how things went, out of
modesty withdrew and hid Modeste and prudenter fecit Saul ut apparerer, eum,
vocante Domino, non malis artibus aut ambitu ad regnum venisse. Et cum
audivisset Samuelem Israelitas objurganeem quod Regem postularunt, inde novum
quendam timorem accedendi ad regnum concepit.
himself, so that they could not find him. Therefore they inquired of the Lord
either by the High Priest, and by Vrim and Thummim, or possibly by Samuel
whether the person chosen would come thither to them, or else how they should
find him? The Lord answered, he has hid himself among the stuff; that is,
among the furniture of his own Tent. Immediately they ran and fetched him
thence, and when he stood among the people, he was higher than any of them by
head and shoulders; Samu^l then said to them, Behold the person whom God has
chosen to be your King, there is not so goodly and proper a person Nota hic
Samuelem nullis invidentiae acultis stimulari, imo e^m laudat, and commendat.
among you all. The people hereupon gave a great shout, and said, God save the
King. Then Samuel told them the manner of the Kingdom V. 25. Aliqui intelligunt
been regnandi praetepta (...) quales habet egregrias Socrates and Stobaeus.
, that is showed them the duty of a King toward his Subjects, and of his
Subjects toward him, and these fundamental Laws of the Kingdom he wrote in a
Book Hic liber periit cum multis aliis.
, and laid it up before the Lord, that is before the Ark, or in the Tabernacle,
for the sure preservation of it, and to intimate that God would take care of
th^se Laws to uphold and maintain them, and to punish those that should violate
or break them. These things being done, Samuel dismissed this great Assembly,
and Saul went to Gibeah his own City, and there went with him a band of men
Quos scil. divinus spiritus ad obsequium illud novo Regi exhibendum impulit.
, such whose hearts God had touched, and moved to think it fit, that they
should attend him, and as a Royal guard wait upon him, and conduct him in his
return home. But all the people were not so well pleased with this Election,
though it plainly appeared to be of God; there were some rude and wretched
fellows, Sons of Belial that despised him, and look d upon him as a person
unfit to be King, and unlikely to govern them well, and defend them against
their enemies as a King should do; whereupon they refused to bring him any
presents That was the custom of those times as is noted concerning Jehoshaphat,
2 Chronicles. 17.5. see Mat. 2.11. sine muneribus Reges orientis adi^i non solebant.
, as it seems the rest of the people did, to testify their subjection, and
that they did acknowledge him to be their King. But Saul held his peace, not
seeming to take notice Novum imperium inchoantibus utilis clementiae fama, ait
Tacitus.
of their unworthy carriage toward him, but seeking to win them by lenity and
love.

1 Samuel Chapter 10. from v. 17. to the end.

SECT. CLXII.
NAhash King of the Ammonites now came up and besieged Jabesh-Gilead, a City
without Jordan; this attempt had been brewing against the Israelites before
they desired a King, and was in great part the occasion of it, as appears Chapter
12.12. And now possibly it was the more hastened by Nahash, because of the
report that was brought to him that the Israelites had shaken off the
Government of Samuel, and had chosen a King to reign over them, at which some
of them were discontent, and would not accept him. It Is like the Ammonites made
the ground of their present quarrel, the old pretense and claim which they laid
to the land of Gilead, in which Jabesh stood, see Judge. 11.13. which now they
hoped to recover, and revenge the shameful overthrow which Jephtah then gave
them. The men of Jabesh-Gilead being now in extreme fear, and not trusting in
the Providence of God as they ought to have done, and contrary to Gods command
(who had forbidden them to make any Covenant with the accursed Nations) they
desire Nabash to make a Covenant with them, and to take them under his
protection as his Confederates, and they would pay him Tribute and serve him.
Nahash proudly and tyrannically answers them that on this condition only he
would make a Covenant with them, namely if he might have liberty to put out
their right eyes. Hereby he intended (it seems) to disable them from War, [for
with their Shields they covered their left eyes, and therefore if their right
eyes were put out, what service of war could they be fit for?] as also to fix a
reproach upon all Israel. For the accepting such base conditions would be a
perpetual disgrace to all the people, of whom it would be said that they were
so base a people that they would buy their peace and lives upon any terms; yea
it would be a reproach to the God of Israel, as if he could not help his people
in their distresses, or would not do it. The Elders of Jabesh-Gilead desire
seven days respite to send unto their brethren for help, in which time if they
were not relieved, they promise to come out unto him, and to yield themselves
to be disposed of at his pleasure. Nahash (being puffed up with a vain opinion of
his own strength, and thinking it impossible that their brethren in that time
either could or durst come to relieve them) yields to their desire, and by this
means (through his own arrogance and folly) he brought ruin and destruction
upon himself and his people. And God by his alwise Providence made this a means
that Jabesh-Gilead should be delivered by the hands of Saul, whose valor and
magnanimity being in this achievement so much displayed, the hearts of the
people were hereby more inclined to receive him for their King. The men of
Jabesh-Gilead having therefore liberty granted them to send to their Brethren,
their Messengers came first to Gibeah (where Saul and Samuel now were) to
acquaint them with the extreme streights they were in, that so they might
speedily send into all the Coasts of Israel for help. When the people of Gibeah
heard these doleful tidings they lift up their voices and wept; Saul though
elected King, yet being returned to his own house, betook himself as it seems
to his former, private Country-life, expecting till God should please to give
him an opportunity by some eminent action to show himself worthy to be their
King. Coming home therefore out of the fields after his Herd, he perceived the
people all in an uproar crying out, and wringing their hands, and tearing their
hair, and expressing the bitterest lamentation. Being extremely surpised at
it, he asks what was the matter? they tell him the sad tidings that were
brought to them concerning Jabesh-Gilead. At the hearing of this the Spirit of
God came upon him, that is the spirit of fortitude and courage, and
magnanimity, and zeal for his Countries defense; and though he was before very
patient in his own cause, when certain Sons of Belial scorned and despised him,
and easily passed it over as we have seen, Chapter 10.27. yet now his anger was
highly kindled, and he was impatient of the wrong that was done to the Lord and
his people by the Ammonites. Taking therefore a yoke of Oxen, and hewing them
in pieces, he sent the pieces to the several Tribes of Israel, in imitation of
the Levite, Judge. 19.29. who did thus cut his Concubine in pieces and sent them
to the several Tribes to stir up their indignation. And because he was not as
yet generally received as King, he uses not only his own name, but Samuel's
also, and by his messengers gives the people to understand that whosoever did
not come forth and join with them in this expedition against the Ammonites,
their Oxen should be so served. And the fear of the Lord fell upon the people,
and so moved and inclined their hearts that they readily came forth and joined
with Saul and Samuel in this undertaking. And when they were come together in
the Territories of Bezek, Saul numbered them, and the Children of Israel were
three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah Where by the way we may observe
the humble submission of the Tribe of Judah to the Government of Saul,
(notwithstanding they had the promise of the Kingly Scepter) because they saw
it thus determined by the pleasure of God.
thirty thousand; having got this great Army together, Saul and Samuel sent
away the messengers that came from Jabesh-Gilead, to inform the Inhabitants
thereof that on the morrow by that time the Sun was well up, they might expect
them to come for their help. The messengers returning to the City with this
news, the Inhabitants thereof were wonderfully revived at it, and sent to
Nahash (who besieged them) that on the morrow they would come out to him,
meaning and understanding thereby if no help came for them in the mean time.
But this they concealed Sic non tam ipsi decipiebant suos host^s, quam
permittebant ut ipsi deciperentur.
, that nothing might be presently attempted against them, and to make their
enemies the more secure, that Saul might have the greater advantage against
them. Saul dividing his Army into three parts, and marching (as it seems) all
night, by the morning-watch he came upon the enemy, and surprised them
unawares, and slew a vast number of them, and so scattered the rest that there
were very few of them left together. And thus he raised the siege of Jabesh,
and freed the Inhabitants thereof from that horrid cruelty intended against
them How thankful the inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead were afterward to Saul for
this great benefit we may see Chapter 31.11, 12, 13.
. The Israelites were so transported with joy for this victory, and so taken
with the prudence and brave conduct of Saul in the obtaining of it, that some
of them came to Samuel, and said, Where are the men that said Saul shall not
reign over us? bring them forth that we may put them to death. But Saul said,
There shall not a man be put to death this day on my account; I shall never
consent that a day of so much joy and triumph, and wherein God has so eminently
showed himself gracious unto us shall be stained with severity against those
that slighted me, or with the least sorrow or mourning among the people. And
here we see again what a difference there was betwixt Saul in his first
Government, and what he was afterward, when the Spirit of the Lord had
departed from him. Now none more humble and gentle than he, not a man shall be
put to death for him, but afterward in his dealing with David and the Priests
of the Lord, he was another man, even blood-thirsty, cruel and implacable
beyond measure. But to go on, Samuel upon this victory spoke to the people
after this manner: Come (says he) let us go to Gilgal and renew the Kingdom
there; that is, let us by a general consent confirm Readiness Election, and settle
and invest him in the Kingdom. Accordingly the people went to Gilgal, and there
they made Saul King before the Lord V. 15. that is in a solemn manner, as in
Gods presence, and possibly before the Ark the sign of his presence, which by
Samuel's appointment might be brought hither at this time that they might
consult with God as occasion served in this weighty business, and also (it may
be) that it might grace the action.
, that is, they anointed him publicly, (as before Samuel had done privately)
and performed all other Solemnities requisite for his Inauguration, sacrificing
Sacrifices of Peace Offerings, and Thanksgiving before the Lord, and rejoicing
and praising him for their late victory, and for their new King, by whose
conduct under God, they had obtained it, and praying to the Lord for him, and
craving his blessing upon his Government.

1 Samuel Chapter 11. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLXIII.
THE Children of Israel being at this time wonderfully transported with joy for
their new King, and possibly flattering themselves that God was well pleased
with them for asking a King, seeing he had given them one by whom they had
obtained so great a victory, Samuel thought fit to take this occasion to make
them sensible of their mistake, and that they had grievously sinned in asking a
King, whereby they rejected God from reigning over them as their Sovereign, and
himself as his Deputy and Vicegerent. Behold (says he) I have hearkened to your
voice, and have according to your desire (the Lord also permitting it) set a
King over you. And now you have a King settled among you to govern you, and go
before you as your General to war. And as for my self I have very great cause
to be well pleased (being old and gray headed) that the burden of the
Government is taken off from my shoulders. And as for my Sons, behold they are
with you now not as rulers but as private men; they are before you to give
account to you and your King of their former behavior and carriage, and to
make satisfaction q. d. Filios meos habetis in potestate vestra. Si quid dignum
severo supplicio commise^int non substraham eos legitimae satisfactioni. Si
enim quid perperam in sua gubernatione commiserint id me praeceptore non
didicerunt, neque talia excusabo.
for any thing they have done amiss whilst they were in place of Government.
And as for my self I may truly say that I have endeavored faithfully, and in
the uprightness of my heart to perform the duties of my place in the sight of
you all, both in the service of the Sanctuary in my younger days, (when I was a
Levite) and in my riper age by administering justice since I was called to be a
Judge. And seeing the Government is transferred from me to another you need not
now fear to speak your minds of me, and therefore if you can justly accuse me
of any evil, speak it freely, and witness it against me before the Lord, and
before his anointed, whose Ox A rare precedent for such to look upon as are in
any public place or office.
(I pray you) or whose Ass have I wrongfully taken away? whom have I
defrauded, or whom have I oppressed? of whom have I received bribes to blind
mine eyes See Deuteronomy. 16.19.
? and to cause me to wrest judgment? If any such injurious dealing can be
proved against me, here I am ready to make restitution, and to give
satisfaction. The people answered, Thou have not defrauded or oppressed us at
all, neither have thou taken ought of any man's hand to pervert justice. Well
then (says he) let the Lord be witness, and let his anointed here present be
witness that you acknowledge and declare that you have not found any injustice
or injurious dealing in me. They answered let them be witnesses. Possibly he
desired thus to justify and clear himself as to the whole course of his
Government (as Moses likewise had done, Numb. 16.15.) both that he might be an
example to their new King, and make him the more careful to avoid those ways of
injustice and oppression which he had told them before the Kings of the earth
were prone unto, see Chapter 8.11. As also that he might hereby convince them of
their sinful folly in rejecting him, and with him the upright and impartial
Government of Judges, and choosing to be under Kings, from many of whom they
should find but hard and oppressive usage. Having thus justified himself, he
goes on further to argue with them concerning Gods dealing with them, and their
carriage toward him: Now therefore (says he) stand still that I may reason
with you concerning all the righteous acts of the Lord, wherein he has
approved himself faithful, and has performed his Covenant which he made with
you, and your fathers, and has given you help and deliverance out of the hands
of your enemies; and therefore you are guilty of great ingratitude in not
relying upon him, but distrusting him, and rejecting his Government. Recollect,
I pray you, and call to your remembrance Gods former dealings with you, when
Jacob was come into Egypt, and his posterity exceedingly multiplied, they being
grievously oppressed, cried unto the Lord for deliverance, he then made Moses
the Governor of his people, and Aaron the High Priest, and sent them to
deliver your Fathers out of that bondage, which they accordingly did, and then
they led them through the Wilderness, and brought them into the Land which the
Lord had promised to give unto them. And Moses put them in possession of that
part of the land which was without Jordan, and substituted Joshua in his place
who gave them possession of the rest. But they soon forgot the kindness of the
Lord, and regarded not his Commandments. So he sold them into the hand of
Sisera Captain General to Jabin (who dwelt at Hazar) and into the hands of the
Philistines, and into the hand of the King of Moab. And when they were in these
distresses they cried unto him, and confessed their sins, and how they had
wickedly fallen to Idolatry, and had worshipped Baalim and Ashtaroth, and then
humbly besought him to help them, and deliver them out of the hands of their
enemies, and promised faithfully to serve him. The Lord being moved with
compassion toward them, he sent them several Saviors and Deliverers,
particularly Jerubbaal, or Gideon, and Bedan (that is Samson, so called because
he was of the Tribe of Dan) and Jephthah He mentions not these Judges in the
order of time in which they lived, and insisteth only on some of them to put
them in mind of the rest. V. 14. Eritis post Jehovam, i. e. Jehovah antecedet
vos, and defendet vos. Pisc.
. And to come down to your own times, I hope I may without vanity mention my
self also as one under whose conduct (by the blessing of God) you have had
great deliverances, and have enjoyed great tranquillity and safety. But when ye
understood that Nahash King of the Ammonites was coming against you, nothing
then would satisfy you but to have a King set over you, whereas the Lord your
God was your King, and held in his own hands the right of governing you, and
ruled over you by Judges as his Substitutes and Deputies. And with his
Government you should have been well contented, and satisfied, till he was
pleased to alter it. And now behold seeing nothing else would content you, he
has set a King over you. But though you have greatly offended him and deserve
to be rejected of him, and cast off from being his people, as you have rejected
him from being your King, yet if you will fear him, and serve him, and obey his
voice, the Lord will not forsake you, but will be to you and your King a
Leader, Guide and Protector, and you shall continue to be his people, following
of him as dutiful children do their father, which will be a great honor and
advantage to you. But if you will not obey the voice of the Lord your God, his
hand will be against you, as it was against your Fathers, whom for their
disobedience he caused to fall in the Wilderness. But possibly you will think
that all that I have said unto you in blaming you for desiring a King, are but
the words of a weak old man, but ye shall know that I speak to you from the
Lord who has sent me unto you as his Prophet and Ambassador; and seeing you
are so difficult to believe me in this thing, except my words be confirmed by
Miracles, you shall see a Miracle to confirm you; Is not this a fair and bright
day as the days use to be in Wheat-harvest Their Wheat-harvest in those dry
Countries of Syria and Canaan was in the heat of Summer, which dried up the
vapors and exhalations that are the causes of thunder; at that time especially
when the day on which Samuel spoke to them was fair, there was no likelihood of
such weather. Tonitru illud tempore messis praeter naturam fuit, id^oque
mirabile propterea quod vere tan^um and autumno fiunt tonitrua. Cujus rei causa
est quod concitantur ex conflictu calidi and frigidi; qui conflictus neque
hyeme, superante frigore, neque aestate, superante aestu fieri potest,
praesertim in aestuosis terris qualis Syria est. Castalio.
? you know we use to have no rain or thunder at this time of the year, [see
Prove. 26.] you see now no sign of any approaching tempest; yet ye shall see me
at this time by my prayer obtain both rain and thunder from God, by which you
may be convinced that your wickedness is great in desiring a King, and thereby
rejecting the Lord (who is so powerful a Protector, and has thunder and rain,
heaven and earth at his command; and is able to destroy all his and his peoples
enemies, as you have had lately experience, Chapter 7.10.) as also in rejecting me
his Prophet, who by my prayers can procure thunder and rain from heaven. Samuel
accordingly prayed unto the Lord that day, and immediately the Lord sent
thunder and rain in a very extraordinary manner, insomuch that the people were
not only convinced thereby that they had heinously sinned in desiring a King,
but also were much afraid that by this terrible tempest they should be
destroyed. They hereupon desired Samuel to pray for them, saying they had added
to all their former sins this also in asking a King They failed in the manner
of asking him: 1. Asking him very unseasonably, not waiting Gods time. 2. They
asked him with impetuous impatience, brooking no delay. 3. Proudly, they would
be like other Nations. 4. Distrustfully, resting more on their King than on
Gods power and promises. 5. Rebelliously, shaking off Gods Government as weary
of it, and desiring to exchange it for that of a King, and casting off his holy
Prophet Samuel, a most innocent and upright Judge.
. Samuel encouraged them, and bad them not despair of Gods mercy toward them,
provided they turned not aside from following of him, but served him sincerely,
and with all their heart. And though they had committed a great wickedness, yet
the Lord would be gracious unto them if they ceased from sinning, and following
after Idols, which cannot profit them, nor deliver them; for they are vain, and
have nothing of power or virtue in them, [see 1 Cor. 8.4. Deuteronomy. 32.21.] Nay,
are so far from being able to help them, that their following after them would
most certainly bring down Gods wrath upon them. However he bids them be of good
comfort, for the Lord would not forsake his people upon whom his name is
called, seeing of his free grace, and not for any merits in them he had chosen
them to be his people, and therefore being in Covenant with him, it would not
stand with his glory to leave them, or cast them off V. 22. Verba negantia pro
contrariis affirmantibus per quandam (...) saepius ponuntur. Glass.
, except they did first reject and cast off him; for other Nations would then
be apt to say God was unfaithful in his promises, or not able to perform them,
which would highly tend to his dishonor. And as for me (says he) though the
unkindness you have expressed toward me may make you afraid, I will not regard
you, and the thunder I have prayed for and obtained, may seem to argue some
displeasure conceived in my mind against you, yet God forbid that I should so
far sin against him as to neglect my duty in praying for you, and faithfully
instructing you. No, assure your selves I will still pray for you, and teach
you the good and right way; only be you careful to fear the Lord, and to serve
him in truth and sincerity, remembering what great things he has done for you.
But if ye and your King shall do wickedly, remember what I say unto you, you
will be both of you consumed and destroyed, neither will my prayers do you any
good.

1 Samuel Chapter 12. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLXIV.
SAVL having reigned one year from the time that he was chosen, and publicly
declared King at Mizpeh, [Ch. 10.24.] to his solemn Inauguration at Gilgal, and
another year vide Malvendam in loc.
since his Coronation, and seeing the people lamentably oppressed by the
Garrisons of the Philistines that were in the land, and kept in such miserable
bondage by them that they would not suffer them to have any weapons of war (but
what they got by stealth, or kept hid in some secret place) nor would suffer a
Smith to remain among them lest by that means they should get them Swords or
Spears, etc. [See Chapter 13. v. 19.] He resolved now to raise an Army to drive the
Philistines out of those Forts, wherefore appointing the people to assemble
themselves and come unto him, he chose out of them three thousand men, whereof
two thousand he kept about his own person, and marched with them to Mickmash (a
tract of ground in the border of Benjamin near the mountain of Bethel) and a
thousand he left with his Son Jonathan in Gibeah, the rest of the people he
sent to their own homes. Jonathan having a thousand of these new raised forces
under his command, he presently set himself to the work, and went and smote the
Garrison of the Philistines that was in Gibeah on the Hill near his own City,
see Chapter 10.5. The Philistines were hereat greatly enraged, and presently raised
a great Army consisting of three thousand V. 5. Triginta millia curruum, At
incredibile hoc videtur. Nam Pharaoh tantum 600 currus habuit, Exodus 14.7. and
Jabin 900, Jud. 4.3. and Solomon 1400, 1 Reg. 10.26. Nimium hoc pro num^ro
equitum qui sequitur. Aliqui mendum ignoscunt, and menda in numeris passim
accidere remo negaverit qui non sic harum literarum rudis atque imperitus.
Itaque sunt qui postremas duas literas abjiciendas censent and sic (...)
significat tria millia. Et sic habent Sir. and Ar. quomodo illos legissem
probabile ^st in Hebraeis quibus usi sunt exemplaribus, quod and ipsum val^le
multum est. Sed in his tribus millibus for ass plerique currus fuerunt
sarcinarii. Et sic ap a erit proportio currum and equitum. Vide Pol. in loc
Chariots of War, and six thousand Horsemen, and an innumerable company of
Foot, intending to be revenged on the Israelites. Saul hearing of their vast
preparations, presently dispatched his Agents into all parts of the Kingdom to
proclaim by sound of Trumpet the victory obtained by Jonathan V. 4. The victory
is ascribed to Saul (though obtained by Jonathan because he put his Son upon
this service. Victoria militum Principi ascribitur.
, for their encouragement, and also to make known to them that the Philistines
being hereupon extremely enraged, were preparing to come against them with an
huge Army. And because Samuel had before appointed Saul [Ch. 10.8.] that if he
came to be in danger, or intended to attempt any thing against the Philistines,
he should first go down to Gilgal, and there wait for him seven days, till he
came and advised him what he should do, and offered Sacrifice both for him and
the people, therefore Saul now removed with his forces from Michmash to Gilgal,
and the people were commanded to gather together and come to him thither. The
people were much terrified at this news of the approach of the Philistines
Army, and some of them hid themselves in Caves and Thickets, some in clefts of
Rocks, some in high places, and places of strength, some in pits and dens, and
some of them fled over Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead. And those that
followed Saul to ^ilgal, followed him trembling. They formerly were confident
that if they had a King, he would save them from all their enemies, and now
they have one they are perplexed with fear, not finding themselves any whit
more secured by his presence from the dangers that threatened them, and so are
taught by their own experience that there is no safety but in Gods protection.
Saul now at Gilgal expects Samuel six days, and having stayed till the seventh
was almost expired, he began to conclude that he would not come, and seeing his
Soldiers continually dropping away from him, and fearing lest the Philistines
might fall upon him on a sudden before he had by Sacrifices sought the Lords
favor and h^lp, he resolved not to stay any longer for Samuel, but commanded
Sacrifices to be immediately offered, intending after that to pitch upon some
course with the advice of those about him, for the defense of themselves and
their Country against the Philistines. As soon as he had made an end of
offering the Burnt-offering, behold Samuel came; and thus by not waiting a
small time longer, he transgressed Gods Commandment, and brought a great
punishment upon himself. Saul hearing that Samuel was come to Gilgal, he went
out to meet him, to salute and welcome him. Samuel understanding how things had
gone, angryly said to him, What have thou done? Saul tells him that having
waited for him till a great part of the seventh day was spent, he conceived he
would not come within the time appointed, and so being constrained by
necessity, even against his will The true cause why he hastened to Sacrifice
seems to be because his Soldiers run away so fast from him, in whom he put more
confidence than in God.
, he had offered Sacrifice V. 12. Roboravi itaque me, i. e. Obfirmavi animum,
q. d. etiam reclamante animo obtuli holocaustum prae timore. Quare cum inter se
confligerent voluntas and necessitas, tandem vicit necessitas, sed nulla erat
necessitas offerendi Sacrificia contra voluntatem divinam. Tali enim Sacrificio
non placatur Deus sed irritatur. V. 13. (...) significat durationem longam non
tamen aeternam, q. d. longo tempore dignitas illa Regia mansisset in tua
stirpe. In sempiternum, i. e. quam diu Saulis posteritas viveret. Gr.
; for how could he stay any longer except he would have had the enemy to come
upon him and his weak and unarmed company before he had made supplication to
the Lord for them, and sued for his help, which would have been the way to
expose them to ruin and destruction. Samuel said, Thou have done foolishly in
not waiting full seven days as I appointed thee from the Lord, Chapter 10.18. Had
thou obeyed the Commandment of the Lord herein, he would have established thy
Kingdom over Israel for ever, that is, for a long time, even as long as any of
thy posterity lived. But now thy Kingdom shall not continue, that is, shall not
be established upon thee and thy posterity, but shall be rent from thee and
given to another. It may perhaps seem strange that Saul should lose his Kingdom
for this, which to the eye of reason appears not so great a transgression, if
we consider what Saul pleaded for himself; but we must also consider that there
may be much wickedness of heart in doing that which outwardly seems but a small
offense; and Saul being the first King of Israel God was pleased by this
severity against him for his violation of his command to make him an example to
all that should afterward succeed in that Throne, that they might fear to
transgress the Commandment of the Lord as he had done. Thus the Lord did with
great severity punish the first sin of Nadab and Abihu, Levit. 10.1. that all
the succeeding posterity of Aaron might take warning thereby, and beware how
they carried themselves in their Priestly Office. But to go on, Samuel tells
Saul that because he had not obeyed the Lord, he knew by revelation that the
Lord intended to reject him, and that he had found out a man after his own
heart, (though he knew not at present who it was) whom he had appointed and
designed to be King and Captain over his people in his stead. Samuel having
delivered to him this sad message, went up from thence to Gibeah. Saul now
numbering the Soldiers he had left, found them to be but about six hundred, the
rest of his two thousand being run away; with this small party he goes up to
Gibeah, where Jonathan joins with him; the Philistines great Army was now
encamped at Michmash, from whence they sent out parties to spoil the Country,
and to fetch in booty to their Camp, and therefore they went out three several
ways, one to Ophrah, a City of Benjamin, that lay North-^ast from Michmash; the
other to Bethoron, a City of Ephraim, that lay North-west; and the third
toward the Valley of Zeboim, which was South-East: Saul had but a very small
Army (as we have seen before), and those only armed with Clubs, Bows, or
Slings, not a Sword or Spear found among any of them but only Saul and
Jonathan; and the reason of it was this, The Philistines when they gave the
Israelites that great defeat [ Chapter 4.10.] and took the Ark of God, they
disarmed them, taking away their iron arms and weapons, and to keep them from
getting any more for the future, they took away all their Smiths, and would not
let one of that Trade live among them, lest they should make them Swords and
Spears The chief victory that the Israelites got over the Philistines after
this was miraculous, not gotten with Sword or Spear, but with thunder from
heaven, 1 Samuel 7.10. Nebuchadnezzar also carried away the Craftsmen and Smiths
out of the land of Israel, possibly for the same reason, 2 King. 24.14.
. Na^ the Israelites were in such miserable bondage that they were feign to go
to the Smiths that were in the Philistines Garrisons to sharpen their Shares
and Coulters, their Axes and Mattocks, only they allowed them Files at their
own houses to sharpen their Tools when they were blunted.

1 Samuel Chapter 13. from v. 1, to 23.

SECT. CLXV.
THE body of the Philistines Army remaining in the Plains about Michmash, it
seems a party of them went and took a passage near to them, which was the
passage from Michmash toward Gibeah, and kept it against the Israelites.
Jonathan the Son of Saul being moved by a special instinct of the Spirit of
God, and endued not only with Heroic gifts of valor and fortitude, but also
with an extraordinary strong faith in Gods promises, that if his people obeyed
him, One of them should chase a thousand of their enemies, and two of them put
ten thousand to flight, Deuteronomy. 32.30. He had a design in his head to set upon
that Court of Guard of the Philistines which kept the Michmash-passage, but he
acquaints not his Father with it, who in likelihood would have dissuaded him
from undertaking so dangerous and desperate an enterprise. Saul was now
encamped with his six hundred men in some field, or plain near unto Gibeah,
called Migron, where having fortified himself, he observed the motions of the
enemy. Abiah God threatened Eli that his children should die in the slower of
their age. See 1 Samuel 2.21, 23.
(the Son of Ahitub the eldest Son of Phinehas) being now High Priest came
thither with the Ephod, and Ark for the peoples better encouragement. Jonathan
now acquaints his Armor-bearer with his design; Come (says he) let thou and I
go and surprise that Court of Guard which the uncircumcised For being aliens
and not in Covenant with God, they are not under his protection* and we being
His people, and in Covenant with him, have his promise that he will give us
victory over his and our enemies; yea a special promise that Saul shall save us
out of the hand of the Philistines, Chapter 9.16.
Philistines keep near Michmash; come let us try, it may be the Lord will work
for us; for there is no restraint to him to save by many or by few. His
Armor-bearer replied, Do all that is in thine heart; that is, all that seems
good unto thee; turn thee and go whither thou will, I am with thee according to
thy heart, that is, as willing and ready to follow thee in this enterprise as
thy own soul can desire. Now there was it seems a craggy passage between Gibeah
and Michmash, and he that went through that passage (which had two Rocks in the
way) must go over both of them one after another; Jonathan now with his
Armor-bearer resolving to make this attempt, he humbly desires a sign from God
to confirm his faith, that he would bless and assist him in this dangerous
enterprise, as Abraham's servant in a like case did, Genesis 24.13. And undoubtedly
by the guidance of Gods Spirit he pitched upon this particular sign, viz. That
if the Philistines when they first discovered themselves to them should say,
Tarry till we come unto you, that should be to them a sign of their great
courage and boldness, and then they should not go up to them. But if they
should say come up unto us, it should be a sign of their fearfulness, and then
they should go up, for the Lord would deliver them into their hands. Having
obtained this sign, Jonathan and his Armor-bearer present themselves before
the fort of the Philistines, who seeing them, said in a scoffing manner,
behold the Hebrews come out of the holes where they had hid themselves; then
they called to them, and said, Come up to us and we will show you a thing;
implying that they durst not come up, or if they did they would pay them for
their pains, or teach them more wit than thus to hazard themselves. Jonathan
seeing that God had now answered his desire in giving him this sign of victory,
he and his Armor-bearer fetching a little compass about to another place (as
Josephus tells us, which was not guarded by any Soldiers, the Philistines
thinking it sufficiently defended by nature) they clambred up on all four,
hands and feet, and so got into the Fort, and God striking the Philistines with
a great terror, Jonathan slew such as he first met with, and his Armor-bearer
having gotten a Spear or Sword from some that fell, did also slay others that
he met with; and they two in a small compass of ground not bigger than half an
acre, sl^w about twenty men. The Army of the Philistines upon this take the
Alarm, and both they and the Garrison, and the Spoilers that went out to spoil
were all smitten with such a mighty terror from the Lord, and with such a
dreadful fear, and such giddiness and distemper of brain, (God also at the same
time sending a terrible earthquake which increased the astonishment) that they
fell upon and slew one another, mistaking their friends and fellows for their
enemies. Saul's Scouts perceiving a great hubbub in the Army of the Philistines,
and that by mutual slaughters they destroyed one another, they acquaint Saul
therewith, who thinking this might happen by some part of his Army skirmishing
with them; he ordered his Soldiers should be numbered to see who were wanting,
and they found only Jonathan and his Armor-bearer absent; Saul then calls to
Ahiah the High Priest presently to put on the Ephod to enquire of the Lord what
was the cause of that tumult in the Camp of the Philistines, and what he should
do on this occasion: But he understanding again by his Spies that the Tumult
went on and increased, he bad the High Priest stay his hand By the many sad
effects that accompanied the following victory we may see how much God was
displeased with this profane contempt of his Ordinance, and not staying to
inquire of the Lord by the Ephod.
, for there was no time for them now to stand consulting, and enquiring of the
Lord, for the present opportunity suggested to them what they should do, namely
all join together, and fall upon the Philistines (being thus disordered) with
all their might; which accordingly they did. And when they came to the
Philistines Camp, they found that every man's Sword was against his fellow, not
being able through fear and amazement to discern friends from enemies, [see
Judge. 7.22. 2 Chronicles. 20.23.] so that there was a great slaughter among them.
And the Israelites who had formerly been taken Captives, and were now slaves
and bondmen to the Philistines, and forced to follow their Camp, and attend
upon their Carriages, joined now with their brethren against them. Also the
Israelites that had hid themselves in Mount Ephraim, when they heard that the
Philistines fled, they also came out of their holes and pursued after them; so
that there were diverse sorts of men which joined in this Battle to work their
destruction; the Philistines themselves who slaughtered one another, Readiness
Army, the Israelites that were Captives among the Philistines, and the
Israelites who for fear of the Philistines Army had hid themselves in Caves and
Rocks. Thus the Lord saved Israel that day. And the pursuit after the
Philistines went on to Beth-haven in the North of Benjamin. Saul being hot upon
the pursuit, though the people were greatly distressed with hunger and
faintness, yet rashly charged them under the penalty of a dreadful curse, and
of being devoted as an accursed thing that they should not eat any food till
night, that so they might not be hindered from pursuing their enemies. But this
charge of Saul's was rash and inconsiderate, and though it had a show of zeal
and good intent, yet it was in many respects sinful and wicked: For, 1. it
savoured something of pride, and too eager appetite to have the glory of the
victory only ascribed to himself, and his policy and conduct, which more duly
belonged to his Son. 2ly, He did it of his own head, without any warrant from
God. 3ly, Though he pretended a good end, yet he used ill means, viz. the
interdicting and forbidding of food to the people, though never so faint, and
needing to eat. 4ly, He charged them under the penalty of present death, v. 43.
which it was unlawful for him to inflict (though a King) without just cause.
5ly, Hereby he weakened and disabled the people, and so hindered them from
obtaining a much more glorious victory, v. 30. 6ly, He was hereby an occasion
of the peoples sin, who afterward being ready to die with hunger, did out of
greediness eat the flesh with the blood, v. 32. However the people being thus
severely charged by Saul, and that under a curse, and the penalty of present
death, none of them tasted any food, but pursued the enemy. At last they came
to a Wood that lay between Michmash and Aijalon, that had such p^^nty of Honey
that they found it upon the ground, either in hollow Trees out of which it ran
upon the ground, or else in clefts of Rocks, or else the Bees made their nests
in the very hollow places of the earth. But though they found such plenty of
Honey there, yet none of them for fear of the curse durst put his hand to take
any of it and to carry it to his mouth; but Jonathan not being with his Father
in the Camp when he thus adjured the people, and so knowing nothing of it, and
being through hunger and weariness ready to faint, he put forth the end of his
Javelin or Spear that he carried in his hand, and dipped it in the wild honey
that lay before him, and did eat of it, whereby his spirits were much revived
and refreshed, and his eyes that were dim before with fasting and faintness,
and emptiness and want of spirits, were now enlightened, and grew clear again.
One of the Soldiers seeing him thus eat, told V. 28. In the Hebrew phrase a
man is said to answer when his speech relates to a thing before done as well
as to a thing before spoken. See Numb. 11.28.
him of the charge that his Father had given the people, which till then they
had observed, but now were grown so weary and faint that they could not any
longer pursue the enemy. Jonathan hearing this, said, My Father has caused a
great inconvenience to the whole land of Israel this day, by imposing upon you
this severe charge, seeing hereby he hinders you from obtaining a full and
complete victory. For if I my self by tasting a little honey am so much
refreshed that I am enabled to go on cheerfully as your Leader in the pursuit,
how much more if all the Soldiers had been permitted to eat freely of the
enemies spoils as they happened to light upon them, would they have been
enabled thereby to have pursued and slaughtered more of their enemies? However
the Israelites smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon in the
Tribe of Dan, not far from their own Country. But night being come, and the
time of the prohibition expired, being with long fasting extreme hungry, they
greedily flew upon the spoil and cattle of the enemy, and slew them on the
ground, and dressed them, and eat them, not staying till they could be
thoroughly cleansed of the blood, which was contrary to the Law, Deuteronomy. 12.16.
And thus though they strictly observed the Kings command for fear of present
death, yet they observed not Gods command, though the violation of it brought
them under the penalty of a greater punishment. Some acquainted Saul herewith
telling him that the people sinned against the Lord in eating the flesh before
the blood was well drained out of it. Saul severely charge their sin upon
them, but without any acknowledgment of his own, which was the cause of theirs:
Ye have sinned this day (says he) in thus eating the blood. Roll me a great
stone that thereon in my sight the people may kill their Beasts, and that I my
self may see the blood fully drained out of the Cattle which they kill. Then
Saul began V. 35. Aedificavit Saul Altar, i. e. Caepit aedificare, and cum
caepisset extruere altar domino, dixit Saul, descendamus ad Philisteos, etc.
videtur hoc innuere Saulem opus tantum-modo incaepisse and postea negligenter
destitisse quomodo antea fecit quando Deum consuleret.
to build an Altar to the Lord that he might offer thereon Gratulatory
Sacrifices for that glorious victory which God had newly given them; but it
seems he did not finish it. Saul and the people having now refreshed
themselves, he exhorts them vigorously to prosecute the Philistines, Let us go
(says he) after the Philistines by night and spoil them unto the morning light,
and let us not leave a man of them. The people seemed very willing to it, but
the High Priest said before we undertake such a weighty business let us first
ask counsel of God by Vrim and Thummim, and crave his direction in it, Saul
agreed hereunto, and was willing to ask counsel of God by the High Priest; but
the Lord answered him not Silentium Dei eo spectabat ut innocentia Jonathae,
and praepostera Saulis inhumanitas, and nimia durities in lucem protraheretur.
that day, which showed that he was highly displeased (see Chapter 28.6.) but not
with Jonathan for eating a little honey, but with Saul for the rash charge
which he in his arrogance and tyranny had imposed upon the people, having no
warrant from God to do it. It is evident that the Lords refusing to answer Saul
tended to his, that it might be discovered that Jonathan had indeed offended
against the command of his Father (though ignorantly) but that Saul had by that
rash unadvised charge and curse hindered the prosecution of the victory, caused
Israel to sin, and now brought his own Son under the danger of being accursed
and put to death. Saul concluding that God was angry, because when he enquired
of him by the Priest, he would not answer him, he therefore presently commanded
all the heads of the Tribes and Families to draw near unto him, that by casting
lots it might be discovered who it was that had thus offended God among them;
for though himself had greatly sinned in that rash and unadvised Oath he had
made, and the curse he had imposed upon the people, yet he concludes that the
violation of his command must needs be the great offense which caused the Lord
to be silent, and therefore for the finding out this he would have them cast
lots, and solemnly protests who ever was found guilty, (yea though it were
Jonathan his Son) he should not be spared; but not a man among them would
accuse Jonathan: Then he said to the people, Be ye on the one side, and I and
Jonathan will be on the other, and he prayed unto the Lord to give forth a
perfect lot, that is, a lot which might clear the innocent, and fall upon the
guilty. The lot being cast, Saul and Jonathan were taken, then the lot was cast
between Saul and Jonathan, and Jonathan was taken; Jonathan was truly innocent
and faultless, but not in Readiness sense, and therefore why is he taken by the
lot that was innocent? Many reasons are rendered for it: 1. To punish Readiness
rash Oath, who thereby brought his dearest Son into extreme danger. [See the
case of Jephtha, Judge. 11.30, 31, 35.] 2ly, To discover Readiness hypocrisy, who
seemed very scrupulous and conscientious in keeping a rash and wicked Oath, yet
made not conscience of killing his innocent Son. 3ly, To justify Jonathan, and
that he might be declared innocent. Jonathan being taken, Saul asks him what he
had done? Jonathan tells him he had tasted a little honey with the end of his
rod or javelin; and he saw he must die for it, though he was wholly ignorant of
the Kings severe prohibition. Saul replies, God do so to me and more also if I
spare thee; a stran^e zeal this was in Saul, and an evidence that the Spirit of
God had left him; he will not now in pursuance of his rash Oath spare a brave,
^^riant and most worthy Son, and yet a little while after contrary to Gods
express co^tr^^^^d spares the wicked King Agag, Chapter 15.8. The people hearing
this his ra^^ resolution concerning his Son, what (say they) shall Jonathan die
who has wrought this great Salvation in Israel? Shall he die that is innocent,
and has committed no offense that deserves death? Shall he die that is so
brave a Prince, and worthy of all honor and reward, seeing the Lord by him
has given a great and miraculous deliverance to his people when they were in a
forlorn and desperate condition? As the Lord lives there shall not one hair of
his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought with God, (that is, under God,
and by his help and assistance) a great deliverance for us. So the people
rescued Jonathan that he was not put to death. Thus Saul ceased from pursuing
the Philistines any further at present, and so the rest of them got back to
their own Country. However Saul being by this glorious victory better confirmed
and settled in the Royal Throne, he took upon him the managing of all the
affairs of the Kingdom, and especially showed himself very valiant and active
in fighting against all the enemies of it, particularly against Moab and the
children of Ammon, bordering on the East of Canaan, against Edom bordering on
the South, against the Kings of Zobah on the North, and against the Philistines
on the West; and though he did not wholly vanquish and subdue them, becaused
God had reserved that work and the glory of it for David, yet he sore vexed
them, and much weakened them, so that they did not with that courage and
success fight against Israel as before they had done. And all this came to pass
through Gods free mercy to his people, giving good success to Saul in his Wars
(though a wicked man) for their sakes. And besides the forementioned successes,
Saul gathered a great host, and smote the Amalekites, as appears in the
following Chapter, and here is spoken of by way of anticipation, that his
warlike exploits might be summed up together. In the next place Readiness Sons are
mentioned that followed their Father in the War, and like valiant Soldiers
lived and died with him, as Jonathan, Ishui (who is called Abinadab, Chapter 31.2.)
and Melchishua. Ishbesheth is not here named though now above twenty years of
age, [see 2 Samuel 2:10.] possibly because he followed not his Father in the
Wars. Neither are his Children by Rizpah here mentioned, because she was not
his Wife, but only his Concubine. The Daughters he had by his Wife (whose name
was Ahinoam) were Merab and Michal. The Captain of his host was Abner, his
Cousin-german, Son to his Uncle Ner. And when he saw any strong or valiant man
he took him into his service.

1 Samuel Chapter 14. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLXVI.
SOmetime after Samuel by Gods appointment sends Saul to destroy the
Amalekites, but before he tells him what God commanded him to do, he puts
him in mind of Gods singular favor toward him, and the high honor he had
exalted him unto, that thereby he might move him to perform what God commanded
him with the more diligence and cheerfulness. And though he had formerly failed
in his duty, yet now remembering what the Lord had done for him, he should be
sure strictly to observe his Commands and Injunctions. Samuel now tells him
that the Lord would send him against Ameleck; three several times the Lord
declared that he would destroy the Amalekites, Exodus 17.14. Numb. 24.20. and
Deuteronomy. 25.19. And now Saul is sent to execute that vengeance upon them which the
Lord had so long ago at several times threatened; and though the present King
and subjects of Amalek had been cruel and bloody adversaries to the people of
God (as Samuel intimates, v. 33. As thy sword has made many women childless,
so shall thy mother be childless), and so deserved to be destroyed for their
own sins; yet because the Lord would have the Israelites know that he had not
forgot the former injury of their Ancestors toward his people, though 'twas
four hundred years since it was done, he resolves now to visit it upon them;
and he mentions one circumstance that greatly aggravated it, viz. that when his
poor people had been long under a miserable bondage in Egypt, and were newly
escaped from it, yet even then they came out against them, and sought to
destroy them. Nor need it seem strange that the present Amalekites should be
utterly destroyed, for that which their Ancestors had done so many years
before. For though God destroys none everlastingly but for their own sins, yet
with temporal punishments he does usually punish the Children for the sins of
their Ancestors, especially when the Children go on in their Fathers steps, as
by that which is said of Agag, v. 33. it seems those Amalekites did. Samuel
therefore commands Saul, from the Lord to go and smite Amalek, and utterly
destroy all that they had, and not to spare Man, Woman or Child, no not so much
as their very Cattle, V. 7. Jumenta, Bruta pereunt, quippe possessiones,
organa, fulcra, gaudia peccantium.
For he had anathematized, and devoted them all to destruction as he did
Jericho: Saul hereupon gathers a great Army, and numbers them in the Plains of
Telaim, or Telem, a City in the Tribe of Judah, Josh. 15.24. and finds them to
be two hundred thousand footmen, besides ten thousand men of Judah The men of
Judah are reckoned apart from the men of Israel: 1. Because they usually had
the privilege of going first against the enemy in any common danger. 2. Because
the Messiah was to come of his Tribe.
, Saul marching his Army and coming near to the chief City of Amalek, he sent
to the Kenites the posterity of Jethro, who lived in Tents [see Judge. 4.17.]
among these Amalekites, to depart and get them out from among them, if they
loved their lives; for Jethro and his family had showed kindness to the
Israelites when they came out of Egypt, he himself came out with much joy to
meet Moses, and to congratulate all the goodness which the Lord had showed to
Israel; therefore now Saul gave them warning to remove away that they might not
suffer with the Amalekites, whom God intended at this time to punish for the
wrong their Progenitors had done to his people; but he was willing to spare the
Kenites for the kindness their Ancestors had shown to them. The Kenites
accordingly removed from them; soon after Saul in the valley of their chief
City fought V. 5. Vajareb, pugnavit, contendit scil. cum eo.
with the Amalekites and discomfited them, and took their King Agag prisoner,
and pursued them from Havilah to Shur, which is over against Egypt, and
destroyed all that came out with Agag to fight against them, with all others
they could meet with, and destroyed also their Cities and Towns. But that many
of them did escape this slaughter is manifest from Chapter 27.8. and Chapter 30.1. as
we shall see afterward. Saul having taken their King (whom he should above all
the rest have slain) he and the people spared him Saul now spared Agag whom God
had by an absolute command devoted to destruction, but showed himself
afterward so bloody and barbarously cruel that he caused Gods Priests to be
slaughtered (whom he should have preserved) and that upon a mere suspicion, Chapter
22.11.
, either to make their triumph more glorious, or out of covetousness Ecce
quantum abstrahit homines avaritia ab obedientia mandatorum Dei.
to get a great ransom for him, or out of foolish pity because he was a King So
Ahab spared Benhadad, 1 King. 20.35.
. They spared also the best of the sheep, oxen and lambs, pretending to reserve
them for Sacrifice; but doing it out of a covetous desire to enrich themselves;
but God having anathematized and devoted them all to destruction, he would have
esteemed it as a pleasing sacrifice if they had thus offered them unto him, as
he required in the case of Jericho, Josh. 6.17. but they following their own
reason, and not Gods command, spared all that was good, and every thing that
was vile and refuse they destroyed. Then the Lord spoke to Samuel saying, It
repents Dicitur Deus resipiscere cum id agit quod resipiscentes agunt
homines, nimirum cum opus suum demoliri statuit, vid. Jacob. 1.17:
me that I have set up Saul to be King, for he is turned from following me, and
has not performed my commandments. God is said to repent when he does as men
do that repent, and are grieved for what they have done; men are said to repent
when they undo what they have before done, so God now resolved to alter the
course of his dispensations toward Saul, and to retract and revoke the
benefits he had bestowed on him. Samuel hereupon was exceedingly grieved for
Saul, and prayed earnestly all night for him, hoping to have obtained of the
Lord not to cast him quite off. But the Lord would not hear his prayer, see v.
23, 26. However Samuel going out early in the morning to meet Saul, it was told
him that he came to Carmel, a Town belonging to Judah, lying in the way from
Amalek, [Josh. 15.55.] and that there he had set up a Monument of Triumph for
this victory obtained over the Amalekites, having the picture of a hand upon it
to signify that by his hand and sword he had conquered his enemies. V. 12. Et
paravit sibi manum, i. e. fornicem triumphalem, nam trophaeis imponebatur manus
ad significandum quod homines valida manu essent profligati. Freidlib.
They further told him that from thence he was gone to Gilgal. Samuel going
thither to him, Saul hearing of his coming, went out to met him, and said,
Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have performed the commandment of the Lord. How
hypocritically and vain gloriously does he boast of his obedience to God when
he was so great a transgressour? Samuel said if thou have obeyed the
Commandment of the Lord, what means this bleating of sheep in mine ears, and
this lowing of oxen which I hear; Saul replies, the people saved the best of
the sheep and oxen to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God, that is to the Lord whom
thou entirely love and servest, and therefore can not sure but allow of the
means of his Worship) but the rest we have utterly destroyed. Samuel answers
that he would tell him what the Lord had said to him that night. Saul bids him
say on, as expecting possibly some good message from him; so far does
hypocrisy blind men even then when they have done that which is notoriously
evil. Samuel said when thou wast little in thine own eyes, and but of mean
condition (as thou did confess, Chapter 9.21.) God advanced thee to be King over
all Israel; and the Lord sent thee on an expedition against the Amalekites,
peremptorily charging thee to destroy those great and notorious sinners who had
so much malice in them against his people, and to fight against them till they
were consumed, wherefore then did thou not obey the voice of the Lord, but
did fly upon the spoil as an hungry hawk does upon his prey, converting that
to thy own use, like Achan which God had devoted to destruction, see Josh. 7.
Saul justifies himself and says he had obeyed the voice of the Lord, he had
gone the way the Lord had sent him, and had brought with him Agag King of the
Amalekites, and had destroyed all the rest of the Amalekites he could light on;
but indeed the people had saved the chief of the sheep and oxen (which should
have been destroyed) to sacrifice unto the Lord in Gilgal Qui locus erat ad
sacra facienda idoneus.
; if this (says he) be a fault, 'twas they not I that committed it. But it
seems to me to be no fault at all, seeing they did it out of a good intention,
and reserved the best of the spoils to sacrifice them to the Lord, in token of
their thankfulness for this great victory. Samuel answers, has the Lord as
great delight in Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices as in obeying his voice? Behold
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken to the voice of God than to
offer the fat Adeps hic ponitur pro victimis adipatis, and pinguibus.
of Rams, or present to him the best of Sacrifices. And the reason is plain,
for obedience preserves from sinning, whereas sacrifices were ordained only to
cleanse us from the guilt of sin when committed; and it is much better to
prevent a disease than to be cured of it when contracted. And further God
always accepted of obedience See Jer. 7.22, 23. Isa. 1.13, etc. and 66.3. Psalm.
50.8, 14. Prove. 15.8. Hos. 6.6. Mat. 12.7.
, and is well pleased with it, but rejects sacrifices as but a dead carcass,
when obedience (which is as it were their life) is wanting. He further tells
him, That rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubborness is as iniquity
and idolatry; for an act of rebellion against any command of God (though had it
not been for that command the thing would not have been of its self unlawful)
is as manifestly a sin as as those things are that are against the law and
light of nature, and contrary to the truth and glory of Gods Essence as
Witchcraft and Idolatry are. And such was this act of Readiness in sparing Agag,
and the best of the Cattle; for being done expressly against the command of God,
it was no less than rebellion and stubborness against the Almighty, which is as
hateful to him as any wickedness or iniquity is, yea as Idolatry it self,
whereby men forsake God, and serve Idols. Lastly he tells him, Because thou
have rejected the word of the Lord, therefore he has rejected Denuntiat ei
privationem regni, cujus executio Paulo post faciendae erat. Saulem enim post^a
Regem mansisse patet, quia eum ut Regem suum habuit and populus, and ipse David
and Samuel, v. 32.
thee, and thou shall be deprived of thy Kingdom. Saul hearing this, said unto
Samuel, I perceive now that I have sinned and have transgressed the Commandment
of the Lord, and have not oserved the orders that thou gave me from him.
Indeed I feared the people, and obeyed their voice, which was a great fault in
me; however I entreat thee earnestly to pray to the Lord for me, that he would
please to pardon my sin, and be reconciled to me; and I beseech thee go with me
to Gilgal, that there we may together praise God for our late victory, and also
pray unto him for the pardon of this great sin which my self and the people
have committed. Samuel replies, I will not go with thee, I will have no
conversation with thee who have showed thy self such a rebel against God, lest
I should seem any way to allow or approve what thou have done. And undoubtedly
Samuel really meant Non intendebat reverti sed postea mutavit propositum ex
causis quae dicentur v. 31. sic Christus, Joh. 7. dixit ego non ascendam, sed
statim postea ascendit.
to do as he said, and accordingly turned about to go away. But Saul was
extreme loath that he should thus go away from him in an anger, and that the
people should take notice of his (and consequently of Gods) displeasure against
him, wherefore he laid hold on the skirt of his mantle to detain him, and using
some force to hold him, the mantle rent; Samuel tells him that this was a sad
Omen The Hebrews add that it was also to show that the man that should
hereafter tear off the the skirt of his garment should be the man that should
succeed him in the Throne, and hence was that which Saul said, Chapter 24.20. Now
behold I know that thou shall be King, etc.
from the Lord against him, and signified that the Kingdom should be rent from
him, and given to a neighbor of his that was better than he, viz. to David,
who was not yet known either to Saul or Samuel himself. And Samuel to assure
him that what he had denounced against him would certainly come to pass, he
tells him that God who is the strength of Israel was absolutely able to effect
what he had threatened, and he would not lie nor repent, nor alter his decree
Mutat aliquando Deus sententiam per Prophetas significatam, non autem consilium.
and purpose as weak men oftentimes do. Saul hereupon confesses again his sin,
and though the sentence of his deposing was so firmly decreed that it could not
be altered, yet he entreats Samuel for the present to uphold his credit with
the people, and to grace him with his presence, and and to accompany him in
worshipping God. Samuel being thus importuned went along with him Non
intendebat reverti sed postea mutavit propositum.
to preserve his Government for the present from the disrespect and contempt of
the people, and that he might perform what Saul had omitted, namely to destroy
Agag. Samuel therefore being come to Gilgal commanded that Agag should be
brought to him; Agag came to him delicately, that is, in the attire, and with
the gesture and gate of a King, thinking surely that the bitterness of death
had been past, seeing he was to be brought (not before the King that took him
prisoner) but before the old Prophet, who he thought (as it is like) would only
reprehend him. When he came before Samuel, he said to him, As thy sword has
made many women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women; then
by an extraordinary motion of the Spirit of God he hewed him in pieces See a
like instance, 1 Kin. 18.40.
in the presence of the Lord, and his people. Then Samuel went to Ramah, and
Saul to his own house at Gibeah; and Samuel never went after to visit Saul to
instruct him and direct him in his affairs, or to ask counsel of the Lord for
him as formerly he had done. He did indeed afterward see him at Naioth, but it
was accidentally and unawares, Chapter 19.24. However Samuel mourned exceedingly
for him, and was grieved at his disobedience whereby he had so highly provoked
God.

1 Samuel Chapter 15. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLXVII.
THE Lord now makes known to Samuel that all his mourning for Saul was but in
vain, partly because he continued still obstinate and impenitent, and partly
because the Lord had absolutely determined to take the Kingdom from him. In
which case though Samuel might bewail Readiness condition, yet he might not bewail
it in that manner as might imply an unwillingness to submit to the good
pleasure and determination of God therein. And though the Lord intended not
that Saul should presently be deposed from being King See Chapter 24.6.
, yet he orders Samuel presently to fill his horn with oil, and to go to Jesse
the Bethlemite, for he had chosen one of his Sons to be King over Israel, and
he should anoint him to that office whom he should point out unto him, that as
he had anointed Saul, so by anointing one of another family (by Gods
appointment) to succeed him in the Throne, he might testify that God had
rejected Saul's posterity. Indeed Saul was chosen by the Lord to be King of
Israel, but it was upon the violent importunity of the people that would needs
have it so, and would not be beaten off from it. So that Saul was the peoples
King rather than Gods, and given to them in wrath; but David was merely chosen
of God, who did of his own free will, (no body thinking any thing of it) send
Samuel to anoint him. And so he was a King of Gods own providing, the King in
whose seed the Kingdom was to be established, and one who would in his
Government carefully perform the will of God. See Chapter 13.14. Samuel was
something afraid to go upon this enterprise, and therefore he said, Lord how
can I go? if Saul hear of it he will certainly kill me. The Lord instructs him
how to avoid this danger, he bids him to go to Bethlem and to take an heifer,
and say he came to offer a Sacrifice there, that is, a Sacrifice Authoritas
Prophetae facit ut Sacrificium ubicunque is adest and imperat, rite fiat;
subsunt enim Prophetae imperio leges rituales faten^ibus Hebraeis. Samuel ex
peculiari mandato hoc fecit.
of Thanksgiving, or a Peace Offering, after which followed a Feast made of the
remainders of the Sacrifice, see Chapter 9.12. He orders him to invite Jesse and
his Sons to this Feast. Thus the Lord directed him to conceal the principal
cause of his coming, and to pretend only that business which might be safely
made known. Samuel accordingly goes to Bethlehem, the Elders of the City
trembled when they saw him, fearing lest some heinous sin committed among them
had drawn him thither, and that he came to deliver some sad message from the
Lord against them; therefore they presently asked him whether he came
peaceably? he said yes, for I come to sacrifice unto the Lord, sanctify
therefore your selves, and come with me to the Sacrifice, and particularly let
Jesse and his Sons prepare and sanctify themselves both legally and
spiritually, that they may eat of the Sacrifice. It Is like Samuel had
acquainted Jesse privately with the cause of his coming, and that thereupon
Jesse brought in his Sons one by one into some private place, whether before
they sat down to eat of the Sacrifice they had retired themselves for that
purpose, that that person might be anointed whom God should point out to
Samuel. Accordingly Eliab, Jesse's eldest Son was first brought forth, when
Samuel saw him, he thought within himself, surely this is the man; the
comeliness of his person made him think this was he whom God had chosen; but
herein he was led and guided only by his own spirit, for the Lord presently
said to him, Look not on his countenance, or the height of his stature,
consider the Lord sees not as man sees; for man looks on the outward
appearance, but God looks on the heart. Then Jesse called Abinadab and made
him appear before Samuel, and Samuel was admonished by a secret voice of Gods
Spirit that neither was this the man whom he had chosen. Then Shammah was
called, he also was refused. Jesse then called four more of his Sons in order,
and set them one after another before Samuel, but he told him never an one of
these was the person whom the Lord had chosen. Jesse wondering at this, Samuel
asked him whether these were all his Sons? DAVID chosen to be King and first
anointed by Samuel.
He told him he had one more, viz. the youngest whom he employed in keeping his
sheep; he had omitted to bring him, as imagining it could not in any likelihood
be he of all the rest whom God would chose; and this possibly was so ordered by
Providence that it might more evidently appear that David was merely chosen of
God; Samuel orders that this youngest Son should be immediately sent for, for
(says he) we will not sit down till he come. At last David came, who was of a
ruddy and beautiful Solet pulcher animus etiam in vultu apparere, vide Platonis
convivium. Erat in Davide forma non mollis sed virilis, and militaris. Oculi
ipsius bellicam quandam ferociam spirare videbantur. Unctus est non ut statim
regnaret, sed ut Sauli morienti in regno succederet.
countenance, and comely to look on, and (as it is probable) about twenty two
years of age. The Lord now by a secret voice of his Spirit said unto Samuel,
This is the man, arise and anoint him; then Samuel took the horn of oil and
anointed him in the midst of his Brethren, whereby he incurred their envy, [see
Chapter 17.28.] no less than Joseph did of his Brethren. And from the very day of
his anointing the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, namely the Spirit of
Wisdom, Courage and Fortitude, so that he was moved and led on by the Spirit of
God to undertake great and noble enterprises, such as was that of killing a
Lion and a Bear. For it seems as he was keeping his fathers sheep there came a
Lion at one time, and a Bear at another, and took a Kid out of his flock, and
he pursued after them, and when the Lion turned upon him, he took him by the
beard and slew him, and took the prey from him which he had selzed upon, and so
he served the Bear also, see Chapter 17.35, 36. and other famous and valourous
exploits, it seems he achieved soon after he was anointed, whereby he became
famous even among Readiness Courtiers, see v. 18. and probably from that time
forward he had an extraordinary measure of the gifts and graces of the Spirit,
poured forth upon him, and particularly the Spirit of Prophecy, and the gift
of Poetry, and composing Divine Psalms, and Hymns, together with the gift of
Music, wherein afterward he became very eminent, insomuch that he was called
the sweet Singer of Israel; and has left such Divine Psalms and Hymns as may
serve to instruct the people of God to the end of the world. Samuel having thus
anointed David, he returned to his own house at Ramah.

1 Samuel Chapter 16. from v. 1, to 14.

SECT. CLXVIII.
SAVL now was bereaved of those Heroical gifts that God had before bestowed
upon him, and Satan (by Gods permission) taking advantage of his extreme
melancholy and discontent (for the loss of Gods favor, and his Kingdom) filled
him with frights and fears with disquietness of mind, and grief of heart, which
so distempered and distracted him, that he fell into fits of Frenzy, and
sometimes grew outrageous, and ready to kill any body that came in his way, and
was (for a time) as one possessed with a Devil. He had preferred his own reason
before Gods directions in the business of the Amalekites, (and so made an Idol
of it) and now God justly deprives him of the use of it. His Physicians tell
him that an evil spirit sent of the Lord (to execute his righteous judgment)
troubled him, and therefore advise him to seek out a man that was skilful to
play on the Harp, who by his Music might cheer and revive his spirits, and
allay his melancholy passions, and thereby he would be less subject to the
Devils operations. One of Readiness servants (that stood by) said he had seen a
Son of Jesse that was very skilful in playing on the Harp, and was also a man
of war, and prudent in matters Ego existimo ex quo David cum unctione alia
quoque dona accepit plane rara, eum vicini^ fuisse notissimum, nam and eximia
erant illa dona, and inopinata atque nova. Sanct.
, and a comely person, and the Lord was with him, and assisted him in all his
designs, and prospered him in all his enterprises. Saul hearing this, sent
messengers to Jesse to desire him to send that Son of his that kept his sheep
Hereby we see that though David was chosen by God and anointed King, yet in
humility of spirit he returned unto his former employment of keeping his
fathers sheep, waiting upon God till it should be his good pleasure in his own
way to raise him to the Kingly dignity.
unto him. Jesse sent his Son David to him, with a small present Such a Present
Jacob sent to Joseph under the notion of the Lord of all Egypt, that his Sons
might find favor with him, Genesis 43.11.
, namely an Ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine, and a Kid; for great
persons do many times kindly accept of small presents from their inferiors,
seeing they are signs that they do respect and honor them. But Jesse knowing
that God had anointed his Son David to succeed Saul in the Kingdom, might well
have been afraid to put him into Readiness hands, had not his faith overcome his
fear. David now came and attended upon Saul, who was much pleased with him, and
loved him greatly, and appointed him to be one of those that should carry his
Shield before him; Saul also liking him very well This great love of Saul to
David quickly turned into mortal hatred.
sent to his Father that he might stay with him, and continue in his service.
And when the evil spirit was at any time upon Saul, David played on his Harp
before him, and so he was for the time freed from his melancholy, God working
with David's Music, and giving Saul ease thereby, that he might make way for
David's advancement. Yet the Music wrought no perfect cure on him, but only an
abatement of his fits. He should have used the right means if he intended to be
cured, viz. Repentance, Faith, Fasting and Prayer.

1 Samuel Chapter 16. from 14, to the end.

SECT. CLXIX.
DAvid continued sometime in Readiness Court, but finding an alienation in Readiness
affection toward him, he withdrew himself and returned to keep his Fathers
sheep, see Chapter 17.15. The Philistines about this time either out of desire to
avenge their former shameful loss (when Jonathan and his Armor-bearer put
their whole Army to flight, Chapter 14. or out of jealousy of the growing power of
the Israelites through the many victories lately obtained by Saul against his
other neighbors, or stirred up by God to accomplish what he intended to do,
now invade the land of Israel with a great Army, and pitched between Shochoh
and Azekah in the Tribe of Judah; and Saul and the men of Israel gathered
together and pitched by the valley of Elah near unto them. So the Philistines
were on a mountain on one side, and the Israelites on a mountain on the other,
a valley being between them. Thus each party kept their ground of advantage for
a time, not joining battle, but only skirmishing now and then. And there came
forth a Champion out of the Camp of the Philistines, whose name was Goliath of
Gath See Josh. 11.22.
, whose height was six cubits and a span, that is three yards and three hands
breadth, so he was higher than any ordinary man by a yard and a foot; and he
had arms suitable to his vast stature, he had an helmet of steel, and a coat of
mail made after the similitude of Fish-scales, one piece lying over another,
and the weight thereof was five thousand shekels of brass, so that counting a
shekel at half an ounce (which was the weight of the common shekel) Goliath's
Coat weighed two thousand and five hundred ounces, that is, one hundred fifty
and six pounds, and four ounces, or thereabout, assigning to every pound twelve
ounces. And he had greaves or boots of brass upon his legs, See 1 Chronicles. 20.5.
a target or gorget of brass between his shoulders, and the staff of his spear
was like a Weavers beam, and his spears head weighed twenty five pounds, and
one went before him bearing his shield, and he stood and cried to the armies of
Israel, Why are ye come out to set your battle in array? that is, what need we
bring a whole Army on each side to fight it out? let us cast all upon a single
combat; am not I a Philistine, and chosen by them for there Champion, and you
servants of Saul, therefore do you chose out a man from among you to fight with
me, and let us two decide the controversy; if he be able to kill me, then the
Philistines shall be your servants; but if I prevail against him, then shall ye
be our servants. And then in an insulting manner he further said, I defy the
armies of the Israelites this day; when Saul and all Israel heard these words,
they were greatly dismayed, none of the whole Army daring to answer this proud
Philistines challenge, no not Jonathan himself, whom God had endued with so
great a measure of courage and fortitude, that he and his Armor-bearer had
alone routed the whole Army of the Philistines, as we may see Chapter 14. but we
must consider that both faith and courage are the gifts of God, which when he
withholdeth, those that were at other times as bold as a Lion may shrink for
fear. God also now meant to magnify David, and make him famous among the
people, that so there might be a way made for the fulfilling his purpose and
promise of advancing him to the Throne. The Philistine for forty days together
morning and evening presented himself before the Army, challenging any
Israelite to come forth and combat him, but not a man among them durst
undertake him; at last it so happened that Jesse the Bethlemite (who was at
that time an old man, and being unfit for war stayed at home) having his three
eldest Sons in the Camp with Saul, he thought good to send his youngest Son
David (who kept his sheep) to see how they did, and to carry to them some
provisions, viz. an Ephah An Ephah was some thing short of our English Bushel
containing ten Omers, and every Omer about a pottle.
of parched corn, and ten loaves, and to carry also to their Captain ten
cheeses (possibly that he might use them with the more kindness and respect*
and to bring him from them some token or pledge that they were alive, whereby he
should assuredly know that he had done what he commanded him. Saul and the
Israelites were encamped on a mountain that lay close upon the valley of Elah,
and in the valley the two armies often skirmished one with another. David
rising early in the morning, and leaving the sheep to the care of a keeper, he
took the provisions which his Father had sent, and hasted away with them, and
when he came to the Trench where the Carts and Carriages lay which brought
provisions to the Army, the host was drawing forth to be set in battel-array,
and shouted to the Battle. The Philistines also on the other Hill had put
themselves in battel-array, and they stood army against army ready to fight if
they could get any advantage against each other. David seeing this, left what
he had brought in the hands of the Keeper of the Carriages, and ran into the
army, and saluted his Brethren; as he talked with them behold Goliath the
Philistines Champion came forth, and drawing up toward the army of the
Israelites, spoke in that insulting manner as he had done before, and defied
the army of the Israelites. The Israelites were so dismayed at his vast
stature, that not one was found that durst adventure to fight with him. David
hearing the daring words of the Philistine, and seeing the people much
perplexed that he should thus defy them, and that none among them should be
found that had courage enough to undertake him, he asks what shall be done to
the man that shall kill this Philistine, and so take away the reproach from
Israel; for what is this uncircumcised Philistine (says he) that he should dare
thus to defy the armies of the Living God? And possibly he inquired after the
reward promised, only to let the standers-by perceive that he himself had some
thoughts of undertaking the combat, but not so much for the sake of the
reward, as to vindicate the honor of God and his people. The people told him
the King would enrich that man with great riches that should undertake it, and
would give him his daughter to wife, and make his Fathers house free in Israel,
that is free from Taxes, and other impositions, and so innoble his family.
Eliab (David's eldest brother) perceiving by the manner of his talking with the
people that he had some inclination to undertake this Giant, his anger was
kindled against him, and very sternly he asked him for what purpose he came
thither, and with whom had he left sheep he was appointed to keep? intimating
that he was fitter to keep sheep and play on his harp, than to be a Soldier;
and then upbraiding him with arrogance and ambition, I know (says he) thy
pride, and the naughtiness of thy heart, for thou art come hither that thou
may see the battle, and try if thou can by some desperate action get thy
self a name. David meekly answers, What have I done to deserve so sharp a
reproof from thee? Is there not sufficient cause that I should come when my
Father has sent me? and being come. have I not cause to be concerned with
other Israelites, and to speak as I have done, when I hear God thus
dishonored, and his own peculiar people thus scorned and reproached by a
blasphemous wretch, an uncircumcised Infidel? Then David finding such harsh
usage from his brother, turned from him to others, to whom he spoke after the
same manner he had done before, and intimated his willingness to fight with
this Giant, if no body else would undertake him, and it is like he spoke the
more freely, that so what he said might come to the Kings ears. Saul hearing of
it sent for him, to whom humbly addressing himself, he said, My Lord let no
man's heart fail him because of this hideous monster, for I my self (though the
weakest of many) trusting in Gods power and assistance will encounter him, if
no body else will do it. Saul said alas! thou art not able to go against him,
for thou art but a youth, and not bred in war, and he a man of full age, and
vast stature, and trained up in war from his youth. David humbly replies that
he had had experience of Gods extraordinary assistance vouchsafed to him; for
keeping his Fathers sheep there came a Lion and a Bear, one at one time, and
the other at another, and seizing each of them a Lamb out of the flock, he
pursued after them, and when the Lion turned upon him, he took him by the beard
(or hair of his nether chap) and slew him, and took the prey from him, and so
served the Bear also, and he doubted not but this blasphemous miscreant (who
defied the armies of the Living God) should (through the Divine assistance) be
as easily conquered as one of them; for that God (says he) who delivered me out
of the paw of the Lion, and the paw of the Bear, will I trust deliver me also
out of the hands of this uncircumcised Philistine. Saul hearing him express so
great courage and confidence in God, and that grounded upon the former
experience he had had of his extraordinary assistance, he gave him leave to
enter the lists with this Giant, and wished him good success, and prayed that
God would be with him in it. But he thought fit first to arm David well with
armor taken out of his own armoury, and so he put on his head an helmet of
brass, and armed him with a coat of mail, and David girded his sword upon his
armor, and assayed to go with his armor on, but he quickly found himself
uneasy, and therefore said, I cannot go V. 39. Non sum assu^factus talia
far. Vatab.
with these, having not been used to wear such arms, they are a burden to me.
So he put them off, and took his staff in his hand, and his sling, and chose
him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them into his shepherds bag,
and so went out to meet the Philistine. When Saul saw him thus going forth, he
asked Abner whose Son he was? for it seems having been distempered with frantic
fits, he had forgotten him, though he had formerly known him, and greatly loved
him, and Abner being General of the Army, and so much absent from Court had not
(it seems) taken any notice of him when he was there, and therefore told the
King he knew not. Saul bad him enquire whose Son that stripling was. David now
(armed only with his staff and sling) goes out to meet the Philistine who came
up toward him with his armor-bearer carrying his great shield before him; V.
43. Baculis, Enallage numeri est, ut Genesis 21.7.
when this monstrous Giant saw David come toward him (who was but a youth, and
his countenance rather amiable than terrible, not like the countenance of a
Soldier) he disdained him, and said, What, am I a dog that thou come out to
me with a staff? then cursing him by his gods, he said, let Dagon and the other
gods we worship confound thee: Come to me and I will give thy flesh to the
fowls of the air, and beasts of the field. David replied, Thou come to me
with a sword and with a spear, and with a shield, but I come to thee in the
name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel whom thou have
defied. This day will the Lord deliver thee into my hand (I know it by the
inspiration of the Spirit of God) and I will smite thee, and take off thine
head, and I will give the carcasses of the host of the Philistines this day
unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the field, that all the
earth may know that there is a God (who is Almighty, and the only true God) who
watches over Israel, and all this present assembly both of Israelites and
Philistines shall know that the Lord saves not with sword or spear, (but he
can save without these, and is not tied to such outward means) for the battle
is the Lords, and he governs it and gives victory to whom he pleases, and I
know that he will this day give you Philistines into our hands. Goliath now
prepared himself for the Combat, and came and drew night to meet David, and
David accordingly hasted to meet him, and putting his hand into his Bag he took
thence a stone and slung it with extraordinary force, and smiting the
Philistine in his forehead, the stone sunk into his head, (God so guiding and
directing it) and he fell upon his face to the earth; then David ran to him,
and trampled upon him, and having no sword with him, he drew out the
Philistines sword out of its sheath, and slew him, and cut off his head
therewith. Thus David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a
stone, God using such contemptible means the more to manifest his own power and
glory. The Philistines seeing their Champion thus conquered, and being stricken
with a secret terror from the Lord, they immediately fled, and the army of the
Israelites with a great shout pursued after them, and did great execution upon
them, insomuch that the wounded of the Philistines fell and were scattered all
along in the way of Shaaraim (a City in the Tribe of Judah) even unto Gath and
Ekron. V. 54. David some years after (when he was constituted King, and had
taken Zion from the Jebusites, 2 Samuel 5.7.) brought the head of this Giant to
Jerusalem, and put his armor in the Tent which he there provided for the Ark
of God, 1 Chronicles. 15.1. But Goliath's Sword was laid up in the Tabernacle of the
Lord at Nob, 1 Samuel 21.9.
The Philistines being thus discomfited, the Israelites returned and spoiled
their Tents. Abner now brought David before Saul with the Head of the Giant in
his hands; Saul asked him whose Son he was? he told him, he was the Son of
Jesse the Bethlemite. Saul had now much discourse with him, and so many
excellent endowments of wisdom, courage, zeal for the glory of God, and faith
and confidence in his protection and assistance appearing in him (all which
showed him a person precious in the eyes of God) Jonathan's heart and
affections were in an extraordinary manner drawn forth toward him, so that his
soul was knit with the soul of David, and hereby God provided David a friend in
Readiness Court to plead for him, and to reveal Readiness plots and evil intendments
against him, and to be (by his true and real love) a comfort and support to him
in all his approaching troubles and distresses. And Jonathan and he made a
Covenant of entire friendship, and brotherly love. Saul also now resolved to
keep him in his Court, and that he should go no more home to his Father, and
made him a Captain over some of his Troops, and David behaved himself so wisely
that he was highly valued by all the people, and even by Readiness servants
themselves; Jonathan also to testify his true and great love to David, stripped
himself of his own robe and gave it to him, and gave him also his Sword and his
Bow, and his Military Girdle, so that he put him both into a Courtiers and
Soldiers Garb. These things being done, they now march from the Camp to Gibeah
where Saul dwelt. As they passed along, the women came forth out of all the
Towns by the way (as the custom It seems it was the custom in those times that
when God had given them any great victory over their enemies; the women were
wont with dances and songs of triumph to celebrate the praises of God. See
Exodus 15.20. Judge. 11.32. As women have usually the heaviest share in the
calamities of a Land that is overrun by an enemy, and that because they are
least able to resist, and are frequently taken for slaves, or ravished and
abused in a savage manner, so likewise they have the greatest cause to rejoice
when the enemy is vanquished; and hence it may be arose this custom of the
women's triumphing at every great victory.
was) with Instruments of Music, singing in Triumphing Songs, Saul has slain
his thousands, and David his ten thousands; they ascribe so much to David,
because by his killing Goliath he was (under God) the cause of routing the
whole army of the Philistines. And so solemn and glorious was this Triumph of
the Israelites, that this passage in the women's song came to be repoted and
known among the Philistines, as we may see Chapter 21.11. and Chapter 29.5. But this
thing greatly offended Saul, and he said they have ascribed to David ten
thousands, and to me but thousands, what can he have more but the Kingdom? From
thenceforth therefore he began to have an evil eye against David, and to
suspect that he was the man of whom Samuel had told him that he should be King
in his room, Chapter 13. v. 14.

1 Samuel Chapter 17. wh. Chapter and Chapter 18. from 1, to 10.

SECT. CLXX.
SAVL's jealousy of David, and his hatred against him does now every day more
and more appear, and it manifested it self in these Particulars following.

1. The evil spirit coming upon him, he prophesied Extra se rapitbatur and
spiritu malo incitus ita sermones actusque suos componebat ut boni Prophetae
solent acti a spiritu bono.
in the midst of the house, not as he had done before [ Chap. 10.10.] when
Samuel had newly anointed him, for then being inspired with Gods Spirit, and
endued with common graces he prophesied and praised God, together with the rest
of the Prophets; but now that Spirit being departed from him, and an evil
spirit being permitted by God to possess him, he fell into strange ecstasies and
raptures, and had such kind of motions and actions as the Prophets when
ravished out of themselves used to have, see 2 King. 9.11. and while David
played on his harp to compose his spirit, and allay his raging passions (as he*
had formerly done) Saul having a Javelin in his hand, cast it at him, intending
to kill him, and this he attempted two several times, but David nimbly avoided
the stroke, Chapter 18.10, 11.

2ly, Saul seeing how the Lord was with David, and preserved him from great
dangers, he feared he was the man whom God had chosen to be King in his room,
and therefore having failed in these violent attempts against him, he resolves
to try other ways to destroy him; therefore he made him one of his Colonels,
hoping he would at one time or other meet with his death in the Battle. And
David behaved himself wisely in all his ways, and the Lord was with him, and he
led forth his Soldiers bravely to Battle, and as bravely brought them off
again, and acted all his Military affairs with such prudence and wise conduct,
and was so prosperous in them that the people generally loved him, ver. 12, 13,
14, 15, 16.

3ly, Saul under pretense of performing that promise made to him of giving him
his daughter if he killed Goliath, he now offers him his eldest daughter Merab
in marriage, but with design to expose him thereby to the Sword of the
Philistines Incidit Saul in soveam, quam Davidi fecerat, nam ipse a Philistae
is postea occisus est.
. He tells him he shall have her, but then he expects he shall be valiant for
him, and not stick to expose himself to any dangers, and ready upon all
occasions to fight the Lords battles. Thus he hypocritically pretended zeal for
Gods glory, when he maliciously intended David's ruin. David humbly answers,
What is my parentage, education, or condition of life Ver. 18. est, Enallage
numeri, (...)?
, that I should think my self worthy to be husband to a Kings daughter? So far
was he from aspiring to this honor, though so justly due to him. But though
David sufficiently approved his valor in fighting the Lords battles, and
contrary to Readiness expectation escaped many dangers, and won much honor, yet
Saul perfidiously broke his promise with him, and at the very time when he
should have married his daughter he gave her to Adriel the Son of Barzillai the
Ephraimite, born at Meholah, see Judge. 7.22. David bears this great indignity
patiently, without expressing any unbeseeming resentment of it. But God to whom
vengeance belongs, would not suffer the malice and wickedness of Saul expressed
herein to go unpunished, for all the five Sons They were certainly Adriels Sons
by Merab, though they were brought up by Michal, of which see the note on 2 Samuel 21.
that Adriel had by this daughter of Saul were hanged up to satisfy the
Gibeonites for the cruelties which Saul had exercised upon them, as we may see
2 Samuel 21.8, 17, 18, 19.

4ly, David being thus treacherously defeated of Merab, Michal, Readiness youngest
daughter falls in love with him. This being made known to Saul, he seemed to
like it very well, hoping by that means to bring his purpose about of
destroying David. So pleasing to a malicious mind is the very hope of doing
mischief to a person whom he hates. Saul therefore resolves to give this
daughter to David to wife, that she might be a snare to him, and a means one
way or other to run him into danger, and he hoped that she being his daughter
would be brought to complot and join with him in effecting his ruin; but it
pleased the Lord to cross his design in this also, for he made Michal an
instrument of preserving him from the snare which her Father had laid for him,
Chap. 19.11, 12. But to proceed, Saul carrying on this treacherous design
against David in his mind, he tells him that though he failed him before, yet
now he would make him amends; he had but two daughters, and one of them he
resolved he should have, and if he became his Son-in-law by marrying either of
them, he supposed it would be no great wrong to him though he had not the
elder. David was not very forward to believe Saul in this proposal, nor greedy
to embrace this motion, having been before deceived by him. Saul perceiving
this, set his Courtiers to persuade him (as of themselves) that the King very
much delighted in him, and that all his servants loved and highly valued him,
and therefore why should he not readily accept of this honor that was offered
him to be the Kings Son-in-law? David answers them, Seems it to you a light
and small thing to be Son-in-law to a King? and do you think me worthy of it,
who am a poor man, and not able to give a Dowry In those days and long before
it was the custom to give Dow^ies to their wives, and not as now to receive
portions. See Genesis 34.12. Exodus 22.16. Deuteronomy. 22.29. and the Dowry was at the
woman's disposing, and if her husband died before her, served for her
maintenance, and education of her children if no other portion were left them.
fit for the Kings daughter; and possibly upon that account I was slighted
before when I should have had his other daughter. The Courtiers relate to Saul
what David had said, Saul bids them go to him again, and tell him that he
desired not any Dowry for his daughter, but only an hundred foreskins of the
Philistines, to take thereby some revenge on them, they being his and his
peoples enemies. This was that which Saul hypocritically pretended, whereas his
great design was to make David fall in the attempt, or else to provoke the
surviving Philistines to revenge themselves on him if he did effect it. And
observable it is that he requires their foreskins not their heads, the more to
enrage them against David; for he knew that the circumcising and cutting off
the foreskins of the slain Philistines would be looked upon by their surviving
brethren as a matter of the greatest scorn and disgrace that could be put upon
them. However David hearing on what terms he might be the Kings Son-in-law,
(namely if he brought him so many foreskins of the Philistines within such a
time, and finding the time was not yet expired) he accepts the terms, and
accordingly went out with his men, and slew of the Philistines two hundred, and
brought their foreskins and gave them in full tale to the King; and having thus
performed double to what was required of him, and within the time limited, Saul
had no color or pretense to deny him his daughter, and therefore forthwith
gave him Michal to wife. However Saul seeing and finding by continual
experience that God prospered David in all his ways, and blessed him in all his
concernments, he was the more afraid of him, apprehending that he was the man
whom God would set up in his stead, and upon that account he became his
implacable enemy. The Princes of the Philistines besides former provocations,
being now extremely enraged at the slaughter David had lately made among them
when he killed two hun-hundred of them, and especially at the dishonor he had
put upon their Nation, by cutting off their foreskins, and bringing them to
Saul, they with their forces invade the land of Israel, and David though a new
married man (and so by the Law, Deuteronomy. 24.5. exempted from going to war this
year) yet (it seems) readily went out and behaved himself more prudently and
valiantly in this expedition than any of Readiness Commanders, so that his name
became very precious and renowned among the Israelites, from v. 20, to the end.

5ly, Saul now seeing that none of his secret designs against David took
effect, but that he prospered in all his undertakings, and so gained more and
more reputation among his Courtiers and all the people, he now openly gives
command to Jonathan, and to his servants to kill him. Jonathan (who truly loved
and much delighted in David) gives him notice of his Fathers bloody purpose
toward him, and advises him to look to himself that night following, and to
hide himself in some Cave or secret place of the field where Saul was wont to
walk and take the air, and thither he himself would accompany him, and would
speak to him in his behalf, and what he saw to be his temper and inclination
toward him, he would discover to him. Jonathan accordingly waited upon his
Father into the field, and there spoke good of David to him; and though he knew
he was sometimes troubled with frantic fits, and might in a rage do him a
mischief for it, yet he resolves to hazard that, rather than desert his friend
in a righteous cause. It Is true, whilst David was esteemed a favorite with
Saul, all his Courtiers carried it fair toward him [ Chapter 18.5.] and faun'd
upon him, but now when Saul had openly discovered his ill will to him, not a
man among them would open his mouth for him, or do any thing to prevent the
danger he was in; however Jonathan that truly loved him, resolved to speak for
him, and therefore he said to his Father, Let not the King sin against his
servant, against David, for he has not sinned against thee, but his works and
deeds have been very good toward thee; for he put his life in his hand, and
slew the Philistine, and the Lord wrought a great Salvation for all Israel
thereby; thou saw it, and did rejoice therein. Wherefore then will thou
sin against God, and shed innocent blood, and slay David without a cause? How
high a degree of ingratitude and injustice will it be so ill to requite so
noble an exploit, which did at that time so exceedingly affect thee? Saul was
so melted with these words of Jonathan, that he solemnly swear to him at that
time that David should not die; but great and frequent swearers do often forget
what they have sworn, and do not stick to forswear themselves, and break their
Oaths, as we shall see Saul soon did. However Jonathan not knowing what was in
his heart, calls David and acquaints him with what his Father had said and
promised, and so he brought him again to the Court, and he was in the presence
of Saul as in time past. During his continuing there, the Philistines again
made an inroad into the Land, and David went out and fought against them with
great courage, and slew them with a great slaughter, and the rest of them fled
to their own Country, Chapter 19. from 1, to 9.

6ly, The evil spirit being again upon Saul, and he having a Javelin in his
hand, as David played upon his harp before him, in a frantic fit he ran his
Javelin so violently at him as if he intended to have pinned him to the wall,
but David nimbly avoiding the stroke, the Javelin ran into the wall. And this
was the third time that Saul had sought to kill him with his own hand. David
therefore thought it now high time to shift for himself, and so he left the
Court, and went to his own house. From v. 9, to 11.

7ly, Saul then sent messengers to David's house to lie in wait about the house
in the night, and to slay him in the morning when he came out. Michal either
casually discovering Readiness servants watching about the house, and guessing at
their errand, or else having some secret intelligence from Court of Readiness
design against her husband, she acquaints David with it, that he might look to
himself, and then to prevent his present danger she let him down thorough a
window See Act. 9.25.
, and so he fled and escaped. And further to delude the watchmen, (if by
violence they should break into the house) and to gain longer time for David to
escape, she laid an Image Humanam quidem non Idololatricam qualis illa, Genesis
31.19.
in a bed, and put a pillow of Goats-hair under the head of it, and covered it
with a cloth, thereby intending to make them believe that David was sick in
bed, and therefore in all humanity at present not to be disturbed. When the
messengers whom Saul had sent to watch about the house had waited till morning,
and saw he came not forth as they expected, they went and told Saul of it, who
sent them back again with a new commission to enter his house and take him.
Michal thinking sickness a fair pretense to keep them from too eager pressing
upon him, that she might gain the more time for his escape, told them he was
sick in bed; they thinking it had been so, returned and acquainted Saul
therewith. Saul suspecting it was but a pretense of Michal's to preserve her
husband, sends them back again to see whither it was so or no; however if he
were sick he charges them to bring him with them, though they brought him in
his bed. They coming again to the house, and going up to lay hold on him,
behold there was no David but only an Image in the bed. They then carry Michal
before Saul, who angerly asks her why she had deceived him, and sent away his
enemy? she answers, He threatened to kill her if she would not let him go. Here
by the way we may observe that though her entire love to her husband be highly
to be commended, yet her telling lies to preserve him cannot be excused, and
further we may take notice, that if people once allow themselves in lying, it
will increase upon them, and one lie will draw on another, and a lesser will
draw on a greater and. louder, as we see here in this example of Michal, who
first told an officious lie (as they call it) to save her husband, and now
tells a pernicious lie to save her self; she should rather have imitated her
brave brother Jonathans example, who spoke boldly to his father in defense of
her husbands innocence. From 11, to 18. David was so affected with this
deliverance that he composed the 59 Psalm upon this occasion of Readiness sending
to his house to kill him, as may appear by the Title.

8ly, David thus escaping fled to Ramah to acquaint Samuel with all that had
passed, and with what Saul had done unto him, and to crave his advice and
counsel in these dangers and difficulties. Hereupon he and Samuel went down to
Naioth near Ramah, where was a College of Prophets, but some body or other
quickly informed Saul that David was come thither, and he presently sent
messengers to take him there; when the messengers came thither and found the
Prophets prophesying, that is, praising God with Psalms and Hymns, and speaking
of Divine matters, and Samuel among them sitting as President over them, and
governing this holy assembly, the Spirit of the Lord fell upon them, and they
(instead of apprehending David which was the business they were sent about)
prophesied also. Saul hearing of this, sent other messengers upon the same
errand a second and a third time, and they prophesied The like example we have
in the Highpriests Officers who were sent to apprehend Christ, Joh. 7.45, 46.
also, that is praised God with Psalms and Hymns, and magnified his name as the
other before had done. Saul might by this miracle have been convinced of his
sin and folly in pursuing after David when he saw him thus miraculously
preserved and protected by God; but being thus disappointed by his messengers,
and his heart being hardened, he resolves to go thither himself, and to fetch
David thence even out of his Sanctuary; but it fell out quite contrary to his
expectation, for whereas his messengers did not prophecy till they came into
the company of the Prophets at Naioth, the Spirit of the Lord now falling upon
him he prophesied Donum Prophetandi aliquando Impiis concedit Deus ut Balaamo,
vide Mat. 7.22.
before he came thither, even in the way, and was changed from a Persecutor
into a Prophet, which plainly shows that the hearts of Kings are in the hand of
the Lord, Prove. 21.1. He comes at last to Naioth, where he, Samuel and David
being all met together, he prophesied for a while before them, praising God
with Psalms and Hymns, and then throwing aside his Princely robe (or military
habit) and falling down on the ground he lay in a trance or ecstasy all that
day, and the night following, see Numb. 24.4. And thus was Saul in the midst of
all his fury cast down See a like case in one of his name and Tribe, Act. 9.
, and as it were bound by the Almighty power of God, and exposed to shame and
contempt among all that saw him thus disrobed, thus manacled and restrained;
insomuch that some of them said, What is Saul (that has showed himself so
great an enemy to David) now among the Prophets, and come hither to act as one
of them? This was mercifully ordered for David, who hereby had liberty to
escape for his life.

1 Samuel Chapter 19. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLXXI.
DAvid taking the opportunity of Readiness ecstasy, (wherein he continued a day
and a night) he fled from Naioth to Gibeah where Jonathan was, and heavily
complaining to him that his father should still persecute him, he said, What
have I done? what is mine iniquity? what is my sin against thy father that he
so earnestly seeks my life? Jonathan replies, Chap. 19.6.
God forbid it should be so; my father has sworn to me that thou shall not
die; and moreover he does not use to do any thing of moment without acquainting
me with it, and I know nothing of any such purpose he has, and therefore I
believe thou art more afraid than thou need to be. It seems Jonathan had not
heard of Readiness sending his messengers to take David at his own house, nor of
his pursuing him to Naioth David seeing him so difficult to believe that he was
in such danger, he solemnly protested and swore to him, as true as the Lord
lives, it was so; and as sure as he himself was alive there was but a step
between him and death. And as for his Fathers not acquainting him with it, that
was no argument against it, for it is like he would not let him know of it, that
it might not grieve him, and that he might not use means to prevent it.
Jonathan then said, seeing the case is so, I will do any thing for thee thou
can reasonably desire of me. David therefore propounds a way to him how he
might discover his fathers affection toward him. It seems the Feast of the
New Mood was to be celebrated on the morrow, in which they offered
Peace Offerings, and Gratulatory Sacrifices, sounding Trumpets over their
Offerings, [see Numb. 10.10. and 28.11. and Psalm. 81.3.] and on the remainder
of these Oblations they feasted together. And though the Feast lasted only one
day, viz. the first day of the month, yet there being provisions in an ample
and plentiful manner provided, they were allowed to eat what remained the next
day, if the Sacrifice which was offered was a vow or voluntary offering, see
Levit. 7.16. This Feast was to be kept at Readiness Court the next day; the chief
men of his Court being to sit with him at Table, and every one having his known
seat, which was so peculiar to him, that if it were empty no other sat in it.
Now David being a great Commander in the Army, and the Kings Son-in-law, had
among others his seat, and did use at this Festival to sit with the King at
Table. David therefore tells Jonathan that he intended to absent himself from
this feast; and not to be at it either the first or second day, but on the
third day he would come and hide himself in the fields that he might be
informed how things went. He desires Jonathan diligently to observe how the
King took his absence. If he missed him and took notice of his absence, he
desires Jonathan to tell him that he asked leave of him that he might go and
keep this New-Moon-Feast with his kindred at Bethlem, for their family for some
signal mercy received from God, did annually set apart that day to commemorate
it. And (says he) if thy father accept my excuse and be not displeased at my
absence, then we may conclude all is well* but if he be angry at it, then it it
a manifest sign that he has determined evil agai^^t me, and is vexed at my
absence, because it did cross his purpose of doing me a mischief. I pray thee
therefore deal kindly with thy servant, for thou have brought me into a
Covenant of friendship with thee, which we made in the presence of the Lord,
and with invocation of him to be a witness and judge between us, to reward the
faithful and to punish the transgressour. And as for me, if thou have hitherto
found any iniquity in me, slay me thy self, for why should thou expose me to
thy fathers fury? Jonathan replied, Far be it from thee that thou should die
either by my hand, or my fathers. If I knew of any evil determined against thee
by my father, assure thy self, I would not conceal it from thee. Then David
said, seeing thou can hardly come to me thy self without suspicion, nor can
safely entrust any servant with such a secret, how shall I know whither thy
Father were enraged at my absence or no? Jonathan desires him to go out with
him into the field that they might discourse of these things more privately;
there he tells him that when he had sounded his Father, and discovered his mind
and purpose concerning him, he would faithfully reveal it to him whether it
were good or bad; if I do not (says he) then let the Lord God of Israel inflict
deserved punishments on me as a false and faithless friend. And as for my part
being well assured that the Lord has made choice of thee to succeed my Father,
I do heartily pray that the Lord would advance thee to the Kingdom as he did my
Father, and would make thee victorious over thine enemies as my Father has
been. And when God shall have made thee King after my Father, thou shall not
cut me off (as a jealous King would do) being the next heir, but shall manifest
that great kindness toward me which by Covenant (made in the Lords presence)
thou have bound thy self to show me. And because this Covenant made between us
extends not only to our own persons but to our posterity also, thou shall not
take off thy loving kindness from my house for ever, [see 2 Samuel 21.7.] no not
then when the Lord has cut off all the enemies of David from the face of the
earth. So Jonathan renewed and ratified the Covenant that was before made
between them, and he said, let the Lord require it at the hands of David's
enemies, and consequently of me if I keep not Covenant with David, but prove
his enemy. And as Jonathan renewed and confirmed his Covenant by a solemn oath
with David and his house, so he required David to do the like with him and his
posterity (being very desirous to make a sure and firm league with him whom he
so dearly loved) and at his motion David willingly did it, as appears ver.
42. Jonathan further said to David, to morrow I suppose thou will be missed at
the New-Moon-Feast, because thy seat will be empty; when therefore thou have
stayed three days at Bethlem, or at some other private place, come down quickly
to the place where thou did formerly hide thy self when I first gave thee
notice of my Fathers resolution to kill thee, [ Chapter 19.2.] and remain by the
stone Ezel, viz. the stone that directs Travelers in the way they should go;
and this shall be a token between me and thee, whereby I will show thee what
thou should do: If I cannot come with convenience to speak with thee my self,
I will shoot three Arrows on the side of that stone as though I shot at a mark,
and I will send a lad to find out the Arrows, and if I call to him and say, the
Arrows are on this side of thee, take them up, then come thou away, for there
is peace to thee and no hurt: But if I say to the lad, Behold the Arrows are
beyond thee, then go thy way, for the Lord by this sign (given thee by me)
commands thee to be gone, and to shift for thy self. And as touching the
Covenant which we have mutually made and confirmed by Oath, the Lord be a
witness between us, and a just avenger of either, if either of us transgress,
that so it may stand firm and inviolable for ever. The New Mood being now come,
the King sat down to eat in his Chair of State by the wall, and Jonathan sat
down by him, and Abner coming after to sit down, Jonathan arose to give him
honor and respect being the Kings Cousin and General of the Army, and David's
place was empty; but Saul said nothing of it that day, but supposed he absented
himself by reason of some legal pollution that had befallen him, which rendered
him unfit to come, and forbad him coming under the penalty of being quite cut
off from the people, Levit. 7.20, 21. On the next day Saul seeing David's place
empty again, he asked Jonathan why the Son of Jesse (by which diminishing title
he intimated his displeasure and indignation against him) was absent both those
days? Jonathan answered, he earnestly desired leave of him to go to Bethlem,
telling him that their family had a Sacrifice to offer in that city, and his
brother (having commission from his Father so to do) had commanded him to be
there, that he might on that occasion meet his Brethren, and on that account he
was absent. Saul hearing this, his anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he
told him he was right his mothers Whether Jonathans mother had deserved this
censure we need not enquire; for this is the property of wrathful persons to
speak any evil whether right or wrong of the person against whom their spirit
is stirred.
son, for she had been perverse and rebellious against him, and so was he. He
tells him he had chosen the Son of Jesse to be his friend and favorite to his
own ruin and confusion, and to the confusion of his mothers offspring that
sprang from her womb. For (says he) thou may assure thy self that as long as
the Son of Jesse lives thou shall never attain the Crown and Kingdom, which by
right of inheritance belongs to thee. Therefore I charge thee to send for him,
for he shall surely die. Jonathan humbly replied, O my Father, what has he
done? what is his crime, that he must die? Saul hearing him speak thus, in a
rage cast a Javelin at him to kill him, but he nimbly escaped the stroke, and
so plainly saw what was his fathers desperate resolution against David. And
thus Saul by his own rage and fury frustrated his own design; had he dissembled
his anger, he might easily have got David into his hands, but by thus openly
discovering it, he taught him to shift for himself. Jonathan seeing how things
went, rose from the Table in a great discontent, and would not eat any thing on
the second day of the Feast, for he was heartily grieved for David, because his
fathers anger was so implacable against him, and because he had in that furious
manner disgraced him in that public assembly, as though he had been a Traitor
and Rebel. On the third day in the morning (which was the day before appointed
between David and him) Jonathan went out into the field and a little lad with
him; he bad the lad run before and find out the Arrows he should shoot; as the
lad ran he shot an Arrow beyond him, and when he was come to the place,
Jonathan cried out to him that the Arrow was beyond him, and bad him make have
and bring him that and the other Arrows that he had since shot. Jonathan and
David agreed upon this secret way of giving intelligence concerning Readiness
mind, because they thought that some body possibly might be present in the
field where David was to hide himself, and they could hardly hope for an
opportunity to meet and consult together without being observed* But Jonathan
(as it seems) now perceiving the coast to be clear, he immediately sent away
the lad with the quiver, bow and arrows, and then David rose out of the place
where he had hid himself, and bowed himself three times with his face to the
ground before Jonathan, and they kissed each other and wept over one another
until David exceeded, whose condition at this time in the eye of reason was
most deplorable, for now he saw he was to be separated not only from his dear
friend Jonathan, but from his wife and family, and from prosecuting the wars
against the enemies of God, in which he had so often been successful, and which
was worst of all he saw he was now like to be banished from the House of God,
and all his public Ordinances in which his soul so much delighted; and this
also aggravated his misery, he knew not well whither to flee and betake
himself. Into these great straights God was pleased to bring him for the
exercise of his faith and patience, and to teach him to flee unto him by
fervent prayer as his only rook and refuge. Jonathan and he having discoursed
some time together, at length Jonathan embracing him, wished him all happiness,
and desired him to be mindful of the Covenant they had both of them sworn in
the name of the Lord, calling upon him to be a witness and a judge between
them, and their seed after them, and to punish those of them that did not
inviolably keep that Covenant. So they parted.

1 Samuel Chapter 20. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLXXII.
DAvid now perceiving how implacable Readiness anger was against him, he concludes
he must shift for himself, and stand upon his Guard; and accordingly taking
some few faithful servants along with him See v. 2. and Mat. 12.3, 4.
, and some few others that voluntarily joined themselves to him.

1. He first flies to Nob a City in the Tribe of Benjamin, near to Anathoth,
about twelve miles from Gibeah, whither it seems the Tabernacle was now removed
from Shiloh (though the Ark still remained at Kirjath-jearim, see Chap. 7.1.)
and possibly Saul caused it to be removed hither for his own convenience, that
he might with more speed and ease upon all occasions resort to it. And hence it
was that there were so many Priests now dwelling here, namely that they might
attend upon the service of the Tabernacle. David being resolved to fly for his
safety out of the land, came hither first, not only to get some supply of his
present want, but also to visit the Tabernacle, that he might there worship the
Lord before his departure, and seek unto him for help and comfort in this his
day of adversity. Leaving therefore his small company in some place nigh, he
went himself to Ahimelech the High Priest at Nob, It seems Ahiah his brother
being dead he was High Priest in his room.
(who it seems was also called Abiather, see Mark 2.26.) and had a Son also of
that name, as we may see Chapter 22.20. Ahimelech was much troubled when he saw
David come to him alone, fearing that he was fled from Saul upon some
displeasure, and if so, it would be dangerous for him to entertain him. He asks
him therefore how it came to pass that he was alone? David replies that the
King had sent him about a secret business, and enjoined him to let no body know
of it, and so he had appointed his servants to stay for him in a place nigh at
hand.

This was indeed a direct lie, and proved afterward the occasion of that
horrible Massacre which Saul made of Ahimelech, and the rest of the Priests of
that City, even eighty five persons that wore a linen Ephod, yea of the utter
destruction of the City, and the inhabitants thereof, both men and women, and
children, yea even of the very beasts as we read, Chapter 22.18, 19. Just cause had
David to bewail this pernicious lie of his as long as he lived, and so no doubt
he did; for he charges it upon himself when Abiathar the Son of Ahimelech
brought him the sad tidings thereof, Chapter 22.22. I have occasioned (says he) the
death of all the persons of thy Fathers house. And it is supposed that the
remorse for this very sin was fresh in his heart when he wrote that passage in
the 119. Psalm. v. 28, 29. My soul melts away for heaviness, strengthen thou
me according to thy word. Remove from me the way of lying, etc. David now
desires Ahimelech to furnish him with some bread and provisions for himself and
his servants that were at hand, they being in great want of food; Ahimelech
tells him he had no bread there at the Tabernacle, but the shewbread David's
have was such thorough the apprehension of danger, that he must presently be
gone, therefore he could not stay for other bread.
, which was not to be eaten by any but the Priests, [see Levit. 24.9.] much
less by any that were unclean. Yet considering that charity is to be preferred
before all ceremonies, and that in case of necessity the Ceremonial Law was to
give way to the Moral, he condescends in this exigence to relieve them with the
shewbread, (and what he did therein is approved by our Savior, Mat. 12.3, 4.)
provided the young men had kept themselves from their wives Hic sacerdos ni nis
videtur scrupulosus, Quid enim si David fuisset immundus? Ideone voluit illum
fame mori?
, which (it seems) the Priests, (that were to eat the shewbread) thought
themselves bound to do by a laudable custom grounded on Exodus 19.15. though not
expressly by the Law commanded. And it seems the High Priest thought that if the
young men had not thus abstained, they would be under a double impediment;
David tells him 'twas three days since they came out, and all that time they
had been absent from their wives, therefore the bodies of the young men were
clean, and on this account not unfit to eat of this bread. Besides (says he)
the shewbread is in this case of necessity to us but as common bread, (so as
we may lawfully eat of it) especially seeing it is this day Hereby it appears
that it was the Sabbath Day on which David came to Nob, whereon new shewbread
was put in the place of the old.
removed from standing upon the Table before the Lord, and there is other bread
consecrated according to the Law, and set hot in the room of it; upon these
considerations the High Priest gave him the shewbread. But it so happened that
there was one of the servants of Saul there that day, by name Doeg, the
chiefest of Readiness herdsmen, by Nation an Edomite, but by profession a
Proselyte to the Religion of the Israelites, yet a notorious wicked man, and a
great enemy to David; it seems he was detained there before the Lord, that is,
in the Court of the Tabernacle, to pay some Vow he had made, or to offer some
Sacrifice he was engaged to offer. This man diligently observed David and his
actions, that he might relate them to Saul; David asked Ahimelech whether he had
not there a Sword or Spear that he could lend him; for (he told him) he had not
brought his Sword or his weapons with him, because the Kings business required
have. Thus one lie making a breach in the Conscience, another quickly follows
it, and finds an easy passage thorough it. The High Priest told him there was
no Sword there but Goliaths The rest of Goliath's armor David had disposed of
elsewhere, see Chapter 17.54. but his sword was brought to the Tabernacle there to
be reserved as a memorial of that victory to the praise of God.
, which was wrapped in a cloth, and kept behind that holy place where the Sacred
Vestments and Ornaments were laid up, of which the Ephod was the chiefest, see
Exodus 28.4, 6. if he pleased he might have that. David answered, There is none
like to that, give it me; for as often as I look upon it, it will put me in mind
of Gods wonderful assistance vouchsafed to me in conquering Goliath, and will
strengthen my faith and affiance in him, that he will help me in the like
difficulties and dangers. Chapter 21. from 1, to 10.

2ly, Having gotten Goliath's sword, he now flies into the Country of Achish
King of Gath, called also Abimeleck, which was the common name of the Kings of
the Philistines; here he hoped to have sojourned (at least for a time) secretly
and undiscovered. It seems he had more hope of safety there than in his own
Country at present. The servants of Achish after some time discover who he was,
and apprehend him. Possibly Goliath's sword might be some means of discovering
of him; and so God justly made use of this sword which he got of the
High Priest by lying, as a means to bring him into danger. The servants of
Achish bringing him before their King, said unto him, Is not this David the
King of the land? that is, a famous warrior, and chief Commander among the
Israelites, and as it were another King in the esteem of the people: or is not
this David who is designed (as we hear) to be King in the land? For possibly
the report that David should be King, and that Saul persecuted him on that
account, was so rife and common in Israel, that it spread it self even to the
land of the Philistines. Further they say, Is not this he of whom the women
sang in their triumphant dances, Chapter 18.7. Saul has slain his thousands, but
David his ten thousands. David was much surpised to hear these words spoken of
himself by the servants of Achish before their King, and seeing himself in
their hands, and not knowing which way to help himself, he resolved to behave
himself before them as if he had been distracted. And indeed they might well
think that he that had done so much against them, would not now alone have come
among them if he had been in his right wits. And accordingly in his gesture,
words, and actions, he carried himself as if he had been mad, scrabling on the
doors, and letting his spittle fall on his beard Non illicita prorsus haec
simulatio, quippe expers mendaci^. Anonym: Stultitiam simulare in loco (inquit
ille) prudentia summa est. Potest Deus suos servare per sapientiam, immo per
insaniam, and per infirmitatem. Simulatio haec mendacium non erat, sed
silentium duntaxat, vel dissimulatio veritatis justa de causa. Nec illicita
erat hujusmodi fictio, cum fiat ad utilitatem suam sine alterius praejudicio.
, he thought possibly that mad men were usually objects of pity and compassion,
not of malice or revenge, and supposed that hereupon they would be the more
inclined to spare him, seeing he was not likely (being in this sad case) to do
them any further mischief. But though at present he made use of this stratagem,
yet he relied not upon it, but put his trust in God, and relied David salutem
suam non simulationi suae acceptam tulit, sed misericordiae Dei.
on him alone for help and deliverance, as appears by the two Psalms he
composed on this occasion, viz. the 34. and 56. And God by his alwise
Providence so ordered this thing that Achish thinking him absolutely mad,
slighted and asked them in some kind of anger, Why they had brought a mad man
before him? He told them, he had no need of mad men, neither desired they
should bring such persons into his house. In all probability (God at present so
infatuating him) he thought this man was not David, but some odd fellow they
had picked up in the way, and with that apprehension he dismissed him.

1 Samuel Chapter 21. whole Chapter.

3ly, David having thus got away from Achish, he fled to the Cave of Adullam (a
City in the Tribe of Judah, not far from Bethlem) which being an hold of some
strength, [see 2 Samuel 23.13.] and lying in his own Tribe among his kindred and
friends, he expected from them favor and protection; and accordingly hither
his Brethren, and those of his Fathers house resorted to him, possibly fearing
if they stayed at home, they should be persecuted and oppressed by Saul for his
sake. And such as were in distress, or in debt, or discontented, gathered
themselves unto him, and he became a Captain over them; so that number of his
followers now came to be about four hundred in all. But some will say did David
do well to entertain such as these? I answer, first, it is like he did not know
who of them were in debt. 2ly, He had no purpose to shelter them against any
that should demand justice against them. 3ly, He intended not to make use of
them against Saul, but only for his own defense. 4ly, His followers lived not
upon Plunder, and the spoil of the Country, but were rather a Guard to the
people, and preserved them from the incursions of their enemies, as Nabal's
servants witnessed for them, Chapter 25.15, 16. It Is true they were many of them
men that were in a poor and afflicted condition, and thinking themselves in no
safety at home, fled to David for protection. 5ly, It Is probable that by this
time it came to be generally known, that Saul persecuted David, because he was
anointed of God by Samuel to succeed him in the Throne. And if this were the
ground of their coming to him how could he reject them? It Is likely indeed that
the mouths of his adversaries were opened against him upon this occasion. But
so long as his cause was just, and he did not undertake to defend his followers
in any evil, nor made use of them to oppress others, their reproaches were
unjust and not to be regarded. Here probably he composed the 142 Psalm, David
here composes the 142 Psalm.
the title being Maschil of David, a prayer when he was in the Cave.

4ly, David finding that his Parents by reason of their age were not able to
endure the hardship of being with him in the Cave, therefore he went to Mizpeh
of Moab to provide a place for them to abide in for a while, till he knew what
God would do with him. And here he judged that the King of Moab would favor
him in his request, out of hatred to Saul Et forsan prop^er cognationem Davidis
cum illa gente, per Ruth. vid. Ruth. 4.10.
who had made war upon him, see 1 Samuel 14.47. and so accordingly it fell out,
for he obtained the King of Moab's grant, that they should dwell in his
Country, and they lived together in the hold or Castle of Mizpeh, till the
Prophet Magnam pro Davide curam ostendit Deus eum nunc per Prophetas, nunc per
Urim, and Thummim instruens. Gr.
Gad David's Seer, 1 Chr. 21.9. with whom he used to consult. He was sent unto
him by God after he had numbered the people, 2 Samuel 24.11.
warned David from the Lord to go back again into the land of Judah, either
because the King of Moab and his people were treacherous, or because he
intended to bring David's faith to a further trial by Readiness persecutions: ver.
3, 4.

5ly, From hence he removes into the Forest of Hareth in the Tribe of Judah;
the news of his being here, is presently brought to Saul, he sitting under a
Tree in an high place in Gibeah, having his Spear in his hand, and his servants
standing round about him; whereupon he said, Hear now ye Benjamites, will the
Son of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you all
Captains of thousands, and Captains of hundreds, that all of you have conspired
against me, and none of you have showed me that my Son has made a league with
the Son of Jesse, and there is none of you that is sorry for me, or discovers
to me that my Son has stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait to
destroy me, as you see it is at this day. Then Doeg the Edomite (of whom
before) tells unto Saul the story of David's coming to Ahimelech at Nob, and
what passed between them, maliciously wresting all they did to the worst sense,
David composes the 52 Psalm on this occasion, as appears by the Title.
and concealing all that might any way excuse them; and this caused David to
charge him with lying and slandering, as well as with malice and mischief, and
to threaten against him utter ruin and destruction, Psalm. 52.3, 4, 5. which
Psalm was composed on this occasion. I saw (says Doeg) the Son of Jesse coming
to Ahimelech, and he inquired of the Lord for him, and gave him victuals, and
the Sword of Goliath the Philistine, but he spoke not a word of David's
pretense, wherewith Ahimelech was deceived. The King hereat was greatly
enraged, and sent for Ahimelech, and all his Fathers house, viz. the Priests
that dwelt at Nob, being the most of those that remained of Eli's house, whom
God threatened to cut off, Chap. 2.31. He asks him why he had conspired with
David against him, and had inquired of the Lord for him, and given him bread
and a sword? Ahimelech acknowledges the doing of the things Saul charges him
with, but utterly denies that they were done with any treacherous mind against
him, but rather therein to do him service; for he thought David had always
approved himself faithful to the King in all his undertakings, for which the
King had highly honored him, and made him his Son-in-law, and (as far as he
knew) he had been ever obedient to the Kings commands, going out readily on all
services, which he appointed him, though never so full of difficulty and
danger, and (as he understood) he was a person greatly honored in the Kings
family. And for his inquiring of the Lord for him, he says he had often done
that in former times when he was to go out on the Kings service, and to lead
out his forces against his enemies; and that which I have done (says he)
without blame at other times, I had no reason to think would be blamed now; but
to aid or assist one that intended and designed to rebel against my Lord and
Sovereign, was never in my heart, far be it from me; let not the King therefore
impute this as a fault to me, or to my fathers house, for of any conspiracy
against thee thy servants knew nothing at all, neither less nor more. We may
see by this Apology that this good man was loath to declare he had been deceived
by David, and drawn on to do all that he did by those untruths which he had
told him. He would not to excuse himself of a seeming fault accuse David of one
that was real, and thereby incense Saul the more against him. But Saul like a
bloody Tyrant shut his ears against Ahimelechs just defense, and told him that
not only himself, but all his Fathers house should die, though he had not so
much as any color of a crime to lay to their charge. And whereas by the Law
none were to die under two or three witnesses, he condemns so many upon the
bare and single and malicious testimony of one false and flattering Sycophant.
Neither does he take time further to examine the cause, or the reasons or
testimonies which might be produced in excuse of Ahimelech and the Priests, but
in a rage and fury from a rash sentence proceeds to a present execution without
any delay. And thus this wretched man that could out of a seeming pity and
mercy spare Agag (who was by God appointed to die) now sticks not to murder
and massacre a multitude of innocent persons. Accordingly he commanded his
guards that were about him to slay forthwith the Lords Priests. But the
servants of the King that attended upon him would not do it, choosing rather to
obey God (who had forbidden murder) than this wicked King. Then Saul commanded
Doeg that he should fall upon them. Doeg accordingly taking unto himself such
persons as were alike bloody-minded with himself, (and so fit for his purpose)
fell upon them, and slew on that day fourscore and five persons that wore a
linen Ephod. And thus that which the Lord had threatened against the house of
Eli, [Ch. 2.31, 32.] was in part fulfilled, for of that family these Priests
were. Then Doeg (having as it seems Readiness Commission for it) went to Nob and
there destroyed men, women and children, and sucklings, yea the very oxen,
asses and sheep that belonged to that City; so great an abhorrence and
detestation did he manifest against all that seemed favorers of David. Upon
the occasion of destroying of this City at this time, the Tabernacle was
removed from hence to Gibeon, where it continued to the days of Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 1.3.

1 Samuel Chapter 22. from v. 5. to 20.

6ly, Keilah a City in the Tribe of Judah being now on a sudden besieged by the
Philistines their neighbors, and David lying with his forces not far from them
in the forest of Hareth, and so in a capacity to afford them some speedier
succor than Saul could do, who was at a greater distance, it seems some of
them came to him to acquaint him with their present distress, namely that the
Philistines now besieged their City, and that they had robbed the threshing
floors of the Corn that was brought unto them, (they being without the City)
and therefore they humbly crave his speedy help. David was not willing rashly
to engage in such an enterprise, (especially with so little strength as he had
about him) without a special commission and promise from God, therefore he
inquired of the Lord (probably by the Prophet Gad who was come to him before as
we have seen Chapter 22.5.) what he should do? and the Lord encouraged him to go
against the Philistines, and to save and rescue Keilah. David's men when they
understood what enterprise he was about, mightily dissuaded him from it,
speaking to him after this manner, We are afraid here in the land of Judah,
even among our friends and acquaintance lest we should be surprised by Saul and
his Troops, how much more dangerous must it needs be then for us (being but a
few) to go against such a potent enemy as the Philistines, and that in the
borders of their own land? David to satisfy his followers, inquired again of
the Lord, and God bad him go, for he would deliver the Philistines into his
hands. So David and his men went to Keilah and smote the Philistines with a
great slaughter, and brought away their cattle, either such as they had brought
out of their own Country for the provision of their armies, or such as they had
brought with them to carry the spoils of the Israelites home with them. While
David and his forces were here about Keilah, Abiathar the Son of Ahimelech, who
only escaped of the Priests at Nob (being now High Priest in his Fathers room)
came to David; and brought the Ephod with him, which was a visible pledge that
God had forsaken Saul, and would be with David to direct him in all his ways.
So that David has now the High Priest and a Prophet in his army. Abiathar
relates to him the sad story of Readiness destroying Nob and the Priests that were
there. David replies, I feared when I was at Nob that Doeg would acquaint Saul
therewith. Alas I must needs say (to my great grief and sorrow) that I have
been the occasion (though not intentionally) of the death of thy Fathers
family, seeing they suffered these calamities not only for my sake, but partly
through my fault. However abide thou under my protection, and I shall take care
of thee that I may as much as lies in me make thee some amends. Thou may
assure thy self that I will be as careful of thy safety as of my own; for I
know that he that seeks my life seeks thine also.

1 Samuel Chapter 23. from 1, to 7. Chapter 22. from v. 20, to the end.

7ly, Saul now understanding that David with his forces had got into the City
of Keilah (which he had lately rescued from the Philistines), he said, God
Hypocritae semper praedicare solent Deum a se stare, and sibi esse propitium.
has delivered him into my hands, for he is shut in, being entered into a Town
that has gates and bars. He thought (it seems) he had him in such a trap that
he could not escape. Saul immediately therefore gathers a great army together
to go down to Keilah to besiege David and his men. David by secret intelligence
understood that Saul was contriving mischief against him, therefore he called
to Abiathar the High Priest to bring the Ephod, and to put it on and to inquire
of the Lord for him by Vrim and Thummim; and David joining his request to the
Lord, said, O Lord God of Israel, thy servant has certainly heard that Saul
intends to come to Keilah to destroy the City for my sake, I pray thee inform
me by thine holy Oracle, whither he will come or no, and in case he do come,
whither the men of Keilah will be treacherous to me, and endeavor to deliver
me into his hands? The Lord who by his Prescience Deus ^erto praescit non solum
quae re ipsa and absolu^e futura sunt s^d etiam quae quavis condition posita
futura essent. A Lap.
knows future contingents which will come to pass in a course of natural
causes, if not prevented or crossed by other contingents; he tells him that
Saul would come thither, that is, if he, viz. David staid there, and the men of
Keilah would deliver him into Readiness hands, that is, if their intention and
purpose were not prevented and crossed by his speedy departure from them. David
having received this answer, he with his men (which were now about six hundred
Semper in cruce crescit numerus pionum quod ex omnibus sacris Historiis, facile
possumus intelligere. P. Martyr.
) arose and departed out of Keilah, and went whither soever they could go, and
sought up and down for some place to shelter themselves in; and Saul hearing
they were gone from Keilah, forbear to go with his army thither.

1 Samuel Chapter 23. from v. 7, to 14.

8ly, David intending only to stand on his own defense, and not to raise an
offensive war, betakes himself with his forces to the strong holds in the
Wilderness of Ziph, in the Tribe of Judah, and particularly to Hachilah-Hill
South of Jessimon. And Saul continually sought his life, but the Lord delivered
him not into his hands. Jonathan having (as it is probable) secret intelligence
from David where he was, he went privately to him, and strengthened his hands
in God, by putting him in mind of the promises of God, and assuring him of his
protection and favor, and thereby strengthening his faith, he filled his heart
with comfort and courage. He bad him be of good courage, for the hand of Saul
his Father should not find him to do him any hurt: Thou shall (says he) be King
over Israel, and that my Father knows very well from the words of Samuel, Chapter
15.28. [see also Chapter 20.30, 31.] and I shall be next unto thee. Of this (it
seems) he conceived some hope grounded on David's great love to him, and
possibly on some particular promise he had made to him, and the firm Covenant
that was between them, though he had no assurance of it, God having made no
such promise to him, but intending otherwise to dispose of him, and to take him
to a better Kingdom, so that he lived not to see David sit on Israel's Throne.
Jonathan having spoken after this manner to David, they renewed and confirmed
their Covenant in the presence of the Lord, which they had formerly made, and
Jonathan went to his own house, David abiding still in the Wood. The Ziphites
being terrified possibly with that severity Saul had used against Nob, and the
Priests of the Lord there, [ Chapter 22.18, 19.] they come now and acquaint him
that David did hide himself in the Wood near them, and if he would please to
come down with his forces thither, they would do their utmost to deliver him
into his hands. Saul took their message very kindly: Blessed be ye (says he) of
the Lord, for ye have compassion on me: Go therefore and prepare or order the
matter with care and diligence before hand, and observe all his haunts, and
lurking places that we may not miss of him. For I understand he is very
cunning and subtle in his proceedings, when you have found out these things
come to me again with certain intelligence of them, and I will go along with
you and will find him out if he be above ground, though he lurks in the most
secret corner of the land. So these Ziphites went before to do as Saul had
enjoined them. But David understanding that they had discovered him to Saul
Upon this occasion he composed the 54 Psalm, as the Title does show.
, and that Saul was coming with an army to take him, he removed with his forces
from that place which was near Hachilah-Hill to a Plain in the Wilderness of
Maon, which lay Southward from Jeshimon. Saul pursues after him thither, and at
last there was only a hill between them, and that not likely to keep them long
asunder, seeing Readiness men being many in number began to compass David and his
men round about. David was here in great fear of being surprised, and therefore
made all the have he could to get further out of Readiness reach. Just in this
nick of time (God so ordering it by his Providence) news came to Saul that the
Philistines had invaded the land, which caused him speedily to draw off his
forces to resist the common enemy. Hereupon David called the place
Sela-Hammahlekoth, that is, the Rock of Divisions.

1 Samuel Chapter 23. from 14, to 29.

9ly, Hence David flies to the strong holds in the Wilderness Here it is thought
he penned the 57 Psalm.
adjoining to Engedi A place exceeding fruitful, with Vines and other
fruit trees, Cant. 1.14.
, a City of Judah; Saul returning with his forces from pursuing the
Philistines, it was told him whither David was fled, and he took 3000 chosen
men out of Israel and went to pursue David and his men upon those high steep
and cragy rocks upon which wild beasts used to live; and he came to the
sheep-coats, where was a Cave, and Saul Nisi somnum Saul captasset motus in
spelunca sensisset militares. Some Caves in that and other Countries are of
that vast wideness that they are sufficient to contain great numbers of men.
being weary went into the entrance of it, which was narrow, to cover his feet,
that is, to sleep. [See note in Judge. 3.24.] But though the entrance of the
Cave was narrow, yet it seems it was room^by within, for David and several of
his men had hid themselves in the sides and innermost parts of it. David's men
perceiving that Saul was come into the entrance or mouth of the Cave, and that
there he had laid himself down to sleep, they tell him that God had now put
such an opportunity into his hands of cutting off his enemy (that thirsted
after his blood) as if he had from heaven called unto him, and commanded V. 4.
dicit, h.e. dicere videtur quia praebet ansam.
him to do it. But David arising, went softly to Saul, and only cut off the
skirt of his Robe, that he might thereby make it evident to him that he could
as well have killed him if he had had a mind to it; and yet David's heart smote
him for this little that he had done, because it had an appearance of an injury
offered to the King. But it seems his men were almost ready to mutiny that he
would not kill Saul at this time, and so put an end to his and their tedious
troubles. Whereupon David mildly spoke unto them, saying, God forbid that I
should stretch forth my hand against my Master the Lords Anointed, I cannot, I
dare not do it. And with these words he stayed his Soldiers from offering
violence unto Saul. Saul awaking rose up and went on his way. David immediately
gets out of the Cave, and following him, cried after him, My Lord the King.
When Saul looked back, David bowed himself to the earth before him, and then
humbly addressing himself to him, said, Wherefore hearknest thou to men's words
that tell thee that David seeks thy hurt? Thou see that this day the Lord
delivered thee into my hands when thou wast in the Cave; some bad me kill thee,
but mine eye spared thee, and I told them I would not put forth my hand against
my Lord, seeing he is the anointed of the Lord. Moreover, my father see, yea
see the the skirt of thy robe in my hand, for in that I cut off only the skirt
of thy robe, and killed thee not when I might so easily have done it, thou
may assure thy self that there is no evil intention in my heart against thee,
neither have I transgressed against thee as those base Sycophants that are
about thee do suggest. And yet thou huntest my life to take it. The Lord judge
between me and thee, and in this my innocent cause (wherein I so unjustly
suffer) do me right against thee. But however, though it should not please him
to do it, yet I am resolved not to avenge my self on thee, neither shall my
hand be upon thee. The Proverb of the Ancients tells us, That wickedness
proceeds from the wicked; that is, wicked men will not stick to do any wicked
thing. But thou need not fear any such thing from me, seeing thou have found
the contrary by thine own experience. I am resolved to refer my cause to God,
and not to avenge my self in my own quarrel. Besides consider, I pray thee, who
it is that thou pursuest with so much eagerness and violence; even a weak and
contemptible man, and in comparison of thee no more to be esteemed than a flea
Valde Pathetica oration and Index summa Davidis modestiae, vid. Psalm. 131.
, or a dead dog Can^m mortuum and pulicem persequi dicitur de iis qui
tenuissimos homines magno conatu insectantur.
. Having therefore neither power nor will to do thee hurt, the Lord judge
between me and thee, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thy hands. David
having ended, Saul was so affected with what he had said, that he lift up his
voice and wept, and said, Is this thy voice my Son David? Thou art more
righteous than I, for thou have done me good, and I have rewarded thee with
evil. I am convinced that thou have dealt exceeding kindly with me. For when
the Lord had delivered me into thy hands thou did not take away my life. If a
man find his enemy, and have him at an advantage, will he let him go away
without doing him any hurt? This is not the common course of the world. The
Lord therefore reward thee for the great kindness thou have showed me this day.
And now I know assuredly that thou shall be King, [see Chapter 15.28. and 23.17.]
seeing God has endued thee with such heroic and Kingly virtues, and does so
eminently prosper thee in all thy undertakings. I know that the Kingdom of
Israel shall remain firm and established to thee and thy posterity after thee.
Swear now therefore to me that thou will not cut off my seed after I am gone,
(as other jealous Princes use to do) nor blot out my name by destroying my
posterity. And David swear unto him accordingly, having in effect bound himself
by Covenant and Oath before unto Jonathan to do the same that Saul here
required. But how can David be said to have observed this Oath, when as
afterward he delivered the five Sons of Merab Readiness daughter, and the two
Sons of Rizpah his Concubine to the Gibeonites to be hanged? see 2 Samuel 21. I
answer, David had a full intention to observe this Oath as far as lay in him,
as appears by his putting to death those that murdered Ishbosheth, though he
had risen against him, 2 Samuel 4. and by his preserving and cherishing
Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 9. But in the case before mentioned he was not left to his
own choice, but necessitated by a special command from God to deliver them into
the hands of the Gibeonites for their satisfaction, that Gods wrath being
appeased, the heavy judgment of famine under which they lay, might be removed
from the land, see 2 Samuel 21.6* 9. and therefore in this he brake not his Oath
Omnia pacta promissa, vota, jurejuranda ad hoc caput referenda sunt si Deus
velit. P. Martyr.
, seeing he did it in obedience to Gods express command, and by his special
commission and direction, which is enough to dispense with any Oath.

After this Enterview between Saul and David, Saul went home and David and his
men betook themselves to the strong hold near Engedi, (of which before) having
no confidence Hereupon he composed the 57 Psalm, and the 63.
in Readiness faithfulness, who had so often after reconciliation returned to his
malicious practices.

1 Samuel Chapter 23. v. 29. Chapter 24. whole Chapter.

Samuel now dies having lived as Judge twenty years, and eighteen years in the
reign of Saul, At this time Samuel dies.
unto which there are two years only wanting to make up those forty years
spoken of, Act. 13.21. which is likely to be the time between the death of
Samuel and Saul. After Samuel's death, very many of all sorts and conditions
assembled together to solemnize his Funeral, and bewail their loss of him, as
of a faithful Prophet who revealed unto them Gods will, as also their sin in
rejecting his Government, which by sad experience they had now found to be much
more easy and profitable to them than that of a King, and that it had been
much better for them to have lived under a Judge of Gods appointing, than a
King of their own chosing; and therefore now they sadly lamented Samuel's
death, and buried him at Ramah, in the ancient burying place of his family, 1 Samuel 25.1.

10ly, Samuel being dead, from whom David used to receive both counsel and
comfort, he now flees with his men from the holds of Engedi to the Wilderness
of Paran, that lay on the South-border of Judah toward Idumea, not far from
the desert of Maon. It seems there was a man who had his habitation in Maon
whose lands and inheritance lay about Carmel, a man of great Estate, who had
three thousand sheep, and a thousand goats; the man's name was Nabal, signifying
a fool, he was of a churlish nature, and ill conditioned, and wicked in all his
course and conversation, though descended of the wise and virtuous, and noble
family of Caleb; so true it is that grace is not intailed, nor goes by
inheritance, but is Gods free gift, which he bestows on whom he pleases, and
often denies to the children of virtuous and religious Parents. His wifes name
was Abigail (signifying the Fathers joy) a name well suiting her nature and
conditions, being a wise, virtuous and beautiful woman. David heard that Nabal
did on such a day shear his sheep, at which time it was the custom to make a
great feast for their servants and friends; hereupon he sent ten young men to
him, to salute him in his name, and to wish all peace (...) pax a perfectione
nomen habet, and omnigenam beatitudinem exprimit. Glass.
and happiness to him and his family, praying for a blessing from God upon all
that he had. They tell him they came from David, who understood he sheared his
sheep that day, and it being a good day, a time of mirth and feasting, and
plentiful provision, he sent them to desire the favor of some provisions from
him for himself and his Soldiers. They tell him they had not injured any of
his servants, nor plundered any of his Cattle (though it be usual with
Soldiers and men of war so to do) when they lay near them in Carmel; therefore
we pray thee (say they) give us that which thou have in readiness, and what
thou art willing to bestow upon us. After this manner spoke the young men to
him in the name of David, without being importunate, or insolent, or adding any
thing more than David had given them in charge. Nabal churlishly replied, Who
is David, and who is the Son of Jesse? Carrying it as if he had not heard of
David before, who was so famous for his virtues and good parts, for his victory
over Goliath, and others of Gods enemies, for his marriage with the Kings
daughter, and for the high honor and esteem he had been in with the Kings
servants, but being now in an afflicted and low condition, and out of favor
with the King, this rich churl in a way of contempt, asks who he was? And
further (says he) there be many servants now a days that break away from their
masters. Covertly hereby upbraiding David first for flying from the King his
master, and standing out in rebellion against him. And, 2ly, for giving
entertainment to fugitive servants that were run away from their own masters.
Further (he adds) shall I take my bread and my water, and my flesh that I have
killed for my shearers, and give it unto men whom I know not whence they be? So
these young men returned unto David and acquainted him with what Nabal had
said. David who at other times could with wonderful patience endure all the
injuries which Saul had done him, being now left to himself, and enraged with
this reproachful and contumelious answer of Nabal, he breaths forth nothing but
revenge; wherefore he bids his Soldiers gird on their Swords, as he girt on
his, and four hundred of his men following him, he resolved to destroy Nabal
and all his family. Surely (says he) I have to very good purpose, kept all that
this fellow has in the Wilderness, (so that nothing was missing of all that he
had) to be thus requited by him: Let the Lord so deal with the rest of my
enemies as I am resolved to deal with this wicked and ungrateful fellow, and
let me not prosper if I destroy not all that belong to him by the morning
light, not leaving him so much as a dog to piss against the wall. Thus David
being left to himself, discovered the inward corruption of his heart, and
plunged himself into grievous guilt; for this was a bloody and unlawful vow In
malejuratis fidem rescinde inquit. August.
; Nabals churlishness and covetousness (though great crimes in themselves) were
not yet to be punished with death, much less was his innocent family to be
slain for his offense. However David with this bloody purpose marches with his
men toward Nabal's house. In the mean time one of Nabal's servants fearing
that mischief would ensue upon his Masters churlish answer, and not daring to
intimate so much to him by reason of his froward and perverse disposition, he
addresseth himself to his Mistress, and acquaints her that David had sent
messengers to salute their master, but he instead of taking it kindly, had used
them with great contempt and reproach. But (says he) our master had little
reason so to do, for David's men were very kind to us when they quartered near
us, in the Wilderness; we were not hurt by them, neither missed we any thing of
all that belonged to us; they were a wall unto us both by day and night, and a
sure and strong guard to defend and protect us from receiving any hurt or
damage either from thieves, or wild beasts, I pray thee therefore consider what
is fit to be done in the case; for David is a man of courage and prowess, and
will never suffer such a gross abuse and injury offered to him to go
unchastised. For my part I am afraid he will revenge himself on our whole
family. I thought good to speak to thee of it, that thou may consider of some
way to prevent it. As for our Master, he is such a Son of Belial, of such an
harsh and churlish temper that a man knows not how to speak to him. Abigail
being greatly awakened by this representation of her servant, she speedily
(without acquainting Nabal therewith) provided and took two hundred loaves, and
two leather-sacks of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of
parched corn, and a hundred clusters of raisons, and two hundred cakes of figs,
and laid them on asses, and bad her servants go before with them, and she would
follow after; and riding upon her ass attended with her servants who had the
charge of the presents, on a sudden as she came under the hollow of the hill,
she met David and his men. Seeing David coming she lighted off her ass and
bowed her self to the ground, and fell at his feet, and said, Upon me Crimen,
initio, transfert ab odiosa persona in favorabilem.
, my Lord, upon me let the punishment of this great iniquity Iniquitas hic
peccati paenam significat.
, and transgression fall, which has so much provoked thee; yet I pray thee let
thy handmaid speak a few words in thy ears, which may possibly dispose thee to
forbear taking revenge upon us. Let not my Lord regard this man of Belial, this
Nabal. Nabal is his name, and indeed he answers his name, for folly is with
him; it will not be for thy honor to regard his words or actions; wise men do
not use to regard the words of fools. He is not worthy that thou should
trouble thy self about him, much less that thou should destroy me and my
whole family for his sake. She spoke not thus to disgrace her husband, (for his
folly was too notoriously known) but because she had no other excuse to make
for him to preserve him from ruin. As for me (she says). I saw not the young
men whom my Lord did send. Had I seen them or known of their coming, I should
have treated them more civilly. And now my Lord as sure as the Lord lives, and
as sure as thou thy self art alive, thou ought to believe that by my coming
to meet thee, and to pacify thy anger, the Lord does intend to hinder thee
from coming to shed blood, and from avenging thy self with thy own hand; and
seeing I trust the Lord will by his alwise Providence so overruled thy heart,
my earnest prayer is that God would make all thine enemies like Nabal; that is,
as weak and unable to hurt thee as Nabal is. And as for the present V. 27.
Benedictionem, id est, munus sive donum sive rem a benedictione Dei profectam.
that thy handmaid has here brought to my Lord, though it is so mean that it
is not worthy of thy acceptance, yet do not (I pray thee) disdain it, seeing it
may be of some use to thy servants that follow thee. And I beseech thee
vouchsafe to forgive the trespass of thy handmaid, seeing I take the blame of
all this miscarriage wholly upon my self. I do verily believe the Lord will
give thee the Kingdom, and that thy Kingdom will be lasting, and durable;
Stabile manebit regnum in familia tua.
and nothing better becomes a a King than clemency and mercy. And that which
enduces me to believe this is, because I see thou fightest the Lords battles,
and have often engaged thy self (having warrant from him) in a just defense of
his cause and people; and no self-revenge or cruelty has been found in thee
all thy days hitherto; therefore (I pray thee) do not stain thine honor now by
shedding innocent blood. Indeed Saul is risen up unjustly to pursue thee, and
seek thy life, but all his attempts will be in vain, for the Lord will
carefully preserve, and charily keep thy life as men are wont carefully to bind
up those things in bundles which they much value and intend to preserve. And
that man's rage must needs be vain who seeks to destroy him whom the Lord will
preserve and protect. But as for the lives of thine enemies, them will he by a
violent death sling out, as men use to sling out stones out of their slings,
which they value not. And it shall come to pass when the Lord shall have
performed all his promises which he has made unto thee, and has settled thee
in thy Kingdom, and made thee Ruler over all Israel, then it will be a comfort
to thee to remember that thou did spare us; and thou will not be tormented
with anguish and trouble of conscience that thou did shed innocent blood, as
certainly thou will be if thou should proceed to execute thy bloody purpose.
And when thou art come to thy Kingdom, let me find favor in thine eyes, when
my occasions and necessities shall require me to wait upon thee.

Abigail having thus spoken, David said, Bl^ssed be the Lord God of Israel
which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be
thou who have kept me this day from shedding blood, and avenging my self with
my own hand; for in very deed as sure as the Lord lives, who has graciously
kept me back from hurting thee and thy family, except thou had thus
seasonably met me, I had utterly destroyed by the next morning, Nabal, and all
that belonged to him. But thou may now assure thy self that my wrath is
appeased, and as an evidence thereof, I do kindly accept of the present thou
have brought me, and will not avenge the wrong offered me by thy husband,
either upon him or any of his family: I have heard thy suit, and do grant all
that thou desiredst; therefore go in peace to thy own house, and the Lord be
with thee. Abigail returning to her husband Nabal, behold he kept a Feast that
day in his house like the Feast of a King, for plenty of provisions, and
multitude of guests. And he had been so merry with his guests that he was very
drunk, wherefore she said nothing to him more or less of his danger till the
morning. In the morning when he had slept out his drunkenness and d^bauch, she
acquainted him with the desperate danger he had by his folly run them all into,
and how near destruction they all were, if in the very nick of time it had not
been by a wonderful Providence prevented. He hearing this was so terrified with
the horror and dread of the danger he had been in, that his heart died within
him, and falling into a swoon, he became as a stone; and about ten days after
the Lord smote him with some plague or sickness whereof he died. When David
heard of the death of Nabal, though he rejoiced not in the evil that was
befallen him, yet he could not but rejoice in the manifestation of Gods justice
upon him, and that the Lord himself had pleaded his cause against him, and had
returned his wickedness upon his own head, and had withheld him from revenging
himself.

Sometime after David understood that Saul out of malice to him, had given his
wife Michal to one Phaltiel Ishbosheth upon David's desire restored her to him
again, 2 Samuel 3.14, 15.
, the Son of Laish, who was of Gallim, a place in the Tribe of Benjamin;
wherefore reflecting upon the piety, the prudence, the modesty and comeliness
of Abigail, and possibly something upon her portion also, (as being in
likelihood of very great wealth, which his present condition might cause him to
consider) he sent some of his Attendants to her to treat with her about
marriage. And he chose rather to send others than to go himself, that Abigail
might be the more free in her choice, (not being overawed with his presence)
and also that he might come off with less disgrace if his motion were not
accepted. The messengers coming to Abigail, acquaint her with their business,
she (as one wonderfully surprised at the strangeness of the motion) bowed her
self to the earth before them, and addressing her self to the principal person
among them, said, Alas, I am utterly unfit for so high a dignity and
advancement: Let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants
of my Lord. I hardly think my self worthy to be a servant to his servants.
Herein Abigail showed not only her great humility, but her faith also, who
could think so honorably of David when he was in such a persecuted state, and
such a despised condition. But the messengers pressing her further, she at last
consented, and as it is like sometime after when the messengers came again to
fetch her, she rode upon an ass after them, having five young maidens to attend
her. And so she became David's wife. David also took to wife Ahinoam of Jezreel
a City in Judah, by whom he had Amnon his firstborn.

1 Samuel Chapter 25. from v. 2. to the end.

11ly, From hence he fled back again to Hachilah-Hill, which is before
Jeshimon, for though the Ziphites had once sought to betray him there, yet he
hoped he should find more favor from them now, seeing they knew how
wonderfully God had delivered him. And besides possibly he apprehended this
place more convenient for him, upon his marriage with Abigail, because her
possessions lay near it. However the Ziphites (fearing possibly that if David
came to the Crown he would remember them for their former treachery against
him) bring Saul tidings a second time that he was there, that so he might be
cut off, and they secured from any danger from him. Saul accordingly without
delay came with three thousand chosen men of Israel to find him out. David
having some intelligence of his coming, he sent out Scouts to see if it were
so, and was by them informed that it was so indeed. Saul being come near to him
with his forces, David arose and went secretly himself, (and possibly
disguised) to the place where Saul had pitched, and he beheld where he lay, and
Abner the Captain of his host, and he saw that Saul lay enclosed with the
Carriages, and his Soldiers about him, but they were all fast asleep; David
being moved doubtless by a special instinct of Gods Spirit to undertake this
dangerous Enterprise, and being desirous once more to manifest his innocence to
Saul, he spoke to Abimelech the Hittite, one of his Commanders, (being so by
birth, though an Israelite by Religion) and to Abishai the Son of Zerviah She
had three Sons, Joab, Abishai, and Asahel, all valiant men, she being David's
Sister is always mentioned and not her husband, who possibly was of no great
family, and his name no where mentioned in Scripture.
his Sister, [1 Chronicles. 2.15, 16.] demanding of them which of them would
adventure to go with him into the Camp to Saul? Abishai readily answered he
would go with him. David and Abishai accordingly entered into Readiness Camp
through the midst of his Army, and found Saul and his men fast asleep, his
Spear sticking at his head, and a Cruse of water standing by him. Then Abishai
said to David, God has at this time delivered thine enemy into thy hands, it
would be a strange and unaccountable neglect if thou should let slip this
opportunity which Providence plainly offers thee; let me (I pray thee) smite
him with the Spear that stands at his head, and let me alone, I will smite him
so surely at the first blow, that I shall not need to give him a second. David
charges him not to touch him Nusquam magis eluceo Clementia Davidis quam hoc
loco, and ca. 24. Privato (qualis adhuc erat David, non actu Rex (vide ca. 16.
13.) non licet regem suum occidere quamvis Tyrannum. P. Mart.
, for (says he) who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed and
be guiltless. Possibly the Lord himself will smite him with some mortal disease
as he did Nabal, or he will die a natural death, as other men do by sickness or
old age, or he will come to his end by some casualty, falling in battle. But as
for me, God forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against him, or smite
him my self, or suffer him to be smitten. But I pray thee take the Spear that
stands at his boulster, and the cruse of water that stands by him, and let us
be gone. So they took away the Spear and the cruse of water, neither Saul nor
any of his men about him awaking, for a dead sleep from the Lord was fallen
upon them. See Genesis 2.21. Then David went over to the other side, and stood on
the top of an hill at some distance from Readiness Camp, but so as his voice might
be heard, and he called aloud to the people and to Abner, and it seems he
called often before he could awaken him; at last Abner awaking said, Who art
thou that criest unto the King, so as to disturb him in his rest? David answers
what art thou Abner, a man so esteemed for valor that there is scarce any in
Israel like unto thee? wherefore then have thou not kept thy Lord the King
better? For I do assure thee there came one of my followers into your Camp that
would have destroyed the King, had not I prevented it; as the Lord lives, thou
and the people about the King are worthy to die because ye have not watched
better about your master, the Lords anointed. And now behold here in my hand
the Kings Spear, and the Cruse that stood at his head; How came I by these?
Saul being now awake and hearing David speak to Abner after this manner he
cries out, What is this thy voice my Son David? David answers, It is my voice,
my Lord O King. And I pray thee wherefore does my Lord thus pursue after his
servant? What have I done, or what evil is in my hand? Now therefore let my
Lord the King vouchsafe to hear the words of his servant: If the Lord has
stirred thee up against me, let him receive an offering Placato iram ejus
Sacrificio, and munere. Chald. Paraph. suspiciat oblationem meam cum voluntate.
, that is, let him be appeased with a sacrifice and oblation which I will offer
for the sin whereby I have provoked him. But if they be Court-Sycophants and
malicious persons that by their lies and slanders have incensed thee against
me, I leave them as cursed creatures to Gods just vengeance, who will plead my
cause against them. For they have endeavored to drive me out from abiding in
the Inheritance of the Lord, and from enjoying his Ordinances, and by forcing
me as an exile to flee into Idolatrous Countries. They have in effect said to
me, Go and serve other Gods. And now seeing thou know my innocence, let not
my blood (I pray thee) be shed without cause, for the Lord will see it, and
will not let it go unpunished. Besides it is not honorable for the King of
Israel to pursue me with so many men, who have so little power to hurt him: For
I am but as a flea, forced to skip hither and thither to save my self, or a
partridge on the mountains forced to flee from place to place to escape thy
hands. Then said Saul, I have sinned: Return my Son David to thy former
condition, for I will no more do thee harm, seeing my life was precious in
thine eyes this day, and thou have spared me when it was in thy power to kill
me. Behold I have played the fool, and erred exceedingly; I do acknowledge my
fault and folly, and openly take shame to my self for it, in the hearing of all
that are about me. David desires him to send one of his young men to fetch his
Spear, having taken it from him, only to evidence his innocence, and that he
had no evil intention in his heart against him. And therefore (says he) let the
Lord recompense every man according to his righteousness, and faithfulness. Thy
life was indeed in my power this day, but I would not stretch forth my hand
against the Lords anointed. And as thy life was precious in mine eyes, so let
my life be precious in the eyes of the Lord my God, and let it please him to
preserve it, though thou should fail of thy promises made to me, and should
seek again to take it away. Then Saul said unto David, Blessed be thou my Son
David, thou shall do great things, and shall at last prevail, maugre all the
malice of thine enemies. Then David retired and betook himself to some place of
safety, not trusting Saul for all his goodly words and promises, having
formerly found him so false and malicious. And Saul returned to Gibeah where he
kept his Court.

1 Samuel Chapter 26. whole Chapter.

12ly, David now seriously considering the condition of his affairs, began
(through the weakness of his faith) to think that he should at one time or
other (notwithstanding all his former deliverances) perish by the hand of Saul,
if he did not speedily get himself out of his reach; therefore he thought there
was nothing more advisable in his present circumstances than that he should
send to the King of the Philistines, and try if he could be received with his
forces into his protection. This indeed was no warrantable course that he now
pitched upon for his preservation: For first, God had once before commanded him
by the Prophet Gad to abide in the land of Judah, see Chap. 22.5. 2ly, He
having before been such a formidable enemy to the Philistines, and having so
hardly escaped with his life once before, when he sought privately to shelter
himself among them, there was no likelihood he should be entertained by them on
any other terms than that he and his Soldiers should turn to the Philistines
and declare themselves enemies to Saul and the people of Israel. 3ly, This must
needs tend to the great grief of those that were righteous in the land; and
would give his enemies occasion exceedingly to triumph, and to say, that now he
discovered what he was, seeing he had deserted his own people and religion, and
had joined himself to their uncircumcised enemies. But thus it is, when men's
hearts sink through distrust of God as it seems David's now did; they seek to
help themselves by any means they can. David therefore having (as it is
probable) sent his Agents before hand to the King of the Philistines, and
having obtained assurance from him under the public faith, that he and his
Soldiers should live safely in his land (which it is like out of mere policy he
consented unto, knowing the hatred that Saul bear him, and believing that David
and his forces would be ready to join with him and his subjects against Saul)
he passed over with six hundred men that followed him, to Achish King of Gath.
He carried also his two wives along with him, Ahinoam and Abigail, and his
followers likewise carried their wives and families, not thinking it safe to
leave them behind them in the land of Israel; and for some time by Achish's
permission they dwelt in Gath, or about it. When it was told Saul that David
was fled to Gath, he gave over any further thoughts of seeking after him, he
being in the land of his enemies, and so out of his reach. David being desirous
to dwell apart by himself with those that followed him, that he might have the
more freedom for the exercise of his Religion, and might keep his Soldiers
from being corrupted with the Vices and Idolatries of the Philistines, and that
he might from thence go out and prey the more secretly upon the enemies of Gods
people, without having any notice taken of it, he humbly desired Achish that
his Officers might assign him and his followers some place in the Country to
live in, it not being fit for him a stranger to live with the King in the Royal
City, especially having so many people with him who must needs be burdensome,
and might sometimes prove offensive to him and the inhabitants of his City.
Achish consents thereunto, and accordingly gave him Ziklag, which being
allotted to the Tribe of Judah, [Josh. 15.31.] was afterward given to Simeon,
[Josh. 19.5.] but the Philistines having gotten possession of it, had kept it
to this day, and now Achish gives it unto David, and so it was not only joined
to Judah's portion Hac donatione justos ad Heredes rediit, Achish dedit Davidi
non solum ad inhabitandum sed ut in illius dominium cederet.
, but was also upon this occasion designed to be ever after a part of the
Crown-land of the Kings of Judah. Here David dwelt a full year and four months.
While he was here diverse of Readiness own Tribe and kindred resorted unto him, who
are named before the men of Gad who had fallen to him before, because these
men's coming to him was more strange and remarkable. And all who favored his
cause had here opportunity to resort to him, as we may see 1 Chronicles. 12. from v.
1, to 22. Now these are they that came to David to Ziklag, and were among the
mighty men, helpers in the war. They were armed with bows, and could use both
the right hand and left, in hurling stones and shooting arrows out of a bow,
even of Saul's brethren of Benjamin. The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, etc. and
Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty Captains that came out of
Benjamin to David, and was Colonel over them. There are but twenty three
Benjamites named, the other seven (which should make up the thirty) are not set
down. And some of the Gadites also separated themselves unto David when he was
in the hold or fortress of Ziklag in the Wilderness of Judea, men of might, and
trained up to war, fit to order a battle, and that could handle shield and
buckler, and whose faces were like the faces of lions, (that is, undaunted,
fierce and terrible to their enemies) and as swift as Roes Some take the word
Roes for Goats, which very readily and swiftly climb over high rocks, implying
that these Gadites could easily scale high walls, forts or towers, and soon
take them.
upon the mountains: Of these Gadites there are eleven named who had command
over several Companies of Soldiers; they were all made Captains of Bands after
David began to reign in Hebron, some of them over an hundred, and some of them
over a thousand. These are they that came over Jordan in the first month called
Abib, when it had overflown all its banks, so that thereby they would not be
kept from coming to assist David, and they put to flight such of Saul's
Soldiers as were in those troublesome times appointed to lie in the valleys
near the banks of Jordan, to guard the fords and passages lest any
well-affected to David should from those parts come over to his aid; upon these
Soldiers of Readiness, these Gadites came suddenly and scattered them, some
flying one way, and some another. There came also some other Benjamites besides
those mentioned v. 2. that were not so nearly linked to Saul, but bordering
upon Judah joined with some of that Tribe, and jointly came to assist David.
David hearing of their coming, went out to meet them, and said unto them, If ye
be come in a peaceable and friendly manner to help me, I shall love you
entirely, but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, (seeing I have done
no wrong to Saul or any of you) the God of our Fathers look thereon and rebuke
you, and manifest his displeasure against you for it. Then the Spirit of the
Lord came upon Amasai He is in other places called Amasa, whom Absalom made
General of his Army, 2 Samuel 17.25. and whom David intended to make General
instead of Joab, but he was treacherously slain by Joab, 2 Samuel 20.3, and 10.
(who was chief of all these brave men) and he answered with great boldness and
assurance, Thine are we David, and on thy side, thou Son of Jesse. Peace, and
all manner of prosperity be unto thee, and to thy helpers, and assistants, and
all that heartily join with thee. We have observed that God has hitherto
wonderfully prospered thee, and we heartily wish it may be so still. Then David
joyfully received them, and so far trusted them that he gave every one of them
a place of command in his Army. Some of the Manassites also, and some others
came in day by day to David, insomuch that his Army began now to be
considerable. His forces being thus increased, he would not let them be idle,
but under pretense of invading Judea, he sent them another way, and smote the
Amalekites, and others (that are supposed to be the remainders of the
Canaanites) viz. the Geshurites, namely such as dwelt formerly at Geshur in
Gilead, [Josh. 12.5.] and the Gezrites whose ancestors dwelt in Gezer which
belonged to Ephraim, [Josh. 16.3.] who perhaps at the first coming of the
Israelites fled thence to the Amalekites, and had ever since dwelt among them;
these Amalekites Saul was commanded to root out, [ Chapter 15.2, 3.] but he left
some alive, and now David smote as many of them as he could light on, with
other the inhabitants of that place, and left neither man nor woman alive, viz.
of such as he met with scattered in several places of that solitary Wilderness,
(God having devoted these accursed Nations to utter destruction) and hereby he
took care that none should carry tidings of his proceedings to Achish, who
would have been highly offended if he had heard that these Nations (who were
either his confederates, or as it is probable his Tributaries) were destroyed by
David; David also carried away their sheep, oxen and asses, and camels and
apparel, and returning to Achish (whom possibly he persuaded that he had got
that plunder out of the coasts of Judah) he offered as it is probable, a part of
the spoils unto him. And after this, when ever Achish asked him, Whither have
ye made a rode to day? He answered that sometimes he made a rode against the
South of Judah, and sometimes against the South of the Jerahmeelites, (who were
a particular family of that Tribe, 1 Chronicles. 2.25.) and sometimes against the
South of the Kenites; and thus either he told Achish direct lies to secure
himself and his followers from danger, or at least he purposely deceived him
with ambiguity of words, intending that Achish should so understand him as if
he had invaded the South parts of Judah, whereas he meant he had invaded those
bordering Countries Aequivoce loquitur nam terminos, Hi p^r vim occuparant qui
jure spectabant ad Tribum Judae.
that lay Southward of Judah, and of the Jerahmeelites, and of the Kenites; and
these were indeed the people whom he invaded, and not the Israelites, and of
these he spared none (of all that he met with) to bring tidings to Gath; for he
thought with himself that if any of them remained alive, they would come and
make a heavy complaint to Achish against him, and say, Thus did David to our
Country, and this will be his manner and constant course all the while he is
permitted to dwell among you. But Achish believed that David had invaded the
people of the Jews, and accordingly said, Surely he has made his own people
utterly to abhor him, and can never hope that they will be reconciled to him;
he shall therefore remain with me to do me service as long as he lives.

1 Samuel Chapter 27. wh. Chapter 1 Chronicles. 12. from v. 1. to 23.

13ly, About this time not only Achish King of Gath, but with him all the other
four Princes of the Philistines gathered their armies together to fight against
Israel, being encouraged no doubt thereunto by the distractions that were now
in the land, and the weak state of the Kingdom by reason of them. Achish
sending for David acquainted him that he resolved that he and his men should go
along with him in this expedition. David being unwilling to displease him by a
direct refusal, answered ambiguously, and told him that if he commanded him to
attend him in this war, he should see what his servant could do. Achish
thereupon being confident of his fidelity to him, told him he would make him
keeper of his head for ever; that is, Captain of his Lifeguard, and would
commit the chief care of his person to him as long as they both lived. The
Philistines accordingly now invading the land, Saul was in great perplexity,
for Samuel was dead, whom though he disregarded in his lifetime, yet now he
finds himself extremely to want his counsel and advice. The Philistines pitched
in Shunem (a City in the border of Issachar) and Saul having gathered an army
out of all the Tribes of Israel, pitched in Gilboa a mountainous place in the
Tribe of Issachar, near Jezreel. And his iniquity being now come to its full
measure, he was exceedingly afraid, the guilt of his conscience suggesting
dreadful things to him; in this distress he enquired of the Lord 1 Chronicles.
10.14. It Is said he enquired not of the Lord. Indeed he pretended so to do, but
he did it not sincerely, nor in faith, and so it is reckoned as not done.
partly (as it is probable) by prayer, and partly by consulting with the Priests
and Prophets that yet remained in the land, and putting them upon seeking to
God in his behalf; but the Lord answered him not, neither by dreams, or by
Vrim, (for Abiathar had carried away the Ephod to David) or by Prophets, giving
them any answer; so that the Lord answered him not, either one way or other See
Lamentations, Chapter 2. 9.
, which was an evidence that he was highly displeased with him. Saul had
sometime before out of a seeming zeal and pretense of obedience to God, put
away those that had familiar spirits See Levit. 19.31. and 20.6, 27. and Deuteronomy.
18.11.
, and wizards out of the land Out of a like zeal he had destroyed the
Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.1, 2.
, (namely as many of them as he could meet with) but yet it could not be
doubted but that there were still some of them that secretly lurked among the
people, wherefore being forsaken of heaven, he now resolves to seek to hell
Divinatio ex mortuis omnium divinationum antiquissima and signum creditae
durationis animarum post mortem. Grot.
for help, and thereupon bad his servants seek him out a woman that had a
familiar spirit This is recorded as the last and most desperate wickedness he
fell into before his death.
, and one that wrought by Necromancy, or raising Apparitions and Ghosts of the
dead Divinatio ex mortuis omnium divinationum antiquissima and signum creditae
durationis animarum post mortem. Grot.
, and consulting with them, [see Isa. 8.19.] for he intended to go and enquire
of her what he should now do; they told him they heard there was such an one at
Endor, a Town of the Manassites within Jordan, wherefore disguizing himself,
and putting on other clothes that the woman might not know him, (and possibly
that others might not discover his gross hypocrisy and impiety in going now to
witches for counsel, whom he had before persecuted to the death) and taking two
servants along with him he came to the woman by night, Flectere si nequeam
superos, Acheronta movebo.
and desired her to cause the spirit or ghost of a dead man (whom he should
name to her) to come up and appear before him, of whom he would enquire several
things. The woman told him he could not be ignorant what Saul had done in
persecuting those that had familiar spirits, and therefore she asks him why he
laid a snare for her life. Saul swear to her as the Lord lives there should no
punishment befall her, neither would he discover her if she would comply with
him in this matter. The woman having this assurance given her, asked him whom
she should call up? He said old Samuel our late eminent Prophet. She
accordingly by her Diabolical art Quis credet faeminae quae se Diabolo
manciparat tantam potestatem fuisse in animam Samuelis in caeleste regnum jam
receptam? Quis credet in manu Diaboli esse, mortuos vita donare? Proinde an
piis molestum est jussa Dei exequi? An ulla molestia in beatas animas cadit?
Nemo itaque non videt non verum sed fictum Samuelem comparuisse. Freidlib.
caused an evil spirit (who took on him the shape and form of Samuel For they
that die in the Lord are under his protection, and their souls out of Satan's
reach, in heaven, and without the soul the body cannot act any thing. And as
the Devil had no power to bring Samuel, so it is not probable that the Lord did
send him. For seeing he refused to answer Saul in an ordinary way by Dreams or
Prophets, it is unlikely he would do it in an extraordinary and miraculous way,
by raising the Prophet Samuel from the dead.
) to appear. For it is no way likely that the Lord who had so lately refused to
answer Saul by the Prophets, would now raise up Samuel from the dead to answer
him. Had Samuel been raised up by God to appear to Saul, he would never have
said as this counterfeit Samuel did, Why have thou disquieted me to bring me
up? It was therefore by the enchantments of the Witch that this counterfeit
Samuel was raised, or the Devil All which shows that the Author of the
Apocryphal Book Eccl^siasticus wrote not by the inspiration of the Spirit of
God, who says of Samuel in relation to this History, Chapter 46.20. After his
death he prophesied and showed the King his end.
in Samuel's likeness, and therefore called Samuel here; and when he was
raised, it seems the Witch was presently possessed with a spirit of Divination,
and thereby knew that it was Saul for whom she had done this, and thereupon
cried out, as apprehending he was come to ensnare her, why have thou deceived
me, for thou art Saul? Saul bad her not be afraid, and asked her what she saw?
she said, she saw Gods, that is, one of the Gods, or some magistrate or
personage of great honor, (such being called Gods, Psalm. 82.6.) ascending out
of the earth. Saul not yet seeing him, asked her of what form or shape he was?
she said, he appeared like an old man covered with a mantle We cannot think
that the true Samuel was buried in his mantle, but the Devil thickning the air
might form such a likeness and representation of him.

V. 17. Faciet enim tibi dominus. Strigelius, (...) malui legere quod est in
margin quomodo Hieron. and Septuaginta verterunt quam (...). Tertia persona
sumitur, pro secunda, sic mos Hebraeis permutandi personas.


. Saul then perceived him in that form, (though it were not the true Samuel but
the Devil in his likeness) and stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed
himself to him. This counterfeit Samuel now asked him, Why he had disquieted
him to bring him up thither? Saul answered, I am sore distressed, the
Philistines make war upon me, and God is departed from me, and answers me no
more either by Prophets, or Dreams, therefore have I called for thee that thou
may make known to me what I should do. The evil spirit now counterfeiting not
only Samuel's person, but his words and actions, replied, Why do thou ask
counsel of me seeing the Lord is departed from thee, and become thine enemy.
Alas! I cannot help thee, for the Lord will do to thee as he has spoken by me.
He will rend the Kingdom out of thine hand and give it to thy neighbor, even
to David, because thou obeyest not his voice, nor executest his fierce wrath
upon Amalek; and therefore it is that this judgment will fall upon thee. And
moreover the Lord will deliver Israel with thee into the hands of the
Philistines, and to morrow To morrow is not to be understood precisely of the
next day following, but indefinitely of some time near approaching: So to
morrow is taken Exodus 13.14. Mat. 6.34. and so here to be understood. For it
was not the next day after that Saul, and his Sons were slain, in which the
Philistines were but preparing for the battle, and sent away David from among
them, (see Chapter 29.) but as it seems by the History some few days after.
thou and thy sons shall be with me First, God may reveal things future and
contingent unto Satan, who may reveal them to Witches, and to Sorcerers before
they came to pass, to encourage and harden their hearts in their Diabolical
practices, and the hearts of others also that resort unto them.

2ly, God sometimes uses Satan as an instrument to execute his judgments, as
he did in the case of Job, and the four hundred false Prophets, that were
deluded by him, 1 King. 22.22. and then it is easy for him to reveal those
things he has in commission to execute.

Permittit Deus Daemones aliquando responsa dare Idololatris, quia ex malitia
sua demerentur, ut sic in erroribus exerceantur, ut Ancilla illa, Act. 16. quae
nisi vera prae dixisset, magnum Dominis suis quaestum non prae buisset; Multa
de oraculo Delphico referant omnes Historiae.

Craeso sciscitanti number futurum esset, ut filius mutus loqueretur, respondit,
infausto die loquuturum esse: quod and accidit.


; that is, shall be dead as the true Samuel was, who was personated by this
evil spirit. Saul hearing these dismal tidings, and being very faint through
fasting all the day before, even to that time of the night, he fell on the
ground in a swoon, and there was no strength in him. The Witch hereupon came to
him and told him that she had so far obeyed him as to put her life into his
hands, therefore she desired him so far to gratify her as to receive a little
refreshment from her, that he might have strength to return to the army. But he
utterly refused it, till his servants together with the woman, by their earnest
importunity prevailed with him; so he arose from the earth, and sat upon the
bed, and the woman having a fatted calf in the stall, she caused it presently
to be killed, and dressed and prepared some of it, and took flour and kneaded it,
and baked unleavened Panes azymos, quos statim curavit coquendos, non enim
expectavit donec farinae illa subacta fermentaretur.
bread thereof, and so brought her provisions and set them before Saul and his
servants, and they did eat of them, and then arose and went their way.

1 Samuel Chapter 28. from v. 1, to the end.

14. The Philistines now gathered all their forces together to Aphek, a Town in
the Tribe of Asher, and the Israelites pitched by a fountain near Jezreel. The
Four Lords of the Philistines led up their forces, and marched with their
hundreds, and thousands, but David and his men marched in the rear with Achish,
who seems to be chief among them, if not their General. The Princes of the
Philistines observing this, asked in some passion what those Hebrews did among
them? Achish replied the chief commander of them was David a servant of Readiness,
a man of great wisdom and fortitude, who had been with him some days, or rather
some years, he having dwelt with him one full year, and four months, (see Chapter
27.7.) and in all that time since he fell to him, he had found no fault in him.
But the Princes of the Philistines were not satisfied with that but imagined
that Achish was merely deluded by him, and that he would endanger their Army;
therefore they urge Achish to send him back, and to cause him to return to the
place he had appointed for him, viz. to Ziklag, lest in the battle he should
fall off from them, and help their enemies. For how can he better contrive (say
they) to reconcile himself to his master than by betraying the lives of this
whole Army into his hands? They further add that he was a most dangerous
person, (of whose abilities they ought to be very apprehensive) being highly
renowned for his military prudence and valor, among his own Nation, insomuch
that the women sang of him in their dances, Saul has slain his thousands, but
David his ten thousands. [See Chapter 18.7. and 21.11.] Hereupon Achish called
David, and told him that as sure as the Lord lived he had found him faithful to
him, and he could not but highly approve all his carriage since he came into
the Army; nay he had found no evil in him since the first day he came up to
him. Nevertheless he must acquaint him that the Lords of the Philistines
favored him not, therefore he advised him to return with his forces to Ziklag
that he might not give them any further cause of jealousy. David replies, what
evil have thou found in thy servant since I have been with thee, even unto this
day, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my Lord the King
Necessaria querela, ne si taceret suspitionibus Philistaeonum suffragari
videretur. Menoch.
? Achish answers, I protest thou seem unto me to be a person of such
excellencies, of such probity and goodness as if thou were an Angel Hunc
loquendi modum Philistaei a vicinis hauserunt Hebraeis. Conterminae enim
regiones (ut experientia docet) multas voces, and phrases communes habent.
sent from heaven unto me; I perceive every thing to prosper that thou take
in hand. However the Princes of the Philistines have resolved that thou shall
not go with them to battle, wherefore arise very early in the morning, and with
thy forces (that are Readiness subjects) depart and be gone, lest our people fall
upon thee. Achish intended no more by his advice than this; but God had a
further design in it, for by this means David was not only freed from the
danger of being perfidious and ungrateful to Achish (who so much trusted in
him) but also from fighting against his brethren and Countrymen, and hereby
also he came in time to rescue the prey out of the hands of the Amalekites
which they had carried away from Ziklag As he went forth with the Philistines,
and as he returned from them diverse fell to him of the Tribe of Manasseh, as we
may see 1 Chronicles. 12.19, 20, 21, 22.
.

1 Samuel Chapter 29. whole Chapter.

15. David according to Achish's advice marches back with his forces, and
coming on the third day after to Ziklag, he found it to his great astonishment
burnt by the Amalekites; for such of them as had escaped Readiness sword formerly,
and his sword of late, taking advantage of the Philistines, and his absence,
and resolving to revenge themselves on him, they suddenly invaded the South
part of the Philistines V. 14. Called Cherethites, some part of the Philistines
Country being called Cherith, and thence the Philistines called Chereshim, or
Cherethites. See Ezekiel. 25.15, 16. Zeph. 2.5.
Country, and the South of Judah By the South of Caleb is meant the South of
Judah belonging to Calebs posterity, Josh. 14.13. where David's possessions lay
which he had by Abigail, Nabals widow.
, and surprising Ziklag burnt it, (or at least a great part of it) and carried
away the women and children captive, God so overruling their hearts that they
did not put any of them to death, but kept them alive to sell them Quod mirum
cum David occidisset omnes, Cap. 27.9, 11. sed Deus ipsorum furorem mitigavit.
, (as it is probable) for slaves, and to make merchandise of them; among the
rest that were carried away captive, were David's two wives, Ahinoam and
Abigail; David and his men coming to Ziklag were extremely surpised at this
dismal calamity, and bursting out into tears, they wept till they had no more
power to weep; David now felt the hand of the Lord sore upon him, for his
distrust of God, and seeking to help himself by flying to the Philistines the
professed enemies of Gods people, and for his lying and dissembling, and
pretending to Achish as if he had a desire to fight against Saul, and against
the Israelites; never was he in greater straits than at this time, for his
followers being transported with rage and discontent for the loss of their
wives and children, began to mutiny Hac omnia Davidi acciderunt, cum jam sibi
videretur esse in tuto.
, and talk of stoning him as the chief cause of this their great calamity and
misery, because having provoked the Amalekites by invading their Country, and
slaughtering their people, [ Chapter 27.8, 9.] he had imprudently drawn out his
forces out of the city, and left it naked to the malice of their enemies, all
this only to employ them in assisting the Philistines in a pernicious war
against their own people. However in this desperate danger David encouraged
himself in the Lord his God, and by an humble and actual trust cast himself
upon his power, goodness, and fatherly care, of which he had had so large
experience; then calling to the High Priest Abiathar to bring the Ephod and by
it to enquire This David had diverse times neglected to do upon weighty
occasions, as particularly before he fled out of Judea into the land of the
Philistines, and before he followed Achish in the war, but having smarted for
it, he is now unwilling to do any thing without Gods direction.
of the Lord whither he should pursue those Amalekites, and whither he should
overtake them, he had a gracious answer encouraging him to pursue them, and a
promise that he should without fail recover all that they had taken away.
Wherefore immediately with his six hundred men he marches after them as far as
the brook Besor in the borders of Simeon, where two hundred of them being faint
and tired could march no further. Here God was pleased to try and exercise his
faith again, in that after he had encouraged him to pursue his enemies, he
seemed now to cross him by disabling one third part of his men from going on
against them, and this he did that the glory of the victory might be ascribed
unto him and not to David; therefore with these four hundred men (leaving the
other two hundred with their baggage) going on in the pursuit, at last they
found a poor Egyptian in the field almost ready to perish thorough sickness and
hunger, having neither eaten nor drunk any thing for three days, and three
nights together; this poor creature they refreshed with bread and water, and a
piece of a cake of figs, and some raisins, and then brought him to David, who
examining him whence he was, and to whom he belonged, he told him he was by
Nation an Egyptian, and served an Amalekite that was in the army gone before,
who left him there in the field three days ago upon his falling sick. He tells
him he came out with his master, and they had inroaded and plundered the South
part of the Philistines, and of Judah, and had burnt Ziklag. David asks him if
he could bring him down to the Camp where his master was. It seems the
Amalekites had told him where they intended to encamp, that so if he recovered
he might come to them. Accordingly he tells David that if he would swear to him
by God, that he would neither kill him himself, nor deliver him into the power
of his master, he would bring him down to them; David promised him faithfully
he would not, and so he brought them to the place where the Amalekites had
pitched. David found them in a careless posture spread abroad upon the earth,
eating and drinking, and dancing and rejoicing for the great spoils they had
gotten out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah; seeing
them in this posture, he fell upon them immediately at the evening of the day,
and smote them to the evening of the day following, and destroyed in a manner
all of them, excepting only four hundred young men that rode upon Camels, and
so escaped. He spared none he could lay his hands on, they being a Nation
destined by God to utter destruction. David and his men having thus vanquished
this great band of the Amalekites, they rescued all the women and children
which had been carried away by them, and there was nothing lacking to them,
either small or great, either sons or daughters, they recovered all Miro Dei
dispositus hoc factum qui neque Davidi quicquam perire voluit, neque aliis
propter Davidem.
; and David's men took all the flocks and herds which the Amalekites had taken
from other places besides Ziklag, and drove them before those Cattle which they
had taken from Ziklag, (which belonged to David and his followers) extolling
David, and proclaiming, this is David's spoil, that is, which belongs to him
by the Soldiers free consent, and gift, and accordingly afterward he bestowed
it on whom he pleased. David with his men now returning with the captives and
spoils they had taken, he came at last to the place where he left the two
hundred weary men, who came forth with great joy to meet David and the people
that were with him. When they came near him he spoke kindly and courteously to
them, that they might not be discouraged at the thoughts of their absence from
the fight, seeing it was occasioned by their weariness. They desiring to have a
part in the spoils, some of the four hundred who had with David vanquished the
Amalekites (being wicked men, and sons of Belial) expressed an unwillingness that
they should have any share therein, but only their wives and children again,
though it was not cowardice, but mere faintness that made them stay behind, and
their staying behind with the carriages to defend the stuff, and being in
readiness to aid and assist their fellows if they had been forced to retire,
might be looked upon as a good service. David mildly speaks to these murmurers
saying to them, Ye shall not do so, my Brethren, with the spoil the Lord has
given us, and which we have gotten not by our own valor and strength, but by
Gods gracious favor, who has preserved us, and given our enemies into our
hands; the thing you propose is unreasonable and unjust, therefore I shall
decide the matter thus: As his part is that goes down to the battle, so shall
his part be that tarrieth by the stuff; that is, the men that tarried behind
and abode with the baggage shall have their share of the prey, as well as those
that marched out with me unto the battle. And so from that day he revived and
ratified a statute formerly made by God, [ Numb. 31.27. Josh. 22.8.] that the
spoil should be divided betwixt those that fought with the enemy, and those
that stayed with the stuff. And when David was returned to Ziklag, he sent some
of the spoils he had taken to the Elders of Judah his friends, partly by way of
restitution, because the Amalekites had taken much of this prey from the South
parts of Judah, and partly by way of thankfulness for the many kindnesses he
had received from them, when Saul hunted him from place to place, and partly in
a way of prudence to make them hereby the more firm to him, and more ready to
give him their assistance when he should stand in need of it. Thus as it is
always darkest just before day dawneth, so God uses to visit his servants with
greatest afflictions when he intends their speedy advancement.

1 Samuel Chapter 20. whole Chapter.

16. We return now to the Philistines and Israelites (whom we left nigh to each
other, Chapter 29.) who joining battle at the very time (as Josephus says) when
David was victorious over the Amalekites, the Israelites were smitten, and
Readiness three Sons, Jonathan By Jonathan's death the Lord cleared the way for
David's advancement to the Kingdom. For if Ishbosheth a worthless man found so
many of the people ready to side with him against David, what would they have
done for Jonathan so brave and worthy a Prince, if he had outlived his Father.
And Jonathan was no loser by it, for instead of an earthly God gave him an
Heavenly Kingdom.
, Aminadab, and Melchishua slain. And the battle went sore against Saul
himself, for the Arch^rs hit him, and sore wounded him; he saw his Army routed,
his friends and followers slain, his dear Sons killed before his face, he found
himself sore wounded and environed with enemies, and apprehending no
possibility of escaping, he bad his Armour-hearer take his sword and run him
thorough, lest the uncircumcised Philistines should take him and put him to
some ignominious death; but his Armor-bearer utterly refusing to do it, he
fell upon his own sword. And thus Saul with the sword he had drawn against
David slew himself, and so concluded a wicked life with a desperate death, the
Lord in a just judgment giving him up to act this horrid murder on himself, as
a punishment of his former wickedness, therefore it is said, 1 Chronicles. 10.14.
that the Lord slew him. His Armor-bearer seeing what he had done, followed his
wicked example, and fell likewise upon his own sword, and killed himself. Thus
died Saul and his three Sons, and his Armor-bearer, and most of his family,
and kindred, most of his Courtiers and Commanders, with a great part of his
army, see 1 Chronicles. 10.6. And when the Israelites (who dwelt on each side of
this valley of Jezreel, where the battle was fought, and they that dwelt in it,
1 Chapter 10.7.) saw that their army was routed, and that Saul and his Sons were
slain, they forsook their Cities and Towns, and fled for their lives, and the
Philistines entered into them and possessed them. On the morrow after the battle
was fought, the Philistines coming to strip the bodies of the slain, they found
Saul and his three Sons fallen in mount Gilboa, and they cut off Saul's head,
and stripped off his armor. His head they carried about as a Trophy, and showed
it in all parts of their Country, publishing their victory, and the death of
Saul and his Sons in a way of joy and triumph in the houses of their Idols Heb.
Terrors, so called because they possess the minds and hearts of their
superstitious worshippers with terrors and fears, and do neither teach nor
comfort them. Hinc superstitio (...) dicitur i. e. Daemonium pavor.
, and afterward set it up in the house of Dagon their God, thereby ascribing
to him the glory of their victory, as appears 1 Chronicles. 10.10. so David had
before served the head of Goliath, which he carried to Jerusalem, Chapter 17.54.
They placed his Armor in the house of Ashtaroth, see the Note on Judge. 2.13.
his body, and the bodies of his Sons they fastened to the wall of Bethshan A
Town that belonged to the lot of Manasseh, but not recovered from the
Philistines in the first conquest, Judge. 1.27. nor to this day as was said
before of Ziklag, Chapter 27.6.
, viz. in a street that was by the City-wall, see 2 Samuel 21.12. And when the
Inhabitants of Jabesh-Gilead heard what the Philistines had done to the bodies
of Saul and his three Sons, in gratitude to Saul (who had rescued them from
Nahash King of the Ammonites, when he had straightly besieged their City, Chapter
11.11.) all the valiant men of that City arose and marched all night, and
coming to Bethshan took and carried away their dead bodies, and brought them to
Jabesh and burnt them there, that is, burnt the flesh of them, which having
hung some days in the Sun was putrified and stinking, and so could not be
embalmed; and the flesh being burnt from the bones, they gathered up their
bones and solemnly buried them under a Tree in Jabesh, and there they continued
till toward the end of David's reign, when he took them up and buried them in
the Sepulcher of Kish the father of Saul, 2 Samuel 21.12, 14. Then the men of
Jabesh-Gilead to express their sorrow for the death of Saul and his Sons, and
that they might implore mercy from God in behalf of the whole land which was
now in a very sad condition, they afflicted themselves with fasting for seven
days together, only taking still at night some small refreshment.

1 Samuel Chapter 31. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLXXIII.
MEphibosheth the Son of Jonathan being five years old at this time, upon the
dismal tidings of these disasters, his Nurse catching him up and flying away
with him in that great fright and consternation, she let him fall out of her
arms, and he became lame of his feet ever after, 2 Samuel 4.4.

SECT. CLXXIV.
WE are now come to the Second Book of Samuel, The Second Book of Samuel.
so called because it contains the History of David's reign, who was chosen
of God to succeed Saul in the Kingdom, and anointed thereunto by Samuel; and
because it relates how those things which Samuel promised unto him from God
were really made good unto him. It contains an History of forty years, from the
death of Saul to the death of David. As for the Author of it, some think it was
the office of the High Priest to register the History of the Jewish Church, and
the remarkable occurrences that happened in his time. Others think it was penned
by Nathan the Prophet, and Gad the Seer, as is intimated in the first of Chron.
29.29. Now the Acts of David the King first and last, behold they are written
in the Book of Samuel the Seer, and in the Book of Nathan the Prophet, and in
the Book of Gad the Seer See more concerning the Title of this Book, Sect. 149.
.

The first thing here related is how the tidings of the death of Saul and his
Sons were brought to David whilst he was yet at Ziklag Which was not (as it
seems) so totally burnt down but that some of it was standing, in which David
thought better to remain with his men than to go to any other Town of the
Philistines.
, whether he was newly returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and had
been preparing and sending away presents to his friends in Judah of the spoils
he had taken in that Expedition; on the third day after, a young man came out
of the Camp with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head, to testify the
dismalness of the tidings he brought; and when he came to David, he fell on the
earth and did obeisance. David understanding he came out of the Camp of Israel,
asked him how matters went? He told him the Israelites were vanquished, many of
them killed, and Saul and his Son Jonathan slain. David astonished at this, asked
him how he knew it to be so? This young man to ingratiate himself with David
(who was by general fame known to be the man whom Samuel had anointed to
succeed Saul) and apprehending that if he should carry the first tidings of
Readiness death to him, he should not miss of a great reward, he tells him that
being on mount Gilboa he found Saul leaning on his Spear The Reader may compare
this whole narration with that he will find, 1 Samuel 31:4. and then judge what
truth there is in the thing.
, as not being able to stand, because of the deadly wounds the Archers had
given him, and the Chariots and Horsemen pursuing him so fast, he called unto
him and desired him to stand over him and slay him (for he was in great anguish
and trouble that his life was yet whole and entire in him) and accordingly he
dispatched him as Saul desired of him, for he was sure he could not live after
he was fallen. And he took off the Coronet he wore on his head, and the
Bracelets which he wore on his arm, and here (says he) I present them unto my
Lord the King.

David then took hold of his Clothes, and rent them, and so did all the men
that were with him, and they mourned and wept, and fasted unto the evening, for
Saul and Jonathan his Son, and for the people of the Lord that were fallen in
the battle, and that by the hands of the Uncircumcised Philistines, which was
an evidence of Gods wrath against the Land. David angrily asked this young man
how he durst presume to stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed? It Is
like the Amalekite thought David would have been highly pleased with him for
doing it, but David upon Readiness death being come into the actual possession of
the Regal rights, and this man having confessed the crime himself, David bad one
of the young men about him to fall upon him, and kill him, which he accordingly
did, and David said, thy blood be upon thy own head See Josh. 2.19.
, for thy own mouth has testified against thee, that thou have slain the Lords
Anointed.

2 Samuel Chapter 1. from v. 1. to 17.

SECT. CLXXV.
DAvid now laments the death of Saul and Jonathan, and the men of Israel in a
Funeral Song, having first given order that the children of Judah should be
taught the use of the bow, and the rather because Saul and Jonathan had been
overcome by the Archers among the Philistines, therefore he desired they should
be expert in that Art, that they might match their enemies in that military
skill for time to come. Which order is further recorded in the Civil Annals, or
the General Chronicle of the Memorable Acts of the Nation, called the Book of
Jasher Which Book with diverse others, particularly some composed by Solomon
were burnt in the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans.
, which was continued (as is probable) from time to time by the Prophets. See
Note on Josh. 10.13.

David begins his Funeral Elegy thus: O how are Saul, Jonathan, and many other
valiant men of Israel (who were the beauty, ornament, and glory of the land)
fallen on the mountains of Gilboa! O tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
streets of Askalon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph, as they used to do in their dances and
songs, [see Note on 1 Samuel 18.6.] O if it were possible that this thing might
be concealed from the enemies of God and his people, lest they triumph and
insult over them, [see Judge. 16.23. Mich. 1.10.] ascribing the glory of this
victory to their Idol-gods, to the great dishonor of the only true God, the
God of Heaven and earth. O ye unfortunate mountains of Gilboa, let no dew or
rain ever fall upon you more; be ye cursed with drought and barrenness Gravitas
doloris etiam rebus, inanimatis maledicere consuevit, vid. Job 3.3.
as a sad and woeful monument of this calamity, and let there be no fruitful
plots or fields found among you, that may yield offerings of first fruits
Poetica exclamatio cum hyperbolica imprecatione ad figurandum horrorem, quo pii
recordantes accepti mali percelluntur.
and Tithes. May those hills which have given so much occasion of sorrow never
afford any matter of rejoicing, for there the shield of the mighty was vilely
cast away, viz. when the Israelites were routed in the field, yea the shield of
Saul as though he had not been anointed with oil, that is, there Saul himself
dropped his shield, and fell contemptibly, as though he had been a common
ordinary man, and not a King. It was far otherwise formerly. For Jonathan's
bow, and Saul's sword used not to return empty from the blood of the slain, and
from the fat Eat is mentioned to signify men healthful, lusty and strong.
of the mighty; that is, they did usually devour the blood and flesh of their
stoutest enemies. Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives;
that is, they dearly loved one another, though Saul in his frantic fits was
sometimes enraged against Jonathan, yet no doubt he dearly loved him when those
fits were over. And in their deaths they were not divided, that is, they fell
together in the field. They were swifter than Eagles, and stronger than Lions;
that is, they were nimble and active in pursuing their enemies, and strong and
valiant in subduing them. Ye daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed
you in scarlet, with other delights, and gave you ornaments of gold upon your
apparel; remember the peace you enjoyed under his Government, which was
accompanied with great plenty and abundance of all things both for necessity
and delight; remember how he enriched the land with the spoils of the enemy.
But O sad and deplorable! how are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle?
O Jonathan how were thou slain upon those cursed high mountains? I am
distressed, exceedingly distressed for thee my Brother Jonathan: Very pleasant
have thou been unto me: Thy love to me was wonderful, exceeding the love of
women, whose affections usually are very strong. How are the mighty fallen, and
the weapons of war lost, viz. the arms that were brought by the Israelites to
the battle, and became a spoil to the Philistines, to the great dishonor and
weakening of Gods own people. O tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
streets of Askalon.

2 Samuel Chapter 1. from 17, to the end.

SECT. CLXXVI.
DAvid now inquires of the Lord by the Ephod, whither he should go up to any of
the Cities of Judah, and he receives directions from God to go up to Hebron
This was at present the chief City of the Tribe of Judah, and was withal the
place where Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were buried.
; accordingly he with his two wives, and his followers with their families went
up to that City. The men of Judah presently flocked thither and anointed David
King over them. For though before he had been anointed by Samuel, yet that they
might testify their approbation of what God had appointed, they cheerfully now
consent to accept him for their King and Sovereign, and he reigned over them in
Hebron seven years and six months before the rest of the Israelites did
generally submit to him. Soon after the men of Judah had thus acknowledged him,
he made inquiry after the Bodies of Saul and his Sons, intending (as it is
probable) to have honorably buried them, and he was told what had been done
concerning them by the men of Jabesh Gilead, of which before, 1 Samuel 31.11, 12,
13. Hereupon he sent Messengers to them to thank them for the kindness they had
showed to Saul, desiring the Lord to recompense it unto them, and to manifest
his mercy and faithfulness to them for it. And he being now anointed King over
Judah, would not have them entertain any thoughts of jealousy, as if he would
bear them any spleen or ill will for their kindness showed to Saul, but to
believe that he would the rather endeavor to manifest all kindness to them,
and to requite them for it.

2 Samuel Chapter 2. from 1, to 8.

SECT. CLXXVII.
ABner, Readiness Cousin-german, who in Readiness lifetime had been General of his
Army, fearing that if David were made King, he should be displaced, or
disregarded; and knowing he could not in reason expect that favor and
preferment under David, which he might under a King of his own kindred and
family, especially if he himself were the chief instrument to make him King;
and further considering that Mephibosheth, Jonathans Son, (the heir apparent to
Saul) was but five years old, and now lately lamed in his feet, and so unfit
for his purpose, [see Chapter 4.4.] therefore he thought it best to take Ishbosheth
(who was the only Son of Saul that was now left, except those he had by his
Concubines) and to make him King, and to that end he took and carried him to
Mahanaim a City in Gilead in the Tribe of Gad beyond Jordan, choosing there to
settle his new King, where he might be safest, and at the greatest distance
from David's party. Abner well knew that David was anointed by Samuel to succeed
Saul in the Throne, [see Chap. 3.4.] but being an ambitious and atheistical
man, he regarded not what God had appointed, and seeing Ishbosheth to be a weak
and poor-spirited man, he thought he might make use of him as a shadow, and in
the mean time rule all himself. And accordingly in that City he made him King
over all Israel, Judah excepted, who to their great praise stuck to David (whom
God had appointed to be King) though they knew it was like to prove the
occasion of a Civil War, and of much danger to them; however they resolved to
do their duty and to leave the event to God. Ishbosheth was forty years old
when he began to reign, and he reigned two years quietly without any quarrel
with the house of David.

2 Samuel 2. from 8, to 11.

SECT. CLXXVIII.
DAvid now the better to strengthen himself in his new Kingdom contracts
affinity with Talmai King of Geshur Israelitis ut puto era vectigalis Rex
Geshur eumque ut sibi devinciret David, and Ishboshetho adversarium faceret,
filiam ejus Maacham sibi in uxorem deposcit. Tirinus. Geshur pars est Syriae
contermina Gileadi in Trachionitide. Deuteronomy. 3.14. There were also Geshurites on
the South Side of Canaan toward Egypt, 1 Samuel 27. and from whom David being at
Ziklag fetched great store of prey.
, a City lying in the North, in the borders of Gilead, and marries his daughter
Maacha, who bare him Absalom, and a fair daughter called Tamar.

2 Samuel Chapter 3.3. and Chapter 13.1.

SECT. CLXXIX.
AFter Ishbosheth's two years quiet reign there grew a long war between those
that adhered to him, and those that adhered to David. Joab the Son of Zerviah
She was mother also of two other valiant Sons, viz. Abishai and Asahel.
( David's sister) bearing up the one side, and Abner the other. And accordingly
Abner led forth an Army from Mahanaim to Gibeon to fight against David, where
Joab with an Army met him; the one pitching on the one side of the pool of
Gibeon, and the other on the other side. The Armies being thus near together,
Abner sent a Challenge to Joab, to wit, that a certain number of their young
gallants on each side might come forth and skirmish together, and by a trial of
their valor, and skill in Arms show both Armies some sport and pastime. And
this no doubt he did in a bravery, as hoping by this vaunting flourish of the
courage of his men to daunt those that were with Joab; but Joab no way
discouraged readily accepted the Challenge, and sent forth twelve of his men to
enter the lists with twelve of Abners. These young men running fiercely upon
one another, and catching every one his Antagonist by the head, they thrust
their swords into one another sides, and so fell down dead all together. By
which sad event of this combat, God declared how much he abhorred such vain
glorious Challenges. The field where they fell was from henceforth called
Helkath-hazzarim, or the field of strong and valiant men. The two Armies being
enraged at the death of their fellows slain in this Combat, they presently
with great fury fall upon each other, and so there was a sore battle, and at
last Joab and his men won the field; and Abner was beaten, and his Army put to
flight. In the pursuit Asahel, Joab's brother, who was as light of foot as a
wild Roe, and also a man of his hands, and valiant And therefore reckoned among
David's Worthies, 1 Chronicles. 11.26.
, hotly pursued Abner ambitiously aspiring (as it should seem) to take the
General of the field prisoner. Abner looking behind him, and seeing him thus
hotly pursue him, he called to him and bad him turn either to the right hand or
the left, and lay hold on one of the young men that followed him, and take his
Armor. As if he should have said, set upon one that is thine equal, and
content thy self with taking the spoil of his Armor from him, and do not
provoke an old experienced Soldier to thy great danger and peril. I am loath to
kill thee, if thou do not too much provoke me to it, for thy brothers sake:
For if I should kill thee how then should I hold up my face to Joab thy
brother, and how could I expect any peace or reconciliation with him? But
Asahel would not turn aside from pursuing him; wherefore Abner turned upon him,
and with the hinder end of his Spear smote him under the fifth rib, and he fell
down dead immediately. Joab's Soldiers who pursued, when they came to the
place where Asahel lay dead, they stood still and ceased their pursuit, gazing
upon this sad spectacle, and lamenting his death; Joab also himself and Abishai
his brother pursued after Abner, and the Sun went down when they were come to
the Hill of Ammah whither Abner had retreated, and there the children of
Benjamin, and his other broken companies rallying themselves together, and
having the advantage of the upper ground, made head again against Joab. Then
Abner as it seems desired a parley with Joab, and spoke to him after this
manner, What shall the sword devour for ever? Know thou not that it will be
bitterness in the latter end? the shedding so much Israelitish blood, whatever
you now may think of it in the heat of pursuing your victory, yet it will prove
like such meats as are sweet in the mouth, but breeding choler are bitter in
the stomach; slaughter and revenge may now seem sweet unto you, but the effects
thereof will be sad and bitter; therefore I advise thee rather to desist from
the pursuit, and to command thy Soldiers to return from following their
brethren. Joab replied, as sure as God lives, if thou had not sent us a
Challenge, and provoked us to the Combat of the young men, the people with me
were so far from desiring to shed the blood of their brethren, that purposely
to prevent it we were minded to have retired in the morning before the battle
was fought. And to show thee that I am more for peace than war, I shall now
give over the chase of you. So Joab caused his Trumpeter to sound a retreat,
and they ceased from pursuing, and fought no more with Israel at this time,
though afterward the War was renewed again. And Abner and his men marched back
to Mahanaim, and Joab mustering his forces upon the place, found he had lost
but nineteen men besides Asahel, but of Abners men they found there were three
hundred sixty slain. Joab then took up the body of Asahel, and buried it in the
Sepulcher of his Father at Bethlem, and so marched back with his Army to Hebron.

2 Samuel from v. 12, to the end.

SECT. CLXXX.
AFter this there was long War between the house of Saul, and the house of
David, which lasted five years and odd months from this time to the death of
Ishbosheth; David's house waxing stronger and stronger, and Readiness weaker and
weaker. David whilst he was exiled and persecuted by Saul had no children,
though he had two wives with him, God in his wise Providence so ordering it
whilst Children might have been an occasion of much care and encumbrance unto
him; but when he was chosen King over Judah, and settled in Hebron, he had six
Sons born to him in his seven years and six months reign there. His first born
was Amnon by Ahinoam; his second Chileab (called Daniel, 1 Chronicles. 3.1.) by
Abigail; his third Absalom by Maacha, daughter of the King of Geshur; his
fourth Adonijah by Haggith; his fifth Shephatiah by Abital; his sixth Ithream
by Eglah Besides these six Sons which he had at Hebron of six wives he had four
at Jerusalem by Bathsheba, besides the Sons of his Concubines, and his daughter
Tamar, 1 Chronicles. 3. from v. 1, to 9.
.

2 Samuel Chapter 3. from 1, to 6.

SECT. CLXXXI.
ABner during the War between David and Ishbosheth acted very valiantly and
strenuously for the house of Saul, and stored himself with Arms and Ammunition
for that purpose, so that he had cause to think he deserved well of Ishbosheth;
but at last it seems Ishbosheth began to be jealous of him, and to look upon
him as one that aspired to the Crown, and charged him (whither he had ground
for it or no is uncertain) that he had gone in to his Fathers Concubine, which
he took to be a dishonor to Saul his Father, and a sign that he had some high
thoughts in his mind (a). So we read of Adonijah affecting the Kingdom of David
by the like practice, 1 King. 2.22.
. Abner was exceedingly provoked and enraged at this, and angerly replied,
What, am I a dogs-head? am I so mean and vile a person in thine eyes that I
should be schooled and reprehended for such a matter as this? I, that have
showed such kindness unto the house of thy Father, and to his brethren and
friends, and have so strenuously stood up against the Tribe of Judah who made
David King, and have made thee King over the rest of Israel, and hitherto
supported thee in thy Kingdom, and have not delivered thee into the hands of
David, as I might have done: What! am I so mean and contemptible a person that
thou should think it a disgrace to thy family that I should lie with one of
thy Fathers Concubines? God do so to me and more also, if I do not translate
the Kingdom from the house of Saul to the house of David, and make him King
over all Israel, even from Dan to Beersheba as the Lord has sworn he should
be. So that it is plain that Abner knew very well that God had chosen and
appointed David to be King, and yet all this while he had opposed him against
his own knowledge and conscience for his own worldly and wicked ends. But though
he behaved himself thus insolently, yet Ishbosheth being a low and
poor-spirited man durst not answer him a word, he stood in such fear of him.

Abner pursuant to what he had threatened, sent messengers to David by whom he
made his acknowledgment that the whole land did indeed belong to him, whom God
by Samuel had anointed to be King over Israel, and therefore he resolved his
hand should be with him to bring all Israel to be subject unto him, provided he
would make a League and Covenant with him to pardon all that was past, and to
receive him into his favor. David returned him an answer that all that he
desired was granted, only he must not expect to see his face except he brought
Michal Readiness daughter along with him. That David insisted upon this condition
needs not seem strange if we consider first that she had beeen his first wife,
and had been faithful to him in preserving his life, [1 Samuel 19.11, 12.] and
had been forced by her father to marry another man when he was fled, 1 Samuel
25.44. And 2ly, David could no way better express his love to her than by
rescuing her from the sin and misery of living in adultery. 3ly, He saw in
policy it imported him to ingratiate himself with and gain the love of Saul's
kindred and allies, which he could no way better do than by this means. 4ly, He
thought he should hereby try the fidelity of Abner. Abner (it seems) hereupon
advised David to send to Ishbosheth for his wife, and then he would second the
motion, and procure it to be done. David accordingly sent Messengers to
Ishbosheth, desiring to have his wife Michal delivered to him, which he had
espoused to him for an hundred David was enjoined only to bring an 100, but he
brought 200, 1 Samuel 18.25, 27.
foreskins of the Philistines. Ishbosheth (being persuaded by Abner to gratify
David therein) immediately sent and took her away from Phaltiel her husband,
who went along with her as far as Bahurim (a Town in the Tribe of Benjamin)
weeping and lamenting that a wise so noble and beautiful should be taken away
from him. But Abner bad him return and comfort himself, for 'twas in vain to
weep for that which could not be helped. Then Abner in pursuance of his design
to come in to David, had communication with the Elders of Israel, and said to
them, Many of you long ago sought to have David to be King over you, now then I
pray let us all agree to it, for the Lord We do not read in the Sacred story
where this is expressly spoken, but Josephus says it was spoken by Samuel, and
commonly known among the people.
has spoken of David, saying, by the hand of my servant David I will save my
people Israel out of the hands of the Philistines, and out of the hands of all
their enemies. He having thus spoken, received a satisfactory answer from them,
viz. that they would receive David for their King. Then he addresseth himself
to the Tribe of Benjamin, speaking to them to the same purpose, and he thought
it needful to address himself in an especial manner to them, because Saul had
been of their Tribe, and so was chiefly in their favor, and therefore if they
gave way to David's Title, and submitted to his government, little doubt was to
be made but that the rest of the Tribes would submit also. Having therefore
received such an answer from the Elders of Israel and Benjamin as satisfied
him, he to show his great diligence and faithfulness in managing David's
business, went himself to carry the news of his good success to David at
Hebron, (reporting to him all that Israel, and especially Benjamin had said)
being attended with twenty men, and (as it is probable) carried Michal along
with him. David received him very graciously, and made a great feast for him
and his company; when that was over, Abner told him he would go and endeavor
to get all Israel to accept him for their King, and to make a league with him
to be subject to him that he might reign over them all, even according to his
own hearts desire; so David dismissed him in peace. Joab with a Brigade of his
Soldiers now returning home from pursuing a Troop of the Philistines, or some
other enemies that had invaded the land, and bringing a great spoil along with
them, he was told that Abner had been newly with the King, and had been
graciously received by him* and honorably dismissed. Joab was enraged at this,
and therefore in a bold and insolent manner he came to the King, and asked him
what he had done? He wondered at his imprudence in sending away so dangerous an
enemy as Abner was, when he had him in his hands. Thou might well have known
(says he) if thou had considered it, that Abner is a subtle and politic
man, and came not for any good end but to deceive thee, and as a spy to
discover thy counsels, and the course of thy actions and proceedings. Thus he
pretends only David's good, but it is like he feared lest Abner by this
important service of coming in to him himself, and bringing in the other
Israelites, should insinuate himself into David's favor, and so prove a
corrival to him in his honors and preferments; and besides the death of his
brother Asahel killed by Abner stuck in his stomach. David (it seems) was not
much moved by what he said, wherefore Joab flinging away in a discontent, when
he was come out from the King, he sent Messengers after Abner (and possibly in
the Kings name who knew nothing of it) who brought him back from the Well Sirah
situate on the North of Hebron. Abner being returned, Joab took him aside in
the Gate The place of Judicature, and of their public and solemn meetings.
( Abishai being by, who (it seems) was also in the Plot, see v. 30.) under
pretense to speak with him peaceably and privately about the Kings affairs, and
on a sudden (he little suspecting any such thing) smote him under the fifth
rib, so that he fell down dead. By this means (though the fact in Joab was base
and villainous) God punished Abner for his rising up against David, (contrary
to his own knowledge and conscience) to compass his wicked end, and for being
the occasion of shedding so much blood in this war, at which he so little
scrupled. When David heard of the murder of Abner he was extremely surprised at
it, and cried out, I and my Kingdom are guiltless before the Lord for ever from
the blood of Abner, let it rest on the head of Joab and all his Fathers house,
and let there not fail from the house of Joab (as long as his family
continues) one that has a running issue, (for which persons were debarred
from entering into the Congregation, and partaking of the public Ordinances,
Levit. 15.21.) or a leper, or one that leans on a staff, (by reason of
feebleness and lameness) or that falls by the sword, (and so dies an
untimely death) or that lacks bread, and so is brought to beggary; let there
be ever in Joabs family some person that is under one or more of these Plagues.
Then David commanded Joab and all the people that were with him to rend their
clothes, and gird themselves with sackcloth, to intimate that their hearts were
rent with grief for this horrid fact. Then he made a solemn and public Funeral
for Abner, and he himself followed the Bier with great expressions of grief. So
they buried Abner in Hebron, and the King lift up his voice at his grave and
wept, and the people wept also. And the King lamented over Abner, and said,
Died Abner like as a fool dies, that is, as a weak and cowardly man that
yields himself to be slaughtered by his enemy, making little or no
resistance. No surely, thou did not die like a base weak captive taken in
war, nor as a malefactor bound in chains and fetters, and so led out to
execution; no, but thou wast basely and treacherously slain. As a man falls
before wicked men so fellest thou; as it might happen to the most wise and
valiantest man in the world that has to do with false, cowardly, and
treacherous men, so it has happened unto thee. And this David spoke before
Joab's face, and branded him with dishonor and reproach before all the people
as a part of his punishment for his wicked fact. It seems it was the manner at
solemn Funerals to have a Feast provided to refresh and cheer the guests in the
time of their mourning, see Jer. 16.7, 8. Ezekiel. 24.17. And such a Feast was now
provided. But David to express his great and extraordinary grief for Abner,
refused to eat at it; whereupon the Commanders of the Army, and heads of the
people came to him and entreated him not to lay the matter so much to heart as
to forbear his food. But David swear to them, saying, God do so to me and more
also if I taste bread, or ought else till the Sun be set. The people observing
his carriage therein were highly pleased with it, and were glad to see him so
much to resent the base murder of Abner, and with so much earnestness to seek
to clear himself thereof; they saw plainly that it was not by David's counsel or
instigation, either directly or indirectly that Abner was slain, but it
proceeded merely from Joab's malice and revenge. And not only David's carriage
in this matter concerning Abner pleased the people, but generally all things
else that he did (through his prudence and wise conduct) were very pleasing to
them. Indeed whither they liked his not executing justice upon Joab at this
time is uncertain, but however he was fain to apologize for himself, and he
said to his servants about him, You see there is Prince and a great man this
day fallen in Israel, whose blood I would revenge on him that shed it, but that
he and his Brother Abishai (these Sons of Zerviah Zerviah one of David's Sisters
was mother of Joab, Abishai, and Asahel, and Abigail his other Sister was
mother of Amasa, 2 Samuel 17.25. 1 Chr. 2.15, 16, 17.
) are at this time too potent for me, they being in so great favor with the
people, and commanding the Army, and I my self (though anointed King) yet am at
present but unsettled in my Kingdom; however the Lord will reward the evil doer
at one time or other according to his wickedness. But this excuse was below
pious and valiant David, and savoured too much of carnal fear, worldly policy;
for he having Gods promise to establish him in the Throne, he needed not to
fear the executing of justice upon so heinous a malefactor as Joab was,
notwithstanding all his power, and the power of his allies. And if justice had
been now executed on him, Amasa's death had been prevented, whom Joab
afterward slew in a like treacherous manner. See 2 Samuel 20.10. But some will
ask, Why did not David execute justice upon Joab afterward when he was
established in his Throne? Doubtless it was a great fault in him, and before
his death he seems to have repented of it, which the charge given to his Son
Solomon seems to imply, 1 King. 2.5, 6. ziz. That he should not let Joab's
hoary head go down to the grave in peace.

2 Samuel Chapter 3. from v. 6, to the end.

SECT. CLXXXII.
Ishbosheth, and the Israelites that adhered to him were wonderfully perplexed
and dismayed when they heard of the death of Abner, he being their General on
whose counsel and conduct they had hitherto so much depended. Things going thus
badly with them, two of Ishbosheth's Captains conspired against him, whose
names were Baanah, and Rechab the Sons of Rimmon born in Beeroth a City of
Benjamin; but the inhabitants of that City after Readiness discomfiture fled out
of it to Gittaim another Town of Benjamin, and the Philistines possessed it,
and so they were still called Beerothites, after the place of their former
habitation, and lived but as sojourners in Gittaim among their Brethren the
Children of Benjamin. And that which encouraged these Captains (as it seems) to
conspire the death of Ishbosheth was, because he being taken away there would
be no legitimate issue of Readiness race, but only Mephibosheth, who being but a
child of twelve years of age, and withal lame in his feet was altogether unfit
to succeed in the Kingdom. Whence they imagined how advantageous their intended
fact would be to David, and how likely they were to be rewarded by him for it,
and lastly how safely they might do it, because there would be none left of
Readiness race to revenge Ishbosheth's death. Accordingly these Conspirators came
to Ishbosheth's house, who was then reposing himself on his bed, and they came
(it seems) in the disguise or habit of Country men or Merchants that came to
buy wheat Non mirum Tirticum in Regia domo repositum esse. Nimis delicati sunt
and antiquae simplicitatis ignavi qui ad hodiernam Aularum elegantiam pristinas
Regum Aulas exigunt.
, (whereof Ishbosheth's lands yielded great store) or of Porters that came to
carry some away that had been bought; and by this color having free access
into his house, and finding him asleep upon his bed, they desperately murdered
him, and cutting off his head took it away with them, and traveling all night
from Mahanaim through the Plain of Jericho to Hebron, they brought it to David,
and presented it to him, saying, Behold the head of Ishbosheth thine enemy who
sought thy life, and the Lord has avenged my Lord the King this day on Saul
and on his seed. David being enraged at this their desperate wickedness and
treachery against their Lord and Master, said, As sure as the Lord lives who
has hitherto deliverd me out of all my troubles, I will inflict upon you the
punishment that your heinous crime deserves; when the Amalekite came to me and
told me that Saul was dead (thinking to have brought me acceptable tidings) and
said moreover that upon Readiness request he had helped to kill him, and rid him
out of his pain. [See 2 Samuel 1.10.] I took hold of him and slew him in Ziklag,
though he thought I would have given him a reward for his tidings; how much
greater reason then have I to execute severe justice on such bloody and wicked
Assasinates as you are who have murdered one that was just and innocent as to
you, having done you no wrong, but contrary deserved well of you, and that so
basely and treacherously in his own house, and upon his bed where he lay
secure, suspecting no such danger? Have not I reason therefore to require his
blood at your hands, and to take you away from the earth for committing such an
abominable villainy? Having thus spoken, he commanded the young men about him to
fall upon them and slay them, which they immediately did, and cut off their
hands and their feet, and hanged them up over the Pool in Hebron, that all men
might see how much David abhorred this fact of theirs, and how far he was from
knowing any thing of it, or giving the least encouragement to them that did it.
As for the Head of Ishbosheth they took and buried it in the Sepulcher of Abner
in Hebron.

2 Samuel Chapter 4. whole Chapter.

SECT. CLXXXIII.
IShbosheth being dead, the Elders and Heads of the several Tribes of Israel,
and the Captains, and many thousands of the people that bare arms came unto
David to Hebron, to settle the Kingdom of Saul upon him, as God had appointed;
and some of them addressing themselves to him in the name of the rest, spoke
after this manner, We are thy bone and thy flesh, that is, Israelites as thou
art, and therefore doubt not but we shall find favor with thee. And when Saul
was King over us, thou wast our Captain, and did lead forth our Armies
against our enemies, and broughtest them back again crowned with victory, and
laden with spoil. And therefore the experience we have had of thy wisdom and
prowess moves us to desire thee for our King. And further God did by Samuel
appoint thee to rule over us, and said unto thee, Thou shall feed my people
Israel, and be a Captain over them. And we are bound to accept him for our
King, whom God shall choose for us. Deuteronomy. 17.15. upon all these accounts we are
willing to accept of thee, and submit to thee as our King. David graciously
received them and their address, and declared himself ready to forget all that
was past, and to receive them as his subjects into his protection. And so he
made a league with them, promising to govern them according to the rule
prescribed in Gods Law, and they promised to obey him as his loyal and liege
people. And this being done with invocation of God as a witness of their
league, it is said to be done before the Lord; and so they anointed David now a
third time anointed.
David King over all Israel. He was thirty years old at this time; he had
reigned seven years and six months over Judah in Hebron before; and after this
he reigned over all Israel thirty three years, so that his whole reign was
almost forty years. In the 1 Chronicles. 12.23. we have the number of those who out
of the several Tribes came to Hebron upon this solemn occasion: Of the Children
of Judah, six thousand and eight hundred ready armed; they had before anointed
David King over them, therefore it was not necessary they should appear in
greater numbers at this time. Of Simeon, seven thousand one hundred mighty men
of valor. Of Levi, four thousand and six hundred; though this Tribe was set
apart peculiarly for the service of God, yet many of them (being men of valor)
did (it seems) go out into the wars, and David being now to be inaugurated and
anointed King, the Levites were willing to show their forwardness also to
establish him in his Kingdom. Of the Aaronites or Priests, three thousand and
seven hundred, with Jehojada their leader. And Zadok This Zadok seems to be the
man who in David's reign was joined with Abiathar, 2 Samuel 8.17. and by Solomon
was put into Abiathars room, and made High Priest, 1 King. 2.35.
a young man of great valor was another leader among the Sons of Aaron, and
with him came twenty two Captains that were Priests, and of his Fathers house.
Of the Chilren of Benjamin, three thousand; no more of them (it seems)
appeared, because they being of the same Tribe with Saul, a multitude of them
endeavored to continue the Kingdom in Saul's race V. 29. Observabant
observationem domus Saulis: i. e. adhaerebant domui Saulis, capessentes mandata
Ishboshethi. Pisc.
, and were unwilling the Royal dignity should go from them. Of the Children of
Ephraim, twenty thousand eight hundred, mighty men of valor, and famous in
their Tribe. Of the half Tribe of Manasseh that was seated within Jordan,
eighteen thousand, which were chosen by name to be employed in this service. Of
the Children of Issachar, that were singularly prudent, and able to give advice
for the doing of any thing that was to be done in the fittest time Vide Esth.
1.13.
, and season They had much given themselves to observe seasons wherein matters
of moment were meetest to be done.
, and whose brethren were at their command, out of the high esteem they had of
their prudence and wisdom; of these the Heads or Captains were two hundred, and
therefore undoubtedly had diverse thousands under their command who came along
with them. Of Zebulon no less than fifty thousand, (the greatest number that
came out of any one Tribe) men expert in war, and armed with all Military
instruments, and who could keep rank and order, and were not of a divided or
double heart, but men of great singleness and sincerity. Of Naphtali, a
thousand Captains, and with them thirty seven thousand, armed with Shield and
Spear. Of the Danites, twenty eight thousand, and six hundred expert Soldiers.
Of Asher forty thousand. Of the Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh
an hundred and twenty thousand, furnished with all manner of weapons and
military instruments. All these (which are reckoned to be in all three hundred,
twenty two thousand, two hundred twenty two) being men of war, (who knew how to
keep rank, and observe Military order and discipline) are said to have come
with an upright heart to Hebron to make David King over all Israel; and those
that came not up with them, yet joined in heart and affection with them
therein. And there they stayed with David, eating and drinking and feasting
three days together, their brethren of Hebron making what preparations for them
they could, and others that were nigh unto them sending in provisions; yea as
far as from Issachar V. 40. Usque ab Issachar, etc. sic Jun. and Tremel.
, Zebulon and Naphtali, they brought bread and other provisions, some on Asses
and Camels, and Mules, and some drawn by Oxen, and meat, and meal, cakes of
figs, and bunches of raisins, wine and oil; they brought also oxen and sheep in
great abundance to make the Feast, for there was then great joy in Israel.

2 Samuel Chapter 5. from v. 1. to 6.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 11. from v. 1, to 4.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 12. from v. 23, to the end.

SECT. CLXXXIV.
DAvid having now so many of his subjects together, and most of them armed, he
resolved to make some good use of them to the taking of Jerusalem, which stood
in the confines of Judah and Benjamin; the men of Judah had taken that part of
it which belonged unto them, [see Judge. 1.8.] but the Children of Benjamin
could not drive out the Jebusites out of their part, [see Judge. 1.21.] no not
when they had the help of their brethren the men of Judah, [see Josh. 15.63.]
and therefore we read that afterward it was a City of strangers, when the
Levite with his Concubine went that way, [Judg. 19.] and so it continued to
this time. It was a place (it seems) of very great strength, because the
Jebusites had held it ever since Joshua had entered the land, and it was even in
the heart of the Country. David having therefore so vast a number of his
subjects that were men of war about him, (who on this solemn occasion had come
up to him to Hebron) he thought fit to take this opportunity to lead them forth
against Jerusalem, viz. that part of it that was held by the Jebusites,
resolving that the wresting of that place out of their hands should be his
first enterprise, after his being anointed King over all Israel, and intending
when he had taken it to make it the chief seat of his Kingdom. Accordingly he
led his Army up thither, but when he had laid siege thereto, the Jebusites that
were within ( presuming upon the strength of the place) in a flouting manner
told him, That except he could take from them their Tutelar gods, that is,
their Idols and Images in which they put their trust, (though he and his people
counted them, and in contempt called them blind and lame gods) he must not
expect to come in thither. And so confident they were of the power and
protection of their Idols, that they thought David and all Israel could never
take their Fort or Castle. David hereupon to encourage his Captains in the
enterprise, promised them that whoever with his Soldiers did first scale the
walls, and get into the Gutter, and kill the Jebusites, and destroy the lame
and blind Idols, they so much trusted in (which his soul hated) he should be
chief Captain and General of his forces. Joab (possibly that he might recover
the Kings favor whom he had highly offended by killing Abner) did hereupon
first scale the walls, and so was made Lord General of the Kings forces, [see 1 Chronicles. 11.6.] And David did the rather promise this reward to him that should
take the Fort, because the Jebusites had said in scorn, the blind and the lame
(as you call them) being here, we need not fear that you shall ever come into
this house Some think it was used as a Proverb, The blind and the lame being
here he shall not come into this house; that is, Take heed lest your confidence
prove like that of the Jebusites, seeing oftentimes (as it was with them) that
which begins in confidence, ends in shame. Others think that the people of
Israel did thus insult over the Jebusites after they had taken the Fort: Your
blind and lame Idols that should have kept us out, are never like to enter into
this Fort again. For no blind or lame, or dumb Idols shall ever be tolerated in
this place.
. David having thus taken the Fort, he built it round about from Millo inward;
that is, he did at his own cost and charges build and reedifie the inside of
the City from Millo, and left the care of building the out-walls to Joab, 1 Chronicles. 11.8. Millo was a deep and broad ditch that separated Mount Sion from
the lower City, which Solomon afterward filled up, 1 King. 9.15, 24. And so
David dwelt in this City, and it was called the City of David, no less than
Bethlem where he was born; and he grew great, and the Lord of Hosts by his
especial favor was with him, and blessed him. And as an effect thereof at this
time Hiram See the like concerning Solomon, 1 King. 5.1, 2.
King of Tire a stranger, sent Ambassadors to him to congratulate his
settlement in the Kingdom, and upon David's request he sent him Cedar-trees,
and Carpenters, and Masons to build him a Palace. And David perceived by his
own experience, and the inward persuasion of Gods Spirit, that it was the
immediate hand of God that had established him King over all Israel, and that
God had exalted him to the Kingdom, and made his Kingdom famous for the good of
his Church and people. And David took to him more Concubines and Wives out of
Jerusalem, after he was come from Hebron, and this (it seems) he did that
thereby he might multiply his friends and allies for the strengthening of him
in his Kingdom. But herein he showed much humane frailty Habuit David 8 uxores,
and december concubinas; sed neque ex tot uxoribus libido adulterandi extincta est:
and weakness, in making use of that as a means to establish him in his
Kingdom, which God had expressly forbidden to the Kings of Israel, viz. the
multiplying of wives. See Deuteronomy. 17.7.

2 Samuel Chapter 5. from 6, to 17.

1 Chronicles. 11. from 4, to 10.

1 Chronicles. 14.1, 2.

SECT. CLXXXV.
THE Philistines who during the Civil Wars between David and Ishbosheth were
content to look on, when they saw that Ishbosheth was dead, and the people had
generally received David for their King (who was a great warrior) and that he
had driven the Jebusites out of the strong Fort of Sion, and that the King of
Tire had made a league with him, they thought it was time for them to bestir
themselves, and to oppose his growing power. And herein the Providence of God
was remarkable, that they began with him, and not he with them, (to whom he had
been formerly obliged) and so might have seemed ungrateful if it had been
otherwise. They therefore having raised a great Army, invaded the land of
Israel, and came to seek David to fight with him. When David heard of it he
went to a Fort or strong-hold near the Cave of Adullam, [see 2 Samuel 23.13.]
there to muster, and arm his Soldiers, and the Philistines spread themselves in
the valley of Rephaim, which was in the way to Bethlem, and they had their
Headquarters in Bethlem it self. The Israelites being (as it seems) at this
time something distressed through want of water, (it being hot weather, and
harvest-time) David wished he had a draught of the well of Bethlem, but not
with any intent (as it is probable) to stir up any of his Soldiers to adventure
to fetch it for him; however three of his valiant Commanders (who are supposed
to be Adino, Eleazar, and Shammah, see 1 Chronicles. 11.19. 2 Samuel 23.13. who were
the chief over the thirty Colonels or Commanders) having heard him express his
desire of that water, they ventured to break through the host of the
Philistines, and came to Bethlem and drew of the water which was by the Gate,
and brought it unto him; but David when he understood the extreme danger they
had gone thorough to procure it, was very sorry he had given occasion to such a
rash enterprise, and had thereby so dangerously exposed the lives of his great
Captains, therefore he would not drink of it, but took it and poured it on the
ground as an offering of Thanksgiving unto God for delivering them from that
great danger, saying. Far be it from me, O Lord, to drink that water which was
procured with the extreme hazard of these men's blood 2 Samuel 23.17. Is not this
the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives?
and lives Aquam tam pretiosam dignam judicavit, quae Domino libaretur.
.

Then David enquired of the Lord by Abiathar the High Priest, whither he should
go up against the Philistines or no? For though he had a great Army, yet he
relied not upon it but seeks to God for direction, and without that would not
stir. He receives answer from God, that he should go up and be victorious. Then
David came to Baalperazim (whether the Philistines were now come from the
valley of Rephaim, 1 Chronicles, 14.11.) and David smote them there with a great
slaughter, whereupon he said, the Lord has broken in upon mine enemies by my
hand like the breaking forth of waters; signifying thereby the sense he had of
Gods hand, and power in driving away his enemies as waters, when they break
through the bank do sweep away all before them. Thence this place was called
afterward Baal-perazim The name is taken from the Idol Baal, who with his
Idolatrous worshippers was there destroyed.
, see Is. 28.21. And there the Philistines left their Images and Idols which
they had brought with them, and trusted in as their Titular Gods, which were
neither able to defend their vain worshippers, nor themselves, and David
commanded his men to burn them, see Deuteronomy. 7.25. 1 Chronicles. 14.12. The Philistines
shortly after recruiting their scattered Army came again to provoke the
Israelites to fight with them in the very same place where they had received
their former defeat, though they had no provocation from David to do so, he
having not hotly pursued his former victory; but though David had gotten a
great victory over them before, yet he was not so puffed up with it as to rely
on his own strength, therefore he would not engage with them again without
first inquiring of the Lord. The Lord bids him not go up openly and directly
against them as formerly, but to fetch a compass, and so to come upon them
behind over against the Mulberry Trees, where they looked not for him; and when
he heard the sound of a going on the tops of the Mulberry Trees, viz. of an
Army of Horsemen and Chariots marching over the tops of the Trees, (like that 2
King. 7.6.) which should be a sign to him that the Lord is gone forth with his
holy Angels to destroy the Philistines before him, then he should bestir
himself and fet upon them, for says the Lord, I will give thee victory over
them. And David did accordingly, and smote the Philistines from Geba, or Gibeah
in Benjamin, where the fight began, unto Gazer, situate in the west of Ephraim,
which was then possessed by the Philistines. So that the fame of David went
into all lands, and God brought the fear of him upon all Nations round about
him.

2 Samuel Chapter 5. from v. 17. to the end.

2 Samuel Chapter 23. from v. 13, to the 18.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 11. from v. 15, to the 20.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 14. from v. 8, to the end.

SECT. CLXXXVI.
DAvid now enjoying peace and quietness began to take into his pious thoughts
the bringing up the Ark from Kirjath-jearim* and placing it in the Fort of
Sion, which he had lately taken from the Jebusites. The Tabernacle was now at
Gibeon, [2 Chronicles. 1.3.] whither it had been removed from Nob, after that bloody
slaughter of the Priests by Saul, 1 Samuel 22. And there was the great Altar for
Burnt-offerings, to which the people frequently went, contenting themselves
therewith, and not regarding the Ark (the principal evidence of Gods presence
among them, and whereat Divine Oracles and directions were given) it being now
lodged in a private house. Upon what occasion the Ark was removed to the house
of Abinadab in Kirjath-jearim, we may see Sect. 153. and 1 Samuel 7. where it
continued about fourtysix years (saving only when upon extraordinary occasions
it was brought into the Camp, see 1 Samuel 14.8.) viz. thirtynine in the days of
Samuel and Saul, and seven in the days of David. David therefore judged it more
for the honor of God, and of the Ark, that it should not lie hid in a private
family (which possibly had occasioned the people so much to neglect it) but be
settled in the chief City of the Kingdom, in a place purposely appointed for it,
that the people might more conveniently resort unto it; wherefore calling his
great Commanders, and the Elders, and Heads of the people together, he imparted
his design unto them, and desired their advice upon it. He told them that if it
seemed good to them, and they apprehended it to be agreeable to the will of
God, he desired the Ark might be brought up to Jerusalem. For (says he) from
the days of Saul Indeed ever since the days of Samuel the Ark had been in the
house of Abinadab, but he desired rather to accuse themselves that were then
living, than their forefathers. Besides in the days of Samuel by reason of the
wars they had continually with the Philistines, they had not so good
opportunity to remove the Ark as they had afterward.
hitherto we have suffered the Ark to continue in a private house, and have not
inquired at it, nor sought Oracles of God from it as we should have done, but
have contented our selves to worship God at the Tabernacle in Gibeon, though
the Ark (the Testimony of his Presence) was not there. Let us therefore send to
our David though a King accounts his Subjects (who came from the same Father)
to be his Brethren.
Brethren in the land, and to the Priests V. 2. In urbibus, and suburbanis
suis, -- q.d. ad omnes ubicunque habitant.
and Levites to gather themselves to us, that we may in a solemn manner bring
up the Ark of God hither. The proposal highly pleased all the Congregation
there present, and they declared themselves very willing to have it done.
Sometime after therefore David sent forth his Messengers through all the land
of Israel, from Shikar a river of Egypt, (which was the utmost Southern bound)
unto the entering of Hamath, (which was the utmost Northern) to invite them to
come up to Jerusalem upon this solemn occasion. And the people came in a vast
number, no less than thirty thousand of Nobles, Magistrates and chief men, with
many of the common people. David being come with all that great multitude to
Baal of Judah, that is Kirjath-jearim, [see 1 Chronicles. 13.6.] he arose and went
with them from thence to carry the Ark to Jerusalem, (at which the name of the
Lord of hosts, who dwells between the Cherubims was called upon) intending to
place it in a Tabernacle or Tent that he had prepared for it. In order hereunto
they having taken the Ark out of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah,
(viz. an hill so called in Kirjath-jearim) they placed it in a new Cart It
seems they thought they might safely do what the Philistines had done before
them without any danger. How easily may multitudes of Gods people err if they
do not examine things by the rule of the Word?
(as the Philistines had before done, 1 Samuel 6.7, 8.) therein manifestly
transgressing the Law of God, which required that the Levites should carry it
upon their shoulders, see Numb. 4.15. and 7.9. Vzzah and Ahio (the Sons of
Abinadab) drove the Cart; Ahio went before to look to the Oxen, and Vzzah
behind to take care of the Cart and the Ark that was in it. And David and all
this great company went before the Ark (the Symbol of the Divine Presence)
playing on all sorts of Musical instruments then in use among them, and
praising the Lord, and singing (probably) the first verse of the 68 Psalm, Let
God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, and let them that hate him flee
before him; which was to be used (as appears Numb. 10.35.) at every removal of
the Ark. When they came to Nachons threshing-floor the Oxen stumbling shook the
Ark, whereupon Vzzah laid hold on it to stay it, for fear it should have
fallen; and God smote him dead Some think God only took occasion from hence to
punish him for some former fault. Sic Augustine.
upon the place for his rashness By this judgment executed on one he brought
David and the rest to see their sin.
in laying hold Non legimus eum sic percussum esse ut nihil ei fuerit temporis
ad cognoscendum and deplorandum peccatum suum. Probabile est hoc fecisse Deum
ad constituendum disciplinam in populo suo.
on the Ark, which no man might touch but the Priests only, see Numb. 4.15.
David was much disquieted and startled at this heavy judgment, wherewith God
had broken forth upon Vzzah, and he called the name of the place Perez-Vzzah,
or a breach upon Vzzah, in memorial of Gods judgment upon Vzzah. And David was
sore afraid lest the anger of the Lord should fall upon himself that day, and
that he was not pleased that the Ark should be carried to Jerusalem. But it was
not the act it self, but the ill manner of performing it, that displeased God.
However David thought it safer at present to desist from his purpose, and so he
carried it aside to the house of Obed-Edom A Levite, and one of the Porters and
Singers, 1 Chr. 15.18, 21.
the Gittite, (that is of Gath-rimmon, a City of the Philistines near Gath, and
appropriated to the Levites, Josh. 21.24.) who considering there was no danger
in harboring the Ark, provided they carried themselves with that respect and
reverence toward it which God required, he gladly received it into his house,
where it continued three months, and God wonderfully blessed They shall be no
losers that give to God, or any belonging unto him due intertainment. As we see
the instances of Potiphars entertaining Joseph, and Laban, Jacob, and the
widdow-woman, Elijah, and the Shunamite, Elisha.
him and his house, viz. his wife, children, servants, cattle, and all that he
had, and all his affairs for the Arks sake. And this blessing was so remarkable
that it was not only discerned by himself, but by his neighbors also, who
acquainted David therewith. David now saw there was no danger in removing or
entertaining the Ark, but only in the miscarriages about it, which he now
purposed to avoid; for he saw that none ought to carry the Ark of God but the
Levites, whom God had appointed to that ministry as long as the Mosaical
dispensation lasted; therefore setting afresh upon the work, and assembling the
people, he takes order to have it brought from Obed-Edom's house to Jerusalem
with all solemnity, as is more fully expressed, 1 Chronicles. Chapter 15. and Chapter 16. In
order hereunto he calls for Zadock the High Priest, and Abiathar his Deputy,
and the heads of the Priests and Levites, and requires them to sanctify and
prepare themselves for this holy service by outward ceremonial purifications,
and by inward purifications of soul. For because it was not so done at first,
he says, God had made a breach upon them, even because they had not Religiously
examined what the Law of God required of them in that case, and had not
performed this service in a right manner according to his will. Accordingly the
Priests and Levites did sanctify themselves, and then the Levites did bear the
Ark upon their shoulders. He appointed also that some of the Levites should go
before the Ark sounding with Psalteries, Harps, and Cymbals, and singing
thereunto with joyful and cheerful spirits. The several Singers played upon
several instruments, some with Cymbals of brass, and some with Psalteries on
Alamoth signifies young maidens or Virgins; and therefore Expositors hereby
understand the Treble, because their voice is shril and fittest for that part
in Music. See Tit. of 46 Psalm. Symphonia acuta, quam virgins edunt
argutissime.
Alamoth (singing the Treble) and others on Sheminith, or an instrument of
eight strings (playing the bass) to make the Music more excellent and
delightful; and some of the Priests did blow with Trumpets. And Berechiah and
Elkanah were appointed to do the office of Door-keepers to keep the people off
from pressing upon the Ark, and so were Obed-Edom and Jehiah, two of them going
before, and two behind. And when the Levites who carried the Ark perceived
after they had gone a little way with it, that God was with them, and did not
strike them with death, as he did Vzzah, but manifested his favor to them, so
that they went on without interruption, (see 2 Samuel 6.13.) they made a stand,
and offered Sacrifices to the Lord by way of thankfulness. David ordering it to
be done by the Priests, who no doubt made an Altar there according to the Law,
Exodus 20.24. David also clothed himself with a robe of white linen, like to a
Priests Ephod, and girded it to him with a linen girdle, and so also the
Levites and Singers were clothed with robes of white linen; and David
transported with an holy joy danced before the Ark of the Lord with all his
might. It was in those days usual to testify their thankefulness and joy by
dancing See Psalm. 149.3. and 150.4. and 30.11. Exodus 15.20.
, and so David did here, dancing gravely and decently, answerable to the
Religious Music, and testifying his zeal for God and his Worship with all his
might, and his thankefulness that the Lord would please to settle the Ark in
his City. Thus David and all Israel brought up the Ark of the Lord with joyful
acclamations and singing, and the sound of Cornets, Trumpets, Cymbals,
Psalteries, and Harps. And when the Ark came into the City of David in this
solemn manner, Michal, Readiness daughter looking out at a window, and seeing
David dancing Pra gaudio immenso David vehementer saltabat, ita ut nasutis non,
judicantibus recte de pio Davidis zelo regiae dignitatis oblitus videretur.
and playing on his Harp before the Ark, she despised him in her heart. So they
brought the Ark and set it in the place or Tabernacle David had prepared for
it, and then they offered Burnt-offerings, and Peace Offerings before the Lord,
and then David like a pious Prince blessed the people in the name of the Lord,
and prayed for their peace and prosperity. Then he royally feasted them,
appointing to each person both man and woman a loaf of bread, a good piece of
flesh, and a flagon of wine, and so he dismissed them, and they departed to
their own houses with great content and satisfaction, having performed this
public service. David then returned to bless his own house, viz. to pray with
and for his family as he had done for the people. But Michal, Readiness daughter
(too much resembling her Father in evil qualities) goes out to meet him, and
being no longer able to suppress her disdainful thoughts, she cries out, O how
glorious was the King of Israel this day, who uncovered himself in the eyes of
the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelesly uncovereth
V. 20. discooperiens se -- and nudatus est, non omnino, sed quod deposuisset
extimam vestem regalem ut Ephod indueret.
himself; intimating that by laying aside his Princely attire, and mixing
himself with the multitude, and dancing and leaping in the open streets as vain
fellows use to do, he had thereby exposed himself to the scorn and contempt of
every girl that came to see the pomp of this removing the Ark. He tells her
that what he had done, he had done as in the sight and presence of God, and for
his glory; and he could never honor him sufficiently who had chosen and
appointed him to be King and Ruler over Israel, and had rejected her father and
his house. And (says he) I am so far from thinking it a disgrace to me to
honor and glorify my God, though among the meanest of his people, and making
my self therein (as it were) equal with them, that if that be to be vile, I
will yet be more vile, and will be ready to humble and abase my self more that
I may glorify him. And as to the Maidservants of whom thou speak as if
they laughed at this my carriage, I doubt not but the more I humble my self for
God the more I shall be had in honor of all my servants: For God has promised
that those that honor him he will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30. Whither Michal was any
thing moved with what David said is uncertain, but certain it is, she got
nothing but a curse for this her scorning of him, for the Lord adjudged her
from henceforth to perpetual barrenness Michal never had any child, those 5
Sons mentioned 2 Samuel 21.8. were the Sons of Merab her sister, whom Michal
brought up for Adriel, Merabs husband, 1 Samuel 18.19. and are called Michals
Sons because she did educate if not adopt them.
, which was looked upon as no small curse among the Hebrew women, but must
needs be accounted a greater curse in a Kings wife, and the daughter of a King,
who being of a more Illustrious family than any other of David's wives; if she
had brought forth a Son he might in likelihood have been heir to the Crown.

2 Samuel Chapter 6. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 13. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 15. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 16. from v. 1, to 7.

SECT. CLXXXVII.
DAvid now deputes certain of the Levites See 1 Chro. 6.31. there the chief
mentioned were Asaph, Heman, and Ethan, called also Jeduthun; these were famous
men, and chief Singers, and withal Prophets and Penmen of some Psalms, 2 Chronicles. 29.30.
to attend upon the Ark of the Lord, and to declare and publish his great and
glorious acts in their Songs and Hymns, and to praise him with their voices and
Musical instruments (namely such as were appointed for his servic 1 Chronicles. 16.
v. 42. called Musical Instruments of God.
,) and that constantly every day at the hour appointed. Then David (who in
regard of that Divine skill he had in composing Psalms, was styled the sweet
Singer of Israel, 2 Samuel 23.1.) delivered to Asaph and his Brethren a Psalm to
have a Tune put to it, and to be sung in the service of God, which is here
recorded; the several parts whereof were afterward much enlarged by him, and
reduced into several Psalms (as we may see Psalm. 105. and 96.) the former part
of it to v. 23. is part of Psalm. 105. and the sum of it is to praise the Lord
for public benefits afforded to his Church and people, in regard whereof in
times of great joy they used (it seems) to sing this Psalm, as may be gathered
from Isa. 12.4. it begins, Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name, make
known his deeds among the people; set forth his glorious Attributes; seek to
know the Lord, and his strength, and resort to the Ark (from whence he uses to
give forth his Oracles, Exodus 25.22. and is the Symbol of his Almighty presence
among us, and therefore called the Ark of his strength, Psalm. 132.8.) yea, seek
his favor continually day after day as occasion requires. Remember the
judgments of his mouth (which he first threatened and then executed) O ye seed
of Jacob, who are his adopted and peculiar people, freely chosen by him. He is
our God, he executes his judgments on his enemies throughout the whole world:
O let us be mindful always of his Covenant, wherein he has declared what
duties he expects from us, and what rewards we may expect from him upon our
obedience, [Gen. 17.7, 9.] which Covenant he has commanded to be observed by
us, and the generations following us, even the Covenant which he made with
Abraham, [Gen. 17.7. and 15.18.] and his Oath unto Isaac, [Gen. 26.3, 4.]
renewing the same Covenant to him which by Oath he had confirmed unto Abraham,
[Gen, 22.16, 17.] and which he gave to Jacob for a Law or Statute, and to
Israel for an everlasting Covenant, [Gen. 28.13] saying unto thee and thy seed
will I give the land of Canaan for an inheritance: And this promise he made to
them when they were but few in number, and strangers in the land; and when they
traveled from Nation to Nation, and from one Kingdom to another, his
Providence was visibly and remarkably over them: He suffered not the
Inhabitants of the places where they sojourned to do them wrong, but reproved
Kings for their sakes, (as particularly Pharaoh, Genesis 12.17. and Abimelech,
Genesis 20.3.) saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; that
is, wrong not those whom I have consecrated to my self by the anointing of my
holy Spirit, and to whom I do familiarly reveal my will in dreams, visions, and
by the ministry of my holy Angels, that they may teach and instruct others; and
God did thus defend them because by special Covenant he had taken them under
his protection.

That which follows from hence to the 34 ver. the Psalmist (it seems)
afterward made a new Psalm of, viz. the 96, the drift of which is to stir up
all Nations to praise the Lord, and consequently includes a Prophecy of
Christ, and the gathering all Nations into the Church by the Preaching of the
Gospel. It begins, Sing unto the Lord all ye Nations of the earth, show forth
from day to day, and time to time (as occasion is offered) his salvation, viz.
the redemption and salvation purchased by the Messiah. Great is the Lord, and
greatly to be feared above all Gods. For the Gods of the heathen are Idols, but
our God made the Heavens. God is a King of infinite Majesty, Glory and honor,
most strong and mighty, the fountain of all strength and gladness to his
people; such his people find him in his Sanctuary (where he reveals himself
unto them) and such with glad hearts they acknowledge him to be. See Psalm. 96.6.
O ye kindreds and families of the earth ascribe unto the Lord glory and
strength, give unto him the glory due unto his name; that is, which is due unto
him in respect of his Glorious Attributes; bring an offering, and come into his
Court, the place appointed for his solemn Worship; and worship him in his
glorious holy Sanctuary 1 Chronicles. 16. v. 29. Worship him in the beauty of
holiness. Sanctitas pro Sanctuario per metonymiam adjuncti; vel in ornatu
sanctitatis, i. e. pura mente.
. Fear before him all ye inhabitants of the earth; by him the world was made at
first, and by his supporting Providence it is established, and firmly settled,
and therefore we need not fear but he will also support his Church and people.
Let the heavens be glad, and the earth rejoice, and let men say one to another,
the Lord reigns. Let the Sea roar Humane affections are here ascribed to
insensible creatures, thereby to set out man's duty.
with the fullness thereof; that is, with all that therein is, thereby as it
were expressing its joy. Let the fields also rejoice, and the trees of the wood
sing out before the Lord when he comes to judge the world; that is, to rule and
govern it, which he will do with righteousness and faithfulness. O give thanks
unto the Lord, for he is good, his mercy endures for ever. Save us O God of
our Salvation, and gather us together, and firmly unite us, who have been
before too much rent and divided, and deliver us from the Heathen, that we may
glory in thy praiseworthy works, and count it our happiness and glory, that we
may serve and praise thee. Blessed be God for ever and ever, and let all the
people say, Amen.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 16. from v. 4, to the end.

SECT. CLXXXVIII.
DAvid at this present enjoying peace and quietness, being not disturbed with
the invasion of neighboring Nations, he began to take into his pious thoughts
the building of a Temple for God and his Ark. In order hereunto he sent for
Nathan the Prophet to advise with him about it. He tells him he was come to
dwell in a stately house which he had built for himself ( Hiram King of Tire
having furnished him with Cedar-trees, and Carpenters, and Masons for that
purpose) but he thought it unfit that he should dwell in so stately a Palace,
and the Ark of God should be lodged in the mean time only in a Tabernacle
covered with Skins and Curtains. Indeed while the Israelites were in the
Wilderness in a flitting condition, the public place of Gods Worship was only
a Tent or Tabernacle, which might easily be removed with them, but now they
were settled in Canaan, he thought it more suitable to their present state that
the house allotted to Gods service should be no longer a Moveable Tabernacle,
but a standing Temple, especially considering that he had said that when they
were come into the land of their inheritance, he would choose out a place for
them to cause his name to dwell there, Deuteronomy. 12.10, 11, 14. And therefore upon
these considerations, and in zeal to the honor of God he had thoughts of
building a Temple for his public Worship. Nathan was much pleased with the
design, and greatly encouraged him in it, saying to him, Go on Hence it appears
that the Prophets had not always the spirit of Prophecy upon them, but spoke
sometimes as private men, as Samuel did, 1 Samuel 26.6.
, build an house for the Lord as thou have designed, he seems to have moved
thee to it, and undoubtedly will answer thee in it. This approbation of Nathan
so far encouraged David that (as some think) he bound himself by a solemn vow
that he would not rest till he had set himself upon the accomplishment of it,
as they gather from Psalm. 132.2, 3, 4. But God delayed not to bring David
quickly out of his mistake, and therefore that very night he spoke to Nathan to
go to him and to speak to him after this manner, Whereas it was in thine heart
to build an house unto my name, thou did well that it was in thine heart, [1
King. 8.18.] but it shall not be done by thee, but by thy Son, 2 Chronicles. 6.7, 8,
9. it is not my pleasure that thou should do it, and that for these reasons:

1. Because thou have been a martial man, and have shed much blood Haec verba
non leguntur, 2 Samuel 7. Ergo pertinent ad Paralipomena, i. e. ad praetermissa,
unde hi duo libri nomen acceperunt.
, which though it was the blood of mine and my peoples enemies (and so was a
service well pleasing to me) yet the Temple being to be a Type of the Body of
the Messiah the Prince of Peace, it shall be built by a Peaceable Prince.

2ly. Though thou enjoyest peace now, yet thou have many wars to wage with the
Nations about thee, that are not yet subdued, and so can not have leisure to
go through with so great a work as that is.

3ly. I have not made choice of any standing permanent house wherein to
manifest my gracious presence to this day, but have manifested my self in a
Tabernacle, flitting and removing from place to place, yet all that while I
have been present with my people ever since coming out of Egypt as their God
Alsufficient; therefore there is no absolute need at present of building any
other house for me, which shall be done when my own time is come.

4ly. I did never speak to any of the Tribes of Israel, or to the Judges whom I
appointed as faithful shepherds to govern and provide for my people, that an
House of Cedar should be built for me. Moreover do not think that my forbidding
thee to do it proceeds from want of love to thee, for thou may remember how I
have taken thee from the sheep-coat from following the sheep to be ruler over
my people, and have prospered thee in all thine enterprises, and have destroyed
all thine enemies that rose up against thee, and have made thee famous and
formidable to the Nations round about thee, and have given thee a name like the
name of the great Princes and Potentates of the earth. And as I have already
multiplied many blessings upon thee, so I am still ready to do it for time to
come. Moreover I have not only blessed thee, but I will bless the whole Nation
under thy Government. As I have appointed a place V. 10. I have appointed a
place for my people. So the Dutch Annotations read it. In the Hebrew it is
(...) and posui.
, a good land for them, so I will plant How was this promise fulfilled that the
Lord would so plant them in a place of their own, that they should thence move
no more, and that the children of wickedness should not afflict them any more
as in former times, etc. when after Solomon's days both the Kingdom of Israel
and Judah were often invaded and wasted by many of the neighboring Nations,
and the people at last carried away captive to Assyria and Babylon. Either this
promise therefore must be restrained to the times of David and Solomon, in
whose days they did enjoy the land as their own, without molestation from the
neighboring Nations, or else it must be understood as a conditional promise,
viz. if they were obedient, else God reserved liberty to himself to deal
otherwise with them.
them there, and so settle them in the land that they shall quietly enjoy it as
their own lawful inheritance, and not be dispossessed of it, and tossed up and
down as formerly they have been, neither shall they be molested and vexed
continually by their oppressing neighbors the children of wickedness, as they
have been ever since I appointed Judges to rule over them even unto this time
that I have set thee over them, and have given thee rest from all thine enemies
round about. And seeing thou had a purpose to build an house for me, I will
(says the Lord) make thee an house, that is, I will establish and continue thy
Kingdom in thy posterity, and (which is far more) raise up out of thy seed the
Messiah, who shall be an everlasting King over his people. And when thy days be
fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, I will set up one of thy Sons
(viz. Solomon) on the Throne after thee, and will establish his Kingdom, and he
shall build an house for my name, for my worship and service, and I will
establish the Throne of his Kingdom for ever This is proper and peculiar to
Christ's Kingdom alone, and cannot be literally understood of Solomon's, seeing
the Kingdom continued in his posterity only to Zedekiah, therefore the promises
here are some peculiar to Solomon, and some to Christ, and some to both.
; I will be to him a Father This promise belonged both to Solomon and Christ,
to Solomon as we read 1 Chronicles. 28. to Christ as we read Heb. 1.5. To Solomon by
grace and adoption, to Christ by natural eternal generation.
, and he shall be my Son, and if he commit iniquity This is to be understood of
Solomon, and not of Christ, who committed no sin.
, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children
of men; that is, I will correct him for his sin, as a loving Father does his
beloved Son, with Fatherly chastisements for his amendment, and not in wrath
for destruction, but I will not quite cast him out of my favor, and deprive
him of his Kingdom as I did Saul. And thine house and thy Kingdom shall be
established for ever before thee; that is, thy Kingdom shall be established in
thy self unto the day of thy death, and shall in thy sight be settled upon
Solomon thy Son, 1 King. 1.28. whence thou may assure thy self of the
continuance of it in thy posterity for a long time (...) Apud Hebraeos non
semper significat tempus infinitum, sed pro materia de qua agitur, aliquando
solum tempus been longum.
. Thus Nathan faithfully delivered unto David all that was revealed unto him in
the vision he had from the Lord, though it was contrary to the advice which he
himself had before privately given him. David having received this message went
into the Tent where the Ark was, and having for some time sat down, and
meditated on the great goodness and mercy of God to him, he then addressed
himself in prayer unto the Lord after this manner: Who am I, O Lord God, and
what is my Fathers house that thou have brought me hitherto, and so highly
advanced me? And yet as if this were but a small thing in thy sight, thou have
promised to continue thy favor not only to me, but to my posterity after me
for many generations. And is this the manner of men, O Lord God, to deal so
bountifully with them that have no way deserved of them; surely such love as
this is not to be found among mortals, but is only peculiar to thy self, who
art God omnipotent. And what can I speak more to thee, or ask more of thee for
my honor or benefit, than thou of thy free grace and mercy have already
promised me, and art ready to confer upon me, [see 1 Chronicles. 17.18.] For thou
know thy servant, and what is good for me better than I my self. And thou
know the desire of my heart is to praise thy name, though with my tongue I
am not able sufficiently to do it. Thou have conferred all these benefits on
me, not for any desert in me, but of thy mere grace and love, and for thy truth
and promise sake, that thy servant might know what thou meanest to do for him
and his in time to come. Thou art the great and only true God; there is none
like thee, nor besides thee, according to all that we ever heard or understood.
And what one Nation is there in all the earth like unto thy people so advanced
in high and holy privileges, V. 23. To do for you great things, here is an
Apostrophy to the people. In the next words his speech is directed to God
again, for thy land before thy people.
whom God came (as it were) down from heaven to redeem and separate for a
people to himself, for the glory of his great name, and has done such great
and terrible things for them openly in their sight, whereby he has delivered
them out of Egypt, and subdued their enemies in the land of Canaan, and rescued
them from all Nations that sought their ruin, and from their false gods, on
whom they foolishly relied for help. And thou have confirmed and established
the people of Israel for a people to thy self for ever, that is, the natural
Israel for a very long time, (viz. to the coming of the Messiah) and the
spiritual Israel consisting of true converts both among Jews and Gentiles for
ever. And now O Lord let the word that thou have spoken concerning thy servant,
and concerning his house be established for ever, and do as thou have said, and
let thy name be magnified for ever, that it may be said, the Lord of hosts is
God over Israel. Yea let the house of thy servant be established before thee,
for thou Lord have made known to me what was formerly hidden from me, saying to
me, I will build thine house, and continue the Kingdom to thee, and thy
posterity after thee; therefore thy servant has found his heart moved to make
this prayer unto thee, that it may be so, having thy promise as a sure ground
of his faith and confidence, and cannot doubt of obtaining his request, for thy
words are true and sure to be performed, and thou have faithfully promised this
goodness unto thy servant. Let it therefore please thee so to bless the house
of thy servant, that it may continue before thee for ever. Thou have, O Lord,
spoken it, and I firmly rest on thy promise for the performance of it. Thou
have promised to bless my house, and I firmly believe it shall be blessed.

2 Samuel Chapter 7. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 17. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 22. v. 8, 9, 10.

2 Chronicles. Chapter 6. v. 8, 9.

1 King. Chapter 8. v. 18, 19.

SECT. CLXXXIX.
WE showed in the former Section that one reason among others, why the Lord
would not permit David to build him an house, was because he would not have
leisure to do it, by reason of the many wars he was to be engaged in.

Indeed from this time to the birth of Solomon, most part of his time, (as we
shall see afterward) was spent in wars, wherein he was very victorious and
successful, and therein God made good to him the promise concerning the
prosperity and flourishing estate of his Kingdom, and the enlarging of his
Dominion, which by these conquests stretched not only from Shicor a river in
Egypt in the South, to A City in Syria, which is thought to be Antioch.
Hamath in the North, [see 1 Chronicles. 13.5.] but from thence to the river
Euphrates, which was the utmost bound of all that land which had been formerly
promised to the seed of Abraham, [Gen. 15.18. compared with Deuteronomy. 11.24. and
Josh. 3.4.] and was never possessed by any of them, save only by David and
Solomon, see 1 King. 4.21, 24. There are in this Chapter five wars mentioned
that he was engaged in.

The first This was indeed his 3d Engagement with the Philistines after he was
anointed King over all Israel.
was against the Philistines descended from the Egyptians, whose Progenitor was
Mizraim the second Son of cursed Cham; they were Heathens, and commonly bitter
enemies to the Israelites; these therefore David now set upon and subdued and
took their strong City Gath It was afterward called Dio-Caesarea, it stood in
the frontiers of Palestine, at the entrance into Judea and Ephraim, and the
mountainous tract of ground whereon it was built (it seems) was called Ammah.
Per hanc urbem Philistaei olim fraenabant Judaeam, nunc David fraenat
Philistaeos, imponens illi militare praesidium.
(with all the Towns under its jurisdiction, see 1 Chronicles. 18.1.) called
Metheg-Ammah, or the Bridle of Ammah, because it bridled and kept in awe all
the Country round about it.

His second war was with the Moabites descended of Lot's Incest with his
daughter, Genesis 19.37. At the coming of the Israelites out of the Wilderness,
they were forbidden by God to invade the Moabites land, or do them any hurt,
because he had given it to the children of lot for a possession, Deuteronomy. 2.9. and
God restrained them from distressing them, because they had not then done them
any wrong, but afterward they proved malicious enemies, and thereupon were
interdicted from entering into the Congregation unto the tenth generation, Deuteronomy.
23.3. They showed their ill will to them in not relieving them with bread in
their necessity, and afterward they hired Balaam to curse them, and when that
would not do, they followed his cursed counsel in tempting them by their women
to commit fornication, and to join with them in their Idolatrous feasts, Numb.
25. whereby a great plague was brought upon them. They oppressed them also by
Eglon their King in the time of the Judges. It Is true the King of Moab gave
entertainment to David's Father and Mother, [1 Samuel 22.3, 3.] looking upon him
at that time as an enemy to Saul and his people; but when David was once
established King over all Israel, it seems the Moabites expressed the same
hostile mind against him, which they had formerly against Saul. But what
particular provocation they gave now unto David to make war upon them, is
uncertain. Some Jewish Writers think that David having left his Father and
Mother under the protection of the Moabites, they treacherously murdered them
after he was departed from them; but the Scripture affording us no ground for
such a conceit, we dare not entertain it. However undoubtedly David had just
cause now to make war upon them, they still continuing in their former enmity
against the Israelites, though his end was not wholly to dispossess them of
their Country, but to make them Tributary. He therefore absolutely vanquishing
them, and levelling their Cities to the ground, he measured their Country with
a Regionem in tres parts mensus est adhibito funiculo, ex quibus unam
conservavit, occisis qui erant in aliis duabus. Glass.
line, dividing it into three parts, and two thirds of the people he doomed to
destruction, and preserved one third part of them alive to inhabit there, and
till the land, and pay him Tribute. And so that Prophecy was in part
fulfilled, Numb. 24.17. There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter
shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, etc. And so Moab
became his Wash-pot, as he himself sang, Psalm. 60.8.

His third War was with Hadadezer King of Zobah, a Country in Syria, lying
between Damascus and Euphrates. Saul (it seems) had had a war with this King, 1 Samuel 14.47. and had prevailed against him, but he was now grown very potent and
formidable, and David knowing how dangerous it was that the Syrians who were
professed enemies to the Israelites, and dwelt so near them should grow
powerful, he made war upon them, intending to enlarge his bounds Upon this
occasion David composed the 60 Psalm, as may appear by the Title.
, and recover the utmost border appointed by God to the Israelites, which
reached to the river Euphrates, Genesis 15.18. And David took from him a thousand
Chariots, and seven hundred Horsemen, that is, seven hundred Companies, or
ranks Thus is this place reconciled with 1 Chronicles. 18.4. where it is said that
David took from him 7000 Horsemen.
of Horsemen, having ten in each rank. And David houghed or ham-string'd all
the Chariot-horses, excepting only so many as would serve for air hundred
Chariots, which he reserved for himself, having regard therein to what God had
commanded the Kings of Israel, [Deut. 17.16.] viz. not to multiply horses to
themselves, lest putting confidence in their horses of war, they should leave
off trusting in the Lord. And therefore this houghing was put in execution by
Joshua, Chapter 11.6. And besides these Chariots and Horses, David took also from
Hadadezer twenty thousand footmen.

His fourth war was with the Syrians of Damascus, who came to succor
Hadadezer, of whom he slew two and twenty thousand, and he put Garrisons into
that part of Syria When Hadadezer King of Zoba was worsted by David, Rezon the
Son of Eliadah fled from him, and gathered together such scattered forces of
Hadadezers as were put to flight in the battle, and made himself Captain over
them, and in time got such an army together (who maintained themselves as it is
like by plunder and spoil roving up and down) that at last in Solomon's time
either he or his Son seized upon Damascus, and was made King there; and it is
said of him that he abhorred Israel and reigned over Syria, see 1 King. 11.
from 23, to 26. the Kings that succeeded him became afterward bitter enemies
to the Kings of Israel.
, and they became Tributary to him. Thus the Lord preserved and prospered David
in all his enterprises. And David took the shields of gold Hac arma vel tum
gestata sunt in armamentario Regio servabantur. Sic Alexander Magnus Milites
Argyraspidas habuit, sic dictos a parmis Argenteis.
which he found with the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem,
and there laid them up for the building of the Temple; and from Betah These
Cities are called Tibhath and Chun, 1 Chronicles. 18.8. possibly their names were
afterward changed when that History was written.
and Berothai (Cities of Hadadezer) he took very much Brass wherewith Solomon
afterward made the Brazen Sea, and the pillars and vessels of Brass. Then Toi
Toi is called Tou, 1 Chronicles. 18.9.
King of Hamath Duplex erat Hamath vel major quae est Antiochia, vel minor quae
Epiphania.
sent his Son Joram (called Adoram, 1 Chronicles. 18.10.) to David to congratulate
his victory over Hadadezer, who was his enemy, and with whom he had had wars.
And Joram brought with him rich presents, viz. vessels of silver, and vessels
of gold, and of brass, which David consecrated to God for the building of the
Temple, as he did the other silver and gold which he had taken from other
Nations. And David by his many victories became renowned for a great Captain,
and victorious Conqueror, having all his enterprises crowned by God with
success.

His fifth War was against the Edomites. When he returned from conquering the
Syrians, he led the Army (which under himself was commanded by Joab and
Abishai) into the Country of the Edomites, (with whom many of the Syrians as it
seems now joined) and in the valley of Salt (situate on the East of Mount Seir,
and on the South of the Dead Sea, 2 King. 14.7.) he engaged with them, and slew
of them twelve thousand, and afterward in the pursuit by Abishai, six thousand
more, in all eighteen thousand. Which victory being obtained by Joab and
Abishai as Generals under David, it is ascribed to them all three, see 2 Samuel
8.13. Psalm. 60. in the Title, and 1 Chronicles. 18.12. Joab after this victory
employed himself first in burying the slain, and then staying there six months,
in that time he made a full conquest of them, and slew every male that he could
lay his hands on from whom he apprehended any danger. In this time Hadad (who
was of the seed royal of Edom, a youth of about twelve years of age) with
several of his fathers servants fled into Egypt, and there was kindly received
and entertained by Pharaoh, and married the Queens sister, and afterward
returning into Edom in Solomon's reign, was a bitter enemy to him, see 1 King.
11. from v. 14, to 22. The Edomites being thus conquered, David put Garrisons
into all their strong holds, and they became Tributary unto him, and he placed
a Viceroy over them to govern them as his Deputy, which continued unto Jehorams
time, 2 Chronicles. 21.8. compared with 1 King. 22.47. And thus that Prophecy, Genesis
25.23. that the elder should serve the younger was fulfilled, though that other
Prophecy, Genesis 47.40. that Esau's posterity should break the yoke from off his
neck, was also afterward accomplished in the days of Jehoram.

David returning from making these Conquests, behaved himself as a wise and
just King, executing judgment and justice to all his people. His chief Officers
were these, Joab was the General of his Army, Jehoshaphat, Recorder and writer
of the Chronicles and things that were to be registered. Zadock (of the stock of
Eleazar, 1 Chronicles. 6.4, 8) and Ahimelech (of the stock of Ithamar, and Son of
Abiathar He fled from Saul to David, 1 Samuel 22.20. and continued High Priest
till Solomon's time, when for his siding with Adonijah he was deposed, and
Zadock put into his room.
the High Priest) were the two chief Priests of their several stocks, and had
the chief command (under Abiathar) of the other Priests, each over the Priests
of his own family. For David divided the Priests into two parts according to
the two families of Eleazar and Ithamar, as we may see 1 Chronicles. 24.3, 4. And
Benaiah the Son of Jehojada was over two bands of select Soldiers appointed to
attend upon the Kings person in their courses as his Guard, see 2 Samuel 15.18.
and Chapter 20.7. and 1 King. 1.38, 44. It Is probable that these Cherethites These
were old expert Soldiers like the Praetorian Soldiers among the Romans.
were such Garrison-Souldiers of the Israelites as were placed in Chereth of
the Philistines, see 1 Samuel 30.14. and that the Pelethites were also such
Garrison-Souldiers as quartered among the Japhlithites, Josh. 16.3. And David's
Sons were chief about the King, and chief Rulers. But that policy or Paternal
affection of his did not succeed well with him, for two of his Sons, viz.
Absalom and Adonijah having their spirits thereby highly raised, at last they
presumptuously affected the Sovereignty.

2 Samuel Chapter 8. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 18. whole Chapter.

1 King. Chapter 11. from 14, to 26.

Psalm. 60. and Psalm. 108.

SECT. CXC.
DAvid having subdued his bordering enemies, and settled the affairs both of
Church and State in his Kingdom, he begins now to call to mind the Covenant he
had made with his dear friend Jonathan, wherein he had engaged himself to show
kindness to him and his posterity. It may indeed seem strange he did not long
ago think of it, and that he should know nothing of Mephibosheth, Jonathan's
Son, who was but five years old when Saul and Jonathan were slain, [2 Samuel
4.4.] and now was come to those years that he was married, and had a young Son;
but being hitherto busied in settling his Kingdom at home, and subduing his
enemies abroad, and Ishbosheth (Saul's Son) having raised a rebellion against
him (pretending a right to the Crown, and denying his right which God himself
had given him) and all that family (as it is like) having sided with him in that
cause, for these or the like reasons, David's head might possibly for some time
be so filled with jealousy of State, that he had no great mind to show
kindness to any of Readiness posterity; but being now well settled in his Kingdom,
and freed from such jealousies, he calls to mind the great love that had been
formerly between him and Jonathan, and the Covenant he had made with him in the
presence of the Lord, and confirmed by solemn Oath, that he would show kindness
to him and his posterity after him, [1 Samuel 18.3. and 20.14, 15.] and thereupon
he inquires whither there were any remaining of the house of Saul that were fit
persons for him to show kindness unto for Jonathan's sake. Ziba an old servant
of Readiness informs him that Jonathan had a Son named Mephibosheth Called
Meribbaal, 1 Chronicles. 8.34.
, that was lame of his feet, who abode in the house of Machir in Lodebar, a
little Town in the land of Gilead beyond Jordan, where he lived in a private
and obscure manner, desiring to be concealed as much as he could, and expected
nothing higher than to have his life saved. David presently sends for him, and
when he came before the King he fell on his face, and did reverence. David
receives him very kindly, and bids him be of good courage; for he did not send
for him for his hurt, but for his good. I will surely (says he) show kindness
to thee for thy Father Jonathan's sake, and will restore to thee all the proper
Which were, it seems, now in David's hands, and confiscated by reason of
Ishbosheth's rebellion.
lands of thy Grandfather Saul, and will repute thee as one of my own Sons, and
thou shall constantly eat bread at my Table.

Mephibosheth ravished at this great and unexpected munificence and favor of
the King, he cries out, What is thy servant that thou should look upon such a
dead dog David had been thus humbled himself once before Saul, 1 Samuel 24.14.
After whom is the King of Israel come forth, after a dead dog, after a flea?
as I am? Then David calling for Ziba, said to him, Behold I have given to
Mephibosheth all that land that pertained to Saul; Thou and thy Sons, and thy
servants shall till the land for him, and bring in the fruits that he may have
food in his house for his family to eat. But for himself he shall eat at my
Table continually. Ziba replied, that all that the King had commanded should be
done. So he with his whole house, viz. his fifteen Sons, and twenty servants,
became servants to Mephibosheth. After this Mephibosheth dwelt at Jerusalem,
having a young Son whose name was Micha We find 1 Chronicles. 8.35. that this Micha
had four Sons, and those many others, in whom the noble family of Jonathan was
continued.
.

2 Samuel Chapter 9. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXCI.
AS David had thus showed himself kind to Jonathan's Son, so he was also ready
to show kindness to any others who had been kind to him; a particular instance
whereof we have in this Chapter, Nahash the King of Ammon had (it seems) showed
David some kindness; possibly when he fled from Achish King of Gath, he had
entertained and protected him, though (as it is like) not so much out of love to
David, as hatred to Saul, who had given him a great defeat before
Jabesh-Gilead, 1 Samuel 11. But whatever the particular kindness was, Nahash now
dying, and Hanun his Son succeeding him, David sent his Ambassadors to this
new King to condole with him for the death of his Father. The Princes and
Courtiers of Hanun begin to be full of jealousies upon this, and strangely
misinterpret this kindness of David, and judge it to be only counterfeit: What
(say they to Hanun) do thou think that David by this Ambassie intends to
honor thy Father? Never imagine that he really intends any such thing;
undoubtedly he has sent these men as spies to search and observe our Country,
and to discover some advantages for the conquering of it, that he may serve us
as he has done other Nations. Besides, we have heard that by their Law they
are forbidden to seek our prosperity all their days; and therefore what reason
have we to trust them? Thus some Politicians think themselves most wise when
they are most suspicious, but such wisdom often proves mere folly, and
brings upon men those very evils which they so unreasonably feared. Hanun
like a young foolish King hearkens presently to the rash counsel of these
unadvised Courtiers, and instead of kindly entertaining David's Ambassadors
(as he ought to have done) he resolves to put all indignities upon them, and to
expose them to the derision and scorn of every one that should see them, and
according first causes one half of their beards to be shaved off, partly to
deform and disgrace them, and partly to put a scorn on their Religion, the Jews
being by the Law forbidden, even in their greatest mournings to cut or shave
their beards, Levit. 19.27. In regard to which Law the Israelites (it seems)
forbear to shave their beards at all. 2ly, Whereas in those Countries they used
to wear long loose garments, not only for ornament and comeliness, but also to
hide their nakedness, and keep their uncomely parts from open view, Hanun
caused their garments to be cut off at the middle, (even to the buttocks) that
those parts which nature it self teaches men to hide, might lie open to their
shame, herein also crossing the Law of God which so carefully provided that
such nakedness might not be discovered, see Exodus 20.26. Exodus 28.41, 42. So
that the Ammonites in thus maliciously and despitefully abusing these
Ambassadors, offended against the Law of God, of Nature, and of Nations, and
thereby deserved most severe punishment. David being informed of these
insufferable injuries done to his Ambassadors, he sent some of his servants to
meet them, and to comfort them, and to cloth them anew, and appointed them to
stay by the way at Jericho That is in some cottage or private house set up in
or near the place where Jericho once stood. For it was not rebuilt till the
days of Ahab, 1 King. 16.24. and the more obscure the place was, the fitter it
was for them to stay in till their beards were grown again.
, till their beards were grown, and then to return to him. The children of
Ammon (who were descended of Lots Incest with his younger daughter, as the
Moabites were of his Incest with the Elder) began now to be sensible that by
this abominable abuse of these Ambassadors, they had made themselves so odious
to David, that he would certainly seek to be revenged on them, and therefore
they thought it needful to make all possible preparations against him; and
accordingly they hired with a thousand talents of silver the Syrians of
Bethrehob (a City at the foot of Libanus) and the Syrians of Zoba (a City lying
between Damascus and Euphrates) and the people of the King of Maacha another
part of Syria near Gilead Trachonitis, and the people of Ishtob where Jephtah
dwelt, Judge. 11.3. and some also of the Syrians of Mesopotamia Called in the
Hebrew Aram Naharaim. This was the place from whence Isaac had his wife, Genesis
24.10. and the Country out of which God called Abraham, Act. 7.2 and therefore
the Israelites were to acknowledge that a Syrian was their Father, Deuteronomy. 26.
, in all thirty three thousand, whereof some rode and fought in Chariots, and
the rest were Footmen, who were all ready enough to engage in this war against
David, that thereby they might deliver themselves from the yoke which he had
lately put upon their necks, and revenge themselves on him. David hearing of
these vast preparations against him, thought it best policy to be beforehand
with them, and accordingly sent Joab with a great host to invade them, and to
make their Country the seat of the war. The Israelites drawing nigh unto them,
the Ammonites put themselves in battle array before their City Medba, that if
they were beaten they might retreat into it; and they caused the Syrians and
their Auxiliaries to put themselves in battle array in the fields, that so they
might hem in the Israelites, and engage them both in front and rear. Joab
seeing this, he thought with himself that the Syrians being Mercenaries were
not like to stand to it if courageously assaulted, and if they were once
beaten, the Ammonites would quickly be put to flight; wherefore he chose the
flower of his Army, (whom he himself led) to set upon the Syrians, and the rest
he put under the command of his Brother Abishai, with them to engage the
Ammonites, telling his Brother that if the Syrians were too hard for him he
should come and help him, and if the Ammonites were too hard for him, he would
accordingly come and help him. And then he spoke to his Soldiers after this
manner, Let us be of good courage fellow soldiers, and play the men for our
people, and for the Cities of our God, and then let the Lord do that which
seems him good. Joab accordingly drew up his forces against the Syrians, and
they soon fled before him, which when the children of Ammon saw, they fled also
before Abishai, and retreated into the City. Joab having now obtained a great
victory, yet did not think it fit at present to pursue it any further; possibly
the season of the year was not then fit for the keeping of the field any
longer, and so he returned triumphantly to Jerusalem.

The Syrians being thus shamefully beaten by the Israelites, and having no hope
that David would ever make peace with them, they having rebelled and joined
with the Ammonites against him, they gathered themselves together and recruited
their Army, resolving there was no way for them but to stand it out, and to do
their utmost to shake off his yoke. Hadadezer accordingly sent out his Agents
and hired the Syrians that inhabited beyond Euphrates, and they marched to
Helam A place no where else mentioned in holy Scripture but here.
a Town (as it seems) not far from Jordan, and Shobach was the General of this
Army. David hearing of it, mustered a great Army out of Israel, and passing
over Jordan fought them at Helam, and totally vanquished them. He slew seven
thousand Ten men fought in every Chariot, which makes up the number of seven
thousand, mentioned 1 Chronicles. 19.18.
men which fought in Chariots; and besides these, the greatest part of the Army
both Horse and Foot, to the number of about forty thousand 2 Samuel 10.18. it is
said he slew forty thousand Horsemen, and 1 Chronicles. 19.18. it is said he slew
forty thousand Footmen, that is, so many men, horse and foot being mingled
together.
. And when all the Kings and Princes that were subject to Hadadezer, and which
were engaged with him in this war saw how they were beaten by David, they
sought and made peace with him, and came under his protection, and paid him
tribute, and they were afraid to assist the Ammonites any more.

2 Samuel Chapter 10. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 19. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXCII.
THE Winter having hindered David and his Captains from prosecuting their
victory in the land of the Ammonites, in the Spring of the next year (which was
the usual time that Kings went out to war) David sent Joab with a great Army to
perfect their begu^ conquest of them, and accordingly he laid siege to Rabbah
their chief City, afterward called Philadelphia. David staying at home at his
house during this siege, and giving himself to ease and idleness Quaeritur,
Aegistus quare sit factus Adulter: In promptu causa est: desidiosus erat. Ovid.
. (contrary to his former practice) and having spent some part of a day in
stretching himself upon his bed, in the evening he arose and walked upon the
roof of his house (houses being among the Jews flat roofed) from whence he saw
a woman washing her self to purify her self from her menstrual uncleanness
according to the Law, Levit. 15.27, 28. Some think she washed her self in her
Garden near adjoining to the Palace, which if she did she was not free from
fault and blame in not taking care to wash her self more privately. Others
think she washed her self in her Chamber which was opposite to the Kings
Palace, and some window or casement being accidently open, David with the quick
sight of his lustful eye gazed upon her, and so was ensnared with her beauty.
His heart being thus inflamed with lust (the first sparks whereof he should
have resolutely quenched) he sends and inquires after the woman, and was told
her name was Bathsheba Called Bathshua, 1 Chronicles. 3.5.
the wife of Vriah the Hittite Some think he was called an Hittite because born
at Heth a place near Abraham's burial place, see Genesis 23.3.
, who was so by Nation, but now a sincere Proselyte to the Jewish Religion, and
one of David's Worthies, as we may see 2 Samuel 23.39. David sends for her
notwithstanding he understood she was another man's wife, and he had so many
wives of his own. What is man if left to himself? She being come to him he used
such allurements and persuasions to her that not having the fear of God before
her eyes, nor that conjugal love and faithfulness which she should have had to
her brave and worthy husband, she consented unto him, and so she became the
Harlot of a King instead of being the loyal wife of an honest subject, and she
who had newly cleansed her self from her legal uncleanness, now defiles her
soul and body with moral filthiness. However she having now conceived by him,
shortly after (when she perceived it) wrote unto him that she was with child.
This she did (its likely) that he might consider of some way how their sin and
shame might be covered and concealed, and that she might escape the rage of her
husband at his coming home, and also the punishment by Law due unto her, which
was no less than death. David upon this instead of repenting of his sin, and
humbly seeking pardon of God for it, sets himself in the hardness of his heart
to contrive and plot how it might be concealed from the knowledge of man, not
considering the all-seeing eye of God which beheld all his close actings, nor
his severe threatenings against all such great and heinous transgressions.
Therefore he immediately sends for Vriah from the Camp to come to him, that
so he coming home might go to his wife and lie with her (as 'twas likely he
would do) and so cloak and cover the business. Vriah accordingly is sent by
Joab from the Army to him. When he was come, David asked him how Joab did, and
how the people did, and how the war went on? It Is like Vriah wondered that he
should be sent for in all have from his service in the Army only to answer such
questions as these, which every Messenger that came from the Army might easily
have satisfied the King in. And thereupon possibly he did suspect that there
was some other cause of his sending for, and began to have some jealousy of
his beautiful wife, and to think that all was not right with her, and that
might be the true reason why he would not be persuaded to go home and accompany
with her. However when he had answered these questions, the King kindly
dismissed him, telling him that it was fit for him after such a journey to go
home and refresh himself, and wash his feet, as in those hot Countries after a
journey they used to do. And presently after he was gone out, there followed
him a mess of meat from the King, which it is like was so ordered that Vriah
might the more willingly go home to his wife and feast with her thereupon. But
he would not go home for all this; by this time we may suppose that his fair
but false wife heard of his being come to Court, and seeing he did not come to
her, that she came her self and with great importunity besought him to come
home, seeing it did so much concern her to enjoy his company to cover her
fault, and hide her shame; but notwithstanding he would not, but slept that
night with the Kings Guard at the Palace-gate. David understanding this, sent
for him next morning and asked him why he did not go to his own house, being
weary with his journey. Vriah replied, the Ark It is probable that the Ark was
at this time with Joab in the Camp, seeing in great and dangerous Wars they
used to carry it along with them, it being a visible sign of Gods presence with
them, and by it they might receive directions from God (speaking to them from
between the Cherubims) in their difficulties, see 1 Samuel 4.4.
and Israel, and Judah and my Lord Joab abide in Tents in the open fields, how
unfitting then is it for me to go home to my house and there solace my self
with my wife and other delights; this I think not fit in a time of public
danger and calamity; as thou live and as thy soul lives I will not do it.
Which words (one would think) might have been sufficient to have awaked David
out of his deep sleep of sin and security, who wallowed in unlawful lust and
pleasure when Vriah would not enjoy honest and lawful delights at such a time
of calamity as this was. David also might have taken notice of the Providence
of God crossing him in his intended design, and thereupon have humbled himself
for his heinous sin, but instead thereof he resolves to practice another
stratagem upon Vriah for the attaining his end. He tells him he shall stay one
day longer with him, and then he shall return to the Army. That day he invites
him to his Table, resolving to make him drunk, that being heated with wine he
might forget his Oath, and go home to his wife, which hitherto he refused to
do. And here behold a sad example of humane frailty, Vriah being now
entertained at the Kings Table, (where it is like David took order to have him
plied with good store of wine) by degrees he is overtaken and made drunk; but
that would not do neither, for notwithstanding all David's devices and
practices he remained firm and constant in his resolution, and so would not go
home to his own house, but lay in the Court among the Kings houshold-servants.
And thus the Lord counterplotted David, and would not suffer him to smother his
sin as he earnestly endeavored to have done. David seeing that none of these
devices would do, resolves now upon a worse project than any of the former; he
writes a Letter to Joab, and sends it by Vriah himself, commanding him to set
Vriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and to retire from him that he
might be smitten and die. Behold here the fearful progress of sin from one
degree to another; David whose conscience was once so tender that it smote him
for cutting off the lap of Saul's garment, being now left to himself grows to
such an hardness in sin, that he scrupleth not to murder a faithful, innocent,
and valiant subject, and together with him diverse others of his good subjects,
and draws Joab also to partake with him in the same wickedness; so great
cause have we daily and earnestly to pray unto God not to lead us into
temptation, or not to leave us unto the power of it. Joab having received these
orders, not regarding (as it seems) whither they were just or unjust, right or
wrong, but resolving to please his Prince (upon whose favor he depended)
whither he pleased God or no, he sets himself to put them in execution; and
perhaps he hoped thereby to recover the Kings favor to the full height, which
had been much lessened and abated toward him since he had killed Abner; and
possibly he thought that David would be the more propitious to him when himself
was become guilty in the like kind. Observing therefore in what part of the
City the stoutest Soldiers of the enemy manned the walls, he assigned Vriah
with a commanded party to that quarter, and the City sallying out upon them,
several of them were slain, and Vriah among the rest. Then Joab sent a
messenger to David to inform him how things went, and put words into his mouth,
and instructed him what he should say if he found the King displeased at the
loss of his men; he tells him that possibly the King would be angry that they
approached so near the walls of the City, seeing they could not but think the
enemy would shoot upon them from thence, and would say what did they not
remember how Abimelech the Son of Jerubbesheth Called Jerubbaal, Judge. 7.1. but
here Jerubbesheth because the Hebrews detestation of Idols did expunge the word
Baal out of their names, and put Bosheth or Besheth in the room of it,
signifying an infamous thing, as the Idol was, Hos. 9.10. compare 1 Chronicles.
8.33. with 2 Samuel 2.8. and 1 Chronicles. 8.34. with 2 Samuel 4.4. where Eshbaal and
Meribaal in the one place are called Ishbosheth, and Mephibosheth in the other.
or Gideon was slain, [ Judge. 9.53.] by venturing too near to the wall of
Thebez? He bids him that if the King expressed himself to him after this manner
then he should forthwith say, thy servant Vriah the Hittite is slain among the
rest. The messenger coming to David told him (it seems) only that the men of
Rabbah had sallied out upon them, and at first prevailed against them, but they
soon forced them to retreat, and pursuing them too hotly even to the Gate of
the City, and the shooters shooting from the wall upon them, they slew some of
the Kings servants, and among the rest his servant Vriah. The King hearing this
expressed no such displeasure at the loss of his men as Joab imagined he would
do, seeing Vriah (whose death he mainly designed was taken off) but bad the
messenger tell Joab that he must not be over much troubled at this loss, for
the sword devoureth one as well as another, therefore he must be content and
bear with patience such accidents, and take care to strengthen his siege for
the future against the City that he might take it. The King further bad the
Messenger in his name to comfort and encourage Joab that he might go on
cheerfully with the war. When Bathsheba heard that her husband Vriah was dead,
she put her self into mourning The time of ordinary, as Josephus writes, lasted
but seven days, see Genesis 50.10. but their more solemn mournings lasted thirty
days, Deuteronomy. 34.8.
for him, the better to conceal her sin; but whether she were inwardly grieved
or no Lacrymas non sponte cadentes effudit, gemitusque expressit pectore laeto.
Lucan.
, be sure she had cause enough of heart-bleeding, and heartbreaking mourning
if she considered that by her sin she had occasioned her husbands untimely
death. But when the time of her mourning Tempus luctus (quod Romany mulieribus
erat annus vel december menses, intra quod tempus nubere eis non licebat) Haebreis
in lege non erat constitutum.
was over, (which undoubtedly was as short as conveniently might be) David sent
for her and made her his wife, that she might be thought to be with child by
him after they were married; but their adultery could not be so concealed, for
she soon was brought to bed of a Son, and the thing that David had done highly
displeased the Lord, and he soon found the bitter effects of it.

2 Samuel Chapter 11. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXCIII.
IOab resolutely pursuing the siege of Rabbah, at last he took that part of the
City which was called the Royal City (wherein the Kings Palace stood) and the
City of waters (because it was environed with waters both for safety and
delight) and knowing that the other part could not long stand out, he sent to
David to entreat him to come thither with some new forces that so he might have
the honor of taking it, and the glory and renown of this great enterprise. For
he knew that Kings were apt to be jealous, and did not love that their subjects
should eclipse their glory; David accordingly went thither and took the City,
and with it their King Hanun, and putting his Crown of State (the weight
whereof was a talent of Gold A Crown of State, and too weighty to be worn.
, adorned with precious jewels) upon his head, and then taking it off, they set
it upon David's, to show that the Royal dignity of that Nation was removed from
him and conferred on David, and then Hanun (as it is probable) was either
instantly deposed or put to death, and his Brother made Governor of Rabbah
under David, whence it was that he showed such respect to David when he fled
from Absalom, David was never so severe and cruel as at this time when he lay
under the guilt of Adultery and murder.
Chapter 17.27, 28. David having thus taken the City, he brought forth the spoil of
it in great abundance, and took so many of the people as he thought fit to make
exemplary, and such of their Elders and Rulers as had been the chief
ringleaders in all their vile and wicked actings, and inflicted most severe
punishments on them, putting some of them under Saws, some under Harrows of
iron, some he ordered to be cut in pieces with Axes, and some he caused to pass
through the fiery brick kiln to express his detestation of their inhumane
Idolatry, who caused their own children to pass through the fire to their Idol
Moloch, 1 King. 11.7. and thus he did to the Elders of every City who were the
chief offenders, and that not only because they had so abominably (contrary to
the Law of Nations) abused his Ambassadors, but had also hired the Nations
round about them to make war upon him, intending (if they could) utterly to
destroy the Israelites. These things being done, David and his people returned
to Jerusalem.

2 Samuel Chapter 12. from v. 26, to the end.

1 Chronicles. 20. from 1, to 4.

SECT. CXCIV.
IN Section 192 we had the sad History of David's fall to be dreaded by all
good men; now we come to give an account of his repentance, and the manner how
he was brought to it. And first we may take notice that David did not seek to
God and turn to him by an act of his free will, before God touched his heart by
his grace. David had now for the space of near ten months continued in his sin
without repentance, (viz. from the conception to the birth of the child, and
possibly something longer) during all which time he had (as it is probable) in a
formal manner frequented Gods Ordinances, taking care only to hide his sin (and
not to be cleansed from the guilt of it) and to cover his shame which yet he
could not do; for by reason of his sudden marrying of Bathsheba, and her so
soon being brought to bed, it began now by some to be suspected and talked of
that all was not right between them, and so by this deed he gave great occasion
to the enemies of God to blaspheme. God therefore now sends the Prophet Nathan
to him to rouse him out of the dead sleep he was in, and to bring him to a
sense of his sin, and to repentance for it. Nathan having received a command
from God to go to David on this errand, he began to think with himself that he
was to deal with a great King whom he was directly to accuse, sharply to
reprehend, and severely to threaten from the Lord; he resolves therefore to
make his address to him in such a way which he thought most likely to work upon
such a great person. Accordingly coming to him, he tells him that there was a
certain rich man in that Country who had exceeding many flocks and herds, and
there lived by him a certain poor man who had only one ew-lamb which he had
bought, and tenderly brought up and nourished, and it lay in his bosom, and was
to him as a young and tender child In these Parables we are to look at the main
scope and drift of them, and not to every circumstance, many of them being
added only as Ornaments to set them off.
, and there came a Traveller to the rich man's house, and he spared to take of
his own flock to dress for this stranger, but took the poor man's lamb and
dressed it for him. David hearing this, and apprehending it to be a true
relation of a matter of fact done in his Country, his anger was greatly
kindled, and he said as the Lord lives the man that has done this shall
surely restore the lamb fourfold In Solomon's time it seems there was required
sevenfold restitution, Prove. 16.31. unless it be meant there that the thief
shall make such a perfect restitution, in which sense the number seven is often
taken.
according to the Law, Exodus 22.1. and I declare that he is worthy to die
because he had no pity. Thus David unwittingly passes a heavy sentence upon
himself. Nathan replies, thou art the man; thou art he who have committed this
heinous wickedness. For thou art the rich man whose many flocks and herds are
thy many wives and concubines, Vriah is the poor man, and his ew-lamb was
Bathsheba his wife; the traveller that came to thee was the sinful lust of thy
heart, for the satisfying whereof thou would not take one of thy own wives or
concubines, but tookest the wife of Vriah; therefore the Lord has commanded me
to say thus to thee, I anointed thee King over Israel, and delivered thee out
of the hand of Saul; I gave thee thy Masters house, viz. the Kingdom of Saul,
who was thy Lord and Master, and have exalted thee to such royal dignity and
greatness, that all (generally) that belonged to Saul is come into thy power,
yea his very wives and concubines, whom I have so far brought into thy power
that none can hinder thee from taking them into thy bosom V. 8. In sinii, i. e.
potentiae subjeci tuae; neque enim soceri conjuges huic ducere licebat.
; did not my Law forbid it, Levit. 18.8. And if all this had been too little, I
was ready to have given thee more; wherefore then have thou despised the
commandment of the Lord to do this heinous evil in his sight? Thou have killed
Vriah one of thy worthy and valiant commanders, who did thee faithful service,
and have made way for thy marrying his wife by murdering of him; yea thou have
slain him by the sword of the children of Ammon, treacherously betraying him
with diverse others of thy faithful subjects into their hands, and thereby have
encouraged and given occasion to the enemies of my people to insult. Now
therefore know (to thy sorrow) that the sword shall never V. 10. In sempiternum
sumitur pro subjecta materia diverse.
depart from thy house, that is, as long as thou live, but those of thy
family shall with the sword kill one another Three of David's Sons came to a
violent death, viz. Amnon, Absalom and Adonijah.
. And because thou have despised me and my Law, behold I will raise up evil
against thee out of thy own house. I will afflict thee with many evils, even by
thy own children, giving them over to commit rapes, murders, and unnatural
rebellions, and will take thy concubines before thine eyes (that is in thy
lifetime, and thou knowing it) and give them unto thy neighbor; that is, to
one near unto thee not only in habitation but in blood, and he shall lie with
them Absalom did it openly in the sight of all Israel, Chapter 16.22. in a Tent
which they spread for him in Jerusalem upon the top of the house, and probably
the same house or Palace from the roof whereof David did first cast a lustful
eye on Bathsheba.
in the sight of the Sun. For thou did it secretly, as fearing shame more
than sin, but I will punish thee openly in the view of all thy people. David
was so convinced and his heart so deeply wounded with what Nathan had spoken to
him that he cried out, I have sinned, yea heinously sinned against the Lord.
His heart was so overwhelmed with grief and sorrow that he could not speak much
now, but afterward he confessed his sin more fully to the whole Church in the
51 Psalm, wherein he acknowledges the greatness of his transgression, and
professes his unfeigned repentance for it. And this Psalm he committed to the
chief Musician to be sung publicly in the Congregation as one of the
Penitential Psalms. Nathan perceiving him truly penitent, tells him, the Lord
had put away his sin out of his sight, it should not be imputed to him to
hinder his eternal blessedness; neither should he die by the sudden stroke of
some temporal judgment, as his sin deserved, even according to his own
sentence. Howbeit (says the Lord) because by this deed thou have given great
occasion to my enemies to blaspheme and to speak evil of what I have done in
raising thee up, and favoring thee so highly (seeing thou have committed such
heinous sins) and they will thereupon blaspheme the Religion I have appointed,
and the professors of it, as though it either taught or favored such
wickedness, or at least that the professors of it were all hypocrites, making
only a show of godliness and honesty, but not practicing it, [see Romans 2.24.]
therefore by many severe corrections inflicted on thee I will vindicate my
justice, and the truth of my Religion against all the reproaches and calumnies
of wicked men. And pursuant hereunto I will first smite the child begotten by
thee in adultery with death. Nathan having faithfully delivered his message,
departed, and immediately the child fell sick. And though Nathan had told David
the child should die, yet he apprehending (as it seems) the threatening to be
only conditional, and that upon his tears and repentance the sentence might be
reversed As was that of Hezekiahs death, and the destruction of Nineveh.
, and though the child (if he lived) was like continually to grieve them (by
daily representing to them their sin and shame) yet he prayed and fasted, and
humbled himself greatly, both with inward contrition and outward afflicting of
his body, begging the life of the child Fuisse Davidem liberorum amantissimum
non ex hac tantum historia sed ex indulgentia circa Absolomum and Adonijam
apparet.
, because the innocent babe was threatened with death as a punishment for their
sin. However as God had threated, on the seventh day after he was born, or
after he fell sick the child died; David's servants at first feared to tell him
of it, lest they should too much grieve him, but upon his strict inquiry they
told him he was dead. When the will of the Lord was plainly manifested he
patiently submitted to it, and arose from the earth and washed and anointed
himself, and changed his apparel, and went into the house of the Lord [the Tent
which he had erected for the Ark] to worship, that he might further bewail and
acknowledge his sin before God, and beg his pardon, and entreat him that he
would please to lighten and lessen those punishments he had threatened against
his family, or at least sanctify them to him, and give him strength and
patience to bear them. And though he had fasted seven days while the child lay
sick, (taking only some small repast in the evening) yet now so earnest he was
to ratify his peace with God, that he would not taste any food before he had
been at Gods house; and then he commanded them to set bread before him, and he
did eat. His servants wondering at this carriage of his as something strange, he
tells them that whilst the child was alive he fasted and wept, hoping that God
would reverse the sentence of death passed upon him; but now he was dead,
wherefore (says he) should I fast, I cannot bring him back again; I shall go to
him [viz. into the state of the dead] but he shall not return to me into the
state of the living. Bathsheba being much dejected under a sense of her sin,
and the displeasure of God threatened against them, and begun to be executed in
taking away their child, David (like an indulgent husband) labored to comfort
her, and went in again unto her, and she conceived and bare him a Son, whom he
(by Gods direction) called Solomon, that is peaceable, because the Lord
intended (when he came to the Crown) to give him rest from all his enemies
round about, and to give peace and quietness to Israel in his days, see 1 Chronicles. 22.9. And the Lord sent Nathan to David to tell him that this his Son
should not only be called Solomon but Jedijah, that is, beloved of the Lord.
Thus the Lord manifested his love to Solomon before he had done either good or
evil.

2 Samuel Chapter 12. from v. 1, to the 26.

SECT. CXCV.
GOD now inflicts upon David many sore and grievous chastisements to punish him
for his heinous sins of adultery and murder: First, Amnon his Eldest Son
ravishes his Sister Tamar; David had two Children by Maacha the daughter of
Talmai King of Geshur, viz. Absalom and Tamar, and he was sorely punished in
them both, as we shall see in the sequel of the story. Tamar was a very
beautiful young woman, and Amnon, David's Eldest Son by Ahinoam the Jezrelites
was smitten with an unlawful love to her, but she being a Virgin and carefully
kept, (being David's only Daughter, for ought appears among so many Sons) he
despaired of having an opportunity to satisfy his lust with her, whereupon he
drooped Medici morbis a^censent eum q^i ex amore contrahitur. Pallidus in
Ly^lcen silvis errabat Orion.
and pined away with vexation. Amnon had a friend who was his Cousin-german
(with whom he was very intimate) Jonadab by name, who though a very subtle man
and wise to do evil, was no true friend to him; for a true friend advises to
nothing but that which is good. Jonadab perceiving by his carriage that he was
rather sick in mind than body, said to him, Why art thou being the Kings Son
lean from day to day? surely thou that art the Kings Son (yea his Eldest Son
and heir to the Crown) may have what thou will; therefore what is it that
thou art troubled about? Amnon told him he was in love with Tamar, but knew not
how to accomplish his desire upon her. Jonadab advises him to counterfeit
himself sick, and when his Father came to see him (as undoubtedly he would) he
should desire him to permit his sister Tamar to come and dress him some meat,
which he should like better from her hand than any bodies else. Amnon
accordingly feigns himself sick. Indeed it had been better for David and
himself too that he had been really sick, for a naughty child is better sick
than well; however it being given out that he was sick, his Father came to see
him, of whom he earnestly desired that his sister Tamar might come to him and
make a couple of Cakes for him, pretending they would do him more good if they
were of her making, and given to him by her hand than if made or brought to him
by any other. David out of his great indulgence to him sends his daughter Tamar
to him. It Is much that David being a wise man should suspect nothing, but when
God intends to punish a man he hides wisdom from him; and it could not but
afterward much add to David's sorrow that he himself was made an instrument to
further such an execrable fact, and that by his command he had cast his poor
daughter into such a snare. Tamar accordingly coming to her Brother Amnons
house, provided him Cakes, making them for him with her own hands in his sight
as he desired. Amnon then commanding all about him to go out, and bidding his
Sister to bring the Cakes into an inner Chamber, he there instead of eating the
Cakes took hold of her, and told her she must lie with him. She poor Lady was
strangely surprised at this, and used all manner of arguments and entreaties
she could devise to dissuade him from so unnatural a villainy: First, she tells
him he was her brother, and therefore should be so far from dishonouring her
himself, that he should be ready (even with the hazard of his life) to protect
her against any that should offer her so foul an indignity. 2ly, He being her
brother he should consider it would be incest in him to defile her, (if she
should be so wicked as to consent) but to force her, and to incest to add rape,
was such a transcendent villainy, that the very Heathens would abhor. 3ly, He
knew very well that no such thing ought to be done in Israel, Genesis 34.7. for
they were Gods own peculiar people, and professed holiness above all Nations in
the earth, therefore an example of so abominable a wickedness committed among
them, (and especially by one of such eminency as he was) would bring a shameful
scandal upon their whole Nation, and cause their Religion, and even the name of
God to be blasphemed. 4ly, He should consider that by the Law of God which they
were under, both incest and rape were to be punished with death, see Levit. 18
6, 9. Deuteronomy. 22.25. Levit. 20.17. 5ly, She desires him to have some pity upon
her, and some regard to her honor and reputation, for how should she ever
cause her shame to pass away if she should be so defiled? It would be a blot
upon her for ever, and none fit for her would ever be induced to marry her.
6ly, She desires him to have some sense of his own honor, for how would he be
esteemed a very fool, who when he might have his choice of wives where he
pleased with their love and liking, yet would not take that course which God
himself had appointed, but would do such a lothed and abominable act as this.
He should consider that the greatest sins are the greatest folly, and expose a
man to the greatest shame. And if such a person as he was should be guilty of
such a crime, he would be looked upon among all wise and good men as a most
notorious, infamous wretch, and a son of Belial, and one utterly unworthy to
succeed his Father in the Kingdom, 7ly, When none of these arguments would
prevail, she (being in a great straight) advises him to desire her of his
Father for his wife, not thinking (as it is like) that this could ever be done,
but only to gain time and allay the present rage of his lust, and escape his
present violence, not doubting but for the future she should be kept out of his
hands. But his lust was so impetuous, and his heart by the instigation of the
Devil so bent on wickedness, that he was deaf to all her persuasions, and being
stronger than she, he brutishly forced her. Having committed this abominable
wickedness, his eyes that were before blinded with lust began to be opened, and
he now saw what an indelible reproach and shame he had brought upon himself,
and being filled with horror, he now hated his fair sister more than before he
loved her; he could not now endure to see her, whose beauty had been the
occasion to draw him into so much shame and infamy; and there was an especial
hand of God in this, that his sin and shame might hereby be discovered, and a
way made for the bringing upon David those judgments which God had threatened
against his Family. But so it was Amnons rage of lust was now turned into the
fury of folly. And he was so infatuated, that he endeavored not to keep her in
his Chamber till her grief and passion was somewhat abated, nor seeks to
persuade her for her own and his credit to conceal the matter, but as if he had
intended to proclaim both his and her shame to all the world, he bids her
presently be gone. She tells him there was no cause to thrust her out of doors
so hastily being in such a woeful condition; this would be a greater injury to
her (in some respects) than the very defiling of her; for though that was an
irreparable injury to her, yet to thrust her out of doors in such a condition
as she was now in, was the way not only to discover that she had been defiled,
but probably would raise an opinion in some that she had consented thereunto,
and so was cast off as a strumpet, which would be a greater inhumanity and
barbarity than the other was. But say what she would he was nothing moved
therewith, but like a mad man commanded his servants to, turn her out of doors
and bolt the door after her; she being apparrel'd with a garment of diverse
colors, (such as Kings daughters that were virgins used to wear) she tore her
garment, and put ashes on her head, and laying her hands thereon went crying
out as women in extremity of sorrow used to do, [see Jer. 1.37.] In this sad
plight she comes to her Brother Absalom, who instantly understanding from her
how she had been abused, did what he could to comfort and quiet her, telling
her it was a force practiced upon her, and so her affliction and not her fault,
and therefore advised her to be patient and to hold her peace, seeing Amnon was
her brother, and his shame would be the shame of their whole family. But she
notwithstanding continued very disconsolate, none being able to comfort her.
Absalom though he said little at present, yet was so highly enraged at this
abominable injury done to his sister, that he resolved to revenge it, which he
afterward did to purpose; but for the present he dissembled his anger, and
seemed to take no notice of it to his brother Amnon. But David when he heard of
it was extremely angry and offended at it, and it is like did express his great
displeasure against Amnon for it; yet for all his anger (it seems) he let him
go unpunished (and was too indulgent to him like old Eli) whereas he ought to
have executed the Law upon him (being so notorious an offender) though he were
his own Son, that by such an exemplary punishment others might be deterred from
offending in the like kind. But though he did not punish him, yet his Son
Absalom did as we come now to show. After two years were past, Absalom had a
sheepshearing feast (as the manner was in that Country) to entertain his
friends, and encourage his servants. To this feast Absalom invites David and
all his Sons, with their retinue, to avoid all suspicion of any ill intention
against Amnon. David tells him if they should all come they should be too
chargeable to him, and therefore he himself would not come; however he blessed
him, and wished him much joy in his Feast. Then Absalom ernestly entreated him
that his brother Amnon (being his Eldest Son) might come, and so representing
his person might grace and honor his Feast. This might (considering former
carriages) have given both David and Amnon some suspicion and jealousy that he
intended some mischief, but God intending to punish them both for their former
sins, hid this from their eyes. Therefore upon his great importunity David
consented that Amnon and all his Sons should go with him. They being come,
Absalom gave command to some of his servants (as evil masters are usually
attended with such servants as will comply with them in any wickedness) that
when they saw Amnon merry with wine, they should fall upon him and kill him; he
bids them be courageous and to do their work thoroughly, seeing he had
commanded them, and would bear them out in it. And though the revenging of his
sister Tamars rape might be the chief thing he aimed at, yet possibly an
ambitious desire of the Crown might further this his resolution of cutting off
his Elder Brother. The servants did as Absalom commanded them, and accordingly
dispatched Amnon. Upon this murder all the rest of David's Sons got every one
upon his Mule Though the Israelites were forbidden to suffer Cattle of diverse
kinds to engender together, Lev. 19.19. yet they might use the Cattle so
engendered, and such Mules were, see Genesis 36.24.
and fled, not knowing how far Absalom's bloody treachery might extend. This
gave such a warm alarm to the Country round about, that presently tidings came
to David that Absalom had slain all his Sons. The King upon this surprising
news tore his garments, and fell upon the earth, and his servants stood about
him with their clothes rent. Jonadab standing by, desired the King not to
believe that all his Sons were slain, but only Amnon, and he did suppose that
he indeed was slain because Absalom had threatened to be revenged on him ever
since he forced his sister Tamar. Presently the Kings Sons that fled came to
him, and with many tears told him what Absalom had done to their brother Amnon,
and the King and all his servants wept very sore. And David mourned for the
death of his Son Amnon (so treacherously slain) very many days. Then Absalom
that he might escape the hand of justice fled to Talmai King of Geshur, his
Grandfather by the mothers side, and there he remained three years.

2 Samuel Chapter 13. from v. 1. to 39.

SECT. CXCV.
It seems Chileab, David's second Son, see Chapter 3.3. was now dead.
IN length of time David's grief for Amnon by degrees wore off, so that he began
now to wish that he had his Son Absalom at home with him again, and had it not
been for shame he could have found in his heart to have gone himself and fetched
him. Joab perceiving that the Kings heart was much toward Absalom, and that he
earnestly desired to have him brought back again, (if it could be done
handsomely, and without scandal) he therefore that he might gratify the King,
and ingratiate himself with Absalom, (now heir apparent The City where the
Prophet Amos lived, Amos 1.1.
to the Crown) sets himself to contrive a way how it might be done. Accordingly
he sent to Tekoah (c) a City in Judah, and fetched thence a woman that was
famous for her wisdom, and acquainting her with his design, he put words into
her mouth, and directed her what she should say to the King in order to the
bringing about his end; she undertakes the business, and being well instructed
beforehand, in a mourning habit, and seeming very disconsolate, she comes to
David, and falling down on her face before him, cries out, Help O King, and
succor thine afflicted handmaid. The King asks her what ailed her? she
answers, I am a widow, and thy handmaid had two Sons, who going into the field
together, and falling out, they fought, and (none being by to part them) the
one of them happened to kill the other; and now all my family and kindred are
risen up to prosecute my remaining Son that he may be put to death, and so the
inheritance may come to them, for so they give out that they will destroy the
heir also; and if they should be suffered to kill this surviving Son (who is
the only comfort that is left me in this world) they will wholly extinguish my
husbands name, which by this Son, as by one poor coal that lies hid under an
heap of ashes, can only be blown up again, kept alive, and preserved. The King
tells her that he would give order that her case should be heard and examined.
She desires him not to put her off, or scruple to grant her request; for if
there were any iniquity or sin in sparing her Son, she would take the guilt of
it See Genesis 27.13. Mat. 27.25.
wholly upon her self, the King and his Throne should be guiltless. But therein
she engaged for more than she could make good; for if it were unjust, God would
punish her for desiring and endeavoring it, and David also for granting it,
see Numb. 35.17, 18, 21, 31, 33. However the King seeing her so importunate, he
bad her go home, and if any persons further troubled her, she should bring them
to him, for as the Lord lives, (says he) not one hair of thy Son shall fall
to the earth. Then the woman said* let the King remember the word that he has
promised unto his handmaid in the presence of the Lord, that he will not suffer
the avengers of blood to destroy my Son. And now having obtained my request,
let thy handmaid speak one word more to my Lord the King: How comes it to pass
that thou have passed so favorable a sentence in reference to my Son, and yet
entertainest thoughts in thy mind against thy own Son which are far different,
and very prejudicial to the good and welfare of thy people? Give me leave to
say that the King does speak this thing as one that is faulty; he has given a
just sentence in the case of my Son, but fails in giving the same sentence when
it comes to the case of his own Son; the King would have no rigor used against
my Son for killing his brother, because it would tend to my great grief and
damage, and yet can be content that rigor shall be used toward his own Son
Absalom, and will not fetch him home again from his banishment, though it
redound exceedingly to the detriment and grief of the whole Commonwealth. Thou
know, O King, that we must all die at one time or other, and when we are
dead there is no recalling us to life again, no more than water that is spilt
on the ground can be again gathered up. And thou may die as well as any of
us, and if thou should die while we are in this unsettled state, we shall be
miserable. And as for Absalom, seeing God has not taken away his life in all
these three years of his banishment, he seems by his Providence to have
provided a way that he may be restored to thee again, namely by my mediation
for him at this time. The King may something wonder that I presume to speak
thus boldly to him, but the truth is, the people are so full of jealousies and
discontent, fearing lest Absalom living so long among Idolaters should be
corrupted in his Religion, and so may corrupt the people if he come to reign
over them, that I was really afraid and durst hold my tongue no longer; and
knowing the King to be so just that he will always hear the cause of the
oppressed, and right their wrongs, I thought it best in a Parabolical way to
propound this matter to thee, that thou might the better judge of it. And I
doubted not but that I should receive a gracious answer from thee; for I know
that the King for wisdom to judge and discern between right and wrong is as an
Angel It Was a Proverbial speech used to express a man's excellency in any thing,
see 1 Samuel 29.9. and 2 Samuel 19.27.
of heaven, and therefore I doubt not but the Lord thy God will bless and
prosper thee in thy Government. Then the King said to the woman, tell me true,
Is not the hand of Joab in all this? She answered (as thy soul lives O King)
none can evade what thou have said by turning to the right hand or to the left,
for thou have hit the very right and the truth; for thy servant Joab set me on
work, and put words into my mouth to speak unto thee. And however I have
delivered my self, I know my Lord the King is wise even as an Angel of God to
know all things that are to be done by him upon the earth in the administration
of his Government.

Then the King called for Joab and told him he had granted his request made to
him by the woman for the return of Absalom: Therefore go (says he) and fetch
him home. Joab fell to the ground on his face before the King, and professed
that he accepted it with much thankfulness, and as a testimony of the Kings
great favor to him that he was pleased to grant his request. Then Joab arose
and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom back to Jerusalem. When he was returned
the King gave order he should go to his own house, but said he should not see
his face; which David did (as it is probable) to avoid the scandal of being too
easily reconciled to him who had committed so foul a fault. But in all Israel
there was no man so eminent for beauty and comeliness of person as Absalom was;
for from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head there was no blemish in
him; this was one thing possibly that made him so proud and insolent, and made
him so popular and attracted the peoples affections so much to him. He used to
poll his head and cut off his hair (it growing else too heavy for him) once a
year, and when cut off, it weighed two hundred shekels after the Kings weight,
viz. after the common shekel, which weighed a quarter of an ounce) and so
weighed about four pound weight at sixteen ounces the pound. And Absalom had
three Sons Chapter 18.18. It Is said he had no Son, it seems by that time they were
all dead.
, and one fair Daughter named Tamar. So Absalom dwelt two years after this in
Jerusalem, and was not all that time admitted into the Kings presence. At last
being impatient of this restraint, and growing discontented and ill-affected
toward his Father, and entertaining thoughts of rebellion against him, and not
seeing any means of compassing his design whilst he was kept from the Court
(where he might make friends by his popular carriage) he contrives how he might
come thither, and in order thereunto he sends to Joab to come to him that by
his mediation he might be recovered into the Kings favor. But Joab like an old
Politician fearing to displease the King would not come at him. He sent to him
a second time but he would not come. He then bad his servants to go and set
Joab's Barley field (which was near to his) on fire, designing by that means to
bring him to him, as God brings people home to himself by afflictions. Joab
then comes and asks him why he had fired his Corn? He tells him because he had
sent for him once and again, and he would not come at him; he tells him he sent
for him to represent his condition to the King, and to know of him why he was
pleased to send for him from Geshur, and yet still all this while withdrew his
face and favor from him. He tells him it had been better for him to have
stayed there still than to be thus used. Help me (says he) to see the Kings
face once again, and if he think me not worthy to live, let him put me upon a
legal trial, and take away my life; I had rather die than live in this manner
that I now do. Joab hereupon comes to the King and tells him how heavily
Absalom took it, that he was debarred from his presence. David hearing this,
sent for him, who coming, bowed himself to the ground before the King, and (as
it is like) humbly begged his pardon; whereupon the King kissed him in token that
he was fully reconciled to him.

2 Samuel Chapter 14. whole Chapter.

SECT. CXCVI.
ABsalom being now admitted to come to Court, contrives to get his Fathers
Kingdom from him. And thus God executes upon David the heavy doom which he had
threatened, viz. That he would raise up evil against him out of his own house,
Chapter 12.11. Absalom remembering the displeasure his Father had showed against him
for murdering his Brother Amnon, and fearing lest for that he judged him unfit
to succeed him in the Government, and having possibly some intimation that
Solomon was designed for the Crown (being so much beloved of his Father) he
resolved (if he could) to get into present possession of the Throne during his
Fathers life. And to accomplish this ambitious design he puts diverse policies
in practice: First, he gets a Princely retinue, and provides himself Chariots
and Horses (which yet the Law did not allow) and a guard of fifty men to go
before him, that taking upon him the port and state of a Prince, the people
might look upon him as next heir to the Crown, and give him answerable respect.
For the people are very apt to be taken with outward pomp and bravery, and to
judge those that use it to be men of brave and noble spirits. David being much
blinded with affection toward him, takes no notice of this his ambition and
popularity. 2ly, He cunningly insinuates himself into the hearts of the people;
for rising early and standing at the Kings Gate, when any Suitors came to the
King for justice, and to do them right he would in a friendly and obliging
manner inquire of their matters and where they lived. When he heard their cause
he would tell them their cause was good and just, but the misery of it was
there was none deputed by the King to hear the causes of those that repaired
thither for justice that would hear them impartially, and do them right. Which
was a base slander of a graceless Son against his Father, of whom it is said,
Chapter 8.15. That he executed judgment and justice to all the people. Then he
would say, O that I were made judge in the land, that every one that has any
cause or suit might come unto me, I would be sure to do them right. 3ly, When
any man came nigh him and did him obeisance, and paid him respect, he would
lovingly take him by the hand and kiss him. And thus continually courting the
people, he stole away their hearts, and drew their affections from the King to
himself. David all this while through the just judgment of God was so blinded
that he minded it not. 4ly, Having by these popular ways and arts brought his
business (as he thought) to some ripeness and maturity, he now tells the King
that he had made a vow when he was in Geshur, that if the Lord would please to
bring him back again to Jerusalem he would offer to him certain
Peace Offerings, and Gratulatory Sacrifices, and he desired leave of him that
he might go to Hebron (the place where he was born, and which was one of the
chief high places in the Tribe of Judah, about sixteen miles from Jerusalem,
whither in those times they resorted to offer Sacrifice) there to perform that
vow. This was forty years Being then about 22 or 23 years of age, and about 7
years before he began his reign in Hebron, and so about the 33 of his reign,
and about 7 years before his death.
after David was first anointed by Samuel in Bethlem, and about seven years
before his death. David bids him go in peace. Absalom accordingly went thither,
and it being the custom when they offered these Peace Offerings to make great
feasts therewith, Absalom under that color invited many of his friends and
followers, and many of the people whom he hoped to win to join with the rest in
his intended Conspiracy, and to persuade them to make him King. Then he sent
spies thorough all the Tribes of Israel, who at the set time agreed on, when
the Trumpets should sound in every Tribe, and the people wonder what the matter
was, these spies should inform them that Absalom was anointed King in Hebron
with all Regal Ceremonies and Solemnities, and was so accepted and proclaimed
by the people. There were two hundred that were invited by Absalom to his feast
of Peace Offerings at Hebron, that went in the simplicity of their hearts
(merely as invited guests) knowing nothing of his intended Conspiracy. He hoped
(it seems) that these when they came thither, and saw what the rest did, would
join with them. However by inviting such known faithful men, he thought his
intended Plot would be the better concealed. He sent also for Achitophel who
had been formerly one of his Fathers prime Counselors, and much esteemed by
him for wisdom, but for some reasons (as it seems) was now laid aside and dwelt
privately at his own City Giloh in the Tribe of Judah. And thus the Conspiracy
grew strong, for many daily flocked in to Absalom.

2 Samuel Chapter 15. from 1, to 13.

SECT. CXCVII.
THese things thus going on, there came a Messenger to David from Hebron to
inform him what had passed there, and to acquaint him that the hearts of the
people were generally for Absalom. David upon this surprising news knew not
well what to do, but concluded that present flying The third Psalm is said to
be penned on this occasion, wherein by faith he relied on God as his shield.
was the safest and securest way both for his own preservation, and the good of
the City. He knew not what party Absalom might have in the City; he thought it
not safe therefore to trust himself there at present, but to go out and encamp
abroad in the fields and deserts. He desired also to preserve the City from
being spoiled and plundered, which they might be exposed unto if they stood on
their own defense. The King therefore departing with his servants and retinue,
he left ten of his Concubines in his Palace, (taking as it is like his other
wives along with him) thinking that Absalom's party would not be so barbarous
and inhumane as to offer any violence to them, both because they were women,
and also stood in so near a relation to the King. But there was an overruling
Providence in this for the bringing about that which God had threatened against
David, Chapter 12.11. I will take thy wives and give them to thy neighbor, and he
shall lie with them.

From David's departure from Jerusalem for fear of Absalom, there happened many
remarkable things, which we shall here set down in order.

1. The King with his servants and guards having marched some reasonable
distance from the City, there they made a stand, and thither to him resorted
most of the Citizens that were truly loyal to him, and with them six hundred
Gittites Sic vocantur auxiliares illorum Philistinorum quos in nuperis bellis
David subegerat, and regno suo adjecerat.
(born (possibly) at Gath, or the Territories of it, and who were become
proselytes) with Ittai their Captain, who is supposed to be the King of Gaths
Son, and a proselyte also; he was a wise and valiant man, and much in the Kings
favor. The King seeing him there, told him that he had no reason to expose
himself to so much danger as they were like to meet with in their flight, he
being a stranger and an exile, and but newly come to him, it were better for
him to return to Jerusalem, and seek to be advanced by the new King, who
undoubtedly would kindly receive him and his followers, seeing they were
strangers: Take therefore (says he) thy Countrymen and Soldiers and go back to
him, and the God of mercy and truth preserve thee. Ittai replied, As the Lord
lives, and as my Lord the King lives, nothing shall make me leave thee, but I
will stick to thee both in prosperity and adversity, both in life and unto
death. David seeing him so generously resolved, gave order that he and his men
should pass over the River Kidron Called Cedron, Joh. 18.1.
, (which lay between the City and mount Olivet) which they accordingly did,
their Children (whom they brought along with them) following them. And the
people thereabout woefully lamented the sad condition they saw their King now
in; and the King and the people that were with him passed over the river.

2 Samuel Chapter 15. from v. 17, to 24.

2ly, Zadock who was next to the High Priest Abiathar, and (whose course it
seems it was at this time to attend upon the Ark) came with many of the Levites
to David bearing the Ark of God, and when they came to the place where David
and his Company stayed, they set it down, and Abiathar the High Priest went in
the forefront of the people that came out to David, and led them up to Mount
Olivet, until all the Company that followed him were passed over the Brook
Kidron. David then spoke to Zadock and Abiathar to carry back the Ark to
Jerusalem; for though he highly valued the Ark being the visible sign of Gods
presence, and at which they used to ask counsel of God in their difficulties,
yet because it could not be conveniently carried about with them in that flying
posture they were now in, and he could not enjoy it unless he had the Priests
and Levites also with him to attend it, and being unwilling to expose them to
so much danger as he himself was like to be exposed unto, he commanded them to
carry it back into the City, saying to them, If I shall find favor in the eyes
of the Lord he will bring me back again unto it, and to the Tabernacle or Tent
I have provided for it, in which he uses in an especial manner to manifest his
gracious presence. But if he say I have no delight in thee, nor will accept
thee because of thy heinous sins, behold here I am, let him do to me as seems
good unto him. I wholly submit my self to his good pleasure. Further he said to
Zadock, Art not thou a Seer and a Prophet, whose duty it is to instruct the
people? Return thou therefore and Abiathar into the City in peace, go and that
with my love and good liking, and take your two Sons Ahimaaz and Jonathan along
with you. You may do me great service there by inquiring into the counsels, and
observing the motions of the enemy, and giving me intelligence thereof, and
this I desire you to do for me, and I will tarry in the plain of the Wilderness
till I hear from you. Zadock and Abiathar accordingly carried the Ark back
again to Jerusalem, but did not take their Sons Ahimaaz and Jonathan along with
them as David appointed, but ordered them to stay at Enrogel (in the borders of
Judah and Benjamin, not far from Jerusalem, see Chapter 17.17.) that lying there in
obscurity they might receive intelligence from their Fathers, and so acquaint
David therewith as occasion required.

2 Samuel Chapter 15. from 24, to 30.

3ly, David now marches up to Mount Olivet weeping bitterly for his sins that
had brought these troubles upon him; and he went barefoot, and with his head
covered (as was the custom of mourners among the Jews) thereby testifying his
deep humiliation and shame for so highly offending God. And the people also
that went up with him covered their heads and wept bitterly, thereby testifying
their simpathy with their King in his sorrows and sufferings. ver. 30.

4ly, David upon this occasion composed the 3d. and 55. Psalm.
One comes now to David and acquaints him that Achitophel that great Politician
had joined himself to Absalom, and the Conspirators with him; whereupon David
earnestly prayed unto the Lord to turn his counsel into foolishness. Which
petition the Lord was pleased graciously to grant, as we shall see Chapter 17.14,
23. -- v. 30.

5ly, Being come to the top of the Mountain he there prayed and worshipped God,
and humbly implored his mercy toward him, and to help him against his enemies;
and behold immediately Hushai the Archite Of the Town of Archi in Ephraim.
his faithful friend and Counselor (and a great Politician) came to him who
was a man whom God had qualified with such a measure of wisdom that he was able
to countermine and counterplot Achitophel. Hushai came to him with his Coat
rent and earth upon his head, thereby testifying the deep sense he had of his
great afflictions and sufferings. David kindly receives him, but tells him it
would not be any advantage to him, but rather a burden to take him along with
him (he being a Statesman and not a Soldier) but he would do him much better
service if he would go to Jerusalem and seemingly join with Absalom, and say to
him, I will be thy servant, O King, as I have been thy Fathers servant, and so
by insinuating himself into his favor, and being made acquainted with his
counsels he might defeat them David's sending Hushai to dissemble with Absalom
may teach us how prone men are in their extremities to pitch upon such courses
as are not so good and right as they should be.
. And (says he) thou will have Zadock and Abiathar there to assist thee with
their best endeavors, and what thou hear from Absalom or his Council thou
may impart to them, and they have with them their two Sons by whom thou may
send to me. It seems David thought their Sons had gone back with them to the
City, and did not know that they were ordered by them to stay at Enrogel as we
showed before. Hushai being David's sure friend complies with him herein, and
accordingly goes to Absalom at Jerusalem, and insinuates himself into his
favor.

2 Samuel Chapter 15. from v. 32, to the end.

6ly, When David was a little past the top of the hill, and was going on
toward the Wilderness, Ziba servant to Mephibosheth meets him with two Asses
sadled and laden with two hundred loaves of bread, and a hundred bunches of
raisins, and a hundred pieces of summer-fruits, and a leather-sack of wine. The
King asked him what he meant by these? He replied, the Asses be for any of the
Kings Household to ride upon, and the bread and summer-fruits and wine for any
of the young men that are his followers to refresh themselves with; and he
hoped the King would please graciously to accept his humble respect and duty,
though the things in themselves were of so small value. The King then asked him
where Mephibosheth was, his Master Jonathan's Son? and what the reason was,
seeing he had showed him so great kindness that he did not come to him? Ziba
answered, Behold he abides at Jerusalem, for he said, To day shall the house of
Israel restore me the Kingdom of my Father. A shameful lie and slander, and
very improbable if Mephibosheths lameneness and infirmities to rule be
considered, as also how the peoples hearts were at this time set upon Absalom.
However David being very tender and jealous in matters that concerned his
Crown, (and especially when there was any Title set up against him by those of
the house of Saul) he passes a rash, sudden and unjust sentence, Behold (says
he to Ziba) all that pertained to Mephibosheth thy master is thine: I freely
give it to thee. Thus David in have deprives an innocent man of his whole
estate, and gives it to a wicked and treacherous Calumniator. It may indeed
seem strange and wonderful that so wise and good a King as David should pass
such a rash and unjust sentence against the only Son of his dear friend
Jonathan, a person of great worth, and who so entirely loved him, and had done
him so many favors, and to whose posterity he was by solemn Oath and Covenant
bound to be kind; and that he should do this upon the bare suggestion of one
single witness (and he a servant against his master) and in his masters absence
who was not so much as heard what he could say for himself, nor any other
witness examined in the case. But it seems David being highly transported with
passion and state-jealousie, (the Crown being a thing that will admit of no
copartners or corrivals) he passed this sentence without considering any of
these things. Thus we see that the best of men are but men, and apt to fail and
miscarry when left to themselves. Ziba like a cunning old fox thankfully
accepted the Kings bounty, yet pretended that he more desired and esteemed the
favor of the King than the gift he had given him.

2 Samuel Chapter 16. from v. 1, to 5.

7ly, David now marches to Bahurim a Town not far off in the Tribe of Benjamin,
there one Shimei a man of the family of Saul came forth like a mad man, and
vented his malice and rage against him in a very high and provoking manner, and
going along on the hill-side over against him bitterly cursed him, and threw
stones at him and his followers, though he was at this time guarded with
valiant Soldiers both on the right hand and on the left. And (as if this had
not been enough) with the extreme hazard of his own life he cried out, Come
out, come out thou bloody man, thou Son of Belial, the Lord has now brought
upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul; intimating that David had stirred
up the Philistines to make that invasion upon the land wherein Saul and his
Sons were slain. And as thou have done to others so now (by the just judgment
of God) others do to thee. Thou did rise up against Saul, and now (by a just
retaliation) Absalom is risen up against thee; thou art now taken in thy own
mischief; thou did rebel against thy Father-in-law, and usurp his Kingdom,
and now thy own Son has rebelled against thee and usurped thine. Abishai was
so enraged at this, that he said to the King why should this dead dog, this
base contemptible wretch be suffered in this shameful manner to curse and
revile my Lord the King. Let me go over to him, I Will cut off his head and bring
it to thee. Joab also (it seems) offered his service in the like kind: David
meekly replies, I will take none of your counsel, nor consent to your ways of
revenge, ye Sons of Zerviah; this is no time for me to think of private revenge
who am under the correcting hand of God for my sins. The Lord has for my trial
and afflicton permitted this man to revile and curse me, and has suffered Satan
to excite him thereunto, which though it be a sin in him, yet it is most wisely
and justly ordered V. 10. To praecepit accipi debet pro permisit hanc
maledictionem, eamque positive ordinavit ad meampoenam. Sic 1 Samuel 13.14.
praecepit Davidi, i. e. ordinavit ut regeret Israelem. 1 Reg. 17.4. Corvis
mandavi, i. e. ordinavi ut pascerent, etc. vel Dominus dici potest proprie ei
praecepisse tanquam lictori suo ut maledicat Davidi, i. e. sua Davidi scelera
exprobret, and public coarguat, licet Simei limits excederet mandati divini,
and veris criminibus, inter exprobrandum, multa falsa admisceret. Non cogitur
David de causa proxima, nota scil. voluntate Simei, sed recurrit ad
Providentiam Dei, ut Josephus, Genesis 45.
of God for my humiliation, and the exercise of my patience; and what reason
have I to be troubled at what this man says against me? you see my own Son that
came out of my bowels seeks my life, how much more may I then with patience
endure the reproaches of this Benjamite who being of the family of Saul is my
declared and professed enemy? Let him curse, seeing the Lord has permitted him
as his instrument and executioner thus to afflict me. And if by this means I be
brought to true humiliation and repentance for my sins, possibly the Lord may
look down upon my affliction and reward my patient bearing of it, and instead
of those curses now thrown at me may please to reward me with a blessing, and
some special mercy. Thus admirably patient was David when supported by Divine
grace, who a little before being left to himself was so impatient in the cause
of Mephibosheth. But David was not so patient, but Shimei was as impudent and
malicious, who went on over against him on the side of the hill cursing him,
and casting stones at him, and throwing up dust into the air in defiance of
him, yet so obedient were David's Commanders and Soldiers that none of them
offered to stir to revenge this great injury, seeing he forbad them. So the
King and all the people that were with him passed on to Bahurim, and being
weary, there refreshed themselves.

2 Samuel Chapter 16. from v. 5, to 15.

8ly, David being now come near to the banks of Jordan where he pitched, he
there (it seems) composed the 42 and 43 Psalms.

9ly, Absalom being now come to Jerusalem and Achitophel with him, Hushai
presents himself to him, and congratulates his coming to the Crown, saying to
him, God save the King, God save the King. Absalom (as it seems) wondering he
should come to him, says, What is this thy kindness to thy friend? thou did
pretend to be a great friend to my Father, and is this the part of a friend to
leave his friend in his extremity? Why do thou not go along with him? Hushai
replies, Nay, but whom the Lord and the people of Israel choose for their King,
his subject will I be, with him will I abide; and whom should I serve but thee?
As I have served thy Father while he was King, so now I will serve his Son
being advanced to the Throne. Thus Hushai insinuated himself into Absalom, that
being near him he might come to know his counsels, and so defeat them.

2 Samuel Chapter 16. from v. 15, to the 20.

10ly, Absalom now calls his Council together to advise him what was fittest to
be done that they might carry on their business successfully. Achitophel
advises him to defile his Fathers Concubines (whom he had in his Palace) and
that publicly, and in the sight of the people, that so the breach between him
and his Father might be made desperate; and so (says he) the people that follow
thee will go on courageously and confidently when they see that by this fact
thou have made thy self so odious to thy Father that there is no possibility of
reconciliation between you; whereas if there be but the least hope left that
thou should ever make thy peace with him, then all thy followers and abettors
will be in extreme danger to be ruined by him. Besides the people will be shy
and fearful to join with thee till they see that thou and David can never be
reconciled. Absalom likes and follows this damnable advice, and so they spread
a Tent for him upon the roof of the Palace, (from which place as it is probable
David first espied Bathsheba washing her self and lusted after her) and there,
not hurried thereunto violently by the strength of lust, but advisedly and upon
Politic considerations, in the sight of the people, and to the blushing of the
Sun, he lay with his Fathers Concubines. And thus what God had threatened
against David, Chapter 12.11. was accomplished, I will take thy wives before thine
eyes and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie with them in the sight of
the Sun. This was the villainous counsel that Achitophel gave him, who was
counted so great a Politician both while he was with David, and after with
Absalom, that his counsel was looked upon for the successfulness of it, as if
it had come from the very Oracle of God.

2 Samuel Chapter 16. from v. 20, to the end.

11ly, Achitophel, seeing that Absalom had so readily followed his former
counsel, he now gives him a new advice, and most dangerous and pernicious to
David had it been followed. He advises him to let him chose out twelve thousand
men out of his Army, and with them he would go in person and pursue David that
very night; and (says he) I will surprise him, while he and his followers are
weary and faint, and I know that his Army will be so terrified with the
suddenness of my coming upon them, that they will flee and scatter, leaving him
to shift for himself, and his army being defeated he may easily be taken and
killed, and accordingly I my self may kill him; and when the King is slain, I
will proclaim pardon to the people that followed him, and so reduce them all
under thy obedience; for thou may easily apprehend that the doing of this one
thing, (viz. the taking off the King) is in effect the reducing of all the
people, who will be quiet and embrace thee for their King when David is gone.
This counsel hugely pleased Absalom, and those that were about him, though it
was so highly villainous, and tended to cut off the life of his Father by a
sudden surprise. But yet God so overruled his heart that he would needs send
for Hushai (who was also reputed a very wise man) to hear what he would say to
it. When he came, Absalom tells what Achitophel had advised, and asks his
opinion of it. Hushai tells him that Achitophel was indeed a very wise and able
man, but the counsel which he had given was not (in his opinion) good at this
time; for (says he) thou know that thy Father and his men are mighty men of
valor, and they are now chaffed in their minds, and their spirits are so
enraged at their being forced to leave their wives and children, and their
habitations, that they are like a Bear robbed of her whelps, and so will
redouble their strength and resolution to recover what they have lost. Thou
may easily understand that it is a dangerous thing to fight with desperate
men, alas it will not be so easy a matter to terrify them, and to make them
flee as Achitophel supposes. Besides thy Father is an old experienced
Commander, wise and cautious, and thou may assure thy self that he will not
at this time lodge in the Camp among the common Soldiers, for fear there should
be any concealed Traitors among them, but will secure himself in some secret
pit or cave, or some unknown place, (as he used to do in the days of Saul) so
that it will not be so easy a matter to seize upon him, and so put an end to
the war as Achitophel apprehends. Furthermore we are to consider how dangerous
and perilous to any side the first overthrow is, which is usually looked upon
as a presage of future success. Those twelve thousand whom Achitophel would
lead forth are but a few to go out against thy Fathers army, and if some of
them should be overthrown at the first, a report will presently fly abroad that
Absaloms forces are beaten, and then the hearts of thy most valiant Soldiers
(whose hearts are now like the heart of a lion) will soon melt and be
dissolved, and thorough fear they will scatter and flee away. Therefore my
counsel to thee is, to assemble all the people from Dan to Beersheba, and to
gather an army like the sand that is on the seashore for multitude, and this
is the way to make sure work in a matter of such great consequence as this is;
and when thou have got such a vast army together, then I advise thee to go out
thy self in person and command them as General, and so thou thy self wilt have
the honor of the victory, and thy valor and conduct will be renowned in the
world. And when thou have gotten such a vast army under thy command, fear not,
we shall find thy Father out where ever he is; for as dew when it falls
overspreads the face of the whole earth, so we shall overspread the face of the
whole Country, and if he be any where in the fields we shall light upon him,
and neither he nor any that are with him shall escape us; and if he be fled
into any City, we will bring ropes to that City, and will draw it into the
river and will pull it down until there be not left one stone upon another.
Thus Hushai concluded his speech, and with such big and swelling words he
sought to blow up the spirit of this proud young Prince, and to humor his vain
glory and ambition; but his main end was to gain time, (knowing that in a
little time such a vast army could not be gathered together) that so David in
the mean while might gather strength, and increase his forces. Hushai having
delivered himself thus eloquently, Absalom and those about him were much taken
with him, and said the counsel of Hushai is better than the counsel of
Achitophel. Thus the Providence of God overruled their hearts, that the
Politic counsel of Achitophel which had been good for the accomplishing
Absalom's ends had it been followed, might be defeated. Hushai presently
acquaints Zadock and Abiathar with what had passed, that they might give David
speedy notice thereof, and advise him not to lodge that night in the plain of
the Wilderness, but speedily to pass over Jordan lest he should be surprised.
For though he had at present (as he thought) diverted them from following
Achitophels dangerous counsel, yet he knew not how soon their minds might
change. Jonathan and Ahimaaz (of whom before) stayed at Enrogel not far from
Jerusalem, expecting to hear from their Fathers, for they durst not come into
the City, being suspected to be of David's party. Therefore Zadock and Abiathar
sent their message to them by a young maid (who was not like to be suspected)
that they might conveigh it speedily to David. But it seems a lad accidently
saw them at Enrogel, and went and gave intelligence of them to Absalom, who
speedily sent some to surprise them. But they understanding some way or other
that they were discovered, hasted away presently to Bahurim, and betaking
themselves to a friends house, they hid themselves in the well which was in the
Court of the house; and to conceal them the more the man's wife spread a
covering over the wells mouth, and spread ground-corn thereon. Absalom's
servants pursue them thither, and inquire diligently after them; the woman of
the house tells them they were gone over the water, (telling therein as they
call it an officious lie to preserve them) and so when they had sought them in
vain and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem. They being gone,
Ahimaaz and Jonathan came out of the well, and went speedily to David to
acquaint him with what Achitophel had counseled against him, and show him that
he must speedily arise and pass over Jordan if he intended to preserve himself.
This therefore David and his followers immediately did that night, and by the
morning the whole army was past over. And the special Providence of God
appeared herein that they were all preserved in such a dangerous passage, and
that in the night. When Achitophel saw that his counsel was not followed, but
Hushai's preferred before his, and foreseeing that this counsel of Hushai would
certainly be their ruin, and that David by gaining this time would so
strengthen himself that he would be too hard for Absalom when they came to
fight it out in the field; and concluding that if David prevailed (as 'twas
most likely he would) there was no mercy for him to be expected at his hands,
who had been so false and treacherous to him, he being greatly discontented
went to his own City Giloh, and there putting his house in order, making his
will, and disposing of his estate, and taking care of all things but his soul,
he hanged himself Herein he was a Type of Judas.
, and was buried in the Sepulcher of his Father, 2 Samuel 17. from v. 1, to 24.

David upon occasion of Achitophel's counsel against him composed the 55 Psalm.

12ly, David by this time having gathered a good Army together marched with it
to Mahanaim (a City in the Tribe of Gad beyond Jordan) and was there furnished
with provisions by three eminent persons, the first was Shobi, the Son of
Nahash of Rabbah, brother of Hanun, (King of Ammon, whom David had deposed for
abusing his Messengers) and set this Shobi up in his stead, in thankful
remembrance whereof he now brought provisions to David. The second was Machir
of Lodebar, who was Guardian to Mephibosheth, when David came to the Crown, see
Chapter 9.4. who observing how much David favored him, and what kindness he showed
to him, did highly esteem him ever after for it, and was the readier (as it is
probable) to commiserate him in this time of his troubles. The third was
Barzillai the Gileadite, of whom we shall say more when we come to the 19th
Chapter. These all came to comfort David Sic solet Deus cum usitata auxilia
absunt, suis de improviso suecurrere.
in his great distress, when his own unnatural Son sought his life; and they
brought beds and cups, and earthen vessels, and wheat, barley, meal, parched
corn, beans, lintils, and parched pulse, and honey, butter, and sheep, and
cheese, to refresh David and the people that were with him, who they thought
must needs be weary, and hungry, and thirsty, having had so long a march
thorough the Wilderness, where they could not but be in great want. From v. 27,
to the end.

13ly, Absalom having now gathered together a mighty Army of the Israelites, as
Hushai had advised, he marches out with them against his Father; Amasa It Is
said here that Ithra an Israelite was his father, and Abigail sister to Zerviah
his mother. In 1 Chronicles. 2.17. this Ithra is called Jether the Ishmaelite. It
seems therefore that he was an Ishmaelite by birth, but an Israelite by
profession, and habitation, being become a proselyte, or else he was called an
Ishmaelite, because he had lived among the Ishmaelites, as upon the same
account some were called Hittites and Gittites. It Is said of this I hra that he
went in to Abigail, and begat this Amasa on her, which intimates, he was not
then married to her. It Is also said of this Abigail that she was daughter to
Nahash sister to Zerviah, 1 Chronicles. 2.16, 17. it is evident that both this
Abigail and Zerviah were daugh^ers of Jesse, and Sisters to David. Either
therefore Jesse had also the name of Nahash, or his wifes name was Nahash, who
was the mother of Abigail
(who was Nephew to David, and Cousin-german to Joab) being made his General,
and with them he passed over Jordan, and pitched in the land of Gilead. 2 Samuel
17. v. 24, 25, 26.

14ly, The Armies of David and Absalom being now near one another, David drew
out his Army (which was at this time much increased by the resort of many out
of the two Tribes, and half on the other side Jordan unto him) and mustering
them, he set Captains over hundreds, and Colonels over thousands, and divided
his Army into three Battalions, appointing three Generals over them, viz. Joab,
Abishai, and Ittai. Then he told them, He would go forth with them in person to
encourage them, and possibly he inclined the more to it, that being present in
the Army he might use his best endeavor for the saving of Absalom; his great
Commanders and Soldiers would by no means consent that he should venture his
person in the battle, telling him that he was worth ten thousand of them; the
Commonwealth should receive more damage, and the enemy more advantage if he
should be killed than if ten thousand of them should be slain; alas (say they)
if we should flee, or half of us be slain, the enemy will not much regard it,
if thou remainest alive who art the mark at which they principally aim, and who
they know (as long as thou live) wilt be able to raise forces and make head
against them; and therefore we think it much better that thou remain in the
City, and from thence that thou send us forth succors and supplies as we have
occasion. The King tells them that seeing they would have it so, he would do as
they desired. So standing at the Gate of the City to see his Army march, he
spoke to the three Generals in the audience of the people that they should deal
gently for his sake with the young man Absalom. For besides his tender natural
affection to him, it is like he feared lest he should die in his sins, and under
the heinous and heavy guilt of Murder, Incest and Rebellion.

The Armies now approach each other, and the Battle was fought in that part of
Gilead which belonged to the Tribe of Gad, near unto the Wood Ephraim, so
called either because it was close by Jordan, right against the portion of
Ephraim on the other side of the river, or else because this was the place
where Jeptha slew the Ephraimites, Judge. 12.5, 6. The Armies furiously engaging
against each other, Absalom's Army was discomfited, and a great slaughter of
them made, and being disordered and routed, and scattered, a great many of them
fled into the wood, whither being pursued they were easily slain in that
confusion and fright they were in; so that more of them were slain in the wood
V. 8. The wood devoured more that day than the sword, Frequens est ut id ab
aliquo loco factum dicatur quod in illo loco ab allis perfectum est. Sanctius.
than in the field, the Country people as it is like falling upon all straglers
they met with, so that the number of all the slain amounted to about twenty
thousand. Absalom flying among the rest, happened to run upon a party of
David's Soldiers, which when he perceived, striving to decline the danger he
was in, he fled into the wood, and running his Mule fiercely to escape, it
happened that his head was catched in a crotch or forked bough of an Oak, and
his Mule going from under him, he hung between heaven and earth as unworthy to
live in either of them. One of David's Soldiers seeing him thus hung, told
Joab thereof. Joab asks him why he did not presently smite him and kill him?
Had he done it, he would have given him ten shekels of silver, and a military
girdle for his pains, which would have been a great honor to him. The man
replies though I should receive a thousand shekels of silver in my hand, yet I
would not put forth my hand against the Kings Son; for the King in our hearing
charged all you his Generals that none should touch the young man Absalom, and
if I should have done otherwise than I have done, I should have wrought
falsehood and treachery Fecissem inique contra animam meam. q.d. whatever
encouragements had emboldned me to do it they would have proved false and
deceitful. I should have wrought falsehood against my own life; for he that
wittingly does any thing to the prejudice of his life may be said to work
falsehood against it.
against my own life; for had I killed Absalom, the King would have found out
who did it, and then thou thy self would have set thy self against me as much
as any other. Joab angrily replied that he must not stand to talk with him, but
bad him show him where it was that Absalom hung; which he accordingly doing,
Joab (preferring the peace and welfare of the King and Kingdom before the
personal command and private affection of the King) took three darts in his
hand, and run them through the midst of Absalom's body near his heart while he
hung in the Tree, and then the young men his Armour-bearers came and killed him
outright. Absalom being dead, Joab sounded a retreat, and recalled his
Soldiers from pursuing the Israelites that followed Absalom, who thereupon
stole home to their own houses. Joab's Soldiers took Absalom's body and threw
it into a great pit in the wood, and cast a great heap of stones upon it; and
this was all the burial he had. It seems sometime before this God had taken
away his three Sons, mentioned Chapter 14.27. not judging him worthy of children
that would not honor his own Father, and had basely murdered his own brother.
Absalom hereupon (being deprived of his Children who should have kept up his
name) reared up for himself a pillar, or some famous Sepulchral Monument
(possibly something like one of the Pyramides of the Kings of Egypt) in the
Kings dale Called the Kings dale (as some think) because the King of Sodom and
Melchisedeck King of Salem, did there meet Abraham, Genesis 14.17.
, lying between Jerusalem and Mount Olivet, to perpetuate his name and memory.
But now God disappointed his pride and ambition by causing him to be buried in
a pit, under a heap of stones in an ignominious manner like a Malefactor.

The Army of David having obtained this great victory over Absalom and his
forces, Ahimaaz the Son of Zadock desired Joab to send him to the King with the
glad tidings of it, that the King might know how God had avenged him of his
enemies. Joab tells him that he should not go now, for there was a mixture of
joy and grief in this news, and he would send him another time when he should
be a messenger only of good. Joab knew that the news of Absalom's death would
so imbitter the joy of the victory to David, that Ahimaaz would have but a cold
welcome for bringing it. So he bad Cushi (a servant and possibly a footman to
David) to run to the King and tell him what he had seen. Cushi runs
accordingly. Ahimaaz desires of Joab that he may run after him; Joab asks him
why he was so desirous to go, seeing he had no news to carry that would be
pleasing to the King; but if he were so bent upon it he might go if he would.
Cushi ran the nearest way which was hilly and mountainous, but Ahimaaz ran the
way of the plain, which though longer about yet was the more easy to run, and
so he outran Cushi. The Watchman from the Turret of the Gate of Mahanaim
discovering a man running thitherward, acquaints the King with it, who sat
there earnestly expecting news. The King said, if he be alone he brings good
tidings; for they that are beaten in battle do flee in companies, whereas the
victors do usually dispatch only one or two to carry news of the victory, being
themselves otherwise employed in pursuing the enemy. Then the Watchman
discovered another running alone. The King said, he also brings us good news.
The Watchman said, methinks the foremost seems to be Ahimaaz. The King said if
it be he, he is a good man, and undoubtedly comes to bring me good tidings.
Ahimaaz then immediately approached, and as soon as he came near to the King,
he cried all is well; then falling upon his face to the earth before the King,
he said, Blessed be the Lord thy God who has delivered the men that lifted up
their hands against thee to be slain by thy servants. The King asks, Is the
young man Absalom safe? Ahimaaz answers that when Joab sent away Cushi (the
Kings servant) and him to bring tidings, he saw a great tumult, but knew not
what the matter was. He knew undoubtedly of Absalom's death, but through humane
frailty, fearing to displease the King, he here miserably faulters. Then came
Cushi who cried out, Good tidings my Lord the King, for the Lord has avenged
thee this day of all those that rose up against thee. Then said the King is the
young man Absalom safe? Cushi replied, let the enemies of my Lord the King, and
all that rise up against him be as that young man is. David was smitten with a
wonderful consternation at this news, and his grief and passion brake out so
violently that it almost overwhelmed him; he now retires into the Chamber over
the Gate there in secret to pour out his sorrow, and as he went up he cried
out, O my Son Absalom, my Son Absalom, would God I had died for thee, my Son
Absalom, if my temporal death would have saved thee from eternal misery.

2 Samuel Chapter 18. whole Chapter.

15. The King taking on so immoderately for the death of Absalom, his excessive
grief came to be known in the Army, and caused great trouble of spirit among
them also, so that the victory was turned into mourning; neither came they up
like a victorious army with joy and triumph to the City, but dispersing
themselves secretly stole into it, not as if they had been Conquerours, but
rather as if they had been beaten and fled away from their enemies. The King
still took on excessively and covered his head in token of extreme sorrow, and
cried out, O my Son Absalom, O Absalom my Son, my Son. Joab understanding this,
and seeing in what a discontent the Soldiers were hereupon, and how their
hearts began to be alienated from the King so that they were even ready to fall
quite off from him, he comes in a great rage to him, and highly expostulates
with him, and tells him, He had shamed the faces of all his faithful servants
that day who had saved his life and the lives of his wives and children, with
the extreme hazard of their own, and had frustrated them of their deserved
praise and reward; this strange carriage of thine (says he) shows as if thou
lovedst thy enemies (in that thou mournest so excessively for this Traitor
Absalom) and hatedst thy friends, seeing thou do thus discountenance their
faithful service. Thou seem not to regard thy faithful subjects, let them be
of what degree or quality they will; I perceive that if that Arch-Rebel Absalom
had lived, thou had not much cared if all we had died. I solemnly protest to
thee if thou will not give over thy whining for that Rebel, and go forth
presently and speak comfortably to thy people, and congratulate their victory,
and give them thanks for their venturing their lives for thee, I believe they
will all forsake thee as a person unfit to govern them, who can not govern
thine own passions, and possibly they will think of choosing another Prospicient
sibi de alio rege site aequum habere non possint.
, and that will be worse to thee than all the afflictions thou have hitherto
met with in all thy life. David being startled at this bold speech of Joab's
(which though harsh and tart, yet was needful at this time) he took his counsel
and went and sat in the Gate, and there shaking off sorrow manifested his
kindness and grace to his Soldiers to win their hearts again to him. As for
those that had followed Absalom and escaped in the battle, they were fled to
their own houses.

2 Samuel Chapter 19. from v. 1, to 9.

16. The people now through all the Ten Tribes of Israel began to blame one
another for siding with Absalom against his Father, and to call upon one
another, and upon their Elders and Officers to submit themselves unto David,
and to go and fetch him back again to the City of Jerusalem with honor; they
began to recount the great and manifold benefits they had enjoyed under his
Government, and how he had saved them out of the hands of their enemies,
especially the Philistines. And they saw that God was against them in that
attempt of making Absalom King, and therefore there was great reason they
should go and seek reconciliation with David whom they had so highly injured
and offended. This resolution of the Israelites to fetch their King home with
honor, coming to his ears, and he perceiving that the men of Judah (who had
been first and chief in siding with Absalom, and had delivered up to him the
City of Jerusalem, and the strong fort of Sion) being conscious to themselves
of their great ingratitude against him, were now afraid to address themselves
to him, or to go to fetch him home, therefore he sent to Zadock and Abiathar
(who had stayed all this while at Jerusalem) that they should acquaint the
Elders of Judah how ready he was to pardon them, and to forget all that was
past. They were also to assure them of his singular affection to them, they
being his brethren and of the same Tribe, therefore he would not have them to
be the last in fetching home their King who ought to be the first. He sends
also unto Amasa (whom Absalom had made General of his Army, and who if he
should despair of pardon, might draw a great party of the Israelites after him)
to assure him that he was ready to receive him into his favor, and to regard
him as his nephew; nay he intended to prefer him, and to make him General of
his Army as long as he lived in the place of Joab. Indeed Joab had incurred his
displeasure by killing Abner, and several other unjustifiable acts, yet he had
also done him great services, and had been always faithful to him, whereas
Amasa had been faithless and rebellious. Besides the place of General belonged
to Joab both by David's promise, and his own purchase, he having hazarded his
life in that dangerous service of assaulting and taking the strong fort of
Sion. However David being now offended with him for killing Absalom, he
resolved to prefer Amasa before him, thinking by that policy to reduce all
Absaloms party that stood out against him under his obedience. By this kind
message to the men of Judah, and to Amasa, David bowed the hearts of the men of
Judah (even as the heart of one man) so that they sent this word unto the King,
Return thou and all thy servants, we are most willing to receive thee, and
submit unto thee. David considered that it might cost a great deal of blood to
subdue them by force, therefore he thought it best by these tenders of grace to
bow their hearts to him; and it happened according to his desire; for the men
of Judah now agreed to meet together at Gilgal, and from thence they passed
over the river Jordan to meet the King, and to bring him back to Jerusalem;
with these men of Judah, Shimei the Benjamite joined himself, (who had before
so unsufferably cursed and reviled David) bringing with him a thousand
Benjamites, so that it seems he was a potent man in his own Tribe. He took this
opportunity of coming to reconcile himself to the King, and obtain his pardon,
hoping to speed the better, because the men of Judah also now came to make
their peace with him.

Ziba also the treacherous servant of Mephibosheth, (who had so falsely accused
his Master) was very forward to come with his fifteen sons and twenty servants
to meet the King; hoping thereby to keep himself in the Kings favor, though
his falseness to his Master should be discovered. All these went over Jordan to
meet the King, and to conduct him back. And there went a Ferry-boat to bring
over some of the chief of the Kings household, (as his wives and children, and
whom he pleased) and to be employed as he should appoint. The rest passed over
the fords on horses, or as they could.

Shimei now coming before the King, fell down on his face before him, and said,
Let not my Lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do thou remember what thy
servant did perversely on the day that my Lord the King went out of Jerusalem,
neither let the King take it to his heart or regard it; for thy servant does
acknowledge that he has heinously sinned against thee: But I am come the first
and before any others of the house of Joseph The Scripture is wont ordinarily
to divide the 12 Tribes into Judah and Israel, Judah having Benjamin adjoin'd
to it, and Ephraim comprehending the other Ten Tribes, which are all called by
its name, because it was the chief of them. See Isa. 7.2. Psalm. 80.1. Zach.
10.6.
, ( viz. of the Ten Tribes) to meet my Lord the King. And therefore as I have
given a good example to others, so if I obtain pardon, others will be
encouraged by my example to come in likewise to submit to the King. Abishai
standing by and hearing what he said, What (says he) shall not Shimei be put to
death, who cursed the Lords anointed to his face! If thou spare him, spare all.
The King replied, What have I to do with you ye Sons of Zerviah? why should you
advise me to that which is so prejudicial to me as if you were my very
adversaries? seeing God has given me so signal a victory over my enemies, and
has made this day a day of rejoicing to me, I will not damp nor stain the joy
of it by sheding any man's blood; I am this day restored to my Kingdom again,
and (as it were) new-created King; and what better becomes a King (especially
on the day of his Inauguration) than clemency and mercy? It will not be wisdom
in me to discourage those that are willing to submit to me, nor to endanger my
yet unsettled State by exercising severity on them who stooped and acknowledged
their faults. Therefore as for Shimei I do here swear unto him before you all,
and pass my royal word that he shall not die This must be understood in
reference to his former faults; if he committed any new offense, this Oath did
not bind to secure him from punishment, therefore David, 1 King. 2.8, 9. gave
order to his Son Solomon to watch and observe him well, that if his malice and
wickedness did break forth any other way, he should proceed against him in a
way of justice. Non morieris, i. e. hodie, vel jam, vel manu mea, and meo
jussu, non propter hanc causam. Nec praecepit Solomoni, ut propter eum puniret
eum, sed solum dicit, noli pati eum esse impunitum, sed eo modo quo just
poteris. Id ergo committit prudentiae Solomonis.
. Among others that met the King Mephibosheth the Grandson of Saul was one who
had neither washed his feet (as in public mournings they used not to do) nor
trimmed his beard, nor washed his linen from the day the King departed from
the City to that day, but had behaved himself as a true mourner for the Kings
long absence and sore afflictions. The King asks him why he came not to him
sooner? he answers, My Lord, O King, my servant deceived me; for I said I would
have the asses sadled that I might ride to the King, and behold he went away
secretly with them leaving me behind a poor lame man unable to help my self.
And besides this, he has also horribly slandered me to the King, and has
thereby, as I understand, gotten a grant of my lands, I do protest I never
spoke those words he has accused me of; but my Lord the King is wise even as
an Angel of God to discern between truth and falsehood, therefore let him do
unto me what seems good in his eyes; for I acknowledge all my fathers house
were but as dead men before my Lord the King; we were all in thy power, thou
might have put us all to death, (if thou had so pleased) for the attempt
made upon thy Royal dignity by Ishbosheth, and therefore what cause have I to
complain if that which was freely given me by thee be now taken from me? David
tells him he was full of weighty business at that time, and therefore he would
not have him for the present trouble him any further about that matter; I have
said (says he) and my sentence shall stand, Thou and Ziba divide the land. It
may seem strange that so wise and just a King as David was should pass so
unjust a sentence against Mephibosheth the Son of his dear friend Jonathan,
with whom he had made a solemn Covenant to be kind to him and his seed after
him; and the poor pitiful plight and condition Mephibosheth was now in, might
have induced David to think that he was far from aspiring to the Crown. Besides
Ziba did not offer now to justify to his masters face what he had before
accused him of. But it seems David was loath to displease Ziba (who had lately
brought him relief in his distress) and was not willing to take back from him
all that he had given him, (especially at such a time as this, when he so much
desired to endear himself to all his subjects) and therefore he appointed
Mephibosheth and him to divide the land between them.

But notwithstanding the hardness of this sentence, honest Mephibosheth was so
far from being displeased at it, that he said, Nay let him take all seeing my
Lord the King is come to his house in peace.

Besides these Barzillai the Gileadite (a man of eighty years of age, who had
supplied the King with Provisions while he was at Mahanaim, see Chapter 17.27.
being a very rich man) came from Rogelim the City where he lived, to conduct
the King over Jordan. The King received him very kindly, and invited him to go
along with him to Jerusalem, where he would entertain him as his friend;
Barzillai told him he was at that time fourscore years old, and therefore 'twas
time for him to think of dying, and not of enjoying the pleasures of the Court.
I cannot now (says he) taste what I eat, or what I drink, neither can I hear
the voice of singing men, or singing women; wherefore then should I go to be a
burden to my Lord the King? Besides, let not the King think of recompencing me
for the poor kindness I did him in lately sending him in some supplies, seeing
what I did was no more than my duty obliged me to; I will therefore wait upon
the King over Jordan, and then I pray thee let thy servant return back again to
his own house, that there I may retire my self, and prepare for my latter end;
for I desire to die in my own City, and to be buried with my Fathers; but as
for my Son Chimham I am very willing he should go over with my Lord the King,
let him therefore I pray thee be taken into thy favor, and employ him as thou
think fit. David readily entertained the motion, and promises Barzillai to
do for his Son whatsoever he should desire of him. So the King and the people
passing over Jordan, Barzillai there took leave of him, and at their parting
the King kissed him, and blessed him, and retained so great a sense of his
kindness to him, that afterward he commanded his Son Solomon to take an
especial care of his Sons, and to let them be of the number of those that did
eat at his Table, [1 King. 2.7.]

2 Samuel Chapter 19. from v. 9, to 40.

17. The King being now come over Jordan, the generality of the Tribe of Judah,
and some few of the ten Tribes, (viz. as many as in that have could come
together) conducted him to Jerusalem; the rest of the Israelites (that as it
seems could not get ready to come so soon) came to the King and expressed
themselves greatly discontented that they had not in hand in bringing him back
as well as the Tribe of Judah; Why (say they) have the children of Judah
stolen thee away and carried thee home as it were by stealth without calling
us, or expecting our company? and so have endeavored (as it were) to ingross
thee to themselves, and to appropriate to themselves the entire glory of this
action. The men of Judah hearing this, answered, that the King was of their
Tribe, and near a kin to them; wherefore then (say they) be ye angry for this
matter? We have not put the King to any expense, we have born our own charges;
neither have we received nor do we expect any reward from him for this service.
The men of Israel replied that they being Ten Tribes had more right to the King
than Judah, who with Benjamin joined to them were but two; and they being the
greatest part of his subjects had most interest in him. And therefore (say
they) why did you thus despise us, as not to think us worthy to be sent unto,
or advised with about bringing back the King? the men of Judah (presuming upon
the dignity of their Tribe) gave them a rough and stout answer, and their words
were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel. This contention the King
heard, and it is like was troubled at, but not setting himself speedily to
compose it, (being loath to displease either party) it brake out into a great
inconvenience soon after; for seeing Judah challenged so great a part in the
King, (and the King did not contradict it) Israel being impatient of such a
disparagement, resolved (as it seems) they would have no interest in him at all.

2 Samuel Chapter 19. from v. 40, to the end.

18. The King being now come to Jerusalem, he shut up the ten Concubines (that
had been defiled by Absalom) in an house of custody, where he provided for
them, but went not in unto them, and so they remained shut up unto the day of
their death in a state of widdowhood; but though David was come to his Royal
City yet his troubles were not yet at an end. For as bones new set are easily
put out again if great care be not taken; so people that have broken out into
sedition, and are newly quieted, are very apt to break out again, if they be
not charily handled; and thus it was with the Israelites at this time, for upon
this quarrel between them and the men of Judah, Sheba a Benjamite by descent,
(but of the hill-country of Ephraim by residence) and possibly of the house of
Saul, having this opportunity, out of hatred to David, and hope to reduce the
Crown back again to that Tribe and Family, he blew a Trumpet to assemble the
Israelites together, who being met, he spoke to them after this manner: You all
see (my Brethren) that we have no part in David, nor portion in the Son of
Jesse: [see 1 King. 12.16.] Alas we are counted pitiful people not worthy to
be regarded; the men of Judah they are the only brave men, they (it seems) have
a King but we have none; at least they desire to have him wholly to themselves;
and for my part let them take him, and let us choose another for our selves, who
will own us for his subjects; let us all now return to our own houses and
Tribes, and there advise and consider what is fit for us to do in this case.
The men of Israel readily embraced this motion, and leaving David followed
Sheba, but the men of Judah unanimously followed the King, and conducted him
from Jordan to Jerusalem. David was much startled at this unexpected defection
of the Israelites from him, and therefore resolves to raise an Army speedily to
reduce them; in order hereunto he makes Amasa his General (being inwardly
offended with Joab for slaying Absalom) and commands him to assemble the people
of Judah within three days, and then to come to him and receive further orders.
This was a short time for so great a work, but David thought Expedition
absolutely necessary, lest Sheba by their delaying should so increase his
numbers, and grow so strong that it would be difficult to suppress him. But the
time being so short, and many of the people (as it is like) being addicted to
their old General Joab (who had been successful) were loath to engage under this
new (who had been unprosperous) or whatever else the cause was, Amasa could not
accomplish it within the time limited. David being impatient of this delay
appoints Abishai to take his own guard (viz. the Cherethites and Pelethites)
and his other servants and attendants (who were valiant and faithful men) and
with them to pursue after Sheba with all speed; for (says he) if this Sheba be
not suddenly suppressed he will raise a more dangerous rebellion against me
than Absalom did, and will with his forces get into fenced Cities, and then it
may be difficult to deal with him. Abishai immediately marched out with that
party to seek Sheba, with whom some that were formerly under Joab's command
joined themselves, and (as it seems) Joab himself (of his own accord) would
needs accompany his brother Abishai in this Expedition, intending when he met
with an opportunity to kill Amasa. Abishai and Joab being come to the great
stone which was near Gibeon, they discovered Amasa with the forces he had
raised not far before them; Joab now resolving to kill him, he girt his garment
close about him (that it might not encumber him) and on it girded his sword,
and put it into a wide scabbard that it might upon the bending of his body fall
out. Joab now coming up to Amasa, bowed his body to salute him, and said to
him, Art thou in health my brother? upon his bowing his sword fell out of the
scabbard (as if it had been by accident) and he stooped to take it up ( Amasa
not suspecting any thing) and then having his sword in his left hand he took
Amasa with his right by the beard as if he would have kissed him, and then with
his sword gave him such a deadly stab under the fifth rib that he immediately
fell down, and his bowels gushed out. This was a vile and treacherous act in
Joab (and not to be mentioned without detestation) yet there was a just hand of
God in it in punishing Amasa for joining with Absalom against his Uncle David
(who was his Lord and Sovereign) and though David had pardoned him for it, yet
God it seems would not let him go unpunished. Joab having thus taken Amasa out
of the way, he now resumed his office of General over the Army (without any
commission from David) and so with his brother Abishai went to pursue after
Sheba, but before he went it seems he appointed one to stand by the body of
Amasa and to make this Proclamation to the Soldiers as they passed by, He that
favors Joab and desires to have him restored to his place of General, (Amasa
being dead) and he that is for David and desires he should have good success in
this expedition against the common enemy, let him follow after Joab, and let
not this accident hinder him. But notwithstanding this Proclamation, many of
the Soldiers when they came where Amasa lay and saw him wallowing in his own
blood, they stood still as astonished at the dreadfulness of the sight, and
possibly murmured that Amasa should be so basely murdered, whereupon the man
removed the body out of the way, and cast a cloth over it to hide it from the
sight of the Soldiers, and then they followed after Joab without staying. So
that we see in what high favor Joab was with the Army and the Military men
notwithstanding David's great displeasure against him. Joab and Abishai pursued
Sheba through all the Tribes where he had been gathering people to follow him
even unto Abel, and Beth-maacha in the North of Canaan in the Tribe of Naphtali
(where was the Country of the Berites Aliqui per Berim Provinciam intelligunt
in qua erat Abela and Bethmaaca. Menoch.
, many of whom joined with Sheba) who betaking himself with his followers to
the strong City of Abel, there Joab besieged him, and casting up a great
Bulwark or bank against the outmost wall, he from thence with his Engines
battered the wall to beat it down. A wise woman that was in the City came upon
the wall, and desired to speak with Joab, who coming within hearing of her, she
tells him that their City formerly had been had in high esteem for wisdom and
ability to give counsel, insomuch that it went for a Proverb, They shall ask
counsel at Abel; so that they used to come from all the neighboring parts when
any controversy arose among them to take advice here, and so they ended the
matter or difference between them as the men of this City advised and directed.
This being so, give me leave though a woman (yet one that is of a peaceable
spirit and faithful to the King) to speak a few words unto thee: Why go thou
about to destroy such an ancient and eminent City as this is, that is a
Mother-city and chief of the Province, having many other Towns and Villages
under it? Why will thou destroy a City that is part of the inheritance in which
God has placed his people? Joab answered that he had no design to destroy
their City, or to do any damage to the Commonwealth, but his aim was to
preserve both by cutting off a pestilent enemy to both, namely Sheba, who had
lifted up his hand against the King; if they would but deliver him up to him he
would presently depart from their City. She tells him Sheba's head should be
thrown over the wall to him very speedily. It seems she was assured that the
men of her City (being wise men would do it.) And though they could not hinder
Sheba's sudden getting into their City with his forces, yet they would never
hazard their City by sheltring such a Traitor. Accordingly by her wisdom, and
the reasons she gave them, the men of the City were persuaded and seized upon
Sheba, and cut off his head and threw it over the wall to Joab, who thereupon
drew off his forces from the City. Joab having thus quelled this rebellion went
to Jerusalem to the King, who though he could not choose but be highly offended
with him for killing Amasa in such a base and treacherous manner, yet he having
done him so great a service in subduing Sheba and his accomplices, and being in
so great esteem with the Soldiers and the people, the King thought it best to
let him alone, and continue him in his place of General. David being now
reestablished in his Kingdom, all things were settled in their former order,
Joab was General, Benaiah Captain of the Kings Guard. Adoram over the Tribute;
This Office was not mentioned, Chapter 8. but David having now enlarged his
Dominions and made many Nations Tributary to him, he erected this office;
Jehoshaphat Recorder, and Shevah called Seraiah 'Twas usual among the Hebrews
for the same man to have two names.
, Chapter 8.17. Scribe; Abiathar the High Priest, and Zadock next to him, and Ira
of the Country of Jair in Gilead, a chief ruler about the King; David's Sons
mentioned, Chapter 8. are not here spoken of, because diverse of them were dead,
viz. Amnon, Absalom, and (as it is like) Chileab also.

2 Samuel Chapter 20. from v. 1, to the end.

SECT. CXCVIII.
AFter these things God punished the land of Israel with famine for three years
together, occasioned by drought and want of rain. David at first looked upon it
as a punishment laid upon them for the common sins of the land, but when he saw
it continued three years together he thought there was some more special thing
for which God was so highly offended Populus punitur quia de eo facto gaudebant
and sperabant se frui posse bonis illorum. Videbatur etiam David rem negligere,
and potitus regno non succurrebat oppressis.
, therefore he enquired of the Lord concerning it by the High Priest, and the
Lord answered, It was for the blood of the Gibeonites shed by Saul and his
bloody family. For Saul pretending a great zeal for the good of Israel,
attempted to destroy the Amorites, and with them all wizards and witches, [1 Samuel 28.3, 9.] and with them he also fell upon the Gibeonites V. 2. Of the
remnant of the Amorites.] All the inhabitants of Canaan are usually in the
Scripture called Amorites. See Genesis 15.16.
, and destroyed many of them Occidit eos ut eorum urbes and possessiones
Israelitis traderet indignam ratus ut praestans illa terrae portio ab
alienigenis occuparetur.
, notwithstanding the Oath which Joshua and the Elders of Israel had sworn to
them that they should live peaceably among them, Josh. 9.15. And it seems the
Lord did not only tell David wherefore this famine was sent, but injoined him
to make satisfaction to the Gibeonites for the wrong they had sustained. David
accordingly sending for the Gibeonites, asked them what satisfaction they would
require for the wrong that had been done them, that so they might not complain
any longer to God of the cruelty the Israelites had exercised upon them, nor
endeavor to draw down judgments upon them, but being satisfied might pray for
their peace, and the prosperity of the land which God had given them for an
inheritance. The Gibeonites answered, We will have no silver or gold of any of
Saul's family, neither for us shall thou kill any man in Israel, save only those
of his family who were chief actors in the destruction of our Brethren; let
those of his posterity (who sought utterly to destroy us from among the
Israelites) be delivered unto us and we will hang them up in Readiness own City
(who being chosen of Gods mere favor and grace to be King over Israel, turned
Tyrant, and shed innocent blood) and this we will do not out of revenge, but
that by their death an atonement may be made to the Lord, and that his wrath
may be appeased, and the famine removed, and that others by this example may
learn to keep Covenant, and not to oppress the stranger that is taken under
Gods protection Voluit Deus se ostendere adjutorem oppressorum and delectatum
esse istorum Ethnicorum conversione qui typum gerebant Gentium vocandarum.
, see Numb. 25.4. David having (as it seems) warrant from God to give them the
satisfaction they required, he promises to deliver seven of Readiness posterity
into their hands; but he would not let Mephibosheth be one of them, because of
that special Covenant that was between him and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 18.3. He had
likewise sworn to Saul, that he would not cut off his seed after him, 1 Samuel
24.21, 22. But God now by this his special command dispensed with him as to
that Oath. So the King took the two Sons of Rizpah Readiness Concubine, and the
five Sons of Merab, Readiness Daughter, which she had by Adriel, [1 Samuel 18.19]
but were brought up, and educated by Michal her sister, (she having no children
of her own) and delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites, who
immediately hanged them up on an hill near Gibeah, that all might look upon
them as a fearful example of Gods high displeasure against Saul and his bloody
house for killing and massacring those poor men in that manner he had done. And
so they were all executed and put to death Whereas it is said, Deuteronomy. 24.16. The
children shall not be put to death for the Fathers, every man shall be put to
death for his own sin. We must know that punishments are either temporary or
eternal, in the former children and such as are innocent of those sins for
which the punishment is sent, may be involved, because they live in the same
community, and are as it were members of the same body; but as for those
punishments that are eternal, they are never inflicted upon any but for their
own sins; and of these chiefly the Prophet is to be understood, Ezekiel. 18.4. and
20.
together in the beginning of Barley harvest. Rizpah the mother of two of them
knew (it seems) that the bodies of her Sons and of the rest that were hanged
were so to remain till God should testify that he was appeased toward the
land by giving them rain. David doubtless had special direction from the Lord
in this matter, for otherwise 'twas against the express letter of the Law that
the body should hang all night, [see Deuteronomy. 21.23.] but God having (as it seems)
otherwise ordered it at this present, Rizpah that she might defend their bodies
from birds and beasts resolved to watch them, and to that end she took
sackcloth, and spread therewith a Tent for her self on the rock next adjoining
(to defend her from the heat and weather) and there sat (possibly with some
servants attending her) in a mournful posture, watching of them till water
dropped upon them from heaven; and God sent rain upon the land as was desired.
David hearing what affection Rizpah had showed to her Sons that were hanged,
and how careful she had been to keep their dead bodies from being torn and
mangled, (that they might be decently interred) being moved by her example he
began to think of showing some respect to the dead bodies of Saul and Jonathan
which had been taken by the men of Jabesh-Gilead from the street of Bethshan
where the Philistines had hanged them. Accordingly David ordered that the bones
of Saul and Jonathan, together with the bones of these men lately hanged (whose
bodies as it is like being putrified, they burned off the flesh from their
bones) should be buried in the Sepulcher of Kish the Father of Saul. And after
that God was entreated for the land, and testified his favor by sending rain,
and taking away the Famine.

2 Samuel Chapter 21. from 1, to 15.

SECT. CXCIX.
TRoubles again arise to David from the Philistines, and four battles are
fought with them, wherein four Valiants of David slay four of their Giants. In
the first of these David himself was engaged, and being old and faint was in
great danger of being killed by one of the Sons of the Giant, but he was
rescued by Abishai who killed the Giant. David's Soldiers hereupon resolved
that he should go no more in person with them to battle, lest he should be
slain, and so the light of Israel be quenched, that is, their glory, splendour
and joy should perish with him. See 1 King. 15.4. The next battle with them was
at Gob near unto Gezer. Here Sibbechai another of David's Worthies slew another
Giant. The third battle was also at Gob, and there Elhanan another of David's
Valiant Commanders slew another Giant, the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the
staff of whose Spear was like a weavers beam. The fourth was at Gath where a
man of great stature came out against them and defied Israel; he had on each
hand six fingers, and on each foot six toes, and was another son of the Giant
Rapha, Jonathan the son of Shimea (called Shammah, 1 Samuel 16.9.) slew this vast
Giant. These four fell by the hands of David and his servants. For though David
did not kill any of them himself, yet their death is ascribed to him as well as
to his Captains, because they fought in his quarrel and under his command.

2 Samuel Chapter 21. from v. 15, to the end.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 20. from v. 4, to the end.

SECT. CC.
DAvid being now delivered from all his enemies on every side both within and
without his Kingdom, and calling to mind Gods wonderful mercies to him, he in a
grateful remembrance of them composed a Triumphant Song or Psalm of
Thanksgiving that God might have the glory of all that he had done for him.
This Song is the same for substance with the 18th Psalm, only there are some
clauses here that are expressed there in other words, and in some places a clause
is now and then added in one of them which is not in the other. So that
possibly this Psalm was penned by him many years before when he was delivered
from his mighty potent enemy Saul, and is here with some little alteration
repeated again. In this Song, first he declares his firm confidence in God, and
that he might show what an alsufficient defense he esteemed the Lord to be unto
him, he uses variety of expressions to set it forth, as not being able by one
or two to express it. He calls the Lord his rock, his fortress, his deliverer,
his shield, the horn Horn signifies power and glory. Christ is called the horn
of salvation, Luke 1.69.
of his salvation (by whose assistance he had been enabled both to defend
himself, and push down his enemies) his tower, his refuge, and his savior,
whence he infers that he will still trust in him, and call upon him who was
worthy to be praised. Secondly, he sets forth the woeful straits and dangers he
had been in; his enemies came upon him like violent floods of water, and like
waves rouling one upon the neck of another, (threatening present death to him)
he acknowledges their roaring rage made him afraid, but that fear drove him to
God. He says that death-threatning sorrows and dangers so encompassed him, that
there seemed no more likelihood for him to escape than there is of a sick man
that has the pangs of death upon him; he intimates that Saul and his other
enemies had so subtly contrived his death and laid their snares so cunningly
for him that all means of escaping seemed to be prevented. In these my great
distresses (says he) I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me (and appeared for
me) out of his Temple Heaven is called the Temple of God, 1st, as being the
place of his special presence. 2. In regard of the the exceeding glory of
Heaven, which to shadow forth, the Temple was built so exceeding glorious. 3.
In regard of the transient holiness of heaven.
; that is out of Heaven, and from thence manifested his power for my
deliverance. Then the earth shook and trembled, and the foundations of heaven
moved and shook because he was wroth; that is, the Lord in his hot displeasure
fought against my enemies, and poured forth his vengeance upon them. This
vengeance he sets forth under the similitude of a prodigious storm or tempest,
when the earth quakes, and the air is covered with thick, black and dark mists,
and when the Heavens send forth wind, rain, thunder and lightning David here in
sublime expressions sets forth not what historically happened, but an a
Poetical manner Gods mighty assistance and concurrence with him in his
victories over his enemies.
; by all which he intimates that the wrath of the Lord was evidently seen and
manifested in the destruction of his enemies, as if he had sent such an
horribla storm and tempest upon them, and so visibly destroyed them. The
foundations of the heavens shook and were moved. In the 18 Psalm v. 7. he says
the foundations of the hills moved, that is, the hills were shaken from their
very foundations or bottoms. These hills are here called the foundations of
heaven Job 26.11. calls that the pillars of Heaven.
, because the tops of high mountains seem to touch the clouds, and the heavens
seem to lean upon them. There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out
of his mouth devoured, coals were kindled by it, that is, he gave forth such
testimonies of his anger and indignation against mine enemies, so vehement was
his wrath that even smoke seemed (to speak after the manner of men) to come out
of his nostrils, and so hot a fire out of his mouth that even coals were
kindled by it. He bowed the heavens also and came down and darkness was under
his feet; that is, the lower part of the heavens was so affected as if God to
manifest his power had come down into it, and (if we may describe him according
to our weak apprehensions) under his feet in the lower region of the air, there
were dark mists and clouds. He rode upon a cherub and did fly, yea he did fly
upon the wings of the wind See Psalm. 18.10.
; that is, he used the ministry of his holy Angels, and by them he raised
violent and strong winds. He made darkness pavillions round about him, dark
waters and thick clouds of the skies; that is, as men are wont by Tents and
Pavillions to shelter themselves, and to hide themselves from the view of
others, so did the Lord cast darkness and thick clouds about the place of his
appearance. Through the brightness before him were coals of fire kindled; that
is, the Lord sent out his flashes of lightning, with the flames whereof much
combustible matter was kindled. The Lord thundered from heaven, and the most
high uttered his voice, he sent out his arrows and scattered them; that is, his
thunderbolts out of the clouds, as arrows from his bow. He sent out his
lightning and discomfited them. The channels of the Sea appeared, the
foundations of the world were discovered; at the rebuke of the Lord, at the
blast of the breath of his nostrils; that is, by this raging tempest the waters
and waves were raised up so high that the very channels and bottom of the Sea
was discovered and laid bare. By these Hyperbolical expressions he signifies
and sets forth the fierce anger of God against his enemies; then he comes to
set forth the wonderfulness of his deliverance, being like a man ready to be
drowned, and perish in deep waters, had not God as it were with his arm
stretched out from heaven pulled him out of them: God delivered me (says he)
from many enemies, yea, from my strong enemies, (such as Goliath, Doeg, Saul,
and Achitophel) who would have been too strong for me, if he had not of his
great mercy helped me. In the day of calamity and distress they thought (by
their subtilty) to prevent me from saving my self, and to surprise me before I
was aware, so that I should not escape, (so Achitophel contrived) but the Lord
was my stay, and upon him I did rely and trust. The Lord also freed me from
the great straits I was in, and set me at liberty, and that not for any merit
in me, but of his own free grace and mercy, and that he might graciously reward
me according to my innocence and integrity; so that I may with great
thankfulness say, The Lord has rewarded me according to my righteousness He
does not here speak of his righteousness in reference to God, for in this sense
he prays, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, but of his
righteousness as to his enemies. though the obedience of Gods servants is a due
debt which they owe to God, and it is God that enables them to do what they do,
yet God of his free grace rewards them for their works when they are performed
with sincerity, though they be far short of what they should be; the Lord
rewards men according to their works, that is, acding to the nature and quality
of their works, though not for any merit in their works. If their works be good
they shall have a good reward, if their works be evil, their reward will be
accordingly.
, according to the cleanness of my hands has he recompensed me; that is,
according to the righteousness of my cause, and the innocence of my intentions
and actions, as to my enemies, I being clear of those faults and crimes they
slanderously charged me with I have kept the ways of the Lord; that is, I have
desired to walk in his precepts, and the ways by him prescribed; and though I
have had many slips and failings yet I have not wickedly and presumptuously
resolved to go on in them, and so to make a desperate defection from God. For
all his judgments and statutes were before me; that is, I have set the whole
Law of God before me as the rule of my life and actions, and do endeavor to
observe them one as well as another. And though I have had many failings, yet
what I have done in Gods service has not been in hypocrisy or dissimulation.
I was upright before him and kept my self from mine iniquity; I restrained my
self from that sin Cavi ne scelus admitterem, quod antea admississe^.
, unto which I was otherwise by nature prone to fall into. Therefore the Lord
has recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to my innocence
which he saw in me.

He now by an elegant Apostrophe turns his speech to God, extolling his
goodness and mercy toward the godly, and his equal and just dealing with the
wicked. With the merciful thou will show thy self merciful, with the upright
thou will show thy self to act uprightly, with the pure thou will show thy self
to act purely and holily, but with the froward and perverse thou will show thy
self wayward V. 27. Perverse ages, i. e. retribues illi secundum perversitatem
ejus.
and unpleasing, inflicting sharp judgments upon them. As they walk contrary to
thee, so thou will walk contrary to them, crossing them in all that they go
about, according to Levit. 26.27, 28. The afflicted people thou will save and
preserve, but as for the haughty thy eyes are upon them to bring them down. He
now comes to show how the Lord was his lamp that enlightened his darkness; that
is, that shined upon him, and comforted him in the darkness of his afflictions,
and directed him what course to take. He declares also that it was the Lord
that enabled him to run thorough the thickest troops of his enemies, and by his
assistance he had scaled their walls, and taken their Cities. And from his own
experience he infers that the Lord is perfect in all his ways, not failing in
any of his promises, and that his word is tried, and has been proved to be
true by unquestionable proof and experience. That he is a buckler and shield to
defend all that trust in him. Then in a way of thankful admiration he cries out,
Who is a God save the Lord? And who is a rock save our God? As for me I do
declare that I have had all my strength and power from him. He has made my way
perfect or plain, removing impediments, and prospering my attempts and
undertakings, so that I have not failed to perfect what I went about. He makes
my feet like hinds feet, that is, swift to escape danger, and to stand safe
upon my high places, as hinds speedily run up to the top of inaccessible rocks
and there are safe. He teaches my hands to war, he has given me skill in
military affairs, and to skill he has given me strength of body fit for war,
so that I am able not only to draw a strong and stiff bow of steel, but if I
please I can break it in pieces. Yet I ascribe nothing to my self, for thou O
Lord have given me the shield of thy salvation, that is thou have been as a
shield to me to defend me against mine enemies; and thy gentleness V. 36. Et ex
exauditione tua magnum reddebas me. Heb. per respondere tuum. Pisc.
has made me great; that is, by thy right hand thou have upholden and
strengthened me in the day of battle, and by thy hearing of my prayers thou
have made me great and victorious. Thou have enlarged my steps under me, or
widened my passage, given me room to walk steadily and safely in, so that I was
prosperous and successful in my marches, so that I have pursued mine enemies
and destroyed them, and they are fallen under my feet. Thou have girded me with
strength in battle, those that rose up against me thou have subdued under me.
Thou have given me the necks of mine enemies, and I have prevailed against
them; when they were in extremity they looked for help from man but there was
none to save them, and then they cried unto God but he did not answer them.
Thus being helpless I have beaten them to pieces as the small dust of the
earth, and stamped them as the mire of the streets, and dispersed them as men
spread dung on the ground. By which Hyperbolical expressions he intimates that
he had not only subdued his enemies, but in a disgraceful manner trodden and
trampled upon them. Then he acknowledges how God had delivered him from the
strivings of the people, viz. in the insurrections of Absalom and Sheba, and
had brought many Nations of the Heathen to be in subjection to him, and to
acknowledge him for their Lord and head. Strangers This is true both of David
and of Christ, (of whom David was a type) viz. in respect of the conversion of
the Gentiles who were aliens and strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel.
(says he) will now submit themselves unto me, and neighboring Nations will
become Tributary to me; as soon as they hear of my coming against them they
will yield unto me. Thus the glory and strength of the Heathens shall by little
and little fade and decay, and though they be in places of strength, yet even
in those close places (their fortified Cities and Towers) they shall be no less
afraid then if they were only in some poor unwalled villages.

He now concludes his Song, praising God for all the benefits before recited:
The Lord lives and blessed be my Rock, and exalted be the God who is the rock
of my Salvation. It is God who avengeth me and brings down the people under
me, and who brings me forth and delivers me out of the hands of mine
enemies, notwithstanding all their power and policies. Thou have lifted me up
on high over those that rose up against me: Thou have delivered me from the
violent man, viz. from Saul my most violent and deadly enemy. Therefore I will
give thanks unto the Lord among the heathen: that is, I will labor to spread
the knowledge of thee, and so to exalt thy praise among the Heathen Nations See
Apostol. Hist. on Romans 15.9. This David speaks by a spirit of Prophecy, having
respect to the calling of the Gentiles.
, whom thou have brought into subjection to me. God is the Tower of Salvation
for his King, that is, he is as a Tower in which he is safe, and shows mercy
unto his anointed, unto David and to his seed for evermore; that is, God will
manifest his favor to him to his posterity after him, and principally to
Christ (who was to be of his seed according to the flesh, Romans 1.3. and to all
the faithful members of Christ who are also by faith his seed. See Isa. 53.10.
and Heb. 2.13.

2 Samuel Chapter 22. whole Chapter.

SECT. CCI.
DAvid now toward his latter end apprehending his death approaching, in
imitation of Jacob and Moses leaves behind him a kind of Testamentary Prophecy
that his Kingdom and Throne should be established for ever, namely in the
person of the Messiah, (who was to come of him according to Gods Covenant, 2 Samuel 7.16.) and he Prophesies of the righteousness, glory and prosperity of
that Kingdom; and these were the last words he wrote by the inspiration of the
Holy Ghost for the use of the Church. In the Preface to this Prophecy, he
first sets down his own Titles, saying, I am the Son of Jesse by birth, yet by
the grace and favor of God exalted to be King of Israel, and who have been
enabled by the Spirit of God to compose many Divine Hymns and Psalms for the
benefit of the Church (and thereupon have been called the sweet Psalmist of
Israel) I David do now declare that the Spirit of the Lord did formerly speak
by me, and his word was in my tongue when I uttered those Divine composures.
And the same God of Israel (who is the Rock of Israel) has now spoken to me,
and I am to declare that there shall be a ruler over men; a righteous person
that shall rule them in the fear of God These words are unstood by learned men
as a promise of the Messiah, Quid dominabitur in timore Domini cum spiritu
timoris Domini unctus sit, and quid subditos suos ita spiritu suo gubernavit,
ut ex vero Dei timore sanctitati vitae studeant. Osiand.
. And he shall reign prosperously, and still increase in glory; his glory shall
be like the morning light that shines more and more unto perfect day, and shall
daily increase like the grass that has seasonably the moistning rain, and
warming Sun to make it sprout up and grow. And though my house be not so with
God as it should be, but I and mine have been guilty of many great sins and
transgressions, yet God has made with me an everlasting Covenant, viz. that my
Kingdom and Throne shall be established for ever in the person of the Messiah
who shall come out of my loins, [ Chapter 7.16.] and this Covenant is well ordered
in all things (for the glory of God and Salvation of man) and sure to be
performed. And this promise of God that the Messiah should spring from my
loins, and come into the world to save sinners, is that on which my hope of
Salvation is firmly grounded, and this thing I wish and desire above all
things, though God do not make the glory of my Temporal Kingdom to grow and
increase. But as for those sons of Belial, those profane graceless and
stubborn wretches who will not submit to the Kingdom of the Messiah, they shall
be all of them as thorns plucked up and cast away, because they are so
intractable that they cannot be taken with hands, but the man that shall go
about to touch them had need have his hands armed with some iron glove or
gantlet, and to have a staff in his hands like the staff of a Spear wherewith
to thrust them into the oven. And these intractable thorns shall be burnt and
consumed in the same place where they grew. Whereby (as some think) he
Prophesied of the destruction of the obstinate Jews who were by the Romans
destroyed in the same place or City where they lived and by wicked hands had
crucified the Lord of life.

2 Samuel Chapter 23. from v. 1. to 8.

SECT. CCII.
HEre now follows a Catalogue of David's Worthies, men renowned for valor and
admirable exploits, and such as were great supports to him in all his troubles,
1 Chronicles. 11.10. These are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who held
strongly with him in his Kingdom, and joined with the Elders of the people to
make him King. they were in all thirty seven, whereof Joab was the chief, being
Captain General of the Host, 1 Chronicles. 11.6. Next to him were six chief
Colonels, and of them the first three were above the other three. The first
three were Adino, Eleazar and Shammah. This Adino was called the Eznite from
the Country where he was born or bred, and the Tachmonite, or Hackmonite from
his Father, being the Son of one Tachmani, or Hackmani. And also Jashobeam, or
Josheph-Bassebet, because he sat in the Chair, and was President of the Council
of War. Concerning his Exploits it is said of him, [2 Samuel 23.8.] That he lifted
up his Spear against eight hundred and slew them. In the 1 Chronicles. 11.11. There
are only 300 mentioned. Therefore either 800 were slain by him at one time, and
300 at another; or else he discomfited 800, whereof only 300 were slain
outright by himself, and the rest by others, which yet are said to be slain by
him, because they were slain by those that fought under him.

The Second of the first three was Eleazar one of the posterity of Ahoah a
Benjamite, 1 Chronicles. 8.4. he was with David at Pasdammim when the Philistines
were gathered together in battle against him, and there defended a field of
barley against them when the rest of the people fled away, and slew so many of
them that at last the people returned to the spoil of the enemy. He smote the
Philistines till his hand was weary, and clave unto his sword, and was as it
were glueed to the hilt of it with blood. The third of the first three was
Shammah. He defended a field of lentils against a Troop of the Philistines when
the people fled from them, and the Lord wrought a great victory by him. It Is
probable that this exploit against the Philistines was jointly performed by
both these Captains at one and the same time, and therefore it is said 1 Chronicles.
11.14. That they set themselves in the midst of that parcel of ground and
delivered it, and slew the Philistines; there being both barley and lentils in
the same field. Eleazar it seems beat the Philistines from the barley-field,
and Shammah from that part of it that had lentils. These three Worthies also
ventured their lives to fetch David water from the well of Bethlem, of which
before at Chapter 5.18. Of the second three Abishar the Brother of Joab was chief,
he lift up his spear against three hundred and slew them. Other valiant deeds
he did besides, as when he went with David into the midst of Saul's Camp, 1 Samuel
26.6. and his killing the Giant Ishi-benob, whose Spear weighed three hundred
shekels of brass, 2 Samuel 21.16, 17. he was the most honorable of this three,
but he attained not unto the first three. The second of this three was Benaiah
the son of Jehoiadah, he slew two Lion-like men of Moab, and he slew a Lion in
the midst of a pit, into which it had casually fallen in the time of the snow,
where the room being straight he knew he must either kill or be killed; and
this he enterpriz'd not out of a vain mind to show his valor, but Heroically
to destroy a noxi^^^ (...) that had done so much mischief to the Country. He
slew also an Egyptian, a (...) of great stature, five cubits high, whose Spear
was like a weavers beam; he went down to (...) only with a staff, and plucked
the spear out of his hand, and slew him with his own spear. He was also Captain
of the Kings guard. The third of this three seems to be Asabel, who was above
the thirty V. 24. Supra Triginta istos.
, (as all those before mentioned were) there being thirty named after him. This
second three attained not unto the first three, but yet were superior to all
others.

2 Samuel Chapter 23. from v. 8, to the end.

SECT. CCIII.
DAvid having vanquished his enemies abroad, and suppressed sundry
insurrections at home, yet knowing that new wars or conspiracies might be
raised against him, therefore in this time of peace he thought fit so to settle
his Militia and Soldiery, that they might be in a readiness on all occasions
to defend the Kingdom. In order hereunto he divided them into twelve courses,
twenty four thousand in each course, who in their turns one month in a year
were still in arms ready to be employed in any service for the State as the
King should appoint; by which means all the able men in the Kingdom were still
trained up in the use of their Arms, and there was always a sufficient number
ready in arms, if on a sudden there should be any occasion for them. Jashobeam
(who it seems was of the posterity of Perez or Pharez the son of Judah, Genesis
46.12.) had the preeminence of being Commander in chief over the first course
for the first month. Over the course of the second month was Dodai, and Mikloth
was the Captain of this course after his death. The Captain of the Host for the
third month was Benaiah a principal Officer. The Captain of the fourth course
was Zebadiah the son of Asahel, (who was killed in the beginning of David's
reign by Abner, 2 Samuel 2.23.) but being a valiant man, and brother to Joab and
Abishai, and of kin to David, his name is put both into the Catalogue of
David's Worthies, 1 Chronicles. 11.26. and here into the Catalogue of chief
Commanders the course possibly bearing his name, though his son was Captain of
it. The names of the other Captains that were over the other courses are here
also set down, as also the Princes and Rulers of the Tribes who had the chief
power in the Civil Government, where thirteen are mentioned, of whom one is
said to be of the Levites, and another of the Aaronites, one of the half Tribe
of Manasseh, and another of the other half; the Princes of Gad and Asher are
not here named, possibly they might be joined with those Tribes that bordered
upon them. Then are set down who was over the Kings Treasure, and over his
storehouses in the Fields, Cities and Villages, and over the Tillage, and over
the increase of the Vineyards for the Wine-cellars, and over the Olive Trees,
and Cellars of Oil, and over the herds in Sharon, and over the herds in the
valleys, over the Camels, over the Asses, and over the Flock, and in sum all
the Officers belonging to the King.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 27. whole Chapter.

SECT. CCIV.
THE Lord being again angry God is said to be angry when he does that which men
use to do when they are angry, that is, to punish those that have offended.
with the Israelites for their wickedness, (possibly for their pride, carnal
security and confidence in their number and strength) he moved David against
them, that is, he let Satan loose to tempt him to pride and carnal confidence
in the multitude and strength of his subjects, and left him to himself, that he
might be foiled by Satan. And accordingly Satan stirred up David in the pride
of his heart Otherwise to number the people was not in it self unlawful, when
done upon good grounds, and for good ends. Yea, God himself commanded it, Exodus
30.12. and Numb. 1.3. and 26.1, 2. And Solomon and Amaziah practiced it, 2 Chronicles. 2.17. and 25.5. But here was, now no necessity of doing it, either upon
an Ecclesiastical or Civil account.
to number the people that God might take occasion thereby to bring upon them
that judgment which he intended, and which both King and people for their sins
deserved; and hereby wrath came upon Israel, upon the King in the loss of his
people, and upon the people in the loss of their lives. And the King (not
inquiring of God as he should have done in a matter of such moment) spoke to
Joab and the Rulers of the people to go through all the Tribes of the children
of Israel from Dan to Beersheba, and to number the people, (viz. all that were
fit for war) and to bring their number to him. Joab civilly addressing himself
to the King, The Lord thy God add unto thy people an hundred fold how many
soever they be, and if it be agreeable to his holy will may thou thy self
live to see it. But give me leave humbly to ask thee, why have thou set thy
heart upon this thing? There is no necessity at all to inquire how many thy
people be, seeing how many soever they be they are all thy servants, and ready
to be employed at thy command; and therefore if thou do this thing I am
afraid thou will be a cause of trespass Sed quid in to commisit populus
consensit and assentatus est Regi. Merc.
unto Israel; and wilt hereby occasion them to be too carnally confident, and
to rely too much on the arm of flesh. But the King declared he would have it
done though Joab and the Captains that were with him did what they could to
dissuade him from it. Joab seeing the King so bent upon it like a servile
Courtier, (though the Kings command was abominable to him, 1 Chronicles. 21.6. and
his judgment against it, and his mind did presage that some judgment would come
upon the Kingdom for it) yet to please the King he and the Captains with him
set upon it; and so taking their journey toward the East, they passed over
Jordan and began the work at Aroer a City of the Gadites situate on the river
Arnon, thence marching to Gazer, they passed Northward and entered into Gilead,
and so came to Dan in the North of Palestine, and then turned toward the
Mediterranean Sea, and so came along the Northern Coasts by Zidon and Tire, and
then came to the South of Judah even to Beersheba; and so after nine months and
twenty days Joab came to Jerusalem and gave in the sum of the number of the
people unto the King. The sum that he gave in as it is here set down, 2 Samuel
24.9. was in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew the sword, and
in Judah five hundred thousand. But in 1 Chronicles. 21.5. it is said he gave in the
number of Israel eleven hundred thousand, and in Judah only four hundred,
threescore and ten thousand; so that here is a double diversity, three hundred
thousand short in the one, and thirty thousand over in the other. For the
reconciling of this some think that Joab when he gave in the account eight
hundred thousand, he left out the Trained bands which were before enrolled, and
did their service in Jerusalem every month, of which there were twenty four
thousand for every month, which will make 288000, and left out also their
Colonels, Captains, Commanders, and Officers of all sorts, which might amount
to twelve thousand more, and so make up three hundred thousand, which being
added to the eight hundred thousand, make up altogether eleven hundred thousand.

As for the other diversity concerning Judah, viz. that in the Chronicles he is
said to have given in of them only four hundred threescore and ten thousand,
and in Samuel five hundred thousand; for the reconciling of that, possibly when
he came first to Jerusalem he gave in but only four hundred threescore and ten
thousand, but then there was an addition of thirty thousand more out of
Jerusalem, which made it up five hundred thousand: But yet he did not number
Levi and Benjamin (which still joined themselves to Judah) being weary of the
work, and the plague soon after breaking out, he gave it quite over. The total
of all was sixteen hundred thousand; scarce a Kingdom in the world of no larger
extent was ever so prodigiously fruitful.

The next morning after the number of the people was given in to the King, the
Prophet Gad was sent unto him by the Lord to make known his sin, and how God
intended to punish him for it: Hereupon David's heart smote him, and he humbly
confessed and acknowledged he had sinned greatly and done foolishly, and
earnestly begged pardon of the Lord. The Prophet Gad tells him that the Lord
was resolved severely to chastise him, but yet he would offer him his choice of
three judgments, viz. either In 2 Samuel 24.13. it is seven years famine; as if
God should have said, you have lately suffered three years famine for the sin
of Saul against the Gibeonites; and this fourth year being a Sabbatical year,
has an harvest indeed, but for want of seed sown a very poor one, and no ways
able to supply the necessities of the land. Now to these four years of famine
art thou willing the Lord should add three years of famine more, which will
make the famine continue in all upon the land seven years.
three years famine, or to fly three months before the enemy, who should
overtake and slaughter his people in the flight) or three days pestilence Not
an ordinary pestilence arising from the infection of the air, but by the
immediate stroke of an Angel. See 1 Chronicles. 21.12.
. So that the Lord now dealt with David as a Father does that brings forth
three or four rods, some greater than others (though he means to use but one of
them, and possibly the least) yet thereby he does the more scare his child, and
humble him with the fear of his anger; thus the Lord showed three dreadful
judgments to David, but yet he manifested so much gentleness and kindness as to
permit him to choose which of them he had rather suffer. David upon this message
said, I am in a great straight, for these are all such sore judgments that I
know not which to choose. He knew the Pestilence might destroy as many in three
days as the sword in three months, or the famine in three years, but at last he
chose the Pestilence, and that because he judged it better to fall into the
hands of God Like a loving child David chooses to be chastised by his Father,
rather than by the hand of a servant, or a slave.
, (whose mercies are great) then into the hands of men. It Is true the sword and
famine are sent by God, yet in them he uses other instruments besides, and
when the Lord punishes by men he usually suffers them to deal with great
severity and cruelty, even more than himself is wont to deal with when he takes
them into his own hand; and this was the main cause why David chose the
Pestilence; yet withal, this is to be observed, that he chose such a calamity
as would not spare the Prince any more than the people. For no antidotes or
preservatives could secure him against the sword of the Angel, whereas in war
he might have got into some strong fort, and in famine might have stored up
provision for himself, and so have escaped; but what fence is there against the
destroying Angel but only the protection of the Almighty. David therefore
having chosen that judgment, the Lord sent a Pestilence from the morning of
that day that Gad came first to him until the evening of the third day after,
and there died of the people from Dan to Beersheba seventy thousand. And thus
was David punished in the very way wherein he had sinned. His heart was proud
and lifted up because of the number of his people, and now their number is
sadly diminished by this sore judgment. The Angel went still on destroying, and
at last stretched out his hand over Jerusalem, and as he was going to destroy
that City, David and the Elders thereof being clothed in sackcloth lift up
their eyes and saw the Angel standing between Heaven and Earth (near the
threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite) with a drawn sword in his hand
stretched out over Jerusalem, whereupon they fell on their faces, and Araunah
and his four Sons saw the Angel also, and his Sons hid themselves through fear.
Then Then David spoke to the Lord, saying, It is I, O Lord, it is I that
commanded the people to be numbered: It is I that have sinned, but as for these
sheep what have they done? Let thy hand I pray thee be on me, and my Fathers
house, but not on thy people that they should be plagued. Then the Angel
commanded Gad to speak to David, that he should presently set up an Altar in
the threshing floor of Araunah, and thereon offer sacrifices; intimating to him
that there was no other way for them to obtain the pardon of their sins, and
the removal of the present judgment, but by faith in that propitiatory
sacrifice which their promised Messiah was to offer up for them. The Tabernacle
and the Altar of Burnt-offerings was at this present at Gibeon, but David could
not now go thither for fear of the slaughter and dreadful execution that might
be made by the Angel in the mean time; therefore no place at present was fitter
to rear an Altar in than that where the Angel appeared with a drawn sword; and
the Lord it seems would have that place as it were consecrated and endeared to
the people by a sacrifice that should procure a very great blessing for them,
namely the staying of this raging plague, because he determined in that very
place to have his Temple built. See 2 Chronicles. 3.1. David accordingly went
forthwith to Araunah This Araunah or Ornan seems to be descended of the Royal
blood of the Jebusites, and now was the chief of the Jebusites that enjoyed
Estates in and about Jerusalem under a Tribute.
, who seeing the King come to him attended with his servants, went out toward
him, and bowed himself to the ground, and said, Wherefore is my Lord the King
come unto me? The King said, I am come to buy of thee thy threshing floor,
there to build an Altar to the Lord that the plague may be stayed. Araunah
answered, Let the King freely take it and offer up there what sacrifices he
pleases. Behold here be also my oxen which thou may take for burnt offerings,
and take also the wooden instruments which are used in this work (which being
dry will soon take fire and expedite the business) and take wheat also for a
Meat Offering, I freely give thee all. All these did Araunah, as free as a
Prince, profer unto David, adding, the Lord graciously accept thee and the
sacrifices thou art about to offer. But the King said, Nay, but surely I will
buy it of thee at a price; neither will I offer burnt-offerings unto the Lord
of that which cost me nothing. So David bought of him the threshing floor, and
the oxen, and materials for sacrifice for fifty shekels of silver, and David
built an Altar there to the Lord, and called upon the Lord, and offered
burnt-offerings, which were miraculously consumed by fire from heaven, whereby
God testified his acceptance of the sacrifice, and granted his desire for the
staying of the Plague; and the Lord repented That is, did as men do when they
repent, viz. cease to proceed on; so the Lord ceased from punishing the people,
neither was there any change in Gods Decree; for he decreed to cease punishing
when he had brought David and the people to unfeigned repentance.
him of the evil and punishment he had brought upon them; and said to the
Angel, It is enough, stay now thine hand and put up thy sword into the sheath.
So the Lord was entreated for the land, and the plague was stayed. Then David
offered Peace Offerings on the same Altar by way of Thanksgiving for so great a
mercy. And possibly God made known to David by Gad at this time that in that
very place This was upon mount Moriah, where Abraham intended to have offered
up Isaac, who was a Type of Christ.
he would have the Temple built, and thereupon David purchased of Ornan the
whole place or plot of ground, with all the buildings, gardens, and all things
belonging to it, containing a large compass, and a sufficient circuit of ground
for the building of the Temple upon it, with all the Courts thereof, and for
this he gave him six hundred shekels of Gold, whereas the mere Threshing-floor
with the oxen and materials of Sacrifice cost him but fifty shekels of Silver,
as we said before. And possibly David might give more for it than the real
worth out of his Royal bounty.

2 Samuel Chapter 24. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 21. whole Chapter.

SECT. CCV.
DAvid now knowing that this Threshing-floor of Araunah (which he had
purchased) was the place where the Temple was to be built, he said of it, This
is the house of the Lord, and this is the Altar of the Burnt-offering for
Israel; that is, this is the place of which God long since spoke by his servant
Moses that he would have an house there built, which should be the settled place
of his Worship, and where there should be an Altar, (not this I have now set up
but another) whereon only they should offer Sacrifices unto him, see Deuteronomy.
12.11. Not long after, it seems, he received from the Lord by the illumination
of his Spirit Except we may suppose that this pattern set down in writing was
brought him by some Prophet. See 2 Chr. 29.25.
, the pattern or model whereby the Temple was to be built, and this he set down
in a draught or platform, and afterward delivered it to his Son Solomon, as
we shall see, 1 Chronicles. 28.11, 12, 13. In order therefore to the carrying on of
this great work, David prepared materials in great abundance, and called the
strangers that were in the land and employed them in hewing of stone and
timber, and such like works. He also prepared iron in abundance, and brass
without weight; that is, it was so much they would not trouble themselves to
weigh it. Also abundance of Cedar-trees which he had from the Tyrians and
Zidonians. And he said, Solomon my Son is yet young and tender, and the house
that is to be built for the Lord must be exceeding magnificent, and must excel
all others Thus it was in the service it self, and in the ornaments
appertaining thereunto. It was one of the worlds wonders. It was far more
excellent than the Tabernacle, and in its dimensions far exceeding it. There
were some greater Buildings in the world, yet there was never any that had such
costly materials, such curious workmanship, such divine services, such
representations of Gods Majesty and mercy, and which prefigured such Mystical,
Spiritual and Caelestial things, as this Temple had.
, that it may be had in higher honor and esteem than any other building in the
world. And therefore though I may not build it my self, yet I will provide
materials for the building of it. And so he did in great abundance before his
death.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 22. from v. 1, to 6.

SECT. CCVI.
IN the next place by the advice of Gad the Seer, and Nathan the Prophet, [see
2 Chronicles. 29.25.] and calling the Princes and Governors of the people to be
present to observe the order he set up, he appoints the several Officers for
the service of the Temple, and ranks them into their several Orders and
Divisions.

1. He distributes all the Priests that were the Sons of Aaron into two parts,
viz. all the Priests descended either from Eleazar or Ithamar, Aarons two Sons.
All that were of the Sons of Eleazar (over whom Zadock was the chief) into one;
and all that were the Sons of Ithamar (over whom Ahimelech was chief under
Abiathar the High Priest) into the other. And there were more Heads of Families
found among the Sons of Eleazar than among the Sons of Ithamar. Then he divides
all these Priests into twenty four courses, in each of which there was one to
be the chief or Head of the rest. And therefore he appoints sixteen of these
courses among the Sons of Eleazar, and but eight among the Sons of Ithamar.
Then he orders lots to be cast amongst these divisions promiscuously (not
preferring those of the one lineage before those of the other) to determine
which of these courses should first serve, and which should be second, and so
in order, each company being to serve a week and then to go out; as also to
show which of these that were Heads of Families in each company should be the
chief of that company 1 Chronicles. 24. v. 19. under Aaron their Father, that is,
under the High Priest, who is here called Aaron, because he held the same place
that Aaron formerly did.
. And so the first company was chosen by lot, and the lot fell upon Jehojarib
to be Head of that Course, which was from thence called the Course of
Jehojarib, and so after the same manner in the rest.

2ly, He numbers the Levites from thirty years old and upwards, and their
number arose to 38000. This numbering was not like the numbering of the people, 2 Samuel 24.2. out of pride and curiosity, but out of piety and prudence, and that
by a Divine command, that knowing the number of the persons he might better
distribute them into several Orders.

These Levites he thus distributes:

1. Twenty and four thousand he appoints to attend upon the Priests in the
service of the Temple, viz. to prepare the Sacrifices and oil for the lamps,
and other things belonging to their office. These were divided into twenty four
Courses as were the Priests. David also gave order before his death, v. 27.
that in each Family of the Levites, all of twenty years old and upward should
be taken into the service of the Temple, because they were not any longer to
carry the Tabernacle and vessels thereof, and therefore such strength of body
was not now necessary as was formerly required, and the service of the Temple
would now one way or other employ them all, see 1 Chronicles. 23.24. David therefore
guided by the Spirit of God, saw cause now to admit them into the Temple at
that age, and possibly at first they were only as Novices and Learners admitted
to behold the service of God that they might be the better acquainted with it,
and after twenty five years they were to assist the Elder Levites in their
particular services, and after thirty to bear offices themselves. These Levites
also were to take care of the measures, viz. that the fine flower, and wine,
and oil for the Meat Offerings should be given to the Priests according to the
just weight and measure appointed by the Law. For to some Sacrifices there was
a greater measure of these required, and to some less. See Numb. 15.4, 5, 6.
and Levit. 23.13. And some think they had the overseeing of all public
measures, and kept the patterns or standards of them in the Temple; whence the
just shekel was called the shekel of the Sanctuary. These Levites being cast
into twenty four Courses or Divisions there were lots cast who should be the
first Course coming in and going out with the first Course of the Priests, and
so who should be the second, etc.

2. Six thousand he appoints for Officers and Judges, these were to be
dispersed into several places of the land to judge of causes that were brought
before them according to the Judicial Laws of Moses, which the Levites were
best skilled in. They were also to take care of the outward business, [See 1 Chronicles. 26.29.] viz. of those things which were to be done abroad out of the
Temple, as to give judgments in doubtful matters to train up younger Levites in
the knowledge of the Law, to look to the gathering and receiving such moneys as
were to be gathered of the people for the service of the Temple, and some of
them had their charge on the West Side of Jordan, and some on the East, and
more on that side than the other, because they being divided from their
brethren by the river, there was the more care requisite to retain them in
their obedience to the Law, and to prevent any backsliding or remisness in the
Worship of God, or departure from his Law.

3. Four hundred were to be Porters So many were at this time set apart by
David for this employment, but at their return from the Captivity of Babylon,
there were of these only found two hundred and twelve, 1 Chronic. 9.22.
to open and shut the Gates of the Temple at seasonable times, and to watch at
the Gates thereof to keep out all unclean persons and things. These were also
divided into twenty four Courses to attend in their turns weekly according to
their courses; and the order of their courses was determined to them by lot,
and by lot also were the Heads of their courses or companies appointed. And
some of these had also the custody of the Sacred Treasures, viz. of the holy
vessels and vestments, and the dedicate things, see 1 Chronicles. 26.27, 28.
Obed-Edom was one of these Porters, 1 Chronicles. 15.18. and God exceedingly blessed
him, because he received the Ark into his house, [1 Chronicles. 13.14.] not only
with a numerous offspring, but with great prosperity in all other respects,
and hence it was that eight of his Sons, (besides his Grandchildren by
Shemaiah) were Heads of the twenty four Courses of the Porters. And they were
mighty men of valor, their work being not only to keep unclean persons from
entering the Temple, but to prevent all confusion and disorder at the resorting
of the people on their solemn Festivals to the Temple, and to be a Guard unto
the holy place upon all other occasions; and therefore it was requisite they
should be men of might and valor.

4. Four thousand to be Singers and Players on Instruments, therewith to praise
the Lord; whereof two hundred eighty eight were eminent men for skill, and
possibly Teachers of the rest. These also were divided into twenty four
courses, and so served about eightscore in every course, and the twenty four
Sons of Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman, (three great Masters of Music) were to be
the chief Heads of their Courses or Companies, and to Prophecy with Cymbals.
[See 1 Samuel 10.5. So for every Course of the Priests, there was also appointed
a Course of Levite-Singers, and these were assigned to their several Courses by
lot also. And as David appointed their Courses, so he gave them also Psalms
penned by himself to sing, assigning some for the Sons of Asaph, others for the
Sons of Jeduthun and Heman, as by the Titles of many Psalms does appear 1 Chronicles. 25.5. All these were the words of Heman the Kings Seer in the words of
the Lord to lift up the Horn. He was called the Kings Seer in the words of God,
because employed in that Prophetical work of setting forth the praises of God,
and singing Psalms, composed by men inspired by God, and therefore called
thence the words of God. And to lift up the Horn, whereby some Musical
Instrument seems to be meant, as the Cornet, etc. These Singers are said to
Prophecy, because in their Music they were acted with an holy zeal, such as
Prophets in their Prophesies used to be acted with.
.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 23. from v. 2, to the end.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 24. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 25. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 26. whole Chapter.

SECT. CCVII.
SOlomon being now about twenty years of age, Rehoboam is born to him of Naamah
an Ammonitish woman, as appears by Rehoboam's age at the beginning of his
reign, 1 King. 14.21. where it is said, He was forty one when be began to reign.

We are now come to the first Book of Kings: The united State of the Kingdom of
Israel as it began under King Saul, and increased under King David has been
described in the two Books of Samuel, and how it came to its height under King
Solomon is described in the Eleven first Chapters of the first Book of Kings,
and how it came to be divided, and upon that division decreased, and came to
ruin at last, we shall find described in the remaining Chapters of these two
Books.

The first Book of the Kings contains an History of 126 years, viz. forty years
of Solomon's reign over all Israel; after him the Kingdom being divided, we
have from Chap. 12. to the end, the Lives and Acts of four Kings of Judah, and
eight Kings of Israel, according to this following Scheme.

Solomon reigned forty years over all Israel.

Kings of Judah. Kings of Israel. Years. Years. Rehoboam 17 Jeroboam 22. Abijam
3. Nadab 2. Asa 41. Baasha 24. Jehoshaphat 25. Elah 2. Zimri seven days. Omri
12. Ahab 22. Ahaziah 2.

SECT. CCVIII.
DAvid being now seventy years of age, and broken with continual cares, wars
and troubles, was grown so weak and feeble that applying warm clothes would
hardly keep any heat in him; whereupon by the advice of his Physicians a
well-complexioned-young-Virgin was sought out for him, who (being taken by him
as a wife or concubine) might lie in his bosom and cherish him. And such an one
was found out, viz. Abishag the Shunamite who did accordingly lie in his bosom
and cherish him, and ministered unto him, but he knew her not.

2 King. Chapter 1. from v. 1. to 5.

SECT. CCIX.
A Donijah David's Eldest Son now living seeing his Father decline so fast,
began to have aspiring thoughts after the Crown, and understanding that Solomon
was designed to succeed his Father, he resolved to prevent it if he could by
making himself King before his Fathers death. In order hereunto he provides
himself chariots and horses, and fifty men for a guard as his brother Absalom
had done before him. And it is like his Fathers former over great indulgence to
him did the more embolden him, though it also aggravated his fault that he
durst do a thing so contrary to his Fathers mind who had been so kind to him.
He was also a goodly man of person, and as that might be one cause that made
David so much to dote on him and Absalom, so it made him the more acceptable to
the people. In order therefore to the carrying on of his design he consulted
with Joab the General of the Army, and with Abiathar the High Priest about it,
who it seems encouraged him in it, and promised him their best assistance. But
Zadok and Nathan, and Benaiah Captain of the Kings guard with the mighty men
that were under his command, joined not with him. Adonijah having the General
of the Army and the High Priest on his side, he now thus contrives his matters:
He makes a great Feast near Enrogel on the East Side of Jerusalem, to which he
invites all his Brothers the Kings Sons except Solomon, and all the Officers
and people of the Court that he thought would join with him, intending there to
be Installed King. Nathan hearing of this, went immediately to Bathsheba and
asked her if she did not hear that Adonijah reigned, and took upon him to be
King? She was strangely surpised at this, having heard nothing of it. He
advises her if she intended to save her own and her Sons life to go presently
to the King and to ask him whither he did not swear solemnly to her that
Solomon should reign after him? And if he did, how was it that Adonijah took
upon him to be King? surely it is without the Kings privity and consent. And
(says Nathan) while thou art speaking to him I will come in and confirm thy
words, and further add what I conceive requisite to be added. Bathsheba
accordingly went to the King, and making a very low reverence to him she told
him that he had solemnly sworn to her that Solomon her Son should reign after
him, but behold (says she) Adonijah has at this very time made a great Feast,
to which he has invited the Kings Sons, and Joab and Abiathar in order to be by
them Installed King. And my Lord, O King, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee
to observe whom thou will declare for thy Successor in the Kingdom, and the
people are generally inclined to yield to that which thou shall determine
therein; and if thou do not confirm what thou did formerly swear concerning
Solomon, when thou die, I and my Son shall be counted Traitors, and accused
for endeavoring to get the Kingdom from Adonijah. While she was speaking
Nathan came in, who bowing himself before the King with his face to the ground,
in a respectful manner asked the King whither he had appointed that Adonijah
should succeed him in the Throne? I do assure thee (says he) he has made a
great Feast this day, and to it has invited the Kings Sons, and Joab and
Abiathar, and many Captains of the host, and behold they eat and drink before
him, and say, God save King Adonijah. Surely this is not done with thy
allowance, for matters of so great moment thou did not use to transact
without consulting me first about them. Then the King called for Bathsheba and
said to her, As the Lord lives who has redeemed me out of all former
distresses, as I swear to thee that Solomon should sit on my Throne after me,
so it shall be. Then Bathsheba bowed her face to the earth, and said, Let my
Lord King David live for ever. As if she should have said, Long may the King
live, and I wish if it were the will of God, we might never lose him. Then the
King called for Zadok, Nathan and Benaiah, and commanded them to take with them
his Lifeguard, viz. the Cherethites and Pelethites, and to set Solomon on his
own Mule, and to carry him to Gihon A Mount with a rivulet close by it on the
West Side of Jerusalem.
, and that Zadok the Priest and Nathan the Prophet should there anoint him King
over all Israel, and when that was done they should blow with the Trumpet, and
say, God save King Solomon; and then (says he) ye shall attend him back in
state to Jerusalem that he may come and sit on my Throne, and be thereby
declared King in my stead. For I have appointed him to be ruler over Israel and
over Judah It seems there was emulation between Judah and the other Tribes,
before the division of the Kingdom. See 2 Samuel 19.41.
. Benaiah the Son of Jehoiada hearing the King speak thus, answered in his own
and the name of the rest, Amen, The Lord God confirm what the King has said.
As the Lord has been with my Lord the King, so may he be with Solomon also,
and make his Throne greater than the Throne of his Father. Then Zadok, Nathan,
Benaiah, and the Kings Lifeguard carried Solomon to Gihon, and there Zadok the
Priest anointed him with oil taken out of the Tabernacle, viz. the Tabernacle
which David had set up for the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.17. for oil being kept there for
several holy uses, Zadok took an horn full of it and therewith anointed the
King. Which done they blew the Trumpet, and all the people there present
shouted, God save King Solomon. Then they carried him in state toward
Jerusalem, and the people followed after piping with Pipes, and rejoicing with
great joy, and they shouted so loud that the earth even rent An Hyperbolical
expression set^ing forth the greatness of their acclamations.
with the sound of their acclamations. Adonijah and the company that were with
him just as they were concluding their great Feast heard this extraordinary
noise and acclamation, and Joab heard the sound of the Trumpet, and wondered
what the matter was, and thought there might be some uproar in the City; but
immediately Jonathan the Son of Abiathar came to them, Adonijah seeing him, O
come in (says he) for thou art a good Hebr. a man of virtue.
man and bring good tidings. The tidings (says Jonathan) that I bring are
that David has made Solomon King, and Zadok; Nathan and Benaiah have anointed
him in Gihon, and they came up with him from thence rejoicing and shouting so
loud that the City rang again, and this is the noise ye heard; and Solomon sits
now on the Throne, and is in actual possession of the Kingdom; and the Kings
servants came and blessed our Lord King David, and rendered him humble thanks for
setting Solomon on the Throne, and prayed that the Lord would make the name of
Solomon more famous than he had made David's, and his Kingdom greater; and the
King bowed himself upon his bed and worshipped, and praised God, saying,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel who has settled my Son Solomon this day on my
Throne, my own eyes seeing it. The Guests that were with Adonijah hearing this,
had enough of their Feast, and began to be sore afraid, and got themselves away
as fast as they could to their own houses, leaving Adonijah to shift for
himself. Adonijah then not well knowing what to do, and being sorely afraid
that Solomon would take away his life, he fled to Gibeon where the Tabernacle
of Moses now was, 1 Chronicles. 21.29. and there took hold on the horns of the
Altar. For though we read of no express Law that God ever gave to his people
that those that fled to the Altar should be there secured, yet that it was a
custom for malefactors to fly to the Altar as to an Asylum or place of refuge,
may be gathered from Exodus 21.14. and the Altar being the place where God did
show forth the riches of his grace in accepting a sacrifice for sin, this
hanging upon the horns of it was a kind of pleading that mercy should be showed
them for Gods sake. And accordingly Adonijah fled to the Altar, and being there
he desires that King Solomon (so he acknowledges him) would swear to him that
he would not put him to death. Solomon sent him word that if he would show
himself a worthy man, and a loyal subject for the future, not an hair of his
head should fall to the ground; but if he appeared to be wicked and disloyal
after this, he should surely die. Upon this promise they brought Adonijah from
the Altar to Solomon, to whom he bowed himself, and Solomon bad him go to his
own house, and there live peaceably and quietly.

1 King. Chapter 1. from v. 5, to the end.

SECT. CCX.
DAvid having now caused Solomon to be anointed King, he gives him in charge
the building of the Temple, speaking to him after this manner: My Son, it was
in my heart to build an house for the Lord, but the Lord would not permit me to
do it, because I had been engaged in many wars, and had shed much blood God
does not upbraid David for shedding blood in his own cause. Saul and Ahab for
sparing blood lost their Kingdoms, 1 Samuel 15.23. 1 King. 20.22, 42. The Levites
for their fact in shedding blood, Exodus 32. and Phineas for his, Numb. 25. have
the Priesthood settled on them.
, and so was not so fit to build a Temple to him, which was to be a figure of
the Messiah the Prince of Peace. But he said to me, a Son shall be born to thee
who shall be a man of rest, and I will give him rest from all his enemies round
about; his name shall be called Solomon, that is, peaceable, for I will give
peace and quietness to Israel in his days, he shall build an house for my name,
he shall be my Son, and I will be his Father, and I will establish the Throne
of his Kingdom over Israel for ever; that is, for a long time, and as long as
the Kingdom of Judah shall continue, one of Solomon's posterity shall sit in
the Throne of David Possibly none of Solomon's posterity did ever sit in the
Throne of David after Zedekiah was carried captive into Babylon, nor ever had
the supreme power of Government after that.
. Now (my Son) the Lord be with thee and prosper thee, that thou may build
the house of the Lord thy God, as he has said thou shall do. And the Lord give
thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee charge concerning Israel, that is,
give thee Divine direction and counsel, to instruct and direct all thy people,
that thou may keep the Law of the Lord thy self, and teach others to keep it,
viz. the statutes and judgments which the Lord first revealed to Moses with a
charge that he should reveal them to the people. Be strong therefore and of
good courage, dread not nor be dismayed at the difficulties thou may meet
with. I have my self met with many troubles and great molestations in my
government from enemies abroad, and insurrections at home, and yet I have so
set my heart on building this house for the service of God, that I have even in
my troubles gathered a great treasure together for this work, viz. an hundred
thousand talents of Gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver, and brass
and iron without weight, and abundance of timber and stone, to all which thou
thy self may add if there be occasion. Moreover I have provided for thee all
manner of workmen and cunning artificers for every manner of work appertaining
thereunto. Arise therefore and be doing and the Lord be with thee.

1 Chronicles. 22. from v. 6, to 17.

SECT. CCXI.
DAvid then assembles to Jerusalem all the Princes and Rulers of the Tribes,
all the Captains and Commanders of the Army, together with his own Sons, and
his servants and Officers; and in this general Assembly of Princes and people
standing upon his feet (though possibly supported by some of his servants) he
made his last and farewell speech and exhortation unto them: He begins, Give
ear unto me my brethren and my people, it was very much in my heart to build an
house for the Ark the footstool The Lord being represented as sitting between
the Cherubims, the body of the Ark was as it were his Footstool. See Psalm.
99.5. and 132.7.
of God, and I made considerable preparations in order thereunto. But God said
to me by Nathan the Prophet, Thou shall not build an house for me because thou
have been a man of a war. The Lord may choose and employ whom he pleases in any
service he has to do; none can justly say to him why do thou so. Among our
twelve Tribes he chose the Tribe of Judah (who was the fourth Son of Jacob,
Genesis 29.35.) that out of it a King See Genesis 49.8, 10.
should be taken to rule over his people. In the Tribe of Judah he chose the
house of Jesse my Father which was none of the greatest families of the Tribe,
[1 King. 12.16] and of that family he chose me the youngest of eight Sons [1 Samuel 16.11.] to be King over Israel for ever, that is, as long as I lived. And
now of all my Sons he has chosen Solomon (who has six brothers elder than
himself, see 1 Chronicles. 3.4, 5. There 19 Sons of David are reckoned up.
) to sit upon the Throne of this Kingdom after me, which in a peculiar manner
belongs unto him. And he has promised to be a Father to this my Son Solomon
and to establish his Kingdom for ever (that is for a long time) if he be
careful to keep his commandments and statutes as he does at this day. Now in
the presence of this great congregation (the representative body of Israel, who
are the Lords peculiar people) and in the audience of God himself who hears
this charge that I give you, I solemnly exhort you all to keep the commandments
of the Lord your God, which are made known to you, and if you be ignorant in
any thing that belongs to your duty, seek to be instructed in it, that you may
quietly possess this good land and leave it for an inheritance to your children
after you from generation to generation.

Having ended his Exhortation to the Princes and people, he now turns his
speech to Solomon, saying, And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy
Father and serve him with an upright heart, and with a willing mind; for the
Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations and workings
of the thoughts. If thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou
forsake him by a total and final apostasy, he will renounce thee and cast thee
off for ever. Take heed therefore to thy self and to thy ways; and seeing the
Lord has chosen thee to build an house for his name, which is to be to him for
a Sanctuary wherein his Ark is to rest, be thou strong and courageous, and see
that thou frame it according to this pattern that here I now give thee. Behold
this is the pattern of the whole building, as it was revealed to me by the
Spirit of God, this is the model of the Porch, and the distinct parts of the
Temple, and of the place of the Mercy-seat, as also of the Chambers,
Treasuries, inward Parlours and Courts; and here I give thee also the order and
courses of the Priests and Levites, and what work and service they are to
perform in the house of the Lord. I give thee also a pattern of all the sacred
utensils and vessels that are to be made for the service of the Temple. As for
the vessels that are to be made of Gold I have weighed out so much Gold as will
be sufficient to make them, and as for the vessels of silver I have also
appointed a sufficient quantity of silver. I have appointed gold for the
Candlesticks There was but one Golden Candlestick in the Tabernacle, but there
were to be ten in the Temple.
, and Tables of shewbread, and for the bowls, cups and basins, and for the
Altar of Incense, and for the chariot That is of the two great Cherubims to be
made of Olive-wood, and covered over with plates of gold, which were to
overshadow the Ark. See 1 King. 6.23. They are called here the cha^iot of the
Cherubims, because the Angels are called the Lords Chariots, Psalm. 68.17.
Insedit Cherubimis Deus, 1 Samuel 4.4.
of the Cherubims that are to spread out their wings and cover the Ark; all
this the Lord made me to understand through his good hand upon me, and gave me
this pattern in writing by his Prophet Nathan. Therefore be thou strong and of
good courage, fear not nor be dismayed, for the Lord God even my God will be
with thee, he will not fail thee nor forsake thee, but carry thee on till thou
have finished all things belonging to the Temple, and the service thereof. And
the Priests and Levites in their several courses will assist thee in what
belongs to them; and thou will have many skilful artificers that will readily
assist thee about things of Gold, Silver, Brass, Wood, or any other materials.
And I doubt not but the Princes and all the people will be wholly at thy
command.

Then David turned his speech again to the whole Assembly, and said to them,
Solomon my Son (whom God alone has chosen to succeed me) is yet young and
tender, and the work that he is to do is great. For this Palace or Royal Temple
that he is to build is not to be built for man, but for the Lord God, and
therefore must be most magnificent. As for my self, I have provided with all my
might, and to the uttermost of my power for the building of it, and the
finishing of all things appertaining to it. And I declare before you all (not
out of pride or ostentation, but to stir you up to follow my example) that I
have provided gold and silver, and brass and iron, and timber, and marble
stones in abundance for this great work; yea I have provided all manner of
precious stones, as Onix-stones, and glittering stones of diverse colors. Yea,
I have so set my heart on the building of this house for God, that I have of my
own proper goods (which I had gathered for my self David got very rich spoils
in the many wars he was engaged in, and the wealthy enemies he conquered.
, after I had consecrated to God his part which was the greatest) given three
thousand talents of Gold, viz. of the Gold of Ophir, seven thousand talents of
refined silver. The gold is for to overlay in thin plates the walls of the
Temple, and the silver to overlay the walls of some particular rooms in the
houses and buildings adjoining. And now let me exhort you all to follow my
example, and to assist my Son with heart and hand, with your counsel and with
your purses in this great work. And truly you have great reason to do it. Is
not the Lord your God among you to bless you? Has he not given you rest on
every side? Has he not given the people, the inhabitants of the land, into my
hand, so that they peaceably submit to my government? Is not the land subdued
before the Lord and before his people, so that being freed from their enemies
they may quietly enjoy their possessions? Therefore set your hearts to seek the
Lord your God, and faithfully to serve him. Arise and build the Sanctuary of
the Lord your God, and bring the Ark and the holy vessels of God into it. And
now let me see who among you is willing to fill his hand with gifts this day,
and freely to offer them to the Lord for the building of this house.

Upon this motion of the Kings, the Princes, Rulers and Captains, and all sorts
offered very willingly and liberally for the service of the house, and it is
like subscribed what they intended to give, and that which they gave amounted
to five thousand talents of Gold, and ten thousand drams, and ten thousand
talents of silver, and eighteen thousand talents of brass, and one hundred
thousand talents of iron. And they that had precious stones gave them to the
Treasure of the house of the Lord for this sacred use. And there was great joy
among all the people, because of the great willingness and forwardness that was
in all sorts to contribut to this work. And David also rejoiced exceedingly at
it, and was much pleased with their large, free and willing contribution.
Whereupon he brake out into an holy and zealous praising of the Lord for it,
and said, Blessed be thou Lord God of Israel our Father, for ever and ever. To
thee, O Lord, belongs greatness, power, glory, majesty and victory: For all
that is in heaven or in the earth is thine: Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and
we do willingly exalt thee, and acknowledge thee to be head above all, and
higher than all: Both riches and honor come from thee, and thou reignest over
all, and in thine hand is power and might: In thine hand it is to make great,
and to give strength to all to whom thou please. Now therefore, O Lord, we
exalt and praise thy name for thy glorious excellencies, and thy benefits
conferred on us: But who am I, and what is my people that we should have hearts
and abilities to offer so freely and so largely as we have done? And yet we
have no manner of cause to boast or glory: For all things come of thee, and of
thine own have we given thee: We do acknowledge that we are not proprietors of
the goods that we possess, but only thy stewards: The land we dwell in is
thine, we are but strangers before thee, and sojourners as all our fathers
were: And our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is no abiding for us
here; and therefore seeing we are to continue but a short time in this life,
and have but a short enjoyment of the things of this world, how can we better
dispose of them than for thy service, who art able to give us in exchange for
them an eternal inheritance in thy Kingdom. O Lord, we do willingly acknowledge
that all this great store we have provided for the building of an house for thy
holy name was given us by thy free bounty, and is all thine own, and therefore
we present unto thee only what thou thy self did first give us. I know, O
Lord, thou triest the heart, and have pleasure in uprightness: As for my self
in the uprightness of mine heart I have willingly offered all these things; and
now to my great joy and comfort I have also seen this people here present to
offer willingly unto thee: O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob our Fathers,
I pray thee keep and preserve this holy zeal in the minds and hearts of this
people, and establish their hearts and make them ever firm to thy self: And
give unto Solomon my Son an upright heart to keep thy commandments, testimonies
and statutes, and to do all things required of him, and enable him to build and
finish this stately Palace for thy name for which I have made so great
provision.

David having ended his prayer, he called to the whole Congregation to bless
the Lord, which accordingly they did with loud acclamations, and bowed down
their heads and worshipped the Lord with divine honor and adoration; which
being done they bowed themselves to the King and paid him civil honor and
respect and so departed. The next day they sacrificed Sacrifices, and offered
Burnt-offerings unto the Lord, namely a thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, and
a thousand lambs, with the drink offerings appertaining to them, which they
offered in the name of all the people, and in such abundance that all the
Israelites there present might eat of the Peace Offerings that were then
offered. And they did eat and drink before the Lord that day with great
gladness of heart, and anointed Solomon a second time King, his first anointing
having been done on the sudden, and almost in a tumultuary manner, and in the
sight only of a few, who did it hastily to prevent Adonijah from making himself
King; and therefore this second anointing was done more publicly and more
solemnly in the sight of the Princes and Rulers, and in a great Assembly of the
people. And they anointed him unto the Lord, that is, devoted him solemnly unto
the Lord, and to be the Ruler of his people under him. Then they anointed Zadok
to be High Priest instead of Abiathar who had joined with Adonijah, and this
was the rather done (as we may suppose) because the High Priesthood was now
translated into another Family. For Abiathar was of the race of Eli, and
descended from Ithamar, second Son of Aaron, and Zadok was descended from
Phineas who was descended from Eleazar his eldest Son, and so the
High Priesthood reverted from the family of Ithamar to that of Eleazar as was
foretold by God it should come to pass, 1 Samuel 2.33, 35. After this Solomon sat
on the Throne of the Lord, viz. on that Throne to which God had by his especial
Providence advanced him, and the disposal of which the Lord in a more peculiar
manner challenged to himself. See Deuteronomy. 17.15. And Solomon after this was very
prosperous, and all Israel obeyed him, and all the Princes and mighty men, and
all the rest of David's Sons submitted themselves unto him. And the Lord
magnified him exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed on him such
royal majesty and greatness as no King of Israel either before him or after him
ever had.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 28. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 29. from v. 1, to 26.

SECT. CCXII.
NOW the days of David's departure out of this life drew nigh, therefore
calling for his Son Solomon, he said to him, I am going the way that all men
living upon the earth must go: Be thou therefore courageous, and though thou be
young in years, yet show thy self a man in understanding, and keep the charge
of the Lord thy God, to wit, the commandments which he has given in charge to
be kept, and walk in his ways, and keep his statutes, his judgments and
testimonies (whereby he testifies what he would have done and observed)
according as they are written and prescribed in the Laws given by Moses, that
so thou may prosper in all that thou do, and in all businesses thou set
thy self unto. And so the Lord may be pleased to confirm his word which he
spoke unto me saying, If thy children take heed to their way to walk before me
in truth and sincerity, with all their heart, and all their soul, there shall
not fail thee a man on the Throne of Israel; that is, there shall not fail a
man of thy posterity to sit upon thy Throne Notandum duo fuisse Davidi
promissa. Primum absolute nempe Messiam ex ipso oriturum licet filii ejus mali
fuerint. Secundum conditionale scil. regnum in ejus familia conservandum si
posteri se sancte gerant. P. Martyr.
. I have now only three things more to give thee in charge before I die: The
first is concerning Joab, thou know how insolently he carried himself
toward me, and how treacherously he slew those two great Capteins Abner and
Amasa, after I had engaged my faith to them both that they should be safe;
which wicked practice of his was enough to make the people think that I had
secretly an hand in it, though I can truly say, my soul abhorred it. Nay he
shed the blood of war in peace, that is, when there was peace made with these
two great men; he slew them as if they had been in open hostility against me.
And he put the blood of war upon his girdle, that is, He put up his sword all
bloody into its scabbard (that hung at his girdle), and the very shoos on his
feet were stained with their blood; so impudently he carried out those base
murders; therefore I charge thee wisely to observe him. He is of a turbulent
spirit, and in all likelihood thou will have at one time or other just occasion
against him. And though he has been General of my Army almost all my reign,
yet let not his hoary head go down to the grave in peace, but when thou find
just occasion against him, cut him off by the sword of justice, and so let the
blood of Abner and Amasa be revenged upon him.

2ly, I would have thee to show kindness to the Sons of Barzillai the
Gileadite, for they came and brought provisions for me and my followers when I
was forced to fly from thy brother Absalom, and therefore let them be of the
number of those that eat at thy Table, 2 Samuel 17.28, 29.

3ly, Thou have with thee Shimei the Benjamite, who reviled me, and cursed me
with a bitter curse when I was in great distress flying toward Mahanaim, and
called me a bloody man, and did in effect say I had been the cause of the death
of Saul and all his Sons, and charged me with crimes I never was guilty of; yet
afterward he met me at Jordan and humbled himself, and acknowledged his fault,
and I swear to him by the Lord that I would not put him to death. But though I
(for my time) pardoned him, yet if he shall attempt any thing against thee
after my decease, hold him not guiltless. Thou art a wise man and know what
thou ought to do unto him, and if he trespass again and thou find any
other just occasion against him, bring down his hoary head to the grave with
blood, and cut him off by the sword of justice See 2 Samuel 19.23.
.

David having thus instructed his Son in a short time after departed this life
and slept with his fathers, that is, died as his fathers and predecessors had
done before him, having reigned in Hebron seven years and six months, and
thirty three years in Jerusalem over all Israel (forty years in all) and having
made his Son Solomon King in his stead about half a year before his death. He
died in a good old age, full of days, riches and honor; he died in the
seventieth year of his age, no King in Israel or Judah after him attaining to
his age Only Uzziah and Manasseh came very nigh it.
. He was buried in his own City of Zion, viz. in that part of Jerusalem where
he had built a Palace for himself, 2 Samuel 1.2. and kept his Court, and which he
had taken out of the hands of the Jebusites, and had built and enlarged, and
from thence was called after his name the city of David. His Sepulcher it seems
was made of such durable materials, and so well kept and repaired time after
time by his posterity, that it was strangely preserved notwithstanding
Jerusalem was so often sacked and burnt; for it continued unto the Apostles
times as the Apostle Peter tells us, Act. 2.24. Men and Brethren let me freely
speak to you of the Patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his
Sepulcher is with us unto this day; and this was above a thousand years after
David was buried. Now as to the Acts of David first and last, behold they are
written in the Book of Samuel the Seer, and in the Book of Nathan the Prophet,
and in the Book of Gad the Seer, that is, the Acts of David were related in the
History or Books of Samuel which were written by Nathan the Prophet, and Gad
the Seer, who set down all the passages of his reign, and his valiant acts, and
the victories obtained by him or his commanders, and the prosperities and
adversities of his time and reign either in his own Kingdom, or the Kingdoms
adjoining to him which he subdued and conquered David was a glorious type of
Christ in his birth at Bethlem, in his victory over Goliath, in his power over
Saul's devil, in his persecutions, in his Royalty and victoriousness over his
enemies.
.

2 King. Chapter 2. from v. 1. to 12.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 29. from v. 26, to the end.

SECT. CCXIII.
DAvid was styled the sweet Psalmist of Israel, 2 Samuel 23.1. for he composed
many Divine Hymns and Psalms for the benefit of the Church which we have in
the great Volum of the Psalms, but he was not the Author of them all. The Jews
anciently divided this great Volum or Book of the Psalms into five lesser.
According to which division the first Book of the Psalms reached from Psalm
the first to the end of Psalm the 41, and concludes thus, Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting, Amen and Amen. All these by
their Titles are declared to be David's, excepting 1, 2, 10, 33. and as for the
2d, that is declared to be David's in Act. 4.25, 26. Hereupon its probably
conceived that the other three were his also, and that this first Book was all
written by him, and by him disposed into this order in which now it is.

The second Book begins at Psalm 42, and reaches to the end of Psalm 72,
(containing 31 Psalms) and closes thus, Blessed be his glorious name for ever,
and let all the earth be filled with his glory, Amen and Amen. The prayers of
David the Son of Jesse are ended. Nineteen of these were composed by David, as
the Titles of them do evince. Probably David collected and disposed in order
this Book also.

The third Book begins at Psalm. 73, and reaches to the end of Psalm 89,
(comprehending 17 Psalms) and concludes thus, Blessed be Jehovah for ever,
Amen and Amen.

Of these seventeen only one is ascribed to David; one to Heman; one to Ethan;
three are directed to the Sons of Corah, no Penman being named; eleven are
ascribed to Asaph Possibly Asaph might collect and dispose in order this Book.
.

The fourth Book begins at Psalm 90, and reaches to the end of Psalm. 106,
(comprehending also 17 Psalms) and concludes thus, Blessed be the God of Israel
from everlasting to everlasting, and let all the people say, Amen. Hallelujah.

Of these one is ascribed to Moses; two to David; fourteen have no author
mentioned in their Titles.

The fifth Book begins at Psalm 107, and reaches to the end of Psalm 150,
comprehending 44 Psalms, and concludes thus, Let every thing that has breath
praise the Lord. Hallelujah.

Of these fifteen are in their Titles ascribed to David, and not one of all the
rest ascribed to any particular Author. So that of all the Psalms we reckon to
David only seventy eight. Many of these Psalms, viz. 125 have Titles, and 25
of them have none.

One of these Psalms (viz. the 90th) was composed before David was born, and
some of them long after he was dead, as Psalm 45.74.83.126.137. Some think this
Book of Psalms was put into this form and order it now has by Ezra; others
think it was thus disposed after the return of the Jews from Babylon. But of
these things (seeing we have no certain foundation to build upon) we shall not
peremptorily determine.

SECT. CCXIV.
SOlomon now sat upon the Throne of his Father David, and his Kingdom was
greatly established, for the people were generally well pleased with his
advancement to the Crown. But it seems Adonijah (being assisted by Joab and
Abiathar) had still a design to wrest the Kingdom from him. And for the better
carrying on of that design he resolved (if possible) to marry Abishag his
Fathers late wife or concubine, thinking thereby to enlarge his interest, and
gain a fairer pretense for what he designed: In order hereunto he addresses
himself to Bathsheba the Kings mother; she was at first a little startled at
his coming to her, considering his former design to get the Crown, and
therefore asked him whether he came peaceably? He answered very peaceably; for
he came humbly to request a favor of her, which was this, Thou know (says
he) that I being the Eldest Son surviving of my Father, by birthright the
Throne of the Kingdom belonged unto me; and the people looked upon me as heir
apparent to it, but now (by Gods own appointment) the Sovereignty is diverted
another way and become my Brother Solomon's It Is like he did not sincerely make
this acknowledgment but only to dispose Bathsheba the more readily to grant his
desire.
. And seeing I am now fallen from so great an expectation, I hope thou will
compassionate my condition, and wilt please to beg one favor of the King for
me, (which I question not but he will readily grant unto thee) which is this,
viz. that he would please to permit me to marry Abishag the Shunamite.
Bathsheba (though a wise woman as appears by the counsel she gave her Son,
Prove. 31.) yet not diving into the bottom of the design, readily undertakes to
speak to the King in his behalf. Accordingly she went to the King, who being
set upon his Throne, as soon as he saw her, he rose up and bowed himself with
great reverence unto her, and then conducting her to his Throne caused a seat
to be set for her on his right hand; where being set, she told him she had one
small request to make to him which she desired him not to deny her. He told her
he would not, provided that what she desired were just and safe for him to
grant. Then she said, I pray thee let Abishag the Shunamite be given to thy
brother Adonijah to wife. Solomon startled at this, replies, Ask for him the
Kingdom also (for he is my Elder Brother) yea for him, and for Abiathar, and
for Joab, that they may share it among them. He seems to wonder at the
strangeness of the request, to wit, that Adonijah should desire her for his
wife that had lain in his Fathers bosom, which was plain incest. And probably
the intention of Adonijah was discovered to him either by some special instinct
of the Spirit of God, or some secret intelligence which he had gotten, and
therefore he said, Ask for him the Kingdom also, etc. As if he should have
said, He has already the plea of an Elder Brother, and has Abiathar and Joab on
his side, if he can strengthen himself by this marriage, he will not then fear
to show himself, and endeavor to get the Kingdom for himself, and then
Abiathar and Joab will King it under him. Then falling into a passion he said,
God do so to me, and more also, and bring upon me greater misery than I dare
now mention, [see Ruth 1.17] if I do not make it appear to all the world that
Adonijah has spoken this word against his own life. For as the Lord lives who
has set me on the Throne of my Father, and made me a family and Court
according to the dignity of a King, (as he promised, 2 Samuel 7.12, 13.) Adonijah
shall surely this day be put to death. So he immediately gave order to Benaiah
Captain of his Guard to fall upon him and kill him, which accordingly he did
Thus what Nathan threatened against David, 2 Samuel 12.10. viz. that the sword
should not depart from his house, was fully verified.
. Then sending for Abiathar he told him, He was worthy to be put to death also
for thus joining with Adonijah in this conspiracy, but (says he) I will not at
this time put thee to death, because thou did bear the Ark of God before my
Father David, and have been a great sharer with him in all his afflictions and
sufferings; therefore get thee to Anathoth a City in the Tribe of Benjamin
(which with the fields about it belongs to the Priests) and there live a
private life, and meddle no more with the Priesthood or Civil affairs.

And thus Solomon by thrusting out Abiathar from his office, and placing Zadok
in his room, fulfilled the word of the Lord which he spoke concerning Eli [1 Samuel 2.31.] when the Tabernacle was at Shiloh, and concerning Phineas [Numb.
25.13.] These things being thus transacted, tidings came presently to Joab that
Adonijah was slain, and Abiathar confined to Anathoth, whereupon being
conscious of his own guilt in joining with Adonijah in his aspiring to the
Crown, (though he would not join with Absalom in the like case) he fled to the
Tabernacle at Gibeon, and there laid hold on the horns of the Altar, thinking
possibly by that means the rather to escape, because Adonijah had there not
long before found favor, 1 King. 1.52. Solomon hearing where he was, presently
sends Benaiah and commands him to kill him there. Benaiah coming to the
Tabernacle would have persuaded Joab to come forth thence; but he utterly
refused it, saying, if he must die he would die there; which possibly he spoke,
hoping that by hanging on the horns of the Altar he should save his life, and
not imagining that they would put him to death there. And thus it seems he
forgot what God himself had said, Exodus 21.14. That he that has slain a man
wilfully shall be taken from the Altar. Benaiah being loath of his own head to
shed blood at the Altar, went back to the King and told him what Joab said. The
King replied, Do unto him as he has said; that is, seeing he resolves to die
there let him die there, and there fall upon him and kill him, and then bury
him decently for the honor of his place, and his former services; and so thou will take away from me and my fathers house the guilt of that innocent blood
which he so barbarously shed, and so the Lord will return blood upon his head
who fell upon two men more righteous and better than himself; for in that cause
for which he killed them they were innocent. He slew Abner for fear lest David
should prefer him above himself. And he slew Amasa because my Father had
preferred him to the place of General in his room. So that they were both
innocent, and not worthy of death upon that account; he shall die therefore
that their innocent blood may return upon his head, and that the blot and stain
of it may remain upon his posterity, and accordingly they shall feel the sad
effects of it for many generations. And I doubt not but that upon the house of
David and upon his Throne, and upon his family there will be peace and
prosperity for a long time from the Lord. For by executing judgment on
murderers, guilt is taken away from the Magistrate, and from the Land, Numb.
35.33. So Benaiah went up to the Altar at Gibeon, and as it is like dragging
Joab from thence, he slew him, and buried him in his own house in the
wilderness; and the King made Benaiah General of the Army in his room. Then the
King called for Shimei, and said to him, Build thee an house in Jerusalem, and
dwell there, and go not forth thence any whither; for it shall be that the day
thou go out and passest over the Brook Kidron Solomon would not permit him
to go over Kidron which was the way to Bakurim his own city, lest he should
raise some sedition there, where was his own inheritance, 2 Samuel 16.5. Kidron
was about a mile from Jerusalem, so that Shimei had room enough.
thou shall surely die, and thy blood shall be upon thine own head, thou thy
self wilt be the only cause thereof. Shimei said unto the King, The saying is
good, thy command is just and equal. As my Lord the King has said, so will I
do; and I do bind my self by a solemn Oath which I now make unto thee in the
presence of the Lord, That I will not go out of the limits thou have set me, v.
42. But how he performed his Oath and promise we shall see afterward, Sect.
221.

1 King. Chapter 2. from v. 12, to 39.

SECT. CCXV.
HAdad the Edomite who in the days of David had fled into Egypt, and had been
there for a great while kindly entertained, when he heard that both David and
Joab were dead, he returned into his own Country, and proved afterward a great
enemy to Solomon as we shall see hereafter.

1 King. Chapter 11. v. 21, 22.

SECT. CCXVI.
SOlomon now contracts affinity with Pharaoh King of Egypt by marrying his
Daughter; and he brought her into Sion into the Palace of David, intending
afterward to build a stately house for her when he had finished the Temple,
the wall of Jerusalem, and his own Palace. And he preferred her before the rest
of his wives, they being of Nations that were his subjects, but she the
daughter of a potent King. And by this match and affinity with such a great
neighbor Prince he designed to secure himself the better against foreign
enemies. It Is not said whether she had embraced the Religion of the Israelites
when he took her to wife; yet considering that he is no where blamed for this
marriage, it is most like she forsook her Idolatry, and that either before or
after her marriage she became a Proselyte, and worshipped the true God, because
Solomon in this marriage is made a type of Christ, wooing the Gentiles to make
them his Spouse, and calling them from their Idolatries to serve the true and
living God. And hereunto the Psalmist seems to allude, Psalm. 45.10. Hearken O
daughter, and consider, incline thine ear. Forget thine own people and thy
fathers-house.

1 King. Chapter 3. v. 1.

SECT. CCXVII.
SOlomon was now quietly settled and strengthened in his Kingdom, and the Lord
was with him and magnified him exceedingly; and he loved the Lord, and walked
in the ways and statutes wherein David his Father walked. It seems the people
after the Ark and Tabernacle were separated did not think themselves bound to
bring their Sacrifices to the Altar at the Tabernacle, but did offer them in
such places as they thought meetest for such services, to wit, upon high hills
and mountains. Indeed the high places of the heathen-Idolaters were always
abominable to the Lord, and those God commanded the Israelites to destroy and
pull down, Numb. 33.52. But there other high places (it seems) were thought at
this time lawful See 1 Samuel 9.12, etc. and Chapter 10.5, 13.
, and accordingly resorted unto; but when the Temple was built, then all other
high places for Gods solemn and prescribed worship and service were counted
abominable And in this sin the Ten Tribes lived, they made Priests of high
places in the mountains, and in all the Cities of Samaria, and their Altars
were as heaps in the furrows of the fields, 1 King. 13.32. Hos. 12.11. Yea,
Solomon himself in his latter days fearfully offended in permitting this kind
of Idolatry, 1 King. 11.7, 8. And Judah it self fell into this sin in Rehoboams
reign, 1 King. 14.23. and in aftertimes they built high places to Baal, and to
the Idols of the neighboring Nations, 2 Chronicles. 25.14. And especially in the
reigns of Ahaz, Joram, and Manasseh.
. It seems Solomon and the people did offer sacrifice and burn incense on such
high places (as these before mentioned) that were devoted to the service of the
true God, and Gibeon it self (where the Tabernacle and Altar now were) was
accounted the great high place, the most famous and most resorted unto. Solomon
therefore now gathering together the Princes and Rulers, and Judges of the
land, and the chief Captains and Commanders of the people, with them he went up
to Gibeon there in solemn manner to praise the Lord for his great mercy to him
in thus peaceably settling him in the Throne. And there on the Brazen Altar made
by Moses, (which he and the great Congregation now with him chose to worship
God at rather than any other Altar) he offered a thousand burnt-offerings to
the Lord in the time he stayed there. And in that night after they had made an
end of offering those burnt-offerings God appeared to him in a dream. Among the
manifold ways whereby God of old made known his mind to his people, dreams was
one. And in dreams sometimes men heard a voice, and apprehending the sense
thereof, returned an answer thereunto, and the things God so made known unto
them were true and certain, and his servants to whom he made them known were
assured thereof. God therefore in such a dream appearing to Solomon, and asking
him what he should give him? He answered, O Lord thou have showed to David my
Father great mercy according as he walked before thee in truth and
righteousness All these must be understood of David's inward disposition and
outward conversation as to the general course of his life, his frailties and
failings still excepted.
, and uprightness of heart, and have reserved for him this great kindness to
set his Son upon his Throne after him, as it is this day, which is a favor
thou did not vouchsafe to Saul. And now, O Lord, thou having graciously made
me King instead of my Father, I am sensible that I am (as it were) but a little
child and unfit to sway so great a scepter as this is; how shall I be able to
go out or come in before this great people? How shall I be able to lead them or
govern them without thine especial direction and assistance? I am indeed set up
as supreme Governor under thee of this vast multitude which thou have chosen
for thy peculiar people, and have so increased them that they are almost
innumerable, according to thy gracious promise, Genesis 15.5. Give therefore thy
servant (I pray thee) an understanding heart that I may rightly discern between
good and evil; for who is able rightly to judge and govern this great people
without wisdom given him from thy self. Solomon having thus prayed, the Lord
was well pleased with the request he had made, and said to him, Because thou
have not asked for thy self long life, nor riches, nor victory over thine
enemies, but have asked an understanding heart that thou may rightly govern
this people, and in hearing causes may know what judgment to give, behold thy
request is granted; I will give thee a wise and an understanding heart, and
such a measure of wisdom and knowledge as no King before thee ever attained
unto, neither shall any after thee be like Some Heathen Monarchs that possibly
exceeded Solomon in riches came far short of him in wisdom.
unto thee, see Chap. 4.29, 30, 31. Moreover I will give thee that which thou
did not ask, viz, riches and honor, so that there shall not be any of the
Kings of Israel like unto thee, either for riches or glory, see 2 Chronicles. 1.12.
And if thou will walk in my ways and keep my statutes as thy Father David did,
I will lengthen out thy days also. Then Solomon awoke and perceived that God
had indeed appeared to him in this wonderful dream, and he returned to
Jerusalem with his Nobles, and there before the Ark of the Covenant offered up
many Burnt-offerings, Peace Offerings, in way of thankfulness to the Lord for
this great and extraordinary kindness manifested to him; and he made a great
Feast for his Nobles and Officers, and the Rulers of the people that were there
gathered together.

1 King. Chapter 3. from v. 2, to 16.

2 Chronicles. Chapter 1. from v. 1, to 13.

SECT. CCXVIII.
SOlomon being now come to Jerusalem, a very difficult case was brought before
him, in the deciding of which he gave a great evidence of that extraordinary
wisdom the Lord had furnished him with. There came to him two women that were
(as it seems) Victuallers by profession, but secretly Harlots, and one of them
said to him, O my Lord the King, this woman and I dwell together in the same
house, and I was delivered of a child, she being present at my Labor, and
three days after she was delivered of a child also, and both our children were
boys; and we were all alone in the house, there was no stranger with us: And
thus (O King) it happened (as I verily believe and am confident) this woman
over-laying her own child in the night, and awaking and finding it dead by her,
and being afraid of the disgrace that was like to fall upon her for her
carelessness about her child, she to avoid that came secretly (as I have reason
to believe) in the dead of the night and took my Son from my bosom whilst I was
fast asleep, and laid her dead child in my bosom in the room of it; for she had
rather (I suppose) have a living child (though another) than her own dead, and
had rather nurse up my child instead of her own, than have it said, that by her
own carelessness and negligence she had been the cause of the death of her own
Son. And when I arose in the morning to give my child suck, behold I found it
dead, but when I had better considered of the matter, and laid circumstances
together, I found it was not my Son that I did bear; and I hope I shall find so
much justice from the King as to return my own child to me again. Then the
other woman spoke for her self and said, Nay but my Lord, O King, let this
woman say what she will I do peremptorily affirm that the living child is my
Son, and the dead is hers. Thus they contested before the King, both the one
and the other challenging the living child for hers; the case was very
difficult, for first both the children were almost of an age: 2ly, Their
features in their infancy might be something alike: 3ly, No body was by when
this fact was done, that might give evidence on either side: 4ly, The mother
that challenged the living child confessed she was asleep, and so did not see
when her child was stolen away: 5ly, The parties contending for the child were
of a like reputation, the one deserving no more credit than the other. All
these things considered, the case seemed so difficult that one would have
thought the wit of man could not determine it. Solomon having heard what they
said on both sides, according to the wisdom that God had given him presently
called for a sword, and bad one of his servants take the living child and
divide him in twain, and give half to the one, and half to the other. But the
woman whose the living child really was, found her bowels so yerning upon this,
that she cried out, O my Lord, give her I pray thee the child, let her take him
whole, in no case divide him; I had rather she should have him whole than that
he should be slain. But the other woman being of an envious disposition, and
not willing that her neighbor should enjoy what she wanted, she cried out, For
my part seeing the King has so determined the matter, let the Kings sentence
stand, let it be neither mine nor hers, but let it be divided. The King by the
different affection that he discerned in these two women, quickly perceived
which was the true mother, and accordingly gave the living child unto her. And
all Israel heard of the judgment the King had given in this case, and all sorts
of persons highly honored him for it, for they saw that an extraordinary
measure of the wisdom of God was in him that enabled him to give righteous
judgment.

1 King. Chapter 3. from v. 16, to the end.

SECT. CCXIX.
HIram King of Tire as also of Zidon, (for the Sidonians likewise were his
subjects, v. 9.) had been always a great lover of David, and hearing that
Solomon his Son was advanced to the Throne of Israel, he sent his Ambassadors
to congratulate him. Solomon received them very kindly, and having entertained
them for some time, by them he sent a message to their Master to this effect:
He acquaints him that his Father David by reason of the many wars (wherein he
was almost continually engaged) could not build an house for the Lord as he
really intended, and he supposed his Father had acquainted him with that his
intention, there being so great a friendship between them; but the Lord having
now advanced him to the Throne in his Fathers room, and having given him rest
on every side, so that he had neither adversary, nor evil occurrent to hinder
him, he resolved to fall upon the work and to build an house for the glory of
the Lord his God, as the Lord had promised unto his Father he should do; he
therefore requested this favor of him, that as he had helped his Father to
Timber It seems most of Lebanon was in the land of Tire, though it were the
Northern bound of the land of Canaan; and though David in his lifetime had
provided many materials, as Cedar-trees, and many workmen, yet it seems more
were wanting which Solomon now takes care to provide.
wherewith to build his own Palace, so he would please to help him also to
Timber to build the house that he intended to build for the honor of God. For
the house (says he) that I intend to build must be great and magnificent; the
God (for whose Worship I intend it) being great above all Gods. And indeed who
is able to build an house for him, seeing the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain
him? It were a vain thing for me to think of building an house for him who is
infinite, except only to worship him in, and that is the end I aim at. Send me
therefore, I pray thee, a man skilful to work in Gold and Silver, in Brass and
Iron, in Purple, Crimson and Blew, and one that can grave, that he may join
with the cunning men that are here with me in Judah and Jerusalem, whom my
Father did provide for this purpose. [See 1 Chronicles. 22.15.] And I pray thee
grant me Cedar-trees, Firr-trees, and Algum-trees for this work, and command
thy servants to cut them down and hew them for me, and I will send my servants
to help and assist them therein, and I will give thy servants twenty thousand
measures of beaten wheat That is of wheat beaten out of the ear, and severed
from the chaff, we call it clean wheat.
, and as many of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and as many of oil
for their wages and provision; or if this do not like thee, I will give
whatsoever thy self shall appoint. Hiram sent an answer to Solomon, and writ to
him after this manner: It is a great sign and evidence to me that God loves
that people because he has made thee King over them. And blessed be the Lord
God of Israel (who made Heaven and Earth) for giving to David such a wise Son,
and for enduing him with so great a measure of prudence and understanding that
he might build an house for the honor of God, and for the honor of his
Kingdom. As for thy request to me concerning Cedar-trees, Firr-trees and Timber
for that great work, behold all thy desires are granted. My servants shall cut
down and hew out sufficient Timber for thee, and I will convey it to thee by
Sea in flotes to Joppa, or any other place thou shall appoint. I have also sent
thee a very skilful and expert artificer, whose name is Hiram (whose Father was
of the Tribe He is called a Tyrian because he lived there.
of Naphtali, 1 King. 7.14. and his Mother of the Tribe of Dan, and who was one
of my Fathers workmen) who is skilled to work in gold, silver, iron, brass,
stone, timber, in purple, blue, fine linen, or crimson, and to grave any
manner of graving, and one that can work not only according to the pattern set
before him, but can also invent other curious works fit and proper for the main
design. I know he will be ready to join with the cunning workmen provided by
thy Father and thy self. As for the reward thou do promise my servants for
their labor and pains, I do willingly accept of it, and let my Lord the King
be pleased to send it to them. But I must make one request to thee for my self,
viz. that thou will grant me liberty yearly to transport out of thy Country a
certain quantity of provision (viz. of wheat and oil) for my own household, our
Country not being well furnished with those things See Ezekiel. 27.17. Ezra 3.7.
Act. 12.20.
. Solomon having receiving his Letter, agreed to what Hiram desired of him, and
accordingly gave him twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat Beaten wheat,
that is wheat beaten out of the ear, and severed from the chaff, we call it
clean wheat.
, and twenty measures of pure oil yearly. And Solomon and Hiram made a firm
league together, and Hiram besides allowing Solomon Timber to build with,
furnished him with six score talents of gold toward the defraying of the
charge, 1 King. 9.14.

1 King. Chapter 5. from v. 1, to 13.

2 Chronicles. Chapter 2. from v. 1, to 17.

SECT. CCXX.
SOlomon also raised a levy The people yielded willingly to this levy for the
Temple, but when it was still continued by Solomon for his own house and his
other buildings it seems they grudged at it, as we may gather from what they
said to Rehoboam, 1 King. 12.4. See also 1 King. 9.15.
among the people toward the building of the house of the Lord, and other
great buildings he designed. See 1 King. 9.15. and having provided stones of
several sorts and sizes, and having obtained leave of Hiram to cut down Timber
in Lebanon, viz. Cedar-trees, Firr-trees, and Algum-trees, he falls now in hand
with the work, and employs a vast army of workmen therein.

1. For servile work an hundred and fifty thousand, whereof fourscore thousand
were hewers in the mountains, and threescore and ten thousand bearers of
burdens; all these were strangers that dwelt among the Israelites, and
submitted to their Laws, and had been by David before appointed for this
service, 1 Chronicles. 22.2.

2ly, For plain work, thirty thousand Israelites were employed, yet with such
alternation that being divided into three parts, they stayed ten thousand of
them at a time, one month in mount Lebanon, and the other two at home, 1 King.
5.13, 14.

3ly, For carved works, the Sidonians only were employed, whose number though
not specified must needs be great, if we may guess the men by the proportion of
victuals allowed to them, 2 Chronicles. 2.10.

4ly, For overseeing all the former three thousand three hundred Officers were
appointed, 1 King. 5.16. but in the 2 Chronicles. 2.18. we read of 3600; possibly
upon a review 300 might be added for the better carrying on of the business; or
these last 300 might be appointed as extraordinary, to be in readiness in case
any of the ordinary should fail by sickness, death, or any other accident. Thus
the ordinary overseers would be each man over forty five workmen or thereabout
Those Officers, viz. 550, 1 King. 9.23. seem to be the chief of the Officers
that were over Solomon's other works when he builded his own house, and that for
Pharaohs daughter, and his other buildings besides the Temple, ver. 15, 17, 18,
19. So that these supervised those that wrought in these works. And the 250, 2 Chronicles. 8.10. seem to be the chief of his Officers that bear rule over those
Canaanites that Solomon had made Tributaries, v. 7, 8. and so differed from the
former 550.
.

If any wonder at the vastness of this army of workmen, let them consider how
that thorough scarcity of horses at that time in Judea (though plenty was
brought out of Egypt toward the latter end of Solomon's reign) massy timber
was to be managed by the main strength of men.

2ly, All things were beforehand so to be fitted and framed in mount Lebanon
(which might occasion many chargeable Essays and trials) that not so much as
the sound of an Ax or Hammer was heard in Jerusalem when the Temple came to be
erected, 1 King. 6.7. that is, there was small noise in comparison of so great
a work, and not obstreperous to a public disturbance by hewing or squaring of
timber or stone, the parts being fitted or matched before. Besides Solomon in
framing this great fabric (that was to be built for the honor of God)
consulted magnificence and not frugality.

1 King. Chapter 5. from v. 13, to the end.

2 Chronicles. Chapter 2. v. 17, 18.

SECT. CCXXI.
SHimei (of whom before, Sect. 214.) had carefully kept himself within the
bounds prescribed for about three years. But at the end of that time two of his
servants (it seems) ran away from him, having (as it is like) stolen something
considerable from him, and fled to Achish King of Gath, (there being at that
time peace between the Israelites and Philistines, so that the one might freely
pass to the other) or possibly they might be native Philistines. Shimei being
informed where they were, and being enraged at them for so serving him, and
having an over-covetous desire to regain them and the things they had stolen
from him, and not imagining that Solomon (he having kept himself within his
bounds for three years) did still strictly watch him or sought an occasion
against him to cut him off as his Father had enjoined him, and possibly
thinking to go so secretly and to come again so quickly that his going should
not be observed, or however it was, he sadles his Ass and ventures to go to
Gath, where he met with his servants, and brought them back again, but the
fetching of them cost him dear; for Solomon being informed that he had gone out
of his bounds, he presently sent for him and said unto him, Did not I protest
to thee that if thou did pass the limits I had set thee, thou should
surely die? did not thou say the thing I required of thee was but just and
reasonable? And over and above did not thou swear to me by the Lord that thou
would not transgress? why then have thou violated the oath that thou swarest
to me in the presence of the Lord, and why have thou disobeyed the commandment
that I so solemnly gave thee under so great a penalty? Thou can not but
remember the wickedness of thy heart, and how basely thou did revile my
Father in his distress, and therefore the Lord will now return thy wickedness
upon thy own head. And I am not afraid to execute justice upon thee, for the
doing justice upon such offenders and wicked wretches as thou art, is the way
(by the blessing of God) to have my Kingdom established to me and to my
posterity after me in the sight of the Lord, that is, his gracious Providence
continually watching over us. So the King commanded Benaiah to kill him, which
accordingly he did. And so the Kingdom was established in the hands of Solomon,
his chief and capital enemies being now cut off.

1 King. Chapter 2. from v. 39, to the end.

CHAP. V. The fifth Age of the World from the beginning of the building of the
Temple in the fourth year of Solomon's reign unto the destruction of it, and
Captivity of Judah in the 11th. year of Zedekiah, containing a space of 420
years.
SECT. I.
IN the year 480 from the coming of the children of Israel out of Egypt in the
fourth year of the reign of King Solomon, on the second day of the second Month
called Zif, (answering as some think to our 21 of May) the foundation of the
Temple was laid in Mount Moriah, (the very place where Abraham was commanded to
offer up his Son Isaac, see Genesis 22.2.) and in the threshing floor of Araunah
the Jebusite, about the year of the world 2988. This foundation was laid with
great and costly hewed stones brought thither by the Kings command, 1 King.
5.17. and this glorious structure with all things belonging to it took up in
the building and finishing of it seven years and an half. The length of this
magnificent building was sixty cubits, besides ten cubits allowed for the
Porch, which made the whole length to be seventy cubits, 1 King. 6.2, 3. The
cubits after which the Temple was built (it is probable) were after the first
measure, 2 Chronicles. 3.3. and double to the ordinary cubits which reached only
from the Elbow to the tip of the longest finger) and equal to our English yard.
If any shall think this sacred pile to be but little in comparison of other
Fanes and Temples, let them consider the stateliness of this Temple did not
consist so much in the greatness of it, as the exquisite workmanship, symetry,
and costly furniture thereof. 2ly, It was big enough for the uses it was
intended for, namely to contain the holy vessels (with sufficient space between
them) and to receive such Priests as did officiate therein. For the Holy of
Holies was accessible only to the High Priest, and that but once a year, and
into the holy or inward house only such Priests entered as by lot or course came
thither to do the service they were appointed unto, ( viz. to light lamps, to
set shewbread, to offer inincense) as appears by Zacharies sole staying
therein, whilst the whole multitude of the people were praying without. 3ly,
The great latitude and capacity of the Temple consisted in the outward Courts
(with the stately buildings and Cloisters about them) which were of such
receipt as to entertain multitudes of men sub dio, in the open air, and so it
equalled the greatest buildings in the world. But though the covered Temple was
not great, yet it was more than twice as big as the Tabernacle made by Moses,
which was only thirty cubits in length, ten in breadth, and as many in height.

Both Jewish and Christian writers place the ends or length of the Temple East
and West, the sides or breadth North and South, making the Porch or entrance on
the East End, and the Holy of Holies on the West End, as is gathered from Ezekiel.
8.16. and Chapter 44.1. and Chapter 47.1.

We shall now describe the parts of this Temple particularly, and shall speak
first of the Porch. 1. The Porch.
In the Book of Kings, 1 King. 6.3: we meet with the length and breadth of the
Porch, but no height thereof mentioned. In Chronicles we find the length and
height thereof, but there the breadth is omitted. Thus we see that by comparing
one Scripture with another, we may come to find out the truth. This Porch was
twenty cubits in length (for its length ran parallel to the breadth of the
house from North to South) ten in breadth from East to West, and an hundred and
twenty in height, being four times as high as the body of the Temple, see 2 Chronicles. 3.4. not that it was all empty and void to the top, but probably had
Chambers in it, and winding stairs ascending up to the roof. The height of the
lowest room within might perhaps be equal to the rest of the House, viz. thirty
cubits. The battlements on the top might have stately railes of stone, besides
other ornaments and Pinacles. There was a magnificent entrance into it raised
by many steps out of the Area of the Priests Court. This Porch, viz. the arched
Portal, Solomon overlaid within with pure gold, 2 Chronicles. 3.4. That is, gilded
it all over, it having plates of silver underneath. For David is said to have
provided seven thousand talents of refined silver to overlay the walls of the
houses withal, 1 Chronicles. 29.4. Thus it took its denomination of gold from the
metal which was most precious, and most visible on the surface of it. And so
all the several rooms of the Temple might be overlaid with pure gold. The Porch
with leaf, the inward house with plate, the Holy of Holies with the most
refined gold of Parvaim.

The Holy or inward House had forty cubits in length, the breadth twenty
cubits, 2. The Sanctuary or inward house, or middle part between the Porch and
the Oracle.
adaequate to the general dimensions of the Temple. For the wall, the outside
of it which was exposed to open view, was (as is conceived) of white polisht
marble, or made of some excellent stone for strength, and the timber and boards
within were all Cedar. The Cedar was curiously carved with the Imagery of
Flowers, Palms and Cherubims, and those figures being outwardly imbossed with
visible prominences, the plates of gold being of the purest and most flexible
metal, applied themselves so close to each line in the Sculpture, that they set
it off and expressed the carved work with advantage, abating nothing of the
art, and adding much to the beauty and richness thereof, 1 King. 6.18, 29. And
in some select places (as it seems) it was most gloriously adorned and garnisht
with precious stones, 2 Chronicles. 3.6. For Solomon intended this Temple should be
very glorious, it being built for the honor of the all-glorious God.

Of the same curiosity for carving were the two doors with folding leaves (made
of firr-tree, and overlaid with gold) which led out of the Porch into the
Temple. The workmanship of these doors and the wall being in all particulars so
alike, that when they were shut no breach appeared in them. Posts of
Olive Tree, four square were made for these doors to turn upon, 1 King. 6. from
the 31 to the 36.

The floor hereof was made of boards of Firr, and they were faced and all
overlaid with gold, 1 King. 6.15, 30 V. 30. The floor of the house he overlaid
with gold within and without; that is, within and without the veil of the
Oracle.
.

Windows also were made in the Temple, 3. The Windows of the Temple.
but how many we cannot certainly determine, 1 King. 6.4. the fewer would serve
the turn because of the abundance of artificial lamps constantly burning
therein.

For the form of these windows it is probable they were of an oblong square,
narrow without, and broad within, and being made as much to let in air as
light, and perchance more to let out smoke than either, (caused by the constant
lamps and purfumes) we may imagine them to be made with gilded lattesses, and
so always open without any shutting at all.

For the roof of the Temple 4. The roof of the Temple.
probably it was flat, like other houses in Judea, where men might walk upon
them according to Gods command, Deuteronomy. 22.8. Preach you (says our Savior) on
the house-tops, Mat. 10.27.
At the sides it was guarded with battlements, and probably adorned with
pinacles. We read not that it was sustained with any Pillars, either of stone
or timber. The Covering was of beams, and boards of Cedar; but surely to defend
it from the injuries of the weather it was covered with some metal-sheets.
Villalpandus (the Scripture being silent herein) thinks it was covered with
tiles of brass, which (squammato opere) in scale-work lay one over another.
What if we should conjecture it to be sheeted with silver? seeing a King of
France St. Dagobert by name, See the Learned Mr. Lee's Temple of Solomon
pourtrayed, page 25.
(far inferior to Solomon in riches) is reported to have covered the famous
Church of St. Denis with silver. But this we mention only as a conjecture. Let
none grudg at this cost, but let them consider that this Temple was built for
the Glory of the King of Heaven, and that the chief glory of it was to be
hidden from common and profane eyes, and therefore vain ostentation surely was
no end aimed at by our Royal builder.

The inside of the Cedar-beams of this stately roof was cicled with Firr-trees,
and adorned with carvings of Palm Trees and Chains, and overlaid with gold, 2 Chronicles. 3.5, 6.

It was in fashion four square, the height, length and breadth thereof equally
extending to twenty cubits, (the Holy of Holies 5. The Oracle or Holy of Holies.
in the Sanctuary was of the same form, but only ten cubits square), 1 King.
6.20. Those ten cubits of room above it reaching up to the roof of the Temple,
(which that place the 2 Chronicles. 3.9. seems to speak of) might possibly be for
Chambers, to lay up those sacred things of the Holy of Holies which belonged to
the Tabernacle, such (I mean) of them as were not used by Solomon.

The Windows narrow without and broad within, were above the Chambers round
about both of the Temple and Oracle.

The walls were (as is conceived) of square polisht marble without, the inside
was covered with boards of Cedar, wrought with Cherubims, Palm Trees, and open
flowers, and all overlaid with fine gold. 1 King. 6.16, 20, 21, 29. 2 Chronicles.
3.8.

For the entering of the Oracle there were made two folding-doors of Olive Tree,
carved with Cherubims and overlaid with gold. The lintel and side-posts thereof
being five square of the same matter and metal. The wall on each side had five
cubits, and the doors with their Posts ten. The hinges of these doors as also
of the holy place were of Gold, 1 King. 6.31, 32.

The floor was covered with boards of Cedar overlaid with Gold, 1 King. 6.16,
20.

The weight of the nails used in this room was fifty shekels of Gold, 2 Chronicles.
3.9. Possibly they were stiffened with some mixture of Silver or Copper, not
for cheapness, but for the greater usefulness; for where the utensils of the
Temple are said to be of pure Gold, we must understand it so pure as the end
for which they were intended would permit. For some allay of baser metal seems
necessary to make them more durable and serviceable for the purposes for which
they were made.

The roof of this room as of the whole house was laid with beams or boards of
Cedar, and overlaid with Gold, and set as some conceive with precious stones, 2 Chronicles. 3.8.

A stately Veil was used as a traverse cross the Holy of Holies, which Solomon
made of blew and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought Cherubims
thereon, 2 Chronicles. 3.14. This Veil doubtless was within the wall of the Holy of
Holies, else the High Priest might enter within the Veil, and yet not be in the
most holy place, if the wall and the door were between the Veil and the Oracle.
In the Tabernacle there was no other partition but the Veil, which when the
High Priest had entered through, he was within the Holy of Holies. Arias
Montanus thinks that the Chains of Gold that were within the Oracle were to
hang the Veil upon, 1 King. 6.21.

6. The side-Chambers about the Temple.
There were Chambers round about the Temple and Oracle, excepting only at the
East End where the Porch stood, which was clear having no other buildings to
hinder the prospect thereof. Three rows there were of these Chambers. In the
lowest each Chamber was five, in the middle six, in the third and highest story
seven cubits broad, and each of them five cubits in height, going up from the
first to the middle, thence to the highest story with winding stairs. Yet on
the outside the stone-work of the Chambers was perpendicularly equal. The beams
of these Chambers did not lie in, but did rest on the walls of the Temple,
which being narrowed in as they went up higher and higher afforded fit stays
for that purpose. For the wall of the Temple for five cubits height above the
ground was a cubit thicker than it was in its height above those five cubits.
So that at five cubits height there was a seat of stone of a cubit broad, round
about the Temple, whereupon one end of the Cedar-beams of the Chambers did rest
to bear up the roof of the lowest, and the floor of the second story. Five
cubits higher from thence, or at ten cubits height from the ground the
thickness of the Temple wall was yet a cubit less, and upon that second seat
thus made by a cubits rebatement in the wall rested the Cedar-beams for the
roof of the second, and floor of the third story. At fifteen cubits height from
the ground the Temple-wall was yet a cubit less, than it was at ten cubits
height, which yielded a third seat on which the beams for the roof of the third
and highest story were laid. So that as the wall of the Temple abated in
thickness, the measure of the Chambers increased in breadth, 1 King. 6.6, 7, 8,
10. Possibly these Chambers were employed for Repositories, wherein the holy
vestments and vessels were safely laid up together with those of the
Tabernacle, which (though not now used) were here carefully preserved.

7. The Courts, Buildings and Cloisters about the Temple.
A Court consisted of an open space in the middle exposed to wind and weather,
and a Covert or Cloisters on the sides thereof, whither in heat or rain men
might retire for shade or shelter.

Solomon made two of these on the East of the Temple: 1. The Inner Court or
Court of the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 4.9. built with three rows of hewn stone, and a
row of Cedar-beams, 1 King. 6.36. We must understand these three rows as being
in height one above another. Probably certain ascents led to them out of the
outward Court, as there did also into the Temple; hence the phrase of going up
to Gods-house. But how many these stairs or steps were is uncertain, though
some will have them fifteen according to the number of the Psalms of degrees;
and these were the steps whereon (as some conceive) the Levites sang the
fifteen Psalms of degrees. This inner Court was only for the Priests to enter
into, yet it seems the Common people made a tumultuous incursion into it when
they stoned Zachariah at the command of King Joash in the Court of the house of
the Lord, even betwixt the Temple and the Altar, 2 Chronicles. 24.21.

2. The greater or outward Court In Solomon's days we read but of these two
Courts, but in the days of the succeeding Kings some think there were added two
Courts more, viz. the Court of the women, and the Court of the Gentiles.
(of which mention is made, 2 Chronicles. 4.9.) was of the same form for building
with the Inner; this Court was large, an hundred cubits square at the least,
yet this seems not large enough to contain all Israel, except the people were
successively admitted to this place. Ascents and Stairs did also lead into this
Court, but possibly they were but low. This Court was by successive Kings
(especially by Hezekiah who cased the pillars thereof with silver, see 2 King.
18.16.) improved to more beauty than it had in Solomon's days, though the
covered Temple had no addition made to it. There was a stately ascent from the
Kings Palace to this Court. It was at first made by King Solomon, and was then
so stately a structure that (among other things) the Queen of Sheba was
ravished with admiration at the sight thereof, when she beheld the ascent by
which Solomon went up into the house of the Lord, 1 King. 10.5. and yet
afterward it was made more magnificent, and Terrassed on both sides with
Pillasters made of those Almug-trees which were brought from Ophir by the
servants of Hiram, 2 Chronicles. 9.11. and 1 King. 10.11, 12. which if odoriferous
(as some will have it) made that passage as sweet to the smell as specious to
the sight.

Several fair Gates on all sides gave entrance into the Courts of Solomon's
Temple, 8. The Gates of the outward great Court, and the Porters belonging to
them.
and the doors or folding leaves were overlaid with brass, 2 Chronicles. 4.9. the
Gates were these: 1. The Eastgate where Shelemiah was Porter, 1 Chronicles. 26.14.
this Gate was set in the front leading directly to the Temple. King Jotham
rebuilt it, 2 King. 15.35. 2 Chronicles. 27.3. At this Gate there were six Levites
to watch. Some think it was called the Kings-gate, not that the King went in
that way, but because King Solomon built it, in a more sumptuous and
extraordinary manner than the rest.

In some one of the Chambers of this Gate sat the Sanedrim, and sometimes also
in the Eastgate of the Inner or higher Court, as some gather by comparing,
Jer. 35.4. and Chapter 36.10. together.

2. The Northgate, where Zachariah (the Son of Shelemiah a wise Counselor) was
Porter; here there were four Levites placed in daily watch, 1 Chronicles. 26.14, 17.

3. The South-gate, attended on by the Sons of Obed-Edom; here there were four
Levites also in constant watch. The house of Asuppim (rendered by Hierom and
Pagnine a Council-house, by Tremellius Aerarium the Treasury) was for
convenience united to their charge. A place probably of entrance from the City,
but certainly of great consequence as needing constantly a Guard about.
Possibly here were two little Gates, and two Porters assigned to each, v. 17.

4. The West-gate where Shuppim and Hosah were Porters, there were also four
Porters constantly to attend. It was called Shallecheth from Shalach to cast
up; it was so denominated from the famous causey which Solomon cast up or made
here to pass from his own house over the valley into the mountain of the
Temple. Each side of this Causey was planted with Oaks and Teyl-trees, there
were also made stately Rails of Almug-trees, of which before; this was the
passage to the house of the Lord from the Kings house.

Lastly, we come to Parbar, 1 Chronicles. 26.18. seated on the West, but whither
Porters Lodge, Priests Vestry, or place where sacrificing instruments were laid
up, is not certain; however it seems to have something of the nature of a Gate,
because two Levites daily attended at it.

So that there were four prime Gates (which respected the four Cardinal Winds)
and three lesser ones toward the West besides. In all seven, and twenty four
Levites in their constant order and course watched at them according to the lot
of their Fathers house, and their several divisions.

Both Courts were paved with stones, and adorned with Porches, and Cloisters,
and Chambers, (as it is probable) round about them. In the buildings of the
outward Court were Chambers and Lodgings for the Levites, especially in those
near the Gates where their offices lay. Some places it is like were employed as
Treasuries wherein consecrated things were laid up, and Ministerial vessels,
and the utensils of the Sanctuary. Other rooms might be for fine Flower, Salt,
Wine, Oil, Frankincense, Spices, etc. 1 Chronicles. 9. from v. 27, to 32. The
Priests also and the Singers and players on instruments (as it is like) had
their Chambers here. Possibly after the death of Solomon the first Temple might
by succeeding Kings have another Court added to it, whereof we find a double
intimation in Scripture, one when Jehoshaphat is said to stand in the house of
the Lord before the new Court, 2 Chronicles. 20.5. which probably about his reign
was added to the first Fabric. Another at the Coronation of Joash, at which
time Jehojadah gave order that the Priests alone should come into the house of
the Lord, (to wit the Inner Court) whilst the people should be in the Courts of
the house of the Lord, importing two Courts at least into which the people at
that time had free access, 2 Chronicles. 23.5, 6.

Having thus spoken of the several parts of the Temple, we come now to speak of
the Furniture, Ornaments, Vtensils and Vessels belonging to them.

In the Porch 1. Of the Porch.
there were two great brazen pillars set up, for height eighteen cubits a
piece, each of them twelve cubits in compass bearing about four cubits in
diameter; they were four fingers thick, of solid metal, and hollow within;
there is some appearing difference in the measure of their height, it being
variously presented unto us, in 1 King. 7. from 15, to 23. and 2 Chronicles. 3.15.
In the first place it is said he cast two pillars of brass of eighteen cubits
high a piece. In the second it is said he made two pillars of thirty and five
cubits high. To reconcile this difference some probably conjecture that in
Chronicles the height of both pillars are counted together. And whereas 18 and
18 make 36, one cubit more than the number mentioned in the Book of Chronicles,
it is conceived that each Chapter did sink half a cubit within the socket of
the Cylinder for their fastening. So that only so much as appeared of these
pillars is reckoned, each of them having half a cubit of their shaft lost in
their height and running in, and hid in his Chapter grafted upon it.

The Chapiters of these Pillars were curiously adorned with Network,
Chain-work, and rows of Pomegranates, Lilies also were made on the top of these
Chapiters. And whereas it is said [2 King. 25.17.] that each Chapter was but
three cubits high, it is to be understood of the stately embroidery and
ornaments of Network, Chains, and Pomegranates which were at the beginning of
the third cubit.

The Pillar that stood on the right hand in the Porch was called Jachin (that
is, he will establish) and the other on the left hand, Boaz, (that is, in him
is strength, 1 King. 7.21.) both those pillars there set up, signified Gods
protection of the place.

2. The Furniture of the Sanctuary or Inner Temple.
1. There were placed there ten Candlesticks of pure gold (the Tabernacle had
but one, Exodus 37.17.) five on the right side, and five on the left, each of
them no doubt fashioned like that which Moses made, viz. sevenfold, with a
great shaft for the body in the midst, and three stemms on each side branching
out thereof; in some resemblance perhaps of the seven Planets, among which the
Sun (the great stock of light) is in the midst, and three of them on each side,
above and beneath it, 1 King. 7.49. Besides these ten standing Candlesticks of
Gold, there were many more moveable ones, but all those made of silver, which
the Priests in the night might carry about with them, 1 Chronicles. 28.15.

2. The Tables of shewbread which Solomon made of Gold, his Father David
having peculiarly provided Gold for that purpose [1 Chronicles. 28.16.] as he
provided silver for the Tables of silver, of whose use and situation we read
not. Possibly they might be used in the Chambers belonging to the Temple. In
the 1 King. 7.48. we read but of one Table of shewbread, but in the 2 Chronicles.
4.8. we find expressly ten in number, together with their situation, five on the
right, and five on the left side of the Sanctuary. The description of Moses's
one Table, may be seen in the 25 of Exodus, from 23, to 29. But the dimensions
of Solomon's we have not, though perhaps double to Moses's according as the
place wherein they were set was double to his in capacity. Some think that
Moses's Golden Table was one of these, and the other nine framed according to
that size. On these Tables the shewbread was set, on each Table twelve cakes
were daily presented unto God. The Priests were allowed by God (when new was
substituted in the room of the former) to eat those loaves which were taken
away.

3. The most eminent utensil in the Sanctuary was the Altar of Incense standing
before the Oracle, [1 King. 6.22.] on which was daily burnt the perfume, see
Exodus 30.34, etc. The Altar of Incense which Moses made was made of
Shittim-wood, and overlaid with pure gold round about. David prepared refined
Gold on purpose for the making of this Altar, [1 Chronicles. 28.18.] and Solomon
made his altar of incense of Cedar, and overlaid it with Gold, 1 King. 7.48. 2 Chronicles. 4.19. 1 King. 6.20. Besides for the services of the Golden Altar, the
Tables and the Candlesticks there were made by Solomon many other excellent
vessels of pure Gold, which were appointed by his Father, as as an hundred
basins of gold, bowls, censers, cups, flowers, lamps for the Candlesticks,
snuffers, spoons, tongues, all of pure gold, besides some basins of silver. 1
King. 7.49, 50. 1 Chronicles. 28.13, 17. 2 Chronicles. 4.8, 20, 21, 22.

Be it premised that both the Sanctuary and the Oracle were adorned on all
sides within with Cherubims, and Palm Trees carved in Cedar, and overlaid with
Gold. But though Solomon altered and enlarged the utensils in the Sanctuary and
outward Courts, yet in the Holy of Holies he made use of the very same that
Moses had made, only for the more magnificence he added two extraordinary
Cherubims, of which more presently. But to speak of the sacred things in the
Oracle or Holy of Holies more particularly.

First, The Ark of the Covenant of the Lord was set in this most holy place, 3.
The Ornaments of the Oracle or Holy of Holies.
under the wings of the Cherubims, the very same that Moses made in the
Wilderness, of which see more, Sect. 21. of Chap. 4. page 132. In this Ark
there were the two Tables of stone which Moses put therein at Horeb, whereon
were engraven the Ten Commandments on all the four sides of them, being the
work of God himself, and written with his own finger. It seems they were not
very ponderous and large, because Moses carried them both in one hand. They
were called the Tables of the Covenant, (and the Ark wherein they lay, the Ark
of the Covenant) because they contained the Ten Commandments, which if they
kept, God made a Covenant with them to bless them. There was nothing else put
within this Ark or holy Chest, 1 King. 8.9. 2 Chronicles. 5.10.

2. Over this holy Chest there was laid a covering of pure beaten Gold called
the Mercy-seat or Propitiatory, equal in its measures of length and breadth to
the Ark, Exodus 37.6.

3. At the two ends of this Mercy-seat stood the two Cherubims of Moses's
making, both of beaten Gold; their faces were opposite one to the other, and
made looking down upon the Mercy-seat with their wings over-shadowing it.
Between whose wings upon the Mercy-seat the Majesty of God is said to sit. The
Mercy-seat signified Jesus Christ the Mediator between God and man, interposing
betwixt Gods wrath and our persons, who have broken the Commandments which lay
within the Ark, Exodus 37.7, 8, 9. 1 Samuel 4.4. Isa. 37.16.

Secondly, There were besides Moses's Cherubims standing on the Ark two other
Cherubims made by Solomon standing on the ground, or Golden floor, and each of
them was ten cubits or thirty foot in height; they were made of Olive Tree
within, but overlaid with Gold, and their faces were toward the Sanctuary or
holy place. Each wing of these Cherubims was five cubits long. All their four
wings were extended to the length of twenty cubits, which was the whole breadth
of the Oracle. Their two inward wings touched each other, and the two ends of
their outward wings touched the wall of the house. Under their two inward wings
stood Moses's Ark and Cherubims. These Cherubims were so made as the parts of
them might be taken asunder. See 2 Chronicles. 3.10. and they were the most splendid
ornament of the whole Temple, and carried away (as it is probable) by the
rapacious Babylonians at the taking of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. 1 King. 6.
from 23. to 29. 2 Chronicles. 3. from 10. to the 14.

These four Cherubims in the 1 Chronicles. 28.18. are likened to a Chariot of four
wheels, whereon the Divine Majesty did sit or ride, and uttered intelligibly
his Sacred Oracles. See Psalm. 99.1.

Thirdly, Besides the Ark and these glorious Cherubims it appears from Heb.
9.4. that within the Holy of Holies was placed Aaron's Rod that budded, and the
pot of Manna See the Apostolical History on Heb. 9.4.
, [ Numb. 17.10.] and the Golden Censer of Aaron.

Lastly, In the time of Moses there was also the Book of the Law (called by
some Deuteronomion) laid on the side of the Ark, see Deuteronomy. 31.26. But whither
it was placed there in Solomon's days we do not, yet we find in Josiah's reign
when the Temple was purged, the Book of the Law was found in the Temple by
Hilkiah the Priest, though no express mention is made that it was found in the
Oracle.

So that by the side of the Ark or before the Testimony in Solomon's Temple
were placed (as it seems) the pot of Manna, Aaron's Rod, the Golden Censer, and
the Book of the Law, as they had formerly been in the Holy of Holies of the
Tabernacle.

4. Of the Vessels in the Priests Court.
1. There we find the Altar of Brass which was twenty cubits in length, twenty
in breadth, and ten in height, 2 Chronicles. 4.1. Its situation was before the
Porch, whereon the Sacrifices were daily offered to God, 2 Chronicles. 8.12.

As for the Sacrifices we read of many instruments that were used about them,
as flesh-hooks of Gold, [1 Chronicles. 28.17.] also pots, shovels and basins of
bright brass, 1 King. 7.45.

2. The next vessel to be considered was the molten Sea, a most rare and
admirable piece of solid brass cast in the clay ground in the plains of Jordan.
It was five cubits high, and ten over from side to side, being round, and
thirty cubits in compass, containing two thousand baths A Bath contained about
8 gallons, 4 baths made a barrel, so that there were usually put into this Sea
500 barrels of water, and if filled up to the brim it would contain 750.
, namely as they usually filled it for ordinary use, but if it had been filled
up to the brim it would then contain three thousand, viz. a third part more, 1
King. 7.23.26. 2 Chronicles. 4.5. therefore 'twas called a Sea for the largeness
thereof. It Is brim was wrought about with Lilly-work, under the brim thereof
were brazen knobs round about, resembling the heads of oxen. These were cast
together with the vessel. It stood upon twelve brazen oxen, which by four
several Threes respected the four quarters of the world.

The use of this vessel was for the Priests to wash in [2 Chronicles. 4.6, 10.] that
is, by water derived to them by a pipe and cock out of it they did wash their
hands and feet, for that they did wash their whole bodies in it seems not very
probable See Mr. Lee, page 86:
. It Is like the Gibeonites or Nethinims, (whose office it was to be drawers of
water for the Congregation, Josh. 9.27.) did out of the fountain of Siloam or
pool of Bethesda hard by fill this Sea, and furnished all other Lavatories with
water about the Temple.

3. In this Court also were placed ten lavers appointed for the washing of the
Sacrifices; in the Tabernacle there were none of these; that single laver made
by Moses for the Priests service answering only to the molten Sea. These lavers
of brass contained forty haths apiece, each set op his basis with wheels for
their more convenient removal (if need were) though generally their station was
five on the one side, and five on the other in the Court of the Priests, and
East of the covered Temple; they were adorned with brazen borders engraven with
Lions, Oxen, Cherubims and Palm Trees, had pillars and wheels, and other
curiosities which we cannot well here describe. 1 King. 7. from v. 27, to 40.

5. Of the Furniture, Utensils and Chambers in the outward Court.
In the outward Court or Court of Israel, (many no doubt) were the utensils
there used; Tremellius thinks the brazen scaffold made by Solomon for himself
to stand and pray upon, 2 Chronicles. 6.12, 13. with the Kings pillar, was placed in
this Court. Also Pulpits and Desks wherein the Priests expounded the Law to the
people.

The Chambers in the outward Courts were severally employed for sundry uses, as
for laying up of Tithes, First Fruits, Wood, Salt, and other requisites for the
Sacrifices. Of Salt a mass was spent in the Temple, seeing no Offering was
acceptable without it, Mark 9.49. Some rooms ('it is like) were employed to
contain the Musical Instruments, whereof thirteen sorts are mentioned and
explained by Mr. Fuller, Chapter 10. Book 3.

In other Chambers (undoubtedly) the standards of all measures were carefully
kept; for we find that the inferior Levites (among other services) had a
superintendency over all manner of measures and sizes, [1 Chronicles. 23.29.] It
belonged to their office to set out the pars quota, the exact quantity of the
meal, oil and wine that was to be used in their several sacrifices; therefore
they were highly concerned to be skilful in measures. It Is likely that the Book
of the description of the land into several parts by lot, as being of public
concernment and use, was preserved in some room of the Temple. See Josh. 18.9.

Some Chambers, it is like, were for lodgings for the Priests and Levites that
attendded on the holy service in the Temple, and others for refectories and
rooms wherein the Priests had their repast or hallowed food as on shewbread,
etc. which though shifted but once a week by Gods command, Lev. 24.8. yet by
his Providence was doubtless preserved, that it lost nothing of its goodness.
There was also as it seems an Armory in the Temple furnished with weapons to
guard the Treasure there kept. David provided Spears and Bucklers, and Shields
for that purpose; and Joash by the assistance of those weapons recovered the
Crown.

Many other Vtensils were added to the Temple after Solomon's death by
succeeding Kings as occasion did require; as particularly that Chest which in
the reign of King Jehoash was made by Jehoiada to receive the peoples free
offerings for the repair of the Temple. A Chest with an hole in the lid
thereof, 2 King. 12.9. In after ages it was called Corban, which signifies
sometimes the gift it self, sometimes the vessel receiving it, see Mark 7.11.

Having spoken of the Ornaments of the Temple, it will not be amiss to speak
something also of the Temple-Officers.

The Temple-Officers were Priests. Levites. Nethinims.


The Priests were distinguished into Chief Priests. Inferior Priests of the
twenty four Courses.


1. The chief Priests were two, the High Priest and his second. The High Priest
was (by Gods appointment) that person who was the right heir in Aaron's line,
or the Eldest that descended in a direct line from his loins. One great part of
his office was, upon the day of expiation to perform the solemn rights of that
service in entering into the Holy of Holies with blood, and to perfume the
Oracle, Exodus 30.10. Levit. 16.34. Heb. 9.7.

2. The second Priest was the most eminent among the rest, who in case of the
sickness or pollution of the High Priest, or any other emergency did supply his
place, So Annas and Caiphas are called the High Priests, Luke 3.2. not that
there were two in that great office at once, but the one was a substitute to
the other.
2 King. 25.18.

3. The ordinary Priests were such as sprang from the loins of Aaron, and were
in a Collateral line of kindred, allied to the High Priest; they were all
Levites, as descending from Levi the great Grandfather of Aaron. But the
Priests were separated from the rest of the Levites for the more immediate
service of God, and the term Levite is restrained to all others of the
posterity of Levi, besides the line of Aaron.

These Priests for the more easy carrying on of Temple-service were divided
into twenty four Courses by lot as we have showed before; each Course ministered
to the Lord for eight days together, viz. from Sabbath to Sabbath. The work of
the Priests was, 1. The Government of the Sanctuary and house of God, 1 Chronicles.
24.5. 2. Sacrificing, with all its rites on the Altar of Burnt-offering, 1 Chronicles. 6.49. 2 Chronicles. 29.22. 3. They set the new prepared shewbread on the
Golden Tables within the Sanctuary every Sabbath, and removed the old. 4. They
ordered the lamps of the Golden Candlesticks. 5. They kindled the daily incense
to make a sweet perfume in the Temple. 6. They were the Judges of Leprosy and
jealousy betwixt man and wife, Levit. 13.2, 3. 7. They blew the Trumpets to
the Solemn feasts, also before the Ark at its removals, and were also to
accompany the Captains of the host in war with their silver Trumpets. Joel
2.15. 2 Chronicles. 13.12. 1 Chronicles. 15.24. and Chap. 16.6. Numb. 10.8. and Chap.
31.6. 8. They were to look to the burning of wood continually upon the brazen
Altar, that the fire that descended from Heaven might not be extinguished,
Levit. 6.12, 13. 9. They were to make the holy ointment with the appointed
spices, Exodus 30.22. 1 Chronicles. 9.30. 10. They were to instruct the people in the
Law of God, Mal. 2.7.


2. Of the Levites.
The Levites strictly taken were all such as came from the root of Levi,
(excepting the children of Aaron) they were divided into four ranks, and
accordingly appointed to four sorts of work.

1. Some of them were appointed to wait on the Sons of Aaron in the Courts of
the Temple, and in the Chambers, and in the purifying of all the holy things
belonging to the service of the house of God, 1 Chronicles. 23. from 28, to the end.

They were at first to enter upon their office at the age of thirty years, but
after the days of David at twenty, because then they did not carry the
Tabernacle, nor the vessels thereof, 1 Chronicles. 23. from 24, to 28.

Their number in the latter end of David's reign was computed at thirty eight
thousand, whereof twenty four thousand were appointed for the work and service
of the house of God; six thousand to be Officers and Judges; four thousand to
be Porters, and four thousand to be Singers and players on Instruments, 1 Chronicles. 23.3, 4, 5. 2 Chronicles. 8.14. 1 Chronicles. 16.4.

So that out of the Levites were taken their Judges, Lawyers, Scribes,
Recorders, Genealogists, and the greatest dignities and offices, (excepting
only the Royal dignity of the Tribe of Judah) were enjoyed by those of this
Tribe. They were the only persons that preferred learning and knowledge, the
Schools of the Prophets being under their Institution.

3. Of the Nethinims.
These were the most inferior sort of persons that were employed in any
Temple-service, being the race of the Gibeonites [Josh. 9.17.] and called
Nethinims, because they were given and delivered over to that service. Some
think that David a little before his death did dispose them into their set
courses as he did other Officers of the Temple, [see Ezra 8.20.] but of this we
shall not determine.

Concerning the Priests garments, their solemn times of worship, their various
Sacrifices and Offerings, with their appendant rites, and the revenues and
profits assigned to the Priests and Levites, we have spoken before when we went
over Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers, and shall not need here to repeat them.

SECT. II.
IN the 11th. year of Solomon 's reign the building of the Temple was finished
with all things belonging thereunto, having been seven years and an half in
finishing, 1 King. 6.38. 2 Chronicles. 3.2. but the Dedication thereof was put off
till the next year, because of the Jubilee. And in the seventh month The whole
Edifice and most material things were now finished, but possibly they were
perfecting some things till the 8th. month. 1 King. 6.38.
of that year called Ethanim, and the seventh day of that month was the first
day whereon Solomon celebrated with great magnificence the Dedication of this
glorious Temple, so that from the seventh day to the fifteenth (the tenth day
which was the great fast and day of expiation being excepted On which the
Jubilee was to be proclaimed with sound of Trumpet. Levit. 25.9.
) was this feast of Dedication celebrated, and from the 15th to the 23. was the
Feast of Tabernacles, and the 23d. was the last day of this feast, and always
very solemnly kept, and the day following the people were dismissed.

Having thus described the parts of the Temple, and the Ornaments and Officers
thereof, we shall now return to speak of the great and magnificent solemnity of
this Dedication, which was on this wise:

1. Solomon assembled the Elders and Heads of all the Tribes, and a mighty
Congregation of all the Nation to meet at Jerusalem on this solemn occasion.

2. By the Ministry of the Priests, and by such rites as were appointed by the
Law he hallowed the middle of the Priests Court, wherein either they did erect
other Altars, or made use of the pavement for that present occasion, because
the brazen Altar was too little to receive so many Burnt-offerings, and
Peace Offerings as he intended then to offer, 1 King. 8.64. 2 Chronicles. 7.7.

3. The Princes and Elders of the people being now assembled waited upon the
King to Mount Sion where the Ark was, and whither (as it is like) they had
brought the Tabernacle with all the things appertaining to it from Gibeon. The
Priests 2 Chronicles. 5.4. It Is said the Levites took up the Ark because the Priests
were also Levites, that is, of the Tribe of Levi.
took up the Ark on their shoulders; the Levites according to their several
appointed ranks carried the Tabernacle with the boards and curtains, and the
holy vessels belonging thereunto. The King and the Elders walked after in a
solemn procession to Mount Moriah The Temple (to speak properly) was not built
on Mount Sion, but on Mount Moriah, but because the whole City of Jerusalem is
usually called Sion, and Mount Sion from that Mount that was a chief part of
it, thence it is that the Temple (Gods dwelling place) is usually said to have
been in Sion.
where the Temple was built; whither being come, the Priests carried the Ark
into the Oracle or most holy place, and set it under the wings of the Golden
Cherubims. But they drew out the staves of the Ark something from under the
wings of the Cherubims that they might be seen in the holy place which was
before the Oracle, but they were not seen as taken out of the Ark, 2 Chronicles.
5.9. And possibly these staves were the rather thus disposed to remember the
people that if they brake Gods Covenant the staves yet remained within the
rings of the Ark ready to bear away the Symbol of Gods gracious presence from
them. The Levites also disposed those things which they carried belonging to
the The Tabernacle was carried about in the Wilderness forty years; it remained
in Gilgal about fourteen years, it remained in Shiloh till Samuels time, 1 Samuel
4.4. it then remained in Nob till Saul destroyed that place, 1 Samuel 22.19. it
was in Gibeon all David's time, from thence it was brought into Zion, and from
thence into the Treasuries of the Temple.
Tabernacle into the Treasuries of the Temple, there to remain as Sacred things
not again to be removed. When the Priests had set the Ark in its place and were
come out, immediately an hundred and twenty of them with silver Trumpers, and
the Levite-singers, viz. Asaph, Heman and Jeduthun with their Sons and
Brethren, being arrayed in white linen, and having Cymbals, Psalteries and
Harps in their hands, stood at the East End of the Altar, and the Trumpets
sounding, and they playing on their Instruments, and lifting up their voices
with one consent, and making one melodious harmony sang (as it seems) the 136
Psalm, the burden of which is, For he is good for his mercy endures for ever.
Whilst they were thus employed suddenly the house of the Lord was filled with a
cloud, which was an extraordinary manifestation of the presence of God; 2 Chronicles. 5.14. it is said the glory of God filled the house, which intimated that
the brightness of his glory was such that if it were not clouded over, no
mortal eyes could behold it. It seems the cloud was such, and so amazing that
the Priests could not continue to minister in the Sanctuary where the cloud
was; and by this visible sign of his presence the Lord did sanctify to himself
this place, [see Exodus 40.34.] and showed his approbation of all that was done.
Solomon standing upon a Brazen Scaffold made for him in the outward Court,
right before the door of the Priests Court through which he might look, and
apprehending this cloud to be a manifestation of Gods gracious presence and
acceptance of the house he had built for his service, in a rapture of joy he
brake out into these words: The Lord (said he) is pleased to dwell in thick
darkness, [Levit. 16.2.] and by a cloud he has usually testified his presence
among his people, as when he led the Israelites by a cloud, Exodus 13.21. In a
cloud he appeared at the giving of the Law, Exodus 19.16. In a cloud he appeared
that covered and filled the Tabernacle as soon as it was reared up by Moses,
Exodus 40.34. and therefore doubtless in this cloud the Lord does now appear
unto us, and testifies his favorable acceptance of our service in building
this house for his name. Then directing his speech to God, he said, O Lord I
have built a Temple for thee to manifest thy gracious presence in; an house not
to be removed as the Tabernacle was, but a settled place for thee to abide in
Officium Templi non est prastare Deo habitationem, sed hominibus directionem ad
soli^m divinum sempiteru^^ quod in c^lo est. Cajet.
to be there ready on all occasions to resolve us in such cases as we shall
humbly propound unto thee, and to hear such prayers as we shall make unto thee,
and to grant such blessings as we shall humbly crave of thee, and to accept
such sacrifices and services as we shall there offer up and present unto thee.
And (O Lord) I pray thee accept this house for thine, and ever manifest thy
gracious presence therein as long as this dispensation (we are now under) shall
last, and till the truth of this type shall be exhibited. Then the King turned
his face to the people standing about him and blessed them, and said, Blessed
and praised be the Lord God of Israel who spoke to David my Father that I
should build a Temple for his great name, and has by his good hand upon me
enabled me to do it. The Lord also said, since the day that I brought forth my
people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no City out of all their Tribes in which I
appointed an house to be built that my name might be there in a peculiar manner
worshipped. But having chosen David to be King over my people, it was in his
heart to build an house for my name. And thereupon I said to him, whereas it
was in thine heart to build an house to my name, I like it well that it was in
thine heart to do it. Nevertheless thou shall not build this house for me, but
thy Son that shall come out of thy loins he shall build it. And the Lord has
now graciously performed the word that he spoke* and I am risen up in my
fathers room to sit on the Throne of Israel, and have built an house for the
Lord, as he promised I should do, and an abiding place for the Ark, wherein are
the two Tables of the Law which the Lord gave as a Covenant to his people,
requiring obedience on their part, and promising many blessings on his part to
the obedient.

Then Solomon turned his face toward the Altar of Burnt-offering, and toward
the most holy place, and having stood a while he then kneeled down, and
spreading forth his hands toward heaven, poured forth this Divine Prayer,
saying, O Lord God of Israel there is no God like thee in heaven above, or in
earth beneath, who keep Covenant and show mercy to thy servants that walk
before thee in the integrity of their hearts. Thou have kept thy word, and
performed thy promise to thy servant David in raising me his Son up to build a
Temple for thee; perform also I pray thee unto my father what thou did
further promise him 2 Samuel 7.13.
, to wit, that there shall not fail a man lineally descended from him to sit
upon the Throne of Israel, and to reign in thy sight, provided his children
take heed to their way to walk before thee with that integrity that he did. Now
let thy word (I pray thee) be verified and fulfilled which thou spakest to my
father concerning this matter. But why do I speak of my building an house for
thee? Will God indeed dwell on earth? Behold thou art an infinite and immense
being: Thou can not be contained within any compass or space. The Heaven, and
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee, much less this house that I have
builded. But though thou can not be contained within this house, yet I pray
thee have regard to the prayer and humble supplication of me thy poor servant
which I make to thee in behalf of this house, namely that the eyes of thy
favor and providence may be open toward it day and night, seeing thou have
said of it that thy name Deuteronomy. 12.11.
shall be there called upon and worshipped. I humbly beseech thee therefore
when ever either my self or any of thy people shall pray unto thee in this
place, or toward it V. 30. Versus hunc locum, quasi respiciens ad promissionem
praesentiae tuae in hoc loco exemplum in Daniele, cap. 6. v. 10.
, that then thou would please to hear in Heaven thy dwelling place, (where
thy glory is most eminently manifested) and when thou hear be pleased to
forgive and pardon our transgressions against thee. For there is no comfort in
obtaining any other mercy, if our sins be not forgiven. Particularly I humbly
request of thee that if any man be charged that he has trespassed against his
neighbor, and he be brought before thine Altar Tacto Altar jurare mos omnium
prope Gentium. Intrepidi quicunque altaria tangunt. Juv.
in the Court of this house to clear himself by Oath (sufficient proof by
witnesses being wanting) that thou would please to deal with him according to
innocence or guiltiness, punishing him if he be faulty, and bringing his wicked
way upon his own head, but justifying and acquitting him if he be innocent. Or
if thy people be smitten before their enemies in the field because they have
sinned against thee, and shall turn again to thee, and confess thy name, to
wit, thy justice (in suffering their enemies to prevail against them) and shall
acknowledge thy mercy and power, and so seek to thee for pardon and help, and
shall make supplication to thee turning their faces toward this house, then
hear thou in heaven and forgive their sin, and bring them again into the land
which thou gave to their fathers. Or when the heaven is shut up and there is
no rain (because thy people have sinned against thee) if they shall pray
toward this place, and confess thy justice in punishing of them, and turn from
their sin, then hear thou in heaven and forgive their sin, and teach them the
good way V. 36. Et ostende eis viam bonam.
wherein they should walk, and then give rain upon the land which thou have
given thy people for an inheritance. Or if any of these great judgments fall
upon the land, to wit, famine, pestilence, and blasting, or if there be any
plague or sickness upon thy people, what prayer and supplication shall be made
by any man singly, or by all thy people jointly, who shall know every man the
plague 2 Chronicles. 6.29. When every one shall know his own sore and his own grief:
Grief is put for that which should cause grief, viz. Sin.
of his own heart, (to wit the sins for which he is punished) and shall spread
forth his hands toward this house, then hear thou in heaven and forgive, and
do what in thy infinite wisdom seems good, and give to every man according to
his ways, (not his former sins but his present repentance) whose heart thou
see to be sincere and upright. For thou, and thou only (O Lord) know the
hearts of all the children of men. And I humbly beseech thee to deal thus
mercifully with thy people that they may fear thee, and walk in thy ways all
the days of their lives. Moreover if a stranger (that is not of thy people
Israel) who hears of thy wondrous works and righteous Laws, and this holy
house, shall come from his own Country to testify his high esteem of thy
great name, and to worship and praise thee, and shall pray toward this house
Or in this house, viz. in the Court of the Gentiles.
, then hear thou in heaven, and grant all that he shall pray unto thee for,
which is agreeable to thy holy will, that all the people of the earth may know
thy name, and learn to fear thee as do thy people Israel, and that they may
know that thy name is called upon in this house that I have built, to wit, that
it is called the Temple of the Lord, and the house of God, and is so in
reality, by thy hearing the prayers that are here made unto thee. Furthermore,
if thy people shall go out to battle against their enemies, and shall pray unto
thee, and seek thy favor and help in that enterprise looking toward this
City, and this house (which I have built for thy great name) then hear thou in
heaven their prayer and supplication, and maintain their just and righteous
cause, by giving them good success. But if they by their sins provoke thee,
(for there is no man that sins not) so that thou give them up into the
hands of their enemies and they carry them away captive, (either further off,
or nearer hand) however if they shall bethink themselves in the land whither
they are carried captive, and shall repent and make supplication to thee,
saying, we have sinned and done perversely, we have committed wickedness, (and
so shall return unto thee with all their heart, and all their soul), and shall
pray unto thee looking toward this land, this City and this house, then hear
thou in heaven their prayer and supplication, and maintain their cause, taking
part with thy people that repent, and pray unto thee against the unjust
oppression of their enemies, and then turn thou (O Lord) the hearts of their
enemies toward them, that they may have pity and compassion on them. For
remember (O Lord) they are thy people, and thine inheritance This people were
to God as a man's inheritance is to him, which he has bought and made his own
for ever. See D^ut. 32.9.
, which thou broughtest forth out of Egypt, even out of an iron furnace Deuteronomy.
4.20.
, And furthermore, let the eyes 2 Chronicles. 6.40.
of thy favor be upon me thy poor servant, and upon this thy people, and let
thine ears be attentive unto the supplications we shall make unto thee, and
hearken to us in all that we shall pray unto thee for, according to thy will.
For thou did separate us unto thy self from among all the Nations of the
earth to be thy peculiar people and inheritance, as thou spakest by thy servant
Moses.

Solomon having ended this his devout prayer rose up from his knees, and
standing with his face toward the Temple, he repeated part of the 132 Psalm,
saying, Arise, O Lord, and take possession of this house which I have built for
thee as a resting place and fixed habitation, and not an ambulatory and moving
one, as the Tabernacle was. And let thy Ark (whereon thou do manifest thy
glory Psalm. 78.61. He delivers his strength into captivity, and his glory
into the enemies hands.
, strength and power for the good of thy people) be here settled and constantly
abide. Let thy Priests (O Lord God) be clothed and adorned with such graces as
may bring salvation to themselves Psalm. 132.9. This clause is thus expressed,
Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness.
, and may enable them to be instrumental in the saving of others; and let thy
Saints rejoice in thy goodness and favor manifested unto them. O Lord God hear
me (I pray thee) and turn not away the face of thine anointed with shame and
confusion by denying me my request, but remember the promises thy mercy moved
thee to make to David my Father, and to his posterity.

Solomon having ended his prayers, the Sacrifices were brought in and laid upon
the Altar, and immediately fire came down from Heaven, and consumed them, and
the glory of the Lord (probably covered with a cloud) filled the house, and
such an orient splendor shone through it that the Priests could by no means
enter into the Temple. The people seeing the fire came down from Heaven, and
the glory of the Lord upon the house, they bowed themselves with their faces to
the ground and worshipped, and praised God, and sang (as it is probable) the 136
Psalm ( as the Singers had done before) the burden or foot whereof was, For he
is good, for his mercy endures for ever.

Then Solomon turned his face and blessed all the Congregation of Israel again,
as he had done at the beginning, and said, Blessed be the Lord God who has
given rest to his people Israel as he promised of old. And indeed he has not
failed of performing any of his gracious promises which he made to his people
by the ministry of his servant Moses. Now therefore the Lord our God be with us
as he was with our Fathers, and let him not leave us nor forsake us; but let
him incline our hearts to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments Viz.
The Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial Laws.
, statutes and judgments which he commanded our Fathers. And let my words
wherewith I have made supplication to the Lord this day be in his mind and
memory continually that he may maintain the cause of me his servant, and the
cause of his people Israel at all times as the matter shall require, and as it
shall appear just and equal to him, that all the people of the earth may know
that the Lord he is the only true God from whom all blessings come, and that
there is no other God besides him. Let your heart therefore be upright and
sincere before the Lord, and walk in his statutes, and keep his commandments as
now you do.

Then the King, the Princes and people offered abundance of Peace Offerings
They were called Peace Offerings, because God having bestowed some benefit upon
them, seemed to be appeased toward them, and they were offered as a kind of
retribution, and to return thanks to God for it. And in offering the same they
also testified their hope that God was reconciled toward them.
to the Lord, and kept this feast of Dedication seven days. During which time
they offered unto the Lord two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and
twenty thousand sheep. By a multitude of Sacrifices the pious Jews were wont to
testify their zealous and grateful affection toward God; and we never read of
any Sacrifice like this. And thus Solomon, the Princes and people by their
joint prayers, praises and sacrifices dedicated the house of God, and set it
apart for his worship and service. And they rejoiced before the Lord seven
days, and seven, that is, they kept the first seven days as the Feast of
Dedication, and the next seven as the Feast of Tabernacles. And the day after
Solomon dismissed the people to their own homes, and they blessed the King, and
prayed unto the Lord for him, and went home with joyful and glad hearts,
rejoicing in the goodness which the Lord had manifested to the house of David,
and to Solomon, and to all the people of Israel.

1 King. Chapter 8. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 5. whole Chapter.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 6. whole Chapter.

2 Chronicles. Chapter 7. from v. 1, to 11.

SECT. III.
SHortly after Some read, 1 King. 9.1. And it came to pass when Solomon had
finished the building of the house of the Lord (and afterward finished the
Kings house, and, all his desire which he was pleased to do) that the Lord
appeared to him the second time, etc.
Solomon had made that devout prayer before mentioned, the Lord (as it seems)
appeared to him in a dream Chapter 6.11. We read that the word of the Lord came to
Solomon, but that was by some messenger or Prophet sent unto him, but this was
the second time that the Lord appeared to him in a Vision.
as he had done before at Gibeon, 1 King. 3.4, 5. and the Lord said, I have
heard thy prayer and thy supplication which thou have made before me, and I
have hallowed this house, and set it apart to those holy uses which thou did
intend it for, and it shall be called by my name as long as it shall last, and
mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually; I will always be ready to
take notice of the prayers there made, and the services there performed, and
will graciously accept them. And if I shall shut up heaven at any time so that
there be no rain, or send the locusts or pestilence among my people, (that are
called by my name) if they shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face,
and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear in heaven and forgive their
sin and heal their land. And if thou will walk before me in integrity and
uprightness as thy Father David did, and keep my statutes and judgments, then I
will establish the Throne of thy Kingdom for ever, that is, thou and thy
posterity shall continue time after time to be Kings over Israel, so as no
other stock but thine shall sit on that Throne so long as the Kingdom of Judah
shall remain, as I promised and covenanted with David thy Father. See Chapter 8.25.
But if thou or thy posterity fail on your part to perform the conditions annexed
to my promise, and shall turn away obstinately and totally from following after
me, and shall renounce me and my service, and will not keep my commandments and
statutes which I have made known unto you, and set before you to walk in, but
shall go and serve other Gods, and worship them, then will I cut off Thus was
the Kingdom of Israel dealt with 2 King. 17.20.
Israel from the land which I have given them as a rotten branch, and pluck
them up by the roots; and this house which I have hallowed for my name will I
cast out of my sight, out of my favor and protection, and Israel shall be a
proverb and a byword As in the time of the Babylonish Captivity the Jews were
a scorn to all Nations, but much more since the last destruction of their City
and Temple by the Romans, and so their great glory was turned into vile
contempt.
among the people. And as for this house which is now so high in all external
glory, every one that passes by shall be astonished at the destruction of it,
and shall hiss at it in scorn, and shall ask why has the Lord done thus unto
this land, and this house, and they shall receive this answer, because the
inhabitants thereof have forsaken the Lord their God who brought forth their
fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have betaken themselves to the worship of
other Gods, whose worship they pertinaciously hold fast, and will not depart
from it. Therefore the Lord brought upon them all these great evils. 1 King. 9.
fr. v. 2, to 11. 2 Chronicles. 7. fr. v. 11. to the end.

SECT. IV.
SOlomon having thus finished the Temple, he now falls in hand with the
building of a Palace for himself in Jerusalem, and built also a stately
Summer House in Lebanon, [5. Chapter 7. from v. 2. to 7.] and an house for his
Queen the daughter of Pharaoh, and his own Throne, so splendid and sumptuous
that there was none like it. In the 13th. year after the Temple was built, he
made an end of these buildings. Before his Palace he built a stately Porch of
Judgment, wherein was to be set his great and Royal Throne wherein he sat in
state to judge the people. This Throne was a stately and magnificent piece; it
was made of Ivory, and in several parts of it overlaid with pure Gold; so as
the white Ivory and glittering Gold gave a fair luster the one to the other,
and made it appear the more glorious. The Throne had six steps to it, and so
was a yard and half from the ground. It had a round stately Canopy, or covering
over it, and stays or Elbows on each side, and a Footstool of Gold for the
King to set his feet upon Calcatas opes scabellum designat aureum.
. Two Lions stood on the outside of the Elbows for support and ornament. And
there were placed twelve Lions besides that stood six on the one side, and six
on the other of the steps or stairs, and standing at an equal distance one from
another were the more glorious to behold. There was not the like Throne for
costliness and exquisite workmanship in any Kingdom of the world. The Lions
signified the power, majesty, undaunted boldness, courage and magnanimity that
ought to be in Princes, as also the great vigilance and watchfulness that ought
to be in them, so that they had need to wake while others sleep, as it is said
of Lions that they sleep always with their eyes open; they might signify also
that good Princes are protected by the special Providence of God, and their
Thrones guarded with Lions. 1 King. 10. from 18, to 21.

Besides this stately Throne he made also two hundred Targets Targets were
large Shields such as Captains used to have carried before them, that as
occasion served they might take and use for the defense of their bodies against
Arrows, Darts, Javelins, and such like piercing weapons. But Shields were less
than Targets, and they used to carry them on their left arm for their own
defense.
of beaten Gold, not for service but for pomp and state to set forth his Royal
Majesty and Greatness. These (it is likely) were ordinarily hung up in his
great Hall or Armory, and at certain times carried before him by his Guard, as
afterward the Brazen ones that were made in the room of these were carried
before Rehoboam. See 1 King. 14.27. He made also three hundred Shields of
beaten Gold, and three hundred shekels A shekel of silver was in weight half an
ounce, and in worth 2 sh. 6 d. The Jews prized Gold at ten times the value of
Silver, so a shekel of Gold was 25 sh. By this account every Target weighed 25
pounds Troy, and was worth 750 l. Sterling.
of Gold went to make one of them, so that the Shields were not above half so
big as the Targets, which weighed each of them 600 shekels. All these he put
into the house of the Forest of Lebanon, which for civil use was the most
sumptuous building that Solomon made, and his Magnificence and Royalty was
therein most manifested; and accordingly those Golden Targets and Shields were
there placed. But he that shall consider how soon these Golden Tarkets and
Shields became a prey to the enemy, will be apt to think there was an excess of
pomp in them, which was not well-pleasing to God. And furthermore all the
drinking vessels, cups, platters, basins, spoons, etc. that were used in the
house of Lebanon were all of pure Gold (this house being made for delight, and
the glory of his Kingdom) none of them were of silver, silver V. 21. Silver was
nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon: This is an Hyperbolical speech,
for silver was brought to Solomon time after time by Ships, v. 22. and given
him as an acceptable present, v. 25. So that hereby only the great abundance he
had of Gold and Silver is intimated.
(comparatively) was not esteemed of for plate in Solomon's time; for they
having such abundance of Gold, most of their Plate was made of that metal, and
silver-plate but little esteemed of in those days. But we must speak more
particularly of this house of the forest of Lebanon. It was so called as being
a kind of abridgment of that famous Forest afar off from Jerusalem, and
containing in it and in the groves and gardens about it all the delights and
pleasures of that Forest, and something more, viz. solitary walks, sweet
music of birds, wild beasts, curious waterworks, and all manner of other
delightful things. See Eccles. 2.4, 5, 6. And it seems this house was also the
chief storehouse and magazine of Arms which the Kings of Judah had, as
appears from Isa. 22.8. Thou did look in that day to the armor of the house
of the Forest.

Thus Solomon finished the Lords house, and his own house, and all that came
into his heart to do, he prosperously effected, 2 Chronicles. 7.11. having spent
full twenty years in this kind of work, [1 King. 9.10.] whereof seven and an
half upon the Temple, and about twelve and an half upon his own houses and
buildings.

1 King. Chapter 7. from v. 1, to 13.

1 King. Chapter 10. from v. 16, 22.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 9. from v. 15, to 21.

SECT. V.
WHilst Solomon was busied about his Magnificent buildings, it seems Gezer a
City allotted to the Levites in the Tribe of Ephraim [Josh. 21.20, 21.] but
never recovered out of the possession of the Canaanites, gave to the King some
great distaste, so that (not being at leisure himself) he entreated Pharaoh his
Father-in-law to take it in for him by his Arms, and to rid him of those
troublesome neighbors. Pharaoh accordingly did it, and burnt the City or some
part of it with fire, and put the inhabitants thereof to the sword, and so gave
it for a present to his daughter, Solomon's wife.

1 King. 9.16.

SECT. VI.
HIram King of Tire having furnished Solomon toward these magnificent
buildings with Cedar-trees and Firr-trees, and sixscore Talents of Gold,
Solomon in a grateful retribution, and to make him amends, gave him twenty
Cities or Towns in the land of Galilee which were not (as it seems) a part of
the land which God had given for an inheritance to his people, but lay in a
tract of ground on the outside of the borders of Asher [Josh. 19.24.] betwixt
them and mount Libanus, and being now reduced under Solomon's Dominion, he
presented them to Hiram that he might by them receive satisfaction for what he
had had of him. But it seems Hiram when he saw them liked them not, possibly
because they stood in a moorish ground, or because he thought it would be long
e're he should from them receive that satisfaction which he expected. Therefore
he returned them to Solomon again, and chose rather to expect satisfaction from
him some other way; and thereupon Solomon repaired and enlarged them, and
planted certain colonies of the Israelites in them, [See 2 Chronicles. 8.1, 2.]
whereas before they were inhabited only by the Heathen; and now that tract of
ground was counted a part of Galilee which it is thought was the reason why
Galilee was called Galilee of the Gentiles.

1 King. Chapter 9. from v. 10, to 15.

SECT. VII.
SOlomon having now finished his own houses, and built an house for his Queen,
Pharaohs daughter, he removed her and brought her up thither out of the City of
David; for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the house of David King of
Israel, because the places whereunto the Ark of the Lord has come are more
holy than other places. It Is true David's house ceased to be holy (in that
respect) after the Ark was removed thence, yet Solomon out of his superabundant
respect to that sign of Gods presence, thought it not fit to make that a
dwelling place for his Queen and her followers (who were aliens and strangers
to the house of Israel, and possibly retained some of their Egyptian
profaneness) which had been the holy dwelling place of the most High, 2 Chronicles.
8.11. Solomon (as it seems) reflecting on his Marriage with Pharaohs daughter,
and his bringing her up to the stately house he had built and prepared for her,
took occasion from thence to pen that excellent Song called the Song of Songs,
or the Canticles, being the chiefest of those one thousand See 1 King. 4.32.
and five Songs, composed by him, and the most excellent of them all. And this
Song he composed after he had built his Summer House in Lebanon, as may be
gathered by some passages in it, see Chapter 4.8. Come with me from Lebanon my
Spouse, with me from Lebanon. And Chapter 7. 4. Thy nose is as the tower of
Lebanon. This Song is clearly a Marriage-song, and much of the same nature with
the 45 Psalm, which is called a Song of Loves. And it is a kind of Pastoral
composed in the way of Dialogue, where the speakers are the Bridegroom and the
Bride (represented sometimes under the quality of a Shepherd and Shepherdess,
or Countrydamsel) and the Bride-men and Bride-maids the friends of the
Bridegroom, and companions of the Bride. And though the most proper aim of it
seems to be at higher and diviner matters, than an earthly marriage, (and a
greater than Solomon is here) yet Solomon thought fit to make his marriage with
Pharaohs daughter a type of that sublime and spiritual marriage between Christ
and his Church. The Song is a continued Allegory, and full of obscurities, yea
here we have all the Rhetoric of love, and such affectionate compellations,
and Elogies as are not elsewhere to be found. The flowers and ornaments of
language used in the praises both of Bridegroom and Bride are not appliable to
natural beauties, but are mystical representations and emblems of higher
things. Indeed this Book is all mystical, and therefore the Jews forbad the
reading of it by any under thirty years of age. Here between Christ and his
Church are interchangings of mutual praises, gloriations, and congratulations.
His divine and glorious excellencies in himself, and rich bounties and
blessings to her, and her precious graces and endowments are in an high
character, in lofty and stately sayings and similitudes set forth both by him
and her. And yet withal her failings, and his withdrawings from her thereupon,
and returnings to her again upon her repentance are not omitted.

In all the interlocutions betwixt them she speaks nine times, and he seven. In
the first Chap. from v. 1, to the 8. the Spouse speaks, expressing her ardent
desires after Christ, and vindicates her own deformities and defects, against
the uncharitable censures of others, and petitions him for further counsel and
direction. From the v. 8, to the 12. the Bridegroom speaks, granting her
request, and giving her great commendations, and making rich promises to her.
From v. 12, to the 15. the Spouse speaks again; then the Bridegroom at v. 15.

In the two first verses of Chapter 2. Christ speaks, characterizing himself and
his Church, and then the Church speaks from the v. 3. to the end, and
throughout all the third Chapter, speaking sometimes of Christ, and sometimes
unto him.

At Chapter 4. Christ speaks from v. 1, to 15. and at v. 15, and 16. the Church.

At Chapter 5. v. 1. Christ grants the request of the Church, and comes into his
Garden, and accepts her entertainment, and brings his friends with him, and
feasteth them; but this kindness (it seems) was not so well improved by her as
it deserved; for she is surprised with a fit of drowsy negligence, and so is
brought into danger of losing him, who after much patient waiting, knocking and
calling upon her, and her unkind answer becomes angry, and being not received
when he tendered himself, departs displeased, and is hardly reconciled, though
she afterward expresses much care and diligence in seeking him, and in so
doing suffers injuries and losses for his sake. Notwithstanding she charge
the daughters of Jerusalem to tell him that she is sick of love. From v. 2, to
the 9. They ask her, What was her beloved more than another beloved? And it is
like they asked this question, not as being totally ignorant of him and his
excellencies, but to give her occasion to set him forth the more unto them,
which she does very emphatically, from v. the 10, to the end.

Chapter 6. The Spouse's speech (so full of affection and admiration of the
Bridegroom) wrought so much on the daughters of Jerusalem, that they ask
solicitously whither he was gone, that they may join with her in seeking him?
She tells them where he is, and declares her peculiar interest in him, v. 2, 3.

The Church having confessed her fault, and sought to make up the breach
between Christ and her, he thereupon readily receives her, and again highly
praises and commends her.

Chapter 7. Christ here continues his praising of her, running over every grace and
ornament in her, under new similitudes and exemplifications, from 1, to 10.

The Spouse thereupon renews the profession of her love to him, and rejoices in
his love to her, inviting him to her Assemblies to see how they prospered and
she promises to devote her best fruits wholly to him by whom alone she had
brought them forth, and by whose blessing she flourished with all sorts of
them, both new and old: From v. 10, to the end.

Chapter 8. The Church expresses her ardent desires after Christ, v. 1, 2, 3. and
charges others they should not disturb nor displease him, v. 4. At v. 5. the
Bridegroom seems to admire at the rising of a new Church in a place where there
had been no Assembly or Congregation of believers before; and coming up from
the wilderness and leaning on her beloved, that is, depending on him by faith;
whereupon he said, I raised thee up under the apple tree, that is, when thou
wast fallen under the tree of forbidden fruit, I by my free grace and the
operation of my Spirit raised thee up, and brought thee to a glorious
condition, though thy mother had brought thee forth in a sinful state.

The 6th and 7th verse. seem to be the words of the Spouse. In the 8th and 9th
verses she expresses her care and solicitude for the uncalled Gentiles. At the
10th verse. the Gentiles are brought in speaking for themselves. Ver. 11, 12,
13. seem to be the last speech of Christ to and of his Spouse in this Song,
wherein he magnifies the price, the precious fruitfulness and worth of his
Church by comparing her to a Vineyard, the best of Vineyards, even Solomon's in
Baalhamon (a very fruitful place) and he shows that that Vineyard is far short
of his.

Ver. 14. is the Churches last speech and prayer, wherein she expresses her
longing and earnest expectation of Christ's second coming.

And so much of the Song of Solomon.

SECT. VIII.
SOlomon now built a Navy of Ships in Ezion-Geber which is beside Eloth, which
were havens on that part of the Red Sea which coasteth on the land of Edom. And
because the Tyrians (that were Hiram's subjects, were always held the most
expert Seamen, Hiram 2 Chro. 8.15. Hiram sent him by the hands of his servants
ships, read guided for him, (i. e. by the hands of his servants) ships to Ophir.
sent Solomon many of them to man his new built Ships, and go along with and
assist his servants in their intended voyage. And it seems he built some Ships
there himself that joined with the Navy of Solomon, and thence they sailed to
Ophir, which is thought to be in the East Indies (for thither they might most
easily sail from Ezion-Geber) and fetched from thence four hundred and Twenty
Talents of Gold. In 2 Chronicles. 8.18. it is said that 450 Talents of Gold were
brought from thence. It seems the overplus, viz. thirty Talents were expended
for the charges of the Fleet, and wages of the men, or else it was the
Adventure of Private persons, and only 400 and 20 Talents came clear to the
King. So that Solomon had at Sea a Navy that went to Tarshish (which possibly
was then taken in as large an extent an India is now) to which the Navy of
Hiram joined, and once in three years they came home, bringing Gold and Silver,
Ivory or Elephants-tooth, and Apes and Peacocks, or Monkies and Parrats, which
they brought ('it is like) for rarities sake. And this Navy also brought from
Ophir a great quantity of precious stones, and Almug-trees, which (it seems)
were better than those Solomon had from Lebanon. And the King made of the
Almug-trees pillars for the house of the Lord, viz. pillars in the rails on
each side of the stairs, whereby they ascended up to the house of the Lord, and
2 Chronicles. 9.10. it is said, He made Terrasses to the house of the Lord, and to
the Kings house of the Algum-trees Some think that the Almug-trees here
mentioned, much differed from the Algum-trees mentioned 2 Chronicles. 9.10. for
these grew in Lebanon, the Almug in India.
; that is supporters on each side of the Gallery that led from the Kings Palace
to the Temple. He made also of this wood Harps and Psalteries for the Singers
of the Temple.

1 King. 9. from 26, to the end.

1 King. 10. v. 11, and 12.

2 Chronicles. 9.10, 11, 21.

SECT. IX.
SOlomon now repaired 2 Chronicles. 32.5. In a time of danger Hezekiah repaired it,
see Judge. 9.6.
Millo Aedificium hoc erat civitatis Sion quod David quidem incepit, sed
Solomon absolvit. Munster.
, which seems to be the Townhouse in the City of David wherein the people had
their solemn Assemblies, or else some tower or fortress belonging to the City.
He built also Hazor in the Tribe of Naphtali, which was the chief City in
former times of the Canaanites, Josh. 11.1, 10. and Megiddo a City belonging to
Manasseh, Josh. 17.11. and Gezer which Pharaoh had taken and given to his
daughter. See Sect. 5. And Beth-horn the upper and nether, that were fenced
with walls, gates and bars, 2 Chronicles. 8.5. And Baalath in Dan, Josh. 19.44. And
Tadmor in a dry and sandy place in the Coast of Syria, though belonging to the
land of Israel. And he built Cities of store, for Ammunition and provisions of
all sorts, and Cities for his Chariots and Horsemen; and whatsoever he designed
to build in Jerusalem, or in the Forest of Lebanon, and in any part of his
Dominions he prosperously finished.

1 King. from v. 15, to 20.

SECT. X.
SOlomon understanding that Hamath a City in the Dominions of the King of Zobah
Syria (which his Father David had formerly taken) had now revolted from him, he
sent his forces against it and took it.

2 Chronicles. 8.3:

SECT. XI.
SOlomon still continues constant in his Religion, offering the daily
sacrifice, and sacrificing on the Sabbaths and New Moons, and constantly
observing the three solemn Feasts of Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles,
offering Burnt-offerings, and Peace Offerings (by the ministry of the Priests)
upon the Altar he had built to the Lord, and incense upon the Altar of Incense
according to the Commandment of the Lord.

1 King. 10.25.

2 Chronicles. 8.12, 13.

SECT. XII.
SOlomon now flourishes in all splendour and glory, which will plainly appear to
us if we consider these things: 1. The Extent of his Dominions. 2. His great
wealth and riches. 3. His Grandeur and Magnificence.


1. Let us consider the Extent of his Dominions: He reigned over all the
Kingdoms round about Israel, from the river Euphrates, the North-East Coast of
the land of Canaan, even from Tipsah a City on that river to Azzah or Gaza [see
Jer. 25.10.] in the land of the Philistines their Western bounds, and unto the
border of Egypt (which was the river Sihor, Josh. 13.3.) which was the South
bounds.

From all these Coasts they brought presents to him in testimony of fealty, and
served Solomon, paying him tribute as long as he lived. And thus was that
promise fulfilled which was made to Abraham, Genesis 15.18. Unto thy seed have I
given this land from the river of Egypt unto the great river, even the river
Euphrates. Solomon had also peace Indeed God stirred up some adversaries
against him after his Apostasy. See Chapter 11.14, 15, 16. but they did more hurt
unto his posterity than unto him.
on all sides round about him, and Judah and Israel were many as the sand which
is on the Seashore for multitude; and so that promise was fulfilled, Genesis
22.17. I will multiply thy seed as the stars, and as the sand which is on the
seashore. And they lived in a very comfortable condition, every man dwelling
safely under his own vine, and under his own fig tree The like blessing was not
granted to any King of Israel before him or after him. David had many troubles,
so had Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah, which were the most flourishing
Kings that succeeded him.
, eating and drinking, and making merry, even from Dan to Beersheba, all the
days of Solomon. 1 King. 4.20, 21, 24, 25. 2 Chronicles. 9.26.

2. Let us consider his great riches and wealth: Solomon had for diverse years
one after another brought in by his ships that went to Ophir and Tarshish, Six
hundred threescore and six Talents of Gold. For though from Ophir there were
brought in but four hundred and fifty Talents, 2 Chronicles. 8.18. yet from Ophir,
Tarshish, and other places, he might receive six hundred sixty six Talents in a
year, which amounts to two millions, four hundred ninety seven thousand, five
hundred pounds. Besides what he had of Merchantmen, Factors, and Customers, and
by the Traffic of the Spice-merchants, whose commodities being precious, they
paid ('it is like) great custom to him for liberty to bring in some, and carry
out other commodities. And furthermore all the petty Kings and Lords of Arabia
(that were subdued by David, and so brought under his dominion) paid him
tribute, and brought him rich presents, viz. vessels of silver, and vessels of
gold, rich vests, harness, spices, horses, mules; every year they brought a
proportion of these presents, 2 Chronicles. 9.13, 14, 24. 1 King. 10.14, 15. Thus
Solomon made silver and gold in Jerusalem to be as plenteous as stones, and
Cedar-trees as Sycamores that grew in every field. So that this was the golden
age of the Israelites under the peaceable and flourishing reign of Solomon. 1
King. 10.14, 15, 25, 27. 2 Chronicles. 1.15. 2 Chronicles. 9.13, 14. and 23.24, 27.

3. Let us consider his Grandeur and Magnificence: Solomon got for himself
Chariots and Horses, and had a thousand and four hundred Chariots, and four
thousand There being in each stall a horse, and four horses for every Chariot,
the 4000 stalls will stand with a 1000 Chariots. As for the 400 Chariots
overplus, they possibly were appointed to be in readiness when any of them
failed or were our of repair.
stalls for his Horses and Chariots, [see 1 King. 9.19.] and twelve thousand
Horsemen whom he bestowed in his Chariot-cities; he ordered some of them to be
in his own Court or near it. If any one shall wonder how Solomon came by all
those Horses, they may consider that they brought him horses out of all lands
near him, especially his Merchants and Factors did buy Horses for him, and
Linen yarn Horses and Linen yarn were the chiefest Commodities of Egypt,
Cant. 1.9. Ezekiel. 17.7. And 'twas by the special favor of Pharaoh, whose
daughter Solomon had married, that he enjoyed that Traffic.
in Egypt. The Linen yarn at such a price as was agreed upon between the
Egyptians and them, and the Horses cost one Horse 150 shekels, and therefore so
many Horses as used to draw one Chariot, viz. four cost four times as much,
viz. six hundred shekels of silver. And these Merchants bought Horses not only
to serve their own Prince and Country, but also for other bordering Kings and
Kingdoms. How far his multiplying of Horses and his multiplying of Wives, [1
King. 11.3.] and his multiplying of Gold and Silver so excessively, [1 King.
10.21, 27.] did agree with that law made for Kings, Deuteronomy. 17.16, 17. possibly
Solomon in that height of his prosperity did not consider.

1 King. 1.14, 16, 17.

1 King. 10.26, 28, 29.

2 Chronicles. 41.14, 16, 17.

2 Chronicles. 9.25, 28.

SECT. XIII.
WE have spoken of Solomon's glory, pomp and magnificence; but that which
wrought in the heart of all people (whither his own subjects or foreigners) so
great a veneration for him, was that extraordinary measure of wisdom with which
the Lord had endowed him: In the 1 King. 4.2. it is said God gave him wisdom and
understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand which is
upon the Seashore. His wisdom excelled the wisdom of the children of the East,
and all the wisdom of Egypt. The Arabians and Chaldeans were at this time
famous for their learning, especially Philosophy and Astronomy, and so were
also the Egyptians. See Act. 7.22. Isa. 19.11, 12. and yet Solomon excelled
these. He was wiser than all men then living; wiser than Ethan the Ezrahite,
Heman, Chalioc, and Darda; who (it seems) were men famous for wisdom and
learning among the Israelites. See 1 Chronicles. 2.6. They were also (as it seems)
famous for Divine Poetry, if these be the Ethan and Heman mentioned in the
Titles of the 88 and 89 Psalms. Solomon's renown was very great in all Nations
round about him. And there came of all sorts of people, and Ambassadors from
all Kings, (that were any thing near him) to hear his wisdom, and to learn of
him.

He discovered his great wisdom in these Particulars: 1. In chosing his
Officers of State; for a wise King will always chose wise Statesmen, and
nothing does more discover the wisdom and sufficiency of a Prince than to chose
out of his Kingdom wise, able and good men to be his Counselors, Officers of
State, and Ministers of Justice. The number and order of them is here recorded
to set forth his great wisdom. 1. Azariah the Son of Zadok was his principal
Minister of State Cohan signifies sometimes a secular Prince as well as a
Priest, and it is probable he was the Son of another Zadok and not of Zadok the
High Priest.
. 2. Eliphoreph and Ahiah the Sons of Shisha his Secretaries. We read but of
one Secretary of State that David had, 2 Samuel 20.25. whose name was Sheva, and
possibly this is the same man with Shisha, and that he trained up his two Sons
in his own way, and made them so expert therein that Solomon took them both for
his Secretaries; and living in greater splendor than his Father he had two
Secretaries, whereas his Father had but one. 3. Jehoshaphat the Son of Ahitub
the Recorder, or Master of Requests, whose office was to put the King in mind
of Petitions, and possibly to record the memorable Acts of State; he had this
place in David's time, and it seems held it still under Solomon, [See 2 Samuel
20.24.] and so must needs be very ancient. 4. Benaiah was Captain General of
the host in Joab's place. 5. Zadok and Abiathar were the chief Priests; for
though Abiathar was removed from the place of High Priest, [Ch. 2.27.] yet (it
seems) he retained the Title though he executed not the Office. 6. Azariah the
Son of Nathan the Prophet was over the twelve Officers or Purveyers which are
named, v. 7, to 19. 7. Zabud his brother was a principal Officer, and possibly
President of the Kings Council, he was the Kings friend and favorite (as
Hushai was to David, 2 Samuel 15.27.) and had on all occasions free access to
him; from hence it appears that Solomon had Nathan in very high esteem, in that
he put two of his Sons in the highest Offices of the Kingdom, and made one of
them his especial favorite. Nathan had indeed been a faithful Prophet and
servant to David, and discovered to him Adonijah's conspiracy, and gave advice
for the settling Solomon on the Throne, Chapter 1.11. And it is probable that
Nathan's Sons were trained up with Solomon under their Fathers Tuition. 8.
Abishai, who was either Governor of the Kings Household, or Treasurer of it. 9.
Adoniram, who was over the Tribute, and chief receiver of the Kings revenues.
Chapter 4. from 1, to 7.

2. Solomon appointed twelve Officers over all Israel to take care to furnish
his House with a set quantity of provisions of meat and drink for all the
twelve months of the year. Had these great stores that were needful for the
Kings household, been to be gathered out of one place only near the Court, the
people thereabouts might have been overburdened; therefore these
store-gatherers were scattered all over the land, and had Treasure-houses to
store up their provisions in, which in their several months they brought forth
and furnished the Kings house therewith. These Officers were (it seems) the
sons of men of note, and therefore their names and their fathers names are here
set down. Their divisions were not exactly made according to the Tribes (for so
there might have been some inequality) but according to the Commodities of the
soil. The son of Abinadab was over the Region of Dor in Manassehs portion; and
it seems he was a man of great worth, for he married Taphath one of the
daughters of Solomon. Ahimaaz's Province was in Naphtali; he also seems to be
some great man, for he married Basmath the other daughter of Solomon. Solomon's
provision for one day was thirty measures of fine flower, and threescore
measures of meal. The word translated measure is in the Hebrew Cor, now one Cor
contained about ten Ephas, and one Epha about three pecks of our measure, so
that by this account Solomon had for every day a very great quantity both of
flower and meal. Also ten oxen fatted in the stalls, and twenty out of the
pastures; also an hundred sheep, besides Hearts, Robucks, fallow Deer, and
fatted fowls. This store shows that Solomon's household was very great, but
possibly under it are to be comprised his wives households, and such Companies
of Soldiers as attended about the Court, yea and such foreign Princes and
Ambassadors as came from other Countries to his Court, and their retinues.

Thus those Officers provided victuals for King Solomon, and for all that came
to his Table, every man in his mouth, and by this means sufficient provision
was made for them all. 1 King. Chapter 4. from 1, to 26.

3. That wherein Solomon more especially discovered his wisdom was in the
Proverbs, or wise and acute sentences he spoke, (which were three thousand) and
in the Divine Songs or Odes he composed, which were a thousand and five. He
spoke also of trees from the Cedar in Lebanon to the Hysop that springs out of
the wall, and of beasts and of fowl and of creeping things, and of fishes. So
that he read Lectures of natural and moral Philosophy, yea and of Divinity too
to those that were about him, or came to hear his wisdom. He was also an
excellent Poet as appears by those many Songs and Odes Liber odarum quam
ediderat, complectebatur mill, and quinque odas. Non Theologus tantum and
Philosophus sed insignis Poeta. Sunt qui dicunt ex Canticis and Proverblis
Solomonis solum utiliora Spiritus Sancti instinctu reservata esse, and in
libellos illos coacta qui hodie extant. Munsterus.
he composed. It Is like he did dictate his Proverbs and Philosophical
instructions in familiar discourse, which those about him wrote down, and some
of them are lost. But let us be thankeful to God for those that remain, and
labor to make a good use of them. 1 King. 4.32, 33.

As for the Book of Proverbs it contains the chief of those three thousand wise
sentences which he spoke.

The first nine Chapters contain instructions of piety and praises of wisdom,
with exhortations to get it; all which may serve as a large Preface to the
whole Book. Then follow his Proverbs, or choice sentences or wise Apothegmes.
There is sometimes a repetition of the same things which might easily happen by
reason of the several collections of these Proverbs. The verity of some of them
consists in such a generality of truth as stands good, and is for the most part
so, and yet admits of alteration by the change of circumstances. Throughout
this Book Solomon speaks one while in his own name, another while in his
Fathers, then in Wisdom's, elsewhere in his Mothers, and sometimes in Gods name.

1. He seems to speak in his own name in Chapter 1st, 2d, 3d.

2. He sets down the sum of his Father David's instructions, Chapter 4.5, 6, 7.

3. He brings in wisdom speaking, Chapter 8.9.

4. He sets down those Proverbs of his own which he had set in order in his
life time, from Chapter 10. to Chapter 25.

5. Then others are added which were gathered by the servants of King Hezekiah,
from Chapter 25. to Chapter 30.

6. Then follows the Prophecy of Agur, Chapter 30.

7. And lastly, the instructions which his mother gave him, Chapter 31. so that the
collection seems made by sundry persons, and at sundry times.

If we duly consider the Book of Proverbs and Ecclesiastes we may out of them
extract a System of Ethics. Oeconomicks. Politics.


1. Let us consider Solomon's Ethics wherein he teaches a man how he may
become a good man, and so be happy. In order hereunto he instructs him in the
first place to get wisdom whereby he will be directed how to perform all other
duties required of him.

Prove. 2.10, See Job. 28. from v. 12: to the end.
11, 12, 20. Prove. 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 23. Chapter 4.7. Chapter 8.11, 12, 17, 18,
19, 33, 34, 36. Chapter 9.12. Chapter 13.14. Chapter 14.8, 16. Chapter 15.24. Chapter 16.16, 22,
23. Chapter 19.8. Chapter 23.23. Eccles. 2.13, 14. Eccles. 10.2.

2ly. He instructs him in the particular duties he owes 1. To God. 2. To his
Neighbor. 3. To himself.


1. His duties toward God he shows him are these:

1. To remember his Creator in the days of his youth, Eccles. 12.1.

2. To trust Job 5.8, 12. 13. Chapter 13.15.
in God, Prove. 3.5, 26. Chapter 14.26. Chapter 16.3, 20, 33. Chapter 18.10, 11. Chapter 19.21.
Chapter 21.30. Chapter 28.26. Chapter 29.25.

3. To fear Job 28.28.
him, Prove. 1.7. Chapter 8.13. Chapter 9.10. Chapter 10.27. Chapter 14.27. Chapter 15.33. Chapter 16.6.
Chapter 19.23. Chapter 23.17. Eccles. 12.13.

4. To obey him and walk uprightly before him. Chapter 12.28. Chapter 13.6, 21, 22. Chapter
14.11, 14. Chapter 15.6, 9, 29. Chapter 16.8, 31. Chapter 20.7. Chapter 21.15, 21, 27. Chapter
28.9, 13, 20.

2ly. His duties toward man he shows him are these: 1. He must be just and
righteous in all his dealings with men, Prove. 3.33. Chapter 4.18. Chapter 10.6, 7. Chapter
11.1, 18, 19, 20, 21. Chapter 14.34. Chapter 20.10, 23. 2. Faithful in admonishing and
reproving him when there is occasion, and he is called to it. Prove. 9.8, 9. Chapter
11.30. Chapter 12.1, 15. Chapter 13.18. Chapter 15.5, 32. Chapter 17.10. Chapter 19.25. Chapter 24.24,
25. Chapter 25.12. Chapter 27.6. Chapter 28.23. Chapter 29.1. 3. Must be true to him. 1. He
must be no liar, Prove. 4.24. Chapter 12.22. Chapter 19.15. 2. No slanderer nor
talebearer, Chapter 10.18. Chapter 11.13. Chapter 16.28. Chapter 17.9. Chapter 18.8. Chapter 20.19.
Chapter 25.18, 23. Chapter 26.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25. 3. No Flatterer, Prove. 29.5.
4. Loving, Prove. 10.12. Chapter 17.17. Chapter 18.24. Chapter 19.22. Chapter 24.17, 18. 5.
Merciful Job 29. from 12, to 18. Chapter 30.25. Chapter 31. from 16, to 33.
, Chapter 3.3, 27, 28. Chapter 11.17, 24, 25, 26. Chapter 12.10. Chapter 14.21, 31. Chapter 17.5.
Chapter 18.23. Chapter 25.21, 22. Chapter 21.13. Chapter 19.17. Chapter 28.27. Chapter 29.7. Eccles.
11.1, 2. 6. Peaceable, Prove. 17.14. Chapter 26.17. Chapter 16.17. 7. Friendly, Prove.
27.9, 10, 17.


3ly. The duties he must perform, and the graces and virtues he must exercise
in the government of himself, he shows him are these: 1. Prudence and
watchfulness.


Particularly 1. Over his heart, Prove. 4.23. 2. Over his tongue, Prove. 12.13,
16, 18, 25. Chapter 17.20, 27. Chapter 15.7. Chapter 18.4. Chapter 14.3, 23. Chapter 21.23. Chapter
13.3. Chapter 15.2, 4, 23. Chapter 10.19, 20, 21. Chapter 11.12. Chapter 18.21. Chapter 29.11.
Eccles, 3.7. 3. To keep himself from being ensnared by Suretiship, Prove. 6.1,
2, 3. Chapter 11.15. Chapter 17.18. Chapter 22.18.


2. Temperance, Prove. 23.2, 6, 7. Chapter 20.1. Chapter 21.17. Chapter 23.20, 21, 29, 30.
3. Chastity, Prove. 2.16, 17, 18, 19. Chapter 5. from 3, to 14. Chapter 6. from 24, to
34. Chapter 7. from 5, to 11, and 26. Chapter 9.16, 17, 18. Prove. 22.14. Chapter 23.27, 28.
4. Humility, Prove. 3.7, 34. Chapter 6.16, 17, 18. Chapter 11.2. Chapter 13.10. Chapter 15.25.
Chapter 16.5, 18, 19. Chapter 18.12. Chapter 21.4, 24. Chapter 22.4. Chapter 26.12. Chapter 27.2. Chapter
28.14. Chapter 29.23. 5. Sincerity, Prove. 15.8. Chapter 14.14. Chapter 21.27. 6. Meekness,
Prove. 14.17, 29. Chapter 15.1. Chapter 25.15, 28. Chapter 15.18. Chapter 26.4, 5. Chapter 29.20.
Chapter 16.32. Chapter 18.19. Chapter 19.11. Chapter 22.24, 25. Chapter 20.3, 22. Chapter 29.22.
Eccles. 7.9. 7. Diligence in his calling, Eccles. 9.10. Prove. 13.11. Chapter 22.13.
Chapter 6. from 6, to 12. Chapter 10.4, 5, 22. Chapter 19.24. Chapter 20.4. Chapter 12.27. Chapter
18.9. Chapter 27.23. Chapter 26. from 13, to 17. 8. Patience, Prove. 3.11, 12. Chapter
24.10. 9. Moderation of affection to the things of the world, Eccles. 1.8, 14.
Eccles. 2.1, 2, 11, 12. Eccles. 9.11. Prove. 30.7, 8. 10. Cheerfulness and
contentedness with his condition, Prove. 17.22. Prove. 15.15. Chapter 12.25. Eccles.
2.24. Eccles. 3.12, 13, 22. Eccles. 4.6. Eccles. 5.18, 19. Eccles. 6.1, 2.
Eccles. 8.15. Eccles. 9.7. Eccles. 11.8, 9, 10.
Lastly, He must associate himself with those that are good, Prove. 13.20. Chapter
14.7, 9. Chapter 28.19. Chapter 12.26.

2. Let us consider Solomon's Oeconomicks, wherein he instructs a man how
righly to order and govern his family.

A Family usually consists of these Relations, Husband. Wife. Parents.
Children. Masters. Servants.


Solomon instructs all these in their particular duties: 1. He teaches the
Husband to be very thankful to God if he has blessed him with a good wife,
Prove. 18.22. Chapter 19.14. Chapter 11.16. Chapter 12.4. Chapter 31. from 10, to the end. 2. He
teaches him how he should carry himself toward his Wife, viz. 1. Wisely as the
guide of her youth, Prove. 2.17. 2. Faithfully, Prove. 5.15, 20. Eccles. 9.9. 3.
Lovingly and cheerfully, Prove. 5.17, 18, 19. Prove. 17.1. Prove. 15.17.
2. He teaches the Wife, 1. To be faithful to her Husband, remembering she is
tied to him by the Covenant of God, Prove. 2.17. 2. Not to be brawling and
contentious, Prove. 27.15. Prove. 21.9, 19. Chapter 19.13. 3. To be prudent and
discreet in ordering her domestic affairs, Prove. 11.22. Chapter 14.1.
3. He instructs Parents in their duties, he shows them that they owe to their
Children, 1. Instruction, Prove. 1.8, 9, 10, 15. Chapter 22.6. 2. Provision, Prove.
13.22. 3. Correction, Prove. 13.24. Chapter 19.18. Chapter 22.15. Chapter 23.13, 14. Chapter
29.17.
4. He shows Children that they owe to their Parents obedience, and care to
please them, that so they may be a comfort to them, Prove. 10.1. Chapter 13.1. Chapter
20.20. Chapter 23.22, 24, 25. Chapter 28.7. Chapter 30.17. Chapter 15.20. Chapter 17.25. Chapter 19.13.
Chapter 27.11. 5. He teaches Masters to carry themselves wisely toward their
servants, Prove. 29.12.21. 6. He shows Servants that they owe to their Masters.
1. Faithfulness, Prove. 25.13. Chapter 13.17. 2. Diligence, Prove. 10.26. Chapter 22.29.



3ly. We come now to his Politics, wherein he directs a man how he may be a
good Magistrate. The qualifications of a good Magistrate he sets down, 1.
Negatively, showing what he must not be: 1. Not lascivious, Prove. 31.3. 2. Not
riotous, Prove. 31.4, 5. Eccles. 10.16, 17. 3. Not false, Prove. 17.7. 4. Not an
oppressor, Prove. 22.22, 23. Chapter 23.10, 11. 5. Not a rejecter of good counsel,
Eccles. 4.13. 6. Not a taker of bribes, Prove. 15.27. Chapter 18.16. Chapter 19.6. 7.
Not harkening to lies, Prove. 29.12.
2. Affirmatively, showing what he ought to be. 1. Truly pious and religious
toward God, Prove. 29.2. Chapter 16.12. 2. Just, Prove. 24.23. Chapter 17.15. Prove.
29.14. Eccles. 4.1. Eccles. 5.8. Prove. 18.5. Chapter 28.21. Chapter 31.8, 9. Prove.
28.15. Chapter 21.15. Chapter 22.22. 3. Merciful, Prove. 20 28.
3. He shows what duties those that are under authority owe to their
Magistrates, 1. Reverence, Prove. 24.21. 2. Obedience in lawful things, Eccles.
8.4.



And so much concerning the Proverbs of Solomon.

SECT. XIV.
SOlomon's fame being now spread far and wide, the Queen of Sheba (a Country
that lay South See Mat. 12.42.
, and far remote from Jerusalem, probably in Arabia the happy) hearing of his
renown, and the glorious Temple he had built for the name of the Lord, she (out
of her noble spirit) took a long and tedious journey (sparing neither pains nor
cost) and came to Jerusalem to see him, and hear his wisdom. She came with a
great train, and with many Camels laden with Spices, Gold, Precious stones, and
such rich things to present to Solomon; and being come she communed with him,
and propounded to him many hard and difficult questions to make trial of his
wisdom, and for her own information. And Solomon resolved all her questions,
there was nothing so dark or hard propounded by her to him that was hid from
his knowledge or understanding. When she had been there some time, and had
diligently observed the great evidences of his wisdom, and had seen the
glorious Temple he had built, and all the Courts, and other excellent things
thereunto appertaining, (so far as by a stranger they might be seen) with the
other stately Palaces he had built, and particularly that stately Terrace or
Gallery whereby he ascended from his own Palace to the outward Court of the
Temple, (the pillars on each side being made of This is called the Kings Entry,
2 King. 6.18.
precious wood (Chapter 9.12.) and had observed what a Royal house he kept, and the
variety and plenty of dishes at his Table, the attendance of his servants, and
the richness and costliness of their attire according to their several degrees
and places, and what plenty and variety of Plate, bread and wine, his
Cup-bearers and Butlers set out, and the sitting of his Courtiers and Servants
at Table to eat, and in what decent order all things were managed and disposed,
there was no more spirit in her, she was so astonished with admiration: And she
said unto the King, It was a true report I heard of thee in my own Country, and
of thy wisdom and glory: But I did not believe it till I came hither and saw it
with my own eyes. And now I can truly say that the one half was not told me of
what I here find. Thy wisdom and prosperity far exceeds what I heard of it.
Happy are thy subjects, happy are thy servants that stand continually before
thee, and hear thy wisdom. Blessed be the Lord thy God who set his favor upon
thee, and advanced thee to the Throne of thy Father, and made thee King over
Israel, his peculiar people, that thou should execute the office of a King
for him and under him as his deputy. It Is a manifest sign that the Lord thy God
loved Israel, in that he has made thee King over them, to do judgment and
justice, and to manage the affairs of the Kingdom with so much prudence and
righteousness. It Is a great sign that God intends to establish your Nation, and
to make them a lasting and a long flourishing people, when he sets such wise
and good Governors over them.

Then she presented the King with some rare jewels and precious stones, and
with an hundred and twenty Talents of Gold, and with very great store of
excellent spices, such as had not been brought thither before. Solomon kindly
accepted her presents, and fully requited her for them, and gave her of his
Royal bounty some rare and precious things, and denied her not any thing she
desired of him. So she took her leave of him, and returned with her servants to
her own Country.

1 King. Chapter 10. from v. 1, to 11. and v. 13.

2 Chronicles. Chapter 9. from v. 1, to 10. and v. 12.

SECT. XV.
HItherto we have seen the singular piety, the extraordinary wisdom, and the
wonderful prosperity and glory of King Solomon, who might well be called
Jedidjah, the beloved of God, 2 Samuel 12.15. But alas! we come now to speak of
that which is strange and wonderful to be found in Solomon, viz. his revolt
from God in the latter part of his life, and after he had received so many
signal and extraordinary favors from him, the Lord was pleased to permit him
to fall Labi Deus eum voluit ne prudentiae humanae nimium tribueretur. Anonym.
that all posterity might learn how frail man is, (even the wisest of men) when
left to himself, and if God withdraw his supporting hand from him. The occasion
of his fall was his inordinate loving of many strange women (besides the
daughter of Pharaoh) women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and
Hittites. So that he sinned first in having so many wives contrary to the Law,
Deuteronomy. 17.17. Neither shall he multiply wives to himself.

2ly. In that his wives and concubines were strange women (not Israelites) and
of Idolatrous Nations, and such as God had charged the Israelites not to mix in
marriage with, lest they should turn their hearts from him to their Idols,
Exodus: 34.16. David had but six wives, [see 2 Samuel 3.] but Solomon had such a
prodigious number as scarce ever was heard of. The Text says 700 wives, and 300
concubines. In Cant. 6.8. he mentions only threescore Queens, and fourscore
Concubines, and Virgins without number. So that possibly he had but threescore
wives or Queens (whom by marrying he had made Princesses if they were not so
before) and the rest (that made up the number 700) were young maidens and
virgins that attended on them. He had also fourscore Concubines Uxores hae
erant secundariae ac legitima.
, or wives of an inferior degree, and they had maidens to attend them that
made up their number 300.

3ly. He loved them too inordinately Disce hinc carnis affectus non obsequendo
sed potius reluctando and obtundendo imminui: nam cum eis quis cesserit indies
majores and vehementiores illos experitur. P. Martyr.
, and (which is strange) in his old age Solomon in senectate otio marcescens,
insanis amoribus operam dabat.
, when those affections use to languish in others, it seems they were strong in
him.

4ly. He permitted them to worship Idols; they by their cunning and subtilty
(taking advantage of his weakness in his old age) won upon him to give way to
their Idolatry. Not that he was ever brought to esteem their Idols as Gods, or
that he himself did worship them; (for if he had done so, it is like he would
have brought them into the Temple) but he gave way to the open and public
Idolatrous worship of his wives, yea furthered it, by suffering them to build
Temples for their Idols; and thus his Idolatrous wives turned his heart from
the Commandments of God, which enjoined him to root out Idolatry; but (it
seems) his carnal love to them devouring his zeal for God; he was so far from
rooting it out that he permitted it, and thereupon is said to have followed
Dicitur sequutus Deos alienos quod eorum cultum non repulcrit. Debuit quatenus
vir ab Idololatria uxores reprimere, quatenus vero Rex ditionem suam in vero
Dei cultu retinere. Horum neutrum praestitit, sed uxorum blanditiis dilinitus,
Templa and Fana extruxit, and impensas ad Sacrificia and Sacerdotes
suppeditavit.
after Ashtaroth See Judge. 2.13.
the Goddess of the Zidonians, and Milcom Levit. 18.21.
or Molech the Abomination of the Ammonites, namely because he connived at the
worship of these Idols. And (to the great aggravation of his guilt) he
permitted V. 7. Aedificavit, scil. permisit ut uxores aedificarent. Non
increpavit eas.
a Temple or an Image, or both to be built for Chemosh Numb. 21.29.
(the Abomination of Moab) and for Molech on Mount Olivet And there it seems
they continued till Josiahs days, 2 King. 23.13.
nigh unto Jerusalem, even in the very face and as it were to affront the
Temple of the living God. And though at first possibly he granted this favor
but only to two or three of his Idolatrous wives, yet the rest by degrees so
far wrought upon him that he was fain to gratify all of them that sought to
him for it, and undoubtedly many of the people were hereby ensnared. And thus
he showed that his heart was not so upright with God as his Father David's was.
For though David was guilty of many gross sins, yet he never yielded to any
Idolatry, but kept the worship and service of God pure all his days. And a
great aggravation of Solomon's guilt it was that he turned from observing the
Commandments of the Lord who had in so extraordinary a manner twice appeared to
him, viz. once at Gibeon, [Ch. 3.5.] and a second time at Jerusalem, [Ch. 9.2.]
and had commanded him particularly to take heed of this thing, namely not to go
after other Gods. The Lord therefore had just cause to be angry with him for
this, and accordingly he sent Ahiah the Shilonite or some other Prophet to him
to speak to him after this manner: Thus says the Lord, Forasmuch as thou have
done this, and have not kept my Covenant A Covenant when applied to God
signifies a Law appointed or enjoined to be kept, and that with promise of
reward to them that keep it, and of penalty to such as transgress it. Deuteronomy.
29.9, 25.
, and my statutes which I commanded thee, I will surely rend the greatest part
of thy Kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant. But I will not do it
in thy days because of my promise to David thy Father, [2 Samuel 7. from v. 12,
to 16.] but I will rend it out of the hand of thy Son, and so thou shall be
punished Monentur hinc Parents ut sancte vivant ne filiis poenas intempestive
attrahant.
in him. Yet I will not rend away the whole Kingdom from him, but will give him
one He speaks here of one of the Tribes that belonged to the Kingdom of Israel
considered as separate from the Kingdom of Judah, which in regard of its
eminency was reckoned apart from the rest of the Tribes. See 1 Samuel 11.8. So
much also of Simeon as lay within Judah was comprised under Judah. See Josh.
19. from 1, to 9.
of the Tribes of Israel (viz. Benjamin) besides the Tribe of Judah. [See 2 Chronicles. 11.12.] And this I will do for David my servants sake, and for
Jerusalem's sake which I have chosen for the place of my public worship, and
the seat of the Kings from whom the Messiah (who I have promised) is to come.

1 King. 11. from v. 1, to 14.

SECT. XVI.
SOlomon (as it is conceived) was so terrified with this threatening that he
repented of his sin, and as an evidence of his repentance wrote his Book called
Ecclesiastes, in which he publishes to the world his remorse for his former
sins and follies, and the vanities to which he had been too intemperately
addicted. Ecclesiastes, or the Preaching Soul, truly penitent, gathering it
self to the Church, and by wholesome admonitions gathering others also that were
going astray after vanity.
In this Book he reflects upon the honors, pleasures and wealth he had so
abundantly enjoyed; the errors and miscarriages he had fallen into; the
observations he had made of things Natural, Moral, Domestical, Civil, Sensual
and Divine; and the curious enquiry he had made after true happiness. And in
the first six Chapters he shows wherein it does not consist, and in the six
last wherein it does.

And first, he shows it does not consist in knowledge, either Natural or Moral.

2. Not in pleasures or sensual delights.

3. Not in honor, greatness and power, which is so far from making men happy
that without the fear of God to correct and temper it, it is ordinarily the
occasion of much wickedness in them that have it, and of much misery to others.

4. Not in an outward formal religiousness.

5. Not in riches and great possessions which are often snares and occasions of
much hurt to the possessours, who must leave them, and many times they know not
to whom.

Then he shows wherein man's happiness does consist: 1. In contentation of mind,
and the free and regular, and joyful fruition of Gods blessings and the
comforts he gives us with humility, moderation and thankfulness.

2. In a quiet and humble acquiescence in the will of God.

3. In sincerity of heart in the worship of God, and in a due care that we
offend not in vows, prayers, and addresses unto him.

4. In patience of spirit under all oppressions.

5. In a composed preparedness of mind to undergo afflictions.

6. In a pious and prudent behavior toward all men, that so we may preserve
our names from calumny, and our persons from danger.

7. In meekness, charity and patience toward such as offend us, considering
humane frailty.

8. In a due deportment of our selves toward our Superiors, that our lives
may not be made uncomfortable to us by their dispeasure.

9. In a practical prudence or wisdom rightly to judge and discern of times
wherein things are to be done.

10. In submission to the holy and invincible Providence of God, admiring his
works, and adoring his judgments.

11. In a conscionable industriousness in our particular Callings.

And lastly, he concludes that in old age (elegantly described by him) and at
death it will appear that to fear the Lord and keep his commandments is both
the duty and the happiness of man, and the chief thing wherein it consists.

And so much of the Book of Ecclesiastes.

SECT. XVII.
GOD threatened Solomon, 2 Samuel 7.13, 14, 15. That if he committed iniquity he
would chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of
men, but his mercy should not depart from him. And accordingly he now stirred
up three Adversaries Though Solomon's enemies had herein their own ends, yet
the Lord used them as instruments of his Justice to punish his revolt.
against him: 1. Hadad the Edomite: When David subdued the Edomites, it is said,
2 Samuel 8.14. He put Garrisons through all Edom, and they became his servants.
And at this time (as it seems) whilst Joab pursued his victory, slaying all the
males where he came, Hadad then (being very young) was hid, and afterward
secretly carried away by some of his Fathers servants (who also took some out
of Paran that lay in the way to attend him) into Egypt, where he was kindly
entertained by Pharaoh, who gave him an house and lands, and appointed him
victuals, and a constant Table; and in time he came to be in so great favor
with him that he gave him to wife his own Queens sister who bare him a Son that
was educated in Pharaoh's house. When this Hadad heard in Egypt that David and
Joab were dead, he desired leave of Pharaoh to return into his own Country.
Pharaoh asked him what he lacked there? He said nothing: However I desire to
return to my own Country that I may recover my Kingdom again. Pharaoh hearing
this, kindly dismissed him, and he came to his own Country where he was
received for their King. Yet it is manifest he attempted nothing against Solomon
for a long time after this. For till Solomon's fall in his old age, his enemies
stirred not, see 1 King. 5.4. so that it is like Hadad at first made some
Covenant with Solomon, and was his Tributary for his Kingdom, but at last he
stirred against him and created him much trouble, yet he was not able quite to
shake off his yoke, for the Edomites continued Tributaries to the Kings of
Judah till Jehoram's reign, 2 Chronicles. 21.10.

2ly, God stirred up another enemy against Solomon, viz. Rezon, who when David
had gotten the better of his Master in battle, and had vanquished the Syrians,
[see 2 Samuel 10.18.] he gathered together such of them as were put to flight,
ande made himself Captain over them; and for some time (it is like) lived by
robbing and pillaging, till Solomon's declining days. And though it is not like
that Solomon lost any thing of that which his Father had gotten till himself
fell from God, yet then (it seems) Rezon took courage to set upon Damascus
(into which David had put a Garrison, 2 Samuel 8.6.) and took it from Solomon,
and there reigned as King. So that Solomon had now one enemy in the North, and
another in the South.

3ly, A third enemy whom God stirred up against him was Jeroboam his own
servant, of the Tribe of Ephraim, who had been raised and preferred by him. And
the occasion of his rise was this: Solomon when he built Millo (of which see
Chapter 9.15.) and repaired the breaches in Zion the City of David, going out often
to see The Masters eye (they say) makes the horse fat, and the servant to sweat.
his workmen, and to encourage them to diligence, he observed Jeroboam (who was
then but a young man) to be very active and industrious in those labors and
services he was set about; whereupon Solomon taking a liking to him, preferred
him, and in time made him Receiver or Treasurer for all the Kings revenue in
the two Tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh: Upon a time when he went out of
Jerusalem to execute his Office, it happened that the Prophet Ahijah He who
with some others penned the Acts of Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 9.29.
the Shilonite (who had clad himself with a new garment) met him and desired
some private conference with him, and when they were alone, he took off his new
garment, and rent it into twelve pieces (according to the number of the Tribes
of Israel) and gave ten of them to Jeroboam, saying, Thus says the Lord, I
will rend the Kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten Tribes to
thee, because they Solomon giving way to his wives Idolatry proved a snare to
the people, and occasioned their revolt from God, and in this rent the people
suffered as well as Rehoboam, the rent in the Kingdom proving an occasion of
continual Wars between Judah and Israel, which brought in many miseries from
foreign Nations upon both Kingdoms.
have forsaken me, and worshipped Ashtaroth and Chemosh, and Moloch, and have
not walked in my ways to do that which was right in mine eyes, and to keep my
statutes and judgments as did David my servant. Howbeit I will not take the
Kingdom from Solomon while he lives, but he shall be King thereof all his days,
for David my servants sake (whom I chose) because he kept my commandments and
my statutes. But I will take the Kingdom out of his Sons hands, viz. ten Tribes
of it, and will give them unto thee. And unto his Son will I give one entire
Tribe, (viz. Judah with Simeon Ac proinde Synecdochice includitur. Nam e
Benjamine tantum pars penes eum fuit. Jeroboamo cesserunt Bethel and Ephraim
quae erant oppida Benjaminis.
that is mixed with it, together with the greatest part of the Tribe of
Benjamin) that David my servant may have a light always before me in Jerusalem,
that is, a Royal glory shining in one of his posterity, (who as a light may
shine before the people and direct them) as long as that Kingdom shall last;
[See 2 Samuel 21.17. 1 King. 15.4.] and that in Jerusalem where my Temple is
built, and where my name is solemnly called upon, and which is called after my
name, the City of God. And I will take thee and make thee King over the Ten
Tribes, and thou shall be a Sovereign King and not under any Superior on
earth, so that thou may reign according as thy soul desires. And if thou will hearken unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do
that which is right in my sight to keep my statutes and commandments as David
my servant did, I will be with thee and build thee a sure house, that is, so
establish thy Kingdom that it shall continue in thy posterity as I promised to
David. And though I will by this division of the Kingdom sorely afflict the
house of David, yet I will not do it for ever. For though they shall be carried
into captivity, yet they shall be brought back again, and the Messiah shall at
last be born of the seed of David, who shall continue to reign most gloriously
for ever.

Ahijah having delivered what God commanded him to Jeroboam, took his leave of
him. How Jeroboam was affected with this surprising message we may easily
imagine. It seems he presently imparted it to some of his friends, and possibly
thereby designed to draw off their hearts from Solomon and to make a party for
himself. Solomon it seems got some intelligence hereof, and thereupon sought to
kill him. Jeroboam hearing of the Kings fierce anger against him, fled
presently into Egypt to Shishack the present King thereof, who (as it is
probable) was Solomon's wife's brother, and possibly was much offended with him
for taking so many wives besides his sister; and therefore for that or some
other reason he gave entertainment to Jeroboam, and he continued there till
Solomon's death.

1 King. Chapter 11. from v. 14, to 41.

SECT. XVIII.
SOlomon now having reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years, died and
slept with his fathers, and was buried in the City of David his Father. He left
only three children (though he had so many wives and concubines) viz. two
daughters who were married to two of his own subjects (as we may see, Sect.
13.) and one Son, viz. Rehoboam who reigned in his stead.

The Acts of Solomon were written by Nathan, Ahijah, and Iddo, Prophets that
lived in his time, 2 Chronicles. 9.29. But this Book of the Acts of Solomon seems to
have been some complete History not now extant, of the reign of Solomon
gathered out of the several writings of these Prophets, and other records of
those times, wherein possibly many passages of his life were set down not
expressed in the Sacred History. And among other things possibly that of his
repentance, which though it be not here so clearly mentioned, yet it may be
gathered from 2 Chronicles. 11.17. For three years they walked in the ways of David
and Solomon his Son: where Solomon and David are jointly commended. Some also
collect it from that promise, Psalm. 89.33. Nevertheless I will not utterly take
away my loving kindness from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. But
especially from the Book of Ecclesiastes, which questionless was written as a
public testimony of his Repentance. And in the 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. we find that
all the Penmen of the holy Scripture are said to have been holy men of God. And
it is probably conjectured that Solomon before his death did throw down
Idolatry, and restrained his wives from it, in that the people who set
themselves to defame his Government complained of no such matter to Rehoboam,
Chap. 12.4.

1 King. Chapter 11. from 41, to the end.

2 Chronicles. Chapter 9. from v. 29, V. 29. In the visions of Iddo] that is, such
Visions and Revelations as were registered, being by Gods Spirit manifested to
Iddo. It seems this Iddo who wrote the History of Rehoboam, Chapter 12.15: did also
join the story of Jeroboam therewith, against whom he wrote.
to the end.

SECT. XIX.
Kings of Israel.
JEroboam being chosen King by the Ten Tribes, The first King of Israel
JEROBOAM.
he first repaired and fortified Shechem, and built himself a Palace there, and
made it the chief place of his residence, and fortified Penuel on the other
side of Jordan, and placed a Garrison in it. And being now settled in his
Kingdom, though God had promised him by Ahijah the Prophet [ Chapter 11.38.] that
if he would walk in his ways he would be with him, and build him a sure house
as he had done for David; yet having no confidence in this promise he began to
think that if he should suffer his subjects to go up to Jerusalem to sacrifice
there (as God commanded) they would soon fall off from him to Rehoboam. For
first, he apprehended they would be in danger to be seized upon as Traitors
when they came up to Jerusalem if they did not renounce their allegiance to
him. 2ly, The Priests and Levites, and their Brethren of Judah he thought would
be continually setting before them the sin of falling off from their lawful
Sovereign. 3ly, He supposed the very sight of the Temple, and the worship of
God there celebrated would much win upon them to come over to the Kingdom of
Judah. And if their hearts were once turned to Rehoboam, he thought they would
be sure to kill him; and not having faith to believe that God would either
prevent or divert these dangers from him, (if he were faithful to him) he
resolved to set up some other way of worship for his subjects, that they should
not need to go up to Jerusalem to worship there. And thus that very thing which
God appointed to keep the people of the Jews in one uniform way of worship, (
viz. that there should be but one Altar, and one place of Sacrifices, namely at
the Temple at Jerusalem) that proved the occasion of setting up a new way of
Worship. Wherefore Jeroboam by the advice of those about him made two Golden
Calves, in imitation of the Egyptians Idol-gods, among whom he had lived of
late, and with whom it is like he desired to hold a strict league and amity, and
that possibly was another politic reason that induced him to make such Idols
as these. However he pretended the peoples ease and accommodation to be the
chief thing that moved him to take this course, and like a kind and indulgent
Prince told them it was too much for them to go up thrice a year, (viz. at the
solemn Feasts) to Jerusalem, and therefore he had found out a way to save them
that labor, and accordingly had made two Golden Calves for them to worship in
their own Country. And these he had made not to represent any false God but as
remembrances and representations of the true God of Israel who brought them up
out of the land of Egypt; and therefore he was not afraid to say to them these
be thy Gods O Israel. When he had given them this account of his proceedings,
he placed one of his Calves in Bethel a City By reason of Jeroboams impiety the
Prophet calls it Bethaven, Hos. 10.5.
belonging to the Tribe of Benjamin, but it seems it had revolted to him, and
so was now in his power, and the Southern border of his Kingdom; the other Calf
he placed at Dan, which was the Northern border. And so he provided that his
subjects both in the North and South should have a place to worship at. But
this thing became a grievous sin, and high provocation to the Almighty, and
drew all Israel from God into Idolatry, and therefore it is put into his style,
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat who made Israel to sin, 2 King. 10.31. For the people
did presently yield to worship these his Idols both at Dan and Bethel. And
further, instead of Gods Temple at Jerusalem he made a Temple on one of the
high places or mountains where Altars were reared to commit Idolatry thereon;
and he made Priests for the high places, and for the Devils Such devotion as is
not done to the true God is done to Devils, see Lev. 17.7. Idols there so
called.
, and for the Calves which he had made [2 Chronicles. 11.15.] of the meanest of the
people, and such as were not of the Tribe of Levi but of other Tribes. Indeed
the basest of the people were Priests good enough for his Golden Calves, but
because he pretended to have erected them for the worship of the true God, this
also is charged upon him as a provocation. And he ordained a Feast to be kept
in the eighth month in imitation of the Feast of Tabernacles which God ordained
to be kept on the 15th day of the 7th month, Levit. 23.34. he ordains it to be
kept in another month, that the people might not take it for the same Feast of
Tabernacles, and so think themselves obliged to go to Jerusalem to keep it. And
to grace this Idolatrous worship that he had set up, even he himself did
sacrifice upon the Altar that he had built, to work in his peoples minds an
higher esteem of it, and also burnt incense to his Idols, whereby he usurpt the
Priests office So did Uzziah, 2 Chro. 26.16. intrude himself into the Priests
office.
.

Whilst he was thus sacrificing at Bethel a certain Prophet sent by God out of
Judah came unto him, (thus timely did the Lord give him warning, and called him
to repentance) and in the zeal and fervency of his spirit, he cried in the word
of the Lord (inventing nothing of his own head) against this Altar, saying, O
Altar, Altar, thus says the Lord, Behold a child shall be born unto the house
of David, Josiah About 300 years after this Prophecy was fulfilled. See 2
King. 23.16.
by name, and upon thee shall he offer the bones of the Priests of the
High Places, that do now or shall hereafter burn incense upon thee; so that
this Altar shall one day have a goodly sacrifice burnt upon it, viz. the bones
of the Priests that sacrificed upon it, and the defiling and polluting of this
Altar in this manner will be a sacrifice very pleasing unto God. Possibly O
Jeroboam (says he) thou will not believe this, therefore I will give thee a
sign from the Lord that this shall certainly come to pass: Behold this Altar
shall now be rent in sunder, and the ashes upon it shall fall upon the ground,
to signify the utter demolishing of it hereafter. Jeroboam hearing this, and
being enraged at the Prophet, put forth his hand from the Altar (where he was
burning incense) and cried out lay hold on him; and immediately his hand was
dried up, and the flesh withered, and the sins shrank, so that he was
disabled from hurting the Prophet himself, and the people were scared from
obeying their King in what he required. And immediately the Altar was rent, and
clave asunder. The King then entreated the Prophet to pray 1 King. 13.6. To
entreat the face of one that is offended, is earnestly to desire the change of
his countenance, and that his angry look may be turned into smiling.
for him that his hand might be restored, which he accordingly did, and it was
upon his prayer restored, and became whole as it was before. The King was so
taken with this kindness that he invited the Prophet to come home with him and
to refresh himself, and he would reward him for it. The Prophet replied, If
thou will give me half thine house I will not go with thee, neither will I eat
bread or drink water in this City; for so God has commanded me, intending I
should show my detestation of your Idolatry by avoiding all communion with such
Idolaters. And he has commanded me also that I should not return the way I
came, but some other way, as abhorring the very way that brought me to the
sight of such abominations. So he returned another way, and not the way by
which he came to Bethel. Now there dwelt an old Prophet in Bethel whose Sons
came to him and told him all that this Prophet had said to the King and what he
had done to the Altar, and in healing Jeroboams hand, the old Prophet presently
enquired which way this Prophet went, and commanding his Ass to be presently
sadled he rode thereon, and following after him found him sitting under an oak,
and then invited him to come home with him to eat bread. He told him could not
do it, for he was expressly forbidden it by the Lord. The old Prophet said I am
a Prophet as well as thou art, and an Angel spoke unto me by the command of the
Lord that I should bring thee back to my house to eat bread, and drink water.
But he lied unto him. However the poor deluded Prophet upon this did go back
with him, and did eat bread and drunk water. And as they sat at the Table the
word of the Lord came to the Prophet that fetched him back by some internal
inspiration, or Prophetic ecstasy, whereby he was (as it were) constrained to
denounce against his deluded guest the judgment that would fall upon him for
coming back, and eating and drinking with him, and so consequently to condemn
himself for the gross lie he had told. He tells him thus says the Lord, seeing
thou have not kept my commandment, but came back and have eaten and drunk in
this place that I forbad thee, behold thy carcass shall not come into the
Sepulcher of thy Fathers, and thou shall not die among thy own kindred, nor be
buried with thy progenitors; which intimated to him that he should die in his
return before he gat home to his own land; and this was a gracious warning to
him that he might repent of his sin before his death. So when they had eaten
and drunken, the old Prophet caused his own Ass to be sadled for the Prophet he
had brought back, and so dismissed him. He was not gone far from the old
Prophets house before a Lion met him and slew him, and his body being fallen in
the way, the Ass stood by it, as also the Lion. That the Ass should not fly
from the Lion, nor the Lion prey upon the living Ass, nor the dead body of the
Prophet, but that both of them should stand rather as a guard to preserve it
from other creatures, and that the Ass should stay there (as it were) on
purpose to carry back the dead Prophets body to Bethel to be buried there,
these are strange passages of Providence, and do show that 'twas not hunger
that provoked the Lion to kill the Prophet, but the overruling hand of God,
and that God had regard to the Prophets body, and would preserve it for burial,
though he testified his displeasure against his sin for the warning of others.
And behold men passed by and saw the carcass cast in the way, and the Lion
standing by the carcass, and they came and told it in the City where the old
Prophet dwelt, who thereupon said undoubtedly it is the man of God that was
disobedient unto the word of the Lord, therefore the Lord has delivered him
unto the Lion which has slain him as the Lord threatened. So he went
immediately and found his carcass cast in the way, and the Ass and the Lion
standing by it, so that the Lion had neither eaten the carcass, nor torn the
Ass. The Lion it seems ran away immediately upon the old Prophets coming, as
having now done what he stayed for, and so the old Prophet took and carried the
dead body of the other Prophet to be buried, and laid it in his own sepulcher
which he had prepared for himself, and he and his sons mourned over him, and
said, alas my brother. See Jer. 22.18. And the old Prophet further spoke unto
his Sons, saying, When I am dead bury me in the sepulcher wherein this man of
God is buried, lay my bones by his bones, that so my bones may lie at rest, and
not be dug up and burnt by Josiah. And for the accomplishing of this end, he
caused a superscription to be engraven on the Sepulcher, whereby it might be
known who was buried there; and herein he had his desire, as we may see 2 King.
23.17, 18. He further declared that the saying of the deceased Prophet which he
uttered by the command of God against the Altar of Bethel, and against all the
houses of the high places which were in the cities of the Kingdom of Israel
(afterward called the Kingdom of Samaria) shall surely come to pass. But
notwithstanding this fair warning Jeroboam returned not from his Idolatry and
evil ways. One would have thought that his hand being miraculously stricken
dead, and as miraculously healed upon the prayer of the Prophet, he should
presently with that hand have plucked down his Idolatrous Calves and Altars,
but neither that nor the cleaving of the Altar asunder, nor the strange death
that befell the young Prophet (whereby the truth of what he had spoken was
mightily confirmed) could prevail with him to forsake that Idolaty, whereby he
sought to assure the Kingdom to himself and his posterity, but therein he was
miserably deceived, for this Idolatry was not only the ruin of his own house,
but of the whole Kingdom of Israel at last, and the cause of their captivity.
And possibly from the violent death of the Prophet that came from Judah he took
occasion to harden himself in his evil ways, and not to regard his threatenings.
And thereupon being obstinate in his Idolatry, he cast off the Priests that
were of the lineage of Aaron, and the Levites, and made of the lowest of the
people Priests of the High Places, even whosoever would offer himself he
consecrated him, and made him a Priest of that order. Whereupon many Priests
and Levites leaving their possessions which they had in those parts, retired
into Jury, and were followed by all such out of every Tribe of Israel who set
their minds upon the true worship of God.

Some years after his Son Abijah fell sick at Tirzah; for though Shechem was at
first the Royal City of Jeroboams Kingdom, yet afterward (as it seems) he
built some stately Palace for himself at Tirzah, a goodly and pleasant City, to
which Solomon alludes, Cant. 6.4. and so both Jeroboam and the other Kings of
Israel that succeeded him, did usually keep their Courts there, till Samaria
was built by Omri. From thence therefore he sends his wife to Shiloh to the
Prophet Ahijah who first told him he should come to the Kingdom, and was now
blind with old age. He appoints her to go disguised lest if the Prophet knew
her he should either refuse to answer her (being offended with their Idolatry)
or else give her such an answer as they should be loath to hear, he enjoins her
therefore to go to him in this manner, and to carry a small present to him,
viz. ten loaves, and cakes, and a bottle of honey, that by so small a present
she might be thought to be only the wife of some poor Countryman, and only
came to ask him what should become of her Son that was sick. It Is to be
observed that he sends her not to him to beg his prayers for the child, though
he had had experience of the efficacy of a Prophets prayers in the miraculous
restoring of his own hand. It seems his obstinacy in his Idolatry discouraged
him from seeking such a favor from him. His wife going accordingly to Shiloh,
the Lord by the secret inspiration of his Spirit informed Ahijah of her coming,
and that she would feign her self to be another woman, and tells him what he
shall say to her. Accordingly when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet as she
came into the door of his house, he said to her, Come in thou wife of Jeroboam,
why feignest thou thy self to be another woman? I am sent from the Lord to thee
with heavy Tidings, go tell Jeroboam, thus says the Lord God of Israel, I
exalted thee from among the people, and made thee King over Israel, and rent
ten of the Tribes away from the house of David, and gave them unto thee, and
yet thou have not been as my servant David who kept my commandments, and
followed me with all his heart, and (as to my worship) did only that which was
right in my sight. But thou have done evil above all that were before thee.
Saul though a wicked man was no Idolater; Solomon though by his wives
instigation he permitted Idolatry, yet he was not an Idolater himself, but thou
have made thee other Gods Representations of God are accounted as Gods.
, and molten Images to provoke me to anger, and have cast my Law behind thy
back, therefore behold I will bring evil upon thy house, and will so utterly
destroy it, and all that belong to it, that I will not leave in it so much as a
dog to piss against the wall, and will destroy both him that is shut up at
home, or left abroad in the field, and will take away the remnant of the house
of Jeroboam as a man takes away dung till it be all removed; for being a
noisome and filthy thing he will take it every whit away The accomplishment of
this, see Chap. 15.29.
. Furthermore let thy husband know, that him of the house of Jeroboam that
dies in the City, the dogs shall eat, and him that dies in the field the
fowls of the air shall eat Intimating they should die unhappy deaths, and not
have the honor of burial.
, for the Lord has spoken it. Arise therefore and go thy ways home and as soon
as thy feet enter into thy house (which is in the City Tirzah) thy Son shall
die; and this judgment is the beginning of your sorrows: But all Israel shall
mourn for him, and he shall be buried with lamentation, and he only shall come
to the grave, because of all Jeroboams family, in him only there is found some
good thing, some seeds of piety, and the fear of the Lord, and consequently
some regard to the true worship of God. Moreover I must tell thee the Lord will
raise up a King Viz. Baasha who made a conspiracy against Nadab, Jeroboam's
Son, and slew him in the second year of his reign, and destroyed all the house
of Jeroboam, Chapter 15.27.
over Israel that shall cut off the house of Jeroboam. If thou ask when or
at what time this shall come to pass? I answer, very quickly, and sooner than
you do expect. And the Lord will smite Israel as a reed is shaken in the water.
He will afflict both Prince and people with uncessant wars and troubles, both
intestine and foreign, so that they shall never abide long in any settled
condition, but as reeds that grow in the water are continually shaken, so shall
it be with this Kingdom; partly by the frequent transferring the Crown from one
family to another, and partly by the frequent invasions of the men of Judah, or
some other neighboring Nation. And the Lord will root up First by
Tiglath-pilesar in the days of Pekak King of Israel, 2 King. 15.29. and the
greatest part after by Salmanassar in the days of Hoshea, 2 K. 17.6.
Israel out of this good land which he gave to their Fathers, and will scatter
them beyond the river, to wit, Euphrates into the land of Assyria, Mesopotamia
and Media, whither they shall be carried captive, because they have made Groves
for Idols, thereby provoking him to anger. And he will give up Israel into the
hands of their enemies, because they consented to the Idolatry of Jeroboam who
did sin highly against God, and made Israel to sin, by causing them to leave
the Temple of the Lord, and to worship the calves he has set up.

Ahijah having thus spoken, Jeroboam's wife departed, and as she came to the
door of her house her Son died. And they buried him, and all Israel lamented
for him as God had foretold by the ministry of his Prophet. There were many
bickerings and continual hostility between Jeroboam and Rehoboam all their
days, and the borderers on both sides did continually invade one another; but
after Rehoboam's death, Jeroboam in the eighteenth year of his reign gathered
together a vast army of eight hundred thousand men to set upon Abijah,
Rehoboam's Son, newly come to the Crown, and Abijah met him with four hundred
thousand, and with them discomfited his mighty Army, and slew five hundred
thousand of them, and pursuing his victory took from him Bethel, and two other
Cities, as may be more fully seen in the life of Abijah. Neither did Jeroboam
recover strength again during Abijah's reign.

Jeroboam at last was stricken with some extraordinary sickness or disease from
the Lord in the days of Abijah, but he died not till the second year of Asa Son
of Abijah, and (it seems) he died not an ordinary death. He reigned 22 years,
and Nadab his Son succeeded him.

1 King. 12. from 12, to the end.

1 King. 13. wh. Chapter

1 King. 14. from 1, to 21.

2 Chronicles. 13. wh. Chapter

NAdab began his reign in the second year of Asa, Second King of Israel, Nadab.
and reigned only two years, namely in part of the second and third year of
Asa. He did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the way of his Father.
Gibbethon a City belonging to the Tribe of Dan, [Josh. 19.44.] was in the days
of David and Solomon in the Israelites possession, but now it seems the
Philistines had gotten it; Nadab therefore and all Israel with him, went and
laid siege to it to recover it, and here during the Siege he was treacherously
slain by Baasha of the Tribe of Issachar, and so the siege (as it seems) was
raised; for twenty six years after, or thereabouts, the Son of Baasha did again
lay siege to this City, as we may see Chap. 16.15.

Baasha now setting up himself in the Throne, he smote all the house of
Jeroboam, according to the Prophecy of Ahijah, 1 King. 14.10. Behold I will
bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam him that
pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up, and left in Israel, and will
take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam as a man takes away dung till
it be all gone. So with Nadab the Regal power in Jeroboam's house ended. And
thus the Idolatry wherewith Jeroboam thought to have established the Kingdom to
himself and his posterity was the very cause of the ruin of his family, and the
transferring the Kingdom to another.

1 King. 15. from 25, to 32.

BAasha the Son of Ahijah of the Tribe of Issachar began his reign in the third
year of Asa, Third King of Israel, Baasha.
and reigned twenty and four years. He did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
walked in the way of Jeroboam.

In the thirty sixth year of Asa's Kingdom, as it stood divided from the
Kingdom of Israel, but in the sixteenth year of Asa's own reign, and about the
fourteenth of Baasha's, he perceiving Asa to grow potent, and that many of his
subjects fell off to him, he began to arm against him, and never ceased from
henceforward to make war upon him all his days; and he went up to build Ramah
which lay between Samaria and Jerusalem that he might suffer no man to come out
from or go unto Asa King of Judah; but he was fain to give it over, being
recalled by an invasion made into his Country by Benhadad King of Syria hired
thereunto by Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. from 1, to 7. and 1 King. 15.32.

Jehu the Son of Hanani the Prophet delivers him a sad message from the Lord
concerning the destruction of his house for his Idolatry and killing of Nadab
For though Baasha did herein what God had decreed, yet he had no command from
God to do it, but did it only to serve his own ends, and to get the Kingdom.
Saepe Deus decreta sua exequitur per malos homines, qui long aliud agentes,
sua quaerunt, ideoque poena digni sunt. Impii saepe imprudentes serviunt
voluntati Dei, quam in lege patefactam scientes oppugnant.
. This Jehu was that Prophet that was sent afterward to Jehoshaphat to reprove
him for his league with Ahab, [2 Chr. 19.2.] and he that wrote the Chronicles
of those times, 2 Chronicles. 20.34. And his father Hanani was the Prophet that
reproved Asa for seeking to Benhadad for aid against Baasha, so that both
Father and Son were eminent Prophets of the Lord at the same time, and both
sent to the Kings of Israel, to whom the Lord was pleased to send many Prophets
to reclaim them. Jehu coming to Baasha tells him, Thus says the Lord,
forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust, and from a mean condition made
thee Prince For it was the Providence of God that made Baasha's attempt against
Nadab so successful. Collatio regni Deo, doll vero and parricidium Baasae
attribuuntur.
over my They were Gods people by Covenant and outward profession, and they
retained still Circumcision, and the Laws of Moses, and there were many pious
Prophets, and some good people among them.
people Israel, and thou have walked in the ways of Jeroboam, and have made my
people to sin by thy example, and have provoked me to anger, behold I will cut
off thy posterity, and will make thy house as the house of Jeroboam. And as
this judgment was pronounced against Jeroboam, 1 King. 14.11. viz. that such of
his house as died in the City the dogs should eat, and such as died in the
fields the fowls of the air should eat, (that is, they should die unhappy
deaths, and not come to an honorable burial) the very same judgment must I
pronounce against thee, and in the same words [see v. 4.] because thou
persistest in the same sins.

Baasha died in the twenty fourth year of his reign and was buried in Tirzah,
and his Son Elah reigned in his stead,

1 King. 15.33, 34.

1 King. 16. from 1, to 8.

ELAH began to reign in the 26th year of Asa, Fourth King of Israel, Elah.
and reigned two years though not complete. Being upon the Throne his servant
Zimri (Captain of half his Chariots) conspired against him, and as he was
drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza his Steward he slew him in the
second year of his reign, his forces lying then encamped against Gibbethon; and
then Zimri immediately by the assistance of the Soldiers that were under his
command slew all his kindred and near relations, and so destroyed all the house
of Baasha, he left him not one that pisseth against a wall; by which Proverbial
speech an utter destruction of all that belonged to him is to be understood.
Thus the Lord dealt with the house of Baasha. For as Baasha slew Nadab when he
had reigned two years, and that whilst he was laying siege to Gibbethon, and
then immediately destroyed all the rest of his family, so Zimri slew Elah the
Son of Baasha in the second year of his reign, and then immediately cut off the
rest of his family and friends, and that whilst his army lay encamped against
Gibbethon. And thus God destroyed both the house of Baasha and Elah for their
great sins and transgressions whereby they had provoked him, and particularly
by their vanities, that is, Image-gods and Idols.

1 King. 16. from 8, to 15.

ZIMRI having thus wickedly made himself King, Fifth King of Israel, Zimri.
his reign continued but a week; for notice that the King was slain coming to
the Camp at Gibbethon, all the host of Israel (that were there encamped)
presently made Omri (their General) King over Israel.

Omri hastens with his Army to Tirzah to besiege Zimri, and so the siege of
Gibbethon was a second time raised. Zimri when he saw the City was taken by
storm, betook himself to the Kings Palace, and burnt himself with it, that he
might not fall into the hands of his enemies. Thus those that are cruel to
others are oftentimes given over to be cruel at last to themselves. But though
Zimri reigned but seven days before Omri was proclaimed King by the Soldiers,
yet perhaps it was longer e're he was forced to burn himself. And besides
within the space of those seven days he might by his Edicts make known to the
people his resolution to continue the worship of Jeroboam's Calves, and might
destroy the family of Baasha, 1 King. 16 v. 17, 18, 19, 20.

Things being now at this pass, the people of Israel were much divided, some of
them misliked that the Soldiers should choose a King for them, and they chose
Tibni for their King. Between Tibni and Omri there were continual wars for
about four years, till at last Omri prevailed, and Tibni dying, Omri reigned
alone.

1 King. 16. from 15, to 23.

OMRI reigned twelve years, Sixth King of Israel, Omri.
reckoning from his first election, whereof six years in Tirzah. Zimri having
burnt the Royal Palace in that City, he removed the Seat of his Kingdom from
thence to Samaria, which he built in the hill which he bought of Shemer for two
Talents of Silver A Talent of Silver was reckoned at 375 l. sterling, (but a
Talent of Gold at 3750 l.) so he paid 750 l. sterling. for the Hill.
, and so made that his Royal City, and the Metropolis of his Kingdom.

He did evil in the sight of the Lord, and worse than all that went before him.
For it seems he did not only obstinately continue in the Idolatry of Jeroboam
himself, but with violence forced and pressed the people thereunto,
notwithanding all the judgments he had seen on all the former Kings of Israel
for that sin. In Micah 6.16. we read of the Statutes of Omri, to wit,
concerning their Idolatrous worshipping of the Golden Calves. He was buried in
Samaria, and Ahab his Son succeeded him.

1 King. 16. from 23, to 29.

AHAB in the thirty eight year of Asa began to reign, Seventh King of Israel,
Ahab.
and reigned two and twenty years over Israel. He did evil in the sight of the
Lord above all that went before him; and as if it had been a small thing for
him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam he took to wife Jezebel Who was a most
wicked woman, Jehu complained of her Witchcrafts and Whoredoms, 2 King. 9.22.
and she is often mentioned as a great persecutor of Gods Prophets, and a great
promoter of the Idolatry of Baal, and therefore St. John calls that false
Prophetess (who in his time had seduced many to Uncleanness and Idolatry in the
Church of Thyatira) Jezabel, Rev. 2.20.
the daughter of the King of the Sidonians, and served Baal the Idol-god of
that people, and built an house, and an Altar for him in Samaria.

Now this Idolatry was far worse than that of Jeroboam's, for in that though
they had Idols, to wit, the Golden Calves, yet they pretended still to worship
the true God, but in this they worshipped Baal as their God.

In his days did Hiel the Bethelite (which shows the horrible profaneness and
contempt of God at this time) adventure to rebuild Jericho (which though
belonging to the Tribe of Benjamin yet it seems was at this time under the
power of the King of the Ten Tribes) notwithstanding Joshuah's curse pronounced
against any that should attempt it, and therefore it had continued a heap of
rubbish from that time till this, but now that bold wretch Hiel that dwelt at
Bethel undertook the work, and paid dear for it (as Joshua had threatened) for
it cost him the loss of all his sons, of the firstborn when he began it, and
of some more of them as he went forward with the work, and of the youngest when
he finished it, and hung up the Gates of it, Josh. 6.26. And Joshua adjured
them at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before the Lord that rises up and
builds this City Jericho; he shall lay the foundation thereof in his
firstborn, and in his youngest Son shall be set up the gates of it.

Though the Israelites were at this present fallen to the horrid Idolatry of
worshipping Baal (...) was the God of the Sidonians, Ahab marrying a wife from
thence did soon set up his wifes Idolatry in the land.
, and the worship of the true God was in a manner neglected and disregarded,
and the Prophets and servants of God that would not bow to Baal were
persecuted, [see Chapter 19.10.] yet there were never more Prophets sent to them
than at this time, (we see Chapter 18.13. that Obadiah had hid an hundred of them
in caves) nor never more eminent ones than now. And of all the Prophets that
God raised up in the Kingdom of Israel we find not any of whom so strange
things are recorded both for courage and miracles as there are of Elijah. And
therefore at the Transfiguration of Christ, Mat. 17. Elijah as chief of the
Prophets appeared (together with Moses) talking with Christ to signify that
both Moses and the Prophets had in their several seasons given testimony of
him. This Prophet Elijah was at this time sent to the Israelites, a man of
transcendent courage and zeal, (as being fitted for those corrupt times) whence
it is said of the Baptist (who in his Ministry was very zealous and fervent,
Luke 1.17.) that he should go before our Savior in the spirit and power of
Elias. Ahab and Jezebel were very zealous to promote Idolatry, and now God
raises up a Prophet as zealous to oppose it, and to defend Gods own worship.
Elijah seeing how things went in the Kingdom of Israel, and being exceedingly
moved with the horrible wickedness of Ahab and Jezabel, and particularly
perhaps with the contempt and scorn they cast upon Gods Prophets did (it seems)
by the instinct of Gods Spirit pray that the Lord would shut up the heavens for
some years, and not suffer it to rain till he sought unto him for it, that so
the wrath of God against the iniquity of that time might be discovered, and the
precious account he makes of his Prophets might be manifested. And being by the
same Spirit of God assured that his prayer was heard, he came to Ahab and
threatened him beforehand (that he might see it was of God) with an approaching
drought for three years and an half, and a great famine that should ensue
thereupon. As the Lord God of Israel lives (says he) whom I continually
serve, and in whose presence I now stand, and who is a witness of the truth of
what I say, there shall not be dew or rain these ensuing years but according to
my words; and as I have declared to thee from God. And according as he
threatened so it came to pass. For during the space of three years and six
months it rained not. See Jam. 5.17 See Luke 4.25.
. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly
that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth by the space of three
years and six months. The drought now beginning, and Ahab seeing there was no
rain for some time together as Elijah had threatened, he was greatly enraged
against him, and being also stirred up (as it is probable) by Jezabel his wife,
he sent presently out to take him that he might be revenged on him. See Chapter
18.10. but the Lord foreseeing what would happen, gave his Prophet warning of
it, and appointed him to withdraw and hide himself by the brook Cherith in
Manasseh beyond Jordan, (that is in some solitary place or cave near the brook)
where he should be fed by Ravens with bread and flesh morning and evening, and
should drink of the brook. Elijah did as the Lord commanded him, and was
accordingly fed by Ravens, who being a very greedy and ravenous kind of bird
(so that they often neglect the feeding of their young ones to feed themselves)
it was the more miraculous that God should make them Caterers for Elijah, and
in such an orderly manner to bring him his provision morning and evening, he
directing them where they should have it, possibly out of some rich man's pantry
or storehouse. Thus we see by what unlikely means God can provide for his
servants when they are in their straits. After some time (possibly about six
Months) the brook quite dried up; thus the Lord was pleased again to try the
faith of his servant Elijah. Then the Lord commands him to go to a widow of
Sarepta in the Country of Sidon, telling him that he would command her, that
is, dispose her heart to entertain him. Accordingly he went thither, and when
he came to the Gate of the City he found a widow-woman gathering sticks, he
desired her to fetch him a little water. She going for it, he desired her to
bring him also a morsel of bread. She knowing him by his habit to be a Prophet
of the Lord, she said to him, As the Lord thy God lives, I have not a cake to
give thee, I have but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a
cruse, and behold I am gathering two or three sticks that I may go and dress it
for my self and my son that we may eat it and so die. Hereby its manifest that
the drought There is not the least intimation of any want of rain that was in
the land of Judah at this time, and yet Elijah is sent to a stranger rather
than to the widows of Israel or Judah, such an one being very unlikely to
relieve him (especially the famine being there as well as in Israel) but herein
was shaddowed forth Gods further mercy intended to the Gentiles when the Jews
should be rejected, whence that of our Savior, Luke 4.25, 26.
and famine was in the Country of Tire and Sidon as well as among the
Israelites; and indeed it being sent among the Israelites for the Idolatry of
Baal (which Jezabel the daughter of the King of the Sidonians had brought in
among them) no marvel if the Sidonians were involved in the same judgment.
Elijah bids the woman not to fear, but to do as she intended, but only to make
for him a little cake first, for (says he) thus says the Lord God of Israel,
The barrel of meal which thou have shall not wast, nor the cruse of oil fail
until the day that the Lord sends rain on the earth. The woman did as Elijah
enjoined her, and she and her house did eat thereof many days, viz. for about
three years, neither the meal nor oil failing, but being miraculously supplied
and renewed. This recompense had this poor widow for entertaining the Lords
Prophet, she for giving unto him one meal has many meals from him, and by his
procurement. But great blessings are oftentimes mixed with some imbittering
afflictions. For some time after the Prophet had been with her, the woman's Son
fell sick and died. Upon this she comes to the Prophet and cries out, What have
I done to thee thou man of God? wherein have I offended thee? art thou come to
bring my sins to remembrance When God punishes any for their sins whom for a
while he did forbear, he is said in the Scripture to remember their sins, 1 Samuel 15.2.
before the Lord, and to punish me for them by taking away my Son? Possibly she
thought that Elijah had besought God thus to punish her, as by his prayer he
had brought the drought and famine upon the land, or that he was sent as the
minister of Gods wrath to take away her Son from her. Elijah said to her, Give
me thy Son, and he took him out of her bosom and carried him to an upper loft,
and laid him on his own bed, and cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God,
let me humbly plead with thee, why have thou brought so great an evil upon this
widow (with whom I sojourn) as to take away her Son? I am afraid thy name will
hence come to be blasphemed, and thy Prophets despised, and it will be said, it
had been well for this woman if this Prophet had never come into her house.
Having thus said, he stretched himself upon the child three times, putting his
mouth upon the child's mouth, and his eyes upon the child's eyes, and his hands
upon the child's hands, and he cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord, I pray
thee let this child's soul come into him again. And the Lord graciously heard
his prayer, and the soul of the child came immediately into him again, and he
revived. So the Prophet took the child and deliverd him to his mother alive See
the like miracle wrought by Elisha, 2 King. 4.34. and by Paul, Act. 20.10. See
also Heb. 11.35.

Cum graves imminerent vexationes and religionem magis indies piis Deus aperire
aliquid voluit de immortalitate animarum. Grot.


. Then said the woman, By this I know that thou art a true Prophet, and that
the word of the Lord in thy mouth is truth, namely the things that were
foretold by thee concerning the continuance of the drought, and the increase of
my meal and oil. And this child is the first that we read of in the Scriptures
that being dead was restored to life again.

The drought having now continued well nigh three years and six months, Elijah
goes to present himself unto Ahab, and to give notice to him that they should
have rain, that so what he had said to him before might be made good, to wit,
that there should be no rain but according to his word. The Governor of Ahabs
house at this time was Obadiah, an excellent person, and one who feared the
Lord greatly, and worshipped him in spirit and truth, and kept himself from the
Idolatry of the times, though he went not up to Jerusalem to peform the
Ceremonial worship there required. It Is a wonder there should be such a pious
person in so corrupt a Court, but God ordered it so by his alwise Providence
for the good of his Prophets. For when Jezabel slew, and cut off the Prophets
They that gave themselves to be thoroughly instructed in the will of God, and
were ready on all occasions to declare the same to others were styled Prophets.
of the Lord, he took a hundred of them and hid them by fifty in a cave, and
fed them with bread and water. It Is like some other pious men also in Israel
besides Obadiah hid and preserved several Prophets of the Lord from her fury.
But the drought now being very sore Ahab ordered Obadiah to go one way as he
himself would another, that so traversing all the land of Israel they might
find herbage and water for their horses and mules which were ready to perish
for want of it. Elijah meets Obadiah, who knowing him fell on his face before
him, and said to him, Art not thou my Lord Elijah? He answered I am, and I
desire thee to go and tell thy Lord and Master that Elijah is here. Obadiah
answered, Wherein have I so offended thee that thou should deliver thy
servant into the hand of Ahab to slay me. I protest unto thee that my Lord the
King has sought thee not only in the land of Israel, but also in all the
neighboring Countries, and among all the Nations that are in league with him,
and he has pressed them so far that they were fain upon their oaths to avow
that they knew nothing of thee How Elijah was concealed in Sarepta we need not
inquire, seeing he being informed of his danger the widow might use means to
hide him.
; and now why enjoynest thou me to go and tell Ahab that thou art here:
Possibly as soon as I am gone from thee the Spirit of the Lord What was done by
any supernatural working of God they used to say was done by the Spirit of God.
, that is, some wind from the Lord, or some Angel will take thee up It seems in
those times Elijah was usually thus miraculously caught up, (and so perhaps
other Prophets too) and carried from one place to another, whence it was that
when Elijah was at last taken up into heaven the young Prophets would needs
send out to seek him, 2 King. 2.16. The like we read of Philip, Act. 8.19.
, and carry thee to some other place, and then the King will slay me, either
because I did not apprehend thee when I saw thee, or because I shall seem to
have deluded him by telling him that which he will not find upon search to be
true. I thy servant have desired to fear the Lord from my youth, and to cleave
unto him, and have been kind to his servants the Prophets in hiding many of
them from the fury of Jezebel (as I suppose thou have heard) and I may be
further useful to them, and therefore I hope thou will not lay upon me so
perilous a command. Elijah assures him he was resolved to show himself unto
Ahab. Hereupon Obadiah went and acquainted the King therewith, who presently
came out to him, and in a very angry manner said, What! art thou he that
troubles Israel! No, says Elijah, thou and thy Fathers house have troubled
Israel in forsaking God, and following Baal. After some vehement contest
between them about the Baal-worship, the Prophet (having doubtless received it
in charge from God before, as may appear from ver. 36.) propounds to the King a
way of trial to be peformed on mount Carmel (which stood near the Sea) whither
God were God, or Baal were God. The God answering by fire (says he) and
consuming the sacrifice from heaven, let him be acknowledged for the true God.
The King being confident that the way of his worship was right, agrees thereto,
and possibly the natural desire that is in all men to see things strange and
unusual (as this trial was) might the more incline him to it. Accordingly he
assembles the Prophets of Baal (viz. those that lived dispersed up and down in
the Country) and the heads of the people to see the issue of this strange
trial. Elijah when the people were met together spoke to them, saying, How long
will ye halt between two opinions: If the Lord be God follow him, but if Baal
be God follow him. The people answered nothing, being afraid to offend the
King. Then Elijah said, Behold there is not a Prophet of the Lords that does
openly appear for the true God and his worship, besides my self. But here are
four hundred and fifty of Baals Prophets that are for Idolatry, let them
therefore give us two bullocks, and let them choose which they will for
themselves, and let them cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no fire
under, and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, and put no fire
under; and let them call on their gods, and I will call on the name of the
Lord, and the God that answers by fire, and consumes the Sacrifice, let him
be acknowledged for the true God. The people cried out, it was well spoken,
they were willing to put it upon that trial. Then Baals Priests took the
bullock that was given them, and dressed it, and called on the name of Baal
from morning even until noon, and said, O Baal hear us. But there was no voice,
nor any that answered. Then they danced and skipped about the Altar they had
made in a frantic manner, as was usual in the worship of Baal. And at noon
when the time limited for their sacrifice was almost ended, Elijah mocked them,
and bad them cry aloud; for possibly their god Baal was at this time talking,
or pursuing his enemies, or in a journey, or perhaps he was asleep, and must be
rouzed up with very loud calling. Baals Priests it is like were vexed at these
sharp taunts of the Prophet, however they cried aloud and cut themselves with
knives and lances till the blood gushed out, (as the heathens used to do in
their great sorrows. See Deuteronomy. 14.1.) the more to move their God to have
compassion on them, and not to be wanting at this time to his own honor as
well as theirs. But no answer could they get notwithstanding they went on
praying and calling upon Baal, and (with many strange gestures as men inspired)
sang the praises of their Idol-god, laboring by all means possible to prevail
with him to send fire to consume their Sacrifice, but all in vain. There was
none that answered or regarded them. Then Elijah called the people to come
near, and mount Carmel having been one of the high places whereon they used to
sacrifice in former times unto the Lord, there were still the ruins of an old
Altar which the Idolatrous Israelites had broken down, [see Chapter 19.14.] and
this the Prophet did now repair, thereby intimating to them that his design was
to restore and set up the worship of the true God in the land. Then he took
twelve stones according to the number of the twelve Tribes, and with them he
built an Altar in the name of the Lord, to intimate to them that they ought all
to be united in the worship of the God of their fathers, or else it would be in
vain for them to reckon themselves the Israel of God. And he made a Trench
about the Altar as great as would contain two measures of seed, and he put the
wood in order, ahd cut the bullock in pieces and laid it on the wood, and bad
them fill four barrels with water out of the Sea that was near, and pour it on
the Sacrifice, and on the wood. He bad them do it three times, which they
accordingly did, and the water ran about the Altar and filled the Trench; so
that it was evident that there was no fraud used to hide any fire secretly
under the wood. Then at the time of offering the Evening-sacrifice Elijah came
and prayed, saying, Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob To these three
Patriarchs God made and ratified his promises of the good things which he did
for Israel, and God took this style to himself, Exodus 3.6. to move the
Israelites (that came from those Patriarchs) to take him for their God, and often
to call to mind his promises.
, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy
servant, and that I have done all these things at thy word, and by thy command
and direction. Hear me O Lord, I pray thee hear me, that this people may know
that thou art the Lord God, and that thou have appointed these things to be
done, to the end that their hearts may be turned from their Idols unto thee.
Immediately the fire of the Lord fell from heaven and consumed the
Burntsacrifice, and the wood and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the
water that was in the Trench. And when the people saw it, they fell on their
faces, and cried out the Lord he is the God, the Lord he is the God. Elijah
seeing them so wonderfully affected with this miracle, and so clearly convinced
of the juglings and deceits of Baals Priests. He bad them presently apprehend
those Prophets of Baal, and to let none of them escape, and to bring them down
to the brook Kishon at the foot of Carmel, and there to slay them. The people
being at this present under a great dread of the Majesty of God (who by this
miracle had testified so loudly against their Idolatry) they without any fear
of the King were ready to do whatever Elijah advised them unto, and accordingly
they took those Priests and carried them down to the brook Kishon (that the
place where Elijah had sacrificed unto the Lord might not be defiled with their
blood) and slew them there according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 13.5. and 18.20. The
King (as it seems) thought it not advisable to set himself against the torrent
of the people's zeal at this time, or possibly he tacitly consented to it upon
hope that rain would presently be given thereupon. These Prophets of Baal that
were slain at this time seem to have been those that were dispersed up and down
in the Villages and Towns, and not the Prophets of the Groves who attended at
Court and performed their Idolatrous service in the Groves planted by Ahab near
Baals Temple in Samaria. For after this we read Chapter 22.6. of 400 Prophets that
were called together by Ahab. Ahab having fasted all day to see the event of
this business, Elijah bids him now go eat and drink, and refresh himself, for
he heard a sound or noise in the heavens that was some intimation to him that
much rain was coming. Ahab accordingly going to refresh himself, the Prophet
went up to the top of Carmel, and there kneeling upon the ground, and bowing
his face down to his knees, in this humble posture he earnestly prayed unto the
Lord for rain. For though he knew that the Lord had promised to send rain, yet
he knew also that it must be obtained by prayer. Then he sent his servant seven
times He sent him seven several times to teach us that we must not be
discouraged though we have not presently that which we pray for, but must with
patience be content to wait upon the Lord for it.
to spy whether he could see any likelihood of it. At last the servant
discerned a little cloud arising out of the Sea as big as a man's hand; upon
this Elijah presently sends to Ahab to make have home lest he should be stopped
by the rain that was now coming. And immediately the heaven was black with
clouds and wind, and there fell a great rain. Ahab getting into his Chariot
went to Jezreel a City of Issachar where was one of his houses, and Elijah
being extraordinarily moved and enabled by God girded up his long garment and
ran V. 46. Currebat ante Ahab, ut officium honorarium Regi suo praestaret. Is
qui caelum clauserat tanquam unus e servis currit ante Regem. Neque enim viri
sancti hanc externam rerum pompam assis faciunt.
before his Chariot to show him how ready he would be to honor and serve him
if he would proceed on to remove Idolatry out of the land, and perfect that
work which was so happily begun by the slaughter of Baals Prophets, 1 King. 18.

Ahab coming to Jezebel, tells her the event of that contest between Elijah and
the Prophets of Baal, and the unavoidable execution of the Baalites that
followed thereupon; and to excuse himself to his imperious wife he represents
their Execution as Elijah's act, not his; she falling into a great rage and
passion like a rash and unadvised woman sent one to Elijah to tell him that she
desired the gods might do so to her and more also, if she did not make his life
like one of theirs by to morrow about that time. And hereby she gave him (as it
were) fair warning to be gone. Elijah hereupon flies for his life to Beersheba,
God suffering him to be overborn with fear of Jezebel now, who e're while
feared not Ahab and all his Baalites, that he might see his own weakness, and
not be exalted in mind by reason of those great miracles that had been wrought
by him) so he now fled into another Kingdom, viz. that of Judah where good
Jehoshaphat reigned, yea to the uttermost Southern part of it, and from thence
withdrew himself into the Wilderness as fearing lest Ahab or Jezebel should
send some thither to dispatch him. And therefore when he went from Beersheba he
left his servant there, because he would not expose him to the wants of the
Wilderness, and going a days journey in the Wilderness, and sitting under a
juniper tree he even wished for death, and said it is enough, O Lord, I have
lived long enough, take away I pray thee my life, I know I must die at one time
or other, for I am not better than my Fathers that have all died before me; and
seeing my life is so full of troubles and miseries, I desire ( if it be thy
holy will) to end my days presently. Then laying himself down to sleep under
the tree, as he slept behold an Angel touched him, and said, Arise and eat. And
he looked and behold there was a cake baking on the coals at his head, and a
cruse of water by him. So he did eat and drink and laid him down to sleep
again. The Angel awoke him a second time and bad him arise and eat again, for
the journey that he was to take was too great for him except he were well
refreshed beforehand by that provision which God by his holy Angels had now
sent him. Accordingly he did eat and drink again, and in the strength of that
food he traveled forty days, and forty nights Christ, Moses and Elijah, (who
all appeared together at Christ's Transfiguration) did each of them fast in
their several times forty days and forty nights without any sustenance.
without any other sustenance, even to Horeb Non recta via progrediebatur,
alioqui tantum 4 aut 5 dieram iter erat; sed fugientium more, vias invias and
inopinatas sectatus est, interdum and substitit, quievit, latuit. Et forte a
principio non ei erat propositum ad Horeb proficisci; sed per 40 dies per
desertum vagatiis eo pervenit. At Deus illum huc perduxit, ut ibi institueret.
, where the Lord formerly appeared unto Moses in a burning bush. Being come
thither and lodging in a cave, the Lord asks him what he did there? he answers,
I have been very zealous for the honor of the Lord God of hosts. For the
children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down the Altars that have
been erected to thee, and have preferred Baal before thee, and have slain thy
Prophets, and I, even I, only am left, (this he speaks according to his own
apprehension See Romans 11.2, 3.
) and they seek my life to take it away. The Lord bad him go forth and stand
upon mount Horeb where he would manifest his presence to him. And behold the
Lord immediately passed by in some visible manifestation of his glory. 1. There
was a great strong wind that rent the mountains, and brake the rocks in pieces.
2. An earthquake. 3. After that a fire, but the Lord was in none of these, to
wit, did not in these speak to Elijah, nor make known his mind to him. These
were the dreadful foregoing signs of Gods majesty and power to prepare Elijah
with the more awe and reverence to hearken to what he should say to him, and to
strengthen his faith in Gods power who had all creatures at his command. Then
there came a still and small voice. It seems Elijah stood all this while in the
mouth of the Cave, but kept himself somewhat inward till knowing that in that
still voice the Lord would speak to him, then he went to the very entrance of
the Cave, casting his mantle about his face out of an awful fear of Gods
Majesty as Moses did, Exodus 3.6. The Lord asks him by this still voice the same
question he did before, viz. what he did there? and Elijah gave the same answer
he had done before. The Lord to comfort and support his spirit intimates to him
that he took notice of and was sufficiently displeased with the Idolatry of the
Israelites, and intended to punish them severely for it. And in order thereunto
he bids him go to the Wilderness of Damascus, and there anoint Hazael to be
King over Syria, and to anoint Jehu the Son of Nimshi to be King over Israel
(that is to anoint them himself, or take order they should be anointed by
others at the appointed times) and to anoint Elisha to be a Prophet in his
room, to succeed him in the Prophetic office. And the Lord tells him that he
that escapes the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay. For though the greatest
destruction wrought by Hazael was toward the end of Jehu's reign, [2 King.
10.32.] and after it [2 King. 13.3.] yet he began to destroy Israel before
Jehu's time, [2 King. 8.28.] and many of those who escaped Hazael's hands, Jehu
slew, as Jehoram and others, 2 King. 9.24. And him that escapes the sword of
Jehu shall Elisha slay; that is, by his Prophetical denouncing See Jer. 1.10.
Hos. 6.5. some think that this is meant of some other judgments not expressed
in the Scripture, which upon the Prophesying and Prayers of Elisha did fall
upon the Idolatrous Israelites.
divine vengeance Prophetae eos per accidens perdere dicuntur, dum exitum iis
minantur.
against such Israelites as remained Idolaters even after Jehu had destroyed
the house of Ahab. And lastly the Lord says to him, Though in this general
apostasy of the Israelites thou think there is none left untainted with the
Idolatry of Baal but thy self, I tell thee that there are many thousands Seven
thousand in Israel, a certain number for an indefinite, meaning a great number,
see Romans 11.4.
in Israel that are not infected with it, and who have not bowed the knee to
Baal, nor with their mouths kissed him in token of adoration, and subjection,
[see Hos. 13.2.] Elijah having received these commands from God, he took care
to have Hazael But some think Elijah did anoint them all three himself, though
it be not particularly expressed, and that he went forthwith to Damascus to
anoint Hazael.
anointed by appointing Elisha to do it when he was dead, 2 King. 8.7. And Jehu
was anointed by a young Prophet at the command of Elisha, 2 King. 9.1. who (as
it is like) received order from Elijah to do it. And as for Elisha (who as it
seems was before a Country farmer) Elijah found him plowing with twelve yoke of
oxen before him; that is, there were many Plows going in the field where Elisha
was, and many persons attending them, and Elisha himself went with the last.
Elijah passing by him cast his Prophets mantle upon him as a sign of his
calling to be a Prophet; whereupon being endued with a Prophetic spirit, he
presently left the oxen, and ran after Elijah a little way, but then said unto
him, I pray thee let me go and kiss my father and mother He in Luke 9.61. made
that a pretext to depart from Christ, or at least to make delay. But Elisha
intends only a friendly farewell, and speedily to return.
, and pay my duty to them, and take my leave of them, and then I will follow
thee and wholly attend upon thee. Elijah bids him use his liberty as to that,
for (says he) what have I done to thee to make thee so willing to follow me? I
have only cast my mantle upon thee, and (it seems) thou have received the
spirit of Prophecy, and the Spirit of God being come upon thee, thou may
thereby know that thou art called to a great and extraordinary work which thou
must not delay to execute. So Elisha went back to his Fathers house, and took a
yoke of oxen and slew them, (probably the very oxen with which he had plowed)
and boiled the flesh with the plow and all the wooden instruments belonging to
it, (thereby showing that he willingly left his former calling) and so made a
farewell feast for his kindred, companions and neighbors, and they did eat
with him, and then he presently arose and followed Elijah and ministered unto
him, and diligently observed his carriage and behavior in his function, that
he might learn of him; and possibly Elijah did also anoint him as he was
commanded, ver. 16. 1 King. 19. wh. Chapter

About this time Benhadad King of Syria gathered all his forces together, and
with the assistance of thirty two petty neighboring Kings These were Kings of
Cities, Counties and Provinces, such as Joshua destroyed in Canaan, Josh. 12.7.
The kind of their Government (which was by one alone) and not the largeness of
their Dominion gave them the title of Kings.
came and besieged Samaria, and Ahab in it. At first he pretended a willingness
to make conditions with Ahab, upon the performance of which he would raise his
siege, and accordingly sent messengers into the City to him, who in an insolent
manner spoke to him, saying, Thus says Benhadad King of Syria, thy silver and
thy gold is mine, thy wives also, and thy children are mine; that is, at my
disposal and under my power. Ahab being exceedingly afraid, like a poor
spirited Prince returned this tame answer, My Lord O King of Syria according as
I understand thy message, I am willing to be thine, that is, a Tributary King
to thee, and to hold all in fealty and fee under thee, paying thee homage.
Benhadad perceiving Ahab to yield thus far, now sends another message to him,
and requires harder conditions of him than before. Thou (says he) did so
interpret my last message as if I intended no more than homage and fealty to be
paid by thee unto me, and that thou should hold all that thou have as my
Vassal and Tributary, but know thou that my intent and purpose is to have the
actual possession of all, and I will send my servants to thee to morrow about
this time, and they shall search thine house and see what is laid up therein,
as also the houses of thy people, and whatsoever is of value or desirable in
thine or their eyes, (and you are loath to part with) they shall take from you,
and bring to me. Ahab ('it is like) of his own bead and out of fear had returned
the former answer, but now perceiving Benhadad to grow upon him, and to require
things of him so extremely unreasonable, he calls together his ancient grave
Counselors the Elders of the land that were with him in the City, and says to
them, I pray you mark and observe how this man seeks mischief against us. He
pretends a Treaty as if he were willing upon terms to raise his siege, but he
intends nothing but mischief and ruin to us, for he sent unto me before for my
wives, my children, my silver and gold; that is (as I understood it) to have
the dominion over them, as chief Lord, reserving to me my subordinate interest
and propriety in them, and this I denied him not. But that will not now content
him, but he will have liberty to take of ours whatsoever he pleases. The Elders
and the people being extremely startled at this, earnestly desired the King by
no means to consent to such abominable terms. So Ahab returned this answer by
the messengers, Tell (says he) my Lord the King, all that thou did require of
me in thy first message (as I understood it) viz. that I should only be
Tributary to the King of Syria, I am willing to perform. But that which thou
requirest in thy last, viz. that I should put all presently into thy hands,
that I may by no means consent unto. The messengers returning carried this
answer of Ahab's to Benhadad, who hearing it, in a proud rage said, The Gods do
so to me and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for
all the people that follow me. As if he should have said, I swear I will bring
more Soldiers into Samaria than there are handfuls of dust in that City. Ahab
hearing of this proud speech of his, bad them say to him, Let not him that
girdeth on his harness boast himself as he may do that puts it off;
intimating thereby that the issue of war was uncertain, and 'twas a foolish
thing to triumph before the battle was ended. Benhadad and the petty Kings that
were with him were drinking themselves up to drunkenness in his Pavilion, when
this was told them from Ahab, whereupon in a rage he charged those of his
Commanders that were about him to attack the City presently, and to place their
Engines against it to batter it down to the ground. It seems there was at this
very time a true Prophet of the Lords secretly lurking in Samaria, and being
sent of the Lord to Ahab, he went confidently to him, though he knew he had cut
off many of the Lords Prophets before [ Chapter 18.4.] and said unto him, Thus
says the Lord, Have thou seen from the towers of Samaria all this vast host,
and great multitude of the enemy? I will deliver them into thy hand this day,
and thou shall know that I am the Lord that give victory and not Baal. Ahab
greedily asks him by whom this deliverance should be wrought? he tells him he
should not by his experienced Captains, or old Soldiers prevail over the
Syrians, but by a forlorn of the young men that waited on the Princes of the
Provinces. Ahab then asks him who shall order the battle? He tells him, he
himself should do it. Whereupon Ahab numbered the young men before mentioned and
found them 232; then he numbered all the rest that were fit to bear arms in
Samaria, and found them to be seven thousand. And at noon they marched out,
first the young men as the forlorn, and then the body of the Army followed;
Benhadad understanding that there was a party come out of the City, he gives
this insolent order that if they came out to sue for conditions of peace they
should take them prisoners, and bring them to him, (though it was against the
Law of Arms) and if they came out as Soldiers, he commands his men, (thinking
it scorn to fight with them) to take them all alive that so he might put them
to cruel deaths, or imprison them, or deal with them as he saw cause. The
forlorn and the army of the Israelites now approaching the enemies Camp, fell
upon them, and slew every man his man, that is, as many of the enemies as they
themselves were in number, viz. 7232, whereupon a panick fear seizing upon the
rest of the Syrians, they fled, and Benhadad himself made shift to escape with
his Horsemen to his own Country. Ahab with such Troops of Horse as he had
pursued them, and smote many of their Horses and Chariots, and slew them with a
very great slaughter.

Shortly after this the Prophet that had foretold this victory to Ahab, having
by Divine revelation knowledge of the enemies intentions and designs, he came to
him again, and said, Go strengthen thy self, and be not secure and careless as
if thou were free from all danger; for at the return of the year when the time
is seasonable, the King of Syria will come up against thee again. Accordingly
the servants of the King of Syria were forward to engage their Master to
another encounter, telling him that the gods of the Israelites were Gods of the
hills; possibly they thought so, because the Israelites did use to worship God
and sacrifice to him on hills and high places. They reflect not at all on the
true cause of their overthrow, viz. their own sensuality, pride and insolence,
but assign this only for the cause of it, viz. the Gods of the Israelites were
Gods of the hills, and this battle being fought in an hilly Country they were
worsted; but (say they) let us fight with them in the plain, and then surely we
shall be stronger than they. Further they desired the King that if he intended
to make a new invasion into the Israelites Country that he would please to
dismiss those petty Kings he had in his Army before (who were fitter to drink
than fight) and to put valiant Captains and experienced Soldiers into their
rooms, and to provide such an Army both of Horse, Foot and Chariots as he had
before, and then (say they) we will fight them in the plain, and doubt not but
we shall prevail against them. Benhadad hearkened to their counsel, and
accordingly at the return of the year he mustered a great Army, and marched
with them to Aphek in the Tribe of Asher, and he intended (if he could) to
fight with the Israelites thereabout, not only because it was a plain Country,
but because this was one of those Cities which his Father had formerly taken
away from the Israelites, and hither they might fly as to a place of retreat if
the battle should go against them. Upon this second invasion the children of
Israel put themselves into the best array they could to resist the Syrians, and
all the Israelites that were appointed came to their general Rendezvous, and
they divided their forces into two bodies, and they were but like two little
flocks of kids before the Syrians that filled the Country. Then the Prophet
before mentioned came again to Ahab and said to him, Thus says the Lord
because the Syrians have said the Lord is God of the hills but not of the
valleys, therefore will I deliver all this great multitude into thy hands, and
though you by reason of your great wickedness deserve not this favor at my
hands, yet to confute this blasphemy of the Syrians, even in the valleys I will
overthrow them, and thereby give you a plain evidence and demonstration that I
am the only true God. So the two Armies faced one the other for seven days, and
on the seventh day the battle was joined, and the Israelites slew of them an
hundred thousand footmen in one day; so that they slew now many more than every
one his man, and the rest fled to Aphek, and Benhadad himself among them, who
was fain to hide himself in an inner chamber in a private house in the City.
The Israelites drawing up their forces now to Aphek, and the Syrians (as it
seems) placing themselves round about upon the wall of the City to defend it,
the wall either by an earthquake, or some immediate hand of God fell upon
twenty seven thousand of them, and killed them. Benhadad being now in a deadly
fear of being taken, his servants that were about him gave him this advice, The
Kings of Israel (say they) as we have heard are merciful Kings It seems their
merciful dealing with those they had taken in battle had got them this good
report.
, Let us therefore put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes on our necks, and go
out to the King of Israel, peradventure he will be persuaded to save thy life.
Benhadad consenting hereunto, in this abject posture they came to Ahab, and
said to him, Thy servant Benhadad says unto thee, I pray thee let me live.
Ahab replies, Is he yet alive? He is my brother. Now the messengers did
diligently observe whither any words would fall from him that signified any
comfort to them, and hastily catched at them. And accordingly hearing these
words, they speedily replied, Thy Brother Benhadad yet lives. Does he (says
he) go and bring him unto me. And he spoke these words so, as they perceived he
intended good to their King. Then Benhadad came forth to him, and he caused him
to come up into his Chariot; so that he not only showed mercy to him (who had
before carried it so insolently toward himself) but he highly honored him.
Benhadad being much wrought upon by this kindness, tells him that the Cities
which his Father had taken from Ahab's Father, or Predecessor, [see Chap.
15.20.] he would now restore to him, and he should make streets for his
subjects to meet and freely trade in at Damascus as his Father had made in
Samaria; so that (it seems) the former Kings of Syria had great power over the
Kings of Israel. Ahab like a weak Prince told him he did accept those
conditions, and would send him away upon that Covenant and agreement, and
accordingly so dismissed him. Thus slightly did this weak and wicked King Ahab
pass over the great damage had been done to the people of Israel by the Syrians
invading their land two years together. But how well Benhadad performed his
Covenant will appear afterward by his detaining Ramoth-Gilead, so that Ahab
and Jehoshaphat were fain to join their forces to besiege it, see Chapter 22.3.
Nevertheless upon this league made there followed a three years cessation of
Arms between the two Nations, see 1 King. 22.1. Shortly after this victory one
of the Sons of the Prophets to foreshew in himself (as was usual with the
Prophets, see Isa. 20.2, 3, 4, Jer. 27.2.) a shadow of that calamity which was
to come upon Ahab, requires one of his neighbors, (by command from the Lord
which he made known unto him) to smite him, to wit, with a sword, so as to
wound him, that thereby he might the better resemble a Soldier that had been
in the battle, and being wounded and bloody he might the better show Ahab what
he was to expect from the revenging hand of God for sparing Benhadad. But this
neighbor (preferring his own reason before the command of God) refused to
smite the Prophet, and was thereupon for his disobedience immediately slain by
a Lion as the Prophet threatened him. And hereby Gods anger against Ahab for his
miscarriage in not smiting Benhadad, (whom God had appointed to destruction)
under a pretense of clemency, was intimated. Then the Prophet met another man,
whom he bad (as he did the former) to smite him, and he smote him so that he
wounded him. Then the Prophet departed and waited for the King by the way and
disguised himself, putting ashes upon his face besmeared with blood, that it
could not easily be discerned who he was, that so the King not knowing him
might the more impartially give his judgment in the case propounded. As the
King passed by, he cried unto him, saying, Thy servant, O King, went out into
the midst of the battle, and behold a Commander in the Army turned aside to me,
and brought me a prisoner, and charged me to keep him safe, and to look to him
that he might not escape; if he did (he told me) my life should go for his, or
else I should pay a Talent A Talent of silver was reckoned at Three hundred
seventy five pounds of our money. A Talent of Gold was ten times as much.
of silver for my neglect. But so it was, as thy servant was busy here and
there the prisoner slipped away from me. Ahab replied, As thou have stated the
case so shall thy judgment be. Thou have decided the case against thy self, and
shall suffer accordingly. Then the Prophet washed off the ashes from his face,
so that the King knew him. And he said to Ahab, Thus says the Lord, because
thou have let Benhadad go, whom I put into thy hands, and whom I appointed to
utter destruction, (as Saul spared Agag) therefore thy life shall go for his
life, and thou thy self shall die for it, and thy people shall die instead of
his people. Possibly Ahab had been expressly charged not to spare Benhadad;
certain it is, the Prophet had told him, v. 28. that because he and his Syrians
had blasphemed the Lord, saying, He was the God of the hills and not of the
valleys, therefore he would deliver them into his hands. And therefore he could
not spare that blasphemous wretch without plain contempt of God who had
delivered him into his power. Ahab being thus self-convict went to his own
house in Samaria heavy and displeased with this doleful message of the Prophet.

1 King. 20. wh. Chapter

God had now given to Ahab great evidences of his Almighty power (and that he
was the true and only God) in giving rain in so strange a manner [ Chapter 18.45.]
and in giving him two such great and wonderful victories over the Syrians, as
we have seen in the foregoing Chapter. But yet none of these things (as it
seems) so far wrought upon him as to turn his heart to God. No mercies will
mend some kind of men, nor work upon their base and disingenuous tempers. We
have this fully exemplified in Ahab, of whom we are next to relate a remarkable
story.

Ahab had in Jezreel a Palace Royal, and near unto it one Naboth a Citizen of
that place had a Vineyard which Ahab's eye being often upon, he had a great
mind to it, and spoke to Naboth to let him have it, (to make a Garden of Herbs)
and he would either give him a better Vineyard for it, or the full worth of it
in money. Naboth considering that God had forbidden in his Law the perpetual
alienating of Inheritances, [Levit. 25.23.] told the King he could not do it
without sinning against God. Ahab hereupon went home heavy and displeased, and
so inwardly vexed that he laid him down upon his bed, and turned away his head
as not caring to speak to any body, and refused to eat. Jezebel his wife came
to him, and seeing him so much out of humor asked him what ailed him? He told
her the reason of it was Naboths refusing to sell him his Vineyard. Jezebel
answered, Art thou King of Israel, and do thou trouble thy self so much about
such a thing as this? cheer up thy heart and be merry; let me alone, see if I
do not procure this Vineyard for thee. Whereupon she presently wrote Letters in
Ahab's name to the Elders and Nobles of the City, and sealed them with the
Kings Seal, wherein she orders them to proclaim a Fast, (as if some high
wickedness had been committed against God that called for speedy humiliation
from all the people) and after that to set Naboth upon a Scaffold in the sight
of the people to be judged, and to suborn against him two false witnesses
(wicked fellows Sons of Belial that would swear any thing for money) that
should witness that he blasphemed God Lev. 24.15, 16. Exodus 21.17. Exodus 22.28.
and the King. And that upon this evidence they should condemn him, and then
immediately carry him out and stone him as a blasphemer. These Magistrates
(being it seems themselves wicked men) having received these orders, and being
desirous to ingratiate themselves with Jezebel, (and possibly willing and
forward enough to take off so good and conscientious a man as Naboth was) did
readily execute her bloody purpose in all particulars. Accordingly they
proclaimed a Fast, and then arraigned innocent Naboth, and condemned him upon
the testimony of two false witnesses by themselves suborned, and then stoned
him (and which was mor cruel and barbarous) with him (as it seems) his Sons
also, [see 2 King. 9.36.] which was directly against the Law of God, Deuteronomy.
24.16. and against all humanity, justice, and common equity. If this were done
(as some interpreters from the forementioned place suppose) it is like the
reason of it was that none might be left to lay claim to the Vineyard, and so
it might be forfeited to the King. These things being done, these good
Magistrates gave notice to Jezebel that they had executed her commands, and
Naboth was dead. Jezebel hearing this, went to Ahab and bad him go and take
possession of Naboths Vineyard, for now it was his. Ahab accordingly goes down
to Jezreel for that purpose. At the same time the word of the Lord came to
Elijah, and bad him go and meet Ahab (whose chief residence was at Samaria) but
he was now in Jezreel, and at this present in the Vineyard of Naboth, which he
was gone to take possession of, and possibly was now giving orders about it.
The Lord bad him when he came to him to speak to him after this manner, What!
have thou killed and taken possession? Well, I tell thee from the Lord,
according V. 19. Aliqui vertunt, propterea quod, aut eo quod aut quemadmodum.
Vide Belgic. Annot. and Poli.
as the dogs have licked the blood of Naboth so shall they lick thy blood, even
thine And thus the dogs licked the blood of Ahab in the Pool of Samaria, Chapter
22.38. and the dogs licked the blood of Joram, Ahabs Son, 2 King. 9.26. And his
dead body was cast out into that very place of ground where Naboth was stoned;
it was also in part fulfilled in Jezebel her self. See v. 33. of that Chapter.
. It argued a mighty faith and courage in Elijah that he durst deliver such a
message as this to Ahab, his servants and Courtiers being about him. But Gods
holy Prophets when strengthened by him, were as bold as Lions. Ahab hearing the
Prophet speak thus to him, What (says he) have thou found me O mine enemy? What
shall I never be at quiet for thee? Thus wicked men count those their enemies
who tell them of their faults. Elijah replies, Yes indeed I have found thee,
and am come to denounce Gods judgments against thee, because thou have sold thy
self to do evil If Ahab was not acquainted with the design of murdering
Naboth, yet he punished not the actors of it, but approved and ratified it by
taking possession of his Vineyard.
, and (as it were) wholly yielded up thy self to the service of the Devil to do
his will, and to work that which is evil in the sight of the Lord, [see 2 King.
17.17.] therefore thus says the Lord, I will bring evil upon thee, and take
away thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the
wall See Notes on Chapter 14.10.
, and him that is shut up and left in Israel. And will make thy house like the
house of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha See Chapter 16.3,
4, 11.
the Son of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou have provoked me to
anger, and thereby have made. Israel to sin. And as for Jezebel, the dogs shall
eat her by the wall of Jezreel. And as for him of the house of Ahab that dies
in the City the dogs shall eat None need wonder at these dreadful things
denounced against Ahab, for there was none of the Kings of Israel before him
like unto him, for he sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord,
Jezebel his wise stirring him up. He did very abominably in following Idols,
and that after the manner of the Amorites, (even the worst of the heathens)
whom God cast out before the children of Israel.
, and him that dies in the fields the fowls of the air shall eat. Elijah
having delivered this dreadful message departed. Ahab hearing these dismal
words, rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth, and fasted, and lay in
sackcloth, and went softly, that is, slowly and heavily as sorrowful men and
mourners used to do. Thus Ahab humbled himself out of fear of the vengeance
threatened against him, but did not truly repent of his sins he had committed.
However hereupon the Lord spoke to Elijah again, saying, See thou how Ahab
humbles himself before me? That the world therefore may see how well I accept
of true repentance, and serious humiliation, I will so far regard this seeming
humiliation of his (though I know he is not truly penitent) that I will defer
these my threatened judgments during his life, and will in his Sons days bring
these evils upon his house. It Is like Elijah was to acquaint Ahab herewith, and
thus God makes his Prophets messengers of good tidings as well as of evil. And
from hence we may observe how effectual true repentance and serious humiliation
and contrition is, and what it may assuredly expect from God when such an
humiliation as this of Ahabs was so far regarded. 1 King. 21. wh. Chapter

We have showed before that upon the Covenant made between Ahab and Benhadad
[Ch. 20.34.] there was a cessation of arms between them for three years, but
Ramoth-Gilead It was a goodly City, and belonged to the Levites, and was a City
of refuge, Josh. 21.38. therefore no wonder he was unwilling it should be any
longer in the hands of the Syrians.
not being all this while restored by Benhadad, Ahab at last resolved to take
it out of his hands by force. It seems Jehoshaphat King of Judah was now come
to visit Ahab. 'Twas strange that a King of Judah should go down to visit a
King of Israel, none of his predecessors had ever done it before him, but more
strange that a worshipper of the true God should go to visit such an Idolater
as Ahab was. See 2 Chronicles. 19.2. However Jehoshaphat being there, Ahab took
occasion to speak to his Counselors of State after this manner, Do you not
forget that Ramoth-Gilead (that goodly City, a City of the Levites, and a City
of refuge) is ours, and should have been restored to us by Benhadad, had he
performed his Covenant made with us; but he perfidiously keeps it from us, and
we are still and quiet. Then addressing himself to Jehoshaphat he asks him, if
he would please to join with him to recover it, and would go in person with him
to besiege it. Jehoshaphat replied, I am as thou art, my people as thy people,
my horses as thy horses. As if he should have said, I my self, my people, and
my horses are all at thy service, and ready to go and do as thou shall order,
even as if they were thine own. But he desired before they engaged in this
enterprise, that he would presently send to some holy Prophet and enquire by
him after the mind of the Lord whether it were his will they should undertake
this war? and whether he would prosper them in it? Ahab thereupon gathers
together his 400 Baalitish Prophets, viz. those of the Groves, which were
reserved from appearing to Elijah's Challenge, Chapter 18.19, 20. (thinking
possibly that Jehoshaphat by such a multitude would be the better persuaded of
the truth of what they said) and spoke unto them after this manner, What say
ye? shall we go against Ramoth-Gilead to battle, or shall we forbear? They
presently said, Go up, for the Lord will deliver it into thy hand. But though
they made use of the name of the Lord, yet they received not this answer from
him, but spoke as they thought was most agreeable to Ahab's humor. Jehoshaphat
was not satisfied with what they said, but suspecting their word was not from
the Lord, he asked if there were not besides these a Prophet of the Lords in the
land that they might enquire of? Ahab told him there was indeed one in Samaria,
Michaiah Some think this Michaiah was the Prophet that denounced the judgment
against Ahab, Chapter 20.42. and that thereupon he had put him in prison in Samaria
till now.
by name, but (says he) I hate him, for he does not use to prophecy good
concerning me but evil. Jehoshaphat replied, Let not the King say so; we ought
not to hate the Prophets of the Lord because they speak sometimes things that
do not please us. If they be the faithful servants of the Lord they must speak
the truth whatever it be. God forbid therefore the King should hate them for
that. Ahab hearing him say so, commanded an Officer to fetch Michaiah to him.
Then both the Kings sitting on Chairs of State (clad in their Royal Robes) in a
void place at the entrance of the Gate of Samaria, all the 400 Prophets of Baal
before mentioned came and Prophesied before them; that is, by strange affected
passionate gestures made show of Prophetical raptures. And Zedekiah the chief
of them made him horns Solebant Prophetae and verbis and signis eventus
praedicere.
of iron (thereby to signify the power of these two Kings) and said to Ahab,
Thus says the Lord, with these shall thou push the Syrians until thou have
destroyed them. And all the rest of those Prophets prophesied accordingly,
saying, Go up to Ramoth-Gilead and prosper, for the Lord shall deliver it into
the Kings hands. The messenger that went for Micaiah, as he was bringing him to
the King, said to him, Behold the rest of the Prophets have spoken good things
to the King, and that with one consent, let thy word therefore I pray thee be
like theirs, and speak things pleasing to him, and to the people. Micaiah
replied, As the Lord lives, what the Lord says unto me that will I speak. So
Micaiah came to the King, who spoke to him after this manner, Come, Micaiah,
what say thou to our design? shall we go against Ramoth-Gilead, or shall we
forbear? He answered, Go and prosper, the Lord will deliver it into thy hands,
if that which thy Prophets have told thee be true. The King said unto him, How
often shall I adjure thee that thou deal really with me, and tell me nothing but
that which is true, and which thou have received from the Lord. Micaiah then
said to him, I saw in a vision all Israel scattered upon the hills as sheep
that have no shepherd: implying, that the King (who was as the shepherd of the
people) should be slain, and thereupon the people should fly and be scattered.
When I saw this (says he) the Lord said to me, These have no Master (that is,
their King is slain) let them return every man to his own house in safety, and
escape with their lives. See v. 36. Ahab turning to Jehoshaphat said, Did not I
tell thee that he would prophecy no good to me but only evil? Micaiah upon
this said, seeing thou have adjured me to tell thee the truth in the name of
the Lord, I now will do it fully and plainly, I saw in a vision the Lord
sitting on his Throne Visio parabolica ut Job 1.6. dicuntur hac (...), ad
indicandum varios providentiae divinae modos quibus decreta sua ad exitum
perducit.
, and all the host of heaven, viz. the good Angels and Saints attending him on
his right hand, and on his left, and some evil spirits were mixed among them.
And the Lord said, who will persuade Ahab that he may go up and fall at
Ramoth-Gilead? and some of them spoke on this manner, and others on that. At
length there came an evil spirit and stood before the Lord and said, I will
persuade him. The Lord asked him, How he would do it? He answered, I will go
forth and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets; that is, I will
urge them, and put them on to lie to him and deceive him. For false Prophets
are instructed and moved by evil spirits as true Prophets are by the Spirit of
God. The Lord answers, I permit thee to go and to delude Ahabs Prophets with
lies, and by them to delude Ahab himself, and thou shall not miss but shall
effectually persuade and prevail. Go forth therefore and do as thou intendest,
for it is an act of justice seeing Ahab hated my Prophets and would not believe
them, that therefore he should be given up to believe lies. According to this
vision (O King) the Lord has permitted a lying spirit to enter into all these
thy Prophets, who has possessed their hearts and tongues, and they speak mere
lies unto thee when they tell thee that thou shall prosper in this expedition.
For assure thy self the Lord has determined evil against thee. Zedekiah
hearing this, stepped to him, and smote him on the cheek, and said to him which
way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak to thee? Micaiah returns not
blow for blow, but tells him thou shall find to thy cost that I have the Spirit
of God, and do declare the truth of God when thou shall see my Prophecy
exactly fulfilled, and when Ahab shall be slain, and his army worsted, on that
day thou shall hide thy self in an inner Chamber from Ahabs children and
friends who will seek thee out to slay thee as a false Prophet and a deceiver
of thy King, and to revenge the blood of the King, and the overthrow of the
Army upon thee. Ahab hearing these things looked upon them as mere dreams and
enthusiastical fancies, and so regarded them not. (Thus God judicially blinds
those whom he intends to destroy.) And being in a rage he orders them to carry
back Michaiah to Amon the Governor, and to Joash (the Son of Omri, who it
seems had some place of authority in the City) and to command them in his name
to put him again into prison, and to feed him with the bread of affliction, and
the water of affliction [see Deuteronomy. 16.3.] until he came again in peace. Micaiah
replys, If thou return at all in peace, the Lord has not spoken by me; and all
you that are here present take notice and observe what I say, and whither I am
a true Prophet or no. It Is strange that Jehoshaphat should see this holy
Prophet Micaiah thus injuriously used by a proud Priest of Baal, and afterward
sent away to prison, and yet speak never a word in his behalf; we may see from
hence how dangerous a snare, even to good men ill company is. But it is much
more strange that after the Prophet had told them so plainly what would be the
event of this expedition that he should yet join with Ahab therein. It seems
having joined himself lately in affinity with him, and engaged his word to him,
he was loath to shrink from it notwithstanding the threatenings of the Prophet,
and so he and Ahab went up to fight against Ramoth-Gilead. Ahab being (as it is
like) something inwardly troubled at the threatenings of Micaiah (though he
seemed outwardly to slight them) and having heard of the King of Syria's charge
to his Captains concerning himself, v. 31. viz. That they should fight neither
with small nor great save only with the King of Israel; that is, that they
should observe especially where he was, and to bend their main force against
him as the chief cause of the war; he told Jehoshaphat that he himself would go
into the battle disguised as an ordinary Commander, but advised him to put on
his Royal Robes, or such kind of Armor as was fit for the General of the
field, that he might appear like himself. This being accordingly done, when the
battle was joined, the Syrians seeing Jehoshaphat, they thought he had been the
King of Israel, and accordingly leaving all others assaulted the party where he
was, and compassed them about. Hereupon Jehoshaphat cried unto the Lord for
succor, who helped him in that great strait, and moved the Syrians to depart
from him; for (it seems) they gathered from some circumstance or other that he
was not the King of Israel, and so not the man they aimed at. Thus the Lord was
pleased by bringing Jehoshaphat into so great danger to let him see his folly
in joining with Ahab, notwithstanding the Prophets fair warning to the
contrary. But the battle going on against that party in which Ahab was, a
Syrian drew a bow at a venture, and the arrow (being directed by God) hit Ahab,
and entered between the joints of his harness and wounded him sorely. He being
thus wounded spoke to the driver of his chariot to carry him out of the host.
The battle growing fiercer and fiercer, it seems they had not time to dress his
wound, but only stayed him up in his chariot (in which he went out to fight
against the Syrians) and toward the evening he died, and his blood ran out of
his wound into the midst of the chariot. And thus at last the vengeance of God
fell upon him for his Idolatry, and persecuting the Prophets of the Lord, and
for the murder of Naboth. When the Commanders of the Army had notice of the
Kings death, they had no heart to continue the fight any longer, and so made
Proclamation about Sunsetting that every man should depart to his own Country
and to his own City. And so the word of the Prophet was fulfilled which he
spoke v. 17. I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills as sheep that have not a
shepherd; and the Lord said, These have no master, let them return every man to
his house in peace. Thus died Ahab, and was brought to Samaria, and was there
buried. And they washed his Chariot in the Pool of Samaria, (and possibly his
bloody Armor might be washed in Jezreel where his chief Armory was, and where
Naboth was killed) and the dogs licked up his blood according to the word of
the Lord which he spoke by Elijah, Chapter 21.19. And the rest of the Acts of Ahab,
and the Ivory house which he made See Amos 3.15.
, and the Cities of defense which he built, are written in the Chronicles of
the Kings of Israel, that is, in those large records and Chronicles which were
written for the use of those times, but were no part of Canonical Scripture,
and differed from the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah and Israel which we now
have. So Ahab slept with his fathers, having reigned 22 years in Israel, and
Ahaziah his Son reigned in his stead. 1 King. 22. from 1, to 41.

As soon as Ahab was dead all the land of Moab fell away from the Israelites.
David had subdued them, and made them tributary to him, see 2 Samuel 8.2. but
when the Ten Tribes revolted from the house of David the Moabites (as it seems)
revolted also from the Kingdom of Judah, and rather chose to be vassals to the
Kings of Israel, upon part of whose Kingdom their land bordered, and so they
continued to the days of Ahab. But now taking advantage from the late
discomfiture of the Israelites by the Syrians at Ramoth-Gilead, and the death
of Ahab, Mesha the present King of Moab refused any longer to pay the tribute
of an hundred thousand lambs, and an hundred thousand rams with their wool,
which before he paid to the Kings of Israel.

2 King. 1.1. and Chapter 3.4.5.

2 Chronicles. 18. from 3, to the end.

WE are now come to the second Book of the Kings, The Second Book of the KINGS.
which is a continuation of the History of the Kings of Israel from Ahab, and
of the Kings of Judah from Jehoshaphat, till Israel was destroyed by the
Assyrians, and Judah captivated by the Babylonians.

The time and order of their reigns we may see in this ensuing Table.

Kings of Judah.
Jehoram 8. years. Ahaziah 1. Athaliah 6. Joash 40. Amaziah 29. Vzziah 52.
Jotham 16. Ahaz 16. Hezekiah 29. Manasseh 55. Amon 2. Josiah 31. Jehoahaz or
Shallum, 3 Months. Eliakim or Jehoiakim 11. Jehoiakin 3 Month. and then carried
captive to Babylon. Mattaniah, alias Zedekiah The History of Ahaziah is partly
in the last Chapter of the first Book of Kings, and partly in 2 King. 1. And some
think the 2d Book of Kings should begin with the beginning of his reign.
. 11.
Kings of Israel.
Ahaziah So that 20 in all with Athaliah reigned in Judah, and 19 in Israel.
2 year. Jehoram or Joram 12. Jehu 28. Jehoahaz 17. Joash 16. Jeroboam 41.
Zachariah 6 Month. Shallum 1 Month. Menahem 10. Pekahiah 2. Pekah 20. Hoshea 9.
AHAZIAH began to reign over Israel in the 17th. year of Jehoshaphat King of
Judah, The 8th King that reigned in Israel was AHAZIAH.
and reigned two years. He did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the
way of his Father and of his Mother, and in the way of Jeroboam who made Israel
to sin, and he served Baal and worshipped him, and provoked the Lord God of
Israel to anger according to all that his Father had done, 1 King. 22. from 51
to the end.

As he was walking in his Palace at Samaria, some grate in the floor of the
Chamber where he was (whereby perhaps light was conveyed to the lower room) did
suddenly break, and so he fell through and was dangerously bruised with the
fall. In this extremity he sends messengers to inquire of Baalzebub the god of
Ekron, whither he should recover or no? This Idol was so famous that the Jews
used to call the Prince of Devils, Baalzebub, Mat. 12.24. An Angel of the Lord
sends Elijah to meet these Messengers, and to say unto them, Is it not because
there is not a God in Israel, that you go to inquire of Baalzebub the God of
Ekron? Therefore go back again to the King that sent you, and tell him what I
say unto you, and further acquaint him that he shall not come down from that
bed on which he is gone up to lie, but shall surely die. The Messengers
perceiving Elijah to understand the secret message they were sent about, and
hearing him also so peremptorily to foretell the Kings death, they knew he must
be some Prophet, though (it seems) they knew not his person. And accordingly
they went back to the King and told him faithfully what he had said. The King
asked them what manner of man he was? they told him an hairy man, and girt with
a leathern girdle John Baptist was thus attired to show that he was that other
Elijah that was to come, compare Mat. 3.4. with Mal. 4.5.
about his loins. Then the King knew it was Elijah the Tishbite, and being
enraged at this hard message, he resolved to have the life of him that sent it,
and possibly he was something also excited thereunto by his mother Jezebel, who
was as much incensed against Elijah as Herodias was against John Baptist, Mat.
14.8. Whereupon he sent a Captain of fifty with his fifty men to apprehend him,
who (he understood as it seems) was at Mount Carmel. The Captain coming to the
place where he was called to him, and as it is like (in a scornful deriding
manner) said, Thou that art esteemed a man of God, and take liberty to send
what bold messages thou please to the King, know thou that by me the King
commands thee to come down and to render thy self to me: If thou will not, I
have here those with me that will fetch thee down with a vengeance. Elijah
answered, If I be indeed a man of God (as thou scornfully calledst me) let fire
come down from heaven and consume thee and thy fifty. And immediately fire came
from heaven and consumed them. This judgment Elijah denounced out of an
extraordinary zeal for the glory of God, and by a special instinct of his
Spirit. And therefore when the Disciples of Christ out of a carnal desire of
revenge would have imitated this act of Elijah, they were reproved by our
Savior for it, who told them they knew not what manner of spirit they were of;
that is, they did not well consider from what frame of spirit that uncharitable
motion came. For those who are called to preach the Gospel are to show all
meekness and gentleness to men, and to desire and endeavor to save them, and
not to destroy them, Luke 9.54, 55. Ahaziah was nothing moved with this
dreadful judgment that had befallen his Captain and his men, but like a man
that neither feared God nor regarded the lives of his subjects, he sends
another Captain of fifty and his men to take the Prophet. This second Captain
shows himself as impudent as the former, and coming to Elijah said to him, O
man of God, thus says the King, Come down quickly. He not only commands him to
come down, but to do it speedily, implying that he would not be delayed, but
would drag him down by force, if he would not yield instantly. Elijah gave him
the same answer he had done the former Captain, saying to him, If I be a man of
God let fire come down from heaven and consume thee and thy fifty, which was
done immediately. And thus we see that like sins usually pull down like
judgments. One would have thought that Ahaziah should have been greatly
terrified with two such dreadful judgments as these were; but increase of
judgments increases some men's hardness and obdurateness. Therefore like a
desperate man, and as it were in defyance of God himself he sends a third
Captain with his men to take Elijah, but he being sensible of his extreme
danger, and terrified with what had befallen the two Captains and their men
that went before him: He, when he came to Elijah in a most humble posture fell
on his knees before him, and besought him, saying, O man of God, I pray thee
let my life and the lives of these fifty thy servants be precious in thy sight,
and do not suffer them as vile things to be cast away, nor deal with us as thou
did with the former Captains and their men, but be entreated to go along with
us to the King. An Angel from the Lord immediately spoke to Elijah to go along
with him, and bids him not be afraid, but to tell the King expressly what the
Lord had said. Elijah being assured of Gods protection readily goes, and tells
the King plainly from the Lord that he should die of that sickness. It may seem
strange that the King who was so enraged against the Prophet before, that he
sent no less than three Captains of fifty one after another to take him,
intending no doubt to kill him, for delivering so sad a message to his servants
concerning his death, yet now when he has the Prophet in his hands, and hears
him utter the same terrible things against him to his face, he should neither
speak not do any thing against him. So true is that of Solomon, that the hearts
of Kings are in the hands of God; Prove. 16.1. And as Elijah prophesied, so it
came to pass, for Ahaziah soon after died, having reigned two years, and
Jehoram his Brother reigned in his stead.

2 King. 1. from v. 2. to the end.

JEHORAM [or Joram, 2 King. The 9th. King of Israel, JEHORAM.
8.16.] second Son of Ahab succeeded his Brother Ahaziah, in the latter end of
the 18th. year of Jehoshaphat, and reigned twelve years. He did evil in the
sight of the Lord, but not like his Father or his Mother. He put away the Image
of Baal which his Father had made, but cleaved to the sins of Jeroboam, and
upheld still the Idolatry of the Golden Calves, 2 King. 3. from 1. to 4.

God now revealed to Elijah that he should shortly be taken up to heaven, as
appears Chapter 2.9. but first he commanded him to visit the Schools of the
Prophets, which were at Bethel and Jericho, that he might both by his counsel
and prayers leave a blessing among them, and perhaps that he might put into
their hands the Prophecy against Jehoram Son of Jehoshaphat King of Judah,
which some time after was to be delivered unto him, whereof mention is made, 2 Chronicles. 21.12.

Elijah therefore addressing himself to this journey, (immediately after which
he knew he was to be taken up into heaven) and not knowing (as it seems)
whither the Lord would allow any witnesses to be present to see his Ascension,
or desiring to be alone that he might the better prepare himself for this his
strange passage to the other world, or desiring to try the constancy of
Elisha's love to him, and to discover whither God had revealed any thing to him
concerning this his assumption, or whatever else the reason was, when he was
going from Gilgal, he advised Elisha to stay there. But Elisha told him, As the
Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee, showing therein his
grateful faithfulness to his Master. So they came down together to Bethel In
his locis erant Prophetarum conventus, quos Reges Israel quamvis Idololatrae
passi sunt. Quod singulari Dei Providantia factum est ne populus ipsius
praesidio verbi sui penitus denudaretur. P. Martyr.
, (which City was indeed since the division of the Kingdom won by Abijam, 2 Chronicles. 13.19.) but it seems it was afterward recovered, and was at this
present in the hands of the Kings of Israel. The Sons of the Prophets that
dwelt there came to Elisha (Elijah probably not being by) and said to him,
know thou not that the Lord will take thy Master from thy head this day Id
est brevi non enim uno die consecerunt hoc iter. A capite tuo, a praesentia
tua, vel a capite tuo, i. e. sursum rapitur, nempe in caelum. Some think here
is an allusion to the Elder Prophets sitting in high places in their Schools
above the heads of the younger, and the younger sitting in lower places, and as
it were at their feet, Act. 22.3.
? that is, take him up and carry him over thy head to heaven. It seems the Lord
had revealed Elijah's assumption unto some of them Deus eos qui cum Prophetis
vivebant paulatim assuefaciebat Prophetiae, nunc hoc, nunc illud de consiliis
suis ipsis aperiens. Grot.
, thereby inuring them by degrees to receive Prophetical revelations. They
therefore ask Elisha whither he were not acquainted that Elijah should be taken
up from him into heaven very shortly? He tells them, He knew it very well, they
needed not enter into any discourse with him about it. Elijah would have had
Elisha stay here, telling him that he himself must go up to Jericho, (where was
another School of the Prophets) which he also must visit. Elisha answers him,
as he did before, viz. that he would not leave him. So they came together to
Jericho. The Sons of the Prophets there also having Elijah's assumption
revealed to them, they asked Elisha the same question that those of Bethel had
done, and he gave them the same short answer. Elijah would have had Elisha to
have stayed here, telling him that as for himself the Lord had ordered him to
go to Jordan. And hereby he tried his constancy and faithfulness to him a third
time, as our Savior tried Peter's love, Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. Elisha tells him
again as he did before, He would not leave him. So they two went on. Fifty Sons
of the Prophets of Jericho, (knowing what was to be done) went and stood,
though at some distance in the sight of the place where Elijah was to be taken
up to heaven. This was so ordered by Divine Providence that there might be many
witnesses of Elijah's assumption Thus was our Savior taken up, while many
beheld it, Act. 1.9.
. Elijah and Elisha coming to the River Jordan, Elijah took his mantle and
wraping it together, he smote the waters and they were divided hither and
thither, and so they two went over on dry ground. See Josh. 3.17. When they
were come to the other side of Jordan, Elijah said to Elisha, Ask what I shall
do for thee (as Gods instrument) or what I shall crave of God for thee? Elisha
said, I pray thee let a double portion of thy spirit be conferred upon me; that
is, a great and eminent measure of the gifts of the Spirit wherewith thou art
endued, even double to what other Prophets usually receive, seeing I am to
succeed in thy room, [1 King. 19.16.] and to be a Father to the Schools of the
Prophets, and to be chiefly employed in opposing the daring corruptions of the
times; Elijah said to him, Thou have asked an hard thing, that is, a thing not
easy to be obtained, and which God does rarely bestow on his servants the
Prophets; nevertheless if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be
done. And this condition possibly was added to make Elisha the more heedful in
observing the manner of Elijah's departure, that he might be an eye witness
thereof, as the men of Galilee were of our Saviors Ascension, Act. 1.10, 11.
As these two great Prophets were talking together ( Elijah having informed
Elisha as it is probable of such matters as should fall out in Israel after his
departure) behold there appeared a fiery splendid apparition (not in a
terrifying but in a glorious manner) of a chariot of fire drawn by horses of
fire. The holy Angels appearing in this form and shape to conveigh Elijah to
heaven. See Psalm. 104.4. And hereby the Lord did highly honor his faithful
servant Elijah whose soul was inflamed with such an heroic and servent zeal
for the glory of his Creator. This fiery apparition coming between these two
Prophets, and parting them asunder, (as the nearest and dearest friends must at
last part) Elijah went up into this glorious chariot, and a whirlwind carried
it up to heaven; to which glorious place he was carried up in soul and body
like Enoch, so that he died not but was changed in a moment, his corruptible
body putting on incorruption, and his mortal body immortality. And thus he was
a type of Christ's Ascension; and hereby God was pleased to give a clear and
evident proof that he had prepared the Heaven of Heavens for the perpetual
abode of his Saints, and that though our bodies be laid for a while in the
grave, yet they shall at last be taken up into Heaven, being first fitted for
that glorious state, and there shall live with God in everlasting bliss and
glory. Elisha seeing his Master thus ascend to heaven, he cried out, My father,
my father, the Chariot of Israel and the Horsemen thereof; so he styles him in
allusion to the present manner of his triumphant ascending in a fiery chariot
into heaven, as also in allusion to his former course of life, who by his
prayers and other good endeavors to bring men unto God, had been a better
defense to Israel than visible Chariots and Horsemen could possibly be. Elijah
thus vanishing out of his sight, Elisha took hold of his own clothes and rent
them in testimony of his great grief for the loss of his Master. Elijah's
mantle as he went up to heaven fell from him, which Elisha readily took up, and
(as it is probable) afterward wore it as a token that God had designed him to
succeed in his place Elisha began to be a famous Prophet in the second year of
Jehoram, and continued so about sixty years, and died in the days of Joash
Grandson of Jehu.
. Elisha having now seen this glorious translation of Elijah, he returned to
Jordan, and with Elijah's mantle in his hand standing on the bank of the river,
he said, Where is the Spirit of the Lord God of Elijah? O that the Lord would
now please to work by me as he did by him? So that his words are not to be
looked upon as words of distrust, but as words of invocation. As if he should
have said, O Lord who by thy servant Elijah did divide these waters, make it
now manifest (by inabling me to work the same miracle) that thou have given me
the spirit of Elijah my Master. Then smiting the waters with Elijah's mantle,
the waters immediately parted asunder, and so he went over, and this was the
first miracle that he wrought. When the fifty Prophets before mentioned, (who
were come come out to see Elijah's assumption, and dwelt at Jericho) saw him
come through Jordan, they said, the spirit of Elijah does rest on Elisha; that
is, such gifts of the Spirit as were bestowed on Elijah are now conferred on
Elisha; for like miracles argue a like spirit. Then they went to meet him, and
bowing themselves to the ground before him, congratulated the gift the Lord had
bestowed on him. It had been revealed to them (as we showed before) that Elijah
should be carried up to Heaven, but whither he should be so taken up as there
to remain for ever, or only for a certain time, that (it seems) they knew not;
wherefore they had a mind to go and see whither they could not find him set
down some where or other on the earth again; accordingly they said to Elisha,
Behold there are with us thy servants no less than fifty strong men fit to
undertake a journey, let us go (we pray thee) and seek thy Master, for possibly
he is not taken away from thee for ever, but for a certain time only; possibly
the Spirit What was done by the supernatural power and working of God they used
to say was done by the Spirit of God.
of God has carried him to some remote place (as he used sometimes to be
carried, see 1 King. 18.12. The like we read concerning Philip when he had
baptized the Ethiopian Eunuch, Act. 8.39.
) and has set him down upon some mountain, or some valley, and there we may
find him. He tells them that he knew that Elijah was carried up both in soul
and body to heaven, and was there to remain for ever, and it would be in vain
to seek him on the earth any more. But they urged him still to let them go,
insomuch that he was ashamed they should be so importunate without any reason;
however seeing they were so bent upon it he let them go, that they might by
their own experience see their error and folly, and might be the more fully
assured of Elijah's ascent into heaven ever after. They accordingly went out
and sought Elijah very diligently three days (Elisha tarrying at Jericho till
their return) but they found him not, and so through their error and mistake
the ascension of Elijah to heaven was the more confirmed, as was our Saviors
Resurrection by Thomas's doubting. The men of Jericho now (possibly to try
whither Elisha had indeed the Spirit of Elijah) told him the situation of their
City was pleasant, (as he knew very well) but the water was naught, and the
ground about it barren. The sins of the inhabitants (and perhaps the
presumptuous reedifying of Jericho by Hiel the Bethelite in the days of Ahab, 1
King. 26.34.) had brought this curse upon the place. Elisha being willing to
exercise the power of that Spirit the Lord had given him, bad them bring him a
new cruse, and putting salt therein, he went to the springhead and cast salt
thereinto (being directed by God to use that means) and he said, thus says the
Lord I have healed these waters, there shall not be henceforth any deadly or
poisonous quality in them, neither shall the land here about be barren.
Accordingly the waters were healed and made good, and so continued even to the
time that this History was written. And this was Elisha's second miracle. Then
from Jericho he went to Bethel to visit the College of the Prophets there, and
to confirm them in the truth by his counsel and exhortations. As he was going
up to the City, some young children that were, as it is like, the children of
Idolaters, or other wicked men that lived there (who it seems had by their
example taught their children to scoff at the Lords Prophets, and to laugh at
the report spread abroad of Elijah's being carried up to Heaven) cried after
Elisha, and said, Go up thou bald-head, Go up thou bald-head; as if they should
have said, You that report your Master is gone up to heaven, why do not you
follow him, and go up after him? Elisha turned and looked upon them, and by a
special instinct and commission from God, He cursed them in the name of the
Lord, who now intended to punish the wickedness of the Parents in the death of
their ill nurtured children, and to show how severely he would revenge the
reproaching of his servants the Prophets; and immediately there came forth two
shebears out of the wood that was hard by, and tore two and forty of them to
pieces. And this was Elisha's third miracle. Then he went into the City. It Is
strange he durst go into Bethel after he had brought such a death upon so many
of their children. But he went under Gods protection, who he knew was able to
defend him as he had done his Master against the fury of Ahaziah. And
accordingly neither the Parents of these children thus destroyed, nor any other
Idolatrous persons in that City durst set upon him, God so overawed their
spirits. From Bethel he went to mount Carmel, (whither Elijah often resorted,
having as it is probable an habitation there) and that being a private place,
possibly Elisha chose now to go thither, that he might be the more retired, and
might the more give himself to prayer, from thence after some time he went to
Samaria, in which (being a populous City) he had more work to do, and more
opportunity to instruct the people, and from thence he went along with the Army
that shortly after went against the Moabites, which undoubtedly he did by the
special instinct and direction of the Spirit of God. 2 King. Chapter 2. whole
Chapter.

Mesha King of Moab upon Ahab's death refused to pay the Tribute which the
Moabites formerly paid to the Kings of Israel, [see v. 5.] and Ahaziah being
King but a little while, (and most part of that time possibly bedrid by reason
of the hurt received by his fall) he could not undertake the reducing of them.
Jehoram therefore now attempts it as soon as he came to the Crown The Moabites
being formerly Tributary to David and Solomon, they had revolted from the King
of Judah, and given themselves to be vassals to Jeroboam and his Successors,
and so had continued till this time.
; wherefore going through all the Tribes of Israel, he mustered all that were
fit for war, and sent to Jehoshaphat King of Judah to desire his assistance in
this war against the Moabites, who were enemies to both Nations, and had not
long before joined with Ammon and Edom against him. See 2 Chronicles. 20.
Jehoshaphat sent him word he would willingly join with him against them, and
that himself, his people, and his horses should be ready to go and do for him
according as he should order, and as if they were all his own. See 1 King.
22.4. It may seem strange Jehoshaphat should so readily join with Jehoram,
having been so sharply reproved before from the Lord for joining with Ahab his
Father, see 2 Chronicles. 19.2. and afterward punished by the Lord for joining with
Ahaziah his Son to make ships to go to Tarshish, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. But possibly he
thought this Jehoram a better man than either his Father or Brother, seeing he
had put down the image and worship of Baal, and so had given some hopes he
would proceed to a further reformation. When their Armies were met together,
Jehoram asked him which way they should go up to fight against Moab? Jehoshaphat
advised that they should go through the Wilderness of Edom, that they might
take the King or Viceroy of Edom and his forces along with them (who at this
time were Tributaries to Judah) and so might come upon the Moabites by a way
they little expected. They agree to take this course, and so they fetched a
compass of seven days march about the Wilderness of Edom; at last when they
came near the Moabites, they were sore distressed for water, insomuch that all
these three Armies, and their horses were in great danger of perishing for want
of it. Jehoram seeing their present distress, cried out, Alas that the Lord
should bring three Kings together to deliver them into the hands of the
Moabites! we are so infeebled through want of water that we can neither go
forward, nor can return back, and so must needs become a prey to our enemies.
Thus he impiously reflecteth the blame of their distress upon God, and not on
their own sins that had brought them into this great strait. And God hereby
discovered to Jehoshaphat his sin in joining with Jehoram without consulting
him first about it; but now being by this judgment made wiser, he asks, Is
there not some holy Prophet here, who may inquire of the Lord for us, and
direct us what we should do? One of the Kings servants answered, Here is Elisha
who poured water Sic solvere corrigium calceamenti, idem est quod servire.
on the hands of Elijah; that is, ministered unto him, and was his servant. It
was undoubtedly by the special instinct of the Spirit of God that Elisha was
come along with the Army into these deserts of Edom, and that he was not far
from the Camp at this time. Jehoshaphat was glad to hear that he was there
(being the disciple of so great a Prophet, and possibly known at this time by
his own fame) for (says he) the word of the Lord is with him, intimating that
he was a Prophet of the true God, and consequently able to counsel them from
God. Upon this, all these three Kings went down to him to speak with him. It Is
strange they did not send for him to come to them; But possibly Jehoshaphat
knowing how much the Prophets of the Lord were at that time slighted and
despised, advised the other Kings rather to go to him, that by doing him this
great honor they might let the people see how much they esteemed him. When
these Kings were come to Elisha, he looking upon Jehoram said, What have I to
do with thee? Get thee to the Prophets of thy Idolatrous Father and Mother
(whom thou toleratest in Israel, and some of which are now in the Camp) and see
if they can help thee in this thy extremity. Jehoram mildly answered, nay
Elisha do not speak of these things now; the Lord has brought us three Kings
together with our Armies, and has brought us into such great straights, that
we are like to fall into the hands of the Moabites, if he do not presently help
us. Elisha replies, As the Lord of hosts lives, before whom I stand, were it
not that I respect the presence of Jehoshaphat King of Judah, I would not look
toward thee, nor regard thee. Having said thus, and finding his spirit
something disturbed at the thoughts of Jehoram's Idolatry, he calls for a
Minstril, that is, one skilful in singing, or playing on instruments to compose
and calm his affections. And when the Minstril played (and possibly sang some
songs of praise to God) the hand of the Lord was upon Elisha, viz. the spirit
of Prophecy came upon him Prophetia est donum actuale, non habituale.
, whereby he was enabled to give counsel and advice to these Kings, and to
foretell what should come to pass. Which abilities the Prophets had not at all
times, but only then when it pleased the Lord to give them to them, and
sometimes they were to prepare themselves for the receiving of them. Elisha
hereupon being instructed from the Lord, bids them make the valley (where they
were) full of ditches, and though they should perceive no wind, (which is the
ordinary means of gathering the clouds together, and causing them to shower
down rain) nor see any rain falling from heaven, yet the valley should be
filled with water, so that they and their cattle should be abundantly supplied.
Nay (says he) besides the mercy which ye so much desire, viz. a supply of
water, the Lord will do a greater thing for you than that, viz. He will deliver
the Moabites into your hands, and ye shall smite every fenced City, and every
choice City that had the fairest Edifices in it, and shall fell every good
tree. This by the general rule of the Law [Deut. 20.19.] they might not do,
(viz. in those Countries they should subdue for their own use and habitation)
but here the Prophet by special direction from God enjoined them to do it for
the punishing of the Moabites, being a people devoted by him to ruin and
destruction. Further he tells them they shall stop up their wells, and mar and
spoil the best pieces of their land by casting stones into them. Accordingly
the next morning about the time of the ordinary morning sacrifice Virtus
sacrificii cooperata est ad hoc miraculum: signum est Elisaum tunc preces suas
conjunxisse cum precibus populi in Templo orantis. Videntur omnes fideles
Israelitae ubicunque suissent illis horis. Deum pro necessitatibus Ecclesiae
atque Reipublicae orasse, ut suas preces una cum illis, qui praesentes
oblationibus aderant, copularent. Martyr.
which was offered on on the Altar at the Temple [see Exodus 29.39.] when the
faithful servants of God were at their devotions, they saw water running along
from the Country of Edom down to this wilderness, (there being no springhead
or river, or such like means from whence it could come) and yet the valley was
filled with water. And this is the fourth miracle wrought by Elisha. The
Moabites understanding that these three Kings were come to fight against them,
they gathered together all that were able to put on armor, or use weapons,
both younger and elder, and they stood at the border of their land to defend
their Country, and keep out their enemies. And rising early in the morning to
see whither the enemy were near them, when the Sun arose, its beams shining
upon the waters, made them seem to them at that distance as if it had been
blood. So that they thought the place where the Israelites were was all bloody
There use to arise some vapors out of the waters which the Sun at its rising
not dispelling, but shining weakly through them, it makes them appear read as
blood.
, which they thought had happened by their slaughtering one another. And that
which induced them the rather to think so was because the like had before
befallen their people when they went with the Ammonites and Edomites against
Jehoshaphat, at which time dissension arising amongst them, they fell upon and
slew one another, see 2 Chronicles. 20.22, 23. And they thought the like had now
happened among these Kings that had combined against them, not imagining there
could be any water in those dry and sandy deserts. Hereupon they encouraged one
another, and gave the word, Moab to the spoil. So leaving their own borders
they came to the Camp of the Israelites, whom they found contrary to their
expectation ready to receive them, and by them they were totally routed and
vanquished, and pursued into their own Country; and then the Israelites
performed what the Prophet had before told them they should do concerning
beating down their Cities, and cutting down their Trees, and stopping up their
wells, and where ever they came in the land of Moab they did what they could to
spoil their Country; at last they laid siege with all their three Armies to
Kirharaseth (the chief City of the Moabites, see Isa. 16.7.) whither the King
of Moab had fled with a party of his Soldiers, and though they could not
presently take it, nor demolish the Stone-walls thereof, yet the Slingers went
about it, (that is the Engineers) who with violence shooting stones out of
their Engines did much batter it. When the King of Moab saw that his enemies
were too strong for him, and like to take the City, he sallied forth with 700
men upon that quarter where the King of Edom lay, hoping to break through and
so to escape. But he found Edom's quarter better manned and stronger than he
imagined, so as he was forced to retreat back into the City. Being now straightly
begirt, and not knowing what course to take to help himself, in this his
desperate distress he took his own son Had it been the King of Edoms Son (as
some imagine from Amos 2.1.) this barbarous fact would have so enraged him and
the other two Kings that they would have pressed the Siege the more vehemently,
that they might have been revenged on the King of Moab for it. As for that
place Amos 2.1. it speaks of burning the King of Edom, not the King of Edoms
Son, and therefore seems to be meant of some other savage act of cruelty in the
Moabites against the King of Edom.
and heir, and according to the blind and abominable superstition of the
Gentiles, sacrificed him as a burnt-offering on the wall to his Idol Chemosh,
[see 2 King. 23.13.] that with so precious a sacrifice he might prevail with
him for help. After this prodigious act of blind superstition, both the King of
Moab and the inhabitants of the City were more bitterly enraged against the
Israelites than ever, and were resolved to fight it out to the last man rather
than yield, which the Israelites understanding, and being perhaps moved with
some compassion upon that lamentable spectacle they had seen of the burning the
young Prince of Moab upon the wall, they raised the siege and went away home.
And it seems the Kings of Judah and Edom were greatly incensed against the King
of Israel, because his wrath against Moab had given occasion to this horrid
act. 2 King. 3. from v. 4, to the end.

Elisha now returning out of Moab into Israel, a certain widow of one of the
Prophets cried unto him, saying, Thy servant my husband is dead, and died in
debt, being not able to pay what he owed; but he would willingly have paid it
if he could, for thou know he was a man that truly feared the Lord. And now
behold my husbands creditor not finding goods sufficient with me to discharge
the debt, is come to take my two Sons for bondmen, either that he himself may
use them as such, or sell them to others, to repay himself for that I owe him
Liberi jure Hebraeo res parentum, and ob parentum debita vendi poterant ut
patet ex Isa. 50.1. and Mat. 18.25.
. See Levit. 25.39. Elisha answered, What shall I do for thee? what have thou
in the house which may go toward the payment of thy debt? She said, I have
nothing of any value in the house (besides the beds we lie on, and some few
other necessaries) save only one pot of oil. He bad her go and borrow of all
her neighbors empty vessels, and to borrow a good many, he intending she
should have enough to discharge the debt to the full. And (says he) when thou
art come in thou shall shut the door upon thee and upon thy two Sons, that the
work the Lord intends to do for thee may not be interrupted, nor any others
come in and seek to share with thee in the oil the Lord intends to give thee.
And then pour out of thy own pot of oil into those empty vessels thou have
borrowed, and as one vessel after another is full, set it aside, and do the
like by the next till all are filled. The Prophet having given her these
directions, she believed his word, and did accordingly; and her Sons brought
the vessels to her, and thereby testified also their faith in God. And when all
the vessels they had borrowed were full, she (not knowing it seems she had
filled them all) called for another vessel; for still the vessel out of which
she poured continued to have oil in it. One of her Sons told her there was not
an empty vessel left. And immediately the oil ceased when there were no more
vessels to hold it, God not being willing to manifest his extraordinary power
further than there is need. Then the widow came to the man of God, and told
him how she had sped. He bad her go and sell the oil, and therewith in the
first place to pay her debts, and then she and her children might live upon the
remainder, teaching thereby that she ought first to be careful that she be
just, and to pay what she owes before she provides for her self and children, 2
King. 4. from v. 1, to 8.

Not long after as Elisha went up and down seeking opportunities of doing good,
it happened that he came to Shunem (a City in the Tribe of Issachar not far
from Mount Carmel) where dwelt a Gentlewoman of great quality, a pious and
prudent Matron, who very friendly and kindly entertained him at her Table. The
Prophet having been so kindly entertained there, as often as he passed by that
way, he used to visit that family that he might do some good among them, as
well as eat bread with them. The Gentlewoman at last said to her husband, I
perceive this is a very holy man of God, and a person of singular sanctity, who
uses to visit us as he passes by; I pray thee let us make a little Chamber
for him on the top of the house In Hebraeo est sublimitatem parietis parvam, i.
e. Conclave sublime parvum seperatum a nostris aedibus.
, and let it be separated by a wall or partition from our other rooms that so
he may be there private and undisturbed; and let us provide for him a bed, and
a table, and a stool, and a candlestick, and when he comes this way let him be
there lodged and accommodated. Her husband agreeing hereunto, this Chamber was
accordingly made and furnished. Shortly after Elisha coming thither took up his
lodging in the new Chamber provided for him. The Prophet finding himself so
kindly entertained by this Gentlewoman, began to think how he should recompense
her, and that the kindness he intended might be the more acceptable, he desired
to know what would be most agreeable unto her; for such kindnesses are usually
the best which best suit our present necessities. Accordingly he bad his
servant Gehazi to go to her, and to say to her from him, Behold thou have been
very careful for us and have expressed much kindness to us, what is there that
I can do for thee that will be pleasing unto thee? Have thou any suit to make
to the King, or to the General of the Army? If thou have, I think I have so
much interest in both their favors (since I was with them at Moab) that I can
serve thee, and I will readily undertake thy business It seems the succor and
supply of water that Elisha had afforded the three Kings when they went against
Moab had brought him into great favor at Court.
. The Gentlewoman replied, I dwell quietly and contentedly here among my own
people, among my neighbors and friends, in a condition not so high as to be
envied, nor so low as to be despised or trampled upon; and though I thankfully
accept thy Masters offer, yet I pray thee acquaint him that I have no need at
present of his friendship at the Court But she needed a friend at Court
afterward, 2 King. 8.3, 4. viz. when Gehazi obtained that her land should be
restored to her again.
. Gehazi carrying back this answer to Elisha, he said to him what shall we do
to gratify this good woman? for though Elisha was so great a Prophet, yet he
disdained not in some cases to consult and advise with his servant. Gehazi
understanding that she had no children, he told his Master that he thought a
child of all things in the world would be most acceptable unto her, especially
seeing both her husband and her self were well in years, and I suppose (says
he) thou can by thy prayers unto God obtain such a blessing for her. Elisha
accordingly prayed to the Lord for her, and obtaining a gracious answer bad
Gehazi go and call her to him. When she came, she stood in the door, thereby
expressing her modesty that she would not enter into the Prophets Chamber
(though it were in her own house) till he himself invited her in. The Prophet
having now received a revelation from God about this matter, he told her that
about that time About this season according to the time of life, that is, about
this time of life, the year returning as it is now. Secundum tempus vivens, h.
e. hoc ipso tempore vigente and revertente. Junius vide Genesis 18.10.
next year (that is, the year returning to what it was then) she should bring
forth a Son, and embrace him in her arms; she being strangely surpised at
this, replied, O my Lord thou man of God, do not deceive thy poor handmaid with
the promise of a thing that is not at all like to come to pass. Thus like Sarah
[Gen. 18.13.] being something doubtful, and as it were betwixt hope and fear,
she desires to be further satisfied. Hereupon the Prophet assured her it would
be so, and accordingly it came to pass; for not long after she conceived, and
at the time of the next year which the Prophet mentioned, she bare a Son to her
own and her husband's great joy and comfort. This was Elisha's sixth miracle.
This child afterward (being grown up) went out one morning into the field to
his Father who was with his Reapers; whither being come he said to his Father,
O my Father my head, my head aches extremely. His Father bad one of his younger
servants to carry him home presently to his Mother, who taking him and setting
him on her knees about noon he died in her arms. Thus we see how God in his
infinite wisdom often tries his dearest servants in their dearest outward
enjoyments. See Genesis 22.2. His mother perceiving that he was dead, she took and
laid him on the Prophets bed and shut the door, having some inward hope (as it
seems) that he might be restored to life again by Elisha's prayers; and perhaps
she the rather hoped it, because she had heard that Elijah had restored to life
a widows son as we read 1 King. 17.21. Then going to her husband, (but not
acquainting him with the death of the child) she desired him to let her have
one of the servants out of the field to attend her, and one of the asses that
she might make have to the man of God, and she would speedily come again. Her
husband not imagining (as it seems) that the child had been so sick, much less
that he had been dead, asks her why she would go then? it was neither New Mood
nor Sabbath, on which days they usually went (as it seems) to the Prophets to
be instructed, and not often on other days. She replied, It will be well
enough, the Prophet will take no offense at my coming. Then she ordered her
ass to be immediately sadled, and getting up spoke to her servant that rode on
another ass before her, that he should ride apace and not slack, except she
called to him to do it. When they came near to mount Carmel where Elisha dwelt,
he (it seems) was sitting at his door talking with his servant, and seeing her
coming at some distance, said to Gehazi, Behold yonder comes the Shunamite, who
has showed us so much kindness; run and meet her, and ask her if all be well
with her, and with her husband and the child? Gehazi accordingly meeting her,
and asking her that question, she answered him very briefly, It is well, as not
being willing by talking to him to be hindered from going to the Prophet his
Master; and her answer must be understood as directed to the two former
questions concerning her self and her husband; as for the last she reserved her
answer to that till she should come to speak with the Prophet himself. When she
was come to him, being transported with the vehemence of her passion, she
kneeled down and caught hold of his legs, intimating she would not leave him
till she had some comfortable answer from him. Gehazi apprehending her to be
too troublesome to his Master, came near to thrust her away. But Elisha bad him
let her alone, for (says he) I perceive her spirit is much grieved within her,
and the Lord has not revealed unto me what the matter is. Then she told him,
Her Son was dead. And (says she) if I had been like Rachel [Gen. 30.1.]
inordinately desirous of a Son, I might justly think that to be the reason that
I was so soon deprived of him. But this Son being freely given me without any
request of mine, and of thy own motion without my asking, Why am I now so soon
bereft of him? I hope thou will by thy prayers endeavor to have him restored
to me again. And this was a great evidence of her faith by which she received
her dead raised to life again, Heb. 11.35. Then Elisha spoke to his servant,
saying, Gird up thy loins, and take my staff in thine hand, and go with all
have to the house where the dead child is, not staying by the way to offer or
answer any courtesies or civilities, and when thou art come thithither, lay my
staff on the face of the child. But the mother said as the Lord lives, and as
thy soul lives I will not leave thee till thou go with me thy self. The
Prophet thereupon arose and went with her, but Gehazi got thither before them,
and laid the staff on the face of the child, but no evidence of life followed
thereupon, for the child neither spoke nor heard any noise. Possibly had not
Elisha yielded to go himself the staff might have been effectual, but now the
Lord was pleased to withhold his power and help till the Prophet himself came.
Wherefore Gehazi seeing he could not raise the child to life again, went to
meet his master and told him the child was not restored to life by the means he
had used. Elisha coming to the house found the child dead, and laid upon his
bed; shutting therefore the door to himself, he prayed unto the Lord, and then
laid himself upon the child, putting his mouth to the child's mouth, and his
eyes and hands upon the child's eyes and hands as near as he could, in imitation
possibly of his Master Elijah, [1 King. 17.21.] and stretching himself upon the
child, his flesh began to be warm, this was the first sign that life began to
come into him; then taking two or three turns in his Chamber, he stretched
himself upon the child again, then the child neesed seven times, and opened his
eyes, which was a sign that he was perfectly restored to life. Then he bad his
servant call the Shunamite, who being come he bad her take up her Son who was
now alive again. She transported with joy fell at his feet in token of her
reverence and thankfulness, and taking up her Son, and hugging him in her arms
brought him down into the house. This was Elisha's seventh Miracle. 2 King. 4.
from v. 8, to 38.

Elisha not long after tells this Gentlewoman that God for the sins of the
people had called for a famine to come upon the land which would last seven
years, and therefore bad her go with her family where she could be best
accommodated till the famine was over; and accordingly (she believing the
Prophet) went with her family (her husband as it is probable being now dead) and
sojourned in the land of the Philistines, there being peace (as it seems) at
this time between them and the Israelites, and no famine in their Country. For
though they were a wicked people, yet God was more provoked by the Idolatry and
other wickednesses of his own people than by them, who had not the means of
grace which his own people enjoyed, 2 King. 8.1, 2.

The famine being now in the land, Elisha goes to Gilgal to visit the college
of the Prophets there, and they sat before him to be instructed by him. He bad
his servant set on the great pot and sees pottage for the Sons of the
Prophets. It happened that one going forth to gather herbs for the pottage
chanced to light upon Coloquintida (somewhat like a vine) the gourds, that is,
the leaves and branches thereof being bitter and poisonous; and gathering a
lap-full of them (not knowing their nature) shred them into the pottage. When
the Sons of the Prophets came to eat of it, finding it of so bitter and of so
unsavory a taste, they cried out to Elisha, O thou man of God, death is in the
pot; we fear our broth is poisoned, and will poison all of us that eat of it.
The Prophet bad them cast meal into the pot. Not that meal had in it self any
virtue to draw out bitterness or poison, but that it might appear that the
virtue of healing their pottage came from God alone, the Prophet commanded them
to use that means. They doing as he bid them, and he knowing that all danger
was now over, said to them, Pour out now for the Sons of the Prophets, and they
did eat thereof, and found no harm thereby. This was Elisha's eighth Miracle, 2
King. 4. from 38, to 42.

About this time there came a man from Baalshalisha It was called Shalisha
before, 1 Samuel 9.4. but since Baal was set up there, Baalshalisha.
(a place in Ephraim) and brought the man of God bread of the first fruits,
viz. twenty loaves of barley, and full ears of corn in the husk thereof, such
as were under the Law appointed to be brought to the Priests, Deuteronomy. 18.4. This
was certainly some pious man, and one that feared God, seeing in obedience to
the Law he was willing to dedicate of his first fruits unto the Lord, but
because he could not carry them to the Lords house as the Law required, Exodus
23.19. Numb. 18.12. nor to the ordinary Priests (they being retired into Judah)
he brought them to this extraordinary Prophet, and to this College of Prophets
(who instructed the people instead of the Priests) and the rather that he might
supply their necessities in this present dearth. Thus he honored God with his
first fruits, Prove. 3.9. Elisha bids his servant to set those loaves this man
had brought before the Sons of the Prophets that they might eat. His servant
answered, What shall I set this small quantity of provision before an hundred
men? The Prophet again bad him do it, telling him from the Lord that they
should not only have enough for the present but should leave some for another
time. So he set this provision before them, and they did eat and left thereof.
See Joh. 6.11. And this was Elisha's ninth Miracle. 2 King. 4. from v. 42, to
the end.

Naaman the King of Syria's General was a person of great honor and power in
his own Country; it is probable that the Army that fought against the Kings of
Israel and Judah [1 King. 22.29.] was commanded by him, and under his conduct
the victory was obtained. For though the Syrians were heathens and enemies to
the Israelites, yet God then gave them victory over his own people, and the
victory is attributed to the Lord for the Syrians were but his instruments.
This Naaman was a mighty man of valor, but he was a leper, so that the
greatest of men are not exempted from the worst of diseases. The Syrians used
often by their Troops to make inrodes into the land of Israel to spoil and
pillage, and in one of their incursions among other prisoners they carried away
one fair and comely young damsel, who thereupon was brought as a present to
Naaman, and by him given to his wife to wait upon her. This was ordered by a
special providence of God as the sequel of the story will show. This young
maiden observing Naaman to be a leper, she said one day to her Lady, I wish my
Lord were with a famous Prophet we have in Israel; I doubt not but he would
soon cure him of his leprosy Though she had not heard of any leper cured by
Elisha, (for says our Savior, Luke 4.27. Many lepers were in Israel in the
time of Elizeus the Prophet, but none of them was cleansed, etc.) but by other
miracles he wrought she believed he could cure this disease also.
. Naaman understanding this told the King of Syria thereof. The King had so
great a kindness for him that he readily yielded he should take any course that
might be thought conducing to his good, and though the leprosy was generally
thought among them to be incurable, yet he was willing he should make trial
whither he could be cured or no. So he consented he should go, and told him he
would send a Letter to Jehoram King of Israel in his behalf. Naaman accordingly
provided himself for his journey, and set out with a very great retinue, and a
noble equipage, carrying with him ten Talents A Talent of silver amounts to 375
l. sterling.
of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of raiment to make
presents to the Prophet, and possibly to some of Jehoram's Courtiers. And he
brought also to the King from his Master the King of Syria a Letter which spoke
to him after this manner, When this Letter is come unto thee be pleased to
understand that I have with it sent Naaman my servant that thou may recover
him of his Leprosy, that is, may take care to have him recovered, if thou
have any body in thy land that can do it. When the King of Israel read the
Letter, he rent his clothes, testifying thereby the great passion he was in,
What (says he) does the King of Syria think that I am a God, or have power
(like God) to kill or make alive whom I please, that he sends to me to cure a
man of a Leprosy? the cure of which is as hard as to raise a man from the
dead. Then turning to his own Courtiers and Counselors that were about him,
You see (says he) how this man seeks a quarrel against me, and a pretense of
a new war in requiring such a thing of me that he knows I cannot do. It seems
he never thought of Elisha, of whose power in working miracles he himself had
had so much experience. But some about the King (that bare a good respect to
Elisha) quickly informed him of Naaman's coming, and of the Letter he had
brought, and how angry the King was at it, and how ill he resented it. Elisha
hearing this, sent to the King that he wondered he should express so much
passion at the receiving of this Letter, seeing he knew there was a Prophet in
his land that had by the power of God done as great a miracle as was the cure
of the Leprosy, and that before his own eyes. See Chapter 3.16, etc. Let him come
to me (says he) and he shall know that there is a Prophet of the Lord in
Israel. Jehoram having received this message from Elisha he sent Naaman to him.
Accordingly Naaman came in his Chariot, and with all his Train and Attendants
to the house of Elisha. The Israelites had not (at least the generality of
them) taken so much notice of this eminent Prophet that was among them as they
should have done, and therefore God will now make him more taken notice of by
the application of this great man (who was a stranger) unto him. When he came
to the Prophets house, Elisha went not out to him himself (as he expected) but
only sent a messenger to him (for the further trial of his faith and obedience)
to tell him that he should go and wash in Jordan seven times, and so he should
be cured. Naaman being a person of so great quality, looked upon this carriage
of the Prophet as a great neglect of him, and resented it accordingly, what
(says he) is this all the help I shall have from this famous Prophet? I thought
he would have come out to me and stood and called on the name of the Lord his
God for me, and would have stroked his hand over my flesh where it is infected
with the leprosy, and so have cured me. And is this all the direction I shall
have from him to go and wash in Jordan? Are not Abana and Pharpar our rivers of
Damascus as good, nay better, and of more sweetness and virtue than any rivers
or waters they have? and besides can washing the body in a river be a likely
means to take away so dreadful and deep rooted a disease as the leprosy is? I
have taken this long journey to good purpose, come let us be gone. Thus apt are
men in their distresses to prescribe means unto God, and to tie him to their
own ways and methods of help. But though this great man was so highly
dissatisfied and displeased, yet (it seems) he had some wise and discreet
servants about him who came to him, and humbly spoke to him saying, My Father A
Title usually given to superiors, and men of age and dignity.
, if the Prophet had enjoined thee some hard and difficult thing (which would
have required much cost and pains) would not thou have done it to be cured?
Seeing then he injoins thee only such an easy thing as to go and bath thy self
in Jordan, why should not thou do it without questioning whither it be a
likely means of cure or no? Naaman being wrought upon by what his servants
said, consented to go, and accordingly went and dipped himself seven times over
head and ears in Jordan as the Prophet had prescribed, and immediately his
leprosy was removed and his flesh that had been much eaten away with it came
again like the flesh of a little child, full, clear and fresh, not leaving any
scar or mark upon him of his disease, and so he was perfectly cured. Thus the
Lord intending to show mercy to him, and that the word of his Prophet might not
fail, passed over his former incredulity and distemper, and had regard to that
weak and small measure of faith he had. And this was Elisha's tenth Miracle.

Naaman having thus to his great joy and comfort found the benefit and efficacy
of the Prophets direction, he now returns with all his retinue to render him
his most hearty thanks Thus did the tenth Leper to our Savior, Luke 17.15.
. When he came to the Prophets house he now came out to him (though he did not
before) to whom Naaman addressing himself, said, Behold now I know that the God
of Israel is the only true God Miraculum hoc proprium finem consequutum est
nempe confirmationem verae sanaequ^ Doctrinae.
, and that there is none in the world besides him, and by his power alone I
willingly acknowledge my self cured By this declaration he showed he was cured
in soul as well as in body.
. But I must thankfully acknowledge thee as an instrument under him of my cure,
and I ought to testify my deep and grateful sense of thy kindness, and
therefore I pray thee accept of a small gift Hebraei munus vocant
benedictionem, quia quicquid boni possidemus habemus ex benedictione Dei.
Benefacere est benedicere.
from thy servant (which I here present thee with) as a testimony of my
gratitude. Thus the Prophet was more honored by this Gentile than he had been
by the generality of his own people. Elisha replied, As the Lord lives before
whom I stand, and whose Minister I am, I will receive no gift or reward from
thee. He designed to show him that he aimed not at his own profit in what he
did. It was enough for him that the God of Israel was acknowledged by this
Syrian to be the true God. He knew that the miracles he wrought were not done
by his own power but by the immediate power of God, and therefore God alone
ought to have the glory of them Elisha had freely received this gift, and
therefore would freely exercise it, Mat. 10.8. Simon Magus was sharply reproved
for a conceit contrary thereunto, Acts 8.19, 20.
, and if the true Religion and the worship of the true God were by his miracles
confirmed, he desired no more. Naaman urged him again with great importunity to
take it, but he again refused it. For having on so good grounds refused it
before, he would not be beaten from his principles. Naaman when he saw he could
not prevail with the Prophet to accept his present, he told him he had another
request to make to him, which was this, Let me I pray thee (says he) with thy
approbation have two mules laden of the earth of your land wherewith to build
an Altar when I come home, to sacrifice thereon to the Lord God of Israel, for
from henceforth I am resolved to sacrifice to no other. This shows him to be a
true convert, and herein he was a type of the calling of the Gentiles. He would
testify that he worshipped the God of Israel by erecting an Altar of the earth
of Israel to worship him thereon. Here was a good zeal expressed in this new
convert, though he mistook in thinking the God of Israel would be the better
pleased with his sacrifices if they were offered on an Altar made of Canaan's
mold. He further tells Elisha that he had (as he must needs confess) been an
Idolater, and had bowed himself to the Idol Rimmon (the Idol of the Syrians)
when the King his Master leaning on his hand, went into that Idols Temple to
worship, but he desired the Lord to forgive him for it, he intended to do so no
more. For thus I suppose 2 King. 5.18. ought to be read, In this thing the Lord
pardon thy servant, that when my Master went into the house of Rimmon to
workship there, and leaned on my hand, and I bowed my self in the house of
Rimmon, that I bowed my self in the house of Rimmon Non peccati futuri
indulgentiam sed elapsi veniam rogare videtur. Anonym. in loc.
, the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing. So Elisha dismissed him with a
friendly valediction, saying to him, Go in peace. When he was departed, and was
going on in his journey, Gehazi the Prophets servant began to think with
himself that his Master had been too kind, and had spared this Syrian too much
in not taking of him what he might have done for so great a cure, and which he
himself was very willing to have given him, but as the Lord lives (says he) I
will not let him go so, I will run after him and take something of him. So he
ran after Naaman, who understanding by some of his servants that he was coming
in have after him, he lighted out of his Chariot to meet him, and asked him if
all was well? Gehazi replied, all is well; only my Master has sent me to thee
to acquaint thee that since thy departure there came to him two young men, sons
of the Prophets, and he desires thee to give them a Talent of silver, and two
changes of garments. And thus by his lying and unworthy practice he did that
which tended to eclipse the glory of his Master's free kindness. Naaman seemed
very glad of an opportunity to gratify Elisha, and accordingly told his
servant he should have not only one, but two Talents of silver, that each of
the young Prophets might have one a piece. Gehazi seemed very modest and
unwilling to have more than one Talent, which was all (as he pretended) that
his Master desired. But Naaman to testify his great gratitude and high
respects to Elisha urged him to take two. So ordering them to be put into two
bags (which must needs be great ones that could contain three hundred seventy
and five pounds a piece) and giving him also two changes of garments; he
commanded two of his servants to bear them before Gehazi, and when they came to
the Tower (possibly some out-house belonging to the place where the Prophet
dwelt) he took the silver and the garments from the servants and bestowed them
in the house, and so dismissed the men, not suffering them to come any nearer
the house, lest Elisha his Master should see them. Then he went in and stood
before his Master very confidently, as if he had done nothing amiss. Elisha
mildly asks him where he had been? he answers, thy servant has been no where,
pretending he had not stirred out of the house. Elisha hearing this, What (says
he) dare thou tell me so? went not my heart with thee when the man turned
again from his Chariot to meet thee? know thou therefore that by a divine
vision in my spirit I saw thee run after Naaman, and saw him light out of his
Chariot to meet thee; I saw what he gave thee, and where thou laidst it. I tell
thee I saw all this in a vision of my spirit, though thou thoughtest to hide
and conceal it all from me. And further, the Lord has revealed to me what thou
did intend to do with the money thou had of Naaman, viz. to buy thee
oliveyards and vineyards, and sheep and oxen, and leaving my service to go and
live by thy self, and to have menservants and maidservants to attend thee.
But Gehazi, is this a time for thee to receive such gifts, and to have such
worldly designs as these in thy mind? Thou know on what grounds I had
refused these things, and thy receiving them now, has crossed all my ends in
refusing of them. Thou know Naaman himself is but a new convert, and I
refused his gifts to bring the more honor to God and to our Religion. Thou
know we live here among Idolaters, and therefore we ought to give no
occasion to them to think that we (the Prophets of the Lord) are a covetous
sort of people as their Idolatrous Priests are. I would not have it thought
that I design any worldly advantage to my self by the exercise of that heavenly
power which the Lord has freely given me, and whereby he enables me to work
miracles. Therefore seeing thou have so heinously transgressed, the leprosy of
Naaman shall cleave unto thee. By thy coveting his goods, and lying unto him
thou have got his leprosy, which shall cleave unto thee and thy children after
thee for a long while In sempiternum, non absolute sed in longissimum tempus,
in tertiam vel quartam generationem juxta, Exodus 34.7.
as an example of Gods just judgment against covetousness and lying. So Gehazi
went out from his presence a leper as white as snow. And here we may take
notice of the wonderful power of God manifested in his servant the Prophet, who
enabled him to inflict the leprosy as well as to take it away, as he enabled
Moses to bring plagues on Egypt, and to remove them. And this was Elisha's
eleventh miracle. 2 King. Chapter 5. wh. Chapter

The succession of two such famous Prophets as Elijah and Elisha, and the many
miracles wrought by them, had (as it seems) drawn many Qui vacabant divinis
literis and laudibus, and precihus and mittebantur saepe ad plebem aedificandam
and confirmandam, etc.
(even in that corrupt time) to join themselves to the Schools of the Prophets
which were at Jericho and Gilgal, and several of them ('it is like) were of
Manual Trades, and even now maintained themselves thereby that they might not
be burdensome to others. Some of these Sons of the Prophets came to Elisha and
told him that the place where they dwelt with him (and were instructed by him
as his disciples and scholars) was too strait for them, they desired him
therefore that they might go to the banks of Jordan, and there cut down and
carried away some timber to make them an house there. It Is like some of them
had sufficient skill to square and frame and fit timber for a building, and to
cover it also, and to make it fit for habitation; but here mention is only made
of cutting down timber because of the miracle that followed. Possibly they
intended only to make some slight building that might serve for then present
use and accommodation. The Prophet bad them go. One of them then entreated him
that he would please to go along with them, they being desirous to have as much
of his company as they could. So he went along with them. It happened as one of
them was felling a tree to make a beam that his ax-head fell into the water,
upon this he cried, O my Master, what shall I do? for this ax was borrowed, and
things borrowed must be restored. This man seems to intimate that he believed
the Proph^t could help him to it again, though it was fallen to the bottom of a
deep water. Elisha asks where it fell in? and when they had showed him the
place, he cut down a stick and casting it in thither, the ax rose up and swum
upon the water, and so the man that worked with it took it up. This was
Elisha's twelfth Miracle. 2 King. 6. from v. 1, to 8.

The King of Syria bearing still an inveterate hatred against the King of
Israel, invaded his Country again, and upon advice with his Commanders resolved
upon a place where he would lie in ambush to surprise him, having some
intelligence that the King of Israel with his followers did intend to pass that
way. Elisha understanding by the inspiration of God the secret projects of the
Syrians, advised the King of Israel that he should by no means go to that
place, for thither the Syrians were come, and designed there to surprise him.
Jehoram something doubting the truth of this, sent some scouts to the place the
man of God had warned him of, and found it to be as he had told him, and
thereupon did forbear to go thither, and so (following the Prophets counsel) he
saved himself from the enemies ambushments; and that not only this once, but
several times after. The King of Syria was much enraged that his designs were
so often disappointed, and thereupon began to suspect he had some about him
that were false to him, and gave secret intelligence to the Israelites; and
accordingly calling the great officers of his Army together, and expostulating
with them, he asked them, why they would not show him which of them were for the
King of Israel, and secretly gave him intelligence? One of them replied, Thou
have no cause to suspect that any of us are treacherous or false to thee, for
assure thy self we are not; but there is one Elisha a Prophet in Israel who by
the inspiration of God can discern the most secret things that are done in any
place, and I believe tells the King of Israel the very words thou speak in
thy bedchamber. The King of Syria being enraged at this, bad them go and
inquire where he was, for he would endeavor to catch him, and if he once had
him in his hands he would do well enough with him. They told him they heard he
was in Dathan a City not far from Samaria. Immediately he sent horses and
chariots, and a considerable host by night to encompass the City that they
might take him. Elisha's servant (whom he had chosen to attend him in Gehazi's
room) going out early in the morning saw a great host about the City, whereupon
he ran back and told his Master thereof, and cried out, Alas! Master what shall
we do? Elisha bad him fear nothing, for (says he) those that be with us are
more than those that be with them. Then Elisha going out of the ^ity with his
servant, prayed unto the Lord that his servants eyes might be opened, that he
might see that great host of Angels that were sent for their defense; and the
young man's eyes being opened he saw the mountains near Dothan full of horses
and chariots of fire, (the holy Angels appearing in that shape, because the
enemy that encompassed the City had horses and chariots) and those appeared to
him to incompass his Master Elisha to Solum visio fuit, vidit imaginem ^eu
speciem Elisei residentem in medio castrorum, quem defendebat ille exercitus,
ut nemo hostium illi nocere potuerit. Munsterus.
secure and defend him. Elisha being come out of the City, some of the host of
Syria seeing him (but not knowing him) came to him to inquire about the Town,
and about the Prophet. He then prayed to the Lord to smite them with blindness,
which immediately he did, but not with a perfect blindness, but only such a
dazeling of their sight Such a blindness as the Sodomites were stricken with,
Genesis 19.11.
that they could not well discern things or persons. He told them that was not
the way they must go, neither was that the City wherein they might expect to
find Elisha. Follow me (says he) and I will bring you to the man whom ye seek.
They accordingly following him, he led them to Samaria. It Is like he sent a
messenger to Jehoram (who was now in that City) to give him notice that he was
bringing his enemies into Samaria, that so he might have all his militia in
readiness against they came. When he had brought them into that City, he prayed
to the Lord to open their eyes, which being done, they saw themselves to their
great astonishment in the midst of Samaria, and so in the midst of their
enemies. Jehoram having them now in his hands spoke to Elisha, saying, My
Father, shall I smite them? shall I smite them? What (says Elisha) would
thou smite them? If thou had taken them prisoners with thy sword and with thy
how, (having given them quarter) surely thou would not kill them; much less
ought thou now to do it, seeing by an extraordinary providence they are
brought unto thee; surely thou shall not smite them. Thus easily the Prophet
forgives their mischievous intention, who came out on purpose to carry him
prisoner to his enemies. Instead of smiting them, he advises Jehoram to set
bread and water before them, that they might eat and drink and go back to their
King, and declare what kindness they had found in Israel, notwithstanding their
ill intentions toward it.

Jehoram hereupon made great provisions for them, and feasted them royally, and
then peaceably dismissed them. After this the Syrians gave over their inrodes,
into the land, and came no more as yet So these words v. 23. are to be
interpreted. See Lightfoot, page 69.
into the land of Israel.

And thus we see how many miracles were wrought about this one matter.

1. The Prophet discovered the King of Syria's secret plots and contrivances.

2ly. The Angels appeared as an host for his defense.

3ly. His servants eyes were opened to see those Angels.

4ly. The Syrians were smitten with blindness.

5ly. Their eyes were opened again, and all this upon the prayer of Elisha. 2
King. 6. from v. 8. to the 24.

Benhadad King of Syria, who had once before besieged Samaria in Ahab's time,
[1 King. 20.1.] but was then repulsed with shame and loss, being now desirous
(as it seems) to blot out the reproach of that his shameful flight, and being
encouraged perhaps by the great overthrow he had given the Israelites at the
battle at Ramoth-Gilead [wherein Ahab was slain, 1 King. 22.34.] he now
attempts to besiege this City again with a collection of all his forces. During
which siege Samaria was so sorely distressed with famine that an Asses-head was
sold for fourscore pieces of silver Which was as some account about ten pounds
of our money.
, (though an unclean and forbidden meat, Exodus 13.13.) and the fourth part of a
cab or pottle of corn which they had taken out of the crop of Doves Quidam esse
ervum credunt, quo saginantur columbae, that is, a kind of pulse or tares
wherewith they fed Pigeons, which in that extremity they were glad of for food
for themselves.
, for five pieces of silver Which was about 12 s. 6 d. of our money.
. One day as the King was walking upon the wall to see whither the Soldiers
duly kept the watches, a woman cried unto him, Help my Lord, O King. The King
replied, Alas! if the Lord do not help thee, how shall I be able to help thee?
I cannot supply thee either from the barnfloor, or the wine press. But tell me
what aileth thee? she said, This woman my neighbor and I (being extremely
distressed with famine) agreed between our selves that my Son should be first
killed and eaten by us, and afterward her Son; accordingly we boiled my Son,
and did eat him, but when her Son should have been eaten by us, she hid him to
save him alive, or else did eat him alone by her self, and gave me none of him.
The King hearing these sad words of the woman, his heart was so deeply pierced
with them that he rent his upper garment, so that the sackcloth that he had
next his flesh appeared, which he wore as a sign of his humiliation and
affliction for the present distress of his people, though he was not so truly
penitent for his sins as he should have been. Then he said, The Lord do so to
me and more also, if I do not take off the head of Elisha before night; for I
look upon him as the cause of all our misery, seeing he has persuaded me to
hold out the City thus long, (assuring me of help from God) but I see none
comes. And thus being transported with rage against Elisha he sent a messenger
immediately to cut off his head. The Prophet was at this time in his lodging,
and some grave and Religious persons of the City were with him, who possibly
came to him for counsel, and comfort in that their great extremity. He
understanding by Revelation from God the Kings bloody purpose against him (even
as he knew the King of Syria's secret plots, and Gehazi's secret practices) he
says to the Elders that were with him, behold this wicked Joram shows himself
the true Son of wicked Ahab, (who was the murderer of Naboth) for he has sent
a man to cut off my head, though I have deserved no such usage from him. I tell
you his Messenger is coming to kill me, but when he comes shut the door and
hold him fast, and prevent him from executing his bloody purpose; and behold
the sound of his Masters feet is behind him; that is, I perceive the King
himself follows hard after him. And while he was speaking the messenger came,
who being stopped at the door, immediately the King himself came thither also,
who (as it seems) having his heart touched with remorse for the rash and cruel
order he had given when he came to the Messenger (now detained at the door) he
gave him a countermand. So quickly can God change the cruel minds of men. Then
Elisha discoursing with him, and persuading him to have patience a little
longer, and to wait upon the Lord for deliverance, he said, This great evil and
calamity that is upon us is certainly from the Lord, and we have waited long
for help, but none comes, and I despair that any will come, and therefore why
should I wait upon the Lord any longer? I had better surrender the City than
that my self and my subjects in it should perish by famine.

The Lord then reveals to Elisha the deliverance he intended to give them the
very next day, and that there should be then great plenty in the City.
Whereupon he said to the King, I do assure thee from the Lord that about this
time to morrow a measure That is about a peck and a pott^e.
of fine flower shall be sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a
shekel A shekel is 2 s. 6 d. of our money.
, in the gate of Samaria. A great Officer of State, a Lord on whose hand the
King leaned, hearing the Prophet say this, answered, If the Lord should make
windows in heaven, and rain corn down upon us, there could hardly be such a
plenty as thou speak of. Well says Elisha) seeing thou art so unbelieving
Infidelity deprives men of the benefit of Gods promises which others enjoy.
, thou shall see this plenty with thine eyes, but shall not eat of it. It so
happened that there were at that time four leprous men (that dwelt at the
entrance of the Gate) who being almost famished, said one to another, Why sit
we here until we die? If we say we will venture to go into the City, alas the
famine is there, and there we shall certainly die, and if we continue here, we
shall die also, for our provisions are all done. What shall we then do, and
what course shall we take? Come let us go to the host of the Syrians; in a
desperate case we must take a desperate course. Possibly they may show us
mercy, and give us some relief. But if they should kill us we shall but die,
which we are sure to do if we stay here, and it is better to be slain by the
enemy than to perish by hunger. Hereupon agreeing to take that course that very
night in the twilight, they went to the Camp of the Syrians, and when they came
to the outermost part of it, to their great astonishment, they found no man
there; for the Lord had a little before terrified the Syrians with an hideous
noise which he made them to hear of the rattling of chariots, and neighing of
horses, See the like 2 Samuel 5.24.
the shouting of soldiers, and the sounding of Trumpets, as if some great host
had been upon them. This noise they heard, but neither the City nor the Lepers
heard any thing of it. It seems the Syrians when they first heard this noise
(being in a great consternation) said the King of Israel has hired the Kings
of the Hittites Hereby they might mean such Hittites and Can^anites as remained
in the land, or else some other people that dwelt in Islands. See Jer. 2.10.
, and the Kings of the Egyptians and Ethiopians to come upon us. And so being
dreadfully affrighted they arose and fled in the twilight (a little before the
Lepers came) and being so terrified they left their horses and asses (not
daring to stay to saddle them) and left their Tents and their Camp as it was,
and fled for their lives. The Lepers thus coming to their empty Tents, they
ventured to go into one of them, where finding good provisions they fell to eat
and drink, and refresh themselves being almost starved, and finding also silver
and gold, and raiment there, they took it as spoil and carried it out and hid
it, that it might not be taken from them; then going into another Tent and
finding the like there, they carried it out, and hid it also. Thus at first
they thought only of providing for themselves. But then better bethinking
themselves, they said one to another, We do not do well thus only to provide
for our selves; this is a day of good tidings, we see the enemy are all fled,
we do not do well to conceal this gladsome news from our brethren of the City.
If we tarry till morning light till they themselves perceive the enemy to be
fled, possibly they will inflict some severe punishment on us for concealing
the matter so long; now therefore let us go and acquaint the King and the City
therewith. So they came to the Gate of the City, and called to the Porter and
Watchmen, and told them that they being sorely distressed ventured to go out to
the Camp of the Syrians to seek some relief, and when they came thither they
found no man there, but they found many horses and asses tied, and the Tents
furnished with provisions as they used to be when the Camp lay there. The
Porter of the Gate immediately ran and called up the Porters of the Kings
Palace, and acquainting them with what the Lepers had said, they acquainted the
King with it. The King immediately suspected that the Syrians had only drawn
off themselves in policy: They (says he) know that we are almost starved, and
therefore they have withdrawn themselves, and hid themselves in the field, that
when we come out they may surprise us, and so enter the City. This shows that
he little regarded or believed what the Prophet had promised from the Lord,
which was the very next day to be accomplished. One of the Kings servants
hearing his Master make this construction of the departure of the Syrians,
replied, let us I pray thee take some of the horses that yet remain in the
City, and go out and see whither the Syrians be indeed fled or no. It will be
no great loss if these be taken by the enemy seeing they are already almost
consumed by famine as most of the people of the City likewise are. The King
consenting hereunto, they took two of the Kings Chariot-horses, and setting
riders on them, sent them out; these scouts rode as far as Jordan and found no
enemy between Samaria and it, but many evidences of the enemies flight, for all
the way was full of garments and other furniture which the Syrians had thrown
away in their hasty flight. So they returned and brought this word to the King.
Then the people transported with joy rusht out of the City with all the have
they could make to spoil the Tents of the Syrians, and in them they found such
plenty of provisions that a measure of fine flower was sold for a shekel, and
two measures of barley for a shekel as the Prophet had foretold. The King
understanding that the people ran so violently out of the City, he commanded
the Lord on whose hand he leaned to take charge of the Gate to keep them from
such a tumultuous running out, and to see to it that they might not all run out
and leave the City naked. This Lord accordingly standing there to keep the
people back, they were so eagerly bent upon the spoil, and to get some
provisions for themselves that they ran him down and trod upon him, so that he
died; and thus what the man of God prophesied of him exactly came to pass.

2 King. 6. from 24, to the end.

2 King. 7. wh. Chapter

The Shunamite (the seven years famine being now ended) returns with her family
into her own Country, and petitions the King for her house and land, which in
her absence was (as it seems) seized upon by the Officers of State for the
Kings use Mos hic fuit in december tribubus qui and alibi reperitur, ut qui patria
exirent eorum bona confiscarentur. Grot.
; at the very time when she came to present her petition the Providence of God
so ordered it that she found the King talking with Gehazi Elisha's servant
about the miracles his Master had wrought. It seems his Leprosy was not of
that sort that did render him unclean or unfit to be conversed Lex non vetabat
leprosos adire alloquii consolari. Naaman leprosus Regem accessit. Alii volunt
Gehazi act^ paenitentia sanatum fuisse.
with, or else upon his repentance (as some think) God reversed the sentence
against him, and had now healed him. Whilst he was discoursing about his
Masters raising one from the dead, he sees this woman come to petition the
King, whereupon he cries out My Lord, O King, this is the very woman of whom I
spoke, and this is her son that was restored to life by my Master. The King
asking the woman about it, she fully confirmed it, and ('it is like) told him the
several circumstances of it, whereupon the King gave order that her lands
should be restored to her again with all the profits that had arisen from them
in her absence.

2 King. 8. from v. 3, to 7.

Elisha now by some special instinct of Gods Spirit went into the Region In
Regionem Damascenam, ut apparet ex versu nono. Jun.
of Damascus to confirm (as it is probable) to Hazael by a second prediction,
what formerly upon Elijahs anointing of him, he did not much believe, namely
that he should be King of Syria.

Benhadad the present King of Syria was at this time very sick. Josephus thinks
his sickness was occasioned by the shameful flight of his Army from Samaria,
[Ch. 7.6.] especially understanding it happened through a causeless fear. The
King therefore hearing of the Prophets arrival in that Region (whose fame was
so spread among them by the cure of Naaman, and other miracles he had wrought)
he sent Hazael (who was now as it seems his chief Minister of State, (Naaman
being either dead, or put by his place for professing the true God of Israel)
with a present to him, and to inquire of him whither he should recover of that
sickness? Hazael accordingly went to meet him with a noble and large present,
viz. forty Camels lading of the best provisions of the Country; and when he
came to him he said, Thy Son Benhadad (who honors thee as a Son does his
Father) has sent me to thee with this present, which he desires thee to accept
of, and to acquaint him, Whither he shall recover of his sickness? Whither the
Prophet accepted the present is not recorded, but he returned him this short
answer, That he might recover for any danger from his disease, yet the Lord had
showed him that he should certainly die, though by some other means, and not by
his sickness. Then the Prophet fixed his eyes steadfastly on Hazael until he
began to blush to see him look so earnestly on him; and Elisha bursting out
into tears, Hazael said, Why weepeth my Lord? He answered, Because I know the
evil thou will do when thou art King of Syria to the people of Israel; their
strong bolds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou slay with the
sword, their young childrens brains will thou dash out, and rip up their women
with child. Hazael replied, Is thy servant a dog that I should ever be guilty
of such great horrible barbarity, and inhumane cruelty Fortuna and potestat
etiam mores, and ingenium mutant.
? It Is like he did not think at this time that ever he should do such cruel
acts. But no man knows the depth of that corruption that is in his heart, which
will soon discover it self if God leave him to himself. See what he afterward
did, 2 King. 10.32, 33. and Chapter 13.3. Elisha replies, The Lord has showed me
that thou will be King over Syria, and then thou will bear the same deadly
hatred to the people of Israel which thy Predecessors have done before. And the
Lord as a just and righteous Judge will permit thee to come into that Throne,
that thou may be a scourge to punish the Idolatrous and Rebellious
Israelites. So Hazael departed from the Prophet, and coming to his Master
Benhadad, told him that the Prophet said, He should certainly recover; but
therein he delivered not to him the true sense of the Prophet. Then considering
with himself what Elisha had told him, viz. that he should be King of Syria,
and apprehending that if his Master did recover of this sickness, it might be
difficult for him to attain the Crown, and being impatient of delay, and
unwilling to stay Gods time for the bringing about of that he had promised him,
the very next day he took a thick wet cloth and spread it on his Masters face,
(possibly under pretense to allay the distemper of his heat) and with it
stiffled him Nimis festinavit Hazael, ad vaticinii exitum, tempus expectare
debuit. Hanc ejus perfidiam non excusat oraculum Prophetae. P. Martyr.
, that so no mark or sign of violence might appear on his body; and the King
thus dying Hazael succeeded him, either because the King had no children, or
because he was so powerful none durst oppose him, or so gracious with the
people Pellebat viribus and gratiae apud populum, and jam a tempore Eliae
increbuerat regnum Syriae Hazaeli deberi. Sanctius.
that they presently chose him.

2 King. 8. from 7, to 16.

Jehoram toward the latter end of his reign with the joint forces of Ahaziah
King of Judah (his sisters son) resolves to attempt the recovery of
Ramoth-Gilead out of the hands of Hazael now King of Syria, which Ahab his
Father with the joint forces of Jehoshaphat seeking to recover, failed of his
purpose, and was there slain by Benhadad, whose life he had unwarrantably
spared. See 1 King. 20.34. Jehoram in this enterprise won the Town, but he
himself was wounded in the siege; wherefore leaving the chief of his forces
there behind him under the command of his great Captains (whereof Jehu was the
chief) to keep it See 2 King. 9.14.
, he withdrew himself to Jezreel to be cured of his wounds. And thither Ahaziah
King of Judah came down to visit him.

Jehu with other Commanders being left with the Army at Ramoth-Gilead, Elisha
called a young man one of the Sons of the Prophets to him, and bad him gird up
his loins, and take a viol of oil which he gave him, and to hasten to
Ramoth-Gilead Here was a fair opportunity offered for the doing this at this
time, Jehoram and Ahaziah being both at Jezreel.
, and there calling to speak with Jehu to take him into a private Chamber and
to pour the oil on his head, and to say to him, Thus says the Lord, I have
anointed Jehu is the only King of the Ten-Tribes that was anointed; as his
calling was from God, so his task was very great.
thee King over Israel, and thou shall smite the house of Ahab thy Master, that
I may avenge the blood of my servants the Prophets, and the blood of all my
servants which was shed by the procurement of Jezabel. For the whole house of
Ahab shall perish, and I will cut off from the house of Ahab him that pisseth
against the wall, and him that is shut up and left in Israel See 1 King. 14.10.
and 21.22.
. And I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam, and like the
house of Baasha. And the dogs shall eat Jezabel in the portion of Jezreel, and
there shall be none to bury her. This young Prophet coming to Ramoth-Gilead,
and finding Jehu sitting among the Captains, he desired to speak with him
privately, and then said and did to him all that Elisha had enjoined him, and
so immediately hasted away. Jehu coming forth to the other Commanders, and they
discerning some troubled thoughts in his countenance, asked him, Whither all
was well? and inquired wherefore that mad fellow (so these Idolatrous Captains
counted the Lords Prophets, whosoever Prophesies usually were very displeasing to
them) came to him? Jehu replied, You know the man to be a Prophet of the Lord,
and by the man ye may guess at his errand, and the communication he has had
with me. They replied, that they neither knew the person of the man, nor could
guess at his errand, or what he had said to him. Then Jehu told them how he had
anointed him King over Israel. They hearing this, and God powerfully working
upon their hearts, they presently arose, and going to the top of the stairs
Great houses have usually an ascent of great stairs into the first rooms.
(which possibly were toward the street) and spreading their garments on the
ground See Mat. 21.8.
, (as a ceremony of honor to Jehu, and to signify their subjection unto him)
with sound of Trumpets they proclaimed him King. Jehu being thus made King, and
commissioned by God to destroy Ahab's house, he immediately contrived to
destroy Jehoram, Son of Ahab, as God had commanded him. And in order hereunto
he tells his Captains that if they approved of it he would presently shut up
the Gates of Ramoth-Gilead that none might get out of the City to acquaint
Jehoram with what was done, that so he might surprise him and come upon him on
a sudden before he could have any intelligence of his coming. Then immediately
drawing out a strong party out of the Garrison, and riding himself in a Chariot
(which for swiftness and convenience they used in war, that in them they might
the better use their bow or any other offensive weapon) he made have toward
Jezreel where both Jehoram and Ahaziah now were. A watchman from the tower in
Jezreel discerning this party coming, gave notice thereof, upon which Joram
sent out an horseman to meet them, who asking when he came up to Jehu, Is it
peace? that is, does all go well at Ramoth-Gilead? Jehu bad him not talk to him
of peace, but to turn behind him, and join himself to his Soldiers, resolving
he should not go back to inform Joram lest he should get away. The watchman
from the tower of the City acquaints them that the messenger came up to them
and spoke to them, but whatever the matter was he saw he did not return. The
King wondering at this, sent out a second horseman, who coming to Jehu was
answered as the other was, and forced to stay with the party, and could not
return. The watchman acquainting the King that this second messenger also did
not return, and that the party marched a great pace toward the City, and by
their fast driving he guessed Jehu was their Commander, who used to drive very
furiously. Hereupon Joram and Ahaziah commanding their Chariots to be made
ready they went out to meet Jehu, not imagining he had come with any hostile
mind against them, and they went out not with any purpose to fight, but only to
know the end of his coming. They met him just at the portion of Naboth. Joram
asks him, Is it peace Jehu? that is, Is all well at Ramoth? Jehu answers, What
peace so long as the whoredoms Idolatry in Scripture is called whoredom, Deuteronomy.
31.16. and to inveigle people to partake with them in it is called witchcraft,
see Nahum 3.4. He mentioned the sins of his mother because Joram suffered her,
and continued in her Idolatry. Onus vocat Prophetiam gravem and Onerosam.
of thy mother Jezebel, and her witchcrafts are so many? Upon this Joram
immediately turned his Chariot and fled, crying out to Ahaziah, who was near
him, There is treachery, O Ahaziah. Jehu perceiving Joram to fly, drew a bow
with his full strength and smote him in the back between his shoulders, and the
arrow went out at his heart and he sank down in his Chariot and died. Jehu ^hen
called to Bidkar his Captain to take and cast his body in the field of Naboth
the Jezreelite; for remember (says he) when thou and I being Commanders under
his Father, and following him as his attendants at that time when he took
possession of Naboths vineyard Which was the day after his death.
) heard this dreadful judgment The Lord laid this burden on him, v. 25. Onus
Vocat Prophetiam gravem, and onerosam.
denounced against him by Elijah from the Lord, Surely I have seen the blood of
Naboth, and the blood of his Sons (who it seems were put to death with him,
that none of them might afterward challenge the inheritance Filii ejus contra
legem Deuteronomy. 24. una interfecti erant licet nulla hujus caedis mentio facta est,
1 Reg. 21.13. Sic multa a sac^is historicis omissa videmus que ab aliis per
occasionem dicta sunt. Sanctius.
) and I will requite thee in this plat, now therefore cast him into that
portion of ground according to the word of the Lord, that the dogs may lick his
blood, see 1 King. 21.19. When Ahaziah King of Judah saw this he fled, but they
pursuing him first wounded him, and afterward killed him in Megiddo, as may be
seen more fully in his life. Then Jehu marched into Jezreel and Jezebel hearing
of his coming painted her face and tired her head, (thinking possibly by her
Majestic bravery to daunt him) and looking out of the window when Jehu entered
the Gate of her Palace, she cried out, Had Zimri peace who slew his Master?
[see 1 King. 16.10.] as if she should have said, Remember what he did, and fear
the like event. Jehu looking up to the window asked, who is there on my side,
who? Two or three Eunuchs Such were Chamberlains of Queens and Princesses for
the most part in those times.
, ( attendants on the Queen) looking out, he called to them to throw her down,
which they (God so working upon their hearts, and possibly fearing Jehu)
immediately did. And he and his followers trod her under their horses feet, and
so pash'd her to pieces, that some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and
on the horses. Jehu having done this great work, and having taken much pains in
this expedition from Ramoth to Jezreel, and seeing all was quiet in the City,
and that none opposed him, he went now to refresh himself. After a little time
he bad some about him to go look after the body of that cursed woman Jezebel,
and to take it up and bury it, for (says he) she was a Kings daughter, viz. the
King of Zidon's. This order ('it is like) he gave on the sudden, not remembering
the Prophecy of Elijah, nor what the Prophet that anointed him said unto him,
ver. 10. but they bringing him back word that the dogs had eaten all but her
scull and feet, and the palms of her hands, then he said, this is the word of
the Lord which he spoke by Elijah, saying, Near ^ Reg. 21.23. In pro juxta. In
eo territorio in quo injuste damnatus est Naboth.
the portion of Naboth in Jezreel shall dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel, and so
much of her body as is left by the dogs shall be as dung upon the face of the
field, and shall lie and rot in the open air, so that none shall be able to say
of it, this is Jezebel.

2 King. 8.28, 29.

2 King. 9. wh. Chapter

JEHV being thus come to the Crown, The 10th. King of Israel, JEHU.
and having already executed his Commission on Jehoram, Ahaziah, and Jezebel,
he now proceeds on to root out the house of Ahab. It seems Ahab had many Sons
born to him of several wives, and many grandchildren, (in all about seventy)
who were bred up under several great men (and some of them Rulers in Jezreel)
who upon these distractions fled with them to Samaria (a well fortified City)
to secure them there. Jehu understanding this, wrote a Letter to those who had
the tuition of these children, and to the Elders of Samaria which spoke after
this manner, Seeing your Masters Sons are with you, and there are with you
chariots and horses, and you are in a fenced City, and have arms; look out
therefore the best and meetest of your Masters Sons, and set him on his Fathers
Throne, and fight for your Masters house. This he wrote in an Ironical way, but
gave them thereby an intimation that if they stood out against him, or offered
to oppose him, he doubted not but he should easily subdue them. And indeed the
Lord having appointed him to destroy the whole stock of Ahab, did in order
there^unto put such a fear into the hearts of these Rulers, that they said
among themselves, Behold two Kings could not stand before him, how then shall
we be able to deal with him? Hereupon he that was chief over all those that
appertained to Ahabs house, and the chief Magistrate of Samaria, and the
Senators of the City, and the Governors of the Kings children returned this
tame answer to Jehu, we are thy servants, and will do whatever thou command
us, (they interpose no such condition as this, if the thing be honest and just,
or the like, so slavish does fear make men) we will make no King, nor set up
any to oppose thee; thou may do what thou please as for us, we are ready to
obey thee in every thing. Jehu then wrote another Letter wherein he told them
that if they were his servants in reality, and would be obedient to him, (as
they professed) then he required them forthwith to cut off the heads of those
seventy Sons and Grandchildren of Ahab, and to bring them to him to Jezreel the
next day. This was indeed a very severe command, and it is strange they did not
utterly refuse to obey it, but they ^^garding more their own safety then either
humanity or the charge and trust committed to them, without any more ado
complied with it, and cutting off the heads of these young Princes put them in
baskets, and sent them to Jezreel, and followed after them themselves. When
they were come thither a messenger acquainted Jehu that these Rulers of Samaria
had brought the heads of the Kings Sons unto him according to his command. It
being (as it seems) late, Jehu ordered that they should be laid in two heaps at
the entering of the Gate till the morning; certainly a most sad and ruful
spectacle it was to see so many young Princes heads lying on heaps together;
but this seems so ordered by Providence that all the people might see the
dreadful judgment of God upon the house of Ahab for his cruelty and Idolatry,
and might be deterred from going on in it. In the morning Jehu went out himself
to see these heads, and abundance of people being gathered together to gaze on
this lamentable spectacle, he there took occasion before them all to justify
himself and his proceedings, speaking to them after this manner: As for you
(says he) that are here spectators of this woeful spectacle, I do pronounce you
all clear and innocent touching the death of these Sons of Ahab. But possibly
you will say that I my self am not innocent, and that I have conspired against
the King my Master, and have slain him, and you will say also tha I have slain
all these whose heads lie here; for who else has slain them but my self,
seeing they were put to death by my command. I do therefore declare before you
all that all these strange things which I have done, I have not done them on my
own head, but by the command of God, and only to execute what he had determined
should be done against the house of Ahab, and which he threatened against it
openly and publicly by his Prophet Elijah, 1 King. 21.21. And you may plainly
see that these seventy persons could not so easily have lost their lives, nor
those that have cut off their heads been so easily drawn to do it (seeing they
had many ways to have avoided it) if there had not been an extraordinary hand
of God therein to accomplish his own purposes. Therefore neither they nor I
have done ought herein but what God would have done, and that is abundantly
sufficient to excuse both them and me. 2 King. 10. from 1, to 11.

Jehu in the next place falls upon Ahab's great men in Jezreel, that is, such
as he had raised to great places and offices, and upon his kinsfolk, and his
houshold-Priests, and cut them off, v. 11. Having settled things at Jezreel, he
goes now to Samaria, and in the way unexpectedly meets forty two Sons of the
brethren of Ahaziah, whom he slew because they were of the cursed stock of
Ahab, v. 12, 13, 14. See more hereof in the life of Ahaziah. When he was gone a
little further he met Jehonadab Son of Rhecab who was coming to meet him. This
Jehonadab was a Kenite of the stock of Jethro, [1 Chronicles. 2.55.] and either now
or afterward imposed upon his Sons an austere rule of life as we read Jer.
35.6. viz. That they should drink no wine, nor build houses, nor sow seed, nor
plant vineyards, nor have any; and that they should all their days dwell in
tents; and that (as it is probable) the better to secure them from being
corrupted with the growing luxury of those times, and to inure them beforehand
to hardness, that they might be the better able to endure the misery he foresaw
the sins of the people would bring upon them. This pious and good man coming to
meet him, he kindly saluted him and blessed him; for Jehu was now the greater
man, and the less was to be blessed of the greater, Heb. 7.7. He asks him, Is
thy heart right as my heart is with thy heart; that is, Is thy heart faithful
toward me as mine is toward thee? Jehonadab answers, It was. If it be (says
Jehu) give me thy hand, and he gave him his hand as a further assurance
thereof. Then Jehu (to testify his high esteem of him as a person of great
piety and prudence) took him up into his chariot, and said to him, Come along
with me, and see my zeal for the Lord, and when he came to Samaria he slew all
that he found were allied, or any way appertained to Ahab, and destroyed all
that might be any way accounted his, according to the saying of the Lord which
he spoke to Elijah, v. 15, 16, 17. Jehu having thus destroyed the posterity of
Ahab (who had been always the great promoters of the Idolatry of Baal) it is
like the Baalites in all places began to shift for themselves, and to hide
their heads in corners as fearing what he would do to them; therefore that he
might catch them all in a trap together he now pretends himself to be altered
in his judgment from what he was lately, and to be for the worship of Baal
Mendacium hoc erat perniciosum quia erat simulatio and professio Idololatriae
ideoque scandalum publicum. A Lapide.
, yea to be very zealous for it, declaring that Ahab served Baal but a little
to what he would do, and that he would serve him much more; and knowing the
people to be much addicted to this Idolatry, he called them together to make
this profession before them. His end might possibly be good to destroy the
worshippers of Baal, but his lying and dissembling was very evil, for he ought
not to have done evil that good might come thereby. After this he proclaimed a
solemn Assembly for the worship of Baal, and required all the Priests and
Prophets of Baal to be present at it, and that none should be absent upon pain
of death. Hereupon they all came, (apprehending no cause to distrust the
reality of the Kings intentions As for his cutting off the Priests of Ahabs
family before, possibly they thought that the cause of that was their special
relation to that family.
) so that Baals house or Temple in Samaria was full from one end to the other,
God suffering them thus to be beguiled that they might be destroyed for their
Idolatry. Jehu now gave order to him that had the keeping of all such things as
appertained to the worship of Baal, that he should bring forth vestments for
all the worshippers of Baal, which was accordingly done. Then Jehu and
Jehonadab went into the house of Baal, and bad them search diligently whether
there were none there that called themselves Prophets of the Lord, for he would
not have the worship of Baal profaned (as he pretended) by the presence of any
that were not cordial to his service. These things being done when the Priests
of Baal were gone in to offer sacrifice, Jehu appointed fourscore of his
Soldiers to stand at the doors of Baals house and charged them to keep them
all in, and declared that he whoever let any man among them escape, his life
should go for his that escaped. As soon as Baals chief Priest had made an end
of offering the burnt-offerings to Baal, Jehu commanded those Officers and
Soldiers to enter in immediately into the house of Baal and to destroy all
they found there, and not to spare a man; which they did accordingly, and then
cast out their dead bodies out of the house, that it might be seen what a
slaughter they had made. Then this guard went to some City near Samaria (which
was particularly dedicated to Baal, and where his chief Temple was) and brought
forth the Images out of it and burnt them, and broke down the Image of Baal,
and brake down this house of Baal, and made it a draught-house or jakes,
thereby to express their great detestation of that vile Idolatry wherewith the
Kingdom of Israel had been so long defiled.

Thus Jehu destroyed the worship of Baal out of all the Ten Tribes; but though
he overthrow this Idolatry yet he departed not from the Idolatry of Jeroboam,
viz. that of the Golden Calves of Dan and Bethel. He also rooted out the house
of Ahab, yet it seems he had a greater zeal for the establishing the Kingdom to
himself, than purely to execute the command of God; therefore Hos. 1.4. God
threatens to revenge the blood of Jezreel on the house of Jehu. However for
these acts God sends a Prophet to him to tell them that because he had done
well as to the matter of what he had done, (though not as to the manner) his
seed to the fourth generation should sit on that Throne; which accordingly they
did as we shall see afterward. But Jehu took no heed to walk in the Law of the
Lord God of Israel sincerely and with all his heart, but followed the Idolatry
of Jeroboam, by which God was so provoked that even in his days he did begin to
cut Israel short, that is, to abate their power by Hazael King of Syria,
especially in the two Tribes and an half beyond Jordan. For Hazael made sore
havoc among the people there, and it is like he did then or afterward (in the
days of Iehoahaz) exercise those inhumane cruelties upon the Israelites which
Elisha had foretold, 2 King. 8.12.

Jehu reigned twenty and eight years (which was the longest time that any of
the Kings of Israel had hitherto reigned) whereof six years Contemporary with
Athaliah, and the remaining twenty two with Ioash Son of Ahaziah; and they
buried him in Samaria, and Iehoahaz his Son reigned in his stead.

2 King. 10. from 11, to the end.

IEHOAHAZ Son of Iehu, The 11th. King of Israel, JEHOAHAZ.
(and first of his race) reigned seventeen years. All which time Ioash the Son
of Ahaziah reigned in Judah. He did evil in the sight of the Lord, and he and
his people followed the Idolatry of Jeroboam, and continued the Grove in
Samaria (which Ahab had planted, 1 King. 16.33.) and did not destroy it as he
should have done. Hereupon the Lords anger was kindled against Israel, and he
delivered them into the hands of Hazael King of Syria, and into the hands of
Benhadad his Son all the days that Iehoahaz reigned alone; for two years before
his death he took his son Ioash into copartnership with him in the Government.
Hazael had invaded and destroyed Israel beyond Jordan before, and threshed
Gilead with threshing instruments of iron, see Amos 1.3. And now he comes on
this side Jordan and oppresses the Israelites so sore there that he left them
but fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen; and broke them
to pieces, and scattered them (as corn is scattered with overmuch threshing)
insomuch that they had scarce any where an army together, and they were brought
to be a people of no power or esteem. And though Iehoahaz resisted them with
all the valor and might he could, yet still they prevailed against him. Which
is the rather noted to make it appear that the calamities that befell the
Israelites in his time were rather from Gods hand and just judgment because of
their sins, than from any want of courage or conduct in their King.

Jehoahaz in these distresses seeks to the Lord for help, and God afterward
gave Israel a Savior, to wit, Joash his Son, (who in his time mightily
prevailed against the Syrians.) And after him he raised up Jeroboam his Son [
Chap. 14.27.] who was also very successful against them. So that afterward the
children of Israel dwelt in their houses quietly and peaceably as in former
times. Jehoahaz dies, and is buried in Samaria, and Ioash his Son succeeds him.

2 King. 13. from v. 1, to 10.

JOASH (the second of the race of Iehu) reigned sixteen years. The 12th King of
Israel, JOASH.
He did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways of Jeroboam who
made Israel to sin. Elisha being now sick of his last sickness, Ioash came to
visit him, and wept over him, saying, O my Father, my Father, the Chariots of
Israel and the horsemen thereof. Elisha bids him take bow and arrows, he did
so, and Elisha puts his hands on the Kings hands (to signify perhaps that God
would fight with him, and that no action of ours without Gods assistance and
blessing can prosper), and bidding him to open the window Eastward (toward
Syria) and to shoot, he said, This is the arrow of the Lords deliverance from
Syria; that is, by this arrow is signified that the Lord by thee will certainly
deliver his people from the Syrians; for thou shall smite them as they were
smitten in Aphek, 1 King. 29.26. (or mightily Fortiter and vehementer sic
aliqui reddunt.
) till thou have consumed those particular Armies which they shall have at that
time. Then he bids the King take arrows and smite on the ground, which he
supposed he might easily understand to be a sign that he should smite the
Syrians, and thereupon would have been eager to give many strokes on the ground
as a sign that he should often conquer them, but he smote only thrice,
whereupon the man of God was wroth with him, and told him he should have
smitten five or six times, and then he should have smitten Syria till he had
consumed them, and utterly ruined the whole power of their Kingdom, whereas now
he should smite them but thrice only.

Elisha now dies, and is laid in his sepulcher; he had been a famous Prophet
about sixty years; God had manifested that the spirit of Elijah did rest upon
him by enabling him to do the same kind of miracles that Elijah had done:
Elijah divided Jordan with his mantle, [2 King. 2.8.] so did Elisha, v. 14.
Elijah multiplied the widow of Sarepta's oil, [1 King. 17.14.] and Elisha did
as much for a poor Prophets widow, [2 King. 4.2.] Elijah brought rain from
Heaven after a time of great drought, [1 King. 18.41.] and Elisha supplied
three Kings and their armies with water, when they were ready to perish for
want of it, [2 King. 3.16.] Elijah cursed the Captains and their fifties that
came to apprehend him, and they were presently destroyed with fire from Heaven,
[2 King. 1.10.] and Elisha cursed the children that reproached and mocked him,
and they were presently torn in pieces by two she-bears, [2 King. 2.24.] Elijah
raised the Sareptans son to life, [1 King. 17.22.] and Elisha the Shunamites,
[2 King. 4.35.] Nay, as Elisha desired that a double portion of the spirit of
Elijah might be given him, so some observe that Elisha wrought as many more
miracles as Elijah did. Sometime after Elisha's funeral, some Israelites that
were going to bury a dead man espied a band of Moabites near them (that were
broken into their land to rob and spoil) and so through fear not daring to
carry him to the place prepared for his burial, they removed the stone that
covered Elisha's sepulcher, and in have cast him in there, whereupon the dead
man as soon as he touched the bones of Elisha revived and stood upon his feet.
By this miracle God gave testimony to the sanctity and holiness of Elisha that
the people might be induced to believe what he had Prophesied concerning their
smiting the Syrians, and hereby also he confirmed to them the hope of a
resurrection and a future life after this.

But to proceed, though Hazael oppressed Israel all the days that Jehoahaz
reigned alone (as we showed before) yet it pleased the Lord to make Joash very
successful against the Syrians, so that in the days of Benhadad (Son of Hazael)
he did according to Elisha's Prophecy obtain three notable victories over
them, and recovered out of their hands the Cities his Father had lost. For the
Lord was gracious unto the Israelites, and had compassion on them because of
his Covenant This Covenant is often set down as the ground of Gods doing good
to Israel, Psa. 105.8.
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and would not destroy them as yet, nor cast
them out of his favor, nor out of the land which he had chosen for his
habitation, though he did it afterward, they persisting in their Idolatry and
other sins.

Joash also conquered Amaziah King of Judah, and took him prisoner, and brake
down four hundred cubits of the wall of Jerusalem, even from the Gate of
Ephraim to the corner-gate: And having gotten from him all the Treasure both of
the Temple and of the Kings house returned to Samaria, as is more fully related
in the life of Amaziah.

Joash now died, and was buried in Samaria, and Jeroboam his Son reigned in his
stead.

2 King. 13. from 10, to the end.

2 King. 14. from 8, to the 17.

JEroboam the second (the third of the race of Jehu) reigned forty one years
(to wit fourteen years and upwards with Amaziah, The 13th. King of Israel,
JEROBOAM the second.
and twenty seven in the days of Vzziah) he did evil in the sight of the Lord,
and followed the Idolatry of Jeroboam the first, the Son of Nebat. 2 King.
14.23, 24.

In his days those three eminent Prophets Jonah, Hosea and Amos Prophesied, God
sending to Israel extraordinary Prophets, and more in number than he did to the
Kingdom of Judah, intending by them to supply the defect and want of the
ordinary Priests and Levites. Jonah The Prophecy of JONAH.
was of Gath-Hepher, a Town in the Tribe of Zebulun in Galilee of the Gentiles,
Isa. 9.1. which confutes that of the Pharisees to Nicodemus, [Joh. 7.52.] who
said that out of Galilee arose no Prophet. This Prophet when the Syrians sorely
oppressed Israel foretold that Jeroboam, Joash's Son, should deliver Israel out
of their hands, and avenge the wrongs they had done them. We read not indeed
before of any such Prophecy, but hence it is certain that there was such an
one, and it might be in the days of Jehoahaz, when in his trouble he prayed
unto the Lord and the Lord heard him, Chapter 13.3, 4. Jeroboam accordingly
recovered all the land of the two Tribes and half beyond Jordan, taken by the
Syrians, even from Hamath a City near Damascus (which was the Northern entrance
into Canaan) to the Sea of the Plain, or Dead-Sea in the South, and also so far
prevailed against them that he recovered from them Damascus and Hamath (which
formerly belonged to Judah, and joined them to his own Kingdom, see 2 Samuel 8.6.
2 Chronicles. 8.3.) for the Lord saw the affliction of Israel which in the days of
Jehoahaz (not long before this) was very bitter, for at that time none were
safe, whether shut up in a place of defense, or left abroad, neither could the
King of Israel or any of his Princes help them against their enemies, nor could
they get any foreign succor. And the Lord had not as yet determined to blot
out the name of Israel from under heaven, nor utterly to destroy them from
being a Kingdom (though afterward he did so determine, they going on in their
sins) and therefore for the present he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam. 2
King. 14. from 25, to 29. The Israelites continuing (as it seems) impenitent
under the preaching of Jonah, the Lord sent him to Nineveh the Metropolis and
chief City of the Assyrian Empire to cry against it for its great wickedness.
But being afraid to go, he fled to Joppa and there taking ship intended to go
to Tarshish in Cilicia (the clean contrary way) but he was followed with a
tempest, and being thrown overboard was swallowed up by a Whale; he continued
in the Whales belly three days, and three nights, which was a resemblance of
Christ's lying in the grave, and to that end thrice alluded unto, and alleged
by our Savior himself, Mat. 12.40. and Chapter 16.4. Luke 11.29. Not that the
correspondence is in all points exact and absolute, either for the space of
three whole days, or three whole nights; but this of Jonas was the fittest and
nearest shadow of Christ's lying in the grave that the Scripture did afford.
Being miraculously kept alive in the Whales belly he prays earnestly to the
Lord to have pity upon him, and so the Whale vomited him out upon the dry land.
Being sent a second time to Nineveh, he obeys, and going thither, He cried,
Forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. This threatening implied a condition,
viz. if they did not repent in that time Intelligenda est haec comminatio rebus
sic manentibus. Deum autem miserturum si resipiscerent.
. And they repenting God spared the City for that time, and justified his
sparing of them against the angry Prophets repining at it. And this is the sum
of the History of Jonab, but there is no Prophecy of his left, either against
Israel or Judah.

Another eminent Prophet whom the Lord raised up at that time was HOSEA, The
Prophecy of HOSEA.
he Prophesied very many years, (some think about seventy) in the days of four
Kings of Judah, viz. from Vzziah to Hezekiah, and of seven Kings of Israel,
viz. from this Jeroboam the second to Hoshea. He threatens the ruin and
desolation of this Kingdom of Israel, though it was now in its highest flourish
under Jeroboam, the most prosperous and victorious King that ever reigned over
the Ten Tribes; which ruin he himself lived to see, continuing in his
Prophetic function to the reign of Hezekiah, in the sixth year of whose reign
the Kingdom of Israel came to its final end. He is sent principally to Israel,
yet has a word of Prophecy to Judah also. This Prophet delivers his
Prophecy, 1. In types and figurative representations in his three first
Chapters: 2. In plain and express terms in which he charges them with their
heinous Idolatry, and other horrible iniquities against both Tables, whereof
all conditions among them were guilty. He threatens judgments, exhorts them to
repent, promises mercies to the penitent. All these are intermixed and gone
over and over again in the residue of the Prophecy.

A third eminent Prophet whom the Lord raised up at the same time was AMOS The
Prophecy of AMOS.
sent principally to the people of Israel. He was an Herdsman, and taken from
following his herd in Judea, and sent to Prophecy to the people of Israel,
Amos 1.1. The words of Amos who was among the herdsmen of Tekoa. And Chap.
7.14. Then answered Amos and said to Amaziah, I was no Prophet nor Prophets
Son, but I was an herdsman, and a gatherer of Sycamore fruits. And the Lord
took me as I followed the flock and said unto me, Go prophecy unto my people
Israel. Amaziah the Priest of Bethel would have stirred up Jeroboam against him
for Prophesying against his house, Amos 7.10. Then Amaziah the Priest of Bethel
sent to Jeroboam King of Israel, saying, Amos has conspired against thee in
the midst of the house of Israel, the land is not able to bear all his words:
For he says, Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and Israel shall surely be led
away captive out of their own land. Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou Seer,
go, flee away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophecy there.
Amos being thus ill used by him, pronounces a heavy judgment from the Lord
upon him, ver. 17. Thy wife shall play the whore, and thy sons and daughters
shall fall by the sword, and thou shall die in a polluted land, (viz. that of
Assyria) when Israel shall be carried away captive out of her own land.

Amos began to Prophecy two years before the Earthquake, and foretold it
before it came, which happened (as it is thought) about two years before
Jeroboam's death. He Prophesied against six Nations besides Israel and Judah:
First, he declares Gods judgments against the neighbor Nations (that were
enemies to the Jews) viz. 1. Damascus, 2. Gaza, and other adjacent places of
the Philistines. 3. Tire. 4. Edom. 5. Ammon. 6. Moab. Then he threatens the
Jews for their sins, speaking sometimes to Judah, but principally to Israel,
against whom he Prophesies first in plain terms, secondly in types and visions.
First in plain terms he threatens them for their ingratitude and idolatry, Chapter
3. Their violence and incorrigibleness, Chapter 4. Their injustice and oppression
of the poor, their slighting Gods threatenings, and their hypocritical worship,
Chap. 5. Their putting off the evil day, and their wanton voluptuousness, Chapter
6. Then his threatenings are delivered in visions and types: 1. Of grasshoppers
and locusts, signifying famine: 2ly, Of fire devouring the great deep,
signifying war. 3ly, Of a plum-line signifying the overthrow of the Kingdom and
of the Kings house, and that the Lord would deal with them according to the
strict rule of justice, and not in mercy as he had formerly done; and he
further denounces particular judgments against Amaziah the Priest and his
family who accused him of conspiracy (of which we have spoken before) Chapter 7.
4ly, Of a basket of Summer-fruits, representing the ripeness of their sins, and
of Gods judgments Poenae tempue maturum significat, and finem, i. e. ultimam
vindictam instare. Significat populum qui velut fructus terrae est ab ea terra
velut ab arbore auferendum.
. 5ly, Of smiting the lintel of the door of the Temple, till the posts
upholding it did shake, signifying not only the destruction of the Temple, but
the cutting off of great and small of the people. Lastly he sweetens and
moderates these severe and hard Prophesies with a twofold promise: 1. That God
would spare a remnant in the midst of these calamities though he destroyed the
profane body of the Nation. 2. That in due time he would recollect and restore
the Church of Israel, and would raise up a Gospel Church from among them under
Christ, which he would enlarge by the addition of the believing Gentiles to it.
Jeroboam now dies and is buried with his predecessors, 2 King. 14.28, 29. After
Jeroboam's death (under whom that Kingdom came to its full height of glory) all
things declined, and those tumults arose which were the forerunners of the
destruction not only of Jeroboams own house, but also of the whole Kingdom, as
was foretold in Chap. 7, 8. of Amos. In which troubled and tempestuous state of
things they fell into a plain Anarchy which lasted about eleven years and an
half. For if we compare the times of these two Kingdoms together, we must be
forced to grant such an Interregnum or vacancy of a King in the land of Israel,
that the six months of Zachariah the Son of Jeroboam For Jeroboam reigned 29
years in the days of Uzziah, then add eleven years of vacancy till Zachariah
began to reign, and it will fall in with the 38 of Uzziah.
, may fall even with the thirty eighth year, and the one month of Shallum In
the space of one year, viz. from 38 to the end of the 39 of Uzziah there were
four Kings in Israel, Jer^boam, Zachariah, Shallum, Menahem.
, (who slew him) with the thirty ninth year of Vzziah King of Judah, according
to what we find recorded, 2 King. 15.8. In the thirty eighth year of Azariah
King of Judah, did Zachariah the Son of Jeroboam reign over Israel in Samaria
six months, and v. 13. Shallum the Son of Iabesh began to reign in the nine and
thirtieth year of Vzziah King of Judah, and he reigned a full month in Samaria.
The occasion of this Interregnum or vacancy To this time Hosea seems to point,
Hos. 10.3. For now they shall say we have no King because we feared not the
Lord, what then should a King do to us?
might possibly be the great dissentions and divisions in Israel upon the death
of Jeroboam, or some mislike of Zachariah his Son that was to succeed him.

THE Subjects of the Kingdom of Israel being wearied out (as it seems) with
their dissentions, at last settled Zachariah The 14th. King of Israel, ZACHARIAH.
the Son of Jeroboam (the fourth and last of the race of Iehu, in his Fathers
Throne as God had promised, 2 King. 10.30.) after eleven years vacancy, as has
been showed before. He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and
departed not from the Idolatry of Jeroboam who made Israel to sin, and reigned
only six months.

At the end of those six months Shallum who was (as it seems) some great
Commander in the Army (such an one as Omri, 1 King. 16.16.) first secretly
conspired against him, but then having got many to side with him he slew him
openly and publicly in the very sight of the people, they not at all opposing
it, or endeavoring to hinder it. After whose death followed those direful
calamities, which were foretold by Amos, Chapter 7.9. And the high places of Isaac
shall be desolate, and the Sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste, and I
will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword. And thus Jehu's race
ended. In the continuance of it so long we may observe how the Lord was pleased
to intermix justice and mercy. First justice in cutting Israel short even in
Jehu's time, 2 King. 10.32. and in delivering them into the hands of the King
of Syria in Jehoahaz time, Chapter 13.3. 2ly, Mercy in making Jeboash and Jeroboam
Saviors and Deliverers to them, Chapter 13.15.

2 King. 15. from v. 8, to 13.

SHALLVM having by the murder of Zachariah got the Kingdom, he held it but one
month; The 15th. King of Israel, SHALLUM.
for Menahem going from Tirzah to Samaria, slew him there, and reigned in his
stead.

2 King. 15. from 13, to 16.

MENAHEM The 16th King of Israel, MENAHEM.
having gotten the Kingdom held it ten years, God suffering him to continue so
long that he might be a scourge to that rebellious people. He did that which
was evil in the sight of the Lord. In the beginning of his reign (as it seems)
coming to Tipsah, not far from Tirzah in the Tribe of Ephraim, the City refused
to acknowledge him for their King, and would not open their Gates to receive
him. Whereupon being highly enraged against them like a cruel Tyrant (to
terrify other Cities from following their example) he smote not only that
City, but all the coasts about it, destroying the inhabitants and exercising
all kind of cruelty, insomuch that he ripped up the very women with child. To
such monstrous barbarity does wrath mixed with scorn and disdain sometimes
transport wicked men.

While he was tugging in those broils to hold the Kingdom, God stirred up the
spirit of Pull King of Assyria (1 Chronicles. 5.26.) to invade the Kingdom of Israel.
This Pull seems to have been the self-fame man who was brought to repentance
by the Preaching of Jonah; so that here the men of Nineveh may seem to have
risen up in judgment against this Nation. If it were so, God now raised up a
repenting heathen to take vengeance on unrepenting Israel. Menahem being unable
to resist Pull, he purchased his peace with him, and gave him a thousand talents
of silver to settle and confirm him in his Kingdom; whereunto some refer that
of Hos. 5.13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound, then went
Ephraim to the Assyrian and sent to King Jareb, yet could he not heal you, nor
cure you of your wound. This great sum of money Menahem exacted of all the
mighty men of wealth in the land, of each man fifty shekels of silver, and so
the King of Assyria turned back from him.

He now dies and Pekahiah his Son reigns in his stead.

2 King. 15. from 16, to 23.

PEKAHIAH began to reign in the fiftieth year of Vzziah King of Judah, and
reigned two years, The 17th. King of Israel, PEKAHIAH.
and did evil in the sight of the Lord. Pekah the Son of Remaliah a Captain of
his conspired against him, and slew him in Samaria in his own Palace, Argoh and
Arieh and fifty Gileadites assisting him therein.

1 King. 15. from 23, to 27.

PEKAH the Son of Remaliah began to reign in the fifty second year of Vzziah
King of Judah, The 18th. King of Israel, PEKAH.
and reigned twenty years In the 2d year of his reign began Jotham King of
Judah to reign.
. He did evil in the sight of the Lord, 2 King. 15.27, 28. In the 17th. year of
his reign he combines with Rezin King of Syria against Ahaz King of Judah, and
they go up with their joint forces to besiege Jerusalem, and resolved to depose
Ahaz, and set up the Son of Tabeal, probably some Syrian of note and eminency.
Ahaz is comforted and encouraged by the Prophet Isaiah against this
confederacy, of which see more in the life of Ahaz. And at this time they could
not overcome Ahaz, nor take Jerusalem, but afterward dividing their forces
they prevailed against him. For God (for his great sins) gave him up first into
the hands of the Syrians, so that Rezin carried away captive many of the people
to Damascus, and then into the hands of the Israelites, so that Pekah slew in
one day an hundred and twenty thousand of them, among whom was Maaziah the
Kings Son, and Azrikam the Governor of his house, and Elkanah the second
person to the King (who were all slain by Zichri a mighty man of Ephraim) and
the Israelites carried away captive at that time out of Judah two hundred
thousand prisoners, reckoning men, women, boys and girls, and made a vast spoil
of their goods, and were carrying all these to Samaria. But before they came
thither, upon the counsel of Oded a Prophet of the Lord, and the command of the
Princes and Elders of Samaria they released all that vast number of prisoners,
and restored them their goods again, and treated them kindly, and caused them
to be conveyed safe to their brethren at Jericho. See more of this in the life
of Ahaz.

2 King. 16.5, 6.

Isai. 7. from v. 1, to 17.

2 Chronicles. 28. from 5, to 16.

Ahaz being brought low by the Syrians and Israelites sends to Tiglath-Pileser
King of Assyria (Son to Pull who had not many years before invaded the land of
Israel in the days of Menahem) to desire his help against these two Kings.
Hereupon Tiglath-Pileser came up first against Syria and took Damascus, and
slew Rezin, [2 King. 16.9.] and then he invaded Israel, and led away the people
of Gilead or Peraea, to wit the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half Tribe of
Manasseh, unto Chabor and Haran, and Gozan. Then passing over Jordan, possessed
himself of Galilee Galilaea magna ex part constabat Tribubus Zebulun and
Naphtali. Tirin.
, and carried away the inhabitants of Zebulun and Naphtali into Assyria; so
that at this time he subdued in a manner five Tribes of Israel, to wit, those
without Jordan (who as they had first their inheritance given them, so were the
first that were carried away captive) and the Tribes of Zebulun and Naphtali
who were settled in Galilee. And this was the first captivity of Israel. Neither
do we read that these or their children ever returned again to their own land.

2 King. 16.7.

2 Chronicles. 28.16.

2 King. 15.29.

1 Chronicles. 5.26.

Pekah having got the Crown at first by murdering Pekahiah his Sovereign, and
having unfortunately engaged against Ahaz King of Judah, and thereby brought
Tiglath-Pileser upon him (who had carried so many of his subjects away captive
into Assyria) it is no wonder he should fall into the hatred of the people.
Hereupon Hoshea the Son of Ela conspired against him and slew him, and reigned
in his stead, in the twentieth year of Iotham, that is in the twentieth year
since Jotham began to reign. Some learned men think that Jotham reigned only
sixteen years (as it is said 2 King. 15.33.) but that he lived twenty years
after he was settled in the Throne of Judah, and that four years before he died
he wholly resigned his Kingdom to his Son Ahaz. So it was in the fourth year of
Ahaz that Hoshea slew Pekah, and in the twentieth of Jotham, because (according
to them) Jotham still had the title of King, though he had resigned the Kingdom
four years before. It Is said indeed in 2 King. 17.1. that Hoshea began to reign
in the twelfth year of Ahaz, because though he thrust himself into the Kingdom
before, yet he was opposed as an usurper till the twelfth of Ahaz, at which
time (it seems) he had the Crown confirmed to him, and afterward reigned four
years in Ahaz's time, and five in Hezekiah's, in all nine years.

2 King. 15.30, 31.

HOSHEA the Son of Ela having murdered Pekah got the Kingdom into his own hand,
The 19th. King of Israel, HOSHEA.
in the fourth year of Ahaz, yet by reason of stirs and tumults that arose
hereupon, he could not quietly enjoy it, but that State continued in confusion,
and a kind of Anarchy for the space of nine years. Hoshea having at length
composed all differences at home began now quietly to reign in the latter end
of the twelfth year of Ahaz, and reigned nine years.

He did evil in the sight of the Lord, but not as the Kings of Israel that were
before him; for though he continued Jeroboam's Idolatry of the Golden Calves,
yet he abandoned the grosser Idolatries of many of his Predecessors. And
besides he suffered such of his subjects (as had a mind to it) to go up to
Jerusalem to worship there, which the former Kings of Israel would not permit.
For when Hezekiah had proclaimed a solemn Passover, many of the Ten Tribes went
up to keep their Passover in Jerusalem as we read 2 Chronicles. 30.11. Nevertheless
diverse of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulon humbled themselves and came to
Jerusalem, 2 King. 17.1, 2.

Tiglath-Pileser (after he had reigned nineteen years) dying, Salmanasser his
Son succeeded him. This Salmanasser This seems to be that Shalman who in the
Prophecy of Hosea, Chap. 10.14. is said to have laid waste the house of Arbeb,
to wit the Country of Arbela in the land of Assyria beneath Arpad.
either invited by the people, or taking advantage of those late broils in the
Kingdom of Israel came up now against Hoshea, and at length prevailed so far
that Hoshea was content to become his servant and pay him tribute, 2 King. 17.3.

But sometime after Hoshea confederating with the King of Egypt, resolved to
cast off his yoke and refused to pay him tribute any longer. Salmanasser
understanding this, resolved to revenge this injury. Wherefore first of all
making sure of all the land of the Moabites, that he might have no enemy on his
back to annoy him, and rasing to the ground their two chief Cities, Ar and
Kirharaseth according to the Prophecy of Isaiah (Chap. 15.) he then went
through and wasted all the land of Israel, and at last marched to Samaria in
the fourth year of Hezekiah, and seventh of Hoshea, and besieged it three
years, viz. in the seventh, eighth and ninth year of Hoshea, which were
concurrent with the fourth, fifth and sixth of Hezekiah.

Isa. 15. whole Chapter.

2 King. 17.4, 5.

2 King. 18.9, 10.

Toward the end of the third year of the siege (the sixth of the reign of
Hezekiah and ninth of Hoshea) Salmanasser took Samaria and their King Hoshea,
and then shut him up and bound him in prison 2 King. 17. latter part of v. 4.
those words are spoken by way of anticipation.
, (as Josephus says lib. 9.) and carried away the Israelites captives into his
own country, and planted them in Chalachochabor and Nehar-Gozan cities of
Assyria, (whither Tiglath-Pileser had before transported the inhabitants of
Perea) and in the Cities of Media. If any such inquire why the Lord did thus
deliver up the Israelites into the hands of their enemies? the reason is here
fully rendered, because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord their God, but
transgressed his Covenant, and all that Moses the servant of the Lord
commanded, and would not hear them nor do them, 2 King. 18.12. And 2 King.
17.7, etc. For so it was that the children of Israel had sinned against the
Lord their God, who had brought them up out of the land of Egypt from under the
hand of Pharaoh King of Egypt, and they feared other gods, and walked in the
statutes of the heathen (whom the Lord had cast out before them) and of the
Kings of Israel, who made statutes for Idolatry. And besides their open
Idolatry they did secretly many things which were not right, against the mind
and will of the Lord their God, and they built them high places in all their
Cities, from the tower of the watchmen A Proverbial speech whereby the extent
of their Idolatry is set forth.
to their fenced Cities. And they set them up Images and groves in every high
hill, and under every green tree. And there they burnt incense in all the high
places as did the heathen whom the Lord carried away before them, and wrought
wicked things to provoke the Lord to anger. Yea they served Idols whereof the
Lord had said unto them, ye shall not do this thing. Notwithstanding the Lord
testified against Israel and against Judah, by all the Prophets, and by all the
Seers whom he sent unto them, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my
commandments, and my statutes according to what I commanded your fathers in the
wilderness, and which I have often since inculcated upon you by my servants the
Prophets time after time. But they would not hear, but hardened their necks as
their fathers did, who did not believe in the Lord their God. And they rejected
his statutes and his covenant that he made with their fathers, and his
testimonies In which respect Ezekiel. 20.25. Gods statutes are said not to be
good, that is, through the wickedness of the people they proved hurtful to
them, and sentenced them to death.
whereby he testified against their transgressions, and they followed vanity,
and became vain, and went after the heathen that were round about them,
concerning whom the Lord had charged them that they should not do like unto
them. And they left all the commandments of the Lord their God, and made them
molten images, even two Calves, and made a grove, and worshipped all the host
of heaven, and served Baal. And they caused their sons and their daughters to
pass through the fire, and used divination and enchantments, and sold
themselves to do evil in the sight of the Lord to provoke him to anger;
therefore the Lord was very angry with Israel, and removed them out of his
sight, there was none left but the Tribe of Judah only. And another cause of
Isreal's ruin was, they were an ill example to Judah, and infected that Nation.
And hereupon Judah also kept not the commandments of the Lord their God, but
walked in the statutes of Israel which they made. So the Lord rejected all the
seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and delivered them into the hand of
spoilers, until he had cast them out of his sight; that is, out of that land
where he manifested the evidences of his gracious presence. It Is further added
that when the Lord had rent Israel from the house of David, they made Jeroboam
the Son of Nebat King, and Jeroboam drove Israel from following the Lord, and
made them sin a great sin. And the children of Israel walked in all the sins of
Jeroboam which he did, they departed not from them, until the Lord removed them
out of his sight, as he had threatened by all his servants the Prophets. And for
these reasons was Israel carried away out of their own land to Assyria, where
they remained as exiles when this History was written.

2 King. 17. from 7, to the 24.

2 King. 18.10, 11, 12.

This was the end of the Kingdom of Israel when it had stood severed from the
Kingdom of Judah by the space of two hundred fifty four years. Their many great
and crying sins highly provoked the Lord against them, especially their
notorious idolatry, their contempt of the Lords Prophets, and their contumacy
and bold persisting in their wicked ways. For after the great blow they
received by Tiglath-Piles^r, 2 King. 15.29. they were so far from any amendment
that they used in the pride of their hearts that Proverb, Isa. 9. v. 10. The
bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones; the sycamores are
cut down but we will change them into cedars; intimating thereby, that they
would build their towns that were spoiled better than they were before. For
these sins therefore the Lord was provoked to reject and cast them off, and to
suffer them to be led away captive.

Tobit or Tobias the elder, says of himself that he at this time with Anna his
wife, and his Countrymen the Naphtalites was carried away into the land of
Assyria, and there made purveyor or provider of corn and other victuals for
Salmanasser's household, and also that he was carried into Media, and there
placed in a principal City called Ruges, etc. Tobit Chapter 1.

Salmanasser having thus carried away the Israelites captives, he planted
Colonies there of five Nations of his own people, (taking them out of Babylon,
Cutha, Ava, Emath and Sepharvaim) and placed them in the Cities of Samaria in
the room of the Israelites. And these were they that after this time were
called Cuthaeans, by a Synecdoche, because the major part of them came out of
Cutha a Country in Persia, many of these at their first coming thither not
fearing the Lord, nor worshipping the true God of Israel were devoured by
Lions; therefore a Jewish Priest was at the request of the rest of them sent
out of Assyria to teach them the manner how the God of Israel would be
worshipped. But this being (as it seems) one of Jeroboam's Priests, and making
his residence at Bethel, he taught them not the pure worship of God, nor to
serve him as they ought in his Temple at Jerusalem, but in their own Country
after the way of Jeroboam. Neither were these people brought to worship the
true God alone, but every City had also a several Idol of their own, which they
worshipped according to the custom of the Nations from which they were
descended, and from whence they had been transported. So though they feared the
Lord, that is, acknowledged the God of Israel to be the true God, yet they
served their own gods also after the manner of the Nations from whence they
came Ex ritu Gentium illarum unde ipsos deportaverant, vel e quibus deportati
fuerant. Pisc.
. And as for the Israelites that were carried away captive into Assyria, they
were nothing amended by their captivity, but it is said of them 2 King. 17.34.
That unto this day they do after their former manners; they fear not the Lord,
neither do they after their statutes, or after their ordinances (appointed and
enjoined them by God) or after the Law and Commandments which the Lord
commanded the children of Jacob (whom he named Israel) to observe with whom he
made a Covenant, and charged them, saying, Ye shall not fear other gods, nor
bow your selves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them. But the Lord
(who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power, and a stretched
out arm) him shall ye fear, and him shall ye worship, and to him shall ye do
sacrifice. And the statutes and the ordinances, and the law, and the
commandments which he wrote for you, ye shall observe to do for evermore Viz.
as long as that dispensation shall last.
, and ye shall not fear other gods. And the Covenant that I have made with you
ye shall not forget, neither shall ye fear other gods; but the Lord your God
shall ye fear, and he shall deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies.
Howbeit they did not hearken, but they did after their former manner. But as
for those Nations whom the King of Assyria brought out of other Countries and
placed in Samaria, they went on in their mungrel way of Religion, they and
their children from generation to generation.

After these first Colonies there were other Colonies brought thither by
Esarhaddon King of Assyria, who was also called Asnapper the Great [Ezra
4.2.10.] Son of Sennacherib, and Grandchild to Salmanasser. This seems to be
the last of the Assyrian Kings, and the person that carried Manasseh prisoner
to Babylon, which was then under the Assyrian Empire, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. So that
the Prophecy of Isaiah seems now to be fulfilled, Chap. 7.8. The head of Syria
is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin, and within threescore and five
years shall Ephraim be broken that it be not a people. For though the greatest
part of the Israelites were carried away by Salmanasser some years before, and
their Kingdom utterly abolished, yet among them that were left, there remained
some show of a Government. But now by reason of the great multitude of
foreigners which came to dwell there, the small remainder of the Ephramites
were accounted as nothing; yet they were not utterly extinct in their own
Country as appears from 2 Chronicles. 34.6, 7. and v. 33. and Chap. 35.18. and 2
King. 23.19, 20.

2 King. 17. from 24, to the end.

These Samaritans before mentioned were succeeded by a second sort of Heretical
Samaritans in the time of the Government of Nehemiah, in whose time one of the
Sons of Ioiada the Son of Eliashib the High Priest married the daughter of
Sanballat the Horonite, and therefore he chased him from him, Neh. 13.28. This
Priest thus driven away from Jerusalem, went with other Jews (that had made the
like mungrel marriages) to the Samaritans their wives kindred, who there (as
the Jewish Writers relate) assisted them in building an Anti-Temple on mount
Gerizim, where a medly Nation devised a Miscellaneous worship of God, rejecting
all the Scriptures, save the five Books of Moses, and maintaining many
abominable superstitions. So that between these Samaritans and the Jews there
grew a deadly hatred as appears Joh. 4. 9. the main difference between them in
point of Religion is briefly and clearly stated in those words of the woman of
Samaria to our Savior, Our Fathers (viz. Samaritans) worshipped in this
mountain (viz. Gerizim) but ye Jews say that in Jerusalem is the place where
men ought to worship, Joh. 4.20. And observable it is, that whereas Moses
appointed an Altar to be built on Mount Ebal, which Joshua accordingly
afterward erected in that place, Josh. 8.30. Yet the Samaritan Penteteuch
makes the same to be built on Mount Gerizim, in the very place where
afterward this mock-temple stood, to gain thereto the greater reputation of
holiness, and so they wilfully depraved the original, (vide Samarit. Pentet. in
Deuteronomy. 27.4.) But if besides the five Books of Moses these Samaritans had
received the Books of the Prophets, their testimony would have overthrown their
cause; for the Psalmist says expressly, Psalm. 78. 67. He refused the Tabernacle
of Joseph, and chose not the Tribe of Ephraim, but chose the Tribe of Judah,
the mount Sion which he loved. But to return, this Temple on mount Gerizim,
Antiochus Epiphanes afterward turned into the Temple of Jupiter, who is
celebrated for hospitality, and it was destroyed something before the time of
our Savior by John Hircanus, after it had stood above two hundred years. But
though the Temple was taken away, yet the mountain remained still, in which the
Samaritans continued their adoration and false worship.

Here Ends the Reigns of the KINGS of ISRAEL.
Kings of Judah.
The first King of Judah, REHOBOAM.
SOlomon being dead, some of the Heads and Officers of Israel immediately sent
into Egypt for Jeroboam to come to them, and it seems they contrived among
themselves that before they would Crown Rehoboam King, they would petition him
to be eased of the Taxes his Father in the latter part of his reign had imposed
on them. For though he made not the Israelites bondmen, Chapter 9.22. yet we read
of large provisions that were gathered in the land to maintain the royalty of
his Court, [ Chapter 4.7, 22, 23.] and of levies made for his buildings, [Ch.
9.15.] and in his declining age especially, (when he was carried away by his
Idolatrous wives and concubines) undoubtedly heavier Taxes were laid on the
people, and it may be Hadad's and Rezons enmity against him might also occasion
some impositions. These Taxes they resolved to be eased of before they admitted
him to the Government. And it seems they met at Sechem a City in the Tribe of
Ephraim to consult of these matters, and from thence sent to Rehoboam, that
there they were convened to Crown him. Rehoboam accordingly going thither,
Jeroboam and the heads of the people came to him, and spoke to him, saying, Thy
Father made our yoke grievous, now therefore we pray thee ease thou somewhat
the grievous servitude of thy Father, and his heavy yoke that he put upon us,
and we will serve thee. Rehoboam took three days time to consider of the matter
of their petition (in which alone he showed himself wise Solomon's Son) and
during that time he consulted first with the old men that had been Counselors
and servants to his Father, and asked them what answer he should return to the
people? They told him if he would be kind to them and please them for this
once, and yield to them, and speak good words to them, they would be his
servants, and obedient subjects for ever; but if he did otherwise, they would
be in danger to revolt from him. Rehoboam liked not their advice, and therefore
advised with the younger men that had been brought up with him, and now
attended on him, and they told him that this people were not to be pleased or
humoured, but to be ratled, and rigorously dealt with; and therefore advised
him to tell them, that if they complained of his fathers taxes and impositions,
he would give them more cause to complain of his. They should find that his
little finger would be thicker than his Fathers loins. If his Fathers yoke
(that he laid upon them) was heavy, he would add to their yoke. If his Father
chastis'd them with whips, he would chastise them with scorpions. This is the
answer they advise him to give them. Accordingly on the third day Jeroboam and
the heads of the people coming again to him, he (forsaking the counsel of the
old men) answered them roughly according to the words which the young men had
put into his mouth. Thus Rehoboam regarded not the desire and petition of the
people, but utterly rejected it, for the thing was of the Lord, who withheld
the spirit of wisdom and counsel from him, (else he might easily have discerned
what the event would be) and gave him over to be misled by rash and evil
counselors, and thereupon alienated the hearts of the people from him,
intending thereby to perform the word that he spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite
concerning Jeroboam. This sharp and rigorous answer of the King gave such a
general distaste to the people that they would no longer stay to advise upon
it, but ten of the twelve Tribes unanimously manifested a present and
peremptory resolution to fall off from him, and muttered after this manner,
What portion (say they) have we in David See the like speech of Sheba, 2 Samuel
20.1. to which possibly they allude.
? that is, What good can we expect from David's stock? or what inheritance have
we in the Son of Jesse? What advantage or profit can we expect from any of his
posterity? To your Tents Because they of old dwelt in Tents, this phrase is
still continued in use among them.
O Israel, let us no longer stay here to make our selves slaves to this Tyrant,
but every man look to his own house, and out of our own Tribes let us choose us
a King; and look thou to thy own house Rehoboam (who art descended of David)
and make much of thy own Tribe, for beyond their bounds thy Kingdom is not like
to extend. We are resolved to take care of our selves, and to choose a King
from among our own Tribes. Rehoboam seeing the people in such a mutiny and
distemper, he sends Adoram (who was over the Tribute) to pacify them, hoping
no doubt but they would reverence so venerable an old man as he was who was not
much short of an hundred years of age, having enjoyed that office above sixty
years, viz. from the midst of David's reign [see 2 Samuel 20.24.] and all
Solomon's until now. But he being one of those who (they thought) promoted the
laying of Impositions upon the people; the very sight, of him did so enrage
them, that in a mutinous and outrageous manner they fell upon him and stoned
him to death. Upon this, Rehoboam thought it high time for him to be gone, and
therefore speedily getting into his Chariot he fled to Jerusalem. Things being
now come to this desperate pass, immediately ten Tribes fell off from Rehoboam,
and chose Jeroboam the Son of Nebat for their King. But the Tribes of Judah and
Benjamin stuck fast to Rehoboam. In memorial of this sad rent the Jews
afterward kept a solemn Fast yearly upon the three and twentieth day of the
third month called Sivan. Rehoboam being come to Jerusalem forthwith raises an
Army of an hundred and fourscore thousand valiant men out of Judah and Benjamin
to reduce the Ten Tribes back to his subjection, but is forbidden to proceed on
in that enterprise by the Prophet Shemaiah, who told him that the thing was of
God, who had so ordered it, for the punishment of his Fathers defection from
him, and so the people returned to their own homes. But though for the present
that design was laid aside, yet there followed continual bickerings between the
two Kings all their days, and the borderers on both sides did continually make
inrodes one upon another, see Chapter 14.30.

Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built and fortified fifteen Cities for the
defense of Judah, and made great warlike provisions, and put Garrisons into the
Cities, and placed Captains and Commanders over them, some whereof it seems
were his own Sons; for 2 Chronicles. 11.23. it is said, He dealt wisely and dispersed
all his children thoroughout all the Countries of Judah and Benjamin into every
fenced City. And in that it must be acknowledged he dealt prudently, for in his
own Sons he might most securely confide. And he stored those Garrisons with
plenty of victuals and with wine and oil, and in every Garrison he put Shields
and Spears, and other Warlike ammunition, and made them exceeding strong. And
many Priests and Levites that were cast off by Jeroboam and his Sons They
probably were placed as Captains in the Cities of Israel as Rehoboam's Sons
were in the Cities of Judah.
, (who would not suffer them to execute the Priests office in their Cities) and
many people out of all the Ten Tribes (who set their hearts to seek the Lord
God of Israel) resorted unto him, whereby his Kingdom was much strengthened.

For three years he and his people walked in the ways of David, and in the ways
of Solomon, (viz. his first ways before his fall) but afterward they forsook
the Law of the Lord (though some particular persons among them undoubtedly
remained faithful to God) and made themselves High Places, Images So that none
of the twelve Tribes at this time continued faithful to God, the Ten revolted
with Jeroboam, and these two with Rehoboam.
and Groves, doing according to all the abominations of the Heathen. And they
did evil in the sight of the Lord, and provoked him to jealousy with their
sins, insomuch that in none of their Fathers days there was such a general
apostasy. And it seems there were among them some that practiced that
abominable sin of Sodomy, so that they did after all the abominations of the
Heathen whom God cast out before their Fathers.

As for the Domestic affairs of Rehoboam we find that he took eighteen Wives,
and sixty Concubines, and begat twenty eight Sons, and sixty Daughters, and
dispersed his Sons through all the Countries of Judah and Benjamin into the
several fenced Cities, and there gave them liberal and Princely allowances, and
sought out many Wives for them out of Noble Families to strengthen their
interest by their alliances. Of all his Wives he loved Maachah best, the
daughter of Absalom, who was a great Idolatress, see 1 King. 15.13. and he made
Abijah her Son to be chief ruler over his brethren, intending he should succeed
him in the Throne.

In the fifth year of his reign (because he had so heinously transgressed
against the Lord) Shishak King of Egypt (invited possibly thereunto by Jeroboam
who had lived there, and been kindly entertained by him before he was made
King) came up against him with twelve hundred chariots, and threescore thousand
horsemen, and people without number. Some of them were Lybians (a people in
Africa bordering upon Egypt) some Suckites, otherwise called Troglodites (a
people dwelling in Caves of Rocks) and some of them Ethiopians. With this great
Army invading Judea, he took the fenced Cities that were in his way to
Jerusalem, and then came before that City also. The people of Judah being now
in great distress Shemaiah the Prophet came to Rehoboam, and the Princes Ver.
6. Princes of Israel, that is, the Princes of Judah who were Israelites.
that were gathered together in Jerusalem, and spoke to them after this manner,
Thus says the Lord, ye have forsaken me, and therefore have I also left you in
the hand of Shishak. Rehoboam and the Princes upon this humbled themselves, and
confessed their sins, and said the Lord is righteous in all the judgments he has
brought upon us. Hereupon the Lord spoke to Shemaiah again, saying, They have
humbled themselves, therefore I will not utterly destroy them, but grant them
some deliverance, and my wrath shall not be poured forth upon Jerusalem by the
hand of Shishak; nevertheless they shall be his servants, and shall yield to
such terms as he shall put upon them, that they may know my service, and the
service of the Kingdoms of the Countries. That is, that they may know by the
hard conditions Shishak will put upon them, how much better it had been for
them to have served me, than by their sins to have brought themselves into
bondage to other Nations. See Isa. 26.13. So Shishak being come before
Jerusalem, to save the Temple and City from plunder, and to regain the Cities
he had taken as he came up to them, they were forced to give him the Treasures
This was the first spoiling of the Temple.
of the Temple, not the holy vessels, but such gold and silver, and other
precious things as were laid up for repairing the Temple, and other holy uses;
as also the Treasures of the Kings house, as also the Golden Shields that
Solomon had made, 1 King. 10.16. Instead of these Rehoboam made Shields of
Brass, and committed them to the hands of the chief of the Guard that kept the
door of the Kings house. And when the King entered into the house of the Lord,
the Guard came and fetched them, and carried them before him, and when he was
come back, returned them again into his Guard-chamber. Thus Rehoboam humbling
himself the wrath of God turned from him, so as he would not destroy him
altogether. And after this, things began to go well again in Judah, for they
enjoyed their liberty of serving the true God, the benefit of their own Laws,
and had for the most part peace and prosperity. So Rehoboam recovered strength
again, and repaired and fortified the Cities of his Kingdom, yet he did not
sincerely set and fix his heart to seek the Lord, that is, did not endeavor to
know him aright, to worship him purely, to call upon him fervently, and to obey
him faithfully, and in all these to persevere constantly. Now the Acts of
Rehoboam first and last, namely such as were done in his first three good
years, in his two next evil years, and in his other years following them, they
are written by Shemaiah the Prophet, and Iddo the Seer in their Book of
Genealogies or Pedegrees, or Histories of Kings, and other great persons who
were famous among the Israelites in those times.

Thus Rehoboam having reigned seventeen years (and for the most part wickedly)
Abijah his Son reigned in his stead.

1 King. 12. from 1, to 25.

1 King. 14. from 21, to the end.

2 Chronicles. 10. whole Chapter.

2 Chronicles. 11. wh. Chapter

2 Chronicles. 12. wh. Chapter

The second King of Judah, Abijah called also Abijam.
ABijah began to reign in the 18th year of Jeroboam, and that was the first
year of his reign, the 19th of Jeroboam was the second year of his reign, and
the twentieth was his third, and though in that year he died, and Asa his Son
succeeded him, yet having reigned two years complete, and some part of the
third year, he is said to have reigned three years. His mothers name was
Maachah the daughter of Abishalom 2 Chronicles. 13.2. she is called Michaiah the
daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. Some think she was the daughter of Tamar, the only
daughter of Absalom, whose husband this Uriel of Gibeah was, and so she was the
daughter of Uriel, and withal the daughter that is the Grandchild of Absalom.
And this seems the more probable because the mother of Absalom was called
Maachah, 2 Samuel 3.3.
, and he walked in all the sins of his Father. For though Rehoboam and his
Princes humbled themselves before the Lord upon the Preaching of Shemaiah, when
the King of Egypt made such a dangerous incursion into their land, [2 Chronicles.
12.6.] yet when that danger was over, he soon returned to his former evil ways,
and this his Son likewise trod in his steps, and his heart was not upright with
the Lord as was the heart of David. Nevertheless the Lord for his promise made
to David [2 Samuel 7.16.] did give him a lamp in Jerusalem, that is, continued
his posterity to sit one after another upon his Throne, and to reign in Kingly
splendour, and established Jerusalem in its former Political and Ecclesiastical
state, and preserved therein the true Religion, because David did that which
was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not from any thing he commanded
him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Vriah, that is, he did
not fall into any heinous and enormous crimes whereby his profession was
notoriously blemished all the days of his life, save only in the matter of
Vriah, and the sins appendant thereunto. There had been during the life of
Rehoboam many bickerings between the two Kingdoms, but now in the first year of
Abijah's reign Jeroboam raised a vast army, intending to fall upon Abijah in
the infancy of his reign. Abijah accordingly prepares as strong an Army as he
could to resist him, and defend his Kingdom. The two Armies met in the field.
Abijah's army consisted of four hundred thousand valiant men, which was a very
great Army, but Jeroboam's consisted of as many more, viz. eight hundred
thousand. Both the Armies being drawn forth and set in battel-array the one
against the other, Abijah by his Herolds or messengers desired a Parley before
the fight began, or at least liberty to say somewhat to Jeroboam and his chief
Commanders, which being granted, he betook himself to mount Zemaraim (which is
part of mount Ephraim) as the fittest place from whence he might be heard, and
there spoke to Jeroboam and his Commanders after this manner.

Hear me thou Jeroboam and all Israel, Ought you not to know that the Lord gave
the Kingdom over all Israel to David and his Sons for ever by a Covenant of
Salt As that which is salted does not use to perish or corrupt. See Numb. 18.19.
; that is, by a lasting and never-failing Covenant Hoc ex part falsum erat.
Non enim Deus promisit se totam Israelem conservaturum in familia Davidis si
ipsa descisseret. Osiand.
, by a perpetual Covenant not to be abrogated or annulled; yet Jeroboam the Son
of Nebat, the servant of Solomon is risen up and has rebelled against his
Lord, and there are gathered to him a company of vain men (children of Belial)
who by mutual agreement combined and strengthened themselves against Rehoboam
when he first entered upon the Government, being then unexperienced in matters
of State Yet Rehoboam was 41 years of age when he began to reign, 1 King. 14.21.
, and much more in warlike affairs, having been bred up delicately in the
peaceful reign of Solomon, and being tenderhearted and soon daunted, and
wanting stoutness of spirit he could not withstand them, and so like rebellious
subjects they fell off from him. And this is now your case. But do you think to
go on in this course, and to withstand the Kingdom of the Lord in the hands of
the Sons of David, and with all your might and power to oppose it? Indeed you
are a great multitude, and I perceive you have brought into your Camp the
Golden Calves which Jeroboam has made for you for Gods. But do you think that
these are able to help you? you have cast off the Priests of the Lord the Sons
of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made to your selves Priests after the
manner of other Nations that have no stock or family among them to which the
Priesthood is tied, and you in like manner choose whom you will to be Priests.
Whosoever comes to consecrate himself for a Priest and brings a young
bullock as was enjoined under the Law, Exodus 29.1.) and seven rams, (whereas
the Law required but two at the most Hypocrites can observe some rites
prescribed by God, but in external rites, they often exceed Gods prescriptions.
See Numb. 23.
, Exodus 29.15, 19.) he may be a Priest of your Idols that are no Gods. But as
for us the Lord is our God This must be understood by their outward profession,
for Abijah's heart was not upright before the Lord, 1 K. 15.3.
, and we have not forsaken him. For the true Religion is openly professed among
us, and the true worship of the true God is incorruptibly maintained in the
Temple. And the Priests which minister unto the Lord for us are the Sons of
Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business, and do the services which in
special belong to them. And they burn unto the Lord every morning and evening
burnt-offerings, and sweet incense; they also set the shewbread upon the
Golden Table There were in the Temple ten Tables of Shewbread and ten Golden
Candlesticks; by a Synecdoche the singular number may be here used for the
Plural.
, and they cause the lamps in the Golden Candlesticks to burn every evening.
For we observe those Ordinances the Lord has given us in charge, but you have
forsaken him. And behold God himself is with us for our Captain, and his
Priests with sounding Trumpets See Numb. 10.9.
to cry an alarm against you. Consider O children of Israel what ye do, fight
ye not against the Lord God of your Fathers? and assure your selves that if you
persist, ye shall not prosper.

Thus Abijah spoke to Jeroboam and the Israelites, but they were so far from
being moved with any thing he said, that Jeroboam in the mean time drew an
Ambushment behind the Camp of Judah, so that the main Battalia of the
Israelites faced them, and an Ambushment was secretly laid behind them to fall
upon their rear. When the fight began, the Army of Abijah beheld, and lo the
battle was both before them, and behind them. Then they cried unto the Lord for
help, and trusted in him, and the Priests sounded with their Trumpets to
strengthen their faith in the Lords promise, Numb. 10.9. So the men of Judah
giving a great shout, and falling on, the Lord smote Jeroboam and all his Army
with such a dreadful fear that they fled before Abijah and Judah, and were
discomfited, and Abijah and his Soldiers slew them with a great slaughter, and
cut off no less than five hundred thousand of them, so that they slew more than
every one his man. Thus the children of Judah prevailed at this time because
they trusted and relied on the Lord God of their Fathers. Abijah pursuing his
victory took from Jeroboam several of his Cities, viz. Bethel, (where one of
his Golden Calves was set up) Jeshanah and Ephraim, with the Towns belonging to
them. Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah.

Abijah now waxed mighty. He married fourteen Wives (partly before he was King,
and partly after) and begat twenty two Sons, and sixteen Daughters. And the
rest of the Acts of Abijah and his ways, and his sayings, are they not written
in the History of the Prophet Iddo, see Chapter 12.15. So Abijah having reigned
three years, slept with his Fathers, and they buried him in the City of David.
And Asa his Son reigned in his stead.

1 King. 15. from 1, to 9.

2 Chronicles. 13. wh. Chapter

The third King of Judah, ASA.
IN the 20th year of Jeroboam, Asa began to reign over Judah, and he reigned 41
years. He began his reign in the time of the first King of Israel, and
continued to the reign of the eighth. In which time the Kingdom of Israel was
in three several families, viz. Jeroboam's, Baasha's, and Omri's. It Is probable
that he was very young when he came to the Crown; and that hereupon Maachah his
Grandmother the wife of Rehoboam, (his mother possibly being dead) was made
Queen Regent during his minority. But when he came to some ripeness of years he
showed that his heart was upright before the Lord, and that he was an enemy to
the Idolatry that was in the land, and desired to maintain the true worship of
God; a thing the more to be wondered at, he having such a Father, and such a
Grandmother. His Grandmother it seems had out of her zeal to Idolatry set up
some new abominable Idol in a Grove. He though young took courage, and assuming
the Government into his own hands deposed her from being Queen Regent, and
destroyed her Idol, and burnt it by the Brook Kidron, and stamped it to powder
out of indignation, and cast the dust thereof into the Brook. He did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord, and reformed those things that were out of
order in matters of Religion, and removed all the Idols that his Fathers had
made; yet the high places where the people worshipped the true God of Israel
were not removed (the people being very loath to be tied to one place for the
offering of their Sacrifices) but the high places that were dedicated to the
worship of strange gods he took away. He took away also all the Sodomites out
of the land which he could discover, [see Chapter 14.24.] but some it seems
remained till his Son Jehoshaphat came to the Crown, and then he removed them,
1 King. 22.46.

During this time of peace which the Lord had given them he exhorted his
subjects to assist him in fortifying several Cities in his Kingdom, and to make
about them Walls, Towers, Gates and Bars, while yet the land was quiet before
them. For (says he) we have sought the Lord, and he has given us rest on every
side, therefore let us make a good improvement of this mercy by preparing in
time of peace for war, 2 Chapter 14.6, 7.

After this he brought into the Lords house the things that his Father, after
his famous victory over Jeroboam, had dedicated, adding something more of his
own free gift, viz. silver and gold, and vessels for the services of the Temple.

For ten years he enjoyed peace, during which time Jeroboam died, and Nadab his
Son succeeded him; Nadab two years after was slain by Baasha, who reigned in
his stead. When those ten years were expired some enemy or other made war
against him, but who it was is not expressed. And afterward about the
fourteenth year of his reign Zerah the Ethiopian with a vast Army of the
Arabians (as it seems) and Philistines joining with him, invaded the Kingdom of
Judah with an host (according to common fame) of a thousand thousand, and with
a thousand Supple mill (...) ut patet ex Cap. 16.8.
and three hundred Chariots and Horsemen proportionable, Chapter 16.8. See Chapter 16.8.
Asa met them with an Army of five hundred, and eight thousand levied out of
Judah and Benjamin, all mighty men of valor. And at Mareshah a City in Judah
they set their armies in battle-array to fight. Then Asa cried unto the Lord
his God, and prayed, saying, It is nothing with thee to help whither with many
or them that have no power. Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and
in thy name we go out against this great multitude. O Lord thou art our God,
let not man prevail against thee. So the Lord smote the Ethiopians with such a
dreadful fear that they fled before Asa, and the men of Judah, and so many of
them were slain, and the rest routed that they could not rally or make head
again. So the men of Judah pursued them to Gerar a City of the Philistines, and
spoiled it and the Cities round about it, and carried away very much spoil from
them; for a great terror from the Lord fell upon them, so that they durst not
resist. And the men of Judah fell also upon the Tents of the Arabians who had
joined with these Ethiopians, and took from them abundance of sheep and camels,
and so laden with spoils marched back to Jerurusalem. Then the Spirit of the
Lord came upon Azariah the Son of Oded, and he went out to meet Asa and his
Army at their return, and lest they should be too much puffed up with this
great victory, he said unto Asa and his Soldiers, You see by experience that
the Lord is with you while ye be with him, and that while you walk in his ways
he will not fail to bless you. If ye seek him he will be found of you, but if
ye forsake him he will forsake you. You may see a clear instance of this in the
Kingdom of Israel, who for above thirty years last past (namely since their
revolt under Jeroboam) have lived without the public pure worship of God, not
having his Priests to instruct them, nor regarding his Law to direct them; but
if they would repent and return to God, undoubtedly he would be ready to
receive them into his favor again. For in former times (viz. the times of the
Judges) when the Israelites were in great trouble, and under sore oppressions,
so that there was no peace to him that went out or came in, but great vexations
were upon all the inhabitants of those Countries, and Nation was destroyed of
Nation, and City of City, (God vexing them with sore adversity) yet even then
when they did seek to the Lord and turned unto him, he had mercy upon them, and
did afford them help and deliverance. And so if the ten Tribes that have thus
forsaken the Lord would turn to him, he would surely have mercy upon them. But
whatever they do, let me advise thee, O King, and thy subjects to go on
courageously with the work of reformation begun by you, and assure your selves
that God will still be with you to bless you whilst you are for him.

When Asa heard these words, together with the Prophecy of Oded (the Father of
this Azariah) which it seems he declared unto him at this time, and added it to
his own exhortation, Asa took courage and made a more diligent search
throughout all his Kingdom, and put away the remaining Idols that were found
among them, and that not only out of the land of Judah and Benjamin, but out of
the Cities which either his Father Abijam, or he himself had taken about Mount
Ephraim. See 2 Chronicles. 13.19. and 17.2. And he renewed and repaired the Altar of
the Lord that Solomon had built in the Priests Court, which now by continual
use was something decayed; and he summoned all Judah and Benjamin, and such of
the ten Tribes as were within his Dominions, (for they fell to him out of
Israel in abundance when they saw that the Lord so eminently blessed him) and
on the third month in the fifteenth year of his reign (which was the 35th For
Rehoboam reigned 17 years, Abijah 3, Asa 15, at this present.
since the Kingdom of Judah and Israel were divided, 2 Chronicles. 15.19.) he and
his people offered unto the Lord of the spoils they had gotten, seven hundred
oxen, and seven thousand sheep, and entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God
of their Fathers with all their heart, and all their soul, and that whosoever
should worship any false Gods either publicly or privately should be put to
death according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.2, etc. And they swear unto the Lord with
a loud voice, and with shouting, and with Trumpets and Cornets sounding. And
all Judah rejoiced at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their heart, and
sought the Lord with their whole soul, and he was found of them, and heard
their prayers, and granted their desires, accepted what they did, and prospered
their endeavors, and he gave them rest round about. There had been no war
betwixt Israel and Judah in Asa's time till the 15th year of his reign 2 Chronicles.
15.19. for, There was no more war, read, there had been no war, viz. betwixt
Israel and Judah, till the 15th year of Asa. Bellum enim non fuerat usque ad
annum trigessimum quintum regni Asae. Tremel.
. But now about the sixteenth year of Asa and 36th since the division of the
Kingdoms, Baasha King of Israel perceiving how potent Asa began to be, and how
fast the Israelites revolted to him, and how they had all entered into a
Covenant to serve the Lord, he began to arm against them in the fourteenth year
of his reign, and from this time there was war between Baasha and Asa all their
days, 1 King. 15.16.

And Baasha having gotten Ramah, which was one of the Cities of Benjamin from
the King of Judah, fearing the greatness of Asa, and the revolt of the
Israelites to him, he resolved to fortify it, and put a Garrison into it, that
he might keep his own people from flying to him. Asa to divert him from
building and fortifying of Ramah, takes out the silver and gold that were in
the Treasures of the Temple, and the Kings house, and sent them to Benhadad
King of Syria, to hire him to break his League with Baasha King of Israel. He
represents to him that there was a League between Benhadad and him as there had
been between their Fathers; he desired him therefore to break the League he had
with the King of Israel, and to invade his Country that he might depart from
him, for he was come down to his very borders. Doubtless for Asa to be so much
afraid of the Israelites, and to rob the Temple, and therewith to hire an
Infidel to break his Covenant with them, and to make war upon them, and that
soon after God had given him so great a victory over that vast host of the
Ethiopians, Lubims, Arabians, and Philistines, and had manifested so great a
readiness to help him, was a great sin. Benhadad accordingly having received
this present (not regarding his faith or league made with the Israelites)
forthwith invaded and took many of their Cities. Baasha upon this, left off
fortifying Ramah, and went against Benhadad to defend his own Country And
afterward when he had secured his own land he went and dwelt at Tirzah.
. In the mean time Asa by Proclamation gathered together all that were able in
Judah to go up to Ramah to demolish it; and the men of Judah and Benjamin went
up thither and fetched away the timber and stones that Baasha had provided to
build, and fortify it with, and Asa built therewith Geba and Mizpah See Jer.
41.9. where we read of a pit that Asa had in Mizpah that continued unto the
Captivity.
, two Cities in the Tribe of Benjamin. Hanani the Seer (father of the Prophet
Jehu, 1 King. 16.) came hereupon to Asa, and said to him, Thou have done ill to
distrust the Lord, and to rely on the King of Syria to deliver thee from
Baasha. For had thou suffered Benhadad to continue firm to his league with
Baasha, they both would have invaded thy land, and thou should have overcome
them both as thou did the great Army of the Ethiopians; whereas now by making
an agreement with Benhadad thou have cut off that advantage from thy self, and
so his host is escaped out of thy hands. Thou may remember how God gave thee
victory over that vast Army of the Ethiopians, because thou did rely on him.
For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth to show himself
strong in the behalf of those whose heart is perfect toward him. Herein
therefore thou have done foolishly, and from henceforth thou shall have wars
with Baasha, 1 King. 15.16.

Asa was very wroth with the Seer for this his plain and faithful dealing with
him, and put him into prison, and dealt very harshly also with some of his
subjects at the same time, who possibly showed their dislike of these his
proceedings.

In the 39th year of his reign he was diseased in his feet (probably with the
Gout) and his disease proving exceeding painful he sought not so much to the
Lord for help as to the Physicians.

He died in the forty first year of his reign, having reigned in the time of
seven Kings of Israel, viz. in some part of Jeroboam's, and all the time of
Nadab, Baasha, Elah, Zimri, Omri, and in some part of Ahab's; and they buried
him in a Sepulcher which he had made for himself in the City of David, and they
laid him in the Bed or Coffin, which was filled with all kinds of odours and
sweet spices prepared by the Art of the Apothecaries, and they made a great
burning for him, that is, they burnt sweet perfumes at his burial in very great
abundance, and Jehoshaphat his Son reigned in his stead.

1 King. 15. from v. 9, to 25.

2 Chronicles. 14. wh. Chapter

2 Chronicles. 15. wh. Chapter

2 Chronicles. 16. whole Chapter.

The 4th King that reigned in Judah was JEHOSHAPHAT.
JEhoshaphat began his reign in the fourth year of the reign of Ahab; he was
thirty five years old when he began to reign, and reigned twenty five years in
Jerusalem: He walked in the ways of Asa his Father, doing that which was right
in the eyes of the Lord. And the Lord was with him because he walked in the
first ways of David his Father, which were purer and more free from sin than
were his latter days. He sought not to Baal as did Ahab, but sought to the
Lord, and walked in his ways and commandments, and not after the doings of
Israel. And the Lord established the Kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought
him presents; and he had riches and honor in abundance; and his heart was
lifted up in the ways of the Lord; that is, he was very zealous and courageous
in the cause of God, and went on with an high and magnanimous spirit, without
any fear or discouragement. At his first coming to the Crown he placed forces
in all the fenced Cities of Judah, and Garrisoned the Cities of Ephraim which
his Father Asa had taken. See 2 Chronicles. 15.8. And strengthened himself against
Israel.

The remnant of the Sodomites which remained in the days of his Father, he took
out of the land. He took away also such high places as were dedicated to the
worship of strange gods, but those wherein the people served the true God of
Israel he took not away, but the people offered and burnt incense still in
them. See 1 King. 22.43. It Is true, his Father had twice removed them, [2 Chronicles. 14.5. and 15.8, 16.] yet it seems some escaped, or else the people in
his Fathers declining time (when he was diseased in his feet) renewed them. But
those high places wherein they served the true God of Israel, he took not quite
away, but the people offered and burnt incense still in them, for they had not
(at least not a great many of them) disposed their hearts to follow the Lord
entirely, and his commandments and injunctions. See 2 Chronicles. 20.33. Some
reformation indeed they had yielded unto, but yet their hearts hankered still
after their old superstition. See 2 Chronicles. 15.17. And though Jehoshaphat did
endeavor to reform what was amiss among them, yet from the high places Docemur
hinc Deo displicere Electitios cultus a Deo non prascriptos. Osiander.
the people would not be reclaimed.

In the third year of his reign finding (as we said before) that the people
were in many places much addicted to Idolatry, and had set up the high places
which his Father Asa had pulled down, he sent some choice Priests and Levites
as Visitors into several parts of his Kingdom to see whither they were rightly
taught and instructed, and by their own personal teaching to confirm those that
were well instructed, and to convince those that were corrupted or misled, and
to show them how expressly the Law did forbid, and threaten all Idolatry
whatsoever; and with them he sent some Princes and men of note to countenance
and encourage them, and possibly to punish those who should oppose them, or be
obstinate in their errors. Jehoshaphat thus setting himself to the work of
Reformation, a great terror from the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms round
about him, so that they made no war, nor gave any disturbance to him. Also some
Philistines (that were deadly enemies to the Jews) brought presents to him, and
tribute-silver; Asa having subdued a considerable part of them, as we may see 2 Chronicles. 14.14. And the Arabians brought him flocks, (their chief calling being
to breed and feed cattle, and so brought such presents as they had) viz. seven
thousand and seven hundred rams, and as many he-goats. These were all clean
cattle, and so fit both for meat and sacrifice.

Jehoshaphat now waxed great exceedingly, great in riches, great in power, and
great in honor and esteem, and he built Castles in Judah, and Cities of store,
viz. to lay up his ammunition and provisions in. And he had much business in
the Cities of Judah, that is, he took great care himself and employed others
under him about such things as were of public concernment for the good of
those Cities in particular, and the whole Kingdom in general; but his chief
Commanders and Captains with some choice Companies of Soldiers he kept about
his own person in Jerusalem. Moreover he had a great Militia ready to attend
him upon any emergent occasion, and these were under the command of five able
leaders successively. The Trained bands of Judah being first under the command
of Adnah, and when Adnah was dead under the command of Jehohanan, and when he
was dead, under Amaziah the Son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself to the
Lord, viz. to fight the Lords battles against the enemies of the land. So
likewise the Trained bands of Benjamin were first under Eliada, and next after
him, under Jehozabad, and their numbers were in the several times of these
Generals sometimes more and sometimes less. This was his Militia, besides the
Soldiers he had in Garrisons, and these in their courses, some at one time,
and some at another came up to Jerusalem to wait upon the King.

About the eighth year of his reign he joined in affinity with Ahab, and
married his eldest Son Jehoram to Athaliah, Ahab's daughter. It may seem
strange that so pious a King as Jehoshaphat was should ever be induced to marry
his Son and heir of his Crown to the daughter of wicked and Idolatrous Ahab,
and cursed Jezabel. But O how often, and how easily does interest of State and
worldly policy make Religion truckle under it. And the Kingdom felt the sad
effects of this match not long after.

About the 17th year of his reign, and the 22th of Ahab (making his Son Jehoram
Viceroy in his absence) with a great train, and (as it seems) accompanied with
some troops of Soldiers he went down to Samaria to visit Ahab. None of his
Predecessors had ever done so before, and for Jehoshaphat a worshipper of the
true God to go down to such an Idolater as Ahab was, may seem very strange. But
being come to Samaria, Ahab entertained him and his followers very
magnificently, and killed sheep and oxen in abundance to feast them. But had
not the Lord been more merciful to Jehoshaphat than he was wise for himself, he
had paid dear for his entertainment; for when he was there Ahab persuaded him
to go up with him to fight against the Syrians, and to take in Ramoth-Gilead,
where Jehoshaphat was in great danger, and Ahab was killed, as we may see more
particularly in the life of Ahab.

When Jehoshaphat returned home, the Prophet Jehu the Son of Hanani (who
reproved Asa, 1 Chronicles. 16.7.) met him, and said to him, Should thou help the
ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? was it for thee to join thy self in
such a strict league of friendship with such an Idolatrous wretch, such an
enemy to God and all goodness as Ahab was? Therefore is wrath Jehoshaphat soon
felt the effects of this denunciation in that invasion of the Moabites and
Ammonites which followed after, 1 Chro. 20.1. and in the dissension that began
at present among his own sons, which was the seed of that horrible slaughter
which his Eldest Son afterward made of them, 1 Chronicles. 21.4.
coming upon thee from the Lord; that is, God is highly displeased with thee,
and has determined to pour out his displeasure upon thee. Nevertheless there
are good things found in thee, in that thou have taken away the groves out of
the land, and have prepared thine heart to seek the Lord, therefore the Lord
will deal gently with thee, and even in judgment remember mercy.

Jehoshaphat being awakened with this reproof of the Prophet, he went out and
visited his Kingdom from Beersheba the South border, to Mount Ephraim the North
border thereof, and reduced those who he understood had revolted from the Lord
unto Idolatry, false worship, or wickedness of life, and reformed what he found
out of order among them. He also set up Judges in all the fenced Cities of
Judah, and said to them, Take heed what you do; ye judge not for man, that is,
merely in the name and by the authority of man, but for the Lord, (to whom ye
must give account) and who is with you in the judgment, seeing all ye do, and
is ready to protect you if you judge uprightly, and to punish you if you deal
unjustly. Wherefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you; be afraid to do any
thing that may offend him. Take heed to your office and execute it justly, and
as you ought to do. For there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, neither
will he favor it, therefore let there be none in you. God is no respecter of
persons, nor will be swayed with outward considerations, nor will be bribed to
do any thing that is unjust, and therefore see that you imitate him therein.

Jehoshaphat had also an especial care over his great City Jerusalem to keep it
in good order. And therefore when he and those that attended him returned
thither, he there set up the high Court or Council called the Sanhedrin,
consisting of Levites, Priests, and the Elders of the people, to which all
appeals were to be made from inferior Courts, and to which all causes of
difficulty were to be referred. So that they were for the judgment of the Lord,
that is, to judge in matters Ecclesiastical, concerning which God had
determined in his word what should be done, and for controversies, that is, to
judge in matters merely civil. And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in
the fear of the Lord faithfully and with an upright heart; whatever cause shall
come before you of your brethren between blood and blood, that is, between
blood shed willingly, and unwillingly and casually, or between Law and
commandment, statute and judgment, that is, when each party shall pretend they
have the Law on their side, and so one shall allege one Law, and another
another, ye shall rightly interpret the Law to them, and warn them that they
trespass not against the Lord by wresting the Law to what it never intended. If
you do otherwise, wrath from the Lord will come upon you and your brethren. But
if you rightly warn and direct the people, ye shall not trespass therein either
against God or your brethren. And behold Amariah the chief Priest is over you
in all matters of the Lord, that is, in all matters Ecclesiastical that concern
Religion and the worship of God, and Zebadiah the Son of Ishmael (a chief ruler
of the house of Judah) is over you for all the Kings matters, that is, for all
matters of State, or controversies, or pleas that concern the Crown, and the
Levites shall be Officers for you, and ready to attend you, and to carry your
orders and directions unto others, and to see them executed. Lastly, let me
exhort you to do courageously, and assure your selves, the Lord shall be with
the good, (and such as are careful and conscientious in the doing of their
duties) to assist and protect them, and to bless their persons and endeavors.

About the 18th year of his reign, there being no King in Edom, [1 King.
22.47.] but only a Deputy set over them by the King of Judah, Jehoshaphat took
that advantage to build for himself a Fleet at Ezion-Geber (which was in Edoms
Territories) to go to Tarshish and Ophir to fetch Gold. Ahaziah the wicked Son
of Ahab desired to go sharer with him in that Fleet, and that his servants
might go along with Jehoshaphats servants, 1 King. 22.49. At first Jehoshaphat
refused it, but afterward (as it seems) upon Ahaziahs importunity consented to
it. See 2 Chronicles. 20.35, 36. Thereupon the Prophet Eleazar came to him and
reproved him for it, and foretold him that his ships should be broken, which
accordingly so came to pass in the very Port of Ezion-Geber, 2 Chronicles. 20. from
v. 25, to the end.

Sometime after the Moabites, and with them probably some of the Syrians, and
especially of the Edomites that dwelt on mount Seir. See v. 10. gathered
together to invade Judea. Possibly Jehoshaphat's late aiding Ahab in his wars
against Syria gave occasion to this invasion. Immediately Jehoshaphat was
informed that a very formidable and great multitude was coming against him from
the other side of the Dead Sea out of Syria Syria must be here taken in a
general and large acception for those Countries that lay beyond Jordan, but
Westward, and something Southward.
, and that some of them were already come to Engedi a City on the West Side of
that Sea. Jehoshaphat was hereat much startled, and being greatly afraid he set
himself to seek help from the Lord, and proclaimed a See Judge. 20.26. 1 Samuel
7.6. Ezra 8.21, 23. Neh. 1.4.9.11. Esth. 4.9.
Fast throughout all Judah, that they might all join in humbling thomselves
before the Lord, and earnest supplication to him for mercy, and so their
prayers might be the more prevalent and effectual. And Judah and Benjamin
gathered themselves together out of the Cities and Towns that belonged to
Jehoshaphat's jurisdiction, and came to Jerusalem to the Temple to seek the
Lord, and to beg help of him. And Jehoshaphat stood before this great Assembly
(probably upon the Brazen Scaffold in the great Court We read Chap. 15.8. that
Asa renewed the Altar of the Lord which stood in this Court. He might also
repair the whole Court. Or perhaps Jehoshaphat himself had done it. Others
understand it of the Court of the people which had been lately repaired, and
perhaps divided into two Courts, the one being appointed for the men, and the
other for the women. For though when Solomon built it, it was but one Court,
yet afterward they say it was divided into two.
where the people used to meet, which was before the Priests Court newly
repaired and beautified) and prayed unto the Lord, saying, O Lord God of our
Fathers, art not thou God in heaven? and rulest thou not over all the Kingdoms
of the heathen? and in thy hand is there not power and might, so that none is
able to withstand thee? Art not thou our God who did drive out the
inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and gave it to the seed of
Abraham thy friend This Title is three times given to Abraham here, and Isa.
41.8. and Jam. 2.3. Thus our Savior styled Lazarus Friends, Joh. 11.11. and
his Disciples, Friends, Joh. 15.15.
for ever That is to the coming of the Messiah.
? And they dwell therein, and have built a Temple therein for the honor of thy
name, and they humbly desired of thee when they consecrated it, [1 King. 8.30.]
that if any evil came upon them at any time, as the sword, pestilence, or
famine, or any other dreadful judgment, and they stood before this house (in
which thy name is called upon) and cried unto thee in their affliction, that
then thou would please to hear and help them. And now behold, O Lord, the
children of Moab and Ammon, and Mount Seir, (whom thou would not permit
Israel to invade, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but did command
them to turn from them, and not to destroy them) behold how they now reward us
who are coming in this hostile manner to cast us out of the possession which
thou have given us? O our God wilt not thou judge them and punish them for
this? As for our selves we must needs acknowledge that we have no might or power
comparatively to resist this vast body of people that comes against us; we
know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee; on thee only we rest and
depend, and from thee alone we humbly expect help.

Thus all Judah (for some from every place were there present) stood before the
Lord with their wives and little ones. For in times of public humiliations
they used to bring their little ones to the public assemblies [see Joel 2.16.]
that their own bowels might be the more moved at the sight of their children
(now in danger to be cruelly butchered by the enemy) and so their hearts might
be stirred up to be more serious, and earnest in their supplications to God for
help. Immediately the spirit of Prophecy fell upon Jehaziel a Levite of the
Sons of Asaph (as he stood in midst of the Congregation) and he spoke to the
King and all the Congregation, Thus says the Lord, Be not afraid nor dismayed
by reason of this great multitude; for the battle is not yours but Gods; God
himself will fight for you, he will not so much as use you for instruments to
vanquish this great host. To morrow go ye down against them, behold they come
by the cliff of Ziz, and ye shall find them at the end of the valley, before
the wilderness of Israel. Ye shall not need to fight in this battle. Compose
your selves quietly to expect the deliverance that God will give you: Stand ye
still, fly upon your enemies, you shall see the salvation of the Lord will be
with you, and he will deliver you, therefore fear not nor be dismayed.

Jehoshaphat hearing this joyful news bowed his head with his face to the
ground, and all the people also fell down before the Lord and worshipped him,
and the Levite-singers stood up to praise the Lord with an high and loud voice,
accounting the victory already gotten because promised by one of the Lords
Prophets. And so they departed with great comfort for that time. The next
morning they rose very early and marched forth into the Wilderness of Tekoa,
betwixt which and Israel was the Cliff of Ziz, and as they marched forth
Jehoshaphat said to them, Believe and trust in the Lord your God, so shall ye
be established, and your minds settled; believe his Prophets particularly what
Jahaziel yesterday prophesied unto you, and so shall ye prosper. And when he
had consulted with the Commanders of the Army what was fit for them to do, he
(as being by faith assured of the victory) appointed some of the Levite-singers
to go before the Army, and to sing the high praises of God, and to praise the
Lord (in whom is the beauty and perfection of holiness V. 21. Some by the
beauty of holiness understand Gods most holy Majesty, who dwells in Heaven,
where is the beauty of Holiness.
) and to do it according to that beautiful and holy order that was prescribed
in the Temple, and especially to sing praise ye the Lord for his mercy endures
for ever; which was the foot of several Psalms of Thanksgiving composed by
David, and particularly of the 136 Psalm. It might seem a strange thing for an
Army to march against a potent enemy in such a manner as this, but Jehoshaphat
firmly relying on what God had promised, he found the success answering his
faith; for when the Levites began to sing praises unto the Lord, and as it were
to triumph before hand for the victory promised, the Lord set ambushments
against the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, that is, sent a spirit of
discord and dissension among them, so that the Ammonites and Moabites
suspecting those of Mount Seir The Edomites that joined now with the Moabites
and Ammonites against Jehoshaphat, might be only some voluntary mercenaries
not sent out by the State of Edom (that was in subjection to the Kingdom of
Judah) and it seems they were suspected not to be firm against Judah, and
therefore were slain by the men of Moab and Ammon.
fell unexpectedly upon them like men that rise suddenly out of an ambush upon
their enemies; and when they had destroyed them, they fell out among
themselves, and destroyed one another. The Army of Jehoshaphat coming now to
the Watchtower of Ziz in the Wilderness, they looked toward the formidable
army of their enemies, and they saw none but dead bodies on the ground; they
saw none flying or escaping whom they needed to pursue or fall upon; and so
that was accomplished which the Prophet foretold, v. 17. Ye shall not need to
fight in the battle. When Jehoshaphat and his people came to the field where
their enemies lay slaughtered, they found very rich spoils among the dead
bodies, viz. rings on their fingers, chains about their necks, jewels in their
ears, besides the wealth and riches they brought on their beasts, and in their
carts and carriages, and their being so vast a number of the enemy slain, the
Israelites could not carry away all in one day, but were three days in
gathering the spoil, it was so much; so God not only freed them from their
enemies, but greatly enriched them by them. On the fourth day they marched to
the valley of Berachah, or blessing, and there solemnly praised the Lord for
this great victory, and from thence that valley had this name given it. Then
they all marched with great joy to Jerusalem, (Jehoshaphat marching in the
front of them) for the Lord had made them rejoice over their enemies. And they
came to Jerusalem playing on Psalteries and Harps, and with the sound of
Trumpets, and so went to the house of the Lord to offer up there their more
solemn praises and sacrifices of thanksgiving. And the fear of the Lord fell on
all the Kingdoms round about, when they heard how the Lord had fought against
the enemies of his people. So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet; for his God
gave him rest round about. But notwithstanding this signal deliverance, and
though Jehoshaphat had been reproved by the Lord for joining first with wicked
Ahab, and then with Ahaziah his wicked Son in building and fitting out Ships to
go to Tarshish, yet he fell again a third time into the like sin by assisting
Jehoram the second Son of Ahab (who succeeded Ahaziah) and going forth with him
and the King of Edom against the Moabites. In which expedition he and the two
other Kings were in great danger of perishing for want of water, had they not
been supplied by the prayers of Elisha the Prophet, who had a great regard for
Jehoshaphat, [2 King. 3.14.] and so they obtained a great victory over their
enemies, 2 King. 3. from v. 4, to the end. Of this we may see more in the life
of Jehoram King of Israel. This seems to have happened about the 22th year of
Jehoshaphat, and then it is probable he set up his Son Jehoram again as his
Viceroy, or took him into Copartnership with him in the Kingdom [2 King. 8.16.]
as he had made him his Viceroy before when he went to visit Ahab. Jehoshaphat,
2 Chronicles. 21.2. is called King of Israel, that is, of the Israelites that lived
in the Kingdom of Judah. He reigned 25 years, and they buried him with his
Fathers in the City of David, and his Son Jehoram succeeded him, who reigned
eight years, which together are 33 years. Yet in Chronological account there
were not above 29 years in the reigns of them both, because Jehoshaphat did set
up his Son Jehoram as partner with him in the Kingdom, whilst he himself was
alive, [see 2 King. 8.16.] which was about the 22th year of his reign; so that
the four last years of his reign, and the four first of his Son Jehoram's were
not eight but only four years, seeing both of them reigned together at the same
time.

1 King. 22. from 41, to 51.

2 Chronicles. 17. whole Chapter.

2 Chronicles. 18. wh. Chapter

2 Chronicles. 19. wh. Chapter

2 Chronicles. 20. wh. Chapter

2 Chronicles. 21.1.

The 5th King that reigned in Judah was JEHORAM.
JEhoshaphat had designed his Son Jehoram to be King, and appointed him to
govern the Kingdom in his absence in the 17th year of his reign, a little
before he went with Ahab against Ramoth-Gilead (thence the beginning of the
reign of Jehoram King of Israel is counted to be both in the 18th year of
Jehoshaphat 2 King. 3.1.
, and in the second year of Jehoram 2 King. 1.17.
Son of Jehoshaphat) but at his return resumed the Royal power wholly to
himself, not communicating the same again to his Son until the fifth year of
Jehoram King of Israel, which was the 22th of Jehoshaphats own reign, and then
this King (being old) took Jehoram his Son as partner with him in the
Government. The cause whereof in all probability was some discord or
differences that brake out even then between him and his younger Brethren,
which moved Jehoshaphat to give to his younger Sons great gifts of gold and
silver, and jewels, and to commmit to their custody some strong fenced Cities
in Judah, [2 Chronicles. 21.3.] the better to secure them against the power of their
Elder Brother, and on the other side he put his Eldest Son into the possession
of the Kingdom (whilst himself was living) for fear of tumults and commotions
that might arise after his death.

Jehoram therefore being 32 years old succeeded his Father, and reigned eight
years in Jerusalem, to wit, four years together with his Father, and four years
by himself alone.

He walked in the Idolatrous ways of the Kings of Israel, as did the house of
Ahab, whose daughter he had married, viz. Athaliah; and a virtuous daughter she
was like to be that sprang from the cursed root of Ahab and Jezebel; she soon
drew him to follow her Fathers courses, so great an influence have bad wives
upon their husbands to draw them to evil. He did that which was very evil and
provoking in the sight of the Lord, howbeit the Lord would not destroy the
house of David, because of the Covenant he had made with him to give him always
a light, that is, a royal glory in a successor, and to continue the Sovereignty
in his race as long as that Kingdom should last. See 1 King. 11.36.

When he was settled in the Kingdom, he sought to make himself strong (as
Jeroboam did, 2 Chronicles. 13.7.) that he might the better effect his mischievous
intents and purposes; and accordingly getting his six younger brethren into his
hands, he like a cruel Tyrant slew them, and many also of the great men of the
land, who he thought favored them, and had a kindness for them.

He made great innovations in Religion, erecting those Idolatrous places in
mountains which his Father and Grandfather had with so much zeal destroyed. He
caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit spiritual fornication in
worshipping of Baal, and to embrace that Idolatry which himself had learned
from the house of Ahab, and compelled the people of Judah thereunto by force,
persecuting such as refused.

A Letter (whilst he was going on in these abominable ways) comes to him from
Elijah, who before his translation saw by the spirit of Prophecy what great
wickedness this Jehoram would commit, and what punishments the Lord would
inflict upon him for it. This Letter was written by Elijah Probabile est Eliam
hoc Scriptum commisisse Elisaeo, quia certo aliud ei commisit post mortem
peragendum, nempe ut Hazaeli indicaret ipsum futurum Regem Syriae.
, whilst he lived upon the earth; neither need that seem strange seeing Isaiah
wrote before hand concerning Cyrus, Isa. 45.1. and the Prophet that was sent to
Jeroboam prophesied of Josiah many years before he was born, 1 King. 13.2.
Elijah having written it, committed it either to Elisha, or some other of the
Prophets, and by them it was now sent to Jehoram, whose insolent cruelty was
such, that he would hardly endure the reproof of a living Prophet. In that
Letter Elijah speaks thus to him, Thus says the Lord God of David thy Father,
because thou have not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat To degenerate from the
example of pious Ancestors is a great provocation.
thy Father, nor the ways of Asa thy Grandfather, but have walked in the ways
of the Kings of Israel, and have made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to
go a whoring and commit spiritual fornication, like the house of Ahab, and have
also slain thy brethren of thy Fathers house, which were better than thy self;
behold with a great plague will the Lord smite thee, and will punish thee in
thy people, and thy children and thy wives, and all thy goods, and thou shall
have great sickness by a disease of thy bowels, (who have had no bowels toward
thy own brethren) and thou shall day by day without intermission be tormented
with it till thy bowels fall out.

This was the threatening of Elijah the Prophet against him, and we shall now
see how it was fulfilled.

1. The Edomites who from David's time had ever been in subjection to the
Kingdom of Judah, see 2 Samuel 8.14. and had been Tributaries thereunto, and had
been governed by a Viceroy set over them by them, [1 King. 22.47.] now fell off
and revolted from him, and made a King over themselves: Jehoram to reduce them
went over to Zair a City in Idumea, and took with him all the Chariots and
Horsemen, and Soldiers he could provide, and he arose by night that he might
come upon them suddenly and unexpectedly, but the Edomites were so numerous and
so well prepared that they compassed his army round about. However his
Soldiers so manfully stood to it, that they put the Edomites to flight, and
slew many of them, and thereupon the Captains of the Edomites Chariots, and
many of their Soldiers fled to their own houses. But though Joram overthrew
them at this time, yet they retiring into places of advantage, persisted
resolutely in their revolt, and so he was forced to return again into his own
land without conquering of them. And thus according to the Prophecy of Isaac,
Genesis 27.40. [By thy sword thou shall live, and serve thy Brother; and it shall
come to pass when thou shall have the dominion, that thou shall break his yoke
from off thy neck.] They for ever after shook off his yoke.

2. Whilst he was endeavoring to reduce the Edomites, Libnah a great City
within Judah, (one of the Royal Cities of Canaan, Josh. 10.29, 30. and given to
the Priests, Josh. 21.13.) now rebelled against him, possibly because he had
made such innovations in Religion, and forced the people to Idolatry, and had
forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers. The revolt of this City was a matter of
great moment, it being a Frontier City, and one of those which the King of
Assyria set upon when he came with his huge host to have taken Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 32.9. It is much indeed that one City alone should venture upon such an
attempt, but perhaps the Kings absence whilst he was in Edom, and the
discontent of the people, yea perhaps some correspondence they might have with
the Philistines, (who soon after invaded the land) gave them hope of some
abettors, and how they sped in the conclusion the Scripture no where expresses.

3ly, God stirred up against him the spirit of the Philistines and Arabians
(who bordered upon the Ethiopians, and had been Tributaries to the Kings of
Judah) and they ran through the land so far as to come up to Jerusalem, and
plundered and carried away all the substance they found in the Kings house, and
carried away all his sons Here we ought to take notice of the righteous
judgment of God against him. He slew all his Brethren, and all his Sons were
slain by the Philistines and Arabians, excepting his youngest Ahaziah, and he
was slain afterward by Jehu, 2 Chronicles. 22.9. And all the Sons of Ahaziah were
slain by their Grandmother Athaliah, excepting Joash, who was hid from her, and
afterward Crowned King. And Joash himself was at last slain by his own
servants.
, but the youngest called Ahaziah And herein appeared the Divine Providence for
the accomplishment of the promise to David.
, (whom it seems they could not find) and all his wives they could lay their
hands on, but it seems they unhappily mist Athaliah, who remained to usurp the
Crown, and to be a scourge to the Nation afterward.

4ly, After all this the Lord smote him in his bowels with an incurable
disease; his malady was very tormenting, and after two years continuance (a
long time for a man to lie under such a sharp disease) his torment was so great
that at last it forced out his very guts and bowels from him, and so he died
under the heavy hand of God. The great sins he had committed against God, the
great wrongs he had done to his subjects, and the great judgments he had
brought upon the land turned the hearts of his people from him, so that they
showed him little respect when he was dead, making no burning for him like the
burning made for his Father. See 2 Chronicles. 16.14. And so he departed without
being desired or lamented. Howbeit they buried him in the City of David, but
obscurely, not in the Sepulchers of his Ancestors (the Kings of Judah) and
without the lamentations and solemnities that had been used at the Funerals of
other Kings. He reigned eight years, four in his Fathers life time, and four
after; which though a short reign in its self, yet seemed undoubtedly long to
the poor people that were so ill treated by him. All the time of this Kings
reign, another King of the same name reigned in Israel, to wit, Joram the Son
of Ahab his wives brother.

2 King. 8. v. from 16, to 25.

2 Chronicles. 21. wh. Chapter

The sixth that reigned in Judah, was AHAZIAH.
AHAZIAH called Jehoahaz, 2 Chronicles. 21.17. and Azariah, 2 Chronicles. 22.6. was the
sixth that reigned in Judah; he was the youngest Son of Jehoram, for all his
Elder Brothers were either slain or carried away by the Philistines and
Arabians as we showed before. It seems he was made King by the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, viz. the Sanhedrin, or great Council there, the rest giving their
consent. He reigned only one year and did evil in the sight of the Lord, and
walked in the ways of the house of Ahab, for his mother was his counselor to
do wickedly; and as some think he married a wife also of the house of Ahab, and
therefore is said 2 King. 8.27.
to be a Son-in-law of it, and the house of Ahab were his counselors after his
Fathers death to his destruction. It Is said 2 Chronicles. 22.2. that he was forty
two years old when he began to reign, but 2 King. 8.25. it is said he was twenty
two years old when he began to reign, and 2 King. 9.29. it is said he began to
reign in the eleventh year of Joram King of Israel. But 2 King. 8.25. it is said
he began to reign in the twelfth year of Joram. Here seem to be two
contradictions, for the reconciling of which we must know that probably the
beginning of his reign did fall in with the latter end of the eleventh, and the
beginning of the twelfth year of Joram King of Israel. And whereas it is said in
the Chronicles that he was forty two years old when he began to reign, (though
his Father Jehoram was but forty years old when he died, as we may see 2 Chronicles.
21.5.) and in the Kings that he was twenty two years old when he began to
reign, we must thus understand it, that he began to reign in the two and
f^^rtieth year of the continuance of the Crown in the house of Omri, and his
race (from which he was descended by his mother Athaliah) but in the 22th year
of his own age. For Omri reigned as sole King six years, 1 King. 16.23. Ahab
twenty two years, 1 King. 16.29. Ahaziah his Son, two years, 1 King. 22.51.
Jehoram twelve years, 2 King. 3.1. Thus Omri's stock continued forty two years,
in this sense Ahaziah was a Son of forty two years Some think here is a
Sphaimagraphicum, and 42 is put for 22, and so the LXX. seem to intimate, who
there only say that Ahaziah, was 22 years old, when he began to reign.
, if we reckon from the beginning of Omri's reign.

He went up with his Uncle Jehoram King of Israel to war against Hazael King of
Syria for the recovery of Ramoth-Gilead, which was withheld from the Crown of
Israel by the Syrians. Ahab had with his own and the joint forces of
Jehoshaphat endeavored to recover it, but failed of his purpose, and was there
slain by Benhadad, whose life he had imprudently spared, 1 King. 20.34. But
Jehoram his Son, with the joint forces of Judah actually recovered it from
Hazael, but was there himself wounded. Having therefore won the Town, [2 King.
9.14.] and leaving the chief of his Army there with his Commanders (of whom
Jehu was chief) to keep it, (lest Hazael should come with new forces to recover
it) he withdrew himself to Jezreel to be cured of his wounds. Jehu being left
at Ramoth-Gilead was there anointed (by the direction and command of Elisha) to
be King of Israel, who thereupon soon slew both Jehoram and Ahaziah. For
Ahaziah going to Jezreel to visit Jehoram, and they understanding that Jehu
marched furiously toward them, they both went out to meet him; but Jehu
killing Jehoram, Ahaziah fled toward Jezreel, yet durst not enter the City,
but in the suburbs (where their Garden-houses were) he turned aside into some
by-way hoping by that means to escape, but Jehu and his Captains at last
overtook him, and smote him at a place by Ibleam, and he flying further (after
he was wounded) to Megiddo (a City not far off which belongs to the Kingdom of
Samaria) Jehu and his men following him close, at last by making diligent
search in the City, there they found him out, and brought him to Jehu, who
presently caused him to be put to death.

Thus the destruction of Ahaziah was of God, and his going to join with Joram
King of Israel was the occasion of it. Had he stayed at Jerusalem Jehu would
not have meddled with him. When he was dead Jehu and his Commanders permitted
his servants to carry him in a Chariot, and to bury him at Jerusalem in the
Sepulchers of his Fathers. For they said, he is a Son, that is, a Grandson of
Jehoshaphat who sought the Lord with all his heart. Thus we see that the piety,
sincerity and integrity of Jehoshaphat was reverenced and highly esteemed even
by those that had not their own hearts possessed therewith, God delighting to
honor them that honor him. Shortly after this Jehu going to Samaria met by
the way forty two young Princes of the blood of Ahaziah, (viz. the Sons of his
Brethren V. 13. The word Brethren must be here taken in a large sense for his
Brethren, Sons or other kindred. They are called Princes of Judah because
places of dignity and government were committed unto them.
) who came thither probably to attend and wait upon their King, and Uncle,
being several of them possibly Officers of his Court. It seems they knew
nothing of the late revolution in Israel, nor of the death of Jehoram, Jezebel,
or Ahaziah, or that Jehu reigned. Jehu asks them who they were? It seems they
knew him not, but supposing him to be some great Officer of Jehoram's, told him
they were kinsmen to Ahaziah King of Judah, and coming to attend him there,
they thought themselves obliged (being so near the Court) to go and pay their
respects to King Jehoram's Sons, and the Sons of Queen Jezebel, and thither
they were now going. Jehu being at this time in his full career of executing
the judgment of God upon the house of Ahab, and perceiving these young men to
be of that cursed stock (being descended from Athaliah Ahab's daughter) he
looked upon it as within his commission to put them to death, and accordingly
bidding those about him to lay hold on them, he commanded them all (with
sufficient severity) to be immediately slain in the place.

2 King. 8. from 25, to the end.

2 King. 9. v. 16. and from 21, to 30.

2 King. 10.13, 14.

2 Chronicles. 22. from v. 1, to 10.

The 7th. that reigned in Judah was ATHALIAH.
THE house of Ahaziah was so miserably weakened by the late destruction of so
many of the branches of it, and none of his children being of years sufficient
to maintain their right to the Kingdom against such as should go about to usurp
it, Athaliah mother of Ahaziah (who probably was left by him to govern the
Kingdom in his absence when he went to help Joram King of Israel in his wars)
hearing that her Son was dead, and that many others of the Royal family were
slain by Jehu, taking this advantage, forthwith she laid hold on the Princes of
the blood, and those of the Royal family that remained in Judah and slew them,
although some of them (as it is like) her own Grandchildren; so cruel and bloody
are the minds of Idolaters. But by the wonderful Providence of God it happened
that Joash an infant-son of Ahaziah escaped her hands; for Jehoshaba the wife
of Jehoiada the High Priest got him away, and hid him with his nurse in a
private Chamber belonging to the Temple. Athaliah did these strange and
unnatural things that she might quietly possess the Royal Throne, and set up
the worship of Baal again in the Kingdom. And some conjecture that she had Sons
by some other man besides Jehoram whom she desired to promote to the Crown,
perhaps some of those who brake up the house of God and bestowed the dedicated
things thereof upon Baal, as we read 2 Chronicles. 24.7. For the Sons of Athaliah
that wicked woman had broken up the house of God, and all the dedicated things
thereof did they bestow upon Baalim. Athaliah having thus usurped the Crown,
she reigned about six years.

2 Chronicles. 22.10, 11, 12.

1 King. 11. from 1, to 4.

The 8th. that reigned in Judah was JOASH.
AThaliah having usurped the Crown and reigned about six years (during which
time she had much promoted the worship of Baal in Judah) at length Jehoiada the
High Priest began to think of settling this young Joash in the Throne, to whom
it did belong not only by natural right (being the former Kings Son) but by
virtue of the promise made by God to David and his posterity, 2 Samuel 7.13, 16.
Having therefore imparted this secret to five Captains of the land in whose
fidelity he had most confidence, and he and they having made a Covenant to do
their utmost to depose Athaliah the Usurper, and to set up Joash and to pull
down Idolatry, and establish the true Religion, afterward by their means he
drew in others of the principal men of the Kingdom (both Levites and others)
procuring them to meet at Jerusalem in order to the carrying on of the design.
And accordingly they being met together in some Chamber of the Temple, and
having taken an Oath of secrecy and fidelity, he showed them the Kings Son.
Then they resolved how the business should be managed the next Sabbath Day in
every particular. The Levites were by an order long since established among
them by David divided in twenty four Companies, which did in their courses
(each company a week) perform the service of the Temple, the rest abiding in
their private dwellings in the several Cities of Judah, and so every
Sabbath Day they that served the week before went out, and another company came
in to serve in their rooms. In each company there were a great many of these
Levites besides Porters and Singers. Now because Jehoiada and his Associates
were not able to bring together secretly so many trusty and serviceable hands
of the Country as would be sufficient to manage this great business, therefore
he resolved to arm the Levites for the work, having secretly laid in the
Chambers of the Temple some arms and weapons for the purpose. And that the
Levites whom he intended to employ in this business might be the stronger, he
took in the new company (that were to come in on the Sabbath Day) and did not
dismiss the old (that should have gone out) but retained them still, and so by
that means without any noise, he made up such a number as he thought would be
able to deal with the Queens ordinary Guards if need should be. All these
Levites therefore he disposes under the command of several Captains (either
such as were principal men among the Levites, or others whom he had sworn his
associates in this design) in this manner. Those that were to enter into the
service of the Temple that Sabbath Day, he divided into three Companies. One
Company whereof he assigned to watch at the Gate of the outer Court, viz. the
North-gate that led to the Kings Palace, where Athaliah now was. Another
company he assigned to the East Called the Gate of Shur, or the Gate of the
foundation, 2 King. 11.6.
Gate that led into the City. A third company to the South-gate. Those Levites
that should have gone out from the service of the Temple he divided into two
companies, and appointed them to be a Guard in the Temple unto the Kings
person, the one on his right hand, and the other on his left. Then he gave to
the Captains for themselves and their men, King David's Spears and Shields, See
1 Samuel 21.9. 2 Samuel 8.7.
viz. such weapons as were there reserved as Trophies and monuments of David's
victories, which weapons of war were some of those things dedicated by David,
and brought into the Temple by Solomon, 1 King. 7.51. Thus this Guard of
Levites stood every man with his weapon in his hand, and Jehoiada charged them
to look to it that their watches were not disordered by the breaking in of any
body, and that if any offered to break through their ranks by force, they
should slay them. Things being thus ordered, he brought forth the Kings Son to
them, and set him on the Brazen Scaffold, and Jehoiadah and his Sons anointed
him, and put the Crown upon his head, and gave into his hands the Testimony,
that is, the Book wherein the Law of God was written, and wherein was testified
what God required of his people, and what they might expect from him in case of
obedience. These things being done, all there present made a great acclamation,
and cried out, God save the King. Then Jehoiada made a Covenant between the
Lord and the King, and the people, viz. that the King should serve the Lord,
and maintain his pure worship, and root out Idolatry, and that the people
should join with him therein, and should fear and serve the Lord, and him only,
and every way carry themselves as became his peopeople. Then he made a Covenant
between the King and the people, viz. that the King should govern them
righteously, and that they should yield due obedience unto him.

Athaliah being at the Palace (which was near the Temple) and hearing these
great loud acclamations of the peopeople, and of such as in the great Court
stood about the King, she with a few of her servants that were about her, rusht
into the Temple through the Guards, and when she came to the great Court she
saw the King standing by the Pillar on the Brazen Scaffold with the Crown on
his head, and the Trumpeters about him blowing, and all the people there
present wonderfully rejoicing; upon this, she rent her clothes, and cried out,
Treason, Treason. Jehoiada immediately commanded the Officers and Commanders to
lay hold on her, and to have her out of the ranges, and and to kill any man
that offered to rescue her, and to carry her out of the Temple, and to slay
her, which accordingly they did in the way that horses came into the Kings
Palace. Thus as she was like her mother in sin, so she was not much unlike her
in her death. See 2 King. 9.33.

Jehojada then appointed Officers for the watch of the Lords house, to prevent
any danger that might happen upon this sudden change, and the rites of
Coronation being finished, and the aforesaid Covenants made, and Athaliah
slain, Jehoiada and the Rulers and Officers brought the King down to his Royal
Palace and set him upon his Throne, and no disturbance followed thereupon, but
the City was quiet, and the people rejoiced. Joash was seven years old when he
was Crowned, and reigned forty years. Jehoiada now bestirs himself to rectify
things that had been disordered in Athaliah's reign, and first he restores the
true worship of God, and takes care to have the services of the Temple duly
performed. Then the people went into the house of Baal, and brake it down with
its Altars and Images (which by the encouragement of Athaliah had been set up)
and they slew Mattan the Priest of Baal even before the Altars, to manifest
their greater detestation of that Idolatry, and possibly in imitation of Jehu,
who had with so much zeal suppressed that Idolatry in Israel.

Joash when he was grown up took two wives whom Jehoiada chose for him, and he
did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord all the days of Jehoiada, who
ceased not to instruct him in the ways of the Lord. But the high places
(wherein they worshipped the true God) were not taken away. For the people
having been so long used to offer Sacrifices and burn incense on them, it seems
Jehoiada durst not advise the King to proceed to a reformation of this evil.

The Temple at this time was fallen into great decay, either by the negligence
of former Kings, or through the wickness of Athaliah, whose Sons had broken up
the house of God, and had bestowed the dedicate things thereof upon Baalim, 2 Chronicles. 14.7. Joash therefore now takes order for the repair of it. And indeed
it was fit he should be very careful to uphold the Temple that had been the
nursery of his infancy, and the best means under God of securing his life, and
upholding his just title to the Crown. In order therefore hereunto he enjoined
the Priests carefully to gather all the money of the dedicated things, that is,
all the money dedicated to the service and repair of the Temple: Particularly,
1. The money of every one that passes the account, that is, the half shekel
that they were to pay when they were numbered from twenty years old and upwards,
[Exod. 30.12, 13.] which is therefore called the collection of Moses the
servant of the Lord, and of the Congregation of Israel, for the Tabernacle of
witness So called in regard of the Ark, and the Tables of stone in it, which
contained the Covenant between God and his people, and was a witness between
them.
laid upon the people when the Tabernacle was building. So in a like case 'twas
thought reasonable that a like course should be taken for the Temple. 2ly, The
money that every one is set at, that is, the money which any man shall by the
Priest be appointed to pay for his redemption, when he has vowed himself to
God according to the Law, Levit. 27.2. 3ly, All the money that comes into any
man's heart to bring into the house of the Lord, that is, which any man shall
voluntarily give for the repair of the Temple. This threefold collection Joash
appointed the Priests to gather from year to year in the several Cities where
they dwelt, and were well known among the people; and with this money he orders
them to repair the breaches of the Temple as there was need, and to expedite it
with all convenient speed. But it seems the Priests were negligent herein; when
therefore in the twenty third year of his reign he saw that nothing
considerable was done, he supposed that either the Priests had been exceeding
remiss in gathering this money, or had not faithfully paid in what they had
received, or at least that the people suspecting they did convert it to their
own private use, did not pay it so willingly as otherwise they would have done.
He thereupon took the work out of their hands, commanding them to pay in what
they had received, and appointed another way for the gathering of it. And that
was this, the King by the advice of Jehoiada made a great Chest, and bored a
hole in the lid of it, and set it in the great Court, at the entrance of the
Priests Court, and into this Chest (for preventing of all fraud in this
business) he orders that all the money that was brought in for the repair of
the house of the Lord should be put. The Priests readily consented to this
course, being willing to be excused from the care and trouble of collecting
this money. Whereupon a Proclamation was issued out through the whole Kingdom,
that every man should bring in to this Chest his appointed contribution, or
voluntary offering, which accordingly was done with much alacrity and
willingness, and they continued their contributions till all that needed
repairing was finished. And thus money came in in abundance. And when they
perceived there was much money in the Chest, the Kings Secretary and the
High Priest came and took it out and told the money and put it up in bags, and
gave it into the hands of the Master-workmen that therewith they might provide
materials, and pay the inferior workmen. And they had such experience of the
honesty and fidelity of these Master-workmen (into whose hands they committed
the money) that they expected no particular account of them how it was laid
out. And till the Temple was fully repaired they would not employ any of the
money so collected to other uses, but when it was fully done, and the house of
God set into as good state as it was before, then these overseers of the work
brought in the remaining money, and with it they made vessels for the Temple
such as were made by Solomon, viz. Incense-cups, Spoons, Censers, and other
utensils of gold and silver. But though these contributions of the people
before mentioned were brought into this Chest, yet the trespass-mony That is,
the money which by the Law those men were to pay by way of satisfaction
(according to the estimation of the Priests) that had any way wronged the Lord
in his holy things, Levit. 5.15. whether it were done ignorantly or wittingly.
In both cases satisfaction was to be made, and the one of these is called
trespass-money, and the other sin-money.
and sin-money was not brought into it, it being properly the Priests. Thus
when they had made the Temple fit for the service of God, they daily performed
such worship therein as was required by the Law, and this they did continually
all the days of Jehoiada. Jehoiada being now very old, and full of days,
(having lived an hundred and thirty years) he died. He was about ten or eleven
years old at Solomon's death, and lived in the reigns of eight Kings of Judah.
It was a great blessing to that Kingdom that he lived so long. And they buried
him in the City of David among the Kings (which was an high honor to him)
because he had done good in Israel both toward God in restoring his worship,
and toward his house in causing it to be repaired.

Now after the death of Jehoiada (that wise godly and zealous Governor)
several of the Princes of Judah who (as it seems) had concealed their impious
mind and hollow heartedness in Religion before, came now to Joash, and making a
low obeisance to him, and presenting unto him a flattering address, they
petitioned him (as appears by what follows) that they might have leave to set
up the Idolatry of Baal again in the land, and to worship God in the high
places after the manner of their fathers, because it was burdensome to go up
from all parts to the Temple. The King being prevailed upon by their flatteries
Multorum Principum aures nihil accipiunt nisi jucundum and l^surum. Tacitus.
, granted their request, and so they left the Temple (the house of the God of
their Fathers) and served Idols in Groves, and thereby brought the wrath of the
Lord upon Judah and Jerusalem by this their great trespass. For shortly after
Hazael King of Syria [see 2 King. 12.17.] invaded the land, and took Gath This
City David recovered from the Philistines, 1 Chr. 18.1. and the Kings of Judah
held it to this time. It was one of the Cities Rehoboam fortified, 2 Chr. 11.8.
, and was preparing to go against Jerusalem. So formidable to Joash was this
approach of Hazael that he was forced to purchase his peace with him by making
him a present of all the hallowed things, and of all the gold that was found in
the Treasuries of the Temple, and in his own house 2 Chronicles. 24.27. The
greatness of the burdens laid upon him, may hereby be meant which are mentioned
in some Civil Records.
. Sundry Prophets and extraordinary messengers God sent to them one after
another, to reclaim the King and his people from those evil ways, and to bring
them again to the Lord. And these Prophets So the Lord dealt with the Ten
Tribes, 2 King. 17.13. and with the men of Judah after this, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16.
did faithfully declare their sin to them, even to their very faces, and
foretold them of the judgments God would bring upon them if they did not
repent; however they would not hearken to them, but by an obstinacy in sin
pulled down vengeance on their own heads. At length Zachariah the Son of
Jehoiada was by the Spirit of God stirred up to admonish them of their
wickedness, who accordingly did it with great boldness and courage, and
standing up in an high place in the Court of the Temple, and speaking to the
King, his Nobles, and people, he told them, Thus says the Lord, why do ye so
transgress the commandments of the Lord that ye cannot prosper, because ye have
forsaken the Lord, he has forsaken you, and given you over into the hands of
the Syrians. Hereupon these Idolatrous Princes, and the people that were like
them being enraged, immediately consulted together to destroy him, and probably
complained grievously to the King of him, representing him (as the manner of
such persons is) as a man highly disaffected to the Kings person and
government, and an enemy to the State. And having by this means inflamed the
King against him, they asked him if they should presently stone him, which he
agreeing to, and commanding, they furiously rushed into the Priests Court
whither Zachariah had betaken himself, and with most daring impiety stoned him
between the Temple and the Altar See Mat. 23.35.
. But before he expired he said, The Lord will look upon it and require it;
that is, he will severely avenge my blood upon you. Thus Joash remembered not
the kindness which Jehoiada the Father of Zachariah had done for him, who had
nourished him in the Temple in his infancy, and with extreme hazard to himself
set him upon the Throne, and instructed him in the ways of God, and had been
his most faithful counselor, and a means of procuring many blessings to him;
and yet notwithstanding all this, he now cruelly consents to the murdering of
his Son, and that only for giving him faithful counsel. But though Joash was
thus abominably ungrateful, yet the Lord would not let it so pass. For before
that year was expired the Syrians invaded the land again, and executed the
judgment of God upon them with great severity. For though they came only with a
small company of men (intending possibly to pillage rather than to perform any
great action) and Joash went out against them with a very great army, yet this
small band of the Syrians overthrew that great host of Judah, because they had
forsaken the Lord God of their fathers. The Syrians being highly encouraged
with this victory, they went up against Jerusalem, and destroyed all the
Princes of the people (on whom they could lay their hands) who had been the
great instruments to draw away their King from the worship of the true God to
Idolatry; and they sent the spoil of them to the King of Damascus. And when
they departed they left Joash in sore diseases (perhaps by reason of some
wounds he had received in the fight) which advantage two of his own servants
laying hold upon slew him in his bed, and thereby avenged the blood of the Son
V. 25. For the blood of the Sons of Jehoiada, i. e. one of his Sons, the Plural
num^er for the Singular.
of Jehoiada the Priest, he was slain in the beginning of the fortieth year of
his reign. And they buried him in the City of David, but not in the Sepulchers
of the Kings. He reigned twenty two years with Jehu, the rest in the time of
Jehoahaz Jehu's Son, and Jehoash his Grandchild; and Amaziah his Son succeeded
him.

1 King. 11. wh. Chapter

2 King. 12. wh. Chapter

2 Chronicles. 23. wh. Chapter

2 Chronicles. 24. wh. Chapter

The 9th. King of Judah, AMAZIAH.
AMAZIAH the Son of Joash was twenty five years old when he began to reign, and
reigned twenty nine years It Is said that in the second year of Joash King of
Israel he began to reign, that is in the second year of Joa^h after he began to
reign alone, his father Jehoahaz being dead. For Joa h began to reign three
years before h^s father died, and that was the 37th. year of Joash King of
Judah (the father of Amaziah) who reigned forty years complete.
.

In the beginning of his reign he did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, viz. that which was for the substance of it good and approved of God, yet
not with an upright heart like David, but according to what Joash his Father
had done. For such as his Father was, such was he. His Father a while (out of
respect to men, viz. as long as Jehoiada lived) did that which was right, but
afterward fell away to Idolatry, and so did he. As his Father did not suppress
the worship of God in high places, no more did he. As soon as he was settled in
the Government he put to death those that had killed the King his Father, who
it seems were great men, and had Court-offices, (and therefore called his
servants) whom at first for fear of danger he forbore to meddle with, but when
he saw a fit opportunity, and felt his own strength, he dealt with them, yet
spared their children according to the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 24.16. The fathers
shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the children for the
fathers, every man shall be put to death for his own sin. About the 13 or 14
year of his reign he resolved to make war upon the Edomites who in his
Grandfather Jehoram's time had rebelled against the Kingdom of Judah, and so
continued unto this time. In order hereunto he musters three hundred thousand
choice men of his own subjects, such as were able for war, and could handle
spear and shield, and made Colonels over thousands, and Captains over hundreds
according to the dignity of their families. But notwithstanding he had so great
an Army it seems he did not much confide in them, but thought it better in
point of policy to manage this war by Auxiliaries, and accordingly hired an
hundred thousand able valiant men of the Israelites (who in those times by
reason of their successful wars against the Syrians were accounted excellent
Soldiers) to go with him against the Edomites, and gave them an hundred
talents of silver That is, thirty seven thousand, five hundred pound sterling.
See 1 Chronicles. 22.14. So every Regiment consisting of a thousand had a Talent of
silver, that is 375 l.
to engage them in this service. A Prophet comes to him from the Lord, and
advises him to dismiss these Israelites, for the Lord was not with them 2 Chronicles. 25.7. to wit, with any of the children of Ephraim. Ephraim is here put
for the ten Tribes, being the greatest Tribe of the ten, and having the
privilege of the first born, Genesis 48.19.
, God did not love them because they were Idolaters, though he did sometimes
prosper them in their wars against the cruel Syrians. But (says he) if thou will go up to fight against the Edomites with these Israelites, (contrary to
the declared mind of God) do it at thy own peril, and make thy self as strong
as thou can for the battle, and see what will come of it, Assure thy self God
will make thee fall before the enemy. For God alone has power to help or cast
down; success in war is wholly ordered by him. The King was something startled
at this message, but (says he) if I should dismiss them what shall I do for the
hundred Talents that I have given them; I know not how to recover them from
such a numerous company, without much hazard, and much bloodshed. The Prophet
answers, The Lord is able to give thee much more than this. So Amaziah
separated them from his own Army to which they were joined, and sent them home
again. But they being thus dismissed were exceeding angry, and looked upon
themselves as slighted and scorned, as if their aid and assistance had not been
of any value; wherefore in their return home they fell upon the Cities of
Judah, viz. such as were the frontier Towns bordering all along the breadth
thereof upon the Kingdom of Israel, and slew three thousand of the subjects of
Judah, and carried away much spoil.

Amaziah having dismissed the Israelites, marches with his own Army into the
Edomites Country, and there obtained a great victory over them, wherein he slew
ten thousand of them, and took ten thousand prisoners, whom he cast down from
the Rock Selah, and so broke them in pieces. Possibly he used them with the
greater severity because of their revolt from the Crown of Judah, and their
unwillingness to return to their obedience thereunto.

Having thus conquered the Edomites, among other spoils he brought away their
Gods also, and by a monstrous impiety set them up to be his Gods, and bowed
down before them, and burnt incense unto them. David did not use to do so, but
burnt the gods of his enemies which he took, see 1 Chronicles. 14.12. But this man
seems more infatuated and bewitched with Idolatry than Ahab himself. The anger
of the Lord was hereupon exceedingly kindled against Amaziah, and he sent a
Prophet to him, who said to him, Why have thou sought after the gods of the
Edomites which could not deliver their own people (viz. the people that
worshipped them) out of thy hands? The King being vexed at this free reproof of
the Prophet, would not let him go on, but said, Who made you of the Kings
council? I charge thee forbear speaking any many, or speak at thy own peril. So
the Prophet forbore, and only said, I know that the Lord has determined to
destroy thee, because thou have done this great wickedness in setting up these
Idols, and now refusest to hearken to my counsel.

Amaziah being puffed up, and grown insolent upon his good success against the
Edomites, and taking advice of some such Counselors as Rehoboam did, in a vain
and proud manner sends a challenge to Joash King of Israel, saying to him, Come
let us look one another in the face, and meet in a pitched field with our
Armies. Probably the injury done him by the Israelites whom he dismissed when
he undertook his late expedition against the Edomites, was that which provoked
him to challenge Joash, and this late wrong might probably bring other old
matters to remembrance. Joash (who was a Prince as proud and haughty every whit
as Amaziah) answers him in a scornful manner by a Parable: The Thistle (says
he) that was in Lebanon sent to the Cedar, saying, Give thy daughter to my son
to wife, and there passed by a wild beast and trod down the Thistle. Whereby he
intimates that it would be insufferable pride in the Thistle to presume to
desire the Cedars daughter as a wife for his son. For he that seeks to match
his child with another man's, supposes himself equal to that other man. But he
takes it in great scorn that Amaziah should think himself equal to him. But if
it be too much presumption for the Thistle to offer to make affinity with the
Cedar, how much more presumption is it to make war against him, which he would
have Amaziah to know was his present case. He further tells him, Indeed he had
smitten the Edomites, and thereupon he perceived his heart was proud, and much
lifted up. But however he advises him to content himself with that victory, and
to tarry at home, and not meddle with him to his hurt, lest he and Judah with
him fall in the enterprise. But Amaziah was nothing moved with what he said,
(for whom God intends to destroy, he usually first hardens) and God intended
to punish him for his abominable Idolatry, into which he had lately fallen.
Joash understanding this would not stay till Amaziah came to him, but he enters
Judah with a strong Army, wisely resolving to make his Enemies Country the
stage of the war. So they met in a pitched field at Bethshemesh (which belongs
to Judah) and Judah was worsted before Israel, and Amaziah himself taken
prisoner, and brought in Triumph Thus in this Amaziah (the Son of Joash King of
Judah) God did yet further revenge the death of Zachariah the Son of Jehniada,
who was most inhumanely and ungratefully murdered in his fathers days,
according to what he said at his death, the Lord will look upon it and require
it; and withal Amaziah himself was severely punished for his Apostasy to
Idolatry.
to Jerusalem by Joash; which City (as it seems standing out against him, he
battered down that part of the wall by the North-gate which was toward
Ephraim, even four hundred cubits in length, and so took the City by force;
then he seized upon all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were
found in the house of the Lord, with the posterity of Obed-Edom (who were
porters and keepers of the treasures in the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 26.15.) as also
the treasures of the Kings house. And having made what spoil he thought fit in
Jerusalem, he set Amaziah free upon certain conditions imposed upon him and his
subjects, and for the surer performance of the Covenants on Judah's part, he
took hostages of him, viz. some noble men's children whom he carried along with
him to Samaria. And he chose rather to go away with his present spoil than to
hazard all by endeavoring to conquer the Kingdom of Judah, which he was not
like to hold if he did obtain, the subjects thereof being so greatly addicted
to the house of David. Amaziah lived after this fifteen years, but a very
miserable life, for his subjects were so disaffected to him for the Idolatry he
had brought in, that from that time they began to conspire against him, though
it broke not forth openly, till by his rash unadvised and unprosperous war with
Joash he had brought so many miseries upon his Kingdom. The conspiracy now
breaking forth, he fled to Lachish, and possibly there hid himself, and lived
in obscurity; so those that had conspired against him (as it seems) governed
the affairs of the Kingdom in his absence. About twelve years after these
conspirators (being men of power in the Kingdom) upon some new occasion were so
enraged against him that they sent some to Lachish to slay him. Amaziah being
dead they brought him from Lachish in a Chariot drawn with horses, and buried
him in Jerusalem with his fathers.

2 King. 14. from v. 1. to 21.

2 Chronicles. 25. wh. Chapter

Tenth King of Judah, UZZIAH.
VZZIAH (or Azariah as he is called, 2 King. 15.1.) Son of Amaziah was the next
that reigned in Judah. In Mat. 1.8. it is said that Vzziah succeeded Joram, [And
Joram begat Ozias] whereas there were four that reigned in Judah between Joram
and Vzziah, viz. Ahaziah, Athaliah, Joash and Amaziah. Some think that these
were omitted because of their evil Government and unnatural deaths, (each of
them being slain one after another) or because by the mother-side they
descended from the stock of wicked Ahab, whose house the Lord doomed to be
rooted up. Vzziah when his Father was slain was about four or five years old,
and there seems to have been a kind of Interregnum or vacancy in the Throne of
Judah for about twelve years, viz, from the 15th. to the 27th. year of Jeroboam
the second King of Israel, at which time Vzziah being sixteen years of age, was
settled in the Throne by the general consent of the people and not till then.
And this possibly may be intimated to us by that unusual phrase, And all the
people of Judah took Vzziah being sixteen years old, and made him King instead
of his Father, 2 King. 14.21. And this might happen partly by reason of his
minority, and partly through the prevalency of some powerful men who perchance
had had a hand in putting his Father to death; or possibly the Government of
the Kingdom might be carried on in his name all that time, though he came not
to the full exercise of his Regal power till the 27th. year of Jeroboam. So
that the twelve years from his Fathers death (which happened in the 15th. year
of Jeroboam, see 2 King. 14.23.) unto the 27th. of Jeroboam (when he was put
into full possession of the Crown) are to be accounted into the number of the
fifty two years he is said to have reigned; and according to this account in
the 26th. year of his reign Jeroboam died. After which (it seems) there was an
Interregnum or vacancy in the Kingdom of Israel also for about eleven or twelve
years, viz. to the 38th. year of Vzziah's reign. After which Zachariah reigned
in Israel six months, Shallum one month, Menahem ten years, Pekahiah two years,
and Pekah had reigned a year or something more before he died, which was in the
fifty second year of his reign, 2 King. 15.27. so that he lived in the times of
six Kings that sat on the Throne of Israel.

In the beginning of his reign he did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, and maintained the worship of God incorrupt, (as his Father had done)
save that the high places were not removed, but the people still offered
sacrifice, and burnt incense on them. And during the life of Zachariah (Son of
that Zachariah that was stoned in the Temple) who was an eminent Prophet, and
had understanding in the visions of God; that is, was accustomed to see
visions, and had a singular understanding in ancient Prophesies, (and so was
able to counsel and instruct Vzziah in matters that concerned the knowledge of
God and his Laws) and possibly was skilful to interpret the dreams and
night-visions of others (as Joseph and Daniel were) I say during the life of
this Prophet Vzziah sought the Lord, and so long the Lord made him to prosper.

He recovered Elath (a City near the Red Sea which had been taken from the
Crown of Judah by the enemies bordering upon it) and repaired and fortified it.
In Ahaz's time it was lost again being taken by the Syrians, see 2 King. 14.22.
He was a great warrior, he had under his command three hundred seven thousand
five hundred fighting men, under two thousand and six hundred Captains, all
which were disposed into Regiments, and companies, and registered, that they
might be in readiness against any urgent occasion. And he furnished all these
with Shields and Spears, Helmets and Habergeons Armor for Back and Breast.
, and Bows and Slings to cast stones.

He was very victorious against the Philistines, of whose Towns he brake down
the walls of some, and dismantled them, as particularly Gath, Jabneh and
Ashdod, and built Cities in the Country of Ashdod, and Garrisoned them to keep
them in subjection. Also he mastered some parts of Arabia, and brought the
Ammonites to pay him tribute: For God helped him. So that his fame spread
abroad, and he grew very much renowned in all Countries between Judah and
Egypt, and he went on strengthening himself daily. And if we consider the great
success of Jeroboam the second at the same time King in Israel, these two
Kingdoms since the division never were in an higher flourish than now. He
repaired the wall of Jerusalem which in his Fathers days Joash King of Israel
had demolished, and fortified it with Towers, wherein he placed new invented
Engines to shoot arrows of an extraordinary bigness, (and possibly many of them
together) for the annoying of an enemy at a distance, and for the shooting of
great stones, greater (it is like) than the greatest of our Cannon-bullets.

He was a great sheep-master, and had many cattle, which he kept in the low
grounds and plains, and he built Towers for the defense of his berdsmen and
cattle, and dug many wells of water for them. He was a lover of husbandry,
and a great planter of Vines, which he planted in the fruitful Carmel, and the
hills about it, employing many Vinedressers in that work. About the 22th. year
of his reign (as it is probable) that dreadful Earthquake The Prophet Zachary
also speaks of it, Chap. 14.5. Ye shall flee like as ye fled from before the
Earthquake in the days of Uzziah King of Judah.
happened which Amos speaks of, Chapter 1.1. The words of Amos -- which he saw
concerning Israel in the days of Vzziah King of Judah, and in the days of
Jeroboam King of Israel, two years before the Earthquake. And seeing
Earthquakes are usually forerunners and presages of great changes in Kingdoms,
(though they have not always immediately followed but some years after)
therefore possibly that speech of the Prophet Isaiah, Chapter 7.8. may have some
reference to that Earthquake, for the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head
of Damascus is Rezin, and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be
broken that it be not a people. Those sixty five years cannot be understood to
begin from the time when this Prophecy was spoken, which was in the first year
of Ahaz, Isa. 7.1. (for from thence there were not above twenty years to the
Captivity of Israel) but must be understood to commence from the 22th. or 23th.
year of Vzziah, and from thence to the year wherein the Kingdom of Israel was
broken were indeed about sixty five years, as learned men compute them.

Under these two renowned Kings, Jeroboam the second of Israel, and Vzziah of
Judah, there flourished sundry eminent Prophets These holy Prophets Speeches
and Sermons were set down in writing by themselves, and (as some think) kept in
the Temple, and added to other holy Books to stand for Authentic Scripture.
Their Ministry was directed to these general Ends: 1. To maintain the purity of
Religion. 2. To beat down the disorders and growing evils and vices of the
times they lived in. 3. To keep always alive the promises of the Messiah, and
to hold the faith and expectation of the Jews always bent toward him.
in each Kingdom, particularly in Judah.

The Prophet ISAIAH.
ISAIAH, he is thought by learned men to have been of an illustrious family,
his Father Amoz being (as they conjectured) brother to Amaziah. Jerome with
others is of opinion that he was of a noble descent. Indeed his Prophecy is so
sublime and eloquent, and so curiously garnished with Rhetoric and all sorts
of Elegancies that he seems to have been a person of more than ordinary
education. He prophesies of the destruction of the Kingdoms of Syria and
Samaria shortly to be accomplished by the Assyrian, and of the Kingdom of Judah
afterward by the Babylonian; and of the destruction of the Babylonians by the
Medes and Persians, and of the Jews deliverance from the Babylonian Captivity
by Cyrus, whom by name he mentions above one hundred years before he was born.
And withal he declares the restitution and enlargement of the Church, whereof
the deliverance from the Babylonish Captivity was a figure, together with the
calling of the Gentiles by Christ, whose Incarnation, Birth, Offices, (Royal,
Priestly and Prophetical) life, teaching, sufferings, death, rising again,
glory ensuing, and his Kingdoms extent, he so largely and lively describes that
he seems rather to write a story of things already done than a Prophecy of
things to come. In regard whereof he is called an Evangelical Prophet. He often
mixes his severe denunciations of judgments with promises of grace in Christ to
all save only the Babylonians, who by reason of their pride and merciless
persecution of the Church did bear the image of Antichrist and his faction,
condemned together with the Devil the head thereof, to everlasting perdition,
the terrors whereof are very lively described in many places of this Book.

How long he Prophesied is obscurely intimated, Isa. 1.1. viz. in the days of
Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah Kings of Judah; but in what year of Vzziah he
began, and in what year of Hezekiah he ceased is not declared. It Is evident
that he Prophesied in the year Vzziah died, Isa. 6.1. and by the Prophesies
foregoing that Chapter it seems probable that he Prophesied a good while
before. But let us suppose with some that he Prophesied only two years under
Vzziah, sixteen years under Jotham, sixteen under Ahaz, fourteen under
Hezekiah. For Hezekiah reigning twenty nine years in all, in his fourteenth
year Isaiah was sent to him in his sickness to tell him that God would add to
his days fifteen years more. After that Isaiah threatens the Babylonish
Captivity upon Hezekiah's showing all his Treasures to the Babylonish
Ambassadors, v. 17. Here is in all 48 years. Now if we may suppose with the
Jewish Doctors that Isaiah was sawn asunder by Manasseh, there is fifteen years
more under Hezekiah, and one year at least under Manasseh, and so we have 64
years in all for the time of his Prophesying. A very long time this was for a
Prophet to preach to a How patient then should Gods Ministers be in their
function, though their peoples profiting for a long time answers not their
labors.
rebellious and gainsaying people. See Isa. 65.2. and Romans 10.21. Some divide
this Book of Isaiah into three parts, and so according to them the first
contains the Sermons he Preached under Vzziah, from Chapter 1. to 6. The second
contains the Sermons he preached under Jotham and Ahaz, from Chapter 6. to 15. The
third, the Sermons he preached, and the Prophesies he uttered, and the things
that fell out under Hezekiah, from Chapter 15. to the end.

Others divide this Prophecy thus: 1. In the twelve first Chapters are
contained Prophesies immediately directed to the Jews, whom he does sharply
reprehend for their sins, intermixing exhortations and consolations to the
penitent. 2. From the 13. Chapter to the 29. he Prophesies against the bordering
Nations that were enemies to the Jews, viz. the Babylonians, Philistines,
Moabites, Syrians, Assyrians, Ethiopians, Egyptians, Arabians, Tyrians, and
lastly against the Israelites of the Ten Tribes. 3. From the 29. Chapter to the 40.
he Prophesies of the Conquest of the Jews by the Babylonians, and their leading
them Captive into Babylon. In which there are four Historical Chapters [viz.
Chapter 36, 37, 38, 39.] occasionally interposed about the invasion of Judea by
Senacherib, of which we shall speak more particularly in the life of Hezekiah.
4. From Chapter 40. to 49. he foretells the deliverance of the people of the Jews
from the Babylonish Captivity. 5. From 49. to the end are contained Prophesies
of the Messiah and his Kingdom.


This Prophecy was always of very great account in the Church, our Savior
himself (whose Sermons were all Text) took his Text out of this Prophet, Luke
4.17, 18. The Ethiopian Eunuch read this Prophet in his Chariot, Act. 8.27, 30.
It Is oftener quoted in the New Testament than any Book of the Old, excepting the
Psalms, which are quoted sixty four times, and this Prophecy of Isaiah no less
than sixty, as the learned Alsted observes In Praecogn. Theolog. lib. 2. cap.
122.
. And this is all we shall say at present concerning this Prophet.

Another eminent Prophet whom God raised up at this time, and sent him to
Prophecy to Judah and Jerusalem was Joel. The Prophet JOEL.
He sets forth to them how the fierce anger of God was manifested against them
in that terrible judgment of dearth and famine now upon them occasioned by an
extreme drought, and swarms of Caterpillars with Lionlike teeth, and other such
destroying insects, the one devouring what the other had left. Thereupon he
exhorts them to true repentance and deep humiliation before the Lord showing it
must be general of all sorts and conditions because they had generally
offended, and it must be serious and hearty, testified by fasting, weeping and
mourning, to which they must join earnest prayer and supplication for mercy;
which if they would do, he promises not only deliverance to them from that
terrible plague, but that their losses should be repaired and made up to them
again by a wonderful plenty. And from a promise of these temporal blessings, he
rises to show them what spiritual blessings in their due time the true Israel
of God should enjoy under the Messiah foretelling the plentiful effusion of the
gifts of the Holy Ghost which should then be poured forth, viz. on the day of
Pentecost. He also tells them they should have deliverance from their enemies
the heathen round about them, and that God himself would judge their adversaries
and take vengeance upon them, for the wrongs they had done to his people. And
so much concerning that Prophet.

Vzziah who had before showed himself to be a worthy Prince, toward the latter
end of his reign after he had been so wonderfully helped and blessed by the
Lord, and made so prosperous, grew proud, and his heart was lifted up to his
destruction; so prone are men to abuse the mercies of God to pride and
presumption, which is usually a forerunner of ruin. Vzziah would needs now out
of a strange arrogance usurp the Priests office, and go into the Temple to burn
incense. Accordingly he goes presumptuously into the holy place to the Altar of
Incense, which none but the Priests might do. The High Priest as soon as he
understood whither he was gone, immediately followed after him attended with
eighty Priests (men of courage) who coming to him just as he was ready with a
Censer in his hand to burn incense, they withstood him, and plainly told him he
had highly trespassed in coming thither; it appertained not to him, but to the
Priests only (and that by Gods appointment) to burn incense. Therefore they
advise him to go presently out of the Temple, for he would receive no honor
from God for what he had done, but contrarily might expect some severe
punishment. Vzziah was very wroth at this their reprehension (Kings and great
men usually scorning to be stopped in the career of their sins by the servants of
God) but his wrath against them did but the more incense the wrath of God
against him; for immediately the Lord smote him with a leprosy in his forehead
as he stood besides V. 19. Megnal pro Inal juxta.
the Altar of Incense. And thus having sinned with so bold a face, and so much
arrogance he was punished in his forehead that his sin might be read in his
punishment. The Priests seeing this, and being encouraged by Gods so eminently
owning of them, and appearing for them, they thrust him out of the Temple, yea
he himself hasted to go out, perceiving that the Lord had smitten him. And from
hence forward to the day of his death he was a leper, and dwelt in an house
apart by himself, and so was cut off from the house of the Lord, and he that
had so presumptuously gone into the holy place, was now excluded from going
even to the Court of the people there to worship God. Vzziah being thus smitten
of the Lord, Jotham his Son as Viceroy and Deputy-King governed the Kingdom in
his stead (as it is thought) about four years. Vzziah's Acts were written by
Isaiah the Prophet, though that Book seems not now extant, as not necessary for
the use of the Church, as neither that of Jasher, mentioned, 2 Samuel 1.18.

Vzziah being dead they buried him in the field where the Sepulchers of the
Kings were, but in some remote corner thereof, (where none of the former Kings
Sepulchers were) because he was a Leper Supplicium triplex, lepra,
excommunicatio, funus inglorium; ut a populo vivum lepra, defunctum a Regibus
aliis dimoverit. Anonym. in loc.
.

When this King died it seems the Philistines greatly rejoiced and triumphed
because he had been such a scourge to them as is related, 2 Chronicles. 26.6.
Whereupon Isaiah Prophesied that a King should spring from this Vzziah, viz.
Hezekiah (the Son of his Grandchild Ahaz) who should sting them worse than ever
he had done, Isa. 14.29. Rejoice not thou whole Palestina because the rod of
him that smote thee is broken, for out of the serpents root shall come forth a
cocatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent.

2 King. 14.21, 22.

2 King. 15. from v. 1, to 8.

2 Chronicles. 26. wh. Chapter

The 11th. King of Judah, JOTHAM
JOTHAM was twenty five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
sixteen years. He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord as his
father had done before him; that is, he maintained and encouraged the true
worship of God as his Father had done, but did not go into the Temple to burn
incense as his Father had done; so that he was like him not in the evil he did
but in the good only. Howbeit the people did yet very corruptly, and by their
Priests (who too much complied with them therein) offered sacrifice, and burnt
incense on the high places, which had Jotham removed he might have prevented
the people's corrupting themselves in that thing, and therefore his not doing
it is noted as a blemish of his government. About this time (namely in the year
wherein Vzziah died) the Prophet Isaiah saw that glorious vision of the Lord
sitting on his throne, and compassed about with his holy Angels, singing Holy,
holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath. And he foresaw the people of the Jews from this
time forward growing more and more obdurate and blind every day than other,
resisting the counsel of the Prophets, and so obstructing the means God
afforded them for their conversion and healing, Isa. 6. Jotham was a great
builder, he built (or renewed and repaired) the high-gate of the house of the
Lord, which was (as it seems) the Gate whereby they went into the Kings Palace,
2 Chronicles. 23.20. And on the wall of Ophel Ophel was a Tower on the outside of
the City, and was the place where in those times the Nethinims dwelt, Nehem.
3.26.
he built much. He built also diverse Cities in the hills of Judah, and in the
Forests he built Castles and Towers to prevent incursions of enemies.

He subdued the Ammonites, and forced them to pay him tribute by the space of
three years, viz. an hundred talents of silver, and of wheat and barley ten
thousand measures of each. So he became mighty because he ordered his counsels
and actions as in the sight of the Lord, and so as he might please him.

The Prophet MICAH.
In his days the Prophet Micah began to Prophecy, and under him and his two
next successors he executed his Prophetic function together with Isaiah and
Hosea. He prophesied a great while as appears Jer. 26.18. He is very like the
Prophet Isaiah both in matter and loftiness of style. He prophesied both
against Judah and Israel. He declares Gods wrath against them, he laments
their condition, and foretells their destruction and captivities by the
Assyrians and Babylonians, for the manifold sins that all sorts had committed,
viz. Princes, Prophets and people, Chapter 1.2. and 3. Then he comfort those
that repent with promises of temporal blessings and deliverances from their
enemies, but chiefly with promises and predictions of Christ, foretelling the
place of his nativity, and the manifold blessings of his Kingdom, Chapter 4. and 5.
In the next place he expostulates with all sorts for their so ill requiting
Gods great kindness and mercy to them, and provoking him so highly by their
manifold sins, Chapter 6. Then he complains of the paucity and scarceness of good
men; and he ends his Prophecy with consolations to the Church exhorting her
to expect Gods time to plead her cause to the shame of her insulting enemies,
and her own mavelous comfort, Chapter 7.

Toward the latter end of Jotham's reign Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah King
of Israel began to conspire against Judah, but they did not invade the land
till his Sons days, the Lord therein showing mercy to him in taking him away
before those heavy calamities fell upon Judah. He was buried in the City of
David, and Ahaz his Son reigned in his stead.

2 King. 15. from 32, to the end.

2 Chronicles. 27. whole Chapter.

The 12th. that reigned in Judah, AHAZ.
AHAZ succeeded his father Jotham in the very end of the seventeenth year of
Pekah. He was twenty Object. If he was only 20 years old when he began to reign
and reigned only 16 years, then how could his Son Hezekiah be 25 when he began
to reign, 2 King. 18.2. for then he must be born when Ahaz was but 11 years
old. Ans. Ahaz was 20 years old when he was first designed King in his Fathers
life time, (it being the manner of Kings in those troublesome times to set up
their Sons in the Throne with themselves in their life time, that they might
hold it the more sure after their death.) But when he began to reign by himself
alone after his fathers death (from which the 16 years of his reign must be
reckoned) he might be 24 or 25, and so his Son Hezekiah might well be 25 at his
death.
years old when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years. He did not that
which was right in the sight of the Lord his God like David his Father. The
Lord was his God as to outward profession, and David was his Father by lineal
descent, but he would neither faithfully serve God, nor imitate David. Soon
after his Father was dead, Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah King of Israel
confederated together, and conspired against him, intending with their joint
forces to go up and besiege Jerusalem, and to depose him, and to make the Son
of Tabeal (probably some eminent Syrian) King in his stead. The King and people
of Judah were exceedingly startled at these tidings as apprehending a sudden
and final destruction of their Kingdom. God hereupon sends the Prophet Isaiah
to Ahaz to comfort him, and bids him take his Son Shear-jashub along with him,
whose name intimated that though the Jews should be brought low yet a remnant
of them at least should return to their former condition again, and should
increase and enjoy the happiness of being a people and a Commonwealth of
themselves. It seems the names of Isaiahs Sons The Sons of Isaiah were for
signs and for wonders, C. 8. 18. by reason of the signification of their names,
which presignified the goodness of God to the Jews.
were imposed upon them by a spirit of Prophecy, and so they were for signs
and significations of the goodness of God which he intended to the Jews, see
Isa. 8.18. And thus Isaiah brought his Son Shear-jashub to Ahaz to confirm him
and his people with this sign that they should not utterly be destroyed by
these two confederate Kings. Therefore he advises him to take heed of
distrusting God, and to be quiet and not to be afraid of those two Tails or
ends of smoking firebrarnds, viz. Rezin and Pekah, whom he so calls because
they should soon be extinct, and their attempts vanish into smoke, though they
thought to have burnt up all before them. For within the compass of 65 years
(reckoning from the Earthquake in the 22 year of Vzziah's reign See more hereof
in the life of Uzziah.
the Kingdom of Syria shall be swallowed up by the Assyrian, and Ephraim shall
be broken This was brought to pass by Salmanassar, 2 King. 17.6.
that it be not a people. But Ahaz seems still incredulous and believed not the
Prophets words. Isaiah therefore tells him if he doubted of the truth of what
he had said to him in Gods name, he might freely ask a sign of the Lord to be
shown him either in the heaven or in the earth for the confirmation of his
faith. But he in a seeming piety said, he would not tempt the Lord by desiring
a sign; whereas they do not tempt God who ask a sign when he allows them (as we
see in the instances of Gideon, Judge. 6.36, 37. and Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.8.)
but they that will not believe he will save them (according to his promise)
except he shows them a miracle to confirm his promise as may be gathered from
Luke 11.16. Seeing therefore Ahaz refused to ask a sign when the Lord permitted
him to do it, Isaiah tells him that the Lord himself would give him a sign
without asking, and that was this, Behold one that is now a Though in the first
sense the Virgin here meant was the Virgin which Isaiah afterward took to
wife, by whom he had a Son called Immanuel (whose name was to signify to the
Jews that the Lord would be with them) yet in a second and more sublime sense
the Virgin Mary is here signified, who was a Virgin and a Mother both in sensu
composito (as the School speaks) that is, a Virgin even when she was a Mother.
And the Son who was to be born of her was Immanuel, not only in name, but in
deed. For he was true God, and being made man dwelt with us, and among us men,
and came into the world to be our Savior, of whom Immanuel the Son of Isaiah
was but a Type. And he was not only signum portendens, but signum operans, a
sign not only foreshewing, but working out our Redemption.
Virgin shall be married Some understand this of that Prophets whom Isaiah
(possibly being at this time a widower) immediately after took to wife. See Chapter
8 v. 3.
, and shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel. This Son
shall be born before Rezin and Pekah shall lay siege to Jerusalem. and the
child's name Immanuel shall signify that God will be with the Jews to help
them. Further the Prophet tells him that this child shall eat butter and honey,
therefore there shall be plenty of food in Jerusalem during the siege. And
before the child shall come to the use of reason, and know how to refuse evil
and choose good, the lands of Syria and Israel (which Ahaz so much abhorred and
dreaded) shall be rid of both their Kings, and they shall be taken away by a
violent death. This was the sign the Lord would give him. And accordingly these
two Kings came up and besieged Jerusalem, but could not prevail against it, and
were fain to return without taking of it; and what became of them afterward we
shall see in the sequel of the story.

This wicked King Ahaz was no sooner delivered from this great danger, but he
forsook God his deliverer, and forthwith walked in the ways of the Kings of
Israel, and set up the Idolatrous worship of Baal, and made molten images for
that Idol, and offered sacrifice in the valley This was a valley near
Jerusalem. See 2 Chr. 33.6. 'Twas called Tophet from Toph a Drum, because they
used Drums and other sounding Instruments to drown the cry of the child that
was sacrificed. See Jer. 7.31. Thence Gehenna came to signify Hell, and Tophet
to be used in the like sense, Isa. 30.33.
of Benhinnom, and made one of his Sons to pass through the fire, and offered
him as a sacrifice to Molech, (contrary to the express Law of God, Lev. 18.21.)
even after the abomination of the heathen whom God had cast out before the
children of Israel; and he offered sacrifices in the high places, and upon the
hills, under every green tree Non tantum in lucis, sed etiam sub magnis
arboribus sacra saciebant. Grot.
, which in height and shade excelled others, and seemed fit for that purpose,
see Deuteronomy. 12.2.

When Ahaz had thus forsaken God, God also forsook him; whereupon Rezin and
Pekah dividing their forces, came again up against him, and overcame him, which
before when both joined together they could not do. For the Lord being provoked
by his grievous sins, first gave him up into the hands of the Syrians, who
having worsted him, carried away a great multitude of his people captive to
Damascus. Then Rezin at the same time as it seems subdued Elath which Vzziah
had recovered to Judah, and built it a new, and placed his Syrians to dwell
there. The Lord also gave him up into the hands of the King of Israel, who made
a great slaughter of his people, God therein using one Idolater to scourge
another; for Pekah slew in one day an hundred and twenty thousand of them
(Zickri a man of Ephraim slaying one of the Kings Sons, and two other great
officers of the Kings, which is mentioned for his particular honor) and the
King of Israel carried away two hundred thousand prisoners of the Jews, among
whom were many women and children. There was at that time a Prophet of the Lord
in Samaria, whose name was Oded, whereby we see that God was not wanting to
send the Israelites Prophets to admonish them, even then when they were most
corrupt. This Prophet met the host of Israel coming triumphantly with their
spoils and captives toward Samaria, to whom he spoke after this manner,
Because the Lord was wroth with Judah he has delivered them into your hands,
and ye have slain them with a rage reaching up to heaven. And now I perceive ye
purpose to keep under the children of Judah, and to make the captives ye have
taken bondmen, and bondwomen, whereas the Law of God forbids you [Levit. 25.39,
40, 41.] to make any of your brethren bondmen. But consider I pray you, are
there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God? Now
therefore hearken unto me, I advise you to send back these prisoners and
captives of your Brethren which ye have taken, or else assure your selves the
fierce anger of the Lord will fall upon you. It seems some eminent men of great
authority in Samaria (whose names to their lasting honor are set down, 2 Chronicles. 28.12.) met the Army also at the same place with many others of the
City, and hearing what the Prophet had said, they were so moved thereby that
they stood up against the Army, and told them they should not carry their
prisoners into the City; for (say they) we have offended against the Lord
already, and have sins too many upon us to answer for, and ye (if you go on
according to your intentions) will add more to our sins. For our trespasses are
great, and there is fierce wrath from the Lord hanging over our heads for the
cruelty we have already exercised against our Brethren, and therefore you shall
carry these prisoners no further. The Providence of God so wrought upon the
hearts of the Commanders and Soldiers of the Army that they presently
submitted, and left their prisoners and spoils to those Princes, and the people
there present to dispose of them as they should think fit. Hereupon these
Governors took those of the captives that were almost naked and clothed them
out of the spoils that were taken, and gave apparel and shoes to them that
wanted, and gave them to eat and drink and refreshed them, and anointed Or
possibly anointed some of the better sort of them to revive and refresh them
according to the custom of those Eastern Countries.
such of them as were wounded; and then setting all the feeble of them upon
asses, carried them back to Jericho, and there delivered them to their Brethren
in Judea. Thus the Lord inclined the hearts hearts of the Israelites to deal
mercifully with the men of Judah. Shortly after (as it seems) the Edomites
invaded Judah, and carried from thence many captives. The Philistines also
(whom Vzziah whilst he trusted in God had subdued, 2 Chronicles. 26.6.) now brake in
upon the Cities of Judah in the low Countries, and the South parts thereof, and
took six of them, and dwelt therein. Thus God gave the people of Judah over to
the spoil, and brought them low because of the sins of Ahaz their King, who
made them naked, that is, deprived them of the help and protection of God by
his great transgressions in practicing Idolatry himself, and drawing his people
also into it.

Ahaz being thus forsaken of God, and sore distressed on every side, he takes
the gold and silver that was in the Lords house, and in the Treasures of his
own house, and sends it for a present to Tiglath-pilesar King of Assyria,
saying to him, I am thy servant, and thy son, that is, I am willing to be
Tributary to thee, and to serve thee, and will be obedient to thee as a Son to
his Father, if thou will come and deliver me out of the hands of the King of
Syria, and the King of Israel. The King of Assyria being an ambitious Prince,
and affecting rule and domination over all Nations about him, readily embraced
this occasion of invading Syria, and coming with a great Army to Damascus he
took it, and carried away the inhabitants thereof to Kir a City of Media, and
put to death Rezin King of Syria; fulfilling therein the forementioned Prophecy
of Isaiah, Chapter 7.16. Before the Child shall have knowledge to refuse evil and
choose good, the lands which thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both their
Kings Of Pekah's death see 2 King. 15.30. Hoshea conspired against him and slew
him, about the fourth year of Ahaz. See more in the life of Pekah.
. And Chap. 8. Before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My Father, and my
Mother, the riches of Damascus, and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away
before the King of Assyria, that is, it shall be plundered and wasted in his
sight, and by his command. And Chapter 9.11. Therefore the Lord shall set up the
adversaries of Rezin against him, and join his enemies together. Amos also
prohesied of these things, Chapter 1.3, 4, 5. Thus says the Lord, for three
transgressions of Damascus, and for four I will not turn away the punishment
thereof, but I will break the bar of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant from
the plain or Aven, and him that holds the scepter from the house of Eden, and
the people of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir, says the Lord.

Thus the Kingdom of Damascus, (and with it that of Hamath of which as being
then in a flourishing condition mention is made, Isa. 37.13. and Jer. 49.23.)
which was begun in Rezon, 1 King. 11.23, 24. now ended in this Rezin, after it
had continued about ten Generations.

Ahaz now goes to Damascus to Tiglath-Pilesar to congratulate him for his late
victory obtained over the Syrians; he sees there an Idolatrous Altar, the
fashion and pattern of which, with all the workmanship thereof, he took and
sent to Vrijah the Priest at Jerusalem, with command that he should make the
like there, which he accordingly did against his return. And Ahaz took a
resolution, (as it seems) to sacrifice to the gods of Damascus which he vainly
thought had smitten him, and helped the Syrians against him, whereas he saw
they could not defend their own worshippers from the power of Tiglath-Pilesar.
However he said because the gods of the Syrians help them, I will sacrifice
unto them, that they may also help me. But this Idolatry proved fatal to him,
and to all that joined with him therein, for thereby they provoked God to give
them over into the hands of their enemies. Ahaz being now returned to
Jerusalem, and this new Idolatrous Altar provided for him, he commanded Vrijah
to remove the Brazen Altar (which Solomon had made) from the forepart of the
Priests-Court where it stood, and to set it on the North-side (as it were in a
corner out of the way) and to place this new Altar in the place of it, telling
him that Solomon's Altar should be for him to inquire of the Lord by when he
thought fit. Then on this new great Altar he offered a burnt-offering and a
meat offering, and poured out a drink offering to dedicate it. He commanded
also Vrijah to offer the morning and evening-sacrifice on this Altar, and all
other sacrifices, that either King or people should offer. R^cte Tertullianus
oportet nos in omni obsequio esse subditos Principibus Magistratibus
potestatibus, sed intra limits disciplinae. Peccavit Uriah malens placere Regi
qu^m Deo. Secus fecit Ambros. Epist. 5.32.
Vrijah like a wicked false hearted wretch, and a fellow that would do any
thing (even forsake God and his Religon) to please his Prince, readily did what
Ahaz commanded him. Ahaz then proceeded further and defaced and cut in sunder
many of the Sacred vessels and utensils of the house of the Lord, that they
might never be used again in his service. He cut off the borders of the bases,
and removed the lavers from them, and took down the Molten Sea from off the
stately Brazen oxen on which it stood, and set it aside. And the Covert of the
Sabbath (viz. the retiring place for the guard and watchmen that on the
Sabbath Day and whole week were to keep the watch of the Temple which they had
built in the house) he removed, and put by or stopped up the Entry and stately
Gallery, whereby the Kings used to pass from their Palace to the house of the
Lord. And he shut up the doors of the covered Temple, that the Priests might
not enter into it to perform the services there required, and it seems it was
not opened again till his sons days. See 2 Chronicles. 29.3. Further, he made him
Altars in every corner of Jerusalem, and in several Cities of Judah he set up
high places to burn incense to other gods, and so provoked the Lord exceedingly
against him. And all this (it seems) he did to ingratiate himself with the King
of Assyria, and that he might show that he had forsaken the Religion of his
Fathers, and had embraced Heathenism. And because he did all this when he had
been lately so heavily afflicted of the Lord, therefore was his sin highly
aggravated, and this brand and black mark set on him, This is that King Ahaz,
viz. that trespassed so heinously against the Lord.

When Ahaz had thus made himself a vassal and tributary to the King of Assyria
(which vassalage his Son soon shook off. See 2 King. 18.7.) he quickly found
that he had received more hurt than help from him, as the Prophet had before
intimated to him, Isa. 7.20. In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor
that is hired, namely by them beyond the River, by the King of Assyria, the
head and the hair of the feet, and it shall also consume the beard. For though
the King of Assyria to serve his own turn vanquished Damascus, yet he
impoverished Ahaz, and did not restore to him any of those Cities which his
enemies had taken from him; nor did him any other good in recompense of those
great treasures which he had given him; and perhaps he did otherways distress
him.

As Tiglath-pileser went up against Damascus and took it, and slew Rezin (as
has been said before) so he shortly after (as it seems) invaded the land of
Israel, and made that great havoc, of which we read 2 King. 15.29. In the days
of Pekah King of Israel came Tiglath-pileser King of Assyria and took Ijon, and
Abel-beth-Maacah, and Junoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee,
all the land of Naphtali, and carried them captive to Assyria. See more hereof
in the life of Pekah.

Ahaz toward the latter end of his reign, set up a stately Dial which
afterward afforded a miraculous sign to his Son Hezekiah, though he himself
refused to ask a sign.

In the last year of his reign he set up his Son Hezekiah with him in the
Kingdom.

Ahaz now dying was buried in Jerusalem but not among the Kings, he having been
so great an Idolater.

The Prophet Isaiah this year forewarns the Moabites of a great calamity that
would befall them within three years after. See Isaiah 15.1. and Chapter 16.14.

2 King. 16. wh. Chapter

2 Chronicles. 28. whole Chapter.

Isai. 7. from v. 1, to 17.

The 13th. that reigned in Judah, HEZEKIAH.
HEZEKIAH being taken by his Father into the Government, in the last year of
his reign, from that time (being the latter end of the third year of Hoshea
Though Hoshea was confirmed King in the twelfth year of Ahaz, and so is said
then to begin to reign in Samaria, yet because he reigned then only as Viceroy
under the King of Assyria, the nine years of his absolute reign are not
reckoned till he cast off the Assyrian Yoke, and took upon him to reign as
absolute King, which was (it seems) two years after, viz. in the 14th. year of
Ahaz, and so the third of Hoshea was indeed the first of Hezekiah's reign.
King of Israel) he reigned twenty nine years in Jerusalem. His Mother's name
was Abi, or Abijah, the daughter of Zachariah. If she was (as it is supposed)
the daughter of that Zachariah, by whom (so long as he lived) Vzziah was kept
in the way of truth, [2 Chronicles. 26.5.] we may well think that her piety
(manifested in this religious education of her Son) was a chief means under God
that he proved so zealous for the cause of true Religion, though his Father was
so extremely wicked. He was twenty five years old when he began to reign, and
he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that
David his Father had done, and removed the high places, which neither
Jehoshaphat nor any of the good Kings of Judah had done before. 2 K. 18. fr. 1,
to 4. 2 Chr. 29.1, 2.

In the first year of his reign in the first month Abib, he opened the doors of
the Lords house which his Father had caused to be shut up [2 Chronicles. 28.24.] and
repaired and adorned them by overlaying them with Gold. Then assembling the
Priests and Levites together in the East-street The Street before the entrance
to the great gate of the House of the Lord.
, (whom his Father had forced to abide in their Cities and suburbs shutting
them out of the house of the Lord) he like a pious and prudent Prince spoke to
them after this manner, Hear now ye Priests and Levites, and attend unto the
words which I shall speak unto you. I require you in the first place to
sanctify your selves, and to sanctify the house of the Lord God of your
Fathers, and to carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place; that is, to
cleanse it of all Idols, and all those things which Idolaters used in their
worship. For our Fathers (both mine and yours have trespassed, and done that
which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and have forsaken him, and have turned
away their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and turned their backs upon
it; that is, have openly, basely, and opprobriously forsaken the worship
appointed by him in his Temple, [see Jer. 2.27.] and have shut up the doors of
the Porch, and not suffered the lamps to be lighted in the Temple, nor the
incense to be burnt; neither have they offered the burnt-offerings unto the
Lord in the holy place as they should have done, therefore the wrath of God was
upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he has delivered them up to great trouble, even
to the astonishment and hissing of strangers, as you have seen with your eyes.
For lo our Fathers have fallen by the sword, and our wives, sons and daughters
have been led into captivity for their great transgressions. Now seeing
Reformation is a special means to divert the wrath of God, it is in my heart to
make a Covenant with the Lord God of Israel, and thereby to engage my self and
my people to a real reformation, that so his fierce wrath may turn away from
us. Wherefore my Sons stir up your selves, be not ye negligent, for the Lord
has chosen you to stand before him, and to burn incense unto him; therefore be
not wanting to your duties, and to perform the ordinances of his house as he
requires.

The King having ended his speech, several of the Priests and Levites taking
courage thereat sanctified themselves, and according to the Kings command
(which they saw was agreeable to the word of God) they came to cleanse the
Temple, and upon the eighth day of the first month entering in at the Porch they
began to cleanse the house of the Lord, and spent eight days in cleansing the
Holy of Holies, and the holy place and the Porch, and then spent eight days
more in cleansing the Courts appertaining to the house, and having brought out
all the uncleanness and filthiness, and Idolatrous trash they found in the
Temple, the Levites carried it out, and threw it into the brook Kidron. Then
they came to the King and told him what they had done, viz. that they had
cleansed the whole house of the Lord, and the Altar of Burnt-offering, with all
the vessels thereto appertaining, and the shew-bread-table, with the utensils
belonging to it. Moreover (say they) all the holy vessels which Ahaz in his
transgression did cut in pieces and cast away, we have repaired and renewed,
and fitted and sanctified for the holy use to which they were appointed. Behold
they are before the Altar of the Lord, and ready to be set in their proper
places. 2 Chronicles. 29. from v. 12, to 20.

The next morning King Hezekiah called together all the Rulers of the City, and
went up with them to the house of the Lord, where he together with the people
by the Ministry of the Priests and Levites offered seven Bullocks, seven Rams,
seven Lambs, and seven He-goats as a sin-offering upon the Altar of the Lord to
make atonement: 1. For the King, his counselors and officers, and family. 2.
For the sins and abominations that were committed in the Temple by Idolatry and
false worship. 3. For the sins of Judah, that is, of the whole people. And the
Priests killed the Bullocks and Rams, and sprinkled the blood on the Altar, and
they brought forth the he-goats before the King and all the congregation, and
they laid their hands on them, thereby acknowledging their sins, and that this
sacrifice was offered up in their stead, and the Priests killed them, and made
reconciliation for the people with their blood. For the King commanded that the
burnt-offering and the sin-offering should be offered for the whole people,
that atonement might be made for all, that the plaster might be as large as
the sore. And he took care also to have the praises of the Lord solemnly sung
by the Levite-singers, and that they should be ready with their Cymbals,
Psalteries, and Harps to do it as David, Gad and Nathan (being all inspired by
God) had directed. The Levites therefore standing ready with their instruments,
and the Priests with their Trumpets, when the burnt-offering began to be
offered, then the Song of the Lord began to be sung, viz. the 136 Psalm, the
Trumpets sounding, and the Levites singing and playing on their instruments
(the more to excite their spirits) and all this continued till the
burnt-offering was offered; and then the King and all the people bowed their
heads and worshipped the Lord. And the King and his Nobles commanded the
Levites that they should sing praise unto the Lord with the words of David and
Asaph the Seer, which accordingly they did with great gladness of heart, bowing
also their heads, and worshipping. Then the King spoke to the Priests saying,
Ye have now consecrated your selves as it were a new to the Lord, therefore
approach his Altar and bring in the sacrifices and thank-offerings which the
people shall be willing to offer. The whole congregation being much wrought
upon by the Kings words, presented their sacrifices and thank-offerings very
freely, and those that were of a more free and forward spirit offered whole
burnt-offerings, wherein there was more respect manifested to God than in other
sacrifices, for in these the offerers themselves had a part, but in the other
all was consumed on the Altar, and yet the number of these burnt-offerings that
were now offered was very great, viz. seventy bullocks, and an hundred rams,
and two hundred lambs. But the other sacrifices of several sorts that were
offered, viz. peace offerings, and free will offerings were very numerous, viz.
six hundred oxen, and three thousand sheep. But the Priests were too few to
slay all the burnt-offerings, therefore the Levites did help them This they did
in this particular case, it was not their ordinary work.
till the work was ended, and till other Priests had sanctified themselves. For
the Levites were more forward to sanctify themselves than the Priests, and so
there were more of them at this present sanctified than of the Priests. Besides
the burnt-offerings were very many, and the fat of the peace offerings was to
be pulled off, and burnt upon the Altar, and drink offerings to be added to
every burnt-offering; all which required much work, which those few Priests
were not able to perform at this time.

Thus the service of the house of the Lord was set in order by good Hezekiah.
And the King rejoiced, and all that were truly pious with him, that the Lord
had put such a good inclination and zeal into the hearts of the people, whereby
they were so willing and so readily inclined to this work of reformation. And
it was evident that the thing was of God because it was done sooner and with
more speed than could reasonably have been expected, considering how much
before (under Ahaz) they had been corrupted with Idolatry. And to have their
hearts so soon and so wonderfully changed was an extraordinary work of the
Spirit of God. 2 Chronicles. 29. wh. Chapter

Hezekiah now resolves to have the Passover solemnly celebrated, but it could
not be kept at the time appointed, viz. on the 14th. day of the first Month,
because the purgation of the Temple was not finished until the 16th. day of
that month, neither had the Priests sanctified themselves sufficiently, neither
were all the males gathered together to Jerusalem according to the Law as they
ought to be at that great Festival; therefore the King, Priests, and
representative body of the people appointed to keep the Passover on the 14 day
of the second month, and in order hereunto the King sent to Judah and Benjamin,
and to all the Israelites that had joined themselves to them, and sent Letters
also to the remainder of the ten Tribes that were not carried away by
Tiglath-pilesar King of Assyria (as many of their brethren were. See 2 King.
15.29.) even to all the Israelites from Dan to Beersheba, inviting them to come
to the house of the Lord to keep the Passover. For they had not done it of a
long while in such sort as was prescribed. So the Posts went out with Letters
from the King and his Princes, inviting the Israelites to come and keep this
solemn Festival at Jerusalem. His Letters ran thus, Ye children of Israel I
exhort you to turn again unto the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and he
will return in grace and mercy to the remnant of you that are escaped out of
the hand of Pull and Tiglath-pilesar Kings of Assyria, 2 King. 15.29. 1 Chronicles.
5.26. And be not like your Fathers and your brethren which trespassed against
the Lord, who therefore gave them up to desolation as you see at this day.
Neither be ye stiff-necked as your Fathers were, but yield your selves unto the
Lord, and willingly give up your selves in obedience unto him, and enter into
his Sanctuary and Temple (which he has consecrated to himself for a place of
workship, even as long as it shall stand) and there appear before him, viz. in
the Court of the people, and serve the Lord your God, that the fierceness of
his wrath may turn away from you. For if you turn again unto the Lord, your
brethren, and your children that are led away captive shall find compassion
from them that led them away, and God will move their hearts to let them return
and come again into their own land. For the Lord our God is gracious and
merciful, and will not turn away his face from you if you turn unto him by true
repentance.

So the Posts passed from City to City through the Country of Ephraim and
Manasseh even unto Zebulun, but most of them (it seems) laughed them to scorn,
and mocked at them for this their message. However diverse of Asher, Manasseh
and Zebulun, humbled themselves under the hand of God for their former sins,
and came to Jerusalem. But in Judah the hand and power of God eminently
appeared in making them unanimous, and giving them (as it were) one heart, and
one mind to do the commandment of the King, and of his Princes, which was
guided by and grounded on the word of the Lord. And there assembled at
Jerusalem very many people to keep the Feast of the Passover in the second
month; and being there met, they arose and took away the Altars that were in
Jerusalem, viz. those that Ahaz had made, both the Altars of burnt-offerings,
and the Altars of incense, and cast them into the brook Kidron. Then they
killed the Passover on the 14th. day of the second month, and the Priests and
the Levites that had been before backward, were now ashamed of their
backwardness (seeing the forwardness of other Levites and of the people
themselves) and they sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt-offerings
into the house of the Lord, and did what belonged to their office. And they
stood and officiated in their proper places, wherein each order was appointed
to stand, as they were accustomed to do before Ahaz's time, who put them all
out of order. The Porters stood in their places, the Singers in theirs, and the
Levites (that assisted the Priests) in theirs, according to the ordinances
delivered by Moses. The Priests also sprinkled the blood of the sacrifice upon
the Altar, having received it from the hands of the Levites. And then there
being many of the Priests that were not sanctified, the Levites that were
sanctified had the charge of killing the Paschal lambs, and other sacrifices
that were to be offered. And this was done to keep the sacrifices from being
polluted as they would have been, if unsanctified persons had offered them. And
many of the people that were of the Tribe of Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and
Zebulun had not cleansed themselves according to those rites that were enjoined
to such as were to eat of the Passover, and yet through ignorance did adventure
to eat of the Passover, whereupon God gave some visible evidence of his
displeasure against them, which Hezekiah observing, prayed to the Lord for
them, saying, Good Lord pardon every one that sets his heart in truth and
sincerity to seek the Lord God of his Fathers, though he has failed (through
ignorance) in the use of those external rites of cleansing required of him, and
is not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary, nor has used
such means of purifying himself as are prescribed to such as come to Gods holy
place. And the Lord heard the prayer of Hezekiah, and removed the judgment he
had inflicted on them. So they kept the Feast of the Passover seven days with
great gladness, and the Priests and the Levites praised the Lord day by day,
singing and praising the Lord on loud instruments of music. And Hezekiah
encouraged and spoke comfortably unto all the Levites that taught the good
knowledge of the Lord; and the people did eat joyfully every day of the Feast,
and offered peace offerings, and made confession of their sins to the Lord. And
the King, Princes and Priests, and all the chief of the assembly advising
together resolved to keep other seven days to the Lord; which though it was
besides the Law, yet the case being extraordinary, God accepted their holy
zeal, and they did accordingly keep them with great gladness. And the King gave
to that great assembly and congregation a thousand bullocks, and seven thousand
sheep, and the Princes gave them a thousand bullocks, and ten thousand sheep,
that they might offer part to the Lord, and eat the remainder themselves in
those days of Feasting, and that those of the Ten Tribes that were there
present might be the better entertained. And a great number of Priests though
they were backward before, yet now seeing the great need of their pains, and
beholding the zeal of others, they sanctified themselves, and put themselves on
to forward the service of the Lord. And that vast congregation of all sorts
there met together, greatly rejoiced, and there was such joy in Jerusalum at
this time as since the days of Solomon, and the division of the Kingdoms there
had not been the like. And the Priests (that descended from Levi) blessed the
people according to Numb. 6.23, etc. and their voice was heard, and their
prayer came up to Gods holy dwelling place, even to Heaven, and the blessing
which the Priests pronounced, God was pleased to ratify. 2 Chronicles. 30. wh. Chapter

When these things were finished, all the Israelites which were there present
about the end of the 2d said month, being encouraged by the King, went forth
through all the other Cities of Judah, and brake down the Images, and cut down
the Groves, and destroyed the high places and Altars throughout the whole land
of Judah and Benjamin, and even throughout all the Cities of Ephraim and
Manasseh (that were under the dominion of the King of Judah) until they had
finished the work they went about, which being done they returned every one to
his own home in their several Countries, 2 Chronicles. 31.1.

Hezekiah went yet further and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent which Moses
had set up ( Numb. 21.9.) to cure such as were stung with fiery Serpents; which
being kep^ as a monument of Gods grace, goodn^ss and mercy to them, many of the
people were so superstitious as to yield to it Divine honor, this good King
therefore brake it in pieces, that God might be no longer dishonored by it.
For when things lawful and useful are perverted to Idolatry they may lawfully
be destroyed. And Hezekiah called it Nehustan, that is, a little piece of
brass, intimating to them there was no deity in it, and therefore no worship to
be done unto it. 2 King. 18.4.

Then King Hezekiah took order that the Priests and Levites should serve every
one of them in his office and course, and should minister and do the service
belonging to their places, and praise the Lord in the gates of the tents of the
Lord, that is, within the gates of the Temple, which by reason of the several
Courts and buildings, and Chambers belonging to it were as Tents in a Camp for
the several orders of Ministers that belonged to it to lodge in. And whereas the
morning and evening-sacrifice, and the sacri ices appointed for the Sabbaths,
and New-M^ons, and other set and solemn Festivals were ordinarily to be taken
out of the offerings which were laid up in the Treasuries of the Temple, and
those being much exhausted by Ahaz, and the people being much impoverished by
inrodes of enemies, Hezekiah for the ease of the people appointed a portion for
and toward these sacrifices out of his own revenue. He commanded also the
people that dwelt at Jerusalem to give to the Priests and Levites the portion
and maintenance that by the Law belonged to them, that so being freed from
distracting worldly cares, they might the better attend to their work, and
might search into and study and meditate on the Law of God, and faithfully
expound it to the people, teaching them to perform the duties therein
commanded. And the children of Israel in and about Jerusalem when this command
was first given brought in abundance of the first fruits of corn, wine and oil,
and honey, and of the things that grew out of the earth, and the tithe of all
things that were by the Law injoined. And those that dwelt in the Cities of
Judah brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep, and all other things which were
ordained to be set apart from the rest of their goods, as being consecrated
unto God, and given to the Priests and Levites. And they brought in so
abundantly that they laid them by heaps; and they began to make those heaps,
and to bring in their tithes to the house of the Lord in the third month (which
was the beginning of their harvest) and finished them in the seventh month when
they gathered all other fruits of the land, and which was counted the last of
their harvest. And therefore the Feast of Tabernacles (which was in that month)
was called the feast of ingathering in the end of the year, Exodus 23.16. When
Hezekiah and the Princes came and saw those heaps (which were many and great
ones) they blessed the Lord for stirring up the people to bring in their tithes
so cheerfully and so plentifully, and blessed the people for their forwardness
therein. Then the King asked the Priests and Levites how it came to pass
(seeing there were many of them) that they had spent no more of the provisions
brought in for them? Azariah the chief Priest of the house of Zadock made this
answer, Be Be pleased to understand, O King, that since the people began to
bring in their first fruits and tithes into the house of the Lord, we have had
enough to eat, and have left a great deal besides. For God has so abundantly
blessed his people, that their offerings have not only yielded us sufficient
provision, but this overplus which thou see here, is also left. Then the King
commanded that they should prepare Chambers and storehouses wherein to lay up
what remained for the future, and ordered that the tithes and offerings, and
dedicate things should be laid up in them, and appointed Cononiah the Levite,
and Shimei his brother to be Treasurers, and to keep an account of what was
brought in, and what was delivered out, according to the order established, 1 Chronicles. 26.20. Then there are ten set down by name who were overseers under them
by the command of the King, and the high Priest who had the chief rule over
those that belonged to the house of the Lord. And Core (who was Porter at the
Eastgate) and six under him had charge to distribute the oblations and tithes
to the Priests and Levites, and that to all sorts of them as they were set in
their several courses both great and small, viz. to every one what was
sufficient for him. And they were to distribute them also to the young ones who
were in their Genealogies of males, from three years old and upward, and to
those that were registered in the Genealogies of Priests and Levites from twenty
years old and upward, who came in their particular courses to do service in the
house of the Lord. Nay further, they were to distribute them to all their
little ones (that were registered) though under three years, and to their wives,
sons and daughters throughout the whole multitude or congregation of Priests
and Levites; for they having sanctified themselves in their distinct offices
for the holy service of the Temple they had not time or leisure to provide
temporal things for themselves, their wives and children as others had. And
besides those persons before mentioned that were to distribute the holy things
to those that dwelt at Jerusalem, or came up thither in their several courses
to perform their service at the Temple; there were others also of the Priests
chosen that dwelt in the other Cities of the Kingdom that were to give portions
to the Priests and Levites (whose names were registered according to their
Families) who were then abiding in those places, and not attending at the
Temple. This care did Hezekiah take throughout all Judah, and he did that which
was good and right in the eyes of the Lord, and he did it in truth and
sincerity. And in every work that he began relating to the service of the house
of the Lord, and to the observance of the Moral Law, and the ordinances about
Divine worship (by all which he took care that God might be duly sought unto
and honored and obeyed) he did it uprightly and with a fervent zeal, and the
Lord prospered him therein, 2 Chronicles. 31. from v. 2, to the end.

About this time (as it is supposed) that Copy of Solomon's Proverbs mentioned,
Prove. 25.1. was found, and transcribed by some of Hezekiah's servants out of
the old Manuscript which was (as it is like) much spotted and soiled with time
and neglect. Further we are to observe what an excellent character is given of
Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.5, 6. viz. that he trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so
that after him there was none like him among all the Kings of Judah (since the
rent of the Kingdoms) nor before him. He excelled those that went before him in
removing the high places, which neither Jehoshaphat nor any of the good Kings
of Judah had hitherto done. But as for those that were after him some may
object that which is said of Josiah, [2 King. 23.25.] viz. that there was no
King before him like unto him. But to this we may answer that though Josiah
excelled Hezekiah in some things, yet in other things Hezekiah excelled him.
For Hezekiah was the first that removed the high places, but when Josiah
removed them he had Hezekiah's example to encourage him therein, and Hezekiah
was more successful in war than Josiah. They were indeed both excellent
Princes, though in some things the one might excel the other. It Is further
said of Hezekiah, that he clave to the Lord, and departed not from following
him, but kept his commandments. And the Lord was with him, and he prospered him
in all his enterprises. As in particular in his wars against the Philistines,
against whom he mightily prevailed, and took all those Cities from them, which
they had taken from his father Ahaz, see 2 Chronicles. 28.18.

But we must now for the better understanding this History of Hezekiah look a
little into the neighbor Kingdom of Israel. We shall find that in the days of
Menahem the sixteenth King that there reigned, (who began to reign in the 39th.
year of Vzziah) that God stirred up the spirit of Pull King of Assyria to invade
the Kingdom of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 5.26. and he made great spoil among them. Then
in the latter end of the reign of Pekah (the eighteenth King of Israel who
began to reign in the 52 year of Vzziah) Tiglath-pileser Son of Pull carried
away captive the people of Gilead, and Peraea, to wit the Reubenites, Gadites,
and half the tribe of Manasseh unto Chabor and Haran, and then passing over
Jordan possessed himself of Galilee, and carried away the inhabitants of
Napthali into Assyria. So that at this time he subdued (in a manner) five
Tribes of Israel, 2 King. 15.29. Tiglath-pilesar dying, Salmanassar his Son
succeeded him, who in the ninth year of Hoshea, and sixth of Hezekiah after
three years siege took Samaria, and their King Hoshea, and carried away the
Israelites captives into his own Country, as we shall see more in the life of
Hoshea. So that the Kingdom of Israel now came to an end. Sometime after
Salmanassar dies, and his Son Sennacherib reigned in his stead, whom Herodotus
(Lib. 2.) calls King both of Assyria and Arabia too. Perchance for that the
Assyrians at that time together with Peraea or the land of Gilead, and Hamath,
or Ituraea, had also under their power a part of Arabia, either Petrea or
Deserta. For Ava or Ivah (which Sennacherib so much boasts of to have been
conquered by him or his ancestors, 2 King. 18.34. and Chapter 19.13.) was a Country
lying in the desert of Arabia, as Fran. Junius affirms upon 2 King. 17.24. And
the Prophet Isaiah foretelling the calamity which was to befall the Moabites
under Salmanassar (Isa. 15.7. and Chapter 16.14.) threatens them that whatever they
had laid up in store, the Assyrians should carry it away into the valley of the
Arabians. Sennacherib now (about the eleventh or twelfth year of Hezekiah as
it is probable) resolving to make war against the Egyptians (perhaps because
they had been so lately assistant to the Israelites against the Assyrians in
the reign of Salmanassar, and an occasion of their revolt, (see 2 King. 17.4.)
and the Philistines, as it seems, joining with him therein) he sends part of
his Army under Tartan (one of his Generals) to besiege Ashdod or Azotus, which
City Hezekiah had sometime before recovered out of the hands of the
Philistines. Now that this war lasted three whole years may be gathered out of
Isa. 20. where the Prophet putting off his coat of hairy cloth (belonging to
his Prophetical function, see Zach. 13.4.) from his loins, and his shoos from
his feet, was commanded to walk up and down naked and bare foot as some
conceive, three days (a day being put for a year) to signify to the Egyptians
and Ethiopians, that when that time was once run out, they should in like
manner (being stripped of their clothes and barefoot) be led away into captivity
and bondage by the King of Assyria; which command the Prophet is said to have
received in the year when Tartan being sent by Sargon King of Assyria besieged
Ashdod and took it, Isa. 20.1. where by Sargon we must understand Sennacherib
himself among whose Commanders this Tartan is particularly named, 2 King.
18.17. And the King of Assyria sent Tartan, and Rabsaris, and Rabshakeh from
Lachish, etc.

Hezekiah (whether provoked by Sennacherib's taking of Ashdod so injuriously
from him, or for other reasons) resolves now to shake off the King of Assyria's
yoke which his Father Ahaz had taken on him, and would no longer pay him
Tribute. Hereupon Sennacherib in the fourteenth year Eight years after
Shalmanasser had taken Samaria.
of Hezekiah (even after he had made so good an establishment of Religion, see
2 Chronicles. 32.1.) bringing his Army out of Egypt, where he had made great havoc
(of which calamity the Prophet Nahum seems to speak, Chapter 3.10. Yet was she
carried away, she went into captivity: her young children also were dashed in
pieces at the top of all the streets; and they cast lots for her honorable
men, and all her great men were bound in chains) invades the Kingdom of Judah,
and besieges many of their fenced Cities, and took many of them. Hezekiah
bestirs himself with all diligence to defend himself and his Kingdom against
him. And to that end by the advice of his Captains and Council he filled up the
fountains and springs that were without the City of Jerusalem, and covered them
with earth, and carried the waters by pipes under ground into the City, that so
the Assyrians if they came to besiege the City, might be distressed for want of
water; also the brook Gihon or Siloe (which ran through the midst of the
Country where Jerusalem stood, and divided it self into two streams) one of
them he turned from the usual channel, and brought it strait down into the
westside of the City of David, 2 Chronicles. 32.30. and made a great pond to receive
the water of it for the benefit of the besieged. And the Princes and the people
did much assist him therein. Also he fortified Jerusalem, and built up that
part of the wall that was broken down by Joash King of Israel in Amaziah's
time, which breach it seems was not fully repaired till now, and he made the
wall strong and high, and made also another wall without as an Antimural or
outwork, [see 2 King. 25.4.] and repaired Millo in the City of David, which
some think was their Townhouse (where the people had their general assembly)
or else some fort in the City; he also provided all sorts of arms, offensive
and defensive, and set Officers and Commanders over his Soldiers, and calling
them together into the broad street that was by the City-gate, he spoke
comfortably to them after this manner, My good subjects and faithful soldiers,
be ye strong and courageous, be not afraid of the King of Assyria, nor of the
great multitude that is with him. For there be more with us than with him; with
him is only the arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and
to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves on the words of Hezekiah.

2 King. 18.13.

2 Chronicles. 32. from v. 1, to 9.

Hezekiah seeing how soon the Assyrian had taken many of the fenced Cities of
Judah, and that proceeding on in his victories he had also laid siege to
Lachish, he began to entertain thoughts of buying his peace with him. Hereupon
he sent his Ambassadors to him to acknowledge his offense in denying the
tribute, and to entreat his favor, yielding withal to pay whatever tribute he
should impose upon him. Sennacherib being puffed up with his success requires of
him three hundred Talents of Silver, and thirty Talents of Gold Which amounts
to 225000 l. of our money as some compute.
; Hezekiah to raise this sum was forced to take the treasures of the Lords
house, and cut off the Gold even from the doors of the Temple, and from the
pillars which himself had overlaid. But the King of Assyria having gotten the
Gold and Silver into his hands, notwithstanding most perfidiously went forward
in his enterprise of subduing them. And therefore he not only continued the
siege of Lachish, but sent a great Army under the command of three of his
Captains (whereof Rhabsheka was chief, and therefore only mentioned by Isaiah,
Chapter 36.2.) to besiege Jerusalem. Rhabsheka at his first coming before the City,
desired a Treaty with the King, and three of the Kings Officers of State, viz.
Eliakim, Joah and Shebna being sent out to him, in a proud imperious and
braggadocian manner he spoke thus to them, Tell your King Hezekiah thus says
the great King, the King of Assyria, what confidence is this wherein thou
trustest? Thou say possibly (but they are but vain words) I have counsel and
strength for the war, whereas alas thou have neither. Or it may be thou
trustest in some foreign aid, or else surely thou never durst have rebelled
against me. And the aid thou expectest I suppose is from Egypt, but alas
therein thou trustest but upon a staff or stalk of a broken reed, on which if a
man lean it will not support him, but run into his hands and pierce him; even
such and no other is the King of Egypt to all that trust on him. But possibly
thou will say, we trust in the Lord our God; but this is a vain confidence
also; for it is he whose high places and altars thou have taken away (and
therein highly offended him Vitio illi vertit quod erat laudandum.
) and have said to the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem, ye shall perform
your solemn worship before this Altar in Jerusalem, and not in other places;
therefore thou have little reason to trust in thy God. And as for thy own
strength it is mere weakness; I will deliver thee two thousand horses which
thou shall keep if thou art able to set riders on them, provided thou will give
hostages to my Master to return them again if thou can not, as I am confident
thou can not; how then can thou think to turn away the face of the least of
my Masters Captains? Possibly thou put thy trust in Egypt Hezekiah sought
not at all to Egypt at this time.
for chariots and horsemen, but alas they will miserably fail thee. And as for
thy confidence in thy God, that also is vain; for I am not come up without
commission from him to destroy this City. It Is he that has sent me against
this land to destroy it.

Thus spoke this bold presumpouous wretch, grounding his confidence only on
their former success. Then turning his speech to the people on the wall, and
speaking to them aloud in the Hebrew tongue, Wherein (says he) do ye trust that
ye think to abide and subsist in the siege of Jerusalem? Does not Hezekiah
persuade you when he persuades you to hold out to give over your selves to die
by famine, and by thirst, telling you that the Lord your God will deliver you
out of the hand of the King of Assyria? Hear you what my Master now speaks to
you by me his servant, Know you not what I and my Fathers have done unto all
the people of other lands? Were the Gods of those Nations able to deliver them
out of my hands? who was there of all the Gods of those Nations which my
Fathers destroyed that could deliver their people out of our hands? how much
less shall your God deliver you?

Thus blasphemously spoke Rabsheka against the Lord, and against his servant
Hezekiah, speaking of the God of Israel as of the gods of the Nations, which
were wood and stones, and the work of men's hands. Then Hezekiah's Messengers
desired him to speak in the Syrian language (for that they understood) and not
in the Hebrew tongue to affright the people on the wall, else they would be
gone and break off the Treaty. Rabsheka hereupon said to one of them, What has
my Master sent me to speak to thy Master only, has he not sent me to speak to
them on the wall also, that they may know they shall eat their own dung, and
drink their own piss if they do not yield? So he lifted up his voice louder,
and said to the Soldiers that were on the wall, Hearken not unto Hezekiah but
unto the King of Assyria, who says thus to you by me his servant, make an
agreement with me by a present, and come forth to me and deliver this City into
my hands, and then ye shall eat every man of his own vine, and of his own
figtree, and shall drink every one waters out of his own cistern. And this
happiness ye shall enjoy till I come and carry you to a land like your own, a
land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of oil, olive and
honey, and so ye may live plentifully, otherwise ye must expect nothing but
desolation and death. And do not let Hezekiah deceive you by telling you the
Lord will deliver you. Has any of the gods of the Nations delivered his land
out of the hands of the Kings of Assyria? Where are the gods of Hamath or Arpad
(Cities of the Syrians) or of Sepharvaim, Hena and Ivah, have they delivered
Samaria out of my hands, though those gods were there worshipped?

Thus this Blasphemer went on venting his rage and blasphemies, but the people
(as the King commanded) answered him not a word. Then the Kings Messengers
returned to him with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshekah.

Hezekiah deeply perplexed hereat, being clothed in sackcloth went to the
Temple there humbly to seek unto the Lord for help in this woeful distress, and
withal sent Eliakim and Shebna, and the Elders, and the Priests (clothed also
in sackcloth) to the Prophet Isaiah, who said unto him, This is a day of great
trouble unto us, and a day of sad rebuke, and a day of blasphemy, for Rabshakeh
has blasphemed the living God. Therefore we beseech thee pray earnestly to the
Lord for us, for the children are come to the birth and there is no strength to
bring forth; that is, our sorrow is extreme, our danger desperate; we are
brought into such extremities, that except help come presently from the Lord,
and he be pleased miraculously to save us we are sure to perish. It may be the
Lord will manifest that he has heard the blasphemous words of Rabshakeh by
punishing him for them; wherefore lift up thy prayer and pray earnestly for the
remnant of the people that are left; thou see the Ten Tribes have been
carried away captive, and only Judah and Benjamin are left, and of them great
havoc has been made by the Assyrians in many of their Cities, therefore pray
earnestly for us. Isaiah bids them return this answer to Hezekiah, Thus says
the Lord, Be not afraid of the words which thou have heard, wherewith the
servants of the King of Assyria have blasphemed; behold I will send a blast
upon him which shall blow him out of this land as the dust or chaff is blown
before the wind, and he shall hear a rumor of the destruction of a vast number
of his Soldiers and Commanders in one night, and shall return to Nineveh his
chief City, and there I will cause him to fall by the sword.

2 King. 18. from v. 13. to the end.

2 King. 19. from v. 1, to 8.

Isai. 36. whole Chapter.

Isai. 37. from v. 1, to 8.

Rabshakeh finding that he could neither threaten nor flatter the inhabitants
of Jerusalem into a surrender, leaving his Army before the City, he went
presently to Sennacherib (whom he found risen from before Lachish, and
besieging Libna) to inform him of the state of things at Jerusalem, as also
perhaps to confer with him about opposing Tirhakah King of Ethiopia, who (as he
understood) was now coming with his Army against them. Sennacherib therefore
that he might use all possible means to terrify Hezekiah into a speedy
surrender (that so he might the better attend the motion of Tirhakah's Army) he
sends other messengers to him, who brought a threatening message by word of
mouth, and spoke to him after the same rate that Rabshakeh had done before;
they did not indeed mention the persidiousness of Egypt, nor the weakness of
Hezekiab's Army as Rabshakeh had done, but understanding that Hezekiah relied
wholly on God, therefore they endeavor to affright him from that confidence by
telling him with what ill success other Nations had relied on their gods,
instancing in Gozan and Haran, Rezeph, and the people of Eden, (all as it is
like, regions of Mesopotamia) and several other people; and therefore they
would have persuaded him that he had little reason to trust and rely on his
God. They also brought with them a blasphemous and threatening Letter from the
King of Assyria, which Hezekiah having received and read, he went up to the
Temple and there spread it before the Lord, and poured forth unto him a most
fervent prayer with many tears, humbly and earnestly begging his help in this
his great extremity. He humbly entreats the Lord to take notice of, and to
revenge the horrible blasphemies of that daring wretch the King of Assyria
against his great and glorious Majesty. His prayer was after this manner:

O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, who dwell between the Cherubims on the
Mercy-seat, and thence art wont to manifest thy gracious presence and thy power
to thy poor people. Thou art God, even thou alone, and all the Kingdoms of the
earth are thine. Thou have made heaven and earth, and all things therein are
subject unto thee. Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear the blasphemous words of
Sennacherib's Letter which I here present before thee, and open thine eyes and
see the blasphemies he has written therein. Hear I pray thee, and take notice
of all these blasphemous railings wherewith he has blasphemed and reproached
thee the living God. Of a truth, O Lord, the Kings of Assyria have laid wast
the Nations they warred against, and have cast their gods into the fire, for
they were no gods but the works of men's hands, wood and stone; and therefore
it is no wonder they destroyed them. But thou art the ever living and true God,
a God of infinite power and might. Therefore we pray thee save us, save us out
of the hands of the King of Assyria that all the Kingdoms of the earth may know
that thou art God, and thou only.

Hezekiah having ended his prayer, Isaiah sent unto him this message, Thus
says the Lord God of Israel, whereas thou have prayed unto me against
Sennacherib King of Assyria, this is the word which I have spoken concerning
him: The virgin-daughter of Sion The inhabitants of any City or Country are
called the virgin-daughter of it because delicately and tenderly brought up by
their mother as a virgin-daughter, and because Jerusalem was fair, beautiful
and comely as a virgin use^h to be, in regard of the Temple, and other
excellencies thereof.
shall Isaiah, Chapter 37.22. Has despised thee. Enallage temporis, a
praeterperfect Tense for a future.
despise and laugh thee to scorn (O King of Assyria) and shake her head at
thee, to wit, when she shall see thine Army destroyed. And consider (O thou
blasphemous wretch) who it is whom thou have reproached and blasphemed, and
against whom thou have lifted up thine eyes so high, and carried thy self so
proudly, is it not against the holy one of Israel? By Rabshakeh and his
companions thy servants, thou have reproached the Lord, and have said, By the
multitude of my Chariots am I come up to the height of the mountains, (as if
thou should have said the strongest places of the Kingdom have I subdued and
passed through as a conqueror, even those that seemed most inaccessible) and
am come to the sides of From the famous Forest of Lebanon. Jerusalem is here
called Lebanon by a Metaphor.
Lebanon, that is, to their chief City and strength, the City of Jerusalem
(where the King, his Nobles and Princes dwell, are like tall cedars and
firr-trees in Lebanon) and will cut down the tall-cedars and the choice
firr-trees thereof; that is, I will destroy the Nobles and Princes of
Jerusalem, and will enter into the lodgings of his border; that is, will
possess my self of his frontier-Towns, and will enter into the forest of his
Carmel, or (by an hypallage) into the Carmel of his forest; that is, his most
excellent and pleasant hill, viz. mount Sion, on which the most pleasant
objects in Jerusalem were seated. Thou further say, I have dug and drunk
strange waters, and with the soles of my feet have I dried up all the rivers of
besieged places; that is, when I have come to places destitute of water, even
there have I dug up new fountains (where none were before) and where Cities
have been environed with great and deep waters, no sooner have I set my foot
there to besiege them, but with the multitude of my Soldiers I have dried them
up Hereby an intimation is given that he laughed to scorn Hezekiah's policy in
cutting off the waters about Jerusalem, and in Thrasonical manner seems to
boast that there was nothing he could not do by his own strength, nor any
places he could not subdue by his own power.
. But though thou boastest so much of thy power in subduing Cities and
Countries have thou not heard that I (the Lord of Heaven and Earth) long ago
contrived and determined what thou should do, viz. that thou should lay
wast defenced Cities, and turn them into ruinous heaps, see Isa. 10.5, etc. And
accordingly I have now brought it to pass. And thence it was that the
inhabitants of those places were of so small power (I striking fear into their
hearts) and were dismayed and confounded; nay they were as the grass of the
field, and as the grass on the house-tops which soon withers away, and as the
corn that is blasted before it be grown up. And as for thee, I know thine
abode, and where thou dwell, and what thou do meditate against me at home
and abroad, when thou go out, and when thou come in; I know all thy
counsels and actions, both public and private; I know thy rage against me, and
how thou reproachest my power, and threatnest me as if I were an Idol. [See
Isa. 36.20.] And because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is come into my
ears, that is, because I have heard thy outrageous and ruffling words, I will
put my hook into thy nose, and my bridle into thy lips, and will turn thee back
by the way by which thou came, that is, thou shall go as thou came without
effecting what thou designest against Jerusalem.

Thus the Prophet delivered to Hezekiah the mind of God concerning the King of
Assyria. Then he tells the King and the people that this shall be a sign to
them by which they may assuredly know that they are loved of God with a
Fatherly love, viz. that though they had been hindered from sowing and planting
this year by reason of the Assyrians invading their land, and though they could
not sow nor plant the next year, because it was the Sabbatical year, yet they
should have plenty of corn notwithstanding that should grow and spring of it
self (without any tillage) from the scattered seeds that fell on the earth the
former years. And herein (says he) the Providence of God will eminently appear
for you that the ground shall yield of it self sufficient food for three years
together; for though in the third year ye may sow and reap, and plant
vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof, yet ye cannot reap what ye shall sow in
that year until the end of it; therefore it will be no less than miraculous
that two years together so much corn shall grow of it self as shall serve you
for three years. The Prophet further encourages them, and bids them not fear
because their Nation was reduced to a small number, nor think that therefore
they should not be able long to subsist, for he tells them that that small
remnant of them which shall escape the sword of the Assyrians shall be like a
thriving flourishing tree that shoots its roots downwards, and its branches
upward, on which it brings forth much fruit. So they shall be well settled in
their Nation, and shall be fruitful in it. He further tells them that that
remnant which is now shut up in Jerusalem and mount Zion shall go out of it,
(when the siege is raised) into all parts of the land of Judah, and shall
inhabit it, and replenish it, shall sow the ground, and reap the fruit thereof.
For the zeal of the Lord of hosts will do this; that is, the zeal he has for
his own glory, and the love he bears to his people, and the indign^tion he has
against ^is enemies will move him to do it. And further (says he) let the King
and all his faithful people encourage themselves, for thus says the Lord,
Sennacherib shall not come into this City, nor force the Gates of it, nor shoot
an arrow at those that stand upon the wall, neither shall he assault it with
men armed with shields, nor cast a bank or trench This is to be understood of
Sennacherib himself and the Army that he personally commanded; for though he
did not closely besioge Jerusalem himself, nor make a Trench about it, yet (it
seems) part of his Army did, as we may gather from Isaiah 29.3.
against it, but he shall go back the way that he came; for I will defend this
City, and save it for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake, because of
the promise I made to him that I would establish the Throne of his Kingdom. 2 Chronicles* 7.18.
2 King. 19. from 8, to 35. 2 Chronicles. 32. from 10, to 21. Isa. 37. from 8, to 36.

Hezekiah about this time, viz. in the fourteenth year of his reign (when the
Assyrian Army lay about Jerusalem) fell extreme sick, and his sickness seemed
such as threatened to put an end to his life. The Prophet Isaiah coming to him
from the Lord, bad him set his house in order, for he should die. This sentence
though very sad in it self, yet seemed not absolute, but conditional, and so
Hezekiah understood it; and accordingly turning his face to the wall as he lay
in his bed, he earnestly prayed to the Lord to spare his life, saying, Remember
now, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which was good in thy sight. He mentions not his good deeds
as if he thought them meritorious, but only that he might incline the Lord the
rather to show him mercy; for the Lord is more ready to show mercy to those
that walk according to his laws and commandments, than to those that disobey
them. And Hezekiah wept sore. He had many reasons to desire to be spared at
this time. For first if he should now die he should leave Judah and Jerusalem
under the pressure of Sennacherib, and should not see the delivery of it. 2ly,
He had no Son as yet to succeed him in the Throne, and it could not but be a
matter of great sorrow and grief to him to think that the promise made to David
and Solomon [1 King. 8.25.] should not appertain to him. He knew also that the
M^ssiah was to spring from the seed of David, and he being lineally descended
from David, if he lived to have issue he might hope that the Messiah might
spring from him; from which hope he should be cut off if he died at this time.
3ly, He had reason to think that they who were so ready to ascribe the
calamities of his time unto him because he had broken down the Idolatrous
Altars and Images, and made a reformation, would be more ready to ascribe them
to him if he now died, and would say (though unjustly) that for this cause God
had cut him off in displeasure. And therefore for this reason he pleads his
integrity, and that what he had done in the reformation of Religion he had done
it with an upright heart, knowing it to be well-pleasing unto God. And
accordingly he found that the Lord was well pleased with it, for before the
Prophet was gone out of the middle Court of the Kings house, he was sent back
again to the King with this comfortable message, Thus says the Lord the God of
David thy Father (intimating to him thereby that he was mindful of his promise
made to David, 1 King. 2.4.) I have seen thy tears, and am moved to compassion
by them, and I will spare thy life, and add unto thy days fifteen years, and on
the third day from hence thou shall be so perfectly recovered that thou shall
go up to the Temple to render praises and thanksgivings unto me for thy sudden
and wonderful recovery; and moreover I will deliver thee and this City out of
the hands of the King of Assyria, and I will defend it for my own glories sake,
and for the sake of David my servant.

The Prophet having delivered this comfortable message to the King, he then
directed him to lay a mass made of dry figs as a plaster upon his boil or
plague sore (for so it is conceived to be) and though the medicine prescribed
was proper for the cure in a natural way, yet if we consider the speediness of
the cure, we may well conclude there was a supernatural and miraculous virtue
added by God to hasten the operation of it. Hezekiah though he made use of the
means prescribed by the Prophet, yet for the strengthening of his faith he
humbly desired a sign from the Lord that he should recover, because this new
promise was so contrary to the former threatening. Isaiah tells him he shall
have this sign from the Lord, the shadow on the Sundial of Ahaz should suddenly
either go backward, or forward ten degrees, or ten half-hour lines which he
should choose. The going backward or forward of the shadow (which always
follows the motion of the Sun) ten degrees on a sudden would have been a
wonderful miracle, yet because it is natural for the Sun and consequently the
shadow to go forward (and not backward) and though it had moved faster away
forward now then at other times it had not been so great a miracle as to remove
backward (which was a course directly against nature) therefore Hezekiah chose
the going backward of the shadow to be his sign. Isaiah thereupon prayed unto
the Lord, and the Sun went back ten degrees [see Isa. 38.8.] and so caused the
shadow on Ahaz's Dial to go back ten degrees also; and it is like the shadow
went back in the same manner in all their Dials, as we may gather from 2 Chronicles.
32.31. though here in the Dial of Ahaz it was most observed. And thus was
Hezekiah's faith confirmed, and accordingly he was healed on the third day as
was promised. 2 King. 20. from v. 1, to 12. 2 Chronicles. 32.24. Isa. 38. fr. 1, to
9. and v. 21, 22.

Hezekiah sometime after his recovery composed and set forth an excellent song
of praise and thanksgiving wherein he magnifies the mercies and loving
kindnesses of the Lord toward him in preserving him from that dangerous
sickness, which Song he begins thus, I said in my extreme sickness (when the
Lord was about to cut off my days, and to take away my life) I shall go down to
the gates of the grave, and shall be laid in my sepulcher. I said, my life is
cut short, I am deprived of the residue of my years which (in the ordinary
course of nature) I might have hoped to live. I said, I shall not visit the
Temple of the Lord any more among those that will there worship, I shall no
longer converse with men on the earth. I said, mine age, that is, the residue
of my years which I might have hoped to live is departed from me, and is
removed out of my sight as a shepherds tent, which we see pitched here to day,
is to morrow removed we know not whither. I said, I have caused Est Metonym.
effecti.
the Lord by my sin to cut off my life as if a weaver should cut off his web
from the thrumb before it be finished. I said, the Lord will cut me off with a
grievous sickness, which makes my flesh to consume and pine away. I said, every
day and all the day long that the Lord would make an end of me before the night
came; and when the night came I thought every hour that as a lion he would
break my bones, and destroy me before morning, and so again after the morning
came I thought every hour I should die by reason of the extremity of my pain.
Like a crane or a swallow so did I chatter; that is, I made a doleful noise
through the greatness of my pain and anguish. I did mourn as a dove, and so
long did I lift up mine eyes toward heaven in prayer that they were weary and
dim with looking up. I said often, O I am oppressed by my disease, Lord
undertake for me and rescue me from this oppressing pain. When he had thus set
forth his sad and deplorable condition he then declares Gods unexpected mercy
and goodness to him in revoking his former sentence against him, stirs up
himself to all possible thankfulness. What shall I say (says he) in what words
shall I express the loving kindness of the Lord? who has not only graciously
removed my disease but has promised to add to my life fifteen years. The Lord
has promised it unto me by his Prophet, and I doubt not but he will Isa.
38.15. Himself has done it; a preterperfect tense is put for a future.
perform it. I shall go softly all my years, that is, I shall pass the rest of
my life cheerfully and quietly after (...), hic valet post, i. e. postquan^^
expertus sum hanc amaritudinem morbi. Pisc.
this bitterness of my soul, after this sharp brunt is past and gone. O Lord by
these things men live, that is, by thy promises and performances is the life of
man prolonged, and mine among the rest, whom thou have graciously restored to
health again. And thus thou have Enallage temporis.
recovered me, and made me to live. Behold for health I had bitter sickness,
but thou have in great love to me To my soul, that is, to me, a part being put
for the whole man by Synecdoche.
delivered me from the pit of corruption, for thou have cast all my sins behind
thy back, and freely forgiven them, and thereupon have taken away the
punishment which they had brought upon me. And thou have done all this for me
that I might praise thee in the land of the living. For the dead He puts death
for the dead, per metonymiam adjuncti.
that lie in the grave, cannot praise thee, nor celebrate thy name. The dead
that go down into the pit cannot hope nor expect thy truth and faithfulness in
performing thy gracious promises as the living may. The living, the living, he
will praise thee for thy mercy showed unto him, as I do this day. The living
Fathers will declare to their children thy goodness and mercy which thou have
showed unto them, and I hope I shall transmit to my posterity how ready thou
were to save me when I was brought so very low. And accordingly I and my people
will sing this and other songs of praise to thee in the Temple with stringed
instruments all the days of my life. Isa. Chapter 38. from v. 9, to 21.

Sennacherib hearing of Tirraka King of Ethiopia's coming against him, went
himself (as it is thought) to meet him with his Army, and having discomfited
him, he led away abundance of them captives in such scornful manner as is
expressed, Isa. 20.4. So shall the King of Assyria lead away the Egyptians
prisoners, and the Ethiopians captive, young and old, naked and barefoot, even
with their buttocks uncovered to the shame of Egypt. And the Jews were ashamed
of Ethiopia their expectation, and Egypt their glory. Isa. 20. from 3, to the
end.

After this victory over the Ethiopians and Egyptians it seems the Assyrians
did reinforce their siege of Jerusalem, begirting it with a vast host of men,
though Sennacherib himself in person did not come thither as may be gathered
from Isa. 37.33. Thus says the Lord concerning the King of Assyria, he shall
not come into this City, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with
shields, nor cast a bank against it. But though he was not there himself, yet
his Army pressed on the siege with great vigor, and when there was no likelihood
(in an humane way) but that the City should be taken by this great host, then
did the Lord by his holy Angel in one night destroy an hundred fourscore and
five thousand of them, and among them many of their Captains and Leaders, and
in the morning when the men of Jerusalem went out they saw all these lying dead
on the ground, and those few that had escaped the sword of the Angel were fled.
Isa. 37.36. 2 King. 19.35. 2 Chronicles. 32.21.

Sennacherib hearing of this prodigious slaughter of his men, with shame of
face returned out of the land of Judah and went to Nineveh his chief City. And
the Book of Tobit tells us that at his return he (in a rage) slew many of the
Israelites whom he had there captive, Tob. 1.18. And if the King Sennacherib
had slain any when he was come and fled from Judea, I buried them privately,
(for in his wrath he killed many) but the bodies were not found when they were
sought for of the King. Not long after (Tobit says fifty-five days) when he was
at his Idolatrous worship in his Idol-temple, two of his own Sons, Adrimelech
It Is a Tradition among the Jews that they killed their Father because he had
vowed to offer them as a sacrifice to his God Nisroch if he would appease the
minds of those of his subjects that were incensed against him. For many of them
who had lost their Sons and Brothers, and Kinsmen in the late slaughter made by
the Angel at Jerusalem, were highly offended with him as being the cause
thereof.
and Sharezer slew him with the sword, which done they fled presently into the
land of Ararat or Armenia, and Esarhaddon his Son reigned in his stead. 2 King.
19.36, 37. 2 Chronicles. 32.21. Isa. 37.37, 38.

Thus God preserved Hezekiah and his people in Jerusalem miraculously from the
Assyrians, and (as it is probable) much enriched them by the spoil of their
Camp; and he manifested his favor to them by saving them out of the hands of
all others also, and by guiding them, and guarding them on every side, and
taking care of them. And many of Hezekiah's subjects understanding this great
goodness of the Lord to him, came to Jerusalem and brought offerings to the
Lord in token of their thankfulness, and presents to the King. So that from
henceforward he grew exceeding rich, and made himself Treasuries for Silver and
Gold, and precious stones and jewels, and rare spices, and perfumed ointments,
and made himself Armories, and storehouses for corn, wine and oil, and stalls
for all manner of beasts, as horses and camels, and cotes for sheep and goats.
Moreover he provided for himself also fenced Cities, and had great abundance of
flocks and herds, and all sorts of worldly substance. So that he was magnified
in the sight of all Nations from henceforth, and he prospered exceedingly in
all that he went about. 2 Chronicles. 32.22, 23, 27, 28, 29, 30.

Hezekiah being now become the wonder of the world for the Suns going back for
his sake, and Gods fighting immediately for him against his enemies, and being
grown rich and wealthy, his heart was lifted up with pride and self-confidence,
and he rendered not unto the Lord according to the benefit done unto him;
therefore God was angry with him, and his anger being kindled by his pride and
ingratitude, and the sins of the people, he afterward in a just judgment
brought on the whole Nation the Babylonish Captivity. 2 Chronicles. 32.25.

Sennacherib being now dead (as is before related) and Esarhaddon his third Son
succeeding him in the Kingdom, it seems Merodach or Berodach Baladan,
Sennacherib's Lieutenant or Viceroy in Babylon taking advantage of the loss of
the Assyrians before Jerusalem, and of the young Kings weakness and contention
with his Brothers, revolted from him, and made himself King of Babylon. And
being thus possessed of that Kingdom, and informed by his Chaldeans (the great
Astronomers of those times) of that wonderful strange alteration in the Sun's
motion (of which we have spoken before) and hearing that it was done by the God
of the Jews to assure their King of his recovery from a desperate sickness, he
took this occasion to send his Ambassadors to Hezekiah, both to congratulate
his recovery, as also to inquire about this wonder of the Sun's Retrogradation,
and withal doubtless to assure to himself the friendship of such a King who was
a known enemy to the Assyrians, from whom he had lately revolted. Now here God
left Hezekiah to himself that he might know what was in his heart Ita Deo
deserente prodente carne, Satana denuo insidiante, pii labascunt.
, and how weak and frail he was, that so he might thereupon humble himself. For
in a vain glorious ostentation he showed these Ambassadors all his Treasuries
and riches that were in his own Palace at Jerusalem, or in other houses which
he had in any part of the Kingdom, and he was too ambitious (as it seems) to
assure to himself the friendship of this new King of Babylon, which argued too
much trust and confidence in the Babylonish aid, and too much distrust of Gods
care over him, which was the more blameworthy in Hezekiah who had had such
large experience of Gods protection of him, and of his Kingdom. And it seems
Hezekiah did not own the Lord in all his deliverances and mercies, and magnify
him before these Ambassadors so much as he should have done. Hereupon God sends
the Prophet Isaiah unto him, who inquires of him who these Ambassadors were,
and from whence they came, and what they had seen? Hezekiah tells him they came
from Babylon, and that he had showed them all his Treasuries. The Prophet then
delivers to him a sad message from the Lord, Behold (says he) the days are
coming when the King of Babylon shall carry away this people and all their
riches unto Babylon, and thy Sons which shall issue from thee shall they make
captives This was begun in Manasseh his Son's time, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. and further
accomplished in Jehoiakims and Zedekiahs time, as we shall see more afterward.
, and they shall be ministers and servants in the Palace of the King of
Babylon, 2 King. 24. and 25. Hezekiah was wounded to the heart with this
dreadful message, however he meekly replied, Good is the word of the Lord which
thou have spoken; that is, it is just and righteous, and no more than what I
and my people had deserved. Then humbling himself for his pride and vanity, and
the people joining with him therein, [2 Chronicles. 32.26.] it pleased the Lord by
the Prophet to declare to him that the judgment denounced should not come in
his days. Whereupon he said that though it was a grievous thing to him to think
of those judgments that should befall those who were to come after him, yet he
acknowledged it as a great mercy of God that there should be peace and truth in
his days. 2 King. 20. from 12, to 20. 2 Chronicles. 32.31. Isa. 39. wh. Chapter

Hezekiah three years after his recovery had his Son Manasses by Hephzibah
twelve years before his death, 2 King. 21.1.

In the days of Hezekiah (as it is thought) lived NAHVM the Prophet, he
Prophesied of the destruction of Nineveh and the Assyrian Monarchy, and
comforted the Jews with a promise of deliverance from the Assyrian Tyranny. He
mentions the evil counsel of Sennacherib against the Lord, and foretells
his death in his Idol-temple, Nahum 1.11. There is one come out of thee, that
imagines evil against the Lord: a wicked counselor; and ver. 14. The Lord
has given a commandment concerning thee that no more of thy name be sown: Out
of the house of thy gods will I cut off the graven image, and the molten image:
I will make thy grave, for thou art vile. This Prophet denounces destruction
to Nineveh in very plain terms. They had repented formerly at the Preaching of
Jonah, but now had relapsed to their former wickedness. The Israelites had been
much oppressed by them: First by Pull, (2 King. 15.19.) then by Tiglath-pileser,
(2 King. 16.) at last by Salmanassar, who carried away the Ten Tribes captives,
2 King. 17.18. After this Sennacherib invaded Judea, and besieged Jerusalem,
and grew to be like a great cedar in Lebanon, Ezekiel. 31.3. and now the Prophet
Nahum declares Gods great power, and the furious revenge he would take upon his
enemies, and that he would make an utter end of Nineveh: Affliction should not
rise up the second time, and no more of the name of the Assyrian should be
sown, and this should be for Iudahs consolation. His Prophecy contains first a
general denunciation of Ninevehs destruction, and consequently of the Assyrian
Monarchy. He shows their destruction shall be sudden, total, irresistible,
Chap. 1. and the effect of it shall be that the people of Judah hearing these
glad tidings of her destruction proclaimed openly as upon the tops of
mountains, shall exceedingly rejoice at them as at tidings of peace to them,
and shall then without disturbance keep their solemn feasts, and perform their
vows unto the Lord, their enemies (who disquieted them) being cut off, Chap. 1.

Secondly, He gives a particular description of the destruction of Nineveh, and
lively sets it forth by the dreadful approach of the enemy, the terror of their
army, the taking of the City, and the captivity of Huzzah the Queen, and her
maids, and their mournful deportment under their captivity, groaning, and
bemoaning their condition with the mournful voice of Doves, and Tabering or
beating upon their breasts to express their sorrow. Then he describes the
spoiling and plundering of the City, the astonishment of the inhabitants, and
how their faces would gather blackness. Also the insulting of the enemy at the
desolation of this City which had been an habitation of Lions, that is of cruel
oppressors, Chapter 2.

Thirdly, He sets forth the causes of Ninevehs ruin, the Lord setting himself
against her for her great sins, viz. her cruelty and blood-guiltiness, her
falsehood, her robbery and oppression, and her filthy Idolatries; for all which
she should be made a shameful spectacle. And lest Nineveh presuming upon her
own strength should think these calamities should not befall her, he shows she
was not comparable to populous No, or Alexandria in Egypt, which yet was
ruined, and so should she notwithstanding all her strong holds, her numerous
inhabitants, strong gates, repaired towers, multitude of Merchants, and her
many Counselors, Princes and Commanders. So that her bruise should be
incurable, and her wound mortal, Chap. 3.

Hezekiah now dies; his acts were written by Isaiah, and by those that wrote
the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah. He was buried in the chiefest of the
Sepulchers of the Sons of David, and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem
did him all the honor they possibly could at his death (he having been so
pious and good a King) and Manasseh his Son reigned in his stead.

2 Chronicles. 32.32, 33.

2 King. 20.20, 21.

The 14th. that reigned in Judah, MANASSEH.
MANASSEH was twelve years old when he began to reign (about twenty four years
after the ruin of the Ten Tribes) and he reigned fifty five years; and so
longer than any of the Kings of Judah. He did worse than all the Kings that
went before him; being carried away (as it is probable) by such Nobles about him
as did not in their hearts approve the reformation of his good Father. He again
set up the high places which his Father had pulled down, he reared up Altars
for Baal, and made a grove (as Ahab had done, 1 King. 16.33.) to the honor of
Idols; he built altars to all the host of heaven, to the Sun, Moon, and the
rest of the Planets, in the two Courts of the Lords house, where God had said
that he would put his name, that he alone might be there worshipped. He made
one of his Sons pass through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom,
sacrificing him to Molech; so that it seems he continued long in his Idolatry,
for he could not have a Son in the beginning of his reign being but twelve
years of age. He observed times, esteeming some days as lucky, others as
unlucky; he used enchantments, and dealt with such as had familiar spirits, and
with wizards; he set up a graven image in the Temple, containing a
representation of the Idolatrous grove he had made See 2 King. 23.6. where it is
said, Josiah brought out the grove from the house of the Lord, unto the brook
Kidron, and burnt it.
, though God had said to David and Solomon that he had chosen that house to put
his name there, and would have his name alone there worshipped as long as that
dispensation should last; and promised upon their obedience that he would not
suffer them to be carried away captive to other lands. But they obeyed not; and
Manasseh seduced them, and made Judah and Jerusalem go astray, and do worse
than all the Nations that God had cast out before the children of Israel. And
moreover Manasseh shed much innocent blood, viz. of the Prophets that condemned
his wicked courses, and of others that opposed his evil ways, insomuch that he
filled Jerusalem with such kind of slaughters. And among others whom he put to
death, he caused the Prophet Isaiah to be sawn asunder with a wooden saw, as
the Babylonish Talmud, Justin Martyr, Jerome and others report; who suppose so
much may be gathered from Heb. 11.37. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder,
were tempted, were slain with the sword. Manasseh being guilty of such high and
great abominations, God sent his Prophets Thus merciful was God to send his
Prophets both to Judah and Israel even in the worst of times to draw them from
their impieties.
to him to declare that because he had done these abominable things which the
Lord abhorred, and had exceeded the very Amorites, and worst of the heathens in
their impieties, whom God cast out of the land of Canaan for their sins, and
had made Judah to sin with his Idols, therefore he would bring such evil upon
Judah and Jerusalem that whosoever heard of it both his ears should tingle with
the affrighting news thereof: He would stretch over Jerusalem the line That is
the line of confusion, as it is Isa. 34.11. whereby he would meet out what was
to be pulled down. And the plummet of the house of Ahab, that is a line with a
plummet at the end of it. The Prophets in their similitudes have more respect
to the things signified by their similitudes than to the things from which they
take them; and so it is here.
of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab; that is, would deal with
Jerusalem as he dealt with Samaria, and with the house of Manasseh as he had
dealt with the house of Ahab. And he would wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a
dish, wiping it and turning it upside down; that is, would utterly overthrow
the state of Jerusalem, turning it upside down, and would clear that City of
all her wealth, and of all her inhabitants, and would forsake the remnant of
his inheritance; that is, the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin which only
remained of the children of Israel, in whom he did formerly delight as a man
does in his inheritance, and would deliver them into the hands of their
enemies, and they should become a prey and spoil to them, and all this because
they had done that which was evil in his sight, and had one generation after
another provoked him to anger even ever since he first brought them out of
Egypt.

2 King. 21. from 1, to 17.

2 Chronicles. 33. from 1, to 11.

2 King. 24.3, 4.

The King of Assyria now sending fresh Colonies into the land of Israel, and
with them possibly some forces to settle them there, it seems some of his chief
Commanders with a party of Soldiers made a sudden inrode into the land of
Judea with an intent to surprise Manasseh, and they came so suddenly upon him
that he was forced to fly and hide himself in some wood or thicket to save
himself, but thither they pursued him, and took him and bound him with fetters,
and carried him prisoner to Babylon So that it seems the King of Babylon was
now King of Assyria.
. When he was in this affliction he besought the Lord his God and humbled
himself greatly What the word of the Prophets could not do the rod of God did.
before him, and prayed There is a prayer of his set down in the Apocrypha, but
it is doubtful whither it be his or no.
earnestly unto him, and the Lord was entreated of him, and heard his
supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his Kingdom, whereby he
was convinced that the Lord was the only true God. For the Lord by his
all-powerful providence so moved the heart of the King of Babylon that he was
content to set him free upon condition that he would oppose the King of Egypt,
which may be the reason why Josiah some years after would needs fight against
Pharaoh Necho, 2 Chronicles. 35.20. It Is probable that Manasseh's captivity lasted
not long because it is said, 2 King. 21.1. That he reigned fifty five years in
Jerusalem, and there is no mention there made of this his captivity. After his
return, he took away the strange gods and the Idol out of the house of the Lord
which himself had before set up, and all the altars he had built in mount
Moriah and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the City. This is a good evidence
of the truth of any man's repentance when he puts away those evils that formerly
he had done with detestation. Furthermore Manasseh repaired the Altar of the
Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace offerings and thank-offerings, and commanded
Judah to serve the Lord. As by his example and command he had before caused
them to sin, so now by both he labors to reform them. Yet the people did still
sacrifice in the high places, but to the Lord only. They were brought to
embrace the true Religion, though they had still a mixture of will worship with
it. Manasseh also fortified Jerusalem and other places, and put Captains of war
into all the fenced Cities of Judah. So that he who was before a monster for
all manner of evil and wickedness, proved now a very commendable Prince, so
great and happy a change does true conversion make in men.

2 Chronicles. 33. from 11, to 20.

The Prophet Habakkuk The Prophecy of HABAKKUK.
seems about this time to have Prophesied, for he speaks of the coming of the
Chaldeans against Judah, yet not so plainly of the captivity of the Jews in
Babylon, as Jeremy did. Therefore it is supposed he might be somewhat before
him. His Prophecy is called the burden There are four Prophesies in the Volume
of the lesser Prophets whose Prophesies are in whole or part called burdens,
viz. Nahum, Habakkuk, Malachi and Zachary.
which Habakkuk the Prophet did see, that is, his Prophecy was a burdensome
Prophecy first to the Jews, and then to the Chaldeans. His Prophecy is set
forth Dialogue-wise between the Prophet and God himself, wherein the Prophet
first (as jealous of Gods honor) complains of the extreme wickedness of the
Jews, Chapter 1. from 1, to 5. 2ly, We have Gods answer to this complaint, wherein
he declares that he will punish them by the Chaldeans whom he describes by
their bitterness, hastiness, tyrannicalness and power to bear down all before
them as the East Wind, and by their pride and haughtiness upon their success,
robbing God of the glory due to him, and ascribing it to their Idols, from v.
5, to 12. 3ly, We have the Prophets replication to Gods answer, wherein he
expresses his hope that the Jews should not perish by those threatened
calamities, grounding his hope on Gods Covenant, power and providence; and he
hoped the Lord ordained the Chaldeans for the correction only and not
destruction of his people, v. 12. Then after an humble expostulation with the
Lord that he should use such wicked instruments as executioners of his
judgments upon his own people that were more righteous than they; He expresses
his resolution to wait with patience for the Lords answer, from v. 13. to the
end, and Chapter 2. v. 1. 4ly, We have Gods answer to the Prophets replication,
which he commands him to publish, expound, and make plain to his Auditors,
telling him that the accomplishment of the vision should not be presently, but
in Gods due time, and therefore it would be a sign of a proud and impatient
heart in them not to wait for it, whereas it is the duty of the godly to live by
faith in the worst of times. Then the Lord shows that he will punish the
Chaldeans for their intemperance, pride, and insatiableness, for their
covetousness, haughtiness and bloody cruelty, for their drunkenness and
notorious gross Idolatry. The Prophet acquiesces in this answer from the Lord,
and testifies his submission in an holy prayer which he thereupon makes,
wherein having showed how much he was affected at the hearing of Gods decree to
punish the Jews by the Chaldeans, he prays notwithstanding that the Lord would
please to revive his Church in their troubles, and make known his love and
favor to them in the midst of their punishment, and in wrath remember mercy.
He urges his petition with arguments taken from Gods bringing Israel out of
Egypt, from the glorious manifestation of himself at Sinai at the giving of the
Law, from his active power and strength metaphorically set forth by his having
horns coming out of his hands, from the effects of his power, having variety of
plagues at his command, and from his ruling over all Nations, and setting them
their bounds, and giving Canaan to Israel, making a path for them thorough the
Red Sea, and the river Jordan, giving his people water out of the rock, and
destroying the Canaanites to give them possession of their land, giving mighty
victories to his people when their enemies were strong and confident. Hereupon
he expresses that Gods judgments now threatened against his people being so
different from his former dealings with them were matter of great astonishment
to him, yet he must rest satisfied that the day of their trouble would come,
and could not be prevented. In the conclusion of his prayer for a pattern to
the faithful, he elegantly sets forth the triumph of his own faith, in and over
all those sad calamities, Though the fig tree should not blossom, neither
should fruit be in the vine, though the labor of the olive should fail, and
the fields should yield no meat, though the flock should be cut off from the
fold, and there should be no herd in the stall, yet he would rejoice in the
Lord, in the God of his salvation, Chapter 3.

Manasseh dying, was buried in the Garden of his own house, called the Garden
of Vzzah; it is like this was done by his own appointment after his repentance,
as judging himself unworthy to be buried in the sepulchers of the Kings of
Judah, because of the abominations of his younger years.

2 King. 21.17, 18.

2 Chronicles. 33.20.

The 15th. King that reigned in Judah was AMON.
AMON was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned two
years. He did evil in the sight of the Lord, and walked in all the evil ways
his Father had walked in, and served the Idols his Father had served, and
worshipped them, and forsook the Lord God of his Fathers, and walked not in his
ways: He renewed such Idolatrous carved images as his Father had made, and
sacrificed to them. He did evil as his Father had done, but he repented not nor
humbled himself before the Lord as his Father had done, but trespassed more and
more.

2 King. 21, from 19, to 23.

2 Chronicles. 33. from 21, to 24.

This impious King was at last slain by his own servants in his own house, and
his death was revenged on those servants by the people of the land, who made
his Son Josiah King in his stead. He was buried in the same Garden his Father
Manasseh was buried in.

2 King. 21. from v. 19. to the end.

2 Chronicles. 33 from v. 24, to the end.

JOSIAH The 16th. King that reigned in Judah was JOSIAH.
was eight years old when he began to reign (the youngest King that ever sat
upon the Throne of Judah) and reigned thirty one years in Jerusalem. He did
that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in all the ways of
David his Father. In the eighth year of his reign (and sixteenth of his life)
he began to seek after the God of David his Father, and to inquire how he might
serve the Lord aright, and did openly declare and manifest his Religious care
to set up and further the true worship of God; and in the twelfth year of his
reign (and twentieth of his life) he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from
the high places, and the groves, and the carved and molten images, and from all
that filth of Idolatry wherein they had so long lain; which he did with a great
deal of zeal and fervency of spirit.

2 Chronicles. 34.1, 2, 3.

2 King. 22.1, 2.

In the thirteenth year of his reign the Prophet Jeremy began to Prophecy [
Jer. 1.2.] by whom doubtless Josiah was much encouraged in the ways of Piety.
The Collector of his Prophesies did not set down all things in the order of
time as they were done, but possibly as they came to his hands. Jeremy
Prophesied eighteen years in Josiah's time, eleven in Iehoiakim's, and eleven
in Zedekiah's; so that he bore the iniquity of the house of Judah forty years,
[see Ezekiel. 4.6.]

In the eighteenth year of his reign and twenty sixth of his life, he began to
set upon repairing of the Temple, and sent Shaphat the Scribe, and Maaseiah,
and Ioah, (great officers of State, 2 Chronicles. 34.8.) to Hilkiah the High Priest,
that the money that had been collected for that use might be delivered into the
hands of the overseers of the work (who were faithful men) therewith to buy
materials to repair the Temple We do not read of any solemn repairing of it
since the days of Joash, 2 King. 12.2, 5. and now above two hundred years had
passed between Joash and Josiah. So that the Temple might well stand in need of
repair at this time. See 2 King. 12.15.
, and the Chambers of the Priests and Levites, (which some of the Idolatrous
Kings of Judah had suffered to run to decay) and to pay the workmen that so the
work might go on. Hilkiah doing accordingly, and going in hand with the work,
as he was searching into those parts of the Temple that needed repair, he found
the original copy of the Law written by Moses, (which was at first laid up in
the side of the Ark of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 31.24, 25, 26. which seems to have
been missing ever since the beginning of Manasseh's reign, who possibly at
first endeavored to burn all the Books of the Law, and so this Book was hid in
some secret place of the Temple by some faithful Priest that it might be
preserved for future times. Hilkiah having found it, he sent it by Shaphan the
Scribe unto the King, who having heard it read all over to him was exceedingly
affected therewith, and rent his clothes, and more especially (as it is likely)
at those dreadful threatenings against Idolatry which are written in Levit. 26.
and Deuteronomy. 28. Hereupon he immediately sent to Miriam and Deborah, and Anna were
all Prophetesses. Thus the Lord is pleased to endue some women with the spirit
of Prophecy, to show that he is not tied to any sex.
Huldah a famous Prophetess, (who dwelt in Jerusalem in the suburbs or second
part) and desired her to ask counsel of the Lord for him; Jeremy possibly being
not then at Jerusalem, but at Anathoth. For Josiah hearing those curses in the
Law denounced against Idolatry, and knowing how much some of his Predecessors
had been guilty thereof, he much seared lest the judgments threatened in that
Book might fall upon him and his people, and desired to know whither there
might be any means to pacify Gods wrath, and prevent those judgments. Huldah
returned this answer, Thus says the Lord, Behold I will bring evil upon this
place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the curses written in the
Book, which the King of Judah has read, because they have forsaken me, and
burnt incense to other gods, and have provoked me to anger with the works of
their hands, (viz. their idols and altars) therefore my wrath shall be kindled
against this place, and shall not be quenched; (intimating the utter
extirpation of the Jews out of that good land) but to the King of Judah who
sent you, say to him, Thus says the Lord, as touching the words and
threatenings which thou have heard read out of the Book, because thy heart was
tender, (and soon moved at the hearing of my threatenings) and thou have humbled
thy self before me when thou heardest what I spoke against this place, and the
inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse, (that is
have the curses written in this Book executed upon it) and have rent thy
clothes, and wept before me, Behold I will gather thee unto thy pious ancestors
in heaven before these dreadful calamities shall fall upon this place and
people, and thou shall be gathered unto thy grave in peace.

This answer of Huldahs being brought to the King, his heart was so affected
with it that to prevent (if it were possible) this judgment threatened, he
called together the Elders of Judah and Jerusalem, together with the Priests
and Prophets, (viz. Jeremy, Baruck, Zephany and Vriah) and the people both
small and great, and caused one of the Levites to read in their ears all the
words of the Book of the Covenant The Law is called a Cove ant because
obed^ence was therein required on the peoples part, and a blessing thereupon
promised on Gods part.
, so called because it contained the Covenant that God made with the people of
Israel. See 1 King. 8.9.

And the King stood by the Pillar on the Brazen Scaffold, (or on some Throne
erected by a pillar in the Temple for him to stand upon at that time), and
there solemnly made a Covenant before the Lord in his own name, and the name of
the people to walk after the Lord, that is, to observe what he prescribed unto
them, and to keep his commandments, testimonies and statutes with all their
heart, and with all their soul, and to perform the words of the Covenant
written in that Book, and he caused all that were present to give their consent
to it, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem were the most forward to engage
themselves to walk according to the Covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers,
and did accordingly so walk.

Then the King commanded Hilkiah the High Priest and the Priests that were next
unto him, and the Levites to bring forth out of the Temple Josiah did begin to
purge Judah and Jerusalem of Idols in the twelfth year of his reign, six years
before the Book of the Law was found, but upon hearing those dreadful
threatenings in the Law against Idolatry, he now proceeded further, and
perfected that reformation which was then begun. Therefore the Penman of the
Sacred History of the Chronicles relating the Reformation that Josiah wrought
in the twelfth year of his reign, adds also what was done afterward when the
Book of the Law was found, and speaking how he suppressed Idolatry upon the
hearing of the Law read to him, he joins many things of the same nature that
were done in the twelfth year of his reign, that all his zealous acts in
rooting out Idolatry might he related together.
all the vessels that were made for Baal, and used in his worship, or in the
Idolatrous worship of the Groves, or of the Host of Heaven, and he burnt them
in the field by which the river Kidron did run, and carried the ashes of them
to Bethel, therewith to defile the prime seat of Jeroboams Idolatry. These
things had been used by Manasseh and Amon, but were set aside (as it seems) in
some by-place of the Temple in Josiah's time, and seeing still they remained
there, this good King's zeal would not permit them to be there any longer. And
he put down the Idolatrous Priests or Chemarim whom the Kings of Judah had
ordained to burn incense in high places in the Cities of Judah, and in places
round about Jerusalem. He put down those also who burnt incense to Baal, or to
the Sun, Moon, and the Planets and host of heaven, and he brought out the Image
whereon a grove was engraven, which (it seems) was hung up in the Temple, and
stamped it to powder, and cast the dust thereof upon the graves of those that
had worshipped Idols, and sacrificed unto them, 2 Chronicles. 34.4. And he brake
down the Tents of the Sodomites that were in the grove by the house of the
Lord, and where the women wove hangings for those filthy tents; so that in that
grove they not only worshipped Idols but (as it seems) defiled themselves also
with all manner of abominable uncleanness. And he brought all the Priests that
were the Sons of Aaron (and had served the true God in high places) out of the
Cities where they had exercised that false worship and would not suffer them to
live there, and he defiled the high places even from Geba the North border of
the Kingdom of Judah to Beersheba the South-border, and beat down their Altars,
and burned dead men's bones on them, v. 14. to make them unclean; and brake down
the high places that were erected at the entering of the Gates by Joshua the
Governor of the City (whither it seems many of the people used to resort) so
that in his reformation he spared neither the high places of great or small.
And the Priests of these high places he permitted not to offer sacrifice at the
Altar in the Temple, yet he permitted them to eat of the unleavened bread, that
is of the shewbread, and such provisions Species hic Synecdochice ponitur pro
genere, q.d. participes erant omnium illorum, quibus alii sacerdotes vesci
poterant. Tirinus.
as were allotted for the maintenance of the Priests. Also he defiled Tophet an
high place in the valley of the Son of Hinnon near Jerusalem, [Josh. 15.8. by
casting dead men's bones into it, that none might hereafter sacrifice his Son to
Molech in that place as they had used to do. Moreover he took away the horses
that had been nourished and kept to carry men with speed from the Gate of the
house of the Lord Equitabant ab ingressa Templi ad cameram Nathan-Melech vel ad
suburbia. Munster.
to the chamber or house of Nathan-Melech the Chamberlain, which was in the
suburbs of the City of David, where they might see the Sun rise, and so might
worship it at its first appearing, which was an Idolatrous practice of the
Persians, and (it seems) the Israelites had learned it from them. And he burnt
the Chariots wherein the worshippers of the Sun were carried (by the help of
those horses) to see the Sun rise; or perhaps the Idolatrous. Israelites might
set a glorious image of the Sun in one of those Chariots which at sometimes was
drawn up and down by those horses for all sorts of people to see and adore. And
therefore he is said to have burnt the Chariots but to have taken away the
horses. Furthermore the Altars that were on the flat roof of an upper Chamber
of Ahaz, which possibly he made to sacrifice thereon to the Sun, Moon and
Stars, [see Jer. 19.13. and Zeph. 1.4, 5.] And the Altars which Manasseh had
made in the two Courts of the Lords house did he break to pieces. For though
Manasseh after his repentance did cast out of the City all the Idolatrous
Altars that he had made, [see 2 Chronicles. 33.15.] yet possibly Amon his Son might
restore them to their places again, and so they might have continued until now,
but Josiah now tumbleth them down, breaks them to pieces, and beats them to
powder, and casts the dust of them into the brook Kidron. And the high places
which were near Jerusalem on the right hand of the mount of corruption, (viz.
Mount Olivet so called because it was so full of Idols in the days of Solomon
See 1 King. 11.7.
, wherewith the people corrupted themselves, Deuteronomy. 32.5.) he defiled, as he had
done other high places before. It Is like those high places were defaced by Asa
or Jehoshaphat, or Hezekiah, but Amon might put them to those Idolatrous uses
for which they were before erected, and thereupon Josiah took occasion utterly
to demolish them, that they might never again be used for any such purpose.
Thus we see how zealously this good King endeavored a thorough reformation by
breaking in pieces Idolatrous Images, and cutting down Idolatrous Groves, and
defiling those those places with dead men's bones, that they might never be used
for those purposes again.

2 King. 22. from 3, to the end.

Chap. 23. from 1, to the 15.

2 Chronicles. 34. from 8, to the end.

Josiah now proceeds further in his reformation even to the Cities of the Ten
Tribes, which he had any power over; and first he went to Bethel, where coming
to the high-place which Jeroboam the first had there made, and seeing many
sepulchers in the mount of the Idolatrous Priests that had been there buried.
He (undoubtedly by a special instinct from God) caused their bones to be taken
up, and burnt them on that Altar, and thereby polluted it according to the word
of the Lord which the man of God spoke, 1 King. 13.2. Who cried against that
Altar in the word of the Lord, and said, O Altar, Altar, thus says the Lord,
Behold a child shall be born unto the house of David, Josiah by name, and upon
thee shall he offer the Priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee,
and men's bones shall be burnt upon thee. Then looking about he saw an
inscription upon a monument, and inquiring what it signified, the men of the
City told him it was the sepulcher of the man of God, who came from Judah and
foretold that Josiah should do these things. And the old Prophet that seduced
him buried him in that sepulcher; and gave order that he himself should be
there buried also, and that there should be an inscription made, declaring that
there the man of God was buried, that when the time came that the things which
he had prophesied should be fulfilled, his sepulcher might hereby be known from
the rest, and so neither the bones of the man of God, nor his own bones might
be disturbed. Josiah being satisfied by the inscription whose sepulcher it was,
he gave order that the bones of those two Prophets should not be disturbed, and
so the old Prophets desire was fulfilled, see 1 King. 13.31, 32. Then he brake
down the high place, and the Altar, and stamped it small to powder, and burnt
the Grove where the high place was. Then he proceeded to the Cities of
Manasseh, Ephraim and Simeon, even unto Naphtali, and caused the Altars and
graven Images to be broken down with mattocks, and did unto them as he had done
at Bethel. And such Idolatrous Priests as he met with, who sacrificed to false
gods, and opposed him in this reformation, he slew upon their Altars, and
therein fulfilled what was long since prophesied, 1 King. 13.1, 2. And Josiah
took away all the abominations out of the Countries that belonged to the
children of Israel (over which he had power) and caused all of them (as much as
he could) to serve the Lord their God, and all his days they departed not from
following the Lord God of their Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 34.33. Whereby it appears
that though the Ten Tribes were carried away captive into Assyria, yet there
were some both of the Priests and people, that either were left behind, or
returned Abeuntibus Assyriis, multi profugi and exules (qui antea fuga, alio
and alio dilapsi sunt) ad suas seeds redierunt cum suis sacerdotibus, ibi que
ut ante idola sua coluerunt.
again into the land of Samaria. It appears also that the greatest part of the
Kingdom of Samaria was at this time under the power of Josiah, which possibly
the King of Babylon (who set Manasseh at liberty) might give him with his
liberty on condition that he should defend his Territories against the
Egyptians, who began in those times with great power and success to oppose the
Babylonians.

2 King. 23. from 15, to 21.

2 Chronicles. 34. from 4, to 8.

In the same 18th. year of his reign, on the 14th. day of the first Month, in
the presence of the people of Judah and Israel, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, he kept the Feast of the Passover. And he set the Priests in their
charges, and encouraged them to perform the service of the house of the Lord.
And he said to the Levites, (that is, to the Priests of the Tribe of Levi, who
prepared the holy things of the Lord) Put the holy Ark in the house of the
Lord. It seems the Ark in Amon's reign had been carried out of the most holy
place, possibly that some Idol might be set up in its room. Or else it had been
purposely carried out by some pious Priests, that it might not stand there
among those heathenish Idols that were brought into the Temple; and now Josiah
orders it to be restored to its proper place again, telling the Priests that it
would not now be a burden unto them; it must abide in the Temple, and not be
carried from place to place upon their shoulders as formerly it had been before
the Temple was built; and they being now delivered from that burden should
serve the Lord their God more faithfully and cheerfully, and should serve his
people also by diligently instructing them,and performing those services for
them that tended to their spiritual good. And because several families of the
Levites were appointed to attend upon the sacrifices and offerings of several
families of each Tribe, some being to be employed in that holy service for such
and such families, V. 6. Prepare for your brethren: Praeparate agnos pro
fratribus vestris. J. T.
and others for others, therefore he appoints them to stand in the holy place
and to attend the service that was to be done, according to the divisions of
the families of the people, and according to the division of their own
families.He exhorts them also to sanctify themselves, and to prepare the
sacrifices for the Priests to offer, that they might do their duty as God had
enjoined them. Then Josiah gave to the people for Passover offerings, viz. of
lambs and kids (for either of these kinds might be offered) thirty thousand;
and for other offerings three thousand bullocks, all of the herds and flocks
that belonged to the King, [see 2 Chronicles. 30.24.] and his Princes gave also
willingly and liberally to the Priests, Levites, and the people; and Hilkiah
the High Priest, and Zachariah, and Jehiel, (who with the High Priest were
Rulers over other Priests and Levites in the house of God) gave to the
inferior Priests two thousand, and six hundred small cattle, and three hundred
oxen. And six eminent Levites (who were Fathers, and Rulers over the rest of
the Levites) gave unto the inferior Levites for Passover-offerings five
thousand small cattle, and for other offerings five hundred oxen. So all things
fit and requisite for a solemn Passover were provided and made ready, and the
Priests stood in their place, and the Levites in their order, according to the
Kings Commandment. So they killed the Passover, every father of a family for
himself and his family, and the Levites for themselves, and for other Levites,
who were otherwise employed, and the Priests sprinkled the blood on the Altar
which they received from their hands, and the Levites flayed the sacrifices;
and they separated such sacrifices as were to be eaten from the burnt-offerings
which were wholly to be consumed on the Altar, that so of the rest they might
give to the people partly for Paschal lambs, partly for peace offerings,
whereof both Priests and people were to have a share. And they roasted the
Passover with fire, but so much of the peace offerings as was to be prepared
for the offerers to eat before the Lord, they sod in pots and chaldrons, and
pans, and so divided them among the people. Afterward the Levites made ready
for themselves, V. 15. Jeduthun is called the Kings Ster. Heman and Asaph also
had this Title, the reason of which see 2 King. 17.13.
and for the Priests who being employed even until night in offering the
burnt-offerings, and the fat, etc. had no time to provide for themselves. And
the Singers stood in their places to perform their service according to the
commandment of David.The Porters also attended at the Gates, and did not depart
from their service during that solemnity, and thereupon the Levites prepared
for them as they had done for the Priests. Thus all things that appertained to
the service and worship of God, and to the keeping the Passover, and the
offering of the burnt-offerings were duly performed that day according to the
Kings command. And so they kept the Passover at that time, and the feast of
unleavened bread seven days after. And there was no Passover like to this kept
in Israel from the days of Samuel the Prophet, neither did any of the Kings of
Israel either David or Solomon, or any of the Kings of Judah since the division
of the Kingdom keep such a Passover as Josiah now kept, if we consider the
multitude of sacrifices that were offered and freely given by the King,
Princes, Priests and Levites, and the exceeding joy of the good people, that
Religion was restored again to its purity among them. Furthermore, Josiah took
away all witches and soothsayers, all images and dunghil-gods, and all
abominations which were found in the land of Judah, and in Jerusalem, that he
might perform all the words that were written in the Book that was found by
Hilkiah the Priest in the house of the Lord. And there was no King that was
before him (in the Throne of Judah) like unto him, or that followed after him
if we consider the fervency of his zeal for the rooting out of Idolatry, and
other abominations which had prevailed before his time, and if we consider the
innocence and integrity of his life, and his diligent heeding the law of the
Lord. We have indeed observed upon 2 King. 18.5. that in some particulars
Hezekiah excelled him, but in others Josiah excelled Hezekiah, as in his
contrition and deep humiliation for the wickedness that prevailed before his
time, [see 2 King. 22.19.] His solemn making a Covenant with the Lord, and
engaging his subjects therein to reform their ways; his solemn keeping of the
Passover, his zealous purging not only Judah and Benjamin from Idolatry, but
the Cities of Israel under his power; besides he was not puffed up with pride as
Hezekiah was. But though Josiah was in his own person so excellent a Prince,
yet (it seems) the people though they yielded to his reformation out of awe and
respect to him, yet in their hearts many of them did still approve Manasseh's
wicked ways 2 Reg. 23.26 Proptet irritationes Manassis, quia is Idololatriae
ingentem saevitiam addiderat, approbante magna part populi
, and this soon appeared after Josiah's death, for all his children did quickly
return to Manasseh's Idolatry, and followed him in his abominations but not in
his repentance and conversion. The Lord thereupon said, I will remove Judah out
of my sight as I have removed Israel, (that is, out of the land which I chose
for my habitation, and to manifest my gracious presence in) and will cast off
this City of Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house of which I said my
name shall be there.

2 King. 23. from 21, to 28.

2 Chronicles. 35. from 1, to 20.

Now after Josiah had prepared the Temple and settled the true worship of God
therein, and made such a great reformation of all things, as we have before
shown, yet it so happened that in the thirty first year of his reign, Pharaoh
Necho King of Egypt came up with his Army to fight against Carchemish a City
lying upon the River Euphrates, which the King of Babylon (who was also now
King of Assyria) had taken from him. He entered the Kingdom of Judah with his
Army, but designed only to pass thorough it to Carchemish without doing any
injury or hurt to Josiah; but it seems Josiah thought himself bound in faith
and honor to hinder his passage, and to prevent, as much as lay in him, his
enterprise against the Babylonians to whom he was obliged either by Covenant
made at the enlargement of Manasseh, or by their giving him that part of the
Country which he held in the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes. Pharaoh Necho
understanding he intended to oppose him, sent Ambassadors to him, one of whom
personating their King, spoke to him after this manner, What I have to do with
thee thou King of Judah, I come not out against thee this day, but against the
house of the Assyrian with whom I have war. For God has commanded me (by some
of his Prophets) to make have and to assault them, therefore I advise thee to
forbear hindering me who go out with Gods commission, lest therein thou be found
to oppose God himself, and he destroy thee for it. But it seems Josiah did not
believe that he had warrant from God for what he did, and therefore resolved to
oppose him, and fight with him; and being thus resolved he disguised himself
that he might not be known in the battle to be the King, and that he might
fight the more boldly and successfully; for he was sensible that if the enemy
knew him they would bend their chief force against him. The Armies met and came
to a battle in the valley of Megiddo in the Tribe of Manasseh near Hadadrimmon,
the Archers of the Egyptians shot desperately at Josiah, either suspecting him
to be the King, or else observing his valor in the fight they were the more
provoked to aim at him, and to endeavor to take him off as a principal enemy.
But so it was, that he was thereby sorely wounded in his chariot, and thereupon
spoke to his servants to have him out of the fight, which they did, and put him
into another chariot, intending to bring him to Jerusalem, but being mortally
wounded he died in the way. Thus God punished the wickedness of the people by
taking away their good King from them. And because he died before those
troubles and calamities fell upon that Nation which Huldah the Prophetess
foretold, and which afterward ensued, and whilst the Kingdom was in a
flourishing condition, and died in the love and favor of God, therefore he may
be said to be gathered to his grave in peace, according to Huldahs prediction.
He was buried in one of the Sepulchers of his Fathers, and the whole people
wonderfully lamented his death, and the Prophet Jeremiah more especially, who
knew the evil that would follow after his death; and all the singing-men and
singing-women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations, and made mention of his
death, even in the mournings they made for others, insomuch as it came to be a
constant custom, and as it were a settled ordinance to speak of Josiah's death
in their doleful Elegies. And it grew almost into a common Proverb, The
lamentation of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, Zach. 12.11. And possibly
upon the loss of so good a King, a law or ordinance was enacted that some
doleful Elegies or lamentations should yearly be sung for him, and these were
recorded and set down among other mournful Elegies, which upon occasions of
public calamity were used to be sung.

2 Chronicles. 35. from 20, to the end.

1 King. 23. v. 29, 30.

The Prophet ZEPHANY Prophesied in this Kings reign, as Jeremy also did. The
Prophecy of ZEPHANY.
His Prophecy may be divided into four parts:

1. He denounces dreadful judgments against Judah and Jerusalem, which should
be distressed by the Caldeans without, within, and in every corner, and there
should be a great spoiling of their goods, and slaughtering of their people.

2. He sets before them the heinous sins that were found among them, which
would draw these judgments upon them: 1. Idolatry in worshipping Baal, and the
host of heaven. 2. Corrupting of Religion, and mingling the worship of Idols
with that of the true God. 3. Apostasy after their solemn Covenant made with
the Lord. 4. The pride of apparel among those of the Court and others. 5.
Oppression. 6. Blasphemy, denying Gods Providence. 7. Security in sinning,
being settled upon their lees. 8. Infidelity. 9. Incorrigibleness. 10. Stupid
incogitancy, being not moved to repent by the examples of Gods judgments which
they saw poured out upon the Nations round about them. 11. Tyranny in their
Princes and Judges. 12. Vanity and treachery in their Prophets.

3. He exhorts them to repentance, and to seek the Lord, to seek righteousness,
to seek meekness, and that speedily before the decree bring forth. Which if
they would do, he tells them it may be they may be hid in the day of the Lords
anger. This he further urges upon them from the exemplary judgments that God
would inflict on other Nations that were impenitent, viz. the Philistines,
Moabites, Ammonites, Ethiopians and Assyrians.

4. And lastly he gives some gracious promises from the Lord to the faithful.
He tells them the Lord would leave in the midst of them an afflicted and poor
people, and they should trust in his name. He prophesies of the conversion of
the Gentiles, and that they shall be joined to the Church. He promises the
restoration of the Jews, and their return from captivity, and that God will
destroy their afflicting adversaries, and will sanctify them, protect them,
and take away their punishments; in contemplation of which he calls upon the
daughter of Zion to rejoice, and especially in Gods gracious presence and
residence among them, and making them the satisfying object of his love, in so
much he would rejoice over them to do them good, and would rest in his love
C^^^^^escit in amo^^ suo erga te.
.

WE read of four Sons Josiah had, 1 Chronicles. 3.15. Iohanan, Iehoiakim, Zedekiah,
The 17th. that reigned in the Kingdom of Judah, JEHOAHAZ the son of JOSIAH.
and Shallum. Probably Iohanan the firstborn died before his Father, for of
him we find no where else any mention. But the youngest Son Shallum having his
name changed into Iehoahaz, (perhaps because of the ill fate of Shallum the Son
of Iabesh King of Israel who reigned but one month, and was murdered by
Menahem, 2 King. 15.13.) was anointed King by the people though he was the
youngest of Iosiah's Sons, either because he was best affected to the King of
Babylon, or most warlike and valiant, and so most likely to defend them against
Necho King of Egypt. He was twenty three years old when he began to reign, and
reigned only three months. He quickly fell to do that which was evil in the
sight of the Lord, and presently set up the Idolatry that his Father Josiah had
suppressed. It seems he also grievously oppressed the people, and therefore he
is compared to a young lion which devoureth men, Ezekiel. 19.2, 3, 4.

The Prophet Jeremy is sent by the Lord to the new Kings Palace, earnestly to
exhort him and his Courtiers, and all the people to repentance and amendment of
their lives, foretelling them that Shallum or Iehoahaz should be carried away
captive into Egypt, and bidding the people not to weep for him that is departed
(meaning Josiah) but for him that is to depart (meaning Iehoahaz) because he
shall return no more to see his native soil. Ier. 22. from 1, to 13.

Pharaoh Necho returning with victory from Charchemish (where he vanquished the
Babylonians) was desirous to revenge the opposition he had received from
Josiah, (who sought to stop him in his passage through his Country) and
therefore making use of the dissension that was between Iehoahaz and Eliakim
his Elder Brother, and getting Iehoahaz or Shallum into his power, he presently
deposed him, (as if the Kingdom of Judea had been at his diposal) and set up
his Eldest Brother Eliakim changing his name into Iehoiakim, and then imposing
upon the land a Tribute of an hundred talents of silver, and one talent of
gold, he put Shallum or Iehoahaz into fetters at Riblah, and carried him away
with him prisoner into Egypt, where he ended his life.

2 King. 23. from 30, to 36.

2 Chronicles. 36. from 1, to 5.

The 18th that reigned in Judah, JEHOIAKIM.
JEHOIAKIM was twenty five years old when he began to reign, and reigned eleven
years in Jerusalem. He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, being
an Idolater and a cruel oppresser of the people, and possibly the more out of
revenge, because they had preferred his younger brother before him; his
oppressions are notably set forth, Ier. 22. from 13, to 20. and Ezekiel. 19. from
5, to 10. But herein he manifested the greatness of his impiety that when the
Prophets denounced the judgments of God against him and his people for their
evil ways, he would not endure it, but persecuted them for it, as we shall show
afterward. He pays the King of Egypt the hundred talents of silver, and one
talent of gold which he had imposed upon him, but he taxed the land for it, and
exacted it of the people.

2 King. 23.35, 36, 37.

2 Chronicles. 36. v. 5.

In the beginning of his reign Jeremy was commanded by God to stand in the
Court of the Temple, and there to exhort the people assembled together out of
all the Cities of Judah to repentance, it being then the Feast of Tabernacles,
Thus says the Lord stand in the Court of the Lords house, and speak unto all
the Cities of Judah which come to worship in the Lords house, all the words
that I command thee to speak unto them, diminish not a word. If so be they will
hearken, and turn every man from his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil
which I purpose to do unto them, because of the evil of their doings; and thou
shall say unto them, Thus says the Lord, if ye will not hearken to me to walk
in my Law which I have set before you; to hearken to the words of my servants
the Prophets whom I sent unto you rising up early and sending them That is,
continually and carefully sending them; a Metaphor taken from careful
householders who with the soonest, seek to redress mischiefs, causing their
servants for that end to rise betimes.
, then will I make this house like Shiloh, and will make this City a curse to
all the Nations of the earth. So the Priests and the Prophets and all the
people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the Lord. And it
came to pass when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the Lord had
commanded him to speak unto the people, the Priests and the Prophets and the
people took him, saying thou shall surely die. Why have thou prophesied in the
name of the Lord, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh, and this City shall
be desolate without an inhabitant? And all the people were gathered against
Jeremiah in the house of the Lord. When the Princes of Judah heard these
things, they came up from the Kings house unto the house of the Lord, and sat
down in the entry of the new gate of the Lords house to understand what the
matter was. Then spoke the Priests and the Prophets unto the Princes and to all
the people, saying, This man is worthy to die, for he has prophesied against
this City, and ye have heard it with your ears. Then spoke Jeremiah unto the
Princes, and to all the people, saying, The Lord sent me to prophecy against
this house, and against this City all the words that ye have heard. Therefore
now amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God,
and the Lord will repent him of the evil he has pronounced against you. As for
me, behold I am in your hands, do with me as seems good and meet unto you.
But know ye for certain that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring
innocent blood upon your selves, and upon this City, and upon the inhabitants
thereof, for of a truth the Lord has sent me unto you to speak all these words
in your ears. Then said the Princes and the people unto the Priests and
Prophets, This man is not worthy to die, for he has spoken to us in the name
of the Lord our God. Then rose up certain of the Elders of the land and spoke
to all the assembly of the people saying, Micah the Morasthite prophesied in
the days of Hezekiah King of Judah, and spoke to all the people of Judah,
saying, Thus says the Lord of hosts, Zion shall be plowed like a field, and
Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places
of the forest. Did Hezekiah King of Judah and all Judah put him at all to
death? did he not fear the Lord, and besought the Lord, and the Lord repented
him of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Therefore if we should
proceed with that rigor you would have us against Jeremy we might procure
great evil against our own souls.

Vriah also about the same time Prophesied against Judah and Jerusalem,
agreeably to what Jeremy had done, for which the King sought to put him to
death, but he flying thereupon into Egypt, the King by his messengers fetched
him back again, and slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body among the
vilest sepulchers of the common people; but Ahikam who had been of great
authority with King Josiah (2 King. 22.12.) stickled so for Jeremy that he was
not delivered over to the people to be put to death.

Jer. 26. whole Chapter.

In the beginning also of this Kings reign the word of the Lord came to Jeremy,
and gave him a Prophecy which was afterward to be executed in the days of
Zedekiah, whereby he intimated to him that Zedekiah should be King of Judah,
and Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and that he should subdue the neighboring
Nations, and bring them under his power. In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim the Son of Josiah King of Judah (says he) came this word unto me from
the Lord, Make thee bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck, and send them
to the King of Edom, and to the King of Moab, and to the King of the Ammonites,
and to the King of Tyrus, and to the King of Zidon, by the hand of the
messengers which came to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah King of Judah, and command
them to say unto their Masters, thus says the Lord of hosts the God of Israel,
I have made the earth, the man and the beast that are upon the ground by my
great power, and by my outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed
meet unto me; and now I have given all these lands into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon my servant That is, whom I am resolved to make
use of for the executing my judgments upon many Nations.
, and the beasts of the field That is, I have given him power over these
Nations, and all that they have.
have I given him also to serve him. And all Nations shall serve him and his
son, and his sons son, until the very time of his land come The time appointed
by God for his visitation.
, and then many Nations and great Kings shall serve themselves of him Such as
served that State before shall then subdue it.
. And it shall come to pass that the Nation and Kingdom which will not serve
Nebuchadnezzar, and will not put their neck under his yoke, that Nation will I
punish, says the Lord, with the sword, and with the famine, and with the
pestilence, until I have consumed them. Therefore hearken not to your Prophets,
nor to your diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, no to your
sorcerers which speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the King of Babylon;
for they prophecy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your land Not that
they properly intended it, but that would undoubtedly be the issue of what they
animated them unto.
, and that I should drive you out and ye should perish. But the Nations that
bring their neck under his yoke, and serve him, those will I let remain still
in their own land, says the Lord, and they shall till it and dwell therein.

Jer. 27. from v. 1, to 12.

Jehoiakim in the second year of his reign according to the accustomed policy
of his forefathers (the better to prevent all changes, and settle the Kingdom
in his line) made his Son Jehoiakin or Jeconiah King with him, being then but
eight years old, 2 Chronicles. 36.9.

In the latter end of the third, and beginning of the fourth year of Jehoiakim,
Nebuchadnezzar being joined with his father in the administration of the
Kingdom of Babylon, the things that he was to act are presently revealed to the
Prophet Jeremy; namely that he should overthrow the Egyptians, first at the
river Euphrates, (which immediately after followed, he cutting off the forces
that Pharaoh Necoh left at Carchemish that very year) and then that he should
conquer the Egyptians in their own Country, which came not to pass till after
the taking of Tire in the 27th. year of the captivity of Jeconiah, as we find
Ezekiel. 29. from 17, to 21. Jer. 46. from 1, to 27.

In the self-same fourth year of Jehoiakim, (which was the first of
Nebuchadnezzar It seems the first year of Nebuchadnezzar concurred with the end
of the third, and beginning of the fourth year of Jehoiakim, see Dan. 1.1.
King of Babylon) the Prophet Jeremy reproving the Jews for not harkening to
the word of the Lord, which from time to time he had spoken to them even from
the thirteenth year of King Josiah to that present fourth year of Iehoiakim
(which was three and twenty years) and for that they had showed themselves
stubborn and refractory to his admonitions, as also to the warnings of all the
other Prophets the Lord had sent unto them, he then again told them of the
coming of Nebuchadnezzar upon them, and that they should be carried away
captive to Babylon, and that captivity should last seventy years, which term
Judah first, and then the other Nations there mentioned, every one in their
order were to serve the King of Babylon; and at last the Kingdom of Babylon it
self should be destroyed. An intimation of which seventy years captivity was
long before made by the Prophet, Isa. 23.15. And it shall come to pass in that
day that Tire shall be forgotten seventy years according to the days of one
King That is, so long as one King and his ^ace shall reign, viz. Nebuchadnezzar
and his seed.
. And it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years, that the Lord will
visit Tire, and she shall turn to her hire, and shall commit fornication That
is, shall trade and traffic, and merchandise with all the Kingdoms of the
world.
with all the Kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth. Jer. 25. wh. Chapter

In the same year also Baruch wrote in a roll or scrole of parchment from the
mouth of the Prophet Jeremy, all the words of the Lord which he had spoken to
him concerning Israel and Judah from the time of Josiah to that day, and he
read them in the Court of the house of the Lord in the audience of all the
people which were there assembled out of all their Cities on the day of their
solemn fast, which they yearly kept upon the tenth day of the seventh month. As
for Baruch himself (who was extremely afflicted in his soul with the
apprehension of those direful judgments he had written) the Prophet Jeremy
comforted him, and assured him of his own life amidst all these calamities.
Ier. 36. from 1, to 9. Ier. 45. wh. Chapter

Nebuchadnezzar having vanquished the Egyptians about the banks of Euphrates,
[Ier. 46.1, 2.] and approaching now with his forces toward Judea to besiege
Jerusalem, the Recabites of the posterity of Ionadab the Son of Recab (2 King.
10.15.) leaving their Tents (wherein by the rule of their forefather Ionadab
they were wont to dwell) came into Jerusalem, and by their obedience in
refusing to drink wine, God condemns the disobedience of the Jews. Ier. 35.
wh. Chapter

Nebuchadnezzar having brought his forces before Jerusalem in a short time
takes it, and Iehoiakim prisoner, whom he bound in chains, intending at first
as it should seem to carry him to Babylon, but was afterward entreated upon
his submission and promises of subjection, to leave him as his vassal, and so
Iehoiakim became his servant and tributary three years, to wit the fifth, sixth
and seventh years of his reign. From which entering of the King and people of
the Jews into subjection to Nebuchadnezzar, The beginning of the seventy years
Captivity according to the Learned Usher.
some think the seventy years of the Captivity are to be reckoned, which were
foretold by the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 25.11. And this whole land shall be a
desolation and an astonishment, and these Nations shall serve the King of
Babylon seventy years. Ver. 12. And it shall come to pass when seventy years
are accomplished that I will punish the King of Babylon, and that Nation (says
the Lord) for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, and will make it
perpetual desolations. And Chap. 29.10. Thus says the Lord, after seventy
years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word
toward you in causing you to return to this place. 2 Chronicles. 36.6. 2 King. 24.1.

Nebuchadnezzar carried away at this time part Some were left and carried away
in Jehoiakim's time, 2 King. 24.13. and some in Zedekiah's, Jer. 52.17, etc.
of the vessels and furniture of the Lords house, and gave command to Ashpenaz
the Overseer of the Eunuchs or Pages, that he should carry from thence some of
the choicest boys both for beauty and wit that he could find, and such as were
of the Royal blood, and of the noblest families (as had been expressly foretold
by the Prophet, Isa. 39.7. And of thy Sons that shall issue from thee which
thou shall beget, shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuchs in the palace
of the King of Babylon); which being by his care educated for three years in
the language and sciences of the Chaldeans, might be fit afterward to wait
upon him in his Palace. Among whom of the Tribe of Judah were Daniel, whom the
overseer of the Eunuchs called Belteshazzar, and Hananiah whom he called
Shadrach, Mishael whom he called Meshach, and Ananiah whom he called Abednego,
every one of them having his name changed at his discretion. These with several
others Nebuchadnezzar carried away at this time. Dan. 1. from 1, to 8. 1 Chronicles.
36.7.

In the ninth month of the fifth year of Jehoiakim there was a solemn fast
proclaimed to all the people at Jerusalem, in remembrance (as it seems) of the
taking of the City a year before in the same month, at which time Baruc
standing at the Gate of the house of the Lord, read out of a roll or book all
the words of the Lord which he had taken from the mouth of Jeremy the Prophet,
in the audience of all the people, who were then assembled out of all the
Cities of Judah; whereof the Princes being advertised, called Baruc unto them,
and caused him to read to them the same book; but when they heard the contents
thereof, they advised him and Jeremy to hide themselves out of the way for fear
of the Kings displeasure. But the King himself having heard some inkling of it,
would needs have the roll or book read unto him, and having heard some part of
it, he was so enraged at it that he cut the roll through with a penknife, and
then threw it into the fire and burnt it. Jer. 36. from 9, to 26.

The King having thus burnt the Book, he gave order for the apprehending of
Baruc the writer, and Jeremy the Prophet, but God hid them, and denounced a
heavy judgment against that impious King for it. And God commands Jeremy to
take another roll, and Baruc wrote therein from the mouth of the Prophet all
the words of the Book which Jehoiakim had burnt, adding many like things
thereunto. Jer. 36. from v. 26, to the end.

Nebuchadnezzar pursuing the victory he had gotten over the Egyptians, took
from them all that they possessed between Egypt and Euphrates, so that from
thence forward Necho was fain to keep himself within his own bounds in Egypt. 2
King. 24.7.

While these things were doing Nabopolassar the father of Nebuchadnezzar dies,
which news coming to Nebuchadnezzar he made no delay but after he had given
order for the bringing away of the captives as well Jews as others, he posted
with a small company the nearest way through the desert, and came to Babylon
before them, and being received there as sole Lord of all his fathers large
Dominions, he afterward disposed of the captives (when they were brought
thither) here and there as he thought fit. And the Sacred vessels and other
furniture of the Temple which he had taken away from Jerusalem, he disposed
into the Temple By the Divine Providence they were there reserved to be carried
back again to Jerusalem. See Ezra 1.7, 8, etc. But Nebuchadnezzar intended
service of his Idol, and Belshazzar his Grandchild most profanely abused them.
Dan. 5.2.
of his god Belus. Dan. 1.2. 2 Chronicles. 36.7.

Daniel and his three fellow Nobles being brought to Babylon, refuse the
Court-diet provided for them, and content themselves with pulse and water, and
yet were found to look better than those that did eat of the Kings fare. And
when afterward at the time appointed they were brought to attend the King,
they appeared in all matters of knowledge, wisdom and sciences to excel all the
Magicians and Astronomers that were in the Kingdom. And Daniel had
understanding in all visions and dreams. Dan. 1. from 8, to the end.

Nebuchadnezzar in the second See Richardson on Dan. 2.1. Anno secundo cum vixi
tanquam consiliarius in regno Nebuchadnessaris non autem cum vixi in regno Cyrl
cujus mentio proxime praecessit v. ult. cap. praeced.
year after the three years of Daniels education were past, and he brought to
stand before the King (which falls in with the fifth year of his reign) dreamt
his dream of the great image made of diverse metals, and forgetting the
particulars of his dream, (though in the general it much affected him) he would
needs know of his Magicians and Astronomers both what his dream was, and what
it meant. And when they could not satisfy him in so unreasonable a demand, he
like a great Tyrant commanded them all to be put to death. But Daniel when he
saw the execution preparing, and understood the cause thereof, humbly moved the
King to forbear a while, and joining in prayer with his fellows unto God,
obtained both to have the dream it self, and the interpretation thereof
revealed to him. And accordingly he declared to the King first the particulars
of his dream, and then the interpretation thereof, showing him how the four
Monarchies which were in their order to succeed one another was the thing
signified by that great image made up of diverse metals, which he saw in his
dream. Whereupon the King enriched him presently with great gifts, and made him
Governor of all the Province of Babylon, and chief over all the wisemen
thereof. And moreover at his request made his three Companions Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, principal officers in all that Province. Dan. 2. wh.
Chap.

Jehoiakim for three years, viz. the fifth, sixth and seventh of his reign, was
Tributary to Nebuchadnezzar, but the King of Egypt (who had set him up) could
not bear this, and therefore threatened (as it seems) to restore Jehoahaz his
Brother whom he still held prisoner in Egypt. And though Jeremy had Prophesied
it should never come to pass, as we find Jer. 22.11. Thus says the Lord
touching Shallum the Son of Josiah King of Judah, which reigned instead of
Josiah his Father, and who went forth out of this place, he shall not return
hither any more, but shall die in the place whither they have led him captive,
and shall see this land no more); yet the fear of it did much perplex him, so
that he was now in a great straight; he was in danger of the Egyptians if he
kept faith with the Babylonians, and of the Babylonians if he should revolt
again to the Egyptians; at length, namely in the eighth year of his reign,
(hearing perhaps of great preparations made by the Egyptians against the
Babylonians) he renounced his subjection to the Babylonians, and sided with the
Egyptians again. 2 King. 24.1.

Nebuchadnezzar in the sixth year of his reign seems to have erected that huge
golden image in the plains of Dura (a Province of Babylon) to be worshipped.
Daniel's three companions (that were newly advanced) are accused for not
worshipping of it. It Is like out of envy to them, and to entrap them, some of
the Babylonians got the King to erect this idolatrous image. These three
worthies being brought before Nebuchadnezzar, make a stout profession of their
resolution to own and serve only the true God. Hereupon they are cast into a
fiery furnace, but are miraculously preserved and delivered by God. The King
seeing the miracle was exceedingly astonished at it, and blessed and praised
God. Dan. 3. wh. Chapter

Nebuchadnezzar being detained for three years after Jehoiakim's revolt by
other occasions, at last in the seventh year of his reign, and the eleventh of
Jehoiakim's, with an army consisting of several Nations he invades Judea and
besieges Jerusalem, and takes it, and Jehoiakim in it, and being enraged
against him for his perfidiousness, he caused him to be bound in chains,
intending to carry him captive to Babylon. But Jehoiakim through grief (as it is
probable) suddenly after dying, he caused his dead body to be dragged out of
the Gate of Jerusalem and cast into the fields to be devoured by birds and
beasts; so that having no burial he may be said to be buried like an Ass, as
Jeremy had before prophesied of him, [Jer. 22.18, 19 and Chapter 36.30.] though he
dying of himself and not by violence; he also may be said to have slept with
his Fathers, or to have fallen asleep and died as his fathers did. Now the rest
of the acts of Jehoiakim, and the abominations that he did, viz. his killing of
Vriah the Prophet, and his perfidiousness to Nebuchadnezzar, and other evils
that were found in him, behold they are written in the Chronicles of the Kings
of Judah. 2 King. 24. from 1, to 7. 2 Chronicles. 36.6.

Nebuchadnezzar carried away at this time three thousand twenty and three Jews
prisoners in the latter end of the seventh year of his reign. Jer. 52.28.

JEhoiakin was called Jeconiah In the Genealogy of Christ Jehoiakim the Son of
Josiah seems quite to be left out, Mat. 1.11. And Josias begat Jeconias and his
brethren, etc. for the resolving of which doubt some conceive that Jehoiakim
the Father was called Jeconiah as well as Jehoiakin the Son; and so whereas it
is said that Josias begat Jeconias and his brethren, it must be understood of
Jehoiakin the Son of Josias, who had several brethren, whereas Jehoiakim had
none. And then that which follows (ver. 12. And after they were brought to
Babylon Jeconias begat Salathiel), must be understood of Jehoiakin the Son,
some learned men (viz. Beza and Pareus) have been ready to think there is an
error in the generallty of the Greek copies crept in by some unadvised scribe,
leaving out Jehoiakim the father of Jeconias. And Rob. Stephen in his Diversae
Lectiones, collected out of old Copies, reads that eleventh ver. thus, Josias
begat Jakim (which is the contract of Jehoiakim) and Jakim begat Ieconias and
his brethren; and some color there may seem to be for it, because otherwise
there is one wanting to make up the third or last fourteenth generation
mentioned by the Evangelist, which he intended as appears ver. 18. So all the
Generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and from David
until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen Generations; and from the
carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen Generations.
, 1 Chronicles. 3.16. and Coniah by way of contempt, The 19th. that reigned in Judah
was JEHOIAKIN. Son of JEHOIAKIM.
Jer. 22.24. As I live says the Lord though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim King
of Judah were as the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck him thence.
This Jehoiakin was eighteen years old when he began to reign, that is when he
began to reign alone after his fathers death; for in his fathers lifetime (as
it seems) he was crowned King ten-years before this when he was but eight years
old as we have showed before in the life of Jehoiakim. He reigned only three
months and ten days, and did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord as
his father had done before him. Against him therefore a dreadful decree went
out from the Lord dooming him childless, that is, as some interpret it, that
none of his race should succeed him in the Regality to sit on the throne of
David, though in a kind of Sovereignty Zerubbabel the son or Grandchild rather
of Salathiel by Pedaiah did succeed him. 2 King. 24.8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 36.9. Jer.
22. from 24, to the end.

It Is not expressed whether Jehoiakin were made King by Nebuchadnezzar when he
last took Jerusalem, and bound his Father in chains, or was set up by the
people when the Babylonians were marched away from the City. If he were set in
the throne by Nebuchadnezzar it may well be (as Josephus thinks) that the King
of Babylon shortly after his departure bethinking himself how dangerous it
might be to leave the Son in the Throne, whose Father he had lately taken and
cast his dead body out unburied, he changed his purpose and presently sent his
Captains back with an Army against Jerusalem, to whom himself in person came a
while after, and being come again before the City, Jehoiakin and his mother,
and his servants and courtiers went out to him (as the Prophet Jeremy advised)
and yielded themselves to him. 2 King. 24.10, 11, 12.

Nebuchadnezzar therefore in the eighth year of his reign taking Jehoiakin with
his mother, and his wives, and his courtiers, carried them away captive to
Babylon; also out of Jerusalem he took the Magistrates, and every man of
strength, to the number of ten thousand men, and all the Carpenters and Smiths,
leaving none behind but the poorer sort of people. And out of other parts of
the land he carried away seven thousand men of able bodies, and of Smiths and
Carpenters one thousand, all strong men, and fit for the wars. Among which
captives Kish Grandfather to Mordecai of the Tribe of Benjamin was one, [ Esth.
2.5, 6.] and Ezekiel the Priest another, who therefore in his Prophecy reckons
the time all along from this captivity, Ezekiel. 1.2, 3. and calls it his
deportation, Ezekiel. 33.21. and Chapter 40.1. with these captives Nebuchadnezzar now
carried away the treasures of the Lords house 2 King. 24.13. it is said, He
carried away all the treasures of the Lords house, viz. all that he pleased.
For this all must be understood with some limitation for he carried not away
all now as may appear from Ier. 27.18.
, and the treasures of the Kings house, and brake in pieces many of the Golden
vessels and furniture which Solomon had made for the Temple of the Lord, as
Isaiah had Prophesied, Chap. 39.6. Behold the days come that all that is in
thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day,
shall be carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left says the Lord. 2 King. 24.
from 13, to 17. 2 Chronicles. 36.10. Ier. 29.1, 2.

The King of Babylon having thus carried away Jehoiakin, he set up his Uncle
Zedekiah in his place, and Iehoiakin after thirty seven years of captivity was
highly honored and raised up by Evil-merodach, as we shall see hereafter. 1
King. 24.17. 2 Chronicles. 36.10.

The beginning of the Babylonish Captivity of 70 years, according to Helvicus.
From this carrying away of Jeconiah, Helvicus begins the Babylonian captivity
that was to last seventy years, grounding his opinion on these Scriptures,
Ezekiel. 1.2. In the fifth day of the month (which was the fifth year of King
Jehoiakins captivity) Jer. 29.1. now these are the words of the Letter that
Jeremiah the Prophet sent from Jerusalem unto the residue of the Elders which
were carried away captives, and to the Priests and Prophets, and to all the
People whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon
(after that Jeconiah the King, and the Queen, and the Eunuchs, the Princes of
Judah, and the Carpenters and Smiths were departed from Jerusalem) by the hand
of Elasah the Son of Shaphan and Gemariah the Son of Hilkiah (whom Zedekiah
King of Judah sent unto Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon) saying, For
thus says the Lord, after seventy years be accomplished at Babylon, I will
visit you, and perform my good words toward you in causing you to return to
this place. And Jer. 24.5. Thus says the Lord the God of Israel, like these
good figs, so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah,
whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans for their
good.

But to go on, whilst Nebuchadnezzar thus prevailed against the Jews, God
prepared a worm which should eat into this spreading tree, Psalm. 137.8. O
daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be that rewards
thee as thou have served us. For in this year was Cyrus the Perso-median born
(whose Father was a Persian, and his mother a Mede) and he was by the Prophet
Isaiah called by his proper name of Cyrus, and styled the deliverer of the Jews
so many years before, as we may see Isa. 44.28. Thus says the Lord thy
Redeemer, that says of Cyrus, he is my shepherd, and shall perform all my
pleasure, saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy
foundation shall be laid. And Chap. 45.1. Thus says the Lord to his anointed
That is, whom he intended to make a great King.
, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have That is, whose right hand I will hold
(Enallage Temporis) that is, strengthen to subdue Nations.
holden to subdue Nations before him; and I will loose the loins i. e. For
whose sake I will strike fear and terrror into Kings, that they may open to him
the Gates of their Cities, they shall not be shut against him.
of Kings to open before him the two leaved gates, and the gates shall not be
shut. And God himself gives the reason of this so unusual a revelation at the
fourth verse, For Jacob my servants sake, and Israel mine Elect, I have even
called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me
Cyrus at first was ignorant of the Lord, but afterward he came to know so much
by the Jews that he acknowledged the Lord for the true God, Creator of Heaven
and earth, Ezra 1.2.
.

The 20th. and last that reigned in Judah was ZEDEKIAH.
NEbuchadnezzar (as was showed before) when he carried away Iehoiakin prisoner,
made Mattaniah Son of Josiah, and Uncle to Iehoiakin, King in his stead. He is
called Brother to Iehoiakin, 2 Chronicles. 36.10. because he was his Fathers
Brother, and so near of kin to him; and he is called his Son, [1 Chronicles. 3.16.]
because he succeeded him in the Kingdom.

Nebuchadnezzar changed his name into Zedekiah, which signifies, the justice of
Lord, for having made a Covenant with him, and taken an oath of fidelity from
him, by the imposition of this name he purposed to mind him that the just
judgment of God would fall upon him in case he did violate his oath. 2 King.
24.17. Jer. 37.1. Ezekiel. 17.11, 12, 13, 14.

Zedekiah was twenty one years old when he began to reign, and reigned eleven
years, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, and humbled not himself before
Jeremiah speaking to him from the mouth of the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 36.11, 12. 2
King. 24. 18, 19.

About the beginning of his reign the people (it seems) began to insult over
Jeremy, and to reproach him because Iehoiakin with many of his subjects were
carried away captive, and had yielded themselves to Nebuchadnezzar upon his
persuasion. Whereupon the Prophet under the type of good and bad figs
foretells it should be better with those that were gone into captivity, than
with those that were left behind; that the former were as good figs Comparative
hic loquitur Propheta cum alios bonos alios malos vocat, nec tam de culpa
loquitur quam de poena; hoc Deus ostendit Prophetae tum quia captivos
desperatio obruere poterat, tum quia residul exulibus insultabant and
tolerantia Dei abutebantur and magis obdurescebant.
that should be valued, the other as refuse, that should be cast away,
intimating that those that went into captivity should be brought back again and
established in their own possessessions, and that the Lord would give them an
heart to know him, and to turn to him. But as for those that remained in the
land, viz. Zedekiah, his Princes and people, he threatens them with exile,
ignominy and scorn, and destruction by sword, famine, and pestilence. Jer. 24.
wh. Chapter

In the beginning also of Zedekiah's reign the Prophecy concerning the
Elamites or Persians, viz. both of their fall and rising again, was uttered by
the Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 49. from v. 34, to the end. For Nebuchadnezzar had
taken from Astyages the whole Province of Elamais, with the City Susa the
Metropolis thereof (which was seated upon the river Vlai) and annexed it to the
Empire of the Chaldeans, as we may see from Ier. 25.25. compared with Dan. 8.1,
2. But afterward those Elamites combining with the Medes against the
Babylonians [see Isa. 21.2.] when Belshazzar was destroyed, recovered their
State again under Cyrus, and their chief City Susa was made by him the seat of
the Persian Empire, as Strabo in his fifteenth Book declares.

Ambassadors now come (in the first year of Zedekiah, but the fourth after the
Sabbatical course, or seventh years rest (Ier. 28.1.) from the several Kings of
Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tire and Sidon to Jerusalem to visit the new King Zedekiah,
and to persuade him to revolt from the King of Babylon; but God appoints Jeremy
to deliver to every one of them bonds and yokes to be presented to their
several Masters, commanding them withal to submit themselves to Nebuchadnezzar,
and not to give ear any longer to their wizards and stargazers, their diviners
and dreamers who advised them to the contrary, and Prophesied a lie to them in
the name of the Lord, though he sent them not. He advises also Zedekiah to be
faithful, and to hold himself fast and firm to the King of Babylon, and not to
believe false Prophets; and lastly both by threats and promises he persuades
all sorts of people to submit unto and obey the King of Babylon. Jer. 27. the
whole Chapter.

In the fifth month of the same year Hananiah a false Prophet Prophesies other
manner of things, viz. that the power of the King of Babylon should be broken;
and declares that at the end of two years all the vessels and furniture of the
Lords house, and Ieconiah, and all the people that were carried away captive to
Babylon, should return and be brought home again. And when Jeremy gainsaid him,
he took a yoke of wood which he had put about his own neck, and brake it,
saying, Thus shall the Lord break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar within two years
from off the neck of all Nations which he has brought under his power. Jeremy
says Amen to this Prophecy, wishing from his heart it might prove true; but
intimates that he vehemently suspected it of falsehood, and refers it to the
event. For he shows that Prophets are to be judged whether they are true or
false by the event of their Prophesies. But the word of the Lord coming anew to
Jeremy he declares that God instead of that wooden yoke would put an iron one
upon the neck of all those Nations under which they should bow and serve the
King of Babylon; and to assure the people that Hananiah had prophesied falsely,
and had made them trust in a lie, he foretells that he shall die that very
year because he had taught rebellion against the Lord, that is, had encouraged
the people to rebel against the admonitions given them by his Prophets; and
accordingly so it came to pass in the seventh month of that year. Ier. 28.
whole Chapter.

Zedekiah now sends Ambassadors to Nebuchadnezzar in Babylon, and by them
Jeremy sent a Letter to the Elders, Priests and Prophets, and the rest of the
people, who had been carried away captive, in which he instructs them how to
demean themselves in that condition of their captivity, viz. that they should
build themselves houses, and plant gardens, and marry wives, and give wives to
their sons, that they might increase and multiply there, and advises them that
they should seek the peace of the City Babylon, whither they were carried
captive, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof they should
have peace. Then he comforts them with promises of deliverance at the
expiration of seventy years; then the Lord would perform his good word toward
them in causing them to return. He foretells them of the grand calamities that
would befall Zedekiah, and those Jews that were left behind, and of the
miserable end that Ahab and Zedekiah (two false Prophets among them) should
come unto; he shows that for their Prophesying lies, and for their adulteries
with their neighbors wives, they should fall into the King of Babylons hands,
and he should roast them with fire, and their names and memories should be used
afterward in forms of execration and cursing, viz. people should say when they
cursed a man, The Lord make thee like Ahab and Zedekiah, whom the King of
Babylon roasted in the fire. Jer. 29. from 1, to 24.

Shemaiah another false Prophet among the captives in Babylon sent a Letter (as
it seems) by Zedekiah's Ambassadors (when they returned) unto Zephaniah, (who
was the second chief Priest, 2 King. 25.18.) and the rest of the Priests at
Jerusalem, bitterly inveighing against what Jeremy had written to them. He sets
before Zephaniah the duty of his place, which was to punish every man that of
his own head made himself a Prophet, but was indeed none, intimating that
Jeremy was such a kind of person: The Lord (says he) has made thee Priest
instead of Iehoiada, etc. that thou should put in prison, and in the stocks
every man that is mad [or a Fanatick] and makes himself a Prophet, etc. He
reprehends him for not using Jeremiah after that manner, Why have thou not
reproved Jeremiah (says he) who makes himself a Prophet to you but is none? He
has written to us to build houses, and plant gardens, and marry wives,
intimating that our captivity will be long, and thereby thou may see what
manner of Prophet he is. Zephaniah reading this Letter to Jeremy, he presently
denounced a heavy judgment from the Lord upon Shemaiah, saying, Thus says the
Lord, Behold I will punish Shemaiah and his seed, he shall not have a man to
dwell among this people, neither shall he behold the good that I will do for my
people, because he has taught rebellion against the Lord, Jer. 29.32. Whereby
the Prophet intimates that neither he nor his posterity should live to see the
promised deliverance.

And at this time (as it seems) were given to Jeremy those other notable
Prophesies contained in the two next Chapters, which he is commanded to write
in a Book that they might remain to support the faith, and keep up the spirits
of the Jews in a long captivity: First, He promises the reduction of the Jews
into their own Country, but before that they were to endure many calamities
from the Babylonians during that day of Jacobs trouble, but they should at last
be saved out of it. God promises to break the King of Babylons yoke from off
Jacobs neck, and that these Chaldeans shall no longer serve themselves of him.
But that his posterity shall serve the Lord their God, and such of David's
lineage as he shall from time to time set over them, but more especially the
Messiah who should come of David's stock. He promises to correct them in
measure, and yet not to leave them altogether unpunished. He promises many
great blessings that he would bestow on his Church notwithstanding their great
miseries, troubles, breaches, wounds, but that Gods wrath shall remain on the
wicked.

In the next Chapter is contained the restoration of Israel, and the
publication thereof. After Rachels lamentation for her Sons as lost, follows
Gods consolation of her, putting her in hope of their return. Ephraim repenting
is to be brought home again; Christ is promised: The Lord will create a new
thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man. And this shall be the Covenant
he will make with his people after those days, he will write his law in their
hearts, and will be their God; and this Covenant shall be stable, and his
Church shall be enlarged.

Jer. 29. from 24, to the end.

Jer. 30. whole Chapter.

Jer. 31. whole Chapter.

God also by his Prophet Jeremy foretells that Babylon, and the land of Caldea
shall be overrun and wasted by the Medes and Persians, and comforts his own
people with the sweet promises of their deliverance.

Jer. 50. whole Chapter.

Jer. 51. from 1, to 59.

Zedekiah in the fourth year of his reign, either went himself, (or which is
more probable) sent Jer. 51.59. When he went with Zedekiah, or on behalf of
Zedekiah.
Seraiah a person of great quality about him to Babylon, to whom Jeremy
delivered the foresaid Prophesies of the destruction of Babylon written in a
Book, to be first read, and then to be thrown into the river Euphrates to
signify that Babylon should so sink and not rise again.

Jer. 51. from 59, to the end.

In the beginning of the thirtieth year from that solemn renewing of the
Covenant, and restoration of the worship of God, in the eighteenth year of
Josiah (which falls in with the fifth of Jehoiakins captivity) on the fifth day
of the fourth Month God vouchsafed the first vision to Ezekiel (one of the
captives in Babylon) by the river Chebar, and from thence he was sent to
execute the office and function of a Prophet among the Jews of the Captivity:
He began thirty four years after Jeremy, and continued his Prophetic office
about two and twenty years, namely to the twenty seventh year of Jehoiakins
captivity. Ezekiel. 29.17.

It seems many at this time both among the Jews at Jerusalem, and among the
captives in Babylon murmured and complained against Jeremy as a false Prophet
that had misled the people, and betrayed them, and caused them to yield
themselves to the King of Babylon, seeing now five years were past, and yet
Jerusalem stood still. Jeremy being thus cried down both at home and abroad
especially by false Prophets, it pleased the Lord to raise up Ezekiel, and
pouring out his spirit upon him, to set him on work to prophecy and foretell
the same things in Babylon that Jeremy had done in Judea (though in a more
vehement manner) so that Jeremy's Prophesies were confirmed and justified by
Ezekiel's. The Prophet Ezekiel therefore going to execute his function among
the Jews dwelling at Telabib near the river Chebar, when he was come thither he
sat him down as a man disheartened for the space of seven days. After which time
God again put him in mind of his charge, both with gracious promises if he
undertook it, and severe threatenings if he refused; and then confirmed him with
a new sign showed unto him, and gave him courage and boldness by his word, and
ratified his vocation by a new command.

Ezekiel. 1. whole Chapter.

Ezekiel. 2. whole Chapter.

Ezekiel. 3. whole Chapter.

Ezekiel is now commanded to make a draught of the siege of Jerusalem in a
table of Tile or Slate, and to lie along upon one side three hundred and ninety
days, typifying thereby Gods patience in bearing with the sins and provocations
of the Kingdom of Israel 390 years before he destroyed that Kingdom, which was
the full time from the revolt of the Ten Tribes to their Captivity. When he had
lain 390 days on his left side, he was to turn himself on his right side, and
to lie so forty days more, to typisie Gods patience in bearing with the sins
and provocations of the Kingdom of Judah, from the time that Josiah and his
people renewed solemnly their Covenant with the Lord unto the Captivity of
Zedekiah, which was just forty years. Then he sets out the grievous famine that
should be in the City during the siege, Chap. 4. In the three following
Chapters he pursues the same matter, viz. Ierusalems misery. In the fifth he is
commanded to cut off his hair, and to divide it into three parts, by which he
was to signify three dreadful judgments that were to be inflicted on Jerusalem
by pestilence, sword, and dispersion. In the sixth Chapter first he threatens
desolation to the land of Judea, viz. to the Idols, Altars, and people thereof.
2ly, Promises mercy to a few that should repent of their evil ways, and come to
a right knowledge of the Lord, from v. 8, to 11. 3ly, He sets forth the grief
and vexation the rest should feel from the sore judgments that should come upon
them, from 11, to the end. In the seventh Chapter he Prophesies again of the
destruction of the Jews and their land, from v. 1, to 16. And of the pitiful
lamentation that they shall make that escape, from v. 16, to 20. And of the
pollution of the Sanctuary by their enemies, from v. 20, to 23. And of their
bondage under the worst of heathens, which is represented by a chain, from v.
23, to the end.

Ezekiel. 4. whole Chapter.

Ezekiel. 5. whole Chapter.

Ezekiel. 6. whole Chapter.

Ezekiel. 7. whole Chapter.

In the sixth year of Jeconiahs Captivity, the sixth month, the fifth day of
the month, Ezekiel was carried in a Vision to Jerusalem, and showed the
horrible Idolatry there practiced, and the plagues that were to befall the City
for the same. The Vision has four parts:

1. The Prophet is shown the abominable Idolatry of the Jews in these notorious
instances: 1. Their having the Image of Jealousy, or the Image of Baal among
them, which highly provoked God to jealousy. 2. Their Chambers of Imagery,
having Idols privately in their Chambers. 3. Their women weeping for Tammuz
Some understand it Osiris the Egyptian Idol; some of Adonis the Paramour of
Venus.
. 4. Their men worshipping the Sun toward the East.

2ly, He has a Vision of the judgments that God would execute upon them for
their sins. In which Vision he hears God commanding six men who had
slaughter-weapons in their hands to destroy all except the secret mourners for
those abominations, the Prophet intercedes for them, but the Lord vindicates
the equity of his proceedings against them by reason of their sins, Chap. 9.

3ly, In the tenth Chapter Ezekiel has a Vision first of the burning coals to
be scattered over the City: 2ly, Of the Lords changing his place and leaving
them. 3ly, A Vision of the Wheels and Cherubims, representing how things
earthly and inferior, as also heavenly and superior are under the disposal of
the Divine Providence, Chap. 10. In the 11th. Chapter he has first a Vision of
those who gave ill counsel, and seduced the people, from v. 1, to 4. 2ly, Of
the judgments denounced against those evil counselors and devisers of
mischief, from v. 4, to 13. 3ly, He has a Vision of Pelatiah's death, the
Prophet deprecates the Lords displeasure, and pleads with him to spare the
residue of Israel: The Lord tells him that the people of Jerusalem did not look
upon their Brethren that were carried into Babylon as the people of God, but
challenged the Temple and the land, and all in it to be theirs. But though
those captives were insulted over by them, yet God promises to be a sanctuary
to them in the Countries whither they were driven, and that he would bring them
back to their own land, and that there they should reform, and cast away their
detestable things, and he would purify them, and give them one heart, and put
a new spirit within them, and take away their stony heart and give them an
heart of flesh, and they should walk in his statutes and do them, and they
should be his people, and he would be their God.

4ly, He has a Vision of the removal and departure of Gods glory from the City
to the mountain, and so exposing them to the fury and spoil of the Babylonians.
The Vision vanishing, the Prophet is brought back by the Spirit to his people
in Chaldea, and there declares to them all that God had showed him.

Ezekiel 8 9 10 11
whole Chapters.

God now both by Typical signs, as also in plain words foretells Zedekiah's
flight by night, the putting out his eyes, the captivity of himself and his
people, and the many miseries they were to suffer before, all which we have set
down in the twelfth Chapter. In the beginning of which we have first the Type,
viz. Ezekiel's removing his household stuff, and carrying it through the hole of
the wall, and bearing it upon his shoulders, from v. 1, to 10. Then we have the
application of this Type both to Prince and people, from v. 10. to 15. Moreover
he has a Vision of the sad condition of the people both before and after the
captivity of the King, whereupon the Prophet is commanded to eat his bread with
quaking, and to drink his water with trembling. Furthermore he confutes those
who made an ill construction of his Prophesies, and put off all with this
byword, If his Prophesies be true yet they belong not to our days, but to the
days of those that are to be a long while after us; or else said, his vision
fails and comes to nothing. God tells them he will make that Proverb to
cease among them by a sudden and dreadful accomplishment of the Prophecy
uttered by his Prophet; and to this matter the seven following Chapters also
belong. In Chap. 13. he reproves the false Prophets and Prophetesses, who
taking upon them that office were led by their own private spirits, and
deceived the people with vain visions, and lying divinations. The false
Prophets he reproves for daubing with untemper'd mortar, there being no truth,
and so no strength in what they said, from 1, to 17. And the Prophetesses for
sowing pillows under the arms of the people, that is, by their lies and
flatteries promising them peace, and making nightcoifs or kerchiefs for the
head of every stature, that is, suiting their juggling to all sorts both small
and great to seduce them. In Chap. 14. upon occasion of certain Elders of
Israel coming to inquire of him, he declares how God abhors to be inquired of
by them because of their Idolatry, and how he will plague Idolaters and false
Prophets except they repent, from 1, to 12. And then shows how irrevocably God
had decreed to punish them with famine, noisome beasts, sword and pestilence,
and that the Intercessions of the most holy men that ever were, such as were
Noah, Daniel and Job, would not be able to help them, they should only deliver
their own souls, from 12, to 22. 3ly, He foretells that some shall be left,
and shall be carried to their Brethren that were in Babylon who were by this
time well accommodated and fitted to entertain them, and should be comforted
concerning them seeing their repentance. In Chap. 15. under the similitude of
an useless and fruitless vine-tree (fit only for the fire) he sets forth the
condition of the inhabitants of Jerusalem that they are fit only for judgment.
In Chapter 16. to make Judah know her abominations by the similitude of a newborn
and miserably forsaken young daughter, God sets before them their natural state
and miserable condition, [from 1, to 6.] and his special love and kindness
which he had showed to them in that wretched state [from 6, to 15.] and their
ungrateful apostasy from God set out under the type of an whore and whoredom,
signifying their Idolatry and heathenish covenants, [from 15, to 35.] Then he
adds a commination of heavy judgments for those sins, they being worse than
their sisters Sodom and Samaria, [from 35, to 60.] Lastly, after he had
thundered out judgments against the multitude of wicked ones. He gives some
Evangelical promises of mercy and comfort to revive the spirits of the faithful
that either now were or hereafter should be among them, from 60. to the end.
The 17th. Chapter contains a denunciation of judgments upon Jerusalem and her
King for persidious revolting from the King of Babylon under the parable of two
Eagles and a Vine. The Parable is propounded, from 1, to 11. and expounded and
applied in a minatory way, from 11, to 22. In the last part of the Chapter
there is a promise of Christ and his Kingdom, and the happiness of all sorts of
people that shall come under his wing and protection, from 22, to the end. In
the 18th. Chap. he reproves the Jews in Babylon, who instead of being humbled
for their sins took up an unjust complaint against God, and charged him to deal
unjustly with them, alleging that their fathers had sinned, and they, their
children, suffered for their sins, making use of that Proverb, The Fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edg. This charge God
clears himself of, and shows that he is most just both in punishing and
rewarding, and that every one shall bear the punishment of his own sins and not
of another; and that if an unjust man repent of his evil ways he shall find
mercy, for God has no pleasure at all that the wicked should die, [see Chap.
33.11.] and if a man that is esteemed a just man turn from his righteousness,
he shall have judgment; wherefore he exhorts all to repent, and so iniquity
shall not be their ruin. And to cast away their transgressions, and to make
them a new heart, and a new spirit That is, to endeavor to get a new frame of
heart and spirit, seeking to the Lord to work it in them by the power of his
grace.
, for God has no pleasure in the death of him that dies. The 19th. Chap.
contains a lamentation for the Princes of Judah, under the Parable of Lions
whelps taken in a pit, from 1, to 10. 2ly, A lamentation for Jerusalem under
the Parable of a wasted vine.

Ezekiel. Chapter 12. Chapter 13. Chapter 14. Chapter 15.

Ezekiel. Chapter 16. Chapter 17. Chapter 18. Chapter 19.

About this time (as it seems) Zedekiah through a vain confidence of help and
assistance from the King of Egypt, revolted from Nebuchadnezzar, not regarding
the Covenant he had made with him, nor the oath of fealty and fidelity which he
had sworn to him. It Is said, 2 King. 24.20. that through the anger of the Lord
against Judah and Jerusalem for their heinous sins, it came to pass that he
permitted Zedekiah to rebel against the King of Babylon, intending thereby to
cast them out of that good land where he had in an especial manner manifested
his presence. The Prophet Ezekiel, Chapter 17. v. 15.16. says of him, He rebelled
against Nebuchadnezzar in sending his Ambassadors into Egypt, that they might
give him horses and much people: shall he prosper? shall he escape that does
such things? or shall he break the Covenant and be delivered? As I live, says
the Lord God, surely in the place where the King dwells that made him King,
whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him in the midst
of Babylon be shall die.

2 Chronicles. 36.13.

2 King. 24.20.

Ezekiel. 17. from 11, to 21.

In the seventh year of Jeconiahs captivity, on the tenth day of the fifth
month Ezekiel reproved the Elders for their gross hypocrisy, who came again to
him, requesting him to ask counsel of the Lord for them, Ezekiel. Chapter 20. in which
Chapter he sets before them a summary of the rebellions of their forefathers in
Egypt, in the wilderness, and in Canaan, and shows them how they trod in their
fathers steps, for which abominations he severely threatens them. He promises
to preserve his Church and his true worship therein notwithstanding, and to
gather his people again by the Gospel. He foretells Jerusalem's destruction
under the Type of a forest burnt by fire. Chap. 21. He is commanded to
prophecy very sharply against Jerusalem, and to declare to them that God had
drawn out his sword against them, therefore he was to sigh with the breaking of
his loins, as a sign unto them of their approaching calamity. He foretells that
the King of Babel shall consult by divination whether he should first set upon
Jerusalem, or the land of the Ammonites, and that he shall first set upon
Jerusalem because of their perjury. He prophesies again against the Kingdom of
Judah, as also of the coming of the Messiah, and that God will overturn that
Kingdom, so that it shall never be restored to its former luster till he comes
whose right it is, that is, the Messiah, to whom it belongs as David's
successor according to the flesh. He prophesies also against the Moabites.
Chap. 22. He sets down a Catalogue of the sins that reigned in Jerusalem, for
which God will burn them as dross in the furnace; and there he sets down the
general corruption of Prophets, Priests, Princes, and people, none standing in
the gap to divert his wrath. Chap. 23. The Idolatrous defection both of Israel
and Judah is set forth under the type of two women notorious for whoredoms,
viz. Aholah and Aholibah, the Idolatry of Israel is set forth from v. 1, to the
9. and her overthrow by her lovers the Assyrians, v. 9, 10. The Idolatry of
Judah worse than Isreal's, is set forth from ver. 11, to 22. who is therefore
threatened with ruin by her lovers the Chaldeans, from v. 22, to 36. The
Idolatries of them both are repeated, and judgments threatened against them
both, from 36, to the end.

Ezekiel. Chapter 20. Chapter 21. Chapter 22. Chapter 23.

In the ninth year of Zedekiah, Nebuchadnezzar invades Judea again to be
revenged on him for his breach of faith. This being a Sabbatical year, the men
of Jerusalem hearing that Nebuchadnezzar approached with his army, proclaimed
liberty to their servants according to the Law, [ Exodus 21.2. If thou buy an
Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve, and in the seventh he shall go out
free for nothing. And Deuteronomy. 15.12. And if thy brother an Hebrew man, or an
Hebrew woman be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years, then in the seventh
year thou shall let him go free from thee.] Nebuchadnezzar having wasted all
the Country, and taken their strong holds, came now before the walls of
Jerusalem, on the tenth day of the tenth month, and raised forts round about
it. In memorial whereof, a fast was afterward kept during the Captivity, Zach.
8.19. Thus says the Lord of hosts, the fast of the fourth month, and the fast
of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth shall be
to the house of Judah, joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts, therefore love
the truth and peace.

2 King. 25.1, 2.

Jer. 39.1.

Jer. 52.4, 5.

Jer. 34.8, 9, 10.

Ezekiel upon the self-same day the siege was laid to Jerusalem, has it
revealed to him in Babylon, namely in the ninth year of Jeconiah, and the utter
destruction of it also represented to him by the type of an hot seething pot,
with pieces of flesh and bones in it. And that evening his wife died, for whose
death he was charged not to mourn, thereby signifying the grievous calamity of
the Jews to be such as might justly drown all private sorrow.

Ezekiel. 24. whole Chapter.

The siege being now laid to Jerusalem the Prophet Jeremy was commanded by God
to foretell to Zedekiah the utter destruction of it by the Babylonians, and that
Zedekiah himself should be carried away prisoner to Babylon, and there should
end his days, and yet be honorably interred.

Jer. 34. from 1, to 8.

The Prophet for this his faithful dealing was by Zedekiah clapped up in the
Court of the prison of the Kings house, where at Gods command he buyeth a field
of Hanamael his Uncles son, takes witnesses of it, and delivers the writing
to be kept as a token that the Jews should return into their own Country again.
This being done, the Prophet humbly prays unto God, (expressing a great
admiration of his Majesty and works) and represents unto him the great
conflict he had in his spirit for this thing. Whereupon God assures him he
will indeed first punish his people for their great sins, but afterward
perform his promise of their return, and moreover will bestow on his Church the
grace of the new Covenant. He will give them one heart and one way that they
may fear him all their days for the good of themselves and their children after
them, Jer. 32.

During his imprisonment the Prophet has another promise made to him of their
return from their captivity, also of the blessed, joyful and quiet state they
should be in under Christ the branch of righteousness, whose name is, The Lord
our Righteousness, whose Priesthood and Kingdom should be continued, and his
seed be blessed.

Jer. Chapter 23. and Chapter 32. and Chapter 33.

Zedekiah being now besieged in Jerusalem, Pharaoh Hophra King of Egypt came
with an army to relieve him. The Babylonians thereupon raise their siege, and
go out to meet the Egyptians. Jeremy upon the raising of the siege being set at
liberty, Zedekiah sent messengers to him to desire him to pray for them, and to
intercede with the Lord for their deliverance from their enemies. But the
Prophet returned him answer, that those succors out of Egypt should return
into Egypt again, and that the Chaldeans should return to Jerusalem and take
the City and burn it with fire.

Jer. Chapter 37. from 1, to 11.

The men of Jerusalem seeing the siege raised, presently took back their Hebrew
servants again, whom they had formerly set at liberty according to the Law, and
made them serve as before contrary to their Covenant; for which as for an
impious act, Jeremy reproves them, and to requite them according to their
doings, he from the Lord proclaims a liberty to the Sword, Pestilence and
Famine to destroy them, telling them withal that the Chaldeans should come
again to the siege and should take their City, and utterly demolish it.

Jer. 34. from 11, to the end.

Whilst the Chaldeans who had raised their siege were gone to encounter the
Egyptian army, Jeremy intended to go out of the City to save himself, knowing
the City would be taken. But Irijah a Captain took him and brought him before
the Princes, and charged him that he intended to go to the Chaldeans. They
being highly enraged at him, smote him, and put him into the dungeon that was
in the prison in the house of Jonathan the Scribe, and there he lay many days.

Jer. Chapter 37. from 11, to 17.

Nebuchadnezzar at his going out against the Egyptian army took eight hundred
thirty two men which had fled out of Jerusalem to him for safety, and sent them
all away to Babylon.

Jer. Chapter 52. v. 29.

In the tenth year of the Captivity of Jeconiah, on the twelfth day of the
tenth month Ezekiel uttered his Prophecy against Pharaoh and all Egypt,
declaring that he should prove but a staff of reed to the house of Israel, and
that Pharaoh should have an overthrow given him in the desert of Lybia, and
that Egypt should be miserably wasted by the Babylonians, and that that
desolation should last forty years.

Ezekiel. 29. from 1, to 17.

Nebuchadnezzar having routed the Egyptian army, returned and laid siege again
to Jerusalem. The Prophet Jeremy having remained in the dungeon many days, the
King sent and took him out, and asked him privately, whither he had any word of
Prophecy from the Lord? he tells him he had, and it was this, that he must be
delivered up into the hands of the King of Babylon. Moreover Jeremy said unto
the King, Wherein have I offended against thee, or against thy servants, or
against this people, that ye have put me in prison? where are now your Prophets
which prophesied unto you, saying, the King of Babylon shall not come against
you, nor against this land? Therefore hear now, I pray thee, O my Lord the
King, let my supplication be accepted before thee, that thou cause me not to
return to the house of Jonathan the Scribe lest I die there. Then Zedekiah the
King commanded that they should commit Jeremiah unto the Court of the prison,
and that they should give him daily a piece of bread out of the Bakers street
until all the bread of the City were spent; and so Jeremiah remained in the
Court of the Prison.

Jer. 37. from 16, to the end.

The siege continuing, Zedekiah sent again to Jeremy, but he returning the same
answer, viz. that both King and people must fall into the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar, and that they that would stay in the City should perish, either
by famine, sword or pestilence, but they that would go out should have their
lives saved. The Princes were so exceedingly enraged against him for this
answer that they desired of the King that he might be put to death, looking
upon him as a person that weakened the hands and hearts of the people; and (the
King leaving it to them) they cast Jeremy into Malchias dungeon (which was in
the Court of the prison) into which being let down by cords his feet sank in
the mire when he came to the ground; from which loathsome dungeon he was
delivered by the intercession and help of Ebedmelech one of the Kings Eunuchs,
and put again into the Court of the prison.

Jer. 21. whole Chapter.

Jer. 38. from 1, to 14.

Zedekiah sends for Jeremy once more, and in the principal entry of the Lords
house, privately consults him. The Prophet expressing his fear that the King
would kill him, or give him into the hands of those men that sought his life,
if he dealt faithfully with him. The King thereupon swear to him, saying, as
the Lord lives who made us this soul, no such thing shall happen to thee;
whereupon he counseled the King by yielding himself to save his life. The King
having commanded the Prophet to conceal what passed between them from the
Princes, he departed, and Jeremy continued in the Court of the prison to the
day the City was taken.

Jer. 38. from 14, to the end.

Jeremy remaining thus in the Court of the prison, he assures Ebedmelech (who
had been so kind to him) from the Lord that he should be free from all danger
and harm in that approaching calamity, because he had put his trust in the Lord.

Jer. 39. from 15, to the end.

In the eleventh year of the Captivity of Jeconiah, the first month, God by
Ezekiel foretells the calamity of the City of Tire (which much rejoiced at the
miseries the Jews were fallen into by the Babylonians) that she also should
fall by the same hand. And he foretells also that the like misery should befall
the Sidonians their neighbors, to the glory of God, and comfort of the Church.
At that time it seems the fame of Daniel's wisdom was grown so great even in
foreign Nations, that they used to say by way of Proverb, As wise as Daniel.
And therefore God upbraiding the King of Tire with his pride and arrogance,
Behold (says he) thou art wiser than Daniel, no secret can be hid from thee;
therefore I will bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of the Nations, and
they shall bring thee down, etc.

Ezekiel. Chapter 26. Chapter 27. Chapter 28.

In the same year also, in the third month, God revealed his will to Ezekiel of
sending Nebuchadnezzar against Pharaoh to the ruin of the Egyptians. In the
same month also God declared that the Egyptians could no more avoid his decree
and determination than the Assyrians had done before.

Ezekiel. Chapter 30. Chapter 31.

In the eleventh year of Zedekiah, the ninth day of the fourth month, when the
famine grew extreme in the City, and the pestilence (as it is like) very hot,
Jerusalem was broken up, and the Caldeans entered it.

Ezekiel. 4. from 9, to the end.

Lament. 4.10.

2 King. 25.2, 3, 4.

Jer. 52.5, 6, 7.

Jer. 39.2, 3.

The City being taken, Zedekiah and all the men of war fled away by night by
the way of the Gate between two walls which was by the Kings garden, being (it
seems) a secret way provided on purpose for escape in such a time of danger,
but the Caldeans pursuing after them, took Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho
and brought him prisoner to Riblah (where Nebuchadnezzar lay) where having
judgment passed upon him for his perjury, and having seen his children first
slain before his eyes (to his extreme torment) together with the Nobles of
Judah, he had then his own eyes put out, and being clogged with chains and
fetters, he was carried away from thence to Babylon; so the Prophesies before
uttered concerning him were fulfilled, viz. that with his eyes he should see
the King of Babylon, and speak with him mouth to mouth, [Jer. 32.4. and 34.3.]
But Babylon he should not see, though he should die there. For so the Prophet
Ezekiel foretold Chapter 12.13. My net also will I spread upon him, and he shall be
taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon to the land of the Caldeans,
yet shall he not see it, though he shall die there.

2 King. 25. from 4, to 8.

Jer. 39. from 4, to 8.

Jer. 52. from 7, to 12.

Upon the seventh day of the fifth month, Nebuzaradan Captain of the Guard sent
by Nebuchadnezzar made his entry into the City, and on the tenth day he set
fire on the Temple, and on the Kings Palace, and upon all the Noblemens houses
in Jerusalem, and burnt all down to the ground, and brake down the walls of
Jerusalem round about. In remembrance of which dismal calamity the Fast of the
fifth month was ordained to be kept. [ Zach. 7.3. and v. 5. and Zach. 8.19.]
Thus was the glorious Temple destroyed in the nineteenth year of
Nebuchadnezzars reign, and four hundred twenty four years, three months, and
eight days after that Solomon laid the first stone thereof.

2 King. 25.8, 9, 10.

Jer. 52.12, 13, 14.

Jer. 39.8.

In the same fifth month the walls of Jerusalem being broken down, all that
were left in the City, and all that had before fled over to Nebuchadnezzar, and
all the common people of the City, with all the treasure of the King and his
Nobles, and furniture of the Temple, did Nebuzaradan carry away to Babylon; and
thus was Judah for their sins removed out of her own land, four hundred sixty
eight years after David began to reign over it. From the division of the Ten
Tribes from the Tribe of Judah three hundred eighty eight years and from the
destruction of the Kingdom of Israel, one hundred thirty four years.

If any shall enquire why the Lord gave up this his own people into the hands
of their enemies, you may find 2 Chronicles. 36. from v. 12, to 20. that the high
provocations both of King and people were the cause thereof. Zedekiah did that
which was evil in the sight of the Lord his God, and humbled not himself before
Jeremiah the Prophet speaking to him from the mouth of the Lord; and he also
rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God, but he
stiffned his neck, and hardened his heart from turning unto the Lord God of
Israel: Moreover all the chief of the Priests, and the people transgressed very
much after all the abominations of the heathen, and polluted the house of the
Lord which he had hallowed in Jerusalem. And the Lord God of their fathers sent
to them by his messengers, rising up betimes That is, continually and carefully
sendding them, a Metaphor taken from careful householders who with the soonest
seek to redress mischiefs, causing their servants for that end to rise betimes.
, and sending, because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling
place; but they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and
misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, and
there was no remedy After that there remained nothing but expectation of
judgment.
. Therefore he brought upon them the King of the Caldees, who slew their young
men with the sword, in the house of their Sanctuary That is, the Temple,
whither it is like many of them fled for refuge.
, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped
for age, he gave them all into his hand. And all the vessels of the house of
God great and small, and the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the
treasures of the King, and of his Princes, all these he brought to Babylon: And
they burnt the house of God, and brake down the walls of Jerusalem, and burnt
all the Palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof.

Jer. 39.9.

Jer. 52.15.

2 King. 25. from 11, to 18.

2 Chronicles. 36. from 14, to 22.

The Scripture says that they that were carried away captive to Babylon in the
eleventh year of Zedekiah were to continue seventy years in their captivity, 2 Chronicles. 36.20, 21. And them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to
Babylon, where they were servants to him and his sons, until the reign of the
Kingdom of Persia. To fulfill the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremy,
until the land had enjoyed her Sabbaths; for as long as she lay desolate she
kept Sabbath, to fulfill threescore and ten years. Where, by those words [until
the land had enjoyed her Sabbaths] we are to understand that so long as the
people were kept out of it, the land rested, there being none to plow or dig it
up, and so it continued for the most part till the expiration of seventy years
as Jeremy had Prophesied, Jer. 25.11. And this whole land shall be a
desolation, and an astonishment, and these Nations shall serve the King of
Babylon seventy years. And Chap. 29.10. Thus says the Lord, after seventy
years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word
toward you, in causing you to return to this place. And so that came to pass
which God threatened, Levit. 26.34, 35. Then shall the land enjoy her Sabbaths,
as long as it lies desolate it shall rest, because it did not rest in your
Sabbaths when ye dwelt upon it See Page 169.
. Hereupon many begin the seventy years captivity from the destruction Here
many begin the Seventy years captivity, though some begin it from the carrying
away of Jeconiah, 2 King. 24.12.
of Jerusalem, which are called the seventy years of the desolations of
Jerusalem, Dan. 9.2. Now the desolation of that City was not till the last
fatal destruction of it.

And the same term also of seventy years is set for, the subjection of the
neighboring Nations, as we find Isai. 23.15. And it shall come to pass in that
day that Tire shall be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one
King, after the end of seventy years shall Tire sing as an harlot, etc.

CHAP. VI. The sixth Age of the World, containing the space of time from the
carrying of Judah into Captivity, unto the liberty granted by Cyrus for their
return, and consists of seventy years, ending in the 3478 year of the World.
THE City of Jerusalem and the Temple being thus destroyed and burnt down to
the ground by Nebuzaradan, he left only a few, and those of the poorer sort of
the people there to dress the Vineyards, and to be husbandmen; over whom
Gedaliah the Son of Ahikam a man of the same Nation was placed Governor, but
as a Provincial Governor only without any badg of Regality or Kingly Title.
It Is like this Gedaliab was one of those that followed the advice which the
Prophet Jeremy gave both to Zedekiah and the rest, Jer. 21.8, 9, 10. And unto
this people thou shall say, thus says the Lord, Behold I set before you the
way of life, and the way of death. He that abides in this City shall die by
the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence; but he that goes out and
falls to the Caldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be
unto him for a prey. For I have set my face against this City for evil, and not
for good, says the Lord, it shall be given into the hand of the King of
Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire. It Is like therefore that upon this
account he was made Governor by Nebuchadnezzar's command.

Jer. 39.10.

Jer. 40.5.

2 King. 25.12. and 22.

Seraiah the chief Priest, and Zephaniah the second Priest, and the three
Keepers of the Gate of the Temple, and other principal men (by whose counsels
Zedekiah had been much led to resist the King of Babylon contrary to Jeremy's
warnings) Nebuzaradan took and carried them to Riblah to Nebuchadnezzar, and
there they were put to death. But Jehozadak the Son of Seraiah (who after him
came to be High Priest) was carried away prisoner to Babylon.

2 King. 25. from 18, to 22.

Jer. 52. from 24, to 28.

1 Chronicles. Chapter 6.15.

The Prophet Jeremy being bound with chains, was carried with the rest as far
as Rama toward Babylon, and had there his irons knocked off, and was set at
liberty, and had his choice given him, whither he would go on to Babylon and
there to be honorably treated, or stay in Judea with those poor people that
were there left? And he choosing to stay, was sent back with money in his purse
to Gedaliah the Governor, who made his residence at Mizpeh in the Tribe of
Benjamin.

Jer. 39. from 11, to 15.

Jer. 40. from 1, to 7.

Some of those Captains and Soldiers which upon the taking of Jerusalem had
fled away by night, and were scattered over the Country, and some of the Jews
that had fled to the Moabites and Ammonites, and other neighboring Nations,
returned after a while to Gedaliah into their own Country, where they had good
provision of wine and oil, and other summer-fruits to subsist withal. Gedaliah
made his residence at Mizpeh in the Tribe of Benjamin, leaving the rest of the
Jews that were with him to live in such Towns as they thought fit.

Jer. 40. from 7, to 13.

2 King. 25.23, 24.

Ismael the Son of Nethaniah of the race of the Kings of Judah had (it seems)
during the siege of Jerusalem kept himself out of the storm with Baalis King of
the Ammonites, Jer. 40.14. and being of the Royal seed he envied that the
Government of the Jews should be committed to Gedaliah, who seems to have been
but of private condition, and being stirred up likewise (as it is probable) by
the King of Ammon, he made a conspiracy with some few more to slay him. Johanan
(of whom mention is made, 2 King. 25.23.) came and discovered this conspiracy
to Gedaliah, and offered his help to dispatch Ismael to prevent it; but
Gedaliah would not believe it, but thought he spoke falsely of Ismael, and
would by no means consent he should be taken off. Not long after Ismael came to
him with ten resolute fellows to Mizpeh, where Gedaliah friendly entertained
him, giving no credit to such as informed him of his treacherous intentions
against him; and in the seventh month Ismael with his associates (taking their
opportunity) wickedly murdered Gedaliah, and such Jews and Caldeans as he had
then about him. And a day or two after fourscore Jews coming from several
places of the Kingdom in a most sad and mournful manner with their beards
shaven, and clothes rent, and having cut themselves, deploring the desolation
that was fallen upon Jerusalem, and bringing certain offerings and incense with
them which they purposed to offer to the Lord in the place where the Temple
before stood, (now lying in its dust) Ismael having notice of their coming went
out to meet them, and with counterfeit tears making show that he also bore a
part with them in their sorrow, he invited them to go with him to Gedaliah,
feigning himself to be one of his friends (thereby to try how they stood
affected to him) and having gotten them within the City of Mizpeh, he and his
companions slew them all there in the open streets (ten only excepted, whom he
spared, because they promised to discover to him some treasure hid in the
fields during the war) and the bodies of the slain he threw into King Asa's pit
In the days of King Baasha Asa King of Judah it seems made a pit in Mizp^h for
a hiding place in case of danger, of which we find no mention but only here.
, which he made in Mizpeh for fear of Baasha. See 1 King. 15.22.

Jer. 40. from 13, to the end.

Jer. 41. from 1, to 10.

2 King. 25.25.

Ismael having now taken the Kings daughters (whom the Caldeans had left
behind, being hidden possibly at first, and afterward coming forth had
committed themselves to the care of Gedaliah) and many others of the people
captive, he was returning with them as his prisoners to the King of Ammon, but
Johanan meeting him with a band of men near Gibeon took from him all his
prisoners, and set them at liberty, and Ismael with only eight men more
escaping his hands, fled to the Ammonites.

Jer. 41. from 10, to 16.

Johanan and his Captains with the rest of the people remaining for a while
about Bethlem, fearing at last that the Caldeans would send in some forces upon
them to revenge the death of Gedaliah, and the Caldeans that were slain with
him, and so utterly destroy all the Jews that were in the land, they thought it
best to fly with the people that were left, into Egypt. But first they consult
Jeremy about it, and desire him to ask counsel of the Lord for them in that
matter. Hereupon (they promising faithfully to conform themselves to the will
of God, whatever it should be) he after ten days brought them an answer,
advising them all not to stir out of their own Country, assuring them if they
staid, of Gods protection there; but telling them that if they went into Egypt
they should there every man of them perish, either by sword, famine, or some
other kind of death. But notwithstanding their former promise they would needs
go down into Egypt, and carried Jeremy and Baruc (against their wills) along
with them. And when they were come to Taphnes, Jeremy sharply reproved them,
and there declared to them under a type of great stones hid in clay in a
brick-kiln, the destruction of Egypt even by Nebuchadnezzar, The death of
Jeremy.
of whom they were so much afraid. And there (as it is thought) he was stoned to
death by his own ungrateful Countrymen.

Jer. 41. from 16, to the end.

Jer. 42. whole Chapter.

Jer. 43. whole Chapter.

2 King. Chapter 25. v. 26.

In the twelfth year of Jeconiah's captivity, the fifth day of the tenth month,
tidings came to Ezekiel of the taking of Jerusalem, and then he prophesied of
the utter destruction which should befall the last remainder of the Israelites
for their sins, even of those few who remained in their desolate Country after
the departure of those before mentioned who went into Egypt. The evening before
these tidings came to him, his mouth was opened again to prophecy to his own
people, which he had not done since the day that Nebuchadnezzar first laid
siege to Jerusalem three years ago, whereof one year and an half was taken up
in that siege, and the rest of the time had passed since the City was taken.

Ezekiel. 33. from 21, to 30.

The Prophet now after so long a silence having his mouth opened, and being
appointed a watchman, and willing to perform his duty, he declares first to
murmurers and hypocrites among the captive Jews, that God deals justly both
with penitents and back-sliders, that he delights not in the death of a
sinner, that his ways are just and equal, notwithstanding their calumnies. He
threatens such as mocked the Prophets, and went on in their wickedness and
hypocrisy.

Ezekiel. 33. from 1, to 21.

And from v. 30, to the end.

In the next place he threatens the shepherds of Israel both Civil and
Ecclesiastical for their unfaithfulness to the flock, Chapter 24. from 1, to 11. He
shows the tender care that God himself will have of his flock, from v. 11, to
23. He promises to raise up and send the chief shepherd and Prince of his
Church Jesus Christ, under whose Government his sheep shall be blessed, from v.
23, to the end.

Ezekiel. 24. whole Chapter.

He also threatens the Ammonites and Moabites, and mount Seir or Edom, and the
Philistines for their pride, hatred, and cruelty against Israel.

Ezekiel. 25. whole Chapter.

The Prophecy of OBADIAH.
Obadiah also (as it is probable) about this time uttered his Prophecy against
Edom, which shamefully insulted over the calamities of the Jews when Jerusalem
was destroyed. He threatens they shall be totally spoiled even more than an
house by night-robbers, or a vine by grape-gatherers. He foretells that their
counselors wisdom shall fail, and their Soldiers, and that they shall be
destroyed by the Caldeans, as it afterward happened. After the minatory part,
the Lord by his Prophet comforts his afflicted Church with a promise of
deliverance and victory over their enemies, and enlargement of their
possessions, most truly fulfilled in the calling of the Gentiles, and of the
Lords dominion over all. And the like did Jeremy, and also the Authors of those
Psalms, Psalm. 79. and 137. who wrote (as it seems) all about the same time.
And hitherto possibly the 63. of Isaiah is referrable though prophesied long
before.

Obadiah, whole Chapter.

Jer. 49. from 7, to 23.

Psalm. 79. and Psalm. 137.

Isa. 63. from 1, to 7.

Ezekiel now comforts the people of Israel, promising them that the Lord would
avenge them of their enemies, who had so spitefully used them. He promises
restoration and prosperity unto them in their own land. He shows that God was
necessitated to punish and chastise them for their sins, for the honor of his
name. But he will again out of his free grace and mercy abundantly bless them
both with spiritual and temporal blessings.

Ezekiel. 36. whole Chapter.

He Prophesies also of their return out of Babylon, though their condition
therein was as hopeless as of dead men in their graves, who are become dry
bones. And by the type of two sticks becoming one in the Prophets hand, he
shows the union and incorporation of Israel into Judah, and possibly the
uniting Jews and Gentiles together, under one King, viz. Christ the true
Messiah.

Ezekiel. 37. whole Chapter.

Further he prophesies of a glorious victory they shall have over Gog and
Magog, who shall distress them after their return from captivity; whereby some
understand the Scythians and Tartars that shall distress the Jews converted
unto Christ toward the latter end of the world.

Ezekiel. 38. whole Chapter.

Ezekiel. 39. whole Chapter.

In the twelfth year of Jeconiahs captivity, on the first day of the twelfth
month, Ezekiel uttered his Prophecy concerning the grievous calamity
Nebuchadnezzar should bring upon Egypt. And upon the 15th. day he Prophesies
against Egypt again; and foretells that Pharaoh and his people should be brought
down as low as hell, with the rest of the uncircumcised Nations.

Ezekiel. 32. whole Chapter.

Jeremy had (it seems) some time before prophesied of the destruction which
should follow the Israelites that were in Egypt for their desperate obstinacy
and Idolatry there practiced, saying it went well with them when they
sacrificed to the Queen of heaven, and for a sure sign of their misery gave
them Pharaoh himself, whom they should see brought to all extremities before
their eyes.

Jer. 44. whole Chapter.

The Lamentations of Jeremy (it is probable) were written about this time. The
Lamentations of JEREMIAH.
These are not those of Jeremy for Josiah mentioned, 2 Chronicles. 35.25. [And
Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing men and the siging women
spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations to this day, and made them an Ordinance
in Israel, and behold they are written in the Lamentations.] But these seem
written by Jeremy in the time of the Babylonish captivity, after the Temple and
City of Jerusalem were destroyed, the woeful calamities of that City, and the
people of God being the chief subject thereof. That passage Chap. 4.20. [The
breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits, of
whom we said, under his shadow we shall live among the heathen,] is more
properly applicable to King Zedekiah than Josiah.

The great City of Tire was now (as it seems) besieged by Nebuchadnezzar, and
the siege lasted thirteen years as Josephus reports, Antiq. Lib. 10. Cap. 11.
and in the compass of those thirteen years the neighboring Nations, as the
Moabites, Ammonites, and Edomites were also subdued by him according to the
prediction of Jeremy and Ezekiel.

Jer. 27.5, 6, 7.

Jer. 48. whole Chapter.

Jer. 49. whole Chapter.

Whilst Nebuchadnezzar lay before Tire, in the three and twentieth year of his
reign, Nebuzaradan Captain of his Guard carried away all the remainder of the
Jews (to the number, of seven hundred forty five persons) unto Babylon. These
possibly were such as having fled from the Babylonians and hid themselves, did
return into the land and dwelt therein for some time, but were now carried away
captive, and brought to their Brethren in Babylon. And this was the last and
extremest depopulation which caused the very earth to lie until'd, as God had
before threatened.

Jer. Chapter 52. v. 30.

In the five and twentieth year of the Captivity of Jeconiah, the tenth day of
the first month (fourteen years after the destruction of Jerusalem) Ezekiel had
that glorious vision of a new Temple (surpassing the glory of Zerubbabels) of a
new worship, new land, and new City, which as here described is incapable of a
literal meaning, but signifies the restoration of the Church by Christ, with
the greatness, honor, and excellency thereof. Possibly the Evangelist alludes
to it in his Celestial Jerusalem, Rev. 21.10, etc. And as our Savior said,
his Kingdom was not of this world; so we may say the sense of Ezekiel's Land,
City and Temple, is mystical and spiritual. It Is generally conceived that this
vision imports the great enlargement of the Church under the Gospel when the
Gentiles shall be called to the knowledge of Christ, and the Jews also (as
mainly concerned though not solely intended in this vision) brought home to the
true Messiah, not excluding those of the Ten Tribes, from having each one a
child's portion in the performance of this Prophecy.

Ezekiel 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
Chapters.

Tire at last was given up to Nebuchadnezzar, being rendered upon conditions,
and not taken by force as Josephus reports, Lib. 1. contra Apion.

Nebuchadnezzar laying hold of the troubles and commotions that were in Egypt,
between the King and his Son Amasis (and peradventure solicited by Amasis to
assist him against his father) he invaded that Country with his Army, and
having gotten it into his hand, even from Siene to the end thereof, he made
havoc not only of the Egyptians but of the Jews that dwelt among them, killing
some, and leading away the rest into captivity, according to the several
Prophesies of Jeremy and Ezekiel.

Jer. 43. from 8, to the end.

Jer. 44. whole Chapter.

Jer. 46. whole Chapter.

Ezekiel. 29. whole Chapter.

Ezekiel. 30. whole Chapter.

Ezekiel. 31. whole Chapter.

Nebuchadnezzar having finished his Conquests, returned to Babylon, and there
in his thirty fifth year (as he lay at ease in all kind of pleasure in his own
house) had that remarkable dream of the great Tree whose destiny it was to be
cut down; the meaning whereof he could not learn from his Magicians and Wizards
of Caldea, but the Prophet Daniel unfolded it to him, and showed him (though
with great astonishment) that the dream was to be fulfilled in himself, and
therefore exhorts him to repentance.

Dan. 4. from 1, to 28.

Nebuchadnezzar (it seems) about this time new-built Babylon in a magnificent
manner, and raised also there many vast and stately structures, among which
that famous and so much renowned Garden born upon pillars, called the hanging
Garden, was one which he built in favor to his wife Amyrtis, who desired the
pleasure of the Hills in that low Country, as having been brought up in Media,
as Berosus reports. Vid. Usher. page 94.

Twelve whole months were no sooner past but Nebuchadnezzar growing proud and
insolent, and boasting of the magnificence of his buildings, fell distracted,
and being put from his house Some think he was possessed by an evil spirit, and
that being mischievous he was driven from among men See Chapter 5.21.
and home, spent seven years in the woods and fields among beasts; but at the
end of seven years was restored both to his right wits and Kingdom again; and
thereupon publicly proclaims Gods great grace and mercy manifested unto him,
and his power over all Nations, and so departed this life when he had reigned
about twenty months copartner in the Kingdom with his Father, and forty three
years by himself alone.

Dan. 4. from 28, to the end.

After him came Evilmerodach his Son, in the thirty seventh year of the
Captivity of Jeconiah. He being settled in the Throne gave order for the
enlarging of Jeconiah Zedekiah died in prison at Babylon, Jer. 52.11. and had
only the honor of being buried as a Prince, and lamented at his Funeral by his
people, Jer. 34.5. Thou shall die in peace, and with the burnings of thy
Fathers the former Kings which were before thee, so shall they burn odours for
thee, and they will lament thee, saying, Ah Lord! for I have pronounced the
word says the Lord.
, on the five and twentieth day of the twelfth month; and two days after he was
taken out of his prison-clothes, and set above all the Princes of the Court,
and reckoned among the number of the Kings friends; so that all his life time
after he did eat at the Kings Table, and was used with all Princely respect.

Jer. 52. from 31, to the end.

2 King. 25. from 27, to the end.

Evilmerodach being a man much hated for his vicious life, had many attempts
made upon him, and at last was murdered by Neriglissarus his sisters husband,
when he had reigned little more than two years as Josephus testifies, Lib. 1.
contra Apion.

It Is probable that Jeconiah died much about this time also.

In the Kingdom of Media upon the decease of Astyages (called Tobit 14.17.
Assuerus) succeeded his son Cyaxares, Cyrus's mothers brother, called in
Daniel, Darius.

The King of Babylon now not only raised his own subjects, but also solicited
Croesus King of Lydia, with the Cappadocians, both sorts of Phrygians, Carians,
Paphlagonians, and Cilicians on the West, and the very Indians on the East Side
of him to join with him in arms against the Medes and Persians, remonstrating
to them that they were two great Nations, and now linked together by affinity,
and would (if not looked unto and opposed in time) overrun and bring into
subjection all Countries far and near. Whereupon Cyrus was by his Father
Cambyses, and the Council of the Kingdom made General of the Persian forces,
and sent away into Media with thirty thousand Soldiers, and one thousand
Commanders; and when he came thither he was by his Uncle Cyaxares (who had sent
for him) made General of the Median forces also, and the management of the war
against the Babylonians wholly committed to him.

Cyaxares and Cyrus march against the Babylonian King, and against Croesus and
the rest of the Confederates, and gained a great victory over them. The King of
Babylon fell in the battle, Croesus with those of his people that were left
brake up his Camp by night and fled. Cyrus having made a league with the
Hircanians (who had fallen over to him from the Babylonians) using their help
and guidance in the way, pursued the enemy that was fled, overtook them, and
fought them, and again overthrew them. The Hircanians fell upon the Companies
of the Cappadocians and Arabians, and slew both their Kings. Cyrus sparing the
lives of such as were either taken by force, or had yielded to mercy, divided
the spoil of the field among his Soldiers. Herod. Lib. 3, and 4.

Belshazzar Grandchild to Nebuchadnezzar by his son Evilmerodach succeeds in
the Kingdom. In the first year of this Kings reign Daniel had the vision showed
him of the four Beasts, signifying the four Monarchies of the World, and of
Gods delivering over all power and Sovereignty to the Son of Man.

Dan. 7. whole Chapter.

In the third year of Belshazzar Daniel had the vision of the Ram and He-goat,
foreshewing the destruction of the Persian Monarchy by Alexander, and that he
being dead, and his horn broken, four horns should arise instead thereof,
denoting four Kingdoms, and that out of one of them a little horn should come
forth, viz. Antiochus Epiphanes, which should prevail to take away the daily
Sacrifice, and bring much misery upon the people of God. This was showed to
Daniel then living at Susa in the Province of Elam, upon the bank of the river
Vlai, which was then in the hands of the King of Babylon, under whom Daniel
lived. And the Angel Gabriel comforted Daniel, and interpreted the vision to
him by the command of Christ.

Dan. 8. whole Chapter.

In the year of the world three thousand four hundred sixty five Cyrus and
Belshazzar (those two great Lords of the world) fought a pitched battle near
Babylon, and the Caldeans being worsted, retired to the City, where Cyrus
besieged them with a vast army. When he had viewed the wall he concluded there
was no storming of it, and therefore resolved that the best way was to pine and
starve them out; at which the besieged scoffed, as thinking themselves utterly
out of danger. But Cyrus taking notice how the river ran through the City,
caused deep ditches to be made, which by draining rendered it fordable, and
taking advantage of a solemn Feast which they kept, entered by night and
surprised them, whilst they were banqueting and reveling, and in their cups.
And so vastly big was the City, that when the skirts of it were surprised and
taken, they who dwelt in the heart of the City heard not of it; to which that
of Jeremiah seems to have reference, Jer. 51.31. that post upon post, and
messenger upon messenger should run to tell the King of Babylon that all the
skirts of the City were possessed by the enemies.

Belshazzar was at this time (as it seems) feasting with his Nobles, and had
caused to be brought forth the vessels of silver and gold which his Grandfather
For that he was his Sons Son may be gathered out of Jer. 27.7. And all Nations
shall serve him, and his Son, and his Sons Son, until the very time of his land
come, and then many Nations and great Kings shall serve themselves of him.
Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the Temple at Jerusalem, that he, his nobles,
his wives and concubines might drink in them. But God suddenly sent a hand to
write upon the wall, where the King and his Nobles sat drinking, Mean, Mean,
Tekel, Vpharsin. Hereby evidently declaring that sudden destruction should fall
upon him. But his Wizards of Caldea could not read the writing; hereupon his
Queen advised him to send for Daniel, who came and both read the writing, as
also gave the interpretation thereof, and for his pains was presently
proclaimed the third man in the Kingdom. Presently after this in this very
night was Belshazzar slain by the Soldiers of Gobrias and Gadales, who having
been formerly injured by him had revolted to Cyrus. And so the Babylonish
Kingdom came to an end, as had been sundry times foreto^^ by Isaiah, Chap. 13.
Chap. 14. Chap. 21. Chap. 34. Chap. 46. and Chap. 47.] By Habakkuk, [Chap. 2.]
and by Jeremy, [Chap. 25. and Chapter 50, and 51.]

Dan. 5. from 1, to 31.

The Babylonish Empire being now translated to the Medes and Persians, Darius
the Mede, (Son of Ahashuerus, otherwise called Cyaxares the Son of Astyages)
took upon him the Kingdom, which was delivered to him by Cyrus the Conqueror.
And the Angel in this first year of his reign, is said to have confirmed and
strengthened him in his Kingdom. After which he reigned two years.

Dan. 5.31.

Dan. 9.1.

Dan. 11.1.

Cyrus having set all things in order at Babylon, went into Media and married
the only daughter and heir of Darius, and for dowry had the whole Kingdom of
Media given him with her, and the marriage finished he returned with her to
Babylon.

Darius now set over the Kingdom a hundred and twenty Princes or Governors,
and over all the Governors he made three Overseers, the principal of which was
Daniel, whereupon the rest of the Governors being stirred up by a spirit of
envy against him, moved the King to make a decree that for thirty days space no
petition should be made to any God or man but to himself alone; which decree
when Daniel had broken by making his prayer to God three times a day, he was
cast into the Lions den, and thence delivered without any hurt at all done to
him; and then Darius having caused those malicious plotters to be cast into the
same Lions den, published that memorable decree through all his dominions, that
every man therein should reverence and stand in awe of Daniels God.

Dan. 6. whole Chapter.

Toward the end of the first year of the reign of Darius over the Babylonish
Empire, the seventy years of the captivity of the Jews drew toward a period,
and this was the last of those years of their calamty specified by Jeremy,
Chap. 25.12. And it shall come to pass when seventy years are accomplished,
that I will punish the King of Babylon, and that Nation, says the Lord, for
their iniquity, etc. And Chap. 29.10, etc. For thus says the Lord, that after
seventy years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good
word toward you, in causing you to return to this place. For I know the
thoughts that I think toward you, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give
you an expected end. Then shall ye call upon me, and pray unto me, and I will
hearken unto you. And ye shall seek me and find me, when you shall search for
me with all your heart; and I will be found of you, and I will turn your
captivity, and I will gather you from all the Nations, and from all the places
whither I have driven you, says the Lord, and I will bring you again into the
place whence I caused you to be carried away captive. Upon consideration of
which time now so near approaching, Daniel with fasting, sackcloth and ashes
poured out a most fervent prayer to the Lord for the remission of his own sins,
and the sins of the people, and for the promised deliverance out of their
captivity. Whereupon the Angel Gabriel brought him an answer not only
concerning this, but also concerning the spiritual deliverance of the Church to
be wrought at last by the death of the Messiah, uttering that most famous and
memorable Prophecy of the seventy weeks, recorded Chapter 9. v. 24, Daniels
Seventy weeks.
25, 26, 27. which are generally understood not of weeks of days, but of years,
each day being put for a year; and seventy being multiplied by seven (every
week consisting of seven days) do make 490, that is, 490 years. And it is usual
in Scripture to signify years by days, as may appear from Numb. 14.34. and
Ezekiel. 4.5, 6. Now for the finding out the meaning of these words we shall
enquire, 1. When those seventy weeks did begin. 2. When they did end. 3. What
is the meaning of that section or division of the seventy weeks into seven
weeks, sixty two weeks, and one week. First, the seventy weeks did begin when
the Commandment went forth to restore and build Jerusalem, verse. 25. which was
at the end of the seventy years captivity, and in the first year of the
Monarchy of Cyrus, Ezra 1.1. where although express mention was not made for
the building of Jerusalem but of the Temple, yet it was implied because they
had liberty to build themselves houses in Jerusalem, and accordingly they did
upon that grant go about the building of the City as well as of the Temple,
Ezra 4.1, 12. Neither were they charged by their malicious adversaries for
going beyond their commission in building the City more than in building the
Temple. And 2ly, it was prophesied and foretold long before of Cyrus, that he
should build not the Temple only, but the City also, Isai. 44.28. and Chap.
45.13. So much for the beginning of these weeks.

2ly, The seventy weeks did end at the death and passion of Christ, which I
shall labor to prove by these reasons: 1. Because the things the Angel
mentions [ v. 24.] are properly the effects of Christ's death. Particularly (1)
the Text says seventy weeks are determined to finish transgression, and to make
an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity. All which expressions
seem to hold out one and the same thing. For our Savior by his death made
satisfaction, and wrought redemption for his people, as may appear from these
places, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14, 20, 21, 22. Heb. 9.26. 1 John 1.7. Rev. 1.5. (2)
To bring in everlasting righteousness; now Christ's satisfaction is the ground
of our being righteous or justified before God, Romans 3.25. Phil. 3.9. 2 Cor.
5.21. 2 Pet. 1.1. (3) To seal Ut obsignet visionem, i. e. ut reipsa praestet
Prophetias de perpessionibus and Gloria Messiae. 1 Pet. 1.11. Vatab.
the vision and prophecy; that is, thereby all the visions and prophesies
concerning the Messiah were sealed, confirmed, and accomplished. (4) To anoint
Ut ungat sanctum, i. e. ut per ascensionem suam in coelum consecret illud ad
cultum Dei illic ab electis in illud assumptis peragendum: Sicut Moses olim
unxit sacratissimam Tabernaculi partem ad cultum Ceremonialem, etc. Pisc.
the most holy; Our Savior by his blood may truly be said to have anointed the
most holy, that is Heaven, as the High Priest (being a type of him) did anoint
the most holy place in the Sanctuary by presenting and sprinkling of blood, as
the Apostle, Heb. 9. from 1, to 13. does make the parallel between them. The
reason of the Angels mentioning the destruction of the City and Sanctuary, ver.
26. is conceived by diverse learned men to be chiefly to set out the dreadful
vengeanc of God that should fall on the Jews for putting the Messiah to death,
and therefore it is not necessary that the destruction of the City and Sanctuary
should come within the compass of the seventy weeks, but did follow after as
the fruit of their cruelty toward him. Lastly, it is said v. 27. that in the
last week the Messiah should confirm the Covenant, and cause the sacrifice and
oblation to cease. Now when was the Covenant confirmed but at and by the death
of Christ? as the Apostle speaks expressly, Heb. 9.16, 17. And when were the
Sacrifices or Oblations made to cease but when Christ did offer up himself a
sacrifice to God upon the Cross, Heb. 10.5, 10. For the body or truth being
come, the shadows and types were to be abolished, Col. 2.17. But if the seventy
weeks did not end before the destruction of the City, then the confirmation of
the Covenant, and the causing of the Sacrifices and Oblations to cease (which
we say was done) by the death of Christ, could not be in the last week as the
Angel said; for the destruction of Jerusalem was not (as is generally
acknowledged) till about forty years after the death of Christ.

For the meaning of that section and division of the seventy weeks into 7, 62,
and 1, (for so the Angel does parcel and divide them) we must know that the
first section being seven weeks (which make 49 years) may possibly signify the
time from the return out of Babylon (when liberty was granted to the Jews for
the building of the Temple) unto the finishing of it, in the sixth year of
Darius, see Ezra 6.15. For after they had begun the work there in a short time
they were forced to give it over through the complaint and opposition of their
adversaries, until the second year of Darius, (which might be about 46 years
from the first year of Cyrus) and then Darius making a new decree for the
furtherance of the building, it was set upon afresh, and finished in the space
of three years, or little more, viz. in the sixth year of Darius. So that in
all from the first year of Cyrus (wherein they might begin the work) unto the
sixth year of Darius, wherein it was finished, there might be 49 years, or
seven weeks.

The second Section is of 62 weeks after the former seven, viz. from the sixth
year of Darius when the Temple was finished to the week wherein the Messiah was
to be cut off.

The third Section is of one week which is the last of the seventy, wherein the
Messiah was to be cut off.

This week the Angel seems to divide into two halves, intimating some special
thing that was to happen about the middle of it, and that might possibly be the
Baptism of Christ, and his entering on his Prophetic office to preach, and work
miracles; and then that in the end of that week, (which was the other half) he
should be slain, and cut off, and so by his death cause the sacrifice and
oblation to cease. And that space of three years and an half from the Baptism
of Christ to his death may be gathered from the four Passovers which he
celebrated after his Baptism. Now in the compass of these seventy weeks, or 490
years there flourished (1) the Persian Monarchy; (2) the Grecian or Macedonian;
and (3) the Roman was begun.

Dan. 9. whole Chapter.

About this time Cyrus (his own Father Cambyses being dead in Persia, and
Darius his Father-in law and Uncle in Media) had all the Empire and Monarchy of
the East in his hands, and this the Scripture reckons as the first year of his
reign, namely as absolute Monarch. It seems by Daniel or some other of the Jews
it was discovered to him, that many years before God had revealed to his
Prophet Isaiah, [see Chapter 44.28. and Chapter 45* 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and v. 14.] that he
was ordained and appointed by God to vanquish Babylon, and to deliver the Jews
out of their captivity, and to cause their City and Temple to be rebuilt. This
Prophecy they showed him as Josephus reports, Lib. 11. Antiq. Chapter 1. And when
he had read it, he was much affected with it; and God stirred up his spirit to
deliver the Jews, and set them free. Accordingly in this year came forth that
renowned Edict of his, mentioned 2 Chronicles. 36.23. of which we shall speak more
afterward. And in this year the seventy years of the Babylonish captivity
being expired, Cyrus gave leave to all the Jews dwelling any where in his
Dominions to return into their own Country, The end of the Seventy years
Captivity.
and commanded such as did return to fall in hand with reedifying of the
Temple. And he allowed the charge thereof out of his own Treasure, and restored
to them all the Vessels of the Lords house which Nebuchadnezzar had brought
from thence.

Dan. 9. whole Chapter.

2 Chronicles. 36.22, 23.

Ezra 1. from 1, to 5.

CHAP. VII. The seventh Age of the World from the return out of Babylon, and
the end of the Seventy years Captivity to the death of Christ, containing a
space of Four hundred and ninety years, signified by Daniel's Seventy Weeks
mentioned, Chap. 9. v. 24, 25, 26, 27.
THE Jews had now free leave by Cyrus's Royal Proclamation given them, to
return to their own Country The first year after the conquest of Babylon was
reckoned at the first year of Cyrus, for he was esteemed as Monarch of those
Kingdoms, though he was not absolute Monarch till the death of his Uncle Darius.
, in which he speaks after this manner, That God having given all the Kingdoms
of the Earth (that were near him, or round about him) into his hands, and
having charged him (as he understood from the Prophecy of Isaiah, Chapter 44.28.
and Chapter 45.13.) to build a Temple for his Worship at Jerusalem, he was willing
to do it, and therefore declares that whoever among his people the Jews were
willing to return to their own Country, and to build an house for their God
(who is the only true God) he gave them free leave to do it, and desired the
Lord to prosper them therein. And as for all such Jews as were not
housekeepers but strangers and sojourners in any part of his dominions, and
had a mind to return to Jerusalem he gave license to the men of that place
(where they were sojourners) to furnish them with silver and gold, and all
necessary provisions and horses to carry them and their goods, and declares
that they shall have free liberty to carry away these things, and if any other
persons have a mind to send by them a freewill offering for the building of the
Temple, they may freely do it.

The Jews upon this gracious Proclamation (being well accommodated with
Necessaries They had Horses 736, Mules 245, Camels 435, Asses 6720. See Ezr.
2.66, 67.
for their journey by those among whom they lived) prepare to return unto their
own Country, namely all such among them whose spirit God raised to go up (for
some of them being well settled there were loath to remove) and over them that
were minded to return Cyrus made Zerubbabel (the Son of Salathiel and
Grandchild to Jechoniah being the chief Prince of the Tribe of Judah) Governor
and Chieftain and his Lieutenant, so that the Government was still in the Tribe
of Judah, see Genesis 49.10. And into his hands did the Kings Treasurer by the
Kings command consign all the vessels belonging to the Temple (the whole number
of which reckoning the vessels here named, and others added thereunto amounted
to four thousand and four hundred) to be carried back to Jerusalem.

Ezra Chapter 1. Chapter 5. v. 13, 14, 15.

It Is like they began their return in the first month of the year, (which was
in the springtime) and they might be about four months in their travel, as
Ezra and his company were, Chapter 7.9. The number of those that returned with
Zerubbabel their Captain, and Joshuah their High Priest, we have set down in
the second Chapter of Ezra, and the seventh of Nehemiah There is some
difference between the Catalogue in Nehemiah, and this set down here, as at
Ezra 2.5. 775 of the children of Arah, and Neh. 7.10. 652 only are mentioned.
It Is like so many gave up their names in Babylon that they would return but
only 652 mentioned in Nehemiah came up into Judea, the rest either changing
their mind or dying by the way. So 2.6. compared with Nehem. 7.11. there are
found six more when they came into Judea than had given up their names in
Babylon. The like must be understood concerning ver. 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17,
19, 35, 41, 65. At v. 55. there is mention made of the children of Solomon's
servants, that is the strangers and proselytes, that were employed by Solomon
in the building of the Temple, and having lived long among the children of
Judah were now reckoned among them. At v. 61. there is mention made of the
children of Barzillai. Some conceive that these Priests marrying into the noble
family of Barzillai and disregarding the honor of the Priesthood, because in
the Captivity they were not employed as Priests, neither had profit or honor
by being Priests, did therefore choose to be called after the family of their
wives, but now being returned to Judea, and the Priesthood growing into request
again, these degenerate Priests would fain have taken place among the Priests
of the Lord, but not being able to prove their Genealogy, they were among
others as polluted persons put from the Priesthood, and the Tirshatha or
Governor said, that those Priests that could not prove their Genealogy should
not eat of the holy things or partake of the privilege of Priests till there
stood up a Priest with Urim and Thummim to inquire of the Lord for them in that
difficult case, whereby it is manifest that the Ephod wherein was the Urim and
Thummim was now lost, yet Zerubbabel seems to hope that it might by the
providence of God be again restored to them, yet we never read it was, the Lord
thereby teaching them that the Ceremonies were going, and the Messiah coming.
. The whole Congregation together was forty two thousand three hundred and
threescore If we compare the number that were carried away captive with those
that returned back again, we shall find a wonderful great increase of them
during their captivity; for there were carried into captivity at three times
four thousand and six hundred, Jer. 52.30. but we see how many returned out of
it.
, besides menservants and maidservants, whose number came to 7377, and there
were among them two hundred singing men, and singing women, who were employed
in singing at their weddings and funerals, and such solemnities, [see 2 Chronicles.
35.25.] that is, reckoning both those of Judah and Benjamin) of whom the
particular numbers are in those Chapters punctually set down) and those also of
the other Ten Tribes (that are not there mentioned) that were captive with the
Jews; for Salmanasser swept not all away out of all the Tribes, but left a
remnant of them in their own Country, which afterward together with the Jews
and Benjamites, and Levites, were carried away by Nebuchadnezzar into Babylon,
and were now dismissed and sent back again by Cyrus. After which as in the
first year of Cyrus all the Israelites are said to have dwelt in their own
Cities [Ezra 2.70.] So in the sixth year of Darius they are said to have been
present at the dedication of the Temple, and to have offered there twelve
he-goats for the sin of all Israel.

Ezra 6.16, 17. And long after when Christ preached the Gospel in Galilee, that
Prophecy of Isaiah is said to have been fulfilled of the people of Zebulon and
Naphtali, who saw a great light, Mat. 4.14, 15, 16. and Anna, Luke 2.76. is
said to be of the Tribe of Aser. To which we may add Act. 26.7. Unto which
promise our twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and night hope to come.


Ezra 2. from 1, to 68.

Nehem. 7. from 6, to 70.

The chief men of their fathers families, coming to Jerusalem to the place
where the house of the Lord formerly stood, offered every man according to his
ability toward the restoration of the Temple (making a treasure for the work)
to the sum of sixty one thousand drams of Gold The quantity of a dram of gold,
is 6 s. 3 d. so that by this account 61 thousand drams amounts to 19 thousand
62 pounds, 10 sh. A pound of silver is counted 12 ounces which is 3 l.
sterling, so that 5000 pound of silver amounts to 15000 pound sterling.
, and five thousand pound of silver, and one hundred Their care to provide
these gives evidence of their desire to have the worship of God duly
performed. That which is here in general noted concerning the gifts given for
the house of the Lord is more particularly set down, Neh. 7.70, 71, 72. but in
Nehemiah there is less set down than in Ezra by 2400; for Ezra sets down all
that was given by any of any sort. But Nehemiah no more than what was given by
the Governor, some of the chief Fathers, and the rest of the people of Judah
and Benjamin.
Priests garments In Ezra are set down only one hundred Priests garments. In
Nehem. 7.70, 71.530 Priests-garments, and 67 more, in all 527. it is probable
when they came to Jerusalem they observed more Priests than they thought would
have come, and thereupon the piety of many moved them to increase the number of
Priests garments. In Nehem. 7.70. mention is made of fifty Basins, whereof no
mention is made in Ezra.
. And both Priests and Levites and the rest of the people dwelt every man in
his own City, that is, in the Cities appointed for them by their present
Governor.

Ezra 2.68, 69, 70.

Nehem. 7. from 70, to the end.

On the first day of the seventh month of that year on the Feast of Trumpets,
the Israelites came all as one man out of their several Cities to Jerusalem,
and there Joshua and Zerubbabel and his brethren, that is, the Princes and
chief men that were with him, built the Altar upon the foundation where
Solomon's Altar was built; and the reason they laid not a new foundation was
because they feared if that business was not soon dispatched, they should be
hindered by the Samaritans their neighbors, who already began to threaten them
and bandy against them. And this being done, they every morning and evening
offered the daily sacrifice unto God, thereby testifying their piety and desire
of reconciliation between God and them, that so they might obtain his
protection against their enemies. And upon the fifteenth day of the same month
they kept the feast of Tabernacles With what extraordinary solemnity this Feast
was afterward kept we may see, Neh. 8. from 13, to the end:
, and offered the particular offerings that were every day of that feast to be
offered up, see Numb. 29.12, etc. And when the feast of Tabernacles was ended
(besides the continual burnt-offering which was every day morning and evening
to be offered) they celebrated the first day of every month; and all the set
feasts that were appointed by the Lord to be kept, and offered on the Altar
such freewill offerings as in testimony of any blessing received, or
deliverance vouchsafed from any danger were in thankfulness by any of the
people offered to God. And though the foundation of the Temple was not yet
laid, yet they would not forbear to perform such services to the Lord as might
be done without a Temple. Moreover they took care about providing Materials and
Workmen for the building of the Temple, giving money to Masons and Carpenters,
and meat and drink, and oil to the men of Tire and Sidon (who had Cedars in
great plenty, and great skill in squaring them) agreeing with them to Bring
Cedar-trees from Lebanon to the Port of Joppa for this service, see 1 King. 5.9.

Ezra 3. from 1, to 8.

In the second year after their return from Babylon in the second month they
appointed Levites to oversee the building of the house of God; and all things
being prepared they appointed the Priests in their proper robes with Trumpets
in their hands, and the Levites (the Sons of Asaph) with Cymbals, [see 1 Chronicles.
15.24.] to praise the Lord according to the Ordinance of David, [1 Chronicles.
6.31.] and they sang by course (observing their due rests and returns) the 118
and 136 Psalms, Giving thanks unto the Lord because he is good, and his mercy
indureth for ever toward Israel. And all the people shouting with a great
shout they laid the foundation of the Temple, but the old men (who had seen the
former Temple standing) wept with a loud voice, thinking this fabric would not
answer the former, but the younger sort greatly rejoiced in hope that a new
Temple would be erected. And the mourning of the one sort, and the rejoicing of
the other was so loud that the noise of both might be heard a great way off.

Ezra 3. from 8, to the end.

The Cutheans the old enemies of the Jews (who had heretofore been planted in
Samaria by Esarhaddon) now cunningly offered to join with them in the building
of the Temple, pretending that they served and sacrificed to the same God that
they did, though it is plain that they served also their Idols, as we may see 2
King. 17.33. But Zerubbabel and the rest of the fathers answered them, that
they had nothing to do to build an house for God with them for they were not of
the stock of Israel, neither did they purely and only worship the true God, but
worshipped Idols also. And therefore they tell them that they would build it
themselves as Cyrus had commanded them. The Cutheans being refused, set
themselves to oppose the Jews all they could in the work, and first by threats
and false rumors, endeavored to discourage the people from proceeding
therein; and afterward by means of some great men in the Emperors Court (whom
it seems they bribed) they did hinder the Jews from going on, and undoubtedly
obstructed their having those moneys out of the Kings revenue which Cyrus had
commanded should be given them for the building of the Temple, Chapter 6.4. Cyrus
himself (it seems) was at this time much engaged in foreign wars, and had left
his Son Cambyses to govern the Kingdom in his absence, and by this means it
happened that the forementioned Courtiers so far prevailed with Cambyses as to
hinder that work which Cyrus himself had commanded to be done. And thus the
work was hindered till the reign of Darius Histaspis, and this gave occasion (as
it should seem) to that three weeks mourning of the Prophet Daniel in the third
year of Cyrus, mentioned Dan. 10.2. After which upon the 24th. day of the first
month, the vision of the Kings of Persia, of Alexander the Great, and his
Successors, and their Kingdoms was showed and revealed unto him as he stood
upon the bank of Hiddekel, or the river Tigris; all which things are contained
in the three last Chapters of Daniel, which (as may be collected out of the
close thereof) was the last vision that ever he had, and that but a little
before his death.

Ezra Chapter 4. from 1, to 6.

Dan. Chapter 10. whole Chapter.

Chapter 11. whole Chapter.

Chapter 12. whole Chapter.

The people of Egypt carried away formerly by Nebuchadnezzar, after forty years
continuing there, were now sent back again by Cyrus into their own Country, and
so were restored to their own Kingdom in the latter end of Amasis's days.

Jer. 46. from 24, to 27.

Ezekiel. 29. from 8, to 17.

Cyrus being now seventy years of age, dies, having lived since he was first
made General of the Median and Persian Armies full thirty years, and after the
taking of Babylon nine years, and after his full Monarchy seven years.

He left his Kingdom to his Eldest son Cambyses, who is known in the Scripture
by the name of Ahasuerus, and probably also was called Artaxerxes [Ezra 4.7.]
for his valor in war. In the beginning of his reign the Samaritans (who had
hitherto sought secretly to undermine the Jews, and hinder them in their work
of building the Temple) now openly framed a direct information in writing Not
only this Letter, but all the History following to v. 19. of Chapter 6. is all in
the Chaldee Tongue.
against them, and presented it to the King, they wrote their Letter in the
Syrian or Caldee-tongue, and the messenger whom they sent delivered his message
in that language also. The Letter was composed by Rehum the Chancellor, and
written by Shimshai the Scribe in the name of themselves and others, mentioned
v. 7, 8, 9, 10. The contents of this Letter were these, They represent to the
King that the Jews who were returned from their captivity were now about
building the evil and rebellious Sempes insimulata rebellionis est Ecclesia,
confer Mat. 22.17.
City Jerusalem, (so they maliciously call it) and had begun to set up the
walls thereof (which was utterly false, see Nehem. 1.3.) and had joined the
foundations together. They insinuate that if this City be built, and the walls
finished, it will be a receptacle of rebels, who will neither pay toll,
tribute, nor custom to the King, and so the revenue of the Crown will be
diminished; and they themselves being the Kings officers having maintenance
from his Royal Palace, they thought it was not fit for them to see the King
dishonored and injured without informing him thereof as became such honest and
conscientious men as they were. Further, they desire that search may be made
into the records of his Predecessors, and there he would find that this City
had been a rebellious City, and hurtful unto Kings and Provinces, as it was in
the days of Jehoiakim and Zedekiah [2 King. 24.1, 20.] who rebelled against
Nebuchadnezzar, and so brought deserved destruction upon themselves. Lastly,
they itimate to him (and strive to put such a jealousy into his head) that if
he permitted that City to be built again, and the walls finished, the Jews
would not only for themselves withdraw their subjection from him, but would
bring the Nations round about them to be in subjection unto them, and so the
King would lose all his Dominions on that side the river Euphrates.

The King having received their Letter, returned them this answer, That their
Letter had been plainly read before him, and he had caused the records to be
searched, and found indeed that that City of old time (as in the instance of
Jehoiakim and Zedekiah before mentioned) had made insurrection against Kings,
and had been guilty of rebellion and of revolting. He found also mighty Kings
had reigned over Jerusalem (such as David and Solomon) who had ruled over all
Countries on that side the river, and that toll and tribute and custom had been
paid to them. Upon which considerations, and lest any further danger should
accrue to the Crown, he required them to command the Jews in his name to give
over the building of their City till he gave further order about it. These
Samaritans having received this Letter, not only the Kings command, but their
own malicious disposition against the Jews made them hasten with it to
Jerusalem that they might acquaint the Jews therewith; and not contented to
show them the Kings Letter and Authority (it seems) they came with armed men to
constrain them by violence to leave off the work. So by the malice of these
wicked men the building of the Lords house was hindered till the second year of
Darius.

Ezra 4. from 6, to the end.

Cambyses having reigned seven years died, and Smerdis the Magus succeeded him,
(who pretended himself to be Smerdis the younger Son of Cyrus, who was privily
murdered by Cambyses) and reigned only seven months; for being killed with the
other Magi who had helped him into the Throne by some of the seven Princes of
Persia, Darius the Son of Histaspis was chosen Emperor by those Princes. First
year of Darius.
In the beginning of his reign, he married Atossa the daughter of Cyrus (who
had been first married to her own brother Cambyses, and after to the Magus)
purposing to establish the Kingdom to himself the better by matching into the
Royal stock. This is he that is called Ahasuerus in the story of Hester, and is
said to have reigned from India to Ethiopia, over one hundred twenty and seven
Provinces. And this his chief wife Atossa seems to be the same that in the Book
of Hester is called Vashti.

The second year of Darius
In the second year of Darius, Haggai the Prophet reproved the Jews for that
they took care to build for themselves goodly and fair houses, and to garnish
them with ceiled work, The Prophecy of HAGGAI.
but neglected the building of the Lords house, under pretense that the time
was not yet come wherein it should be built. He declares to them that that long
barrenness of the ground, and other plagues which one after another fell upon
them, and Gods blowing upon all they had, were all the effects and fruits of
their great neglect of that work; he earnestly therefore persuades them to mend
that fault. Whereupon Zerubbabel and Joshua took the work in hand afresh, and
provided materials necessary for the building on the 24th. day of the same
month.

Hag. Chapter 1. whole Chapter.

In the same year, upon the one and twentieth day of the seventh month, Haggai
animated the Jews to go on with the work, with a promise of Gods gracious
presence with them, and his blessing upon them in it. And although the
beginning of this present structure seemed mean and despicable in the eyes of
such as had seen the glory of the former, yet he tells them that if they
considered that blessed and so much desired Messiah, (the desire of all
Nations) should after a time honor that house with his presence, they might
well conclude that the glory of this latter house should be greater than of the
former.

Hag. Chapter 2. from 1, to 10.

The Prophecy of ZACHARY.
In the eighth month of the same second year of Darius, Zacharias the Son of
Barachias began to Prophecy, and exhorted the people to repentance, and not to
tread in the steps of their impenitent forefathers. He is now added to Haggai
as his Coadjutor and Colleague in the Prophetic office. Haggai began to
Prophecy in the sixth Month, and Zachary in the eighth; they both carry on the
same design, viz. to encourage the Jews to build the Temple.

Zac. 1. from 1, to 7.

Upon the 24th. day of the ninth month of the same second year of Darius,
between seed-time and harvest, the Temple began to be reared by Zerubbabel and
Joshua the High Priest, with the assistance of Haggai and Zachary the Prophets,
upon the foundation which had been formerly laid. For though they had been
forbidden by Cambyses [Ch. 4.12, 21.] from building the City, yet there was no
word in that Letter forbidding the building of the Temple; and besides there
being now a new King in Persia, and of another family, they knew not why they
might not return afresh to their work, having had Cyrus's grant at first for it.

Ezra, Chapter 5. v. 1, 2.

Hag. Chapter 2. v. 18.

Upon the same day the two last Prophesies of Haggai were revealed to him, the
one of the cessation of those plagues which hitherto had followed them Hag.
2.19. From this day (says the Lord) I will bless you.
, the other of the subversion of sundry Kingdoms, and the exaltation of
Zerubbabel.

Hag. 2. from 18, to the end.

The Samaritans did not hinder the Jews whilst they were only building their
own houses, but no sooner did they set upon building of the Temple, but again
they banded together against them. Accordingly Tatnai Governor of the
Countries on this side the river, and Setherboznai, and the Apharsakites their
Associates coming to Jerusalem, endeavored to hinder the Jews in the work of
the Temple, asking the chief of them by whose command they did it, and enquired
very diligently who were the principal agents therein? But the Jews though they
were at present a poor unsettled and friendless people, yet were not scared
hereat, but encouraging themselves in the Lord they courageously answered them,
that they did it by virtue of Cyrus's command. These enemies of the Jews
hereupon wrote a Letter to Darius which spoke after this manner: Unto Darius
the King, all peace and prosperity, Be it known unto the King that we went into
the Province of Judea and found the Jews very busy in building a Temple for
God, which they are building with great stones, and the work goes on apace,
and prospers in their hands, when we inquired by what authority they did it,
and who were the chief agents therein, that we might certify their names unto
thee, they returned us this answer, We are the servants of the great God of
heaven and earth, and build again the house that was built many years ago by a
great King of Israel, viz. Solomon. But after that our Fathers had provoked the
God of heaven to wrath, he gave them into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, who
destroyed this house, and carried the people away into Babylon. But Cyrus in
the first year of his Empire made a decree, wherein he gave us liberty to
rebuild the house of God in the place where it formerly stood, and the vessels
of gold and silver which Nebuchadnezzar had taken from the former house of God
in Jerusalem, he delivered to Zerubbabel (whom he made Governor over us) to be
carried back, and that they should be kept safe till the new Temple was built,
and then they should be placed there for the use thereof. And accordingly our
Governor with the assistance of the Elders and Priests laid the foundation of
this house, in the second year of our return, but it is not finished to this
day. The Samaritans tell the King that this was the ans^er the Jews gave them,
and therefore desire him that search may be made in the Kings Treasure-house at
Babylon whither ever any such Grant was made by Cyrus; and they request the
King would please to send his further pleasure to them concerning that matter.

Upon the 24th. day of the 11th. month in the second year of Darius, the
Prophet Zachary had a vision of Horsemen (that is Angels) galloping up and down
over the face of the whole earth, and returning answer to the Angel that sat
upon the red horse (to wit, the Son of God appearing in humane shape) that all
other Nations and people about Judea were at rest and ease, in peace and
prosperity, only Gods own people the Jews could not recover themselves from
their late calamities, but were still under great molestations, Christ upon
this intercedes for the Church; whereupon (in the hearing of the Prophet) God
the Father gave a gracious answer, speaking many comfortable words to the
Angel, who entreated him to cease his anger and fury, which had been so hot
against the Jews and Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah now these seventy
years, Chapter 1. from v. 7, to 18. 2ly, He had a vision of the four Horns, and
four Carpenters, signifying how God would break the power of his Churches
enemies, Chapter 1. from v. 18, to the end. 3ly, The vision of the man with the
measuring line in his hand to measure Jerusalem, intimating the reedifying the
City and Temple, and safety of both, and that God would be their protection,
and a wall of fire about them, and their glory. To which is annexed an
exhortation to the Jews yet remaining in Babylon to repair to Jerusalem. Ho,
he, come forth and flee from the land of the North, says the Lord, etc. Chapter 2.
4ly, A vision of the continuance of the Priesthood among them, in which he sees
Joshua resisted by Satan, whom the Lord rebukes, and honors Joshua by taking
away his filthy garments, and setting a fair miter on his head, and
establishing him in the Priesthood. The thing typified hereby was the Eternal
Priesthood of Christ, who is described by his names, viz. The branch rising out
of the stock of David, and the stone full of eyes, (that is, of wisdom and
providential care for his Church) and graven, that is, beautified with the
Graces of the Spirit who gives remission of sin, and peace of Conscience, Chapter
3. 5ly, The vision of a Golden candlestick, and two Olive Trees, intimating
that as the Candlestick was supplied with oil naturally dropping from the two
Olive Trees standing by it, so God without the help of man, nay notwithstanding
man's opposition, would raise and maintain both his material Temple and his
Church, Chap. 4.

Zach. Chapter 1. Chapter 2. Chapter 3: Chapter 4.

The Prophet has now a sixth and seventh vision, viz. that of the large flying
Roll, and that of the Ephab, intimating that sin continued in would first bring
on private calamities, and having filled up its measure would also draw down
public judgments upon the whole Nation. By the first vision, viz. that of a
large flying Roll was typified Gods judgment swiftly coming, and ready to be
executed upon such as were guilty of theft or perjury, and that it should
consume their houses and families. In the second vision under the type of an
Ephah or measure, A Talent weighed 3000 Shekels, Exodus 38.25, 26. or an 125
pound.
and of a woman sitting in the midst of it, and a talent of lead laid upon her
to press her down is represented the sinful Nation of the Jews, whose
wickedness grew to a full measure, for which Gods heavy judgments were ready to
fall upon them; and by the two women carrying away the Ephah with the woman in
it into the land of Shinar, was signified the Jews dispersion into the Eastern
parts of the world, viz. into Chaldea, Babylon, and Mesopotamia, where chiefly
they reside at this day, though generally dispersed all over the world.

Zach. 5. whole Chapter.

Zachary has now an eighth vision of four Chariots coming out from betweeen
two mountains of brass, drawn by four sorts of horses, intimating Gods
provident decrees and counsels (immovable as mountains of brass) and his
directing the Angels of Heaven (those ministering spirits) in the executing his
will upon the enemies of his Church, and so as may tend to his Church's good.
The Prophet is shown also the effect of their employment, viz. the quieting of
Gods Spirit in the North Country, that is, by their executing his wrath upon
them, they pacified his anger, Chapter 6. from v. 1, to 8. 2ly, Under the type of
two Crowns made of silver and gold offered by strangers, and set upon the head
of Joshua, is typified that the office of King and Priest should be united and
continued in Christ, who is described first by his name, (importing his humane
nature) viz. the Branch. 2ly, By his works, building the Temple of the Lord,
raising the glory of the Kingly and Priestly office, (which till his time
should be but mean) uniting the Kingly and Priestly office in himself, and
uniting the Gentiles to the Church, from. v. 8, to 15. In the close of the
Chapter the Prophet tells them that they should know by experience that the
Lord had sent him unto them, and that obedience was the only way wherein they
might expect the comfortable fruits of these promises, v. 15.

Zach. 6. whole Chapter.

But to return to our History, the means that the Adversaries of the Jews used
for the hindering the building of the Temple, proved effectual (through the
gracious providence of God) for the finishing thereof; for search being made
for Cyrus's decree, it was found at Acmetha in the Province of the Medes, which
decree was to this purpose, that Cyrus in the first year of his reign had
decreed that the house of God should be built at Jerusalem in the same place
where the former Temple had stood, and the foundations thereof strongly laid,
The Cubits here meant it is like were the common cubits, whereas in the 1 King.
6.2. and 2 Chronicles. 3.4. the Sacred or Geometrical cubits were meant.
that the height thereof should be sixty cubits, and the breadth sixty cubits,
with three rows of great stones, and a row of new timber, (which seems to be
meant of the buildings about the Priests Court) and that they should be made as
formerly, with three galleries of ston^, and one of timber; and that the
expenses thereof should be allowed out of the treasure which appertained to the
King in those parts. And that the Golden and silver vessels of the Temple which
Nebuchadnezzar had carried away should be restored. This was the decree of
Cyrus. Darius understanding this, gave command to Tatnai and Shetharboznai that
they should no way hinder the building of the Temple. And further the King not
only ratified Cyrus's decree, but made a new decree of his own, whereby he
enlarges that of Cyrus with more grants and privileges, and charg^d Tatnai
and his Companions that they should furnish the Jews with moneys out of his
tribute to carry on the work, as also to buy bullocks, rams and lambs for
burnt-offerings to be offered to the God of heaven, and to buy wheat, salt,
wine and oil for the sacrifices, that they might offer sacrifices of a sweet
savor unto the Lord of heaven and earth, and pray for the life of the King,
and of his Sons. Also he confirms his decree with a great penalty, that it
might be the more carefully observed, saying, Whosoever shall go about to alter
that word or decree, let the timber be pulled down from his house, and set up
as a Gibbet, and let him be hanged thereon, and let his house be made a
dunghill, and the God that has formerly caused his glory to dwell in that
house, and has manifested his gracious presence there, destroy all Kings and
people that shall put to their hands either to alter (and so turn to another
use) or to destroy this house of God which is building at Jerusalem. Thus (says
the King) I have decreed, and I require and command that my decree be speedily
and effectually executed. Tatnai and Shetharboznai receiving this command,
durst not disobey it, but forthwith furnished the Jews with moneys as the King
commanded, and so the Jews being thus encouraged by the Prophesies of Haggai
and Zachary, and thus countenanced by the decrees of Cyrus and Darius, and
Artaxerxes Whereas it is said, v. 14. And Artaxerxes King of Persia, etc. This
Artaxerxes in likelihood was one of those seven Princes that had put down
Smerdis Magus (of whom before) and in a sort at the beginning was partaker in
the Empire with Darius. But Darius afterward delivered himself from the power
of those Princes, and made himself absolute.
, went on courageously to the finishing of the work.

Ezra 6. from 1, to 15.

Darius (or Ahasuerus as he is called in Scripture) in the third year of his
reign as he sat in his Palace at Susa, being in peace and quietness, Third year
of Darius.
to show the glory of his Kingdom, and the greatness of his state, The Book of
Esther, which was written (as some conceive) by Mordecai, see Chapter 9.20, 21. or
at least he wrote a relation of these things from whence the Penman of this
Book (whether Ezra or any other) did by the instinct of Gods Spirit gather
together these remarkable passages that are here recorded. It has been
received as a part of the Sacred Oracles of God committed to the Jews, and by
them faithfully preserved, though the name of the Lord Jehovah be not mentioned
in it.
made a feast for all the Governors and great men of his dominions, which
lasted an hundred and eighty days, or near half a year. After this Royal feast
and entertainment given to his Nobles, he made another of seven days long for
all the people both great and small in the Court of the Garden of the Kings
house, where were white and green, and blew hangings, fastened with cords of
fine linen and purple to silver-rings, and pillars of marble, and the beds or
couches were of gold and silver standing upon a pavement of red and blew, white
and black marble. At this feast they had plenty of the best wine enough, and
served to them in golden cups according to the Royal state of the King, but the
King commanded that none should be compelled to drink more than they had a mind
to, which may sufficiently condemn our intemperate Health-drinkers who so
tyrannically impose their Healths on others, thereby usurping upon their
liberty, and many times shamefully occasioning their debauchery. The Queen also
made a feast for the women within the Palace, and there entertained them. Upon
the last day of this feast the King being something high-flown with wine, would
needs show the beauty of his Queen (which was very great) to the men, and
accordingly sent for her to come to him. But she (it seems) not being in humor
refused to come. Thereupon the King being exceedingly enraged consulted his
wise men, (who were skilled in the Histories of ancient times) it being his
manner to consult such in all difficult cases as knew the Law, and were able to
give just and righteous judgment. He consulted also the seven Princes of Persia
and Media, who were nearest about him, and had always free access to him, and
asked them what he might do by law unto the Queen, who had expressed such a
contempt and disobedience toward him? Memucan (one of them) answered, that the
Queen had not only done that which was injurious to the King, but had injured
all persons of authority and dignity throughout the Kingdom Observa quam
facile, regis voluntas aliorum ad se judicia trahit. Novit hic non ingratam
Regi irato hanc futuram sententiam. In gratiam Regis locutus est, nam
imbecillium est sequens argumentum.
; for this her disobedience being so public was enough to infect all the women
in the Empire, and to encourage them to despise their husbands, and from this
day forward if their husbands shall require any thing at their hands, they will
say they will not do it, encouraging themselves from the Queens Example. And by
this means wives may be brought to despise their husbands, and too much wrath
may be kindled in husbands against their wives. If it therefore please the King
let a Royal commandment go forth from him, and let it be written among the Laws
of the Medes and Persians, and so not to be altered, that Vasthi shall be
divorced from the King, and that her Royal Estate shall be given to another,
who is more humble, and will be more obedient to the King; and the publishing
this decree will make all the wives throughout the Empire to give honor to
their husbands by constantly obeying them. This counsel pleased the King, and
accordingly he divorced and put her away; making moreover a Law that every man
hereafter should be Master in his own house, and that whatever he commanded,
(provided it were honest and just) should be yielded unto by his wife, children
and servants.

Esther 1. whole Chapter.

Atossa or Vashti being thus divorced, there was enquiry made, among all the
fair damsels that were any where to be found in Ahasuerus's dominions for a fit
consort for the King, in Vashti's room, and among others Esther a fair damsel
of the Jewish Nation was taken into consideration, who was Cousin-german to
Mordecai, whose great Grandfather Kish was carried away captive with Jechoniah
King of Judah. This Esther being a very beautiful young Virgin (through the
overruling Providence of God) she first finds favor with Hegai the keeper of
the women, and he speedily gave her all things requisite for her purification,
( viz. sweet odours and perfumes, see v. 12. and whatever might make her
acceptable to the King) and seven maids to attend her, and preferred her and
her maids to the best place of the house of the women, but by Mordecai's
direction she did not discover her self to be of Jewish race, that people being
then despised, and Mordecai feared she might fare something the worse upon that
account if her Parentage were known.

Esther 2. from 1, to 12.

Fourth year of Darius.
In the fourth year of Darius, the fourth day of the ninth month, when the Jews
by Sharezer and Regem-meleck, consulted with the Priests and Prophets
concerning the Fast appointed to be kept upon the day of the destruction of the
City and Temple of Jerusalem, God answered them, that those Fasts of the fifth
and seventh Months, (which they had observed for 70 years space) were no way
pleasing to him, he had not commanded them. He puts them in mind of their
obstinacy and impenitence, and going on in their sins (which he had forbidden
them) which had brought that terrible desolation, and all their calamities upon
them.

Zach. 7. whole Chapter.

In the eight Chapter, God tells them that he would restore Jerusalem, and put
an end to all their former miseries, and that he would change their Fasts (as
well that of the fourth Month, on the ninth day whereof the City was taken, as
that of the fifth Month upon the tenth whereof the Temple was burned, and that
of the seventh Month whereon the remnant of the people, upon the murder of
Gedaliah were scattered among the Nations, and that of the tenth month upon the
tenth day whereof the City in the reign of Zedekiah began to be besieged by
Nebuchadnezzar) into mirth, and would give joy and gladness, and ^^berty unto
his people. Instead of those Fasts he enjoins the more necessary and
substantial duties of Religion; urging them from the approach of such times
wherein ceremonies should cease, and wherein the Gentiles should be converted
to make up a glorious Church with the Jews.

Zach 8. whole Chapter.

The Prophet now encourages them to go on in the work; first, by Prophesying of
the calamities that would come on the enemies bordering about them.
Particularly (1) on the land of Hadrack So called from the name of some of
their Idols.
or Syria, whereof Damascus was the chief City. (2) On Hamath, a Country lying
to the North betwixt Judea and Syria, (3) On Tire and Zidon, whose prudence,
strength and riches should not preserve them. (4) On Askelon and the
Philistines, who should be affrighted, destroyed and made desolate, and
strangers should possess their Cities, whereby their pride should be stained,
and their cruelty repaid; and that in the midst of all these calamities the
Church should increase and be protected. Secondly, He prophesies for their
encouragement of the coming of the Messiah, who is described from his Kingly
office, and his properties of justice, power to save, and lowliness which he
manifests by riding on an ass, and the foal of an ass. He further prophesies of
the Kingdom of the Messiah. He shows that their deliverance out of Babylon had
been by virtue of his blood typified by that which was sprinkled on the people,
Exodus 24.8. That he will be the deliverer of his Church and people, and they
may hope for a rich recompense of their sufferings from him. He promises also
that he will strengthen them against their enemies, and will be their General,
and will appear for them in fight, and will give them victory, and satiate them
with spoils, which victory shall tend to Gods glory, and their honor; for they
shall be preserved by God as his own flock, and as his Crown; and he will give
them cause to glorify him for this, as also for the fruitfulness of their
land. Chap. 9.

In the next place he shows them that they are to seek to God in all their
necessities, and not to Idols. He then prosecutes his former Prophecy
concerning Isreal's restitution and victories, and that he will recollect them
and join them with Judah. He shows them that he can easily do it, v. 8. and
make them increase as formerly; that he will preserve them in their scattering
as seed in the ground till the time of their conversion and restitution does
come. That he will remove difficulties and impediments out of the way, and that
by these promises the truly godly among them shall be encouraged and
strengthened to persevere in faith and obedience.

Zach. 10. whole Chapter.

He utters now a Prophecy of the desolation of the land, and destruction of
the City and people of the Jews by the Romans for their horrid ingratitude in
rejecting Christ who was appointed of the Father to be the shepherd of that
people, and executed that charge so as might reclaim them, but they would not
be reclaimed; wherefore he threatens to break his two staves, viz. beauty and
bands, and so to deprive them of the benefit of his Government and care,
especially because of their crucifying the Lord of life, and selling him for
thirty pieces of silver. He also threatens to give them up to wicked Rulers in
Church and State for their destruction.

Zach. 11. whole Chapter.

In the next place he Prophesies that God will destroy the enemies of the
Christian Church to whom she shall be a cup of trembling, a burdensome stone,
and as a torch of fire in a sheaf; that he will defend his people, and increase
their strength in straits; lastly, that he will pour upon the house of David,
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and supplication, so that
they shall mourn exceedingly for their piercing and crucifying Christ, yea they
shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only Son, and this mourning shall
be very vehement and sincere, as when the people lamented the death of their
good King Josiah, and general throughout all ranks and families, and that not
only in a public way, but also by private humiliations in their private houses
and habitations.

Zach. 12. whole Chapter.

In the first part of the next Chapter he declares that there is a fountain
opened for sinners in the blood of Christ, and that remission of sins is
obtainable for the penitent by faith in his blood. He prophesies also that they
shall be delivered from Idolatry and false Prophets, some of whom shall be
convinced of the evil of their way, and shall quit it, betaking themselves to
their callings again, and shall acknowledge the equity of the severity used
against them, from v. 1, to 7. In the second part there is a Prophecy of the
suffering and death of Christ [the shepherd shall be smitten] and of the
scattering of the visible Church, and of his care of his own, v. 7. that the
greater part of them shall be cut off, and but a few preserved, who being
purged by afflictions shall increase in holiness and in the sense of Gods
favor toward them.

Zach. 13. whole Chapter.

Lastly, he prophesies again of the destruction of Jerusalem, with a promise
nevertheless that the Lord would save and preserve a remnant; that the
instruments of this destruction should not go unpunished, nor the Church perish
by this stroke, but thereby the way of Salvation should be made clear to the
Gentiles, and a free and large passage opened for them to come into the Church
of Christ, with whom the converted Jews should join. He Prophesies also that
the state and condition of the Church under the Gospel should be unsettled and
mixed of variety of dispensations, [the light shall not be clear nor dark] yet
so as in the end things shall go better with them. [At the evening time it
shall be light] he prophesies also that the Doctrine of Salvation shall spread
to all parts of the world, and that Christ shall be King over all the earth,
and shall be acknowledged as the only Savior both by Jews and Gentiles, and
that his name only shall be preached, invocated, and worshipped, and that Idols
shall be rejected. Further, a particular promise is made of the exaltation,
restitution, and safety of converted Israel, v. 10, 11. and sore judgments are
threatened against the enemies of the Church, viz. that they shall be cut off as
by a consumption, v. 12. by intestine discord, v. 13. by the hand of the
Church, v. 14. and that the stroke should reach all those means they had
employed against the Church, viz. their very beasts for carriage and service
should share in the plague, v. 15. Next there is a promise of the conversion of
many of these enemies of the Church, when they shall see Gods judgments on the
rest, and that they shall acknowledge Christ and join with the Church in this
public spiritual worship, which is expressed in terms taken from the outward
ceremonial worship of the old Testament, v. 16. And if they did not, God would
impart none of his blessings to them, but inflict a curse upon them, v. 17, 18,
19. Lastly, there is a promise of the holiness and purity of the Church [in
that day there shall be upon the bells of the horses holiness to the Lord] that
is, all the superfluities of these new converts shall be turned into charity,
and so consecrated to God, and they shall offer frequent sacrifices of
thanksgiving, described in a way of allusion to the ancient ceremonial service,
and that in the time of the Messiah no people or Nation shall be excluded from
the worship of God, for the Nations that were before unclean shall then be holy
to the Lord.

Chap. 14. whole Chapter.

Sixth year of Darius.
In the sixth year of Darius toward the latter end thereof, on the third day of
the twelfth Month called Adar, was the structure of the Temple finished, about
twenty years after the foundation was laid. The Dedication whereof the
Israelites which returned out of the Captivity celebrated with great joy, and
abundance of Sacrifices (though it was not to be compared to the magnificent
dedication of Solomon's Temple, of which we read 1 King. 8.5. and v. 63. and 2 Chronicles. 7.5.) And they set the Priests in their divisions, and the Levites in
their courses for the service of the Temple, according as Moses had enjoined.
Upon the 14th. day of the first Month, they and the proselytes (that had joined
themselves to them) celebrated the first Passover in the second Temple, keeping
also the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great joy, for that God had
turned the heart of the Emperor of Persia (who was now also King of Assyria)
toward them, whereas Cambyses's had been turned against them.

Ezra 6. from 19, to the end.

The seventh year of Darius
In the seventh year of Ahashuerus's reign when Esther was brought unto the
King, she obtained favor in his eyes above all other damsels, insomuch that he
put the Crown of the Kingdom upon her head, and made her Queen in the room of
Vashti.

Esth. 2. from 12, to 18.

Ahashuerus in honor of his new Espousals made a most sumptuous feast for all
his Princes and servants, and called it Esther's feast, at which he eased the
Provinces of many Taxes, and gave gifts answerable to the state and
magnificence of so great a King.

Esth. Chapter 2. v. 18.

When there was a second gathering of Virgins (possibly to chose some out of
them to attend upon Queen Esther) Mordecai was one of the Kings Porters, and
attended at the Gate of the Palace. It so happened that two of the Kings
Chamberlains being exceedingly offended (as it is probable) at the Kings putting
away of Vashti, (on whom (as it is like) they had attended) and at his taking of
this new Queen, who was crowned with so great solemnity, they conspired to take
away his life. This (as Josephus thinks) was discovered to Mordecai by a Jew
who was servant to one of them. Mordecai immediately discovered it to the
Queen, and she to the King, acquainting him that Mordecai had done him this
faithful service, that so she might bring him into his favor. Inquisition
being made about this matter, and it being found to be true, the Conspirators
were both hanged, and the thing was registered in the Book that continually lay
before the King, for him to read in at his pleasure.

Esth. 2. from 19, to the end.

Sometime after (as it seems) Ahashuerus promoted Haman the Son of Amadetha of
the Royal stock of Agag King of the Amalekites, (who were ever bitter enemies
to the Jews, as may appear Deuteronomy. 25.17, 19. and advanced him above all his
Princes, and commanded his servants to bow unto him, and do him more than
ordinary reverence. Mordecai was not satisfied in conscience to pay him that
respect, because he was a professed enemy of Gods people, and withal one of
that accursed Nation, against whom the Jews were by the Law bound to oppose
themselves in perpetual enmity, Exodus 17.16. The Apocryphal Additions of Esther
do assign this as the true reason of Mordecai's refusal, whom they bring in
saying thus, [ Chap. 13.12, 13, 14.] O Lord thou know all things, thou
know that it was neither in contempt nor pride, nor for any desire of glory,
that I did not bow down to proud Haman: I could have been content with good
will for the salvation of Israel to have kissed the soles of his feet, but I
did this that I might not prefer the glory of man above the glory of God. So
far that Author. But however it was, Haman was desperately enraged at it, yet
thought it a mean revenge for him to destroy Mordecai alone, and therefore
resolved for his sake to be revenged on all his Nation, and (if possible) to
root it quite it out. And for the better executing of this his bloody purpose,
that he might find out the most lucky and successful time (as he
superstitiously thought) for the accomplishing of it, on the first month
(Nisan) in the twelfth year of Ahashuerus (about four years after Esther was
married to him) he caused Pur, that is, a lot to be cast before him (which was
a kind of divination used in those times) to find out what month and day would
be most lucky for the accomplishing his intended revenge. And the lot fell upon
the twelfth and last month of the year, and the thirteenth day of it. And thus
by the Providence of God overruling the superstition of this wretch a way was
made for the preservation of the Jews, as we shall see afterward. Haman having
found out the lucky time (as he thought) for the accomplishing his wicked
intent, he comes now to the King to get leave and authority from him to put it
in execution; he tells him there were a certain people scattered For though
some were returned out of captivity into the land of Judah, yet many of them,
especially of the Ten Tribes, did remain dispersed here and there, not
embracing the liberty proffered them.
up and down his dominions, whose laws were diverse from the laws of his
Kingdom, and who observed not his laws. It Is true in matters of divine worship
they did not observe them, nor could they do it with a good conscience, but
otherwise they did observe the laws of the land, as which concerned the peace
and tranquillity thereof. See Jer. 29.7. Haman further suggests that it was not
for the Kings profit to suffer those Jews to live among his own subjects, lest
they should draw them from their obedience to him. Therefore he entreats the
King that his subjects (among whom the Jews lived) might fall upon them and
destroy them. And whereas it might be objected that the Jews paid a great
tribute, which the King would lose if they were destroyed, therefore in
recompense of that loss, he proffers to pay ten thousand talents of silver
himself into the hands of the Kings receivers. Haman had at this time such an
ascendent over the King (being his chief favorite) that he took off his ring
from his hand, and gave it unto him, therewith impowering him to seal what
decree he thought fit to make touching this matter; and as for the money he
proffered, the King bad him keep it to himself, telling him that that sum was
freely given to him, and the people of the Jews also, to do with them what
seemed good unto him. It Is like the King did not yet understand that his Queen
was of the Jewish Nation, for that Mordecai advised her to conceal. So on the
13th. day of the first month the Kings Secretaries were called, and the decree
concerning the destruction of the Jews was written and sealed, and Haman took
care to have it presently published, and sent to all the Lord Lieutenants, and
Governors of Provinces, authorizing them that they should destroy and kill all
the Jews both young and old, little children and women in one day, viz. the
13th. of the last, or twelfth month, and to take the spoil of them to
themselves for a prey. And it is like Haman did expedite the sending out of this
decree, lest the King by the counsel of others, or from some relenting in
himself, or by some means or other should alter his mind. The bloody decree
being sent forth, the King and Haman sit down to drink, so far were they from
any remorse or touch of conscience for what they had done; but the inhabitants
of the City of Shushan were greatly perplexed at it.

Chap. 3. whole Chapter.

Mordecai understanding what was done, rent his clothes and put on sackcloth
and ashes on his head, and went into the midst of the City, and cried with a
loud and bitter cry, and in this mournful posture came before the Kings Gate,
for into it clothed with sackcloth he might not enter, the Persian Kings not
allowing their Court-pleasures to be interrupted with any thing that had an
appearance of sorrow or sadness. And in every Province where the decree came,
there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, weeping and wailing, and
many lay in sackcloth and ashes. Queen Esther understanding the great mourning
of Mordecai, and his being in sackcloth, was much surprised at it, and sent to
know the reason of it, and withal sent him new raiment to cloth him, but that
raiment being unsuitable to his present condition he would not receive it.
Mordecai coming to her informed her what Haman had done, and what a sum of
money he had proffered to the King for liberty to destroy the Jews, and what a
decree he had obtained of him for their destruction. And soon after he sent her
a copy of that bloody decree, and charged her to go to the King to make
supplication to him for her people. He now thought it necessary she should make
known to him of what stock and Nation she was, though before he thought it not
convenient that she should do it. The Queen sends him word that he could not be
ignorant that whosoever (whither man or woman) came unto the King into the
inner Court where was his apartment, without being called for was to be put to
death, except the King shall of his Royal favor hold out his golden scepter to
them. And she had not been called to come unto the King these thirty days last
past, and therefore she did not know whither the Kings affection toward her
might not be somewhat abated, and if so, her going to him uncalled might be
very hazardous to her. But Mordecai (the people of God being in so great
danger) would accept of no excuse, but sent her word that she her self must not
think to escape more than the rest of the Jews; the Kings house could be no
protection to her against this bloody decree, and Hamans malice. For the decree
being general against all the Jews without any exception, it might reach her as
well as others. He further tells her that if she altogether held her peace at
such a time as this, and would not venture her self when all her people were in
such extreme danger, he doubted not but deliverance would arise to them from
another place, and some other way; but as for her and such of her kindred as
were about her, he believed they would be destroyed for their faint heartedness
and cowardice, and not affording what help they could to the people of God in
their great extremity. And lastly he tells her that she should consider that
possibly she came to the Kingdom for such a time as this, and that the
preservation of Gods people was the end God aimed at in advancing her to be
Queen.

Mordecai's words wrought so powerfully on Esther that she resolved to do what
he required; yet like a pious and prudent Lady she resolved first to use due
means for the obtaining the blessing of God upon her endeavors; and to that
purpose she sends to all the Jews in Shushan desiring them to keep a solemn
fast three days together, and neither to eat That is, not to take their
ordinary repasts but to eat sparingly, and to afflict their souls by true
repentance and humiliation.
nor drink night nor day, and earnestly to seek to the Lord for her. And (says
she) I and my maids It Is like her maids were Jews, or such as she had
instructed in the true Religion.
will fast also, and so I will go unto the King, though it be not according to
law, and if I perish I perish That is, I will embrace my death quietly and
contentedly, seeing I could not avoid it without failing in my duty.
. Mordecai and the Jews at Shushan did as Esther desired.

Esth. Chapter 4. whole Chapter.

This being done, Queen Esther on the third day having put on her Royal
apparel, presented her self in the inner Court before the King as he sat on his
royal throne; as soon as he saw her his heart was toward her, and she obtained
favor in his sight, which he manifested by stretching forth his golden scepter
to her, and she went up and touched the end of it in token of her reverence and
obedience. And if we consider what absolute obedience the Persian Kings
required of all their subjects, and that Vashti his former Queen was cast off
for as small an offense as this of Esthers, and that he had not called for her
of thirty days before, we may well think there was a special hand of God in
moving the Kings heart to show her such favor, and that it was a gracious
answer to his peoples prayers. The King graciously asks her, What was the
request she had to make to him, it should be granted her even to the half of
the Kingdom This (it seems) was a Proverbial speech, whereby Princes promised
liberally and largely. Herod used the some to the daughter of Herodias, Mat.
6.23.
. She told him that she only desired that his Majesty would please to honor
her that day with his presence at a Banquet she had provided, and that Haman
might come also. The King readily accepts her invitation, and he and Haman came
to her Banquet accordingly. At the Banquet the King asked her again what her
request was? she not finding as yet a fit opportunity to make known her desires
to him, she told him that her petition and request at present was only this,
that the King and Haman would favor her once more with their presence at a
banquet she should prepare for them the next day, and then she would make known
her suit unto the King. God undoubtedly by the secret instinct of his Spirit
inclined her heart thus to put off her petition to another time, he intending
in the interim to advance Mordecai before her next banquet was prepared. Haman
went away from this first banquet very joyful and with a glad heart, being not
a little proud of the honor the Queen had done him in inviting him with the
King to her banquet; but when he came to the Palace-gate he saw Mordecai refuse
to rise up to him, which kindled his indignation highly against him. When he
came home he sent for his wife and his friends, and there in a boasting fashion
set before them the greatness of his riches, the multitude of his children Ten
of his S^ns are reckoned up by name, Chapter 9. 6.
, (which he esteemed a great honor to him) the great offices the King had
conferred on him, and how the Queen had invited none to her banquet which she
made for the King but himself alone, and that on the morrow he was invited
again unto her with the King. All these (he shows them) were great things, and
such as few subjects attained unto, yet he could not but tell them that all
these honors, dignities, and preferments did not so much comfort him as the
neglect and contempt of that vile Jew Mordecai did vex and trouble him; for he
would not so much as rise up to him, nor pay him the respect that all others
did. His wife and friends advise him not to trouble himself about him but to
get a Gallows of fifty cubits high presently set up, and on the morrow to get
leave of the King to hang him thereon. Haman liked their counsel very well, and
gave order accordingly to have the Gallows prepared.

Esther, Chapter 5.

The wheel of Providence begins now to turn for the deliverance of the Jews, as
we shall see in the sequel of the story; for on that very night Ahasuerus could
not sleep, being restless he calls for the records to be brought and read unto
him to divert him, wherein among other things it was recorded how two of his
servants, viz. Bigthan and Teresh had conspired to take away his life, and that
Mordecai had revealed this conspiracy, and so preserved him. The King hereupon
asks what honor and dignity had been done to Mordecai for this? His servants
about him tell him none at all. It being now (as it seems) morning, the King
asks who of his Counselors were in the outward Court? They told him Haman was
there (for he was come early to beg of the King that Mordecai might be hanged
on the Gallows he had provided for him); the King sends for him, he being come,
the King asks him what shall be done to the man whom the King delights to
honor? Haman presently imagining the King intended this honor to him and to
no body else, he thought he would not give scant measure to himself, and
therefore says he let the royal robe that the King uses to wear be put upon the
man the King delights to honor, and let him ride on the Kings own horse, and
let the Crown royal be set on his head, and let one of the Kings most noble and
illustrious Princes attend him riding in this state through the streets, and
proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delights
to honor. Haman having said this, the King commands him immediately to take
Mordecai (whom of all persons in the world he most hated) and to do all this
for him, and that he should not fail in any one particular. This was as a
dagger to Hamans heart, but he durst not refuse doing it, and did it
accordingly. Mordecai having received this strange and unexpected honor,
returned to his ordinary office and place at the Kings gate again, not being at
all puffed up with it. But Haman hasted to his own house, being almost
heart-broken through grief and vexation, and covering his head through shame
and discontent. Being come home, he acquainted his wife and friends with what
had happened to him; they told him that if Mordecai (before whom he had begun to
fall) were of the seed of the Jews he would not be able to prevail against him,
but would certainly be worsted by him. For these being (as it seems) prudent
persons and wise in their way, had observed formerly Gods wonderful appearing
for his people against all their enemies, as particularly against those Princes
that had plotted against Daniel, Dan. 6.4. and thence they infer that 'twas
probable the Lord would do the like for Mordecai. While they were speaking of
these things the Kings Chamberlains came to Hamans house to call him away to
the Queens banquet.

Esther, Chapter 6.

The King and Haman being again royally entertained by the Queen, and the King
being highly pleased therewith he asked her again what her suit and request
was, which he assured her should be granted her whatever it was. She then
humbly prostrating her self at his feet with tears besought him to spare her
own life, and the lives of her people; for (says she) I and my people are sold
to be slain and to be destroyed; and had we been sold for bondmen and bondwomen
(though our condition then would have been exceeding sad) yet I had held my
tongue, for there would have been a possibility, that by our good service we
might have obtained some favor from those that had bought us. But now we are
all adjudged to death without any exception. Had we been sold for bondslaves
some profit might have redounded to the King by our sale, but yet the Kings
loss in his tribute, and in so many useful subjects could never have been
repaired by all that our enemies can do, or ever will do for the King. The
Queens petition (both the matter of it and the manner of delivering it) so much
affected the King, that being in a great rage and passion, he said to the
Queen, Who is he? and where is the man? and what is his name? that durst
presume in his heart to do such an abominable thing as this? Queen Esther
replies, Our adversary and implacable enemy is the wicked Haman. At this we may
suppose Haman's heart did not a little ache and tremble. The King being now
sensible (as it is like) and ashamed of his own folly in yielding so rashly to
such a bloody Edict, which involved not only thousands of his peaceable
subjects, but his beloved Queen her self; and being highly incensed against the
author and contriver of so great a mischief, he rose up suddenly as a man
disquieted in his mind, and went into his Garden to take a turn or two to give
vent to his passion. The King being gone, Haman stood up to make request to the
Queen for his life, and that she would mediate with the King for him, for he
saw that evil was determined against him. The King after a little time
returning into the Banqueting chamber again, he found Haman fallen upon the bed
whereon the Queen sat, that is, he had prostrated himself before her, and (as
is supposed) clasped her feet in his hands to testify the earnestness of his
desire, and that he would not let her go till he found some favor from her.
The King seeing him in this posture, what (says he) will this villain force my
Queen before my face and in my own house? Thus it was just with God that he
that falsely accused the Jews to the King, should now by the King be charged
with that which he never intended. The servants and attendants perceiving the
Kings mind presently apprehended Haman, and as the custom it seems among the
Persians, was they covered his face as a condemned person, and one unworthy to
behold the Kings face, or the light of the Sun, but sentenced to perpetual
darkness. Harbonah one of the Kings Chamberlains (who it seems was sent to
Hamans house to bring him unto the Queens banquet) when he was there saw that
extraordinary Gallows of fifty cubits high, which he had erected for Mordecai
(who now was acknowledged to have done great service for the King) and he now
acquainted the King with it. The King hearing this commanded that they should
immediately take Haman and hang him thereon. And accordingly they hanged Haman
on that very Gallows he had prepared for Mordecai, which being done the Kings
wrath was pacified. Thus God who turned the heart of this King to Esther and to
Mordecai, now alienated it quite from Haman, and pacifyed and quieted his
spirit after execution done upon him.

Esther, Chap. 7.

On the same day the King gave Hamans house and goods, and estate to Queen
Esther, and Mordecai was taken into his especial favor, the Queen declaring
how nearly related he was unto her. And the King took off his ring that had
been before given to Haman See Chapter 3.10.
, and which he kept till the Kings wrath was manifested against him, and then
being sent to execution they pulled it off his finger, and returned it to the
King who now gave it to Mordecai as a pledge of his favor Possibly hereby
Mordecai was made keeper of the Kings private signet as Haman had been.
. And Esther set Mordecai over the house and estate of Haman which the King had
given her, to take care about it and to manage it for her use. Esther also fell
down at the Kings feet, and humbly besought him with tears that he would please
to prevent the execution of that mischief and destruction which Haman had
devised against them. And she said; If I have found favor in thy sight, O
King, and if I be pleasing in thine eyes, let letters be sent out to reverse
the letters devised by Haman, by which he designed to destroy all the Jews that
are in any part of the Kings dominions; for how can I endure to see the
destruction that will come upon my kindred* and the evil that will come upon my
people thereby if it be not prevented. The King would not reverse the former
decree, (it being against the laws and customs of the Medes and Persians so to
do) but he told Esther and Mordecai that they might write what they thought fit
or could devise in favor of the Jews, and for their preservation, provided the
former decree were not in express terms reversed, and they might write it in
his name, and seal it with his ring, and what was so written and sealed none
durst gainsay. Hereupon the Kings Scribes being called, on the 23d of the third
month (two months and ten days after the first decree for their destruction was
sent forth During which time we may imagine in what a sad condition the Jews
were; but yet there being eight months and 20 days still behind before their
fatal day did come, (which was the 13th. of the 12. month) all this time they
had to provide for their own defense.
) it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded, and he wrote in the
Kings name, and sealed it with his ring, and the letters were sent by Posts
into all the 127 Provinces under the Kings dominion, that the King granted to
the Jews in every City and Country, liberty to gather themselves together on
the day appointed for their massacre, and to stand upon their guard, and to
kill and slay all that should assault them. So the Kings Grant to Mordecai was
as large as that to Haman.
Yea to kill their wives and children also, and to take the spoil of them to
themselves for a prey. By the former Edict the Natives of each Province were
authorized to destroy the Jews, and by this second Edict the Jews were
authorized to destroy those that should set upon them, but yet this would
hardly have prevented their ruin (they being but few in comparison of those
among whom they lived) had not this new discovery of the change of the Kings
mind much abated the malice of their enemies. Mordecai being now in great
favor with the King went out from his presence in royal apparel of blew and
white, and with a great Crown of gold on his head, not the Crown royal, but
such as Princes in great place used to wear, and a garment of fine linen and
purple; and the inhabitants of Shushan not only Jews, but many others also
greatly rejoiced at this change of affairs. The Jews had now light and
gladness, joy and honor, most men having them in high esteem and account. And
in all the Provinces and Cities where this new decree came, they greatly
rejoiced and feasted together, and kept a good day. And many of the people of
the land became Proselytes, and embraced the Jewish Religion, seeing the
wonders God had done for his people; and God struck the hearts of the Heathen
with such a fear of the Jews that they durst not execute Hamans Edict against
them.

Esther, Chap. 8.

In the next place we come to describe the full deliverance of the Jews, and
the destruction of their enemies, and how they expressed their thankfulness for
so great a mercy. The 13th. day of the month Adar being come the enemies of the
Jews hoped to have had power over them, but it turned quite contrary through
the gracious Providence of God, and the assistance which the Rulers of
Provinces afforded the Jews through the dread they had of Mordecai (the new and
great favorite) and through the fear that seized on the hearts of such as bore
them ill will. For the Jews in all the Provinces gathered themselves together
to resist those that sought their hurt, and none of them could stand before
them. In Shushan some of Hamans faction combined together to revenge his death,
(being possibly put on by his ten Sons) but they being suddenly daunted the
Jews slew of them five hundred, and among them Hamans ten Sons; but on the
spoil (though the King permitted it) they laid not their hands, to show that
what they did was not out of covetousness, but for their own defense. The
number of those that were slain in Shushan by the Jews was that day brought to
the King, and he acquaints the Queen with it himself, knowing it would be
acceptable news to her. And (says he) if they have slain so many in Shushan,
what have they done in the rest of my dominions? Thou see what I have done
for thee, and yet I am ready to do more; therefore tell me what thou do
further desire of me? Esther replied, If it please the King let it be granted
to the Jews which are in Shushan to do to morrow also according to what thy
decree allows them to do this day. For though 500 were slain in the City, yet
she understood (as it seems) that many had escaped who bare a deadly hatred to
the Jews, and might seek an opportunity another time to be revenged on them for
the death of Haman and his Sons; therefore to prevent that mischief, she
desires leave for the Jews to destroy such of their enemies as had escaped. She
further desires that the bodies of Hamans ten Sons (that had been newly slain
by the Jews) might be hanged on the same Gallows that Haman himself was hanged
for their greater reproach, and for terror to others. The King consented to
both her desires, and so Hamans ten Sons were accordingly hanged on the same
Gallows, and the Jews in Shushan gathered themselves together on the 14th. day
of Adar, and slew 300 more of their enemies in that City, but on the prey they
laid not their hands. The Jews also in the other Provinces gathered themselves
together on the 13th. day of Adar, and slew their enemies that assaulted them,
and then rested and kept a day of feasting and rejoicing on the 14th. day,
whereas those at Shushan slew their enemies both on the 13th. and 14th. days,
and so kept not their day of feasting till the 15th. day. And Mordecai wrote V.
20. And Mordecai wrote these things, etc. It may possibly be extended to the
whole Book of Esther, of which Mordecai in probability was the Penman.
unto the Jews scattered abroad in all the Provinces, and gave them an account
concerning the two days which the Jews at Shushan had spent in destroying their
enemies, and showed them that that was the reason of their keeping the 15th.
day as a day of feasting. So that though for this time the Jews in the Country
kept the 14th. day, and those at Shushan the 15th. day, yet in succeeding time,
year after year, Mordecai orders them all to keep both days showing them that
they ought to rejoice in one another welfare, and to keep both days as days
wherein the Lord gave them rest from their enemies, and to remember that month
above all months, wherein their sorrow was turned into joy, and their mourning
into gladness, and that they should constantly observe them year after year as
days of feasting and rejoicing, and of sending portions one to another, and
gifts to the poor; and that they should keep those feasts in remembrance of
Purim, or the lots that were cast for their destruction, and fell in that
month, and how God turned those lots or divinations to contrary issues, and
made them vain. The Jews accordingly as well for the words of Mordecai's
letter, as also for what they had seen of those things with their own eyes, and
what had been related to them by others (as of Hamans casting lots, etc.) they
ordained it for a law and engaged for themselves and their children, and such
proselytes as should join themselves to them that they would keep those two
days yearly according to the writing they had received from Mordecai, which was
registered. And lest they should not hold on in their yearly observing this
feast, Queen Esther and Mordecai wrote a second letter to enjoin the
continuance of this anniversary feast, and authoritatively to press upon them
the observance of it. And in these letters he enjoined them to live peaceably
among themselves, and with others also, and to hold fast to the truth. Those
days therefore were first enjoined, and afterward the observance of them
confirmed by Esther and Mordecai, as the Jews had formerly decreed for
themselves, and for their seed the matter of the fastings and their cry, that
is, to keep certain days of public humiliation with fasting and prayer in
remembrance of the desolation of Jerusalem, and burning of the Temple, of which
fasts the Prophet Zachary speaks, Chapter 7.5.

Esther, Chap. 9.

Ahashuerus now laid a tribute upon all parts both Continent and Islands that
were under his dominion, which is here set down as an evidence of the good
offices that Mordecai did for the Jews, for whom he got an exemption (as it
seems) from this tribute; so that he sought the weal of his people, neither did
his greatness (though advanced to be the next man to Ahashuerus) make him
forget them, but he was always ready to speak to the King for them, and to do
whatever might be for their peace and welfare.

Esther, Chapter 10.

Ahashuerus having reigned thirty six years dies, and leaves the Empire to his
Son Zerxes, the fourth King of Persia (after Cyrus) who trusting in his riches
(as they were indeed exceeding great) stirred up his own subjects, together
with all his allies and friends to make war upon the Grecians according to the
Prophecy of Daniel, Chapter 11.2. And now will I show thee the truth, behold there
shall stand up yet three Kings in Persia, and the fourth shall be far richer
than they all: and by his strength through his richer he shall stir up all
against the realm of Grecia. Zerxes Zerxes.
having reigned twelve years was slain by Artabanus Captain of his Guard, and
immediately after Darius his eldest Son was dispatched also, and so the Kingdom
came to Artaxerxes Artaxerxes.
his second Son called Longimanus.

In the seventh year of Artaxerxes Ezra the Priest, the Grandchild of Seraiah
being a Scribe As among the Grecians their wise and learned men were called
Philosophers, and among the Chald ans, Magi, so among the Jews their great
Doctors were called Scribes.
, that is, an acute learned and ready expounder of the Law, and one that had
prepared his heart to understand it, and to yield obedience to it, and to
instruct the people in the knowledge thereof, obtained a large Patent Chapter 7. v
6. it is said, The King granted him all his request according to the hand of the
Lord his God upon him; that is, according as the Lord favored and prospered
him.
from the King and his seven Counselors, impowering him to go to Jerusalem,
and to reform things that were amiss there; which Patent ran thus, Artaxerxes
King of Kings, unto Ezra the Priest, a Scribe of the Law of the God of Heaven,
perfect peace; I make a decree that all those of the people of Israel, whether
Priests, Levites or others, scattered up and down in my dominions, if they are
willing to it, may go up with thee to Jerusalem. For thou art sent of the King
and his seven Counselors to make inquiry whither all things be done in Judah
and Jerusalem, according to the rule and direction of Gods Law, wherein thou
art very skilful, and which thou have always before thee; and to carry the
silver and the gold which the King and his Counselors have freely offered unto
the God of Israel, (whose habitation is in Jerusalem) as also all the silver
and gold that thou find has been collected, or thou thy self can collect
in all the Province of Babylon, with all the free will offerings that either
Priests or people of the Jewish Nation shall offer for the service of the house
of the Lord. And thou have liberty with this money to buy bullocks, rams, or
lambs, and to offer them with their meat offerings, and drink offerings upon
the altar at Jerusalem. And as for the rest of the money thou and thy brethren
the Priests may dispose of it as you think most agreeable to the will of your
God. And the vessels that are given thee, and entrusted to thee for the service
of the house of thy God, those deliver thou faithfully at the Temple, where God
most eminently manifests his presence. And whatever more money shall be needful
to be laid out for the service of the house of thy God, shall be allowed thee
out of my Exchequer What King of Israel could have manifested more respect to
the house of God?
And I command all the Receivers of my Tribute, customs and taxes beyond the
river, that whatever Ezra the Priest shall have need of in order hereunto, they
speedily furnish him with it, even to an hundred Talents of silver That is, 37
thousand five hundred pound sterling. See 1 Chronicles. 22.14.
, and to an hundred measures That is an 100 Cors, a Cor was about ten bushels,
that is, a thousand bushels of wheat.
of wheat, and to an hundred baths A Bath contained eight Gallons, that is,
eight hundred Gallons.
of wine, and for salt Because they used much salt in their sacrifices.
to give them whatever they need. And whatever is agreeable to the command of
the God of Heaven, let it be carefully done for his house. For if we should do
otherwise we may bring the wrath This King stood more in fear of Gods wrath
than many Kings do.
of God upon the realm, and upon me and my children. Further we declare it to
be our will and pleasure that no tribute, toll or custom shall be imposed on
any of the Priests, Levites, Singers, Porters, Nethinims, or other Minesters of
the house of God. And thou Ezra (according to the wisdom which God has given
thee, and agreeably to his word which is in thy hand) set such Magistrates and
Judges over the people as know and understand the Laws of God; and take care to
have the ignorant instructed in those Laws. And whoever will not obey the Law
of God, and the Law of the King, let judgment be executed speedily upon him,
either by death or banishment, or confiscation of his goods, or imprisonment
according to the merit of his offense.

This was the purport of the Kings Patent which was in the Chaldee Dialect, the
History following is in the Hebrew. Ezra having received this large Patent or
Commission, he falls into admiration of Gods gracious providence to him
therein, and cries out, Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, who has put
such a thing as this into the Kings heart, and the hearts of his Counselors,
and great Princes to show us favor and kindness. Hereupon he took courage
(perceiving how the Lord was with him) and gathered together many of the chief
men among the Jews to go up with him to Jerusalem.

Ezra 7. whole Chapter.

In the seventh year of the reign of Artaxerxes the first day of the first
month See Ezra Chapter 7. v. 7, 9.
Ezra with a great number of Jews set out from Babylon to go to Jerusalem. The
numbers mentioned in the eighth Chapter, besides such as are expressed by name
make one thousand four hundred ninety and six males besides women. The place
appointed for their general rendezvous from all parts was by the river Ahava,
and here they abode in tents three days waiting to see whither any more of
their Brethren would come thither to them. And when Ezra had viewed the whole
number he found no Levites among them, which much troubled him, for he found he
had special need of them for the instructing of the people in the Law of God,
and the reforming of those things that were amiss at Jerusalem, according to
the rule and direction of the word of God. Hereupon he sent eleven chosen men
to a place called Casiphia where he knew there lived many Levites with Iddo
their chief Doctor and President. He sent therefore these men to desire Iddo
that he would send him some Levites to go up with him to Jerusalem that might
assist him in that great work he had now undertaken. Iddo accordingly sent them
38 Levites, and 220 Nethinims for the service of the Levites. Joshua did first
appoint them to this service, but David and the Princes in his time did confirm
them therein, and possibly gave some special orders for the manner of their
attendance. Then Ezra proclaimed a fast that they might humble themselves
before the Lord for their sins, and might seek of him a right way for
themselves and their little ones; that is, that he would please to conduct them
in a right way, and preserve them and their children, and their substance from
being a prey to their enemies. For he was ashamed to desire of the King to send
a band of soldiers and horsemen with them to guard them in the way, (which
favor yet he might easily have obtained) because he had declared unto the King
the glorious power and goodness of that God whom they worshipped; telling him
that his hand was upon all them that seek him for their God, but his power and
his wrath was against all them that forsake him. So they fasted and earnestly
sought unto the Lord for this thing, and he was pleased graciously to answer
them. Then Ezra chose and separated twelve choice men of the Priests, and as
many of the Levites [whereof Sherebiah and Hashabiah were two, see v. 18, 19.]
to take care of the silver and gold, and the vessels which were offered for the
service of the house of God by the King and his Nobles, and the Israelites in
those parts, and to carry them safe to Jerusalem, and there rightly to dispose
of them. So he weighed unto them, and committed to their care six hundred and
fifty talents of silver, and of silver vessels an hundred talents, and of gold
an hundred talents; also twenty basins of gold, with a thousand drams a piece
Viz. Three hundred and twelve pounds ten shillings, of the value of drams, see
1 Chronicles. 29.7.
; and two vessels or some excellent and curious shining brass or copper almost
as precious as gold. And he said unto them ye are persons consecrated to God,
as these dedicated things are, therefore keep them safe till ye weigh them
before the chief of the Priests and Levites, and the chief of the Fathers of
Israel at Jerusalem. And the forementioned Priests and Levites took care of
this Sacred Treasure accordingly. So upon the twelfth day of the first Month
they removed from the river Ahava and through the good hand of God upon them,
they were delivered from their enemies, and such as lay in wait by the way to
surprise them, and arrived safe at Jerusalem, and there rested themselves three
days. Upon the fourth day of the fifth Month the gold and silver they had
brought was weighed out, and with the other furniture was laid up in the house
of the Lord, and the account was taken by number and weight of every one, and
written down and registered. And they which returned out of captivity offered
their burnt-offerings to the God of Israel, viz. twelve bullocks according to
the number of the twelve Tribes, and 96 rams, and 77 lambs, and twelve he-goats
for a sin-offering. Then they delivered the Kings Commissions unto the Kings
Lieutenants and Deputies on that side the river, who thereupon showed all
favor to the Jews, and were assistant to them in all things according to the
Kings command, and afforded them such things as were requisite for the service
of the house of the Lord.

Ezra, Chapter 8. whole Chapter.

It being known that the principal cause of Ezra's coming was to reform such
abuses as were crept in among them contrary to Law, some of the Princes and
chief men who were best affected, came presently to him, and informed him of
this as one of the most heinous evils tolerated among them, to wit that not
only the people but the Princes also, yea the Priests and Levites (that could
not pretend ignorance of the law) had married wives of those Idolatrous Nations
their neighbors about them, and so the holy seed had mingled themselves with
the people of those lands, and were tainted by that means in many things with
their abominations; and the Priests themselves (who should have restrained the
people from this wickedness) had a chief hand in it, and been boldest in this
transgression. Ezra understanding this, rent his Mantle, and plucked off the
hair of his head and beard, and sat down on the ground as one amazed at these
high provocations. It seems the report was quickly carried about how mightily
he was afflicted and displeased when he heard how his brethren had taken wives
of Idolatrous Nations, and thereupon many of the godly inhabitants that heard
of it, (being themselves afraid of the judgments of God threatened in his word
against those transgressions) came presently to him to advise with him what was
fit to be done in that case, but till the evening sacrifice he sat like one
overwhelmed with grief and astonishment at that which had been told him. At the
time of the evening sacrifice he rouzed up himself from his great dejection,
and then falling on his knees At the time when Sacrifices or incense were
offered up, pious people used to pour forth their prayers to God.
, and spreading out his hands unto the Lord, he prayed, saying, O my God I am
ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee. For our This good man puts
himself into the number of those transgresso^s, because he was of the body of
that state whereof many of the members had committed that sin, so as he might
be involved in the judgment that might fall on them, see Dan. 9.5.
iniquities are increased over our heads, that is, they are risen so high that
like a great flood of waters, they are even ready to overwhelm us; [see Psalm.
38.4.] our trespasses are grown up unto the heavens Beyond Heaven nothing can
ascend.
, that is, they are so great, they can scarce be exceeded, and cry to heaven
for vengeance against us. Since the days of our Fathers and Predecessors before
the captivity (whose sins caused the captivity) we have been great
transgressors, one generation after another continuing in their sins; and for
our iniquities have we, our Kings, and our Priests been delivered into the
hands of Heathenish Kings, and exposed to the sword, to captivity, and to
spoil, and to confusion of face, as it is at this day with some of our brethren
who are yet in captivity. And now it is but a little while since grace and
favor has been showed unto us from the Lord our God, who has left us a
remnant to ^scape, and to be brought back again into our own Country, and has
given us a nail Significat firmum statum, seeds certas fixas and stabiles,
firmam habitationem quae hactenus inconstans erat. Pisc.
in his holy place, that is, by his providence has fixed and settled us in
Jerusalem his holy City again, and has given us some prop and support of our
faith, and has enlightened our eyes, and refreshed and cheared our drooping
hearts, and given us a little reviving in our bondage. For we were bondmen, yet
our God has not forsaken us in our bondage, but has extended mercy to us, and
given us favor in the sight of the Kings of Persia (viz. Cyrus, Darius, and
Artaxerxes) and leave and encouragement from them to set up the house of our
God, and to repair the desolations thereof, that is, to renew the joyful
assemblies of Gods people and his worship and service in the Temple which
before was desolate, and to give us a wall in Judah and Jerusalem, that is, his
own defense and protection against our enemies. And now, O our God, what shall
we say, that after all this thy goodness and mercy shown us, we should again
forsake thy commandments as we have done, which thou have not only enjoined us
in thy law to observe, but have often pressed them upon us by thy servants the
Prophets, and particularly that we should not make marriages with Heathens and
Idolaters, nor by league or affinity join our selves to them, and thereby
endeavor to promote their prosperity and welfare, seeing any such near union
with them was like to be dangerous to us. Thou did show us that if we shunned
their society we should be strong, and able to defend our selves against our
enemies, provided we firmly depended on thee our God. And that we should eat
the good of the land, and leave it for an inheritance to our children from
generation to generation: yet after all the dreadful punishments that have been
inflicted on us for our sins, and after all the mercy that has been shown us
by thee in returning us from our captivity, and giving us such a deliverance as
this, and punishing us far less than our sins deserved, that we should again
break thy commandments, and join in affinity with people that are guilty of so
great abominations, we may wonder and admire that thy wrath is not so kindled
against us as to consume us utterly, that none should remain or escape. But O
Lord God of Israel thou art gracious and merciful, and we that are escaped are
as so many monuments of thy great goodness and mercy, though we are laden with
a great guilt, in respect of which, if thou should enter into judgment with
us we were not able to abide the trial.

Ezra, Chapter 9. whole Chapter.

Ezra having thus before the Temple (that is in the outward Court of it)
manifested such wonderful affliction of mind, and sorrow of heart, and that no
doubt to discover to the people the heinousness of their sin, and the danger
they were in because of it, the noise hereof was soon carried throughout the
City, and there came in unto him only some few at first, viz. those that were
afraid of those judgments, [see Chapter 9. 4.] but now at last a great number,
being much affected with Ezra's grievous lamentation, did also weep with him.
And possibly the men that had sinned in taking strange wives brought those
women and their children with them to expect what directions should be given
them in this matter. Thereupon Shechaniah a Priest, a pious and prudent man
(looking upon himself as one of that body and people that had committed that
sin) he cried out, We have trespassed highly against God in taking strange
wives. However there is hope in Israel concerning this thing, that is, there is
hope that God may be reconciled to us if we truly repent and forsake our sins,
and put away the strange wives that are among us, and there is hope the people
will be persuaded to do this, when they shall consider the danger they are in
if they do it not; therefore this is the course that I think requisite for us
to take for the pacifying of Gods wrath. Let us make a Covenant with our God to
put away all the strange wives and the children that are born of them, viz. all
such of them as retain their heathenish principles. For of those among them
that are converted to our Religion neither mother nor children are to be put
away. Witness the case of Rahab, and her son Boaz, also Ruth and her son Obed.
And let this be commended to the people by thy advice (my Lord Ezra) and by the
advice of those other godly Israelites that are now assembled unto thee, and
let this great business be managed according to the warrant and directions of
Gods Law. Arise therefore for the matter belongs unto thee in an especial
manner, we will also be with thee to assist thee. Be of good courage, and set
about it. Ezra hereupon caused the chief of the Priests and the Levites, and of
all Israel to swear that they would do according to this word, and they did
swear to it acccordingly.

Ezra 10. from 1, to 6.

Ezra now rose up and went into the Chamber of Johanan the Son of Eliaship, who
was doubtless of chief account among the Priests at this time, and it is like he
went into his Chamber that he might there with the Princes consult how to
effect that Reformation to which the forementioned assembly had sworn to yield.
But when he came thither, though they offered him bread and water to refresh
him, yet he refused to eat till some order were taken for redressing that great
evil which they had been lamenting, and which they that had been carried away
captive had been so guilty of; Proclamation therefore was now made that all
that were returned out of the captivity should appear at Jerusalem within three
days, and whoever did not come within that time according to the order of the
Princes and Elders, all his substance should be forfeited, and he separated
from the Congregation, that is, excommunicated from the number of Gods people.
Hereupon all that inhabited in the land of Judah and Benjamin, and with them
such also of the Ten Tribes as were come from Babylon on the 20th. day of the
ninth month came to Jerusalem, which was about the beginning of our December (a
time usually of much cold and rain) and all the people sat in the streets of
the house of God, that is, in the place of the outer Court (which possibly was
not yet walled in) trembling because of this matter, and for the great rain
that poured down upon them. So Ezra stood up and said unto them, Ye have indeed
sinned heinously in taking strange wives, and thereby have increased the
trespass of Israel: Now therefore with a penitent heart make confession of your
sins to the Lord, and do that which is agreeable to his will declared in his
word, and have no familiar converse with the people of the land, and separate
your selves from your strange wives. And they cried out with a loud voice, As
thou have said, so must we do; even justice and common equity require it of us
And yet within a few years they returned to it again.
. But (say they) the people are many, and it is a time of much rain, and we are
not able to continue abroad sub dio under the sky in this rainy time, neither
is this a work to be done in one day or two days; let therefore some of the
Rulers of the people, some pious and prudent men be appointed to sit daily here
in Jerusalem for the hearing of this business, and to take cognizance who they
are that have married strange wives (viz. such as have not embraced the faith
of Israel, or that since their marriage have relapsed to Idolatry) and let
those that are found guilty herein in every City be brought hither in their
turns to appear before these Elders, and let the chief men in every City
testify against them if they have found them guilty, and so let the business
be dispatched, first with one City, and then with another, until at length all
the strange wives be put away, that so the fierce wrath of our God may be
turned from us. Hereupon four men being chosen, viz. two Priests, and two
Levites, to set forward this business; the children of the captivity agreed
that the forementioned course should be taken. And Ezra with certain chief of
the Fathers were chosen and set apart to that great work, and began it on the
first day of the tenth month, and made an end of it on the first day of the
first month, and so were three whole months about it. And upon examination even
among the Sons of the Priests (who should have known and practiced better
things) there were found some who had taken strange wives; yea some of the Sons
of Joshua the good high Priest who assisted Zerubbabel were guilty in this
matter, and diverse of their brethren in that function also. They being found
guilty offered a ram of the flock for their transgression, and gave their hands
that they would put away their Idolatrous wives. And it is like many others
whose names are there recorded did the same, though it be not here expressed.
And some of the Levites (who ministered to the Priests) and some of the Singers
and Porters were also guilty herein, and put away their Idolatrous wives, yea
though they had children by them.

Ezra, Chapter 10. from 6, to the end.

We are now come to the Book of Nehemiah: As in the Book of Ezra we had a
relation of the building of the Temple by Zerubbabel, and of reforming Religion
by Ezra, so in this we have a relation of the building of the City, and the
walls thereof, and settling the Commonwealth, and redressing many disorders by
Nehemiah who came to Jerusalem thirteen years after Ezra's first coming
thither. In the 20th. year of Artaxerxes in the ninth month answering to part
of our November, and part of our December, Hanani and some other Jews came to
Nehemiah (who was one of the Kings Cup-bearers) being then at Shushan the
Winter-mansion of the Persian Monarchs, and acquainted him that those that were
left of the Captivity in the Province of Judah were under great affliction and
reproach, and that their neighbors round about them did exceedingly despise
and wrong them; and that which encouraged them the more in those insolences was
because the walls of Jerusalem were broken down, and the gates thereof burnt
with fire by Nebuchadnezzar, and so they continued still. So that the Jews were
disabled to defend themselves against their enemies. Nehemiah was so affected
herewith, that he sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted and
prayed, prostrating himself before the God of heaven with his face toward the
Temple the place of Gods presence, [see 1 King. 8.44.] and he said, O Lord God
of Heaven, the great and terrible God, that keeps Covenant and mercy for them
that love thee and keep thy Commandments; let thine ears be attentive to the
prayer of thy servant which I make before thee day and night for the children
of Israel, and wherein I confess and humbly bewail our sins which we have
committed against thee. Both I and my Fathers have sinned against thee, and
dealt very corruptly, and have not kept either the moral, ceremonial, or
judicial laws which thou gave us. Yet remember I pray thee the word thou
spakest by thy servant Moses, (Deuteronomy. 4.25.) saying, if you transgress, I will
scatter you abroad among the Nations, but if ye turn unto me, and keep my
Commandments and do them, though you were scattered to the remotest parts of
the earth, yet thence will I gather you, and bring you to the place that I have
chosen to put my name there. Now, O Lord, we are thy people whom thou have
redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand. Therefore I beseech thee
let thine ear be attentive to the prayer of me thy servant, and to the prayer
of thy servants that desire to fear thy name and prosper me, and grant me
favor and mercy in the sight of the King to whom I intend to address my self,
that he may grant the request that I shall make to him.

Nehem. Chap. 1.

About four months after when the time came that Nehemiah in his course was to
attend upon the King, and to minister to him as his Cup Bearer, both King and
Queen took notice of his sorrowful and dejected looks. The King asked him the
reason of it? Nehemiah replied, Let the King live for ever That is, very long,
an usual salutation given to Kings. See 1 King. 1.1.31. and Dan. 6.21.
, There is reason my countenance should be sad when the City, the place of my
fathers sepulchers (where my ancestors lived and died) lies waste, and the
gates thereof being formerly consumed with fire are not repaired. The King
asked him what he desired of him? Nehemiah (lifting up his heart to God in a
fervent Ejaculation The Ejaculation of the heart may be as fervent and as
prevalent as a solemn prayer uttered with the mouth, witness that of Moses,
Exodus 14.15. to which God made this answer, Why criest thou unto me? yet no
words of prayer were then uttered by Moses. This frequently and heartily used
argues an heavenly mind, and it is one way whereby we may pray always or con
inually, that is, at all times and in all places, and on all occasions.
, that he would please to direct him rightly to order his petition to the King,
and incline the Kings heart to grant it) said, If it please the King, and thy
servant has found favor in thy sight, I pray thee that thou would send me
to Jerusalem (the City of my Fathers sepulchers) that I may build it. The King
said, how long will thou be absent, and when will thou return? Nehemiah set him
a time, which it is like was not long, and at that time did accordingly return;
but from this time forward it seems he continued Governor of Judea under the
King for the space of twelve years or more, during which time it is probable he
often went into Persia to wait upon the King. The King graciously granting his
request, he then humbly besought him that he might have letters to the
Governors beyond the river to conduct him This Ezra would not desire when he
went to Jerusalem, because he had occasionally spoken to the King of the
Providence of their God over them that served him. Therefore if he had desired
a guard, it is supposed they would have derided his former confidence in Gods
protection. But Nehemiah's case was different, having no cause to suspect any
such things; besides he was a person of great quality about the King, and it
was for the honor of the King to have his immediate attendants safe guarded
and respected.
safe till he came to Judea. As also letters to Asaph the keeper of the Kings
Forest, (viz. Lebanon) requiring him to furnish him with timber to make beams
for the Gates of the Temple which looked toward the Palace, and for the Gates
of the walls of the City, and for the house that he should enter into and there
make his abode. And by the good Providence of God the King granted him all his
desires, and over and above sent a guard with him to conduct him safe to the
river Euphrates (which was more than he desired of him) from whence he was by
the Governors beyond the river (to whom he delivered the Kings letters)
conveyed safe to Jerusalem. Sanballat the Horonite Of Horonaim a City of Moab.
See Isa. 15.5.
, (who it seems was the Kings Lieutenant or Deputy Governor over the Moabites,
and had insinuated himself so into the Jews that there was an alliance between
him and the high Priest, see Neh. 13.28.) and Tobiah This Tobiah (his wife
being a Jew) had often intelligence of their affairs, and so wrought them great
mischief.
(who was the Kings servant or Deputy Governor over the Ammonites, to whom the
high Priest was also allied, see Neh. 13.4.) being both of them secret and
inveterate enemies to the Jews, when they knew that Nehemiah was come to
Jerusalem, they were greatly vexed at it, especially that there was a man come
from the King to seek and endeavor the welfare of the children of Israel.
Nehemiah being come to Jerusalem, rested himself there three days after his
long journey. Then he arose in the night with some few only with him, and
taking the advantage of a Moonshine night, and to avoid noise, no horse but
that himself rode on, he went to view the ruins of the walls round about, and
the circuit of the City, that so he might consider whither they were able in
likelihood to go through with such a work as the repairing of them, and what
provision was requisite in order thereunto, and what places were most necessary
to be first and with most speed repaired. All which he desired to be privately
informed of before any body knew of his purpose, and that he might be the
better able to answer any objection that should be made against it, and that
there might be no talk of it till they were ready to set about it, lest their
enemies should thereupon seek to hinder them; and on these accounts it is like
it was that he carried the business so privately and did not acquaint the
Rulers nor the Priests, nor so much as the workmen that were afterward
employed in the work, with his intentions and purposes. Having thus seen the
ruins, and acquainted himself with all things he thought requisite, he calls
the Nobles and Rulers and Priests together and spoke to them after this manner;
You see (my Brethren) the distress that we are in, how Jerusalem lies wast,
the walls ruined, and the Gates thereof are burnt with fire. Come let us build
up the walls again that we be no more a reproach and scorn to our adversaries.
Then he told them all the providence of God about his coming thither, how he
heard of their affliction, and how he petitioned the King, and how graciously
the King answered him, and what encouragement he had given him. When the Jews
heard these things they were mightily animated, and said one to another, come
let us rise up and build the walls of our City. So they took courage and
resolution, and prepared themselves for the work. But when Sanballat and
Tobiah, and Geshem the Kings Deputy among the Arabians heard of their
intention, they scoffed at them for undertaking such a business which they were
never like to effect, and despising them, said, What do these people intend to
do? Do they intend to rebel against the King? If they do, we shall quickly
take a course with them. Nehemiah understanding this courageously sent them
this answer, The God of heaven we trust will prosper us, therefore we his
servants will arise and build. But as for you, you have no portion nor right,
nor memorial in Jerusalem, that is, you are appointed Governors in other
Countries; look to your own charges; you have no interest or concern in
Jerusalem, neither is their any memorial of you or your Progenitors to be found
among us; why therefore do you meddle with that which belongs not unto you?

Nehem. Chapter 2. whole Chapter.

Nehemiah and the Jews notwithstanding the opposition of their enemies resolve
now to set upon the building the walls of Jerusalem. Eliashib the Grandchild of
Joshua the high Priest with his brethren the Priests undertook the building of
the sheep-gate, which was near the sheep-market, and having at their own
charges built it, and set up the doors of it, they by prayer dedicated it to
the Lord. The inhabitants of Tekoa a City in Benjamin were well affected to the
work, and some of them built the wall in one place, and some of them repaired
another part of the wall, v. 27. but to the disgrace of the Nobles among them,
it is said, that they put not their necks to the work of the Lord; that is, they
refused to help therein, and out of their greatness pretended they would not be
taxed to the work, nor have any such burden imposed upon them, v. 8. The men of
Gibeon and Mispeh repaired to the Throne of the Governor on this side the
river, that is to the place where the Governor appointed by the Persian King
on that side of the river did use to sit, v 7. Shallum was another eminent
repairer (who was Ruler of half Jerusalem Jerusalem being part in Judah, part
in Benjamin, might have two Rulers.
) and his pious daughters out of their zeal were willing to let some part of
their portions go to the work, v. 12. It Is recorded also to Baruck's great
commendation that he earnestly repaired his part, that is, with more than
ordinary zeal and heartiness. Some of the Priests built the wall over against
their own houses, and Meshullam (who it seems was but a lodger) over against
his own Chamber. And thus by several persons the walls and gates of Jerusalem
were built.

Nehem. Chapter 3. whole Chapter.

Sanballat hearing what progress the Jews had made in building their walls, was
very angry, and scornfully scoffed at it; and before his own Countrymen and the
army that quartered in the City of Smaria, and when ever he had occasion, he
would say, What do these feeble Jews intend to do? Do they intend to fortify
themselves? Do they think to finish this work they have begun, and by
sacrifices to dedicate it to God as they use to do other great buildings?
surely we shall hinder them from that except they can hope to finish their work
in one day, or a very short time. And besides they will want materials for such
a work except they can raise up again the burnt stones that made the former
wall out of the heaps of the rubbish. Tobiah being by when Sanballat thus
scoffed, he said, Let them alone; alas! the walls they build are so weak that
if a Fox should go upon them he would break them down. Nehemiah hearing of
these scorns and contempt of their enemies, betook himself to God by prayer,
and humbly pleaded that relation that was between God and them. Hear, O our God
(says he) for we are despised, and turn their reproach upon their own head, and
let scorn and contempt fall on them, and let them be carried away captive, and
there made a prey to their enemies. And cover not their iniquity, nor let it go
unpnished, and let not their sin be blotted out from before thee, except they
repent and cease to proceed on in this their impiety. For in reproaching the
builders of thy City, employed by thy appointment, they have reproached thee;
so that we desire they may be punished not out of any private grudg or desire
of revenge, but that thy glory may be vindicated. Thus prayed Nehemiah. And the
builders went on with the work, and all the wall was joined together unto the
half height thereof, for the people had a mind to the work, and where there is
a willing mind, much will be done in a little time. But when Sanballat and
Tobiah, and the Arabians and Ammonites, and Ashdodites heard that the walls of
Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped, they were
very angry, and conspired together to come and to fight against Jerusalem, and
to hinder the work. But Nehemiah and the Jews made their prayer unto God, and
set a watch day and night because of them. About this time also another trouble
arose to Nehemiah, for the men of Judah who had the oversight of the work and
such also as labored in the work, complained that there was still so much
rubbish unremoved, and the strength of the bearers of burdens being much
decayed, they thought they should never be able to go through with the work, or
to build the walls so as to make them a defense to the City. They further added
that if the Trench without the wall were not cleared of rubbish, all that they
had done would be to little purpose. This added much to Nehemiah's grief that
the workmen themselves should thus complain and mutter. He understood also that
their adversaries said this of them among themselves, They shall not know nor
see till we come in the midst of them and slay them, and cause the work to
cease. And the Jews that dwelt among the Samaritans when they came to Jerusalem
often V. 12. Ten times, that is, many times.
told their brethren there of the contrivances of these their enemies, and said
to them, From all places by which a man may come from thence hither, and go
from hence thither, they will assault you, therefore look to your selves.
Nehemiah hereupon caused the people for the present to give over their work and
to arm themselves that the enemy might not surprise them, and to that end he
set some of them beneath behind the wall, and others above in the towers, and
other fortifications with their swords, arrows and bows in their hands. And he
spoke unto the Nobles and Rulers, and the rest of the people, saying, Be not
afraid of them, remember the Lord who is great in power, and terrible to his
enemies, and fight for your brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives
and your houses. But when the enemy heard that their design was made known to
the Jews, and that thereupon they were ready and prepared to defend themselves,
they laid it aside. And God having thus brought their counsel to naught, the
Jews returned every one to his work at the wall again. Yet they were careful
still to be in a readiness to resist the enemy in case he should assault them.
And particularly Nehemiah employed only half of his servants in building the
wall, the other half stood always ready armed to keep off the enemy if occasion
should be, and those that were employed in building were also armed with
swords, (the Rulers being at their backs to encourage them) so that they may he
said (as it were) to have wrought in the work with one hand, and to have held a
weapon in the other, because whilst they were busiest in building they had
their weapons ready to defend themselves. And he that sounded with the Trumpet
kept near to Nehemiah, that upon any danger he might give warning to all the
people to be ready. Nehemiah further said to the Nobles, Rulers, and rest of
the people, the work is large and great, and we are separated upon the walls
one from another, in what place therefore ye shall hear the sound of the
Trumpet resort thither unto us, and our God will fight for us. And thus they
went on with the work, some being in arms from morning to evening, and some
working at the wall. Nehemiah also, gave charge to all Masters that had
servants, and to all workmen that had laborers under them, that they should
all lodge in the City, that so they might be in readiness and at hand both to
keep their turns of watching by night, and of working by day. And Nehemiah
though the Governor, spared not himself, but what he required of others he
himself was ready to do. And both himself, his kindred, servants and guard that
attended him were so watchful and diligent in this time of danger, that they
slept in their clothes, and did not put them off except when need required that
they should be washed.

Nehem. Chapter 4. whole Chapter.

The Adversaries of the Jews hearing that the walls of Jerusalem were now
almost finished, Sanballat and Geshem sent unto Nehemiah that they might have a
conference with him near to Ono a City in Benjamin, pretending a willingness to
be reconciled, but intending to do him a mischief; he suspecting their design,
sent them word he was about a great work which he could not leave, therefore
they must not expect him. They sent again and again to him even no less than
four times, importuning him to come, but he still returned the same answer.
Then Sanballat sent his servants to him a fifth time with an open letter,
possibly that they might show it to other Jews before they came to him, and so
might with the contents thereof discourage them. The letter spoke after this
manner, It is reported among the Heathen, and Geshem the Arabian affirms it,
that thou and the Jews think to rebel, and that thou have built the wall of
Jerusalem, that thou may set thy self up as their King, according to the
report that goes of thee. And thou have appointed Prophets to preach thee up at
Jerusalem, and to tell the people that there is now a King in Judah of their
own Nation, so that they shall not be in bondage any longer to foreign
Princes. And this will accordingly be reported to the King of Persia, and so is
like to bring great mischief on all us on this side the river; therefore let us
meet and take counsel together how we may prevent this great evil. Nehemiah
returned Sanballat this answer, That there was nothing true of what he
reported, 'twas all a fiction of his own head. Thus the enemy sought to make
them afraid by such reports as these; but Nehemiah prayed to the Lord to
disappoint their plots, and to strengthen his own and his Countryment hands in
the work. The enemies of the Jews seeing their former plots did not take, now
betake themselves to a new stratagem, viz. to hire false Prophets to terrify
Nehemiah with apprehensions of eminent danger to his own person. Accordingly
they hired Shemaiah and other false Prophets to assist them in their design.
Shemaiah was a Priest of the course of Delaiah, 1 Chronicles. 24.18. and pretended
to be a Prophet, (though he was a false one.) It seems he shut up himself,
thereby to signify to Nehemiah that there was such danger approaching as there
would be no safety in being abroad. Accordingly he sends to Nehemiah to come to
him, who being come, he persuades him to hide himself with him within the
Temple, and to shut up the doors, for (he tells him) his enemies will seek to
slay him, yea that very night they would come to slay him. Nehemiah replies,
Should such a man as I flee, who am called of God to do what I do, and being at
present the chief Magistrate and Governor of this City am to take care for the
defense of the people, and to give them all possible encourageragement both by
word and deed? What good man is there that being in the place that I am, would
flee into the Temple to save his life? Assure thy self I will not do it. But
for all his pretended Prophesies, Nehemiah perceived the Lord had not sent him,
both by the nature of the advice he gave him, (which tended to terrify him
from the work God had called him unto) as also from the event, for the enemy
did not come that night to seize him as Shemaiah prophesied; he saw therefore
that the enemy hired this false Prophet to make him afraid and to desist from
his work, and so sin against God in omitting his duty, and that they might have
matter for an evil report against him, and so might reproach him. Whereupon he
humbly desires the Lord to think upon Tobiah and Sanballat, and to deal with
them answerably to these their evil works, and so likewise with the Prophetess
Noadiah (who also was hired as it seems to prophecy to Nehemiah after the same
manner) and with the rest of the false Prophets who had conspired with Shemaiah
to put him in fear. But all that the enemies could do could not hinder the
work, for the whole work was finished on the 25th. day of the month Elul
agreeing with part of our August, which shows that they began the work in the
height of Summer, when the days were at the longest, and the season every way
most fit for building, and so all was dispatched in 52 days, which was not full
two months, and this great dispatch need not seem incredible if we consider
that the walls and towers of Jerusalem were not wholly demolished, but only in
many places broken down. 2ly, That there was a vast multitude of people that
round about the City in several places at one time were employed in the work,
and did with all earnestness follow it. 3ly, And above all Gods more than
ordinary blessing accompanying them, and helping of them in the work; I say if
we consider all these things we need not wonder that it was finished to the
astonishment of the enemy, before they dreamed it could have been done, [see v.
16.] so that they were forced to confess that there was more than an ordinary
hand of God in it. When Nehemiah had overcome all these difficulties, he met
with one more, and that was this, At that time some of the Nobles of Judah (who
possibly had married strange wives, and so were something infected with the
customs of the Heathen) held correspondence with Tobiah, and had bound
themselves by oath to prosecute his designs, he having married the daughter of
Sheconiah (some great man among the Jews) and Johanan his Son having married
the daughter of Meshullam See the mischiefs of forbidden marriages, and the
hypocrisy of some who made a fair show before men.
who had helped to build the wall, Chap. 3.4. These men told Nehemiah fair
stories of Tobiah, and sent back what he said to Tobiah, whereupon Tobiah sent
threatening letters to him, but he was not terrified by any thing that he wrote,
nor discouraged in his work.

Nehem. Chapter 6. whole Chapter.

See Deuteronomy. 20.5. and Psalm 30. the Title.
The wall being now finished, Nehemiah and the Jews resolved to make a solemn
dedication of it to the Lord, praying unto him that he would please to make it
a means of safety to his holy Temple, and to the City, and the inhabitants
thereof. Now because the Priests and Levites were to have a chief hand therein,
he first sets down their Genealogies that it might the better appear that they
were true Priests and Levites. And here are two pedigrees set down, one of such
as came up with Zerubbabel to Jerusalem, and the other of such as were in the
days of Joakim The prime Priests that were then heads of Families are now set
down in number only twenty, from v. 12. to 21. yet the number of the courses of
the Priests appointed by David was to be 24. See 1 Chronicles. 24. from 7, to 18.
that the number of Priests was now but few, that place Ezra ^.15. does import.
the Son of Joshua. The Priests and Levites being by their distinct orders set
down in the former part of the Chapter, the dedication it self is now related,
which was after this manner: First, they assembled all the Levites together
from their several habitations to celebrate this dedication with gladness and
thanksgivings, and singing with Cymbals, Psalteries, and Harps; and the Priests
and Levites being called to this holy service, first purified themselves by
washing their clothes, [Exod. 19.10.] and their flesh, [Numb. 19.7.] and by
sprinkling themselves with that purifying water mentioned, [ Numb. 19.9. and by
all other means both of moral and legal purifying. Then they purified the
people by such rites as they purified themselves by, and purified the gates and
the wall, recommending them to Gods custody and protection with solemn prayer.
Then the wall being thick and broad, so that many could go abrest on it,
Nehemiah divided the people into two great companies consisting of Priests,
Levites, Princes and people, they entered upon the wall about the middle of the
west-wall near the dung-gate, and there the two Companies parted, and each went
as in procession in this order: The one company had Ezra the Priest before
them, and other Priests followed after him sounding with their Trumpets; after
them came the Levites playing on sacred Musical instruments, and the Singers
all sounding forth Gods praises, and their own joy and thankfulness. After them
came the Princes and Rulers, and after them the people, and this company went
on the right hand Southward by the fountain-gate, and about the City of David,
and all along the South-wall even unto the watergate on the East. The other
company went in like manner, and Nehemiah himself the last of them. And they
made their procession on the left hand Northwards from beyond the Tower of the
Furnaces even unto the broad wall. These two Companies somewhat beyond the
Prison-gate met together, and in order descended from the East-wall to go into
the house of God, and that day they offered great sacrifices, and greatly
rejoiced with feasting and singing; for God by his gracious Providence over
them gave unto them, their wives and children, great occasion of rejoicing, so
that the joy of Jerusalem was heard a great way off, and the report of it went
into other Nations. After they had thus manifested their zeal in dedicating the
wall, they manifest their piety in providing for the Priests and Levites, who
had had so great an hand in it, and accordingly some faithful Levites were
appointed to take care of all such things as by the people should be brought
for the Ministers of the house of God, and places were appointed to lay up all
offerings, first fruits and tithes which were brought out of the fields, viz.
the portions appointed by the Law for the Priests and Levites. And the people
cheerfully brought in the forementioned portions, rejoicing that there was care
taken to settle the Priests and Levites in their accustomed courses, and so to
provide for them, that they should not be forced to go into the Country to seek
maintenance, but might now stay their full time and course at the house of God
to perform their particular services there. And both Singers and Porters kept
the watch of their God, that is, which by Gods command they were appointed
unto, taking care that the worship of God should be duly performed; and they
kept the watch of purification, taking care that themselves and the people
should be kept from legal uncleanness, according to the commandment of David
and Solomon his Son, who walked in the statutes of David his Father, 1 King.
3.3. For in the days of David and Asaph, Jedathun and Heman, (with whom David
consulted) there were some chief Singers appointed (who had a charge over the
rest) to see all things belonging unto the Singers duly and orderly performed,
and there were Songs of praise and thanksgiving composed, and set unto tunes by
those Singers. And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel and Nehemiah gave to
the Singers and Porters such portions as were appointed for their daily
maintenance. And the people set apart holy things for the Levites, and the
Levites set apart a tenth part of them for the Priests. Neh. 12. wh. Chapter

After these things Nehemiah appointed Hanani who first brought him word of the
sad estate of Jerusalem, and Hananiah the Ruler of the Palace i e. Palatii R
gii in monte Sion.
(who was a faithful man, and one that feared God above many) to be Governors
over the City, and to order the guards and matches thereof, and to take care
that the Gates were carefully shut and opened in due time. Then perceiving that
the City was large and great, yet but thinly inhabited, and that though some
fair houses were built before the Temple was finished, Hag. 1.4. yet abundance
of other houses were not built, thereupon (God putting it into his heart Good
motions, useful and profitable for the Church arise from Gods Spirit.
) he calls together the Nobles and Rulers, and people, and numbered them that
had returned out of the Captivity according to their Genealogies, that so it
might be known what families formerly appertained to the City, that out of them
a number might be selected and appointed to settle themselves there again. And
secondly, that as need required others also might be called to dwell there,
though their Progenitors had not been formerly inhabitants thereof. And 3ly,
that as men were found able they might lend aid toward the rebuilding of those
houses in Jerusalem that now lay in rubbish And for their better proceeding in
this matter a precedent was sought of their former numbering in the days of
Zerubbabel, and a Register was found of it (which is here set down) which in
many things differs from that, Ezr. 2. therefore it is thought that that in Ezra
was taken and written when they were preparing to come out of Babylon, and this
when they were come into Judea. And there is added to that Register what was
given at their first return out of Babylon toward the building of the Temple,
etc. viz. all that was given by the encouragement of Cyrus, viz. both by Jews
and Persians; but here is only set down what was collected after the people
were numbered by Nehemiah. And as then there was a collection of money and other
things made when they were numbered according to their Genealogies in
Zerubbabels time, Ezra 2.68. so was it now also, only that collection was
merely for the building of the Temple, and this was partly for the service of
the Temple (for why else were so many Priests garments given?) and in part also
for the rebuilding of the City. See v. 4.

Nehem. 7. from 1, to 8. and v. 70, 71, 72.

On the first day of the seventh month which was the Feast of Trumpets [Levit.
23.24.] the Jews were gathered together as one man to Jerusalem, and they met
both men and women before the watergate (the Court of the Temple not being
able to contain so great a multitude) and desired Ezra to bring the Book of the
Law, and to read it, and expound it to them. See Deuteronomy. 31.11. Ezra accordingly
brought it, and standing upon a pulpit of wood, he read therein distinctly
before the people, and expounded it, and gave them the sense of it. Ezra also
blessed the Lord the great God, and all the people answered, Amen and Amen,
with lifting up their hands, and they bowed their heads, and worshipped the
Lord with their faces to the ground. And several other persons, viz. Priests
and Levites stood on his right hand and on his left to be witnesses of the
truth of what he delivered, and to move the people the better to entertain it.
And not only Ezra but others of the Priests and Levites also expounded the Law,
and caused the people to understand it. And because they could not all
conveniently hear Ezra, they divided themselves into several companies, and in
each of them there were Pulpits or Scaffolds erected (as may be gathered from
Chapter 9.4.) from whence they expounded the Law unto them; there being several
teachers in each place that successively discharged that work. And in these
holy exercises and duties they continued from morning till noon, viz. about
five or six hours. The people were exceedingly affected at the hearing of the
Law expounded to them, being thereby convinced of their sins, and their
liableness to the dreadful judgments of God for them, and fell a weeping, and
wept very sore; but Nehemiah the Tirshatha or Governor, and Ezra the Priest,
and those Levites (that instructed the people) comforted and encouraged them,
telling them that God was merciful to the penitent, and that that was a day
holy to the Lord their God, and therefore on that day they should rejoice and
not mourn and weep. So Nehemiah dismissed them, and bad them go their way, and
eat the fat and drink the sweet, (that is, feast together with their
peace offerings) and send portions to them for whom nothing is provided, [see
Deuteronomy. 16.14.] for this day (says he) is holy unto the Lord our God, neither be
ye sorry, for the joy of the Lord is your strength, that is, the Lord would
have you rejoice in his goodness and manifold mercies which he has conferred on
you, and does still continue to you, and thereby to comfort your hearts. So the
people were quieted, understanding Gods readiness to forgive them upon their
repentance, and went and did as Nehemiah directed them.

Nehem. 8. from 1, to 13.

Upon the second day of the same month Ezra was consulted by the Elders of the
Families, and by the Priests and Levites concerning certain doubts arising upon
the reading of the Law the day before, and particularly concerning the Feast of
Tabernacles, whereof (as it seems) Ezra had purposely spoken to instruct the
people about it, because that Feast was now at hand. Whereupon Ezra showed them
that they were bound to keep that Feast on the 15th. day of the seventh month
abroad, and in booths made of boughs of trees according to the Law, Levit.
23.34. and v. 40. The people yielded a ready obedience hereunto, and
accordingly went forth and fetched in Olive-branches, and Pine-branches, and
Mirtle-branches, and Palm-branches, and branches of thick trees, and made
themselves booths upon the roof of their houses, and in their Courts, and in
the Courts of the house of God, and in the streets all over the City from one
end of it to another, and sat under their booths to eat their meat and take
their rest, and there was great joy and gladness among them, so that from the
days of Joshua until this time the children of Israel had not kept this Feast
They kept this Feast, Ezr. 3.4. 1 King. 8.65. and at sundry other times.
with so much devotion and solemnity as now they did; for the Law required that
only the first and last day of the Feast should be more solemn convocations
[Levit. 23.35, 36.] and great holy days, (whereon they might do no work) and
their manner it seems had been to assemble the people, and on those days only
to read the word, and though on other days they were to offer sacrifices, yet
they might therein do the works of their particular callings, but such was
Ezra's zeal that he did now on every day of the Feast read the Book of the Law,
and expound it to them, and as he was willing to preach, so they were willing
to hear every day. And they kept the eighth day also as a solemn assembly
according to the manner which God had enjoined, and his people from time to
time had practiced. On that day they used to beg the pardon of all their sins
and failings, and to crave a blessing also from the Lord upon themselves and
their families for the future.

Nehem. 8. from 13, to the end.

The Jews having been so careful according to the Law to keep the Feast of
Trumpets on the first day of the month, and the Feast of Tabernacles on the
15th, it is likely they omitted not to keep the tenth day, which was the day of
atonement whereon they were to afflict their souls very solemnly. But yet
having heard the Law day by day, all the Feast of Tabernacles, expounded to
them [ Chapter 8.18.] and finding thereby how grievously they had sinned, and how
far short they still were of what God required of them, they resolved now to
keep a solemn Fast before this great Assembly now gathered together departed to
their own houses. And accordingly on the 24th. of this month they again
assembled to keep a solemn fast, and to renew their Covenant with God. It seems
they had not performed what they so solemnly covenanted, Ezra 10.3. But by
hearing the Law so plainly expounded to them, they came to understand how great
a sin their taking and living with strange wives was, and what great judgments
they were liable unto by reason thereof. And being deeply priced in their
hearts for the same, they humbled themselves before the Lord, and testified
their humiliation by fasting, and putting on sackcloth and earth upon their
heads, thereby acknowledging that they were more worthy to be under the earth
than above it. And they separated themselves from their strange wives, and the
children they had by them, as also from such strangers as had mixed themselves
with them, and they stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their
fathers who had given them such an ill example. The people stood up in their
several places of meeting, and being divided (as it seems) into eight several
congregations, accordingly eight Levites stood up each of them upon a Scaffold
or Pulpit erected for them, and the day among the Jews consisting of twelve
hours, or four Trihoria, the first three hours were allotted for the morning
sacrifice, and the three last for the evening-sacrifice, and the other two
fourth parts, were thus employed, one fourth-part the Priests and Levites read
in the Law of God, and another fourth-part prayed and praised God. Thus they
continued in these holy exercises from morning to evening. The Priests standing
upon their several Scaffolds cried unto the Lord with fervency of spirit, and
extention of voice. And they stirred up the people to bless the Lord who lives
for ever and ever, going before them, in such words as these: Blessed be thy
glorious name, O Lord, which is exalted above all blessing and praise, and is
so high and glorious that we cannot sufficiently praise the same. The eight
Levites before mentioned had their several companies before whom they prayed,
and read, and expounded the Law. But it is like Ezra did all this before the
heads and Governors, and other chief men of Judah, and that he made the prayer
following before them; for all that congregation could not hear one man
together at one time. In this excellent prayer are these six things to be
observed. 1. A description of God, v. 6. 2. An enumeration of his mercies, from
v. 7, to 16. 3ly, A confession of sins, from 16, to 27. 4ly, A declaration of
Gods just judgments for them, from v. 27, to 32. 5ly, A supplication for mercy,
from 32, to 38. 6ly, A solemn binding themselves to God by Covenant, that they
would carefully observe all his commandments, v. 38. He begins his prayer thus:
Thou even thou art Lord alone, thou have made heaven, the heaven of heavens
with all their host, the earth and all things that are therein, the sea and all
that is therein, and thou preservest them all, and the host of heaven
worshippeth thee. Thou art the Lord God, who did choose Abraham, and
broughtest him forth out of Vr of the Chaldees, and gave him the name of
Abraham. And foundest his heart faithful before thee, and made a Covenant
with him to give the land of the Canaanites to his seed, and have performed thy
words, for thou art righteous. And did see the affliction of our Fathers in
Egypt, and heardst their cry by the Red Sea, and shewedst signs and wonders
upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on all the people of his land. For
thou knew that they dealt proudly against them; so did thou get thee a
great name and glory which we celebrate to this day. And thou did divide the
sea before them, so that they went through the midst thereof on the dry land,
and their persecutors thou threwest into the deeps as a stone into the mighty
waters. Moreover thou leadest them in the day by a cloudy pillar, and in the
night by a pillar of fire, to give them light in the way wherein they should
go. Thou came down also upon Mount Sinai, and spakest with them from heaven,
and gave them right judgments, and true laws, good statutes and commandments.
And made known unto them thy holy Sabbath The Sabbath was instituted at the
beginning of the world, but being much neglected God renewed the command for
the observance of it.
, and command them excellent precepts, statutes and laws, by the hand of
Moses thy servant: And gave them bread from heaven for their hunger, and
broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for their thirst, and
promisedst them that they should go in to possess the land which thou had
sworn to give them. But they That is, the Israelites that came out of Egypt,
and our Ancestors since.
and our fathers dealt proudly and hardened their necks, and hearkened not to
thy commandments, and refused to obey, neither were mindful of thy wonders that
thou did among them, but hardened their necks, and in their rebellion
appointed a Captain to return to their bondage; but thou art a God ready to
pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and
forsookest them not. Yea when they had made them a molten calf, and said, This
is thy god that brought thee up out of Egypt, and had wrought great
provocations, yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsookst them not in the
wilderness, the pillar of the cloud departed not from them by day to lead them
in the way, neither the pillar of fire by night to show them light, and the way
wherein they should go. Thou gave also thy good Spirit viz. To their
Governors, to Moses and the 70 Elders, Numb. 11.17. by whom they were
accordingly instructed and directed in the right way.
to instruct them, and with-heldest not thy manna from their mouth, and gave
them water for their thirst. Yea forty years did thou sustain them in the
wilderness, so that they lacked nothing, their clothes waxed not old, and their
feet swelled not. Moreover thou gave them Kingdoms and Nations, and did
divide them into corners That is, did plant them in the several parts and
corners of the land of Canaan, some within Jordan, and some without.
, so they possessed the land of Sihon, and the land of the King of Heshbon
Which was then in the possesssion of Sihon, who had formerly taken it from the
Moabites, Numb. 21.26.
, and the land of Og King of Bashan. Their children also multipliedst thou as
the stars of heaven and broughtest them into the land, concerning which thou
had promised to their fathers, that they should go in to possess it. So their
children wene in and possessed it, and thou subduest before them the
inhabitants of the land, viz. the Canaanites, and gave them into their hands,
with their Kings, and the people of the land, that they might do with them as
they would. And they took strong Cities, and a fat land, and possessed houses
full of all goods, wells dug, vineyards and oliveyards, and fruit trees in
abundance; so they did eat and were filled, and became fat, and delighted
themselves in thy great goodness, and the plenty thou had given them.
Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled against thee, and cast thy law
behind their backs, and slew thy Prophets [see 1 King. 49.10.] which testified
And protested that God would not suffer their sins to go unpunished.
against them, to turn them to thee, and they wrought great provocations;
therefore thou deliveredst them into the hand of their enemies, who vexed them,
and in the time of their trouble when they cried unto thee thou heardest them
from heaven, and according to thy manifold mercies thou gave them Saviors
Temporal deliverers, such as the Judges were, Judge. 3.9. 2 King. 13.5.
, who saved them out of the hand of their adversaries. But after they had rest
they did evil again before thee, therefore leftest thou them in the hand of
their enemies, so that they had the dominion over them; yet when they returned
and cried unto thee thou heardest them from heaven, and many times did thou
deliver them according to thy mercies: And thou testifiedst against them by thy
Prophets that thou might bring them again unto thy Law, yet they dealt
proudly and hearkened not unto thy commandments, but sinned against thy
judgments That is, thy righteous ordinances and commandments.
, (which if a man do he shall live in them See page 158. on Levit. 18.5.
, and withdrew the shoulder That is, were stubborn and refused to submit to
Gods Government, a Metaphor taken from Cattle that struggle and will not take
the yoke upon them. See Zach. 7.11.
, and hardened their neck, and would not hear: Yet many years did thou
forbear them, and testifiedst against them by thy Spirit in thy Prophets, yet
would they not give ear; therefore gave thou them into the hand of the people
of the lands where the Heathen reigned. Nevertheless for thy great mercies sake
thou did not utterly consume them, nor forsake them, for thou art a gracious
and merciful God. Now therefore, O our God, the great, the mighty, and the
terrible God, who keep covenant and mercy, let not all the trouble seem
little before thee that has come upon us, on our Kings, on our Princes, and on
our Priests, and on our Prophets, and on our Fathers, and on all thy people,
since the time of the Kings of Assyria unto this day. Howbeit thou art just in
all that is brought upon us, for thou have done right, and that which is just,
but we have done wickedly; neither have our Kings, our Princes, our Priests,
nor our Fathers kept thy Law, nor hearkened unto thy commandments, and thy
t^stimonies wherewith thou did testify against them and their evil ways. For
they have not served thee in their Kingdom, viz. of Judah which in thy great
goodness thou gave them, nor in that large and fat land which was daily in
their sight, neither turned they from their wicked works. Behold we are
servants this day in the land that thou gave unto our Fathers to eat the
fruit thereof, and the good thereof, behold we are servants in it; and it
yields much increase unto the Kings We reap not the benefit of the lands
fruitfulness, but the Kings that reign over us have a great part of all the fru
ts thereof.
whom thou have set It Is God that gives soreign Kings power over his people,
but it was for their sins.
over us because of our sins, also they have dominion over our bodies, and over
our cattle at their pleasure; and we are in great distress. And because of all
this we humbly crave mercy at thy hands, and do bind our selves to better
obedience for the future, and do engage our selves by a firm Covenant
thereunto, which we, our Princes, Priests and Levites in our own and the names
of all the people do now make with thee, and intend to write and set our seals
unto It Is like Ezra had obtained their consent to make this Covenant before he
began his prayer.
.

Nehem. Chapter 9. wh. Chapter

In the next Chapter we have first the names recorded of those that sealed the
Covenant in their names, and in the name of all the people, from v. 1, to 29.
And 2ly, the matter of the Covenant. For the first, the persons that sealed it
were Nehemiah the Governor, Scraiah who is said to be ruler of the house of
God, Chapter 11.11. and the Nobles and heads of the people, and the heads of the
Priests and Levites, and all the rest of the people, and of the Priests,
Levites, Nethinims, Proselytes, and their wives, and sons and daughters, all
that had knowledge and understanding clave to their brethren, viz. those
honorable persons before mentioned, who had sealed the Covenant in their
names, as well as in their own. And they entered into a curse and into an oath
to walk in Gods Law which was given by Moses: And particularly, 1. That they
would not give their daughters to the people of the land, nor take their
daughters for their sons. 2ly, That they would observe the Law about the
Sabbath This many of them broke afterward as appears, Chapter 13.15, 16.
, and though it was not in their power to force the neighboring Nations to
observe the Sabbath, yet they bound themselves by covenant that they would not
buy any thing of them on the Sabbath Day, or on any other holy Festival which
God had enjoined them to observe. 3ly, That they would leave the land every
seventh year to lie at rest, not plowing or sowing their fields, or dressing
their vineyards, and to leave what grew of it self free for others to gather as
well as for themselves; and further that they would not exact that year their
debts of those that were indebted to them; all which things were enjoined by
the Law [ Levit. 25.3, 4, 5. and Deuteronomy. 15.1, 2.] but had not been of late times
observed by them. 4ly, They made an ordinance for maintaining the services of
the house of God, binding themselves to perform not only what the Law required
but to do something more, viz. to pay yearly the third part of a shekel, which
is ten pence of our money. This was over and above the half shekel which the
Law enjoined to be paid by the poll for every one, [ Exodus 38.26.] and it was
to be laid up in the Treasury for the daily use of the Temple as need should
require, viz. for the providing the shewbread, and for the continual
meat offering, and continual burnt-offering, and for the offerings of the
Sabbaths (for every Sabbath Day there were offerings enjoined besides the
continual burnt-offering, see Numb. 28.9, 10. (and for the special offerings of
the New Mons, [see Numb. 28.11, 15.] and of the set-feasts, and for
peace offerings which were to be offered in the name of the whole Congregation,
and for other sacred services of the Temple besides offerings, and for the
occasional sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the work of
the house of God, viz. reparations of the house as well as services in it. 5ly,
Because there was much wood to be spent in the service of the Temple, and there
were not those treasures in the Temple now as had been, wherewith it seems the
wood had been formerly provided, both Priests, Levites and people did
unanimously at this time agree to take upon them the charge and care of
providing and bringing in of wood for the service of the Temple. V. 34. It Is
called the Wood-offering, because it was freely given and offered to the house
of God, and because the burnt-offerings were consumed therewith.
And so having equally divided the charge among them according to their
families, and assigned to each family what proportion they should bring in, the
time for every one to bring in their proportion was determined by lot. 6ly, To
bring in the first fruits of their ground, that is, of all manner of corn, and
of all fruit trees year by year unto the house of the Lord, for the use of the
Priests and Levites who attended on the service of the Temple. Also to bring
the price appointed by the Law for the redemption of their firstborn, Exodus
13.13. Numb. 18.15, 16. Also the redemption-money of all beasts that were not
fit for sacrifice; and that they would bring the firstlings of their herds and
flocks to the Priests to offer them for them. And that they would bring the
first fruits of their dough (as was enjoined Numb. 15.20, 21.) and all such
other things as upon any occasion were to be offered to the Lord, and the fruit
of all manner of treees, and of wine and oil unto the Priests, and to the
Chambers of the house of God, which were made for Treasures to lay up
first fruits and tithes, and such other things in. And that they would bring
the tithes of their grounds unto the Levites, the tenth part whereof the
Priests were to have. See Numb. 18.26. For as the people gave the tenths of all
they had to the Levites, so the Levites were to give the tenth part of those
tenths to the Priests. And as the Priests so such other officers as had their
Chambers about the Temple were to be maintained by such provisions as were
brought thither. And lastly they covenanted that they would not forsake the
house of their God, that is, that they would not neglect to bring those things
that belonged to the Temple, lest they that served therein should be forced to
leave and forsake the house of God; and secondly, that they themselves would
not forbear to come to the house of God, but would frequent it at all such
times as they ought to do.

Nehem Chapter 10. whole Chapter.

The chief Heads and Rulers of the people voluntarily offered themselves to
dwell at Jerusalem, In the 1 Chronicles. 9. there is another Catalogue of them,
where more are mentioned than here. But it seems in that both those that were
chosen by lot, and those that voluntarily offered themselves to dwell there are
set down. Here only those that were chosen by lot.
and the rest of the people cast lots to bring one of ten to dwell there; they
cast lots to prevent all murmuring, and that it might appear by the lot that
God would have such and such to dwell there. The people much commended those
that willingly offered themselves to dwell at Jerusalem, and desired the Lord
to bless and prosper them. Here we have a Catalogue of their names that dwelt
there, the rest dwelt in other Cities.

Nehem. 11. whole Chapter.

All these things before mentioned seem to have been done in the first year of
Nehemiah; after which he went back (as it is probable) to wait upon his great
Master Artaxerxes in Persia. How long he staid there before he returned is
uncertain, but it is like he came back within a short time, and so governed the
people of the Jews several years, viz. twelve in all from his being first made
Governor. In the 12th. year of his Government, and the 32th. year of
Artaxerxes, he went to him again, and soon after returned with a new commission
from him, and redressed and reformed those disorders in the State that are
mentioned Chap. 5. and those abuses in Religion that are mentioned Chap. 13.

The disorders in the State were these: 1. Some of the poorer sort of the Jews
with their wives and children grievously complained that they were oppressed by
the rich; they represent to the Governor that they had many children which in
it self was a blessing, but oppression had made it a heavy burden to them, for
they were forced to take up corn upon use of the Nobles and rich men to
maintain them, and sometimes to pawn or sell them for servants till they could
redeem them, which they were not like ever to be able to do, v. 5. A second
sort complained that they had been forced to morgage their lands, vineyards and
houses for corn, by reason of the dearth that was among them. A third sort
complained that they had been forced to borrow money upon their lands and
vineyards to pay the Kings Tribute, which lay as a heavy burden upon them, and
the wealthier Jews would not lend them money except they pawned their lands and
vineyeards to them; yet our flesh (say they) is as the flesh of our brethren;
though we are poor yet we are of the same lineage and seed of Abraham that they
are, and our children are freeborn as well as theirs, and therefore ought not
to be bondslaves to them, Levit. 25.39. but we are forced to bring into
bondage our sons and our daughters, and to subject them to that base condition,
or else they must starve. And some of our daughters are already in bondage,
neither is it in our power to redeem them. Nehemiah was very angry when he
heard these complaints, and much offended at the hard heartedness of the richer
sort. He seriously considered what was fit to be done in the case, and calling
the Nobles and rich men together (that had been guilty of these oppressions)
first he sharply reproved them himself, telling them they exacted usury See
Exodus 22.25. Levit. 25.36, 37. Deuteronomy. 23.19.
of their brethren which they ought not to do. Then he set a great assembly
against them, that is called a general assembly of the Elders of Israel that
they might hear the cries of the oppressed, and might reprove the oppressors,
and protest against what they had done, and so make them ashamed. Nehemiah also
in that great Assembly sharply reproved them, telling them that he for his part
was so far from doing what they had done, that he had according to his ability
redeemed several of his poor brethren that were sold to heathens, and (says he)
will you by your unjust exactions get that power over them, that you may now
sell them again? surely they being redeemed from the heathen, and so made free,
there is no reason they should be sold again to their brethren the Jews.
Nehemiah having thus spoken, these oppressors were so convinced of the
heinousness of their offense that they had nothing to say for themselves. The
Governor further told them they had done very ill, they ought to have been
afraid thus to sin against God, and against their poor Brethren, and the rather
because the heathen would thereupon take occasion to reproach their Religion if
they saw them cruel to their brethren. Ought you not (says he) to walk in the
fear of our God, because of the reproach of the heathen our enemies? Further he
shows them that he and his kindred and servants might exact of the people money
and corn as due to them for the care and pains they took for their good, but
they had not done it. Therefore (says he) If I do not take what is justly due
to me, why do you exact what you ought not? Leave off therefore I pray you this
usury you have been so guilty of, and restore to your brethren their lands,
vineyards, Olive-yards, and their houses again, remitting the debt for which
they were morgaged, and the hundredth For they used to take the hundredth part
of what they lent for use every month, or one in the hundred by the mouth. As
if they lent an 100 sh. or 5 l. for a month, they took one shilling for it.
part of the money, corn, wine and oil that ye have exacted of them; namely
what ye have received for interest I require you to restore again, and that in
kind whither it were money or any other commodity. The persons that were
concerned being touched at the heart for their sin, replied, They would do what
he required of them, they would restore the lands and houses they had in
morgage, and would require nothing for them. Then Nehemiah called the Priests
to bear witness, and took an oath of them that they should do according to this
promise. And he shook his lap, and said, God so shake out every man from his
house, and from his labor (that is, his lands and estate for which he has
labored) that performs not this promise, even thus let him be shaken out and
emptied of every thing that may do him good. And all the Congregation said,
Amen, and praised the Lord, that the offenders were brought to see their sin,
and to reform, and that hereby the oppressed were relieved. Moreover Nehemiah
that he might convince them how unreasonable it was for the richer sort to
exact thus upon the poorer, he tells them that since the time he was first
appointed by Artaxerxes to be their Governor (which was now twelve years) he
and his family had not eaten the bread of the Governor, (that is, the
allowance of bread and other provisions which had been usually paid by the
people for the Governors maintenance) but had lived wholly upon his own
estate, which the former Governors that had been before him had not done, but
had been chargeable to the people, and had taken of them a certain quantity of
bread and wine, besides forty shekels of silver, or 5 l. a day; yea even their
servants bear rule over the people, and exacted of them what they pleased; but
he did not so because of the fear of the Lord that ruled in his heart. Yea when
the wall of this City was building, he was continually employed in the
oversight of the work, and was still with the workmen to direct and encourage
them, yea his servants were employed also where most need was to help in the
work, yet he had no allowance for this. And further, though the people being
many of them much indebted, he might have had great bargains of them, yet he
bought no land, which might convince them that he sought not to advance
himself, but sought only their good. Furthermore, he shows them that there were
usually at his Table an hundred and fifty of the Jews besides strangers, and
his daily provisions were one ox, six choice sheep, and variety of fowls, and
besides this his ordinary and daily provision every tenth day he feasted them
more liberally, and gave them store of all sorts of wine Magnificus ergo erat
Nehemias. Et hinc colligo eum non fuisse in civitate totos 12 annos. Quomodo
enim tam diu sustinuisset hos sumptus? Sanctius.
. Which he mentions not out of vanity but to show them that yet for all this he
required not the allowance that the former Governors had, because he would not
add to the peoples burdens which he knew were very heavy. And doing what he did
with an eye to Gods glory, he humbly implores the Lord to think upon him for
good according to all that he had done for that people. Not that he thought
that he thereby merited at the hands of God, but because God had graciously
promised to reward whatsoever good is done unto his people.

Nehem. Chapter 5. whole Chapter.

He comes now to reform the enormities that were crept in among them in matters
of Religion. In Chap. 9. 2. we read that the children of Israel had humbled
themselves for their former sins, and had separated themselves from all
strangers, viz. from their strange wives, and the children born of them, as
also such strangers that were Idolaters and had mixed themselves with them, but
now they had relapsed into the same evils We see how prone men are to relapse
and revolt from good purposes, promises, vows and Covenants, yea and beginnings
of reformation. See Chap. 10.30.
again, which Nehemiah understanding he causes the Book of the Law to be read,
and expounded to them again, there being no better way to convince a sinner of
his sins than by the word of God. In that Book it was written that the
Ammonites and Moabites (viz. such as retained their Idolatrous principles and
practices) should not come into the Congregation Deuteronomy. 23.34.
, [that is, into their civil assemblies, to partake of their offices and
priviledges] for ever; that is, so long as the Polity of the Jews remained,
because they met not the children of Israel with bread and water when they had
fought against the Kings of the Ammorites, and had destroyed them, but hired
Balaam against them that he should curse them, though God turned his curse into
a blessing. This passage concerning the Ammonites and Moabites seems here
alleged rather than any other, because it did so expressly discover the great
sin of Eliashib (mentioned afterward) in joining himself in affinity with
Tobiah, who is often called the servant of the Ammonites. Now when the people
heard these words of the Law they separated such strangers from them as had
been unduly joined to them, whither strange husbands, or strange wives, or
strange children, even all those with whom God had forbidden them to have
communion or society. V. 4. Chamber is indefinitely taken for all the Chambers.
But sometime before this Eliashib the Priest (who had the oversight of the
Chambers of the House of God) was allied unto Tobiah (Eliashib's son having
married the daughter of Tobiah) and he made ready and furnished for this his
friend and allie Tobiah the Ammonite a great Chamber even in the Chambers of
the Temple (where aforetime they laid the meal and flower, and frankincense,
and some vessels belonging to the Temple, and several sorts of Tithes, etc.)
which was done (it seems) by laying many Chambers into one, the partitions
being taken down, see v. 9. Nehemiah understanding this, was greatly grieved,
at this strange miscarriage of the high Priest, it being very dishonorable to
God, and immediately cast out all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the
Chamber with indignation, and caused the Levites to cleanse the Chambers,
(possibly by sprinkling them with the water of purifying) because they had been
polluted and profaned by the lodging of strangers therein that were not of the
seed of Israel, and he brought thither again the vessels of the house of God,
and such things as had been before removed from thence. Nehemiah also
understood that the portion of the Levites had not of late been paid them,
though the people had not long before bound themselves by covenant with God to
do it, Chapter 10. 35. Yet it seems out of indignation against Eliashib for lodging
Tobiah in the Treasuries of the Temple, and because they feared thereupon that
what they brought thither would be diverted another way, and not employed as it
ought, they forbear to bring in the Levites portions as they had formerly done.

Then Nehemiah contended with the Rulers and Governors who had before made a
solemn Covenant [Chap. 10. 39.] that they would not forsake the house of God;
therefore he upbraids them with their own words, and condemns them out of their
own mouths, asking them why is the house of God forsaken? that is, why did they
withdraw maintenance from the Ministers of Gods worship, and so in effect
hinder the worship it self? Then he prays to the Lord to remember him
concerning this, and not to wipe out his good deeds that he had done for the
house of God, and for the offices thereof, and to procure that his holy
ordinances should be duly observed.

Nehemiah also at that time found some treading wine-presses on the
Sabbath Day, and bringing in sheaves, and wine and grapes, and figs, and all
manner of burdens into Jerusalem on that day, and he testified his dispeasure
against them, as also against those that sold victuals on the Sabbath Days. He
understood also that some of Tire brought fish and other wares to sell on the
Sabbath Days, and that in Jerusalem it self; he chides the Nobles and Rulers of
Judah for permitting these things, and suffering the Sabbath to be so
profaned: Did not your fathers (says he) do thus, and did not God for these
sins See Jer. 17.27.
(among others) bring the captivity upon us? And for you to return to the same
sins for which such judgments have been executed, is the way to incense God the
more against you, and to pull down the heaviest judgments upon you. Therefore
to redress this great evil, on the evening before the Sabbath when it began to
be dark (at which time the Sabbath began Levit. 23.32.
) he commanded the gates to be shut, and that they should not be opened (that
is set wide open, that all might have egress and regress as on other days) till
the Sabbath was ended, and set some of his servants at the Gate that there
should be no burden brought in on the Sabbath Day. So the Merchants and sellers
of all kind of wares lodged once or twice without Jerusalem; and he testified
against them, and asked them why they lodged about the wall, so that the Jews
that dwelt about the wall might be tempted to buy of them on the Sabbath Day.
He tells them that if they did so again he would lay hands on them, and cast
them into prison. Hereupon from thence forward they came no more on the
Sabbath Day. Further, he commanded the Levites that they should sanctify
themselves and keep the gates of the house of God, that no unclean persons
might enter into them in that great concourse of people that resorted to them
on the Sabbath Days. He desires the Lord also to remember him concerning this,
and to spare him according to the greatness of his mercy.

He saw also some that had married wives of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab, and
their children spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the
Jews language, but according to the language of those people, so that they had
a mixture of the manners as well as of the language of their heathen mothers.
And he contended and highly expostulated with them, and reviled them, and
caused some of them (that were most obstinate) to be beaten according to the
Law, Deuteron. 25.2. and commanded those that were to beat them to pluck off
their hair and made them swear So they had sworn before, Chapter 10.29, 30.
by God that they should not for the future make interchangeable marriages with
them. He asks them whither Solomon did not sin by these things? yet among many
Nations there was no King like him who was beloved of his God, and God made him
King over all Israel, nevertheless even him did outlandish women seduce and
cause to sin. Is it fit therefore (says he) that we should yield to you in this
matter, and suffer you to do the like, even to marry strange wives, you being
more liable to be seduced than wise Solomon was?

He found also that one of the Grandchildren of Joiada (whose name was
Manasses, as Josephus reports, and brother to Jaddua the high Priest) had
married the daughter of Sanballat, and was not willing to put her away;
whereupon he caused him to be excommunicated and banished from among them But
that he might not turn away his wife (which either he must do, or be turned out
of his Priesthood) his Father-in-law Sanballat undertook to build a Temple on
Mount Gerizzim hard by the City Sichem, wherein Manasses should be the chief
Priest; which he accordingly did, and many other Priests and Israelites that
had married strange wives resorted to him, and hereupon there grew a deadly
feud between the Samaritans and Jews, which lasted to our Saviors times. See
Job. 4 20.
. Hereupon he desires the Lord to remember those men and to punish them who had
defiled the Priesthood by such unlawful marriages, and that more special and
strict Covenant that God had made with Aaron and his seed, together with the
Levites concerning their holy function, see Levit. 21.6, 7. and Numb. 25.12,
13. Thus Nehemiah cleansed all Priests and Levites from all strangers, that is,
forced them to put away their strange wives, and such children as they had by
them, or else forced them to leave the Temple and the land. Further, he
appointed such courses of the Priests and Levites as David had formerly
appointed, 1 Chronicles. 23.24, etc. and ordered that every one should do the work
of his own place and function, and took care about the wood-offering, and the
first fruits, of which before, Chap. 10.34, 35. He closes the whole Book with
this Prayer, Remember me, O my God, for good.

Nehem. Chapter 13. whole Chapter.

The Prophet MALACHI the last of all the Prophets seems to have been
Contemporary with Nehemiah. The Prophecy of MALACHI.
For he no where exhorts the people to the building of the Temple, as Haggai
and Zachary had done. He reproves those disorders that Nehemiah in the last
Chapter of his Book says he found in his absence to be crept in among the
Jews, as particularly marriage with strange women, [Chap. 2. 11.] withholding
Tithes, [Chap. 3. 8.] and corruptions in the worship of God, [Chap. 1. 13. and
Chap. 2. 8.] His Prophecy is called, The burden of the word of the Lord to
Israel by the hand of Malachi. Who ever he was his Prophecy is authentic, and
the authority thereof notably confirmed by being so often alleged in the New
Testament, as in Mat. 11.10. Mark 1.2. and Luke 1.16, 17.

The occasion and scope of it was this: The Jews being newly returned from
Captivity did for a while heartily serve God, they built the Altar, laid the
foundation of the Temple, but then for a good while the work ceased, partly
through the opposition of the Samaritans, and partly through their own
sluggishness, till Haggai and Zachary stirring them up, and Darius encouraging
them they finished it, and set up the worship of God therein aright, but after
relapsed to corruption and hypocrisy in Gods worship, and to looseness in their
lives by mixed marriages, adultery, divorces, polygamies, and other enormities.
Hereupon God raised up this Prophet, who by his Ministry endeavors to reclaim
them, and to reform those corruptions. In this his Prophetic Sermon he
proceeds much in the way of Dialogue. In it we may observe two parts, 1. A
Reproof. 2. The effect of it. In his Reproof we may take notice of these
particulars:

1. He aggravates the ungrateful wickedness of the Jews from Gods singular love
in electing them in Jacob to be his people, and making a Covenant with them,
when he rejected the Edomites in Esau.

Chap. 1. from 1, to the 6.

2. He sharply reproves the Priests for offering blemished and unlawful
sacrifices, viz. blind, lame, sick, torn, (which no Governor would accept at
their hands) as also polluted bread, Gods Table and Altar being in their eyes
contemptible; and herein they sinned against his greatness and goodness, (who
was ready to reward their meanest services for him, even the shutting the
Temple-doors and kindling a fire on his Altar) and showed themselves horribly
ungrateful toward him who had preferred them to the Priesthood, and freely
chosen the Tribe of their Father Levi before the other Tribes. And having
mentioned their Father Levi, he adds four things concerning him: 1. The honor
conferred on him in calling him to that holy Office. 2. His faithfulness in the
discharge of it, both in right interpreting the Law, and living a good life
answerable thereunto. 3. His reward, he had for his reward life and peace. 4.
By his good Doctrine and good life he brought many to righteousness. Contrary
to all which these Priests now acted, who by their false glosses and
interpretations of the Law, and an ill life led many into error and wickedness;
yea they caused many to stumble at the Law, and corrupted the Covenant made
with their own Tribe to their great damage; for God would not accept their
persons nor their sacrifices; yea would reject the Jews and call the Gentiles,
Chap. 1. v. 11. And would further punish them by cursing their blessings, and
making them base and contemptible among the people, and would spread dung upon
their faces.


2. Then he reproves the People: 1. For their nauseating the service of God,
and being weary of it, and saying what a weariness is it, and snuffing at it.
2. For their low and mean opinion they had of the service of God: Ye have
profaned it and say the Table of the Lord is polluted, and the fruit thereof
even his meat is contemptible. 3. In bringing the worst of their herds and
flocks for sacrifice. 4. For robbing God of his Tithes: Will a man rob God? yet
ye have robbed me, etc.


3. He reproves the Priests and People jointly.

1. For dealing treacherously one with another. 2. For their polygamy and
marrying strange and Idolatrous wives. 3. For the wickedness and profaneness
that was found among many of them, who made a mock at Gods justice and
judgments, and blasphemously said, That God accepts the wicked, and that
every one that does evil is good in his sight, and he delights in them. For
condemning Gods service as unprofitable. Your words have been stout against me,
etc. You have said, It is in vain to serve God.
2ly, We may observe the effect of the Prophets reprehensions especially in the
godly, who hereby were moved to speak often one to another in detestation of
those sins and blasphemies; this God takes notice of, and rewards them with
many promises of blessings. As,

1. Of gathering them together, and taking care of them as of his Jewels.

2ly, That when he corrects them he will correct them in mercy as a father does
his son.

3ly, That he will destroy their enemies, Chap. 4.1.

4ly, That he will send the forerunner of the Messiah, viz. John Baptist, who
should come in the spirit and power of Elijah to turn the hearts of the fathers
with the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, so that his
Ministry should be very powerful in converting sinners by his preaching
repentance and faith in the Messiah, and so preparing the way before him.

5ly, That he will send the Messiah himself into this Temple, (how contemptible
soever it seemed unto them) whose coming should be terrible to the wicked. He
will be a swift witness against the sorcerers and adulterers; but his coming
would be very comfortable to the godly, being a refiner, and a Sun of righteous.

6ly, He directs them to Moses's Law to be their guide until Christ should
come; till whose coming they should expect no more Prophets, but look to Moses
who prophesied of Christ: Remember ye the Law of Moses, and the statutes and
judgments which I commanded him in Horeb, Chap. 4.4. And so much of this
Prophet.

Thus we see the History of Nehemiah, and so of the Old Testament ends with the
two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, which Josephus, Lib. 1. contra
Apion. confirms, speaking on this wise, From the death of Moses to Artaxerxes
King of Persia, the Prophets comprised what passed in their times. But from
Artaxerxes to our times, things indeed have been committed to writing, yet they
are not held to be of like credit with the former. And Eusebius in his Chron.
on the two and thirtieth of Artaxerxes (with which the History of Nehemiah
ends) has these words, Hitherto the Divine Scriptures of the Hebrews contain
the Annals or Year-Books of the times, but those things that were done among
them after this time, we must deliver out of the Books of the Maccabees, and
out of the writings of Josephus and Affricanus, who have delivered a general
History of things done among them down to the Roman times.

Now unto him that sits upon the Throne, the Father of mercies,
And unto Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace,
And unto the Holy Spirit of Truth, the Comforter,
Be ascribed all Wisdom, Blessing, Honor, Power and Glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.
FINIS.
A SHORT HISTORY OF THE Jewish Affairs, From the End of the OLD TESTAMENT TO
THE BIRTH OF CHRIST.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE Jewish History.
THE History of the Old Testament ends (as we have showed) with the Book of
Nehemiah, and extends no further than the 32th. year of Artaxerxes Longimanus.
Now for the better understanding the state of (...) Jewish affairs from the 32
of Artaxerxes to the Birth of Christ ^^taining a space of 358 years, which is
the interval or interstitium between the Old and the New Testament) it will be
requisite to set down.

1. What Persian Kings succeeded Artaxerxes till that Kingdom was conquered and
swallowed up by Alexander the Great, and so an end put to the Persian or second
Monarchy. 2. To speak something of Alexander in whom the Grecian or Third
Monarchy began, and the four Kingdoms into which his Empire was divided after
his death, till they were swallowed up by the Romans, who began the Fourth
Monarchy, and under whose Empire our Savior was born. 3. To show who were High
Priests among the Jews from their return out of Captivity to our Saviors time,
where we shall have occasion to speak something of the History of the Maccabees
till their power was swallowed up by Herod, made King by the Romans.
For the First, the Persian Kings who succeeded Artaxerxes The Persian Kings
that preceded him were Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius Histaspis, Xerxes, Artaxerxes
Longimanus.
Longimanus were these, Darius Nothus. Artaxerxes Mnemon. Darius Ochus. Arses
vel Arsames. Darius Codomannus, who being conquered by Alexander, the Persian
Monarchy ceased, and the Greek or Macedonian began in Alexander the Great.


Secondly, This third Monarchy was Typically prefigured in a threefold Vision,
recorded by the Prophet Daniel. The first Vision hereof we have Dan. 2. v. 32,
39. where it is represented by the belly and thighs of brass; as the belly and
thighs are under the breast and arms (by which the Persian Monarchy was
typified) so this was to succeed that. It was fitly compared to brass because
of Alexander's warlike prowess and hardiness, for in twelve years space he
subdued all Asia, and great part of Europe and Africa, beginning to reign when
he was but twenty, and dying at thirty two. He overthrew Darius in three
Battles, the first at the river Granicus; the second at Issus of Cilicia, the
third at Arbela or Gaugamela, and so got the Asian Empire, which he held six
years from the death of Darius, and then died.

The second Vision hereof we have Dan. 7.6. After this I beheld, and lo!
another (beast) like a leopard, which had upon the back of it four wings of a
fowl, the beast also had four heads, and dominion was given unto it.

1. Alexander was compared to a Leopard for his cunning, swiftness and cruelty.
2. To a Leopard with four wings on his back, intimating his swiftness in
conquering. 3. With four heads, because his Empire was divided into four
Principalities after his death, as we shall afterward show. 4. Dominion was
given to him by God. See Dan. 2.21. Prove. 8.15.
The third Vision hereof, Dan. 8. from v. 5, to 13. which we have explained v.
21. In which Vision, 1. The He-goat represents the Grecian King. 2. The notable
horn between his eyes signifies Alexander and his power and prudence. 3. He
came from the west, that is, from Macedonia that lies west from Asia. 4. His
going on the face of the whole earth, signifies his marching from thence into
Asia, and into other parts of the world. 5. His not touching the ground
signifies his celerity in motion. 6. He ran upon the ram, that is, upon Darius
Codomannus, v. 20. 7. He brake his two horns, namely conquered him who was King
of Medes and Persians, and so grew great. 8. When he was strong the great horn
was broken, signifying how Alexander should be cut off in the flower of his
age, as he accordingly was in the thirty second year of his age, by a Fever
contracted (as is supposed) by drinking over much wine in Babylon. 9. And
lastly instead of the great horn four notable horns arose, that is, four great
men who divided his dominions among them; so that the Monarchy of the Greeks
after Alexander's death was divided into four Kingdoms, namely the Kingdom, 1.
of Macedonia. 2. Syria. 3. Asia minor. 4. Egypt. But Daniel in his 11th.
Chapter Prophesies chiefly of the Kings of Syria and Egypt, viz. the Kings of
the North and of the South, because Judea lay between them both, and was
miserably ground and harassed by them both.


The particular KINGS that Reigned successively in those Four Kingdoms, were
these;
KINGS of MACEDONIA.
1. A Rideus Brother of Alexander, he reigned under Tutors or Protectors,
Perdiccas and Antipater. 2. Cassander Son of Antipater. 3. Philip Son of of
Cassander. 4. Antipater and Alexander both Sons of Cassander, they struggle for
the Kingdom, and so destroy one another. 5. Demetrius Peliorcetes Son of
Antigonus King of Asia, who reduced it under his power. 6. Pyrrhus King of
Epirus who conquered Demetrius, and also Lysimachus, Lord of Thracia, but he
held it but seven months. 7. Lysimachus, Lord of Thracia. 8. Ptolemeus
Ceraunus, Son of Ptolemaeus Lagi first King of Egypt, and Brother of
Philadelphus. Lysimachus being killed by Seleucus King of Asia, he slew
Seleucus and invaded Macedonia, and held it 9 months. 9. Meleager. 10.
Antipater. 11. Sosthenes. 12. Antigonus Gonatas, Son of Demetrius Poliorcetes
last King of Asia, so that though the Seleucidae got Asia, yet the posterity of
Antigonus got Macedonia and held it several years. 13. Demetrius Secundus, Son
of Antigonus. 14. Antigonus Tertius, called Doson, Tutor of Philip. 15.
Philippus Son of Demetrius Secundus. He was vanquished by the Romans. 16.
Perseus the last King of Macedonia, who was conquered by Paulus Aemilius the
Roman Consul, and condemned to perpetual im^risonment. His Son was made one of
the Scribes ^o the Roman Senate. So ^he Kingdom of Macedon came into the Roman
Power, A.M. 3803. who made it a Province.
KINGS of Syria, or KINGS of the North. See Dan. 11. v. 15.
1. SEleucus Nicanor. 2. Antiochus Soter Son of Seleucus. 3. Antiochus Theos.
Dan. 11.6. 4. Seleucus Callinicus, Son of Theos. Dan. 11. v. 7, 8, 9. 5.
Seleucus Ceraunus, Son of Callinicus. Dan. 11.10. 6. Antiochus Magnus second
Son to Callinicus. Dan. 11.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. to the 20. He was a Friend
to the Jews. 7. Seleuchus Philopator, eldest Son of Antiochus Magnus called
also Soter. He is called also a Raiser of Taxes, Dan. 11.20. He sent Heliodorus
to rob the Treasury of the Temple at Jerusalem. He was taken away by Poison
given him by Heliodorus. 8. Antiochus Epiphanes 2d. Son to Antiochus Magnus,
succeeded his Brother Seleuchus Philopator, called a Vile Person. Dan. 11.21.
He was killed also by the little Horn, Dan. 8.9. He got the Kingdom from his
Brothers Son Demetrius by craft: So that between the Posterity of this
Antiochus Epiphanes, and of Demetrius there were Wars for almost 200 years,
sometimes one getting it, and sometimes another: See more of him in Dan. 11.
from v. 20. to the 30. he profaned the Temple, and brought in great misery
upon the Jews. 9. Antiochus Eupater, he makes Wars upon the Jews. 10. Demetrius
Soter, Son of Seleucus Philopator, 7th King of Syria, Nephew to Antiochus
Epiphanes; He makes Alcimus that fled to him, High Priest. He wars against the
Jews, 1. By Bacchides; 2. By Nicanor; 3. By Bacchides and Alcimus. 11.
Alexander Bala, son of Antiochus Epiphanes, a Friend to the Jews. 12. Demetrius
Nicanor, son of Demetrius Soter. He cast out Alexander Bala: A great Friend to
the Jews at first, but afterward false to them. 13. Antiochus Entheus, son of
Alexander Bala: A Friend to the Jews. He was helped into the Throne by Tryphon
General to Alexander Bala. 14. Tryphon a foreigner, but Capt. General to
Alexander Bala: A most treacherous person to the Jews. 15. Antiochus Sidetes,
son of Demetrius 1 mus. Soter, and Brother to Demetrius 2 dus. Nicanor, who was
held captive by the Parthians, called Pius by the Jews, because on the Feast of
Tabernacles he sent them a great Bull to be offered to God. He was first kind
to the Jews, afterward very injurious. 16. Demetrius Secundus son of Demetrius
1 mas. and elder Brother of Antiochus Sidetes. He was before, the 12th King of
Syria, but driven out of his Kingdom, and now restored. 17. Alexander Zebenna,
an Egyptian. 18. Antiochus Griphus son of Demetrius Secundus. 19. Antiochus
Cizicenus, son of Antiochus Sidetes the 15th King of Syria, Brother of
Antiochus Gryphus. At this time the Kingdom of Syria was miserably shaken by
intestine Wars raised by the children of these two last Kings that strove for
the Kingdom, so that it became a prey to Tigranes King of the Parthians. 20.
Tigranes King of Armenia major, with the help of the Parthians, gets the
Kingdom of Syria. He was conquered at last by Pompey, and the Kingdom of Syria
taken away from him, but that of Armenia was restored to him. And so the
Kingdom of Syria was reduced under the Roman power, and made a Province by
Pompey 260 years after Alexanders Death.
KINGS of ASIA minor.
1 ANtigonus Bastard to Philip King of Macedon. He succeeded Alexander in the
Kingdom of Asia and reigned Eleven years. 2. Demetrius son of Antigonus, he
brought almost all Greece under his Power. Afterward by Seleucus Nicanor King
of Syria, his Son-in-Law, he was overcome when he had reigned Thirteen years,
and being imprisoned Two years, he there died. And so the Kindgom of Asia came
into the power of the Kings of Syria, and was joined to that Kingdom, A. M.
3683.
KINGS of Egypt, or KINGS of the South.
1. PTolemeus Lagi, son of Lagus a Macedonian, called Soter. He conquered
Palestine, and took Jerusalem, used the Jews cruelly at first, but afterward
was more kind to them. He carried a great many of them into Egypt, and let them
live there with the same freedom as his other Subjects. And hereupon many
others of the Jews went down into Egypt and lived there. Daniel speaks of him,
Chap. 11. v. 5. 2. Ptolemeus Philadelphus so called, because he married his
sister Arsinoe. He was son of Ptolemaeus Lagi, by Bernice his 2d. Wife.
Ptolemaeus Ceraunus eldest son of Ptolemaeus Lagi, by Euridice his first Wife,
being put by. He was a very learned King, and a great lover of Learned men. He
married his Daughter Bernice to Antiochus Theos, 3d. King of Assyria, Dan.
11.6. He founded the famous Library at Alexandria. He procured the Translation
of the Septuagint. He was after this a great Friend to the Jews. He redeemed a
vast number of them that were Servants, from their Masters, with his own Money,
and made them Free, and was otherwise very munificent to them. 3. Ptolemeus
Euergetes, son of Philadelphus, and his Sister-wife Arsinoe. This King carried
himself commendably; but all the Egyptian Kings after him were debauched
persons. He led a great Army into Syria against Seleucus Callinicus, and
overcame him; of which Daniel speaks Chapter 11. v. 7. He was poisoned by
Ptolemaeus Philopator his son. 4. Ptol. Philopater, son of Ptol. Euergetes,
called Philopator per antiphrasin; He killed his Mother also, and his Brother,
married his Sister. He waged War against Antiochus Magnus 6th. King of Syria,
and overcame him. After the Victory he would needs offer Sacrifices to God at
Jerusalem, but he was forbidden by the High Priest to enter into the Temple.
Hereupon being enraged against the Jews, he carries multitudes of them into
Egypt to be destroyed of Elephants; of him Daniel speaks, Chap. 11.11. 5. Ptol.
Epiphanes, son of Ptol. Philopator. He was but 5 years old when he began to
reign. Antioch. Mag. hearing of his Fathers death, and taking advantage of his
Childhood, and procuring Philip of Macedon to join with him, comes against
Egypt with a great Army; He is met by a great Army of the Egyptians under
Scopas their General, in the North part of Palestine, where the Egyptians are
beaten. He takes the Tower of Sion, and so became Lord of Judea. He afterward
marries his Daughter Cleopatra to Ptol. Epiphanes, and gives her for Dowry,
Coelosyria and Judea. Of these things Daniel speaks, Chapter 11.13, 14, 15. 6.
Ptol. Philometor, son of Ptol. Epiphanes, he married his own mother Cleopatra,
and had a Daughter, called Cleopatra, by her. Antiochus Epiphanes 8th. King of
Syria his Uncle brings a great Army into Egypt against him, and takes many of
his Cities. He marries his Daughter Cleopatra to Alexander Bala the 11th. King
of Syria. The Nuptials were celebrated at Ptolemais, to which Jonathan the High
Priest was invited by Alexander, and gave great Presents to both Kings. Ptol.
Philometor afterward finding his Son-in-law treacherous, he took his Daughter
from him, and gave her to Demetrius Nicanor, who overcoming Bala by the help of
Philometor, got the Kingdom of Syria. 7. Ptol. Physcon, 2d. son of Ptol.
Epiphanes; He married Cleopatra his Neice, who whas first married to Alexander
Bala, then to Demetrius Nicanor. 8. Ptol. Lathurus, eldest son of Physcon, he
married first Cleopatra his Sister, and then by the persuasion of his mother,
putting her away, he married his younger Sister Salone. Afterward he was
driven out of the Kingdom by his mother, and fled to Cyprus, when Alexander
Jannaeus King of the Jews besieged Ptolemais, the besieged called Ptol.
Lathurus out of Cyprus to their aid. He fights with Alexander and overcomes
him, and slays 30000 of the Jews, and used his victory cruelly. 9. Ptol.
Alexander, 2d. son of Physcon, was set up by his mother whilst his brother
Lathurus remained in Cyprus. He killed his mother, and then was driven out of
the Kingdom by the Egyptians, and flying to the Island Coos, there lived
privately to his death. 10. Ptol. Lathurus is now called back out of Cyprus,
and enjoys the Kingdom of Egypt again. 11 Ptol. Auletes, son of Ptol. Lathurus
by Salonice his Sister-Wife, he used to contend for mastery with Fiddlers,
thence called Auletes. He buys the Friendship of the people of Rome, with great
gifts, which he exacts from his Subjects, and so is hated by them, and ejected
out of his Kingdom. He flies to Rome for help, but not obtaining it, after a
long waiting, he goes to Ephesus, where he carried Letters from Pompey to
Gabinus Prefect of Syria, that he should use his endeavor to restore him,
which Gabinus effected, yet this Auletes's Son afterward destroyed Pompey. 12.
Ptol. Dionysius junior, son of Ptol. Auletes, his Sister was Cleopatra, last
Queen of Egypt, whom he marries, and joins with himself in the Government by
the command of Julius Caesar, who had conquered Alexandria and all Egypt. He
killed Pompey flying to him from the Pharsalian Battle. Julius Caesar coming
with his Army into Egypt, this Ptol. Dionysius strives to fly away by Sea, and
is there drowned. 13. Cleopatra daughter of Auletes, and Sister and Wife to
Ptol. Dionysius. After his death, Antonius was so enamoured of her, that
putting away his former Wife Octavia Augustus's Sister, he married her,
whereupon he was engaged in a War with Augustus, and being conquered by him in
a Naval Fight, at Actium, he flies into Egypt with Cleopatra, where he kills
himself, and Cleopatra, lest she should be carried in Triumph, kills her self
with Asps; and so Egypt was reduced into the Form of a Province by Augustus.


3ly, We are to show who were High Priests among the Jews from their return out
of the Captivity to Christ's time. The Catalogue of them follows.

1. Joshua the Son of Jozedeck who returned out of Captivity (where his Father
died) with Zerubbabel, and began and forwarded the building of the second
Temple, and the settlement of the people. He was High Priest all the time of
Cyrus and Ahasuerus, and some part of the time of Darius. The High Priesthood
was now grown poor and low, but was restored to its dignity with the renovation
of the Covenant to that office, Zach. Chapter 3. and Joshua being a Type of Christ,
both he and the people were comforted with a promise of his Incarnation.

2. Joiakim the Son of Joshua.

3. Eliashib the Son of Joiakim, Nehem. 12.10.

4. Joiada the Son of Eliashib.

5. Jonathan, or Johanan the Son of Joiada, Nehem. 12.11, 22. Josephus calls
him John, Antiq. Lib. 11. C. 7. and relates how he slew his own Brother Jesus
in the Temple, whom Bagosis (the chief Commander for Artaxerxes Mnemon) would
have made High Priest, for which foul fact Bagosis broke into the Temple and
laid a Tax of forty drams upon every lamb that was sacrificed in the daily
Sacrifice.

6. Jaddua Son of Jonathan, Neh. 12.11, 22. He had a Brother called Manasses
who had married Sanballat's daughter, and for that was driven from the
Priesthood, which occasioned the building of the Temple on mount Gerizim, as we
have showed before. This Jaddua met Alexander in the High Priests Vestments
when he marched in fury against Jerusalem, and the very sight of him appeased
him.

7. Onias the Son of Jaddua.

8. Simon or Simeon the just; of him the Jewish writers speak many excellent
things.

9. Eleazar, Simeons Brother; this was he that sent the seventy two Elders to
Ptolemaeus Philadelphus to translate the Law into Greek.

10. Manasses, Eleazar's Uncle, Brother to Onias the first.

11. Onias the second, Son of Simeon the Just, a covetous wretch, who brought
the displeasure of Ptolemaeus Euergetes upon him by his covetousness, and
refusing to pay a moderate tribute of twenty Talents, used to be paid by them
to the King of Egypt.

12. Simon the second, Son of Onias the second.

13. Onias 3 us the Son of Simon the second.

14. Jesus the Brother of this Onias 3 us his Brother leaving a Son behind him
but very young, this Jesus (who called himself Jason) was by Antiochus
Epiphanes made High Priest, but Antiochus being afterward offended with him,
set up his Brother Menelaus.

15. Onias the Brother of Jason; Jason by the assistance of the people drove
him out of the High Priesthood; whereupon he flies to Antiochus, and forsakes
his Country's Laws and Religion to procure his favor, and Antiochus coming in
to restore him brought in such trouble as Israel had never seen since they were
a Nation to that time. See Dan. 11.30, 31. Dan. 12.1.

16. The woeful pollution Antiochus had brought into their Religion and the
Temple causes Mattathias a Priest of the course of Joiarib (the first of the
twenty four) though he was now old to stand up for the maintenance of their
Religion, and for the deliverance of his Country. Here began the name and
renown of the Asmonean Josephus says that Mattathias was the son of Asamonaeus,
or rather the Grandson of Simon Surnamed Asamonaeus. David in Psalm. 68. v. 32.
uses Hasmonim to express Princes, and great men.
family. Mattathias not living long after his first appearing a Champion for
his distressed Country, he left the charge of that war to his Sons after him,
among whom,

17. Judas his Eldest Son (Surnamed Maccabeus from these four Acrostick Letters
in his Ensign, (...) Exodus 15.12. Lord who is like thee among the mighty) was
chosen High Priest by the people, and the first on whom they conferred the
honor both of Prince and Priest. He undertook the quarrel of his people and
their Religion, and was very victorious in many battles, but at last was slain.

In these times of confusion one Alcimus was put in High Priest by Demetrius
Soter, and bare the name, a mischievous wretch, and one that came to a fearful
end. See 1. Mac. 7.12, 13, 14. and Chapter 9. v. 55, 56.

18. Jonathan succeeds his Brother Judas as chief Commander; he was made High
Priest by Alexander Bala Son of Antiochus Epiphanes. He was very valiant and
successful, and at last was slain by Tryphon, see 1 Mac. Chapter 9. and Chapter 10. and
Chapter 11. and 12.

19. Simon his Brother succeeds him; he was also valiant and successful in the
quarrel of his people like his Brethren, but slain at last treacherously by his
own Son-in-law Ptolemaeus at a Feast.

20. Johannes Hircanes the Son of Simon; he sacked Samaria, destroyed the
Temple on Mount Gerizim in the 200th year after it had been built by Sanballat.
In his latter days he grew much offended with the Pharisees (whom at first he
much favored) and fell to the Sadduces. The people enjoyed much tranquillity
under him.

21. Aristobulus his Son; he first took upon him the style of King, he killed
his second Brother Antigonus, famished his Mother, and died vomiting blood.

22. Alexander Jannaeus Brother to Aristobulus, and third son to Hircanus; he
took also the Title of King; he waged war against Ptol. Lathurus. He was hated
of his own people, and much vexed with their insurrections against him. He died
at last of a Quartan Ague which held him three years.

23. Hircanus his Son is made High Priest, but his mother Alexandra by the help
and assistance of the Pharisees swayed the Kingdom.

24. Aristobulus younger Brother to Hircanus, after the death of their mother
Alexandra makes war upon his Brother Hircanus, and drives him from his Kingdom
to a private life, and takes both Kingdom and Priesthood upon himself. They
both desire help from Pompey. Aristobulus by some misbehaviour provoking
Pompey, occasioneth the sacking of Jerusalem, and the subjecting of the Jews to
the Roman yoke, from under which they were never after delivered. Pompey
restores the High Priesthood to Hircanus, and carries Aristobulus and his Son
Antigonus and his two daughters prisoners to Rome. Julius Caesar after Pompey's
death being assisted by Antipater (an Idumaean, but of the Religion of the
Jews) in his Egyptian wars against the Pompeyans, the war being ended, Caesar
made him Procurator of all Judea, and confirmed Hircanus in the Priesthood;
Antipater makes Phasaelus his Elder Son Governor of Jerusalem, and Herod his
Younger Governor of Galilee.

25. Alexander the Son of Aristobulus escaped out of the hands of Pompey when
he carried his Father and his Brother Antigonus to Rome. In Judea he raises
diverse stirs and tumults, and affecting the Kingdom, is twice suppressed by the
Roman Gabinius.

26. Antigonus, Aristobulus's other Son escaping from Rome into Judea, first by
the help of the King of Tyrus, and after by the help of the Parthians he
striveth to get the High Priesthood and Kingly dignity from Hircanus. In order
hereunto taking Hircanus prisoner he causes his ears to be cut off, and by
that blemish or maim he makes him incapable of the Priesthood, and delivers him
to the Parthians to be carried to Babylon. This being done, for the present he
enjoys the Kingship and Priesthood. Herod in the mean time flying to Rome, he
is made (through Anthony's power with the Senate) King of the Jews; and getting
some forces there with them he returns into Judea, and conquers and takes
Antigonus and sends him to Anthony, who causes him to be put to death. And so
the Kingdom of Maccabees ended 126 years after it began. After this Herod and
his successors, or the Romans made whom they would High Priests. See Lightf. p.
30. and Capellus's Chronolog. p. 29.

Julius Caesar having gotten the Dictatorship or supreme Government of the
Romans into his hands, about forty seven years before the Birth of Christ began
the Roman or fourth Monarchy, and continued it about five years, and so was the
first Roman Emperor.

To him succeeded Octavius Augustus who began to reign about forty two years
before the Birth of Christ, and reigned about fifty six years, but the first
twelve of them he governed together with M. Anthony and M. Lepidus (they three
making the Triumvirate) the latter forty four he reigned alone. In the 31th.
year Aliqui aliter computant, and asserunt Christum natum 41 An. Imperii
Augusti, Annoque Mundi 3948.
of his reign (reckoning the beginning of it from his victory at Actium) our
blessed Savior was born, and in the 35th. year of the reign of Herod.

The third Roman Emperor was Tiberius, in the 18th. year of whose reign our
Lord and Savior was Crucified.

HAving thus given a general view of the Jewish Affairs from the end of the Old
Testament to the Birth of Christ, we shall now speak a little more largely of
that subject, collecting (for the main) our History thereof out of the Books of
the Maccabees, and the writings of Josephus, and other Modern Authors who have
written of those times, and particulariy out of the Annals of the renowned
Usher.

To Artaxerxes Longimanus succeeded Darius Nothus in the Persian Empire, and to
him Artaxerxes Mnemon, and to him Darius Ochus, who marching with a great army
against Sidon in Phaenicia, which had revolted from him and confederated with
Egypt, the City was betrayed into his hands by Tennes the King thereof, and
Mentor who commanded the Egyptian Auxiliaries. The Citizens seeing themselves
betrayed, in a mad passion set a fire to their houses, and burnt themselves,
wives and children, and servants, so that above forty thousand are said to have
perished in the flames: He now marches with his army toward Egypt, and takes
Jericho in his way; and takes many Jews along with him out of Judea to serve
him in his wars against Egypt. Having conquered Egypt, and returning to Babylon
full of glory and spoils, he carried thither with him many of the Jews
prisoners, sending most of them into Hircania bordering upon the Caspian Sea,
and some he placed in Babylon it self.

Jonathan or Johanan the Son of Joiada being High Priest at this time, had a
Brother whose name was Josua, this Josua grew into great favor with Bagoses,
Ochus's General, insomuch that he had a promise from him that he should have
the Priesthood. Upon this he was so puffed up that he presumed to strive with his
Brother Johanan the High Priest in the very Temple, and so far provoked him
that the High Priest killed him in that sacred place. Bagoses hearing this,
endeavored to enter the Temple, and when he was forbidden, he asked if they
accounted him more impure than the carcass that lay within. And so forcibly
entering the Temple he plundered it, and thence took occasion to punish the Jews
seven years for the death of Josua; for two Lambs being constantly offered in
the daily sacrifice, he imposed upon every one a tribute of fifty drachms,
which amounted to the yearly rate of sixty Attick Talents, Joseph. Lib. 11.
Chap. 7.

Johanan the High Priest was Father of Jaddus (who succeeded him in the
Priesthood) and of Manasses who married Nicaso Sanballat's daughter, Neh.
13.28. It Is said one of the Sons, that is, Grandsons of Joiada Son of Eliashib
was Son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite. This Sanballat was a Cuthaean by
birth, from whom the Samaritans had their original, and was by Darius King of
Persia made Governor of Samaria, and being desirous by this band of affinity
to hold in the better with the Jewish Nation he gave his daughter in marriage
to Manasses.

Ochus being poisoned by Bagoses his General, and Arses or Arsames his Son set
up by him, and shortly after by him killed with all his children; at last
Bagoses set up Darius Codomannus a friend of his and made him King, the Royal
family of Darius Histaspis being now extinct. Bagoses shortly after repenting
of what he had done, and being much versed in King-killing, he thought by
poison to send Darius also after Ochus and Arses. But the matter being
discovered, Darius sent for him* and forced him to drink the potion himself
which he had provided for him.

The Elders at Jerusalem being offended that Manasses, Jaddus's Brother, had
contrary to their Law married a wife of a strange Nation, required that he
should either put her away, or come no more at the Altar. Hereupon he goes to
Sanballat his father-in-law, and tells him that his wife was dear unto him, but
he must either part with her or his Priesthood. Sanballat answered that he
would so bring it about (in case he would keep his wife) that he should not
only be a Priest but an High Priest too. For he would build for him upon Mount
Gerizim a Temple like that at Jerusalem, to do which he doubted not but to
obtain leave and authority from Darius. Hereupon Manasses continued with his
father-in-law, and all the Priests and other Israelites who had married strange
wives resorted to him, Sanballat furnishing them with money, and giving them
lands to till, and forwarding the ambition of his Son-in-law all that possibly
he could. Joseph. Antiq. Lib. 11. Cap. 8.

Alexander of Macedon now contends with Darius for the Empire of Asia, and
having won the Battles at Granicus and Issus, and driven Darius back into
Persia, he lays siege to Tire, Sanballat revolts from Darius and goes over to
Alexander at the beginning of the siege with 8000 men, and desires leave of
him to build his new designed Temple, persuading him it would he for his
interest, that thereby the Jews being divided among themselves might be the
less able to resist him. Alexander yielding to his request, he returns and
falls with great industry upon the work, and built the Temple, and made
Manasses his Son-in-law High Priest of it, thinking thereby to leave a great
honor to the posterity of his daughter.

During the siege of Tire, Alexander sent to Jaddus the High Priest at
Jerusalem, demanding of him supplies and other provisions, and withal such
tribute as was formerly paid to Darius. Jaddus answered that he was tied by a
former oath of Allegiance to Darius, and that he could not be free from that
oath so long as Darius lived. Alexander being very angry hereat swore that as
soon as he had taken Tire he would march against that City. Accordingly as soon
as he had taken Tire he marched forthwith into Judea, going in person against
those places that would not of themselves submit. But when he was upon his
march to Jerusalem, Jaddus the High Priest terrified with his former threats,
and now more especially fearing his rage, betakes himself to God by prayer, and
was by him warned in a dream that he should make Holy Day in the City, and set
wide open the Gates, and that he and the rest of the Priests every one in his
Priestly V^stments, and the people all clothed in white should go forth to meet
him. Alexander seeing this company coming meets them, and lighting from his
horse prostrates himself before the High Priest, and adores that God whose name
he saw engraven on the golden plate of his Miter. At which all his followers
being amazed, Parmenio asked him the reason thereof? to whom he answered, That
he worshipped not the Priest but the God whom he served, for that whilst he was
in Greece and consulted about his Expedition into Asia, such a man as this, and
so attired appea^^d to him, and advised him to it, and promised him success.
Then going up to the City he ascended to the Temple and sacrificed to God as
the Priests directed him. There they showed him the Prophecy of Daniel,
wherein was foretold that a Grecian should obtain the Empire of the Persians;
he accounting himself the man exceedingly rejoiced thereat, and the next day
offered the Jews whatsover they would ask of him. They requested that they
might live after their own laws and customs, and that on every seventh year (in
which they sowed not) they might pay no tribute. All which he readily granted
them. He offered them also, if they would follow him, the free exercise of
their Religion; whereupon many presently listed themselves to serve him. Then
leading his forces to the neighboring Cities he was friendly received by them.

Having now got all the Towns of Palestine into his hands, except Gaza (which
held out against him) he came with his forces and sat down before it, after two
months he took it, himself having received two wounds during the siege. The men
were slain to the number of 10000, the women and children made slaves,
furnishing the City with a new Colony gathered out of the places adjacent, he
made it a Garrison and Magazine for himself. Curtius Lib. 4. C. 10.

After this he marches for Egypt, subdues it, builds Alexandria, goes to the
Temple of Jupiter Hammon, and at his return the war yet depending with Darius,
he removed to Tire, from thence he passes Euphrates to meet with Darius, and
beats him again at the Battle at Arbela or Gaugamela, and so was declared King
of Asia.

Darius thus vanquished was forced to fly, and wandering up and down, at last
was betrayed by his own servants (among whom Bessus was chief) and being
ignominiously bound with fetters, and mortally wounded by them, he died, after
he had reigned seven years. And thus the Persian Empire was dissolved when it
had lasted about 203 years, A. M. 3675. ante C. N. 328.

Alexander reigned six years and ten months after the death of Darius as
Emperor of the East, and then falling into a Fever at Babylon drawn upon
himself by intemperate drinking. He died A. M. 3681, ante C.N. 322 About this
time and something after flourished many Schools of Greek Philosophers, viz.
the Academicks, Peripateticks, Stoics, Epicureans, Cynicks, Scepticks, of whom
it is not our business now to speak.
.

After Alexander's death his Empire was shared among his great Commanders, and
was divided (for the main) into four Kingdoms, viz. 1. the Kingdom of
Macedonia; 2. of Asia Minor; 3. of Syria; 4. of Egypt. These two last, the one
lying North, of the other South of Judea, did often grievously afflict that
poor people lying between them.

After Jaddus his Son Onias succeeded him in the Priesthood at Jerusalem.

Ptolemaeus Lagi the first King of Egypt after Alexander's death, subdued
Palestine, and got Jerusalem by a slight Viz. He enters Jerusalem on a
Sabbath Day under pretense to sacrifice, and then surprises the City.
, and carried thence a vast number of Jews into Egypt, out of which he selected
many and took them into his army upon greater pay than ordinary. And finding
that the Jews were most strict observers of any Oaths they had taken, he
committed many of his Garrisons and Castles to their custody. And he placed
many of them in Alexandria, suffering them to enjoy the same privileges with
the Macedonians. He sent many of them also to inhabit Cyrene, from whom it is
probable Simon the Cyrenian who bare the Cross of Christ descended, Mat. 27.32.
And other Cyrenian Jews of whom mention is made, Act. 2.10. and Chapter 6.9. Others
of the Jews whom he brought out of Judea with him into Egypt he gave away for
slaves among his Soldiers, not so much of his own inclination, as upon their
importunity who desired to have them rather than any other for their necessary
uses, and attendance in things belonging to the war.

Simon or Simeon the Just succeeded Onias in the Priesthood; he was so called
because of his great zeal and servency in the worship of God, and the exceeding
love he ever expressed to his Countrymen the Jews.

About this time as it is probable arose those three famous Sects of Pharisees,
Sadduces and Essenes Among the Jews there were some who thought they ought only
to live by the prescript of the Law, neither above nor below it. Others thought
they were not to act according to the bare letter of the Law, but according to
such consequences as might be deduced from it, and accordingly performed over
and above what the Law required in the service of God. Those that stood to the
letter of the Law were called Kerraim. Those that besides the letter of the Law
did works of Supererogation were named Hasidim or Sancti, and afterward they
grew into a body called Hasidaeans. As long as this voluntary and
supererogatory service was free and spontaneous there was no schism; but when
this Doctrine of the Hasidaeans came to be digested into precepts and Canons
many doubts and disputes daily arose, whence two Sects had their original. One
which allowed only the Law it self, and another which embraced the glosses and
interpretations of it. From the latter, (being that of the Hasidaeans) sprang
up some who called themselves Peruschim or Separate, as those who by reason of
their holiness were not only distinct and separated from the vulgar, but from
others also who would not come up to their strict rules and injunctions. These
Peruschim came by Greek writers to be called Pharisaei. Now as out of the
Hasidaeans arose the Pharisees, so from among the Karraim, the Sadduces, so
named from Sadoc. Antigonus the Master of this Sadoc, and Scholar to Simeon the
Just, among other heads of Doctrine had taught that they ought not to be like
servants who served their Masters mercinarily, and only for rewards; Sadoc and
Baithus interpreted this good saying into a bad sense, inferring from thence
that there was no reward after this life, and thereupon denied the future
state, and Angels and Spirits, and so framed their Heresy.

The third Sect was that of the Esseni, who its probable sprang from the
Pharisees. They had skill in Physic, and thence some would derive their name
from Asa which signifies to heal. They were accounted in some things more
strict than the Pharisees themselves.


.

Simon dying and leaving behind him only one Son named Onias, then an infant,
his brother Eleazar the Son of Onias the first took upon him the High
Priesthood of the Jews.

Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, second King of Egypt, being a great favourer of
learning, and all Liberal Arts and Sciences, in the seventh year of his reign
built a very famous Library at Alexandria. He committed the care of getting
Books of all sorts, and out of all Countries to Demetrius Phalereus, who was
not only a great Grammarian and Philosopher, but also had been a great
Statesman, and an excellent Governor in Athens. Now to make this collection of
Books he had this advantage, as it is reported of him, Aristotle at his death
left his Library to Theophrastus, and he at his death lest his own and
Aristotle's Books to Neleus Scepsius, and of him Ptolemy bought them, besides
others which he bought at Athens and Rhodes, and brought them all to
Alexandria. It Is said that he gathered together 20000 Books or Manuscripts.

Demetrius Phalereus advised Ptolomy to send to have the holy writings of the
Jews to be translated out of the Hebrew into the Greek. But Aristeas who was an
attendant about him at that time, advised him for the purchasing of that
translation, to set all the Jews (who were then slaves in Egypt) at liberty,
and to send them home, which Ptolemy agreeing unto, it is said the number of
them came to One hundred thousand souls, and every one of them cost the King a
hundred and twenty drachms, as Josephus says. Now an hundred and twenty drachms
make thirty Sicles or Stateres, which was the price of a slaves. See Exodus
21.32. At which rate our Savior was sold by Judas, so that the price which
Ptolemy paid to redeem the Jews from their Masters came to above 400 Talents.
In which redemption the like price was paid for every sucking child of them,
together with their mothers whom they sucked; whence it is that Josephus says
that Ptolemy paid in this kind upward of 460 Talents. Of these Jews Ptolemy
took the younger sort, and ablest of them into his Army, and of the rest, such
as he thought fit he employed in his private affairs, as he himself in his
Letters to Eleazar the High Priest affirms. And with those Letters he sent
also rich presents to the use of the Temple at Jerusalem by Andreas and
Aristaeas his two servants to be delivered to the High Priest; as namely a
Golden Table of two cubits long, and no less than half a cubit thick, all of
solid gold; also twenty goblets of like gold, and thirty of silver, and
precious stones to the number of five thousand of very great value. Besides
which he sent an hundred Talents to buy sacrifices, and for other uses of the
Temple.

Eleazar the Priest receiving these presents he chose six principal men out of
every Tribe (for after the Captivity there remained some of all the Tribes, as
we have showed before) and such as were most eminent for gravity, learning and
experience, who should translate Gods Law out of Hebrew into Greek; the
particular names of which Seventy two Elders are expressly delivered by
Aristaeas.

Eleazar also sent a Letter to the King full of respect and thankfulness when
he sent the Seventy two Interpreters to him, who coming to Alexandria presented
the King with such gifts and presents as Eleazar had sent unto him, together
with sundry Parchments wherein the Law was written in Hebrew in golden letters,
and the Parchments so joined together, that the seaming of them could not be
discerned by the eye of man. And it fell out that they came thither at a happy
time, viz. when news came to him of a great victory obtained by his Navy at Sea
against Antigonus. Ptolemy receives these Seventy two Interpreters with great
respect, feasts them seven days in a most magnificent manner, and afterward
appoints one Dorotheus to take care of them, and to supply them with all
necessaries, not letting them want for any thing for their Table or otherwise.
And the King himself would now and then put questions to them, some concerning
affairs of State, some concerning Morality, whereunto they made him prudent and
well advised answers, as we find in Aristaeas, who took all that he wrote out
of the King's Diaries.

Three days after Demetrius led these Interpreters into the Isle of Pharos, and
there placed them in a goodly house, and far off from any noise or tumult, and
there they set themselves every one to his work of the Translation, most
exactly fitting it to the meaning of the Original, which done Demetrius caused
it to be fairly exscribed. Every day they sat at it till three a Clock the
afternoon, and then went and took their repast, having all things abundantly
provided for them, and especially their diet, which was of the same kind that
was provided for the Kings own Table. Moreover every morning early they came to
Court, and there having paid their respects to him, and wished him a good
morrow, returned to their place, and there having washed their hands (as their
manner was) and prayed, they set themselves to read and to interpret from point
to point.

It so fell out that this work of the Seventy two Interpreters was finished in
seventy two days, as if it had been so cast by them of set purpose. Which done,
Demetrius calling them all together in the place where it was done, read it all
over in the presence of them all, and they as the Authors and finishers of so
great and good a work were highly commended, and magnified by all the Jews
there present. Demetrius also himself wanted not his share of praises among
them, and they besought him that he would deliver a copy of the Law so
translated to their Rulers, which Was accordingly done.

When the work was thus finished it was read all over to the King, who
exceedingly admired the wisdom of the Legislator, and commanded all possible
care to be taken thereof, and that it should be religiously laid up and kept.
He also desired the Interpreters themselves that after their return home they
would not fail to come often to him again. And he gave to every one of them
three fair Gowns, two talents of gold, a cup of one talent, and the full
furniture of a Chamber. And moreover to Eleazar the High Priest he sent with
them ten Bedsteads with silver feet, and rich furniture thereunto belonging; a
cup of thirty talents, ten vests of scarlet, and a Crown richly wrought, and
about one hundred pieces of very fine linen; and by his letters desired him
that if any of those Interpreters had at any time a desire to come and visit
him, he would not hinder them, for he much desired to converse with such kind
of men, and had rather spend his money upon them than any other way.

Antiochus Theos third King of Syria gave the Jews living in Ionia equal rights
and privileges with the Gentiles, and suffered them to enjoy their own
Religion. He made sundry times war upon Ptol. Philadelphus, and fought with him
with all the forces he could raise out of the Oriental parts. Wherefore Ptolemy
desirous to put an end to this bloody war gave him his daughter Berenice to
wife (while his former wife Laodice was yet living, by whom he had Seleucus
Callinicus, and Antiochus Hierax) with an huge portion, which gives light to
Dan. 11. v. 5, 6. But afterward he put her away and took Laodice again, and
she was at last slain by the procurement of Seleucus Callinicus who succeeded
his father in the Kingdom, which was the Original of many wars between the
Kings of Syria and Egypt.

Manasses, Eleazar's Uncle, Brother to Onias the first, and S;on of Jaddus
succeeded in the Priesthood at Jerusalem.

Ptol. Euergetes Son to Ptol. Philadelphus marches into Syria to revenge his
Sisters death, and over-runs and conquers all before him; and then came down to
Jerusalem and there offered many sacrifices of thanksgiving unto God, and
dedicated to him many gifts in acknowledgment of so great a victory, and then
returned into Egypt, (carrying with him many rich spoils and Images of their
gods, which Cambyses heretofore had taken out of Egypt at his being there)
being called back by a sedition of his own people. See Dan. 11.6, 7, 8, 9.

Ptol. Euergetes followed his father Philadelphus's steps in promoting
learning, and the magnificence of the Library begun by him at Alexandria. He
sent for Eratosthenes Cyrenaeus from Athens, and made him keeper of it. He took
great care to get into his Library the works of ancient writers, where ever
they could be procured. He borrowed from Athens the works of Sophocles,
Euripides and Aeschylus only to transcribe, and left them fifteen Talents in
pawn, and then caused them to be written out very fair in parchment, and then
retaining the Originals he sent the Transcripts back, desiring them to keep his
pawn of fifteen Talents, and to suffer the Originals to remain with him.

Onias the second, son of Simon the Just, after that Eleazar had executed the
office of High Priest (because he was then but a child when his father died)
and after him also Manasses, (because when he came to age he proved but a
half-witted man) yet at last came to be High Priest among the Jews; in which
office he carried himself very unworthily and basely, and by his covetousness
drew the anger of Ptol. Euergetes upon him, for he refused to pay the tribute
of twenty Talents of silver, which his Predecessors ever used to pay out of
their own store for the ease of their people. Hereupon Pt. Euergetes in a great
rage sent to him that if he did not speedily send him his arrears of tribute,
he would forthwith give away all his land amongst his Soldiers, and plant new
Colonies of his own there. Josephus the son of Tobias a young man of singular
prudence and virtue being advertised by his mother (who was the sister of this
Onias, and daughter of Simon the Just) of the coming of these messengers, he
presently came to Jerusalem and undertook to go in an Embassy to Euergetes
about this matter, and being come thither he so far insinuated himself into the
good liking and favor of the King, and Cleopatra the Queen, that he not only
diverted this storm which threatened his Country, but also obtained a company of
2000 Soldiers to levy the tributes, and other dues belonging to the King out
of Coelosyria, Phoenicia, Samaria and Judea. In which office he continued by
the space of twenty two years, and in that time doubled the Kings Revenues, and
brought them from 8 to 16 thousand Talents by the year, and brought into the
Kings Exchequer all the goods of Felons, and other Confiscations which formerly
the Exchequer-men swallowed up, and shared among themselves, Joseph. 16. Chapter
3.4.

After the decease of Onias the second, his son Simon the second succeeded in
the Priesthood.

About the year of the world 3787, when the second Carthaginian war began
between Annibal and the Romans, the Roman name began to be famous in the world,
and their power looked upon as formidable as any of the Kings either of Egypt,
Syria, or Macedon.

Ptol. Philopator overthrew Antiochus Magnus King of Syria in a great fight
near Raphia a City in Syria, and so got Raphia and those places round about.
The Jews sending some of their Sanedrin to render him their service, and to
congratulate him after so great a victory, he promised to go thither, and to
honor their City with his presence. When he came he admired the beauty of
their Temple, and would fain have gone into the Sanctum Sanctorum, whereinto it
was not lawful for any to go save the High Priest only. The Jews vehemently
opposing him therein, the King was more earnest and bent upon it, whereupon all
the Temple was filled with cryings and howlings, and the City with tumult. Then
Simon the High Priest kneeling down between the Temple and the Altar, humbly
sought help from God in that time of trouble. Whereupon the King fell into such
an horror of mind that he was unable to speak, and so was carried half dead
out of the Temple, 2 Mac. Chapter 1. and 2. Ptol. Philopator being returned into
Egypt fell into all manner of loose living and debauchery, and sought by all
means to turn the Jews of Alexandria from the worship of the true God, and some
of those that would not turn he caused to be slain, and some he marked with hot
irons on their faces, and some with the sign of an Ivy-leaf, because that was
the badg of Bacchus. Hereupon many abandoned their Religion in compliance to
the King's will. Others bought their peace and saved their lives, and escaped
their marking with hot irons for their money. But they who continued constant
in the Religion of their forefathers continued also constant in their
allegiance to the King, but would not converse in any kind with those of their
own Nation who had apostatized from their Religion; whereupon their enemies
presently made this construction of it, that they opposed the King in his power
and Government, and sought to turn away his subjects from their obedience. Upon
this Philopator growing angry with the Jews, not only in Alexandria, but even
throughout all Egypt, sent out orders to have them all gathered together into
one place, intending there to expose them to be destroyed by Elephants. And
accordingly the Elephants being prepared and filled with wine mingled with
myrrh that so they might be the more mad and fierce; it so happened that they
instead of falling upon the Jews, ran upon the Kings Soldiers and trod them
under foot, whereupon the King began to relent toward these poor prisoners,
and not only saved them but feasted them for seven days together. Vsh. p. 371.

Ptol. Philopator had by his Wife-sister Euridice a son called Ptol. Epiphanes
(who at the age of five years succeeded him in the Kingdom of Egypt) whose
birthday was first solemnly celebrated at home by all the great men and others
of that part of Syria, and the Country thereabouts that was under his
dominions; and then many of them made a journey to Alexandria there to wish him
joy of his young son, among the rest Josephus the Jew (of whom before)
Collector of his Tribute in Syria, Phoenicia, and Palestine, sent his youngest
son Hircanus to kiss his hand, and with Letters to his Agent at Alexandria to
furnish him with moneys to buy the most rich and precious present for the King
that the place did afford.

After Simon the second succeeded his son Onias the third in the High
Priesthood, a good man, of a venerable aspect, meek in his carriage, and very
advised in his words, and one who from his youth framed himself to a virtuous
life.

Pt. Philopator dying, left his son Pt. Epiphanes but five years old. Antiochus
M. taking occasion herefrom, confederates with Philip King of Macedon, that
with their united forces they should set upon the Kingdom of Egypt, Dan. 11. v.
14. and each should enjoy those parts of that Kingdom (if they conquered it)
which lay next to them. Antiochus at last got Judea from Epiphanes, and
Epiphanes by his General Scopas recovered it from him again, and shortly after
lost it again; so that Antiochus being now Lord of Judea, he grew friendly and
kind to the Jews, who voluntarily submitted to him, and assisted him in the
siege of the Castle of Samaria, into which Scopas had put a Garrison.

One Simon a Benjamite chief Keeper of the Temple falling into a contention
with Onias the third now High Priest, when he could not get his will of him,
went to Apollonius the Governor of Coelosyria, and Phoenicia, (for Seleucus
Philopator who succeeded Antioch. Magnus) and informed him that there was a
vast sum of money in the Treasury of the Temple, of which the Priests made no
use, and therefore it would do well in the Kings coffers; which when the King
was made acquainted with, he presently sent away his Treasurer Heliodorus to
Jerusalem to fetch him that money from thence; but when he came, Onias the High
Priest told him that it was true there were some moneys in the Temple, but they
were the moneys of Widows and Orphans, and were there deposited only as in a
place of safety, part of which also was the proper goods of Hircanus a very
honorable person, and that all there amounted not to above 400 Talents of
Silver, and 200 of Gold, and that such was the holiness of the place that it
ought not to be violated. Heliodorus nothing persuaded by this, enters the
Temple, and was smitten by an Angel dead for the present, but being restored by
the prayers of Onias, he returned to his Master Seleucus, declaring the
holiness of the place and the power of God, 2 Mac. Chapter 3.

Simon after this calumniated Onias, as if he (who had so well deserved of his
Nation) had been the cause of this mischief and had forced Heliodorus to do
what he did. Upon this matters proceeded so far that many murders were acted by
Simon and his party in the City, and Apollonius waxed mad withal, and backed him
in what he did, so that Onias was forced to go to Seleucus Philopater, and (as
some say) got him banished.

Antiochus Epiphanes The beginning of Antiochus Epiphanes, and the History of
the Maccabees. An. M. 3829. Ant. C. N. 175.
now obtains the Kingdom of Syria (putting by his Brothers son Demetrius, and
the true heir to the Crown) who by reason of his mad and wild conversation was
by some called Epimanes: He is styled by the Angel in the 11th. of Dan. a vile
person, and the little horn, Dan. 8.9.

Jason son of Simon the second, being weary of the continued High Priesthood of
Onias the third his Brother, goes to Antiochus, and of him purchases the High
Priesthood to himself for 360 Talents of Silver, and a rent of eighty Talents,
and not satisfying himself with wronging his Brother in this manner, he
promised a 150 more for a license to set up at Jerusalem a place of exercise
for the training up of youth after the fashion of the heathen, and so the Greek
rites and heathenish fashions were introduced, whereby an inlet was made not
only to Idolatry and profaneness, but also to that cruelty and bloodshed which
after ensued.

Jason three years after he had bought the High Priesthood of Antiochus sent
Menelaus Brother of Simon the Benjamite (that Arch-Traytor to his Country, of
whom we have before spoken) to the King to carry the moneys he had promised
him, and to solicit his affairs. Menelaus making use of the opportunity,
serves Jason in the same kind that he had served Onias, and promising to the
King 300 talents of silver more than Jason paid, procured the High Priesthood
for himself; and having thus gotten it by the Kings Mandat, he expelled Jason
into the Country of the Ammonites, but took no care to pay any of the moneys he
had promised to the King, 2 Maccab. 4.25, etc.

Antiochus having seized on Caelosyria, Ptol. Philometor (who claimed it as
belonging to him, being passed over to his Father as his Mothers portion)
sought to recover it out of his hands. Antiochus marching down toward Egypt
overthrew Ptolomy's forces, and quickly got Egypt into his power, pretending
nevertheless to have a kindness for young Philometor, and a care of his affairs.

Menelaus taking the opportunity of the Kings absence took diverse golden
vessels out of the Temple at Jerusalem, some of which he gave away, and some he
sold to Tire, and other places, for which being accused of Sacriledg by Onias
the true High Priest, who had betaken himself to Sanctuary, he procured him to
be taken out from thence and put to death. Going on in such mischiefs he was
accused to the King, but bribing Ptolomy the son of Dorimenes (who had revolted
to Antiochus, and was in great favor with him), he procured the death of his
accusers.

About this time Antiochus went down a second time into Egypt with a great
power, which he recovered again (the King thereof flying before him) and
getting the fortified Towns into his hands there staid, till the Jews procured
his return to their own destruction.

A false rumor of Antiochus's death being spread abroad in Judea, Jason having
got a thousand men together set upon Jerusalem, and getting the City into his
hands, forced Menelaus into the Castle, and then made slaughters, not as if he
had been among his own Countrymen and kindred, but among enemies and
foreigners; yet he got not the Priesthood, but was forced to betake himself
back again into the Country of the Ammonites, where being accused before Aretas
King of the Arabians, he fled from place to place like a Vagabond, hated of all
men as a forsaker of the Law, and public enemy to his Country, and died at
last at Lacedemon.

Antiochus hearing in Egypt that the Jews rejoiced at the report of his death,
and suspecting by the sedition stirred up by Jason that Judea would revolt, in
a great rage departed thence, and came and sat down before Jerusalem, and took
it by force, and giving no quarter for three days space, there were forty
thousand slain, and as many more taken prisoners and sold; and not contenting
himself with this, he presumed to go into the Temple, having that Arch-Traytor
Menelaus for his guide, and rifled it of the holy vessels; particularly he took
away the Golden Altar of Incense, and the golden Candlesticks with all the
vessels belonging to them, the Table of the Shewbread, and the Vail, and the
Crowns, and the golden Ornaments that were fastened to the Temple-doors; he
pulled off the gold from every thing that was covered with it, and likewise
took the silver vessels, and all the hidden treasure which he could find. He
also killed swine upon the Altar, and with the broth of the flesh of them he
sprinkled the Temple. And having taken 1800 talents out of the Temple he
speedily went to Antioch, leaving behind him to afflict the people, Philip a
Phrygian by Nation, but by manners a Barbarian, and Andronicus, and besides
them Menelaus more grievous unto and more spightful against his own Countrymen
than either of the other.

Two years after he sent Apollonius a cruel man with an Army of 22000 into
Judea, commanding him to put to death all the young men he could meet with, and
to sell the women and children for slaves. Apollonius coming to Jerusalem kept
himself still until the Sabbath, and then taking the opportunity of the
solemnity of the day, he destroyed all that came to perform Religious duties,
and marching with his forces about the City, he put to death a great multitude,
and plundering the City he set it on fire in several places, destroying the
houses, and demolishing the walls round about, and led away many women and
children into captivity, seizing on their cattle, whilst Antiochus his Master
was busy again in his attempts upon Egypt.

During these horrid outrages Judas Maccabeus departed with some others, and
lived in the mountains three years and six months, for which space of time the
daily sacrifice ceased, and the Sanctuary lay desolate, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem fled, and their City became an habitation of strangers.

The Samaritans seeing the Jews so miserably handled, professed themselves to
be by descent Sidonians, and thereupon obtained Letters from Antiochus to
Apollonius his President, that they should not be involved in the calamities of
the Jews, and that their Temple on Mount Gerizim as yet not honored with the
title of any God, should from thenceforth be called the Temple of the Grecian
Jupiter.

After this in the year of the World 3837, Antiochus by a public Edict
commanded all Nations that were subject unto him to observe the same way of
worship that he did, and laying aside their peculiar customs to profess the
same Religion with the Greeks, and to conform thereunto, threatening death to
all such as should be found unconformable. And he appointed Overseers over
every people and Nation who should compel them to uniformity, 1 Mac. 1.41, etc.
Into Judea and Samaria he sent an old man of Athens, that he should force the
Jews to depart from the observation of the Divine Law, and defile the Temple at
Jerusalem, and impose the name of Jupiter Olimpius upon it. And upon the Temple
of Gerizim he imposed the name of Jupiter Hospitalis, or Protector of
strangers. He also commanded the sacrifices to be left off, he prohibited the
Sabbath, he commanded them to defile the Sanctuary, to erect Altars, Groves and
Chapels to Idols, and that they should sacrifice swine and other unclean
beasts, and should suffer their children to remain uncircumcised, and should
forget the Law and the Ordinances of God, and made it a crime to profess the
Jewish Religion. Moreover order was sent to the Neighboring Cities of the
Greeks that they should compel the Jews to partake of their sacrifices, and
kill those that would not come over to their rites; so that many of the Jews
for fear obeyed, and sacrificed to Idols. The Temple was now filled with riot
and revelling by the Gentiles, who within the circuit thereof defiled
themselves with women, and committed other abominations. And on the 15th. day
of the month Casleu they erected the Abomination of Desolation (that is the
detestable Idol of Jupiter Olympius) upon the Altar, and built Idol-altars
throughout the Cities of Judah, and burnt incense at the doors of their houses,
and in the streets, and some were compelled to go in procession to Bacchus
carrying Ivy; they cut in pieces the Books of the Law which they found, and
burnt them in the fire, and with whomsoever they were found, or whoever
approved of them, they were by the Kings command to be put to death. Yet
notwithstanding there were many that stood out and would not conform to the
Kings Edict, nor defile themselves, at which the King being enraged, he caused
diverse to be brought before him, resolving to enforce them by torments to taste
impure meats, and to abjure Judaism, and upon refusal he racked them and put
them to death. Among others, Eleazar of the Priestly family an eminent Scribe,
and expert in the knowledge of the Law, of ninety years of age, was very eminent
for his courage, who neither yielding to eat swines flesh, nor dissembling to
have eaten it, chose rather to undergo the most cruel torments than to violate
the Law. After him seven young men that were Brethren, together with their most
courageous Mother, were brought before Antiochus at Antioch, who refusing to
eat swines flesh, after they had been exquisitely tortured with new-invented
torments, rendered their pious souls unto God. The Martyrdom of those persons is
described in the seventh Chapter of the second Book of Maccabees.

The rage of this persecution coming to Modin a Town situate between Rama and
Emmaus, it there found some opposition. Mattathias the Son of Jonathan a Priest
of Jerusalem of the family of Joarib (which was the first among the 24 courses,
1 Chronicles. 24.7.) dwelt here at this time with his five Sons; among whom his Son
Judas was called Maccabeus; and Josephus says their Father Mattathias was the
son of Asamoneus Or rather the Grand^on of Simeon Surnamed Asomonaeus.
, and from him that Surname descended to his posterity. David in the 68. Psalm.
32. v. uses the word Hasmonim to express Princes and great men.


Mattathias was earnestly pressed by the Kings Officers to sacrifice on the
Heathen Altars, but he utterly refused to do it, yea he proceeded so far as to
kill a certain Jew whom he beheld so sacrificing, and after that he slew the
Kings Commissioner who forced the people to sacrifice, and threw down the
Altar. Being so far engaged he exhorted all that had any zeal for the Law of
God to follow him, and so with his five Sons he fled into the Mountains,
leaving all their goods behind them in the City.

Many went after him and lived with their wives and children in dens and caves,
which when it was discovered to Philip Governor for the King at Jerusalem, the
Garrison-Souldiers were presently drawn out to pursue them, who falling on many
of them on the Sabbath Day, (and they not at all resisting in honor to the
day) they destroyed the number of about a thousand persons of them.

When Mattathias and his friends were informed of this, they much lamented the
case of their Brethren, and decreed that from thence forward if they should be
assaulted by their enemies on the Sabbath Day they would resist them with arms.
Then the Asidaeans a sort of religious men joining with him, and several others
who daily fled out of the Country, he made up a little army, and therewith
prosecuted the wicked ones, and marching up and down, threw down Altars,
circumcised all children whom they found uncircumcised in the coasts of Israel,
and pursued the sons of pride, and the work succeeded very prosperously in
their hands. After Mattathias had been Captain of this wandering company for the
space of a year, he died, having first exhorted his Sons to piety and a valiant
defense of the Law of God, and having appointed his Son Simon for a Counselor,
and his Son Judas Surnamed Maccabeus for a Captain to them. His Sons buried him
in the Sepulchers of their Fathers at Modin, and the Israelites bewailed him
with great lamentation, 1 Mac. 2.

Judas being assisted by his Brethren and such as followed his Father, fell
upon the enemy, burnt diverse of their Towns, and seized upon several commodious
places, (coming usually upon them in the night) insomuch that he forced many of
them to quit the land. Apollonius the Governor of Samaria coming against him,
Judas overthrew and slew him, and getting his Sword, ever after used it in the
wars. After this he overthrew Seron the Governor of Caelosyria, who marched
against him with the forces under his command, his whole army was routed by
Judas, and eight hundred slain on the place, the rest fled into the land of the
Philistines near the Seacoast.

Antiochus hearing of this success of Judas, was exceedingly enraged at it, and
levying all the strength of his Kingdom, and giving them a years pay, he
commanded them to be in readiness; he purposed to have marched immediately
against Maccabeus, but he found his Treasury much exhausted by the pay of his
Army, and he saw he had lost 300 Talents of yearly tribute by the Jews
revolting from him, and much also which he was wont to receive from other
places who were in combustion, because he would force them to quit their
ancient rites. For his persecution raged even in the Grecian Cities, insomuch
that he spared not the very Gentiles, but endeavored to make them abjure their
ancient superstitions, and to come up to a conformity of worship with himself,
and by these things his revenues were much impaired. Fearing therefore he
should not have enough to defray his charges and gratuities, (wherein he took a
pride to exceed all his Ancestors) he resolved to make a progress first into
Persia, and the upper Countries to gather the Tributes thereof, and fill his
coffers. But before his departure he made Lysias his kinsman Governor of the
Regions betwixt Euphrates and Egypt, (committing to his care his young Son
Eupator) and gave him half his forces, and this also in charge to blot out the
Nation of the Jews utterly, and to give their Country to be inhabited by
strangers.

Philip the Governor of Jerusalem observing how that Judas grew stronger and
stronger every day, wrote unto Ptolemy (Son of Dorymenes) Governor of
Coelosyria and Cilicia to lend his helping hand to the Kings affairs, who
presently dispatching Nicanor (one of his chiefest friends) with 20000 men,
purposed to root out the whole stock of the Jews; and to him also he joined
Gorgias a man of great experience in Military affairs. Lyfias also dispatched
away Ptolomy himself as a reserve to them, so that under these three
Commanders, Ptolomy, Nicanor, and Gorgias were mustered 40000 foot, and 7000
horse, who marching with this their great army, pitched by Emmaus in the plain
Country. Antiochus was at this time behind hand with his tribute to the Romans,
the sum of 2000 Talents, and Nicanor making sure of the victory before hand,
resolved to wipe off that score by the sale of the captive Jews; and to that
end invited out of the Cities near the Seacoast a thousand Merchants,
promising that he would allow ninety slaves for a Talent; which was no sooner
divulged but the Merchants of the Country with their Attendants repair to the
Camp to purchase the Jews for slaves, great Companies also flocked out of
Syria, and other parts to barter for the same commodities.

The Heathen now holding Jerusalem and the Temple, Judas Maccabeus in this
great extremity removed with his Army to Mizpeh (for there before the building
of the Temple was the Israelites place of Worship, 1 Samuel 7.5, 6.) and there he
proclaimed a fast, and with most servent prayers importuned the Lords help
against this formidable host, for he had with him but six or seven thousand
against the vast power of the enemy. After this such as had betrothed wives,
planted vineyards, or were fearful he dismissed according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 20,
6, 7, 8. and then divided his army into four Squadrons, and appointing his
Brothers to command them, committed to each 1500 Soldiers; so the Army removed
and pitched on the South Side of Emmaus opposite to the enemy. That night
Gorgias had a design to surprise them unawares, and to that end took along with
him 5000 foot, and a 1000 choice horse, and came toward the Jews Camp, having
the Garrison-Souldiers of Sion-fort for his convoy. Judas having notice hereof,
wisely turned it to his advantage, resolving to march straightways to Emmaus,
and so to fall upon Nicanor in the absence of the other, who was the more
experienced Captain. Gorgias arriving at the Jews Camp, and finding no body
there, thought they had fled for fear of him into the mountains, and so he
sought for them there, but they being got to Nicanor engaged him; in the
morning Judas having first encouraged his men, and given the word in the help
of God, through the assistance of the Almighty they routed Nicanor's whole
army, laying above 5000 dead upon the place, and had the chase of the rest a
great way. Among others who were thus vanquished were the Merchants, who
(nothing doubting of the victory) followed the Kings army in hope to get a good
bargain of the captives, and now became a prey themselves, and the Jews seized
on their money which they brought to buy them. And when they had had a long
pursuit of them, but being prevented by time, they sounded a retreat; for the
evening on which the Sabbath began drawing on, after they had gathered up the
Arms of the vanquished Host, and taken the spoils from them, they composed
themselves for the celebration of the Sabbath, magnifying the mercy of God for
this so marvelous a victory, 2 Mac. 8. Gorgias returning from his fruitless
expedition, and perceiving by the smoke of the Tents set on fire, that that
other division of their army was routed, and seeing Judas on the plain standing
in Battalia with his forces ready to receive them, they all shifted for
themselves. The coast thus cleared, Judas returned to the spoil, where he found
plenty of gold, silk, and purple, (which the Phoenician Merchants had left
behind them) and much wealth, all which the Soldiers shared among themselves,
having first deducted a portion for the maimed Soldiers, widows and orphans.
Then with joint supplication they desired the Lord to continue still to be
gracious unto them.

After this Judas overthrew Timotheus and Bacchides, both of the Kings party,
and killed above 20000 men, and made themselves masters of many strong holds,
and divided among themselves much spoil, always admitting the maimed, orphans,
widows, and aged persons into equal portions with themselves.

Lysias was exceedingly vexed that things fell out so contrary to his
expectation, and therefore the next year invaded Judea with an Army of 60000
choice foot, and 5000 horse. Judas (having first implored the Divine
assistance) meets him with an army of 10000 men. Lysias received such a blow
that with the loss of 5000 men he was glad to retreat to Antioch, intending
greater preparations for his next expedition.

Judas and his Brethren having now some respite from their enemies, march with
all their forces to Jerusalem and recover the Temple, and all the City, except
Sion-fort. The Altars and Chapels which the enemy had built in the open
streets they demolished. And by the assistance of the Priests they cleansed the
Temple, built a new Altar, repaired the holy, and Holy of Holies, hallowed the
Courts, made new holy Vessels, brought into the Temple the Candlestick, the
Altar of Incense, and the Table of shewbread, and so they burnt Incense upon
the Altar, lighted the Lamps which were in the Candlestick, and placed
shewbread upon the Table, and spread the Vails, and finished whatever they had
taken in hand. Then on the 15th. of the ninth month called Casleu (two years
after he had succeeded his Father in the Government, but three years complete
since the Gentiles first sacrificed in that place) having furnished themselves
with fire by striking stones one against another, they offered sacrifice
according to the Law upon their new Altar of Burnt-offerings; so that on the
very same day of the same month on which the Gentiles profaned the old Altar,
Judas consecrated this new one.

This Dedication was celebrated with Songs and Hymns, and Instruments of Music
very joyfully, and all the people fell prostrate on the ground, and worshipped
the God of Heaven who had so prospered them; beseeching him that he would not
suffer them to fall again into such calamities, but that if they offended him
he himself would punish them, and not suffer them to fall into the hands of the
barbarous Gentiles. They kept this feast of Dedication eight days, and ordained
that it should be kept yearly for the same space of time, and should begin the
25th of the same month Casleu. In the Gospel, Joh. 10.22. it is called the feast
of Dedication.

Whilst these things were doing, Antiochus Epiphanes prospers in his wars
against Artaxias King of Armenia, and in the upper Countries, though in his
attempt to plunder the Temple of Venus or Diana at Elemais in Persia, he was
repelled by the inhabitants, and caused shamefully to retreat. In his return
homewards, hearing first of the overthrow of Nicanor and Timotheus, and then of
the defeat of Lysias, and the throwing down of the Idol of Jupiter Olympius,
and fortifying of the Sanctuary, he fell into an extreme rage, and resolved to
be revenged on the Jews, proudly vaunting that he would make Jerusalem the
common burying place of them when he should come thither. Scarce had he made an
end of threatening when he was stricken with an extreme torment in his bowels,
but being brought thereby to no better a temper of mind, he breathed out
menaces against the Jews still, and calling to his Chariot-driver to make have,
it happened that in this his so furious career he fell out of his Chariot, and
was much bruised by the fall, and his limbs put out of joint; and after that
being carried to and fro in a horse-litter, worms bred so fast in his body that
his flesh rotted, so that none could endure to carry him for the noisomeness of
the stench, being forced to stay at Taba a Town in Persia in this pitiful
plight, despairing of recovery, he openly acknowledged all those miseries to
have fallen upon him for the injuries he had done to the Jews. When he could no
longer endure his own smell, he said, It is meet to submit to God, and for
mortal man not to set himself in competition with God. He vowed if God would
restore him, to grant to the Jews a free exercise of their Religion, and of
their own laws and customs, and that he would beautify the Temple with most
rare gifts, and restore all the holy vessels, and that with advantage, and
defray the charges of the Sacrifices out of his own Exchequer, and that he
himself would turn Jew, and go through the whole habitable world declaring the
power of God. But when he saw his end to draw nigh, he caused most kind Letters
to be written to the Jews desiring them to stand faithful to his Son. Then
constituting Philip the Guardian and Protector of his Son (who was but nine
years old) till he should come to age; he died, and that a miserable death, in
a strange land, after he had reigned twelve years.

Antiochus his Son, Surnamed Eupator, succeeds him: Lysias who had brought him
up would not part, with the Government of him, whereupon Philip (who was
appointed his Guardian by his Father) fled into Egypt.

Gorgias who had the command of those parts about Judea, fomented a continual
war with the Jews, and with him joined the Idumeans, who entertained all the
Jerusalem-runagadoes, and infested the Jews, and did what they could to keep
the war on foot; against those therefore Judas Maccabaeus marches, takes diverse
places, and puts 20000 of them to the sword. After which setting upon the
Ammonites he overthrew them in diverse engagements, and taking Jazer with the
Territories thereunto belonging returned into Judea. Timotheus the General of
the Ammonites hereat enraged and gathering together multitudes of foreign
forces, came as if he would devour Judea. But Judas and those that were with
him, having humbled themselves, and sought to the Lord for help, marched out of
Jerusalem against them, and being encouraged by an Apparition of Horsemen in
the Heavens fighting for them, they slew of the enemy 20500 Foot, and 600
horse; Timotheus himself fled to Gazara a strong Garrison kept by his Brother,
but that being taken, he was pulled out of a cave (where he had hid himself)
and slain with his Brother.

After this the Gentiles about Galaad and Galilee sorely afflicting the Jews of
those parts, Maccabaeus divided his Army into three Brigades, one whereof
consisting of 3000 men he gave to his Brother Simon to relieve them of Galilee;
the second, to Joseph the Son of Zachariah to defend Judea, charging them not
to fight with any enemy till his return; with the third, he marched himself to
the succor of those of Galaad. Simon notwithstanding fought many Battles with
the enemy, and killed many of them. And Judas had the like success, taking many
Towns, and putting many thousand to the sword. But those that were left at
home, desiring, upon the report of these things, to atchieve some military
glory, marched to Jamnia, whence Gorgias issuing out put them to flight, and
following the chase as far as the borders of Judea, killed about 2000 of them.
So dangerous a thing is presumption and vainglory.

Lysias the Kings Protector and chief Minister was extremely vexed to hear of
Judas's success, therefore mustering together near eighty thousand men, and all
the horse he could make, marches into Judea, resolving to make Jerusalem an
habitation for the Greeks, and the Temple Tributary, and to set the High
Priesthood to sale every year. Being entered into Judea, he lays siege to
Bethsura nigh to Jerusalem. But Maccabaeus engaging with him, killed 11000 of
his foot with 1600 horsemen, and forced him with the rest, (many of them being
wounded and disarmed) to shift for themselves. Lysias considering with himself
what loss he had sustained, and how God fought for the Jews, he sent to them to
treat of peace, and according to his promise brought the King to yield to such
reasonable terms as were demanded by Maccabaeus; but this peace was quickly
broken by those of the Kings Captains that had the command of the places
adjacent, who would not suffer the Jews to be quiet. And the Citizens of Joppa
also having by fair speeches enticed two hundred Jews which dwelt among them
into their ships, put from shore and threw them all overboard. When Judas
heard of this piece of villainy he came by night to Joppa, and fired their Port
and Navy. And understanding that the inhabitants of Jamnia had some such design
against those Jews that lived with them, he did the same by night to their Port
and Fleet also.

Judas now marching against Timotheus, the Nomades of Arabia set upon him to
the number of 5000 Foot, and 500 Horse, where after an hot dispute, the
Arabians were worsted, but afterward upon an engagement to supply him with
Cattle, obtained a peace from him. Shortly after this he stormed the City
Caspis, wherein was such a slaughter made of the inhabitants that a lake
thereto adjoining seemed to be full of blood. Removing from thence he came to
the Jews called Tobieni inhabiting the land of Tob, concerning which mention is
made in the Book of Judges, Chapter 11. Timotheus was drawn off from that place,
but had left behind him a very strong Garrison, which Dositheus and Sosipater
(two of Judas's Captains) ventured upon, and taking it, put to the sword about
10000 men.

Upon this Timotheus levies a new Army consisting of 120000 Foot, and 2500
Horse of all Nations round about him, and mercenary Arabians, sending the women
and children into a strong Town called Carnion. He encamped against Raphon on
the other side the Brook Judas approaching with his forces gave this great Army
such a total rout, that some fled one way, and some another, and Judas pursued
them with such earnestness that he slew near thirty thousand of them; and
Timotheus himself falling into the hands of Dositheus and Sosipater, obtained
his liberty upon promise of setting at liberty such of the Jews as he had in
his power.

Judas then proceeding took Carnion whither many of the enemy had fled, he put
to the sword 25000 men, fired their Temple, and demolished their City.

After this he gathered together all the Jews with their wives and children
which were in Galaad to bring them into Judea. And being come as far as Ephron
(which was a great City well fortified, through which they were to pass) the
Citizens denied them passage, and shut their gates against them; hereupon they
assaulted the City and took it, after a day and a nights battery, and
demolished the City to the ground, took all the spoil, killed all the males
near 25000 in number, and so marched to Jerusalem to the Feast of Pentecost.

The Feast being over, Judas taking 3000 Foot, and 400 Horse along with him,
went and fought with Gorgias, whom Dositheus had once taken, but leading him
away a Thracian Trooper made up toward him, and cut off his shoulder, and so
rescued Gorgias, who made his escape into Marissa. After this victory the Jews
coming to strip and bury such of their own party as had fallen that day, found
under their coats certain things dedicated to the Idols of Jamnia, which was
prohibited them by the Law, Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. so that it appeared to them that
this was the cause of their death, they therefore betook themselves by prayer
unto God, entreating him that this miscarriage might not be charged upon them
all.

After this Judas with his Brethren subdued the Edomites and the Philistines,
burnt their Idols, and overthrew their Altars, and then returned into Judea;
and observing that Antiochus's Soldiers which were Garrisoned in the Tower at
Jerusalem did infest the Jews about the Sanctuary, he with all the people
besieged them close, but some of them with certain Jewish fugitives getting
out, went strait to Antiochus Eupator, and persuaded him with expedition to
come and give a check to the growing power of the Jews.

Antiochus gathering together all his friends and Captains, and a mighty Army
(concerning the number of which the two Books of Maccabees differ) in a great
rage marched thither, intending to deal worse with the Jews than his Father had
done. And with him Menelaus the usurping High Priest joined, hoping thereby to
recover the Priesthood. Judas hearing of these preparations, commanded the
people that they should call upon God day and night, that he would please to
grant them his wonted assistance. Antiochus marching into Judea assaults
Bethsura or Bethhoron, where Judas by night with a choice party fell upon his
Camp, and piercing as far as his own Tent, slew 4000 men, and giving an alarm
to the whole Army, at break of the day safely retreated; whereupon the King
marched toward him next day, and they coming to an engagement Antiochus lost
several hundreds more, but the Jews seeing themselves overpowered retreated.
The King then returned to the siege, and they not being well stored with
provision (this being the Sabbatical year) at last yielded up the Town upon
composition. Antiochus having herein placed a Garrison, marched up to
Jerusalem, and there made all provision possible for the gaining of it, all
manner of Engines being raised for the casting of fire and stones, but the
besieged defended themselves bravely (though provisions were very short with
them) and the famine prevailed so much among them that they were in danger of
falling into the Kings hands; but before he could finish his work, news came
that Philip (whom his father had appointed to be Guardian) being returned out
of Egypt, was coming with the forces that Epiphanes had left in Persia and
Media to recover his right usurped by Lysias. Hereupon both he and his Captains
were presently persuaded by Lysias, (because the place was strong, and
provisions began to fail in the Leaguer, and the affairs of the Kingdom
required it) to make peace with the besieged, and with the whole Nation of the
Jews upon such terms as they required. Then returning to Ptolemais, the
inhabitants thereof (being great enemies to the Jews) stickled hard to persuade
him to break the League, but Lysias so well argued the matter among them that
he quieted their minds, and confirmed the peace; so that the Investiture of the
commanding power in the Hasmoneans took its rise from the time of this peace
agreed on betwixt Antiochus Eupator and Maccabeus.

The King hasting thence toward Antioch, brought along with him as a prisoner
Menelaus the High Priest, whom Lysias accused as an Incendiary, and the cause
of the war, whereupon by order from the King he was let down into a Tower
filled with ashes, and there miserably ended his life, ten years after he had
first usurped the Priesthood.

Menelaus being thus taken out of the way, the King substituted in his room one
Alcimus a man every whit as bad as he. Indeed he was of Aaron's progeny, but
not of the High Priests blood, and Lysias persuaded the King to transfer that
dignity into another family. Onias the Son of Onias the third, seeing the High
Priesthood conferred on Alcimus, went into Egypt, and after he had well
insinuated himself into the affections of Ptol. Philometor and Cleopatra his
wife, obtained of them leave to build a Temple to God in the jurisdiction of
Heliopolis, answering to that at Jerusalem, and that they would constitute him
High Priest there. See more of this in Usher, p. 467.

Antiochus coming to Antioch found Philip Master thereof, but setting upon it
he took it by force, and taking Philip therein put him to death, and so quickly
quieted those stirs, being reserved with Lysias his Guardian (though but a
little time) for others more dangerous.

Demetrius Soter Son of Seleucus Philopator (the right heir to the Kingdom) now
escaping from Rome quickly got the Kingdom, and put to death Eupator and Lysias
his Guardian.

Alcimus who had procured from Eupator to be made High Priest, being not now
receiv^d nor owned by the people, for that in the days of Epiphanes he had
wilfully defiled himself, came to Demetrius with other Apostates to get the
Priesthood confirmed to him. He accused his Countrymen, especially the
Hasmoneans (viz. Judas and his Brethren) as guilty of cutting off the Kings
friends, and banishing them out of the Country. Hereupon Demetrius sent
Bacchides the Governor of Mesopotamia (his trusty friend) with great forces
into Judea, and confirmed the High Priesthood to Alcimus, whom he sent back
with him. All their design was (being arrived there) by fair speeches to get
Judas and his Brethren into their hands but they gave no credit to them. Many
of the Scribes went out to them to seek peace, expecting they should have
obtained it of Alcimus, who was of the seed of Aaron, and had now great power
in the army, but having gotten them into his hands, he most wickedly contrary
to agreement and his oath put sixty of them to death, all in one day, by which
perfidiousness many being terrified fled from the City. Then Bacchides going
from Jerusalem caused many that had fled from him, and several others of the
Jews to be slain and cast into a great pit, and so committing the care of the
Country to Alcimus (for the defense of which he left him some forces) he
returned unto the King.

After his departure Alcimus striving all he could to confirm himself in the
Priesthood made great havoc of the people. Hereupon Judas went out through the
whole Country, taking vengeance on such as had revolted from him, and so
terrified those that adhered to Alcimus, that they were forced to keep
themselves within their Garrisons, and durst not make any more incursions into
the Country. Alcimus apprehending danger to himself from these proceedings goes
once more to Demetrius carrying along with him a Crown of Gold to present unto
him. For Judas and his party increasing in power would not suffer him to come
near to the holy Altar, at which being enraged he eagerly accused them to the
King as authors of all the commotions and disturbances in Judea; further
complaining that he was deprived of the Priesthood, (the honor, as he said, of
his Ancestors) and further affirmed that as long as Maccabeus lived the Kings
affairs could not be secure. This being seconded by some ill-willers to the
Jews, and his friends, Demetrius was so inflamed, that sending for Nicanor one
of his chiefest Princes, and a bitter enemy to the Jews, made him General
against Judea, giving him order to destroy Judas, and disperse his associates
the Assideans, and to settle Alcimus in the High Priesthood.

The Jews, upon the report of Nicanors approach, and the Association of several
Gentiles with him, cast dust upon their heads, and made their Supplication to
God. And it so happened, that after a short skirmish betwixt Simon (Judas's
Brother) and a party of Nicanors near the Village Dessaro. Nicanor
understanding the Courage and Resolution of Judas and his Party in defending
their Country, he was unwilling to run the hazard of a Battle, but sent to
parle with the Jews, and to make peace with them, upon mutual engagements of
fidelity each to other. And Articles being agreed upon between them, the two
Captains met, and the Conference proved very successful, and closed in a League
without the Kings Privity. Nicanor after this, abode a while in Jerusalem, and
dismissed the Companies he had collected, and was so taken with Judas, that he
continued with him some time, and loved him in his heart, and lived so friendly
and familiarly with him, that he persuaded him to marry a Wife.

But when that wretched fellow Alcimus observed this Correspondence between
them, he addressed himself a third time to Demetrius, and accused Nicanor as
having some treacherous Design in agitation against the King, who was so
enraged by those Calumnies, that he sent Nicanor word, That he took very ill
those his Intercourses with Judas, commanding him forthwith to send him to him
bound to Antioch. Nicanor was very loath to do this, because it was a violation
of the Articles of Peace between them, which Judas had not in the least manner
broken; yet because he knew not how to resist the Kings command, he watched a
convenient time to do it by a Stratagem.

Judas observing how Nicanor was grown more reserved to him than formerly, and
that his dealings were more rough than usually they had been, began to suspect
something, and gathering together many of his Associates, he withdrew himself.
Nicanor following him with a great party to Jerusalem, under pretense of a
Parle with him, had prepared some to seize upon him; which Judas having notice
of, got away, and would see him no more. When Nicanor saw his design was
discovered, he marched with his forces against Judas, and fought with him near
Caphersalama; in which Encounter Nicanor lost near 5000 of his men, and the
rest fled to the City of David.

After this Nicanor came up to Mount Sion, and some of the Priests with the
Elders of the people went forth of the Sanctuary to salute him peaceably, and
show him the Burnt-Offering that was offered for the King. But he jearing and
scoffing at it, demanded Judas to be delivered unto him. And they affirming
with an Oath, that they knew not where he was; he stretched out his hand
against the Temple and swore, that except Judas and his Associates were
delivered up unto him, he would, when he should return in peace, set the
Sanctuary on fire, demolish the Altar, and build there a stately Temple to
Bacchus. The Priests hearing this went in, and standing before the Altar, with
Tears begged of God, That he would frustrate this wicked man's intention, and
avenge his Blasphemies on him and his host.

Nicanor hearing that Judas was gone from Jerusalem into the parts of Samaria,
he went and pitched his Tents in Bethoron, where he met new supplies out of
Syria. But Judas pitched in Hadasa with only 3000 men. Nicanor did what he
could to engage in battle on the Sabbath Day, which the Jews (who were
constrained to follovv him) friendly dehorting him from, (out of reverence to
the day, and to God the Institutor thereof) he with most horrid Blasphemy
slighted what they said. As for Maccabaeus he encouraged his Party, recalling
to their minds their former Encounters, and declaring unto them a Dream of his,
wherein there was represented unto him Onias the 3d. praying for the people;
and the Prophet Jeremy reaching unto him a golden Sword, whereby he much
cheared their Spirits. The Jews being now well armed with Prayers and a sure
confidence in God, on the 13th. day of the last month Adar, fell upon the
Enemy. Nicanor himself was one of the first that fell in the fight, which when
his Army saw, they cast away their Arms and fled; and the Israelites following
the chase slew 30000 of them. Then they fell upon the Spoil, and finding
Nicanors Body, they cut off his head and hands, and carried him to Jerusalem,
where they hung his head upon an high Tower with his right hand which he had
stretched out so proudly against the House of God; and his blasphemous Tongue
Judas commanded should be chopp'd in pieces, and given to the Birds of the Air.
In commemoration of this Victory it was Enacted, That the 13th. day of the
month Adar, (the day before the Feast of Mordecai) should be yearly kept as a
day of thanksgiving, and public rejoicing, as the Author of the second Book of
Maccabees tells us, who with this story finished his Work, being the Epitome of
the Five Books of Jason, a Jew of Cyrene.

After Nicanor's death, Judea for a while had rest from Wars. During which time
Judas hearing of the great power of the Romans, and their Humanity toward such
as were in distress, understanding also in what great fear Demetrius stood of
them, he sent Eupolemus the son of John, and Jason son of Eleazer, as Agents,
to the Senate of Rome in the name of himself, his Brother, and the
Commonwealth of the Jews, to negotiate an Alliance and Association with them,
hoping thereby to free their necks from that heavy yoke of Demetrius, and the
Empire of the Greeks.

After Demetrius heard that Nicanor and his Army were cut off in the late fight
with Judas, he dispatched Bacchides and Alcimus a second time into Judea, and
with them the right wing, and better part of his Army, who marching on the way
that leads to Galgala, took in their march Massadath which is in Arbela, and
put multitudes to the Sword. From thence they removed to Jerusalem, and from
thence to Berea with Twenty thousand Foot, and Two thousand Horse, to seek out
Maccabaeus. Judas pitched in Eleasa having only 3000 men with him. The Jews
seeing the number of the enemy so great, began to be afraid, and many of them
fled away; in so much that all forsook Judas, save only 800; with these he
charged Bacchides's great Army, and fought from morning to night, and routed
the right wing in which Bacchides himself was, but they on the left wing
perceiving this, and pressing hard upon Judas, and those that were with him,
slew him fighting valiantly; and as soon as he fell, the rest of his men fled,
and shifted for themselves. Judas was slain in the 6th. year after he had led
the people from the death of his Father, and A. M. 3844.

After the death of Judas, wicked men discovered themselves in all the Coasts
of Israel, who before played least in sight for fear of Him: And by reason of
the great Famine that happened in those days, almost the whole Country joined
with them, and submitted themselves to Bacchides, that they might the more
commodiously be supplied with provision. Bacchides advanced those wicked men to
be Governors in the Country; who when they lighted upon any of Judas's
Friends, brought them to him, who reviled them, and revenged himself upon them,
so that there had not been so great an Affliction since the days that the
Prophets ceased from among them. 1 Mac. 9.23, 27.

But such of the Jews as could do it, assembled themselves together, and chose
Jonathan (Judas's Brother) Captain in his room; which Bacchides hearing of,
sought to kill him; but he understanding thereof, fled into the desert of
Tekoa, and sent his Brother John with a b^^d of Soldiers to desire the
Nabathites (that were Arabians) that they might leave their Carriages with
them. But the Children of Iambri out of Medaba met with them upon the way, and
slew John and his Company; and having seized upon the Spoil, went their way.
But no great joy had they of their Booty; for Jonathan and his Brother Simon
hearing they were about to make a great Marriage, and bring the Bride from
Medaba with great Pomp (being the Daughter of one of their Noblest Princes)
they went, and hiding themselves under the Covert of the Mountain, when the
Bridegroom and his Friends came forth with Timbrels and Instruments of Music,
rose up out of the Ambush, slew 400 of them, and took the Spoil. So having
revenged the death of their Brother, they returned again into the Marshes of
Judea. 1 Mac. 9.

When Bacchides heard this, he marched down, and came thither with a great Army
upon the Sabbath Day; and Jonathan being beset behind and before by the enemy,
and on each side with the River and Marshes, yet encouraged his men to fight;
and after having slain about a 1000 of them, seeing himself too weak for the
enemy, He and his men leaped into Jordan, and got over to the other side;
neither did the enemy attempt to follow him. As for Bacchides he returned to
Jerusalem, and built fenced Cities in Judea, and a Fort in Jericho, and other
places, and garrisoned them all, that by their Sallies and Incursions they
might annoy the Israelites. He fortifyed also the Cities of Bethsura and
Gazara, with the Castle at Jerusalem, where he placed Soldiers and Provisions,
and taking the Sons of the chief of the Country for Hostages, he put them in
ward in the Tower of Jerusalem. 1 Mac. 9.

The Ambassadors sent from Judas Maccabaeus to Rome, were kindly received, and
concluded a League of Association with the Romans; the Tenor of which was, That
they should mutually assist and succor each other against the common Enemy:
And the Articles were written in Tables of Brass. The Senate also wrote Letters
to Demetrius, That he should forbear to oppress the Jews any further, being
their Confederates, otherwise they would wage War upon him both by Land and
Sea. And this was the first League that was ever known to be between the
Romans and the Jews.

About this time (as it should seem) Alcimus commanded the wall in the Temple,
which severed the Court of the People from that of the Gentiles to be pulled
down, which had been built by Zerubbabel and the Prophets, whose Monuments he
began also to pull down and destroy. But at the same time he was so smitten,
that he could not open his own mouth, nor so much as give orders concerning his
own House, but died in great Torment, the third year after he had usurped the
High Priesthood. After his death Jerusalem was seven years without any
High Priest at all. But then Jonathan put on the Highpriests Robes.

After Alcimus's death, Bacchides returned to Demetrius. For two years the land
of Judea continued quiet, but at the end thereof, certain wicked Jews sent for
Bacchides again, acquainting him, that he might easily apprehend Jonathan and
his Company in one night. Whereupon Bacchides made toward them with a great
force, and sent privily Letters to his Friends in Judea, to assist him in this
Enterprise. But their Plot was discovered to Jonathan and his Company, and he
taking 50 of the Contrivers of that Villainy, put them all to death. Then
Jonathan and Simon, and those that were with him, removed to Bethbasin in the
Wilderness, and repaired the walls thereof, and fortified it; which Bacchides
having notice of, went down thither and besieged it. But such was his
Entertainment from the besieged (who sallying out, burnt his Engines, and
killed many of his men) that having lain before the place a long time to no
purpose, and being thus disappointed in his hopes, he turned his anger against
those that had procured him to make this Expedition; in so much that he slew
many of them, and purposed to return into his own Land. Jonathan having notice
thereof, sent to him to treat of peace, and to exchange Prisoners, which he
gladly accepted of, protesting he would not any more disturb Jonathan all the
days of his life. So he returned home into his own land, and never after entered
into Judea with an Army.

The Wars thus composed in Judea, Jonathan dwelt at Michmash in the Tribe of
Benjamin, and began to judge the people, and to take away the Wicked out of
Israel.

About this time Alexander Bala crying himself up for the Son of Antiochus
Epiphanes, seized upon Ptolemais, a City in Phaenicia. Demetrius hearing of
this, began to prepare to fight with him, and sent Letters also to Jonathan,
whereby he renewed peace with him, and gave him Authority to levy forces, and
provide Arms, that he might assist him in his War against Alexander. He
commanded also that the Hostages which were kept in the Fort, should be
released, which was accordingly done; and he delivered them to their Parents.
Jonathan improving this opportunity, began to re-edifie and repair Jerusalem,
and to build up the Walls. And the Aliens that were in the Forts which
Bacchides built, quitted them, and hasted away to their own land. Alexander
having notice of Demetrius's Message to Jonathan, he courts him likewise, and
desires his Friendship and Association. And among many other Privileges and
Immunities which he granted to that Nation, he appointed him to be the
High Priest, sending him Purple and a Crown of Gold, and honored him with the
Title of being called the Kings Friend.

So in the seventh month of the 160th. year of the Seleucides, Jonathan put on
the holy Robe; in the nineth year after the death of his brother Judas (the
Priesthood having been vacant seven years from the death of Alcimus) being the
first of the Hasmoneans that arrived at this dignity, as being descended from
Jehojarib (of the Priests family indeed) but not from Jaddus the High Priest,
whose Heir Onias now lived in Egypt with Ptol. Philometor.

The Jews now disclaiming Demetrius, of whose hatred to them they had had
sufficient experience, stick close to Alexander; and from that time forward
continued his Confederates in the War.

Alexander Bala having gotten an Army together, made up partly of the Soldiers
that revolted to him from Demetrius, and partly of the Auxiliaries of Attalus
King of Pergamus, Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, and Jonathan, and especially
Ptol. Philometor, encountered Demetrius, and conquering his Army, killed him in
the Fight, after he had reigned in Syria twelve years: And so Alexander
obtained the Kingdom.

Alexander shortly after, remembering how much he was engaged to Ptol.
Philometor for his assistance, sent to him to desire his Daughter to make him a
Wife; which he willingly assented to, and brought her to Ptolemais in
Phoenicia, and there married her to him with Royal and magnificent Solemnity.

Jonathan being by Alexander invited to this Wedding, he brought with him great
Presents of Gold and Silver, and several other things which he presented to
both the Kings, and their Friends; so that thereby he much wrought himself into
their favor. At the same time several vile malcontents came out of Judea to
accuse Jonathan, but Alexander was so far from listening to any Tales against
him, that he caused him to be clothed with Purple, and to set next to himself,
and forbad by Proclamation any to speak against him, or molest him in any
matter. The King also did him a great deal of honor by listing him among those
that were esteemed his most intimate Friends.

After this, Alexander gave himself up to Idleness and Luxury, and permitted
the affairs of his Kingdom wholly to be managed by one Ammonius, who carried
himself insolently, and made slaughter of the Kings friends, and among the
rest, put to death the Lady Laodice, Daughter of Epiphanes. These things coming
to the notice of Demetrius, eldest son of Demetrius Soter, he procured out of
Crete a considerable force of Mercenary Soldiers, and with them sailed into
Cilicia. At the notice of which, Alexander being affrighted, hasted to Antioch
to secure his affairs there before Demetrius should come, where he made Hirax
and Tryphon Governors. With Demetrius joined Apollonius the Governor of
Coelosyria, who was ordered by him to go against those Jews that adhered and
continued firm to Alexander. Apollonius having gotten together a great Army,
encamped at Jamnia, and sent a proud challenge to Jonathan to come and meet him
(if he durst) and to fight with him in the plain field. Jonathan enraged
hereat, marched from Jerusalem against him with 10000 men. In his way he took
Joppa, which Apollonius understanding, marched to Ashdod, and left an Ambush in
the way to entrap him, but he getting clear of it, engaged Apollonius and put
all his Forces to flight; whereof many fled to the Temple of Dagon, which
Jonathan set on fire; and so what with the Sword, and what with Fire, destroyed
about 8000 of Apollonius his men. This coming to the ears of Alexander, he
honored Jonathan more than ever, and sent him the Golden Buckler which was
usually given to those of the Blood Royal, and gave him Accaron, a City of the
Philistines, with its Territories, for an Inheritance to him and his Heirs for
ever.

Ptol. Philometor now comes out of Egypt with great forces both by Land and
Sea, under pretense of aiding his Son-in-law Alexander, but indeed with an
Intention to seize upon Syria. He fell out with Alexander because he would not
deliver up Ammonius to him, who (he alleged) had plotted his Destruction.
Hereupon taking his Daughter Cleopatra away from Alexander her Husband, he gave
her to Demetrius, promising to assist him in the recovery of his Fathers
Kingdom. The Antiochians also deserted Alexander because of Ammonius, who had
used them so hardly. Hereupon Ammonius endeavored to make an Escape in Woman's
apparel, but was taken and slain.

Ptolemy went to Antioch, and being there saluted as King, was crowned with two
Diadems, the one for Syria, the other for Egypt. But at last persuaded the
Antiochians to receive Demetrius for their King.

Alexander was at this time at Cilicia, whereupon consulting the Oracle of
Apollo, it is said, he received for answer, That he should take heed of that
place that had brought forth a double formed Spectacle; which seemed to point
out the City Abas in Arabia; where a certain Woman (as 'twas thought, named
Herais) being married to one Samias, was found to be a man; into which City he
went not long after. For invading and wasting of Syria with Fire and Sword,
Ptolemy and Demetrius his new Son-in-law met him and overthrew him at the River
Oenopara; whereupon he flying to Abas, his Head was cut off by Zabdiel the
Prince of the place, and sent to Ptolemy, who, though he received it with much
joy, yet having in the Fight received a great hurt in his head, he died of that
Wound three days after.

Demetrius now obtaining his Fathers Kingdom, was called Nicanor. About this
time Jonathan besieged the Castle at Jerusalem, and did all he could with his
Engines to reduce it. This being made known by some wicked Jews to Demetrius,
he in great anger sends to him to raise his siege, and appear before him at
Ptolemais. Jonathan would not draw off his siege, but taking with him the
Elders and Priests, he ventured to go to the King; and by the Presents he
brought and other ways so appeased him, that the King rejecting his Accusers,
confirmed the High Priesthood upon him, and counted him one of his chief
Friends. And upon promise to pay to him 300 Talents, he procured from him an
immunity from Tribute for all Judea, and the three Seigniories thereunto
annexed.

Demetrius seeing all in peace at home, disbanded his old Soldiers, which bred
great discontents among them. Diodotus (afterward called Tryphon) one of
Alexander Bala's Captains laying hold on this opportunity, went to Elmacuel the
Arabian, with whom Antiochus (Alexander Bala's young Son) was brought up; and
acquainting him how matters stood with Demetrius, obtained of him to have the
young Child delivered up to him, undertaking to settle him in his Fathers
Kingdom.

Demetrius in this tottering condition of his affairs, sends to Jonathan for a
supply, who sent him 3000 men, which stood him in good stead; For he going
about to disarm the Antiochians, they rose up in Arms, and many thousands of
them assembling together, they attempted to surprise the King himself, insomuch
that he was forced to retreat to his Palace; but the Jews hastening to his
relief, overcame this Rabble, and slaying a great number of them, set the City
on fire; whereupon the Citizens were glad to submit.

Tryphon now bringing Antiochus the young son of Bala from Arabia into Syria,
he there set the Crown upon his head, calling him Theos. Hereupon all the
disbanded Soldiers flocked unto him, so that Tryphon grew strong enough to
fight with Demetrius, and overthrowing his Army, forced him to fly to Seleucia.
Then Tryphon in the name of Antiochus sent Messengers to Jonathan to draw him
to his party. And in order thereunto confirmed the High Priesthood to him, sent
him also chargers of Gold, and gave him leave to drink in vessels of Gold, to
be clothed in Purple, and to wear the Golden Buckler. Jonathan was easily drawn
to be for Antiochus, because Demetrius had for some time past falsified his
word, and dealt very ungratefully with him.

Jonathan now having gotten leave of Antiochus to wage War against Demetrius
his Captains, gathered his men together, and reduced the Country beyond Jordan
as far as Damascus, and overthrew a party which there met him, killing to the
number of 3000 men.

Jonathan observing now how his affairs were in a good condition, sent
Ambassadors to Rome to renew the Alliance made with them by Judas Maccabaeus.
And he gave them Instructions, that in their return homeward from Rome, they
should visit the Lacedaemonians, and to mind them of the Alliance and ancient
League with Onias the third, sending a Letter to the same purpose, wherein the
people of Judea among other things signified how that as a Testimony of their
continued affection toward them, they constantly remembered them as their
Brethren in their solemn Sacrifices and Devotions. These Ambassadors were very
honorably received both by the Romans and Lacedaemonians, and effected what
they were sent about.

Tryphon having brought his design thus far on as to break the power of
Demetrius, and having to that end desired the friendship of Jonathan, he now
desired his ruin above all things, as standing in his way, and likely to
hinder his intended Treason. For he resolved to seize upon the Kingdom himself;
but fearing lest Jonathan should stand fast to the Interest of the young King,
and oppose him; he came down with his forces to Bethsan thinking to surprise
Jonathan, but he hearing of his coming, made toward him with 40 thousand
choice men, which so disheartened Tryphon, that he was so far from daring to
attempt any thing against him, that he treated him very honorably, and with
Presents and other kindnesses so dissembled with him, that he persuaded him at
last to dismiss his army, and taking only a selected party along with him, to
go to Ptolemais, which he promised to put into his hands: Jonathan consenting
hereunto, sent all his men back but a 1000 whom he took along with him; but as
soon as he entered Ptolemais, Tryphon commanded the Gates to be shut, and cut
off all his men, and kept him Prisoner. Then Tryphon invaded Judea with a great
Army (carrying Jonathan with him Prisoner) to oppose whom Simon the Brother of
Jonathan was chosen General in his stead by the people. But Tryphon seeing the
Jews prepared for resistance, feigned, as if Jonathan was only detained for a
100 Talents of Silver, which he was in arrear, which if they would send to him
together with Jonathans two Sons for Hostages (as a security that Jonathan
should not attempt to revenge his Imprisonment after he got his liberty) he
promised he should be released. Simon, though he distrusted him, yet least it
should be said he neglected any thing for his Brothers safety, sent his Nephews
with the money; which, when Tryphon had received, he most perfidiously slew
Jonathan, and then returned into Syria. Jonathan lived after the decease of his
Brother Judas, 17 years, and enjoyed the High Priesthood about nine years, he
was put to death near Bascha in the Country of Gilead, and there buried.

Simon some time after sent to fetch away the body of his Brother Jonathan, and
buried it at Modin the City of their Ancestors; and all Israel lamented him
many days. Simon also built a stately Monument over the Sepulcher of his Father
and his Brothers, exceeding high, of white stone polished all over. He erected
also seven Pyramids all of a row in memory of his Father, and Mother, and
Brothers. To these he addded a Porch of great Pillars, on which he caused the
Portraiture of Armies and Ships to be engraven. Josephus says, this rare
Sepulcher of Modin lasted to his time.

Tryphon now makes away young Antiochus, giving out, that he was troubled with
the Stone; and under pretense of cutting him for it, he caused the Physicians
to kill him. This done, he put the Crown upon his own head. Simon being so
highly disobliged by him, and accounting him a great Tyrant and Robber, he sent
to make his peace with Demetrius, presenting him with a Crown of Gold.
Demetrius considering the great Respect the Romans had lately showed the Nation
of the Jews, and particularly to the Ambassadors Jonathan had lately sent to
confirm the League with them, promised to bury all things in oblivion, and
confirmed to Simon the Immunities before granted to Jonathan. The year after he
had the Castle of Jerusalem surrendered to him: The Gentiles within having been
pent up for two years without any relief, were most of them consumed with
Famine. Simon having cleansed the Fort of all the Pollution of Idols, entered in
with Branches of Palms, Harps, Cymbals, Viols, Hymns and Songs. He ordained
also an Anniversary Solemnity for this day: Which done, he afterward repaired
and fortified it, together with the Hill of the Temple, and there dwelt himself
with his attendants.

After he had been High Priest three years, by a public instrument of the
Priests, Nobles and Elders of the people, after a recapitulation of his merits
and great services performed for his Nation, he was made their Prince and High
Priest perpetual till God should raise up the true Prophet, and all ornaments
and prerogatives of Majesty were given unto him. This instrument being made in
brass was fastened to the wall that encompassed the Sanctuary, and a Copy
thereof was laid up in the Treasury. Thus was the yoke of the Heathen taken off
from Israel, and the people began to date their instruments and contracts from
the years of their High Priests after this manner, viz. In the first year of
Simon being the great High Priest, General and Leader of the Jews, 1 Mac. 14.

Simon seeing his Son John (Surnamed afterward Hircanus) to be a very valiant
man, appointed him Captain over all his forces.

Demetrius being invited by the Macedonians to come and head them against the
Parthians, and being with great alacrity received and assisted by them, he
overthrew the Parthians in several Battles, till at last being circumvented by
the cunning of one of their Princes, and having lost his Army he fell into
their hands, and was cast into Prison. Arsaces King of the Parthians having got
him thus into his hands, afterward sent him into Hircania, where he caused him
to be treated with respect due to a King, and afterward gave him his daughter
to wife, promising to restore unto him the Kingdom of Syria which Tryphon had
dispossessed him of.

The Soldiers in Syria growing weary of Tryphon's Government, revolted from
him to Cleopatra (wife of Demetrius) who then lived in Seleucia with her
children. Cleopatra taking it in great disdain that Demetrius her husband had
married the King of Parthia's daughter, in a strange revenge sent to his
Brother Antiochus (called Sidetes or the Hunter, second Son of Demetrius Soter)
offering her self in marriage to him, and with her self the Kingdom also.
Antiochus willingly accepted the offer, and marrying of her took the name of
King upon him. Then writing Letters to Simon the High Priest and Ruler of the
Jews, and (designing to make him his friend) he confirms unto him not only all
the privileges and immunities which other Kings of Syria had granted, but
added also a privilege of coining money with his own stamp.

Simon now sent Ambassadors to Rome for himself and the people of the Jews to
renew their League and Amity with the Romans. These Ambassadors carried with
them a great shield of gold of a thousand pound weight to present to the Roman
Senate. The present was very kindly accepted, and Lucius the Consul gave them
Letters to the Neighboring Kings and Provinces prohibiting them from
attempting any thing which might prejudice the Jews, or abetting and assisting
any that should fight against them. And if at any time any Runnagado-Jews
should flee out of Judea and come into their Territories, they should deliver
them up to Simon the High Priest to be proceeded against according to the Laws
of their Country.

Antiochus Sidetes having married Cleopatra his Brothers wife, all the Armies
of the Syrians except a few revolted to him; so that Tryphon seeing himself
thus forsaken fled to Dora a Maritime City of Phoenicia, whither he was
straight pursued and blocked up both by sea and land. Simon sent 2000 choice
men to Sidetes at the siege of Dora, but he to Simons great astonishment
refused them all, and brake whatever Covenants he had made with him. And
further, sent Athenobius to him, complaining of his holding Joppa, Gazara and
the Castle at Jerusalem, and destroying the borders, and holding the Government
of diverse places of his Kingdom, requiring of him the tributes of those places
beyond the bounds of Judea (which were possessed by him) or else in lieu
thereof to pay 500 Talents, and for the tribute of the other places held by him
500 Talents more, menacing war against him, except all things were performed
that he demanded. To these things Simon answered that he held no Towns
belonging to any other Prince, but had recovered by his sword some Towns of his
own held back from him by his enemies; as for Joppa and Gazara though they had
done much harm to his people, yet he was willing to pay an hundred Talents. At
this answer Sidetes was exceedingly enraged. In the mean while Tryphon escaped
away from Dora to Orthosias another Maritime City of Phoenicia; Antiochus
himself pursuing Tryphon left Cendebaeus to take care of the Seacoasts, and to
build up Cedron, and to deal with the Jews. He being come as far as Jamnia
began to make inroads into Judea, and to take the people prisoners, and to kill
and slay such as he pleased. John (the Son of Simon) then lying at Gazara, and
understanding how things went, gave notice thereof to his Father, who being now
decrepid committed the managing of the war to him and his Brother Judas. John
therefore with 20000 Foot, and some Horse marched against Cendebaeus (who met
them with a powerful Army) and marshalling his body in such wife that the Horse
and Foot might mutually protect each other, and then sounding with their holy
Trumpets they engaged the enemy and overthrew him, and put his whole Army to
the rout; some betook themselves to the Fort newly built, and others flying
away, he pursued as far as the Towers of Azotus, and having slain about 2000
men in the pursuit, he burnt those Towers, and returned safe into Judea.

Tryphon at last fled to his own Countrymen at Apamea, and in the way as he
went he scattered money on purpose to retard Antiochus's Soldiers in the
pursuit of him, and so escaped out of their hands; but at last he was taken by
Antiochus and put to death.

Simon traversing the Cities of Judea, and providing for their orderly
government, came down with his Sons Mattathias and Judas to Jericho, there
Ptolemy the Son of Abubus his Son-in-law (who was by him set over the Province
of Jericho) entertained them in Doc-castle which he had fortified, but
designing to get the Government of the Country to himself, whilst he was
treating them at a Banquet, most treacherously and barbarously slew Simon with
his two Sons, and some of his servants, after he had discharged the office of
High Priest for the space of eight years and three months. Ptolemy immediately
acquaints Antiochus Sidetes with this villainy, desiring him to speed an Army
for his assistance, promising to deliver the Cities and Country of Judea into
his hands. So that it seems more than probable that this villainy was not
transacted without the privity of Sidetes, and that the honor and reward which
the Traitor so much aspired unto was before promised him by the King upon his
performance of it. This perfidious Ptolemy also sent other cutthroats to
murder John, Simon's other Son, but he escaped them. He dealt also with the
Colonels of the Jewish Militia to draw them over to himself, promising them
great rewards. And moreover sent some to seize upon Jerusalem, and the mountain
of the Temple.

John having received information of the murder of his Father and Brethren, and
that some were sent to do as much for him, prevented his enemies by falling
upon them first, and so was made High Priest in the room of his Father, 1 Mac.
16.

And here the Author of the first Book of Maccabees concludes his work, having
therein delivered the History of forty years, which Josephus continues on.

Antiochus Sidetes taking the opportunity of Simon's death, entered Judea with
an Army, and having wasted the Country forced John (Surnamed afterward
Hircanus) to retire into the City of Jerusalem, and then laid a close siege to
it; the siege was prolonged through the strength of the walls, and valor of
the defendants. Antiochus built many turrets about it, out of which he
attempted the walls, and begirt it so straightly with a double Trench that
there was no getting out for the besieged any way. Hircanus seeing a great and
useless multitude in the City, which consumed the victuals, put out the more
infirm out of the walls, but Antiochus would not suffer them to pass, so that
they wandered about the walls almost famished, till at last out of pity they
were taken in again.

At this Feast Hircanus sent out to Antiochus to desire a truce for seven days
for their Feasts sake, which Antiochus not only granted, but also brought in
great pomp to the very gates of the City, bulls with gilded horns, and gold
and silver cups filled with all manner of spices to be offered to the God of
Israel; and delivered sacrifices to the Priests of the Jews; so easily can God
change the hearts of Princes. Hircanus was so taken with this great act of
piety in Antiochus, that from thence forward he gave him the title of Pius, and
sent to him to request terms of peace of him, and that he would give them leave
to live according to the Laws of their forefathers. Many of those that were
about the King pressed him not to make any peace with them, but to demolish
their City, and destroy the whole Nation of the Jews as being a people severed
from all other Nations by their peculiar laws and customs, or if he would not
do so, at least to abrogate their Laws, and force them to change their manner
of living. But God so overruled the Kings heart that he utterly rejected this
counsel, and approving the piety of the Jews, offered them peace upon condition
that they should pay him tribute for Joppa, and other Towns without Judea, and
receive a Garrison. They yielded to the former but not to the last, in regard
they would avoid all commerce with strangers; in lieu of that they chose rather
to give hostages for their fidelity, (amongst whom Hircanus's own Brother was
one) and to pay 500 Talents, whereof 300 at present. These terms being agreed
unto by Antiochus the siege was immediately removed. Hircanus opening the
Sepulcher of David found there 3000 Talents, wherewith he not only paid
Antiochus his 300, but feasted him and his Army in Jerusalem, and also filled
his coffers, so that he began to entertain foreign Auxiliaries which never any
of the Jews did before.

Antiochus Pius three years after his departure from Jerusalem marched with a
great Army against Phraates who succeeded his Brother Arsacidas in the Kingdom
of Parthia, his design being to fetch back his Brother Demetrius Nicanor kept
there still in free custody. In this Expedition John, the Jews High Priest,
followed him with his Auxiliaries. Antiochus much prevailed upon the Parthians
at first, in so much that the King of Parthia sent Demetrius into Syria with a
party that he might seize upon that Kingdom in Antiochus's absence, and so
divert him. And John having overthrown the Hircani in battle, from thence
obtained the name Hircanus, and returned home with a great deal of honor. But
Antiochus (his army being grown dissolute and debaucht) was at last overthrown
by the Parthians (falling upon them at a time appointed as they lay dispersed
in their quarters) and Antiochus himself was slain.

Demetrius now recovers his Kingdom of Syria again. Hircanus the High Priest,
and chief Magistrate of the Jews taking this occasion leads down his Army into
Syria, supposing (as indeed it happened) that he should find the Cities thereof
unmanned, he took Medeba, and Samega, and Sicima the Metropolis of the
Samaritans; so that after the death of Antiochus Sidetes the Jews wholly shook
off the yoke of the Syrians, and never after sent them any supply either as
subjects or as friends.

Hircanus also took Gerizim, and demolished the Temple of the Cuthites in the
two hundredth year after it had been built by Sanballat.

Demetrius having recovered his Kingdom was outed of it again by his own
subjects, and was slain at Tire. Zabinas a counterfeit Egyptian, Surnamed
Alexander, (pretending to be the adopted Son of Antiochus Balas) is now set up
King, who entered into league with Hircanas, so that things went well with the
Jews during his reign, which was but four years.

Hircanus now subdues Idumea, the Inhabitaats whereof he put to their choice,
Whether they would be Circumcised, or quit their Habitations? They chose the
former; and now began to be reckoned among the Jews, submitting to all their
Rites and Ordinances. Hircanus also sent Ambassadors to Rome to renew their
friendship and amity with the Romans. And it was ordered by a Decree of the
Senate, That Joppa, Gazara, and other Towns that Antiochus Sidetes had taken
from them, should be restored. It was further ordered, That the King of Syria
should notpass through their Country with his Armies. The Fathers also renewed
the League with them according to their desire, and promised to take order they
should be no more wronged; and then dismissed the Ambassadors with money out of
the Common Bank to provide necessaries for their return homeward, and gave them
Letters Commendatory to those Kings and free People through whose Countries
they were to pass.

Many changes now happened in the Assyrian Kingdom: For after Demetrius's death
(notwithstanding the usurpation of Alexander Zabinas) Seleucus his eldest Son
put on the Diadem, but at the years end his Mother slew him with a dart by her
own hand, because he took the Government upon him without her permission. She
sets up Antiochus Gryphus his younger Brother, who being assisted by Ptol.
Physcon (whom Alexander, though set up by him, had disobliged) defeats and
kills Alexander the usurping counterfeit. He reigned securely for some years,
but then Antiochus his half Brother (begot on his Mother by Antiochus Sidetes
his Uncle, and from Cyzicus the place where he was brought up, called
Cyzicenus) began to be his Emulator for the Kingdom; and between them there
were great Contestings. The civil Broils in Syria diverted the several Princes
from meddling with the Jews, so that they were glad of their Friendship; and
this gave opportunity to Hircanus to establish his affairs, and enjoying
quietness, he got together a great mass of money, and then went and besieged
Samaria; the Inhabitants of which he was sorely displeased with for some
injuries offered by them to the Marisseni, though the King of Syria's Subjects,
yet now his Friends and Allies. He cast a Trench about it, and committed the
care of the Siege to his two Sons Antigonus and Aristobulus. The Samaritans in
this distress sent to Antiochus Cyzicenus imploring his aid. He coming to their
relief, was routed by Aristobulus's Soldiers, and persued as far as
Scythopolis, hardly escaping. The besieged now reduced to great necessities,
sent once more to Cyzicenus, who obtaining 6000 men of Ptol. Lathurus, made an
inrode into Hircanus's Dominions and made great havoc, thereby hoping to
constrain him to raise the siege. But having lost many of his men (who were
intercepted by the enemy) he himself went to Tripolis, committing the managing
of the War with the Jews to two of his Commanders, Callimander and Epicrates.
Callimander encountering the Jews with greater resolution than discretion, had
his party routed, and was himself slain. Epicrates being corrupted, betrayed
Scythopolis and other Towns to Hircanus; who then after a year, lying before
Samaria, took it, and rased it to the very ground.

After this, Hircanus being both a Disciple and a great Favourer of the Sect of
the Pharisees, invited some of the most Eminent among them to a Feast. He there
labored to approve his sincerity to them, and desired, that if any of them
knew any fault by him, they would tell him plainly of it. All approved of his
manners, but only one Eleazar (a seditious and bad man) who told him, if he
would be accounted good, he must divest himself of the Priesthood, and be
content with the Principality; for that (as he heard) his Mother was a Captive
in the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, and was fain to serve for a Livelihood.
This being utterly false, and the Scandal not being so deeply resented by the
rest of the Pharisees there present (as he expected it should have been) he
grew enraged against the whole Sect of them by the Instigation of Jonathan a
Sadducee, who persuaded him, that this affront came from all the Pharisee^, and
so deserting them, he turned Sadducee.

Hereupon he abrogated the constitutions of the Pharisees, and punished their
followers. A sedition arose hereupon, but he soon quieted all; and having
governed the people 31 years, he dyed, being honored with three especial
dignities, namely, the sovereign Authority over the Nation; the
High-Priest-hood, and the gift of Prophecy, as Josephus tells us; who relates
how he foretold, that his two eldest sons should neither of them long enjoy his
Principality.

After Hircanus's decease, the stones which were set in the Highpriests
Breast Plate, and the Onyx-stone upon his right shoulder (by whose radiation
the will of God was wont to be intimated to the people of the Jews) upon Gods
displeasure for their sins, grew dim, and lost their luster, as Josephus
reports, lib. 3. Ant. c. 9.

Hircanus left five Sons, whereof Aristobulus the eldest (surnamed Philellen
for his love to, and familiarity with the Greeks) succeeded him. He changed his
Principality into a Kingdom, setting a Diadem upon his head, and was the first
that did so after the return from the Captivity in Babylon. His second Brother
Antigonus he loved exceedingly, in so much that he made him his Partner in the
Kingdom, but shut up the other three in Prison, and with them his Mother (who
contended with him for the Principality) and he proceeded to that height of
Cruelty, that he famished her to death in Prison.

Aristobulus now marched with his Army into Itrurea, and laid a great part of
it to Judea, forcing the Inhabitants under penalty of Banishment to admit of
Circumcision, and other Jewish Ceremonies. Not long after he caused his beloved
Brother to be made away, though against his will. For Antigonus returning from
the Wars in Triumph at the Feast of Tabernacles, it so happened, that
Aristobulus was then sick, and kept his Bed in the Tower that was afterward
called Antony's Tower. Antigonus marched up with his Soldiers to the Temple,
intending to offer sacrifice for his sick Brother. This was presently
interpreted to Aristobulus as the effect of a bad intention toward him, and a
sufficient sign of his affecting the Kingdom, and it was represented as if
Antigonus would presently come down and kill him. Aristobulus to provide for
his own security, and yet to shun suspicion, commanded some of his Guard to
stand in an obscure place where his Brother was to come, and if he came armed,
then to kill him; but if unarmed, then not to meddle with him; and that he
might do so, he sent one under hand to him to desire him not to come with his
arms. But Solome the Queen, and the rest of Antigonus's back friends persuaded
the Messenger to tell him that the King had a mind to see him as he then was in
his Warriors habit. So Antigonus thinking nothing, but coming armed to see his
Brother, was there immediately slain upon the place. After it was done,
Aristobulus was smitten with a great remorse for it (though he knew nothing of
the altering the purport of his Message) and his distemper increasing, at last
he vomited blood, which being carried out by one of his Attendants, he chanced
to spill some of it in that very place where Antigonus was slain. Aristobulus
having notice given him of this accident, acknowledged the just Judgment of God
therein, and immediately gave up the Ghost in extreme anguish both of body and
mind, having reigned only one year,

After his decease his Wife Solome (whom the Grecians call Alexandria) released
his Brothers whom he had kept Prisoners a long time, and made Alexander
Jannaeus the eldest of them, King in his room. He, as soon as he was possessed
of the Kingdom, put one of his Brothers to death upon the discovery of some
treasonable design against him: But he loved the other exceedingly, who
affected to live a retired life. He was called Absolon, and was taken Prisoner
at Jerusalem by Pompey many years after.

Alexander Jannaeus having settled his affairs at home, went and besieged
Ptolemais, which with Gaza only of the Sea-Towns remained unconquered, besides
the Tower of Straton (since called Caesarea) and Dora, which Zoilus the Tyrant
had got into his hands. At this time the two Brothers, Antiochus Gryphus and
Cizicenus were eagerly destroying one another in Syria, so that the Ptolemaians
had little hope of Relief from them, only Zoilus (who gaped after the City
himself) gave them a little Relief. There being no hope of any Relief but from
Cyprus (whither Ptol. Lathurus had been driven by his Mother Cleopatra) they
sent to him, desiring his aid against Alexander, giving him hopes that he
should not only save them, but with them the Inhabitants of Gaza on his side,
and that Zoilus, the Sidonians and others would assist him also. He being puffed
up with these Promises, made what haste he could to their assistance; and
Zoilus and the Gazaeans joining with him, the Siege was raised before
Ptolemais, and Alexander departed home, attempting afterward by Policy to
overturn the design of Ptolemy. For openly professing himself his Friend and
Ally, he promised him 300 Talents to take off Zoilus the Tyrant, and so lay his
Territories to his own Dominions; which Lathurus consented to do, but then he
privily sent to Cleopatra his Mother, exciting her against him; which Lathurus
understanding, though before he embraced his friendship, yet now he utterly
renounced the League he had made with him. And laying a Siege with part of his
Army against Ptolemais, which City (it seems) had shut their Gates against him,
he marched away himself with the residue of his forces against Judea. Alexander
Jannaeus marches out to meet him with fifty thousand men. Ptolemais coming
unawares on the Sabbath Day on Asychis a City in Galilee, stormed it and took
it, and carried away with him about 10000 Prisoners. Next he fell upon Zephoris
not far distant from thence; but having lost many men before it, he drew off to
encounter Alexander. They engage near Jordan, and Ptolemy's Soldiers rout the
Jews, and in the pursuit slay many thousands of them; Josephus says 30000.
Ptolemy ranging up and down the Country, fell at last into some Villages, which
being full of Women and Children, he commanded his Soldiers to kill them
promiscuously; and cutting off their Limbs to cast them into Caldrons, that so
a report might be spread abroad, that his army eat man's flesh, which would
strike Terror and Discouragement into their Enemies. Cleopatra hearing how her
Sons power increased, held it small Policy to let him go on as he did,
therefore she came against him with Forces both by Land and by Sea; over which
she placed as chief Commanders under her self, Chelcias and Ananias, both Jews,
and Sons of that Onias who built the Temple in the Seigniory of Alexandria. Her
Son Lathurus imagining she had drained the Garrisons of Egypt to make up this
great army, hasted thither, hoping to have surpised that Kingdom in her
absence; but she left it so well provided, that his attempts proved
ineffectual. Cleopatra with her Army now lays siege to Ptolemais and takes it.
Thither comes to her Alexander Jannaeus with Presents in his hands, where he
was received as a person distressed by her adversary, and one only who had no
other Refuge but her self to betake himself unto. Some that were about her,
advised her to seize his Country immediately into her own hands, and not to
suffer so many good Jews to be at the pleasure and command of one man. But
Ananias advised the contrary, accounting it a great wickedness to dispossess a
man (received into Friendship) of his Estate: And if the Queen should do so,
she would, by offering injury to Alexander, in a short time lose the affections
of the whole Nation of the Jews. The Queen being persuaded by Ananias, entered
into a League with Alexander at Scythopolis a City in Coelosyria.

Alexander being now freed from fear both of Mother and Son, (Ptolemy being
gone to Cyprus, and his Mother to Egypt) he fell upon Gaza for calling in
Lathurus to their help against him. In the mean time Apollodorus their General
broke out into his Camp by night with a very strong party, and as long as night
lasted, had the better of it; but as soon as it was day, the Jews uniting
themselves, charged the Gazaeans so stoutly, that they slew a thousand of them.
The City held out a good while, but was at last taken by the treachery of
Lysimacus, Brother to Apollodorus, whom out of envy for being in so much favor
with the people, he murdered; and then getting a party about him, delivered up
the place. Alexander at first marched in very calmly and peaceably, but after a
while let loose his Soldiers to fall upon the Citizens without control, who
sold their Lives as dear as they could, destroying many of the Soldiers. He cut
the Throats of many Senators who were met in Apollo's Temple; and after he had
sacked the City, he returned to Jerusalem.

Alexander was hated by his own Subjects, and being injuriously used by them on
the Feast of Tabernacles, he is reported to have slain six thousand of them
having furnished himself with Guards hired out of Pisidia and Cilicia for the
purpose. He overthrew the Arabians, and imposed Tribute upon the Moabites and
Gileadites. He was troubled with intestine Broils from his own Subjects,
stirred up principally by the Pharisees, who had been provoked by his Father
Hircanus; which Broils continued six years, during which time, they fought
often, but he usually had the better of it. It Is said, that in that time he
destroyed no less than fifty thousand of them. It troubled him thus to destroy
the strength of his own Kindom, therefore he endeavored to compose matters
with them, and asked them, Wherewith he should appease them? They answered, If
he would kill himself; for scarce could they pardon him, though he were dead. At
last they called in Demetrius Encaerus son of Antiochus Gryphus (made King of
Syria by Ptol. Lathurus) to their assistance, and by the help of his Army,
overthrew Alexander: But many of them being touched with compassion toward
their King after this defeat, about 6000 of them went over to him, which so
discouraged Demetrius, that he thereupon retired into his own Country. The
Pharisees being thus left by Demetrius, forthwith waged War with Alexander by
themselves, but still had the worst of it, and many of them being taken by him,
were nailed to Crosses, and their Wives and their Children slain before their
faces. During these stirs he lost all that he had got in the Arabian and
Moabitish Regions. Yet afterward gathering together his forces he wan diverse
Towns, and reduced under his power the valley called Antiochus's Valley, and
the Fort Gamala, and outed Demetrius Lord of those places; and then returned
home and was joyfully received by his Subjects for the good success he had had
in that Expedition. At this time the Jews possessed many Cities in Syria,
Idumaea, Phoenicia and other Countries (a Catalogue of which Josephus has left
us) among which Pella a Town of Moab being one, they destroyed it, because the
Inhabitants refused to receive the Jewish Rites. Anna a Prophtess, Daughter of
Phanuel (her Husband being dead) went not out of the Temple, but served God day
and night for 84 years together, until she saw Christ in the Temple. Alexander
toward his latter end giving himself to intemperate courses, contracted a
quartan Ague, which held him three years. Yet for all this he followed on his
Wars, and laid siege to Ragala Castle beyond Jordan; but being at last overcome
by the force of his disease, he died there before the Walls of that place, in
the 27th year of his reign about 76 years before the birth of Christ.

Alexander a little before his death (when he saw he must die) advised his Wife
to keep close his death, till the place should be gained, and then going
victoriously to Jerusalem to send for the chief of the Pharisees (whom both he
and his Father had grievously offended) and to express kindness to them, and
give them the disposal of his Corpse, and to assure them, that she would not act
any thing in State matters, but by their advice. This advice she punctually
followed, and thereby so gained the love of the Pharisees, that they cried up
Alexander for a good King among the people, and bewailed his death, and
provided a more stately and sumptuous funeral for him, than they had made for
any King before him.

Alexander left two Sons, Hircanus and Aristobulus; but to his Wife he left the
management of the Kingdom. Hircanus was of a dull and heavy temper. Though
therefore she made him High Priest, yet she kept the Government in her own
hands, though indeed all things were ordered at the will and pleasure of the
Pharisees, whom the people were commanded to obey, and against whom whatever
Ordinances were made by Hircanus, were now abolished. The Queen kept in pay a
great number of Foreigners, and so increased her Power, that she became
formidable to the neighboring Princes, and took Hostages of them; yet no great
matters were done by her abroad, but sufficient stirs happened at home. For the
Pharisees knowing no moderation in the prosecution of their ambitious and
envious designs, procured the Queen to put to death many of those who had
counseled her Husband to deal so cruelly with their adherents. Hereupon those
of them who were most obnoxious, being backed by Aristobulus, made their
Address to the Queen, beseeching her, that either they might be all slain
there, or else that they might be dispersed severally into Castles where they
might pass the remainder of their lives in some security from the Treachery of
their Enemies. The Queen not well knowing what to do in this Exigent, resolved
at last to entrust them with the command of all the Castles, excepting
Hircania, Alexandrium, and Machaerus. After this, Alexandra falling grievous
sick, Aristobulus judged that now or never was the time for him to do some
thing for the setting up of himself. Whereupon departing privately by night
with only one Servant to attend him, he went to those Castles which his Fathers
Friends had the command of, and in a short time got them into his power. The
news of this being brought to the Queen, she and the Pharisees were exceedingly
troubled at it, knowing that if he had got the Kingdom into his hands, he would
call them to a strict account for the hard usage of his Friends. Hircanus the
High Priest, and the Elders of the Jews having secured Aristobulus's Wife and
Children in the Castle at Jerusalem, make their Address to the Queen, desiring
her speedy direction what they should do in these State Emergencies. She told
them, They might do what in their Judgments they thought fit, and most
conducing to the public good, and might employ the Arms and Treasure of the
Kingdom, as they saw occasion: But for her part, she was in so weak a condition
both of Body and Mind, that she could not take care of those matters. And
shortly after she died, having reigned nine years, and in 73 of her Age.

In the meantime Aristobulus increased in power, many flocking to him that
hoped to get something by this Innovation in the State.

Hircanus the High Priest now succeeding in the Government, his Brother
Aristobulus presently made War upon him. They come to a Battle near Jerico,
where many of Hircanus's Soldiers revolted to the other side. Upon which he
fled into the Castle where the Wife and Children of Aristobulus were then kept.
The rest of this party for fear of the Conqueror, betook themselves to the
Protection of the Temple; and in a short space delivered up themselves. At
length it came to a Treaty between the two Brothers, and it was agreed, that
Aristobulus should reign, and that Hircanus should lead a private life, and
enjoy his Brothers Estate. This Covenant they both entered into in the Temple,
having both sworn to it, and solemnly confirmed it. Then kindly embracing each
other in the sight of the people, they withdrew, the one to his Court, the
other as a private person to Aristobulus's house.

But this agreement lasted not long. For Antipater (an Idumaean, Father of
Herod the Great) having been made Governor of Idumaea by Alexander Jannaeus,
and being a Rich man, and Factious, and busy by nature, he feared
Aristobulus's power (by reason of some Grudges that were between them) and
endeavored his destruction by stirring up Hircanus and the most powerful of
the Jews against him, suggesting it would be very ill to let him possess a
Command he had so unjustly gotten, having put by his elder Brother, and
dispoiled him of the Prerogative of his Birth. And with the like Suggestions he
plied Hircanus, constantly adding with all, that his very life was in danger,
except he prevented it by a timely flight. At length (though with some
difficulty) he prevailed with Hircanus to fly to Aretas King of the Arabians,
whom Antipater procured to assist him with his Arms for the recovering of his
Kingdom. Hircanus promising him, that if by his means he obtained it, he would
restore to him a Country with twelve Cities, which his Father Alexander
Jannaeus had taken away from the Arabians.

Aretas being wrought upon by these promises, invades Judea with fifty thousand
men, and overthrows Aristobulus, so that he was forced with many Priests that
were with him, to fly into Jerusalem, where he was closely besieged in the
Temple by Hircanus and the Arabians. The besiegers brought one Onias (a man
that had at that time a great repute for his Piety and the Prevalency of his
Prayers) to the siege, and there would needs have him to curse the besieged. He
refused a great while, till being at last compelled by the multitude, he stood
in the midst of them and prayed thus; O God, thou that art King of the whole
world, forasmuch as these that are with me are thy people, and those that are
besieged are thy Priests, I beseech thee, that thou would neither hear these
praying against them, nor them against these. This so enraged the rude
multitude, that they fell upon him and stoned him to death.

The Feast of the Passover happening during the Siege, the Priests that were
besieged with Aristobulus in the Temple (that the Sacrifices might not be
omitted) bargained with the Besiegers to sell them Beasts for that service. But
when they had let down their money from the Walls, they were derided by the
Besiegers, and no Sacrifice returned. This Wickedness, and the Murder of
Onias, the Historian observes to have been punished with great storms and
tempests, which procured extraordinary scarcity of Corn.

In the mean while Pompey the Great being diverted by the War with Tigranes in
Armenia, sent Scaurus his Quaestor into Syria, who coming strait to Damascus,
found it newly taken by Metellus and Laelius; whereupon he advances presently
into Judea. As soon as he had entered the Country, he meets Ambassadors both
from Hircanus (that had besieged the Temple at Jerusalem) as also from his
Brother (that was besieged) both of them entreating his assistance. And though
the one promised as much as the other for his help, (namely 400 Talents) yet he
closed with Aristobulus, counting him more free and rich, and whose Request was
more easy to be fulfilled in driving away the Besiegers, than that of the
other to take the place which he held, being so strong both of it self, and by
the valor of the Defendants. Having therefore received Aristobulus's money, he
sent to the Besiegers, threatening them in the Romans and Pompey's name, if they
did not immediately desist from that Siege. Aretas being affrighted with this
Message, withdrew his siege, and Scaurus returned to Damascus. Aristobulus
being thus freed from the siege, gathers together all the forces he could
make, and pursuing Aretas and Hircanus at a place called Papyron, he there
worsted them, killing about 7000 of them, and among others Cephalias the
brother of Antipater. Not long after Pompey came to Damascus, whither were sent
unto him Ambassadors from several parts. Aristobulus sent him an excellent
present, being a Golden Vine, a piece of so exquisite Workmanship, that it was
called the Delight. It was placed in the Temple by Alexander Jannaeus, and now
by his Son Aristobulus presented to Pompey; and by him afterward among other
things dedicated in the Capitol at Rome. Pliny describes it thus: A foursquare
mountain of Gold, with Hearts and Lions, and all kind of Apples with a Vine of
Gold encompassing it. Plin. Lib. 37. Cap. 2.

A while after there were sent some to him from both the Brothers, namely,
Antipater from Hircanus, and one Nicodemus from the other. Pompey commanded
both Parties, viz. Hircanus and Aristobulus to appear before him at Damascus.
Thither was sent also an Embassage from the Jews themselves, who declared they
were unwilling to live any longer under Kings, it being the custom of their
Country to yield obedience to the High Priest of their God; that though these
two Brothers were indeed of the race of the Priests, yet they had a design to
alter the Government, and to bring slavery upon the people.

Hircanus accused his Brother of Usurpation, and depriving him of his
Birthright. Aristobulus excused himself by the necessity of the thing, his
Brother being so unfit for Government, insomuch that there was danger (if he
had not taken it upon him) that it would have been transferred to some other
family. There were a great number of the chief of the Jews, whom Antipater had
brought with him, who confirmed what Hircanus had said. But Aristobulus's
followers (whom he appealed unto) were a Company of young Gallants, ridiculous
to all for their fantastic Bravery.

Pompey having heard them both, rebuked Aristobulus's violence, yet dismissed
them both very kindly at present, promising he would come himself to them as
soon as he had inspected the Affairs of the Nabathaeans, injoyning them both in
the mean time to be quiet, and to make no disturbance. But Aristobulus being
high spirited, resented his usage, and thought it intolerable for him to be
treated so much beneath the Majesty of a King; wherefore he betook himself, in
some discontent to Judea, to take care of his own affairs. Pompey being
offended with his carriage, took the Army he had provided against the
Nabathaeans, and other supplies out of Syria, and the Legions which were at his
command, and followed him, Hircanus very much entreating him so to do. Having
entered Judea, and hearing that Aristobulus was fled into Alexandria, a goodly
Castle, he sent to him to come to him. Aristobulus being persuaded by many of
his friends not to commence War against the Romans, came unto Pompey. After he
had debated his Title, touching the Kingdom, Pompey permitted him to go back to
the Castle again. And thus he did two or three times, always flattering Pompey
as if he would obey him in all things, but in the mean time he privately
provided for War, fearing lest Pompey should give the Principality to his
Brother. At last Pompey commanded him to deliver up into his hands the Castles
and Garrisons which he held. Aristobulus in a discontent withdrew to Jerusalem,
and there prepared for War. But Pompey immediately followed him, not thinking
it fit to give him time to prepare himself. His first nights quarters were at
Jerico, and next morning he marched toward Jerusalem. Aristobulus thinking
with himself what he had done, came out to meet him, and promised him money,
and that he would yield both himself and the City up to him, only he desired
that laying aside all hostility, whatever he did, he would do it in a peaceable
manner. Pompey pardoned him, and sent Gabinius with some Soldiers to receive
the money, but he was fain to return without any. For Aristobulus's Soldiers
would not stand to what he had promised. Hereat Pompey grew very angry, and
committing Aristobulus into custody, marched in person against the City. The
Citizens within were divided among themselves, some being for Hircanus, others
for Aristobulus. The former were for the delivering up the City to Pompey; the
other being wholly against it, seized upon the Temple, and cutting down the
Bridge by which they go into the City, stood upon their defense; whereupon the
other party let the Romans into the City, and delivered to them also the Kings
Palace; the custody of both which Pompey gave to his Lieutenant Piso. Pompey
first offered to the besieged Conditions of Peace, which being refused, he
prepared to give a general assault, and was assisted by Hircanus in all things
needful. Pompey's Soldiers with great labor and difficulty filled up that vast
trench, or valley wherewith the Temple was begirt, and then with Engines
brought from Tire, battered the Wall, taking advantage of the Superstition of
the Jews, who thought it sinful to hinder the works of their enemies, or do any
thing on the Sabbath Day, but defend themselves. The greatest Tower being
battered down, and with the fall thereof breaking down a great piece of the
wall, the Romans break in, ( Cornelius Faustus the Son of Sylla first entering
the breach) and then made slaughter of twelve thousand Jews. The Priests,
during the siege, performing the daily Sacrifice, not intermitting it, in their
greatest extremities, no not then when they saw their enemies rushing in with
their drawn swords upon them, so that many were slain whilst they were offering
sacrifice and burning Incense in the Temple, preferring the performance of
their duty before the saving of their lives. Some were taken Captive, among
whom was Absolon the Uncle and Father-in-law of Aristobulus. Pompey with many
followers entered the Temple, and looked on those things which it was unlawful
for any but the High Priest to behold. And though there were in the Temple, the
Table, and Candlesticks with the Lamps and all Vessels for sacrifice, and the
Censers of Gold, and one huge heap of spices, and in the Treasury about 2000
Talents, yet he meddled not with any thing, but next day commanded them who had
the charge of the Temple, to purify and cleanse it, and to offer their solemn
sacrifices to God. The Temple was taken, as Josephus tells us, in the third
month, and on the Fast day which was usually kept in memory of Jehoiakims
burning the Roll about 62 years before the birth of Christ.

Pompey restored the Priesthood to Hircanus, because among other Services he
had done him during the siege, he had kept the Country from joining with
Aristobulus. And with the Priesthood he invested him also with the
Principality, yet forbad him to wear a Crown. Then putting to death the chief
Authors of the late War, he made the Jews tributary to the people of Rome. And
the Cities which the Jews held in Coelosyria, he took away, and subjected them
to a Governor of their own^ and the Dominion of the Jews he reduced within its
ancient bounds. Thus Aristobulus and his Brother were the cause of losing their
Countries Liberty to the Romans, who within a short time exacted above ten
thousand Talents of it.

Pompey having broken down the walls of Jerusalem in many Places left Syria to
the Government of Scaurus, and with two Legions hasted to Rome, leading
Aristobulus along with him captive with his two Sons, and as many Daughters.
One of his Sons, (namely Alexander) escaped in the way, and returned into
Judea, where he got together a considerable power, and awed his Uncle Hircanus
who was unable to resist him, being then employed in repairing the walls of
Jerusalem, which Pompey had thrown down. Within a while Gabinius was sent from
Rome to govern Syria. He undertook the War against Alexander, who had now got
together 10000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, and had strongly fortified Alexandria and
Hircanium, and Machaeron. Gabinius overthrew him near Jerusalem, killing and
taking about 6000 of his men. He then besieged him in the Castle of Alexandria,
whither he had fled. But leaving here sufficient strength for carrying on the
siege, he went and visited the Country, causing diverse Cities to be re-edifyed,
and then returning and more powerfully re-inforcing the Siege, Alexander
yielded himself and the Castles which he held. All which Gabinius by the advice
of the Mother of Alexander levelled with the ground, lest they should be an
occasion of new Troubles. For she being sollicitous for her Husband and
Children that were carried captive to Rome, used all obsequiousness toward
Gabinius.

Gabinius then went to Jerusalem, and established Hircanus in the Priesthood,
but Cantonized the Country into five parts, which he ordered to be Governed in
an Aristocratical way. One division was to be governed by a Committee, or
Assembly at Jerusalem, another at Jadara, a third at Amathus, a fourth at
Jerico, a fifth at Saphora a Town of Samaria. The Jews very gladly embraced
this Form of Government. But Aristobulus not long after with his Son Antigonus
escaping from Rome, and coming into Judea ministered occasion of new troubles.
For coming into his own Country, he presently found some, who out of desire of
Innovation sided with him, among whom was Pitholaus the Governor of Jerusalem
who left the Romans, and revolted to him with a thousand men. He quickly got
together 8000 men well armed, so that when the Romans followed him, he gave
them Battle, in which he fought stoutly till his men being overpowered, 5000
of them were slain upon the place; near 2000 fled to a certain Mountain from
whence they got away and provided for their own safety as well as they could.
The rest with Aristobulus fled to Machaerus, and began to fortify the Castle,
but being not able to hold out the siege above two days (having received many
wounds) he was taken Prisoner with his Son Antigonus, and brought to Gabinius,
who sent them both to Rome. The Senate kept him Prisoner, but sent his Son
immediately back again into Judea, because they understood by Gabinius's
Letters, that he had promised his Mother so much for the delivery of the
Castles.

Gabinius now prepared an expedition against the Parthians, but passing over
Euphrates, was hired by Ptol. Auletes (who brought Letters to him from Pompey)
to reduce him into his Kingdom. In this expedition he made use of Hircanus,
especially Antipater, who furnished him with Supplies both of men and
Provision, and prevailed with the Jews inhabiting about Pelusium to give him
passage, and so he presently became Master of Egypt which he delivered to
Ptolemy.

During his absence and tarrying in Egypt, Alexander the Son of Aristobulus
seized upon the Government, and having gotten together a great number of the
Jews, he put to death all the Romans he could meet with, and besieged all those
that fled to mount Gerizim. Gabinius sent Antipater before (knowing his great
Wisdom) to see if he could reduce the people to obedience, and he effected it
with many. But Alexander having gotten together an army of 30000 Jews, he came
out and gave battle to the Romans near the mountain Isabyr, in which Fight the
Jews lost ten thousand men. Then Gabinius having ordered the affairs of the
City of Jerusalem by Antipater's advice, went against the Nabathaeans, whom he
overcame in one Battle. Then returning to Rome, he left his Province to Crassus
his Successor. Crassus intended first an Expedition against the Parthians, but
hearing of the Riches of the Temple which Pompey, like a brave and gallant man,
had left untouched, he turned aside into Palestine, and came to Jerusalem, and
spoiled the Temple not only of those 2000 Talents which Pompey had spared; but
of all the Gold which he found there besides, which amounted to the Sum of 8000
Talents more, though Eleazer the Treasurer had given him a Beam of Gold weighing
750 common pounds, as a ransom for all the rest, and he had bound himself by an
Oath therewith to be satisfied, and not to meddle with any thing else; but
going against the Parthians he received the reward of his Sacrilege and
Perjury; for there he lost his life. Crassus being dead, one Head of Varro's
three-headed Faction was cut off, and a Foundation laid of the Civil Wars
between Pompey and Caesar.

Cassius (who was Treasurer to Crassus, and he that together with Brutus
afterward killed Julius Caesar) now took on him the Government of Syria. He
being come to Tire visited also Judea, and therein took Tarichaea, and led from
thence many of the Jews Prisoners, and slew Pitholaus who had assisted
Aristobulus, at the desire of Antipater, who now grew very considerable, having
entered into Confederacy and Alliance with diverse Princes, especially with the
Arabian, out of whose Country he had married a Wife of Noble Extraction, by
name Cypris, by whom he had four Sons, Phasaelus, Herod, Joseph and Pheroras,
and a Daughter named Solome. His Sons he sent into Arabia, and committed them
to the Custody of the King thereof whilst he was engaged in the War with
Aristobulus.

The Civil Wars between Pompey and Caesar now beginning, and Pompey being
driven beyond the Ionian Sea, and Caesar having got Rome into his power, he set
Aristobulus at liberty, and with two Legions sent him back into Syria, hoping
that all that Country round about Judea might be brought under by him, yet he
was frustrated of his hopes, Aristobulus being poisoned by the Pompeians in the
way, and buried after by the Cesareans in the Sepulcher of his Ancestors. This
Expedition proved fatal not only to Aristobulus, but to his son Alexander also,
who was beheaded by Scipio at Antioch by order from Pompey, beig first
arraigned and condemned for what he had done against the Romans.

Ptolemy Mennaeus the Governor of Chalcis under Mount Libanus, sent Philippio
his Son to Ascalon to Aristobulus's Wife, for her Son Antigonus and her two
Daughters, and courteously entertained them; the youngest of which, named
Alexandra, Philippio fell in love with, and married. But Ptolemy's Passion
overcoming both Reason and Nature, he killed his Son, and took the Lady to
himself.

Pompey being now murdered on the Egyptian shore, Antipater betook himself to
Caesar as his Interest led him, and by his great services purchased his favor.

Caesar Warring with young Ptolemy in Egypt after the death of Pompey, Antipater
joined with Mithridates of Pergamus (who went down thither to him with
supplies) and brought a supply of 3000 Jews for his assistance. At Pelusium he
did special service, being the first that broke down the Wall and entered. And
whereas the Jews inhabiting the Country of Onias hindered them from going any
further, he prevailed with them not to oppose Caesar, yea, to furnish his Army
with Provisions. At the Battle at Delia he recovered the Battle almost lost by
Mithridates, and afterward behaved himself very gallanty for Caesar, having
received many wounds as the tokens of his valor. Antigonus the Son of
Aristobulus coming unto Caesar, complained to him of the hard Fate his Father
had met with for taking his side, that he was poisoned by the Pompeians, and
his Brother beheaded by Scipio; he desired him, that he would have pity on him,
being cast out of his Fathers Kingdom. He also accused Hircanus and Antipater,
that they had by force got the Government. But Antipater so pleaded his cause,
and indeed the Wounds he had received, and the pains he had taken in Cesars
service so pleaded for him, that Caesar confirmed Hircanus in the
High Priesthood, and offered Antipater what Government he would desire, and
made him Procurator of Judea, and gave him leave to re-build the walls of
Jerusalem thrown down by Pompey, and caused these Grants to be registered in the
Capitol, and seconded them with diverse decrees made both by himself and the
Senate in favor of him and the Jews. Antipater then bringing Caesar on in his
Journey as far as the borders of Syria, returned, and fell to building up the
walls of Jerusalem; and going about the Country, by threatenings and other
Policy, contained the people in obedience, otherwise ready to Rebel. Hircanus
being heavy and dull, and unfit to manage the Affairs of Government, Antipater
made his Son Phasaelus Captain of Jerusalem, and the Country adjacent, and
committed Galilee to the Custody of his second Son Herod, being then about 25
years of Age.

Herod at the very first gave evidence of what Spirit, and height of courage he
was. For there being at that time one Hezekias a notable Thief, who with a
great company of followers, used to infest the Country of Syria, he took him,
and put him to death, with many others of that Rout; which thing much endeared
him to the Syrians, and thereby he became known to Sextus Caesar the President,
and Kinsman to the Dictator. Phasaelus his Brother was hereby much stirred up
to Emulation, and carried himself very obligingly and honorably toward those
of his Jurisdiction, so that their Father was honored by the people as a King,
and yet preserved his fidelity entire to Hircanus. But diverse of the Nobles and
chief men of the Jewish Nation, understanding how he flourished both upon his
own account, and that of his Sons, inwardly fretted at it; and the rather
because he made use of Hircanus for his own ends (as they conceived, having
contracted friendship with the Roman Generals) and persuaded him to send money
to them, yet got to himself the credit of the President. But especially the
forward and bold disposition of Herod affrighted them, whom they looked upon as
a young and growing Tyrant. They make their Addresses to Hircanus, complaining
to him bitterly against Antipater, as one who carried away all the profit of
the Kingdom. They further complained of that bold act of Herod's in putting to
death Hezekias with many others without any Commission received from Hircanus,
in contempt of the Laws by which no man is to suffer (though he were never so
wicked) till he had a legal Trial, and were condemned by the Sentence of the
Judge. Hircanus being at last wrought upon by these complaints, summoned Herod
to Jerusalem to give an account of these his actions before the Council.

Herod having settled the affairs of Galilee, appeared at Jerusalem, but with a
Guard (as his Father had advised him by Letter) yet a moderate one lest he
should affright Hircanus. When he appeared before the Sanhedrin in his Royal
Robes, and with his Guard, no body had the courage to say any thing to him, or
accuse him, till one of the Council called Sameas, a just man (and yet no
hot-spirited man, as the Jewish Proverb shows; Be thou humble as Hillel, and
not angry as Sameas) rising up, inveighed against him for the manner of his
Appearance, not suitable to the condition of a person summoned to answer for
his faults; and blamed both Hircanus and the Council for their too great
Indulgence, which he feared they would afterward pay dearly for. And the event
proved his words true, that very Council, and Hircanus himself being afterward
put to death by Herod when he was King.

The Council being inflamed with Sameas's words, had certainly now condemned
him, had not Hircanus foreseeing it, put off the business till the next day,
and in the mean time privately advised Herod to shift for himself. Herod
thereupon retired to Damascus, and visited Sextus Caesar (who loved him as his
own Son) and then gave out, That he would no more appear though he were cited;
at which they at Jerusalem fretted, and persuaded Hircanus, That all these
things tended to his ruin. Herod having purchased of Sextus Caesar the
Government of Coelosyria, disdaining now that he had been commanded to come and
plead his cause at Jerusalem, marches toward the City with an Army, and if his
Father and Brother had not met him, and otherwise persuaded him, he had made
mischief enough. Having therefore made a show of his power, he retreated. About
this time Caelicius Bassus in favor of Pompey, made away Sextus Caesar, and got
his Army to submit to him; but diverse of Cesars party came to revenge his
Kinsmans death, and a War ensued about Epamea, whither Antipater (mindful of
the Benefits he had received from Caesar) sent his Sons with aid to assist
Cesars Captains. The War being drawn out in length, Statius Marcus was sent to
succeed Sextus, and in the mean time Julius Caesar was stabbed in the
Senate House, which as it bred trouble and disturbance to the whole Roman
Empire, so neither did Judea escape without its share thereof.

A Civil War ensuing, the chief Captains on both sides, ran up and down to
provide themselves for it. Cassius (one of them that slew Caesar) came into
Syria, where raising the Seige before Apamea, he drew both Marcus and Bassus to
his Party, and then taking upon him the Power of a General, and Title of
Proconsul, he reduced to his obedience all the Cities of Syria, and levied men,
and exacted grievous Contributions: But especially he afflicted Judea, levying
a Tax of above 700 Talents upon it. Antipater seeing the Commonwealth in
trouble, and fearing Cassius's Threats, appointed his two Sons to gather part
of the money, and Malichus a Jew (that was an enemy of his) to gather another
part, and some others, another part. But Herod bringing first of all an 100
Talents, which were imposed upon Galilee (which belonged to his Government)
became thereby much in Cassius's favor. But under the other Governors diverse
Cities were set to Sale to make up the Sum. And the Tax (as it should seem)
came in so slowly, that Cassius was exceedingly enraged, and was about to put
Malichus (one of the Collectors) to death, had not Hircanus by sending to him a
100 Talents of his own money by Antipater, appeased his fury. But Antipater was
ill requited by Malichus for this. For as soon as Cassius left Judea, Malichus
practiced to take away Antipaters life, thinking that he being removed out of
the way, they should better provide for the security of Hircanus's Government.
Antipater having an inckling of it, passed over Jordan, and gathered an Army,
intending to revenge the Treachery; but Malichus (being a crafty Dissembler) so
denied the matter with Oaths to his two Sons, that they reconciled him to their
Father, who by his Intercession saved him out of the Hands of Marcus, President
of Syria, who understanding that Malichus attempted some Innovations in Judea,
had resolved to put him to death. But Antipater preserved him to his own
Destruction.

Cassius and Marcus having gathered an Army, made Herod (for his good services)
Governor of Coelosyria, and gave him forces both of Horse and Foot, and also
Ships at Sea, and promised to make him King of Judea, if they got the better
against Anthony and young Caesar.

Antipater not long after, being feasted by Hircanus at Jerusalem, Malichus
corrupting the Kings Butler, poisoned Antipater, and gathering a Band of
Soldiers, seized on the Government of the City.

Antipaters Sons having notice of their Fathers death, Herod would have
revenged it out of hand, and that by open force; but Phasaelus thought it
better to circumvent the Murderer in some more private way, lest they should
seem the beginners of a Civil War. And therefore Malichus stiffly denying he had
any hand in Antipaters death, they seemed satisfied with his justifications,
and Phasaelus set himself to erect a Monument for his Father. Not long after,
the Feast of Penticost approaching, Herod came up to Jerusalem with a company
of Soldiers at his Heels. Malichus hearing of his coming in this Equipage, was
much startled at it, and persuaded Hircanus not to suffer him to enter the
City; and Hircanus accordingly forbad him to approach so holy a solemnity with
a Profane rout of Strangers. But he notwithstanding got in by night, and so
affrighted Malichus that he betook himself to his old Trade of dissembling, and
openly bewailed with Tears the death of Antipater as his great Friend. So that
for that time it was thought fit by Herod's friends (for the shunning of
Suspicion) to treat him fairly. Yet Herod by Letters signified his Fathers
death to Cassius, who willed him by all means to revenge it; and gave order to
the Tribunes then lying at Tire, to assist him in his just endeavors.

Cassius not long after having taken Laodicea, the Governors came flocking
from all places to him bringing Crowns and Money, and Herod expected now that
Malichus should be punished for the Murder of his Father.

Malichus being apprehensive of the danger he was in, began to cast about for
his own security. And his Son being at that time kept in Tire as an hostage, he
resolved to go in, and get him out by stealth, and carry him into Judea, whilst
Cassius was busied in the War against Antonius, to stir up the Nation of the
Jews to revolt from the Romans, and then to depose Hircanus, and get the
Kingdom to himself. Herod understanding something of his design, prevented him:
For inviting Hircanus and him to Supper with their company in Tire, he sent to
the Tribunes to come out to meet them, who remembering the Commands of Cassius,
encountered Malichus on the Shore, and slew him there. Hircanus much startled
at this fact, asks, Who had slain Malichus? One of the Tribunes answered, The
Command of Cassius: At which he replied, Then Cassius has saved both me and my
Country from him that plotted the destruction of both.

After Cassius was gone out of Syria, there arofe a great stir at Jerusalem.
For Felix (who was left thereby Cassius with Soldiers) in revenge of Malichus's
death, set upon Phasaelus, and it happened, that at that very time Herod, being
at Damascus with Fabius the Roman Captain, was fallen sick, and so unable to
come and help his Brother. Notwithstanding Phasaelus was hard enough for Felix,
and forced him into a Tower, where he gave him quarter, and let him go with his
life. But he expostulated highly with Hircanus, objecting ingratitude to him
for taking Felix's part, and suffering the Brother of Malichus to seize diverse
Castles which he held at this present, and Massada among the rest, the
strongest of all. But Herod (upon his recovery) gained from him all those
Castles, and let him go out of Massada upon composition.

Antigonus the Son of Aristobulus about this time so bribed Fabius, that he
suffered him to get for himself an army. He was also aided by Ptol. Mennaeus
(who by Cassius's means had subjected Tire, and diverse places in Syria, and
three Castles in Galilee) and adhered to him for the hatred he bore to Herod.
But Herod going against those Castles, had them surrendered to him by the
Tyrians, whom he dismissed very graciously out of respect to their City, and
then marched against Antigonus, whom he overthrew in battle presently after he
had entered the Coasts of Judea. Going to Jerusalem he was very honorably
received not only by the People, but by Hircanus also, who had of late agreed
to receive him into his Family, having consented to a Contract between him and
Mariamne the Daughter of Alexander (eldest Son of Aristobulus) whom with young
Aristobulus her brother he had by Alexandra, Hircanus's own Daughter. Herod by
this Wife had afterward three Sons and two Daughters, having by a former Wife
(and his own Country-woman) Doris, his eldest Son Antipater.

Within a while after Cassius and Brutus were overthrown at Philippi by Caesar
and Antony; of whom the former returning into Italy, the other came over into
Asia, which gave occasion to new stirs in Judea.

Anthony being come into Bithinia, Ambassadors were sent thither to him from
all Countries; and among the rest, some came from the chief of the Jews, to
accuse Phasaelus and Herod, who usurped (as they said) all the Power, and
Hircanus reigned only in show. Herod went thither to defend himself, and so
prevailed with his money that his Accusers could do nothing against him.
Anthony being come to Ephesus, an Ambassy was dispatched to him in the name of
Hircanus, and the whole Nation of the Jews, desiring that all Captives that
Cassius had carried away out of Judea, might he set at liberty; which he
readily granted, and sent his Letters throughout the Provinces to effect it. As
he was traveling into Syria, Cleopatra met him in Cilicia, to whose
Allurements he wholly gave up himself. Being come to Daphne near Antioch, an
hundred of the most considerable men among the Jews came to him to complain of
Phasaelus and Herod; but Anthony who knew their Father, and had been obliged by
him, when he served in Egypt under Gabinius, made them both Tetrarchs, leaving
unto them the Government of all Judea, and clapped up fifteen of their
Adversaries in Prison, and would have put them to death, had not Herod
interceeded for them. Yet notwithstanding the Jews were not so discouraged as
to desist; for instead of an hundred, now a thousand resolved to go to Tire,
there to complain to Anthony against the two Brothers; but he being already
sufficiently bribed by them, commanded the Magistrates of the place to kill
them as persons that attempted Innovations. Herod coming to the Jews, advised
them to withdraw themselves; and Hircanus also (who was there) showed them the
danger they were in, if they should go on in their Purpose, But they contemning
this advice, were presently fallen upon by some of their own Countrymen that
were there, as also by the Inhabitants of the Town; and part of them being
slain, and others taken, the rest got away and returned home. The people
exceedingly clamoured against Herod for this, at which Anthony was so far
incensed, that he slew those he had in hold.

A year or two after, Pacorus son to the King of Parthia, and Barzaphernes one
of his great Officers, seized upon Syria. Antigonus the Son of Aristobulus
bargains with the Parthians, promising them a 1000 Talents to settle him in the
Kingdom of Judea, and to kill Herod with his Friends. The Parthians undertake
it, and in order to effect it, march with their Army into Judea. A strong party
of horse under the command of Pacorus (Butler to the King of Parthia) are sent
before to make discoveries. The Jews about Carmel, and diverse others join with
them for the establishing Antigonus. At last their number increasing they came
to Jerusalem; they assault the Palace, but the two Brothers with their Friends
beat them back. Many Skirmishes between them ensue; Antigonus whiled off the
time as well as he could, staying for the Feast of Pentecost, at which he
expected multitudes of the Jews would come up, from whom he hoped for
assistance. And accordingly multitudes came to the Feast, and so assisted him,
that he got all but the Palace, which Herod and his Brother manfully defended,
and made Sallyes out to the great hurt of their Enemies. At last Antigonus
desired, that Pacorus the General of the Parthians might be admitted to be a
Mediator between them. The Proposal being accepted, Pacorus persuades Phasaelus
to go as an Ambassador to Barzaphernes to treat with him about those matters,
having a design to entrap him. Phasaelus suspecting nothing, went (contrary to
the mind of Herod) and with him went also Hircanus (an unheard of employment
for the Prince himself) under the conduct of Pacorus. As soon as they came into
Galilee, they were met by the Governors of the Towns there, and Barzaphernes
entertained them very civilly; but shortly after they were both secured (in
vain upbraiding the Barbarians with Perjury) and an Eunuch was dispatched to
Jerusalem to get Herod by some means or other out of the City, if he could, and
to apprehend him. But Herod presently hearing of his Brothers Captivity,
resolved to shift for himself; and taking the opportunity of the Evening, got
away with his Relations and Friends that night without the knowledge of the
Enemy. And making all speed he could to get into Idumea, his Mothers Litter was
overthrown in the way, by which she was in danger of death. Herod was so
disturbed at this accident (fearing lest the enemy should overtake them whilst
they stayed there) that he was ready to kill himself with his own Sword; but
being restrained by those about him, he went on to Massada, a strong fortifyed
place in the Country of Arabia. A Party of the Parthians first, and then
another of the Jews pursued him, but he beat them off. When he was come into
Idumea, his brother Joseph came to him, and persuaded him to dismiss many of
his followers, because the Castle of Massada would not maintain them all, which
he accordingly did, giving them money to bear their charges. But calling out
the ablest Soldiers from among them, he with them and his Relations marched on
to Massada, and there disposed of the Women and most of his Companions, there
being plenty of all sorts of Provisions in the Castle. But he himself held on
for Petra in Arabia the Metropolis of that Kingdom, hoping from that King (who
was such a Friend to his Father) to obtain help for the recovery of his
Brothers Liberty. The Parthians, after his departure from Jerusalem, plundered
the City, and Palace, and wasted the Country, and destroyed the rich Town of
Morissa; and so reducing Antigonus into Judea, delivered up Hircanus and
Phasaelus into his hands, he fearing that Hircanus by the favor of the people,
might again be restored to the Kingdom; he cut off his ears, making him thereby
incapable of the Priesthood, which by the Law was not to be given to any one
that wanted any member. But Phasaelus knowing that he was destined to death,
seeing that he could not otherwise kill himself by reason of his chains, dashed
out his brains against a stone. The Parthians having thus settled Antigonus,
when they departed took Hircanus along with them Prisoner into Parthia.

Herod knowing nothing of his Brothers death, was going as fast as he could to
the King of Arabia, hoping to get money of him either upon free gift, or trust,
to ransom his Brother; and he carried with him Phasaelus (his Brothers Son) a
Child of seven years old, to leave him with him as a Pledge.

But the Arabian being persuaded by his great ones to return the Treasure which
Antipater had deposited with him, and not to afford Herod any Succor; he sent
some to meet him, and to command him to depart from his Borders, (pretending
the Parthians had so commanded) but afterward repenting of this ingratitude,
he sent after him, but could not overtake him; for hearing of his Brothers
death, posted toward Egypt as fast as he could, where coming to Pelusium, the
Mariners that were to sail to Alexandria denied him passage, but the
Magistrates of the place honorably entertained him, and brought him to
Cleopatra the Queen, who kindly received him, intending to use him in her Wars.
But nothing could hinder him from hasting to Rome, though it was then the
Winter season, and though great stirs were reported to be in Italy. He came
thither at last, though he had been grievously tossed with tempests in his
passage; and he came thither at a time, when not long before there had been an
Agreement made betwixt Anthony and Caesar, (the former having married Octavia
the Sister of the latter) and another betwixt them two and young Pompey, who
then held Sicily, which was a time very convenient for his affairs. He made his
Application first to Anthony, of whose favor he had formerly tasted, declaring
to him the whole story of the Parthians overrunning Judea; of his Brothers
death; and the misery of his Family now besieged in a Castle; and how through
great Tempests both at Sea and Land he had ventured to come to him as his only
harbor and refuge, and withal did not spare to promise him a large Reward, if
he would procure him to be declared by the Senate, King of Judea. Anthony being
moved partly with pity, and partly by the memory of me former Friendship that
had been between him and Antipater, and also highly displeased with Antigonus
(whom he looked upon as a turbulent man, and an enemy to the Romans) was much
inclined to favor Herod. Octavius Caesar also because Antipater had done good
service for Julius Caesar in Egypt, and because he was willing to gratify
Anthony, and out of a peculiar fancy he had to the man for his courage, did
willingly join with Anthony in his promotion. The Senate therefore being
called, first Messala, then Atratomus brought forth Herod, and commended him to
the Fathers, relating what good services both his Father and himself had done
for the Commonwealth, and withal they inveighed against Antigonus as a bitter
enemy to the Romans; and that he had not only showed himself so before, but of
late, more especially in calling in the Parthians. Then Anthony rose up, and
declared to them how much it would conduce to the ending of the Parthian War
(which was now on foot) if Herod were made King. So that without any more a do
he was so declared by the unanimous suffrages of them all. Then Anthony and
Caesar leading him between them (being accompanied with the Consuls and other
Magistrates) went up into the Capitol to do sacrifiec, and to place there the
Decree of the Senate according to cust^me. And this done, the new King was
feasted by Anthony. Thus Herod obtained the Sovereignty of Judea, A. M. 3965.
about 35 years before the Birth of Christ (to the just Wonderment both of
himself and others) having always feared that the Romans would never confer
that honor and dignity upon him which was not wont to be bestowed upon any,
but those of a Royal Stock. But this added to the wonder, that within seven
days Anthony dismissed him out of Italy. During Herod's absence Antigonus laid
close siege to the Castle of Massada (where Herod had left his Relations)
abounding with all sorts of provisions, only Water was wanting, so that Joseph
had thoughts of getting away with 200 men into Arabia, the King whereof he now
heard repented of his unkindness to his Brother. But this was prevented by a
shower that fell by night, as if sent on purpose from Heaven for their relief;
whereupon they were so heartned as to sally out upon the Besiegers, whereof
they cut off many.

In the mean time Ventidius the Roman General being sent into Syria to expel
the Parthians thence, after their retreat came into Judea, under pretense to
help Joseph, but indeed with intentions to extort a good Sum of money from
Antigonus; which accordingly he did; and then drew off the greater part of his
forces, but left Silo with a party behind, who was also to be pleased by
Antigonus lest he should raise him some new Troubles.

But in the mean time Herod landed at Ptolemais, and having got together a good
Company of Soldiers, hasted through Galilee against Antigonus, being aided by
Ventidius and Silo, to whom Anthony had sent express order, that they should
place him in the Kingdom. Ventidius was then busy in composing differences
among the Cities, which the Incursion of the Parthians had made* Herod's forces
increasing, he marched toward Massada for the relief of his Friends, which he
accomplished, having first taken Joppa in his way; after which he marched up to
Jerusalem in spite of Antigonus, many of Silo's Soldiers joining themselves to
him, and many of the Jews that were terrified by his power. Having encamped on
the west side of the City, he commanded an Herald to proclaim round about the
Walls, that he came for the public good, and for the Conservation of the City,
and that he would pardon all former injuries. On the other side Antigonus
remonstrated to Silo and the Romans, that it was unjustly done to give the
Kingdom unto Herod, a private man, and an Idumaean, whereas it ought only to be
given to one of the Priests Line. Silo being bribed by Antigonus, dealt
privately with some of his Soldiers to begin a mutiny, requiring to be led into
a place more plenteous of Provisions. Hereupon the Army being in disorder, and
ready to dislodge, Herod entreated the Captains and Soldiers, that they would
not leave him now, he being sent both by Caesar and Anthony, and all the rest of
the Senate; and he would take care they should not want Provisions; and
accordingly brought Plenty out of the Country, and so cut off all occasion of
Silo's departure. Then taking out a party consisting of Ten Companies, (half
Jews, half Romans) he went to Jericho, which City he found forsaken of its
Inhabitants. The Romans entering the Town, plundered it, finding it full of good
booty. Then returning, he sent the rest of the Roman Army to winter quarters,
which he appointed in Idumaea, Galilee, and Samaria. But Antigonus obtained of
Silo, that part of his Army might quarter in Lydda, thereby endeavoring to
curry favor with Antony. Thus the Romans lay idle all this season in places
abounding with all plenty.

However, Herod was not idle, but (sending his Brother Joseph into Idumaea with
400 Horse, and 1000 Foot) went down into Galilee, to reduce some places held by
Antigonus; and within a short while brought all the Country into obedience
(except those men that lurked in Caves) and then giving to his Soldiers 150
Drachms a man; and more to the Captains, placed them also in Winter quarters.
Silo a little after, came to him with his Captains who had Wintred with
Antigonus, but he refused to maintain them any longer, and commanded the
Inhabitants thereabout to spoil the Country of all necessaries, and taking with
them such Provisions as they could carry away, to flee to the mountains, that
so the Romans might perish through want.

Ventidius being now engaged in Syria against the Parthians, sent to Silo to
come to him, and bring Herod along with him with his Forces. But Herod having
sent Silo to him, marched himself with his Soldiers against the Thieves that
lurked in Caves, many of whom he destroyed. In the mean while Ventidius having
in a Battle slain Pacorus and put the Parthians to flight, by Antony's command,
sent Machaeras, with two Legions, and 1000 Horse to assist Herod against
Antigonus; but being come, he would needs (contrary to Herod's mind) go to
Antigonus, pretending thereby he should be able to discover and spy out his
Designs. But Antigonus suspecting him, would not admit him; then repenting he
had not taken Herod's advice, he went and secured himself in Emmaus; and out of
madness at what had happened to him, slew all Jews that came in his way, without
any difference of Friend or Foe. Herod being hereat enraged, resolved to go and
complain to Antony, (who was then in person besieging Samosata upon the River
Euphrates; but Machaeras entreated him to stay, or if he would needs go,
however to leave his brother Joseph with him to carry on the War against
Antigonus; which latter he granted, yet charging his Brother not to venture all
upon a Battle, nor contend with Machaeras. Then hasted he to Antony, taking
with him Auxiliaries both of Horse and Foot. At Antioch he met with many that
desired to go to Antony's Camp, but durst not venture by reason the Barbarians
had beset the ways; but Herod taking the Conduct of them, and beating the
Barbarians once or twice in the way, with great honor and reputation for his
valor, arrived safe at Samosata. Antony to do him honor, sent out a little
Army to meet him, and with great Praises and Embraces received him, and gave
him great respect, being a King of his own making. Shortly after the Town being
yielded up, Antony delivering to Socius the Government of Syria with an Army,
and commending to him the affairs of Herod, went himself back into Egypt.

In the mean while Joseph neglecting his Brothers Counsel, was slain in Judea,
and Antigonus being Master of the Field, and having the dead bodies at his
dispose, was so enraged, that he whipped the dead body of Joseph, although
Pheroras his Brother offered 50 Talents to redeem it. Great Innovations upon
Joseph's death ensued in that place, and in Galilee.

Herod understanding these things, being furnished by Socius with two Legions,
he marched into Galilee, where meeting the enemy, he fought with them, and
worsted them, and took the Castle that some of them fled into. Thence hasting
to Jericho, he there feasted many honorable persons; and after the feast was
ended, and the Guests gone, and himself had retired to his Lodging, the Room in
which they had supped, being now empty of Company, fell down, and did no body
any harm; whereupon he was accounted as one especially owned by God, who had so
wonderfully preserved him Not long after he got five Towns into his hands,
wherein he put to the Sword 2000. Garrison Soldiers, and then went against
Pappus, whom Antigonus had sent into Samaria. Pappus gave him Battle very
boldly, but his Army was overthrown by him, and himself taken Prisoner; and
Herod in revenge of his Brothers death, did great Execution upon them; by which
defeat Antigonus's Interest was quite broken. Next day he cut off Pappus's
Head, and sent it to his Brother Pheroras in revenge of his Brother Joseph's
death, whom it seems Pappus slew. The extremity of the Weather being over,
Herod marches up to Jerusalem and lays siege to it in the third year after he
had been declared King by the Romans, intending to use the same manner of
assault that Pompey had made formerly against the Temple. Socius also came up
to him to Jerusalem, so that both carried on the siege with an army of eleven
Legions, and 6000 horse. The Defendants with great courage made resistance,
doing all that could reasonably be expected from them, though much straightened
for provisions, it being the Sabbatical year. They held out five months, though
there was so great an army besieging them. At length twenty of Herod's stoutest
Soldiers got upon the walls, and then the Centurions of Socius. The outward
part of the Temple being taken, and the lower City, the Jews fled into the
inward part, at length by a general assault, that was taken also, and then all
places were filled with slaughters; the Romans being enraged that they had held
out so long, and the Jews out of malice and particular grudges seeking to
destroy all of the contrary faction, the reverence of the Temple not abating
their rage. Antigonus came and fell at Socius's feet, who insulting over him,
called him Madam Antigona, and put him in prison and set keepers over him.
Herod did what he could to restrain the Soldiers from exercising such extreme
violence, and to keep the profane multitude from violating the Temple, and from
plundring the City, asking Socius, If the Romans intended to make him King of a
wilderness? and added, that he should think the victory worse than an overthrow
if they proceeded to such extremities. At length he was fain to redeem the City
from further plunderings by his own moneys, wherewith he rewarded the Romans,
and sent them away sufficiently enriched.

Socius having offered a Crown of Gold to God departed from Jerusalem, leading
Antigonus with him prisoner to Antony. This disaster befell Jerusalem in the
third month, on the 28th. day of which the Jews were wont to celebrate a solemn
fast in memory of the Roll that was burnt by Jehoiakim, and it was taken on the
same day it had been taken by Pompey several years before. Herod fearing that
if Anthony should carry Antigonus to Rome, he would there obtain favor of the
Senate as being of the Royal race, and procure the Kingdom at their hands, if
not for himself, yet for his children, who never had ill deserved of the
Romans, he procured Antony to dispatch him out of the way, who pretending the
unquietness of the Jews, for his sake caused him to be beheaded at Antioch. And
so the Principality of the Asmonaeans came to an end, after it had stood 126
years, and had been freed from the yoke of Syria 98 years, and Herod a
forreigner was confirmed in the Sovereignty over Judea by the Romans.

Of these miserable times (among others) were spectators, Zachary the Priest,
with his wife Elizabeth, of the relicts of David's stock Heli and Joseph; Anna
also the Prophetess of the Tribe of Asser, and Simeon who was assured from God
he should not see death till he had seen the Lords Christ.

Herod being thus settled in the Kingdom, in the third year after he was made
King by the Romans, advanced those of his own faction, and put to death many of
the contrary party; among others he put to death all those Judges of the great
Sanhedrin, who had accused him of capital crimes before he was King, except
Pollio the Pharisee, and his disciple Sameas whom he highly honored.

During these things the King of the Parthians had courteously treated the
captive High Priest Hircanus, who hearing that Herod was made King, began to
conceive hopes of favor from him, because he had saved his life when he was
called into question, and therefore thought of returning into his own Country.
To which he was at last persuaded, having received courteous invitations from
Herod, who strove to get the poor old man into his clutches; and when he came,
Herod received him with all honor and respect, and gave him the upper hand in
all Assemblies, and calling him Father, lulled him on lest he should suspect
any treachery.

Then he preferred to the High Priesthood an old friend of his one Ananelus,
sending for him from Babylon, a man of obscure parentage, derived from those
Jews that were carried away beyond Euphrates, but of the race of the Priests,
passing by Aristobulus the Grandson of Aristobulus the King, and Brother to his
own wife Mariamne.

Alexandra the Mother of Mariamne being exceedingly enraged at this, and
Mariamne continually following him with entreaties that he would restore the
High Priesthood to her Brother (to whom of right it belonged) whither moved by
these things, or that Antony desiring to see the youth Aristobulus for the same
of his beauty, he feared the Romans might advance him, or however it was, to
stay him at home, he gave him the Priesthood (putting out Ananelus) and excused
his not sending him to Antony by the inclination of the Jews to rebellion.
Perceiving him therefore to be in extraordinary favor with the Jews, and that
Alexandra plotted the escape of her self and her Son into Egypt (where she
expected aid and assistance from Cleopatra) Herod caused him to be duckt to
death as he was bathing himself, in the eighteenth year of his age; and then
feigning to be very sorrowful for his death, he buried him with a most
magnificent funeral, and then made Ananelus High Priest again.

Alexandra certifies Cleopatra by Letters of this horrid treachery of Herod,
who exceedingly pitying her misfortune, urged Antony exceedingly to revenge
the young man's death. Antony when he came into Laodicea, sent for Herod to come
to him to answer the crime objected against him. He therefore leaving the care
of the Kingdom to his Uncle Joseph, gave him private instructions, that if any
thing otherwise than well should befall him, he should put his wife Mariamne to
death, for he so loved her that he would not have any one to enjoy her though
after his death. And then going to Antony he quickly appeased him by gifts and
presents, and made his peace with him, notwithstanding the endeavors of
Cleopatra.

Joseph now governing the Kingdom in Herod's absence, did often converse with
Mariamne, partly upon business, and partly out of civility, and frequently in
discourse with her he labored to assure her how passionately Herod loved her,
which discourse being laughed at by the Ladies (especially Alexandra) he was
transported with such a desire of evidencing the Kings love to her, that he
told her what private command the King had given him, supposing this would
appear to be a certain argument of his love, that he could not endure to live
without her, nor in death to be disjoined from her. But these words were
otherwise interpreted by the Ladies, as savouring of a tyrannical mind. Upon
Herod's return Solome (who bore a grudg to Mariamne because she had upbraided
her with her obscure birth) accuses her husband Joseph to Herod, as if he had
been too familiar with Mariamne. But Mariamne when she had by a solemn oath
purged her self of that crime, Herod told her how much he loved her. She
replied, That it was not the part of a loving husband to command, that if he
should die that his wife should be put to death. Herod supposing this secret
could never have been known if she had not had over much familiarity with
Joseph, he was so transported with rage that he was about to kill her, but he
restrained himself. However he commanded Joseph to be put to death, not so much
as suffering him to come into his presence. He also cast Alexandra into prison.

In the Civil Wars Herod joined with Antony, and was by him desired (having
forces sufficient) to chastise the Arabians, who it seems denied to pay the
Tribute imposed on them, which he did, and though at his first attempt he
miscarried, yet afterward he quite overthrew and brought them under.

Cleopatra having accompanied Antony in his journey to Armenia as far as
Euphrates, in her return came into Judea, where she was nobly entertained by
Herod, and had duly paid her the Tributes of the Countries of Judea and Arabia,
which Antony had given her, though those great gifts exceedingly offended the
people of Rome.

In the seventh year of Herod's reign (reckoning from the death of Antigonus)
Octavius Caesar overcame Antony at Actium. In the beginning of the spring that
year there happened such a dreadful Earthquake in Judea, that 10000 were
destroyed with the fall and ruins of houses.

About this time Hillel a Babylonian of the stock of David flourished at
Jerusalem, of whose disciples Jonathan was one, the son of Vzziah, the famous
Author of the Chaldee Paraphrase, from a difference between this Hillel and
Sameas or Shammai (of whom before) the Pharisees were divided into two Sects,
concerning whom see Jerome, Lib. 3. Com. on Isa. Chapter 8. v. 14. There were great
differences afterward between the Scholars of Hillel and Shammai, and now
began the Titles of Rabban and Rabbi. See Dr. Lightfoot's Harmon. Sect. 8.

Alexandra now hoping that Herod would be punished by Caesar (to whom he was an
enemy, having assisted Antony) counseled her Father Hircanus not any longer to
endure these afflictions of their family, but to go to Malchus King of Arabia
and seek protection from him. The old man was at last prevailed with to send to
the Arabian for this purpose, and employing one Dositheus a friend of his in
this secret business (who had many obligations upon him to be faithful to his
trust) yet he to curry favor with Herod showed him the Letter. The King
thanking him for that kindness to him, having read it, desired him to new-seal
it and carry it to the Arabian, and to receive his answer and bring it to him.
The Arabian wrote back that he was ready to receive him and his family, and the
Jews of that party. Upon this Herod produces these matters, and this
confederacy before the Sanhedrin, and so causes Hircanus to be put to death.

Having thus dispatched Hircanus, he thought then of going to make his peace
with Caesar, therefore committing the care of his Kingdom to Pheroras his
Brother, he disposed of his Mother and his Sister Salome, and several of his
kindred in the Castle of Massada; but Mariamne (who for some differences would
not live with his Mother) and Alexandra he placed in Alexandrion, committing
the custody of them to his Treasurer Joseph, and one Sohemus an Iturean, with
this private instruction, that if any sinister thing should befall him they
should presently put both of them to death, and to the utmost of their power
continue the Kingdom to his children. Having thus ordered matters, he posts to
Rhodes to meet with Caesar there, whither being come he only laid aside his
Crown, but for his other Princely ornaments he altered nothing. Being admitted
into Caesar's presence with great constancy and magnanimity of spirit he
plainly avowed and owned the love and affection he had born to Antony, as also
the succors he had sent him; adding also that he was ready with the same
faithfulness and affection to serve Caesar; which so wrought upon this brave and
magnanimous Prince, that he liked him exceedingly, and confirmed him in the
Kingdom, and took him into intimate friendship with himself.

Afterward as Caesar passed through Syria into Egypt, Herod entertained him
with all Royal magnificence at Ptolemais, and gave plenty of victuals to his
Army: He also presented Caesar with eight hundred Talents, and furnished his
Army in their march to Pelusium, (through places that were barren and wanted
water) both with wine and water, so that he procured from them the reputation
of a noble and Heroic spirit.

Herod upon his return to his own Kingdom found his wife Mariamne very cool in
her affections toward him, so that at all the caresses he made to her she
would deeply sigh (for she had got out of Sohemus by her feminine insinuations
the secret command that Herod had given him concerning her self and her
Mother.) Being by this and the false accusations of his sister Salome, and his
Mother Cypra much incensed against her, he had thoughts of putting her to
death, but news coming then to him of the death of Antony and Cleopatra, and
that Caesar had won Egypt, he hasted down to him and left his family as it was.
Caesar highly honored him, and restored to him part of his Country which
Cleopatra (upon Antony's gift) had seized upon; and further added to his
Kingdom Gadara, Hippon, and Samaria, and by the Seaside Gaza, Anthedon, Joppa,
and the Tower of Straton, which was no small accession to the splendour of his
Kingdom.

Caesar having settled all things in Egypt as he thought fit, marched with his
forces into Syria, whither also Herod attended him as far as Antioch.

After Herod's return from Caesar by the space of one whole year, suspicions
daily increased between him and Mariamne; she often upbraiding him with the
death of her Grandfather Hircanus, and her Brother Aristobulus. Solome
perceiving discontents to grow high between them, suborned a Butler who came
and told the King that he was solicited by Mariamne to deliver unto him a
love-potion, which whatsoever it was, he had by him. Hereupon Herod examined
the most faithful servants of Mariamne by torture, who confessed nothing but
that she was offended at something that Sohemus had declared to her, which when
the King heard, he cried out that Sohemus (who had been ever faithful to him)
would never have revealed those things to her had there not been some more
secret familiarity between them than was fit, and thereupon commanded Sohemus
immediately to be put to death. Then calling a Council of his friends, he there
accused his wife for practicing to poison him; they perceiving the Kings mind
by general consent condemned her, and so she was put to death, the execution
being hastened by Solome's instigation. When she was dead Herod was almost mad
for grief that the deed was done (for he loved her extremely) neither could he
by any delights or feastings divert his Melancholy, but was forced to yield to
his grief, and his passion prevailing upon him, he would often bid his servants
call Mariamne, as though she were alive. So that casting off the care of his
Kingdom, he retired to Samaria (called then Sebaste in honor of Augustus)
which was called by the Greeks (...) from the splendour of his dignity, and the
honor they gave him something greater than humane.

As Herod was thus affected there came a Plague which swept away a great part
both of the Nobility and people, this being interpreted as a judgment from God
for the unjust death of the Queen. Herod's discontents increasing, he at last
fell into a great sickness, so that his Physicians almost despaired of him.
During his sickness Alexandra (now living at Jerusalem) endeavored to get the
two Castles of the City into her own hands, (one of them joined to the Temple,
the other was within the City) and dealt with the Governors of them to that
purpose, that they would deliver them to her for the children of Mariamne, lest
if the King should die they should be seized on by others. But the Governors
being faithful to Herod sent Messengers presently to him to acquaint him with
Alexandra's design, who thereupon ordered she should forthwith be put to death.
Then recovering from his sickness he returned to Jerusalem, but was grown so
cruel that he was ready for the least cause to put any one to death. A
difference arising between Costobarus an Idumean, and his wife Solome the
sister of Herod, she contrary to the custom of the Jews sent him a bill of
divorce, and accused him to Herod, that he with Lysimachus, Antipater, and
Dositheus were practicing some innovations; upon which Herod sent and slew
them, with others that were conceived to be of their party, endeavoring that
none should remain of the kindred of Hircanus, or indeed any other persons of
worth and power that might resist him.

Herod now departed more and more from his Countries custom, violating them
with strange inventions; for he instituted wrestlings every fifth year in
honor of Caesar; for the exhibiting of which he built a Theater in Jerusalem,
and an Amphitheater in the Plain, both of them very sumptuous for the
workmanship, but clean contrary to the Jewish customs. To these he invited all
such as were skilled in wrestling, and that excelled in Music, and playing on
instruments. And hanging his Theater with Trophies, much distasted the people,
as being principled by their Religion against Pictures.

Ten Citizens of Jerusalem about that time conspiring against him were
discovered and put to death.

In the thirteenth year of his reign, that he might be more secure from
Conspiracies, he began to fortify Samaria called Sebaste. Also he built
another fort as a bridle to the Nation, namely the Tower of Straton, and in
Galilee Galalus, in Poraea Esthmonitis, which Castles being so conveniently
placed he by them kept the people in awe.

This year very grievous calamities befell the Country of the Jews: 1. There
was a continual drought, upon which a famine followed, and after that the
plague. Herod upon this to supply the public necessities took and melted all
the gold and silver that was in the Palace, not sparing any thing though of
never so costly workmanship, nay not his own vessels that were for his daily
use. Having made money of all he sent it into Egypt, where at that time under
Caesar Petronius was Governor, who though he had multitudes who at that time
fled to him for the like necessity, yet being Herod's friend he readily gave
his men leave to export corn, assisting them both in the buying, and in the
carriage of it. When the corn was come into Judea Herod very carefully divided
it, first to such who were most in need, and took care that the ancient and
sickly should not want; and by this means he recovered himself into the
affections, and good liking of the people again.

He also provided for his subjects against the sharpness of winter that none
should want clothing, for their cattle being dead, their wool and other things
failed. He helped also the Neighbour-cities of the Syrians with corn, so that
by his providence and bounty he began to be renowned both at home and abroad.

He now marries another Mariamne, esteemed the most beautiful woman of that
age, the daughter of Simon a Priest, whom he preferred to the High Priesthood,
putting out Jesus the Son of Phabes.

After this he employed his time and treasure in sumptuous and royal buildings,
as particularly that of Caesarea formerly called the Tower of Straton, which he
began in the sixteenth year of his reign, and in twelve years finished it. He
built for himself also a Palace in Sion very stately, and a Town about sixteen
furlongs from Jerusalem, which he called Herodion.

He now sends his Sons Alexander and Aristobulus (whom he had by Mariamne the
Asmonaean) to Rome to Caesar, to be there brought up, for whom their lodging
was prepared at Pollio's house the great friend of Herod. Caesar entertained
the young men very courteously, and gave Herod power to make which of his Sons
he pleased heir of his Kingdom.

Augustus gave the Tetrarchy of Zenodorus to Herod, which was seated between
Galilee and Trachona; he made him also one of the Governors of Syria, and
commanded the Governors of that Province to do nothing without his advice.
Herod also begged a Tetrarchy of Caesar for his Brother Pheroras, on whom he
bestowed an hundred Talents out of the revenues of his own Kingdom.

At Panium near the Fountain-heads of Jordan he built a goodly Temple in honor
of Caesar, of white marble. He remitted also to his subjects some part of their
Tribute under color that they should have some ease after the dearth, but
indeed to appease their minds which he saw were offended at such kind of
buildings, which seemed to tend to nothing but the destruction of Religion and
good manners.

To prevent disturbances he forbad private meetings, and too frequent
feastings. He had spies that mingled themselves in all companies; yea he would
sometimes go himself disguised among the people to hear what they said of him
and his Government. The disaffected to him he took a course to punish, and the
rest he bound unto him by an oath which he exacted of them.

After this in the eighteenth year of his reign, taking down (at least for the
most part) the old Temple at Jerusalem, (as Josephus reports, Lib. 14. Chapter 14.)
he built another much more stately and magnificent, having provided very great
white stones See Mark 13.1.
, (whereof some were 25 cubits long, twelve broad, and eight in height) and
other materials for the work in the space of two years. He began to build it
forty six years before the first Passover of the Ministry of Christ, see Job.
2.20. where we may read the words, forty and six years (reckoning to this time)
has this Temple been built. The building the Temple under Zerubbabel began in
the first year of the Monarchy of Cyrus, and was after twenty years time
finished in the sixth year of Darius the Son of Histaspis. But this magnificent
building of Herod's was finished in nine years and an half.

The inward Temple containing the Holy and Holy of Holies was finished in a
year and an half. In all which time (it is reported) that it never rained in the
daytime but only in the nights. Then in the eight years following the Porches,
the Ranges, and the rest of the building about the Temple were all finished. He
celebrated the Dedication of the Temple on his own birthday, sacrificing three
hundred Oxen to the great joy of the people.

These things done, Herod sets sail for Italy to salute Caesar, and see his
Sons, and passing by Greece was not only present but made Judge at the Olympic
Exercises, and bestowing some Annual revenue upon them (that they might be the
more splendid) for this bounty he is declared perpetual Judge of those
Exercises. Coming to Rome, Caesar courteously received him, and delivered to
him his Sons well educated and instructed in all the Liberal Arts and Sciences.
Being returned home with his Sons Alexander and Aristobulus, they being grown
to man's estate he provided them wives; for Alexander, Bernice the daughter of
Salome; for Aristobulus, Glaphira the daughter of Archelaus King of the
Cappadocians. These young men gained the love and affection of the people
exceedingly, but Salome and her followers feared they would sometime or other
revenge their Mothers death, and therefore she and Pheroras, Herod's Brother
practiced against them, infusing into their father suspicion of them, as if
they were not well affected toward him, but exclaimed greatly against the
Authors of their Mothers death. Herod troubled hereat called to Court Antipater
his eldest Son, begotten by him when he was a private man (whom he had banished
the City in favor of these two Sons, only giving him liberty to come thither
on Festival days) that setting him up against them he might make them more
careful of their behavior. But they were thereby the more incensed, and
Antipater (making use of his time) got more and more into his Fathers
affections, and at his entreaty brought to Court also his mother Doris, whom
(being a woman of mean parentage Herod put away when he married Mariamne.)

Herod hearing that Agrippa, Caesar's great friend, and Son-in-law, (having
married Julia his daughter) was come into Asia, he went to him and invited him
into Judea, and entertained him magnificently in all the Cities and Castles he
had newly built, showing him his buildings, and presenting him and his friends
with all the delights he could. Then conducting him to Jerusalem, all the
Citizens met him in their best habit with joyful acclamations. Agrippa having
sacrificed an Hecatomb to God, feasted the people; and the winter drawing on he
made have to sail to Ionia. As soon as it was spring Herod hearing that Agrippa
was going with an Army to Bosphorus, made have to go to him, he overtook him at
Sinope a City in Pontus, bringing some Auxiliaries with him for his service.
Agrippa embraced him with singular affection, and made him partaker of his
Counsels. And afterward in their return Agrippa was ready to gratify Herod in
any thing, and at his entreaty relieved the necessities of many that made use
of his Intercession. He procured for the Jews that dwelt in Jonia a
^onfirmation of the privileges formerly granted them (which the Grecians would
not suffer them to enjoy) and that none should molest them for living after
their Countries Laws. Then with mutual embraces they took their leaves each of
other. Herod in few days arrived at Caesarea, and thence came to Jerusalem,
where calling the people together, he gave them an account of his journey, and
how he had procured liberty for the Ionian Jews, and to ingratiate himself the
more with them, he declared he was willing to remit unto them the fourth part
of their Tribute. The people exceedingly pleased herewith wished all happiness
to the King.

Agrippa after ten years Government in Asia, being now to return to Rome, Herod
went again to salute him, and take leave of him, and taking (of all his Sons)
only Antipater with him, he delivered him to Agrippa to be brought to Caesar
that he might by his means obtain the Emperor's favor. Antipater accordingly
was much honored at Rome, being commended to several friends and great persons
by his Fathers Letters. From thence he was not wanting by his Letters to whet
his Fathers displeasure against his Brothers the Sons of Mariamne, and seemed
very sollicitous of his Fathers safety, though aiming at the succession thereby.

Herod being by these artifices exceedingly incensed against his two Sons
Alexander and Aristobulus, sailed with them to Rome to accuse them before
Caesar, and carried with him Nicholas Damascene in the same Ship, with whom he
studied Philosophy. Augustus being gone to Aquileia, thither Herod went to him,
and the young men being there accused before Caesar of an intention to poison
their Father, they so cleared themselves and by their tears and other evidences
so manifested their innocence, that Caesar reconciled them to their Father.
Then after thanks returned to the Emperor, they departed and Antipater with
them, feigning himself glad that they were received again into favor.

Herod having given three hundred Talents to Caesar, and been very liberal (as
his custom was in all places) to the people of Rome, Caesar bestowed on him
half the profits of the Mines of Cyprus, and gave him liberty to make which of
his Sons he pleased his Successor; or if he would, to distribute his Kingdom
among them all; which Herod presently would have done, but Caesar would not
allow that he should part with the Government during his life. In Herod's
absence the Inhabitants of Trachonitis (a considerable part of his Kingdom)
rebelled, but were reduced again to obedience by his Captains. But some of them
leaving their Country, fled into Arabia Nabataea, where they were entertained
by Syllaeus the Administrator of the Kingdom (who was an enemy to Herod,
because he denied him his Sister Salome to Wife) and he granted them a place
well fortified.

Herod being returned into Judea, he called the Chief men of the Jews together,
and told them what had passed in his late Voyage, and declared unto them, that
his Sons should reign after him, first Antipater, then Alexander, and then
Aristobulus, whom he had by Mariamne. Caesarea Stratonis was now finished in
the 28th. year of his reign; for the Dedication of which, there were very
solemn, and most pompous Preparations, Musicians, and Wrestlers, and
Sword-Players, and Wild Beasts, and whatever was in account of that kind either
at Rome, or in other Nations, being now brought thither. These sports were
consecrated to Caesar, and to be renewed every fifth year. The day he spent in
Sports, and the night in Banquets and Revellings, and so between both he spent
his time very well.

After this, he began to build another Town in a Field called Capharsala, which
after his Fathers name he called Antipatris, and a Castle, which after his
Mothers name he called Cyprus. In honor also of his dead Brother he built a
fair Town which he called Phasaelus in the valley of Jericho, from whence the
Country thereabouts is called Phasaelis. Having wasted his wealth by his
extravagant expenses, and now wanting money, after the example of John
Hircanus, by night without the knowledge of the people, he opened David's
Sepulcher, in which he found no money, but store of costly attire, and
Ornaments of Gold, which he took away. After this 'twas observed, that his
Family was grievously afflicted, nothing being heard among them but Broils and
Accusations one of another.

As for Antipater, he accused and calumniated his Brother Alexander, insomuch
that his Father committed him to Prison. Those of Trachonitis (who had fled to
Syllaeus) being increased in number, infested not only Judea, but Coelosyria
also, with Inrodes and Incursions. Syllaeus is hereupon complained of by Herod
to Saturnius and Voluminous, Presidents of Syria. Herod requires the 60 Talents
which he had lent Obodas King of Arabia under Syllaeus's Security; and demands
also, That the Plunderers protected by him should be delivered up. The matter
being debated before the Presidents, they determined, that Herod's demands were
reasonable, and that Syllaeus should perform them. Syllaeus unwilling to stand
this their Determination, went to Rome. The Presidents therefore gave Herod
leave to enter Arabia with an Army, and to prosecute those obstinate people
there; which he accordingly did, and suddenly took the Castle which those
Plunderers kept. But an Arabian Captain with his forces coming to their aid,
Herod joins Battle with him and overthrows him; the Captain himself being
slain, and his forces routed. But Letters were speeded to Rome to Syllaeus,
which represented things far otherwise, and aggravated every thing in so odious
a manner, that Caesar by those Lies, and such false representations as Syllaeus
had made unto him, was so incensed against Herod, that he wrote to him menacing
Letters, because he had presumed to march with an Army out of his own Kingdom,
and thrice denied his Ambassadors audience, that were sent by him to acquaint
him with the true State of things. The Rebels and Arabians taking hold of this
occasion, did him much mischief, which he was glad to put up for the present,
for fear of further provoking Caesar, but sent Nicholas Damascenus to Rome to
plead his cause, who so laid open Syllaeus's Forgeries, and how he had
circumvented the Emperor in the cause of Herod, that Caesar condemned Syllaeus,
remanding him again into the Province, that when he had satisfied the Debt
(before mentioned) he might be punished, and was perfectly reconciled to Herod.

Whilst Herod was thus out with Caesar, the former discords in his Family were
exceedingly heightened by the Artifices of Eurichus a Lacedemonian, who winding
himself into Alexanders acquaintance, betrayed him first to Antipater, and then
to Herod himself. Herod making inquiry into his Sons actions, put to death by
the vehemence of Tortures, many both of his own and his Sons Friends. Alexander
being examined, denied all Accusations, except that he intended with his Wife
to fly to Archelaus King of Cappadocia her Father.

Herod sends Letters to Caesar complaining of his Sons, and desires his Imperial
Majesty to give him direction what to do in that difficult affair. The Emperor
returns answer, That he should call a Council at Beritus, and join with them
the Presidents of Syria, and Archelaus King of Cappadocia, and other Noble men
his Friends; and that they should together determine concerning that matter.
Herod hereupon convened all those Caesar had appointed, (except only Archelaus)
to Berytus, and in an Assembly of 150 Men, declaimed most furiously against his
Sons, not producing any Proof at all, more than that they intended to fly; and
not suffering them to be present to answer for themselves. Saturninus who had
been Consul, and had run through all honors, gave his opinion, that the Sons
of Herod were to be condemned, but not to be put to death; and his three Sons
were of the same opinion. But Voluminous declared, that they ought to be
punished with death, whose opinion the major part followed. Then the King took
his Sons along with him to Tire, where an old Soldier named Tyro, smartly
reprehended him for the severity intended toward his Sons. Alexander and
Aristobulus being led to Sebaste, were there strangled by their Fathers
command, and their bodies buried in the Castle Alexandrion, where Alexander
their Grandfather by their Mothers side, and many others of their Progenitors
were buried.

Antipater, after the death of his Brothers, began now to plot the Destruction
of his Father, and drew Pheroras the Brother of Herod to his side, and some of
the Kings Women that were most addicted to the Sect of the Pharisees, but not
Salome who constantly adhered to her Brother Herod. The Pharisees had refused
to swear fealty to the King, who being for this fined; the Wife of Pheroras
paid their Fine, to whom in requital (they being accounted wise to know things
to come) they foretold, that the Kingdom should be taken from Herod and his
Children, and should be transferred on her, and that her Husband, and their
Children. These things Salome made known to Herod, and they had solicited and
corrupted many of his Courtiers with Bribes; in which fault Herod having taken
some of the Pharisees, he put them to death, and some others also whom he found
had conspired with them. Then he urged Pheroras to put away his Wife, which he
refusing to do, he forbad Antipater Pheroras's company.

Antipater, that he might remove all suspicion of his Father from him, procured
by his Friends at Rome to be sent for thither by Caesar. He accordingly going,
Herod sent by him great Presents and his Will, in which he declared, that
Antipater should be King; but if he died, then Herod his Son by Mariamne
daughter of Simon the High Priest.

Pheroras being banished into his Treachery, there fell sick; Herod visits him,
and seeks help for him, but he died within a few days after, whose body was
brought to Jerusalem, and there honorably buried by Herod.

Pheroras dying in this sickness, after his death his Wife was accused as if
she had poisoned him. Herod inquiring into this matter, by little and little
began to find out a treasonable Conspiracy of his Son Antipater against
himself; namely, how that he going to Rome had delivered a deadly poison to
Pheroras that was sent by Antiphilus (one of his Friends) out of Egypt, to be
given to the King in his absence, and that it was kept by Pheroras his Wife:
She being examined, confessed the same, that it was committed to her charge;
but added also how that her husband when sick, and when Herod came so kindly to
visit him, was so overcome with his love, that he forbad her to give it him.
Among the accessaries of this Conspiracy was Herod's own Wife, the daughter of
the High Priest. Hereupon Herod put her away (which was a great favor; he put
others to death for a lesser matter) and deposed her Father from the
Priesthood, and preferred Matthias the Son of Theophilus to his place, and put
her Son Herod out of his Will, whom he had appointed his Successor, and put
Doris also Antipaters Mother out of the Court, taking her Jewels from her. Not
long after Bathillus the freed man of Antipater coming from Rome, being
tortured, confessed, that he had brought with him a poison to deliver to
Pheroras, wherewith the King might be certainly and speedily dispatched, in
case the other should fail.

Antipater got some to write from Rome to his Father how Archelaus and Philip
(Herod's two younger Sons that were at Rome to study) often rubbed up the Sore of
the Murder of Alexander and Aristobulus, pitying the misfortune of their
innocent Brethren; and he when he wrote to his Father about them, as it were
excusing them, would impute their speeches to their age.

During these things JESUS CHRIST the Son of God is born two years after the
Wise men came to Herod to Jerusalem, and there are taught, that the Birthplace
of Christ was at Bethlehem; they return no more to Herod, being so directed by
God in a Dream. Herod being thus disappointed, killed all the Children that
were at Bethlehem, and in all the Coasts thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time of the Stars being first seen in the East, which he had
learned from the Magi. Among which Children it is said, that a young Son of
Herod's was one, which when Augustus heard of, he said, 'Twas better to be
Herod's Hogg than his Son; for under pretense of Religion, he would not touch an
Hogg, or eat Swines flesh, but made it no great difficulty to destroy his own
Children. See Macrob. lib. 2. chapter 4.

Antipater all this while hears nothing of the death of Pheroras, or of those
things that were ready to be alleged against him, but returns to Jerusalem
ignorant of all these Passages. When he came thither, he entered the Palace in
his Purple Garment which he was wont to wear, but the Guards at the Gates
suffered none of his followers to enter in with him. When he addressed himself
to his Father, he thrust him away from him with indignation, reproaching him
with the murder of his Brethren, and his intention to poison his Father. It
happened that Quintillius Varus President of Syria was now at Jerusalem. The next
day therefore the King and Varus sitting in Judgment, Antipater was brought
before them, and being not able to purge himself, all things being made so
clear and evident, (and the poison it self produced, which being give to a
condemned man, dispatched him immediately) hereupon he was committed to Prison;
and Herod signified to Caesar by Letters all these matters, and also sent
Ambassadors to him, who by word of mouth, might acquaint him more fully with
this cursed Treason of Antipater.

Herod now falls sick, and in his sickness was exceeding impatient, but his
Distemper was much increased by this accident. Judas the Son of Sariphaeus, and
Matthias the Son of Margalothus (two of the most learned men among the Jews,
and the best Interpreters of their Law.) hearing that the Kings sickness was
incurable, persuaded some young men that were their Scholars, to throw down the
Golden Eagle that was set up by Herod over the great Gate of the Temple. The
young men accordingly went up at Noonday, and with Axes hewed down the Eagle,
a great multitude beholding it. Immediately, about forty of these young men
were taken by the Captain of the Castle, and (together with their Masters)
brought before Herod, where they confidently defending what they had done; he
calling the Rulers of the Jews together, took away the High Priesthood from
Matthias (as not altogether a stranger to this business) and put Joazar into
his place, the Brother of his Wife Mariamne the Daughter of Simon the High
Priest. But he burned alive the other Matthias (that was a Promoter of this
Sedition) and his Companions.

Then Herod's disease began to grow worse; for he burned with an inward heat, he
was vexed with a ravenous and insatiable Appetite; he was tortured with Ulcers
in his Bowels, and pains of the Cholick; His Feet swelled and his Thighs; his
Body rotted, and was full of crawling Worms; to all which, he was troubled with
Convulsions, and difficulty of breathing. He used all means possible for his
Recovery, and was carried to the hot Baths beyond Jordan: Thence he returned to
Jericho. Perceiving now that he must die, and supposing that the Jews would
much rejoice in his death, by Proclamation he calls together from every place
to Jericho, some of the most Noble of the Jews, and shuts up those of them that
came in the Hippodrome, giving command to his Sister Salome, and her husband
Alexas, that as soon as he was dead, they should cause all those Jews to be
killed, that the people might have cause of Lamentation at his death, which
otherwise he thought they would rejoice at. Before his death he received
Letters from Caesar, that he might do with his Son Antipater as he pleased.
Being afresh tormented with his distemper, he went to stab himself, but was
prevented by those about him.

Antipater thinking his Father had been dead, began to tamper with his Keeper
about his Liberty, that he might seize upon the Kingdom. But his Keeper went
and revealed it to Herod, who was thereupon so enraged, that he commanded one
of the Guard to go instantly and kill him, and that he should be buried in the
Castle of Hircanion without any honor; which was done accordingly five days
before Herod died. To such an end came he who had wrought the ruin of his
Brethren, and had made such sad broils in his Fathers house.

Herod now makes a new Will, in which he leaves the Kingdom to Archelaus (his
eldest Son by his second wife Mariamne). Herod Antipas he makes Tetrarch of
Galilee and Petrea, or the Country beyond Jordan; Philip he makes Tetrarch of
Trachonitis, Gaulonitis, Batanea (that is the Land called Basan) and Paneada,
nearer the heads of Jordan. To Salome his Sister he gave Jamnia, Azotus, and
Phasaelis, and fifty thousand drachms; to several of his Kindred he gave money
and yearly Pensions; and to Caesar and Livia his Wife he left great Legacies.

Herod having thus ordered matters five days after he had put Antipater to
death he died himself about the 25th. of our November, having enjoyed the
Kingdom 34 years from his Conquest over Antigonus, but 37 years from the time
he was first made King by the Romans, and about the 70 year of his age. Solome
and Alexas before the death of the King was known, discharged those Nobles that
were shut up in the Hippodrome.

Then was the Kings death declared, and all the Soldiers called into the
Theater at Jericho, and there they first read the Kings Letters to the
Soldiers, in which giving them thanks for their fidelity and love to him, he
desires them, that they would do the like for his Son Archelaus, whom he had
appointed his Successor in the Kingdom. Then the Kings Testament was read; then
was there a shout for joy that Archelaus was King; the people praying God to
prosper him.

A Royal Funeral was prepared by Archelaus for his Father: The Body was carried
in Funeral Pomp from Jericho to the Castle Herodion (where he himself had
appointed it to be buried) they going each day but Eight Furlongs, or an
Italian Mile. It was carried in a Golden Litter set with precious Stones,
Bearing-Cloth of Purple. The Body also was clothed with Purple, and a Diadem
on his head, and a Scepter in his right hand, and over his head hung a Crown of
Gold. His Son and Kindred marched about the Litter; then followed the Soldiers
marshalled according to their several Nations; then 500 Servants bearing
Perfumes.

The Ceremony of the Funeral being ended, Archelaus coming to Jerusalem,
solemnized a Mourning for his Father seven days, according to the Jewish
Custom, and at the end of the Mourning made a Funeral Banquet to the multitude.
After this, going up to the Temple, and there sitting on a Golden Throne, he
spoke very graciously to the people, but withal said, He would not take upon
him the name of King, till Caesar had confirmed his Fathers Testament.

FINIS.
Some BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Thomas Simmons at the Princes-Arms in
Ludgate Street.
1. THE Lives of sundry Eminent Persons in this latter Age, in two Parts: I. Of
Divines, viz. Mr. Hugh Broughton, Mr. Rob. Boid, Dr. ^wiss, Mr. Tho. Wilson,
Dr. Sam. Bolton, Mr. Richard Vines, Mr. Richard Blackerby, Mr. Ralph Robinson,
Mr. John Janeway* Mr. John Machia, Dr. Sam. Winter, Mr. Tho. Tregoss, Mr. Rich.
Mather, Mr. Joseph Allein, Dr. Staunton, Mr. Sam. Fairclough, Mr. Tho.
Wadsworth, Mr. O. Stockton, and Mr. Tho. Gouge. To which are added some
remarkable passages in the Lives and Deaths of diverse Eminent Divines in the
Church of Scotland, viz. Mr. John Scringer, Mr. Rob. Blair, Mr. Andr. Steward,
Mr. John Welsh, Mr. Hugh Kennedy, Mr. Rob. Bruce, Mr. Davidson, and Mr. Patr.
Simpson. Together with an account of several Providence strange and
extraordinary. II. Of Nobility and Gentry of both Sexes, viz. Sir Phil. Sidney,
Sir Charles Coot, Mr. John Lamot, Sir N. Bernardiston, Mr. John Row, Sir Mat.
Hale, Mrs. Mary Gunter, Lady Alice Lucy, Lady Mary Vere, Mrs. Kath. Clark,
Countess of Warwick, Mrs. Marg. Baxter, Lady Armine, Lady Langham, and Countess
of Suffolk, by Samuel Clark, sometimes Pastor of Bennet-Fink, London. To which
is added the Life of the Author. In Folio.

2. Church History of the Government of Bishops and their Councils,
abbreviated, including the chief part of the Government of Christian Princes
and Popes, and a true account of the most troubling Controversies and Heresies
till the Reformation. By Richard Baxter a Hater of false History. In Quarto.

3. A Treatise of Episcopacy confuting by Scripture, Reason, and the Churches
Testimony, that sort of Diocesan Churches, Prelacy and Government which casts
out the Primitive Church Species, Episcopacy, Ministry and Discipline, and
confounds the Christian World by corruption, Usurpation, Schism and
Persecution. Meditated in the year 1640, when the Et caetera Oath was imposed;
written 1671, and cast by. Published 1680 by the importunity of our Superiors,
who demand the Reasons of our Nonconformity. By Rich. Baxter. In Quarto.

4. Forgetfulness of God the great Plague of man's heart, and Consideration of
the principal means to cure it. By W.D. M.A. and once fellow of Kings Col.
Cambridge.

5. Londinum Triumphans, or an Historical Account of the grand influence the
Actions of the City of London have had upon the affairs of the Nation for many
ages past. Showing the antiquities, honor, glory and renown of this famous
City; the grounds of her rights, privileges and franchises, the foundation of
her Charter, the improbability of its forfeiture or seizure; the power and
strength of the Citizens, and the several contests that have been betwixt the
Magistracy and the Commonalty. Collected from the most authentic Authors, and
illustrated with variety of remarks worthy the perusal of every Citizen. By
Will. Gough, Gent. In Octavo.

6. The five days Debate at Cicero's house in Tusculum, 1. Upon Comforts
against Death: 2. Patience under pain. 3. The cure of Discontent. 4. The
Government of the Passions. 5. The chief end of man. Between Master and
Sophister. In Oct.

7. The Samaritan, showing that many and unnecessary Impositions are not the
oil that must heal the Church; together with the way or means to do it. By a
Country-Gentleman, who goes to Common Prayer, and not to Meetings. In Octavo.

8. A Private Psalter, or Manual of Devotion, composed by a Minister under the
apprehension of the Stone; which may serve for all Christians, with the
omission of any such petition which is peculiar or not suitable, and the
addition of others as are suitable to every ones proper condition. In Octavo.

9. Magna Charta made in the ninth year of King Henry the Third, and confirmed
by King Edward the First in the 28th. year of his Reign. With some short but
necessary observations from the L. Chief Justice Cook's Comments upon it.
Faithfully translated for the benefit of those that do not understand the
Latin. By Edw. Cook of the Middle Temple, Esquire In Octavo.

10. The Plea of the Children of Believing Parents, for their interest in
Abraham's Covenant, their right to Church Membership with their Parents, and
consequently their title to Baptism. The cause of publishing this Discourse
after so many Learned men have labored in this Province is declared in the
Preface to the Reader. By Giles Firmin. In Octavo.

11. The Traveller's Guide, and the Countries safety: Being a Declaration of
the Laws of England against Highway men, or Robbers upon the Road; what is
necessary and requisite to be done by such persons as are robbed in order to
the recovering of their damages, against whom they are to bring their action,
and the manner how it ought to be brought. Illustrated with variety of
Law-Cases, Historical Remarks, Customs, Usages, Antiquities and Authentic
Authorities. In Twelves.

12. The Right Honorable Portrayed, or the Vizard taken off pretenders, with
persuasive reasons to allure the will, and reduce men's actions to obtain the
Title, as also a set boundary to the Honor of Saints departed. By Samuel
Gilbert. In 12 s.

13. De Analogia, sive Art Latinae Linguae Commentariolus, in quo omnia, etiam
reconditioris Grammaticae, Elementa, ratione nova tractantur, and ad
brevissimos Canones rediguntur. In usum Provectioris adolescentiae. Opera
Wilhelmi Baxteri, Philistoris. In Octavo.

14. A Modest Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Irenicum. By a Learned Pen. In
Octavo.

15. A Peaceable Resolution of Conscience, touching our present Impositions,
wherein Loyalty and Obedience are proposed and settled upon their true
foundation in Scripture, Reason, and the Constitution of this Kingdom against
all resistance of the present Powers; and for compliance with the Laws so far
as may be in order to union. With a Draught or Specimen of a Bill for
Accommodation. In Octavo.

16. Patriarcha non Monarcha: The Patriarch Unmonarch'd; being Observations on
a late Treatise, and diverse other Miscellanies, Published under the name of Sir
Rob. Filmer Baronet: In which the falseness of those opinions that would make
Monarchy Jure Divino are laid down, and the true Principles of Government and
Property (especially in our Kingdom) asserted. By a Lover of Truth and of his
Country. In Octavo.

17. Moral Prognostications: (1) What shall befall the Churches on Earth till
their concord, by the restitution of their Primitive purity, simplicity and
charity: (2) How that restitution is like to be made (if ever) and what shall
befall them thenceforth unto the end, in that Golden Age of Love. Written by
Rich. Baxter, when by the Kings Commission we in vain treated for Concord,
1661, and now published 1680. In Quarto.

18. The Lively Effigies of the Reverend Mr. Matthew Pool, so well performed as
to represent his true Idea, to all that knew him, or had a veneration for him;
designed on purpose to befriend those that would prefix it to his Synopsis
Criticorum. Price 6 d.

19. The Lively Effigies of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, who was barbarously
murdered by the Papist, 1678. Price 6 d.

20. The Genealogy of the Kings of England from William the Conqueror to his
present Majesty King Charles the Second, with their Achievements truly
Blazoned, all well Engraven upon a large Broadside.

21. The History of the Successions of the Kings of England from Canutus the
first Monarch, giving a brief account of their Birth, Coronation, length of
Reign, manner of their death and burials, with their Queens and Children, in
folio. Price stitcht 1 s. -- 6 d.

22. Memorabilia, or the most remarkable Passages and Counsels collected out of
the several Declarations and Speeches that have been made by the King, his Lord
Chancellors and Keepers, and the Speakers of the Honorable House of Commons in
Parliament since his Majesty's happy Restoration, Anno 1666, till the end of
the last Parliament 1680; reduced under four heads, viz. of the Protestant
Religion: 2. Of Popery: 3. Of Liberty and Property, etc. 4. Of Parliaments. By
Edward Cook of the Inner Temple, Esquire Humbly Dedicated to the Grand Council or
Senate of this Kingdom. In Folio. Price stitcht 3 s.

23. An Historical Account of the wonderful Cures wrought by Scarbrough Spaw,
on several Persons afflicted with the Scurvy, Stone, Jaundice, Dropsy* etc.
Together with an Account of many strange Rarities of Nature found at
Scarbrough. By Will. Simpson, Med. D. In Twelves, Price 1 s.


