A DISCOURSE, WHEREIN The Interest of the PATIENT in Reference to PHYSIC and
PHYSICIANS is soberly debated.

Many ABUSES of the APOTHECARIES in the Preparing their MEDICINES are detected,
and Their Unfitness for Practice Discovered.

Together with The Reasons and Advantages of Physicians preparing their own
Medicines.

(...).

Max. Tyr. Dissert. X. LONDON, Printed for C. R. MDCLXIX.

IMPRIMATUR,

Sam. Parker, R. Domino ac Domino Gilberto Archi-Episcopo Cantuariensi a Sacris
Domesticis.
Ex Edib. Lambeth, Novem. 2. 1668.
The Preface To the Reader.
IT being usual for Authors in Prefaces to render an account of the occasion
which gave Birth to their writings, and to acquaint the Reader with the design
or scope of their Discourses, I thought it convenient to continue a custom
approved by many Illustrious examples.

Let me therefore give thee to understand, that it is not desire of applause
has engaged me in this Controversy. The care I have taken to conceal my Name
will, I suppose, free me from such suspicion; but besides, let me assure thee I
am too far from promising my self any addition to my Repute from this scrible,
That I do rather apprehend it will lessen my Esteem with many of those
excellent Persons, who are now pleased to Honor me with their Friendship: and
do expect from me Discourses very different from those I here present thee.
Which considerations surely will gain me credit, when I affirm That no Motive
besides that of public advantage could ever have prevailed upon me, to
exchange my darling Studies of Experimental Philosophy, and Physic (most
pleasing and profitable employments) for barren Controversy, which I ever
declined. And among all, if I had consulted my own quiet or Interest; I should
have avoided this wherein I have now engaged; which may occasion me much
trouble, but cannot possibly bring me any advantage, besides that satisfaction
which is always the result of Actions well intended. Which pleasure I must
confess will be much heightened, if this endeavor of mine meets with good
entertainment and work the desired Effect; which that it may have, I will
particularly address my self to all the Persons concerned with me in this
debate: Who are the People or Patients, and Physicians.

This Discourse is chiefly intended for the First, it being they* who are most
highly injured by the unwarrantable practices of those we have therein accused;
for although many understanding Persons among the People are sufficiently
sensible of the abuses we have manifested; and that it is of absolute necessity
some reformation be made: yet all are not thus persuaded, for we may daily
observe, that many who are less discerning, being deceived by an imaginary
good, covet their own ruin; and unless they be given to understand which is
the evil and which the good, by persons in whom they have reason to confide,
they must necessarily run much hazard. I have here endeavored to undeceive
them, which I should despair of, did I only foresee inconveniences a far off
(the Vulgar being led by sense, and not by probable conjectures) but since they
do now actually labor under many, and those obvious inconveniences, how short
soever their sight be, the sense of feeling being no less acute in them, than
in others I persuade my self they will readily give their assent to those
Truths I have here discovered. Now there are many things whereof most
Apothecaries are highly guilty, as carelessness, Unskillfulness, Unfaithfulness
on the one hand, and Intrusion into the Physicians Employment (I mean the
Practice of Physic) on the other: on all which accounts as I have fully
demonstrated, they are exceedingly injurious to the Public. In order to the
prevention of such unpardonable abuses of the People I have made this Proposal,
That Physicians prepare and dispense their own Medicines; and at large showed
That the advantages of such a Constitution will be many and great. For it will
much abate the charge and expense of Physic, and the Medicines themselves will
be more safe and effectual than now they are, interest obliging Physicians to
have their Physic as good as they can contrive or prepare; and certainly such
a State of Physic of all other is most desirable, wherein no man having the
Interest can have the Power, nor any having the Power can have the Interest to
prepare Medicines unfaithfully: wherein bad men shall be made good, and those
that are good never be tempted to become dishonest. And in that Constitution of
Pharmacy for which we contend, suppose men be never so bad; yet nevertheless
their wickedness cannot have any ill influence on Physic, as is manifested at
large in this following Discourse: so that if the sick have regard, either to
profit or safety, they will address themselves to those Persons who supply them
with the best Remedies, and ^at cheapest Rates.

And as for Physicians, they must necessarily put their affairs into some such
Method, as this we have commended; If they have any concern for their Patients,
or intend to improve Pharmacy it self. For as it has been well observed, if we
depend only upon that we read in Books, we shall never promote this Art beyond
its present limits; and if Physicians in former times had not been knowing in
Simples, examined their Virtues, and Tempers, enquired into their Effects, and
mixed them with their own hands, there had been no such Science as Physic. Now
according to the Ancient Axiom, Ex quibus Constamus, ex iisdem Nutrimur, Those
things which gave a being to this Noble faculty must help to make it complete;
toward which as nothing can contribute more than the improvement of Pharmacy:
so neither can any thing promote that, more than Physicians taking it into
their Management. But besides all this, it is fit that they who exercise
themselves in the Practice of Physic, be satisfied their Medicines are good;
whereby their Mind will be free, and without any clog: which would add more
difficulties and dangers to a thing by it self hard and dangerous.

These and other Considerations mentioned and insisted on in the following
Discourse will I assure my self, persuade all Physicians who have respect to
the good and benefit of their Patients, Honor of their mrofession, or own
Reputation, to put Pharmacy into other hands, and into better Methods, than
those wherein at present it is; Whereby they who now dishonor it (I mean the
Apothecaries) will either be reduced to a sense and performance of their Duty,
or sufficiently punished. For Notwithstanding that they do now Unanimously
resolve with associated endeavors to Oppose all Reformation; yet I am
persuaded that if Physicians take some such courses as those I have mentioned,
the event will be the same with that of Mutinies. Where if the Commander be
resolute he makes some of the Mutineers exemplary, and threatens others; of
fierce, that they were in general, each one out of his particular Fear becomes
obedient: So how insolent soever the Apothecaries now are when they see their
Punishment near and certain, not trusting to one another, they will hasten all
to Obedience; especially if good encouragement be given to those who return to
their Duty, and become Reformadoes.

And now (to hasten to a Conclusion) if any fancy, we have too rudely attaqued
the Apothecaries, let them consider (and then certainly they will excuse us)
that what we have done is only in our own defense; for we had never interrupted
their quiet, could they have contained themselves within due limits and not
invaded our Profession. So that if the Case be stated rightly, it will appear
most evident, that we are on the Defensive part, They the Aggressors; and that
we cannot justly be blamed, if in our own Defense we offend them: or if being
forced, we take violent Courses, whose End yet is not (as may be pretended)
Destruction and confusion, but Order and redress.

Nothing now remains but that I Apologize for the defects of the ensuing
Discourse. It may be objected, that the Method is not exact, the expression
rude, the Style unpolished and abrupt, the parts not closly cemented by handsome
and suitable Transitions. All which I readily acknowledge: But withal Desire
the Readers to consider that this Book was begun and finished within the space
of six or eight days at the most; and even then I was not free from diversions
of many kinds: so that being penned in so short a time, the subject it self
unpleasant, and the writer various^^ distracted, it is scarcely possible (...)
should be complete in Method or Expression. Besides, this Discourse was not
calculated for Scholars, but for the Vulgar to whose capacity it is adapted;
for if I had intended to instruct the former, I would have taken more time and
pains, digested the matter better, disposed it more advantageonsly, and
endeavored to cloth it in more handsome expressions.

I must not here forget to acknowledge, that I have borrowed several passages
from the judicious Author of a late excellent Discourse concerning the State of
Physic, and the regulation of its Practice. I suppose it will be easily
imagined that I could have spoken the same things in other words; but my
respect for that Worthy Person disposes me to believe they will sound better
and be more effectual in his own language; although I must crave his pardon for
transposing some, and accommodating others to a proposal, he did not then think
fit to mention.

For Faults in Printing etc. the Printer must be responsible; and particularly
for that formal beginning of the 177. Page, which was never so intended by the
Author.

This is all with which I thought fit to acquaint thee, I shall therefore now
end with this request. That thou determine nothing in the behalf, or to the
prejudice of this performance, till thou have impartially examined all that is
contained therein; and then if it appear that I have spoken truth, I expect it
should be owned and promoted by thee: if I be in any thing mistaken I am
content to hear of it, and ready to retract whatsoever is not consonant to
Truth and Reason.

A DISCOURSE WHEREIN The Interest of the Patient in reference to Physic and
Physicians is soberly Debated, etc.
IN all Ages, and among all Nations, Health has obtained the repute of being
the greatest among Earthly felicities, in the absence whereof we cannot relish
any of those numerous enjoyments which the bountiful Creator has plentifully
bestowed on us; so that the most sublime Ancient Philosophers, who excluded all
other External good from being necessary to the well-being of Man, placing
happiness only in those things whereof we cannot be deprived: yet out of them
they excepted Health, knowing there was so near a Connection between the Soul
and Body, that this could not be disordered in its Functions, but that would be
disturbed in its Operations.

Hence it was, that even among the Wisest, that Science or Art, whereby those
Defects we call Diseases were repaired, was always accounted Divine; and the
Ministers or Dispensers of this Skill were looked on as the hands of the Gods:
and some of them held the first places among their Deified Mortals.

It is well known how great a name Hippocrates obtained, not only in Greece
(which he delivered from a depopulating Plague) but in remote parts; so that
the greatest Monarch in the East, and his Viceroys, were suitors to him to
free their Country from that devouring Disease, which threatened to exhaust
those populous Regions of their Inhabitants: unless the same Person which freed
Greece, interposed, whom they esteemed Divine, and descended from the Gods,
because so Successful in such great undertakings.

Neither did the Reputation of Physic die with that excellent Person, but was
afterward in such high account, that the greatest Kings were its chief
Professors, and Cherishers; and thought to render themselves more famous (as
indeed they did) by finding out the Virtues of some single Plant, or by the
contriving of some noble Composition, and leaving their Names entailed on them:
than by their acquists of Countries, or enlargement of Empire.

And the Profession of Physic, although neglected by the rude ancient Romans;
yet with the increase of Civility, Arts and Sciences, this noble Faculty made a
proportionable progress in the esteem of that then judicious people: and it
has ever since been most honored, and encouraged in the most civilized
thriving Nations and Times; Neither was it ever exploded, but where Barbarism
or Ignorance prevailed.

So that, when I consider, what reverence has been paid to this Profession,
and the Professors thereof, in all times whereof we have any particular
account, I am amazed to find that in this latter Age, wherein it has received
a greater improvement than in two Thousand years before, and daily makes a
considerable and sensible progress; that nevertheless it should be by many
neglected, by others slighted, and by some even contemned. After a diligent
enquiry into the causes of so strange and sudden an alteration, I could not in
my opinion so justly ascribe it to Defects in the Profession, as to those of
its Professors. Not that I deny Physic to have its Desiderata, for I believe
it is capable of receiving great improvements; But howsoever, all this
notwithstanding, it might to this Day have been maintained at least in the same
degree of honor and esteem which all Ages have justly had for it, if the
imprudence of the Real, ignorance and baseness of the pretended, Artists had
not interposed. Under the former I comprise the Physicians, under the latter
their Dependants the Apothecaries, who I am confident have caused many of the
inconveniences, under which the practice of Physic now labors; and will
occasion others, if not prevented, whereof Physicians are (not without reason)
apprehensive.

Perhaps I shall hardly find credit among superficial observers, when I affirm,
that the greatest enemies Physic or Physicians have at present, are the
Apothecaries, who should be, and are thought to be their fast friends; but this
Assertion will easily gain belief with more discerning persons, who know that a
false Friend is more dangerous than an open Enemy: of which the Italians are
sufficiently fensible when they desire to be delivered from their friends, they
being always upon their Guard against their professed Adversaries. And indeed
it is much more easy for any one, who is acquainted with the thoughts, designs
and affairs of him, to whom he pretends friendship, to injure him in his
Person, Estate, or blemish his Reputation, than for another who is not privy to
his intentions, nor entrusted with the management of his affairs. Hence it is,
that Physicians cannot sustain much damage from common Quacksalvers, or
Mountebanks; and that they cannot promise themselves the same security from
Apothecaries, will appear so evident in the ensuing discourse, that every
unprejudiced Reader will readily conclude Physicians were either very facile,
credulous, or else extremely improvident, when they committed so great a trust
to the Apothecaries, in whom they reposed such confidence, that the
short-sighted Vulgar were sensible of their danger before they themselves could
imagine that, those whom they had so highly obliged, would prove unfaithful to
Physic and Physicians: But now they are forced, though late, to acknowledge,
that the great Indulgence they showed to them, and their notorious abuse of
privileges, wherewith had Physicians been circumspect, or suspicious, they had
never been acquainted, have occasioned those inconveniences, to which they now
endeavor to bring a timely remedy. It is not without a great deal of regret,
that they are necessitated to proclaim the Crimes of those whom they have too
much, too long countenanced, too often vindicated; and they still retain to
much kindness for them, that if a private opposition could have reclaimed them,
the Physicians would never have used so severe and violent a remedy, as is the
exposing their unworthy Principles and Practices to the view of the World: but
since they are both so mischievous, that to conceal, would be to permit, and
allow them; and thereby to betray their Patients, themselves, their Profession
and Successors, they are therefore forced to declare how much themselves, their
Profession, and the Sick are injured by those vile arts of the Apothecaries,
which we shall here display.

It is well known they have great pretenses (how fair we shall soon examine) to
the practice of Physic; and are now arrived at that degree of confidence (not
to say worse) that they are not ashamed to publish this before all men, whom by
most unworthy, and illegitimate Artifices, they endeavor to alienate from the
Physicians, and assure to themselves. And besides, they are not more fraudulent
in their Practice, than unfaithful in their preparations, few Physicians
having the satisfaction they desire, and it is fit they should receive, that
the Medicines they prescribe are prepared after their direction; nothing being
more frequent than for the Apothecary to employ bad Druggs, add, substract, or
substitute at pleasure one Ingredient instead of another. Now how consistent
these Actions are with the ends of their Institution, we desire not to be
judges our selves, but appeal to all that have the exercise of Reason; and if
after such unpardonable abuses, the Physicians do not desert them, and make
better provision for themselves, and their Patients, they would be unworthy of
the trust reposed in them, betray their Profession to the scorn of the World,
and themselves soon become contemptible.

But yet although the Physicians might with justice wholly reject the
Apothecaries, and are highly censured by many for their forbearance; and though
the Apothecaries themselves have little regarded their frequent Admonitions:
yet such is the tenderness of those generous persons, that they are determined
once more to invite them to entertain a sense of their Duty, and to return to
that state from which they are degenerated. Its true we have little hopes of
their Reformation, an almost infallible Symptom of incorrigibleness, seeing
their scandalous reflections on Physicians in most Companies, their entering
into competition with them, nay, sometimes preferring themselves before them;
their Associations, not to endeavor the improving their Trade otherwise than
by the decay of Physicians, their resolution to stand by each other, and keep
the Ground they have got by Treachery, resolving with united Counsels and
Purses to withstand any Reformation the Physicians shall attempt among them.
These are their ordinary discourses, and they do not scruple to give them
forth, even in the presence of sober Physicians, who cannot certainly be blamed
if they do ill resent such unhandsome and so ungrateful a Carriage. But
Charity obliges them to endeavor their amendment rather than their inevitable
ruin, which they can when they please, effect by dispensing of their own
Physic; the conveniences of which will be found so great by the people (as we
shall manifest) that they would soon utterly desert the Apothecaries and leave
them in solitude to bewail their wretched improvidence; who when they might
have had a comfortable and honest subsistence neglected it, that they might
obtain a greater: though thereby many lives were hazarded, most of their
Benefactors disobliged; and how could they expect that building should be
lasting, whose foundation was laid in blood, and ingratitude. Yet how notorious
soever matters of Fact are, least they should pretend innocence, and thence
promise themselves impunity, we shall first declare their enormous abuses of
Physicians and their Patients. Secondly, lay down certain Propositions,
wherewith if they comply, we will oblige our selves yet to retain them.
Thirdly, if they refuse to submit to such reasonable terms, we shall acquaint
the World with some Methods whereby the Practice of Physic can be more
successfully managed by Physicians without the Apothecaries than it can
possibly be with them, as they are now constituted.

The grounds of our Complaint against the Apothecaries are these.

That no Physicians can be certain, Medicines are made up according to their
prescription. So that after they have taken much pains to inform themselves of
the symptoms of the disease, to understand the causes of the distempers, and
have duly deliberated what are likely to prove the most proper remedies; which
being judiciously prescribed, they promise themselves that success which
usually attends solid Counsel: but after all this trouble, either from the
design, Ignorance, Carelessness, or unfaithfulness of the Apothecaries, they
are often frustrated, not so much to their own prejudice (which yet is not
inconsiderable) as to the Patients, which shall be here demonstrated.

1. Physicians are subject to suffer from the malice or Design of Apothecaries.
Now although Charity obliges us to think well of all men, till their actions
discover them to be bad; yet such has been the demeanor of the Apothecaries
toward the Physicians, that they have reason to stand upon their guard, and
hazard as little with them as they can. For some Apothecaries having been, as
they pretend, highly disobliged by Physicians (I suppose, because for their own
advantage, they would not permit them to injure their Patients by bad Physic)
what assurance can the Physician have, that they do not meditate revenge;
especially since, if they have an opportunity, they can execute it, and be so
far from being suspected themselves, that they may make a great advantage of
their own miscarriages. (which indeed they often do) As suppose a Physician
with whom the Apothecary is disgusted, prescribe a Purge, the Apothecary may
make it with Worm-eaten superannuated Druggs, wherewith most of them are well
stored; which very probably will not work according to the Physicians promise,
and the Patients expectation: the Apothecary may be ready at hand to tell him
that this was no ways accommodated to his temper; nay, perhaps he beforehand
presages to him, that it will not work sufficiently, (as he may without
Conjuring or Astrology) whereby he obtains the reputation of a person more
judicious than the Physician, and makes way for this proposition, That he will
prepare a purge for him which shall work more effectually than the former. This
perhaps is the same the Physician before prescribed, but assuredly made up of
better Druggs; and so the Apothecary at once executes his malice, and effects
his design which is to exclude the Physician, and introduce himself. This is,
indeed, a supposition, but I fear such as is often practiced; and there are
many Physicians who have found it true to their cost: yet these are some of the
more Innocent Cheats. I wish we be not often exposed to others of worse
consequence, than a slight disgrace of the Physician, and abuse of the Patient.
Charity forbids me to suspect worse than I know, but what will not a dishonest
mind intent on revenge or gain, scruple? howsoever, I think it behooves
Physicians to take such care, that they and their Patients lie not exposed to
the designs of wicked Apothecaries; and that there either are, or may be some
such, they have reason at least to fear, and Consequently provide, that they be
not injured by them.

2. Another thing Physicians find fault with, in many Apothecaries, is their
ignorance in the Latin Tongue, which is of very ill Consequence; for
Physicians, for good reasons, not here to be mentioned, have been long
accustomed to write those prescripts, they send to the Apothecaries, in Latin:
which not being rightly understood, has often occasioned, not only innocent,
but also fatal mistakes. And that a great part of the Apothecaries are very
illiterate, is so evident that they themselves dare not deny it. Nay, I have
heard them often divert themselves with the mistakes committed by the younger
Apothecaries at their Hall; where it is the Custom before they make an
Apprentice (that has served seven, or eight or nine years) free of their
Company, to put him to construe a Doctor's bill, or something in the
Dispensatory; which is the only mark of respect they have left for Physicians*
and if the Probationer escapes this dangerous trial, he is admitted with great
applause. But I do not hear of any, whom they exclude; and they have been
highly offended at Physicians, excepting against them: yet many by their own
relations, are guilty of gross mistakes; which though they may be pleasant to
talk of, yet are sad and serious ones when they come to cost people their
lives, or so much as hazard them, which they frequently do. This assertion I
could confirm by an innumerable company of instances* and there is scarce any
Physician, who has not been troubled with several of them in his Practice. Now
if the Masters themselves are subject to these miscarriages, what can we expect
from the Servants, who we may presume are in every respect, their Inferiors.
These mistakes are either of one Material for another, or in the Quantities of
the Materials; especially, when Physicians write them at length in Latin: for
many of the Apothecaries understand the numbers only in figures, so that some
of them know little difference between Sexdecem Sexaginta and Sexcenta; And of
duodeviginti they will make at least twice twenty. And so for measures,
sometimes mistakes proceed from their ignorance in the names of the Materia
Medica. Among many other instances of this kind, That most unfortunate one
recorded by an eminent Physician, is notorious, Of an Apothecary, who instead
of a dose of Mercurius Sublimatus Dulcis, exhibited so much common Sublimate, a
mortal poison; which was scarce ever given inwardly, instead of an innocent
Medicine, approved by all Physicians. Sometimes they mistake one operation for
another, of which I could give a large account; but the mentioning of them will
be sufficient, since every Physician is able to make a fair Catalogue of them:
and there are not many Apothecaries whose Consciences will not at the mention
of this, reproach them with the remembrance of many such mistakes, the meanest
and most innocent, of which cannot but be a great injury to the Physician, and
Patient. The first expects his Medicines should have such Operations as he
might promise himself from them, if rightly prepared; the other waits for
relief, which in these cases is usually the effect of Counsel, rarely of
Chance: or if the miscarriage prove fortunate, which has sometimes happened,
the Patient is no more beholding to the Apothecary, than he was to the Enemy
that cured him of an inward Ulcer (under which he had long languished) by a
thrust with his Sword. For as that salutary wound would have proved mortal, if
it had been in another place; so these lucky mistakes might be dangerous, if
the Apothecary had lighted on another Material: which that he did not employ,
cannot be ascribed to his knowledge, Care or Sagacity, whatsoever he may
afterward pretend.

3. Another Complaint against the Apothecaries, is, that they are not well
acquainted with the Materia Medica; the knowledge whereof is an Essential part
of their Profession: but take the words of Druggists who themselves are
sometimes mistaken, and differ about the names of several druggs; and which is
worse, they trust to Herb-women, who obtrude almost any thing upon the greatest
part of them. And that these women do often mistake one thing for another,
sometimes ignorantly, otherwhile designedly, is well known to many Physicians*
who have seen them sell the Apothecaries, herbs, roots, and seeds, under oher
names, than those they do really bear. I do not affirm this of them all, for I
am not Ignorant that some Apothecaries are good Herbarists, whose diligence I
cannot sufficiently commend; and our industrious Countrymen, Parkinson and
Johnson, to whom we are beholding for their elaborate Herbals, were
Apothecaries: although they have not wrote, especially the former, with that
judgment which is requisite, and found in the writings of many Physicians, from
whom indeed they derive the greatest part of their knowledge, as they
themselves acknowledge. But the generality of Apothecaries are of another
humor, they will eat the kernel, but give not themselves the trouble of
cracking the shell; take no pains to inform themselves in those things which
are absolutely necessary to the faithful discharge of their trust, many among
them cannot distinguish between Ingredients, noxious and salutary: so, That we
have not Patients daily poysened, is rather from the care of Herb-women, than
Apothecaries. Now Physicians depending almost wholly on such Vegetables as our
own Country affords for the cure of Diseases; which if rightly applied, are
more proper, cheap, fuller of virtue and efficacy, than those that come from
remote parts (excepting a few whose virtues are kept pretty entire) and some of
them specificall for diseases, which others substituted in their place, may
exasperate, though even they also upon another occasion may prove effectual: so
that hence proceed many inconveniences. The Patient is not relieved, who
perhaps might have been perfectly restored to former health; the Physician who
would thereby have acquired repute, is neglected, if not disgraced: and which
is worst of all, he distrusts; nay, perhaps wholly rejects remedies, commended
in the books of experienced Physicians, or communicated to him by judicious
faithful friends, through the fault of the Apothecary, which might have proved
conducive to promote the recovery of many sick people, who after languish all
their lives for want of some proper generous Medicine.

4. Most of the Apothecaries trust to several for Compositions, in whom (how
charitable soever the Apothecaries may be) Physicians have little reason to
confide. There is it seems a great trade driven by many in this City, of
selling Medicines by Wholesale. One makes Treacle, Mithridate or Diascordium,
in great quantities; Unguent's Plasters, and what not: now many of the
Apothecaries can buy such Compositions cheaper of these persons, than they can
prepare them for, after the prescription of the College in their Dispensatory.
This is a good thrifty course, but suppose a dissatisfied Physician (of which
not without Cause, there is a great number) suspect, That these Compositions
are not made of sound druggs, and other choice Ingredients; especially since
they afford them cheaper than other honest men can make them. And besides,
these men for the most part are not Apothecaries, or bred in that trade; but
Operators, who casually have taken up this way of living: so that their skill
as well as honesty is liable to be questioned. To these Objections the
Apothecaries readily answer, That buying their Ingredients at the best hand,
and in Quantities, they have them cheaper than those that deal for smaller
parcels; and besides they have some peculiar knack in Composition, which saves
them much trouble and expense. The first signifies somewhat, yet is not a
sufficient answer; but of what kind this latter should be, an honest
Apothecary, that surmises no worse of others than he is conscious of in
himself, cannot easily imagine. To expend sixpence less in fire in the making
two hundred or three hundred pound weight of Plaster, or Unguent, is not very
considerable; so neither is Expediteness or dispatch, which at most cannot save
much more in the same quantity: so that what this knack should be, unless
leaving cut some of the most costly Ingredients, substituting others in their
room, or using only such as are perished and may be procured at easiy rates, I
cannot conceive. And that thus it is, I am rather induced to believe, from what
I my self have often observed in the Shops of the Apothecaries among other
abuses, too many to mention. They ordinarily vend to those that pay a price for
the best than can be made, Emplastrum Oxycroceum sine croco; which in down
right English, is the Plaster of Saffron, without a grain of that noble
Ingredient, from which it derives its name and most of its Virtues: which for
the most part they borrow of their corresponding Plaster-mongers. In short,
most of the Plasters and Unguents of the Shop, compared with those that are
made by skilful and honest hands, are so unlike, that they may be easily
distinguished by the naked Eye, or some other of the Senses which argues a
sufficient difference: but there is a much greater and more sensible in their
effects, as has been often experimented. And I have sometimes heard some
curious Chyrurgions grievously complaining of the Shop-trash (they could bestow
no better title on it) and professed, that if they used the Unguents and
Plasters of the Apothecaries, their employment would keep pace with their
cures, and be as little, as they few; whereas preparing those Medicines they
use themselves, their success is conspicuous, and their Patients numerous. If
Physicians did in this imitate the Chyrurgions, they would not have occasion to
complain so often, as now they do; and that, I fear, not without cause.

I cannot dismiss this Subject, before I take notice of an Observation I have
often made and admired at, which is, that the Apothecaries who are very tender
of their Privileges (to give them their due) and who pretend to have a Charter
of large extent, should yet nevertheless permit these Unguent and
Plaister-sellers to follow that way of traffic; whom yet they are so far from
prosecuting and dissallowing, that on the contrary they seem to approve of them
by keeping a Correspondence with them, and buying their Commodities. Now what
should dispose them to this tenderness and forbearance, of which they are not
often guilty, I cannot imagine, unless it be interest? These persons furnishing
them with those Compositions at such easy rates, that I have my self overheard
some of them question, Whether they could possibly make them faithfully, since
the very Ingredients, would cost as much as the Plasters, etc. were sold for?
Which I confess is to me, a deep Mystery: whether of Iniquity, let others judge.

There is another Custom among Apothecaries, whereof all Physicians do not
approve; that is, there are some who make Mithridate, others Treacle, a third
Diascordium; perhaps one, all these: another, that noble Preparation, Pulvis e
Chelis Cancrorum, commonly known by the name of Gascoign's powder; others
Alchermes, Lenitive Electuary, Confectio Hamech; some, Syrups; other, Cordial
waters; and they drive a trade of Exchanging with each other, it being to be
supposed, that making great Quantities, they can sell cheap: which dealings
render their Preparations suspected to the Physician, who often finds these
Medicines to be as bad as they are cheap; and therefore most decline the use of
Preparations, if they have not first an assurance that they are made by the
Apothecaries themselves, whose word we only have for it. But let us suppose
they do really make all the Physic they dispense, yet still the Skeptical
Physician will not be satisfied, having still some scruples remaining* which, I
fear, will not be easily removed.

5. It is therefore objected by many Physicians, who are somewhat more
concerned for the good of their Patients, than the Apothecaries, as yet appear
to be* That these in the Compounding of Physic employ bad druggs, and use
superannuated Medicines which are fit for the dunghill, without any previous
Preparation; That if they want any Simple or Composition that is prescribed,
they substitute in its place some other, which (in their profound Judgments)
they apprehend, approaches nearest thereto. Besides some of them have been
found to add to some prescriptions, and substract from others; One or the
other, according to the suggestions of a petulant fancy. These are grievous
charges, and deserve to pass a severe examen, That if true, some remedy may be
found against such unpardonable abuses; or if false, that the innocent may be
acquitted, and the scandal removed. Its commonly said, Vox populi, Vox Dei: So
that the Apothecaries being accused by both Physicians and their Patients, it
is to be feared they are Criminal. But they will not permit us the Testimonies
of Physicians, which they endeavor to render invalid; for being Conscious that
they have grossly abused them, they are persuaded these will unanimously condemn
them: therefore they are excepted against, as interested persons, and their
plea must not be allowed of. If we appeal to events, and tell them of persons
that have been, either manifestly injured by bad Physic; when that which was
prescribed, if it had been duly prepared, would in all probability have given
them great relief: or if we mention others, on whom strong purging, vomiting,
or sweating Physic, or such, as if prepared after the Physicians prescript,
would have proved such, has had little or no sensible Operation, when the same
faithfully prepared by other hands, or by the same, the Physician supervising,
quickly displayed its nature according to his intention. All these things they
ascribe to chance, and pretend that when Physic has not the desired or
promised effect, the Physician to excuse his own defects, lays the blame on
Apothecaries, or bad druggs. Since therefore we are excluded from these ways of
proof (which yet no indifferent or unconcerned person will deny us) nothing
remains, but that we accuse them out of their own mouths. I remember a great
Philosopher tells us, that if we would know what actions are vicious, we should
enquire of the Vulgar, whose Consciences force them generally to condemn what
is bad in others, if they have no concern in the Action; for though they may
approve of it in themselves, when they apprehend, it is for their own advantage:
yet they will endeavor so to disguise and excuse it, that it may not appear in
its native color, but pass current under the notion of good, honest, or
convenient. This is verified in the Apothecaries. There is no particular person
that will acknowledge himself to be in the least faulty, they all faithfully
prepare their Medicines; but if we will give credit to what they say of each
other, we shall hear the contrary: for if the people urge against them, as well
they may, the dearness of their Medicines (which frequently happens) I have
often heard them reply, that they were faithfully prepared; and therefore
deserved a greater price than those which others vended (its true) cheaper,
because they were made with bad druggs, That surely none, who had any respect
for their health, would grudge to give a small matter more, for good remedies
than the worst would cost them: thus they generally exclaim on each other. And
perhaps there are some who apprehend that few of them are wronged by these
mutual Accusations.

But howsoever, either the Apothecaries are an envious, malicious sort of
people, to traduce each other in affairs of so great consequence as those
wherein the lives or welfare of many thousand men are at stake; or these
taccusations are true: either of which being allowed, must necessarily render
the Apothecaries unworthy of any great trust* at least till they reform their
words* or actions. But truly I am inclined in this particular to believe what
the Apothecaries affirm of each other, it being seconded by common Fame, and
the observation of Physicians whose duty and interest obliges them to discover
the intrigues of a Profession which has so immediate a dependence on them* as
indeed they on it.

It were an endless task to enumerate all the fraudulent tricks, which are used
by those* Apothecaries who are not Conscientious; for some I persuade my self
there are, who keep strictly to the end of their Institution, the faithful and
careful Preparation of Medicines: but I fear these are so few, that they are
scarce observed in a crowd of men so bad, that to endeavor to render them
worse then they are, were to throw Ink in the Face of an Ethiopian. And indeed
I cannot say worse of them then barely to relate their practices. I shall not
take much notice of their buying bad Druggs, which they apprehend to be good,
(and that they are often overreached seems not impossible to those who have
been much conversant with many of them) These being mistakes of Ignorance, and
therefore pardonable, so that I do not more blame then pity them; and if many
did not suffer for their unskilfulness I should entertain a pure compassion for
them without an alloy of Anger or Animosity. But there remains other manner of
miscarriages than these, to be considered; and they are not innocent mistakes,
but designed cheats, and such as not only the all-seeing God, but I hope man
also will call them to an account for: such are some of these. A great Copper
^embick at one Distillation (O wonderful accurtation) supplies a whole Shop
with simple waters; for it is but flinging into a great quantity of Water in the
Stillatory a handful of twenty or thirty sorts of Herbs, as much of the Water
being drawn off as is thought sufficient, a due proportion is put into each
Glass with its title. Now it is well known that most simple distilled Waters
have neither sensible smell, nor taste; and differ as to appearance no more
from each other than the fixed salts of Plants, though we find both them and
these have somewhat (at least a few of them) different effects: So that this
cheat is not so easily detected, as an unskilful person would be apt to
imagine. But to give our Apothecary his due, I cannot say he vends any of those
Waters, whereof he has not put a handful into the Still, his Conscience is not
so large as to permit him to impose so grossly on his Patients; Nay, perhaps the
Virtue of each Herb keeps it self distinct in some portion of Water, without
being confounded with its neighbor, as several Chemical Liquors, though never
so much shaken, each retires to the station assigned by those various degrees
of Gravity and Levity Nature or Art has bestowed on them; so that the
sagacious Apothecary may perhaps restore each Water to its proper Receptacle.
But how possible soever this may seem, it does not appear very probable; and
till it can be demonstrated, we shall look upon this as a deceitful Practice,
and such as no Physician will dispense with. The same thread runs through many
of their other Preparations, as in making Pectoral Syrups, one made up with a
handful of each Ingredient serves for all. Some after that they have extracted
the best of the tincture out of Saffron with spirit of Wine, to make the
extract and spirit; then they pour more Spirit on the remaining Dreggs, which
being strongly expressed, the vinous Spirit is a little tincted: and this is
often substituted in the place of that noble Tincture on which Physicians
sometimes depend too much, unless they could have it better prepared.

Another just cause of complaint the Physicians have against the Apothecaries,
are their old Medicines; For suppose them as faithfully prepared as they can
pretend, or we desire: yet length of time will make some changes in them, which
are not often improvements. Thus Syrups grow acid, and Waters full of Mother;
Electuaries, and Pills dry, and deprived of their most active parts; Powders
themselves are not free from this fate, whose virtues in time we find
marvelously diminished. But let the Physicians inculcate this and much more to
them, they may with as good success preach to stone-walls; for not a Dram of
any Medicine will the Apothecaries part with but for sale: so that they many
times sell their Preparations five or six years after they were made; and
whether their Medicinal properties are not much impaired, if they have any
left, we leave to others to determine. And indeed the Apothecary has many
things in his Shop which are not called for in many months, yet these must be
vended with the rest. All which when they have lost their Virtues, should they
be rejected, it would be much to the prejudice of the Apothecaries; and they
have a fundamental Maxim, that no such thing should be allowed of: for it is
much better that the Patient should suffer somewhat in his Body than the
Apothecary in his Estate. And if he injured by the bad Physic he took, perhaps
he will have pity on him, and the next Prescription shall be faithfully
prepared; whereby he makes him abundant recompense for the hurt he received by
that which was bad: and he himself makes an advantage of both. Although
perhaps, if he had consulted the Patient, he would rather have chosen to keep
his Head sound, than have it broken, that a proper Plaster might be applied for
the Cure. This is so notorious a Truth that all the World, even their best
Friends exclaim against them for it; and till they amend this among many other
Peccadilloes, the Physicians desire to be excused that they scruple to employ
them.

Another Property they have of substituting one Ingredient for another, which
how pernicious a thing it is, unless the Apothecary were equal or superior to
the Doctor in judgment, is very apparent. This is a subject, on which every
Physician can expatiate; but I omit it, not that it is less material than the
others, but because it is better known: so that here to be particular were as
great a Soloecisme as to carry Coals to Castle; for I should acquaint people,
especially those who have been conversant with the practice of Physic with
nothing, which they were not sensible of long since. I shall therefore wave
this discourse and proceed to another complaint against the Apothecaries, which
is,

That Apothecaries and their Servants are so Careless, Slovingly, and Slight in
preparing of Dispensatory, or prescribed Medicines, that neither Physicians or
the Diseased have reason to repose that trust in them which they challenge as
their due. As for slovenliness they may I confess plead the old Proverb; that,
What the Eye sees not, the Heart rues not. I confess of all the rest it may be
best dispensed with, but should Patients but once behold how their Physic was
prepared in some Shops, they would so nauseate it, that perhaps they would
undergo much, rather than take the least Dose so ordered. But lest I offend
nice queasie Stomachs, I shall dismiss this Subject; and proceed to another,
which is the carelessness of Apothecaries and their Apprentices: on which I can
never reflect without Fear and Indignation; Indignation to think what numbers
have been destroyed and injured by such proceedings; Fear, lest it should be my
own misfortune to suffer in my Repute, and in my Patients (for whom every
honest Physician is passionately concerned, abstractedly from his own interest)
from the rashness or carelessness of some giddy Apprentice or indiscreet Master.
That this is not a groundless apprehension many Families can witness; and you
can converse with few persons, who are not able to give an account of some such
miscarriages. Now although in these cases the Patient is chiefly injured, yet
it reflects also somewhat on the Physicians; if for nothing else, yet that they
employ persons who are so little concerned for that precious Merchandise, the
Lives of Men, that they will not be at the expense of a litttle Care, Pains and
Trouble to secure them. In vain is it for a Pilot to direct the course of a
Ship skilfully, if persons shall make leakes in it under Water; the Wisdom and
Care of the Governor will not bring them to their desired Haven: but even He
with the Ship will suffer Shipwreck in his reputation, especially if what was
transacted in darkness be not discovered; for then it will be supposed that
through his unskilfulness it split upon some Rock, struck on some Sand which
might have been avoided. Now if Physicians and their Patients will not make
provision against such Dangers, they have no reason to complain when they
suffer; since it is nothing but what they might easily have remedied.

Now the last complaint of Physicians against the Apothecaries on the account
of their Medicines which I shall mention, is their being most of them strangers
to Chemistry, which is no inconsiderable part of Pharmacy; whose Preparations
at least many of them are of great efficacy and come frequently in use. It Is
true indeed Phycians were formerly very shy of these Remedies, used them with
great caution, and that not without good Reasons; for although the Physicians
were satisfied, that being faithfully prepared they were endowed with great
Virtue: yet not being at leisure themselves to prepare them, and being
earnestly admonished by Helmont and other eminent experienced Spagyrists not to
trust to Venal Medicines made by common Operators, who for their private gain
scruple not to adulterate, as indeed they ever did, and still do, most of their
Medicines; Therefore those that consulted the good and welfare of their
Patients, did rather wholly decline practice with those Sophisticated Medicines
than expose their Patients to a manifest hazard. But of late years Chemistry is
again come into request, for Physicians curiosity prompting them to prepare
some particular Remedies themselves, others were bestowed on them by Persons of
Quality who prosecuted Chemistry; only that they might oblige the public with
useful discoveries, especially in Medicine, such as That Honorable Person Mr.
Boil: and some few honest industrious Apothecaries preparing others for them,
finding these Medicines of unusual efficacy, they were so far from decrying
them (which some falsely object) that they were of frequent use among such whose
good fortune it was to meet with these advantages. Others making use of those
Preparations they had from unfaithful Apothecaries or Mercenary Chemist, sand
finding they had seldom good, frequently ill effects, they cannot be blamed for
desisting from the use of what they found attended with so bad consequences;
which how injurious it has been to the practice of Physic both in reference
to the Physician and the Patient, will appear in the sequel of this discourse.
Which that it may be more distinct, I shall proceed after this Method, First,
Show what Chemistry is; and that its Medicines are of great efficacy, and safe.
Secondly, That very many Chemical Medicines ill prepared, are dangerous, and
cannot be safely used. Thirdly, That the Apothecaries are not furnished with
such Chemical Medicines as the Physicians can confide in. As to the First, we
say that Chemistry is an Art which teaches us how to divide bodies into several
parts; and being separated, to purify and again compound them according to the
pleasure of the Artist. Indeed according to the vulgar acceptance of the word
it is an Art of making Gold and Silver out of baser Metals; and that even some
who before had the repute of being wise, have entertained such favorable
thoughts of it. In this respect I am apt enough to believe, having known many
Learned Men's hopes and expectations swelled up to a high pitch by promising
experiments or fine-spun speculations, for which they were beholding to the
writings of some eminent Alchymists. But supposing this to be an extravagant
Notion, and an abuse of Chemistry; yet the Art it self is not therefore to be
exploded, It being acknowledged by all Ingenuous unprejudiced Persons that an
excellent use may be made thereof, either as it discovers to us the Nature of
most Bodies exposed to its Analysis: and in that by its means many Noble
Productions may be made, which increase our Knowledge of Nature and our power
over her; so that at this day nothing is in more esteem with the greatest
Philosophers then Chemistry. But I shall wave this use of it, as not pertinent
to our present discourse; and proceed to another, which is the preparing of
various Subjects in order to the rendering them Noble Medicines. For in many
Bodies which are of great use in Physic, that Virtue which makes them so,
consists in few Parts which by Chemical Art may be separated from the useless
though greater Portion, and further refined or exalted; and then they do more
freely, much sooner, and in less quantity display their salutary effects. Thus
we see that a small quantity of a Vegetable Spirit made by Fermentation or of
Chemical Essential Oils, are a Compendium of a great quantity of the
Vegetables that afforded them, retaining exactly the genuine Odours and Tastes
of their Mother Plants; And a few drops of Spirit of Hartshorn are more
effectual than some Ounces of the Horn any other way prepared. We could
instance in a thousand other things which I omit designing brevity. There are
also among Minerals, many Subjects which are ennobled with excellent Medicinal
Properties; but they are most of them Noxious, unprepared: and the useful part
is locked up or closely united to the bad from which it is not easily freed. Now
here Chemistry assists us, for by it we are enabled to separate the Pure from
the Impure, the Good from the Bad, that which is of use from the more copious
part, which would either have none or ill effects. I will mention but two
Minerals which are acknowledged by all, duly prepared, to afford noble
Remedies. They are Mercury and Antimony. Mercury admits of various
Preparations, and there is not one of these that are commonly known (as for
instance those in our own Dispensatory) which faithfully prepared do not answer
many intentions of a judicious Physician which could not be any other way
satisfied, Such are Mercurius dulcis, Mineral Turbith, the red and other
Precipitates; and that not only in Venereal distempers, for which alone they
were formerly in use; but also in many other Chronical diseases; which are
sometimes cured by these, after they have baffled many other promising Methods,
and Medicines. As for Antimony it is sufficiently known, that scarce any Vomits
are prescribed, throughout not only England, but Europe that are not prepared
out of this noble Mineral; which ordered after other Methods is an Excellent
and safe Purge, working without gripes: and if we proceed after another way we
may render Antimony Diaphoretick. As in that which is commonly so called, and
in Mineral Bezoara Medicine highly commended by those who in the vogue of the
People have went for great Galenists. I might instance in Vitriol, Lead, Tin,
Iron, Silver, Many of whose preparations have obtained much Credit in the
World: Such are Salt and Sugar of Steel, its astringent and aperitive Crocus,
Diaphoreticum Joviale, Sugar of Lead, Lunar Pills Spirit and Oil of Vitriol,
Ens the Veneris of Mr. Boil. To these we may add many Preparations of
Vegetables and Animals, as the Volatile Spirit, Salt, Oil and Balsom of Amber,
Flowers of Benzoin, the Cremor or Chrystalls of Tartar, its Spirit and Fixed
Salts Refines of Jalap, and Scammony, Extracts of Hellebore, Rhubarb, the fixed
Salts of Vegetables, Tincture of Saffron, and Castor, with many others, which
when duly prepared are used very success fully; and therefore it is great pity
every Physician cannot be supplied with such of these Preparations as he has
occasion to use: which he that consults the welfare of his Patients dares not
do, unless he either prepares them himself, for which few have leisure and
conveniences, or receive them from persons in whom he can perfectly confide.
For Chemical Remedies though as Innocent or any that are made, if prepared by
those who are careful, skillful and honest are of more then ordinary virtue and
efficacy; Yet if by others of contrary dispositions, Nothing more pernicious:
The Consideration whereof unfolds that Riddle which has puzzled so many. Whence
it is that some sober and modest Physicians do so highly exalt Chemical
Remedies; and at the same time others of candid Tempers as loudly decry them:
the one pretending that they are usually attended with good effects: the other
confidently pronouncing, that either they have had bad success with them, or
that they have proved wholly ineffectual. The difference may be easily
reconciled, the one either prepares himself, or supervises the making of his
own Medicines; the other trust to Apothecaries, and common Chemists; whom I
shall evince in this particular to be as great cheats as are now Extant in the
World: and do deserve more severe punishment, than those that pick-pockets or
rob on the High way; for by these abuses man only deprived of a small part of
his estate; by those sometimes of life, often of Health which is always by
their Medicines extremely hazarded.

In the Third Place, I come therefore to manifest that we ought not to trust
the Apothecaries for Chemical Remedies. There are indeed some few that are very
skilful and curious in this kind, whose care and industry deserves
encouragement; but these are not many, and are so obscured by the far greater
number of those that Act otherwise, that they are scarcely visible. The
remainder (if I may so call almost the whole company such, without being guilty
of a Soloecism) are not instructed in the very Rudiments of Chemistry: many
among them never saw a Chemical glass or furnace, are wholly unacquainted with
the very names of the operations; and yet these persons are well provided with
all sorts of Chemical Remedies which they buy of the Mercenary Chemists. Whom
though otherwise undisposed to Sophisticate their Remedies, (to which I think
them naturally Mavelous prone) they tempt to adulterate by offering them such
low prizes, for which indeed they cannot afford them, if Genuine and Right; and
have an handsome subsistence out of the gain which certainly their Labor and
industry deserves: Yet these cheap prized Medicines are retailed by the
Apothecaries at unreasonable rates, at least six times the value they cost
them. Now what trust there is to be had in the Venal Chemists will appear by
the ensuing account, which I protest is most true and faithful, being free from
any other design than that of having such enormous abuses redressed.

Since Chemistry came into the request it has been subservient, not only to
Medicine, but also to Trades; and has found employment for many searching
busy heads: some of which engage therein only, that they may gratify an
unbounded Curiosity, by observing an infinite variety of changes in the Subject
they expose to the action of Fire, and Solvents, delighting themselves greatly
in the contemplation of the Causes of those pretty appearances: Others promise
to themselves Golden Mountains, either from the general great work as they
style it, or from some particular Lucriferous Experiments. Now they that are
intent on any of these, make use of many Materials which are ordinarily vended
by a sort of men, whose sole employment it is to prepare them. And we know by
sad experience, that the greatest part of Mankind are not acted by Principles
of Reason, Honesty, or Religion, it being Interest which swayes most; few
regarding how it fares with the Public, so that they thrive in their private
Concerns. These Operators therefore having ready vent for their Preparations,
they contrive the cheapest Methods of preparing them, not regarding how
injurious they are to the Sick, and those that dispense their Medicines; or to
those curious Persons who deal in nice Experiments: which differences in the
same Materials do often exceedingly vary, these unworthy Selfish People being
highly satisfied, if the Substance, they vend, resemble the Genuine in all
sensible properties. Now those that are well acquainted with Chemistry, know
that most of the ordinary Preparations which are the Grounds or Ingredients of
others, may be variously prepared; and yet all of them approach so near unto
the true, that the most judicious Eye, Nose, or Palate, cannot distinguish
between them.

As for instance, There is no Venal Preparation comes more in use than
Sublimate made of Salts and Mercury, whether to make Mercurius Dulcis, Butter
of Antimony, in order to Mineral, and Jovial Bezoard^ca, That Precipitate of
it, which is abusively called Mercurius Vitae, or liquid Emetick Remedies; And
yet it is too well known that this is often Sophisticated by sublimation with
Arsenick: and certainly we cannot expect, that Remedies wherein this is an
Ingredient, can be very innocent. There are so many other known Methods of
preparing Sublimate amiss; which yet shall be no less fair to sight than the
best, that it is to me a greater wonder we have any good, than that we have so
much, adulterated by vile Impostors and covetous Operators. Some only
Re-sublime common Sublimate twice or thrice, and then vend it for that famed
harmless Remedy Mercurius Dulcis, it becoming almost as Insipid as that; which
whether it does exactly emulate in internal as it does in sensible Properties I
leave to Experience to determine. But this is none of the most profitable
Succedanea, Therefore many only dissolve the Mercury in Common Aqua Fortis, or
other Corrosive Liquors; which abstracted from the Precipitate, that being
sublimed the result is said to be Mercurius Dulcis and sold for such, and it
may be so: but yet such Preparations are (not without Reason) liable to
suspicion, It not being advisable to permit processes of this nature to be
varied at pleasure by any Ignorant, Conceited, Covetous Operator; for although
the Medicines may possibly prove more effectual than when prepared after the
common Method, yet I fear they are often sufficiently noxious. And this perhaps
is the occasion of so many miscarriages in the use of the Shop-Chymical
Remedies; which prepared after the usual Method, would have displayed salutary,
rather than such pernicious effects. I am unwilling to discover more of these
fraudulent tricks, lest I should inform some of them, whom a happy ignorance
only has kept from putting them in execution: yet the Sophistication of the
Cremor, or Crystals of Tartar (which come so frequently in use) with Alom, and
the vending common Copperas or English Vitriol for the Salt or Vitriol of Steel
are such notorious Cheats that I cannot but mention them. And to pass over the
rest, Chemical Essential Oils which are so often Sophisticated, that I never
met with any Venal which was not so abused; and my skilful Friends have often
complained to me that they never found, any sincere unmixed Chemical Oil, in
the Shops either of the Druggists, Chemists, or Apothecaries. I remember that
formerly I made many of those which were of daily use in Medicine, keeping some
parcels by me; that comparing them with the Venal Oils, I might learn whether I
was imposed on. This precaution was thus far useful to me, as it instructed me
that unless I would injure my Patient, I ought not to make use of any of these
Oils; unless presented me by my own Laboratory, or by Friends in whom I could
absolutely confide: Those which We, and the Apothecaries, or Druggists borrow
of the Chemists enjoying little of the Taste, and less of the Virtues of those
Subjects, out of which they are pretended to be Extracted, being usually mixed
with a far greater portion of the Oils of Turpentine, Spike, or rotten decayed
Limons, of which as I and others have observed many of the Chemists make great
quantities. Which recals into my mind what once happened to me: Having occasion
once to buy a great number of Limons, I enquired of the Merchant how he
disposed of those that were rotten, and unsound; who Answered me, that nothing
was lost, the Chemists and Apothecaries buying all that refuse Trash which he
could not otherwise vend, to make Oils and Syrups* which did not a little
confirm me in my suspicions of their unworthy Practices. And surely such as
these I have mentioned, will deter those Physicians that have any respect for
their Patient's Health and own reputation, from trusting to those Remedies of
the Shops, which the Apothecaries have of Mercenary Chemists, or Common
Operators.

But suppose these Chemical vulgar Medicines are prepared with the greatest
care and honesty, there are besides them, many noble Remedies, which do as much
exceed them, as they, the common Syrups, or Electuaries; such are those which
great Chemists call the lesser Arcana, The greater being it seems no less then
their renowned Elixir, the Universal Medicine, and the Alkahest or great
Solvent which they affirm many have actually possessed. How true this latter
assertion is makes not for our purpose: But as for what concerns the former, I
my self can affirm it. These generous Remedies have been hitherto
industriously concealed by their Possessors from the Apothecaries and common
Chemists, knowing that they would make a preposterous use of them; but should
Physicians put themselves in a Method that they can have any Chemical
Preparation, which shall be discovered to them, faithfully and skilfully
prepared, they would soon be divulged: which would be much to the benefit both
of the Physician and Patient, they being more sure and sudden in their
Operation than any other whatsoever, and are of much greater extent, one single
Remedy often curing many diseases that have any affinity with each other. Such
are the Essences of Plants made by the union of their Volatile Spirits,
Essential Oils, and fixed Salts, Volatile Salt, or Spirit of Tartar, Tincture
of Corals, Essences of Pearls, and Crabs Eyes, Basilius Valentinus's Tincture
of Antimony, his Mineral Bezoar, Tinctura Lilii, Helmont's Elixir
Proprietatatis, his Laudanum, his Aroph, the Volatile Spirit of Vitriol, the
Anodine Sulphur of Vitriol, its Essential Oil the Tincture of Gold: etc. All
which I have seen, and can witness that they have had extraordinary effects:
And there are many such or better in the hands of discreet Persons, who are
nothing so reserved and invidious as the generality of Chemists (how deservedly
I know not) are taxed to be. For I have heard several of them, persons of great
note and honor, profess their readiness to communicate what they know in this
kind, to any Society of sober, Industrious Physicians that would oblige
themselves to use, as they see occasion in their Practice, such noble Remedies
as they will direct them to prepare. Now is it reasonable Physicians should
neglect these advantages of improving their faculty, only to gratify an
ungrateful, idle, careless generation, by whom they and their Patients are so
highly injured that no Persons who have any sense of Honor or Honesty can
further trust them, till they give sufficient testimony of their Reformation:
which what it is, shall be anon mentioned. Another Remedy may be applied, and
which perhaps were most advisable, that is, for Physicians to prepare their own
Physic, whether Chemical or what is commonly called Galenical: but of this
more hereafter.

Another thing the Physicians deservedly blame in the Apothecaries, is their
enhauncing the Prizes of Medicines so much above what they might in Reason
expect; about which the Physician does not so much concern himself, because it
has a bad influence on him: as on the account of his Patient; though certainly
if Apothecaries were more modest in the Prizing their Physic, the Patient
could be more liberal to the Physician. Whereas on the contrary the Apothecary
holds them at such unreasonable rates that in most courses of Physic, he gains
more then his Master, how deservedly let others determine; though in my Opinion
were their pay proportionated to their care and honesty, I doubt they would
gain little besides shame and reproaches. But the Apothecaries Bills must be
paid without abatement; otherwise there shall be more clamor than if twenty
Physicians went unpaid: but with how much regret they are discharged, almost
every Physician can witness, most of them being daily troubled by their
Patients with complaints of their Apothecary, which it is not in their power to
redress. Now several things contribute to, or are the occasional Causes of this
universal Grievance: The Number, Pride, or Covetousness of the Apothecaries;
and that prizes are not set on their Medicines.

For Apothecaries, the Physicians procuring it being reduced into a company
were at first few; and therefore having full employment could afford their
Medicines at moderate prizes: but being since that time increased to a great
number, each person bringing up two, three or more, That employment which was
before in a few hands became more dispersed; so that a very small portion
thereof falls to the share of some; and indeed very few of them, have more than
they can manage.

Now the Sick must maintain all these, for although there be no occasion for a
Sixth-part; Yet they must all live handsomely, as those that account themselves
Physicians Fellows: to supply which Expense they have no other way than to
exalt the prizes of their Medicines; and still the less they are employed the
higher they must prize them: otherwise they could not possibly subsist, unless
they become Physicians and Prescribe as well as prepare, to which practices
they are not only propense but are initiated in them, as we shall see in the
sequel of this Discourse.

Now would it not be much better, if it were with us as in some parts of
Germany? Where the Magistrates of many Cities, and I think Territories, agree
upon a certain number of Apothecaries, so many as they can apprehend are
necessary, all the rest being excluded; and must either seek other seats, or be
content for a small Salary to work under those that are allowed. The number of
the Apothecaries thus limited, is beneficial to themselves in that they never
want employment; and to the Patient, who for the same reason has his Physic
at cheaper rates. I hope so manifest an advantage will invite us to imitate
them which would not only be a great ease to the Patient; but also should be
desired by the Apothecaries themselves if they consulted their own Interest.
For if the future increase of their number bear any proportion to what is
already added thereto since they were Constituted a Company, the Physician need
not oppose them, they must necessarily fall of themselves; unless they meet
with some Extraordinary support which cannot be at Present foreseen nay
scarcely imagined: but they are so intent on their private gain that I do them
an injury in proposing to them the good of the Public or of their Company,
especially when it will diminish their present profit. Therefore, since here is
so little (...) that they will reform themselves, others must take upon them
that troublesome and ungrateful task; and next to the Magistrate I know not
who are more capable of this than the Physicians: as will be seen when we come
to the Remedies which shall be proposed in order to the prevention of this and
other inconveniences, of which they are the Causes

Another bad Property the Apothecaries have, is their Insinuating many things
to the prejudice of an Honest Physician among their Patients; to whom the
Apothecary endears himself by the frequent access he has to them, and some
little pieces of Officiousness, as applying of Blisters Leeches, Plasters, or
some such trivial business, which might be as well performed by any Nurse that
is used to attend Sick people: so that a Physician, whose Name and Interest is
not very considerable, is in a great measure at their Mercy; which is such,
that he may rest assured if he be a stranger to the Patient* or have not so
great an Interest in him as the Apothecary, and if this have no immediate
dependence on him, that if he be never so little distasted, he will employ all
his Skill and Interest to ruin him in the Opinion of his Patient, and
Introduce Himself or another Physician that shall be more compliant in his
stead. Now one thing which touches an Apothecary to the Quick, is Detracting,
as they call it, from the goodness of their Medicines (although how speaking
truth should be Detraction, I understand not) against which no exception must
be made, though the Patients Lives lie at stake; Another cause of their
displeasure is, if they are reproved for setting immoderate Prizes on their
Medicines: or which amounts to the same thing (I mean the lessning of their
Gain) if the Physician prescribes a few Medicines; and those either commonly
known to be cheap, and especially if he gives the Patients Directions to make
their own Physic, as if it be the Decoction or Infusion of a Simple or two: or
if he cures them by a Regular Diet. For by this means, little Profit coming to
the Apothecary, you cannot blame him that he thinks himself highly injured, or
affronted, and seeks to be Revenged on that unworthy Physician, who prefers the
Good of the Patient before the Benefit of the Apothecary. Whereupon he suggests
to the Patient, that this Physician is a Man of mean Parts, of moderate
Knowledge, of little Repute; that the Things he prescribed are very Slight, and
altogether unlikely to effect what the Physician designs; that if he would be
advised by him, some other Physician should be consulted, which yet is not very
frequent: for they do most of them redeem Opportunities, of imposing themselves
on the Patient, who certainly makes a goodly exchange when he parts with a
Sober, Judicious Physician for a Confident, Daring, Empty, Bragadocio
Apothecary.

This Consideration brings to my remembrance another particular, which is the
last complaint we shall make of Apothecaries; and that is their taking on them
the Practice of Physic, Quis Credet haec? It will seem hardly Credible to
Sober, Judicious people that have not observed the course of the World: and I
confess it amazes me when I behold a Company of such Ignorant persons, dare at
so great an Undertaking. I wonder, First, how they had the Confidence to
attempt it; and having made so fair an Essay, that they did not Clandestinely
manage those unwarrantable Practices, creep into Corners and Oblige to
Secrecy: But to commit all this in the face of the Sun, when Challenged, be so
far from Excusing and Retracting that they should publicly avow, acknowledge,
and Glory in their shame, is a piece of Insolence that I could never have
imagined a Society of men should ever have been guilty of. That a private man
should so far degenerate, is no unusual thing; but this is the first Rank of
men that ever in England did generally revolt from their Masters, and greatest
Benefactors; and they are indeed so rare an example, that they deserve to be
Registered in the black Catalogue, if not of Perfidious, yet at least of
Ungrateful Persons, from whence without some general Repentance and
Reformation, their names will never be Cancelled.

But amongst all these Prodigies nothing does more excite my Admiration, than
the consideration tht anay Persons dare confide in them, for whence can it be
imagined they should derive this Skill, to which they are such high pretenders,
That especially the more ancient among them, boldly affirm they have many
advantages over young unexperienced Physicians, and stand on even ground with
the elder. Did ever those Physicians that were a means of constituting them a
Company, and procuring for them such Privileges, suspect that in the same
Century, some of their own Profession should be forced to take Pen in Hand and
determine the Controversy, whether They or the Apothecaries are more fit for
the Practice of Physic? One would think this should be like those common
Notions which are said to be Imprinted in the Minds of all men, As that the
Whole is more than the Part, etc. so methinks every Man that is asked of the
Question in hand, who understands what Physicians, and what Apothecaries
commonly are, should as easily determine which is fitted for, and which ought to
be excluded from Practice, as to tell us that One and Two makes three; or that
if we add equal parts to equal they are still equal. But lest we should be
thought to Assume rather then Prove, or it be Objected that we are Precarious
in our assertions, we shall give this Question a fair debate; and then we shall
manifest the unworthy Artifices that Apothecaries use to depretiate and exclude
the Physicians, to introduce, and ingratiate themselves.

As for what refers to the first, Apothecaries have this to plead for
themselves. That it is unreasonable to deny them the liberty of Practicing, who
understand the Symptoms, and Cures of Diseases; if not as well as some
Physicians, yet better then many, at least than the young and unexperienced.
They have been present at the Death, and Recovery of many Patients; and
therefore have had Opportunity to observe the course of the Distempers, and
procedures of Physicians: That they have kept exact Diaries of these
Transactions, What Medicines the Physician prescribed; especially if they
proved succesful: That they want nothing of a Doctor but the bare title: That
they are not destitute of this, amongst the people, the most competent Judges;
who if they were not satisfied with their Abilities and Success, surely they
would not salute them by that Name, which is conferred by the Universities,
rather upon those who have read Books than cured Diseases.

Not to answer to these frivolous allegations, that on the account of some of
these pretensions old Wives, or Nurses, and others, Farriers and Smiths, may
pretend to the Name or Thing they are so ambitious of: Nor to tell them which
is most certainly true, That the knowledge they derive from Doctors Prescripts
is very uncertain, and fallacious: it being absolutely impossible for the best
Physician to calculate a Medicine that shall be proper for all that are, or
shall be subject to any one Disease; unless he were Possessor of the Universal
Remedy, So great in the variety of Complexions, so many are the complications
of Distempers, and so infinite are the variations of Circumstances: all which
the Judicious Physician attends to, and which few Apothecaries are capable of
Comprehending. The former being commonly men of more smart, piercing, natural
Parts; and their Brains farther refined, purged from Prejudices, and well
furnished with excellent, clear, and distinct Conceptions of things, for which
they are beholding to an excellent Education: so that notwithstanding I have
heard several of the Apothecaries confidently, (not to say impudently) affirm
they were so thoroughly acquainted with such men's Practice, naming some eminent
Physicians, that if they knew the Case, they would lay a Wager they did exactly
Predict before they took Pen in Hand what they would Prescribe; when to my
knowledge there is not so much difference between a shallow River and the
profoundest Sea, as between these empty, light Fellows and those Grave admired
Physicians, whose depths such light Shittle-Cocks, Cork and Feathers, are so
unlike to sound, that it is not without much difficulty that they are made to
penetrate the very Superficies. In short, to compare them with sober, judicious
Physicians, is as preposterous, as to parallel the faint glimmering of an
expiring Candle with the beauty and luster of the Sun in its Noonday Glory.
But we shall more clearly and distinctly perceive the vast difference between
them, by comparing them both with the Idea of Medicine; and see which is the
more likely to have it imprinted in their Minds, and display it in their
Actions.

The design of the Physician, ought to be the preservation of Health and cure
of Diseases. The Preservation of Health is best effected by a regular Diet, and
the due use of those things which are called Non-naturals; to which may be
added some small matter of Physic when there is a slight propension to a
disease rather than a Disease formed. Now in this Part certainly the Physician
is more understanding than the Apothecary, being bred a Philosopher; and must
therefore probably (or he is much to blame) understand more of the Nature and
properties of Meats and Drinks, of Air, Sleeping and Waking, Exercises, and
Passions of the Mind, than the Apothecary who never addicted himself to these
enquiries. Then as for the Cure of Diseases, it seems highly probable that they
who are best acquainted with the Causes and Symptoms of Diseases, will apply
Medicines more properly than others that cannot so well distinguish although
possessed of the same Remedies. But we will wave this, although it would be
very proper for our present purpose; and examine which are best furnished with
Methods and Medicines in order to the Cure of Diseases.

Diseases are removed, either by Method, Specificks, Arcana, chiefly Chemical;
or by a Practice mixed of Two or more of these. That Cure by Method which does
not interfere with the other by specificks, is when by Virtue of Medicines that
have a Sensible Operation, such are Vomits, Purges, Salivating, Sweating,
Diuretic, vesicating, Cordial Anodyne and Narcotick Remedies, (with the helps
of Phlebotomy etc.) used in such a Method as the Physician apprehends most
proper, the Diseases are removed. And that most Distempers might be Radically
or Perfectly Cured by these judiciously prescribed without either specificks or
Chemical Arcana, I am so far from Doubting that I could name some excellent
Physicians, who have eminently signalized themselves only by Method. But then
these (and indeed whosoever insists in this way must be such) were Men of most
quick apprehensions Solid Judgments, knew when, what, how much, and in what
order to prescribe, a little mistake hazarding the Patients Life in acute
Distempers, either in over, or under doing; and how fit a Hairbrained, Careless
or Ignorant Apothecarie is for this Practice, is easily discerned.

As for Specificks by which we mean such Simples as being appropriated to a
Disease, cure without any sensible Operation; probably by changing the ill
texture of the Morbous matter into another more innocent and less incongruous
with those parts which before were extremely disaffected thereby. Now the great
question is, how Physicians come by the knowledge of these admirable
Properties. Surely they have it not by natural Instinct, much less can any
pretend to Divine inspiration. I am not ignorant that some talk of a Medicina
Adepta, but the boldest and most talkative Apothecary I ever yet met with, had
not the slightest Pretensions to it; and no wonder for till they leave off
their fraudulent unworthy Practices, of all men I know in the world, they have
the least Reason to expect revelations in this kind, supposing there were such.
Well then, since there are no other means besides, Physicians must derive this
knowledge from Communication, either of living or dead Physicians; or from
their own Experience and Observations, and indeed I believe they are not a
little beholding to the writings of those that preceded them: wherein yet this
Knowledge is so scattered, that great Labor, Industry and Sagacity must be
employed before any Physician can arrive to an ability of Curing most
Distempers by means of Specificks. Now that the Apothecaries are like to be
Possessors of this Treasure, will appear very improbable, If we consider that
they do not trouble themselves to search any other Records than they themselves
have made of Physicians, Prescripts; and besides they are great Enemies of
Cures by Specificks, because that notwithstanding they personate the Doctors:
yet their gain comes in by the Trade of an Apothecary, which this way of Cure
does much impair. And therefore by their good will they would neither allow of
it in others, nor practice it themselves if they were able; from which they are
so remote, that all the Physicians in England, can hardly beat it into most of
their heads, that any thing should effect a Cure without Evacuating sensibly
the Material Cause of the Disease: and therefore they deal chiefly in Purges,
Vomits, etc. And how judiciously they manage these instruments, we shall
hereafter make inquiry.

A third course whereby Diseases are said to be cured, are Chemical Arcana:
Such were the Mercurius Diaphoreticus of Helmont and Paracelfus, the Ignis or
Sulphur Veneris, the highly exalted Tincture of Gold, the Mineral Laudanum of
Paracelsus, and other great Medicines which those renowned Chemists, B.
Valentinus, R. Lully, R. Bacon, Paracelsus, Helmont and Others were said to
have had in their Possession; and to have used with incredible Success. These
noble Remedies curing without any Evacuation (besides ordinary Diseases) those
that had then the Repute of being incurable: such were the Gout; Dropsy,
Stone, Leprosy, and other formidable Distempers. It is not my intention at
present to spend time in inquiring after the truth of this Tradition, whether
these Persons were actually possessed of these Remedies, and whether by their
means they effected such great Cures: Or whether such Medicines may be
procured. I shall only insist on this that if any of them can be obtained by
Labor, Skill, and Industry, the Physicians are much more like to be possessed
of them than Apothecaries, triffling Chemists, or mean Operators. Many of them
having been long conversant with Chemical Operations, and having ^ot spared for
any expense of Money, Time, or Trouble, are now so thoroughly acquainted with
the Principles of that Art; and have rendered Nature so familiar, that they
design few things which they do not effect: and I can say from my own Knowledge
that the Productions of their Furnaces, have been as considerable as of any
sort of Men whatsoever that do publicly appear in the World. So that if there
be any thing in Chemistry useful and noble, what should hinder their bidding
fair for the possession thereof? Besides, there are many Ancient, and Younger
Physicians who daily engage in these Enquiries; and the whole College of
Physicians is so concerned for the promoting this useful part or appennage of
Medicine, that they do intend publicly to promote it by associated endeavors.
And notwithstanding what has been said to the contrary, I am Confident there
is not a Society of men in Europe more considerable; not only for that
knowledge which we owe to Books, for their insight into Philosophy, Skill in
Anatomy, and all Natural History which is allowed by most: but even for an
intimate acquaintance with Chemistry, which though some have denied them, yet
how unjustly the World will be soon (if it be not already) convinced.

Now it remains that we discourse of the Fourth and last way of Practice, which
we said was composed of those already mentioned, and indeed this is the most
frequent; for, although I know there are some few, who confine themselves to
that which I call strict Method, others to Cure by Specificks, a Third sort who
only use Chemical Medicines, which they are pleased to dignifie with the
glorious Title of Arcana (although I fear they are far from being so) and
perhaps there may be some Persons in the World, who have those that are really
such; yet I have observed that the generality of sober judicious Physicians,
compose out of all these a Practice which pertakes somewhat of every one: yet
so, that Medicines which have a sensible Operation, Specificks and Chemical
Remedies, have all a subserviency to Method, that is, they observe a certain
order in the use of all these, which is so advantageous, that inverted or
transposed, they have not the same effect. Thus perhaps first they premise some
general evacuations, whereby the Body being freed from impurities, the Stomach
after strengthened with digestives, the Vital Spirits invigorated by Cordials or
a Regular Diet* Specificks then easily perfect the Cure, which perhaps would be
complete neither without them, nor with them only, without the mentioned helps.
Now he that has but half an Eye must necessarily discern, that much of
judgment, much of contrivance is requisite in these Cases; and indeed so much,
that it is well known many (and I hope that it may be affirmed of most)
Physicians, make a History of the Patients condition, or Case: and then after
due Consideration of all circumstances, determine to proceed after a certain
Method from which they do not recede without great occasion given them, as the
intervening of some accidents, which Humane, Wisdom, and Care, could neither
soresee, nor prevent. Now how Apothecaries, or indeed any others that have not
a solid Judgment, quick Apprehension, and fixed indefatigable Mind, can sustain
so much labor be capacitated for so great undertakings I cannot imagine. And
they that know them did never suspect they would give themselves so much
trouble to obtain what they can purchase at a cheaper rate. For they design not
so much the doing good, as that the People should entertain an opinion that
they do it, which is no hard matter to arrive at, being in this like
Machiavel's Politician (though in other things silly enough) who is to make a
profession of Virtue and Piety; but not to be really so, for many things will
be swallowed that are proposed under the pretense of Virtue and Piety, by
unwary, well-meaning People, who are not apt to suspect others because free
from Designs themselves: whereas a strict profession of Religion and Virtue
will hinder the Politician from doing many things which might prove highly
advantageous to him. The Parallel is easy and obvious. Besides, as it is easy
to obtain an Opinion of Virtue or Piety, but to be really and truly Virtuous,
requires much Sweat and great diligence; so it is with Learning, nothing being
more easy then to impose on the incautious, credulous Vulgar, who believes he
knows most, who makes the largest profession. And at this the Apothecaries are
excellent; good success so rarely anticipating their promises, that I scarcely
ever heard such a thing happened; but how devoid they are of solid Knowledge,
how free from Care, and empty of Skill, or whatsoever is requisite for the
making good their pretenses, is so well known to them that dive into the depth
of their silly intrigues: and they are so numerous, that it is needless to
repeat what is imprinted on so many memories.

But we shall now proceed to enumerate and descant on the particulars, wherein
the Physician seems to have some advantages over the Apothecacaries, and indeed
all other whom Nature and a good Education have not fitted for so great an
employment.

1. It seems very probable that Diseases will be better cured by them that are
acquainted with the Frame and Fabric of Man in his sound Constitution, with
the Nature and Properties of the Humors and Ferments in the Body, that
understand (which they chiefly do by Analogy from what they have observed
without Man) how these are depraved and perverted, What was the Occasion, or
Instrument. Whereby certainly they may nearly conjecture what is most fit to
oppose the cause of these Irregularities, and to remove their Effects. This is
no new Notion, it having been the persuasion of former, and later Ages, That
the Physician is to begin where the Philosopher ends; And that the Physicians
have made great advantages of Experiments and Observations, is most evident
from their own confession: but chiefly manifested in many of those Noble
productions of their Brains, which will perpetuate their Names, and oblige all
Mankind that shall succeed them. Of how great use was that admirable Invention
of Harvie's concerning the Blood's Circulation? and, What great advantages may
we derive from the Inventions of Pecquet, Glisson, Ent, Wharton, Bartholine,
Willis, Needham, Lower, and other excellent Anatomists? Some have gained to
themselves immortal Renown by their voluminous, yet judicious Histories of
Plants, Animals, and Minerals; and indeed Natural History, and Philosophy have
been scarcely cultivated by any besides Physicians: who were so considerable
that the deservedly admired Descartes, not long before his death, was deeply
engaged in the study of Anatomy, Chemistry, and other appendices of Medicine;
designing all his Philosophical toil, only for the good and benefit of Man;
intending to employ his later time in the investigation of the Nature of
Diseases, and their Cures. Neither did a high Birth, and Quality, an Excellent
Education, a plentiful Estate, and great Reputation, dispose that Noble
Experimental Philosopher Mr. Boil to think himself above the Profession of
Physic; which cannot be questioned, after he has given so public a
testimony, as the accepting a degree therein, freely proffered him by one of
the most Famous Universities in Europe: whose expectations he has not
deceived, having ever since applied himself to improve that noble Faculty, with
such success, that notwithstanding what some few in their mistaken Zeal urge to
the contrary, it is well known that most acknowledge themselves highly obliged
to him for what he has already published; and wait not without some Impatience
for what he has promised in the same kind. And how great advantages a
Physician skilled in Philosophy has over others, He has so clearly, and
copiously evinced in many parts of those excellent Discourses concerning the
usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, (to which I refer the Reader) that he
has saved me a Labor of saying more on that Subject, which would be only a
Recapitulation of what he has there at large delivered, and which will be
better understood in his own words; and probably make a deeper impression than
any thing I can add. So that now nothing remains for me to do, but to draw this
Corollary, That till Apothecaries become better Philosophers its very probable
that there will be better Physicians: but to proceed.

2. It is not unlikely that they who in their cures attend to the Age, Sex,
strength of the Patient, time of the Year, their Constitution or Complexion,
Antipathies or Aversions, Diseases preceding in them or their Parents, and the
present Complication of Diseases (for they are not frequently solitary) that
they, I say, who attend to those Circumstances, should be more succesful in
their Cures than those that have little regard of them; for whatsoever the
Apothecaries think, the Physicians are of the mind that all these are material,
if not necessary to the Cure of Diseases. And although the Apothecary not
hearing the Physician enquire after all those particulars, himself also
neglects them; Yet nevertheless the Physician considers them, having such a
habit that he does it intuitively rather than discursively, especially if he
were formerly with the Patient: but the Apothecary looks on this as work of
Supererogation, and thinks it is only to please and humor the Sick, and
persuade them of their care. But that this surmise is grounded rather on
Ignorance than Sagacity we shall now manifest. To avoid Prolixity I shall
instance only in one particular, and that is the Complication of Diseases;
about which the Physician is (not without just cause) marvellously solicitous.
And indeed this is so nice a Speculation, that it sometimes almost puzzles the
most perspicacious Physicians; and is far out of the Apothecarie's Ken, who yet
presumes he can see into a Millstone as far as another man, and so he may: but
in this case it is with the Physician and Apothecary, as it is said to be with
two persons diversely qualified looking into a Magical Glass; where the one sees
a great variety of objects, and the other nothing but a transparent Glass, and
will not believe but what the other sees is by the help of Imagination's
Spectacles; which objection, how true soever it may be in that case, is not in
this. Or, (to make a comparison less liable to be censured) It is with
Apothecaries and Physicians as with two Persons that contemplate the Galaxy, or
milky way, the one with his naked Eye, the other by the assistance of a
Telescope; That to the former seems only a confused white cloud, which to him
who veiws it through his Tube appears to be a great company of Stars: which he
perceives little less distinctly, than he does by his Unarmed Eye, those that
are most conspicuous among that innumerable Company, wherewith the Heavens
aremost gloriously bespangled. But that I may render this more manifest, I will
descend to particulars, and show first that there is frequently if not usually
a Complication of Distempers in the Diseased. Secondly, That the Apothecaries
are not often sensible thereof.

It has been judiciously observed by Piso, Bontius and others that in Brasile,
etc. where their way of living is most simple, the Temper of their Air
constant, their exercise much, and their hereditary Distempers few; That their
Diseases also are few, and short, for the most part simple (being scarcely ever
complicated) seldom dangerous, the Crisis certain and visible, so that they
rarely dye, except of Accident, or old age: whereas on the contrary, in these
Northern Regions our Diseases are many and various, Crisis uncertain, and
oft-times scarcely sensible; and which I chiefly aim at, Diseases are variously
complicated. And indeed how can it possibly be otherwise when we are generally
very irregular in our Diet; so that I know not whether we are more injured by
the great quantities, or ill Qualities of the food we live on: When we
sometimes too much indulge our selves in sleep, at other times allow our selves
too little, and that at unseasonable times, when we lead for the most part
sedentary lives, exercising either too little, or immoderately; not to say how
intemperate some are in their Passions, and insatiate in their Lusts: besides
the Air in which we breath is as uncertain as the Winds that blow which
suddenly changes from heat to cold, moisture to dryness; and on the contrary,
cannot but leave ill Impressions behind them, to which we may add Hereditary
Distempers. For what is more frequent than for weakly diseased Parents to be
further tormented by seeing their Children labor under the same Infirmities;
which are either rivitted into the Principles of their Constitution, or sucked
in with their milk: from which dispositions they are hardly, if ever freed. Now
any one of all these is sufficient to change the nature of a Disease, which in
their absence would have appeared in a much different form: So that there being
in most of those who are surprised with any distemper especially Acute a
previous, ill Diathesis, or Constitution of the Blood, a depraved ferment in
the Stomach, and these very various, we must apply our selves after different
methods to cure Diseases, which spring from different causes. Thus for instance
in Fevers, Agues, and many other Distempers, it is not sufficient to remove
their occasional Cause, and to allay the inordinate commotion of the Blood; but
he that will approve himself a true Physician must (in a great measure at
least) free the Patient from that ill habit of Body, which exasperated the
former Distemper, and disposes still to the same, or worse. For when the Blood
is depauperated or the spirits oppressed by more numerous Saline, or Earthy
parts, on every light occasion the whole Body is disordered; and indeed the
great skill of a Physician is seen in the cure of Chronical Diseases, which is
too far out of an Apothecaries reach: that although I have made strict enquiry,
I solemnly profess, I never heard of any one cured by them. If then they are
unable to cure Chronical Diseases, which are those that chiefly reign in
England; and if they are absolutely unfit to deal with any acute Distempers
where there is any Complication, Why are they allowed to practice Physic? With
which if they must be conversant, let them addict themselves to the cutting of
Corns, and drawing of Teeth, which do resemble the cure of Diseases; and that
may perhaps in some measure gratify their petulant Fancy at a cheaper rate by
spoiling a part, than hazarding the whole, which is now their daily practice.

3. It is no inconsiderable part of a Physician's Office, to know when nothing
is to be done, but the whole matter committed to Nature, the Physician
supervising, and taking care to correct all Nature's aberrations; and if there
be occasion, to give her some little assistance. For Diseases seize on many in
whom Nature is so strong that after some conflicts the Aggressor is expelled
without any assistance from Physic, according to the Aphorism of Hippocrates:
Naturae sunt morborum Medicatrices. Whereas should a Physician in these cases
administer any active Medicines, or make use of other pretended helps (suppose
Phlebotomy) unless by his great Sagacity, or the obviousness of the Distempers
cause, he applies a Remedy very suitable (for which there is yet little
occasion) We cannot imagine otherwise, than that Nature being weakened by
evacuations, or diverted from her usual Methods by Medicines; which if not
appropriated, will rather disorder or debilitate than bring relief, in the
interim the distempers will proceed by insensible, degrees and at length may
become so powerful, that Nature with the help of the most generous Remedies
cannot prevail: where if She had not been unseasonably weakened or diverted She
would have obtained an easy Victory.

As for Example there is a well-known Disease, wherewith Children are as
frequently afflicted, as by Agues or the Rickets; which soon deprives the
poor Infants of their color; makes them lose their appetite; they sleep
little, and that unquietly; they will be exceeding Thirsty, Froward or Peevish,
and seem to have grievous sick or fainting fits: and after they have long
labored under this distemper, they have usually great swellings or hardness of
the Belly, and are so emaciated that they seem not much unlike to little
Skeletons; and yet notwithstanding all these threatening Symptoms I have
seldom, if ever, known Children miscarry who were forbidden the use of Physic
till freed from most of them (for they vanish of themselves) and then gently
purged for a few days successively, they not only recovered their former
health but have often given me occasion to dispute with my self, whether they
were not rather better than worse for the distemper thus managed. Whereas on
the contrary others that have been disordered and weakened by evacuations,
Cordials, or fuges, appointed by the Apothecaries or other unskilful
practicioners, (who are very ready to prescribe and Impose Physic on these
occasions) although to appearance they are freed from their troublesome
companion; yet withal soon after, many exchange this life for a better: and
those that survive, are usually weakly, more subject to Rickets, Convulsions,
and other Distempers, than those in whom the Disease was permitted quietly to
take its course without interruption. The same has also been observed in elder
Persons laboring under Quartain Agues. Neither is it without a great deal of
trouble that Physicians observe so many miscary of acute simple Fevers, who
committing themselves to the care of Apothecaries, and rather unskilful
pretenders to Medicine, often receive dispatches out of this World, by Food, or
Physic preposterously administered, rather than from their Distemper; which
will appear evident to them who consider that a Fever is usually Natures
Instrument, or an Ebullition of the Blood, caused by the Vital Principle, in
order to the expelling of some substance mixed with the Blood, or other Humors
in the Body: whose presence perverts Natures regular actions, and thereupon is
opposed by those active parts, through whose mediation She performs her
operations. Now in most of those conflicts Nature would be victorious, subdue
or expel her intestine Enemy; if She were recruited sparingly with the liquid
part of Her ordinary and daily supply: and be not diverted by gross Food, whose
digestion while the Spirits attend the Morbous matter, exceeding the remainder
in quantity or energy, may gain great advantages, either by vitiating the
Organs, or by reducing the Humors to their own Nature by a depraved Ferment;
and the Stomach wanting Spirits copious enough to assist it in digesting the
Food, dismisses it crude: or being it self disaffected, imparts thereto some
noxious qualities, which are again communicated to the Blood, whose impurities
it thereby increases, extremely hazarding, and sometimes over-powring the
Principle of Life. The same happens by Medicines unsuitable to the Distemper, or
unseasonably exhibited; as if in the height of a Fever one should advise to
hot Medicines, whereby more Fuel is added to the Fire, and the Disease rendered
more formidable and difficult of cure than ever: or if in the declination of
the same Distemper, when the Patient should be supported by Cordials, and
relieved by Opiates, whereby the Crisis, or separation of the peccant matter is
most certainly and easily affected; if instead of these refrigerating
Medicines, Juleps, Clysters, or other Coolers which weaken the Blood, depress
the Spirits, and disable Nature for her intended separation, whereby the
Distemper runs into a Diuturnity, and if Life chance to be secured for the
present, howsoever the Patient continues weak: and without great regularity, or
exact observation of Diet, Exercise, and the other Non-Naturals, will become
subject to some Chronical Distempers, whether Consumption, Scorbute, Dropsy,
Jaundice, Scyrrhus, Tumors, or Ulcers, which frequently succeed acute diseases,
ill managed, and are seldom perfectly removed; at least not by the
Apothecaries, who were the occasion of these, and are daily of many other
Miscarriages, when they are consulted about Persons who would recover without
the use of any, or with the help of little Physic. But as it is above their
skill to know what Persons are thus affected, so it is contrary to their
Interest to manage them aright; and therefore they neither can, nor will do it.
That they cannot, the faithful Character or Description we have given of them
will render sufficiently probable; That they will not, may be easily believed,
if we consider that this way of proceeding would diminish their Profit, which
they do by no means approve, but will rather charitably obtrude store of
Physic on all their Patients: and that sometimes so much to their prejudice,
that they had better hire them at a dearer rate to be less officious.

4. Oftentimes persons seem to labor under several Diseases, when as really
the whole Tragedy is acted by the same peccant matter, which is either
translated from one part to another; and affecting them after different
manners, the Symptoms are various and their Denominations different: or from
differences in Age, Sex, previous habit of body, Complexion or Constitution,
Strength of the Patient, Season of the year, and other circumstances. Matter
which has the same Nature and Properties, may diversely affect the Persons thus
discriminated; also according to Quantity and Degrees in the same Qualities it
may diversely affect the body: and thereby occasion different Symptoms, which to
the Unwary or Unskilful seem distinct Diseases, when as it is but one and the
same matter variously displaying it self; and which may be removed or otherwise
disposed of by one and the same Method or Medicine.

Thus for instance a great number of Diseases are caused by the redundance of
Acidities, which acid noxious juice being mortified, all those troublesome
effects of its presence cease. Many Diseases there are which proceed from the
obstruction of some part, such are Apoplexy's, Lethargy's, Carus, Catalepsia,
Gutta Serena, Palsy's, etc. Now those Methods and Medicines which will cure the
most obstinate and dangerous of these, will seldom fail to remove the rest. The
same happens in Convulsions, Epilepsy, Madness, Hysterical and Hypochondriacal
Passions, Vertiginous Affections, and Melancholy, etc. We also daily observe
that many violent Fluxes, wherein the blood or other humors have the same
cause and cure, all which proceed mostly from sharpness, thinness, or heat of
the blood, are removed by Medicines answering the Indications of cooling,
dulcifying or incrassating. Some of the Diseases thus cured, are immoderate
Fluxes in Women, spitting and vomiting of blood, Periodical, or other copious
Evacuations thereof at the Nose, Haemorrhoids, with the Urine, or by Stool in
the Flux, commonly called Hepaticas, and Dysenteries; to which we may add
several sorts of Diarrhea's, fluor albus, incontinentia Urinae, much Spitting,
Weeping, Coryza, and Rheumes, of diverse kinds. Further, most simple, continued
and intermittent Feavours have very nearly the same way of Cure; although the
Body seems diversely affected by them: an evident Argument that their causes are
little different. We might instance in Colical, and Iliack pains, and many
other torments in the Stomach and Bowels, which seem to have their rise from
the same Causes, and have almost the same Cure; Nay to proceed still higher,
What Analogy does there seem to be between the Palsy and the Colic? yet this
often degenerates into that which also many other Diseases do; whereof I could
give a large account: but shall refer it to a more convenient Opportunity. We
might proceed to show how great an affinity, there is between many outward
affections in their Causes and Cures: But because the care of such Diseases is
denied by some to belong to Physicians; and because the Apothecaries do
scarcely ever intermeddle with the Chyrurgeons employment (which yet it is much
less intricate then the Physicians) I shall pass over this Ponsideration.

Thus we have given a superficial account of those opportunities judicious
Physicians have to discriminate themselves from ignorant pretenders, by their
discerning with great Celerity, and Sagacity, how to act where all these are
always grievously perplexed, and often perfectly confounded; as is manifest
in their ways of proceeding, which are usually so ridiculous and Irrational
that they would give intelligent Physicians a full and pleasant Divertisement,
if they could Indulge themselves therein: which they can by no means do, where
their Errors and Miscarriages are so far from Innocent, that they do often
exceedingly hazard, and sometimes occasion the Misery, or Destruction of the
unhappy credulous Patient. Which sad accidents dispose those generous
Physicians, they neglected, rather to Pity and Compassion than to disport
themselves, or look with Malicious Smiles on misfortunes; which they in some
measure deserved, for being guilty of so egregious a piece of folly, as
committing themselves to Ignorant, and Unskilful Practiciooners, altogether
unfit for so great a trust. And indeed it will excite Admiration in any
judicious Person to observe what a Wild-Goose-Chase they go in most of the
Cases we lately mentioned: sometimes applying a Remedy they have learned is
proper for the Headache, then another for the Tooth, Stomach, or Heart-ach,
Gripes, Flux, heats in the Head, and burning in the habit of the Body, Vartigo
Asthma, and other semblances of Distempers which one and the same matter will
often occasion. Now the Sagacious Physician soon detests this Cheat, and
immediately by a stroke or two at the root, intercepts the depraved
Nourishment; so that all the other ill effects cease with the removal of their
cause: whereas should he only attend to every particular symptom as the less
discerning do, there would be no end, either of Physic or the Disease, which,
it is very probable will receive a great aggravation by so many improper
Remedies. For Physic is, or ought to be active; and if not appropriated to the
distemper, it must necessarily work an effect contrary to that for which it was
designed, so that if it do not abate of the Disease, it is more than likely to
exasperate it, if it do not strengthen Nature actually, or consequentially; I
mean by removing Impediments, it will certainly weaken Her.

V. It seems most evident, That many Diseases may be Cured by a convenient Diet.
AND if this be so great a truth as Physicians have hitherto generally esteemed
it to be, then he that is acquainted with the Nature of Aliments, and the
Process of Nutrition, will probably cure Diseases with greater certainty and
less trouble to the Patient, than him that is utterly ignorant of both these:
And who is more like to be a Possessor of this knowledge, than a judicious
learned Physician? For,

1. He understands the Nature of Aliments, whether Animal or Vegetable; he
knows that such among them as are most temperate, and have no sensible
Operation are more agreeable to the body, and nourish more than others which
abound with active parts, whose Purging Vomitive, Sweating, Diuretic, or other
Qualities, render them unfit for Nutrition. As also, that most, if not all
things that are used for food, although they be not active in so high a degree
as others which come commonly in use for Medicine, that yet they often cause
great alterations in the body, according to the quantity, quality, right, or
unsuitable application thereof; and find that the Cause and Cure of many, if not
most Diseases, have their dependence on a good and regular, or a bad inordinate
Diet. But this will be made more evident by descending to particulars. I think
nothing can be more plain and evident, than that Onions, Shalutes,
Horseradish, Capers, Olives, Broom-buds, Pepper, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Salt,
Sugar, Butter, Vinegar, Wine, and Oil, are active alterative substances; and
yet they are often taken alone, or variously compounded to make savory picquant
Sauces which are supposed to promote digestion by rendering the food more
grateful, and by strengthening the ferment of the stomach. But besides these
there are many Vegetables which come frequently in use among all people, and in
some Countres with Bread, Cheese, and Milk are almost their only food, such are
Melons, Pompions, Cucumbers, as also Turnips, Carrots, Parsnips, Skirrets,
Radishes, Pease, Beans, Artichocks, and other Thistles, Asparagus, Hop-tops,
Cabbages, Coleworts, Cauleflowers, Comfry, Lettuce, Purslain, Parsley, Sage,
Leeks, etc. (not to mention various kinds of fruits) These are either boiled,
or eaten crude; alone, or variously compounded according to pleasure, being
rendered more grateful, or as is thought wholesome, by the addition of Butter,
Vinegar, Pepper, or other of the mentioned active substances. I shall not
insist on the great difference that there is in substance and qualities,
between Flesh and Fish, the variety of both being unimaginable; especially if
we consider the various ways of preparing them for food, and the additaments
that are used to render them more agreeable to the Palate: Concerning which
Physicians have wrote entire Volumns. Now the body partaking of the nature of
the Aliments (which I suppose no one will deny, or if they should, I could
demonstrate it by unquestionable experiments and observations) They having such
various qualities, and there being so great a variety in the complexions and
constitutions of men, it will necessarily follow, that some of those Aliments
may be contrary to a good sound constitution of body; and if a person indulge
himself much in the use of them, his health will by degrees be impaired, and a
bad texture or disposition of blood superinduced, which would have been
prevented: and if recent, easily removed by suitable nourishment, especially if
this regular good Diet be long continued.

Now the Physician being better than any other person acquainted with the
properties of most things that are commonly eaten, and with the temper of his
Patient, can teach him what to eat, and which to avoid; what will prove
beneficial to him, which are hurtful. Besides, he gives him some general Rules
in reference to Diet, yet not so strict and severe, but that they may be easily
without any trouble or inconvenience observed. These Rules may respect men
either in a Healthful, Neutral, or Diseased state.

1. For a man in Health, the Physician prescribes him not any set time or hours
whercin he should take his repasts, only that he should not eat another
plentiful meal, till what he eat before be well digested, and passed out of his
stomach. Then for the Quality of his food, that it be such as is most agreeable
to his constitution and employment; a gross food being most suitable to those
that are of a strong robust, a more fine and delicate to such as have a more
spare and weakly complexion: he allows them also such food as being long
accustomed to, they find agreeable to them, there being Idiosyncracies or
peculiarities in some men, whereby some food agrees well with them, which would
be noxious to others seemingly of the same constitution. As for Quantity, that
they should eat only so much as abates, not gluts their appetite; and after
which they find themselves rather more than less lightsome than they were
before eating: That its better to eat little and often, than much and at once;
that as near as they can, they keep to an equality for substance, not quantity,
making allowances for meats that have little nourishment, as substracting from
what are very nutritive, as Swines flesh, etc. And if they live temperately, to
exceed once or twice in a month in eating and drinking their ordinary stint,
which is found to promote perspiration the great preserver of health, and
enables the stomach to bear any accidental overcharge, there being few persons
that can at all times command their Appetites; and such a surplusage is
dangerous to those that have long observed exactly a regular Diet, not varying
the quantity of their food. Then lastly for Order, he advises that they should
not eat immediately after any great exercise of body or mind, and that they
avoid all those things which hinder the concoction or distribution of the
nourishment, and use whatsoever promotes it. Some such general rules as these
observed (abating hereditary and contagious Diseases which yet are in a great
measure prevented by an orderly Diet, and are less dangerous when we lapse into
them) will keep them in perfect health: For then the food will be readily
converted into good chyle, which conveyed into the veins, the blood not being
overcharged with quantity, and the food being before well prepared and opened
by the ferment of the stomach, becomes upon reiterated circulations, a most
noble generous liquor, and in its passage through the brain a pure unmixed
spirit will be sublimed or separated from it, free from preternatural acidities
which cause many Diseases.

This subtle and sincere Liquor or Spirit supplies the Nerves and Muscles with
what is necessary for Animal Actions, the Lungs, Stomach, Spleen, and other
Viscera, And the parts destined for the Propagation of the Species with so much
as is necessary to keep them in a due Tone and enable them to perform all these
actions for which they were instituted. The rest of the blood visiting the most
extreme parts of the body, and others retired from sight, where percolated
through Parenchymous fibrous or bony substances, it leaves with each part what
is Congruous to it: And so long as this course is continued without
interruption, health also will be uninterrupted.

Whereas on the contrary high Compounded nourishment, whose quantity and
substance is often varied, especially if it be more then the Stomach can well
digest, must by a Mechanical necessity cause Diseases. For if the quantity be
greater then the ferment of the Stomach can dissolve the Chyle will enter the
Blood Crude, and being more then that is used to assimilate at once, and not
well opened by a previous digestion, it by insensible degrees depraves the best
constitution, for then the blood supplies the Brain, Nerves, Viscera, and
Musculous parts with unsuitable Spirits, and nourishment which affecting them
after an unusual manner, pain or somewhat worse, is in time the result of this
bad or irregular Diet. Then for the quality of the food if it abound too much
with Oily and Spirituous parts, it puts the blood into that great commotion or
Ebullition we style a Fever, if with cold Crude juyces as Melons, Cucumbers or
Cherries, it sometimes extinguishes the Native-heat, and if the sick escape
they are usually stigmatized by blotches or eruptions all over their bodies or
in some particular parts, whereat the Morbous matter is excluded. Lastly, if
Salt be predominant in the nourishment it causes various Maladies, especially
of the Genus nervosum often occasions strange disorders in the whole mass of
blood and sometimes Corrodes the External parts which it deforms and and
tortures in Ulcers, Fistula's, Cancers and other painful, loathsome and
formidable Diseases. All which might have been prevented, and if timely care
had been taken, cured by a suitable and orderly Diet. For an ill Crasis or
Constitution of the blood does not always, presently, display it self in such
bad Syptoms as to deserve the denomination of a disease, this by Physicians is
called a Neutral-state which may be first Checked, and then redressed by Diet.
For although if we will examine things strictly there is no middle between
sickness and health, yet because it is so hard to find a Standard for either of
them; therefore Physicians have agreed on this third, as an expedient the
better to express their thoughts: so that we apprehend a man is in perfect
health who is free from pain or any Indisposition, performs in his own and the
Physicians opinion all Animal and Natural Actions as well as if he were in
perfect health, we account a Neutral state to be a slight propension to a
disease, when the ferment of the Stomach begins to be perverted, the blood
somewhat depraved, and yet no very ill Symptom appears, No function of the body
is much hindered or interrupted at least not very sensibly; As when by too
strict and severe a diet the body begins to be Emaciated, the Nerves
disaffected, or when by drinking to freely the body is inclining to a fever,
dropsy or Consumption, to the same or other diseases, by eating frequently too
much, or such food as suits not with the Stomachical Ferment being to it hard
of Digestion, or meat endowed with any other ill quality: by frequent excesses
crudities being accumulated which if they increase will display pernicious
effects; But if timely discerned may be conquered without the help of Physic.
As to avoid Repetition I shall manifest under the next head.

But suppose that a Disease is sensibly formed: Let us examine then what Diet
can contribute to the Cure, Moderation, or Palliation of the Distemper.

To avoid prolixity, I shall mention only some general ways of Cure by Diet,
on which any understanding person may expatiate in his mind.

It Is so well known that many Indispositions are cured by Fasting or a spare
Diet, that I need only mention it. Others are cured by a Diet axact for the
quantity of food which has laudible qualities, for what is taken being no more
then can be well overcome and dislolved by the stomach, this conveyed into the
blood soon renders it more spirituous, whereby what is crude is either
digested, or carried off in perspiration; so that Nature being duly* fed with
a constant supply of good spirits, the bad texture of the blood is soon
exchanged for one more innocent. Thus Consumptions and other Chronical
Distempers have been frequently cured. Many diseases are overcome by a Diet
contrary to the peccant matter; as Hecticks by a Milk Diet; Fevers by Ptisans;
some Consumptions by Snails, and other glutinous substances; Hot Diseases by
moist cold, Cold and moist by a hot and drying Diet. Some Diseases are always
moderated and often cured by substracting from the liquid part of the
nourishment, as Catarrhs; others by allowing it more plentifully, as in that
dreadful Disease called by Physicians Cholera Morbus, wherein if the Patient
take great quantities of Posset Drink, or thin weak Chicken-broath, those
affrightful symptoms of Vomiting and Looseness soon cease, the liquor dilating
that corrosive saline matter, which pricking the coats of the stomach, and
intestines, caused those violent workings upwards and downwards. And this is a
remedy so certain that I never yet observed it to fail, and others who have had
longer time and more opportunities to make Observations than my self, and
particularly he whom I take to be the first inventor of this easily parable
effectual Remedy, do unanimously affirm, That it has scarcely ever frustrated
their Expectations; and yet we know that many miscarry of this distemper, even
where the pretended generous Remedies of the Chemists, and best methods of
those whom they style Galenists have been employed.

But to proceed: Another way of curing Diseases by Diet, and the last I shall
mention, is with some sorts of food, which by a hidden or specifical property
cure Diseases. Our instances shall be only in the Vegetable Kingdom, whose
Simples are numerous, and they differ from each other in many sensible
properties, as Taste, Smell, Figure, Color, and their internal qualities are
far more numerous; and between them also there are great differences and
contrarieties. Some are of a hot, others cooling, moist, or dry Nature; some
are saline, others oily, etc. And most of them have several of these properties
in some degree, all which may be suited to the removal of whatsoever is contrary
to, and less powerful than themselves: now Diseases, if simple, are only an
excess in one quality or other, which an appropriate nutritive simple
judiciously applied, if the quantity be sufficient, and especially if often
reiterated, does usually redress. To make this more clear, I will give one or
two obvious examples of the same disorders caused and cured by different
Vegetables. It Is well known, that Parsley eaten in a small quantity is apt to
exasperate diseases of the Eye, and there are other Plants which prove more
healing than that is hurtful, witness Eybright: And it has been observed that
even Turnips render the sight more acute, cure moderate Inflammations, and are
commended by Physicians to be of frequent use while persons are under cure for
the Gutta Serena, Recent Cataracts, and other diseases incident to that tender
part. But this will appear most evidently in the Sea Scorbute which is
contracted usually by a bad Diet, salt meats, and nastiness; sometimes
extremity of heat or cold combining to exasperate it. It Is hardly to be
imagined how deplorable a condition those persons that are highly afflicted
with this distemper seem to be in, being to appearance absolutely incurable by
the most generous Medicines, helped with the advice of the greatest Physicians;
yet such slight things as the juice of Limons, Fresh meat, but especially
plenty of green Herbs presently dispell all these horrid threatening Symptoms,
and that so suddenly that they seem to be cured by a Charm, those who were not
able to stir a limb, were exercised with many grievous Maladies, in a week
recovering perfectly their former health; which perhaps long courses of Physic
would never have restored to them in a much longer space. And we find, that not
only the Sea Scorbute, but that also which. is on land contracted by eating salt
meats, is more certainly and suddenly cured by a convenient diet, then by
Physic. And an Eminent Physician in this city assured me, that most ill habits
of body occasioned by feeding much on salt meats, are soon cured by eating
daily for a few weeks a good Quantity of almost any edible green herbs. And
another no less considerable, who has great dealing with Seamen, protested
seriously to me, that he cures all those among them that are Scorbutically
affected, only with young pease, ordered all manner of ways; eaten crude, boiled
with, or without their shells, whose juice is to be plentifully mixed with
their broth; that this Remedy never failed him, nor the Seamen of cure: and
this sometimes after the disease had eluded many very promising Methods and
Medicines.

We have hitherto treated of Meats, which Physicians, as I have showed, can
render medicinal. I now proceed to mention, Drinks, which are no less, nay more
capable of being improved, by being impregnated with the virtues of Simples
Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral, or their Preparations, and not become
considerably distastful to the Palate, or nauseous to the Stomach. There are
myriads of such prescripts in the books of Authors. I shall only mention that
method which is of general use in order to the extricating the virtues of
Simples or Compositions, which is this: The ingredients are to be hung in
fermenting liquors, whether Wine, Ale, Beer, or Cider, etc. and that their
medicating properties are extracted by this method, daily experience does
attest, many who either will not, or cannot use other Physic, being recovered
by ingredients thus prepared. For the fermenting liquors being in a brisk
motion, and abounding with active parts chiefly spirituous, insinuate
themselves into the most private recesses of the Simples or other materials,
give motion enough to their active parts to loosen them from the more gross,
and drive them into the liquor, and these freed, associate with their
deliverers to unloose the rest. And that the Crasis, or chief parts and
properties of Simples are by this method obtained, is evidenced by the effects
and tastes of the drinks exactly emulating those of the materials which were
thus fermented. As for what refers to Cures effected by these means, I dare
boldly affirm, That there is scarcely any Chronical Disease, that is cured by
the Shop Medicines, which may not be cured with more certainty, ease, and
pleasure, by Drinks thus ordered, joined with a regular Diet.

Thus have we showed of how great advantage a convenient Diet is in order to
the cure of Diseases. I have spoken more largly to this particular, not that I
design to learn Physicians any new notion, they having many of them better
digested thoughts on this subject, then these which are the Product of two
hours Meditation; But I mention these things partly on the account of the
Vulgar, that they may have other apprehensions of understanding Physicians,
then they have hitherto entertained; as also that I might learn the
Apothecaries to know themselves, and their own insufficiency; or if they will
not acknowledge it, to expose them so nakedly to others, that, unless they will
shut their eyes, they cannot but behold unpardonable weakness and great defects
in most of those confident blind Bayards, the Quacking Apothecaries; who before
I have dismissed them, will appear lean and scrannel, though now they seem
plump and juycy. I shall therefore proceed to polish the mirror: wherein if
impartial Spectators do view and compare them with Learned honest Physicians,
they will find without any delusive Catoptrical trick, no less difference
between them, then there is betwixt admired beauty, and hated deformity.

Therefore lastly, A Physician will appear to be Superior to other pretenders,
if we reflect on those many advantages he has, whereof they are wholly
destitute. He is accounted to to enjoy a great Piviledge, who has been
Educated by an Eminent Practicioner of Physic, who has been free in his
communications to him; and this is by the Vulgar accounted sufficient to
constitute a person, who has been in such circumstances an able Physician: And
the best plea the Apothecaries have, is, that they have collected the Practice
of some worthy Physician for most Diseases; now there is no Physician but
injoys the benefit of the writings of many hundred excellent persons, that were
eminent in the same faculty before him: These have faithfully communicated
their experiements and observations of the causes and symptoms of diseases, and
of their cures; what methods and Medicines they found most beneficial, what
things are injurious and to be avoided: And there are others who have left us
their writings concerning the virtues of most Simple and Compounded Medicines,
in what cases they have been found effectual; and many (which is perhaps the
most profitable way of writing) have left us entire books of Medical
Observations, to which Physicians, who have a Scheme of them in their memories
have recourse in difficult cases, and by Analogy know how to proceed, as do the
Lawyers, on other occasions.

Now let us suppose with some that Physic is altogether Empyrical, being
rather a Mass of Experiments then a Science perfectly formed and established on
sound unquestionable verities (which is the most plausible plea Apothecaries or
other pretenders can use) yet still it must needs follow, that he ought to be
esteemed most able and sufficient, who is furnished with most and best
experiments, either from his own observation, or by reading of books which
afford him the experiments of all the rest of the world, and can best conclude
and argue from the Analogy, Correspondence, and Harmony, they have one to
another. So that a studied Physician must, in all consideration of reason, have
far the advantage of any other.

Indeed it has been objected by some that the diseases of one country and age
are so vastly different from those of others, that what is profitable to those
thar live in one age, or to the inhabitants of one Country is not so to
another. Which is not only a great mistake as I have else where demonstrated,
but of bad consequence, leading us to the neglect of the writings of many
Excellent Persons, from which we do daily derive great assistance: For although
I will not deny but that there may be some uncertainty, and the Analogy may not
be altogether so exact, as we could desire; yet it is no otherwise then the
variation of the Needle, touched by the Lodestone; which although it does not
always directly point to the Poles, but in some places considerably varies, so
that the most skilful Mariners cannot certainly, though they can nearly
determine where, and in what degree of Longitude they are; yet it is such a
help that they cannot without great hazard engage in long and dangerous voyages
without it; and by it is direction, if no other ill accidents intervene, they
usually arrive at the desired ports, though very remote from the place whence
they set forth. So a Physician by the help of his own and others observations,
for which he makes allowance, or abatements, as he sees occasion, Pilots most
of his Patients almost, as surely as if his course were chalked out for him or
directed by a line; So that patients, who venture themselves in dangerous cases
with Physicians and Apothecaries, do it only with this difference, the one (as
it were) Imbarks for a long Voyage in a Leaking Skiff, with an Ignorant Pilot
without Sayls, Compass, and other due Provisions, the other in a stanch fair
Ship, well Riggid, provided with a skilful Pilot, good Compasses, and all other
requisites for Navigation: And which is like to make the most short and
fortunate Voyage, which is most secure from storms, foundring, or holding
uncertain courses, is, I suppose easily determined? It Is true we read of some,
that in a little Boat set out from New England, and made a quick and safe
Voyage to Ireland; and of others, who no better accommodated Sailed from the
Bermudas to Virginia; yet these Accidents are not frequent, and if they are
registered, it is under the notion of extarordinary events. And besides none of
these were so mad as to have neglected any helps they could have procured, it
not being choice but necessity, that put them on such strange adventures, and
to run so great a risque to escape dangers, which they could not otherways
avoid. But this is not the case of any that are sick, there being choice of
means, so that for a man advisedly to hazard that, which is so precious and
valuable as life, by committing himself to the care of ignorant unskilful
Empericks, when he might in a great measure secure it by consulting a sober
Learned Physician, is to put an affront upon his reason, or to disesteem his
life; but certainly there are not many, who after so fair a warning given them,
will expose themselves to dangers, which they may so easily avoid. I will
therefore now proceed, in compliance with my promise, to give an account of
some of those numberless unworthy practices, the Apothecaries are manifestly
guilty of, in Order to the disgracing Physicians, and insinuating or confirming
a good opinion of themselves.

They will often commend to persons as preventive Physic, a gentle Purge, and
at night a little Dose of Diascordium, Mithridate, Treacle or somewhat else, in
so small a quantity that it shall not disorder them; so that their Patient, for
so they call them, finding that he has received no prejudice by this Physic,
and the purge possibly working kindly, (of which they among the Physicians
prescriptions may have enough) apprehends that he may be somewhat better, and
so begins to have some confidence in the Apothecary; who does not loose any
hold he has got. For soon after the Patient perhaps has occasion for a
Physician, himself or some of his family being ill: If it be for any distemper
they were formerly subject to, for which the Apothecary has any of the Doctors
Prescriptions; he then suggests that there is no necessity he should give
himself the charge of sending for a Physician who would prescribe the same
things he ordered formerly, which prescriptions he has by him, and is ready to
make up for them; although now, as I showed before, the case may be so altered
by complication or otherwise, which the Physician would presently have
discovered, that this, which did once give Relief, may be either highly
prejudicial or ineffectual. Thus they do ordinarily obtrude themselves and
their Medicines on the sick especially if the disease be frequent and obvious,
as the Measles, Smallpox, Fever, Scurvey; and some among them soar so high as
the Venereal Lues: For they have seen persons often under courses for these
diseases, and, having the prescripts still on the File, they know no reason why
they should not cure them, as well as the Doctor: They therefore tell them that
it is a great expense to gratify the Physician, and pay the Apothecaries Bill,
which in these courses they assure them, will amount to much (as indeed they do
by their ordering) that they are thoroughly acquainted with the Physicians
Method: which as I have already showed, is a gross mistake and high
presumption. But I cannot dismiss, without a further Check this frivolous
pretense of the Apothecary, that because he has most of those Medicines which
the Physician otdinarily imploys, therefore he ought to be allowed in the
practice of Physic, it being a way of Argumentation not much unlike that, some
silly fellow might make, who seeing a Lutinist play well to admiration, is
there upon desirous to please himself, and gratify the Company with the like
Music: But upon trial although he have the same Instrument, as many Fingers as
the Musician, and the Notes pricked down before him; yet can produce no other
harmony, then what is the result of discord: And would he not render himself
yet more ridiculous, should he persuade himself his Music is not inferior to
that of the Excellent Artist, and becomes highly difpleased with the Company,
because they do not bestow on him the same applause they gave to the person, he
vainly endeavors to imitate? There being requisite to the best performance of
Music, not only a hand and instruments, but also an exact knowledge of the
Rules of that Art, and frequent Exercise. So that for any to promise themselves
the Art or habit without the use of the right means, which conduce to it is
attainment, is the highest folly, and has as little foundation in reason as an
Attempt (according to our Common homely Proverb) to make a Velvet Purse of a
Sowes ear, or any other unsuitable matter.

But to leave this, and proceed in the account of our Quacking Apothecaries,
who by some such Artifices as we mentioned having scrued themselves into
families, that they take especial care of them according to their mean ability,
I am willing to admit, their interest, obliging them so to do, and you may be
sure, they ply them with store of Physic; which how fatal it proves to those
that have the Measles or Smallpox, is too well known. But if by good fortune
the Patient escape, then they sufficiently Celebrate themselves in all
Companies, rendering the case somewhat more dangerous and difficult, then really
it was: whereby they make way for their Introduction into other families. But
if (as is most likely) by their ill management, the Patients lapse into a
dangerous condition, so soon as they are sensible thereof, they immediately
advise them to send for a Doctor, who is oftentimes so Civil as not to
animadvert on what has been done amiss. If they recover, then he endeavors to
persuade them, that the Physician proceeded in the very same course he intended
to have followed; and that it was only for their satisfaction he was desirous
to have the Physician advised with. But if the person dies before the Physician
was sent for, he cries out with a wide mouth on malignity, which is for the
most part no other then the effect of his ill management; yet being dead he
sparingly suggests that he fears the Physician took not a right course; and
wishes that he himself had proceeded after his own method, which for any thing
he knew might have recovered him: which suggestion taking with the humor of
the people, who are very prone to accuse the last medicines of any strange
Symptoms which are often Forerunners of death, the treacherous Apothecary
makes a great advantage of his own miscarriages. Which double dealing having
been detected by some Physicians, has so highly displeased them that they have
often been ready to take up a firm resolution never to take care of any
Patients who had before been managed by Apothecaries; and had actually
performed it, did they not apprehend it would be a breach of Christian charity
to punish people so severely for imprudent actions extorted from them by an
others over-bearing persuasions and confidence. These are some of those many
artifices the Apothecaries employ, I speak not at random what they may do, but
what they have often actually done, many of which have fallen under my own
observation, others I have received from the Patients or Physicians themselves,
on whom they have thus imposed. Now I appeal to the whole Nation, whether such
great mischiefs and inconveniences as these I have already enumerated, ought
not to be redressed; and that we may not think they are beyond the reach of any
remedy, I shall now proceed to the mention of those proposals the Physicians
make to the Apothecaries: with which if they comply, they will save themselves
from ruin, which otherwise is at their heels. I have also thought fit to let
the world know that we can subsist without them, and that probably much better
then with them; I mean more to our own and the Patients satisfaction or
security, as in it is due place shall be made manifest.

Notwithstanding that Physicians and their Patients have been so highly injured
by Apothecaries, that they might with the greatest justice utterly reject them;
and although the nature of their crimes seem to be such, that they cannot
safely keep any further correspondence with them: yet this is so far from being
the design of the Physicians, that if any expedient can be excogitated (and
such they apprehend they have found out) which may prove a fair ground for an
accommodation, they are willing to forgive and forget all former miscarriages,
and give them such encouragement as reasonable and honest persons can desire.
Now all that the Physicians expect of them, is that they keep in their own
Station, and endeavor to answer the end of their institution. That is, First
they shall give the Physicians sufficient security and assurance, that they
will carefully and faithfully prepare their medicines; And secondly, that this
shall be their sole employment, they no more intruding themselves into the
Physicians, which is the practice of Physic. If these be not reasonable
requests, let the Apothecaries themselves propose such as are, which the
Physicians are ready to receive. Now that the Physicians can be satisfied with
nothing less, if they have regard, either to their own credit and subsistence,
or the welfare of the Patient, is easily evinced by a recapitulation of what
was said before. For if it be true which I think was demonstrated, That many
Apothecaries are not well acquainted with the Materia medica, and liable to be
imposed on by Herb-women, Druggists, and others; If they trust to those for
Medicines, that prepare them unfaithfully as it is manifest they do; If they
themselves use bad drugs in their compositions and vent medicines which have
lost most if not all their Medicinal virtue; Or if they are fraudulent in their
compositions, leaving out frequently the chief Ingredients; If they substitute,
add, and subtract at pleasure; Are negligent, slovenly, and superficial in
their compositions, subject to mistakes, either from their own or Apprentices
ignorance of the Latin tongue; and besides utterly unacquainted with
Chemistry, a most material if not necessary part of Pharmacy; and instead of
those noble Remedies, employ such as they have from unfaithful persons, who
ordinarily adulterate and sophisticate them. If all these may be affirmed (as
they may most certainly be) of most Apothecaries, would not Physicians expose
themselves and their Profession to the scorn of the world, and might not their
Patients deservedly load them with reproaches, should they still make use of
their Medicines? And further, if the Apothecaries be absolutely unfit for the
practice of Physic, why are they allowed in it? And that they are, was proved
from the nature of Diseases, and those several ways whereby they admit of
cure. Where we showed, that the Apothecaries are Masters neither of the cure by
Method, Specificks, Arcana, or any other compounded of these; That they
understand not Physiology, and are not capable of attending to all those
circumstances, which ought to be duly considered by a true Physician; That
they understand not when Nature is to be left, to manage things after her own
conduct: but on the contrary, that they disturb her orderly motions, and
distract her in most regular Operations; That they are not acquainted with cure
of Diseases, or preservation of health by Diet; That they ordinarily mistake
simple Diseases for complicated, and these for such as are simple; That they
are not furnished with those helps which are of great use to the Physician,
such are the observations of the Ancients concerning the rise, symptoms,
progress and cure of Diseases; and therefore deserve not the denomination of
Physicians, nor can without extreme prejudice to the public, be permitted to
follow the practice of Physic till they are better qualified for it. I hope
then after such a Manifesto of grievances, the Physicians may either endeavor
their reformation, or desert them; and entertain such as will be more faithful
to themselves, and to their Patients. But they are very unwilling, though
highly provoked, to be an occasion of the ruin of so many as will upon their
deserting them, be exposed to miserable exigencies; they will not therefore
promote their downfall, till they deserve it by rejecting verbally or implicitly
the succeeding modest proposals. It will therefore be expected:

That they do faithfully and carefully prepare all the Medicines they send out
of their Shops, not trusting to wholesale either Apothecaries or other
Medicine-mongers; That all the Drugs they use shall be viewed and approved of
by one or more Physicians before they enter Compositions, as also the Drugs
that are of daily use; That once in three months a solemn Scrutiny be made by
Physicians, deputed for that purpose, of all their Drugs and Compositions: who
shall be empowered immediately to cause to be destroyed all such as are found
unfit for use. We also require, That they either themselves prepare their
Chemical remedies, or give the Physicians such assurances, that they are
faithfully and skilfully made as shall satisfy them; And that care be taken
for the future, that no Apothecary entertain any for an Apprentice that is not
competently skilled in Latin tongue; and that they be first examined and
approved by such Apothecaries as the Physicians shall depute. Further,
Physicians observing the great inconveniences which have ensued on
Apothecaries having access to the Patients, which is not allowed of in many
Countries, do also think it unreasonable that Apothecaries here should take
that liberty, which for reasons mentioned is thought fit should be denied them;
especially having found upon due deliberation, that there is no need of them
out of their Shops, where they are to look to the Composition of their
Medicines: which in their absence often suffer through ignorance of their young
Apprentices, whatsoever is commonly performed by them among Patients, being
otherwise easily effected. Further, That they contract their number, or at
least take care for the future, that it be not increased. And lastly, that such
prizes be set on Medicines by Physicians as they shall think fit, who will take
care that the Apothecaries have reasonable gain; That these be Printed, as in
the Amsterdam and other Pharmacopoeia's, so no person can be cheated.

The Substance of what I have here delivered, is comprised in the last
proposition mentioned, and insisted on by the Judicious Writer of that rational
discourse concerning the state of Physic, in these words, or to this effect.

That Physicians send bills to be made up by Apothecaries, as now they are;
provided only that the Time and Manner of using them, be not set down nor the
name of the Patient, That it be not sent by the Patient, but by their own
servants; That it be returned to the Physicians again with the Physic it self,
to be filed up by them or entered into a book with the Patients name and the
time: the Physic so made and provided by the Physicians order to be fetched at
their own houses (as it is now at the Apothecaries shops) or from thence sent
home by their own servants to the Patient. And because we cannot safely trust
to Apothecaries for Chemical Remedies, they usually buying them of common
Chemists or Operators, It is desired that the College would erect a public
Laboratory, where all Chemical Medicines fit to be used, shall be well and
faithfully made upon the Faith and Authority of the College; and that they
shall expressly appoint those, whose Physic they shall think fit to buy, to
provide all their Chemical Preparations from thence; nor to permit the use of
any other Chemical Preparations to any of their number, except he himself make
and prepare them, or have them from such Apothecaries as the College being
satisfied with their abilities and honesty shall approve of. And lastly, That
the College of Physicians (who herein will be soon imitated by others) Enact,
That none of their number send bills to, or buy Physic of, any Apothecary who
takes on him the practice of Physic, till they are fully satisfied he is
sensible of the injury done to them, and cease to do the like for the future.

Now how severe and unjust soever these Limitations may seem to the
Apothecaries, yet in reality this is but a fair and moderate course between
them and Physicians; for it hinders not the Apothecaries making and selling of
Physic to any that shall please to buy of them: which thing only belongs to
their Trade. To visit the Patient, feel his Pulse, and consider his Urine,
discourse of the state of the Disease, and prescribe proper Remedies for it, is
the business and care of the Physician: So that by this method the Interest of
both will be preserved, and all causes of jealousy between the Physicians and
them will for ever cease. The Physicians practice and profession will be so
absolutely and entirely secured to himself, that the Apothecary cannot invade
it; for he will never see a Physicians bill (from which they always take
direction) nor the Patient himself, and so be utterly ignorant of that case for
which the Physic was prepared and used; nor will he hear the Physicians reason
and discourse of the due times and manner of Administering it, or explain the
nature and cause of the distemper, nor have occasions of officious intervening
between the Physician and Patient, nor dispense the Physic with praise of his
own great care and pains in preparing it as he is wont to do, all this the
Physician obtains by only concealing his bills (the writing of a bill being as
it were the Mystery of his trade) in which therefore he does nothing, but what
is held reasonable among all men.

Besides, This will insensibly lessen that exorbitant number of Apothecaries,
which makes the trade scarce a competent subsistence. For as things are now,
while the Master or their Servants, are employed by the Physician to visit his
Patients, and carry Physic about, they will be under a necessity of taking
several Apprentices; else they cannot perform such attendances abroad, and the
business of their shop too: and this has made so vast in increase of the trade
within few years, as has rendered it but a mean way of livelihood to a great
many, and very dangerous to the sick. Now as their number will by little and
little grow less, so the trade will become better; and they who are of it, both
for skill and estate much more considerable: and, which is of much greater
consequence, Physic will be better prepared, for the Apothecaries will be more
in their shops, and not leave things to raw, negligent Servants, as is now
often done; they not being sent about by Physicians to their Patients, or with
Physic, no^ engaged in any Quacking practice of their own, will have more
leisure to attend making good Medicines, which is their proper business.

This in short, is the Summary of what we expect from them; and if it be not
granted us, nothing remains, but that Physicians take Pharmacy into their own
hands, supervise the making of their own Medicines, and dispense them
themselves. And we have reason to apprehend that Physicians will be put on a
necessity of acting thus, it being highly improbable, that the generality of
Apothecaries should be reduced to a sense and practice of their duty, having
been so long accustomed to such bad courses. For Custom, we know, is a second
nature, and where bad, they are not easily subdued by those that heartily
desire and design it, how much less by Immoral men who if they amend, it is from
a principle of fear; and therefore they will redeem every opportunity of
infranchising themselves and getting loose from a restraint so troublesome, and
contrary to their inclinations. Besides, how unwilling will they be to moderate
their gain, lessen their number, which must necessarily be done, unless we will
allow the mentioned Inconveniences, which cannot otherwise admit of a remedy.
Besides, it is natural for some to be ambitious of practice, not only as it is
gainful, but because it adds to their credit and repute, conciliates them more
respect, than people think ordinarily due to simple Apothecaries; and therefore
to part with their employment in this kind, will not be without unspeakable
regret and vexation. And besides, supposing, which is yet very improbable, that
they should promise to keep within due limits, reform abuses, what other
security can they give us besides their bare word or promise, which is so much
the more unlikely to be valid; because, as I before intimated, it is not free
but extorted: and it is absolutely impossible for any besides their own
consciences to detect all their fraudulent practices. For though Physicians see
and allow of their Ingredients, behold them mixed, what should hinder them, if
any of the old Ferment remain, from increasing the quantity with bad Materials?
And indeed, neither Laws of God nor Man, good Instructions, excellent Examples,
or strict Observance of their actions, can hinder those that are ill disposed
from acting that secretly, which sinister respects keeps them from doing in
public. Therefore such a constitution of Pharmacy is desirable, where bad men
shall be made good and faithful, rather that where those that are innocent meet
with daily temptations to be dishonest.

This will be accomplished by Physicians taking it into their own hands; for
then suppose them as bad as malice, or the Apothecaries can render them, how
little sense soever they retain of their duty, that of interest will strongly
oblige them to have good Medicines. Machiavel somewhere prudently advises, That
if you would understand what men's designs or intentions are, learn what will
conduce most to promote their interest; and that they will chiefly aim at,
although to the unwary Spectator, they may seem to look another way, and act
another part then they intend. There are but two cases where this Maxim is
rendered invalid. The one is, when men are overawed with such a sense of
Religion, as will not allow them to practice what they apprehend would be
highly for their temporal advantage: but this is so far from hindering the
Physician, that it is or ought to be the greatest encouragement he can meet
with, the applauses and acquittances he will daily receive from his own
conscience, proving an abundant recompense for the unusual trouble he will meet
with in compounding and dispensing his own Remedies. The other occasion of
invalidating the fore-quoted Maxim, is, when men mistake their interest and do
not see it; which here is morally impossible for a Physitian's credit, and
consequently his profit depending on the goodness and success of his Remedies,
the better his Medicines are, the greater will be his gain, the higher his
repute: Whereas the Apothecary, let his Medicines be never so bad, runs little
hazard, the Physician only being usually blamed if they cause people to
miscarry; especially if the Apothecary can confidently affirm, that his
Materials were choice, carefully and skilfully prepared, which they are never
backward to do: adding, sometimes such insinuations as have a tendency to
disparage the Physician, and introduce themselves, as was before intimated.
Therefore now we proceed to show that Physicians can manage Pharmacy. Secondly,
That if they proceed in such Methods as we shall mention, or some other
analogous great conveniences, and advantages to the Physician, and Patient;
nay, even to the public, will be the result of such Procedures.

The Proposals that we make, are, That either every Physician prepare and
dispense his own Physic; or that they enter into Associations: either of which
will be of great advantage to the public. Nothing can in my opinion be
objected against the first, unless the Physician himself pretend that it will
be too great a trouble, and divert him too much from his other employment, of
visiting and advising the Sick, or consulting in private with his Books,
Reason, and Experience, (as every honest Physician does) in order to the
Recovery and Relief of his Patients. Now to him that considers things
attentively, this can be urged only by such Physicians as have a full
employment, which will afford them to keep in their own houses; or to have near
them persons skilful in Pharmacy, whose only business it should be to provide
such Medicines, whether Compound or Simple, as they shall have occasion to use
in their practice, the Physicians directing and supervising them. So that
supposing the Apothecary skilful, there will be little reason to fear
miscarriages; for the Apothecary will have no temptation to be unfaithful,
because it will not benefit him, his gains not being contingent (as now)
depending on the quantity of Physic he sells, his salary being we suppose fixed
and certain. But rather on the contrary it is his interest to have the Physic
as good as he can make it; for the greater success the Physician has, the more
will be his employment: and consequently he will be the better able to gratify
the Apothecary for his care and trouble in preparing the Medicine he imployes
so successfully. But suppose the Apothecary should have bad designs (which yet
he can never have so long as he is in his wits) he will want opportunities to
effect them; himself, and his Medicines being almost continually under the
Physicians inspection, who allows no bad drugs admittance into his Operatory,
and may if he please, see them mixed and duly prepared.

But Physicians will be freed from much of this trouble, if they take the
advice of that late judicious Writer we have already cited, which is, That the
most eminent among them entertain in their houses persons of three or four
years standing in either of our Universities, who are to be received in the
capacity, not of Servants, but of young Students, Friends, or virtuous
Companions, to be instructed in their worthy Profession; and brought up in the
exercises of Anatomy, knowledge of Herbs, mixing and compounding of Medicines,
(the drudgery resting on Servants) and visiting the sick under their direction:
who when they are a little advanced, and studied in this Art, may be appointed
by the Physician to observe Patients in his absence, and give him an account of
their cases; by which means he will be ignorant of nothing material, although
he be not there himself. They may also visit their Laboratories, and look after
the Preparations of those Medicines the Physicians prescribe; which as it will
much ease the ancient, so it will be of great advantage to the young Physician,
who while he imployes his industry in such services as these for the elder
gains (besides what is learnt from Books and Authors) his long experience sees
his Patients, hears him discourse of their several Cases, considers the
Medicines provided for them, and observes their several effects: All which
advantages are now given away in vain to Apothecaries, to whom the practice of
Physic does not belong. And if this has been the course that all mankind has
ever taken to raise and propagate practical arts, and trades of daily use in
humane life, why should it not be used in Physic, which is a practical Art of
much greater consequence? especially if we consider how dangerous the errors
of this Profession are, and how necessary a practical education is for any man
that intends the exercise of it. And though some through pride or weakness
disgrace this method as Mechanical; yet without doubt there are many ingenious
young men in England, who would be very glad, and take it for a great honor to
be thus received by some of the Grandees and great Practitioners: and their
Friends think them well and honorably employed.

But (to proceed in our discourse, which was interrupted by this seasonable
Digression) because young Physicians, and such as have little employment cannot
allow an Apothecary maintenance out of their small gain; it being therefore
proposed, That Physicians enter into Societies or Combinations, (which indeed
they do naturally, and many such there are now in this City) more or fewer in a
company, according as they have greater or less employment: That these provide
a place which shall be the public Laboratory, for the preparing of all
Physic, Chemical and Galenical. That they also procure one or more skilled in
the Operations of both faculties; these to have, either the profit profit of
all the Medicines that shall be prepared: or to have a certain salary or
allowance from the Physicians, yet to proceed to register Bills, and receive
money, as if they were concerned only for themselves. So many Physicians
frequenting the Laboratory, will be a double advantage; for if they meet with
any new and extraordinary way of preparing any sort of Medicines, they will
readily communicate it for the benefit of the Society: and so many supervising
Drugs and Operations, it will be almost impossible to err, and difficult to
cheat, if the Operator should have such a design, which would be the highest
folly and madness in him who makes no benefit thereof, but is rather to his
prejudice; as it will be also eminently of the Physicians, who therefore will
not connive at, much less encourage, any Practices of that nature.

But to be more particular, the Reasons and Advantages of these proposals are
very many, and of great Consideration.

For first, if this course be taken, It will free the Physician from much
Anxiety and Hazard, from which, he cannot plead exemption (if an observing
considerative person) while he depends on the honesty, care, and skill of an
Apothecary, in whom perhaps he has little reason to confide, upon some or all
of those accounts, I have already mentioned: Whereas now in this Constitution
of Pharmacy, the Physician will be satisfied his Medicines are good; and that
he cannot be injured by the malice or design of unworthy, miscarriages or
mistakes of Ignorant or Careless Apothecaries.

2. This will also free the Patient from fears, jealousies, and dangers; to
which, they will be subject so long as the Physician shall repose so great a
part of their trust in persons, who do seldom faithfully discharge what is
committed to their care. How great a satisfaction will it be to them, for
Physicians to put their affairs in such a Method, that all the Physic is
prescribed, be prepared exactly after the Physicians direction? and That it
will be very unlikely they should suffer from any of those mistakes and
miscarriages, which have heretofore often happened? For the Patient knowing it
is the Physicians interest to take care that his Medicines be prepared aright;
that they are immediately under his inspection; that the Operators have no bias
clapped upon them, which should make them run aside, will thoroughly acquiesce in
all that shall be done: which quietness, composure, and satisfaction, will
promote the Cure, according to that of Galen, Plures sanat, cui plures fidunt.
There is greatest success where people have most confidence. Which in this case
is far from presumption; For I see no reason, why they may not promise to
themselves, and expect better success from Medicines, that are contrived with
skill, and are prepared with the greatest care; than from such as are carelessly
and slightly made, or which is worse, Adulterated. Which brings to my mind a
third Advantage.

3. If this course be taken, it will render Physic more successful. For
Medicines will be better prepared, than now they are, the Physician taking care
himself to have nothing but what is good; which he could not so well do, when
it was made up out of his sight. Besides, He is under a necessity of taking
greater care to have all he uses very good, and most exactly prepared; for no
man can now lay any miscarriage on the neglect or ignorance of an Apothecary.
It rests altogether on himself, and he becomes responsible for it.

Further, the Profession of Physic will be exercised with greater success, if
Physicians prepare and dispense their own Medicines, than now it is; because
then, all sorts of men would apply themselves immediately to the Physician,
whereby he will have opportunities of seeing the disease in its first rise,
which gives him a mighty advantage, for the true understanding and cure of it.
Whereas now it is the unhappiness of the Physician (and indeed chiefly of the
Patient) that he is never almost sent for, till things are brought to
extremity, and all opportunities of curing near lost; Whereas if the Disease
had been encountered in the first rise of it, with powerful and convenient
Medicaments, the Patient had been again restored to health: whose life it may
be must now answer for the first omission. Besides, that the Disease if met in
the beginning, is often carried off with a little matter; which neglected,
requires a long and troublesome course: Not to insist on this, that more coming
than formerly to the Physician, enlarges his business, and experience. Neither
is it a mean convenience, that Physicians will have no temptations, to recede
from experimented Methods and Medicines, which I fear now they sometimes do,
especially if they are easy, or obvious, lest they should bring themselves
into contempt with Apothecaries, and discover their practice; so as they might
use it to their prejudice, which is now frequently done. Neither need they add
more Ingredients than are necessary, or those that are of great price, and
little efficacy to serve dishonorable Interests. And preparing themselves the
Physic they give, will help them better to remember what had a good effect,
and which had not, ot failed; and how to accomodate themselves to the same
persons at other times.

4. This will mightily abate the charge and expense of Physic, the Physicians
being contented with such moderate prices for their Medicines, as will
discharge what they expend for Drugs in their Laboratories, among Servants and
Operators; so that if at the years end their receipts for Medicines amount to
so much as they have expended on them, it is all they promise themselves, or
expect from others. For the Physician will not, as the Apothecary now does,
depend upon the gain of the Physic he sells to such as come to him; but as he
did before upon the Fees which he receives from persons of condition and
ability, when he is sent for out of his own house: for the trouble of selling
his own Physic, he takes upon him only to advance the public Interest,
satisfy himself more in his own Profession, minister to the necessities of the
poor, and consult the greater security of all. Now the charge of Pharmacy (upon
a modest compute) if this course be taken, will not arise to a sixth part of
what is now paid toward it; for we can buy Druggs as cheap as any retail,
Apothecaries, and every Physician or Association of them, knowing what
Compositions they shall chiefly have occasion for, such only are prepared, and
so much of them, as they conjecture may be sufficient, till they have an
opportunity again to make them, which shall always be when the Ingredients are
fullest of virtue and vigor. By which means they will avoid that great loss of
Medicines which is frequent in an honest Apothecaries shop, where many
Compositions are made, that are not used six times in a year; may perhaps not
once in six years, as I have heard many of them seriously protest: which must
necessarily occasion great losses, unless they are kept till they have
opportunities to vend them, as most of them do, although they retain nothing of
the Medicine, they once were, besides the Name. So that in this case the
Apothecary is inevitably exposed either to be a looser, or become dishonest,
This is to the prejudice of the patient, the other of himself, who must
endeavor to repair his losses, by inhauncing the prizes of those that remain;
which does also obliquely reflect on the patient, although of the two it is more
excusable, and both of them are avoided, by the expedient we have proposed;
Where the Medicines will be assuredly good, the Physicians interest obliging
him to look to that, and withal afforded cheap, I mean at the same prizes they
cost him; Physicians being abundantly requited for their care and pains in
seeing to the preparing their own Medicines by the success they will have, and
by it is necessary Concomitant, a full Employment. But suppose a Physician
should sell his Physic to the meaner sort of people, who give him nothing for
his advice, as dear as the Apothecary now does, it is still a great benefit to
them, they having advice and Physic too for the same rate they paid for
Physic alone.

5. The leaving off the common way of sending Patients to the Apothecaries,
will be a great case to the public; especially to the poorer sort of people,
to whom now the Physician will have a fair advantage of being charitable, and
exceedingly helpful as he will be: either if he let them have their Physic at
the same price it cost him, bestow it on them freely or (which I suppose will
be most usual) teach them how to prepare it themselves. For it is well known
that Physicians who are Masters of method, and well acquainted with the
Medicinal properties of simples, do often effect great cures, by means, which
to an injudicious Person will seem slight or trivial. And indeed if we
seriously consider things, we cannot but conclude that nature has made perhaps
no less plentiful provision of remedies for the poor than for the rich, that
Diseases may be cured in the absence of Aurum potabile and costly Elixirs;
without Magisterial Syrups, Apozems or other chargeable Compositions. We have I
persuade my self Medicines at our doors* or near us; we need only gather, and
slightly prepare them, and certainly it is no great labor or trouble to make an
Infusion or Decoction, to express the juice, or dry the herb* and employ the
powder: and yet these easy and obvious Preparations are oftentimes (perhaps
usually) no less effectual then those which are more elaborate. Now of how
great advantage is it to the poor to be adopted Apothecaries by the Physician;
and instructed how to make their own physic, which costs them nothing but a
little labor? These otherwise by reason of poverty must commit all to Nature,
whereby they are often exposed to a manifest hazard; and many die who if they
had seasonably consulted the Physician might have been rescued with some common
familiar remedy. Besides we shall frequently have opportunities of obliging the
poor in another way; For Physicians having for their patients many Ladies,
Gentlewomen and other Persons of Consideration or Qualitys, whose charitable
inclinations dispose them not only to feed and clothe the poor, but also to
supply them with Physic, if they knew what was proper for their Diseases, now
a Physician knowing what Distempers are most frequent in his neighborhood, can
instruct them what provision they should make in Order to their Cure, of Drugs,
Simple distilled Waters, Syrups, Conserves, Spirituous or Cordial-waters; and
those much better then any which are made in the Apothecaries shops. For I
should suppress truth, if I did not acknowledge to the honor of that Curious
Sex, that all those preparations they themselves make, are much superior to any
the Apothecaries can produce. Now what I have mentioned, is not a mere
supposition, or a thing desirable; but is daily practiced by many tender,
sweet-natur'd Creatures: and if all Physicians improve the Interest they have
in Wealthy, Generous Patients, I persuade my self it will become a general
Practice. Which if it should, as these gallant persons will be commended by all
men, and beloved by those toward whom they exercise this beneficial Charity;
so without doubt these Actions will be acceptable to God, and have their reward
in this life, and in that which is to come.

6. This will be of high advantage to Physicians, and those Patients of theirs
that live in the Country, where multitudes miscarry, (and many even among the
Gentry,) either under bad or for want of good Physic. For the Country
Apothecaries not having certain vent for their Medicines, and few among them
being well skilled in their Composition, to avoid charge and trouble, buy such
things* as they have most frequently occasion for, of London Apothecaries who
sell Medicines cheaper than the others can make them; and well they may, they
being either the refuse of their Shops, or fraudulently compounded, I mean,
made either with old or perished Drugs: or else they leave out the most costly,
which are often the most effectual and active Ingredients. Now Physicians in
the Country comporting with the common way of sending prescripts to the
Apothecary, especially those that concern persons of Quality; Which Physic,
what effects it is like to have, I leave to others to conjecture; for my own
part I will not affirm, That any are dispatched by it (though we have little
reason to believe bad Physic can have good effects) but of this I am most
certain, that it lets many die (which is little better) whom probably it would
have restored, had it been such as the Physician presumes the Apothecary is
furnished with. And but that it is contrary to my nature, and the design of
this Discourse, to divulge any thing which might be a reproach to particular
persons, I could name several gallant Gentlemen, exceedingly beloved in their
Countries, wherein they were very useful; who miscarried, as is verily thought
(by those that are competent Judges) between the neglect and baseness of the
Country and City Apothecaries. Whereas, when it shall be once declared by the
College of Physicians, That it shall be accounted to disgrace for any to
prepare their own Physic; this will be the most pleasing News that can come to
Physicians who live remote from great Cities, and have hitherto abstained from
that practice, only to maintain their reputation, the Apothecaries and their
adherents, endeavoring to blast the repute of those that provide, and give
their Medicines themselves; branding them, in all Companies, with the
ignominious Titles of Empirick, and Mountebanck: which injurious design often
takes effect among those half-witted people, that are greater admirers of
Formality, than Realities. But the College having published such a
Declaration, as I have mentioned, Physicians will receive greater encouragement
from discerning persons, who certainly will be best satisfied with their
Physic, when they have it from the Physician himself, which surely will be as
good as he can contrive or ^^ke; otherwise he will ruin his Patient, his
Reputation, and indeed himself by the loss of his livelihood, and subsistence:
for now if the sick miscarry, from any defects in the Physic, the Physician
only can be blamed, it proceeding from his ignorance, or neglect, that he
provided not better. Besides, in many parts of England, there are no
Apothecaries, or the people are so poor, that the expense of Physic is
intolerable to them; and therefore the Physician cannot help them, if he
prescribe only Shop-Medicines.

Now, Is it not a great shame, that Physicians should not be able to teach the
poor, how to provide themselves with suitable Remedies? especially in the
Country where Nature has open so rich and large a shop, stored with all those
materials Physicians can have occasion for, who want only the knowledge of
their virtues, or how to prepare them: with both which they will better
acquaint themse^^es, when they leave off the Apothecaries, and take Pharmacy
into their own hands, which brings to my mind, those other Advantages that will
attend such a state of Physic.

7. Physicians preparing their own Medicines, and giving or selling them to the
poor, without expecting any thing for advice, is a great advantage to the
Public, as it overthrows the practice of persons that are ignorant of the Art
of Physic, who now take on them to Administer it, to the great prejudice and
damage of the people; especially the meaner sort, who now the charge of advice
is taken away, and that of Physic lessened, will much more willingly address
themselves to sober intelligent Physicians, than to Apothecaries, and other
Quacks or Mountebanks.

8. This improvement of Physic will be of great advantage to Philosophy.

First, Because thereby the practice of Physic being taken from those who have
hitherto usurped it, and entirely secured to sober, learned Physicians, will
afford them somewhat more than an handsome subsistence; which of all persons
living, they are most capable of improving, and most ready to employ in
Physiological Researches. This overplus will enable them to be much conversant
with Anatomical experiments, not only about Man, but other Animals; that by
comparing their structures, they may attain to the knowledge of the true and
natural uses of each part: they will also busy themselves more about the
investigation of the nature and properties of Simples, and be more frequent in
the practice of their composition; and some it is probable will engage deeply in
Chemistry, a most noble Invention, which seems equally calculated for the
benefit of Medicine, and Advantage of Philosophy.

But Secondly, Pharmacy being in the hands of Physicians, will give them many
and great opportunities of advancing the Knowledge of Nature; Because (as a
Learned person has judiciously observed) Physicians will then be frequently
invited to take notice of many excellent Phenomenon, for the use and service of
Philosophy, which now pass unregarded in the hands of Apothecaries and their
Servants. Besides, that by observing the several mutations which happen in the
Preparation of Medicines, as well Simple as Compound, they will be assisted to
consider what effects may happen upon their mixture with the blood or other
juyces of the body; and give a great light to the Reasons of all the
Appearances of Health and Sickness.

But above all other parts of Pharmacy, Chemistry will most transcendently
manifest its usefulness, in reference to the improvement of Philosophy; which
it does most signally promote, by discovering the nature and properties of
those Subjects, which are exposed to its Operations: as it gives us a great
insight into the nature of those simple affections of Bodies, we call
Qualities, The knowledge whereof is the basis of a solid natural Philosophy; as
it acquaints us with the constitutive Principles of most Bodies, whether
Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral; informs us what are the great Principles or
Springs of action in the production, preservation, and destruction, or
dissolution of all Concretes. In a word, there is no part of Natural
Philosophy, which it doth' not highly illustrate and enrich, with many noble
experiments and observations which would pass unheeded by common, incurious
Chemists or Operators: But will be highly improved by judicious, observing
Physicians, in Order to the increasing our knowledge of Nature, and our Power
over her, which are the main intentions of Philosophy.

9. Physicians taking Pharmacy into their own hand, will be a profitable means
of improving it. For first, it may be a means of enlarging the extent of the
Materia Medica; and therein chiefly our knowledge of their Specifical Virtues.
For then, there will be a more immediate converse between Physicians,
Druggists, and Merchants; which will be an occasion of bringing into use many
excellent Drugs we know nothing of, but what we read in Authors: by whose
directions, Physicians can give them advice where they may be procured; how to
discriminate the good from the bad, the Genuine from such as are Spurious, and
Sophisticated; they can also inform the Merchants or Druggists how to preserve
many of them, which for want of a little care or skill, loose most of their
virtues, before they arrive at these parts. And as to what belongs to the
Specific properties of Simples, It is generally acknowledged, that of late
they have been too much neglected. Now this is the only way to retrieve and
improve that knowledge, which will, I am persuaded, be greatly enlarged by some
new ways of Analyzing Vegetables lately invented; and which will be suddenly
communicated. From which we may derive fair conjectures, not only what their
Constitutive Principles are, and what proportion of each Principle is in every
Concrete; but some other hints will be given by some, of these Methods of
Operating on them, which will not meanly conduce to discover their hidden
properties: of which I must say no more at present. Whereas it is well known
that the Apothecaries have very little of Curiosity, being rarely tempted to
make any experiment, out of the Road of our Dispensatory: So that Pharmacy may
degenerate, as it does daily, every one striving to make Medicines cheaper, but
few being concerned to have them better than others. Now Physicians, as they
are more judicious; and understand the grounds of Pharmacy much better than the
Apothecaries, as may appear by some of their accurate writings on this subject;
and may be seen in their ordinary prescriptions; many whereof are as exact, and
the Ingredients no less Judiciously disposed, than in those processes we find
in Pharmacopoeas. They are also acquainted with many excellent Chemical and
Galenical Preparations which have been either Invented, or published, since our
Dispensatory was last revised; and most know better Methods of preparing many
of those Medicines that come frequently in use, as of simple distilled Waters,
Syrups, Spirits, Extracts, Tinctures, Magisteries, as also of several Elaborate
Preparations which may be made in less time, and with less expense then they
now are, some Ingredients being superfluous, adding nothing but trouble, and
expense to the goodness of the Preparation. Farther it being, as I have showed,
the Interest of every Physician to have his Medicines well made, there will
arise a generous emulation between Combinations, who shall exceed in that kind,
which will put them on contrivance and Experiments. The result whereof must
necessarily be of Public advantage; for somewhat amiss in former preparations
will daily be discovered and corrected, instead of which, additions and
improvements may be made: so that probably in a few years, Pharmacy will be
very different from what it now is, and greater success will attend better
Medicines, Which will heighten the honor of that Noble profession which seems
now to languish for want of some such Remedy; add to the repute of Physicians;
and be highly beneficial to the Patient, whose diseases will be cured more
certainly, speedily, with greater security, and more pleasure (if there is any
in courses of Physic.)

And here, since I have taken the liberty to reflect (a little unhandsomely, it
may seem to some) on our own Dispensatory, I am forced to make a digression.
The substance whereof is, that it is not my Opinion only; but the persuasion of
most Physicians who are but indifferently acquainted with those Methods of
preparing Medicines, which are of recent invention, That our Dispensatory is so
far from being arrived at the highest degree of perfection, that on the
contrary it is most manifestly, and in many respects very defective, abounding
with pompous Prescriptions, some whereof seldom, if ever, come in use; And many
Compound Remedies have been recently invented or divulged, which are of greater
efficacy and larger extent than the best our Dispensatory can boast of. Besides
in many of the Prescriptions that are of frequent use, there are superfluous
Ingredients, which add indeed to the trouble and charge we are at in
compounding them; but little to the virtues of the Medicines, which would be
better displayed, if they were omitted, the Preparations being rather clogged
than improved by them. And besides, Modern Industry, and Invention, has found
our better Manuals or Methods of Compounding Medicines, whereby the Ingredients
are better opened, more exactly mixed, and in some more highly depurated; I
mean, where the Active parts are freed from those gross useless portions of
their bodies, which hindered them from exerting their salutary properties. And
there are many Natural, Genuine, easy Methods of preparing Simples, especially
Vegetable, whereby their whole Crasis is preserved entire, their virtues being
rather heightened, then in the least impaired; which taken in a small Dose are
more effectual than whole pounds of the Vulgar waters, Syrups or Electuaries.
And as they are not ungrateful to the palate; So neither does the Stomach
Nauseate them. And they have this further privilege, that in some years their
virtue does not sensibly decay, not are they subject to corruption, as the
shop-Preparations; and yet neither Honey, Sugar nor any Saccharine substance is
employed to preserve them, their own simplicity or their being exactly freed
from gross unsuitable parts, which are usually the occasional causes of
fermentation and putrefaction, rendering them less liable to these destructive
operations. Besides it has been the complaint of Physicians for many ages,
that Flowers which seem to be made up of the most fine and active parts of the
whole Vegetable, and are probably enobled with Extraordinary virtues, do, in
most of the Operations they are exposed to, loose those subtle portions of
matter, from which we might promise our selves great effects. And I confess it
seems highly probable to me, that flowers are the Compendium of the whole
plant, and possess more of their Medical virtues in a little room, than is
contained in a far greater quantity of leaves, stalk, root, or fruit; and the
wise contriver of the Universe seems to have destined them chiefly for
Medicine. I shall not here mention those reasons and experiments which inspire
me with this persuasion; only this I dare affirm, that they afford more Noble
Medicines, if truly prepared, than any other part of the Vegetable: at least so
far as I have made trial. Now the shops employ the flowers, either dried, and
then a great part of the Volatile active parts are exhaled, which being after
decocted leave behind them a scarce sensible impression of their prefence; Or
else they are beat up with Sugar into Conserves, which does, as I could
manifest at large, almost wholly change the properties of these otherwise
Active substances: The same happens also in Syrups and all other preparations,
where Sugar is employed. For although many persuade themselves that Sugar is a
most Innocent thing, keeping Simples and their parts from putrefaction; and
that it does not make the least change in the Vegetables, it is employed to
preserve: yet by their leave I do assert that it is highly questionable,
whether simples mixed therewith do not loose many of those Properties, with
which by nature they were endowed, Sugar being an Active body, a sweet Salt
(for so it may be styled without a Soloecisme, I having often made a Salt
sweeter then Sugar of Ingredients either very Acid, or exceeding Fiery) and is
a potent Menstruum or dissolver of bodies. And though Metals are commonly
reputed indestructible, it being well known that they are recovered from all
ordinary Solvents, the same Metals without any alterations that they were when
first exposed to their Actions; for notwithstanding that they are sometimes
disguised, appearing in the form of Volatile Salts, lovely Crystals, or are
brought over in the form of an Oil swiming on water (both which I have had my
self from them) nevertheless after all these Operations, the Metals are easily
reduced into the same for weight, color and other properties: and yet the
Calces of these seemingly indestructible bodies, by a slight manual with Sugar
over a Kitchen fire are so strangely altered, that none of the ordinary ways of
Reduction will recover them their Metalline form. And so mild an Ingredient of
Medicines as Honey, only by Distillation is made, as Corrosive and pernicious
as any Aqua fortis made with Saltpeter and Vitriol, dissolving Metals much
after the same manner. If then Sugar and Honey may, and do probably often
superinduce another Texture, and other qualities than they found in Vegetables,
destroying the former, it were advisable, that besides these Preparations we
used others, at least on extraordinary occasions; wherein the virtues of the
simples are preserved more entire: and wherein much is concentred in a little
room. I will not deny but there is more trouble in making the latter, than the
former; but extraordinary success will be an abundant recompense for the
expense of time and trouble, the charge being rather inferior, or at least but
equal to what the vulgar Shop-Medicines now cost: a small Dose of those being
likely to prove more effectual then a great Quantity of these. And as for
Flowers which occasioned this digression by a most facile and natural method
without any additament, or so much as the help of Culinary fire, they may be
converted into Liquors exceedingly Spirituous; and which may be kept without
loss of virtue many years. But of this the world will shortly, I suppose, have
a more particular account; and therefore I shall let it pass without any
further Illustration.

ut if it be enquired, What Preparations of Vegetables they are, which are
pretended to retain the whole Crasis and Virtues of the Vegetables entire?B

I answer, The Essences made by Distillation, per descensum, in the Sun, which
by other easy Operations, are further purified and exalted: the Essential
Salts of Vegetables, I mean not the vulgar, but such as have the exact taste and
smell of the Vegetables that afforded them, whose active parts are most
evidently united in the Crystalline Salts, as appears by the effects; as also
from this, that if the Capious faeces be Distilled, they yield only an insipid
Phlegm, and a very small portion of gross faeculent Empyreumatical Oil: and
afterward the Caput Mortuum calcined never so long, yields no fixed Salt,
which is in another form in the Essential, united with the active Principles of
Spirit and Oil, as appears upon Distillation. But besides these, the Essences
of Vegetables made by the union of their pungent vinous Spirits, essential
Oils, and highly depurate fixed Salts, which by iterated Cohobations become a
similar Liquor, wherein the Principles are inseparably united, are noble
Remedies; and though I do not affirm, that they retain all the Specifical
properties of their Vegetables: yet I persuade my self, that if they want any,
this defect is abundantly supplied by the acquest of new, which perhaps in many
cases are much superior to what we could expect from the crude plant, most
exactly appropriated. And that in a word I may manifest, how great alterations
may be made on Vegetables by slight means, I will mention one Method more of
dealing with them; whereby without any other additament than what they may
receive from the Air, the leaves of all Vegetables being duly fermented and
distilled, yield copiously a Liquour which rectified, is not to be
distinguished from Spirit of Blood, Soot, Hartshorn, or other urinous Spirits
or Salts: and mixed with highly dephlegmed Spirit of wine, they concoagulate
into the Offa alba. And though some herbs, as Wormwood, Carduus Benedictus,
Mugwort, etc. yield it more plentifully then others; yet all yield so much that
a large Retort filled only with common Grass thus ordered, gives at least a
pint of this subtle, volatile Spirit: which if often rectified, appears in a
Saline form, and is as penetrating and fugitive, as the Salt of fermented
Urine. As for the Caput mortuum, in vain do you expect a fixed Salt in it; That
being made such by the action of the Fire; it being volatile not fixed in the
Vegetable, as this natural way of Analysis evinces. I have by me an entire
discourse on this subject; wherein there is a great variety (I had almost said
infinity) of experiments and observations. And sometimes I am apt to flatter my
self into a belief, that this is the true, genuine, and universal way of
extricating the component Principles of Vegetables; and that it will give us a
greater insight into their nature, than any thing which has been hitherto made
public. Besides, there appear during these Operations many things, which will
prove highly instructive to those that Philosophize on other Subjects. But to
return into the way from which we were diverted, I affirm.

That, Physicians preparing and dispensing their own Medicines will be of great
advantage to the Public, as it confirms the health of the weak, and rescues
many from diseases, who would otherwise faint under them, This addition to the
number of the living, and increase of their strength, being of no mean
importance, the honor and prosperity of a Nation consisting in a multitude of
sound minds animating healthful bodies; whereby they are rendered fit for the
Arts of War and Peace. And therefore, we may presume that public persons,
whether the most supreme or subordinate Magistrates, will be so far from
opposing such a reformation as this we design; that they will give us all the
encouragement and assistance we can desire. And questionless, if there be any
Impediments or Obstacles, which Physicians themselves cannot remove, as I hope
there are not many, they have reason to rest assured; that our Great and Wise
Counsel will in such cases interpose their Authority, which will extirpate
whatsoever opposes it self to so just and advantageous designs. For where any
thing is of public advantage, what should hinder its proposers from expecting
public Countenance? It being well known, that in all well founded
Constitutions where there is a union of interests, there will be united
Counsels and Endeavors. And we may farther encourage our selves from hence,
that they who are so tender of every man's propriety, that they account every
invasion thereof, an injury done to themselves, will not deny their assistance
to Physicians, whose propriety also is strangely invaded, the Usurpers now
being almost ready to plead Prescription. And besides, we suppose that they who
are so much concerned to keep every man in quiet possession of his own estate,
will not be wanting to those who would endeavor to render them more secure of
their lives; which are of somewhat greater value. And that the lives of many
are frequently endangered by ignorant, bold, daring Apothecaries and Empiricks,
has been made sufficiently manifest.

But besides all this, If Physic be really, as is pretended, a useful Science,
the Public ought to take care it do not degenerate; and that its worthy
Professors be not discouraged, or deprived of an honorable subsistence. For it
has been ever observed, That where any Art receives greatest encouragement,
there it usually arises to its highest perfection; and where its much slighted,
there it soonest declines: The Artists either leaving those places, or applying
themselves to the study and exercise of more profitable employments. This will
be exactly the case of Physic, which whilst it is established in that degree
of Honor and Esteem it may justly challenge, and the Professors thereof are
liberally rewarded, and duly respected: this countenance will exceedingly
heighten their Industry, and put them on Actions which may manifest to the
World, that they do, in some measure, deserve the favor it shows them. So that
some will cultivate the Anatomy both of the body and its humors, endeavor to
acquaint themselves and the World with the admirable Fabric and use of those
parts whereof Man is composed, and the nature of those humors which produce
such admirable effects as are daily observed. They will never cease till they
have investigated the nature of the stomach's ferment, a Menstruum so
universal, that there is scarcely any Animal Vegetable, nay, even Mineral
substances, which can elude its dissolving property, they being all by it
reduced into a seemingly homogeneous milky liquor; they will then enquire how
this comes to be tincted with a noble purple dye, which they find it puts on
soon after its admission into the blood, and how that nourishes all parts,
leaving with each what is suitable to its nature, and then returns again for
fresh supplies, running this round without intermission till death puts a
period to its Course. They will further examine the frame of the Lungs, the
nature and properties of that air whereby they are dilated, its use in
reference to respiration, and whence it is that we cannot subsist a minute
without it. They will also more attentively consider the nature of the Nervous
liquor, and that truly admirable effect thereof, Muscular motion; where small
chords, by means of a little spirituous Juice, helped with an advantageous
situation, perform actions which would appear stupendous if they were not
common: And are a Subject which has hitherto sufficiently exercised the
greatest Wits later or former Ages ever produced: But nothing will more deserve
their attentive consideration than the propagation of the Species, in which
process there is not a greater or more pleasant variety than obscurity: The one
serves to excite Desire, the other to heighten Industry; and there is no
Physician, who has any spark of Curiosity, or sense of his Duty, and
sufficient Encouragement, but will endeavor to acquaint himself with these
great Processes of Nature; I mean, the preparation of the food, its
Distribution, Respiration, Muscular motion, and Generation: To which we may
add, the exclusion of what is useless or burdensome. And then he can be no
longer a stranger to her regular actings, and knows what are most likely to
continue them such without interruption. But before this excellent Person we
would here characterize, I mean, a true Physician, attains to this knowledge he
is at the expense of much money, time, and trouble; for howsoever Providence
might deal with the Protoplast, the wisest of Kings, or others in former Ages,
and whatsoever some now pretend to the contrary, we cannot find that this Skill
comes by inspiration, but is the result of innumerable Experiments and
Observations. One dissection of a dead man is not sufficient to inform him of
his frame, does not learn him the use or function of each part; he converses
with many other Animals living or dead, whereon he makes numerous experiments,
which by Analogy and Induction he aptly applies to Man. Neither does his
learned toil here end, this is but the Praeludium and most pleasant part
thereof. He is forced therefore to consider the body of Man, not only as an
Engine of curious and admirable contrivance, of unmatchable workmanship,
wherein nothing besides beauty and order appears: But also as a Machine, which
consisting of many parts, and having great variety of motions, is often out of
order, seldom long performing them all with the greatest exactness, but
sometimes gives the skilful Artist an opportunity to manifest that he knows
much of its nature and contrivance, by redressing what was amiss, and some
ways supplying its defects. It is needless to mention those many diseases Man
is subject to, there being no person that understands himself, and others, who
has not a Scheme of them in his memory; and yet, although the Anomalies man's
body is subject to are so numerous, and many among them appear exceedingly
formidable to most Spectators; they may be all removed by the skill of a
Judicious Physician. But how great is his care, how unspeakable his trouble,
before he attain to the knowledge of the Symptoms and cure of Diseases? How
often is his mind upon a Rack, and he frequently perhaps too anxiously
solicitous for his afflicted neighbor? He makes it his business to enquire
into all those helps Nature or Art can afford him, which may prove conducive to
promote their recovery; he many ways examines Simples, and uses all means to
extort from them a Confession of their nature, deliberates whether he should
employ them in their simplicity, slightly, or more elaborately prepared; and
when he has determined, administers them with all due Circumstances. Now,
surely to inform himself of the Medicinal properties of Simples, to know how
skilfully to mix, compound, and sutably apply them, as it is no mean Art, so
neither is it an easy labor, or an ordinary trouble, whether he derive his
knowledge from those that have preceeded him in the same Faculty, or from his
own personal observations. And if Physicians, who are of so clear Judgments, so
unparalled for Industry, have no more respect or consideration than mean,
empty, shallow pretenders, we have reason to fear that hereafter persons of
great Abilities and liberal Education will scorn to look toward a Faculty
which, though noble and honorable in its own nature, is so low and mean in the
esteem of the World* that every person who has the confidence to affirm he is
a Physician, although perfectly ignorant of the Rudiments of Physic, shall yet
have no less countenance from the Public, than those gallant persons, who
after a long courtship have rendered nature familiar, are acquainted with the
causes and cure of diseases, and who have so well deserved of Mankind, that I
cannot but marshal them next to those Divine Persons, who also, as these, are
often slighted and neglected, although of them the World is not worthy.

But it is now fit I should leave these idle melancholy speculations, and
presage better things of the Public, and to sober learned Physicians. For I
persuade my self, I may promise them from Authority encouragement, and
assistance proportionable to their care and success; both which will be more
conspicuous, if they prepare their own Medicines: which I most passionately
commend to their Consideration. And that this Proposition may meet with a kind
Reception, and be more readily entertained, I will endeavor to return
satisfactory replies to to whatsoever can be objected against it, by either
Apothecaries or Physicians: For the most Noble designs have ever met with great
opposition, and sometimes a proposal, which was made with a sincere intention
of Public benefit, has occasioned the ruin or been otherwise prejudicial to
the propounders; which would happen in this Case, supposing the Event of
affairs did depend on the will of Apothecaries. But howsoever if they are
resolute, and determine unanimously to oppose all reformation, (which is
sufficiently probable) they, and most of those that are tied to their Interests
by alliances, will endeavor to possess the people wheresoever they come, with
an Opinion of the injustice, and unreasonableness of the Physicians cause, and
as plausibly as they can maintain their own pretensions; whereby they may
possess many with prejudices against a most honest and Honorable design, who
would otherwise have promoted it: For hearing the plea, but of one party which,
if they proceed at the usual Rate, will be well stuffed with falsities, denying
many matters of fact, which are notoriously scandalous, and producing things in
their own behalf, which almost every Physician can easily disprove. So that
those persons, whom they shall thus abuse, apprehending they are engaged in a
good cause, may unawares oppose Truth and Equity, contrary to their Intention;
which they had never done, but through misinformation. Besides the Apothecaries
may urge (where they have not confidence to deny truths as visible as the Sun)
that these designs of Reforming them are indeed fine spun Speculations, but can
no ways be reduced to Practice; That if the hedge be once broken, and the
Apothecaries discountenanced, it will occasion greater inconveniences then
those, for which the Physicians design a remedy.

The Inconveniences are some such as these,

First, It will be an Act of great cruelty, advisedly to design the Ruin of so
many Persons, who have most of them families to make Provision for. Besides
that it will be a great injury to the Public.

To this we answer, that the Physicians design no man's ruin, their intentions
are Innocent, Rational, and such as will approve themselves to all the world;
And I suppose they are so far from deserving blame for Endeavoring to reform
abuses, which have crep't into their Faculty, that, on the Contrary among wise
people, they will meet with great Commendation and Encouragement: And for the
Apothecaries to oppose them, because their credit by such proceedings will be
Eclipsed, and their dishonest gain diminished, is, (pardon the Comparison) like
Demetrius and the Silver Smith's opposing the Apostle, because, if the people
hearkened to his wholesome Counsels, their Trade would fall to decay; a worthy
way of Argumentation, and such as is in the mouth, only of selfish persons, who
are more eager on their Private gain, then the Public good. And the
Apothecaries being so little concerned for that, I admire with what confidence
they can expect the Public should be so deeply engaged with them in a Quarrel
against those who are it is best friends, and fall out with the Apothecaries,
only because they are enemies to the Public; as most certainly they are if the
least part of that be true we have affirmed of them which whether it be, let
the world first examine, and after determine. So that if the mentioned plea of
the Apothecaries pass for legitimate and valid, what sort or profession of men
is there so base, and vile, which may not use the same Argument? Coyners,
Robbers, Cutpurses, Sophisticaters of wine, who all pretend necessity of acting
as they do, that otherwise they cannot subsist, but the Law is so far from
approving of such idle pretenses, that it deservedly, orders severe
punishments, for such as shall by fraud or force deprive men of their
Propreity. And shall we animadvert with so great severity on those that take
away unjustly an inconsiderable portion of a man's Estate, without which he can
well subsist, and at the same time take no notice of him, that shall deprive
men of health, and sometimes life? This were like fishing with that strange
net, which keeps little fish and dismisses the greater: There is no reason we
should punish offenders for slight faults, and find excuses and evasions for
such as are guilty of greater crimes. In short where the continuance of a few
disorderly persons in any place, employment, or Public capacity, is
inconsistent with the good and Welfare of the Community, it is so far from
injustice, and cruelty to reject them, that it were both, should we do
otherwise, which is the very case of the Apothecaries, if their Medicines and
practices be so dangerous, as we have reported them. But to be more particular
in our reply, because some deceit may be concealed in universals; First, I say
if it be so great cruelty to ruin many men in their Estates, how much greater
is it to expose as many, not once in an age, but every year, to a manifest
hazard of loss of health, or life which are so much more considerable, that the
Estates and wealth of all the Apothecaries put into the balance against the
life of the meanest person in these Nations, the latter will surely
Preponderate. Therefore when we are in such straits, that of two inconveniences
we can avoid but one, none but an Imprudent or mad person will make choice of
the greatest: But this is not our present Case. For all such Apothecaries, as
are found to be upright and honest, shall be well provided for; and the
remainder may addict themselves to other professions: If they pretend
unskilfulness, no one will regard that frivolous allegation, who observes their
frequent intrusions into the Practice of Physic. For which, by what has been
said* they appear more unfit, then for any Mechanical or other employment; to
the knowledge of whose Mysteries and Intricacies they may certainly much sooner
arrive, then of so profound a Science as Physic. But to put a Period to this
Reply the Apothecaries may consider, that there are in this famous City, and
many other parts of England a great number of Ingenious Persons, whose ill
fortune it was to addict themselves to the study of Physic, (for the event
plainly shows it was their unhappiness) these after great expense of Money,
after long and intense Study, being become well Qualified for the Practice
thereof, cannot have a subsistence, the Apothecaries having more in their own
hands then would be a sufficient maintenance for some hundred such persons, who
are under so great discouragements, through the Coveteousness and Injustice of
the Apothecaries, as none can imagine, besides those that converse with them.
Now to retort the Apothecaries argument upon themselves with advantage, we say,
that it is a high piece of Cruelty and Injustice for the Apothecaries to
deprive so many Learned, Ingenious Persons of a means to subsist. And I make
full account that the Practice which is in the Apothecaries hand is as much
their due, as an inheritance, which is held from the right owner by the
Artifice of some usurper, and to take the Practice out of their hands, and turn
it into the right Channel, deserves no more blame, than he that shall restore
an inheritance long withheld to the true owners; For since but one can possess
it, it is fit surely, that he to whom of right it appertains should enjoy it,
rather than any other, how urgent soever his wants may be, how great his
necessities. Thus all Circumstances duly weighed, it appears evident that the
inconveniences, some few persons will deservedly labor under, is not
comparable to the advantages the Public will receive from their Seclusion or
Reformation.

Another thing the Apothecaries plead in their own behalf against the
Physicians, is, that they are like Aesop's Dog in the Manger (for such an
irreverent Expression I heard one use) who could not eat Hay himself, and yet
would not permit the Ox to feed thereon. So the Physicians will neither take
care of the poor themselves, nor permit the Apothecaries so to do, who are
chiefly Conversant among them, advising and assisting those who would meet with
little other help, they not being able to gratify Physicians; who are (as one
of their worthy Authors says) like Balaam's Ass they cannot speak till they see
an Angel. These being neglected (as they would persuade the world) by
Physicians, have recourse to them; and they it seems being prevailed on (Tender
Hearts!) by sentiments of pity, let them have such Medicines as they think most
apposite to their distemper.

Whosoever reads this plausible story which the Apothecaries set off with
greater advantage than their Advocate can, will look on the Physicians as
churlish Levites, passing by their distressed brother, not vouchsafing him a
single regard; who there lies in misery and danger till he is rescued from
both, by such as vaunt themselves to be so many Charitable Samaritans: But how
well that title becomes them, and how grossly and palpably they have calumniated
the Physicians, will appear by the ensuing Discourse. First, suppose the
Physicians should say to them (which yet they neither do nor ever will) we cannot
but approve of your charity, although we do not intend to imitate it; therefore
we give you free permission to concern your selves as much as you please for
the poor, we allow you to advise, and give them Physic, either freely: or to
afford it at such prises as you may be no gainers, so neither loosers. This and
a greater liberty we will allow you, so that you tamper not with the rich, to
whom we will give better advice and greater assistance than any they can
receive from you. Can any man think, understands who the Genius of the
Apothecary, that such Language will be very agreeable to him? No, the Contrary
is well known, they make it more their business than the tending of their Shop
is, to insinuate themselves into the most wealthy families, and find this
Employment more beneficial then their observance of Physicians.

But let us imagine, that our Apothecaries Shop is like an Hospital, to which
there is great resort of poor distressed people, all which he supplies with
suitable remedies (we will suppose the best) but upon what terms? Truly on such
as are very beneficial to himself. For, not a dose of any thing goes out of the
Shop, which is not twice paid for; I mean is sold for double the value or
price, for which they might afford it, and yet be gainers. So that by this time
we see the Charity of the Apothecary is not so Conspicuous, as his Collusion in
gratifying of others at their own expense. And that what I have said, are no
Fictions will be attested by great numbers of Physicians, whose repute was
never yet stained by unhandsome practices; and are so far from being such
covetous, uncharitable persons as they represent them, that they have on the
contrary often given their advice freely, refused money when it was offered
them, if they knew or suspected the condition of the person to be very mean.
And it is well known, that scarce any Physician exacts money of his Patient, what
comes, is free gift, not extorted; whereas the Apothecarie will be paid by the
poor immediately: and he always gains more of them by his Physic, than the
Physician has ever for his advice. Nay I am well acquainted with several
Physicians, who pay their Apothecaries every year out of their own Purses, for
a large Catalogue of Medicines they cause to be bestowed freely on poor
Patients. I fear the Apothecaries cannot produce many such Examples of persons
in their own faculty. And besides, there is a great company of Physicians, of
whose number I own my self to be (and I am confident many others, with whom I
am not acquainted, have the same intentions) who have solemnly obliged
themselves to go at all times to all Patients, poor as well as rich, whenever
they are called; and if they are in a necessitous condition, to give them their
advice freely: only they will be called by the Patients or their friends, not
by the Apothecaries, who will endeavor to give them much unnecessary trouble,
and put them to as many Inconveniences as they can, that they may make a
benefit of their well-grounded refusals. If any person be taken Apoplectical
with Convulsions of any kind, violent pains, or any other dangerous disease or
Symptom, we will not at midnight decline giving them visits, although they
dwell with poverty it self; But it is unreasonable a Physician should be called
out of his Bed on trivial occasions, and endanger himself to do that, which
without any danger to the Patient, might be deferred till morning. To invite a
Physician to visit them at unseasonable times upon the aching of a tooth or
corn, a slight pain or lask of the belly, or to cure diseases which are extant
only in a depraved Fancy, is a most unreasonable request, and such as the
Apothecaries themselves will not comply with. And indeed Physicians have been
ever more ready (If I flatter them not, which I would not willingly) to Visit
and Advise the poor, where it has been only a deed of charity, and abstracted
from interest, than the Apothecaries.

Another Objection I have heard some Apothecaries make against Physicians
dispensing their own Physic, and deserting them, is, That the public cannot
with safety allow thereof; for then Physicians might prescribe their Patients
poison instead of salutary Physic: and all this without any danger to
themselves, if they have any command of their Tongues and Consciences. That
this is prevented by sending Bills to the Apothecaries, which besides is a
great convenience to the Physicians; for should they be suspected upon some
horrid Symptoms or ill Accidents attending the Physic they prescribe (which
the Apothecaries well know sometimes happens, rather from their own
carelessness, unfaithfulness or Ignorance, then the Physicians as I have
showed) these surmises are presently quelled by the Physicians, appealing to
his Bills on the File, which on Examination being found to contain nothing of
that kind, for which he is suspected, he is without any more ado acquitted.

This Objection is so fraught with malice, and design, that I cannot consider
it without some Indignation. This is the first time that ever I heard
Physicians were in danger of turning Poysoners; and I do not remember that ever
any were suspected for that fowl crime, although it is well known the
Apothecaries have not escaped so well. But howsoever this is a most frivolous
Objection on many accounts, for first, If Physicians were so wicked, as this
Objection supposes some of them to be, that they should design the destruction
of that life, they ought to preserve, Is any man so senseless as to think they
could not meet with Apothecaries, as ill minded as themselves? Yes, I dare say
ten for one, besides, Is it not very apparent that all people lie now more at
the mercy of Apothecaries and their Apprentices or Operators, then (supposing
the design we have proposed take effect) they can ever at the Physicians? For
although we send Bills to the Apothecary we can have no assurance, they are
made up according to our Prescription, but the Master or Servants may add what
they please, without any but their Consciences, being able to detect them.
Therefore since they are so malicious as to start so unworthy an Objection, we
might retort it upon themselves, and argue; since Physicians and their Patients
are in danger of being poisoned by every Apothecary or their Apprentices, Were
it not much better that Physicians should supervise those that make their
Physic, whereby they may prevent this danger? And since the trust must be
reposed in some, whether does not the Physician more deserve it; than the
Apothecary and his Apprentices?

But we will not insist on this, For I hope that all English men have so
strange an Antipathy against this horrid Crime, that I am persuaded there are
few amongst the worst of them would be guilty of it, although to save their own
lives; and therefore we will acquit the Apothecaries, and others from suspicion
of a crime, of which should they entertain the least favorable thought, they
would deserve to be excluded from humane Society. But these vices I hope have
not passed the Alps, and I wish they may ever keep within those bounds; and
that they will never pass the Seas to us, so as to become Epidemical, my mind
does strongly presage.

But yet nevertheless, that no ground may remain for suspicion we shall send
Bills or Prescriptions to our Laboratories, as duly as we now do to the
Apothecaries, which necessity will oblige us to, many being concerned together;
otherwise instead of that order, and Convenience we promise our selves, we
shall have discord and confusion: but I shall relinquish so nauseous and
ungrateful a Subject, Whereunto Physicians might have returned the same answer
the Lacedaemonian did to him that asked, What was the punishment among them for
Parricides? viz. That they could not imagine any person should arrive to so
high a pitch of wickedness, as to be guilty of so enormous a crime; therefore
they had made no Provision against it.

Another thing they are ready to Object to us, is, That if Physicians reject
the Apothecaries, let them Contrive their business never so prudently,
Medicines will be more unskilfully prepared, than whilst they Employed them.

To which we Answer, That the Contrary will happen; for Physicians will employ,
as I showed before, such sober industrious Apothecaries, as are willing to be
engaged by them, to which shall be associated, ingenious Operators: all these
Combining, certainly Medicines will be better prepared, than they have been
hitherto; for Physicians the Inventours of Pharmacy have ever since been the
great improvers thereof, and not the Apothecaries: Among the Ancients Mesue,
among the Moderns Renodoeus, Schroder, Zuelfer, Quercetan and Others. Besides,
its well known that most Physicians are Masters of some Excellent Compositions,
which are not extant in our Dispensatory, with which only the Apothecaries are
acquainted; and many of them there are, have found out better general Methods
of Distilling Waters, making Syrups, Electuaries, and other forms of Medicines
than are commonly known: which if this design succeed, they will put in
Practice highly to their own, and the Patients advantage. And indeed there are
few Physicians, but would prescribe (if they knew where to have it) Physic
more pleasant, less Nauseous for quantity, and Quality, than any is in the
Apothecaries Shops. So that we see this Objection returns upon them to their
prejudice.

And indeed, if we impartially examine things, it will readily appear, that
many Physicians have greater skill in Pharmacy, or the ways of Compounding and
Preparing Medicines than any Apothecaries. For if no Persons are so well
acquainted with the Nature, and Virtues of Simples, or with the ways of finding
them out as Physicians, which is acknowledged by all; It will thence follow,
that they in all probability must know best, how to prepare Simples, how to
dispose them to Operate with the greatest advantage, which are most Effectual
with, and what without Elaborate Preparations; whereby the Virtues of many
Simples are often destroyed not improved. And in Compositions they know the
true Methods of mixing things together, that some may not annihilate the force
of others* and so become altogether ineffectual.

But if it be further Objected by Apothecaries, That the Materia Medica is so
copious, Compositions so numerous, that it will be an unspeakable trouble to
Physicians to provide the one, and see to the Preparing of the other.

To this we Answer, That a good Method with little trouble, will dispatch much
business, which in a hurry and confusion, will require a far longer time,
greater expense, more labor; and perhaps at last be more perfunctorily, and
slightly performed then the other. But further its sufficiently known that few
Physicians, use a tenth part of what is in the shops; and perhaps if they made
their own Medicines they would find a convenience in a farther contraction of
their practice; I mean confining themselves to fewer compositions, making
amends for the number in the goodness and extent of those they use, and they
can at any time supply the want of a Composition* (which yet will seldom
happen) with Simples which as I have already manifested, would be so far from
an inconvenience, that it would be a privilege to Physician and Patient, and
conduce greatly to the increase of our knowledge of the Specifical properties
of concretes; wherein I fear we are very defective. And every Physician knowing
what Medicines he shall usually employ, may have them only made, which perhaps
are different from those made in other Combinations, where he enjoys a double
benefit; making fewer Medicines, he has the more time to prepare them, and is
likely to take care they be such as they ought to be: and making only such as
he is sure he shall have occasion for to dispense, thereby having little loss
in their Medicines they can afford them cheaper; whereas the Apothecaries who
make all the Dispensatory Medicines, loose many, (they being never called for)
and are put on the temptation of selling others, when they are old,
ineffectual, and have lost their sanative properties.

Another thing the Apothecary Objects against the Physicians new Model, is,
That the Patients will suffer, they not having made Provision of Persons, that
are acquainted with many Operations, about sick people which the Apothecaries
perform with great skill and facility; such are the administering of Clysters,
applying Leeches, Vesicatories, Plasters, Pigeons, Cupping-Glasses, tending
them whilst under salivation, making fomentations,etc. and that otherwise they
are very helpful to, and officious about the diseased.

To this we answer, That most of these little pieces of Officiousness, whereby
Apothecaries do so much endear themselves to Patients (of which favor, we have
seen, they make no good use) are either such, as may be altogether as well
performed by nurses or others that attend the sick, by the Apothecaries of our
Laboratories, or others we shall breed up to these easily learned Operations;
which have nothing of difficulty, but that a child of ten years old by the
Physicians directions shall accurately perform: looking to people under
Salivation only excepted; whom the Apothecaries for the most part less
understand how to manage, than many whom the Physicians having instructed shall
depute for that service* but to proceed.

The Apothecaries may further object, That neither Physicians nor Patients have
much reason on their side, when they find fault with the dearness of their
Medicines; which if the Physicians upon Complaint find too high prized, the
Apothecaries do make such abatements as they think just and fit.

This will be a fair pretense, although I never heard it urged by any of them,
neither do I believe they will trust to the Physicians arbitration; but on the
contrary I know several have flatly refused it. But supposing they should all
agree, let us examine whether this will give much relief to the abused Patient.
For, first the English are known to have so generous a humor, especially the
richer sort; that they will rather pay the whole bill without deduction,
especially if the sum be not considerably great, rather than give the Physician
the trouble of enquiring into this affair, which is indeed unreasonable,
especially if such complaints were frequent: and nothing more certain, than
that if all who were abused, should appeal to the Physician, he would hear
daily as many complaints of Apothecaries, as he now does of Diseases. And that
an endeavor to relieve the Plaintiff would give the Physician sufficient
diversions from more serious employments, will appear, if we consider that
Apothecaries bring in their bills but once every year, when all circumstances
are forgot; which gives them a fair opportunity of adding to the true number
and heightning the prices of Medicines, the Physician not remembering what he
prescribed so long before. Neither is it to be imagined that a Physician will,
or indeed can have leisure to examine twenty or thirty bills, and set down the
true value of the prescriptions, not to urge how unfit an employment it is for
the Professors of so noble a science as Medicine, to decide such controversies.
Besides that there would be no end of this trouble, some of the original bills
being lost, only the common title of a Cordial or Purge being registered with
their prices in the book. So that it will be impossible to make an Estimate of
the value of Compositions, whose Ingredients we do not know.

The last Objection we shall think worthy an answer, is made by such
Apothecaries, as will not acknowledge (which we have so largely proved) their
unfitness for the practice of Physic. All they have to plead is, That surely
people would not trust their lives with them, were they not satisfied with
their abilities and success. That Physicians indeed, may be better versed in
the Theory; but that they are as well acquainted with the Experimental,
Practick part, which is the most material.

To this I answer, first, Let them prove that any person who is not Master of
the greatest Chemical Arcana (for that somewhat may be done by them
extraordinary, though exhibited by illiterate, unskilful persons, I dare not
absolutely deny) can successfully exercise Physic; and yet have none of those
Qualifications, I have before enumerated: Some of which seem not only
conducive, but necessary, to the right administration of Physic. And for the
vulgar to entertain a mavelous good opinion of many, who little deserve it,
has been observed by wise men in all ages; and has of later years been
confirmed by many almost incredible Examples. I shall instance only in some of
recent memory: although I might without exhausting the store, in many hundred.
It Is well known that a pretended Chemist who calls himself Lockier, has gained
by a Pill many thousand pounds; which yet is one of the vilest and most
contemptible among all the Mineral Preparations, I ever yet knew tried in
Medicine. The Ingredients being certain proportions (it is needless to mention,
though I have often made it) of Antimony, Saltpeter, common Sea Salt and
Charcoal; whereof more may be made in one Laboratory, by two men in twenty four
hours, than I believe he has ever disposed of in the space of a year: and is
so dangerous a Medicine that no honest person skilled in Chemistry, who is
acquainted with it is Composition, durst venture to exhibit it. It Is true the
gums and sugar wherewith the yellow powder is made up, do add considerably to
it is bulk; but the chief and only active Ingredient is taken in so small a
dose, that I know few things which can poison in so little a quantity and this
has been fatal to many, who never spoke after it had begun it is operation, and
others did long repent their use of so rough a Medicine. I could give the world
a large Catalogue of its mischievous effects: But I think they are generally
satisfied in that point; which is the reason that it is now disused. But
formerly what crouding, what enquiring was there after it, and how highly did
they extol it whose good fortune it was not to be prejudiced thereby? Now if
this were so admirable a remedy, why is it not so still? wherefore lies it
neglected, if so effectual as was once pretended? But it seems long experience
has given the generality of people such proof of it is noxious qualities, that
thereupon, they have desisted from it is use, and learned a lesson of
abstinence, which some have offered to teach them at a cheaper rate. But the
wit of the vulgar is most of it bought, and many of them cannot avoid any other
inconveniences, than those they have suffered by.

Thus Time the Mistress of truths, often discovers many of great importance,
and the vulgar, though not so quick-sighted to discern dangers at a distance;
yet they can feel pressures when they labor under them: and having cast their
burden, will never again admit of it unless so disguised, that it appears
different from what it was before. And thus my mind presages it will be with
the Apothecaries, if their Ruin or Reformation do not anticipate it; for this
encroachment of theirs on the Physicians Profession, is of no long standing. So
that people are not yet well aware of what they suffer by them, but time and
some more Experiments will open their Eyes; then the tide will turn, and that
same water which carried them so merrily down the stream, will return them to
the place from whence they set forth; and it is well if they be dealt so
favorably withal.

But further, That we are not to take our measures of things from the opinions,
and persuasions of the vulgar, will be yet more Conspicuous, if we consider,
how many resort to be basest pretenders to Physic, that ever yet appeared;
which may serve to abate the Pride, and Confidence of Apothecaries, who urge
this is an Argument of their own worth. There is scarce a Pissing-place about
the City, where many Bills are not fastened; among which the most Modestly
Penned, promise great matters. One undertakes a long Catalogue of diseases, and
among them (can any be blamed for laughing thereat) of those that are
incurable. Another performs wonderful cures by virtue of Medicines extracted
out of the souls of the heathen Gods (by which I suppose he means Tinctures of
Metals which he never saw) Many cure by direction from the Stars: Some by
Phisnomy and Palmistry can foretell events; and I wonder none undertake to make
the Heavens more propitious, for if they should I suppose there are many
credulous enough to believe them. And how likely are most of these people, who
make such large promises to perform them, when they are not instructed in the
Rudiments of any Single Art or Science, being most of them mean, Ignorant
Mechanics; who not being ingenious or industrious enough to subsist by the
calling in which they were brought up, engage in another, the meaning of whose
name they scarcely understand, and whose first Principles they are utterly
unacquainted with: and yet the world flows in a pace to them they shrowding
themselves from the discovery of the Ignorant, under the Covert of pretended
Secrets, which are usually some ridiculous, sordid Preparations, whose effects
if they have any good cannot possibly be made out unless we have recourse to
the imagination of him that takes it. And if either they or the Apothecaries
brag of any particular success; We may answer them, as he in Lucian did the
Priest; who showing him the offerings of those that had invoked Neptune, when
they were in danger of Shipwreck, boasted of the Power of his God which was
manifested by the number of his Donaria, but how shall we know replied he, how
many notwithstanding they invoked thy God, have nevertheless suffered
Shipwreck, which he suspected to be far the greater number. I wish the
Application were not so easy as I fear it is. Thus we see that popular
approbation is not sufficient to authorize Practicioners of Physic, even by
the Apothecaries own Concession; who in all Companies do most bitterly inveigh
against these pretenders, and dissuade all people from consulting them: which
whither they do from a sense of their duty or Interest is soon determined. I
shall therefore take my leave of them, with this request that they would
Exchange the Motto of their Arms for another, which will better sure with their
actions. It is this Eadem probamus, eadem reprehendimus; for the Quacking
Apothecary can plead little in his own behalf, which the Mountebanks will not
make use of in their defense: and urge few things against those Quacksalvers,
their professed enemies, which these, if they have so much Latin may not again
retort on them, in the saying of the Poet; -- Mutato nomine de te
Fabula narratur. --


Now having displayed at large though not at full the injuries Medicine it
self, the Physicians, and most sick people do daily receive from the
unwarrantable Practices of Apothecaries, nothing remains, but that I add a
Proviso, which I have had in my Eye all along this Discourse. I would not
therefore have any apprehend that, what I have said against the Apothecaries,
is intended against them all, being affirmed only of the greater number; for it
would be the highest injustice to Comprehend them all in the Character I have
given of their unworthy associates: whose actions the Physicians do not
dissallow of, or declaim against more, than some among themselves. I dare not,
I say, accuse them all of dishonest practices, there being several on whom
there is impressed so true a Sense of their duty to God, and their Neighbors,
that they are not capable of actions which will so highly dishonor their
Christian Profession, or injure their neighbor. Others there are, whose skill
in Pharmacy, and Chemistry, secure Physicians from those fears they would be
otherwise Subject to, from their unskilfulness or ignorance, in one or the
other. And here I must necessarily acknowledge, that I have met with some
Apothecaries that for knowledge in Chemical affairs, have been much Superior to
professed Chemists; and of all that I have hitherto met with, I account them
the most faithful and industrious: and which may seem strange, they do prepare
Galenical Physic, better than most others, who have no other employment; and
therefore of all others in a New Constitution of affairs, they will deserve the
greatest encouragement, as being most likely to be serviceable, and faithful to
the Profession of Physic, and Physicians. Who are so far from designing any
thing which will be to the prejudice of such honest skilful Apothecaries (who
are all sufficiently known to some Physician or other) that on the Contrary
they intend them more good than they can in the present way, promise to
themselves; and will make such provision for them that they shall never have
cause to complain, or occasion given to betray, as the greatest part of their
Company have done so Noble a Profession as that of Physic, Or such generous
friends and great Benefactors as they will find the Physicians to be, so long
as they keep in those due limits which shall with their own consent be
Prescribed them.

But here I foresee, some Objections may be made, by Physicians themselves,
against the Design of preparing their own Medicines; which although they are
weak, and of little import, and deserve not to be named after the mention of
those many reasons, and high advantages, wherewith that proposal is attended;
yet we shall give them a fair debate, and so put a Period to this Discourse.

It may be pretended by some that are guilty of delicacy, sloth, or ignorance;
and by others, who are either proud, or imprudently Zealous, for their own
honor, and that of their Noble Profession; That it is below a Physician to
make his own Medicines, or give himself the trouble of supervising those whom
he shall appoint to prepare them.

To this I Answer, That I would gladly learn, whether they are Galenists or
Chemists that object this; not the latter certainly, for then they desert the
Principles of their great Masters, Paracelsus, and Helmont, who do Anathematize
all those that trust to Mercenary Chemists for their Medicines. And as for
those who are the followers of the deservedly admired Hippocrates, or Galen, I
wonder with what confidence any among them can scruple, as beneath them, those
Offices wherein their great Dictators were so much Exercised. Hippocrates has
left recorded in many of his Writings, the care and pains he took to provide
Simples, preserve, and prepare them for Medicinal uses; not only dispensing
them himself, but making them in his own Operatory. And Galen visited many
parts of Asia, which were renowned for famous Remedies; as Palestine for it is
Noble Balsome, Lemnos, for it is Earth, and Cyprus for it is Minerals, bringing
away quantities of them; Exposing himself to great hazards, labor, and
expense, only that he might furnish himself with the genuine Simples, and
provide against the Cheats and abuses of Impostors. He had also a Repository
where his Medicines were always, either under his Eye, or in his hand. He
himself made Treacle, and never gave any Medicine of which he had not first
tasted or smelt. Now could these great Persons give themselves so much trouble,
and publicly acknowledge it, as apprehending it would rather enhance than
derogate from the Esteem the world had justly for them? And shall their
pretended admirers, and followers plead exemption from such employments,
because dignified with some empty Title? For so indeed it is, where not
accompanied with real intrinse call merit, although it conciliates more
Respect and Esteem to those Gallant Persons, who Honor their Titles and
Dignities, by a diligent pursuance of those Noble Ends, on whose account they
were conferred on them; not neglecting any means which may make their
Profession more Effectual for those great ends of preserving life and
restoring health: Which if any Neglect, it is not their Formalities will gain
them Repute, or enable them to Cure Diseases. They must therefore in this
imitate those great Physicians, they do so highly Magnify in their Discourses,
who did not refer to Apothecaries the Preparing of Medicines, but made it their
own care; neither did they think it too mean, or below them to do with their
own hands, most of those things which are now accounted (by those, who in their
own and the worlds Opinion are much beneath them) the Ministry of Inferior
Persons.

I have by this time, I hope, returned satisfactory Answers to all those
Objections I can foresee Apothecaries, or others, will make against Physicians
preparing their own Medicines; which is a Proposal more free from Exceptions
than any I have hitherto met with. But let us suppose that it is attended with
some slight inconveniences; yet since there is a necessity of a change, in the
opinion of all honest judicious Persons, I know no expedient like this I have
offered, which in my opinion promises so well, that although through difference
of opinions among Physicians and Patients, it may prove a difficult task to
introduce such a change as this we plead for, many perhaps not understanding
the good of it: yet I am very confident, that having once made trial, both
Physicians and Patients will generally agree, not to quit, upon any slight,
frivolous pretenses, what both one and the other find experimentally to be
highly advantageous. I would therefore persuade them to deal with this
Proposition, as they do when a fair new Suit of Clothes is brought them; which
they put on, knowing, that though it be not exactly fit at first, it will
either fit it is self to the body in wearing, or thereby more plainly show
wherein it may be mended. But if I flatter not my self and the world (which I
do not if I know my self, or understand the things I have been debating) not
only few or no difficulties, and inconveniences will accompany the mentioned
Proposition; but on the contrary, as I have fully demonstrated, many and great
advantages: whether we have respect to the Patient or Physician. And indeed,
what can be more desirable to either, than to have Pharmacy put in such hands,
and in such a method, that none having the Interest can have the Power, nor any
having the Power, can have the Interest to prepare Medicines unfaithfully?
Therefore if Physicians regard the Honor of Medicine, or good of the Diseased,
they will not neglect the means which answer these noble ends. And as it has
been well observed in Government, That the safety of a Kingdom, or
Commonwealth consists not wholly in a Prince that Governs wisely, while he
lives; but in one that so orders it, that he dying, it can preserve it self: So
the safety of the People (in reference to health) being cast upon Physicians,
it is not sufficient that they are honest men, addicted to all the good ends of
their Profession, unless they be also skilled and careful to put their affairs
in such a method, that these ends may be certainly attained to, not only by
themselves, but also by others that shall succeed them. Which will most
infallibly happen, if it become the custom and fashion for Physicians to look
after the preparing of their own Medicines; for then the common interest will
oblige all Physicians to have them as good as they can contrive or make them.
And let their Servants, Apothecaries, or Operators, be never so bad or wicked;
although I will not say, if this course be observed it will make them good: yet
it is attended with the great convenience of being sufficient to prevent any
influence their wickedness can have on Physic, It being highly improbable that
they should Sophisticate or Adulterate Medicines, when they make no benefit
thereof. And besides, it will be almost impossible to effect such designs,
should they be so mischievously disposed; for they would be soon discovered,
and for the future prevented.

Nothing therefore remains, but that I address my discourse to the Physicians;
And certainly I need not use many more words to engage them in a design which
Duty and Interest (the most persuasive and powerful Arguments in the World)
must necessarily oblige them to promote. That it is our duty to reform such
enormous abuses as those we have mentioned, I suppose no one will question; and
that it is also no less our Interest, the Arguments I have produced, will
render to those that are free from prejudices, sufficiently probable: so that
as I am most certain, no honest persons who will allow themselves the liberty
of reflection can be ignorant of their Duty, so neither can they mistake their
Interest. It is true indeed, the Apothecaries give forth in most Companies,
that they are not at all apprehensive of any danger from the designs of such
Physicians, as shall endeavor their reformation, who they pretend are but few,
and those inconsiderable persons; that the greater number, and they the most
eminent Physicians, have their Interest so interwoven with the Apothecaries,
that they cannot be separated from them, and will never desert them: but repute
all such persons their own enemies, who shall attaque the Apothecaries, and all
injuries that are done to these, as intended against themselves. All which is a
mere fiction, of their own devising, to deter Physicians, from engaging against
so great a number, so potent a faction, as they would persuade the world they
are. But how gross and palpable a cheat this is, will then appear, when all
honest, industrious Physicians shall unanimously agree to confute them; and I
dare assure the world, that this will most certainly and suddenly be effected,
unless there happen the most unlikely change in the humors, intentions, and
resolutions of men that was ever yet known: And for the Apothecaries to expect
such an alteraon, were to promise to themselves little less then
impossibilities. Besides, Suppose any Physicians should stand Neuter, or appear
publicly concerned for them, they will be such as will rather discredit their
cause, than add to it any honor or repute* for they that stand Neuters in this
quarrel, or vindicate the Apothecaries must either be such who look on the
profession of Physic, as a mere cheat, a craft, rather than an art or Science,
who believe, that as much is performed by those that are reputed the meanest
Physicians, as by any other; the difference arising only hence, that some being
more prudent and fortunate than the rest, obtain a repute proportionable to
their pretended success, affable obliging demeanor, or cunning management of
the People, working more upon the humors of their minds, than on those of
their bodies. And if there be any thus minded, I do not wonder that their Zeal
should not transport them too far against the Apothecaries; for if Physic does
so little influence diseases, what matter is it whether the Medicine be made up
of bad or good Drugs? Whether it be recent, or of a longer standing? Whether
made up of the same or different Ingredients from what were prescribed? Neither
will a person thus persuaded, apprehend he is in conscience obliged to reform
these abuses, which as I have showed, are frequent among Apothecaries; Nor can
he have the least pretense against their exercising the practice of Physic.
For if all cure alike, and so little good be done by the Professors of that
Faculty, then why may not the Apothecaries be allowed as well as any others? So
that these, should they oppose them on an account of interest, their
consciences rather reproaching than encouraging them, they cannot with any
confidence accuse the Apothecaries for actions, which if they be faults, they
themselves are guilty of the same; and if they be not, the same Principle which
acquits them, must also free the other. These probably, if there are any such,
will stand Neuters, and not much concern themselves in a quarrel de Lana
caprina.

But perhaps there are some of another humor, who make great advantages of the
Apothecaries in ways I could mention; which for many reasons, I forbear to
manifest. Now if there be any Physicians of this latter sort, who shall
endeavor to uphold the Apothecaries, notwithstanding they do not relinquish
their former ill courses, only because they make some benefit of them;
whosoever, I say, they are that have such sordid Spirits, so unworthy the Name
they bear, the noble Science they make profession of, and the great Trust
reposed in them; that for a little gain, shall betray their Profession to
scorn, and their Patients to most manifest hazards, These dishonest and
unfaithful persons will have so good espial kept on them, that all their
prudence shall not secure them from having their sordid actions displaied in
genuine colors: which will render them so odious and despicable, that most
will desert them, and apply themselves to those worthy Physicians who are so
far from countenancing the Apothecaries in their fraudulent courses, that they
had rather give themselves the trouble of preparing their own Physic, than
expose the Sick to manifold inconveniences: as they do who compromise with the
Apothecaries in their unworthy practices, and share with them their dishonest
gain.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. line 14. read being, p. 15. l. 23. dele not, p. 16. l. 1. dele such,
p. 21. l. 19. for of r. in, p. 23. l. 15. add another, l. 19. dele for, p. 29.
l. 1. dele still, p. 30. l. 24. for such r. so, p. 40. l. 4. r. Newcastle, l.
24. dele but, p. 46 l. 4. dele the period, p. 50. l. 2. r. the Ens Veteris, p.
51. l. 1. r. and are, p. 53. l. 20. dele the, p. 61. l. 12. r. that seem not to
have any affinity, p. 65. l. 24. dele can, p. 72. l. 18. for in r. on, p. 108.
l. 7. for Pffections r. Affections, p. 110. l. 7. for Ponsideration r.
Consideration, l. 14. dele all, p. 112. l. 3. r. detects, p. 190. l. 16. r.
dilating, p. 193. l. 25. dele long, p. 209. l. 6. for dies before r. dies,
although before, p. 216. l. 14. dele shall, p. 218. l. 19. after Physic, add
and its regulation, p. 233. l. 13. for it being r. it is, p. 254. l. 24 for
profitable r. probable, p. 255. l. 5. for converse r. commerce, p. 226 l. 5.
dele and, p. 267. l. 3. r. Copious, p. 273. l. 7. dele in some measure, p. 291.
l. 8. r. who understands.


