THE Usurpations of France UPON THE TRADE OF THE WOOLLEN MANUFACTURE OF ENGLAND
BRIEFLY HINTED AT; Being the EFFECTS of Thirty Years Observations, by which
that King has been Enabled to wage War with so great a Part of EUROPE.

OR, A Caution to England To Improve a Season now put into Her Hand, to Secure
Her Self.

By WILLIAM CARTER.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin at the Oxford-Armes in Warwick Lane, and
Joseph Fox at the Cap in Westminster Hall. MDCXCV.

THE PREFACE
THE Subject of the following Discourse being matter of Fact, the less Apology
will be required; nor needs it many Arguments to Demonstrate what we see and
feel, viz. That the French have within this 40 Years, not only by Increase of
Trade, Enriched their Country, but also Multiplied their Shipping to that
degree, that the Effect thereof has occasioned the Effusion of so much Blood
and Treasure in these late Years; and how much more few can tell.

The Consequences that have happened, I long since foresaw, and publicly
declared my Fears, that unless some speedy method were taken, the French would
in a short time Engross the whole Woollen-Manufacture, and consequently Trade
it self, to the irreparable Damage of this Kingdom.

And though the War with France has cost Us so many Millions, yet I question not
but the Perusal of the following Sheets will convince all Persons, that rather
regard the Public Interest than some Private Convenience that may attend
themselves; that had there been no War (speaking humanely) we should have (ere
this time) lost the whole Profit of the Exportation of the said
Woollen-Manufacture, (amounting to several Millions in Value Yearly;) the
French (before the War) having made so great Progress therein, that they had
not only Prohibited our Cloth and Stuffs to be Imported into France, but had
also so far advanced themselves in that Manufacture, as to Export the same into
many Foreign Parts, as Mr. Andrew Marvel has formerly showed at large, in a
Paper Printed in the Year 1677, a part of which is inserted in the following
Discourse.

And if this be the true state of the Case in the Infancy of the said
Woollen-Manufacture in France, as it was before the War (if a Peace were
concluded) what the Consequences will be when that King shall enlarge and bring
it to a greater Perfection, rational and wise Men may judge

And when ever a Peace may be Concluded betwixt England and France, unless such
a Provision be made while we are at War to keep the Balance of Trade, I do
foresee (who have been almost 30 Years observing the Designs of France to get
the Trade from Us) the evil Consequence to England of that Peace which may end
in our Ruin; as was admirably well observed lately by another Hand, viz. That
Peace made up with an Enemy, whose Power is too Strong, and his Fidelity too
Weak, is only a Cob-Web-Lawn to break through at pleasure; and a Reconciliation
of Friendship with such a Prince, is the only means to Empower him, to be more
Dangerous, because then a more Surprising Enemy: Should France in her Present
(or rather Late Greatness) give a Cessation to Hostillity, it is certain she can
never give a Cessation to her Ambition; and it is as certain that War is only
raked up, not quenched, when the Coals of Ambition are still glowing, that at
any convenient Rupture may set it fresh a blazing, to that Aspirer that so
visibly aims at Universal Monarchy; Universal Peace can be no more than a
Disguise: In short in any present Accommodation with France, her holding her
Hand will be no other than to take Breath to enable her to make a stronger Blow.

The Consideration of these Things, has all along prompted me (as an English
Man) to use the utmost of my Endeavors in the Post I have stood in for so many
years, to prevent the Designs of France on England, that those Things threatnea
may be prevented, otherwise I had not appeared in Print at this Time, being
rather inclined to be more Retire, especially when I Reflect upon the
Discouragement and Difficulties I have met withal in my former Undertaking; of
which I have given a short Account in the close of this Discourse, but more at
large in another, written by me sometime since, for the clearing my self of
some Malicious Imputations suggested against me in my said former Undertakings;
nor did I however intend to be named in this Paper, when I put it to the Press;
but finding my Name made use of in several Projects about Raising of Money, and
in bringing in a Bill to lessen the Penalties about the Exportation of Wool;
and which occasioned the Mistake of diverse of my Friends, who thereby were
induced to believe me concerned in Matters which were utterly against their
Opinion; and indeed I may presume to offer my thoughts, will instead of
preventing, be rather an Encouragement to the said Exportation; and if
Experience for near Thirty Years may be credited, there is nothing now wanting
in Point of Law but Execution; and if there were a Thousand Laws made and not
Executed it is just the same as if none at all. These Reasons amongst others
have prevailed with me to Subscribe my Name, and to make use of this
Opportunity to declare, That I am not Engaged in any of those Matters which my
Friends might take to be against my former Opinion in this Case, and which, I
believe, will rather redound to the prejudice than good of the Public; not
that I would be construed to Reflect upon any Person under Mistakes, being
charitable to all; though in the following Discourse I have been somewhat sharp
on those I judged to be willful Enemies to their own Trade and Nation.

William Carter.

The renewing of a CAVEAT Entered in our Court several Years ago against the
Growth of FRANCE.
ALthough it be beyond all Dispute, that the French King (who not many years
ago was very inconsiderable both in Trade and Shipping) is now become so
formidable, as to be able to make War with so great a part of Europe, insomuch
that very lately he bid fair to be Emperor thereof.

And though the Matter of Fact be clear; yet it is by many made a Question, How
so prodigious an Alteration should come to pass in so short a time. For
notwithstanding it be notorious, that that King's Interest was very great in
the two last Reigns, and thereby he obtained many Advantages here, not only
Moulds of our best Ships of War, but some Materials for their Building; and had
it not been for a great Man now of Their Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, much of our best Timber had been long since in France: For the
Duchess of Portsmouth having a Grant of Forty thousand Pounds, which was to be
raised out of the Timber growing in the New Forest, and that of Sherwood; his
Lordship prevented that Mischief, which had it not been done with great
Prudence, it would have been of a had Consequence to England. For which he was
suddenly after, and for espousing the Prince of Orange's Interest, condemned in
the Court of France, and brought out of Favor here, (to the Honor of that
Noble Lord, let it be remembered for the Good of England, against the Designs of
France.)

And although it be too true, that the said Duchess promoted the French
Interest here, by which many Advantages were procured thereby from England to
France, (which may be elsewhere enlarged) yet that was but as Flashes in a
River, for a Season: But its Trade, that is the main Spring or Fountain that
gives Life unto, and that does maintain, Riches and Strength to any Nation,
Kingdom, or People.

And though in Trade it self its generally reported, that France (by way of
Barter) got from England upwards of a-Million of Pounds Sterling per Annum, for
several Years last past, which is only known by the Entries made in our Custom
Hou^^ Books; yet this (to those that know the Intrigues of that People) may not
be ^ne half in value of the Goods imported from France. For that which comes in
by Stealth (and of such some Persons are so fond, as to give double if not
treble the worth of it only to have the name of French) may be as much in the
Sum, if not more than what is truly and really entered, which for the most part
are bulky Commodities.

And as our Loss in the Trade with France is about Two Millions per Annum, by
the Importation of their Commodities here; so its presumed, (on very good
grounds) that the Exportation of our Wool thither, unwrought, enriches France
much more than all the Importation of French Goods into England.

So that if France, for upwards of twenty Years last past, has gained only
from England more than Four Millions per Annum (besides what that King has
gained out of other Countries by his Intrigues,) it is humbly presumed, the
Question before stated (viz.) (How France in so short time became so great?) is
in a great measure answered.

When on the other Hand, England (if true to its real Interest) might quickly
turn the Scales, and beat France without Fighting, though not now. For there
are but few Princes or States, that have such means to support their Splendour,
as the Kings and Queens of England: Nor few (if any) Countries, such staple
Commodities, as this Kingdom has; yet those Advantages were never as yet
improved as they might be: And as to what might have been formerly done of this
Nature, Sir Walter Rawleigh propounded to King James the I. that the Native
Commodities of England, with other Traffic, might have been then improved
Three Millions of Pounds Sterling per Annum, beyond what they then came to, and
that the Revenue of the Crown might proportionably increase thereby. If Matters
stood thus at that time, woeful Experience tells us (as before mentioned) that
the Case is now far worse: For instead of increasing, we have lost so many
Millions by the Intrigues of France, which will more particularly appear in the
sequel of this Discourse.

The most of the Goods, which are now yearly imported into this Kingdom, being
to the Value of several Millions of Pounds Sterling per Annum, are no otherwise
answered, but by the value of the Commodities which are exported; the Bulk of
which consists chiefly in our Woolen Manufacture, as being the great support of
our Trade and Shipping. For before King Edward the III. the Burgunder enjoyed
that Advantage, in making of a Yard of Cloth, of English Wool cost Eighteen
Pence, worth then Ten Shillings, to the enriching of that People, and advancing
the Revenue of their Princes; which being perceived by the said King Edward,
upon a Visit made by himself to the Duke of Burgundy; during his Residence
there, he employed such able Agents amongst the Elemish Clothiers, so
effectually representing to them the Danger they were in by the Bordering War
with France, the peaceable Condition of England, and the Freedom of the People
that are Subjects here, that he found them inclinable to accept an Invitation
to come over hither, he promising them the same Privileges and Immunities with
his own Subjects; by which Means he prevailed with a great number of them to
come into England soon after him, where he most royally performed those
Promises: He also called home many of his own Subjects, who had been long
settled in Flanders; and then strictly prohibited the Exportation of Wool.

So the Trade of Cloth was then settled in England; but the Manufacture of
Bays, Says, and Perpetuanies, etc. (which is now almost half the Woolen
Manufacture of this Kingdom) was not set up here till the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, but was till then wholly carried on in Flanders, with English Wool;
so that by these two Princes the Woolen Manufacture came to be settled in
England: By which Means, as our Wealth came greatly to increase, so we became
more powerful in Shipping; which Greatness of our Trade, and Strength of our
Shipping, founded on that, has been not only observed, but of late emulated by
the French King. And seeing it was clearly discerned, that the chiefest Means
for the Maintenance of it proceeded from our Woolen Manufacture, the said
French King has for several Years last past used all Means to get our Wool to
France; and then prohibit the said Manufacture, which is of so great Concern to
England. For the said Manufacture, being exported together with its Returns,
does pay more than three Fourths of the Customs; and consequently the same in
proportion are the Ships and Seamen employed thereby; and it does not only give
Life to all Trade, but a Value to Land; by which Means also all other Branches
of the Revenue of the Crown are proportionably increased. But my Lord Cook
says, that its much more. For, says he, Divide the Exported Native
Commodities of this Kingdom into Ten Parts; and what comes from the Sheep's
back is in Value Nine Parts; which, as before hinted, the French King has used
all Arts and Means, for above twenty Years, to encourage this Woolen
Manufacture in his own Dominions; not only to furnish his own Country, but to
export it to Foreign Parts, which were formerly supplied by us; to the
increasing of their Riches and Strength by Sea, (now so formidable) and then by
so much the less Place or Probability there will be, that we should furnish
them or export it into foreign Parts; and then also so much the greater stop
must of necessity be put to the vending of our Woolen Manufacture beyond the
Seas; because there is a determined Quantity thereof consumed in the Trading
World. And is it not as manifest, that by how much our Manufacture decays, our
Trade and Wealth must decay; and the Strength of our Shipping mainly depending
thereon, must decay also? and consequently the Revenue of the Crown, not only
in the Customs, but in all other Branches of the said Revenue that do depend
upon Trade.

So that, if it be from our Manufacture that the Riches of this Nation comes,
and if it be chiefly from thence that our Shipping is Employed, and our
Mariners bred; if it be from our Trading alone, and from the Riches which our
Trading brings in, that their Majesty's Customs are Raised, and that our Fleets
have been hitherto Built and Maintained, and the Dominion of the Seas
preserved, then it is and must be from our Manufactures, that our Trade is
increased, and by which the Rents of the Nobility and Gentry have been advanced.

And therefore it may be easily granted, that there is no higher Temporal
Interest in the Nation, than that which sustains the Nobility and Gentry's
Rents, that which preserves their Majesty's Revenues, and increases our Navy
and Shipping.

Then in regard our Manufacture does this, the Encouragement of it must
necessarily be the greatest Interest of the Nation, to preserve it; but for the
want of due care therein, the French have gained so much from us, as before
mentioned, which has so highly contributed to their Riches and Strength at
Sea, and consequently to the Impoverishing of us, even the whole Kingdom of
England: Which Evils I did not only long since foresee, but publicly declare
above 20 years ago, and with some warmth too; and also, with no little
Importunity, presented the same to King Charles II. and upon several occasions
since, renewed the same, (viz.) that France was then Learning to be too hard
for us, which is too too true to be denied: And as I did it to those in
Authority; so I did it, also, both to the Merchants and Clothiers; and not
resting there, I have also spent the greatest part of my small Estate, and
(...) (as well as lost a profitable Trade) about it, with the frequent hazard
of my Life, together with many and great Indignites, which I have born up
under, because my Labor has not been altogether Fruitless: though by my
Importunity, I have rendered my self Burdensome to some, a Scorn and Reproach to
others, when I have only Reasoned in my Discourse, and publicly declared, what
I had too much ground for, (viz.) that the Diligence of the French to enrich
themselves upon us, has so far exceeded our Care to preserve our selves, that
it is cometo, if not beyond, a Question, Who have the greatest benefit of the
Manufacture of English Wool, (of so great consequence) They who have no Right
unto it, or to whom of right it does belong (as the very Foundation of all our
Riches and Strength;) that it is so, is too too obvious, (viz.) that France
will be too hard for us by the steps already made therein; desiring a serious
consideration, and comparing the Practice of the French King (assisted by the
Counsel and Advice of Monsieur Colbert, bred a Merchant) with what was done
formerly by King Edw. the 3d, that as the said King Edward wisely transacted
his Affairs in Flanders, in bringing over hither the Manufacturers to the Wool
in England, so the said French King, by his Agents here, is using no less
Policy in gaining oar Wool to his Subjects for his own advantage; for without
our Wool they could never imitate our Manufacture, all other Wool being
insufficient for that use; but having our Wool in such great Quantities, even
in the Years 1669, 1670, and 1671, that they gave out, that they could make as
good Manufacture as ours; and further added, that they were got into a way of
making a low sort of Cloth called Serge De-berry, which comes as cheap as
Northern Cloth, but made of English Wool.

After all these Transactions, comes forth an Answer by way of Objection
against what I had done, Entitled, Reasons for a limited Exportation of Wool,
pretending it was for England's Interest; which came forth in the year 1676. to
which I made my Reply, which I shall not here insert, but only crave leave but
to abstract the Introduction to that Discourse, (viz.) I must needs say, that I
had no thoughts of appearing in Public any more, and could not easily have
been moved thereunto, (my discouragements having been so great) had not the
importunity of some Friends dealing much in that Manufacture, and my Zeal and
Affection to the Trade and Commerce of this my Native Country, (which is at
present solely maintained by the Woolen Manufacture of it) raised my fears so
far, as to believe a great Prejudice is coming upon us; and so far as to doubt
also, that we may be hastening of it by those very Means, we would endeavor to
prevent it.

And therefore I cannot, but, like the dumb Child, speak when he saw a Knife at
his Fathers Throat; I mean when I consider the extremity we are like to be in,
from the French Kings Vigilance, and the endeavors that he has of late used
to acquire the making of the Woolen Manufacture in his own Dominions, and what
Artifices, and vast Expense, he does use and is at, to effect his said Design,
both in France, and by his Agents here in England, even at this very day,
notwithstanding he is engaged in a War with so great a part of Europe; and if
he does this in the very midst of his Distractions, what will he not do? or,
what may we not expect hereafter, when he shall be at Peace with all his
Neighbors?

And if the French King he designing by all ways and Means to under mine our
Commerce, and by it prejudice us in our Trade, and Strength by Sea, I may, I
hope, be pardoned, if I am more than indifferently concerned, or more than
ordinarily warm, to think, we should endeavor to perfect his Design by
delivering up our Wool, the Foundation of so Rich a Manufacture, into his
hands; nor can we think hereafter to recover our Woollen Manufacture once lost,
or to preserve the King's Customs or the Strength of this Kingdom, without it;
for we must be very short-sighted if we understand not, that, after he has
supplied his own Country, he will also supply other foreign Markets (as already
begun, which will appear by the Testimony of another hand which I shall add) to
gain an advantage to himself; for if he may (as he already does) break the Laws
of Commerce, and lay what Impositions he pleases, upon our Cloth, etc. (yea
prohibit the same) while we had a Peace with him, why may he not also lay what
Imposition he please upon our Ships that may come near his Territories?

And when our Commerce is lost, and our Manufacture gone, and our Ships imposed
upon that shall pass the Seas, what shall be left to defend our selves from
whatsoever he shall (for the Greatness of his Name) think fit to require of us?

Give me now leave to add the Testimony of another person, who wrote upon this
Subject about the year, 77, but came lately to my hands, Mr. Andrew Marvel;
who observes, That the French, who were not long since at best but the
Milliners of Europe, are now become, or pretend to be, the Cape-Merchants, and
their King gives not only the Mode, but Garment to all Christendom, and the
World puts it self into his Livery at their own Expenses; well may We therefore
complain of the Death rather than Deadness of our Manufacture, when from this
Cause it receives such an Obstruction even to Suffocation, when we are not only
deprived of that general and gainful Vent that we had formerly in France it
self, but in all other places where we Traffic, we meet the French at every
Town, and the Foreign Post brings News from all parts, that they come before
us, and have undersold us in the same Commodities.

And to this Disease so Mortal, and which is beyond any private Men to remedy,
we do more particularly contribute by those vast quantities of Wool, which are
Transported to France, so that Calice is still no less our Staple, than when it
was formerly under the English Dominion.

From the whole matter I then conclude, (viz.) in the year 1677. That not only
the Clothing Trade, but the very Interest of the Nation was at Stake, and in
hazard to be utterly lost; which there was just cause to suspect would come to
pass, if the same were not with Industry and Diligence prevented; and if this
all would not move us, I thought it then impertinent to insist on lesser
Arguments; upon which consideration I was then, as also before, prompted singly
as an Englishman, to use my utmost Endeavor and unwearied Diligence, to try
what might be done, toward the finding out some Method, that might prevent the
threatened Ruin, (by the French King) and that some good part of what is lost
may be regained (and why not that Kingdom be under the English Government, as
well as part of the Tithes of our King.) These endeavors being used in the two
late Reigns, in which I drew up the Hill, and strove against the Stream, yet,
it is visible, I did many a time stem the Tide, till huge Torrents came down
upon me, yet I did nevertheless recover again, though with hard Rowing; and in
the very last year of the late King, when Addressing his Majesty with some
Clothiers of Exon and Taunton, in behalf of 200, that then kept 100000 poor
people at work, complaining of the French prohibiting the English Woolen
Manufacture; after that Discourse was over, the King then told me, That the
French Ambassador had complained, that I had disturbed the French King's
Fishermen, I did return this Answer, that I owned the Charge, and was glad of
the Season (for I had heard before of Complaints of that nature, made at the
Treasury, and at the Custom-House, where I made my Defense, and prevented the
said Design) to give his Majesty an Answer, I did confess, that I had disturbed
them, by causing above 20 of them to be taken and condemned to his own use, for
that they had broken the Laws, and came on shore and fetched our Wool, that was
the Fishing which was disturbed; which I told his Majesty was the Foundation
both of his Riches and Strength: and moreover I added, that had I not been
greatly discouraged, those Gentlemen then present Addressing his Majesty, would
not have had the occasion of giving him that trouble; this Relation is nothing
but truth, the persons then present being my Witnesses.

I may without offense add, that the Season of this Address was such, that his
Majesty was then, in a quarter of an hour after we came forth from his
Presence, visited by Father Peter, Sir Edward Hales, and Sir John Gage, that
came to intercede for three persons then Prosecuted for Exporting of Wool to
France, one of which was the then Mayor of Galloway, who confessed a Judgment of
22000 l. and the Earl of Tyrconel wrote in his behalf, but the said King
rejected the Motion; but the Matter was again endeavored at the Treary, which
I still watched, and put in Caveats, and prevented the design of his Discharge.

Now if I did go so far then, against the French Interest, shall I despond now
in this Government, when not only England, but a great part of Europe, is in
actual War with them? Now is the Season, in this very thing, to Humble France,
which if we let slip, it is very probable, there may never be the like
Opportunity.

But after all, I suppose another Question may arise; viz. How this may be
done? I answer, though it is not in my power to do; yet to propose to such as
can, I shall readily, as I have not omitted hitherto what lay in my power, in
order to the completing so great an Undertaking; but there are many things not
so proper to be made public, that may greatly contribute to the effecting so
necessary a Work; which I shall not only offer (with all Submission) when
called thereto, but really and indeed put in practice when commanded; and
therefore desire to be excused from offering that to public View, which may
furnish French Agents with such Matter, as may render the whole abortive.

For though we have seen and too much felt the power of France, and that some
persons are very apt to magnify that Monarch, and yet the poverty of the
generality of that People with the Inland Countries being Depopulated by which
a great scarcity of Corn have been the effect thereof, and the great loss in
their Trade at present, ought a little to be considered to balance their
greatness.

And though we have too much cause to fear (but not despair) that we are in a
languishing condition, yet when I have considered how near Ireland was lost, I
would in my greatest despondency entertain some hope for England also: Though
it is the fear of some, and too justly that without more than ordinary skill to
abate the power of France, all our endeavors to that end will prove Fruitless.

There was a time, and that not long since, when England alone was able to
Bridle that Prince and hold the Reins, so as to be able to have turned about
that Monarch as it pleased; but now we see that neither England, or Holland, or
both with their united strength at Sea, nor all the Confederates at Land, can
as yet give check to the Ambition of that aspiring King.

And although in England, we have formerly made several Acts to curb that Prince,
and continued two of them lately, which were ready to expire, yet the
experience of the time past has demonstrated that little has been done, and
as little may be expected for the future, till those Acts are put into strict
Execution, (without which they are dead and useless) which if we design to do,
we must reasume that ancient and generous Temper, that heretofore ran so
freely, and did circulate in English Veins, which did preserve the liberty of
free born Englishmen, and not to suffer our selves to be imposed upon, and
made Slaves to France, by our own folly, for if we expect to live by our Laws,
as a free People, we ought to use the means to support them, by a strict
Execution, and that cannot be well done, but by such persons, who will make it
their Interest, as well as their duty to Execute the same, and also made
capable of it.

And if our Predecessors, that were instrumental in procuring for us some of
those great Privileges, which we now enjoy, were short of that experience
which we have since attained to, it should call upon us to consider what may be
expected from us, who have arrived to greater knowledege, and have more and
better Laws to assist us, for our preservation, and thereupon we ought to
Improve our Privileges as a free People, and to have attained many more and
greater advantages, since the Reign of that Famous Queen Elizabeth, whose
Ministers agreed altogether against the common Enemy which was then the
Spaniard, and though we have to our shame, lost many of those advantages, which
was once in our hands, to have kept the French King lower, yet now if we were
once true to our real Interest we might give a great check, if not a turn to
that Haughty Prince, but then there must be a great change amongst us, for
notwithstanding our present War with France, and the prohibition of French
Commodities, yet our general desire is for that which has the name of France
writ upon it (though we have already paid and like to pay dearer yet) wherein I
need not descend to particulars; but incert one Parragraph out of Mr. James
Whiston Discourse of Trade, Printed the last Year, (viz.)

But if there be a necesity that our Luxury must be indulged, there is nothing
to that purpose that France could afford, which the Industry of our Friends and
Confederates cannot supply us withal; having of late in their several Countries
set up some Manufactors, which if the War continues, will be so Established,
that neither we nor they shall ever stand in need of being beholding to France
for them again, to the utter and Irreparable damage of that Kingdom. And
thereby we shall vent greater quantities of our own Commodities in return for
what we receive from them; whilst our Trade with France, did nothing but
furnish us with Trifles in lieu of those vast Sums of Sterling they have drawn
from us. And though we shall in a great measure enrich several of our
Confederate Neighbors, as well as Advantage our selves, yet it will never put
them into such a condition of doing us hurt as our Trade with France has done.

I will add another Parragrah out of the same Author, viz.

Where Trade is, there will be Employment; where Employment is, thither People
will resort; and where People resort, there will be a Consumption of
Commodities, and thereby the Public Revenue will be raised: So that would we
once make Trade flourish we need not doubt but People from all parts of the
Glob, would resort hither to enjoy themselves, and improve their Stocks, which
formerly by reason of the Shackles upon Conscience, the continuance of which so
long Depopulated this Nation, both by discouraging Ingenious Persons from
repairing hither, and Cramping the Industry of others that remain by rendering
them a prey to each other; which deadly wound did not end here, but Debauchery
and Profaneness were increased to such a degree, that the Nation was dissolved
in Luxury, and Intemperance, whilst the French had the wit to take the
Advantage of our negligence, by Encouraging Industry and Commerce; (which all
the while we were laboring to overthrow and undervalue,) By which means,
chiefly he is become so troublesome to us, and so dreadful to some of our
Neighbors.

To stop this humor if we consider the many Millions France has gained this
way upon us, (as before alleged) we may observe that as Trade in general is
introduced by rational Methods, so it ought to be supportod by the same means,
and it should be so in this case, that as France has gained upon us in our
Trade, partly by stealth, and openly by imposing upon us, for the time past, so
also we ought to consider the same for the future, and put no vallue upon their
fancies, but more upon our substantial commodities which are staple, ceasing to
Imitate their vain and wastful Fashions, for all other ways and means (were
there a Peace) will be totally insignificant to us, for that Prince will not be
held in by any other ways, unless it be in that wherein his strength lies,
which is Trade, (as before in short hinted) for otherwise (Samson like) he will
break all other ties of humanity, etc. And we at length shall be made both poor
and miserable and though there is nothing (speaking generally) more certain, than
that most persons pursue those things wherein they suppose their interest does
consist, yet it is as true that many times they are apt to mistake the way to
that Interest, and if so, its no marvel those measures are taken that tends to
their great and inevitable prejudice.

That this is the case of too to many of our English Men in relation to France,
woeful Experience proves, and nothing is more plain than matter of fact, for as
France and England about Forty Years ago had an equal Trade, supposing in
vallue two Millions of Pounds per Annum each from other, so it is as true that
within those few last years (even before the War) the Trade of the English
Woollen Manufactuary was prohibited in France, but the Importation of French
Commodities were rather more increased into England, that this is so is not to
be denied, but how it is so, I shall endeavor (with submission) to
demonstrate, but before I come to speak of that in general, would crave leave
to be particular only in the County of Kent, where the great mischief is, and
where I meet with the greatest opposition, whose People always pleads the loss
to them by hindering the Exportation of Wool, I will therefore state the case
thus, (viz.) That there was only Kent in England that did produce Wool, and
admit that there grows Yearly 6000 Packs, and admit to be worth 10 l. per Pack,
which amounts to 60000 l. and supposing for Arguments sake, that if it were
freely exported (as desired by some) it would raise the price. 40 s. per Pack,
which amounts to 12000 l. whereas if the said Wool was wholly Prohibited, and
fully Manufactured in England, and supposing in Kent, and there exported to
France, and the same valued at 579999 l. in the particular sorts (as I have
elsewhere more enlarged,) before its put on Board, let us now therefore compare
the profit and loss of this County of Kent, (viz.) The Wool with its supposed
advance vallued at 72000 l. and Manufactured to be vallued at 579999 l. so that
the County of Kent would lose 502999 l. by that Trade: but I would come a
little nearer to the Gentlemen in Kent, being owners of Wool by the Seaside,
and admitting for arguments sake, that the Land there would advance 10 l. per
cent, per Annm more then in other parts, and supposing that one Gentleman had
in value two or 300 l. per Annum, by the Seaside, and the same Gentleman had
two or 3000 l. per Annum, in an Inland Country that depends upon Trade, and
that for want of Trade those Rents were abated 20 l. per cent, I have no need
to ask who was the loser; for what would it signify to advance 10 l. per cent,
per Annum on the Lands by the Seaside in Kent, in a small Farm, and lose 20 on
the Lands in a great one in the Inland Country, but more especially when that
loss we in England sustain by it, proves double the advantage to France, our
Mortal Enemies Country, for thither principal if not only and to the French
Kings Dominions our unwrought Wool is Transported; I would upon this account
close this Parragraph, with the preamble of that Act made in the 14th Year of
King Charles the II. Prohibiting the Exportation of Wool: (viz.) In these three
respects, First for the setting on Work the Inhabitants of this Realm, Secondly
for the Improving the Native Commodities of this Country, to its best fullest,
and utmost use, and Thirdly that the advantage accruing hereby might redound,
to the Subjects of this Kingdom, and not to the Subjects of Foreign Realms as
hitherto, and as it would and otherwise must do.

Although I have formerly often reflected and sometimes hinted at our mischiefs,
for want of consideration, what is the true and real Intrest of England, and
the necessity of putting those good Laws in Execution, and also repeated some
part of Letters writ from some of our Merchants then living in Flanders; yet I
would crave leave at this time, and in this place to incert one particular
Letter that came to my hands in the Year 1670, Dated at Lile the 6th, of April,
1670. Informing us that they then gave out that they could make as good
Manufacturs as ours, and that they were got into away of making a low sort of
Cloth called Serge-Deberry, which comes as cheap as Northen Cloth, but made of
English Wool, and that they had then made so much as to be able to Cloth a
great number of their Army: And in another Letter from the same person, Dated
the 5th, of March 1671, writing of the great quantities of Wool Imported into
the French Kings Dominions, he adds unless some were made examples there would
be continual abuses; about which time I did prosecute some Offenders, and gave
some stop to it as I had done three Years before, which is confir-med in the
same Letter, (viz.) There is a City not Five Leagues form this, called Tourney,
a place renowed for the making all sorts of Stockings of Wool, its not above
Twenty Tears ago that they betook them selves to make the Worsted Hose a Trade,
which in my minority was considerable* from London, its not above three years
ago, that there was a scarcity of Kembed Wool here in this quarter of the
Country, and several of those Stocking Merchants came here to buy some, I told
them, that such severity was then used in England, as People were mad to
adventure (which was the time I first began to prevent it) which put the People
of Tourney on a resolution to draw up a request to Monsieur Colbert, that he
would make a defense of all English Manufacture, since they in England had put
a stop to the Expertation of their Wool, to the great prejudice of the
Manufacture of their City, after which those of this Town joined with them, and
so came a stop to the Trade which we enjoyed for some time, so that you can
easily see how insensibly those Dover and Canterbury Transporters draw the
Kingdoms hearts blood from them; I could add much more of the great benefit our
Neighbors receive from it which proves an absolute ruin, but I guess you can
as easily comprehend my meaning, as if I had further enlarged: In a word,
France rejects our Fabrics at this Day, presuming that they shall never want
our Wool to make their own fantastic Fabrics, which are so variable, as puts
a great stop to the Current demand that used to be of our more solid Fabrics,
for they will pretend to give the mcde to all the World, and so by this means
in time all the World, will be disgust with our Fabrics, when by consequence
they shall receive the mode from France, consider of this I pray that so there
may be some speedy remedy; I shall hear take leave to repeat part of another
Letter from the same person a little before mentioned, (viz.) Some of our
English Men have the Reputation of betraying their Father for Twopence, it is
no marvel then that they will betray their Country; And as this was wrote to me
above Twenty years ago, (which I also then Printed) so a late action which I
saw my self, confirms the same temper in some English Clothiers, as well as
others contrary to the common Proverb) it is a sorry Bird that defiles his own
Nest, and being upon record, and my self both an Eye and Ear witness to the
main part thereof, I shall venture to relate the matter of Fact, and make some
observations thereon, being partly in my Post obliged thereunto: That as I have
observed the Treachery, and falseness of some of our English Men for the space
of Twenty Years and upward, to contribute so much to the setting up the Woollen
Manufacture in France, by furnishing them with our Wool, so to discover the
same Temper, has visibly appeared, not only in some English Men, but also in
Clothiers themselves, by countenancing the Exportation of Fullers-Earth to
Holland, to complete their full Improving the Woollen Manufacture in that
Country, who appeared, not only as witnesses to prove a Negative (against many
positive and substantial Witnesses) but rather acted like Soliciters, and
Advocates for Holland, then for Englands Interest, at two several Trials in the
Exchequer, as also at several Committes of the House of Commons, the
consequence of which must be wholly to destroy the English Woollen Manufacture,
and consequently Trade it self, and to promote a Foreign Interest.

It may be looked upon as Monstrous, that any English Clothier should with so
much Industry endeavor to ruin their own Trade, either for a Muint gain or
private Friendship to any other person, and had not I been both an Eye and Ear
Witness, I should not, could not, nor durst I be so bold thus to charge any
Man, but am so tender of Persons as not to name them, fearing the Poor People
might pull down their Houses about their Ears, when their poverty is so great
for want of Work.

Though this charge being in general as to persons, yet I shall adventure to be
particular in the matter of Fact. (viz.)

There having been for some Years several parcels of ClayShipt off from England
to Holland, in the name of Potters Clay, and some Years past, an Officer of the
Customs made a seizure of a Vessel Laden with it, as believing it to be
fulling Clay, but the said Officer being poor was not able to deal with the
Proprietor, was forced to desist; and so it continued to be Exported, till
about the Month of January, 1692, There being three Vessels Laden with the
said Clay, and Ry-ding at Ancor in the River of Thames, and entered in the
Custom House of London, to be Exported thence to Holland, as Potters Clay, but
some of the Officers being jealous that it was Fulling Clay, or scowring Earth,
made a stop of it, and it coming to the Ears of the Searcher, whose said Office
it is to look after the same, it being as well Felony in them to suffer it to
be Exported (if it were Fulling Clay,) as in the Exporter, which Officers being
as well Men of some Reputation as Experience in their Office (before any
seizure was made to give the Merchant any needless trouble) caused Experiments
to be made of the said Clay at several places and times, and found it to be a
very good sort of Fulling Clay, upon which Experiments they caused the said
Clay to be Landed, and put into their Majesty's Seller, or Warehouse, and
ordered the same to be laid in three distinct places, and then Exhibited an
Information in the Court of Exchequer against the Merchant for one of the said
Ships Loading, on the Statute of XII. Car. which makes the Forfeiture three
Shillings in the Pound, (as it is Felony by the XIV. of the same King, and the
Officer is at Liberty to Prosecute upon which Statute he pleases, but not on
both;) and though the Forfeitures was so great, yet the Officers were so tender
of ruining the Merchant, that in case he would not continue Exporting of it,
they would not take the Advantage of the Forfeitures, but he declining that
offer the said Officers did prepare for Trial; and in order to have more
Experiments made of it, I was amongst others desired to take a parcel thereof
out of the Warehouse, which I did, and kept in my possession until I had made
an Experiment of it in the Country, in the presence of about Ten Clothiers and
Fullers, and found it to be better Earth for their use than any that those
Clothiers or Fullers had used, upon which Experiments the said Officers brought
it on to a Trial in Hillary Term 1692, And notwithstand there were above Twenty
Witnesses produced viva voce, and the Clothiers themselves (upon which the
Experiments were made) were brought into Court, yet the Jury found it for the
Defendant, the coullor for the Verdict being, that though Skowring Earth was
named in the Title, yet it was not in the body of the Act.

That after this Verdict the Clothiers that were then present Petitioned the
Queen in Council to order a Second Trial, upon another of the Ships Loading,
and although there were several other Experiments made not only at the same
Mills as before, but also in more remote places, (viz.) In Somerset, Gloucester,
and Worcestershires; from which places Twenty seven Persons were then also
produced, and the Cloths upon which the Experiments were made, not withstanding
which, yet it had the same fate as the other Trial had, the consequence of
which will be very prejudicial not only in its self, but also in the seizures
of Wool, and though those Officers were able to bear the charge of near three
Hundred Pounds, yet its a great question whether any others will be at such
vast expense to adventure to run such risks, for uncertain gain (though it has
been familliar to me) which will be very bad to the Nation in the end.

I shall say the less here upon this head, because I have enlarged upon it
elsewhere, wherein also I have in short hinted some of the obstructions and
oppositions, I have met withal in this Affair, as those Officers have in this
about Earth.

And though I am now growing Old, having spent almost Thirty Year, in the prime
and strength of my time, (with much hazard cost and pains) and though in reason,
I cannot expect my self to live and see its full effects, yet I hope to dye in
the Faith that others may live to see England again flourish, and yet I would
not omit any thing worthy of Imitation though in an Enemy, and therefore will
relate one project of the French King* who has within this Forty Years caused
a Nursery of Young Oaks to be raised in a great part of Britain that are now
well grown for a Provision of Shipping against another Generation, which piece
of good Husband like policy does both softly call us thither to nip his future
Ships in the bud (the same way to beat him at the Sea for hereafter), and
loudly upbraids the neligence of us now in England, whose posterity must needs
complain of this present Age, that contents its self not with the providence of
our Predecessors, but are rather in a prodigal and careless way of destroying
that which they took so much care and pains to Erect.

And then another Advantage France has over us is to encourage Industry, and
discourage the contrary (viz.) to pay well, and punish well, when as the
contrary is toomuch in use at this time.

I dread to name my fears (if we are yet careless) if England that has been so
famous to all the World, should now be given up to ruin, and be a prey to the
French King, and thereby a scorn and a by word to the World, by the Evil
practices of its own Natives, whereas were we unanimoufly true to our real
English Intrest against the common Enemy, we need not fear all the World. But
on the other hand, if we persist in that careless way, (and prefer private
Intrest) so much in use amongst us; what misery may be justly expected by us,
when we are so insensible of that Train that has been so long laying by the
French King's Intrest, to blow up those good Foundations (which have been long
laid by our Noble Ancestors) of all our English Liberties, and Properties; or
to expose us to a lingering Consumption, by a long and costly War.

Give me leave here to mention what those persons that are chiefly the
Instruments of the great misery we are exposed unto, which consists of three
sorts, (viz.) First, Such as are Pensioners to France; Secondly, Such as that
nothing is valuable with, or pleasing but French Modes (whose number is too
great:) and Thirdly, Such who are employed to conveigh those Commodities from
France, now at this time to England notwithstanding the War, which are all
betrayers of their own Country. And though this Treachery be pleasing to, and
desirable by our Enemies (for which they may well laugh at us,) yet the parties
so doing cannot but expect to be hated by our very Enemies, even the French
themselves, of which we may observe something of the like in former times
(viz.) In the Reign of King John: As that King had entrusted the Defense of the
Famous Castle called Valle de Royal in France, (then under the English
Government) to two of his Nobles, that he thought he had confidence in, yet
those persons, when the French King Phillip set down before it, before one
Stone of the Castle was shaken, or any of their Men had lost the least hair of
their Heads, they Dishonourably Surrendered the Fort; for which Treachery (tho
so profitable to the Enemy yet) he commanded them to be Fettered in Chains, and
basely entreated in close Prisons, till they had dearly redeemed their Liberty.
But on the other hand, in that story, it is pity to omit an Instance of the
Loyalty, Fidelity, and Resolution, of the Lord Delacy, (Governor of another
English Garrison in France) who having received of King John the Custody of
that goodly Castle Rock Andley, did bravely bear of the Siege, and power of
King Phillip of France, and his Host, almost a whole Year, yet they could never
make entry upon them; but were repulsed with slaughter, till his Provision of
Victuals being spent, he called his Soldiers together, encouraging them, that
it was more noble for Soldiers to Dye Fighting than Famishing, and together
with their own Lives, to Sacrifice to their Countries Honor, the blood
slaughtred Enemies. Whereupon fiercely Sallying forth with his Resolutes, after
a blody shambles, made in the midst of his belegers; he was by Multitude
overborn and taken. But in regard of his Exemplary Faith and prowess in
maintaining his charge, he was by King Phillips express command (though an Enemy)
Honorably used, and without restraint of a Prison; yet this very King Phillip
(just as Lewis now) shortly after used such Instruments to get other places;
that he first corrupts them, that they might corrupt others to defection, with
great rewards, and greater promises, that he might in time obtain the English
Diadem from King John; (which was very near obtained at that time) in the
mean-time go Roan, and so all Normondy, which had been in the hands of the
English Kings, (viz.) King John and his Predecessors, about Two hundred Year;
and no less Treacherously dealt Phillip the French King with them, when he
caught them with the Trap of glossing proffers, causing without delay their
Cities goodly Walls to be utterly demolished, and giving strict charge never to
be built again: It may not be amiss to relate the occasion why Normondy was so
soon lost to the French (and thereby afterward Lewis Phillips Son to come
here, as by and by more of Lewis) when King John had notice of the French Kings
design on Normondy, he prepared a very great Army, and Ships accordingly to
Transport them, and when ready to Embark, Hubert then Bishop of Canterbury
(that he might faciliate the French Kings design) prevented that enterprise,
threatening Excommunication from his Holiness at Rome, if he attemptsd it: The
like have been by some others done, by hindering our attempts upon the French,
when opportunities have been offered; but to return by King John's being
hindered from going to France, and loosing so much expense here, and his Intrest
in Normondy; by which means and his adhearing to Rome, the Barons War began,
which gave opportunity for the French King Phillip to put in Execution what he
did aim at before, (viz.) The Crown of England, and to that end his Son Lewis
(being invited) came over with an Army, and after great destruction by that
War, as King John was going from Lynn, in Norfolk to give Lewis Battle, as he
was passing the washes in Lincolnshire, with his Army in those Sands, all his
Carridges, Treasure, and Provision (himself and his Army hardly escaping) were
Irrecoverably lost; many likewise were the grievances into which the Barons the
mean while were plunged, to see their Native Country thus horribly Massacreed,
their own Castles, and Possessions ruined by the King, and which bred in them
most Anxity their Faithful service (in their Faithless adherance) not so
respected by Lewis as he and their foreruning hope had promised them, while he
conferred only on his French, all such Territories and Castles, as the hand of
Victory had lent him, but their distress were yet greater than those their
jealousies could comprehend, till a Noble French Man (Vicont de Modan) a Man of
great esteem with Lewis, having his Soul in his Sickness deadly wounded with
the Sin of his Health, desired private conference on his Deathbed in London,
with those English Barons, to whom Lewis had committed the Custody of that
City, to whom he imparted, what lamentable desolations, and unsuspected ruins
hung over their Heads; for that Lewis with sixteen other his chief Earls and
Barons, whereof himself was one, (avowing it on the Salvation of his now
departing Soul), had taken an Oath, if ever Englands Crown was settled on his
Head, to Condemn unto perpetual Exile, all such as now adhered to him against
King John, as Traitors to their Sovereign, and all their Kindred in the Land
utterly to Extirpate. So Coucelling them timely to prevent their misery, which
by the sudden Death of King John, and Crowning Henry the Third was
accomplished, and then Lewis was forcest to be gone, which had not King John
been taken away so soon, great misery had then befaln England.

I would upon this occasion crave leave to look back and consider how seasons
and opportunities, have been neglected to have given that common Enemy of
mankind a very great check, and freed England from those losses, lately in our
Turkey Fleet, and and fears of more, who knows how things may be for the future,
or who may hereafter call any thing their own, things are so uncertain whether
we believe it or no; I wish I may be deceived in my fears.

I would upon this occasion (as being not Impertinent) recite a passage that
the Turkish History affords us; (viz) That at the taking of Constantinople by
Mahomet the Great, at which time the Riches of the Conquered were no better
then poverty, and beauty worse than deformity; but to speak of the hidden
Treasure there found passes credit. The Turks themselves wondering thereat,
whereof if some part had in time been bestowed upon the defense of the City,
the Turkish King had not so easily taken both it and the City. But every Man
(as now here) was careful how to increase his own private wealth, few or none
regarding the public state (its still our case) until in fine every Man with
his private abundance, was wrapped together with his needy Neighbor, in the
self same common misery; yet the security of the Constantinopolitans was such,
that though being always environed with their Mortal Enemies, yet had they no
care of Fortifying of so much as their inner Wall of the City, but suffered the
Officers which had the charge of it to convert the greatest part of the Money
into their own Purses, as appears by one Manuel Geogrius, a little before a
very poor Man, and likewise by Neophilu an Officer, who had in a short time
gathered together Seventy Thousand Florens, which becomes a worthy prey unto
the greedy Turks.

Upon the whole matter I must conclude, that if our Intrest, and the Glory of
our Nation be things of value, I humbly submit to better Judgments, whether the
things before mentioned duly considered, and timely Improved be not the
properest way to promote the one, and preserve the other.

If it be granted by the wisest of Lawyers, that a mischief is better than an
Inconvenience, some Men ought (if necessity requires it) to suffer, rather than
the whole Nation.

Supposing also that our Manufactures, and the encouraging of it, is the main
and chief (if not the sole and only Intrest of the Nation) then no Intrest
besides can, or ought in reason to to stand in composition with it; which if it
should, it is simply impossible, that either our Trade, and Navigation should
be preserved, which must and will certainly and effectually bring an utter
destruction both to the Commerce, Strength, and Shiping of this Kingdom.

We have small reason to expect our Neighbors (who are now our Rivals) should
help us, or pity us, when we do wilfully contribute to the ruin of our
selves, and may (if we will) either prevent it, or easily remedy it.

And indeed if our all being at stake (I mean the very Intrest of the Nation it
self) will not move us to alter our general Temper, I think it would be very
Impertinent to insist upon lesser Arguments.

And therefore, though it would be for the Interest of the Nation greatly, to
arrest this occasion (I mean the cheapness of Wool, and War with France) to
beat out the French in their Foreign Trade, of our Manufactures, and by
underselling them at least abroad.

And though this might now more easily be done then ever, seeing our
Manufacture is Improved of late Tears, in the goodness of it; and might soon
(if we would not be wanting to our selves) be brought to an absolute perfection.

And though it be but equal and and just to forbid the Commodities of France
(had we Peace) who did refuse (before the War) to deal with us for our Woollen
Manufactures, or by Exorbitant, and Arbitrary Impositions laid upon them, did
in Effect Prohibit them; and though the doing of this, is but agreeable to the
Rules of Justice, and to the Laws of Nations, and of Commerce.

Though also it cannot be denied, that it may be consistent with the public
Good of the Nation, to make sumptuary Laws, and to restrain the Excess that is
at present amongst us, yet I most humbly crave leave to say, That this is but
like the taking much pains, to stop the Leaks of a Barrel, and let the Liquor
run out of the Bung, while we neglect the main Foundation, viz, The Public
Interest and Benefit of the Commonweal in general to promote any single and
private Design.

POST SCRIP.
AND though I have in the foregoing Lines, in general, stated the Gains of France
from England, within these Thirty Years; and though I have also in short named
the County of Kent, by stating a Case to be compared Profit and Loss; yet I
shall here crave leave to be more particular therein, Viz.

That the Cities of Exon and Norwich (alone) Exported to France in Serges,
Perpetuanoes, and Stockings, the Value of Five Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling
per Annum; and from Dorsetshire great quantities of Bays and Cottons, not only
made in that County, but also in the West of Sommerset: And from Southampton
great quantities of Cloth-Rashes made there and at Rumsey, were Shipped off to
France. From Hull, great quantities of York-shire-Kersies and Lancashire-Bays,
were Exported thence, besides what was Shipped off from London, of all those
sorts before mentioned, and also Broad Cloth, Welsh Cottons, etc. in so much,
that a Merchant of my Acquaintance in that City, had Commission for the buying
up the Value of Fifty Thousand Pounds Sterling per Annum; and if One Man had
Commission for so much, we may rationally conclude, That others might be
considerable, besides our own Merchants in London, that had Factors there in
France; all which Trade were lost before the War was begun with that Kingdom,
which was principally the Effect of the Exportation of Wool.

Having been thus particular in the Damage we have already received by France,
through our Negligence, I shall also crave leave to give a few Instances
amongst many of my Endeavors, to prevent it, viz. That by the Observations I
had made in the Year 1667, and part of 68, of the Crafts and Designs of France
(as formerly more at large appears) I humbly Proposed to the late King
Charles the Second, several things that to me seemed the most conducive to
hinder so ill an Effect, and to restore our Trade to its former Flourishing
Condition; which being referred to the Council for Trade to Examine, they upon
hearing of my Proposals, were pleased to Testify their Approbation, by their
Report, viz.

WHEREAS in pursuance of an Order of this Board, of the 20th of November last,
Referring to the Council of Trade the Proposols of William Carter, for
preventing the Exportation of Wool, the said Council having returned their
Report to the Board, That having Discoursed with the said William Carter, and
such other Persons, as they thought capable of giving them any good
Information, touching this Matter, they find the Exportation of Wool is of a
destructive Consequence to the Trade of this Kingdom; and that the same has
grown into Practice, as well by reason of the Doubtfulness and Provisions in
the Statute made in the 12th Year of His Majesty's Reign, Prohibiting the
Exportation of Wool, as by the Neglect and Remissness of Officers, in not
putting the Laws in Execution.

White Hall, Council Chamger, The Second of April, 1669.
Pursuant to which Report, Sir Olando Bridgman, the Lord Keeper, in the
beginning of the Year, 1669. brought into the House of Lords a Bill to Explain
some Words in the Statute of the 12th Car. II. Which are Explained in an Act
lately made in the present Reign.

Which Bill I have Solicited; and during my Attendance, was Informed by One of
their Lordships (yet Living) That One Hundred Thousand Pounds were offered for
leave to Export Wool to France, which Design though (by some lucky Accident) did
not take Effect. Yet that Interest so far prevailed, as to get me into Prison,
only for Printing some Reasons of my Proceedings, on pretense of wanting the
Form of a License; and during my Imprisonment, the Bill before mentioned, was
so much Clogged as to miscarry; notwithstanding which, I proceeded in the
interval of Parliaments to Watch the Seacoast; and though betwixt the Merchants
in Cailice and their Corespondents here, a considerable Purse of Money was
Collected, and Lodged at Dover to wage War with me (which I felt to my Cost)
yet I so far succeeded, as to put a great stop to that impending Mischief, by
discovering diverse of the Exporters, and Prosecuting them on Two several
Statutes, viz. That of the 12th Car. II. which makes the Forseitures Three
Shillings per Pound, besides the Wool; and the other of the 14th of the same
King, which makes it Capital; of which I shall here incert an Abstract of of a
Report and Certificate, and of a Letter from Flanders, Confirming the Effects
of my Prosecution, notwithstanding the Defects of the Laws supposed; and first
from a Second Report from the late Lord Chief Baron, Sir Edward Turner, to King
Charles the Second, in these Words, viz.

May it please your most Excelent Majesty, in Obedience to Your Majesty's
Second Order of Reference, bearing Date the 20th of December last, I have
Considered of the Matter to me Referred, and have Discoursed with the
Petitioner about his Charges etc. in Prosecuting the Transporters of Wool;
whereby it appears, That during this Four Years last past, wherein he has
brought into Your Majesty's Exchequer about Eight Hundred Pounds more than in
former Years had been Received, but there be many more Informations still
depending, if proved, may bring in a greater Sum; but without some Supply at
present from Your Majesty, he will not be able to proceed with them.

January 3. 1671. Edward Turnor.


Upon which Report I had Three Hundred Pounds paid me toward my former
Expense, which was almost Eight Hundred Pounds, of which I then Expended about
Two Hundred Pounds in further Prosecutions that Year, some of which were at the
Assizes, as appears by the Abstract of a Certificate, viz.

These are to Certify, That at the General Jail-delivery holden at Maidstone
in the County of Kent, the 12th of March, 1671. Edward Nichols Mariner, was
Convicted of Felony for Transporting of Wool. And that on the First Day of
August 1672, Thomas Knight, Nicholas Davis, and Thomas Stoner, were Convicted
of Felony for the like Offense; and that William Catter did on his Majesty's
behalf Attend the respective Trials of the said Nichols, Knight, Davis, and
Stoner, for the respective Felons aforesaid, and did manage the Evidences
against them, and thereupon cause them to be Prosecuted and Convicted for the
said Felons aforesaid.

Given under my Hand the 22th of April, 1676. Tho. Lee Clerk of the Assizes.

And as those Persons were Convicted as aforesaid; so there were about Twenty
more Continued, and bound over to the next Assizes; but an Act of Grace
discharged the said Offenders at that timo; and some Officers Compounding with
those Prosecuted in the Exchequer, that gave Encouragement to the Offenders
afterward to continue that evil Practice; but by the aforesaid Prosecutions, a
great stop was then made to the said Exportation, as may appear by a Copy of a
Letter writ to me from Lille, Dated March 1671/2. viz.

There is a City not Five Leagues from this, called Tournay, a Place Renowned
for the making of all sorts of Stockings of Wool; it is not long ago, since that
there was a scarsity of Wool in this Quarter of the Country, and several of
those Stocking-Merchants came hither to buy some; I told them, That such
Severity was used in England, that People were mad if they did Adventure.

So that it is apparent, the Law was not so defective as it is suggest'd, but the
Prosecution being vigorous, a stop may be made thereunto; as another Instance
may be given by and by in the late Reign.

That upon those Prosecutions, Complaint was made to Monsieur Colbert, by the
Woollen-Manufacturers at Lille and Tournay (in French-Flanders) That a stop wa
put to their Gainful Importation of English and Irish Wool; which being by him
represented here in England; the Assistance I had from King Charles, in Vessels
at Sea, and Horse, as my Guard at Land, was recalled (as well as my
Imprisonment, beforementioned) so I was forced to desist.

That in the Years 1676 and 1677, the French Interest continued so much to
prevail, under a Disguise, That when the Parliament was endeavoring to pas an
Act to prohibit all French Commodities, to prevent the Growth of France;
nevertheless comes out a Paper in Print to invalidate all my Endeavors, and in
the Front of which, I was somewhat Exposed. The Title was, Reasons for a
limited Exportation of Wool. The Introduction runs thus, viz. Reflecting upon
the great Mijery of this Nation, by the Cheapness of Wool, and thinking of some
Remedy, found my Design opposed by several Pamphlets, under the Name of W. C.
and chiefty by one he calls England's Interest. I have here endeavored to
winnow his handful of Corn, from abundance of Chaff, I replied (as before
hinted) and frustrated that Design at that time; as also another Design the
following Year, in lessening the Penalties of former Acts.

In the Year 1684, I was again importuned by diverse Eminent Merchants, Factors
and Clothiers, to proceed in that Service; and though those great Oppostions I
met with, were a sufficient Discouragement, yet I proceeded, and by my Care, a
considerable Check was given to those Evils, in causing near 300 bags of Wool
to be Seized and Condemned, and much more cast overboard into the Sea, and
Twenty Freuch Vessels, besides some English, to be also Taken and Condemned;
insomuch, that Wool rise at that time in Callice, above 30 per Cent. which
occasioned a further Complaint against me from the French Ambassador, to the
late King James, who was pleased himself to tell me of it, and to heat my
Answer to that Charge, as before appears.

That afterward, continuing to Prosecute some of the Exporters, I was
Assaulted in my Lodgings at Rumney and Lidd, Two several Nights, one after
another, and some of my Men dangerously Wounded; and the Day following, going
to Rye, was pursued by above One Hundred Horsemen, and was forced to leave my
Horses on the Seaside, where One was killed, and the rest taken, and my Self
and Men narrowly Escaping, as appears by the following Affidavits

ABSTRACTS of the Affidavits of several Persons Employed to prevent the
Transportation of WOOL, etc.
JAMES WEBB and John Edwards, being Employed to prevent the Transportation of
Wool, was on the 11th instant December, required to Execute a Warrant from the
Lord Chief Justice, against several Exporters, living in and about Rumney, and
afterward being informed, that there was designed that Night 30 packs of Wool
to be shipped off, of which they designed to Seize; but to prevent their
Intentions, these Deponents, with some others, were Arrested with seign'd
Actions: That on the 12th came about Twenty of the Exporters with Arms, being
led on by John Slaughter, one of the Persons taken up the Day before, on the
said Warrant, and bound over to the Assizes; upon which Mr. Carter sent to the
Mayor to disperfe those Persons, and keep the Peace; which Mayor being a
Favourer of the said Exporters, refused, so we was forced to keep our Lodging
for several hours, 'till one of the Jurats, and a former Dealer with Mr. Carter
had prevailed with the Mayor, to disperse the said Slaughter and Company, and
then we went to Lydd, where they were Assaulted twice that Evening, and some of
us dangerously Wounded; and afterward about Twelve a Clock that Night, came to
our Lodging a great Company, both of Horse and Foot, firing several Shot, and
threatening of us; and had not Mr. Carter diswaded us from firing upon them,
there had been much Blood spilt that Night.

The next Day, these Deponents, with Mr. Carter and Company, were pursued
toward Rye, by a great many Horsemen; and had not there been Boats to take
them in, we might have been destroyed. John Edwards farther says, There being
two of our Company left with the Horses to go over the Ferry, were pursued by
the Horsemen, which forced those Men to get into a Boat, and leave the Horses
on the Beach; one of which were killed, and the rest taken.

James Atkins says, That he saw a party of Horse, the 13th instant December,
follow Mr. Carter and his Assistance, intending, as he believes, to do some
Mischief to them; for that they fired at them, as they got into a Boat, some of
the Bullets dropping by the Boat-side.

John Syer Mariner, makes Oath, That being Employed in a Vessel to prevent the
Exportation of Wool, was on the 12th of this instant December, required with
others, to Assist in the Execution of the Lord Chief Justices's Warrant against
several Exporters of Wool, living at Rumney, came that Day to Iadd, in order to
go to Rye, on board their Vessel then lying at Anchor there, and about hight or
Nine of the Clock that Night, at the request of Mr. Carter, were going toward
the Seaside, to p-event the Exportation of Wool, intended to be then
Transported, and as this Deponent and Company were going through the Street,
they were set upon by several Persons unknown, by whom some of us were Wounded
after which time a great Number of Men came to our Lodging, firing several
times at us, and also threatening of us.

And the next Day was pursued by a great Number of Horsemen Armed; and had not
the Boats belonging to several Vessels taken us in, we might have been all
destroyed.

Randal Gossey makes Oath, That on the 13th instant December, there being a
great Body of Horse on the Camber near Rye, the Magistrates sent some Persons
in a Boat, to discover who they were, and understood they intended some
Mischief to Mr. William Carter, and his Assistance, who had taken up some
Persons for Transportation of Wool; these Horsemen following them so fast,
that Mr. Carter's Men could not get their Horses over the Ferry, but left them
on the Camber-Point; and being afterward sent by the said Mr. Carter to look
after the Horses, went as far as Lidd, where one Slaughter owned the Horses to
be in his Custody, and would keep them for Damages pretended to be done him by
the said Mr. Carter; And further said, that his Name was Slaughter, and a
Slaughter he should find of him; and that others then in Company of the said
Slaughter said, That they would Secure his Body, and some others his Soul; for
that neither was his own.

Jurat coram me Tresime, Die Decembres Anno. Dom. 1688. John Spain Mayor
These are all True Copies of the Original upon Record, here Examined by me
Henry Darington Town Clerk, and Public Notary of the Ancient Town of Rye, in
Sussex.


This Deponent makes Oath, That upon the 13th Day of December 1688, He was
importuned by James Hunt and other Transporters of Wool about Rumney, to pursue
Mr. William Carter, who suddenly after met with a great Number of Men, about
One Hundred, who went after the said Mr. Carter and his Men toward Rye; and
had they not gone into some Boats, Mr. Carter would have received some hurt;
for many of the Exporters were Desperate Fellows, not caring what Mischief they
did.

William Ralph.
Jurat coram Jo Moore, Mayor,
September. 1. 1690.


THese are to Certify, That the aforesaid Affidavits are all True, being
present, and an Eye Witness of all those Transactions: For that I going along
with Mr. Carter from London, to assist him in the execution of the Lord Chief
Justices's Warrant against several Persons which were taken in the Fact, as
they were going to Export Wool in the Nightime; some of whom, to free
themselves, discovered others, to the number of about Twenty: And whereas it
was a very difficult thing to take up those Persons, they generally having the
Countenance of their Neighborhood, the said Mr. Carter, having several Vessels
under his Charge and Care to look after, and prevent the said Exportation, some
of them Riding near Rye, he directed about Twelve Seamen to meet him at Rumny,
and to come in there Four in a Company in the Nightime, to keep his Design
private, and the next Morning placed Two at each Door, in the Street, to
prevent the Escape of the Offenders, and then required the Constable to keep
the Peace in the Execution of the said Warrant, which was the occasion of the
Mayor being a Favorite of the Offenders, refusing to take Notice of the
Persons that came the next Day to Assault Mr. Carter and his Company, being led
on by John Slaughter, one of the Persons bound over to the Assize, who had the
Repute of a very dangerous and desperate Man, and an old Transporter; and the
Night after, the Exporters were bound over to the said Assize, he was
endeavoring to cause a Mutiny amongst the Seamen Employed by Mr. Carter.

The next Day when we were preparing to leave Rumney and go to Rye, the said
Slaughter, with his Assistance beforementioned, in James Webb and John Edwards
Affidaved we were forced to stay about six hours in Rumney, before we could
stir out of our Lodging, and then it was we escaped, by the Interest Mr. Carter
had in one of the Magistrates that he had formerly deal'd with for Wool; and
when we came to Lidd, the same Evening, being not above three Miles from
Rumney, we met with some Persons near the Town, Riding out, which we understood
were preparing for Transportation of Wool that Night, which afterward proved
true; for when the time came, about Eight or Nine a Clock, our Company went
out, some on Horseback and some on Foot, designing to go to the Seaside and
endeavor to prevent them; and as soon as we were out of our Lodging, we were
fired at by several Persons unknown, and my self being upon Mr. Carter's Horse
(which was well known) was in particular shot at, but they missed me, the
Bullets coming over my Head, which we saw the next Day fixed in a Beam of the
Barn, several of our Company being Wounded: Mr. Carter diswaded us from going
further at that time, because they knew our Strength, but we did not know
theirs; so they had the liberty to accomplish their Design that Night, and at
their return from their Work, about Twelve of the Clock that Night, their
Company then appearing by the very Light that their firing made, to be a far
greater Company than ours; nevertheless, if Mr. Carter had not then used some
Arguments to the Seamen he had for his Assistance, they would have been
Revenged for the Wounds they had received the Evening before, tho they had lost
their Lives in it; for those Exporters Challenged us, saying, Come out you
Dogs, the Owls (viz) the Wool-Flyes. The next Morning Mr. Carter. having sent
to some of the Houses of those Persons he was informed were the Offenders, and
found their Horses in the Stables, and the Boots lying very Dirty, concluded
they were in Bed, so we hasted away altogether, till we came near the Seaside,
and then Mr. Carter and James Web, before-nam'd, and my self, did Ride before
(leaving Two Horses to carry the Wounded Men) that the Boats might be ready to
take them in belonging to the Ships, and my self and one more staid with the
Horses to go to the Ferry; but so it fell out, that we Riding by the Seaside,
saw a Hogshead floating, which we got upon shore, which proved to be
White Wind, which was advantageous to us; that though our men had broached it,
yet their Company that followed, staid to drink it up, by which means all got
into Boats, but my self, and he with me that had the Horses, very narrowly
escaping; for we had not time to take off all the Saddles and Bridles, our
Adversaries firing at us, the Bullets falling by the Boat-side, whereby we were
forced to leave our Horses, being Five, to their mercy, who killed one of them
which could not leap, the rest got away, but were afterward taken by them, and
kept for some time, till the Mayor of Rye wrote to them about it, and so we had
our Horses again much hurt. Afterward Mr. Carter having discovered many of
those Rioters, Indicted them at the next Assizes, and the Bill was found
against them; but before next Assize, an Act of Grace past, after which time
when they were Discharged by the Act of Grace and Pardon, they Imprisoned
several of those Persons Employed to prevent Exportation of Wool, on frivilous
pretenses, and detained them a long time before they could be removed by Habeus
Corpus, one of which being my own Brother, who fell Sick and Lame, during his
Abode in that Country, and is since Dead; and others undone, and forced to
quit this Service.

ROBERT TOOKET.

FINIS.

