Gulielmus Cowper Chyrurgus
portrait ^ Closterman pinxit

I. Smith fecit



THE ANATOMY of HUMANE BODIES

By Willm. Cowper Surgeon

School.



THE ANATOMY OF HUMANE BODIES, WITH FIGURES DRAWN AFTER THE LIFE By some OF THE
BEST MASTERS in Europe, And Curiously Engraven In One Hundred and Fourteen
Copper Plates, ILLUSTRATED WITH LARGE EXPLICATIONS, CONTAINING MANY NEW
Anatomical Discoveries, And CHIRURGICAL OBSERVATIONS: TO WHICH IS ADDED AN
INTRODUCTION EXPLAINING THE ANIMAL ECONOMY. WITH A COPIOUS INDEX.

BY William Cowper.



OXFORD PRINTED AT THE THEATER. For SAM. SMITH and BENJ. WALFORD, PRINTERS to
the ROYAL SOCIETY. At the PRINCES ARMS in ST PAUL'S CHURCH Yard, LONDON
MDCXCVIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES MOUNTAGUE, FIRST LORD OF THE TREASURY;
CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER; ONE OF THE LORDS OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST HONORABLE
PRIVYCOUNCIL; AND PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL-SOCIETY, etc.
SIR,
Having heard from those Persons who have often the Happiness of waiting on
You, how easy an Access You give to All, I have presumed to ask the Honor of
being admitted into Your Presence. If this Address may be thought too forward,
it will be some Excuse, to have it known, that I was justly afraid of being
prevented by those Numbers of Men, Eminent in all Faculties and Professions,
who are preparing to make the same Attempt upon You. The Peace, which His Most
Sacred MAJESTY has with the greatest Glory brought Home to us, as much as it
owes to the Influence of Your particular Counsels, will be very far from
allowing You any Share of that Rest, which it affords to all Europe besides:
Believe me, SIR, the Men of Letters knowing now, that Your Thoughts are no
longer taken up by the War, are all ready to break in upon You with their
Offerings; they look on You as their declared Patron and Protector; they have
upon this Prospect recovered their Spirits, and enlarged their Hopes; and some
of them have gone so far, as to think they find You Born for their Advancement,
under that very Star, which was never before observed to shine out in all its
Luster, but only at the Birth of the Roman Mecaenas, and the French Richlieu
and Colbert.

Every Art and Science pretends a Right to approach You, because every one of
'em is Familiarly known to you: ANATOMY has this also in particular to Allege
for it self, that, having received its Chief Improvements and Advantages from
our own Countrymen, it may be accounted of English Growth; which the World
will agree, is the most effectual Thing that can be said of it, to Recommend it
to Your Protection, who lay the Honor and Interest of England so near Your
Heart, and whose Love for Your Country, is not to be outdone, but by the Love
Your Country returns You.

The Favor of Great Ministers to the Learned, is a Subject that takes up but
little Room in our British Annals. It has been thought to be the Defect of some
Former Reigns, Famous in all other respects; and was reserved, we believe, to
Complete the Glories of This. My Lord Treasurer Burleigh was a better Servant
to Queen Elizabeth, than Patron to the Muses: But were Spenser, who had the
Misfortune of being born a Hundred Years too soon, Alive at this Time, we have
Instances sufficient to Convince us, that his Applications would meet with no
Repulse. Mr. Stepny, Mr. Prior, Mr. Congreve, and many more, are as much
Distinguished by Your Favor, as by their own Merits; the World at last being
satisfied, that Polite Learning in good Hands, is so far from excluding
Business, that it gives a Grace to it; and that a Genius truly Great, will,
which way soever it is Directed, Exert its Force and Maintain its Rank.

You will please to bear this Freedom, SIR, in a Person who as little Capable
as he is himself of making a right Judgment of Men, yet living in a Place,
where he is ever surrounded on all sides with Your Praises, may have leave to
Remember what he so often hears from the Knowing and Judicious, and to repeat a
Character, that comes Warranted to him, by the most allowed Authorities.

The truest Mark of Worth, SIR, is to be Valued there, where One is most Known.
The People of Westminster, who were acquainted with the First Parts of Your
Life, and have had the longest Experience of Your Virtues, own Openly their
just Esteem of You, by Placing in You the Trust of Representing them in
Parliament. It Is there, in the Midst of Those that Choose You, that Your
Excellent Conduct of Public Affairs is still Supplying Them, and all the
World, with Fresh Matter of Applause and Admiration: But they had never more
Reason to be Satisfied with their Choice, than on that Glorious Day, when Right
was done to Your Merit, by the Testimony of the Nation in a Vote of the House
of Commons; where it was Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, That
the Honorable CHARLES MOUNTAGUE ESQUIRE, CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER, for his
Good Services to this Government, does Deserve His Majesty's Favor. A Vote,
that carries more Honor in it, than all the Titles and Patents of Modern
Heraldry, than all the Inscriptions of Ancient Greece or Rome. What has ever
happened like this to any of our Ancestors, in all the Course of our Records
and Histories? Who besides, has Received so Solemn, so Noble, and so Public a
Panegyric from the Vocie of his Country; Pronounced within those Walls, where
the Tongue is left to its Liberty, and no Man Obliged to Speak otherwise than
he Thinks? It Is, without doubt, the First Wish an Englishman would make, thus
to Deserve, and Possess the United Favor of Prince and People; and this Degree
of Happiness has been Granted to You alone: The Next is, to have a Place in the
Good Opinion of Him that is so Universally Valued; and this is the Utmost
Ambition of

SIR, Your Most Humble and Most Obedient Servant WILLIAM COWPER

THE INTRODUCTION Explaining the ANIMAL ECONOMY.
THE Contemplation of Humane Bodies is doubtless one of the most Diverting and
Noble Amusements, in which a Philosophical Mind can employ it self. The
Structure, Contrivance, and Disposition of the Parts are Astonishing, and we
can hardly desire more plain and convincing Proofs of the Wisdom and Providence
of the Author of Nature, than what may be deduced from this Source. How
surpizing are the Discoveries which the Happy Industry of the present Age has
made in the Animal World: The Doctrine of the Circulation of the Blood; the
Unity of the Veins and Arteries; the Origin and Distribution of the Chyle and
Lympha; the Ovaria in Females; the Embriunculi in the Masculine Seed, are
equally certain and amazing; besides a Multitude of other Curious Observations
we Daily make by the Help of Microscopes, Mercurial Injections, and such like
Methods.

These are sufficient Motives to induce all Inquisitive Persons, and Lovers of
Natural History, to the Study of Anatomy; but all Professors of Medicine are
more immediately concerned to be Acquainted with it; this being little less
than the Basis and Foundation of their Art. Without a due Knowledge of the
Animal Mechanism, I doubt all our Attempts to Explain the Multiform Appearance
of Animal Bodies, will be Vain and Ineffectual, and our Ideas of the Causes of
Diseases and their Symptoms, as Extravagant and Absurd as those of the Chinese
and Indians; nay I am afraid the whole Art of Physic will be little better
than Empirical.

But if the Knowledge of our Bodies does so much conduce to advance true
Philosophy and Medicine; it is not less required in the Practice of Surgery: In
this Case it seems not merely convenient, but absolutely necessary; I mean so
far as concerns the External Parts, since the Artist here, does not as in the
former Instances, Acquiesce in Contemplating his Subject, and the Manner how it
is Affected; but is often obliged to Perform some Difficult, and perhaps
Hazardous Operation on it. For my Part I cannot forbear wondering at the
Confidence of Ignorant Men, who dare Attack a Humane Body, make Incisions,
apply Causticks Actual and Potential; without a due Knowledge of the Site,
Position, Dependence, and other necessary Considerations of the Parts
concerned. The Fatal Consequences of these bold Practices are frequently felt,
an Instance or Two of which, are Accidentally shown, Tab. 13. Fig. 1. Tab. 15.
Fig. 2.

I must confess frequent seeing and assisting at Chirurgical Operations may
dispose Men to Perform the like again, when Circumstances in all Points shall
agree; but without a Competent, if not Accurate Knowledge of Anatomy, and
actual Administration of Dissection, such Persons must be a long Time
Spectators, before they can Arrive at a tolerable Pretense to a General
Practice: And therefore as I cannot but deplore the Profound and Universal
Ignorance which prevails, so I would heartily recommend it to most of the
Surgeons in this vast and populous City, to apply themselves with more Industry
than they have hitherto done, to so Useful a Part of their Art; who would soon
then be convinced this was no Dishonor to themselves, and cease to Reproach
others who have spent some of their vacant Hours in these Exercises.

But this is foreign to my purpose, and therefore I shall Address my self to
the Business now before me, which is to Present the Reader with a Brief and
General Plan of the Animal Economy, as an Introduction to the following Tables.

All the Functions of an Animate Body may be well enough divided into Natural
and Animal; by Natural, I mean all which Terminate in the Body, and Conduce to
the preservation of the Individual or Propagation of the Species; by Animal, I
understand such, in which the Soul is concerned, which in Regard of the Body to
which it is United, are Passive or Active; the First is Sense; the Latter
Voluntary Motion. For the more Orderly Distribution of the Whole, we shall
first Treat of the Former, leaving the Animal Functions to succeed; and here we
shall follow the Process of Nature; beginning with the First Reception of the
Aliment in the Mouth, and pursuing it thence through its several Stages.

After the Aliment is taken into the Mouth, (for the more Commodious doing of
which, the Dentes Incisorii are often Employed) it here suffers Comminution,
and is mixed with Saliva, which is Previous to the Second Preparation, it
receives in the Stomach. This Operation is called Mastication, and is performed
by the Lower Jaw, Variously moved by its Proper Muscles, and Assisted by the
Tongue, Cheeks, and Lips; which last, still apply the Less divided Parts of the
Mass, to the Dentes Molares, for it is due Comminution; while all the
Neighboring Muscles in their several Actions, Compress the Parotid, Maxillary,
Sublingual Salivary Glands, and those of the Lips, Cheeks, etc. and force them
to Discharge their Contents to mix with the Masticated Aliment, now ready for
Deglutition.

The Aliment after it has undergone this Alteration, does not Descend into the
Stomach by its own Weight, but is conveyed thither by the joint Action of the
Muscles of the Tongue, Os Hyoides, Fauces, and Oesophagus; all which Conspire
in Deglutition, by Raising and Dilating the Gula, and Protruding the Meat into
it. The whole Action does very much resemble the pouring Corn into a Sack, and
is done in the Manner I shall just now Describe. The Root of the Tongue being
Deprest by means of its Muscular Fibers, its Tip and Sides are applied in a
Semicircular Manner, to the Insides of the whole Range of Teeth of the Upper
Jaw or Gums, when these happen to be wanting; and the Whole in this Position is
drawn Upwards, by the Musculi Styloglossi and Stylohyoidei, Tab. 14. Fig. 1.
Tab. 15. Fig. 1. At the same Time the Fauces are Raised by the Musculi
Stylopharyngaei, which by their Oblique Position, (as is Noted App. Fig. 38.)
draw open their Mouth, and Dilate that Cavity. Now Two Thirds at least of the
Upper Surface of the Tongue, being applied to the Roof of the Mouth, and drawn
as we have now Described, Upwards, and Inwards; the Epiglottis is Deprest in
such Manner, that the Aliment is Protruded over it (as on a Bridge) into the
Dilated Cavity of the Fauces, and thence by the Contraction of the Musculus
Pterygopharyngaeus and Oesophagaeus, App. Fig. 38. it is Deprest into the
Gulae, which Helps its Descent into the Stomach, by the Action of its Muscular
Fibers.

We must not omit to observe here, That in the Instant the Aliment passes through
the Isthmus of the Throat, the Gargareon is drawn Upwards and Backwards, by the
Musculi Sphaenostaphylini, (Expressed Append. Fig. 8.) and the Foramina Narium by
this means occluded, while the Epiglottis below covers the Rimula, as was above
Noted; and by this means the Matter in its Passage is hindered from Reverting by
the Nose, or Descending into the Windpipe; The first happens when the
Gargareon is wanting, whether by Venerial Exulcerations or otherwise; or
Intumified and Inflamed as in the Small Pox, and cannot yield to this Motion.
We may likewise Note, That the Musculus Mylohyoideus ( T. 15. F. 1.) in its
Action does press the Sublingual and Maxillary Glands, and force them to
discharge their secreted Liquors, by the Papillae, situated at the Fraenum or
Ligament of the Tongue; and that the Muscles which Contract the Fauces, have
the same Effect on the Tonsills and other Glands of that Part; all which
Liquors, discharged from the Mouths of their Excretory Channels, do facilitate
the Passage through the Gula, and serve to Compose the Stomachick Menstruum; of
which further in the next Paragraph.

After the Aliment, thus altered by Comminution and Admistion with the Saliva,
is received into the Stomach, we proceed next to consider, how its Second
Preparation is performed. The great Agent in Digestion is the Stomachick Juice,
secreted from the Blood by numerous Glands in this Part, and discharged into
its Cavity, in Conjunction with the Spittle. This is that which acts promptly
upon the Meat lodged in the Capacity of the Stomach, and from the Mixture of
these two Juices, is compounded a proper Menstruum, by which the Parts of the
Aliment are dissolved, and receive their first Transmutation within the Body.
In this Action, which is a Dissolution of the Texture of the Alimentary Mass,
the Aerial Parts included in its Pores, now escape from their former Prisons,
and being rarefied, distend the whole Body of the Stomach; and this I take to
be the true Reason why most Men have less Appetite at some distance of Time,
viz. when this Intumescence is made, than immediately after they cease from
Eating: From the same Cause arise frequent Eructations, great Inflation from
diverse Meats, such as Old Pease, Cabbage, Roots, Herbs, and other Vegetables,
which very much disturb decayed debilitated Stomachs. I am apt to suspect the
Stomachick Menstruum may excite an Intestine motion of the Particles of the
Mass in Digestion; which yet I do not think fit to call Fermentation, fearing
so bold a Term may mislead us into a False Idea of a greater Conflict than
really happens.

The Intumescence or Dilatation of the Stomach has two Effects: First to
compress the Gall Bladder and Pancreas, and oblige their Ductus Excretorii to
spue out their Contents into the Duodenum; next to retard the Refluent Blood,
and by this means dispose the Muscular Fibers of the Ventricle to a
Contraction. The Reason of this last Hint will appear by what we have offered
concerning Muscular Motion, in the Introduction to our Myotomia Reformata.

For the Cause of Hunger which is an observable Phenomenon belonging to this
part, I conceive it to be an Irritation of the Stomach, arising from a copious
Quantity of this Menstruum, when it wants Matter to act upon. This conjecture
seems more probable, since it is Natural to discharge the Spittle out of the
Mouth which comes into it at that Time, rather than suffer it to descend into
the Stomach; and we may perpetually observe a depraved Appetite does follow a
Vitiation of the Saliva, as in Scorbutic Habits, Salivations by Mercurial
Medicines, and such like Cases.

When the Mass is sufficiently prepared and reduced to a Pultaceous
Consistence, the Stomach by the help of its Muscular Fibers contracts it self,
and expels its Contents through the Pylorus into the Duodenum; where the Digested
Mass is mixed with the Bile and Pancreatick Juice, (forced to discharge it self
here as was just now described) which Volatilize, Subtiliate, and Separate the
more Fluid and Fine Parts of the Aliment, from the more Impure and Gross, and
here it is that Chylification is first made perfect. Now the Bile abounding
with Lixivial Salt, is apt to entangle with the grosser Parts of the Chylaceous
Mass, and its Saline Quality not only cleanses the Cavities of the Guts from
the Mucus, Excreted by their Glands ( App. Fig. 40.) (to smear their Inmost
Coat, and defend the Ostia of the Lacteal Vessels from being injured by
Extraneous Bodies, which may happen to pass that way) but Stimulates the
Intestines in their Peristaltick Motion.

The Peristaltick or Wormlike Motion of the Guts being thus Accelerated by the
Acrimony of the Bile, the Contents of the Intestines are carried on, and the
Thinner and more Fluid Parts, fitted for the Pores of the Lacteal Vessels, is
absorbed by them, and the Thicker move on more slowly, till by the many Stops
they meet with in the Connivent Valves, all the Chyle is at length absorbed,
and the Remains being merely Excrementitious, are only fit to be excluded by
Stool.

This Vermicular Motion of the Guts, is performed by the Alternate Contraction
of their Longitudinal and Transverse Fibers, ( App. Fig. 39.40.) which at the
same Time convey the Digested Mass through the Intestinal Tube, and express the
Chyle into the Orifices of the Lacteal Vessels adapted to receive it; whose
Progress from the Intestines, till it is discharged into the Mass of Blood,
next presents it self to our Consideration: By the reciprocal Action of these
differing Fibers, and the Apposition of the Connivent Valves ( Tab. 39. Fig.
2.) the Chyle is forced into the Lacteal Vessels, Tab. ib. Fig. 1.) and hence
it is we cannot make any Fluid pass from the Cavity of the Guts into the same
Vessels, when the Peristaltick Motion ceases. A farther Use of the Contraction
of these Muscular Fibers, is to Accelerate the Chyle in its Progress, till the
Lympha derived from the Arteries of the Guts join with it, which is done before
it leaves the External Surface of the Intestines; by this Addition the Chyle is
diluted and assisted in its Progress toward the Mesenterick Glands; in the
Cells of which it is a Second Time Mixed with a Juice or Lymphatick Liquor
there Secreted from the Arteries, and so carried on to the Vasa Lactea secundi
Generis. These Vessels resembling Pipes, convey the Chyle from hence, all
emptying themselves into the Common Receptacle or Cistern; the happy Discovery
of which, we owe to the Observation of Mons. Pecquet: It is here the Lympha
returned from the Inferior Limbs and adjacent Parts, is mixed with the Chyle, (
App. Fig. 11.) which not only serves to dilute, but promotes its Ascent through
the Thoracick Duct, ( Fig. ib.) to the Lest Subclavian Vein, ( Fig. ib.) where
this Channel empties its Contents into the main Current of the Blood. If we
consider in this Duct, its several Divisions and Inosculations, (resembling the
Veins of the Testicles) its numerous Valves looking from below Upwards, its
advantageous Situation between the Great Artery and Vertebrae of the Back,
together with the Ducts discharging their Refluent Lympha from the Lungs, and
the other Neighboring Parts, we shall find all conduce to demonstrate the
utmost Art of Nature, used in furthering the Steep and Perpendicular Ascent of
the Chyle; which Beautiful Order is Represented App. Fig. 11. and cannot but
equally Create in us Delight and Admiration.

Having traced this Animal Juice to its Reception into the Blood, with which it
is at last Circulated and Assimulated, we shall proceed to the Blood it self,
whose Circular Motion, the various Artifices of Nature for adjusting the
Proportions and other subordinate Contrivances; the Manner and Cause of the
Contraction of the Heart and Arteries, Respiration, with the whole Theory of
the Lympha and Glandular Secretion in the Order of Nature, follow.

The Refluent Blood in the Upper and Lower Trunk of the Vena Cava meeting in
the Right Auricle of the Heart, is thence expelled by its Contraction into the
Right Ventricle, when the Heart is in its Diastole; but by its Systole or
Contraction, it is thence driven into the Arteria Pulmonaris, from whose
Capillary Vessels it passes into the Extremities of the Vena Pulmonaris, and
thence returning, is discharged into the Left Auricle and Ventricle of the
Heart: From whence it is again by the Systole driven into the Aorta, by whose
Branches it is conveyed through the whole System of the Body: But when it arrives
in the Capillary Arteries, it does not stop there, but passes into the like
Capillary Veins, and from thence into the greater Branches, next into the Trunk
of the Vena Cava, and so into the Right Ventricle again. In the mean time the
Three Tricuspid Valves in the Right ( Tab. 22. Fig. 6.) and the two Mitral
Valves ( Tab. ead. Fig. 12.) in the Left Ventricle of the Heart, oppose its
return into the Vena Cava and Vena Pulmonaris; and the Semilunary Valves of the
Arteria Pulmonaris ( Tab. ead. Fig. 14.) and Aorta, ( Tab. ib. Fig. 13.)
prevent its Reflux into the Ventricles. The Structure and Position of which
Membranes, are sufficient alone to lead all Observing Men into a complete
Knowledge of its Motion and Progress.

The Circular Motion of the Blood was first Explained, and the whole
Demonstrated in a Treatise expressly Writ upon that Subject, and Published in
the Year 1628. by our Learned and Ingenious Dr. Harvey; To omit all disputes
here how far this was known to Cesalpinus, Columbus, Servetus, or any of the
Anatomists or Virtuoso's of the last Age. But the Manner how this Animal Liquor
is transmitted from the Arteries to the Veins, has remained hitherto a Secret,
and afforded Matter of Controversy. Some pretend this is done by some blind
Imperceptible Meatus in the Carnous Parts, and perplex themselves to give
Irrational and Chimerical Accounts, which we shall not here lose Time to
enumerate or refute. But the late great Improvement of Microscopes has put an
end to all these uncertain Conjectures, by discovering to our Naked Eye, that
the Veins and Arteries are but one continued inflected Tube, and the Blood
passes from one to the other in an uninterrupted Current; which Unity of the
Blood Vessels by a Parity of Reason, we infer extends to the whole System, and
will hardly be questioned by those who consider the Prompt Passage of Mercury,
and other injected Liquors from the Arteries to the Veins, or see the Globules
of Blood passing these Angustia, and reverting with incredible Rapidity in the
Fins of Fishes; ( App. F. 4, 5.) which curious Discovery ought not to be
reputed the least Advancement which this Part of Natural History has received.

The great Engine which sets all this Motion on Foot, is the Heart, ( Tab. 22.
Fig. 9.) by whose repeated Elastick Contraction, the Blood is driven to the
remotest Parts through the Arterial System, ( App. Fig. 3.) and forced to
continue its Motion back through the Venous Channels. This Elastick Force is
primarily seated in its own Muscular Fibers, whose Spiral Contortion ( Tab. 22.
Fig. 2, 3.) is very well described by Dr. Lower in his Book De Cord; but the
Pendulous Position and the Fibers, which compose its Great Arteries, i. e. the
Pulmonaris and Aorta, assist very much; and the Heart taken out of the Body and
held up by the Arteries, will continue the least gentle Motion impressed on it
for a considerable Time, which Effect can only be ascribed to the Elasticity of
the Arterial Trunks by which it is suspended.

The Heart is the immediate Instrument, but what is the Vis Motrix which forces
its Fibers to a Contraction, is a far greater Difficulty, and one of the most
Abstruse, Inscrutable Mysteries of Nature. It is in this respect our Bodies
differ from Artificial Machines; the Former having in themselves a perpetual
Principle of Motion, which the Latter by no Invention of Men can arrive at. In
my Opinion the Heart of an Animal bears a great Analogy to the Pendulums of
those Artificial Automata, Clocks and Watches, whilst its Motion is performed
like that of other Muscles, the Blood doing the Office of a Pondus. The
Observation of the Curious Mons. Peyer in Parergo Septimo, seems to favor this
Opinion; who tells us, He has with Pleasure seen the Heart renew its
Contraction, by blowing into the Thoracick Duct, when the Parts have began to
grow stiff after Death. The like Motion of the Heart I have more than once
observed to be restored, by blowing into the Veins of a Dog, and pouring warm
Water on it, or applying the Palm of the Hand not long after its Cessation.

Besides the Quantity, doubtless the Quality of the Blood has a Share, since
all Distempers which alter the Mass, at the same Time create a Hurry and
Disorder in its Motion. To explain the Action of the Blood in this Case, and
the Influence it has over the Motion of the Heart, we must consider its Nature,
Constituent Parts, and the Alterations it is disposed to receive. This Animal
Fluid consists of Two Parts, Serous and Globular. The Distinction of these
Parts of the Blood is evident to the Naked Eye, after its Stagnation in any
Vessel, but is clearly evinced by the Microscope in its Circulation through the
Tails and Fins of Fishes, and other Transparent Parts, in the same manner as is
Represented Appendix Fig. 4, 5. where the Globules seem to Swim in the Serum in
this state of Mixture. Now the Blood being in this manner a Heterogeneous
Liquor, Composed of Particles of various Magnitude and Figure, must be subject
to an Intestine Motion; but the great Rapidity of its Current through the
Arteries, and the Angustiae in the Extremities of the Blood Vessels, not
admitting any Retrograde Motion to be there made, it is deferred till it
arrives in the Great Veins, where its Progress is retarded, and the Room more
spacious, and the Intestine Motion there Commences, which arises to a Greater
or Less Height, as the Blood is more or less Charged with Incongruous Parts.
The Alteration which the Blood by this means receives, has no inconsiderable
Share in the Heart's Contraction; and tho it be not the prime efficient Cause,
yet we cannot deny but that it is Partial and Incitative, as appears in Fevers
and several other Distempers, where the whole Mass is Accelerated, and the
Pulse more frequent.

Besides all these Causes, the Brain by its Nervous Trunks sent to this Part,
which are very Thick and Tense, yet lie very loose, contributes much to this
Action. And here we may observe, not only these of the Heart, but the whole
System of Nerves which serve the Viscera in the Thorax and Lower Belly, have
their Propagines very Numerous and Tense, notwithstanding which, they lie Loose
or Free in their Progress from the Brain to their respective Parts; both which
concur in disposing them to Receive and Retain all Impressions from their
Extremities: This Faculty beginning to Exert it self even while the Foetus is
in Vtero, grows Familiar and Natural, and from this early Habit and Practice of
the Infant, they after perform their Duty Sleeping or Waking, without the least
Advertence; but this by the by. And now if what has been Noted, shall be
thought sufficient to give ground to Hope Future Enquiries may discover more
Adequate Causes of this great Phenomenon, we have obtained our Desire, and
shall leave these Hints to be improved by Men of more Industry and Leisure.

Before we leave this Subject, we must not omit to Remark some Observable
Artifices of Nature, for the better carrying on the Circulation. The First is
the Valves placed in the several Divarications of the Veins, between their
Capillar Extremities and Larger Trunks: These are Membranes proceeding from the
inner Coat of the Vessels, in the Form of a Crescent or C. which was the
Ancient Greek Sigma, and are generally Double, with their Concavity looking
toward the Heart, and readily give way to the Current of the Blood thither, as
is Represented: ( Tab. 23. F. 7.) But if by its Weight, or any other Cause, the
Blood should Revert, they oppose it, and being Distended, prevent its Return
from the Great Trunks of Veins to the Lesser, and at the same time hinder the
Superincumbing Blood from pressing on the Inferior; concerning which consult
Tab. 23. Fig. 6.

Another Considerable Artifice in Nature, is the Conveying great Quantities of
Refluent Blood from several Parts of the Trunk by particular Channels, instead
of discharging it by the next and most immediate Passage into the Neighboring
Current. Dr. Lower has well Observed, that the Heart is not placed in the
Center of the Body, but inclines to its Upper Part, which Position is necessary
to Drive the Blood in its Systole to the Head, with more Force then is required
to make it Descend to the Feet, to which its own Weight and Fluidity does not a
little Conduce. Now the Heart being seated so near the Upper Part, as that Two
Parts in Three of the whole Fabric, appear to be below it, there must be a
like Inequality of Blood sent to the Inferior Parts, to that which Ascends to
the Superior. And this we see Confirmed by comparing the Diameter of the
Blood Vessels Descending with the Ascending, the Former being much Larger then
the Latter. This great Disproportion of Blood in the Upper System to that of
the Lower, seems to threaten a great Disturbance in the Animal Order, but is
prevented by the Provident Care of the Author of Nature, in the Manner we are
now about to Describe.

The Intercostal Arteries App. F. 3. which arise from the Lower System, are
accompanied with Veins (that Return the Blood they Exported) which do not enter
into the next Large Trunk according to the ordinary Process of Nature in other
Parts; but are all United into One Channel (and sometimes Two) which Ascends by
the Side of the Aorta, and Empties it self into the Descending Trunk of the
Vena Cava, there Discharging all its Refluent Blood; which had it been Inserted
into the Ascending Trunk, it must have added so great a Weight, that the Blood
could not have past up to the Heart, which it now easily does. Beside these,
the Mammary Veins likewise Empty themselves into the Subclavian, so that all
the Blood Arising from the Parietes of the Thorax, the Back and its Muscles, as
well as those of the Scapulae, returns again to the Heart, by the Upper Trunk
of the Vena Cava, though it was sent thither from the Lower Trunk of the Arteria
Magna.

Another Contrivance of this Nature is Observable in the Vena Porta, which
Receives the Blood from the Stomach, Omentum, Spleen, Pancreas, Guts and
Mesentery, sent thither by the Coeliack and Mesenterick Arteries, which large
Quantity had it Entered into the Vena Cava, immediately below the Liver or
Kidneys, its Weight so far beneath the Diaphragm, must have Hindered its Ascent;
wherefore the Vena Porta (not unlike the Azygos of the Thorax before Noted)
carries up all the Blood by another Channel, and Discharges it into the
Extremities of the Vena Cava within the Liver, where it is Diluted and
Propell'd by the Refluent Blood from the Splenick Vein, and afterward assisted
in its Ascent, by the Contraction of the Diaphragm.

Here I cannot forbear making a Digression, and presenting my Conjectures of
the Use and Office of the Spleen, since it ministers in this Part of the Animal
Economy. The Arteria Splenica is not only very large in Proportion to the
Magnitude of the Spleen, but has a Remarkable Tortuous Passage to it, ( Tab.
36. F. 1.) whence we may conceive as the Quantity of Blood sent to the Spleen
is very great, so its Impetus is very much Abated: Next the Communications
between the Extremities of its Arteries and Veins are very Large, as appears by
the Prompt Exit, which Water poured into one Finds by the other, and the
Inflation of the Veins which is easily made by Blowing into the Arteries, when
the whole Spleen and its Veins become Distended with it. The Lymphe-ducts of
the Spleen we have Observed, ( Tab. 36. Fig. 1.) to Arise from the Vesiculae at
the Extremities of its Veins, and Discharge their Contents into the
Neighboring Lymphatick Glands, whence it is sent into the Receptacule of the
Chyle: Its Nerves are Distributed through its whole Substance, and serve to
preserve its Tone and Regulate the Separation of its Lympha and Nutritive
Juice. But the most exact Scrutiny of Anatomists could never yet Discover any
Excretory-duct arising from this Viscus; and indeed the Patent Communication of
its Vessels seems a convincing Proof, that no such Excretory-duct can Exist but
must appear very plain. Besides it seems Extravagant and Unbecoming the
Wonderful Providence of Nature, to Separate any particular Juice in the
Arteries here to be instantly Refunded into the Veins, and we can hardly
conceive the Blood can suffer any Alteration, in a Place where the Transit from
the one to the other, is so Ample.

After these Considerations Premised, if the Problem be Proposed, What can be
the Design of the great Architect of our Bodies, in the Fabrication of so Large
and Remarkable a Part, without any Fluid Secreted in it, besides its own
Nutritive Juice and Lympha? I believe our Hypothesis will enable us to give a
sufficient Reply to this seeming invincible Difficulty, with which Learned Men
have exceedingly perplexed themselves. I conceive then the Spleen is Designed
by Nature, as a Diverticle to receive a large Proportion of Blood to be
Refunded by its Veins into the Porta, and promote the Reflux of the Blood
Imported thither from the Stomach, Guts, Pancreas, Mesentery, etc. by whose
slow Progress through the innumerable Glands of those Parts, it returns Thick and
unfit for Motion: And this seems but Necessary that a new Quantity of Blood,
charged with a Copious Serum, should be Infunded into this Refluent Liquor
before it Arrives at the Liver, to dispose it to pass the Extremities of the
Vena Cava, and add a fresh Impetus to its Languid Motion caused by its Long and
Tortutous Progress. This I take to be the Use and Office of the Spleen, and
seems to have all the Circumstances the Laws of Mechanism require for this
Purpose. The Novelty of which Opinion will (I hope) be no Prejudice to its
Reception in the Minds of Candid and Impartial Men.

Having thus Represented the Circulation; the Order of Nature leads us to
Respiration, which serves in conveying the Blood from the Right to the Left
Ventricle of the Heart, and Impregnates it with Parts proper for its further
Elaborations.

Respiration or Breathing is a double Action, i. e. Inspiration or Receiving of
Air into the Lungs; and Expiration or Expelling it again: The whole is done by
means of Widening and Straitning the Cavity of the Thorax, in which the Lungs
are contained.

How the Cavity of the Thorax may be Enlarged and Contracted, we may easily
conceive, if we consider the Order of its Bony Parietes, ( Tab. 27, and 28.)
and observe the Oblique Descending Position of the Ribs from the Vertebrae of
the Back, with their Cartilaginous Connection to the Os Pectoris, and the
Position and Action of the Diaphragm, as is explained Tab. 52. whence it
appears when the Ribs are drawn up, and the Superior Unequal Surface of the
Diaphragm deprest toward a Plain, the Included Space must necessarily be
Enlarged; and on the contrary very much Straightened when the Ribs are drawn down,
and the Upper Surface of the Diaphragm Unequal toward the Lungs, as it is
Represented in the last mentioned Table.

The Elevation and Depression of the Ribs is performed by the Proper and Common
Muscles of the Thorax: The First have their Rise and Termination confined to
the Parts Composing its Parietes: The Other, notwithstanding their Relation to
other Parts, yet chiefly respect This: Of the Common Muscles some are
Principal, immediately moving This, together with those Parts from which they
are derived: Others are Auxiliary, which by moving the Contiguous Bodies,
Contribute to the better performing the Grand Motion: Thus the Elevation of the
Shoulder-Blades is required in violent Respirations, without which the Musculi
Serrati ( Tab. 20.) (which spring from the Scapulae) ( Tab. 29. V. W.) could
not Act; hence it happens that Respiration is Interrupted when the Arms are in
Action, by reason the Scapulae at that time engage all their Muscles
(especially the Serrati T. 20.) to render them Stable; and the Extension of the
Vertebrae of the Neck becomes necessary, to the end the Musculi Scaleni ( Tab.
18. B B.) may Raise the Upper Ribs.

The Proper Muscles of the Thorax are the Intercostales Externi and Interni, (
Tab. 26. Fig. 1.) the Triangulares, ( Tab. and Fig. ead.) the Serrati
Superiores and Inferiores Postici, Tab. 28.

The Principal Common Muscles, are the Scaleni, ( Tab. 18.) the Subclavii, Tab.
20. the Serrati Majores and Minores Antici, ( Tab. ead.) and the Sacrolumbales,
( Tab. 29.)

The Auxiliary Muscles are such as Raise the Scapulae, and draw them Backwards,
and those which Extend the whole Spine.

The Cavity of the Thorax being dilated in the manner above mentioned, the
Ambient Air necessarily rushes through the Aspera Arteria and Bronchia, into the
Vesiculae of the Lungs, whereby their whole Substance becomes Distended; and
this we call Inspiration.

In Expiration, the Air contained in the Vesiculae of the Lungs, is Excluded;
in this Action the Lungs are not merely Passive as in the Former, but the
Elasticity of the Ligaments of their Bronchia, draw their Small Cartilages over
each other, and Conduce to the Expulsion of the Air contained in their
Vesiculae.

This Alternate Diastole and Systole of the Lungs and Thorax, bears an Analogy
to a Pair of Bellows, whose Two Boards being drawn from each other, the Ambient
Air necessarily rushes in between them, and Fills the Internal Space enlarged
by the Deduction of their Sides; which Air is again Expelled from thence, by
Approaching them toward each other.

The Inducements the Author of Nature had to Frame this Pulmonary Organ, are
many; by this the Aerial Particles pass to the Mass of Blood, which Rarifie,
Subtilize and render it fit for those Elaborations it afterward undergoes: By
these the Tenacious Serum of the Blood is Attenuated, and the whole Mass
rendered fit for Motion; the Effects of which are Evident in those Rhumatick
Asthmas and other Cases, which Oblige some to leave this Town for a Clearer Air.

The Lungs are the Intermediate Passage between the Two Ventricles of the
Heart, whereby the whole Mass of Blood passes through their Large Blood Vessels
in an equal Rapidity and Quantity, with that of all other Parts of the Body
besides, and do by this means discharge the Blood of a great Quantity of its
Serum, by Halitus in Expiration; wherefore the Accurate Dr. Tyson Reckons them
among the Number of Glands.

This Alternate Action in which Respiration consists, is Necessary, to the End
the Blood may pass the Lungs, whose Vesiculae, if they were constantly
Distended by the Inspired Air, the Extremities of the Pulmonick Blood Vessels
would be Comprest; and on the contrary, if these Vesiculae were Collaps'd (as
after Expiration) their Blood Vessels would be consequently Corrugated; but by
this Vicissitude they become Permeable, and the Blood easily passes their
Extremities.

We have Traced the Aliment from its First Reception till it is Elaborated into
Blood, and pursued in its Motion and Circulation through its several Channels. We
ought next to take a View of the several Liquors or Fluids separated from it in
its Tour. All Animal Juices except the Chyle are separated from the Arterial
Blood, which common Material in its Percolation in the Brain and Nerves, yield
the Contents of their Fibers; in the Glands of the Mouth and Throat, the
Saliva; in the Mammae, the Milk; in the Kidneys, the Urine; in the Testes,
Sperm; (not to name the Sweat, Mucilage of the Joints, etc.) and through the
Universal Body, a Copious Quantity of Lympha; which is not applied to any
distinct Use in the Animal Economy, but is all discharged into the Great
Cystern or Receptacle of the Chyle and Subclavian Vein, and so Refunded into
the Refluent Blood.

The Doctrine of Secretions is the last and only remaining Part of those
Natural Functions, which are directed to the Preservation and Subsisting of the
Individual. For the Nature and Properties of these Liquors, their Use and
Office, and the peculiar Structure adapted for the Percolation of one, and
excluding the rest; we must remit the Reader to the Description of the Organs
themselves, contenting our selves here with the Theory of the Origin of the
Lympha, and Secretion in General.

The Knowledge of this Animal-liquor called Lympha, and the Ducts which Convey
it, is owing to the Industry and Searches of this present Age. But whether
Rudbeck, Bartholine or our Countryman Dr. Iolive ought to carry the Honor of
the Discovery, I shall not pretend to decide. But the Rise, Course, and other
particular Circumstances needful to inform us of their Use, and the Design of
Nature in the Fabrication of these Ducts, has not been hitherto, at least
fully, Demonstrated. Some have pretended to derive these Ducts from the Nerves,
others from the Membranes or Tendinous Parts of the Muscles; but these are
Impertinencies scarce worth a serious Refutation.

The diligent Melpighius in his Epistle to the Royal-Society, is follicitous in
enquiring whether they are not Excretory-ducts to Export the Juice Secreted in
the Conglobate Glands, since there is none of these Glands so inconsiderable to
be found which has not its Lymphe-ducts belonging to it, as well as its Nerves
and Blood Vessels. After several Observations premised, he concludes they Arise
in exceeding Minute, and scarce perceptible Sirculi, from the Lesser Glands,
which afterward are United to those Arising from other Glands, forming Greater
Trunks, and so proceed till they Empty themselves into the Common Cystern of
the Chyle. I shall not repeat the Reasons or Experiments of that Curious
Gentleman to sustain his Opinion, which mainly amounts to this, That in
pursuing these Ducts, we cannot by the most exact Scrutiny, or any Art yet
known, Trace them further. But we must crave leave to differ from him in this
Point, and perhaps the Reasons we shall offer, will be sufficient to justify
our Dissent, and give a more clear and satisfactory Account of the First Source
of this Fluid.

The Glands I must confess have a great Concern in preparing the Lympha,
insomuch that no Lymphe-duct can absolve its Course without Touching on them;
and their Necessity appears yet further, while we see other Lymphe-ducts, (when
the main Trunk passes by,) yet emit several Lateral Branches which Insert
themselves into these Glands, and after being remitted from thence, are
rejoined to the Former Trunk ( App. Fig. 14.) Besides these Lymphe-ducts which
Enter the Glands, are frequently divided into several Branches; which make
their Exit again divided, and after approaching each other, join into one
Current, ib. Fig. 13. But however Important the Glands may be, I think they are
far enough from being their Source.

The Glands of the Mesentery have their Lacteals which Import, and others which
Export the Chyle from them. We shall find the Case of these Vessels to be
entirely Parallel; every Lymphatick Gland we have yet been able to Discover
having both Species of Ducts, the one to Import, the other to Export the Lympha
from them; whence it is probable the Lesser not differing from the Greater in
Structure, but Magnitude only, they serve to Transmit the Lympha, and not give
it its First Rise: This will be still more evident, if we consider the Great
Communication between the Blood Vessels and these Ducts.

The First Origination and Extremities of these Lymphe-ducts, are too Subtle
and Fine to be discerned by the Eye, even Assisted by the Microscope, and must
give Room for Suspicion and Conjecture. The Arteries and Veins, we have above
Demonstrated, are but one continuous Reflected Tube: For the Truth of this
Assertion, in the Transparent Parts of Animals ( App. Fig. 4, 5.) we have the
Evidence of our Senses; and that the same Continuity is kept through the whole
System of the Body, no Rational Man who will please to Reflect on the
Uniformity of Nature, can with any Pretense of Reason doubt. Now as these
Vessels Communicate with each other, and admit a Prompt Passage of Air, Tincted
Liquors, Mercury, etc. from each to other, so by some Experiments we find they
have with the Excretory-ducts, and Vice-versa, those Liquors which we can
convey into the Excretory-ducts after Death, will pass from them into the
Blood Vessels and Lymphe-ducts, which Experiment I have remarked ( Tab. 43.
Fig. 5.) as an Objection to those who suppose Valves in the beginning of the
Excretory-ducts.

From these Demonstrative and Convincing Experiments, we may conceive the true
Origin of the Lymphe-ducts, is from the Extremities of the Blood Vessels; and
their Office to carry Back the superfluous Serum, which is more Copious in the
Arteries, than is perhaps convenient in the Veins, where the Progress of the
Blood is Slower, and the Quantity much greater. This Rise of the Lympha is
still more clear,* if we consider in some States or Habits of Body, when the
Crasis of the Blood is depraved, some Parts of it pass this way, and the Lympha
is Tinged by it; as it happens by Injecting Water by the Arteries after Death,
when Part of the Blood still remains in its Vessels, you will see the
Lymphe-ducts filled with a Bloody Water.

This Origination of the Lymphe-ducts from the Extremities of the
Blood Vessels, we don't take to be altogether immediately from their Sides, as
we do that of the Secretory Tubes, ( App. Fig. 7.) but that they have a Double
Origin, the one from the Extremities of the Arteries, and the other from the
Cells or Tubes which contain the Nourishment of the Parts they Arise from: By
this means not only the superabundant Serum of the Blood in the Arteries, is
carried off before it Arrives in the Veins, but the superfluous Nutritive Juice
also, is returned with the Lympha.

In those Parts where we find the Passage of the Blood between the Arteries and
Veins very Patent, as in the Spleen and Penis, the Lymphe-ducts Arise from
their Vesiculae; as has been Observed in the Former by the Accurate Nuck, and
by my self in the Latter.

The like Origin of these Ducts may be Observed from the Spermatick Veins of
the Testes and Ovaria, in which the Blood returns very little Divested of its
Serosity, to the end its Globular Parts may the better Ascend in those Veins,
with a Less Proportion of Serum.

These Ducts Empty themselves into the Vesiculae of their Glands, as is
Represented ( App. Fig. 13, 14.) from whence the Exporting Ducts Arise, and
carry the Lympha on to the next Gland or Thoracick-duct, ( App. Fig. 11.) and
so to the Subclavian Vein. Thus we find the Motion of the Lympha, Chyle and
Nutritive Juice, is propell'd by means of the Systole of the Heart, by which
all the Secretions of the Animal Fluids, are in like Manner carried on.

In the Seventh Figure of our Appendix we have Expressed the Secretory Tubes
Arising from the Venous, as well as the Arterious Part of the Sanguineous
Channel before its Inflection; because we find there is a Transit from the
Veins into these Vessels; yet in my Opinion most of them Arise from the Artery,
where it Commences to grow Conical, where the Sides of the Vessel through the
Efforts made by the Parts of the Blood propell'd, receive a more direct
Pressure than in their Cylindrical Extremities, and the Particles Adapted to
their Pores, are driven into the Tubes derived from them.

By this Scheme, the Origin of the Lympha, and the Manner of Secretion, is well
enough Explained. But why the Saliva is separated in the Parotid Maxillary and
Sublingual Glands, the Bile in those of the Liver, the Urine by the Kidneys,
etc. must be deduced from their peculiar Structure; the Magnitude, Figure of
their Pores, and Various Disposition of their Arteries, having a mighty share
in these Operations. Thus we may Observe the Arteries of the Testes, have a
long and Flexuous Progress, and contrary to the ordinary Method of Nature, are
smaller at their Originations from the Aorta, than in their Trunks after a
farther Descent, as we have Noted ( Tab. 45.) all which conduce to abate the
Impetus of the Blood, before it Arrives in the Testes. On the other Hand the
Current of the Blood to the Kidneys, (by the Largeness, Short and Straight
Course of the Emulgents, and their Vicinity to the Left Ventricle of the
Heart,) is very Rapid, which discharges a great Quantity of Urine, soon after
the Use of Chalybeat Waters, or other plentiful Drinking, whilst it is
infinitely more slow in the Salival Glands, Pancreas, Liver, etc. We shall not
here recite any further Particulars, hoping the Reader will peruse our Tables
and Discourse of the several Organs.

Having done with our Doctrine of the First Order of Natural Functions, we
proceed to the Second, or those which serve for the Propagation of the Species;
which Naturally divides its self into Two Parts, ( viz.) Generation, and
Accretion, or what concerns the Foetus in its Formation, and by what means and
steps it is carried on to an Adult State. Since Animal Bodies are Transient and
Temporary, the Author of Nature has endued them with the Power of Propagation,
and a Set of Proper Organs to continue their Species, and furnish a constant
Supply of new Individuals. From the Difference of which Organs of Generation
Arises the difference of Sexes.

All Animals have been Divided into Viviparous and Oviparous, till Dr. Harvey
removed the Distinction, by Demonstrating all Living Creatures to derive their
Original from Eggs, with this Difference only; in one the Foetus is perfected
within, and in the other without the Mothers Body. This Doctrine of that great
Man has since been fully evinced by the repeated Dissections, Observations, and
Experiments of Later Anatomists: No Species of Fowls, Fishes and Quadrupedes
are found to want them: The Foetus being sometimes found in the passage between
the Ovarium and Vterus, ^ad the Alveoli deserted by them, are sufficiently
discernable in all Animals after Impregnation; so that the Existence of These
cannot be doubted, or that there is a perfect Conformity between the Pullus in
Ovo, and the Foetus in the Womb. But here we must distinguish the Essential and
Constituent Parts, from those which are only Alimentary and Accessory. It is
the Cicatricula alone in the Eggs of Fowls, in which reside the Rudiments of
the Foetus, whilst the Vitellus and Albumen prepare and supply its Nourishment;
both bearing an exact Analogy to the Lobes and Plantula Seminalis in Vegetable
Seeds. The Seminal Vesicula or Ovum found in the Testes of Women, etc. agrees
in every respect with the Cicatricula, and the other Parts are unnecessary,
because the Foetus is nourished by Aliment supplied from the Mothers Body.
Since the Discovery of these Eggs, the Ancient Doctrine that the Foetus was
Formed from the Commistion of the Male and Female Seed, has been by all
Rejected, and that Liquour which has been taken by all preceding Ages for Seed
in the Latter, is found to be only a Mucous Matter, Secreted from the Glands of
the Vagina, ( Tab. 51. F. 3. C.) and discharged without the Body; which in
Mares, Cows, and many other Animals is in much greater Quantity, than is
possible to be contained in their Testes.

Though Generation ex Ovo may be justly reputed among the Modern Improvements of
Anatomy, yet this did not altogether escape the Notice of the Sagacious
Hippocrates, who in his Book De Natura Pueri, informs us, the Embryo after
Conception is Included in a Membrane, exactly resembling an Egg without its
Shell, and describes the Rudiments of the Vmbilicus and Placenta, with its
Plexus of Blood Vessels, and the Pellucid Liquor of the Amnios after the same
Manner as Represented ( Tab. 57. Fig. 2.) This Accurate Observation, he
acquaints us he made from an Abortion artificially procured within Six Days
after Conception, to preserve the Reputation of an Incontinent Wench; which
remarkable Passage (not ordinarily taken Notice of) was shown me by my very
Ingenious Friend Dr. Fern. Much of the same Age or something more, and agreeing
with the Description of Hippocrates, are the Secundines which the Learned Dr.
Hannes keeps among his other Anatomical Collections.

Upon the Invention of these Ova, De Graaf and Others, who have successfully
employed themselves in their Enquiries on this Subject, began to Erect an
Opinion, That the Female only furnished the Matter of the Foetus, and the Male
served to Actuate it by its Prolifick Influence. This Opinion, which derogates
much from the Dignity of the Male-Sex, prevailed till Mons. Leeuwenhoeck by the
Help of his Exquisite Microscope, in which he has been well pursued by Mr.
Melling, detected Innumerable small Animals in the Masculine Sperm, and by this
Noble Discovery, at once removed that Difficulty, and added much to the Theory
of Generation: In his Letter to the Royal-Society, he Acquaints them he had
observed Incredible Numbers of these Animalcula in the Testicles of Froggs, so
slender, as not to exceed the Thousandth Part of a single Hair, with a Head
proportionably larger than the rest of their Body, all Variously moving to and
fro; That he had found the same in the Testicles of all Animals, which he had
Inspected; and in another, he gives them an Account, That in the Spawn of a
Cabeliaw he had found them to be still Lesser, and more than Ten Thousand
Swimming about in a Portion of Seed, not exceeding a Grain of Sand; and
pretending to find by a Formal Computation all the Animals contained in the
Lactes of this Fish, to exceed more than Ten times the Number of Men on the
Surface of the Earth. Foecundation he esteems to proceed from one of these
Numerous Animalcula, after Ejection, striking through the Pores or Perforations
on the Sides of the Ovum, and Lodging it self in the Cicatricula, which is
disposed to Receive and Nourish it.

From this surprising Discovery, it is evident That no Aura Seminalis, or
Influx of Active Spirituous Matter does Delineate the Foetus; and that
Observation of Malpighius Illustrated, That before Impregnation, no Vestigia of
the Pullus could be found, and yet in some few Hours after, it is distinct and
visible. Having thus taken a short Prospect of the Materials, we must proceed
to the Order and Progress of Generation, from the Inchoation, till the
Perfection of the Foetus in the Womb, and its Exclusion, and thence till its
full Growth, or Dimensions prescribed by Nature to the Species.

The Arteriae Spermaticae in Men bring the Blood to the Testes, in whose
Convolutions, it is Prepared and carried by the Vasa Deferentia to the
Vesiculae Seminales, where it is Lodged till in the Time of Coition, it is
Injected into the Vagina Vteri. The Manner of the Erection of the Penis in
applying it to the Transverse Ligament of the Ossa Pubis, by the Musculi
Erigentes and the Constriction of the Corpus Cavernosum Vrethrae, by the
Musculi Acceleratores, to Stop the Refluent Blood, and Inflate the Bulb and
Cavernous Bodies, I shall wave Repeating, having amply Described this Artifice,
in the Appendix to my Myotomia Reformata.

The Semen Injected into the Vagina of the Woman, is Conveyed to the Ovaria,
through the Womb it self and the Falloppian Tubes; which, in the Time of Coition,
by means of their Reticular Structure, are Inflated and strictly Embrace them.
We have Described the Manner how the Foliated Expansions of the Left Falloppian
Tube, Embrace the Ovarium on that Side, and are Distended by the Refluent Blood
from the Vagina, whose Veins being Comprest by the Penis in Coition, all, or
the greatest Part of its Blood, passes up by the Spermatick Veins, (which
Inosculate with the Hypogastrick) and the Distended Tubes are Incurvated by the
Broad Ligaments of the Vterus, and the Fundus Vteri being Distended also, and
at the same Time the External Air Pent out by the Penis, a free Passage is left
for the Semen to the Ovarium. This I prefer as a more Compendious way of
Conveying it, than either through the whole Mass of Blood, which must in my
Opinion too much alter it, or through the Porous Substance of the Vterus, as
others would have us believe. Nor can I conceive why any Man should scruple to
think these small Animals may pass some Pore in the External Membranes, as they
do in Froggs, Fish, etc. where the Ovula are ejected out of the Female, before
they are Impregnated by the Male, rather than suppose they should pass by the
Spermatick Arteries to the Ovarium, after several Circulations through the whole
System of the Body. The immediate and direct Passage of the Semen is very much
confirmed, by comparing the Appearances of these Uterine Parts in Fowl,
especially Hens.

One, or sometimes more of these Ova happening to be Foecundated at a Time, are
distended and break the Pedunculi, by which they are affixed, and leaving their
Folliculi, pass into the Falloppian Tube, which resembling the Ovi-ducts in
Birds, receive and convey them to the Fundus Vteri. The manner how they are
carried on is not less Mechanical, than most other Operations in the Animal
Economy; for as the Turgescence of the Penis first remits in its Extremity, so
does this exactly after the same manner, and by Consequence drives the Ovum
contained in it to the Fundus of the Womb.

After the Ovum is arrived here, it Fluctuates about some Time without being
fixed, and receives Nourishment by Apposition only, till at length some of its
Vessels begin to Germinate, and afterward Inosculate with those of the Vterus.
The Arteries of the Ovum protruding themselves into the Veins of the Vterus,
and the Veins Vice-versa into the Arteries, from which mutual Intertexture of
the Vessels, the Placenta is composed.

By Intervention of the Placenta and Umbilical Vessels, the Foetus receives
Blood from the Mother, and a common Circulation is continued, the Particulars
of which, and the Difference of its Course from the Circulation after the
Birth, is Described in the Explication of the following Tables.

The Aliment for Nutrition of the Foetus, seems to be a sort of Chylous Juice
separated by the Glands of the Placenta, and reposited in the Capacity of the
Amnios ( Tab. 55, 58.) which Grows considerable for its Quantity in the Second
and Third Month, and the Foetus begins to take it in at its Mouth, for some
time before its Birth, whence it is conveyed to the Stomach and Intestines, and
Part passes into Chyle and Blood Vessels, according to the Ordinary Method of
Nature in an Adult; the remainder Composing the Excrement we find in the
Intestines of the Foetus, and sometimes Floating in the Liquor of the Amnios.
Besides which, the Mammill^ of Recent-born Infants of both Sexes, contain a
Serous Milky Liquor, which is discharged into the Liquor of the Amnios.

After the Foetus has lain Nine Months in the Womb, it Arrives at such a
Magnitude as makes it uneasy both for want of Room and Aliment. Besides the
Excrements voided from its Anus foul the Contents of the Amnios, and molest the
Foetus, which by its frequent and strenuous Struglings, shakes the Placenta,
and breaks the slender Vessels, which Connect it to the Vterus; from the
Conspiring of which Circumstances, Parturition must necessarily follow.

After the Secundines are removed, and the Infant first Opens its Mouth, the
Ambient Air rushes into the Lungs, and Distends the Vesiculae Aereoe, which
afterward remain in some measure Inflated, because the Extremity of the
Bronchia which Open into them, are much Less than the Vesiculae themselves, and
some Part of the Air will still continue in them; whence they Gain a greater
Specific Lightness, and Swim in Water. The Pulmonick Blood Vessels which
before the Birth lay Collaps'd, have their Trunks and Ramifications Extended,
and admit the Blood to pass through them; the Foramen Ovale, and Canalis
Arteriosus not lying in a Direct Line to the Propulsion of the Blood; these
Passages in Tract of Time, become Obliterated, and all the Blood from the Right
Ventricle of the Heart, passes through the Lungs, before it can Arrive at the
Left. These Alterations of the Economy happen after the Foetus is brought into
the World, and Exposed to the External Air.

Having seen how the Infant is Generated and Ushered into the World, with the
Alterations which attend its Birth, we must consider next by what means
Nutrition and Accretion are Effected, or the Steps by which it proceeds
insensibly from such small Beginnings, to its due Size and Dimensions. It is
certain, that the Bodies of Animals are nothing else than a Vascular Compages,
and all their Parts Exist in the Foecundated Ovum, which by the Accession of
New Matter, are only Distended and become Visible. From which Consideration we
may infer, That the Augmentation of the Body is made by a Simple Extension of
all the Tubes, Vessels and Cells; which when they will no longer recede to
admit the Nutritious Particles, to be Lodged in the Interstices of the Fibers
which Compose their Parietes, and there remain no more Ostiola in the Sides of
their Vessels, by which the Fluids can Open a Passage, the Body is Arrived at
the utmost limits of its Growth. This Tenseness and Contiguity of the Fibers
which refuses to admit more of the Nutritious Parts, is that which Determines
the Magnitude of Animals, and the same Hypothesis will serve to Explicate the
differing Sizes of Individuals of the same Species. In this Manner the Bones
Arrive at their full Dimensions, and then preserve their Stability and Figure,
whose Accretion and other Accidents Arising from its Vitiation, are very well
Explained by Dr. Havers in his Osteologia. But besides the gradual Increase and
Formation of the Tubes and Vessels, there is a necessity for a Supply of Fluids
to maintain a Plenitude, with a constant Reparation of the Blood and Humors to
prevent the Collapse: Thus in an Atrophy, the great Emaciation and apparent
Loss of the Substance, proceeds from a want of Proper Fluids to preserve the
Arteries, Veins, Lymphe-ducts, etc. and other Channels of the Body in their due
Distention. I must confess a Corrosive Salt in some depraved Crases of the
Blood, may consume the Stable and Organick Parts, as in the Spina Ventosa, and
such like Cases, where the Bones sometimes (as I have seen in one of the
Fingers) are wholly Dissolved, while the External Teguments have not been
injured; but in this Case, contrary to the other, the Loss is Irreparable.
Hence Appears the necessary Distinction between Accretion and Nutrition, the
First being an Accession to the Organical Parts, by New Matter Intruding into
the Interstices of their Fibers, and there remaining; and the Latter only a
Supply of a Proper Pabulum to the Fluids, to preserve them in a due Temper and
Proportion. The First being fixed and permanent, and scarce altered once in the
Term of a Man's Life, and the Last in a perpetual Succession and Flux; which
therefore requires the superfluous Part of the Succus Nutritious, not retained
in the Proper Tubes and Cells to be Infunded into the Lymphe-ducts, by which it
is again returned to the General Mass; the Manner of which we may Conceive by
Fig. 6. of the Appendix.

From the Natural, we pass to the Animal Functions: That the Brain and Nervous
System are the Common Medium of Sense and Motion is uncontested; but the manner
how the Impressions are conveyed from the External Organs to the Seeds Animae,
and Vice-versa from thence to the Organ, and how a Material Substance can
affect and be affected by an Immaterial, is Obscure and scarce to be conceived.
Wherefore waving all Precarious Hypotheses, I shall confine my self to the
Description of such Phenomenon as are Matters of Fact, and undeniable, and
leave the Reader at Liberty to erect what System he pleases. The Seat of Sense
is the Brain, whose Nervous Dispensations are the Intermediate Bodies between
it and the Organs, on which the External Objects act. When the Impression is
made by the Object, and received into the Organ of Sense, it is conveyed from
thence with the same Type or Character, by an Agitation of its Nervous
Expansions and their continued Trunks, to the common Sensory: This is common to
Men and Brutes, and is by Des Carts made the First Degree of Sensation: The
Second is the Perception of the Soul attending that Motion, which immediately
follows the former Degree, by reason of the intimate Connection of the Soul to
the Sensorium Commune. The Third comprehends all those Judgments which we form
by the Occasion of those Motions: Hence it follows, all Corporeal Objects are
only Perceivable by us, in as much as they affect the Nerves expanded, in such
and such Organs. This is the general Idea of Sensation so far as can be
explained without Engaging in particular Schemes.

Before we enter on the Consideration of the External Senses, we shall offer a
short Account of the Structure of the Brain and Nerves in general. The
Cerebrum, (Tab. 10. Fig. 1.) Cerebellum and Medulla Spinalis (Tab. and Fig.
ib.) are evidently composed of Two Parts: the first which appears on the
Surface of the Cerebrum and Cerebellum is of a Cineritious Color, and is
called the Cortical and Glandulous Part; the other or internal is Whiter and
Harder, and is called the Medullary, Callose, and Fibrous Part: This Order is
inverted in the Spinal Marrow, where the External Part is Callose and White,
and it is Internal, Soft and Cineritious. The Cineritious or Cortical Part of
the Cerebrum is remarkable in those Turnings and Windings which are deeply
divided by the Pia Matter within the Body of the Cerebrum ( Tab. 10. Fig. 1. C.)
from whence it appears to have a very large Surface. The like Contrivance is
observable in the Cerebellum; the outward Appearance of the Sulci of which
differ from those of the Cerebrum, and are ranged in Parallel Lines according
to its Length, as expressed Tab. 7. Fig. 2. Besides the Cineritious Part of the
Cerebrum placed on its Surface, it has still other Cineritious Bodies or
Protuberances added to its Corpus Callosum; as the Corpora Striata, (App. Fig.
30. DD.) Nates and Testes. (Tab. 10. Fig. 1.)

In a Horizontal Section of the Cerebrum, its Cortical and Medullary Parts
Appear, as Represented App. Fig. 30. In a Transverse Section of the Cerebellum,
an Arboreous Disposition of the Latter Appear within the Former ( Tab. 10. Fig.
1.) The Cineritious Color of the Cortical Parts of the Brain Arises from the
Number and Contortion of its Proper Blood Vessels, which Pass according to the
Length of the Fibers in the Callose and White Part.

In Viewing the Surface of the Cortical Parts, it Appears Composed of a vast
Number of small Glands of a Deprest Oval Figure, from each of which Spring the
Medullary Fibers, which Compose the Callose or White Part; all which make the
Centrum Ovale of Vieussens (App. Fig. 30. n n.) before they Compose the Crura
Medullae Oblongatae, ( App. Fig. 29. B B.) In this Progress, the Medullary
Fibers of the Cerebrum, give Originals to the Olfactory and Optic Nerves: At
the Conjunction of the Crura, the Third Pair of Nerves Arise, App. Fig. 28, 3,
33: soon after the Annular Process or Pons Varolii, (which partly Arisies from
the Cerebellum) ( App. Fig. 28. s s) is Joined with the Crura. In this Part of
the Conjunction of the Medullary Parts of the Cerebrum with the several
Processes of the Cerebellum, the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Pair of
Nerves Arise: and at the Beginning of the Medulla Oblongata, (whence Spring the
Eighth and Ninth Pair of Nerves,) there is a complete Union of all the
Medullary Parts of the Cerebrum and Cerebellum; Where a Cineritious Part may be
seen in its Middle, as Appears App. Fig. 29. d d. This Inversion of the Order
of the Callose and Cineritious Parts, is kept through the whole Medulla Spinalis.

From what has been above Observed, it Appears, the Surfaces of the Cortical
Parts of the Cerebrum and Cerebellum are much larger than those of their
Medullary, consequently each Gland which helps to Compose them, must be larger
in its Diameter than the Medullary Fiber, which Arises from it. This
Consideration will lead us still farther; for since it is plain, the Surfaces of
the Medullary Parts of the Brain and Cerebellum, are much larger than they are
afterward in the Medulla Oblongata, therefore the Fibers which Compose them,
must necessarily be thicker in their Diameters, at each Gland, than they are
afterward in their Progress to the Beginnings of the Nerves, where they are
considerably contracted, and frame the Apex of a Cone.

Here we must not omit to take notice, that all those Medullary Fibers
inservient to Motion in general, and the Organs of Tasting and Touching, are
very much Contracted at the Beginnings of their Nerves, without the Body of the
Brain and Medulla Spinalis; and on the other hand, all those Medullary Fibers
employed in the Organs of Seeing, Hearing and Smelling are contracted, or have
the Apices of their Cones within the Body of the Brain: Thus the Nervous Fibers
concerned in Motion in general, and such as are Moved by the Contact of Gross
Objects, are lessened between their Originals and several Divarications, extra
Cerebrum; but those affected by the Mediation of Light and Air, within the
Brain.

The utmost I could yet Observe in Viewing the Nervous Fibrillae with a
Microscope (whether Composing the Corpus Callosum of the Brain, or the Bodies
of the Nerves themselves) is, that they are Formed of a Reticulated Compages of
Fibers; which in the Latter Appear Globular; but in the Former or Corpus
Callosum (by reason of the irregular Section, or Expanding a Thin Divided
Transparent Part of it on the Object-Plate of the Microscope) it Appears
Reticulated, and the Interstices of its Rete of various Angles. This Structure
of the Nervous System, seems to Plead against those Hypotheses of the Animal
Functions, Founded on the Motions of the Spirits or Fluids, Derived immediately
from the Brain, and Transmitted by the Nervous Channels. We shall here only
present the Reader with an Anatomical Plan of the Organs of the External
Senses, and show how Objects may be Impressed on them and Conveyed to the
Sensorium Commune, and leave him to Contemplate on the Elegant Fabric of the
Brain, whose particular Contrivances have hitherto escaped the Discovery of the
most Sagacious Enquirers.

The Five External Senses, are so many differing Species of Perception from the
Applications of Bodies to their several Organs; either Immediate, as in Feeling
and Tasting; or through a Proper Medium, as in Smelling, Hearing and Seeing. The
Sense of Feeling is Extended through the whole Body, except some few Parts, as
the Bones, Cartilages, etc. but chiefly Resides in the True Skin, whose
Structure, so far as it Relates to this Sense, is as follows. The Cuticula,
(Tab. 4. Fig. 1, 2, 3.) (which is a common Covering to the whole Surface of the
Skin) being Removed, certain Papillary Protuberances Discover themselves, which
Viewed with a Microscope ( Tab. 4. Fig. 6.) Appear made up of many Roundish
Sudoriferous Glands, with a vast Number of Nervous Fibrillae Expanded on their
Surface: This Uneven Papillary Surface is necessary, to the end those Fibrillae
may be the more Expanded and Applied to Tangible Objects; so that the Figure,
Modification and other manifest Qualities may be Discerned, and the Impressions
Conveyed to the Common Sensory, by the Mediation of their Nerves. Since the
Extremities of the Fingers and Thumbs are (for many Reasons) necessary Parts to
be Endued with an Exquisite Sense of Feeling; therefore the Order of these
Papillae are there Converted to a Contorted Series, which Appear like so many
Rugae under the Cuticula, as is Represented in the last Mentioned Table, Fig.
4. The Cuticula here, as well as in other Parts of the Skin, is a necessary
Medium between the Object and the Organ; but when it Grows very Thick, as in
some Laborious Mechanics, it becomes an Impediment. From the vast Number of
these Nervous Filaments, any Solution of Continuity of the Skin it self, is
more Painful, than most of its subjacent Parts.

The Fabrication of the Tongue, its Papillary Surface, and the Manner of its
Application to Objects, bears a great Similitude to that of the Skin now
Described, in so much that some have reckond the Sense of Tasting a Species of
Tactus. The Structure of this Part, as well as its Coverings and Papillary
Bodies, are Represented Tab. 13. where Fig. 2. Shows the External Membrane, in
which the Papillary Bodies lying under it, Appear variously Figured, some
Conical, others Round, and others with their Extremities Forked. In some
Animals these Papillae are externally Large, and their Extremities
Cartilaginous and Horny, but in Humane Tongues it is far otherwise; the Outward
Membrane here being very Soft, the Papillae Numerous and Small, and appearing
Villous to the Naked Eye. This Membrane being Raised (after sufficient Boiling
the Tongue) the next which offers, is more Spongy, Softer and full of
Blood Vessels, Tab. ib. Fig. 6, 7. This is Perforated by the many Nervous
Papillae, immediately Placed under it: ( Tab. ib. Fig. 8.) the Tops of which
are afterward Received in the Vaginulae of the External Membrane. These
Papillae Cleave to the Fleshy Fibers of the Tongue, and are of various Sizes
and Figures as above Noted. In the Interstices of these Papillae are Placed
Diverse Salival Glands, the Excretory Tubes of which, Discharge themselves by
certain Apertures; ( Tab. ib. Fig. 2. G G.) whereby the Villous Covering of the
Tongue is Moistened, and the Saporiferous Particles are readily Admitted to the
Corpora Papillaria, whose Nervous Expansions (on their Surface, like those of
the Cutis) Transmit the several Impressions (made by Objects of Various
Figures) to the Common Sensory, by the Mediation of the Par Quintum. Thus the
Structure of the External Parts of the Tongue, Agree with that of the Skin,
with this Difference, the Former being Clothed (in Humane Bodies) with a very
Thin Soft Membrane, and its Papillae very Numerous, Less and more Extruded or
Longer; whereas the Papillae Cutis, are Larger, Shorter, and Covered with a
more Dense Membrane or Cuticula. Hence the Tongue Appears to be an Exquisite
Organ of Tactus. However the Sense of Taste principally Resides in the Tongue,
yet we must Refer the Organs of Smelling hither, since Experience Shows us the
Former Sense cannot be Complete, where the Latter is Deficient.

The External Organ of Smelling is not Confined within the Cavities of the
Nostrils, but is Composed of a very Large Glandulous Nervous Membrane, in like
manner Extended within the Cavities of the Ossa Frontis (Tab. 89. Fig. 1. ib.
Tab. 91. Fig. 2.) Fourth Pair of Bones of the Upper-Jaw, ( Tab. 92. Fig. 1. E.)
and in that Part of the Os Sphenoides composing the Sella Turcica, (Tab. 89.
Fig. 2.) all which Open into the Foramina Narium. Besides these Cavities, the
Nostrils are furnished with Diverse Ossa Spongiosa, Described, Tab. 92. Fig. 1.
H. on which the same Membrane is Expanded. This Membrane is in a great Measure
composed of the Extremities of the Olfactory Nerves, and is the Organ of this
Sense, which receives the Impression made by the Odoriferous Effluvia, whether
in Inspiration, as in the Proper Action of Smelling; or Expiration, as in
Tasting, which happens in Mastication or Deglutition of the Aliment. What we
have hinted concerning the Complication of Tasting with Smelling, will in some
Manner be evinced, if we reflect on that Common Practice of Holding the Nose to
avoid Nauseous Tastes: And when the Foramina Narium are partly Obstructed, (as
after taking Cold) how little we Distinguish the Proper Tastes of some Things,
especially such as are Odoriferous.

The Organs of the Fourth External Sense, are the Two Ears, by which the
Various Sounds Impressed on the Ambient Air, are Represented to the Common
Sensory. The External Ear or Auricula (Tab. 12. Fig. 1.) is Composed of a
Cartilage Covered with the Cuticula and Cutis; whose many Contorted Foldings,
are Fitted for the Reception of the External Undulating Air, and Transmitting
it to the Meatus Auditorius. The Winding Progress of the Meatus seems purposely
contrived, to prevent some Inconveniences which might Arise, from the Violent
Irruption of the Air through too Direct a Passage to the Membrana Tympani, placed
at the farther End of it: ( Ap. Fig. 15. e.) For the same Intent, the Cerumen
or Ear-Wax, seems to be Separated by the Numerous Glands in the Membrane of the
Meatus, to Infringe its Motion. The Air which thus Passes the Meatus, Shakes
the Membrana Tympani more or less, according to the Various Impressions made on
it ab Extra: The Long Process of the Malleus (App. Fig. 15.) which is
Contiguous to this Membrane, is necessarily Moved, consequently the Incus which
is Articulated with the Malleus, (App. Fig. 16. H, I.) and the Stapes, which is
Articulated with the Incus, by the Mediation of the Os Orbiculare, (App. Fig.
17. H I.) are all successively Moved by each other: Nor could any Tremulous
Motions be Impressed on the Membrana Tympani by the External Air, if the Cavity
of the Tympanum it self had no Aperture, by which its Contained Air could
Fluctuate, no more than a Drum it self would Sound if there were no Holes in
its Sides. For this Reason a Passage from the Palate to the Tympanum is Formed,
( Vid. App. Fig. 8. N N.) By this Curious Artifice the Various Sounds Arising
from the Vibrations of the External Air, are Modifi'd, and Articulately
Represented to the Auditory Nerve, Expanded within the Winding Cavities of the
Labyrinth or Three Semicircular Ducts and Cochlea (App. Fig. 17, 18.) by means
of the Stapes, whose Basis immediately Covers the Foramen Ovale or Entrance to
those Cavities, where the Aer Insitus or Congenitus, is said to Reside. This
Air though called Innate, must Arise from that Contained in the Tympanum, and
necessarily has a Communication with it, else we cannot see how the Vibrations
made by the Stapes, should be Communicated to these Contorted Channels. Nor can
it be supposed, the Basis of the Stapes has any loose Membranous Connection to
the Margin of the Foramen Ovale (which it must have, to keep out the Air
Contained in the Tympanum;) Or that the Stapes adequately Closes that Foramen:
Both which would meet with Equal Impediments from the Grosser Air in the
Tympanum, pressing on the Basis of the Stapes, and hindering its Elevation.

The Small Muscles which move the Malleus, and that of the Stapes, like the
Heart, Diaphragm and Muscles concerned in Respiration, do their Office
Inadvertently, and are Useful herein, as we have Represented them in App. Fig.
15, 16, 17. This Structure of the Auricula and Parts within the Tympanum,
Prepare the Impressions made in the External Air, and Represent them to the
Expansions of the Auditory Nerve; not unlike the Membranes and Humors of the
Eye, Refracting the Rays of Light in passing to the Tunica Retina in the Eye,
which falls next under our Consideration.

As the Air is the Vehicle of the Objects to the Two Former Organs, so the
Light is to this. The Nature and Properties of Light, the Magnitude, Figure or
Motion of Luminous Particles, as well as the Shape or Conformation of those
Parts, which Affect the Organs of the other Senses, we omit as more Proper for
the Disputes of the Schools than an Anatomical Discourse, confining our Theory
of Vision to the Structure of the Parts.

In the Fabrication of these Organs, the Eyelids or Palpebrae (Tab. 11. Fig.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5.) are none of the least Remarkable. The Upper is Elevated and
Deprest by Two Muscles, the External of which is Circular and called
Orbicularis. (Tab. 12. Fig. 4.) This Draws the Upper Eyelid down; the Internal
is Straight ( Tab. 11. Fig. 4.) and Pulls it up. By this Contrivance the Eye is
not only Defended from Extraneous Bodies, but the Discharge of the Lachrimal
Humor is Accelerated by the several Ducts, into the Internal Part of the
Palpebrae next the Bulb of the Eye, Vid. Tab. 11. Fig. 5. The Eye it self is
Spherical and Moved by its Proper Muscles, Represented in the last mentioned
Tab. Fig. 7, 8, 9, 10. Its Membranes, Humors, and the Parts which Compose it
being Expressed Tab. ib. Fig. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24.
we shall here only take Notice of its Structure, so far as Relates to its
Action, and Describe the Plan made by a Section through the Axis of Vision, which
will Conduce to the right Apprehending the Manner, how Objects are Represented
in the Sensorium Commune.



A A, The Tunica Cornea, whose External Surface is a little more Unequal than
the Bulb of the Eye it self.

B B, The Tunica Sclerotica or Dura.

C C, Parts of the Tunica Adnata or Conjunctiva, which are Continued to the
Internal Parts of the Palpebrae.

D D, The Choroeides, the Forepart of which is called Wea; Its Blood Vessels
Appear very Beautiful, when Injected with Mercury, and seem to Compose Diverse
Glandulous Bodies.

E E, The Retina or Expansions of the Optic Nerve, on which Objects are
Depicted.

F F, The Iris which lies Loose or Floating in the Aqueous Humor.

G G, The Ligamentum Ciliare.

H, The Aqueous Humor.

I, The Chrystalline.

K, The Vitreous Humor.

L, Part of the Optic Nerve.

The Tunica Cornea Receives the Various Rays of Light proceeding from all
Points of the Object, Collects and Transmits them through the Foramen of the
Wea, or Pupil, Refracting the Diverging Rays on each Side toward the
Perpendicular. The Chrystalline Humor Receives the Rays First Infracted in the
Cornea, and beginning to Diverge again in the Aqueous Humor, and Refracts them
a Second Time; So that all the Rays proceeding from the same Point of the
Object, by Passing through. this Dense Medium, do Converge again, and Terminate
in the same Point on the Retina. From this Refraction or Direction of the Rays
of Light, to a Point, distinct Pictures or Images of Visible Objects are
Represented on the Retina, as the Figures of External Bodies in passing through a
Single Unequal Glass on a Paper on the Wall of a dark Chamber, the whole will be
better Conceived by the following Figure, which Represents the same Section of
the Eye, as the Former with the Luminous Rays passing through.



Thus the Rays in Passing through the Cornea and Humors of the Eyes, are
Inverted, and the Image of the Object is so Depicted on the Concave of the
Retina. How this Inversion is Reduced in the Sensorium Commune to a Right
Perception, may be Accounted for in our Proper Knowledge of Things, in the same
Manner, as we know when we hold a Stick in each Hand cross each other, that the
Stick in the Right Touches such an Object, and that in the Left another: Thus
Vision being made by the Rays of Light proceeding from the Object, and making
Due and Various Motions of the Nervous Fibers of the Retina, which are
Communicated to the Common Sensory by the Optic Nerves with the same Type and
Character; we may reckon this Sensation to be not altogether unlike that of
Tactus.

The Last of the Animal Functions which we should here speak of, is Muscular
Motion, but having already Published my Thoughts conerning that Phenomenon in
my Myotomia Reformata, I shall not trouble the Reader here with a Repetition,
since no Experiment, nor Observation (besides that mentioned in Tab. 64. Fig.
2. concerning the Fleshy Fibers) has since Occurred, which should Add to those
Conjectures, or Favor any other.

To the READER.
THE Fate of Authors, when they appear on the Public Stage of the World, is
extremely uncertain; Good or Ill Success, Reputation or 'Disgrace frequently
depend more on the Humor and Prejudice of the Reader, than the Merit of the
Performance. This hard Fortune of all Writers has made it Dangerous for any
Book to venture Abroad, without some Harangue or Apology before it, to bespeak
a favorable Treatment. For my Part, I have no Excuse to offer for not
Complying with this reasonable Custom; but wholly resign my Cause to all
Well-wishers, to the Advancement of Anatomy, the proper Judges of this Matter;
whose Candor and Indulgence, I doubt not, will be a better Protection, from the
Defects that shall be Discovered in this Work, than any Reasons I shall be able
to allege in my Defense.

This Volume contains a General Description of the Fabric of Humane Bodies,
after the Manner of a Commentary on the Tables, which Represent their several
Organs. The present and last Age, have been Industrious in making Discoveries
in the Animal Machine, by Detecting the Structure of the Heart, and Artifice of
the Circulation, the Origin and Course of the Lymphe-ducts, the several Salival
Glands and their Channels, the Texture of the Bones, and Medullary Cells, the
Mucilaginous Glands of the Ioints, the Organs and Process of Generation, the
Organs of the External Senses, in reforming the Myology, (an Essay on the Last
of These, with some Remarks on the Structure and Erection of the Penis, I some
time since Published,) all which the Reader will find in the following
Descriptions, with my own Observations and Conjectures, which in many Places
differ from the General received Opinions. Besides the History of the Natural
Structure, I have through the whole Series of the Work, Inserted some Phenomenon,
I have found in Dissecting Morbid Bodies, and such Practical Instructions, as I
hope will be Useful in many Cases, to the Chirurgical Operator.

The whole is disposed in this Order: In the first Hundred and Five Tables,
after a Prospect of the Body, with the Teguments, Hair, etc. the Parts of the
Head, Neck, Brain, Medulla Spinalis follow, and so proceeds to those of the
Breast, Back, Loins, Lower-belly, Uterus with the Foetus and its Adjuncts; next
the Muscles of the Limbs, and lastly the Osteology. These Figures were Drawn
after the Life, by the Masterly Painter G. de Lairess, and Engraved by no less
a Hand, and Represent the Parts of Humane Bodies far beyond any Exstant; and
were some time since Published by Dr. Bidloo, now Professor of Anatomy in the
University of Leyden. I shall take the Liberty here to acquaint the Reader,
That in these Tables I have added above Seven-hundred References, all which are
Lettered with a Pen in the several Figures; among which it is hardly possible,
but Mistakes may occur in some Places, (by those who have Inserted them) which
I hope will not be imputed to my Inadvertence. The Parts which in many Places
had their Nomenclature barely annexed, are here Copiously Described; to which,
as I before Noted, are added such Observations of the Male Conformation and
Vitiated Structure, as may Illustrate the Pathology or History of Diseases,
their Symptoms and Causes; I have likewise interspersed several Remarks on the
usual Method of Chirurgical Operations, with Directions for performing them in
a more Exact and Successful Manner; and lastly given an Account of several
Cases and Accidents rarely occurring, and not (at least commonly) observed by
Authors. The Appendix is partly a Supplement to the preceding Tables, and
partly a Correction of such Things as are not well Expressed; for Instance, The
two First Tables present a Prospect or General View of the whole Body, both on
the Fore and Backside, Denuded of its Teguments, and Cleared from its Fat;
where the External Muscles with their Tendons, Fasciculi and Series of Fibers,
Appear on the Surface. These are not Drawn by Invention, but are Touched on
after an Original Cast from the Life in Plaster of Paris, which I have now by
me. The Third Table contains a System of the Arteries Dissected from a Foetus,
with their several Trunks and Ramifications, Delineated from the Life, which I
have also by me Injected with Wax; how much this differs from that Described (
Tab. 23.) may be soon Discovered. In two other Figures of the same Table, are
the Prospects of the Extremities of the Veins and Arteries, as they Appear in
the Transparent Finns of a Grigg and Flounder, viewed through a Microscope. Here
the Method of Circulation, the Continuity of the Venous and Arterious Channels,
the Globuli passing them in an uninterrupted Current, is Demonstrated. In
another Figure is Expressed our Conjecture of the Rise of those Ducts, which
Export the Lympha and redundant Nutriment. In the Fourth Table, the
Receptaculum Chyli is Represented, Filled with Mercury, with the Various Course
of the Chyle-Vessels and Lymphe-ducts, their Communicant Branches, the Lumbal
Glands, the Triple-Division of the Receptacle, hitherto Unobserved, at least
not Delineated. In the remaining Tables (I fear the tedious Enumeration of
Particulars may tire the Reader's Patience) are the Organs of Hearing, with the
Meatus a Palato ad Aurem, and that from the Inner Ear to the External Meatus;
the Foramina of the Tonsils which Evacuate the Pituita; the several Parts of
the Tongue and Aspera Arteria; the Basis of the Brain, that of the Cranium; the
Muscles of the Face and Lips, several of which are not Described, and the rest
Erroneously.

In this Undertaking I have been Obliged to my Learned Friend Dr. Tancred
Robinson, in Revising as many Sheets as his Leisure would give him leave. In
the last Place, to render the whole more Useful, a Copious Index is added at
the End; which if the Reader finds Useful, he is Obliged to return his Thanks
to the Deserving Mr. James Fern the Surgeon, who was at the Trouble of
digesting the Contents of this Work, into an Alphabetical Order, which my
Avocations would by no means permit me to do.

-- If the Reader happens to Discover any Literal Errors, of which some may be
found, it is hoped he will Excuse them, upon Account of the Haste and Distance
of the Press; the Practice in my Profession not suffering me always to Revise
every minute Passage.

THE ANATOMY OF HUMANE BODIES.
BEFORE we enter on the Anatomical Description of Humane Bodies, let us take a
View of their External Parts, as they appear in the Living State: Here we shall
First briefly take notice of their most remarkable Appearance in the Embryo and
Foetus of the Womb; and thence proceed to observe the several Stages of
Proportion from Children to those of a Fullgrown State, and Old Age: To these
we shall add the different Proportions of Men and Women; and lastly the
External Appearance of the Muscles and other Parts in diverse Actions.

If a Praeexistence of Parts in an Embryo was allowable, that at Twenty five
days after Conception (Figured Tab. 57. Fig. 3.) would incline us to believe
the Brain and whole Head had a Precedence, since its Magnitude then exceeds the
whole Bulk of the rest of the Parts; but as the time of the Birth advances, the
Head of the Foetus does not commonly exceed a Fourth Part in its whole Length.

The Center or Middle Part between the two Extremes of the Head and Feet of an
Infant, is in the Navel; but that of an Adult in the Ossa Pubis: And this
Proportion of dividing Children into Four Parts, whereof the Head is one, is
commonly made use of by Painters and Sculptors, etc.

A Child Two Years old has about Five Heads in its whole Length; but one of
Four or five Years, has about Six; thus measured, by dividing the whole Body
into so many Lengths, whereof the Head must be one. Hence it appears, as the
Growth of the Body advances, there is a gradual Approach to the Proportion of
an Adult of Eight, nine, or ten Faces in the whole Length.

There are many Bodies in a Full-grown State, which have not above Four or five
Lengths or Faces; but those are Miscarriages in Nature, and therefore not
Subjects of our present Consideration.

About the Fifteenth or sixteenth Year, Seven Faces or Lengths are then the
Proportion or Measure, and the Center inclines toward the upper Parts of the
Ossa Pubis; and though this Proportion may serve indifferently for a short
well-set thick Person, when the Shoulders are broad, and the Limbs thick, and
strong; yet if on the contrary the Shoulders are somewhat narrow, and the Limbs
slender, it will represent a Youth: And however Paradoxical it may seem at
first, yet an Old Woman, or the Goddess Vesta will fall under this Proportion
of Lengths, through the bending forwards of the Back-bones; and though the Limbs
bear a Proportion to one of Eight or nine Faces, yet they not being duly
extended (for want of the vigorous Action of the Muscles) render the Appearance
of the whole Figure very short.

The Ancients have commonly allowed Eight Heads to their Figures, says the
Author of the Observations on Mr. Du Fresnoy's Art of Painting, made English by
the Incomparable Mr. Dryden; but we, says he, divide the Figure [of a Humane
Body] into Ten Faces, from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, in
the following manner: N.B. That this Number of Faces depends on the Age, as
above hinted, and the Quality of the Persons represented. The Apollo and Venus
de Medices have more than Ten Faces.

THE FIRST TABLE.
FROM the Crown of the Head 1, to the upper part of the Forehead A, is the
Third Part of a Face.

The Face begins at the Roots of the lowest Hairs, which are upon the Forehead
AB, and ends at the Bottom of the Chin I.

The Face is divided into Three proportionable Parts; the First contains the
Forehead AB; the Second the Nose C; and the Third the Mouth and Chin GHI.

From the Chin to the Pit between the Two Coller-bones, or upper Part of the
Sternum, are Two Lengths of a Nose.

From the Pit between the Two Coller-bones to the Bottom of the Breast, called
Scrobiculus Cordis N, One Face.

From the Bottom of the Breasts to the Navel R, one Face; the Apollo has a Nose
more.

From the Navel to the Pudenda S, One Face; but the Apollo has Half a Nose
more: and the upper Half of the Venus de Medices is to the lower Part of the
Belly, and not to the Privy Parts.

From the Genitories or Pudenda, to the upper Part of the Knee, called the
Thigh W, Two Faces.

The Knee contains Half a Face.

From the lower part of the Knee to the Ancle, called the Leg, Two Faces.

From the Ancle or Malleolus internus to the Sole of the Foot, Half a Face.

A Man, when his Arms are stretched out, is from the Extremity of the Longest
Finger of his Right Hand to the Extremity of the Longest of his Left, as broad
as he is long.

From one side of the Breasts to the other below the Paps M M, Two Faces.

The Bone of the Arm called Humerus is the Length of Two Faces from its
Conjunction with the Shoulder Blade to the Elbow. Here we think our Author is
mistaken, for if you allow Two Faces to that Part of the Arm between the
Shoulder and bending of the Cubit, and Two more from the Elbow to the Root of
the Little Finger, when the Fingers contain Half a Face, and the Distance
between the Point of the Shoulder, and Pit of the Throat, a Whole Face; you
will make Five Faces and Half on each Side or Half Length, which amounts to
Eleven Faces in the Whole: But if you add to this what he says afterward, that
the Boxes of the Elbows with the Humerus, and of the Humerus with the
Shoulder Blade, bear a Proportion of Half a Face, when the Arms are stretched
out; then the Whole Distance between the Extremities of the Two Middle Fingers,
when the Arms are so extended, will amount to Eleven Faces and a Half;
wherefore we think the Account may stand Corrected thus.

From the Pit of the Throat to the Top of the Shoulder or Extremity of the
Spine of the Scapula, One Face; from thence to the bending of the Cubit or
Elbow, one Face and a half; thence again to the Wrist, One Face and a Nose. The
Hand with the Fingers Extended contain One Face: hence it follows that Four
Faces, a Nose, and Half a Face, is the distance between the Throat Pit, and
Extremity of the Middle Finger; which upon extension of the whole Arm, etc.
will amount to Five Faces, or rather more than less.

The Sole of the Foot, is the Sixth part of the whole Figure, says our Author;
but the Foot ought not to exceed a Face, and a Nose in Length.

As for the Breadth of the Limbs, no precise Measure can be given, because the
Measures themselves are not only changeable according to the Quality of the
Persons, but according to the Movement of the Muscles.

A Man is Two Lengths or Faces from the Point of each Shoulder; that is to say,
from the Upper Part of the Sternum between the Claviculae called the Pit of the
Throat, to the Extremity of the Spine of the Scapula, called the Top of the
Shoulder, One Length; and so on the other Side.

The Breadth of the Hips of a Man is One Length and a Half; that is, from the
great Trochanter of the Thigh Bone of one Side, to that of the other: The
precise Places of which Bones are intersected by an Horizontal Line drawn from
the Pubes to each Side.

K, The Pomum Adami, or Protuberant Part of the Larynx, which in Men is much
larger than in Women. L, The Sternum or Os Pectoris appearing under the Skin
etc. between the Two Pectoral Muscles. N, The Scrobiculus Cordis commonly
called the Pit of the Stomach, under the Skin, etc. Precisely in this Place, is
the Cartilago Ensiformis. O P, The Epigastrium. Q Q, That of the Left Side
denotes the Inguina; that of the Right, the Ilia. R, The Region of the Navel.
S, The Penis. T T, The Arms. V V, The Legs. W W, The Thighs. X X, The Feet. Y
Y, The Shoulders. Z Z, The Hands. d d The Hypocondrium. * *, The Hypogastrium.




THE SECOND TABLE
REPRESENTS the Forepart of a Woman, in whom the Symmetry or Proportion
differs from that of a Man: First, that most remarkably the Shoulders are
narrower; the Man having Two Lengths or Faces in the Breadth of his Shoulders,
and One and a Half in his Hips; whereas a Woman on the contrary, has but one
Face and a Half in her Shoulders, and Two in her Hips: Secondly, the Claviculae
or Channel-bones, and Muscles in general do not appear in Women as in Men;
whence it is, the out Line of the one, as Painters call it, differs very much
from that of the other. Nor will any Action, in which a Woman uses her utmost
Strength, occasion such Swellings or Risings of the Muscles and other Parts to
appear, as they do in Men; since the great Quantity of Fat placed under the
Skins of Women so clothes their Muscles, etc. as prevents any such Appearance.

We cannot conceive this one Quantity, and more equal Distribution of Fat under
the Skins of Women does entirely proceed from any peculiar Qualification,
either in their Whole Frame, or intimate Structure of their Parts where it is
produced; but by reason they lead a more sedentary Life, and are scarce at any
time accustomed to hard Labors, whereby their Fatty Vesiculae (expressed Tab. 4.
Fig. 14.1, 2, 3.) are comprest, by the frequent Operations of their Muscles, so
as to prevent that more equal Distribution, and increase of their contained
Oil: Yet on the other hand, it must be acknowleg'd, that the Legs, and Feet of
Women, and even those who walk much, do not afford those Muscular Appearances
like those of Men, which we might expect, were it not that Women did suffer
very much in those Parts; whether in the time of Impregnation, when the Uterus
by its Extension so presses the Iliack Veins, as to hinder the Progress of the
refluent Blood, whence the whole Legs become Swelled, and frequently Varices of
their External Veins proceed; or when the Menstrua are Obstructed, the Legs
(through a Plenitude of Serosities in the Vessels) are incident to suffer in like
manner in their outward Enclosures, by reason of the Unaptness of their
Position to discharge their refluent Blood.

The other remarkable Parts, which differ from a Man, and appear Externally in
a Woman, are;

A A, The Mammae. B, The Pudendum.
THE THIRD TABLE.
WHAT has been said, in the preceding Table, relating to the Appearance of the
External Parts of a Man, or Woman, may indifferently serve this Place;
wherefore we shall proceed to the last Part of our Design in these
Animadversions, viz. Of the External Appearance of the Muscles, and other
Parts, in diverse Actions. If a strong Person is to be represented in a vigorous
Action, such as Hercules etc. after a suitable Proportion to such a Figure, and
the Action is designed; the next Thing the Painter, or Sculptor is to consider,
which are those Parts, or Limbs employed in the chiefest Force of the Action;
and if the Figure is standing, let him be sure one Leg, and particularly its
Foot, be in a Right Line, or Perpendicular to the Trunk, or Bulk of the Body,
where the Center of its Gravity may be placed in an Aequilibrium: This Center
is determined by the Heel; or if the Figure is on Tiptoe, as it is called, then
the Ball of the Great Toe is the Center; the Muscles of this Leg, which thus
support the Body, ought to be expressed more in Action, or Swelled in their
Bellies, and their Tendons drawn more to an Extension, than those of the other
Leg, which is placed only in Order, to receive the Weight of the Body toward
that Way, to which the Action inclines it: As for Example, suppose Hercules was
with a Club, or the like, striking at any Thing which stood before him toward
his Left Side; then let his Right Leg be placed so as to support the whole
Weight of his Body, and the Left loosly touching the Ground only with its Toes.
Here the External Muscles of the Right Leg ought to be expressed very Strong, or
much Tumified: but those of the Left, scarcely appearing more than if the whole
Figure was in some sedentary Posture; except, as in the Case now mentioned, the
Foot being extended, then the Muscles, which compose the Calf of the Leg, are
in Action, and appear very Strong; as it is well expressed in the Right Leg of
that excellent Figure of the Ancients, the Gladiator in Prince Borgheses's
Palace at Rome; of which, we have only a Copy, or Cast, placed by the Canal in
St. James's Park. When we say, the External Muscles of the Right Leg, or that
which supports the Weight of the Body, ought to be expressed very Strong; we
don't mean that all those Muscles should be expressed equally Swelled, or in
Action; but that those chiefly Concerned in that Action, or Posture, that the
Leg is then in: As for Example, if the Leg, or Tibia is extended, then the
extending Muscles, placed on the Thigh, are most Swelled; if it is Bended, then
the Bending Muscles, and their Tendons appear most. The like may be observed of
the whole Body in General, when it is in pursuit of some vigorous Action; as
appears in that Figure of the Gladiator last mentioned. The Laocoon in the
Vatican Garden at Rome also furnishes us with an Example of this Muscular
Appearance through the Whole; but in the Antinous, Apollo, and other Figures also
of the Ancients, in the Vatican, and other Places, in Postures where no
considerable Actions are designed, we see their Muscles expressed but Faintly, or
scarcely Appearing; whence we cannot but think the Sculptors of those Times were
very well acquainted with these Observations. Tho it be granted, the ancient
Greeks were accustomed to see Nudities very Often, nay, almost Constantly; yet
the Difficulty of Copying these things from the Life is so Great, that unless
they were well acquainted with such like Remarks, they would fall short of
Nature in such Performances; since it is well known, even the Life it self,
when exposed to the Artist, cannot continue those vigorous Actions for any time;
but the Muscles fall, and the Parts loose their necessary Appearance in Action,
though the Posture is the same. Hence it is, that Limbs, though Cast, or Molded
from the Life it self, are not strictly to be followed, unless the Life could
continue the whole Spirit, or Force of the Action during the time, that the
Mould was making from it, which I am apt to think is next to an Impossibility;
however it might be attempted, at least in some particular Parts. Wherefore a
rational Theory must help us, at least, to such Hints, that when we see, we may
know what to observe, and the Reason why it appears so in the Life.

This is indeed a very Entertaining Study, which many of our Modern Painters
and Sculptors are least acquainted with.

Thus far, in General, relating to the Muscles, etc. In the next Place, let us
take Notice of some particular Appearances of the External Muscles, and other
Parts: First, of the Musculi Mastoidii (vid. App. Fig. 1.14.14.) if either of
these Act, the Head is turned to the contrary Side, and the Muscle, which
performs the Action, appears very Plain under the Skin, and is often well
expressed both by Painters and Sculptors, as is represented in the Neck of the
Figure of the First Table.

If the Arms are lifted up, the Swelling of the Muscles, placed on the
Shoulders, which perform that Action, called Deltoides, (App. Fig. 1.20.) make
the Extremities of the Spines of the Shoulder-blades, ( App. Fig. 2. ii.)
called the Tops of the Shoulders, appear Hollow, or Indented.

The Shoulder-blades follow the Elevation of the Arms, their Basis (App. ib. l,
l.) incline, at that Time, Obliquely Downwards.

If the Arms are drawn Down, put Forwards, or pulled Backwards; the
Shoulder-blades necessarily vary their Positions accordingly; all which is to
be learnt by consulting the Life only; when being well acquainted with what
then appears in the very Action, the Artist will be able to comprehend an Idea,
how to express it: Hence it is, we seldom find the Back so well expressed, as the
Fore-parts; the Latter not being subject to such various Alterations, as the
Motions of the Shoulder-blades cause in the Former.

When the Cubit, or Arm is Bended, the Two-headed Muscle called Biceps Internus
(App. Fig. 22.) has it is Belly very much Raised; as appears in the Left Arm of
the Figure of the First Table: The like may be observed of the Biceps Externus,
called Gemellus, (App. Fig. 2.17, 17.) when the Arm is extended.

The Right Muscle of the Abdomen (App. Fig. 1.41.41.) appears very Strong in
Rising from a decumbent Posture.

Those Parts of the great Saw-Muscle before, ( App. ib. 40, 40.) which are
received in the Teeth, or Beginnings of the Oblique Descending Muscle ( ib. 38,
38.) are very much Swelled, when the Arm on the same Side is thrust Forwards;
that Saw-Muscle then being in Action in drawing the Scapula Forwards also.

The long extending Muscles of the Trunk, placed on each Side the Backbone, (
App. Fig. 2. **) Act alternately in Walking after this manner; if the Right Leg
bears the Weight of the Body, and the Left is in Translation, as on Tiptoe; the
last mentioned Muscles of the Back on the Left Side, may be observed to be
Tumified about the Region of the Loins; and so on the other Side.

The Trocanthers, or outward, and uppermost Heads of the Thigh-bones ( App.
Fig. 2. r, r.) vary in their Positions, in such manner, as no precise
Observations can explain their several Appearances; but the Study after the
Life will soon inform the diligent observing Artist.

If the Thigh is Extended, as when the whole Weight of the Body rests on that
Side, the Glutaeus, or Buttock-Muscle, ( App. Fig. 2. 32, 32.) makes a
different Appearance, from what offers at another Time; but if the Thigh is
drawn Backwards, that Muscle appears still more, and more Tumified.

When the whole Leg is drawn Upwards, Forwards, and at the same time the Foot
inclined Inwards, the upper Part of the Musculus Sartorius (App. Fig. 1.44.)
appears rising very strong; in other Positions of the Thigh that Muscle makes a
furrowing Appearance in its whole Progress, as is expressed in the Figure of the
First Table.

If a Man is on Tiptoe, the extending Muscles of the Shank, placed on the
Forepart of the Thigh ( App. Fig. 1. 46, 47, 48.) and those of the Foot, which
compose the Calf of the Leg, ( App. Fig. 2. 43, 44.) appear very strong, and
the Musculus Peroneus primus (App. Fig. 1.55.) makes a considerable
Indentation, or furrowing at that time in its Progress, on the Outside of the
Leg.

Besides these Remarks we could mention many more, which will soon be taken
Notice of by the observing Artist in consulting the Life; to which he ought to
apply himself, after he is well acquainted with the Anatomy of the External
Parts; see the First, and Second Figures of our Appendix.

A B, The Hairy, or Back part of the Head. C, The Right Temple. D, The Hair
tied up on the Occiput. E, The Neck, where Fontanels are usually made. F F, The
Shoulders. G, The Back. H, The Loins. I I, The Buttocks. K K, The Thighs. L L,
The Legs. M M, The Arms.




THE FOURTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
REPRESENTS a Portion of the Cuticula or Scarf-skin, raised from the Back of
the Hand, and viewed with a Microscope.

A A, The Perforations or Pores, whereby the Sweat is discharged.

B B, The Indentures or Furrows.

C C, The Bladder like Protuberances; both these arise from the Inequallity of
the Papillary Surface of the Skin it self.

D D, The Hairs which break forth through the Cuticula.

E E, The Asperities or Filaments, by which the Cuticula is fastened to the True
Skin.

With the Assistance of the Microscope, the Cuticula appears composed of diverse
Strata or Beds of Scales, fastened to the Papillary Surface of the Skin; and are
so entangled with each other, as that they appear a continued Pellicle or
Membrane when raised from the True Skin, whether by the Application of
Blister-Plasters in Living People, or Scalding Water, Hot Irons, or the like,
in Dead Bodies: According to the Number of these Strata or Beds of Scales, the
Skin appears to be more, or less Fair, and the Person is commonly said to have
a thicker or thinner Skin; though very frequently the Jaundice and other Diseases
give it an ill Tincture. The Cuticula like the True Skin is not Uniform, in
diverse Parts of it the Number of its Scales and their Strata exceed those of
others; on the Lips not above two Strata appear; on other parts more, seldom
less; in the Bottoms of the Feet of those who walk much, and the Palms of the
Hands of Laborious Mechanics, these Strata are not only very numerous, but
each Scale is thickened. If you Macerate the Cuticle in Water, after some days,
its Strata of Scales will appear, and you may divide it into Two, sometimes
Three, or Four Pellicles; the like Division of it may be also observed in
Vesicatories or Blisters raised on Living Persons.

Fig. 2.
A Portion of the Cuticula raised from the Bottom of the Foot, and viewed with
the same Microscope as the former; where its remarkable Thickness appears.

Fig. 3.
A Portion of the Cuticula raised from the Back; in which the Indentures,
Furrows, etc. agree with those of Figure the 1st. The Surface of the True Skin
of that Part being exactly agreeable with that of the other; but at the
Extremities of the Fingers, and Thumbs, the Cuticle is variously wreathed and
contorted, conformable to the subjacent Papillary Protuberances of the True
Skin, as appears in the following Figure.

Fig. 4.
The Upper and Inner Side of the Thumb drawn likewise by the Assistance of the
Microscope.

A, From the Point arise

B B, Two Lines, of a Circular Disposition;

C C, Others which form Triangles.

D, Other Lines variously contorted or winding.

The Cuticle being removed, the Cutis or Skin it self appears.

Fig. 5.
A Portion of the Skin of the Arm, as it appears on its External Surface to the
naked Eye.

Fig. 6.
The External Surface of the Skin, when viewed with a Microscope; where its
Internal Structure or Rete of Blood Vessels are also expressed.

A A, The Papillae Pyramidales; made up of diverse Pyramidal Roundish Glands, in
whose Composition the Nerves have a considerable Share.

B B, The Capillaments of the little Aqueous Vessels placed between the
Papillae according to Bidloo. I must confess notwithstanding all the Diligence
I could yet use in examining this Part with the Microscope, or otherwise, I
have hitherto doubted of the Existence of these Aqueous Vessels, between the
Cuticula and Cutis; in which some have placed the Seat of that Tawny Tincture
of the Egyptians, and that Black one of the Aethiopians.

C C, The Sudoriferous Glands, which compose the Papillae.

D D, The Sweat Vessels or Excretory-ducts arising from the last mentioned
Glands.

E E, The Hairs arising near the Pores of the Sweat Vessels: Besides these
Vessels, the Skin is furnished with Arteries, Veins, Nerves, and Lympheducts;
the Trunks of the Two former are well expressed in this Figure F F: Hence it
appears the Skin can no more be esteemed a Similar or Simple Part, than any of
those called Dissimular or Compounded Parts. Nor is there any Part of the whole
Animal Economy, that can be justly esteemed Simple or not Compounded; even the
Blood Vessels, Nerves, and Lympheducts are Compounded Parts, as shall be else
where demonstrated. Besides the Pyramidal Sudoriferous Glands, which compose
the Papillae Cutis, there are other Sudoriferous Glands placed on the Internal
Surface of the Skin; the most considerable of these we find in the Axillae,
where they are sometimes called Axillares, but more properly Miliares, from
their Figure; the Axillary Glands lying underneath these Sudoriferous ones;
they receiving the Lympha, brought into them by the Lympheducts springing from
the whole Arm, do discharge it again into the Exporting Lympheducts in its Way
to the Thoracick Duct. There are other Sudoriferous Glands, though not so evident
to the naked Eye, under the Skin of the Fingers, Inguina, and behind the Ears:
The Hairy-scalp, Skin of the Forehead, Palms of the Hands, and Soles of the
Feet are also furnished with these Glands; wherefore we shall not distinguish
them with the Names of the Places of their Situation, but choose to give them a
more general Denomination, either as to their Office, as Glandulae Sudoriferae,
or Figure, as Miliares. In the Skin also are placed those Bodies whence the
Hairs arise; these, by some are also esteemed Glands, and called Piliferae:
These Piliferous Bodies or Glands, are furnished at their Roots with Importing
and Exporting Blood Vessels, Nerves, etc. the Hairs being as it were their
Excretory Ducts with this Difference from those of other Parts, viz. They
receiving their separated Juice immediately from the Pores in the Extremities of
the Blood Vessels; whereas the Hairs, as we conceive, have their Radical
Moisture transmitted to them by the Mediation of a Spongious Body which absorbs
it from the circumjacent Parts: Hence it is that the Hairs grow in dead Bodies,
when the Natural Motions of the Fluids cease. The Hair between the Light, and
naked Eye, appears pellucid; but if viewed with a Microscope in that Position,
it appears Spongy, or not unlike the Internal Part of a Cane: It seems to be
composed of horny globular Particles variously joined together, and colored,
where it has Plenty of Moisture, it is commonly Pendulous; if more Dry, it is
Curled.

Fig. 7, 8.
Two of the Hairs of the Head figured with a Microscope:

A, Its spongious Body composed of horny globular Particles.

B B B, Its straight and transverse Stalks, which join its Globules together.

C C C, The woolly or downy Part of the Hair, which descends from above, and
stands obliquely downwards; whence it happens, when the Ends of the Hairs are
not placed in their right Position, the Hairs are apt to entangle in Combing,
as it does in those Periwigs made of what they call Combings.

D D, The Top of the Hair divided:

E, Its Middle Part:

F, Its Root arising from the Piliferous Body, placed within the Skin.

G, A Portion of the Cuticle, which commonly sticks to the Hair when extracted.

Fig. 9.
The Branches, which sometimes appear on the Top of the Hair by a Microscope.

Fig. 10, 11, 12.
The different Thickness of the Hairs of diverse Parts of the Body, when viewed
with the same Microscope. Figure the Tenth, that of the Groin; the Eleventh,
that of the Nostrils; the Twelfth Figure represents the Hairs of the Eyelids.

Immediately under the Skin is placed the Fat in Humane Bodies; nor is it found
in all Parts alike; on the Forehead it is very little, under the Hairy Scalp
less, except its Hinder Part, on the Eyelids and Penis none, nor on the
Muscu^us Quadratus Colli.

Fig. 13.
A Portion of the Fat of the Abdomen.

A A, Its External Membrane.

B B, Its Internal Membrane.

C C, The Globules of the Fat with their Blood Vessels passing to them, whence
their oily Contents are derived.

1. The Integument or Covering of the Globules of Fat raised. 2. The Globules
of Fat themselves. 3. Some of the Globules divided from the rest; in which the
Breaking off of their Membranes, and Blood Vessels, are expressed: Hence it
appears, that the Fat is a Congeries or Heap of Membranous Cells, which in the
Microscope appear distended with Oil: If the Existence of those Ductus Adiposi
could be demonstrated, as Bidloo intimates at C C in the last described Figure,
I should incline to think of another Office of them intended in Nature, than
what Malpigbius has assigned them, viz. To convey the oily Contents of the
Adipose Cells to some neighboring Interstices, whether of Muscles, or other
Parts, that are on Occasion moved, or slide on each other; or into some
remarkable Cavity, as into that of the Abdomen, etc. where it meets with a
Mucilage separated by the Mucilaginous Glands placed in the neighboring
Membranes, and serves to make up a Composition to Lubricate the Parts according
to Doctor Havers's Osteologia Nova, Page 209.
Fig. 14.
The Outside of the last Common Integument of the whole Body, called the Common
Membrane of the Muscles; some divide this into Two Membranes, and distinguish
them by the Names of Carnosa and Communis Musculorum; which we look on to be
altogether needless as may appear by the following Description.

Fig. 15.
The Inside of the Membrane last described: The rise of this Membrane is
commonly said to be from the Spines of the Vertebrae of the Back, because as I
suppose that is the most stable Part to which it is Connected: It is coextended
with the Skin it self, as appears in most Parts, and has its Corresponding
Foramina for the Eyes, Nostrils, Ears, Mouth, Anus, and Pudendum: As to its
Intimate Structure, I have always met with concurring Experiments and
Observations, of its being an Extensible Body, composed of diverse Strata or
Membranes, framing Cells, which have diverse lesser Cells or Loculi within them;
and in diverse Parts, where the Looseness of the Skin it self would admit, those
lesser Cells or Loculi, are filled with Oil, and are called Fat; but in other
Parts where either the Hardness of the subjacent Bone, when the Skin is
extended, as on the Top of the Skull, or the repeated quick Motions, as of the
Eyelids, or the Structure of the Part, as of the Penis; these Membranous Loculi
are not so extended with Oil, as to make an Appearance of Fat; whence it is we
find this Membrane much thicker in those Parts last mentioned, than in others;
and on the contrary, thinner and fewer Strata of Laminae, where its Cells are
partly possessed with Fat. This Common Membrane is furnished with Vessels of all
sorts; nor is it confined to the Surface of the Muscles only, but insinuates in
their Interstitia, and helps to compose their Coverings; whence it happens that
by blowing into the divided Strata of the Cells of this Membrane, the whole
Body of the Animal is Tumified; which is commonly practiced by Butchers,
especially in dressing their Veal.

The common Integuments of the whole Body being demonstrated, we proceed to
those particularly belonging to the Head; nor shall we omit speaking again of
these hereafter, where any thing in their particular Parts occurs to our
Observation or Memory, which the succeeding Figures may help us to explain.

THE FIFTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
A A, etc. SHOWS the Internal Part of the Hairy Scalp, as it appears after a
cross Section, and hanging down, when freed from its subjacent Membrane the
Pericranium. The Thickness of the Hairy Scalp is not only owing to the Number
of its Piliferous Bodies, and they so much larger than those of other Parts,
except the Chin, Lips, etc. but it is also plentifully furnished with
Sudoriferous Miliary Glands; both which appear in a Division of the Scalp:
Hence so many Blood Vessels, and they so very large, are to be found in this
Part; whence such large Fluxes of Blood arise in dividing the Scalp in Living
Bodies, as is commonly done to apply the Trepan, etc.

B B, etc. Part of the Pericranium, together with the Frontal Muscle on the
Left Side hanging down: The Pericranium like the common Membrane of the Muscles
may be divided into diverse Lamellae, or Membranes, as is hinted in the
Explanation of the preceding Table: It is plentifully furnished with
Blood Vessels which chiefly spring from the Temporal and Occipital Arteries;
but diverse of them arise from the Arteries of the Dura Matter, which pass through
the Skull; of which Two remarkable Trunks may be observed, one on each Side the
Longitudinal Suture, between that Part called the Sinciput and Occiput, a
little above the Lamdoidal Suture.

C, Part of the Pericranium cleaving to its Subjacent Membrane the Periostium.

D D D, The Periostium raised and reclined to the Right Side, where the Pores
of that Membrane, and of the Skull, for the Transit of the Blood Vessels, are
expressed: Nor is the Periostium of this Part truly distinct from the
Pericranium, but seems to be a Continuation of its Inferior, or Internal
Lamellae; the Distribution of the Blood Vessels being in common to both, except
where they are distinguished by the Temporal Muscles, under which the
Periostium is placed, and the Pericranium runs over them.

E E, The Os Frontis, and Bregmatis.

F, The Upper Part of the Temporal Muscle divested of the Pericranium.

G, Part of the Coronal Suture on the Left Side.

H, The Sagital Suture.

I, A small Artery, together with a Branch of a Nerve passing out of the Skull
to the Frontal Muscle; in the former an Aneurism has happened on a sudden, and
a great Laughter, when all Attempts in the Cure thereof proved unsuccesful,
till with a pointed Actual Cautery the Bone was so burnt, as to cause an
Exfoliation of its External Lamina; the concealed bleeding Artery being then
not only more exposed to a Compress, but by the Removal of the circumjacent
Bone, the neigbouring Blood Vessels in its Meditullium, were at Liberty to
confirm a Cicatrice.

Fig. 2.
The Upper Part of the Brain in Situ, with its Membranes, the Top of the Skull
being removed.

A A, The Dura Matter covering the Brain on the Right Side.

B B, The Left Hemisphere of the Brain covered with the Pia Matter only, where
the Anfractus of the Brain are elegantly expressed.

C C, The Dura Matter on the Left Side divided, and reclined laterally.

D D, A faint Appearance of the Brain through the Dura Matter.

E, The Blood Vessels of the Dura Matter lying in its Duplicature.

F, That Part of the Dura Matter, which was contiguous to the Coronal Suture,
where diverse Blood Vessels pass from it to the Skull, of which some pass through
to the Hairy Scalp.

G G, The Veins of the Brain lying in the Duplicature of the Pia Matter, before
they enter the Longitudinal Sinus; here it is they are subject to Rupture in
Concussions of the Brain, and let out their contained Blood between the Dura
and Pia Matter; which Case I have seen more than once, where the Dura Matter
ought to have been divided, etc.

H H, The Edges of the Skull.





THE SIXTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE Upper Part of the Brain covered with the Dura Matter, as it appears after
the Top of the Skull is taken off.

A A, The Edge of the Forepart of the Skull, whence the Upper Part was divided.

B, Part of the Temporal Muscle.

C C, The Dura Matter covering the whole Brain.

D D, Diverse Impressions on the Dura Matter, which adhered to the Internal Part
of the Skull, near the Coronal Suture; where diverse Blood Vessels pass between
it, and the Hairy Scalp.

E E, The Blood Vessels distended with Wind.

F F, The Longitudinal Sinus opened from near its Beginning at the Os Crista
Galli, to its Entrance into the Two Lateral Sinus's, as expressed in the
following Figure.

Fig. 2.
A A, The Back Part of the Longitudinal Sinus opened, together with the Lateral
One on the Left Side.

B B, The Os Occipitis broken off and turned down.

C, The Os Petrosum.

D, The Orifice of the Fourth Sinus, called Torcular Herophili, at the
Conjunction of the Two Lateral Sinus's with the Longitudinal One.

E, Diverse transverse strong Ligaments in the Lateral Sinus.

F F, The Orifices of the Veins of the Brain in the Longitudinal Sinus.

G G, That Part of the Dura Matter, which adhered to the Lamdoidal Suture of the
Skull.

H, The Medulla Oblongata going out of the great Foramen of the Skull, in the
Os Occipitis.

I, The Cerebellum covered with the Dura Matter.

Fig. 3.
A, Part of the Longitudinal Sinus opened.

B B, etc. The Veins of the Brain, before they enter the Sinus.

C C, Their Orifices opening into the Sinus variously; some of them being
parallel to their Trunks; other Veins first pass in the Duplicature of the
Sinus forwards, and others backwards; by which means the Progressive Motion of
the Blood is not only assisted in some Positions of the Head, and its too rapid
Motion prevented in others; but a due Mixture and Reunion of its Parts are
made, after undergoing so elaborate a Strainer, as that of the whole Substance
of the Brain, especially in its Cortical or Glandulous Part.

Fig. 4.
A A, The Posterior and Lateral Part of the Brain covered with its Meninges.

B B, The Os Petrosum broken off from the Cranium.

C, Part of the Os Occipitis in like manner divided from the Skull.

D, The Inferior and Tortuous Part of the Lateral Sinus on the Left Side
opened, in which may be observed its transverse strong Ligaments, expressed Fig.
2. E.

E, The Cavity in the Os Petrosum or Specus, which receives the Bulbous Part of
the Lateral Sinus at the Beginning of the Jugular Vein.

F, The Trunk of the Internal Jugular Vein.

G, A Probe inserted into the Jugular Vein by the Sinus.

H, The Bulbous Part of the Lateral Sinus, which was contained in the Specus of
the Os Petrosum.

Fig. 5.
A A, Part of the Lateral Sinus cut off.

B B, A lacerated Portion of the Dura Matter, which involved that Sinus,
expanded.

C, The Bulbous Part of that Sinus, which was contained in the Specus or Cavity
of the Os Petrosum; which is a Diverticulum to the Refluent Blood, least it
should too suddenly press into the Internal Jugular Vein.

D D D, The Filaments of the Dura Matter broken off.

E, The Beginning of the Internal Jugular Vein.

As the Structure of the Veins of this Part differ from that of others; so also
the Arteries of the Brain, have a peculiar Organization at their Entrance from
the ordinary Course of those of other Parts, as does somewhat appear in the
following Figure: We have also Figured this Disposition of the Trunks of the
Carotid Arteries, finding them much more Tortuous, than they are here
represented. Vid. App. Fig. 3.13, 14.

Fig. 6.
A, The Trunk of the Carotid Artery passing toward the Brain.

B C, Part of its Membrane borrowed of the Dura Matter, separated and expanded.

D D, The lower Part of the Artery next the Heart.

The Vertebral Arteries also enter the Cavity of the Skull very much Contorted,
as appears in the Third Figure of our Appendix, and again in the Eighth Figure;
where II, shows their passing through the Transverse Process of the first
Vertebra of the Neck; K K, their Trunks marching between the first Vertebra and
Os Occipitis, to the great Foramen of the last named Bone, through which they
pass into the Skull, and afterward conjunctly make up the Cervical Artery. The
Design of these Curvations in the Arteries, before they enter the Cavity of the
Skull, is to prevent too great a Swiftness of the Current of the Blood through
the whole Substance of the Brain, which being placed so near the Heart, would
also suffer by its too great Pulsation; were it not that the Contorted Trunks
of these Arteries lessened its force; else the frequent disorderly Motions of
the Heart, would make us as often incident to suffer great Inconveniences in
the Brain; yet nevertheless we are incident to suffer in some Degree; whence
it is that the Passions of the Mind, wherein the Heart is affected so suddenly,
disorders the Reason.

THE SEVENTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
REPRESENTS the Posterior Part of the Brain as it appears lying on the Basis of
the Skull, its Upper Part being freed from the Dura Matter.

A A, The Hinder Lobes of the Brain raised, and drawn somewhat forwards.

B C, etc. The Ligature, and Two Pieces of Wood, made use of for the better
supporting the Brain in that Position.

D D, Parts of diverse Quadruplicatures of the Dura Matter.

E E, A Division of the Second Process of the Dura Matter on the Left Side; in
which the Cerebellum appears.

F F, The Cerebellum laid bare in that Division.

G H, The Second Process of the Dura Matter, on the Right Side entirely covering
the Upper Part of the Cerebellum.

I I I, The Edge of the Os Occipitis, whence the Upper Part of the Skull is
divided.

K K, The Common Integuments of the Head turned off.

Fig. 2.
The Inner Face of the Os Occipitis, together with the Cerebellum, etc.

A A, The Cerebellum inclined forwards toward the Cella Turcica, so that its
Back Part, which rests on the Os Occipitale, comes in view.

B B, The Hindmost Part of the Medulla Oblongata, in its Passage out of the
great Foramen of the Os Occipitis.

b, The Processus Vermiformis of the Cerebellum.

C C C, Diverse Roots of the Eighth, Ninth and Part of the Tenth Pairs of Nerves.

a a, The Accessory Nerves accompanying those of the Eighth Pair, at their
Egress.

D D, etc. The Crassa Meninx, or Dura Matter.

E E, etc. Part of the Edge of the Skull.

F F, The Hairy Scalp diffected.

G, Part of the Pericranium raised.

H, The Left Ear.





THE EIGHTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
IS Part of the Dura Matter, together with the Falx, dried.

A A, The Falx supported, so as to show its proper Extent and Figure.

B B, The Sinus Falcis Superior or Longitudinalis, opened.

C, The Sinus Falcis Inferior, not distinguished in this Figure.

D D, etc. The Orifices of Veins opening into the Longitudinal Sinus, and
Trunks of other Veins going to it.

E, The Beginning of the Longitudinal Sinus at the Os Crista Galli.

F F, The Left Lateral Sinus.

G G G, Two Parts of the Quadruplicatures of the Dura Matter, lying between the
Cerebrum and Cerebellum.

H H, etc. The Sticks, Thread, and Pins made use of, to support the Membrane in
drying it.

Fig. 2.
Parts of the above mentioned Sinus distended with Wind and dried, together
with Part of the Dura Matter.

A, The Longitudinal Sinus.

B B, The Two Lateral Sinus's.

C, The Fourth Sinus.

D, A large Vein, which empties its Blood at the Conjunction of the Four
Sinus's; which Union of the Sinus's, is called Torcular Herophili.

Fig. 3.
The Connection or Beginning of the Falx, at the Os Crista Galli.

A, The Os Cribrosum.

B, The Crista Galli.

C, A Portion of the Falx cleaving to the Crista Galli.

Fig. 4.
Part of the Falx dried, and expressed somewhat bigger than the Life.

A, The Forepart of the Falx;

B, Its Hindpart.

C, That Part of the Falx where the Fifth Sinus passes, called Sinus Falcis
Inferior. To this lower part of the Falx the Pia Matter firmly adheres, where
diverse Veins pass into its Lower Sinus as well as its Upper one; which together
with diverse Adnascences the Falx has with the two Hemispheres of the Brain, (as
may be seen by freeing it from them) the Brain is kept suspended, least its
Superior Part should press too much on its Inferior; which Office cannot be
ascribed either to the Internal Part of the Brain, called Fornix, as the former
and some later Anatomists pretend, or to the Corpus Callosum, as Vieussenius
will have it: A further use of the Falx is by its Extension between the Two
Hemispheres of the Brain, to prevent the Superincumbence of the one upon the
other, when we lie on either Side; and by its Connection with the Os Crista
Galli, and Continuation of it to the Superior Part of the Dura Matter, and its
Second Processes, lying between the Cerebrum, and Cerebellum, the whole Brain
is kept suspended, and especially its Hinder Lobes, from pressing on the
Cerebellum.

D D, Diverse Veins of the Brain before they enter the Longitudinal Sinus.

E, The Cavity of the Longitudinal Sinus as it appears after a Transverse
Section of it.

F F, Part of the Dura Matter which covered the Left Hemisphere of the Brain.

G G, The Superior and External Surface of the Dura Matter on the Longitudinal
Sinus.

Fig. 5.
The Two Hemispheres or Upper Part of the Brain, together with the Cerebellum,
as they appear when the whole Brain is taken out of the Skull, and laid on its
Basis.

A A, The Two Hemispheres of the Brain.

B B, The Cerebellum covered with the Dura Matter.

C, The Processus Vermiformis.

D, A Portion of the Medulla Oblongata cut off.

E F, The Forepart of the Division of the Two Hemispheres of the Brain, in
which the Falx is inserted.

G G, The Middle Membrane of the Brain according to Bidloo, separated and
turned to one side, which we take to be the External Membrane or Lamina of the
Pia Matter. That the Pia Matter is composed of diverse Strata of Membranes, not
unlike the Peritonaeum, does not only appear in an Hydrocephalus or Hydropical
Brain; but in ordinary Diffections we find it Double, especially about the
Medulla Oblongata, Processus Annularis, etc.

In Wounds of the Pia Matter, and Brain, we meet with very great Fungus's, even
to the Size of a Tenis Ball above the Surface of the Dura Matter, and Skull;
which may be taken off by Incision without a dangerous Flux of Blood: An
Instance of which we have had more than once an Opportunity of observing; and
notwithstanding these Excrescences have been frequently removed, yet they have
grown again, and the Patient has Languished, and died. Vid. Diemerbroeck,
Anatom. Lib. III. Cap. V.

I I I I, The Pia Matter remaining on the Brain.

K K L, The External Surface of the Brain composed of diverse turnings and
windings of its Cortical Part.

M M, The Retiform Distribution of the Blood Vessels between the External and
Internal Lamina of the Pia Matter; the largest of these Vessels on the Superior
and External Part of the Brain, are Veins which discharge their Blood into the
Longitudinal Sinus, from whence they are here cut off.

THE NINTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE whole Brain taken out of the Skull, freed from the Dura Matter, and laid
on its Hemispheres, its Basis being uppermost. In this Figure many things are
unobserved, and others very ill expressed, wherefore we shall add a Figure of the
Brain in this Position, more correctly drawn after the Life. Vid. Appendix.

A A, etc. The Basis of the Brain;

B B, etc. Its Division into Four Lobes;

C C, The Foremost Lobes,

D D, The Hindmost Lobes of the Brain.

E, The Infundibulum, very ill expressed.

F F, The Two white Protuberances behind the Infundibulum, not well expressed.

G G G, The Annular Process, or Pons Varolii, and Beginning of the Medulla
Oblongata.

H, The Medulla Oblongata cut off near its Egress at the great Foramen of the
Os Occipitis.

I I, Part of the Pia Matter, where it is apparently Double between the Annular
Protuberance, and Medulla Oblongata.

K K L L The Cerebellum covered with the Pia Matter.

O O, The Cerebellum covered with the Pia Matter.

M, A Section in the Cerebellum.

N, The Arborescent Distribution of Blood Vessels within the Cerebellum.

P P Superior, The Trunks of the Carotid Arteries injected with Wax, and cut
off.

P P Inferior, The Cervical Artery in like manner injected with Wax.

NB. That the Two Semicircular Branches, which join these Two last mentioned
Arteries together, called the Communicant Branches, are expressed too large in
this Figure, or else the Subject, from whence it was taken, differed very much
from the ordinary Course of Nature; neither of which are mentioned by Bidloo.

Q R S, The Olfactory Nerves.

T T, The Optic Nerves;

V, Their Conjunction;

W W, Their Trunks cut off at their Egress from within the Skull.

X X, The Third Pair of Nerves, called Oculorum Motorii.

Y Y, The Upper and Forepart of the Processus Annularis.

Z Z, Par Patheticum, or the Fourth Pair of Nerves.

a a, The Fifth Pair of Nerves.

b b, The Sixth Pair of Nerves.

NB. The Seventh Pair of Nerves are not here expressed, though Bidloo pretends to
describe them at c c d e.

c c, d, e, f, g, Confused Descriptions of several Pairs of Nerves erroneously
multiplied into diverse Pairs by Bidloo.

h h, The Spinal Accessory Nerves.

* *The Beginnings of the Ninth Pair of Nerves.

i i, k k, The Tenth Pair of Nerves, or the First of the Neck.

Fig. 2.
Part of the Brain on the Basis of the Skull.

A A, The Forepart of the Brain.

B, The Fingers which support it, so that the following Parts come in view.

C, The Infundibulum.

D, The Glandula Pituitaria lying within the Cella Turcica.

E, The Membranous Connection of the Infundibulum to the Glandula Pituitaria.

F, A Blood Vessel passing through the Lateral Part of the Os Cuneiforme, which
Bidloo has grossly mistaken for the Olfactory Nerves.

G G G, Portions of the Optic Nerves so divided, that Parts of them remain on
the Basis of the Skull, as well as on the Brain it self.

H H, The Third Pair of Nerves, called Motorii Oculi, in situ.

I I, The Internal Part of the Basis of the Skull.

K K, The Dura Matter.

Fig. 3.
The Internal Part of the Basis of the Skull, after the Brain is taken out, and
Portions of the Ten Pair of Nerves of the Brain remaining at their Egress,
together with Part of the Dura Matter.

A A, etc. The Edges of the divided Skull in which the Duploi may be seen.

B B, The Os Crista Galli.

C C, The Os Cribriforme on both Sides.

D D, etc. Part of the Dura Matter cleaving to the Basis of the Skull.

E E, The Os Occipitale bared from the Dura Matter.

F F, Portions of the Olfactory Nerves cut off, near their Egress at the Os
Cribriforme.

G G, The Optic Nerves in like manner cut off, before they pass the First
Foramina of the Os Sphenoides.

g g, The Carotid Arteries also divided.

H H, The Third Pair of Nerves cut off.

I I, The Pituitary Gland within the Cella Turcica, lying under the Dura Matter.

K, The Infundibulum.

L L, The Fourth Pair of Nerves, or Par Patheticum going out of the Skull, with
the Third and Sixth Pair of Nerves.

M M, The Fifth Pair of Nerves.

N N, The Sixth Pair of Nerves running under, or in the Duplicature of the Dura
Matter, at a considerable Distance before they march out of the Skull at the Two
Second Perforations of the Os Sphenoides. Vid. Tab. 89. Fig. 2. C.D.I.

O O, The Seventh, or Auditory Nerves passing out at the Ossa Petrosa.

NB. That O on the Right Side should have been placed a quarter of an Inch
below the M on the same Side.

P, The Eighth Pair of Nerves, or Par Vagum going out at the Second
Perforations of the Os Occipitis, with the Lateral Sinus's, which lead to the
Internal Jugular Veins.

Q Q, The Spinal Accessory Nerves passing out of the Skull with the Par Vagum.

R R, The Ninth Pair of Nerves passing through the Third Perforations of the
Occipital-bone.

T, The First and great Foramen of the Os Occipitis, by which the Spinal Marrow
passes out of the Skull to the Specus of the Vertebrae of the Back.

The Sinus's of the Dura Matter, which appear where it cleaves to the Internal
Part of the Basis of the Skull, are expressed in a Figure of our Appendix; where
the Egress of the Ten Pair of Nerves of the Brain are also represented,
together with the most considerable Blood Vessels, which come in, and go out
from the Cavity of the Skull.







THE TENTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE Brain together with the Medulla Oblongata continued to it, when freed
from the Skull, and Specus or Cavity of all the Vertebrae of the Neck, Back,
and Loins.

A A, The Dura Matter freed from the Brain, and somewhat expanded.

a a, Part of the Falx.

B B, Part of the Brain cut Transverily.

C, The Division in its Cortical Part, which compose those turnings, and
windings on its External Surface.

D D, The Cortical, or Cinericious Part of the Brain; by some called the
Glandulous Part.

E E, The Medullary, or white Part of the Brain; by some called the Callous,
and Fibrous Part.

f f, The Hindmost Part of the Brain, which rested on the Second Process of the
Dura Matter.

F G H, The Right and Left Ventricles of the Brain opened; where the Blood
Vessels of the Pia Matter, which Line them, may be seen: F, their Upper and
Foreparts, which are largest, and become still less, and less toward their
Lower, and Back-parts, G.

H H, The Corpus Callosum.

I K, The Roots of the Fornix.

L, The Thalamus Nervi Optici of the Right Side; that of the Left, not being
Leuer'd.

M, The Corpus Transversale of the Corpus Callosum.

N N, Parts of the Corpora Striata whole.

O O, The Nates.

P P, The Testes.

Q, The Glandula Pinealis, in situ.

RR, The Plexus Coroeides composed of Blood Vessels of both Kinds, Lympheducts,
Membranes, and Glands. See Fig. 3.

S S, The First Process of the Cerebellum, going to the Nates.

T, A Transverse Process joining the Two Pathetick Nerves, and last mentioned
Process.

s, The Fourth Ventricle, called Calamus Scriptorius.

V V, The Pathetick Nerves.

W W, Two Processes of the Spinal Marrow which compose the Sides of the Fourth
Ventricle.

X Y Z, The Meditullium of the Cerebellum appearing in an Arboreous Manner,
after a Transverse Section of the Cerebellum.

a b, a b, etc. The Dura Matter, which incloses the Spinall Marrow, divided, and
expanded.

c c, etc. The Pia Matter as yet enclosing the Medulla Spinalis, but raised with
a Probe in its Lower Part, where it inverts the Cauda Equina.

1 2 3, etc. The several Pairs of Nerves springing from the Medulla Spinalis:
From 1 to 9 the Origins of the Nerves of the Neck; the First of which passes
out at the Third Perforation of the Os Occipitis, and ^^ reckoned the Tenth of
the Brain; the rest march out between the Vertebrae of the Neck, Back, Loins,
and Perforations of the Os Sacrum successively; that of Fig. 9 marching out
between the Sixth and Seventh Vertebra of the Neck; those of 10 to 21 are the
Nerves of the Back: From 22 to 27 those of the Loins; the rest go out at the
Foramina of the Os Sacrum.

Fig. 2.
A A, Part of the Brain boiled, and viewed with a Microscope.

B B, The Membranes of the Brain separated; of which the External is the Dura
Matter; the Two Internal compose the Pia Matter.

C D, The Reticular Distribution of the Blood Vessels near their Extremities.

E E, Diverse Orders of Cortical Glands on the Surface of the Brain.

F F, The Tubes derived from those Cortical Glands.

G G, The Lobes, or distinct Clusters of Glands wreathed with various Angles.

H H, The Complicated Tubes.

I I, The Nervous Fibers derived from the last mentioned Tubes.

Fig. 3.
Part of the Plexus Coroeides delineated, by the help of a Magnifying Glass.

A A, The Membranous enclosures of the Fasciculi of the Vessels, separated.

B C, The Blood Vessels extended with Plaster of Paris, and their own Blood.

D D, Branches of Lympheducts, somewhat extended with Wind.

E, Nervous Tubuli according to Bidloo, which I can by no means conceive to be
existent in the Plexus Coroeides.

F F, The Glands of the Plexus Coroeides placed irregular, of which, some are
Hard, and Fibrous, others are Vesiculous, and Flaccid.

Fig. 4.
A Portion of the Medulla Oblongata cut off, and divided laterally according to
its Length; expressed somewhat bigger than the Life.

A A, The Upper Part of the Medulla Oblongata.

B B, The Fore and Back Part.

C C, The Nervous Fibrillae arising from the Fore, and Back Part of the Spinal
Marrow.

D D, The Inferior Part of the Spinal Marrow cut off.

E E, Portions of the Dura Matter left, to show its Perforations for the Nerves,
as they pass out of the Specus of the Vertebrae.

F F F, The Plexus Ganglioso^mes of the Nerves at their Egress from between the
Vertebrae: Two or Three of the Bodies of the Nerves themselves are expressed in
this Figure pinned out.

Fig. 5.
A Portion of the Medulla Spinalis, cut off about the Third Vertebra of the
Back, expressed somewhat bigger than the Life.

A, The Upper Part of the Spinal Marrow.

B B, A Portion of the Continuation of the Dura Matter expanded.

C C, The Nervous Fibers arising from the Fore and Back Parts of the Spinal
Marrow.

D, The Nervous Fibrillae collectively passing through the Dura Matter.

E, Their Gangliform Plexus at the Beginnings of the Bodies of the Nerves.

F, A Division of the Spinal Marrow according to its Length.

G, Some Vestigia of Blood Vessels, which pass on the Outside of the Spinal
Marrow.

Fig. 6.
The Structure of a Nerve expressed by the Assistance of a Microscope.

A, The Branch of a Nerve dissected from the Neck.

B, The Blood Vessels passing in the Nervous Fibrillae: These Blood Vessels I
had an Opportunity once of discovering with my naked Eye in a very small Branch
of the Par Quintum of the Head, where they were filled with Mercury, by pouring
it into the Carotid Artery; but in examining the same Branch of the Nerve with
my Microscope, I discovered a vast Number of smaller Branches of Blood Vessels,
which did not before appear, lying still parallel with the Nervous Fibers, as
here expressed; though without doubt diverse of the Trunks of those Blood Vessels do
intersect, and pass obliquely over the Nervous Fibers, especially near their
Extremities. From those Blood Vessels I am inclined to think the Globular
Contents of the Nervous Fibers take their rise immediately, and not from the
Brain, as it has been generally supposed; since the Fibers of the Brain, as
well as the Nerves themselves do neither of them appear Tubulated, or hollowed
Pipes according to their Length; but their Cavities are frequently interrupted
with diverse Cells, which make a Globular like Appearance; and this Structure of
the Nervous Tubes is very easily demonstrated in the Tunica Retina of the Eye
by the Assistance of the Microscope.

C C, A Fasciculus of the Nervous-Tubes separated, and expanded.

D D, The Cohesion of the Tubes by Lateral Fibers.

E E, The Villous Extremities of the Tubes as they could be delineated. What
has been said above, relating to the intimate Structure of the Nerves,
interferes very much with those Hypotheses commonly proposed concerning the
Animal Spirits, by some called Fluidum Animale; and that not only because their
Original is supposed to be in the Brain, but that they are transferred from
thence by the Nerves so very quick to serve those Offices, to which they are on
such frequent Occasions said to be employed in: Neither of which can
reasonably, nay possibly, happen, from the Structure of the Nerves themselves:
Besides, if the Animal Spirits, or Fluid were ordered to skip up and down at
that rate, another visible Impediment would be incident to obstruct them, at
the Originals of the Nervous Tubes from the Medulla Spinalis; where those Tubes
are much contracted, and again expanded, and frame Gangleons, as appears in
this Figure at E; nor can we conceive what should give the Spirits that Impetus
to drive them up and down in that manner; wherefore we should rather incline to
believe the Contiguities of those Globuli, above mentioned, are the Mediums
between the Objects, and Common Sensory. There is too much of Argument belongs
to this Subject, to be inserted in this Place; wherefore we must proceed in our
present Undertaking.

Fig. 7.
A Portion of the Medulla Spinalis taken out of the Specus of the Vertebrae of
the Back, together with its Common Integument.

A A, The Back Part of the Spinal Marrow next the Spines of the Vertebrae.

B B C, The External, or Common Integument (accompanying that of the Dura Matter
the whole Length of the Specus of the Vertebrae) here being partly raised and
supported with a Stylus.

D, The Dura Matter, or First Proper Membrane of the Spinal Marrow.

E E E, Diverse Sacculi of Fat lying between the Proper and Common Membranes of
the Medulla Spinalis.

Fig. 8.
The Inferior Part of the First Vertebrae of the Thorax:

A, Its Spinal Process,

B B, Its oblique descending Processes, which are Articulated with the
ascending Processes of the Superior Part of the Second Vertebra of the Thorax;

C C, The Transverse Processes.

D, The Body of the Vertebra.

E, The great Foramen of the Vertebra, in which the Medulla Spinalis descends.

F F, Some fatty Mucilaginous Glands, which are continued through the Inside of
the whole Specus of the Vertebrae.

The Office of these Glands is to separate a Liquor to lubricate the Membranes
of the Medulla Spinalis, and Inner Part of the Specus; which Liquor I have
frequently found in such Quantity, as to run out, in breaking up the Vertebrae
to discover the Spinal Marrow.

THE ELEVENTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE External Parts of the Eye, as they appear when the Eyelids are opened.

A B, The Eye-brow: B, the various Disposition of its Hairs in this Subject.

C, The Great Canthus of the Eye next the Nose.

D, The Lesser Canthus.

E, The Upper Eyelid.

F, The Lower --

G, The White of the Eye covered with the Tunica Adnata or Conjunctiva.

H, One of the Lachrimal Glands placed in the great Canthus of the Eye, called
Caruncula Lachrimalis, and Glandula Lachrimalis Inferior.

Fig. 2.
The Eyelids shut.

A, The Eye-brow, as in the former Figure.

C, The Great Canthus of the Eye toward the Nose.

D, The Lesser Canthus.

E, The Superior Palpebra.

F, The Inferior Palpebra.

Fig. 3.
A A, The Skin with the Musculus Orbicularis Palpebrarum removed.

B, The Bone of the Upper Part of the Orbit of the Eye bared.

C, The Great Lachrimal Gland involved with Fat.

D D, A faint Appearance of the Excretory Ducts of the Lacrhimal Glands, by
Borrichius, called Hygroophthahmicos.

E E, Diverse little Glands interposed between the last mentioned Ducts.

Fig. 4.
Parts of the Muscles of the Eyelids.

A, Part of the Musculus Aperiens Palpebram Rectus, at its Implantation to the
Upper Eyelid: The Origin of this Muscle is sharp and fleshy at the profoundest
Part of the Orbit, near the Egress of the Optic Nerve, accompanying the Rectus
Oculi Attollens in its Progress, becoming broad, thin and tendonous, as it
passes over the Superior Part of the Bulb of the Eye, to its Implantation at
the whole Superior Part of the Upper Eyelid.

B C, A Portion of the Upper Part of the Orbicularis Palpebrarion turned down,
it still remaining to the Upper Eyelid: A Description of which Muscle will be
inserted in the following Table. Fig. 4.

Fig. 5.
The Lachrimal Glandules, etc. within the Orbit of the Eye, represented much
bigger than the Life.

A A, The Upper Part of the Bones of the Orbit.

B B C C, The Superior Lachrimal Gland.

D D D, The Vasa Lachrimasia, or Ductus Hygroopluhalmici, whose Orifices open
into the Internal Part of the Palpebrae, whence the separated Liquor, conveyed
by the Tubes, issues to moisten the Palpebrae, and External Part of the Bulb of
the Eye.

E E E, Diverse Lachrimal Glands interspersed between the last mentioned Ducts.

F F G G, The Cartilages of the Cilia joined together with diverse Membranes G.

H H, The Hairs of the Eyelids turned Upwards, whose Ramifications appear.

I, Part of the Superior Lachrimal Gland, by Bidleo called, Glans Lachrimalis.

K K, The Bones of the Nose broken off, so that the following Ducts may appear.

L, The Ducts, which convey the superfluous Moisture of the Vasa Lachrimalia
from between the Palpebrae, and Bulb of the Eye, into the Foramina Narium: The
Orifices of these Ducts appear in the two Papillae of the Upper and Lower
Eyelid, at the Great Canthus of the Eye. Fig. 1. H. and are evident to the
naked Eye, especially in those, who Cry much, and are called, Puncta
Lachrimalia: Soon after these Two Ducts leave the Great Canthus of the Eye,
they are united into One Trunk, called the Lachrimal Duct, which descends in a
Foramen of the Second Bone of the Upper Jaw, Tab. 92. Fig. 1. D. into the
Cavity of the Nostrils. In the great Canthus of the Eye arise those Tumors,
called Aegilopes, whose contained Matter, when it degenerates into an Abscess,
frequently frames Fistula's in that Part; and when the Membrane, which composes
the Lachrimal Duct, within the Cavity of the Bone, becomes Tumified; the
Passage of that Duct is rendered impervious, and Part of the Humor employed in
moistning the Eyelids, is hindered in its Discharge that Way; whence the Cheeks
become inflamed by its running down on them; in which latter Case, besides
opening the Tumor largely, we must also Perforate the Second Bone of the Upper
Jaw or Os Lachrimale, into the Cavity of the Nose, whereby the Lachrimal Humor
will afterward be discharged: This Operation is best Practiced with a pointed
Actual Cautery, fitted with a proper Cannula or Director. The Incision in these
Cases may be made according to the Direction of the Fibers of the Musculus
Orbicularis Palpebrarum; and in using the Actual Cautery, great care must be
taken to defend the Palpebrae; which we have sometimes seen exposed to the
heated Cannula through the Struggling of the Patient: After this Operation is thus
performed, it is not necessary you should keep the External Wound open to
expect an Exfoliation of the Fragments of the Bone through it; but after Three or
Four days, when the Callosity is removed, and the Matter discharged, you ought
to lessen your Dozils, or Tents, and permit the Sinus to fill with Flesh, and
hasten a Cicatrice, and the Edges of the perforated Bone will pass off by the
Nostril, as well as that Part of the Bone thrust in by the Cautery. Nor will
any great Inconveniency follow if the Healed up Part should Imposthumate again,
through the moving of the Fragments of the Bone toward the External Wound, if it
is again opened by Incision to discharge them; but should you keep the External
Wound open long, either by hard Tents, or Escharoticks, you will not only
procure a Discharge of the superfluous Tears, or Moisture that way; but the
Perforation made in the Os Lachrimale will fill up, and you must be obliged to
repeat the Use of the Actual Cautery, or thrust a Probe through it. I had almost
forgot to tell you, that after the First Incision made in the External Parts,
it is necessary you should pass your Knife down to the very Bone, and divide
the Trunk of a large Artery, and Vein, which pass that way with the Lachrimal
Duct, least the Flux of Blood at the time of the Operation should so cool the
Cautery, as to prevent its Action.

Fig. 6.
The Bulb of the Eye lying within the Orbit after the Superior Palpebra is
removed.

A B, The Tunica Adnata placed on the Forepart of the Sclerotis.

C, The Iris, in whose Center is the Pupilla.

D D, The Lower Eyelid, in situ, together with Part of the Upper, dissected.

E, The Bone of the Orbit.

F, The Margin of the Lower Eyelid, where the Hairs grow out.

Fig. 7, and 8.
The Muscles of the Eye, as they appear within the Orbit, when cleared of the
Fat, and adjacent Parts.

A, The A^usculus Attolens.

B, (Fig. 8.) Musculus Adducens.

C, Deprimens.

D, Abducens.

E E, The Internal Part of the Bones of the Orbit.

H, The Tendon of the Musculus Obliquus Superior passing through the Trochlea K,
to its Insertion behind the Musculus Attollens.

I, The External Part of the Bones of the Orbit next the Nose.

K, The Trochlea, or little Cartilage, on which the Tendon of the Oblique
Superior Muscle is reflected.

X, Fig. 7. The Optic Nerve.

Fig. 9.
The Fore-parts of the Muscles of the Right Eye, when taken out of the Orbit,
and cleared from the Fat, Membranes, and Glands, a; and Expanded.

A, Attollens.

B, Deprimens.

C, Adducens, which Bidloo calls Abducens.

D, Abducens, which be in like manner mistakes, and calls Adducens.

E, Trochlearis Musculus, or Obliquus Superior cum Trochlea.

F, The Trochlea Cartilage, expressed in situ. Fig. 7. K.

G, The Musculus Obliquus Inferior.

H H H, The Tunica Adnata, together with another Membranous Tegument derived
from the Tendons of the Four straight Muscles, mentioned by Realdus Columbus.
Lib. X.

I, Is scarce seen, but is placed in the Center of the Bulb, and distinguishes
the Pupilla.

K, Part of the Optic Nerve.

Fig. 10.
The Back Parts of the Muscles of the same Eye, when taken out of the Orbit,
etc.

A, The Musculus Abducens, or Indignatorius.

B, Adducens, or Bibitorius.

C, Obliquus Inferior, or Brevissimus Oculi Musculus.

D, Attollens, or Superbus.

E, Deprimens, or Humilis.

F, Obliquus Superior, seu Longissimus Oculi Musculus.

G, The Trochlea Cartilage.

H, A Portion of the Optic Nerve.

I, The Back Part of the Bulb of the Eye, composed by the Tunica Sclerotis.

Fig. 11.
The Bulb of the Eye and Optic Nerve freed from the Muscles and their Common
Membranes, so that the proper Membranes of their Surface appear.

A, Part of the Tunica Adnata, which is continued to the Internal Part of the
Palpebrae, which can by no means prevent the Retraction of the Eye, when any of
the straight Muscles Act, as some Anatomists conjecture.

B D, The Tunica Sclerotis.

C, The Tunica Cornea, circumscribed by the Iris, in whose Center is the
Pupilla.

E, The Optic Nerve covered with a Tunick derived from the Dura Matter.

Fig. 12.
A A, The Sclerotis opened, to show the Choroeide Tunick immediately under it.

B, The Tunica Chorocides.

C, The Cornea, Iris, etc. as in the preceding Figure.

Fig. 13.
Part of the Ligamentum Ciliare viewed with a Microscope.

A A B B, The Ligamentum Ciliare consisting of Two Sorts of Fibers; the one
extended through its whole Breadth, A A; the other end in the Midway B B:
Between these are placed diverse Lympheducts according to Bidloo. This Musculous
Contexture of the Ligamentum Ciliare moves the Uvea, or Forepart of the Tunica
Retina composing the Iris, by which means the Inner Edge of the Iris approaches
toward the Center of the Pupilla, or is retracted, whereby the Pupil is
enlarged, or diminished according to the different Radiation of Light. In some
Animals, as Cats, etc. we find a Musculous Structure in the Iris also, for a
more effectual narrowing their Pupils; which Contrivance in those Creatures,
perhaps, is the more requisite in regard their Horny Tunicks have a Surface not
so prominent in Proportion to the Bulbs of their Eyes, as those of other
Animals.

Fig. 14.
The Bulb of the Eye together with a Portion of the Optic Nerve, where a
Division of the Tunica Sclerotis together with the Chorocides is made, to
exhibit the Tunica Retina.

A, The Tunica Retina.

Fig. 15.
Part of the Optic Nerve together with the Tunicks of the Eye, after the
Humors ( Fig. 19, 20.) are taken out.

A, The Inner Surface of the Tunica Retina.

Fig. 16.
Another View of the Internal and External Surface of the Tunicks of the Eye,
after the Humors are discharged.

A A, The Tunica Sclerosis.

B, The Cornea.

C, Part of the Optic Nerve.

Fig. 17.
The Internal and Forepart of the Tunicks of the Eye, when the Humors are
discharged by a transverse Section through the Bulb.

A, The Tunica Cornea.

C, The Inner Surface of the Iris, next the Ligamentum Ciliare.

D, The Tunica Retina Chorocides, and Sclerosis together.

Fig. 18.
The Inner Surface of the Back Part of the last mentioned Tunicks of the Eye.

A, Part of the Optic Nerve cut off; in which Division its Blood Vessels are
expressed.

B, The Tunica Sclerosis.

C, The Tunica Retina, in situ.

Fig. 19, and 20.
The Vitreous and Crystalline Humors of the Eye, when taken out of the Tunicks.

A, The Crystalline Humor.

B, The Vestigia of the Ciliar Ligaments on the Vitreous and Edge of the
Crystalline Humor.

C, The Vitreous Humor.

Fig. 21.
A B, The Crystalline Humor taken out; A, its Forepart next the Aqueous Humor;
B, as it appears Laterally.

The Aqueous Humor cannot easily be expressed after the Life, wherefore we shall
here speak of its Interstice, where it is lodged, whereby its Figure is
circumscribed; its Forepart is Convext by means of a Concave framed by the
Cornea in the Center, and Iris in the Circumference; the Back Part of the
Aqueous Humor is Concave, to receive the Unequal Surface of the Crystalline
Humor; it is sides are Circular, conformable to the Cavity of the Bulb; whence
it appears the Aqueous Humor is Circular in its Circumference, Convext
forewards, and Concave backwards, like the following Figure.

Fig. 22.
A, The External and Forepart of the Vitreous Humor.

B, A Concave in the Vitreous Humor, which receives the Crystalline Humor. The
Tunicle, which is said to enclose the Vitreous Humor, does not appear, but when
it is exposed to the Air; wherefore Dr. Briggs supposes it to be merely
adventitious.

Fig. 23.
A B, The Crystalline Humor dried; which Bidloo according to some Anatomists,
calls Tunica Aranea, or Crystaloeides.

Fig. 24.
A B, The Vitreous Humor dried in like manner; leaving its supposed investing
Membrane only.

I should in this place (as I have hitherto, and shall hereafter in describing
of Parts, to which any considerable Operation of Surgery does belong) speak of
the Couching of Cataracts; but I am afraid I have already transgressed the
limits of my Page; wherefore I shall only tell you that in Practicing that
Operation, the Puncture through the Adnata, ought to be at a greater Distance from
the Pupilla, than Authors commonly direct; and that a round Needle is to be
preferred; for the edges of the Needle else are liable to wound the
Blood Vessels of the Choroeid Tunick largely, and an Extravasation of Blood
happens between that Tunick, and the Sclerotis; which may be of ill consequence
to the Patient.





THE TWELFTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
IN this Figure there is a Repetition of the same Letters of the Alphabet; the
one on the External Parts of the Auricle; the other on its Muscles, and Parts
adjacent:

The First.

A A, The External Margin of the Outward Ear, called Helix, and Capreolus, from
its Tortuous Disposition.

B B, Anthelix Auriculae.

C, Hircus Auriculae, by some called Antitragus.

D E, Circumscribe the Concha; D, Tragus Auriculae, below which is the Lobus.

The Second.

A, The Musculus Attollens Auriculam; which derives its partly fleshy, and
Membranous Origin, from above the Temporal Muscle, and descending over it to
its Insertion at the Superior Part of the Cartilage of the Root of the Auricle.

B C C, The Musculus Retrahens Auriculam, whose Origin we have always observed
with M. Du Verney, to be from the Apophysis Mastoides; the whole Muscle is here
expressed much larger than it is commonly found.

D D, Part of the Parotid Gland cleaving to the Outward Ear:

E F F, The Excretory Ducts arising from that Gland, which compose the Ductus
Salivalis Superior.

G, Part of the Ductus Salivalis Superior.

Fig. 2.
Exhibits the Back Part of the Auricle, when cut off.

A, The Skin, etc. divided from the Hairy-Scalp, and freed from the Cranium.

B, The Internal, or Back Part of the Ear next the Skull.

C, The Inferior Part of the Auricle.

D, The Meatus Auditorius;

E, The Thickness of its Cartilage.

Fig. 3.
Represents the Ramifications of the Ductus Salivalis injected with Wax, and
freed from the Parotid Gland.

A, The Trunk of the Ductus Salivalis cut off at its Progress over the Musculus
Masseter.

B B C, The Ramifications of the Salival Ductus freed, which arise from the
Extremities of the Arteries within the Parotid Gland.

Fig. 4.
Represents diverse Muscles of the Face after the Quadratus Genae is taken off.

A, This formal Appearance of circular Fibers about the Alae Nasi, I suspect to
be fictitious, having never observed such a Disposition in any Subject, though I
have purposely examined this Part; yet the like Figure of them may be seen in
Placentinus.

B, A Muscle, whose Position renders it capable of pulling up the Ala Nasi;
whence it is called Elevator Alae Nasi; and by Casserius, Pyramidalis, from its
Figure; nor do we commonly find this Muscle in Dissection; the fleshy Fibers on
this Part, frequently taking the same Course with those of the Orbicularis
Palpebrarum, do pass by the Ala Nasi.

C, The Musculus Elevator Labii superioris proprius.

DD, The Orbicularis Palpebrarum; This is a thin fleshy Muscle, circularly
environing the Eyelids, to which it is inserted, not unlike the Sphincter
Muscles of other Parts, as of the Lips, and the Bladder of Urin: It acts in
drawing the Eyelids nearer each other; which we call shutting the Eyelids; but
if this Muscle Acts vigorously, it not only draws the Eyelids close together,
but forces the Bulb of the Eye into the Orbit. Galen and the ancient Anatomists
not discovering the Musculus Aperiens Palpebrarum Rectus, (since found out by
Fallopius,) were at a loss for assigning a proper Instrument to draw up the
Upper Eyelid; wherefore they erroneously divided this Orbicular Muscle into
Two: The like error has been incident to some later Writers, among which Bidloo
falls into the same Mistake.

E, The Zygomaticus or Distortor Oris.

F, A Branch of an Artery, which arises from the Carotid in the Neck, and
passing through the Inferior Maxillary Gland, runs over the Lower Jawbone, at
the Insertion of the Masseter Muscle, as it is here expressed.

I have frequently met with Tumors on this Part, which have required Incision;
in which Case the dividing of this Artery ought to be regarded; wherefore I
have rather chosen first to make Two Perforations, one on each Side this
Artery, whether by Caustic or otherwise, and then pass a Ligature to
comprehend the Artery for some Days; and though I cannot advise the Practice of
letting the Ligature divide the whole, by frequently straightening it; yet in
Three or Four Days time the Ligature will so compress the Artery, that you may
cut through free from any dangerous Flux of Blood.

G, The Os Iugale.

H, The Lower Jawbone made bare by the removing of the Skin, and Musculus
Quadratus Colli.

I, Part of the Carotid Artery.

K M N, The Temporal Muscle; K N its Outside; M its Inside next the Cranium
turned down.

L, Part of the Parotid Gland, the greater Part of which Gland being cut away,
to exhibit the following Muscle.

O, The Musculus Masseter in situ: The Origination, Progress, and Insertion of
this, and the Temporal Muscle, are sufficiently expressed in this, and the
following Figure.

Fig. 5.
Exhibits the Muscles of the Lips, and some of those of the Lower Jaw.

A B C, The Musculus Buccinator freed from its Origin at the Procossus Coronae
of the Lower Jaw, (nearer N) and left at its Insertion at the Angle of the
Lips: Here we may observe, that in this Figure (as in the Life) the Fibers of
this Muscle run according to its Length, contrary to the Description Bidloo,
and others give of it; through this Muscle passes the Ductus Salivalis of the
Parotid Gland into the Mouth.

D, The Musculus Elevator Labiorum Communis; This arises from the Os Quartum of
the Upper Jaw, and descends directly to its Insertion under the Termination of
the Zygomaticus; in this Figure (as we have likewise seen it) a Fasciculus of
fleshy Fibers of this Muscle run over the Termination of the Zygomaticus.

E E, The Elevator Labii superioris proprius, and the Musculus Dilatator Alae
Nasi.

F, The Musculus Zygomaticus.

G, Depressor Labiorum Communis.

H, Depressor Labii inferioris proprius.

I, Constrictor Labiorum.

K M N, The Temporalis; N, its Implantation at the Processus Coronae of the
Lower Jaw.

L, Part of the Parotid Gland.

O, The Masseter cut from its Origin at the Os Iugale, and left at its
Insertion to the Lower Jaw.

P Q, Part of the Origin of the Musculus Pterygoideus externus in situ; This
springs from the External Part of the Processus Pterygoides, and Upper Part of
Os Sphenoeides, and runs backwards to its Insertion at the Neck of the
Processus Condyloides: To discover the Progress of this Muscle, the Processus
Coronae should be cut off with a Chizel.

R, The Processus Condyliformis of the Lower Jaw, which is here in a great Part
laid bare.

S, Part of the Musculus Digastricus of the Lower Jaw.

THE THIRTEENTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE External Parts of the Nose, together with the Tongue, Fauces, Gargareon,
and the like, in Situ.

A, The Back of the Nose.

B, The Spine,

C, The Tip,

D, The Septum Narium or Bridge,

E E, The Alae Nasi or Sides of the Nose.

F F F, The Cheeks divided, so that the Parts within the Mouth may appear.

G, The Tongue.

H, The Gargareon or Uvula in Situ, covered with the Glandulous Membrane of the
Palate.

I, The Tonsillae described in our Appen. Fig. 9.

K K, The Gums of both Jaws.

L L, The Palate or Roof of the Mouth, whose Glandules are expressed Tab. 14. Fig.
4. B C.

M, The Upper Part of the Epiglottis raised through the Depressure of the
Tongue. We seldom see the Epiglottis in looking into the Mouths of Living
People; but in some few I have some times seen its Upper Part, by very much
depressing the Tongue to inspect the Fauces; in such Persons some (very
Ignorant in Anatomy) have taken it for an Excrescence, and have proposed its
Extraction. A Mistake, equally as pernicious, has been incident to some
Practitioners, in supposing the Foramina of the Excretory Ducts of the
Tonsillae when filled with a Tenacious Matter, (as in Cases of taking Cold, as
it is called, etc.) to be Ulcers; as Fallopius takes notice.

Fig. 2.
The Outward Covering of the Tongue viewed with a Microscope: This Figure
together with the 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th, were done after the Tongues
of some Quadrupedes, as of Bulls, Sheep, or the like. With the Assistance of a
Microscope, an Appearance not altogether unlike this may be found on a Humane
Tongue; without any Horny Covering like that described by Bidloo in these
Figures, as follows.

A, That Part toward the Tip of the Tongue,

B, That toward the Root may be seen, arising from the Membrane underneath, a
sort of Bodies of a Toothlike Form C C, etc. hard as Cartilages, or the Nails;
for which reason (says he) I call them Ungulae: Betwixt these (he further adds)
are placed certain forked Bodies of the same Structure: (See Fig. 3.) Between
these Two Kinds of Bodies, and sometimes upon them, are placed certain
Bladder-like Pyriformal, and Pellucid Globuli. ( Fig. 2. D.) These Ungulae are
framed by the manifold joining together of Fibrous Lamellae. (See Fig. 4. A.)
whose Middle B, is Medullary and Pervious; but the Globuli are hollow like
Bladders: Both these kinds are clotted about with a strong tensile Membrane (
Fig. 2. E.) to which they are fastened on their Sides. This Membrane is
supported with Hairy Stamina F. like the Membrane immediately under it, which
subjacent Membrane is Perforated by the aforesaid Bodies, as appears in ( Fig.
6.) In some of the Interstices of these Bodies there may certain Cavities G,
Fig. 2. be discovered; whose Bottom is very Porous. The Appearance of the Back
Part of these Bodies is represented in Fig. 5. A, The broken Globuli. B, The
Asperities of the Ungulae. C, The Hairy Membranous Covering. D, The porous
Apertures. The Upper Covering being removed, the Second or Subjacent Membrane,
mentioned above, comes in view. Fig. 6. Spread like a Net; the Duct of whose
Fibers is so intricate and various, that nothing certain can be determined of
their Order; For in a Raw Tongue it is glutinous, in a Boiled one extendible;
its Superior Part expressed in this Figure, is whitish and thinner; but the
Lower is observed to be thick, and more tenacious. (See Fig. 7.) Its
Perforations AA, Fig. 6. answer to the Number of the Ungulae: Here also may be
observed several small Vessels B, creeping along, and running to the
Superficies of the Tongue. The Edges of these Perforations are made rough by
small Fibers and Vessels of their own, as well as of the broken Ungulae. The
like Structure may be observed every where in the Membrane in the Inside of the
Mouth, especially in the Palate. Under this Netlike Covering some Nervous
Papillary Plexus. Fig. 8. A, and certain Glands B are hid; the Tops of which
are inseparably joined to the above named Medullary Middles of the Ungulae: So
that these Ungulae, like little Horns, cover those Papillary Bodies like a
Membrane spread over them: These Papillae are tied in several Places to the
Carnous Fibers of the Tongue; of these, some are Large C; some Smaller D; some
confused and in Heaps E; others more distant, and distinct, and of different
Figures; about These are placed a great many Glands F, to which the Vessels of
the Net-like Covering do adhere. The same Organs, though in a larger Form, do
arise out of the Coverings of the Lips and Cheeks, as above.

Fig. 9.
The Musculous Structure of the Tongue.

A A, The External Order of Fibers continued according to the Length of the
Tongue, ( viz.) from its Basis to its Tip; between these are interspersed (B B
B) diverse Glandules and Lobes of Fat, B B.

C D, The Second Order of Fibers of the Tongue, which descend from the Upper
Part toward its Basis.

E F, Other Fibers arising from the Basis go to the Superficies of the Tongue.

G H, Others carried from the Middle of the Tongue toward the Sides; the
Tendinous Extremities of these Fibers are fastened to the Coverings of the
Tongue: At the Middle of the lower Part of the Tongue, are Two distinct Classes
of Fibers very intricately disposed, which contribute to those various Motions
the Tongue is necessarily employed in, whether in Speaking, Mastication, or the
like.

Fig. 10.
The Structure of the Gums magnifyed with a Microscope.

A A, Part of the Gums.

B B, Two of the Foreteeth.

C, The Covering of the Gums opened.

D, The Duct of the Fibers.

E, The Glands situated between the Fibers.

F, Part of the Upper Jaw broken off.





THE FOURTEENTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
DIVERSE Muscles of the Tongue, Os Hyoides, and Larynx, as they appear in their
proper Situation, after the Side of the Lower-Jaw is taken off.

A A B B, The Tongue Pinned up B.

C, The Musculus Styloglossus in Situ; It arising from the Processus Styloides
is inserted to the Root of the Tongue immediately below the Implantation of the
Ceratoglossus; it draws the Tongue up, and inwards, in the Action of
Deglutition.

D D, The Musculus Ceratoglossus, Arising Fleshy from the Horns at the Os
Hyoides, and is so Inserted to the Tongue: If this with its Partner Act, they
draw the Tongue directly into the Mouth; if One of them Acts, it pulls the
Tongue to one Side.

E F G I L, The Musculus Genioglossus in Situ; It arising from the Middle of
the Internal Part of the Lower Jaw, and is Implanted at the Root of the Tongue;
when this with its Partner Act, they draw the Tongue Forwards, and thrust it
out of the Mouth.

H, Part of the Fauces contiguous to the Root of the Tongue.

K, Part of the Musculus Sternohyoideus.

L, Part of Coracohyoideus.

N. B. That L is inserted in Two different Parts of this Figure; wherefore the
Reader is desired to take Notice that the Lowermost belongs to the last
Reference.

M, The Musculus Styloceratohyoideus; Its Origin, Progress and Insertion, are
so well expressed in the Figure, that there needs no other Description to be
added; this Muscle, together with the Styloglossus, and Stylopharyngaeus, with
their Partners on the other Side, Act in Drawing up the Os Hyoides, Tongue,
Larynx, and Pharynx in Deglutition; by which means the Aliment when fitted for
Swallowing, does not only Descend into the Pharynx (which is at that Time
dilated;) but the Epiglottis is in that Position of the Tongue by consequence
deprest, and adequately Covers the Rimula of the Larynx; whereby, the least
Particle of the Aliment is hindered, in its Descent into the Larynx, and Aspera
Arteria; which is a wonderful Mechanism in Nature! Hence it is we can by no
means Expire in the Action of Swallowing of the Aliment, without some Part of
it Descending into the Rimula of the Larynx; which is so troublesome as to
cause an incessant Coughing, till it is ejected.

N, The Musculus Mylohyoides, Cut from its Origination at the Internal Part of
the Lower Jaw Bone, and left at its Implantation to the Middle and Upper Part
of the Os Hyoides.

O, The Geniohyoides Muscle in Situ.

P, The Middle Part of the Lower Jaw Bone, which composes the Chin, broke off.

Q, The Internal Surface of the Upper Lip.

R, The Inside of the Cheek.

S, The Gustatory Nerve; being a Branch of the Fifth Pair of Nerves of the
Brain, in its Way to the Tongue.

T, The Motory Nerve of the Tongue, springing from the Ninth Pair of the Brain.

t, A small Branch of the Ninth Pair going to the Larynx.

V, The Left Horn of the Os Hyoides.

W, The Trunk of the Carotid Artery.

X X, The Musculus Digastricus left to its Origination at the Processus
Mastoides.

Fig. 2.
Represents, according to Bidloo, the Salival Ducts freed from the Inferior
Maxillary Gland, expressed in Situ, in Fig. 1. of the following Table M M. I
cannot conceive this Figure of the Salival Ducts was designed after the Life;
nor does it express any other Excretory Duct which occurs to my Memory;
wherefore I shall here add the Description of it by Bidloo. A, The Twigs of the
Salival Duct, above mentioned, injected with Wax, and freed from the
Glandules: B, The larger Branches: C, The Common Duct: D, It Is Orifice enclosed
with an Edging. E, Part of the investing Membrane of the Mouth cut off. See the
Figure of the Salival Ducts of the Lower Maxillary Glands, together with the
Sublingual Glands in our Appendix.

Fig. 3.
The Inner Face of the Upper Jaw, and Fauces, after the Lower Jaw is taken off.

A, The Roof of the Mouth, or Palate.

B B, The Glandulous Membrane of the Fauces near the Tonsillae.

C C, Diverse Foramina in the Surface of the Glandulous Membrane of the Mouth or
Palate, through which issues a Juice separated in its Glandules, expressed Fig. 4.
B, B, C, C.

D E, The Forepart of the Palate near the Dentes Incisores, where the Bone
underneath is Perforated, to transmit diverse Blood Vessels and Nerves; but in
Bulls and some Animals, in this Part, is a Perforation through both the Membrane
of the Palate, and that of the Nostrils, and is a common Passage between their
Foramina Narium and Mouths; which in them is called Fretum, and serves to
convey Part of the Matter separated by the Glands of their Nostrils into their
Mouths.

F F, A Stylus put through the Left Nostril into the Fauces.

G, The Uvula or Gargareon hanging down from the Palate.

H, The Glandulous Membrane which helps to compose the Back Part of the Fauces.

I I, Parts of the Musculi Flexores Capitis.

K K, Parts of the Longi Colli.

L L, The Vertebrae of the Neck.

Fig. 4.
The Inside of the Membrane of the Palate, as it appears when Raised, and Viewed
with a Microscope.

A A, The Tunica Palatina Raised from the Bone, and Pinned out.

B C D, The Glandules, and Carnous Fibers, which compose the Membrane.

E E, Two Dentes Incisores.

F, The Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw, by some called Os Palati, whose Surface
is full of Vestigia, where the Tunica Palati did Adhere.

Fig. 5.
The Foramina Narium Opened, by taking off the Greater Half of the Fourth Bone
of the Upper Jaw, or Os Palati.

A A B B, The Pituitary or Glandulous Membrane, which invests the Foramen of
the Left Nostril, separated from the Septum Narium B.

C C, The Glandulous Membrane extended, so as to receive a strong (D D)
Reflection of Light, by means of a Stylus D D, introduced as in Fig. 3. The
Structure of this Glandulous Membrane is altogether agreeable to that of the
Palate Fauces, etc. so that we need not say more of it in this Place; but that
it is not only extended to all the tortuous Meanders of these Cavities of the
Nostrils, but it also invests the Cavities of the Cheek-Bones, Os Sphenoides,
and Frontis; all which communicate with the Nostrils, where they discharge
their Pituita; as shall be demonstrated in the Osteological Part of this Work.

THE FIFTEENTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
DIVERSE Muscles of the Lower Jaw, and Os Hyoides in Situ, the Skin, and
Musculus Quadratus Colli being Removed.

A B C, The Musculus Digastricus or Biventer; B, its Fleshy Origination from
the Processus Mammillaris; C, its Middle Tendon passing through the Musculus
Styloceratohyoideus (N), and an Annular Ligament arising from the Os Hyoides,
to its Fleshy Termination A, in the Lower Jaw (D).

The Middle Tendon of this Digastric Muscle, and its Partner, passing through Two
Annular Ligaments Fixed to the Os Hyoides, as the Ropes through a Double Pully, is
a necessary Contrivance in Nature to render them capable of pulling the Lower
Jaw Down; which, had their Progress been direct from their Originations, they
could not have performed; nor is there any Processes, whether of the Vertebrae
of the Neck, or Neighboring Parts, that could give Originations to these
Muscles below their Insertions, as in some Quadrupedes: Wherefore the Divine
Architect, in Humane Bodies, has placed this Double-Pully below their
Terminations, by which means they are made capable of performing their designed
Office. Hence Deglutition is Hindered, when these Muscles are in Action, they at
that Time preventing the Ascent of the Tongue, and Larynx; neither can we in
the Time of Swallowing, draw the Lower Jaw down, because the Center of
Direction is pulled up; wherefore we are obliged to keep the Jaws close in that
Action. But in Dogs, and other Voracious Animals, (wherein these Muscles Arise
from the Transverse Processes of the First Vertebra of the Neck) these Actions
do not Depend upon each other; whence it is they devour their Aliment so Quick

D, The Inferior Edge of the Lower Jaw Bone made bare.

E E, The Musculus Mylohyoideus, which derives its Fleshy Origin from the
Internal Part of the Lower Jaw, partly under the Inferior Maxillary Glands, and
partly at the Insertions of the Musculus Digastricus; whence Descending with a
Double Order of Fibers, here elegantly Expressed, is inserted to the Superior and
Forepart of the Os Hyoides. Immediately under this Muscle lie the Glandulae
Sublinguales, and Salival Ducts of the Inferior and Maxillary Gland; both which
are Comprest by it, and their contained Saliva driven Forewards into the Mouth
when this Muscle Acts, as in Deglutition, etc.

F F, The Musculi Sternohyoidei, Arising from the Internal and Superior Part of
the Claviculae, and not from the Sternum, as it is Vulgarly supposed, and are
inserted to the Inferior, and Forepart of the Os Hyoides.

G G, Parts of the Ceracohyoidei, coming from under the Mastoid Muscles (II).

H H, Parts of the Sternothyroidei, which spring from the Superior and Internal
Part of the Sternum, and march under the Sternohyoidei to their Terminations in
the Thyroide Cartilage, as appears in the following Figure.

I I, The Mastoidei.

K, Part of the Masseter on the Right Side.

L, Part of the Parotid Gland on the same Side.

M M, The Glandulae Maxillae Inferioris.

N, That Part of the Musculus Stylohyoideus, that is Perforated to transmit the
Middle Tendon of the Biventral Muscle of the Lower Jaw; which together with an
Annular Ligament, springing from the Os Hyoides, in like manner involving the
last mentioned Middle Tendon of that Muscle, does like a Pully render it
capable of pulling the Lower Jaw down, as above Noted.

O, Part of the Internal Jugular Vein.

P, Part of the Carotid Artery.

Q, A Blood-Vessel cut off and ti'd.

Fig. 2.
Diverse Muscles lying under those expressed in the former Figure.

A A A, The Lower Edge of the Inferior Jaw Bone laid bare.

B B, The Musculi Sternohyoidei freed from their Insertions, and left at their
Originations.

C C C C, The Coracohyoidei are a Pair of Digastrick Muscles; they Arise Fleshy
from the Processus Coracoides Scapulae, and Ascend under the Musculi Mastoidei
where they become Tendinous, but Growing Fleshy again, are Inserted at the
Basis of the Fore-Bone of the Os Hyoides; this draws the Os Hyoides downwards,
and pulls it somewhat inwards.

D, Part of the Musculus Stylohyoideus at its Termination.

E E, The Musculus Mylohyoideus; on the Right Side not quite Freed from its
Origination; on the Left, so Raised, as that the Glandula Sublingualis W, does
Appear; this Bidloo calls Geniohyoidei.

F F, The Geniohyoidei, by Bidloo called Anthereohyoidei; they Arise Fleshy
from the Internal Part of the Lower Jaw, which composes the Chin, and are
Inserted to the Superior, and Forepart of the Os Hyoides: When these Muscles
Act, the Os Hyoides is pulled Upwards, and Forewards, and Assist the
Genioglossi in Thrusting the Tongue out of the Mouth.

G G, The Digastrick Muscles of the Lower Jaw cut from their Insertions.

H H, The Mastodei Muscles; that of the Right Side being cut from its
Origination and left at its Insertion, that of the Left remaining in Situ.

I, The Scutiformal Cartilage of the Larynx, which makes what they call, the
Pomum Adami.

K, The Aspera Arteria or Windpipe.

L L, The Glandulae Thyroidaeae.

M, The Musculus Masseter in Situ.

N, The Musculus Pterygoideus Internus in Situ; it A^^es partly Tendinous, and
partly Fleshy, from the Cavity of the Winglike Process of the Os Sphenoides.
Tab. 29. Fig. 2. K. whence it Descends to its Implantation at the Internal and
Inferior Part of the Lower Jaw Bone, opposite to the Termination of the
Masseter: Either this, or its partner Acting, draws the Jaw to the contrary
Side; if both Act, they Assist the Musculi Temporales, and Masseteres.

O, Part of the Parotid Gland.

P, The Musculus Hyothyroideus; it Arising from the Os Hyoides, is Inserted to
the Lower Part of the Scutiformal Cartilage; this draws the Larynx Upwards in
an Acute Tone of the Voice.

Q, The Cricothyroideus. See Tab. 24. Fig. 5. H H.

R, The Sternothyroideus ending in the Scutiformal Cartilage.

S, The Internal Jugular Vein, whose Lower Part is at some distance placed
under that Part of the Mastoid Muscle, ( App. Fig. 1.14.) which springs from
the Clavicle, which Part of that Muscle is most commonly Contracted in those
who are said to have Wry Necks, which the Operator in that Case ought to
Observe, least in too boldly Thrusting in his Knife to divide the contracted
Part, he also Wounds this large Blood-Vessel, and the Flux of Blood prove
Destructive to the Patient; for though its Flux may easily be restrained
outwardly, yet the Vein lying in so large an Interstice, defended by the
Clavicle, and Adjacent Muscles, the Blood will nevertheless pass out of the
Vessel between the Muscles, and Neighboring Parts. When such a Mischief is
done, we ought to divide the External Integuments largely, and clear the Part
of the Coagulated Blood, and apply a moderate Compress on the Wounded Vessel:
An Instance of which Practice we had once Occasion to make in a Wound between
the Pectoral, and Deltoid Muscles, immediately under the Clavicula, where the
Subclavian Vein was Wounded. In such like Cases, how can those Ignorant in
Anatomy, Practice without Fear and Trembling?

T, The Carotid Artery.

V, A large Vein proceeding from the Thyroide Gland to the Ramus Subclavius.

W, The Glandula Sublingualis lying immediately under the Musculus Mylohyoideus.





THE SIXTEENTH TABLE.
THE External Muscles which move the Head as they appear on the Back-part; the
Upper Part of the Cucularis being taken off, and some Muscles of the
Shoulder Blade, and Thorax, raised and reclined laterally.

A A, The Musculus Splenius in Situ;

B B, andc. Its partly Tendinous, and partly Fleshy Origination from the Five
or Six Spines of the Superior Vertebrae of the Thorax; the Lower Part of this
Muscle appears in most Subjects distinct from its Superior, and is Inserted to
the Transverse Processes of the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Vertebrae of the Neck,
as is Expressed at e e e.

C C, etc. The Origination of the Superior Part of the Splenius from the Spines
of the Inferior Vertebrae of the Neck, D D its Fleshy Termination at the Os
Occipitis.

E E, The Splenius on the Left Side raised, and reclined laterally;

e e e, Its Three, sometimes Four, Tendinous Terminations inserted to as many
of the Transverse Processes of the Neck: Anatomists have erred in reckoning the
Splenii among the Proper Muscles of the Head, since they are also Implanted to
the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck, wherefore they are to be
esteemed as Common to the Head, and Neck, so that if either of Them Acts, it
draws the Head together with the Vertebrae of the Neck to which it is inserted,
to that Side Backwards; if they both Act, they pull the Head directly
Backwards, together with those Vertebrae of the Neck.

F G H, etc. The Complexus Implicatus or Tergeminus, on both Sides in Situ; the
Left being laid bare;

H H, Its partly Tendinous, and partly Fleshy Origin, from the Transverse
Processes of the Vertebrae of the Thorax, which becomes still more Fleshy in
its Ascent F G, and is so inserted to the Os Occipitis I I, immediately under
the Termination of the Splenius D D.

f f, A Part of the Musculus Complexus, Inserted to the Processus Mammiformis,
and is by Fallopius described as a distinct Muscle; but to avoid Confusion, and
multiplying the Number of Muscles, we have hitherto looked on it as not
perfectly distinct, having in some Subjects found it inseparably joined with
the other Part of the Complexus.

Either of these Complexi Acting, draws the Head to the same Side Backwards; if
they both Act, they draw it directly Backwards.

K, The Serratus Superior Posticus, raised.

L, The Rhomboides in like manner raised and reclined laterally.

M, The Upper Part of the Longissimus Dorsi, and Sacrolumbalis.

N, The Musculus Levator Scapulae, partly appears.

THE SEVENTEENTH TABLE.
SEVERAL Muscles of the Head and Neck, lying under those represented in the
precedent Table.

A, The Musculus Rectus Major Posticus Dissected from its Insertion at the
Occiput D, on the Left Side, and hanging down from its Origination at the
Double Spine of the Second Vertebra of the Neck:

B, The same Muscle in Situ, on the Right Side.

C C E, The Rectus Minor Posticus on the Left Side laid bare, and remaining in
Situ; on the Right Side it is partly hid by the Rectus Major.

D D, The Insertions of the Recti Minores to the Os Occipitis; they derive
their Originations from the Back-part of the First Vertebra of the Neck, and
not from any Condyliform Process of that Vertebra, as Bidloo discribes them;
the First Vertebra of the Neck, not only wanting such a Process, but is
constantly without any Process in that Part, as has been taken Notice of by
most, if not all Anatomists.

Those Recti Minores pull the Head backward on the First Vertebra of the Neck,
and from their Use may be called Renuentes or Nodders backwards, and are
Antagonists to a small Pair of Muscles in the Forepart of a Right Position
also; to distinguish which, from these, we call them Recti Minores Antici, and
Annuentes from their Use, of which, we shall add a Figure in our Appendix.

F F, The Obliqui Inferiores; that of the Right Side remaining in Situ, the
Left being freed from its Insertion and remaining at its Origin: Either of
them, arises from one of the Double Spinal Process's of the Second Vertebra of
the Neck, and after an Oblique Ascent, is Inserted to the Transverse Process of
the First Vertebra.

When either of these Inferior Oblique Muscles Acts, it draws the Transverse
Process of the First Vertebra near the Spine of the Second, and the Head by
Consequence, is moved to the same Side, and is very much assisted by the
Mastoideus on the contrary Side, of which in the following Table; If both Act,
they conspire to hold the Head more stable.

G H, The Obliqui Superiores; that of the Right Side remaining in Situ G; the
Left being cut from its Implantation at the Os Occipitis, and left at its
Origin at the Transverse Process of the First Vertebra of the Neck: Though these
Superior Oblique Muscles perform the same Office with the Recti Majores last
treated of, when the Head is in an Erect Position in pulling it directly
backwards; yet in regard it is necessary the Head should be moved also
backwards, at the same Time it is turned to one Side; it is an Argument of a
considerable Council of the Author of Nature, to add these and the Recti
Minores to Act at that Time; since the Recti Majores are then so extended by
that Rotation of the Head, that they cannot well Act.

I I, An Asperity of the Bone of the Occiput, where the Musculi Splenii and
Complexi Terminate.

K K, The Under Sides of the Musculi Complexi, as they appear when raised and
reclined laterally, the greater Part of that of the Right Side being cut off.

L, Parts of the Longissimus Dorsi and Sacrolumbales.

M N, The Musculus Spinalis Colli; this arises Fleshy from all the Transverse
Processes of the Neck, except the First and Second; and is Inserted, after an
Oblique Ascending Progress, to the Inferior Margin of the Back-part of the
Second Vertebra of the Neck, as it is here expressed on the Right Side: This and
its Partner Acting, draw the Vertebrae of the Neck directly backwards.

O O, The Spines of the Vertebrae of the Neck.

P P, The Musculi Interspinales; of which, in our Appendix.

Q, The Elevator Scapulae.





THE EIGHTEENTH TABLE.
DIVERSE Muscles of the Head and Neck, which appear in the Forepart after the
Lower-Jaw, Tongue, Larynx, Aspera Arteria and Gula are removed.

A A, The Musculi Longi Colli, which arise partly Tendinous, but chiefly
Fleshy, from the Foreparts of the Five Superior Vertebrae of the Thorax, and
after a Dilatation, in the Middle of their Progress to Fleshy Bellies, they are
inserted, in like Manner as they begin, to the Foreparts of all the Vertebrae
of the Neck:

These may be called Flexores Colli from their Use.

B B, The Three Scaleni in Situ: The First of these Muscles arises Fleshy from
the Forepart of the Second, Third and Fourth Transverse Processes of the
Vertebrae of the Neck, and descending obliquely forewards, becomes Tendinous at
its Insertion to the First Rib, the Axilary Nerves pass between this and the
following: Scalenus Secundus, in like manner springs from the Second, Third,
Fourth and Fifth Transverse Processes of the Neck, and is inserted to the
Second and sometime Third Rib. Scalenus Tertius, arises from the same
Transverse Processes with the former; as also from the Fifth and Sixth, and is
soon implanted into the First Rib.

I I, The Mas^oidei, which arises partly Tendinous and partly Fleshy from the
Upper Part of the Os Pectoris or Sternum, and near Half the Clavicula M, with
Two and sometimes Three distinct Beginnings (as in this Subject K K K) which
ascend obliquely and join in Half their Progress; composing a somewhat round,
thick, Fleshy Muscle, and marching over the Upper Part of the Musculus Elevator
Scapulae, becomes broader again and Tendinous, at its Implantation to the
Back-part of the Processus Mammillaris, and the adjoining Part of the Os
Occipitis, above the Implantation of Part of the Splenius.

The Origin, Progress, and Insertion of this Muscle, not being duly considered,
has led Anatomists into Errors concerning its Use: For if this Muscle Acts on
either Side, the Mammillary Process on the same Side, is brought toward a
Right Position with its Original at the Sternum, and the Head is turned to the
Contrary Side; and this Action of it is commonly well expressed by Painters; but
should it more and more contract, it will draw the Head to one Side forewards,
as we see in Wry Necks (commonly so called) where one of these Muscles remains
contracted; but if they, both Act together, the Head is rather pulled back than
forewards, by how much their Insertions are rather behind the Mammillary
Processes, than upon them; which Processes are e Diametro opposite to the
Articulation of the Head, with the First Vertebra of the Neck.

L L, The Recti Interni Majores Antici, by some called Par Rectum Internum
Colli, says Bidloo; we have elsewhere called them Flexores Capitis from their
Use: They Arise partly Fleshy, but chiefly Tendinous from the Forepart of all
the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck, except the First and
Second becoming Fleshy, are Inserted to the Anterior Appendix of the Os
Occipitis, before the great Foramen that transmits the Medulla Oblongata.

They are employed in Bending the Head forewards.

M M, The Claviculae.

O, The Uvula.

P P, The Bodies of the Vertebrae of the Neck.

THE NINETEENTH TABLE.
Fig. 1, 2.
ONE of the Mammae or Breasts of both Sexes; some distinguish them by their
Denominations, calling that of a Woman Fig. 1. Mamma, and that of a Man Fig. 2.
Mammilla: We commonly call them the Breasts; but in Woman Dugs.

A A, A Portion of the Skin Raised and Pinned out, to show its Inside.

B B, The Protuberant Parts of the Breasts of both Sexes, in which that of the
Woman exceeds that of a Man.

C C, The Papillae, or Nipples; the Difference in the Magnitude of which, is
very Conspicuous.

D D, The Areolae whose Difference is here very well Expressed between the Man
and the Woman, as they appear to the naked Eye.

E E, The Glandules of the Mamma.

F F, The Plexu's of Blood Vessels and Lactiferous Ducts lying between each
Glandulous Protuberance.

G G, Diverse Sacculi Adiposi lying on the last mentioned Vessels and Ducts
between the Mammary Glandules.

H H, The Adipose Membrane Pinned out.

Fig. 3.
The Papilla and Areola of a Woman's Breast viewed with a Microscope, and
Represented Six times bigger than the Life.

A, The Head or Top of the Papilla.

B, Its Glandulous Membrane.

C C, The Orifices of the Lactiferous Vessels in the Top of the Papilla.

D D, The Areola.

E, Its rough Membrane. The Areola in Virgins is of a Pale Color, and somewhat
hard; in those with Child and give Suck, it is Brown; and in Old Women Blackish.

F, The Papillary Protuberances of the Areola; from each of which a Hair
proceeds.

G G, Some Vestigiae of the Lactiferous Tubes in their Progress from the Mamma
through the Areola to the Papilla.

Fig. 4
The Papilla of a Woman's Breast in like manner Expressed with the Assistance of a
Microscope.

A A, The External Glandulous Membrane of the Papilla, separated and expanded.

B B, Diverse Glands of the Papilla cleaving to its Membrane.

C C, The Lactiferous Tubes which arise from the Extremities of the Arteries
within the Mamma, in their way to their Orifices in the Top of the Papilla, C C
Fig. 3.

D D, The Glands of the Papilla whose Sec^e^o^y Ducts discharge their Contents
into the last mentioned Lactiferous Tubes.

To examine the Papilla or Nipple, the following Method may be Practiced.
Insert a Blow-Pipe into one of the largest of the Lactiferous Tubes on the Top
of the Nipple C C, Fig. 3. and after making a straight Ligature on the Nipple
and Blow-Pipe, you may Blow up all the Lactiferous Tubes of the Mamma, through
their Communications with each other, before they approach the Nipple Figured
by Nuck Adenog. Curiosa, Fig. 11. Fol. 15. All the Lactiferous Tubes of the
Mamma being thus extended with Wind; those Parts of Them which help to compose
the Papilla (C C;) together with their Extremities within the Glands D D, being
very much extended; make a straight Ligature on the Inferior Part of the Nipple
next the Breast, then cut off the Nipple from the Breast and Dry it, and
afterward by cutting it Variously, you may easily examine its Structure: By
these means the Nipple appears to be composed of a Double Series of Fibers; the
one somewhat Large, the other Less; both of a Net-like Disposition, being full
of Perforations of diverse Forms; the like of which is not to be found in other
Parts of the Body, says Nuck in his Tract above mentioned; to this add a vast
Number of Blood Vessels which every where adorn the Papilla: Hence an Account
may be given how the Nipples strut out, and are so extended in Nurses, and on
the contrary so Limp in those who discontinue giving Suck.

I could never discover any Valves in the Lactiferous Vessels of the Mammae of
Women, which some describe; though I have made Injections of diverse Liquors, and
sometimes Mercury into them; the like has been done by the Accurate Nuck, who,
with what I have frequently observed, also takes Notice that the Mercury so
Injected passes into the Blood Vessels of the Mamma, especially its Arteries.
But our last named Author takes Notice of diverse Straitnesses in the
Lactiferous Vessels, occasioned, as He suspects, by diverse fatty hard
Substances compressing Them, even to that Degree, that if their contained Milk
becomes a little Thickened, it there stops through the Narrowness of the Duct, or
requiring a longer Stay, it becomes so Vitiated as to Affect the Breast
variously, especially with what are commonly called Milky Tumors; in which Case
an Abscess succeeds, and the Milky Tubes break and discharge their Contents
with the Pus. The Milk by these means flowing at the Ulcer, frequently proves
troublesome, and hinders its Cicatrice or Closing, as it happened in the Case
of a Patient I not long since had under my Care, who at the same time was
infected with the Itch, in whom the Milk flowed from the Ulcer for at least
Three Months; nor could I find any tolerable Abatement of the Milky Flux,
notwithstanding her dry Diet, and Drinking of a Decoction of Sarsa, China,
Guaiacum, etc. till she had taken proper Remedies for the Itch.

The Expert Nuck takes Notice that the Lactiferous Tubes, though very Capacious
in the Mamma, yet are Straightened at their Orifices in the Papilla, insomuch,
that a Bristle of the smallest Size will not enter them: This Contrivance, He
adds, is very necessary, least the separated Milk contained in the Tubes should
be continually apt to run out, and that it should be only so retained, that the
Nipple of the Mother when Sucked by the Infant may easily void it: This
Structure is very evident in the Tets of Quadrupedes, especially where their
pendulous Position renders this Contrivance very necessary; yet when the
Lactiferous Tubes are filled with Milk, it is apt to run out.

Fig. 5.
The Inferior and Internal Part of the Areola and Basis of the Papilla after
Dissection from the Mamma.

A A, The Circumference of the Areola next the Mamma.

B B, The Mammary Glands placed under the Areola.

C C, The Lactiferous Tubes in their way to the Nipple.

The Arteries which convey Blood to the Mamma, are many small Branches,
Springing from the Mammary and Intercostal Arteries; of these I told Six, which
afforded a Flux of Blood without Pulsation in taking off a Schirrous Breast
Here I cannot omit recommending to Practitioners of Surgery the Tying of these
Arteries; the doing of which is so easy, that it is hardly possible for One
tollerably acquainted with the same Practice in taking off of Limbs, to be at a
loss in this. The Trunks of these Arteries Arising from the Mammary and
Intercostal Arteries, are very small, as they pass between the Pectoral Muscle
and Mamma, as appears from the Blood not having any Pulsation as it flows from
them when divided in Living Bodies, except the Breast which was taken off is
much Tumified. You must not expect to full them with Wax by Injecting into the
Aorta; because you are oblig d to raise the Sternum in order to Practice that
Operation; whereby you cut off their Communication with the large Mammary
Artery adjacent (...); nor does Wax commonly pass the Intercostal Arteries so
far as to reach these. The Veins of the Mamma are Numerous, and pass on the
Outside of the Mamma under the Skin only, and are very Conspicuous in those who
give Suck, or have had Children: These Arise, or are continued from the
Extremities of the Arteries and composing many large Trunks which discharge
their Blood into the Mammary and Intercostal Veins; some pass up to the
Subclavian Vein. The Nerves are commonly said to Arise from the Thoracick
Nerves, and pass through the Intercostal and Pectoral Muscles to the Mamma: I
must confess I never yet traced Them, nor does Vieussemus Figure Them; but in
his XXIV. Table Expresses Two Branches U, X, Arising from the Sixth and Seventh
Nerves of the Neck composing one Trunk, which descends and gives Branches to
the Musculi Serratus minor anticus, Pectoralis, Serratus major anticus, and to
the Coverings of those Muscles: From the same Nervous Stock I am apt to think
may also Spring some Branches passing to the Mamma, whence those painful
Communications between the Mamma and Axilla may proceed. Besides these Vessels
the Lymphe-Ducts of the Mamma are also mentioned; I must confess I never yet
saw these Ducts Arising from the Mamma, yet I cannot doubt of their Existence on
that Part, when I reflect on what Use they are of in General, in the Animal
Economy, of which elsewere. The Communication between the Lactiferous Tubes
and Blood Vessels, is demonstrated in the above mentioned Experiment, by
Injecting Mercury into the Former, and its Running out again by the Later. The
Opinion that the Chyle is transmitted to the Mamma immediately from the
Thoracick Duct is now altogether Exploded, and the last mentioned Experiment
seems to evince the Milk to be derived immediately from the Blood within the
Mamma. It is evident, the Milk is not Transparent like other Liquors separated
from the Blood, as the Saliva, Urine, Bile, etc. but by a Microscope it appears
composed of Globules not unlike those of the Blood, except that the Globules of
the Blood are somewhat larger than those of Milk.





THE TWENTIETH TABLE.
DIVERSE Muscles on the Superior and Forepart of the Trunk of the Body.

A, The Musculus Subclavius in Situ; when freed from the Trunk of the Body and
left to the Clavicula; (see Tab. 66. P.) It arises Fleshy from the Inferior
Part of Half the Clavicula next its Connection to the Spina Scapulae, whence its
Fibers Descend Obliquely Forewards, to its partly Tendinous and partly Fleshy
Implantation at the Superior Part of the First Rib next the Sternum.

The Office of this Subclavian Muscle is to draw up the First Rib, and
consequently the rest in Inspiration.

B, Part of the Clavicula on the Right Side.

C, The Cartilaginous Ending of the First Rib at the Sternum.

D D, The Musculus Serratus Major Anticus in Situ on the Left Side; It arises
Broad and Fleshy from the whole Basis Scapulae, Tab. 65. G G, and running on
the Subscapularis Tab. ib. E, becomes broader and thicker as it passes
Forewards to its Fleshy Insertions at the Eight Superior Ribs Laterally E E
etc. by diverse distinct Portions by some called Digituli; of which, the Three
Inferior, are Indented with the Musculus Obliquus Descendens Abdominis, as is
here Expressed on the Left Side; on the Right Side the Serratus Major Anticus E F
is raised.

G, Part of the Obliquus Descendens on the Lest Side Indented with the last
mentioned Serratus.

H, The Pectoralis in Situ, on the Left Side; this Muscle has a Broad
Semicircular Fleshy Beginning; above from near Half the Inferior Part of the
Clavicula B; below from the Os Pectoris L, and all the Cartilaginous Endings of
the Six Superior Ribs M M, and from the Bony Part of the Seventh Rib, it has
sometimes a distinct Fasciculus of Fleshy Fibers which I have frequently seen
Confounded with the Obliquus Descendens; hence it passes Transversely over the
Upper Part of the Biceps Cubiti, where it is made into a short and broad strong
Tendon Inserted to the Superior and External Part of the Os Humeri, above the
Termination of the Deltoides.

I, The Right Pectoral Muscle raised, where the Decussation of its Fibers near
its Insertion is well Expressed: This crossing of its Fibers is a Contrivance in
Nature to render its Action more Vigorous; the Fibers of its Upper Part
Descending to the Lower-Part of its Implantation to the Os Humeri, and those of
its Lower-Part Ascend to the Superior; crossing each other with Acute Angles.
This Muscle is called Adductor Humeri; when it Acts, it moves the Arm variously
according to the Operation of its several Series of Fibers.

K, The Serratus Minor Anticus, raised from its Implantation at the Bony Parts
of the Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth Ribs, and left at its Origin at the
Processus Carocoides Scapulae.

L, The Os Pectoris or Sternum.

M M, The Cartilaginous Endings of the Superior Ribs Connexed to the Sternum.

N N, The Deltoides. Vide Tab. 66. XX.

O O, The Superior Parts of the Recti Abdominis. Vide Tab. 32, Fig. 1. N O, etc.

P, Part of the Coracobrachialis. Vide Tab. 65. F.

Q, Part of the Biceps Cubiti. Tab. ib. 1.

THE TWENTY-FIRST TABLE.
SHOWS the Sternum Raised, and the Principal Organs contained in the Thorax
partly in View. A, The Inner-Face of the Sternum or Os Pectoris.

B B, The Cartilages of the True Ribs, cut from the Bony Extremities of the
Ribs, and left at their Connexions to the Sternum: Upon these Cartilages are
placed the Musculi Triangulares; which Muscles Arise from the Inferior and
Internal Part of the Sternum, and after an Oblique Progress are inserted to the
Bony Endings of the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and sometimes Seventh, and Eight
Ribs. These Triangular Muscles scarcely appear in Macilent Subjects, as is
Expressed in this Figure.

C, The Mediastinum freed from the Os Pectoris, where, in Humane Bodies it
appears Double, being a Continuation of the Pleura from both Sides the Internal
Part of the Thorax; whence it Descends and firmly Cleaves to the Pericardium,
dividing the Thorax into Two Cavities, and the Right Lobes of the Lungs from
the Left: In this Progress of the Mediastinum it parts with One of its Laminae
to cover the large Blood Vessels within the Thorax. A Triangular Interstice is
framed immediately under the Sternum at the Approach of the Pleura, from each
Side as it Descends to compose the Mediastinum: Nor is this Interstice an empty
Space as it is commonly supposed, but is interwoven with various Orders of
Fibers, framing Loculi or little Cells. Real. Columbus Lib. xi. Cap. iii.
Proposes the letting out of Pus, collected in this Interstice by Perforating
the Sternum. As the Forepart of the Mediastinum plainly appears a Continuation
of the Pleura^ so its Back-part is evidently a Continuation of the same
Membrane, as it advances toward the Vertebrae of the Back. In Dissecting a
Morbid Body, I found the Right Side of the Cavity of the Thorax so extended
with a Serous Humor, as its External Appearance, (especially at the
Cartilaginous Endings of the True Ribs,) was Prominent: Nor would the least
Portion of the Lungs on the same Side Swim in common Water, but Sunk to the
Bottom of the Vessel: In this Subject I could not find any Part of the
Hydropick or Serous Humor in the other Side of the Thorax; but the Lungs on
that Side in no very ill State. By this, we may be assured that the Mediastinum
adequately divides the Right Side of the Thorax from the Left. The Mediastinum
also supports the Pericardium, leaft its Flaccidity impede the Systole of the
Heart, and sustains the Trunks of the Nerves of the Par Vagum in their Progress
through the Thorax. The Diaphragm is also said to be suspended by the
Mediastinum, leaft the Liver, to whose Lower-Side it is Connexed, should become
Insupportable. The Mediastinum receives Arteries from the Mammary and
Intercostal Branches; it has Two large Veins which discharge their Blood into
the Subclavian and Neighboring Trunks: Its Nerves are said to Spring from the
Eighth Pair. The Lymphe-Ducts of the Mediastinum pass toward the Thymus.

D D, The Pericardium or Capsula Cordis Opened and Pinned up. The Pericardium
Arises from the large Vessels at the Basis of the Heart, and seems to be
composed of a Continuation of the Pleura or Mediastinum. It adheres to the
Diaphragm below, and laterally to the Mediastinum. It has Blood Vessels from
the Diaphragm and Mammary-Vessels, according to the Accurate Ruysch in his
lately published Epistles: The Capillary Extremities of these Blood Vessels are
very Numerous, as will appear when Injected with Mercury. There are diverse
Lymphe-Ducts on the Pericardium, which convey the Lympha to the Thoracick-Duct.
The Glands, which are in the Pericardium and at the Basis of the Heart, which
separate that Humor employed in Moistening the Inside of that Membrane and
Surface of the Heart, are not to be discovered by the naked Eye in ordinary
Dissections; no more than those on the Inside of the Peritonaeum and Surface of
the Intestines, which afford a Humor to Lubricate those Parts; but when either
of these Parts are Diseased so that those Glands are Affected, their Existence
then is Demonstrable; as appeared in the Pericardium of an Infant I lately
Dissected, where the Neighboring Parts and Pericardium its self were
Apostumated. In the Pericardiums of this Subject we found Two or Three Ounces
of Purulent Matter in place of the Serous Humor; and the External Membrane of
the Heart so loosned, as its Surface appeared Villous; nor did any Fat appear
on the Basis of the Heart. In an Adult Person who Died suddenly I found the
Pericardium somewhat Thickened and no Humor contained in it; but in Two, or
Three Places cleaving to the Heart especially near its Basis, and the Heart it
self entirely covered with Fat; The Use of the Pericardium is to defend the
Heart in its Systole from the Neighboring Parts, and to contain a Humor to
Moisten the External Surface of the Heart.

E, The Heart lying within the Pericardium.

F F, Parts of the Lungs on both Sides the Thorax in Situ.

G, The Thymus in Situ. The Magnitude of the Thymas varies according to the Age
of the Body; in a Faetus Two Months after Conception it is larger in Proportion
to the Bulk of the Body than in One of Five or Six Months: In a Faetus of Nine
Months it almost fills the Interstice which the Lungs after the Birth begin to
take up in the Upper Part of the Thorax. The Thymus after the Birth gradually
decreases, except the Upper Part of the Cavity in the Thorax is Capacious
enough for its Reception, as appeared in an Anatomical Subject I lately
Dissected of Thirty Years of Age, in whom the Thymus was very large: I must
confess I never yet met with a Subject, tho never so Old, in whom the Thymus
was wanting. In those Bodi^^ the Thymus is less than ordinary, we find the
Subclavian Glands, those of the Internal Jugular Veins, and the Glandule
Thyraidam larger; as they lately appeared in a Boy of about Eight Years of Age.
In Women the Thymus and Thyroid Glands are larger than in Men, but the
Subclavian Glands are less; by reason the Claviculae in Women are straight and
shorter than those of Men; whence a much less Interstice is frain'd for
entertaining those Glands. I have more than once found the Lymphe-Ducts filled
with Wax, which Arise from the Thymus, and empty themselves into the Upper Part
of the Thoracick-Duct; by Injecting that Duct by the Vesica Chyli: See App.
Fig. 12. D.

From what has been abovesaid, it appears the Thymus bears a Proportion to the
Head; whether in the Faetus or in Bodies before they become Adult, which we
conceive, is in order to receive a Proportionable Quantity of Lympha, derived
from thence: And as the Subclavian Glands of Women are less than those of Men;
so the Thyroide Glands and Thymus are larger: Hence also it appears the Thymus
is a Lymphatick Gland, and Varies its Magnitude according to the Quantity of
the Lympha, that is necessarily transmitted through it from the Superior Parts;
or as the Neighboring Lymphatick Glands do more or less transmit their Lympha
to it: Besides this common Office of the Thymus, whether in the Faetus or
Adult; it has another Use which was first suggested to Me by Injecting a Liquid
into the Thoracick-Duct; when finding it not only fill the Lymphe-Ducts of the
Thymus, but the Thymus it self was Extended with it: The like Observation, I
since found, was made by the Expert Anatomist Dr. Tyson, some Time since;
whence I conceive, the Thymus and its Lymphe-Ducts are Diverticula to the
Chyle, when too great a Quantity is pressing forewards toward the Subclavian
Vein. I know it may be Objected that the Valves of the Lymphe-Ducts oppose this
contrary Course of Liquours in them; but repeated Observations convince me,
that not only these Lymphe-Ducts of the Thymus, which are large and have very
few if any Valves, (as appears by their being Injected with Wax) but those of
the Loins, and their Glands from whence they Arise, are frequently filled with
Chyle, when no Compress is made on the Thoracick-Duct. Hence it is, a Milky
Liquor has been commonly found in the Thymus, but more frequent in that of a
P^tus than i^ an Adult; and that not only because the Thymus and its
Lymphe-Ducts are much larger Proportionably in the former State or Faetus, but
the bended Position of the Thoracick-Duct of the Fetus in Vter^, renders the
Ascent of the Chyle by that Duct more liable to Regurgitate by the Lymphe-Ducts
of the Thymus.

H H, The Forepart of the Diaphragma freed from the Cartilaginous Endings of
the Ribs, and Pinned up.





THE TWENTY-SECOND TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE Heart with Parts of the Trunks of the great Veins and Arteries cut off.

A A, The proper Membrane of the Heart; a Portion of which is Raised and hangs
Down.

B B, The Left Side of the Heart, adorned with in Coronary Vessels.

C ps, Part of the Right Auricle of the Heart.

C, The Left Auricle on the Basis of the Heart.

D, The Cone of the Heart.

E, The Vena Cava which conveys the Refluent Blood from the whole Field of the
Body into the Right Auricle of the Heart, when the Heart i^ i^ Systole; whence
the Blood is again transmitted into the Right Ventricle of the Heart when it is
in Diastole: So that when the Auricles of the Heart are in Diastole or
Relaxation, they are filled with Blood, and the Heart it self is in Systole or
Contraction, and Vice versa when the Heart is in Diastole, the Auricles are in
Systole.

F, The Arteria Pulmonalis or Vena Arteriosa which carries the Blood from the
Right Ventricle of the Heart into the Lungs.

G, The Vena Pulmonica or Arteria Venosa which conveys the Refluent Blood from
the Lungs into the Left Auricle and Ventricle of the Heart, not unlike the Vena
Cava, etc.

H, The Arteria Magna Arising out of the Left Ventricle, which conveys the Mass
of Blood from the Heart through the Field of the Body; from whose capillary
Extremities the Veins are continued, as appears by a Microscope in the
transparent Parts of living Animals: See App. Fig. 4. and 5.

Fig. 2.
The Heart divested of its External Membrane and Carnous Fibers after Boiling;
so that the Disposition of the Subjacent Fibers may appear. The way of
preparing the Heart to exhibit this Disposition of its Fibers, may be practiced
after the following Manner. The Heart with Portions of the Trunks of the large
Blood Vessels being taken off; the Blood as well within its Ventricles as
Blood Vessels being evacuated, then with Tow, or Pieces of Rags, fill the
Ventricles, Auricles, and large Vessels on the Basis of the Heart; the Mouths
of the large Blood Vessels being stitched up, least their Contents should be
Extruded by the Contraction of the Heart in Boiling. This done, Boil it
according to its Bulk; if it is the Heart of an Ox, etc. Boil it Four or Five
Hours; if of a Man, One or Two.

N. B. This Figure is Printed reverst.

A, A Sinus placed between both Ventricles, in which a large Trunk of one of
the Coronary Arteries is conveyed.

B, The Cochleated or Oblique descending Order of Fibers of the Left Ventricle
of the Heart.

C, The External and Oblique descending Order of Fibers of the Right Ventricle;
which decussate the former or Subjacent Fibers in Acute Angles.

D, Part of the Arteria Pulmonalis.

E, The Aorta.

ee, The Trunks of the Coronary Arteries.

F, The Right Auricle.

G, The Left.

Fig. 3.
A, The Sinus above mentioned between the Ventricles.

B, The Tortuous Disposition of the Fibers of the Right Ventricle.

C, Those of the Left.

The Heart consists chiefly of diverse Strata of Oblique descending Fibers; the
External passing more straight or less Contorted than the Internal; whence it
happens that the External Fibers are seen to Decussate the Internal with Acute
Angles; the former Arising from the Basis of the Heart at the Roots of the
Blood Vessels, and End in the Cone; the later Arise from the same Place, and
Terminate either in the 'Parietes of the Ventricles or Columnae Carneae Fig. 7.
g g, from which diverse Tenditious Filaments are continued to the Lower-parts of
the Tricuspid and Mitral Valves.

D, The Aorta divided between its Origin from the Heart and Valves, and
reclined to One Side, hanging by its Two^ Coronary Arteries; Expressed Fig. 2. e
e.

e e, The Three Semilunary Valves of the Aorta, which hinder a Return of the
Blood into the Left Ventricle, when the Heart is in Diastole.

Fig. 4.
The Concourse of Fibers near the Cone of the Heart, as they appear after a
Transverse Section.

Fig. 5.
Some Fasciculi of Fibers of the Left Ventricle of the Heart.

A B, The Two Tendinous Extremities of the Oblique Fleshy Fibers, Expressed Fig.
2, 3.

C, The Fleshy Parts of the Fibers between the Two Tendons.

D, The Collateral Fibers which appear in dividing the last mentioned
Fasciculi: Nor are these any other than Parts of the Fibers of the divided
Fasciculus, and lay Parallel to each other according to their length. The
Blood Vessels and Nerves passing between these Fibers make a Reticular
Appearance, when divided, as here Expressed.

Fig. 6.
The Right Auricle, and Part of the Basis of the Heart.

A A, The Right Auricle expanded.

B B B, The Three Tricuspid Valves; Two of which, are extended by Pinning out
their Tendons, derived from the Columnae Carneae: See Fig. 7. g g, Fig. 10. A,
Inferior. The Office of the Auricles is to receive Part of the Refluent Blood
whilst the Heart is in Systole, and to discharge that Blood again into the
Ventricles of the Heart when it is in Diastole, so that the Auricles of the
Heart seem as Diverticula to the Blood in its passing into its Ventricles; else
a Repercussion of the Blood in the Veins would necessarily happen in the
Systole of the Heart; which would prevent the regular Influx of the Blood to
the Ventricles.

Fig. 7.
The Heart with its Left Ventricle Opened.

A, The Inside of the Vena Pulmonalis.

B, The Aorta in like manner Opened.

C C, The Septum Cordis, which divides the Right Ventricle from the Left.

D, The Left Auricle entire which in Humane Bodies is very little, as appears
by this Figure; and the Trunk of the Pulmonick Vein very large.

d, The Trunk of the Arteria Pulmonica cut off.

e e, Two of the Three Semilunary Valves at the Beginning of the Arteria Magna;
which hinder the Reflux of the Blood when the Heart is in Diastole; in which
Action they are Expressed, Fig. 3. e e.

f f, The Two Mitral Valves in the Pulmonick Vein, which prevent the Blood
repassing that Vessel when the Heart is in Systole.

g g, The Carneae Columnae composed of Muscular Fibers, derived from those of
the Sides of the Heart, whence diverse small Tendinous Filaments do Arise, and
are faltned to the Inferior Limbus of the Mitral Valves; by which means those
Valves are drawn down toward the Cone of the Heart, and prevent the Blood from
passing out again that way when the Heart is in Systole. I know Dr. Lower in
his Accurate Book De Cord, Supposes that these Mitral and Tricuspid Valves are
Relaxed in the Systole of the Heart, and by their Rising up stop up the
Passages of the Veins: But if the Structure of the Heart and these Parts are
Attentively considered in a large Animal, as in an Ox, etc. it will appear
reasonable to conceive that these Mitral and Tricuspid Valves are rather drawn
down than suffer Extrusion upwards: nor need Nature have been at any trouble in
making those Valves at the Orifices of the Veins, any otherwise than the
Reverse of the Semilunary Valves of Arteries; if as the Expert Dr. Lower
Supposes they are driven up and Extended like a Sail with Wind when the Heart
is in Systole; but by fastening those Tendinous Fibers to the Lower-parts of
those Tricuspid and Mitral Valves; which, are of a Conical Figure, seems to me
to be an Argument that they cannot suffer such Extension upwards, without
letting some Part of the Blood repass them in the Systole of the Heart: Besides
there must constantly a considerable Part of the Blood remain in the Ventricles
of the Heart, if those Valves are so disposed in its Systole; which I think the
Dr. himself seems no where to conceive; but on the contrary the Ventricles of
the Heart are with great Strength adequately Comprest in it is Systole, for
which End the Insides of its Ventricles are composed of diverse Fleshy Columns;
between which diverse Intersticia necessarily Result, (that are elegantly
Expressed in this Figure,) by which means, the Ventricles are more exactly Closed
in their Systole, than they could have been, had they been smooth.

Fig. 8.
The Heart with its Right Ventricle Opened.

A, The Inside of the Right Auricle of the Heart as it appears when Opened and
Pinned out.

B, The Left Auricle Entire.

C, The Coronary Blood Vessels of the Heart; from these, particularly from the
Arteries, Spring those of the Auricles and large Blood Vessels of the Heart; as
the Accurate Ruysch describes them in his Anatomical Epistles Page 15. The
Nerves of the Heart Spring from the Eighth Pair and Intercostal Nerves; a
particular Description of which, may be found in Dr. Lower's Book De Cord, and
Vieussenius Nervographia.

D, Part of the Right Ventricle of the Heart Opened.

E, A Portion of the Vena Arteriosa or Arteria Pulmonalis Divided and Expanded.

f f f, The Three Valvulae Sigmoides or Semilunares, which oppose the Return of
the Blood from the Lungs, by the Arteria Pulmonica into the Heart, when it is
in Diastole.

Fig. 9.
A A, The Heart cut Transversely.

B, That Part of it next its Basis.

C, That next its Cone.

D D, The Right Ventricle of the Heart.

E, The Left --

F, The Septum Cordis or the Partition between the Two Ventricles of the Heart.

G G, A Stylus put through the Vena Cava into the Right Ventricle of the Heart.

H H, Another passing from the same Ventricle through the Arteria Pulmonalis.

I I, A Stylus in the Left Ventricle of the Heart passing out at the Arteria
Magna;

K K, Another Inserted into the same Ventricle, by the Vena Pulmonica.

Fig. 10.
A, Inferior, A Portion of the Columna Carnis of One of the Ventricles of the
Heart cut off: See Fig. 7. g g, in Situ.

B, The Tendinous Fibers derived from the Fleshy Column, and fastened to the
Inferior Margin of One of the Tricuspid Valves.

A A, Superior, Portions of the Tricuspid Valves.

Fig. 11.
The Coronary Blood Vessels of the Heart as they appear on its Surface when
Injected, after Drying the whole Heart.

A A, The Arteries filled with Mercury fixed with Tin.

B B, The Veins Extended with Wax.

Fig. 12.
A Portion of the Vena Pulmonalis next the Basis of the Heart.

A A, Parts of the Mitral Valves Pinned out by their Tendons.

Fig. 13.
The Inner Surface of a Portion of the Arteria Magna cut off at the Basis of
the Heart when Divided and Expanded.

A A A A, The Three Semilunary Valves well Expressed when Pinned out; One of them
being cut through in its Middle, in dividing the Great Artery.

Fig. 14.
Represents in like manner a Portion of the Arteria Pulmonalis.

A A A, The Three Sigmoidal or Semilunary Valves.

THE TWENTY-THIRD TABLE.
Fig. 1.
REPRESENTS the External Coat of a Vein viewed with a Microscope.

A B C D, The Fibers extended according to the Length of the Vessel, where may
be observed the Vasa Vasorum.

Fig. 2.
A, The Second Coat of the Vein, called by Dr. Willis, the Vasculous and
Glandulous Coat.

Fig. 3.
The Third or Internal Tunick of a Vein composed of Circular Fibers.

Fig. 4
The External Coat of an Artery consisting of a Rete of small Nerves (A,)
Blood Vessels, (B) and Membranous Expansions (C*) On this Membrane of the
Artery diverse Glandulous Bodies appear composing greater and lesser Clusters, D
E, variously dispersed.

Fig. 5.
A B, The Second Coat of an Artery consisting of diverse Strata of Fibers
variously decussating each other, and joined with the Internal or Third Coat.

Fig. 6.
A B C, The Inner and Smooth Surface of the Third or most Internal Coat of the
Artery; where the Foramina for the Branches which arise out of it, are expressed,
and its Fibers extended according to its length B, C. The great Trunks of the
Arteries do evidently appear to consist of a greater Number of Strata of
Fibers, than those of the Veins; but the farther they recede from the Heart,
they are both still more and more subdivided, and their Trunks and Capillary
Branches become still thinner and thinner, till their outmost Extremities
consist of one single transparent Membrane; chiefly composed of such Tubes, as
only convey their Succus Nutritious. And this I am apt to think may serve for
the Description of Blood Vessels in general; and shall farther consider the
Organization of the several Extremities of the Blood Vessels, in speaking of
their particular Offices relating to Secretion in the several Parts; wherefore
at present shall only mention, that the Extremities of Veins and Arteries are
continued Channels, variously contorted and not all of them of an equal Size,
even in Parts which are uniform or the same. Vid. App. Fig. 4.5.

After the Blood has past the Extremities of its Vessels, and is in its Return
to the Heart again by the Veins; it there meets with diverse Valves or Stops,
which prevent the Weight of the Blood of the Inferior Parts of the Body, and
the Recoiling of it in the Superior, (when any violent Motions affect the
Thorax, as in Coughing, from pressing on the Extremities of the Vessels, and
hindering its progressive Motion. That there is a Recoiling of the Blood in any
extraordinary Motions of the Thorax, in the Jugular Veins, may be observed in
taking Blood from thence, especially in Children. Hence it is the Valves in
those Veins are necessary; least the Blood should again repass into the Vessels
of the Brain with great Violence; which is also prevented in the Contortion
made in the Internal Jugular Vein, in its Specus in the Basis of the Skull. I
must confess I never yet observed above Two Valves (one opposite to the other)
in the largest Vein that is furnished with Valves; however Anatomists commonly
mention Three, and Professor Bidloo tells us of Four and Five Valves, as they
appear in the following Figures.

Fig. 7.
Part of a Vein extended with Wind and dried, having a double Valve or Two
Valves of Semilunary Figures, placed opposite to each other.

Fig. 8.
A A, A Portion of the Jugular Vein blowed up and dried; B B B, Its Threefold
Valves.

Fig. 9.
Part of a Vein with Five Valves.

Fig. 10, 11.
A A, The Portions of Veins expressed in the Two preceding Figures laid open;

B B, etc. Their Valves as they appear in their Insides.

Fig. 12.
The Valves as they appear in the Insides of the Veins according to Bidloo.

Fig. 13.
Two Valves as they appear when taken out of the Veins.

Fig. 14.
The unequal Distance of the Valves in the Veins; the Vestigia of the Valves
being here only expressed, as they appear when the Vein is extended with Wind.

Fig. 15.
Represents (according to Bidloo) a System of the Arteries injected with Wax,
and freed from the Body of an Infant Six Months Old; which he tells us he has
reserved: If so, it is a great Rarity indeed! For having more than once freed
the Arteries from the Body of an Infant, as well as from an Adult, and finding
them far differing from this Figure, and not much disagreeing with the
Descriptions and Figures of Vesalius and others; I cannot look on this, but as
a Prodigy in Nature. Wherefore I shall here give you his Description of it, and
refer you to my Appendix. Fig. 3. Where their common Appearance is expressed, as
I now have them injected by me, and dissected from the Body of an Infant.

The Arteria Aorta (says Bidloo) arising from the Heart, soon sends out Two
small Coronary Branches. B, in the Body of the Heart. Its Trunk is divided on
the Pericordium into the Ascendens C, and Descendens D. The First gives
Branches to the Parts above the Heart, and is divided into the Subclavii E,
from which the Axillares F, and Internal Mammary G, Three or Four Intercostales
H, and Cervicales I. do arise. From the Axillary Artery are Branches
communicated to the Scapula K, and to the Superior Parts of the Thorax. When it
has got between the Muscles of the Cubit, it is divided into Two little
Branches; the First of which L, goes to the Wrist, Thumb, and Forefinger; the
other to the Three other Fingers. It divides into Two about the Thymus, and
Forms the Carotides M. These ascending near the Windpipe after having sent
several Branches to the Tongue, Larynx and Parts adjacent, and are divided into
the External N, and Internal Branch O, the Exterior supplies the Face, Lips,
partly the Ear and lower Teeth; the other Branch serves the Forehead, Temples
and Neighboring Parts.

The Inward Branch ascending straight through the Os Sphoenoides creeps under
the 'Dura Matter, and forming various Plexus's, in that Part within the Skull,
it is covered with a particular Coat already described; it sends out small
Branches near the Optic Nerves; but the large Trunks creep back again,
sometimes united and by and by separated from each other. There are small
Branches conveyed to the Spinal Marrow, partly above and partly below the
Heart. From the Axillarie's, and ascending and descending Trunks, it derives
several Branches which reflected into a Circle, creep through its Coverings and
several Parts of the Head. The descending Trunk of the Aorta D, supply's some
of the Intercostals 1, and the Neighboring Muscles and Parts; there is a large
Trunk 2, also sent to the Diaphragm; under the Diaphragm the Branches of the
Viscera of the Abdomen are remarkable. viz. of the Stomach, 3. The Inferior and
Superior Meseraic Branches, 4, 5, those of the Omentum, or Caul, 6, of the
Liver, 7, of the Kidneys 8, the Spermatics 9, and so on. About the Os Sacrum
this Trunk is divided into Two Branches, from which others are again derived to
the Right Gut and Pudenda, some to the Hips, some to the Thighs and Legs, as
well Internally, as Externally. Thus much concerning the principal Distribution
of the Aorta.

In the next Place Professor Bidloo gives us the Anatomy of the Blood. In the
Anatomy of the Blood Chymically performed (says he) it is manifest there is a
Water in it, which as well as it can be, is simply to be considered) a Spirit
and Salts both fixed and volatile. Though by this Method (he very well says) some
Parts are very accurately discovered; yet does it exceedingly destroy the
Appearances of some Figures, which ought by no means to be altered; wherefore
he proposed the following Figure.

Fig. 16.
A, A small Drop of Blood enclosed in a Glass Tube, and its Particles by the
Help of a Microscope are represented very much magnifyed.

B, The Globular Bladders.

C, The little Fibers variously turned, laid, and disposed, according to
Bidloo. I must confess I have frequently viewed the Blood in the same Manner as
here Expressed with a Microscope, and have constantly observed its Appearance as
here represented: Nor could I ever apprehend the Blood was furnished with
Fibers (so much talked of) but that the Fibrous Appearance it has, (when any
Blood-Vessel is open in the Mouth, or in Bleeding into warm Water and the like)
is owing to a Coagulation of its Serum, by which Means its Globules are
entangled and frame those Fibrous Bodies: The Streaked Mass represented at D,
E. (according to Bidloo) I am apt to think proceeded from a Coagulation of the
Serous Part of the Blood, by sealing the Tube Hermetically; in doing which the
Glass must be heated. To this our Author adds another Way of Anatomizing the
Blood, thus:

The watery whitish Liquor, which is of a different Substance, being separated
from the cold coagulated Mass of Blood, and set on the Fire, thickens in a
short Time; the red Part which remains, (of which the more fluid Part being
frequently washed away with warm Water,) appears like a grumous Heap; every
Particle of which resembles a Globular Bladder; of which, some are Transparent,
others not. The rest of the Mass which consists of very flexible Fibers,
according to Bidloo, and being exposed to the Air and Cold, become very tough,
tensile, and seem like Network, owe that Appearance to a Combination of the
Globules variously stratified on each other.

The Third Way (which our Author proposes) of enquiring into the Blood, is when
the Blood is separated from the Serum or Liquor it swims in, and put on a Piece
of Paper daubed over with Lard, is become a little dry; after an External View
of the Particles, gently with the Finger break off a little of the Mass of
Blood; in which, you will presently behold little Globes of a differing Frame
and Figure, little Fibers, and Streaks of the same Kind.





THE TWENTY-FOURTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE Fore-parts of all the Viscera within the Cavity of the Thorax, when taken
out together.

A, The Heart covered with the Pericardium, and hanging to the Lungs by its
Membranes and Vessels.

B B, The Descending Trunk of the Vena Cava, on the Right Side, and the Aorta
on the Left.

b b b, The Ascending Branches of the Arteria Magna, which make the Two
Carotides and Right Subclavian Branch.

C, Part of the Mediastinum cut from the Sternum.

D D, The Right and Left Anterior Lobes of the Lungs.

E E, The Two Posterior Lobes of the Lungs.

F, Part of the Windpipe.

G G, Portions of the Nerves called Par Vagum.

H, Part of the Gala.

In freeing the Lungs from the Cavity of the Thorax, we frequently find their
Outward Membrane cleaving to the Pleura, nor has any known Inconveniences
attended such Persons when Living. The many Phoenomena which have occurred to
our Observation in Dissecting Morbid Bodies, in whom these Parts have been
Diseased, are too Numerous to be inserted in this Place; wherefore I shall only
mention what I have more than once taken Notice of in examining these Parts,
when they have not been Diseased ( viz.) by Blowing into the Blood Vessels, (
i. e.) the Vena Arteriosa and Arteria Venosa those Vessels derived from the
Pleura, as well as those by Ruysch called Arteriae Bronchales, (Corresponding
to which I have frequently observed Veins which empty themselves into the
Subclavian Branches;) all which I have found to Communicate with each other
upon Distension; by which we may be informed the Blood does not enjoy such
particular Vessels in its Circulation through these Parts, as some have
conceived; but that Part of the Blood which Arises from the Right Auricle of
the Heart, may pass into the Bronchial Veins, as well as into the Arteria
Venosa; and on the other Hand, the Blood Springing from the Bronchial Arteries,
may partly pass into the Left Auricle of the Heart by the Arteria Venosa, as
well as by its Corresponding Bronchial Veins before mentioned.

Fig. 2.
Part of One of the Lobes of the Lungs cut off, and a Division made according
to its Length, so that a Branching of the Blood Vessels and Bronchus do appear.

A A, A Branch of the Pulmonick Vein, or Arteria Venosa, lying on that of the
Bronchus.

B, A Branch of the Bronchus.

C, The Pulmonick Artery, or Vena Arteriosa, cut Transversely, lying on the
other Side of the Bronchia.

Fig. 3.
Another Lobe of the Lungs Dissected as in the preceding Figure.

A A B B, The Ramifications of the Pulmonick Artery Accompanying those of the
Bronchia: See Tab. 25. Fig. 10.

C, The External Membrane of the Lungs Raised and Pinned out to show its
Blood Vessels: These Vessels partly Arise from the Pulmonick Vessels last
mentioned, and partly from the Arteriae and Venae Bronchiales, as appears from
what has been above Noted; and do frequently Germinate and Inosculate with the
Intercostal Veins and Arteries of the Pleura: The Germination and Inosculations
of these Vessels I have had frequent Opportunities of observing to be in
several little Parcels or Fasciculi, and of an Inch or Two in Length between
the Lungs and Pleura: They very often appear in Filaments more or less Divided,
and I am apt to think are frequently the Beginnings of those Adhesions of the
Lungs with the Pleura.

Fig. 4.
A A, The Bronchia or Branch of the Trachea made bare.

B B, Part of the Lungs.

Fig. 5.
The Forepart of the Larynx, and Part of the Windpipe, together with the
Common Muscles of the Larynx, etc.

A B, The Musculus Sternothyroideus, not well Expressed; it being here as it were
continuous with the Hyothyroideus C E.

D, The Os Hyoides, or Bone of the Tongue reclined Laterally.

F, The Upper and Forepart of the Epiglottis in Situ.

G, The Forepart of the Scutiformal Cartilage.

H H, The Musculi Cricothyroidei; on the Left Side One of them hanging down at
its Beginning; the other remaining in Situ. These Muscles Spring from the
Forepart of the Annular Cartilage, and are soon Inserted to the Internal, and
Lower Part of the Scutiformal Cartilage.

I, O, The Forepart of the Cartilago Annularis, made bare.

Fig. 6.
The Back-part of the Larynx, and its Muscles placed on it; Expressed very
Confusedly; which, together with the former Figure, is Erroneously described by
Bidloo.

F F G K L M P Q, Should Express the Back-part of the Cartilago Annularis
covered with the Musculi Cricoarytenoidei Postici, as it is Represented in our
Appendix.

N N, The Musculus Arytenoideus.

O, The Internal and Concave Part of the Epiglottis, as it appears when Pinned
up.

R, The Posterior Edge of the Scutiformal Cartilage of the Right Side.

S, The Membranous Part of the Windpipe next the Gula.

Fig. 7.
The Os Hyoides, or Bone of the Tongue, together with the Forepart of the the
Cartilages which compose the Larynx, and Part of the Aspera Arteria.

A, The External and Unequal Part of the Cartilago Scutiformis.

B, The Internal and Concave Part of the Os Hyoides; which Part of it
necessarily comes in View in this Position.

C, The Annular Cartilage.

D, The Epiglottis, Expressed with the Internal Concave Part Forewards, as is
truly Exhibited in the following Figure; which on the contrary, should have
been here Represented with its External and Convext Part, as in Fig. 5. F.

E, Part of the Aspera Arteria, or Windpipe.

F F, The Glandulae Thyroideae: From what I have hitherto observed, these
Glands seem to be of the same Office with the Thymus: Nor does their Color or
Compactness distinguish them from the Thymus; if we consider, that by their
Situation on the Windpipe, they are perpetually in Motion, by which the Motion
of the Blood is very much hastened through them, and the Blood Vessels
consequently Enlarged, whence their Color and Compactness does Arise.

G G, Two long Processes of the Thyroide Cartilage, or Scutiformis tied to the
Extremities of the Os Hyoides.

Fig. 8.
The Os Hyoides and Back part of the Lar^yx.

A, The External Convext Part of the Os Hyoides. This Bone of the Tongue
appears in this preceding Figure, to be composed of Three Bones; the
Middle-Bone A, is joined to One of the Extremities of the Two Side-Bones, by a
Cartilaginous Interposition called Sychondrosis; the Two other Extremities of
these Side-Bones are tied to the Extremities of the Two long Processes of the
Thyroide Cartilage G G, Fig. 7. by a Ligament; which Connection is called
Syndesinusis.

B, The Internal Concave-part of the Epiglottis next the Glottis.

C C, The Arytenoidal Cartilages covered with the Glottis, or Internal Membrane
of the Oesophagus.

D, The Cricoidal Cartilage covered with the Internal Membrane of the
Oesophagus which composes the Glottis.

E E, The Two Sides, or Back-part of the Thyroidal Cartilage, whence the
Musculus Oesophageus does Arise; which Muscle in a Semi-circular Manner Invests
the Back-part of the Oesophagus.

F F, The Back-parts of the Thyroidal Glands.

G, The Posterior-part of the Windpipe where it is Membranous, and receives
the Forepart of the Gula in its way to the Stomach.

Having Viewed the Fore and Back-parts of the whole Larynx, we come in the next
place to Examine those Cartilages which Compose it, when Separated from each
other.

1, The External Convext-part of the Thyroidal Cartilage.

2, The Internal Concave-part of the same Cartilage: In these Two Figures, the
Two Kinds of Processes of the Thyroidal Cartilage are Remarkable; the Two
Superior or long Processes are joynd with the Extremities of the Os Hyoides G
G, Fig. 7. the Two Inferior are fastened to the Cricoidal Cartilage Laterally.

3, 4, The Cricoidal Cartilage; 3, the Forepart; 4, the Back-part of this
Cartilage: That Figure of the Right Hand (toward the Figure of the Lungs and
Heart) Expresses the External, Inferior, and Back-part of the Annular
Cartilage; That of the Left Hand, Represents the Inferior, Internal, and
Forepart of the Annular Cartilage.

5, 6, 5, 6, Two different Views of the Arytenoidal Cartilages, which are
Articulated to the Superior Part of the Cricoidal Cartilage.

THE TWENTY-FIFTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
A Portion of the Windpipe cut off.

A B B, The External Membrane of the Windpipe Raised and Pinned out.

Fig. 2.
The Muscular Fasciculi lying between the Cartilages of the Windpipe.

Fig. 3.
The Glandulous Membrane of the Windpipe, where diverse Clusters of Glandules
of a different Magnitude are Expressed.

Fig. 4.
The Internal Membrane of the Windpipe, composed of Fibers extended according
to its Length; between this Internal and Longitudinal Order of Fibers, and the
Cartilages, are placed another Transverse Order, which pass Circularly
according to the Disposition of the Cartilages: These Internal Transverse
Fleshy Fibers are more Numerous than the Superior Longitudinal Ones: Both these
Orders of Fibers are Expressed in this Figure. This Disposition of the Fibers of
the Internal Membrane of the Windpipe, is very Conspicuous in the Wind-Pipes
of most Quadrupedes, especially in the Larger sort, as Oxen, Horses, etc. But
chiefly, (considering the Bulk of the Animal) in a Hog, in whose Windpipe this
Membrane appears composed of Strong Fleshy Fibers; whence an Account may not
improbably be suggested, why that Animal is capable of altering the Tone of the
Voice from a Base to a Treble: For when these Fibers Contract, the Channel of
the Windpipe is very much Straightened, as well in its Diameter as Length; whence
the Tone is rendered more Acute. This Constructure of the Inward Membrane of the
Windpipe, is continued to the Beginning of the Bronchia, where these Fleshy
Fibers lessen and bear a Proportion to the Cavities of the Bronchia, and are at
length so Thinn'd as to Frame Transparent Membranes, which help to compose the
Vesiculae of the Lungs.

Fig. 5.
Part of One of the Lobes of the Lungs, with the Bronchia Injected with Wax to
exhibit the Lobuli.

A, Part of the Bronchial Tube cut off.

B B, The Lobuli, or distinct Clusters of the Vesiculae, partly composed of the
Extremities of the Bronchia; and partly of the Blood Vessels of the Lungs:
These Lobuli are not always of the same Figure, some being Round, others Oval,
some Oblong, and others Variously Figured.

C C, The Interstitia of the Lobuli; which are Invested with the Internal
Lamina of the Proper Membrane of the Lungs, here Pinned out; on which the
Blood Vessels are very Conspicuous: These Interstitia, or Spaces between the
Lobuli, Appear in the Lungs of a Foetus very plain, and do not Communicate with
the Vesiculae of the Lobuli, but are distinguished from them, as does Appear by
Blowing into these Interstitia; which may be done with a Blow-Pipe, after
Wounding the External Membrane of the Lungs, and you will find the Interstitia
of the Lobuli very much Distended with Wind, and the Vesiculae not at all
Inflated: Nor on the Contrary, will these Interstitia be any ways Inflated by
Blowing into the Bronchia, though the Vesiculae and Lobuli are very much Extended.

D D, The Branches of the Pulmonick Vein and Artery on each Side the Bronchia:
See Fig. 10. A, B.

Fig. 6.
Part of the Bronchia with diverse Lobuli of One of the Lobes of the Lungs. Dr.
Willis who has given a Figure of these Lobuli, after the Manner as they are
here Represented, says, that by filling the Bronchia with a Liquid, these
Lobuli may be separated from each other. I must confess I have more than once
Attempted to Divide these Lobuli, but could not be satisfied of their
Appearance like this Figure: The External Surface of the Lobuli in the Foetus
Appear Angular, and are in a Cubical manner placed by each other.

A, The Inside of the Bronchia, where the Holes for diverse of its Ramifications
which pass out of it; and the Straight Progress of the Fibers of its Internal
Membrane do Appear.

B B, The Bronchia divided into lesser Branches; to which the Lobuli are
Fastened.

C C, The Lobuli, which may be more or less Divided, and are composed of the
Vesiculae. The Vesiculae as above hinted, are Framed by the Extremities of the
Bronchia, and the Pulmonick Blood Vessels.

N. B. The Lobuli in this Figure may be observed to have the Extremities of the
Blood Vessels Branched on Them. Each Vesicula also has One of the Extremities
of the Pulmonick Veins and Arteries Branched on it; and without doubt
(Conformable to the Extremities of the Blood Vessels of other Parts) those
Vessels also are continued Channels on the Vesiculae of the Lungs. Here the Art
of Nature is very Extraordinary, in Framing the Extremities of these
Blood Vessels of the Lungs so very small, and confining their vast Number in so
narrow a Compass, as the Body of the Lungs; for these Pulmonick Blood Vessels
Correspond to those of the whole Field of the Body, in constantly 'Discharging
the Blood through them, as well as through the Heart; whilst Life with perfect
Health is maintained. And notwithstanding One Half of the Lungs is completely
Vitiated, (as I have more than once found in Dissecting Morbid Bodies) yet
nevertheless the Circulation of the Blood has been still carried on for some
time. Though in this Case Respiration must not only be very Quick and Attended
with no small Difficulty on frequent Occasions; but the Heart must also Labor
very much to drive the Blood on.

Fig. 7.
A Portion of the External Surface of the Lungs cut from them, when Dried,
after Inflation.

A A, The External Membrane.

B B, The Lamellae of the External Membrane, which pass between the Vesiculae
and compose the Lobuli; between which, the Interstitia necessarily Result.

C D, The Lobuli composed of the Vesiculae, which are here well Expressed.

Fig. 8.
The Aspera Arteria or Windpipe, together with the Bronchus or Ramifications
of it, freed from the Lungs.

A A, The Forepart of the Windpipe.

B B, The Division of the Windpipe into Two Branches, and afterward into
more, called Bronchus.

C C, The Larger Branches of the Bronchus.

D D, The Lesser, from whose Extremities the Vesiculae are Pulled off.

E E, The Semicircular Cartilages of the Windpipe.

F G H, The Cartilages of the Bronchia of Various Figures and Sizes; some of
which are Circular F F; others Semicircular, Triangular G; Quadrangular etc. H.
These Cartilages of the Bronchus are not Connexed to each other like those of
the Windpipe it self; but the Lower-parts of the Superior receive the
Upper-parts of the Inferior; not unlike the Crustaceous Coverings of the
Locusts, or Tail of a Lobster: so that in Inspiration the Bronchus may be
Coextended with the Tumified Lungs; for these Ligaments between the Cartilages
of the Bronchus have an Elastick Power of Restitution; not unlike that strong
Ligament, placed on the Spines of the Vertebrae of the Necks of Quadrupedes; by
which means the Superior Parts of the Lower Cartilages of the Bronchus are
drawn under the Inferior Parts of the Upper, in Expiration: But in Inspiration
the Ligaments are Extended, and the Inferior Cartilages are withdrawn from
under the Superior; and to this Action in Expiration the Longitudinal Fibers of
the Windpipe (which pass into the Bronchus) do concur to Contract them. In
Inspiration the Weight of the Superincumbent Air is sufficient to Extend the
Bronchus, and consequently the Lungs, when the Cavity of the Thorax is Widen'd
by the Muscles which Draw the Bibs up.

Fig. 9.
A small Portion of the Lungs, whose Bronchial Branch is filled with Injected
Quicksilver.

A, The Bronchial Branch; on both Sides of which, the Pulmonick Blood Vessels
Appear.

Fig. 10.
Part of the Largest Branches of the Bronchus freed from One of the Lungs;
together with the Pulmonick Blood Vessels and Lobes Injected with Wax.

A A, The Pulmonick Vein.

B B, The Artery filled with different Colored Wax. Besides freeing the
Bronchia, as in Fig. 8. there is another way of Demonstrating their
Ramifications by pouring of Melted Tin into them; which may be Practiced in the
following Manner. Cut off one Side of the Humane Lungs at the Division of the
Trachea B B, Fig. 8. and with the Feather End of a Goose-Quill so wipe the
Inside of the Bronchia, by often thrusting it into their Various Ramifications,
that at length it no longer comes out wet with the Mucus they have in them. The
Insides of the Bronchia being thus thoroughly Dried with a Feather: In like
Manner Anoint them with Linseed Oil. This done, Tie the Mouth of the Divided
Trachea to a Tin or Iron Tunnel: This Tunnel must be so placed that the Lungs
may hang Pendulous and Free; but least their Flaccidity should too much
Compress the Bronchia, it is convenient to pass diverse Threads through the
External Parts of the Lungs, and so Fasten them to the Floor and other
convenient Places, that the Lungs may be Extended thereby: In doing of which,
be sure you do not distort the Lungs from a direct Pendulous Position; but that
the large Trunk of the Bronchia remains Perpendicular to the Tunnel. This done,
Melt Block-Tin and pour it into the Tunnel; in doing of which, stand at some
Distance, least the Conflict which arises from the hot Metal in its meeting
with the remaining Moisture in the Bronchus, scatters it on your Hands, or
Face, etc. N. B. If the Metal is made very hot it will so Scorch the First
Passages of the Bronchia as to Contract them, and thereby Obstruct the rest:
Nor must it want Fluidity, least its passing into the smaller Branches is
thereby Hindered. The Bronchus being thus Injected in the Lungs; lay them in
Water, Nine, or Ten Days* till they begin to Putrify; then Boil the whole
Lungs off the Block-Tin, and you may expect to see it much fuller of Branches
than it is Expressed in the 11 th Figure.

Fig. 11.
Represents the Ramifications of the Bronchia in Block-Tin, as above Described.



THE TWENTY-SIXTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE upper Part of the Body lying in a Supine Posture, with the Os Pectoris or
Sternum raised, together with the Cartilages of the Ribs which are connexed to
it; so that the Cavity of the Thorax after its Viscera are removed, comes in
view.

A A A, The Cavity of the Thorax invested with the Pleura, whose smooth Surface
toward the Lungs, is here seen.

B B, The Musculi Triangulares as they Arise from the Inferior and Internal
Part of the Sternum, and Ascend to their Insertions at the Bony Endings of the
Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Ribs: In this View of the Internal Part of the
Sternum, the Mammary Blood Vessels on each Side of it are conspicuous: The
Cartilaginous Endings of the Two First Ribs are also remarkable, being somewhat
longer than the rest.

b, The Ensiformal Cartilage.

C D, Superior) The Course of the Fibers of the Internal Intercostal Muscles
which appear through the Pleura A A.

C D, Inferior) The External Intercostal Muscles whose Fibers decussate the
Internal like the Letter X.

These Intercostal Muscles arise from the Lower Edge of each Superior Rib, and
are Inserted to the Upper Edge of each Inferior one: They are employed in
bringing the Ribs nearer each other, to Enlarge the Cavity of the Thorax in
Inspiration.

D D, etc, The Seven Superior or True Ribs.

E E, The Saw-like Endings of the Serratus Major Anticus.

F F, The Diaphragm freed from the Cartilaginous Endings of the Ribs and
Ensiformal Cartilage, b.

f f, The Musculi Psoii partly in view.

G, The Cartilage of One of the Bastard-Ribs which is not joined to the Sternum.

H H, The Bodies of the Vertebrae of the Thorax.

I, The Vertebrae of the Neck.

K, The Lower Jaw Bone made bare.

k, The Musculus Pterigoideus Internus in Situ.

L L, The Claviculae.

M, Part of the Deltoides Muscle.

3, 4, 5, 6, The Bony Endings of the Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Ribs, cut
from the Cartilages which are fastened to the Sternum.

Fig. 2.
See Tab. 52.

THE TWENTY-SEVENTH TABLE.
THE Skin, Fat, and Membranes being removed, the Muscles appear on the Back as
follows.

A A, B B, C, D D, E, F F, G, H, The Musculus Cucularis or Trapezius on both
Sides in Situ:

Either of these arises Fleshy from the Os Occipitis, and Tendinous from the
Ligamentum Colli and Points of the Spines of the Three Lowest Vertebrae of the
Neck, and Eight Superior of the Thorax; from which broad Origination becoming
thick and Fleshy A A D D F, is so inserted to the Claviculae E and Tendinous H
F to the Spina Scapulae I. These move the Scapulae variously according to their
Directions of Fibers, as Upwards, Backwards, and Downwards.

J, Part of the Spina Scapulae.

K O O, The Latissimus Dorsi or Aniscalptor: A thin, broad Tendinous
Origination of This is derived from the Spines of the Seven Inferior Vertebrae
of the Thorax, and all the Vertebrae of the Loins, and Superior of the Os
Sacrum; as also from the Posterior Part of the Spine of the Os Ilium R, and
begins to grow Fleshy as it marches over the Longissimus Dorsi and Sacrolumbus,
K. and in its Ascent over the Ribs laterally, it has diverse Fasciculi of Fleshy
Fibers arising from thence and joining with it, becomes still thicker, more
Fleshy, and narrower, marching over the lowest Angle of the Scapulae; whence
sometimes a Fleshy Portion of this Muscle does arise, which we have commonly
found in those Bodies in whom the Teres Minor was wanting, as it was in this
Subject, and is at Length Inserted with a short flat strong Tendon to the Os
Humeri, at the Implantation of the Teres Major: Its Use is to draw the Arm
Downwards and Backwards.

L L, Parts of the Obliqui Descendentes Abdominis.

M, Part of the Deltoides on the Left Side.

N, The Infraspinalis on the Right Side.

O O, The Sacrolumbalis lying under the Tendon of the Latissimus Dorsi on the
Right Side.

P, The Basis of the Right Scapula.

Q Q, The Rotundi Majores.

R, The Spine of the Os Ilium.

S, Part of the Glutaeus Magnus.





THE TWENTY-EIGHTH TABLE.
THE Muscles of the Back lying under those Represented in the preceding Table.

A B C D, The Rhomboides in Situ, It arises Tendinous from the Spines of the
Two Inferior Vertebrae of the Neck, and Three or Four of the Superior of the
Thorax C; growing Fleshy in its Oblique Descent, it is inserted to the Basis of
the Scapula D: It draws the Scapula Upwards and Backwards.

E, The Rhomboides on the Right Side, remaining at its Origin at the Basis of
the Scapula.

F, A Portion of the Rhomboides which we frequently find distinct.

G, Part of the Elevator Scapulae or Musculus Patientiae: This Muscle has
diverse separate Originations from the Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth
Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck composing a large Fleshy
Muscle, which is Inserted to the Superior Angle of the Scapula.

H, That Part of the Basis Scapulae toward its Superior Angle.

I, The Serratus Superior Posticus Arising thin and Tendinous from the Spines
of the Two Inferior Vertebrae of the Neck, and Two Superior of the Thorax; and
after an Oblique Descent over the Inferior Part of the Splenius Capitis and
Upper Parts of the Longissimus Dorsi and Sacrolumbalis, becomes Fleshy,
marching under the Scapula to its Insertions at the Second, Third, and Fourth
Ribs. This Muscle assists in drawing the Ribs Upwards in Inspiration.

K, The Serratus Inferior Posticus: The Origination of this Muscle is much
larger than this Figure seems to represent. I have frequently taken Notice of a
Series of Tendinous Fibers continued between the Serratus Superior and this
Muscle; and its Lower Part in like Manner continued to the Spine of the Os
Ilium, strictly embracing the Sacrolumbus and Dorsi Longissimus; in which it
performs the Office of a Bandage as shall be hereafter mentioned. These
Inferior Saw-Muscles, in this Figure, are freed from their Originations at the
Spines of the Vertebrae of the Thorax and Loins, in raising the Latissimi
Dorsi, Expressed in the preceding Table K L O O, whose Tendinous Originations in
most Subjects, do inseparably cleave to these Serrati near the Spines: This
Figure demonstrating the Progress and Insertion of these Muscles, I shall only
add; their Use is to draw the Ribs Downwards, and Contract the Thorax in
Expiration.

L, Part of the Cucullaris left at its Insertion to the Clavicula.

M, The Latissimus Dorsi raised and left hanging at its Insertion on the Right
Side; the like is done on the Left, but not Lettered.

N O P Q; The Longissimi Dorsi; This Muscle and its Companion the Sacrolumbalis
are insepable at their Origination from the Spine of the Os Ilium, Superior
Part of the Sacrum, and all the Spines of the Vertebrae of the Loins;
Externally it is Tendinous; Internally Fleshy; in its Ascent it bestows diverse
Insertions on the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins; but
proceeding farther, it continues to derive Tendinous Originations from the
Spines of the lower Vertebrae of the Thorax, which in their Progress become
Fleshy Fibers, and Terminate in the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Spines of the
Thorax; and this Part of this Muscle Bidloo calls Semispinatus: The other
larger Part of it, in its Ascent on the Thorax, divides it self after the
Manner of a Palm-branch, into many Fleshy Portions which become Tendinous at
their Insertions to the Transverse Processes of each Vertebra of the Thorax,
and Tubercle of the Ribs, and some of the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae
of the Neck; This Muscle is not only employed in keeping the Trunk of the Body
Erect and Bending it Backwards; but in Progression, it has also a considerable
Office; for when either Leg is moved Forewards, this Muscle on the same Side,
near its Origin, may be observed to be in Action; which we suppose is necessary
to render the Os Ilium at that Time stable, to the End the Thigh Bone may be
more commodiously moved in its Acetabulum of the Coxendix.

R, The Sacrolumbalis which we shall describe hereafter.

S, Part of the Glutaeus Magnus.

S, The Spine of the Os Ilium.

T, The Splenius Capitis.

V, The Deltoides.

W, The Infraspinatus.

X, The Teres Major.

Y, Part of the Spina Scapulae, above which, Part of the Supraspinatus may be
seen.

Z, Part of the Serratus Major Anticus.

ps, The Seventh Rib made bare.

THE TWENTY-NINTH TABLE.
DIVERSE Muscles employed in moving the Back, Thorax and Arms.

A B D E, The Musculus Sacrolumbalis: Its Origin is already described in the
preceding Table with the Dorsi Longissimus, they arising inseparably: At their
parting below the last Rib, the Fleshy Part of the Sacrolumbus is divided into
diverse Parts, which become so many distinct Tendons and Terminate on the Ribs,
as may be seen on the Left Side of this Figure: Besides these Fleshy and
Tendinous Productions of this Sacrolumbal Muscle; it has another Order of
Tendinous and Fleshy Fibers which may be esteemed as so many distinct Muscles;
They arising partly Tendinous and partly Fleshy from the Transverse Processes
of the Loins, and Posterior Prominence of the Ribs, that is connexed to the
Transverse Process's of the Back, whence Ascending Obliquely outward, become
Fleshy, and growing Tendinous, do pass over Three or Four of the Superior Ribs,
and join with the First described Tendons at their several Terminations above
mentioned. This Disposition of the Sacrolumbus is continued the whole Length of
the Thorax, even to the Fourth Vertebra of the Neck; which Upper Part of it is
called by Diemerbroek, Cervicalis Descendens, and by him made a distinct Muscle.

C, The Tendon of the last described Muscle and Longissimus Dorsi, cut from the
Spines of the Vertebrae of the Loins.

F H I K K, The Longissimi Dorsi; that of the Right Side being freed from the
Spines of the Vertebrae of the Back and Loins.

L, The Spines of the Vertebrae of the Loins.

M M, The Musculus Semispinatus or Transversalis Dorsi: The Course of the
Fibers of this Muscle agree exactly with that lying below it, called Musculus
Sacer G; which is Expressed on the Right Side of the Spines of the Vertebrae of
the Loins between L M C: They are called Transversales Dorsi and Lumborum,
because they arise from the Transverse Processes of those Vertebrae; from
whence they ascend Obliquely and are inserted to the Spines of the Superior
Vertebrae; which Oblique ascending Disposition of these Fibers may be observed
in this Figure M M.

N, Part of the Musculus Trapezius left on the Neck.

O, Part of the Serratus Superior Posticus left at its Insertion.

P, Part of the Spina Scapulae.

Q, The Basis Scapulae.

R, Musculus Deltoides.

S, Infraspinatus.

T, Teres Major.

V W, Parts of the Serrati Majores Antici; that of the Left-Side representing
its Progress over the Subscapularis, as it arises from the Internal Part of the
Basis Scapulae as is mentioned Tab. 20.

X X X, The Serrati Inferiores Postici raised and left at their Insertions.

Y, Part of the Obliquus Descendens.

Z Z, The Spines of the Ossa Ilii.





THE THIRTIETH TABLE.
SOME of the Muscles employed in Extending the Back and Loins, Raised.

A B C D E F G H I K, The Longissimi Dorsi and Sacrolumbales near their
Originations.

L, The Sacrolumbalis on the Left Side freed from the Ribs, etc. and hanging
loose from the Trunk of the Body.

M M, Those Tubercles of the Ribs connexed to the Transverse Processes of the
Vertebrae of the Thorax made bare; whence the other Order of the Tendinous and
Fleshy Fibers of the Sacrolumbal Muscle (mentioned in the precedent Table) do
arise.

N N, The Spinal Processes of the Vertebrae of the Back made bare.

n n, Their Transverse Processes.

O O, Parts of the Musculi Splenii Capitis.

P, The Infraspinatus Raised from the Scapula.

Q, Part of the Rotundus Major.

R R, Parts of the Serrati Majores Antici on both Sides.

S, The Upper Part of the Bone of the Arm laid bare.

T, The last or Twelfth Rib.

V, The quadratus Lumborum: It arises Fleshy from the Posterior Part of the
Spine of the Os Ilium, and after an Oblique ascending Progress is so Inserted
to the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Loins: This not unlike the
Rectus Abdominis, moves the Vertebrae of the Loins or Os Ilium nearer each
other, as either is held most stable: So when we stand on one Foot it draws the
Vertebrae to that Side, and makes the Trunk come toward a Perpendicular
Direction of its Gravity to that Foot; as appears in the Figure of the First
Table, where the Right Leg sustains the Weight of the whole Trunk, and Superior
Parts: But if we hang by the Hands, then either of these Musculi Quadrati
Acting, draws the Os Ilium nearer the Vertebrae of the Loins.

It was necessary the Muscles employed in Extending the Head, Neck, Back and
Loins should be framed strong enough not only to sustain the Head and Trunk in
their Projection forewards from the Axis of the Vertebrae; but that they should
move the whole Spine variously, especially in Bending it backwards: Hence it is
these Muscles are not only more Numerous; but are Multiform, as appears in the
Dorsi Longissimus and Sacrolumbalis; whereas the Bending Muscles of the Trunk
and Head are but one Pair to each, and they of a Longitudinal Order of Fibers
only; namely, the Par Rectum Internum Capitis, or Flexores Capitis, Tab. 18.
LL; and the Recti Abdominis Tab. 31. EE.

THE THIRTY-FIRST TABLE.
REPRESENTS the Common Integuments of the Abdomen, and the External Appearance
of its Muscles on the Left Side.

A A A A, The Skin together with the Fat and Membranes of the Left Side Raised.

B B, The Fat remaining on the Right Side after Raising the Skin; where the
Lobi of Fat and the Blood Vessels passing between them, are Elegantly Expressed.

C D E F G, The Musculus Obliquus Descendens in Situ; CC, Its Fleshy Part
Springing from the Ribs; D D, Its Inferior Tendinous Part, under which the
Fleshy Fibers of the Ascendens do Appear.

E E, The Sraight Fleshy Fibers of the Musculus Rectus, as they Appear under
the Tendons of the Descending and Ascending Muscles.

F F, The Tendinous Interfections of the Rectus Appearing through the Two Tendons
of the Oblique Muscles.

G G, The Linea Semilunaris composed by the Two Tendons of the Oblique Muscles
before they March over the Rectus to the Linea Alba.

H, The Linea Alba.







THE THIRTY-SECOND TABLE.
Fig. 1.
ABCDEFG, THE Obliquus Descendens, or Declivis Raised: See App. Fig. 1.38, 38.
It Arises with several partly Fleshy and partly. Tendinous Acute Productions
from the Lower Margins of the Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eight Ribs; where its
several separate Origins lie between the Indentations of the Serratus Major
Anticus; these, for better distinction we call its Former Origin; Besides
which, it continues to derive more Heads in like Manner from the Ninth, Tenth,
Eleventh, and sometimes from the Extremity of the last Bastard-Rib; ( Vid. Tab.
29, Y.) where it is frequently Indented with the Serratus Inferior Posticus (
Tab. ib. XX.) as Vesalius takes Notice: From its Former Origin B B B, its
Oblique Descending Fleshy Part E E, Expands its self into a Broad Membranous
Tendon F F, before it Marches over the Rectus P P, to its Insertion in the
Linea Alba Tab. 31. H, and Os Pubis G: From its Latter Origin, in the same
Manner Descending, ( Vid. App. Fig. 2.31.) it Ends partly Tendinous in the
Ligamentam Pubis C C, but chiefly Fleshy on the Superior and Forepart of the
Os Illum. Besides the Offices commonly Ascribed to this Muscle in Compressing
the Intestines and Bladder, etc. either in Extruding the Foeces and Urine in
both Sexes, or Foetus in Women; They have still a farther Use: That Part of
this Muscle that is Interjacent between its Lower Origin and Spine of the Os
Ilium, Tab. 29. Y. bearing an Analogy in its Position to the Mastordeus of the
Head, ( App. Fig. 1.14.) serves for the Circumrotation of the Trunk upon the
Axis of the Vertebrae; as when we Convert our Bodies to the contrary Side, the
Feet remaining Stable.

H H H, The Cartilaginous Endings of the Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, and Tenth
Ribs; which, in the following Table are cut off at the Bony Part of the Ribs
and Raised: Vid. Tab. 33. K K.

1 K K, The Musculus Transversalis Raised from the Peritonaum and Reclined
Laterally; It derives a Tendinous Origin from the Transverse Processes of the
Vertebrae Lumbares, and a Fleshy One, from the Cartilaginous Endings of the
Ribs, Spine of the Os Ilium, and Ligamentum Pubis; whence it passes over the
Convext Surface of the Peritonaeum, composing a Broad Tendon as it Marches
under the Rectus to its Termination in the whole Length of the Linea Alba. When
this Muscle and its Partner Act, they press the Abdomen directly Inwards.

L M N O P, The Recti Abdominis; One remaining in Sat^ the other being Raised:
Either of these Muscles derives its Origin from Two of the Cartilages of the
True, and One of Bastard Ribs; and in its Descent has Four, sometimes Five
Tendinous Intersections O O O O; still Lessening it self below the Navel,
becomes Tendinous, immediately above the Os Pubis, where it is Implanted M: This
Bends the Trunk of the Body.

P P, The Under-Side of the Rectus, where the Epigastrick and Mammary
Blood Vessels may be seen.

Q, The Pyramidales, which derive their Fleshy Origin from the Upper Part of
the Ossa Pubis, and Terminate in the Linea Alba.

R R S S, The Obliquus Ascendens, or Acclavis in Situ: It Arises from the
Forepart of the Spine of the Os Ilium and Ligamentum Pubis, whence Mounting
with an Order of Fibers Inclining Forewards, Forms a Broad Membranous Thin
Tendon SS, Marching over the Rectus to its Implantation in the Linea Alba; the
Posterior Part of it being Inserted to the Cartilages of the Eighth, Ninth,
Tenth, Eleventh, and Twelfth Ribs. Besides its Office in Compressing the
Contents of the Lower Belly; that Part of it that is between the Spine of the
Ilium and Cartilaginous Endings of the Ribs, is not only Useful in drawing the
Ribs Downwards in Expiration; but its Fleshy Fibers (Intersecting those of the
Descendens in the Ilia) are also employed in Converting the Trunk of the Body
to the same Side, as the Descendens above Noted, does to the Contrary. In the
Structure and Reciprocal Cooperations of these Parts of the Ascending and
Descending Oblique Muscles, the Art of Nature is very Admirable.

T T V V, The Peritonaeum under which the Intestines Appear TT. Though the
Peritonaeum is a Transparent, Thin Membrane, yet it consists of diverse Laminae,
and is apparently Double in diverse Parts, especially between the Navel and Os
Pubis: Besides its giving an External Double Integument to all the Viscera of
the Lower Belly, it Provides still others Investing each Viscus, and Helps to
compose the Omentum and Mesentery. What vast Extensions the Membranes of the
Peritonaeum are capable of, is well known to those who have seen it Affected
with a Dropsy; for in its Duplicature I have often taken out above Fourscore
Pints. Job Meekren in his Ob. Med. at Chir. tells us of a Hundred and
Twenty-Five Pints of clear Water contained within the Duplicature of the
Peritonaeum; besides, the Membranes themselves (in the Case now mentioned) were
Thickened beyond a Thumbs Breadth, and their Internal Surface furnished with
many Fleshy Bodies and Water-Bladders, called Hydatides; so that the whole,
when taken out, seemed to be a Monstrous Mass of Fleshy Matter.

Fig. 2.
The Texture of the Peritonaeum Examined with a Microscope.

A A, The Nervous Fibers Running according to the Length of the Abdomen.

B B, Other Fibers carried in a Circular Manner from the Nervous Plexus through
to the Breadth of the Abdomen.

C C, The Fibrillae which join the preceding Fibers together, and are
Complicated with them.

D D, The Nerves and their Branches which are very Remarkable about the
Ventricle.

E E, The Blood Vessels broken off.

Concerning the Lymphe-Ducts of the Peritonaeum, etc. consult Nuck's
Adenographia Curiosa, Cap. IX.

The Peritonaeum has diverse Perforations; Forewards, for the Umbilical Vessels
in the Faetus; in its Upper Part, for the Vena Cava, Gula, and Eighth Pair of
Nerves, etc. In the Lower-Part by the Anus Bladder of Urine, and Vterus in
Women: in this Lower-Part of the Peritonaeum, it is Two Processes attending the
Spermatick Vessels fall next under our Inspection.

Fig. 3.
A A, Part of the Peritonaeum.

B, The Process of its Internal Membrane, proceeding from within the Cavity of
the Abdomen.

C C, The Spermatick Vessels as yet Covered with the Double Process of the
Peritonaeum. We call it a Double Process of the Peritonaeum in Men, that passes
through the Muscles of the Abdomen in the Inguen, because it consists of Two
Membranes of different Extents; the External of which, being a Continuation of
the External Membrane of the Peritonaeum, is there called Tunica Vaginalis,
Enclosing the Spermatick-Vessels and Testicle; the Internal Process Descends
about Four Fingers Breath on the Spermatick-Vessels in the Inguina, and then
Cleaves to them Inseparably (and this Nuck calls a Diverticulum) as it is
Expressed, though somewhat stiffly, in the following Figure.

Fig. 4.
A A, Part of the Internal Membrane of the Peritonaeum.

B, The Orifice or Anulus of its Process.

C, Its Progress on the Spermatick-Vessels, called Divertitulum.

D, Its Cohesion to the Spermatick-Vessels.

THE THIRTY-THIRD TABLE.
SHOWS the Viscera of the Lower Belly in Situ, after the Common and Proper
Integuments of the Abdomen are laid Open, and some of them cut off, and the
Cartilaginous Endings of the Bastard Ribs divided from their Bony Parts, and
turned Upwards.

A A B B, The Omentum, where its Upper Membrane Appears Contiguous to the
Bottom of the Stomach, from whose Inferior Coronary Vessels it receives its
Arteriae Gastricae, Emploicae Dextrae, Sinistrae and Mediae, which have their
Correspondent Veins entering into the Coronary Veins, and Convey their Blood to
the Vena Porta; the Arteries being Propagated from the Coeliack Arteries. This
Superior Part of Lamina of the Omentum is not only a Continuation of that
External One of the Ventricle, Borrowed from the Peritonaeum, but its Right Ala
in like Manner is derived from the Lower Part of the Liver, and its Left from
the Concave Part of the Spleen: Thus the Superior and Outwardmost Part of the
Omentum Arises; and after Descending on the Intestines, joins or is continued
to its Inferior or Inward Part, in like Manner derived from the Colon: Between
these Superior and Inferior Parts, is framed the Bursa Omenti; which may be
plainly Discovered, if you pour Water into its Cavity; and though the Water will
pass it is many Foramina, yet it will nevertheless Discover the Lower Part of
the Omentum to be Double.

C C, The Bottom of the Stomach where its Inferior Coronary Blood Vessels may
be seen.

D D, The Liver.

E, The Ligamentum Suspensorium Hepatis, in which the Umbilical Ligament is
Enclosed.

F, The Fissure made by the Umbilical Ligament.

G G, Part of the Colon near its Beginning in the Right Ilia.

H H I I I, The Small Guts, some of which being here Covered with the Omentum.

K K, The Cartilaginous Endings of the Bastard Ribs cut from their Bony Parts,
and turned up toward the Sternum: To these Cartilages, Parts of the Transverse
Muscles of the Abdomen and the Diaphragma may be seen to Adhere in this Figure.







THE THIRTY-FOURTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
A A, A Portion of the Omentum, the Cells of which being filled with Oily
Contents are called Fat.

B B, The Fatty Glandules of the Omentum which are placed in the Arboreous
Distribution of the Fat.

C C, Diverse Foraminulae Collateral to the Arboreous Fatty Bodies.

Fig. 2.
The Membranes of the Omentum freed from their Oily Contents; which Professor
Bidloo Proposes to be done after the following Manner. When the Blood Vessels
of the Omentum are Injected with Wax, or any Tenacious Body, then dip the whole
in hot Oil of Turpentine, and with your Hand squeese it, and move it up and
down till the whole Mass of Fat is disolv'd in that Oil. Afterward expose the
Membranes to the Air, or gentle Fire to dry them.

A A, The Upper Lamella or Membrane of the Omentum.

B B, The Lower Membrane of the Omentum.

C C, The Foraminulae.

D D, The Arboreous Ramifications of the Porous Cells, whence the Fat or Oil is
Expressed.

E E, The Blood Vessels Injected with Wax according to Bidloo.

Fig. 3, 4.
These Figures of the Muscles of the Pharynx are Copied after Bourdon's Table
4. Fig. 28, 29. and are agreeable to the Erroneous Descriptions of those
Muscles by Ryolan, Spigelius, Veslingius, Bartholin, etc. The Muscular
Contrivance of this Organ being vastly differing from what is here Expressed, I
shall add a Figure of it in the Appendix.

Fig. 5.
The Stomach with Part of the Omentum taken out of the Cavity of the Abdomen;
the Stomach being somewhat Extended with Wind, and placed according to its
proper Position.

A A, The External and Anterior Surface of the Stomach, Covered with a Common
Membrane derived from the Peritonaeum.

B C, Two Bunchings out in the Lower Part, or Fundus of the Stomach.

D, Part of the Gula at the Upper or Left Orifice of the Stomach, called Cardia.

E, Part of the Intestinum Duodenum Arising from the Right or Lower Orifice of
the Stomach, called the Pylorus.

F, The Superior Coronary Blood Vessels of the Stomach, and the Nerves of the
Eighth Pair Complicated with each other, are here Elegantly Expressed.

G, The Inferior Coronary Artery and Vein of the Stomach. These Coronary
Blood Vessels are in like Manner distributed to the Omentum.

H, The Superior or Outward Membrane of the Omentum, hanging at the Bottom of
the Stomach.

In Dissecting the Morbid Body of a Young Gentlewoman, by the Order of Dr.
Radcliff: Amongst other Phenomenon of the Viscera in the Abdomen, I found the
Omentum so Lessened, that at first Sight, it Appeared doubtful wether there
ever had been such a Part framed in that Subject; but upon stricter Enquiry,
that little Remains of it seemed to Represent a Heap of small Glands,
containing a Steotomatous or Suet-like Matter. Nor was this Appearance of these
Steotomae on the Omentum only; but a Multitude of Little White Bodies or Specks
(not unlike those of the Omentum) placed at some small Distance from each
other, were spread on the Outward Membrane of the Stomach, Intestines, and
Internal Surface of the Peritonaeum. In this Subject the External Parts of the
Small Guts so stuck to each other, that they seemed to be contained in One
proper Covering, or not unlike the Brain Covered with the Pia Matter: so
strictly did the Intestines Cleave to each other, that it was not without
Violence I could any where Divide them to see the Mesentery: By this means the
Peristaltick Motion of the Guts must needs be very much Lessened, if not quite
Hindered; so that it was no wonder to find their whole Chanel filled with
Excrements, even from the Pylorus to the Anus: Besides the Intestines had
suffered Mortifications in diverse Parts, whilst other Parts of them were
Inflamed and very much Thickened: Nor was there any Part of them Appeared of a
Natural Constitution; so general did this Diseas'd-Habit Affect the
Peritonaeum, in all its Expansions. Nor can I omit doing Justice to the
Inquisitive Dr. Radcliff, who upon frequent Observations of the Symptoms of
this Case, left this Prognostic, That there was scarce any of the Viscera of
the Lower Belly which had escaped the Attacks of the Disease: All which he
supposed to Arise from a Scrophulous-Habit, as Appeared by very large Tumified
Glands of the Mesentery; of which Two very Remarkable Ones had so Comprest the
Receptaculum Chyli, as very little (if any) of the Aliment could at Length pass
into the Blood. Whence the Body became so very much Emaciated, that scarce any
thing but Bones Appeared under the Skin: Nor did I any where see the least Lobe
of Fat in the whole Dissection. From what has been above taken Notice of in the
Omentum, and Surface of the Peritonaeum, whether Covering the Inside of the
Abdomen, or Outsides of the Intestines; It Appears, that when the Mucus, which
is necessary in Lubricating the Intestines, is obstructed; those Parts are
Subject to Adhesions, and the Peristaltick Motion of the Latter can no longer
be Performed, and though the Existence of proper Glands for separating this Mucus
from the Blood does not offer in Common Dissections, yet it may be hoped that
the frequent Examining of Morbid Bodies, will at one time or other Demonstrate
them; which, I am apt to believe, not unlike the Sweating Glands of the Skin,
are placed at certain Distances, and do discharge their Mucus from their
Excretory Pores in like Manner; which Mucus may join with Fatty Exsudations
from the Omentum, etc. and make a Composition necessary for making the
Intestines slide on each other. That there is a Slimy Matter besmearing these
Parts, may be observed in Opening any Large Animal, not Diseased, soon after
Death. It is well known to the Butchers that this Mucus makes the Hands Glib or
Smooth; to which End they commonly Use it, so soon as they have Opened any
Animal, by Rubbing their Hands with the Intestines. I know it is commonly
supposed the Water in an Ascites proceeds from a broken Lymphe-Duct within the
Cavity of the Abdomen; but it is not unlikely that that Scrosity may at least
sometimes Arise from an Exsudation by thos^ Glands; since we constantly find
the Peritonaeum very much Thickened in those Cases.

THE THIRTY-FIFTH TABLE.
THE Membranes, Glandules, Blood Vessels, etc. which compose the Stomach.

Fig. 1, 2.
A A, etc. Portions of the Stomach showing its First or External Membrane,
borrowed from the Peritonaeum; the Veins being Injected with Wax, are extended
beyond their Natural Magnitude.

B B, The Superior and Inferior Coronary Veins, Inosculating with each other in
their Large Trunks.

Fig. 3.
A B, etc. The Branches of the Blood Vessels on the External Membrane of the
Stomach, Representing their Various Plexusses and Mutual Inosculations with
each other, viz. The Veins being joined with Veins, and Arteries with Arteries,
before they become Capillary.

Fig. 4.
The Second Membrane of the Stomach, called the Muscular Membrane, consisting
of Two Orders of Fibers.

A B B, The First and Superior Order of Fibers, continued between the Pylorus
and Upper Orifice of the Stomach.

A C C, The Second or Inferior Order of Fibers, embracing the Fundus of the
Stomach.

Fig. 5.
A Portion of the Second or Muscular Membrane of the Stomach Dried.

A A, The First Order of Fibers,

B B, The Second; Consisting of Fleshy and Tendinous Parts,

C C, Their Fleshy Parts,

D D, Their Tendinous Parts.

The Third, or Internal Membrane of the Stomach, may be Divided into Three
Lamellae, and therefore may be considered in a Threefold Manner.

Fig. 6.
A A, The Inward Surface of the Third Membrane of the Stomach, by Dr. Willis
called the Villous Tunicle: The Villi or Velvet-like Surface of it, is best
shown by dipping it in Scalding Water.

B B, The Glandules as they Appear obscurely under the Villi.

C D, etc. The Glandules and Vessels of the Stomach as they Appear where the
Villi are taken off, which may easily be done with the Assistance of Hot Water.
This may be esteemed the Second Part of the Third Membrane of the Stomach.

Fig. 7.
The Third or Last Division of this Internal Membrane of the Stomach, which
Bidloo and others call the Tendinous, and Dr. Willis the Nervous Membrane.

A B, Diverse Perforations for the Blood Vessels to pass through this Membrane.

Fig. 8.
The whole Stomach partly laid Open to show the Foldings of its Internal or
Third Membrane.

A A, The Foldings of the Internal and Third Membrane, in which the Villous
Surface does Appear.

B, The Upper and Left Orifice or Mouth of the Stomach, with Part of the Gula.

C, A Portion of the Intestinum Duodenum continued to the Pylorus.

D, The Pylorus or Lower and Right Orifice of the Stomach.

E, The Antrum Pylori.

The Omentum and Superior and Inferior Coronary Blood Vessels, are here again
Expressed as in the preceding Table, Fig. 5.

Fig. 9, 10.
The Two Orifices of the Stomach when Dried after Inflation. Fig. 9, The
Superior. Fig. 10, The Inferior.

The Plexus of Blood Vessels Appearing in the Inside of the Stomach, Fig. 8.
are Remarkable, and their Appearance is owing to the Stagnation of the Blood in
them. The Stomach cannot be Wounded into its Cavity, but many of these Vessels,
especially the Arteries must be Divided, and no small Effusion of Blood must
necessarily happen, which if it flows into the Cavity of the Stomach, must
either be Ejected by Vomit, or pass down the Intestines with the Excrements, if
the Patient Survives: An Instance of which lately occurred, where my Friend Mr.
Goodier called me to see the Patient; who had received a Wound by a Sword on
the Right Hypochondrium, which past Obliquely to the Linea Alba, immediately
below the Ensiformal Cartilage: A Vomitting of Blood soon followed with
Syncopes, which denoted the Stomach to be Wounded, not less than a Pound of
Coagulated Blood being Ejected by the Mouth so soon as he was brought to his
Bed. After some Hours the Vomiting ceased, and the Pulse was recovered which
before was very feeble: Nor was it many Days before the Patient Recovered and
could Drink Two or Three Quarts of Strong Drink at a Sitting; what became of
him afterward, we could by no means learn. By this it Appears that Wounds in
the Stomach are not always Mortal, though they very frequently prove so, as in
the Case of one Wounded in like manner with a Sword on the Left Hypochondrium,
in whom the Stomach was Wounded also; but in this the Contents of the Stomach
in no small Quantity, were Discharged with a great deal of Blood into the
Cavity of the Abdomen, as Appeared on Dissecting his Body. If the Trunk of a
Large Artery happens to be Wounded on the Stomach, it is a great Chance but it
proves Mortal through the Flux of Blood, but if the Wound happens where the
Blood Vessels are Capillary, the Flux of Blood does not prove Fatal.





THE THIRTY-SIXTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
SHOWS the Lower Part of the Stomach and a Portion of the Intestinum Duodenum
continued to it, together with the Pancreas and Spleen.

A A, The Upper Part of the Duodenum continued from the Right Orifice of the
Stomach or Pylorus, in a Semicircular Manner; in which Bending of the Gut, the
Common Passage for the Gall and Pancreatick Juice empties it self N. This
Curvation of the Intestine is here necessary, left the Aliment after having
undergone a Preparation in the Stomach, should too quickly descend into the
Small Guts, before it has met with a due Mixture with the Gall and Pancreatick
Juice.

B, The Ductus Pancreaticus made bare, before it enters the External Membrane
of the Intestine, between which, and the Internal Membrane, it passes before it
arrives at its Orifice N, in Conjunction with the Common Gall-Duct.

C, The Progress of the Common Gall-Duct in like Manner between the Membranes
of the Gut, before it arrives at its Orifice N, in Conjunction with the
Pancreatick Duct.

D D, The Superior and External Part of the Pancreas as it appears in its
proper Situation.

E E E, Part of the Bottom of the Stomach next the Pancreas, Colon and Spleen;
whence diverse Blood Vessels are propagated, especially Veins, which discharge
Part of the Blood from the Stomach into the Ramus Splenicus: The most
remarkable of these have obtained the Denomination of Vasa Brevia; to which,
some Anatomists have inconsiderately assigned diverse Uses.

F F, The Internal Concave Part of the Spleen next the Pancreas and Stomach,
covered with its Proper Membrane, as well as a Common one continued from the
Peritonaeum.

G, The External Membrane of the Pancreas raised and pinned out:

H, That of the Spleen in like Manner raised and pinned out.

I I I, Diverse Vesiculae or Airy Bladder-like Appearances, occasioned by the
Breaking forth of the Wind into the Interstitia of the Common and Proper
Membrane of the Pancreas, in Blowing into its Ductus Excretorius B.

K, The Duodenum opened, to show the Common Orifice of the Gall and Pancreatick
Duct.

L L, The Pancreatick Duct made bare in diverse Parts of the Pancreas.

M, Part of the Common Gall-Duct.

N, The Common Orifice of the Gall and Pancreatick Ducts, opening into the
Cavity of the Intestinum Duodenum.

O O, etc. The Arteria Splenica injected with Wax; its Magnitude and Tortuous
Progress being very remarkable as it is truly Expressed in this Figure.

P P, Diverse Arteries of the Pancreas arising out of the Splenick Artery.

Q, The Vena Splenica in whose Cavity a Blow-Pipe is inserted.

R, One of the Lympheducts arising from the Spleen pinned out. In Blowing into
the Vena Splenica of a Castling Calf, I have frequently observed the
Lympheducts of the Spleen distended with Wind: The like has happened by Blowing
into the Splenick Artery after tying the Vein, though not so immediately as by
Blowing into the Vein. The same Phenomenon I have observed in the Penis of a
Dog by Blowing into the Veins of that Part. The Accurate Nuck in his Adenograp.
Curio. p. 52. tells us by forcibly Blowing into the Splenick Artery, he has not
only seen diverse Vesiculae to rise on the Surface of the Spleen; but diverse
Lymphatick Vessels arising from those Vesiculae and distended with Wind also:
In the Subsequent Page he takes Notice that the Spermatick Vein of the Testicle
being distended with Wind, shows the Lympheducts on the Tunica Vaginalis, but
in Blowing into the Spermatick Artery of that Part, the Lymphe-Ducts are by no
Means distended with Wind: By this, it appears the Lympheducts of the Spleen,
Penis and Testicles, do not arise from the Extremities of the Blood Vessels of
those Parts, as the Lympheducts of other Parts seem to do; but that the Venous
Channels of those Parts seem to give the immediate Originations to their
Lympheducts.

S, The Spleen partly made bare of its Integument.

Fig. 2.
The Ductus Pancreaticus injected with Wax, and freed from the Body of the
Pancreas, together with a Portion of the Intestinum Duodenum and Common
Gall-Duct dried.

A, Part of the Duodenum dried.

B, The Ductus Pancreaticus lying between the Membranes of the Intestine before
it joins with the Common Gall-Duct.

C, The Common Orifice of the Gall and Pancreatick Duct opening into the
Intestine.

D, The Common Gall-Duct.

E E, The Trunk of the Pancreatick Duct.

F G, The Ramifications of the Pancreatick Duct, which arise from the
Extremities of the Blood Vessels of the Pancreas.

Among the Opinions hitherto held concerning the Office of the Pancreatick
Juice, that of Brunnerus seems most probable: That like the Saliva it is a
Dissolvent or Menstruum for a farther Concoction, in Order to Chylification.
Nor can I conceive the Succus Pancreaticus can Act with any Hostility by Way of
Fermentation with the Bile and Aliment, as Franc. Sylvius, Bern. Swalve, Rog.
de Gaff, and Isbrand de Diemerbroek apprehend; or that it takes off the
Acrimony of the Gall; which Latter, would be to rectify a Mistake in Nature
that might have been avoided in the First Design: Wherefore the Pancreas
appears to be a Large Salival Gland, or One of the Largest of the Glands of the
Intestines, which continually supplies a proportionable Quantity of Liquor for
the End above mentioned. Besides, the Pancreas has another as it were
accidental Use, ( viz.) To discharge those Serosities from the Blood which we
find in taking of Purging Medicines; Or at other Times, when the Blood is
disordered so that a Diarrhaea happens, the Pancreas as well as the Glands of
the Intestines are those Strainers which discharge the Vitiated Juices from the
Mass of Blood.

Fig. 3.
The Spleen with its Blood Vessels Injected with Wax.

A A, The Internal Concave Part of the Spleen next the Stomach and Pancreas.

B B, The Splenick Arteries Injected with Red Wax.

C C, The Veins filled with White Wax.

D E, The Various Flexures and Contortions of the Veins and Arteries near the
Surface of the Spleen.

Fig. 4.
A, Part of the Spleen of some Quadrupede cut off, after the whole Spleen has
been distended with Wind and dried.

B, The External common Membrane derived from the Peritonaeum.

C, The Internal Proper Membrane of the Spleen.

D E, etc, The Cells of its Cavernous Body, which open into the Large Veins of
the Spleen.

In the Humane Spleen these Cells are more Numerous and Less, and open into the
Extremities of the Veins and Arteries. I know Ruysch in his Accurate Anatomical
Epistles lately published, denies the Existence of these Cells as well as
Fibers in the Humane Spleen, but if you blow into the Splenick Vein, or Inject
Water by the Arteries, when the Outward Membrane of the Spleen is not torn or
broke in taking it out (which are very liable to happen in freeing the Humane
Spleen) you may be satisfied of the Existence of its Cells; and if you Inject
the Veins with Wax you will find this Difference from that of a Quadrupede;
that the Wax in the Humane Spleen does not reach the Cells, except it is driven
on with great Force, and Injected very hot; but if you Inject Wax into the
Spleen of an Ox, Dog, or the like, you will find all its Cells soon distended
with it, and the great Ramifications of the Veins scarce to be distinguished,
by Reason the Wax so soon passes out of their Sides into the Cells.

Fig. 5.
A A, The Internal Face of the Proper Membrane of the Spleen of a Quadrupede.

B C, The Fibers broke off which pass between the Cells to each Side of the
proper Membrane of the Spleen.

D D, Some of the larger Cells of the Spleen of various Figures.

Fig. 6.
The whole Spleen freed from its External and Proper Membranes, after its
Blood Vessels were Injected with Wax.

A A, The Arteries.

B, The Veins of the Spleen filled with Wax.

a a b b, The Ramifications of the Blood Vessels before they enter the Body of
the Spleen.

C, Part of the Capsula or Proper Membrane of the Spleen, according to Bidloo.

D, The Nervous Plexus.

E F, The Ramifications of the Blood Vessels at their Extremities, into whose
Sides the Cells of the Humane Spleen open.

F, The Interstitia at the Extremities of the Blood Vessels, which Bidloo Calls
the Cells.

G G, The Extremities of the Lympheducts, and diverse Fibers of the Spleen. The
Texture and Composition of the Spleen being thus known, we should in the next
Place consider what Office this Part has in the Animal Economy; but that being
a Task too great for the Limits of our present Page, I shall insert my Thoughts
of it elsewhere.

THE THIRTY-SEVENTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE Superior Unequal Surface of the Liver here Printed on the Reverse.

AA, The Superior Gibbous Part of the Liver, where diverse Lympheducts may be
seen.

B B, The Ligamentum Suspensorium Hepatis, fastened to the Diaphragma, its
Forepart being cut from the Ensiformal Cartilage.

C C, Part of the Diaphragma; in which its Fleshy and Tendinous Parts appear
together with its Blood Vessels.

D, The Ligamentum Umbilicale pinned out.

E E, That Part of the Liver which is Extended toward the Left Side, and rests
on the Stomach, and is sometimes (as in this Subject) divided into Lobes.

F, Seems to be Part of the Diaphragma: Bidloo makes it to be a Ligament that
adheres to the Ensiformal Cartilage, which I can by no Means conceive.

G, A Portion of the External Membrane of the Liver, continued from the
Peritonaeum, raised.

Fig. 2.
The Inferior Concave Surface of the Liver.

A, The Right Side of the Liver.

B, The Ligamentum Suspensorium Hepatis pinned out.

C, The Ligamentum Umbilicale.

D, The External and Common Membrane of the Liver raised and pinned out.

E, The Liver cut into, to show its Inside.

F, Part of the Diaphragm.

G, The Arteria Hepatica, which we commonly find divided into Two Branches or
Trunks of the Size of this here Expressed, before they enter the Liver.

H H, The Vena Porta as it enters the Liver.

I, The Capsula Communis or Production of the Peritonaeum, which is said to
enclose the Vena Porta, Arteria Hepatica, and Ductus Bilarii in their Progress
through the Liver; which Description of it, I am apt to think, is rather imposed
on it in Favor of some Conjectures concerning the Office of the Vena Porta
within the Liver, than any real Appearance of it in Nature; though it is very
plain those Vessels within the Liver do appear covered with a Common Enclosure;
the like of which may be seen on the Vessels within the Spleen, Kidneys, etc.

K K, The Vena Cava Extended on a Pencil.

L, The Gallbladder.

M, A Lympheduct passing on the Surface of the Gallbladder.

N, The Ductus Cysticus.

O, The Common Gall-Duct.

P, The Lympheducts of the Liver marching on the Vena Porta toward their
Lymphatick Glands, placed on the Trunk of that Vein below the Liver.

Concerning the Distribution of the Vessels of the Liver, and the intimate
Structure of that great Gland, consult the following Table.





THE THIRTY-EIGHTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
A Portion of the Liver Boiled and Viewed with a Microscope.

A, The Outward Membrane of the Liver Raised and Pinned out.

B B B, The Lobuli composed of small Glands, of Various Figures and Sizes.

C, The Membranes continued from the Blood Vessels, which divide the Lobuli
from each other.

D D, The Blood Vessels, of which some are Broken off.

E E, The Gall-Ducts, many of which are in like Manner Broken off as they Arise
from the Lobuli.

Fig. 2.
A, A Branch of the Vena Cava.

a a, Its Extremities within the Liver.

B, A Branch of the Vena Porta.

b b, Its Extremities in like Manner not joined with the former, says Bidloo.
In preparing the Liver to Inject its Blood Vessels with Wax, I found such a
Communication between the Vena Cava and Porta, that I could by no means but
Conceive the Extremities of those Vessels are continued Channels; for by pouring
Water or Spirit of Wine into the Vena Porta, with the assistance of a Tunnel
only, I found it soon run out again by the Vena Cava: Nor does the Extremities
of the Arteries of the Liver seem less Communicative with the Vena Cava; for by
Syringing Water into the Hepatick Arteries, it easily passes into the Vena
Cava, or Porta. In Blowing into the Hepatick Arteries or Gall-Ducts, I commonly
find the Lympheducts of the Liver Distended with Wind.

Fig. 3.
The Gallbladder and its Ducts.

A, The Ductus Cysticus.

B, The Internal Membrane of the Ductus Cysticus Appearing after Raising the
External. This Internal Membrane is much Larger than the External, by which
means it Frames diverse Valves or Rugae in the Cavity of this Duct. These Rugae
(which some call Valves) prevent the perpetual Effusion of the Bile into the
Duodenum: Nor do they Oppose the Retrocession of the Gall by the Cystick-Duct,
as some pretend; for if you either Blow, or Inject Water into the Ductus
Communis, the Gallbladder soon becomes Distended. In Examining the Gall-Ducts
of a Lamb's Liver, I clearly Discovered diverse Ducts of Gall Arising from the
Liver, and emptying themselves into the Ductus Cysticus: Nor could I by any
means observe in that Subject any Gall-Ducts Arising from the Liver, and
Discharging their Contents into the Gallbladder at its Neck, as some pretend.
I have more than once emptied the Gallbladder of a Humane Body, and made a
Ligature on the Ductus Cysticus some Distance from its Neck, and afterward
forcibly Distended the Hepatick-Ducts with Wind, but could by no means Raise
the Gallbladder: I have also made the same Experiment in Quadrupedes with
Mercury, by Injecting it by the Ductus Hepaticus, but could not find it come
into the Gallbladder immediately; but in the Ductae Cysticus about a Quarter
of an Inch from the Gallbladder, I have seen the Mercury Arise from Two or
Three Gall-Ducts proceeding from the Liver.

C, The Ductus Hepaticus cut from the Liver.

D, Part of the Ductus Communis.

Fig. 4.
A A, The Gallbladder partly Opened.

B, A Portion of the Meatus Cysticus.

C C, Diverse Blood Vessels Propagated between the Gallbladder and Liver, which
Bidloo takes to be some of the Lesser Cystick-Ducts.

D, One of the Larger of the last mentioned Vessels, which Bidloo in like
Manner Describes as One of the Largest of the Cystick-Ducts, with its Orifice E
F, looking into the Gallbladder.

Fig. 5.
The Blood Vessels of the Liver and Gall-Ducts Injected with Wax, and freed
from their Extremities which compose the Glands. This Scheme or Distribution of
these Vessels may be prepared after the following Manner. The whole Liver being
taken out with the Trunks of its Blood Vessels left to it of a convenient
length; wash out the Blood from its Vessels by Syringing of warm Water into
Them: This done, fill the Blood Vessels with Spirit of Wine or Alum-Water, or
Inject them with Oil of Turpentine a little warmed. After some Hours, dip the
whole Liver in hot Water, and Inject Wax of a different Color into all its
Blood Vessels and Secretory-Ducts; the Arteries being filled with Red; the Vena
Porta with a Dark Color; the Vena Cava of a Distinguishable Color; and the
Gall-Ducts with Yellow Wax: This done, free the Liver of its Outward Membranes,
and with your Forefinger begin to divide the Lobuli from each other, by
thrusting it through the Glandulous Surface even to the Trunks of the Large
Blood Vessels. The Lobuli of the Liver being very much divided, dip the whole
in warm Water, and with a stubbed Brush, made of the stiffest Hogs-Bristles,
begin to Brush off the Glandules of the Liver from the Extremities of the
Injected Blood Vessels. In doing of this be Cautious, left you break off the
Large Trunks of the Injected Vessels, always remembering to begin at the Surface
of the Glands, and after the Extremities of the Injected Vessels are cleared,
than proceed to their Larger Branches and Trunks. If due care is taken in
managing this Preparation of the Vessels of the Liver, you will find them more
Numerous than this Figure Represents.

A, The Right Side of the Liver.

B, The Left.

C C, The Larger Trunks of the Hepatick Arteries Injected with Red Wax.

c c c, The Branches of the Arteries which do Accompany the Vena Porta, and
Hepatick Gall-Ducts.

D, The Trunk of the Vena Cava filled with Green Wax.

E E, A Portion of the Diaphragm.

F G H, The Three Large Branches of the Vena Cava within the Liver, lying
toward its Superior and Unequal Surface, and not Associating with the Vena
Porta and other Vessels, framing Acute Angles in their Intersecting those of
the Porta.

g h i, The Lesser Branches of the Vena Cava.

K, The Trunk of the Vena Porta cut off, after being Injected with White Wax.

L L, Parts of the Capsula which includes the Vena Porta, Hepatick Arteries,
and Gall-Ducts together.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, The Large Branches of the Vena Porta.

M, The Gallbladder.

N, The Roots of the Ductus Cysthepatici, according to Bidloo.

O, The Ductus Cysticus.

P, The Ductus Hepatius: p, their Branches.

Q, The Ductus Communis.

R, Part of the Ligamentum Umbilicale.

S, The Canalis Venosus between the Vena Porta and Cava, become a Ligament.

T, Parts of the Hepatick Nerves.

V, Some of the Lympheducts of the Liver Marching on the Capsula of the Vena
Porta.

Hence it Appears the Liver is a Glandulous Body composed of Blood Vessels,
Excretory-Ducts, Nerves and Lympheducts. The Vessels which Import Blood into
it, are the Vena Porta and Arteria Hepatica; at their Extremities Arise, or are
Continued, the Branches of the Vena Cava: Nor are the Extremities of the
Blood Vessels of the Liver equally lessened like the Veins and Arteries of
other Parts, as the above mentioned Experiment of pouring Water only into the
Vena Porta, and its running out by the Vena Cava does Evince; or by gentle
Syringing Water by the Hepatick Arteries, and its easily passing by the Vena
Cava; so that the Extremities of the Hepatick Blood Vessels seem to be largely
Inosculated with each other, especially the Vena Porta with the Cava. The
Gall-Ducts Arise from the Extremities of the Blood Vessels, and though they
Communicate immediately with the Blood Vessels, yet Liquors conveyed into the
Vena Porta and the like, do not so readily pass into these Ducts as the other
Blood Vessels; because the Ortiolae in the Sides of the Blood Vessels whence
those Ducts Arise, are much less than the Pore of those Vessels themselves.
Besides the Blood Vessels of the Liver, which are furnished with Pores for the
Secretion of the Gall, there are still other Branches of the same Vessels which
Administer a proper Nourishment to the Gland it self. By the Gland it self. I
mean the Parietes of those Vessels which compose the Liver: For I cannot
conceive the Liver to be any thing else then a Compages of Vessels more or less
Distended. As there is a proper Nourishment due to the Gland it self, so it is
Necessary, that besides its Secretory-Ducts, the Liver should be also furnished
with Lympheducts, to carry off the Redundancy of its Nutritive Juice,
continually supplied by the Arteries; but of this elsewhere. The Nerves are
necessary in the Liver, as they are in all Parts where Membranes are Useful;
not because they Import any Liquor as some conceive, as an Ingredient to the
Matter separated; but by the Nerves the Tone of Parts is in a great Measure
maintained; for if the Nerves are Relaxt, the Parts to which they belong,
suffers an Atrophia, tho the Blood has its free Accession to the Part as
before; but of this also in another Place.

In Dissecting a Morbid Body which before Death was much afflicted with
Hypochondriack Pains, I found the Liver very much lessened, and its Surface
uneven, not unlike a heap of small Bullets. In Dissecting the Body of a
Nobleman afflicted with the like Pains, I found that Part of the Liver which
Appears below the Cartilaginous Endings of the Ribs, of a Livid Color, and the
whole somewhat Lessened, the Gallbladder very much Contracted, and filled with
Two or Three small Stones; the Peritonaeum on the Parts adjacent being much
Thickened, and its Blood Vessels Turgid. In the Body of a Young Lady (reduced to
a Marasmus from a Scrophulous Indisposition) I found the whole Surface of the
Liver very Black. In a Person who is now Living, and in tolerable Health, I
could Three Years since discover (by feeling the Right Hypochondrium) the Lower
Part of the Liver exceedingly Tumified and Hard; which is now entirely Vanished.

THE THIRTY-NINTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
PART of the Iejunum or Hungry Gut, together with a Portion of the Mesentery,
etc.

A A, The Surface of the Iejunum Covered with its External Membrane continued
from that of the Mesentery, it being produced from, or a continuation of the
Internal Lamina of the Peritonaeum.

B B B, The Vasa Lactea not Extended, being here Expressed by simple Lines only,
as they pass from the Intestines through the Mesentery.

The Lacteal-Vessels carry both Chyle and Lympha Promiscuously, and have a
Twofold Origin; the One from the Extremities of the Arteries; the Other from
diverse Ostiolae in the Cavities of the Guts: The Former Appears not only by
Injecting of Mercury by the Arteries of the Mesentery D, and its passing into
the Lacteals B; but when these Milky-Vessels are not employed in conveying of
Chyle, they are constantly charged with Lympha: The Latter Origin of these
Milky-Tubes from diverse Ostiolae in the Cavities of the Guts, Appear in their
receiving of Chyle from thence. The Lympha from the Arteries meets with the
Chyle at the beginnings of the Lacteal-Vessels, by which means its Progress
toward the next Lymphatick Gland is promoted: The Vasa Lactea primi generis,
Arise with Capillary Branches very much Divided, and become United into large
Trunks, in the Midway between the Intestine and Lymphatick Gland; and are
sometimes again Divided before their Entrance into the Vesiculae of the Gland.
The Chyle and Lympha thus received into the Vesiculae of the Mesenterick
Glands, there meets with other Lympha brought into those Vesiculae by the
Arteries; whereby the Chyle is not only more diluted, but its Ascension toward
the Vesica Chyli is promoted, by its receiving a fresh Impetus from the Lympha
so mixing with it. Thus we may conceive the Progress of Chyle toward the
Receptaculum Commune is carried on, by means of the Lympha joining with it in
its several Stages thither. Nor would the Valves of the Lacteal-Vessels be of
any considerable Use, if the Chyle did not receive an Additional Impetus from
the Arteries in their supplying it with fresh Lympha, as well in the Lymphatick
Glands, as at the Beginnings of the Vasa Lactea primi generis.

C, The External Membrane of the Intestine Raised and Pinned out.

C C, The Muscular Membrane of the Intestine lying immediately under the
External Membrane consisting of a Longitudinal and Circular Order of Fibers.

D D, The Mesenterick Arteries Propagated to the Intestine.

E E, The Veins which Arise from the Extremities of the Arteries, and discharge
the Refluent Blood into the Vena Porta.

F, A Branch of the Mesenterick Nerve made bare.

G G, The Vasa Lactea primi generis.

H, The External Surface of the Intestine Adorned with Blood Vessels.

I I, The Glands of the Mesentery into whose Vesiculae the Vasa Lactea primi
generis Import their Contents, as above noted; whence the Vasa Lactea secundi
generis Arise, and convey their Contents in like manner, either into the
Receptaculum Chyli immediately, or into the Pancreas Asellii. Tab. 40. L, Fig.
1.

Fig. 2.
A Portion of the Iejunum dried after being Distended with Wind, whereby its
Valvuiae Conniventes, framed by the looseness of its Inward Membranes Appear as
here Represented.

A B C D, The Various Disposition of the Valves in the Cavity of the Intestine;
some of them taking up near Two Thirds of the Circumference of the Inside of
the Gut, A, Inferior: Others B D, about a Fourth Part; whilst others are
Semicircular.

As the Upper Part of the Duodenum next the Pylorus is Furnished with large
Valves, so they gradually Decrease in the small Guts as well in Magnitude as
Number, as they approach the Lower Parts of those Intestines toward the Colon:
Hence the Valvulae Conniventes of the Duodenum are very Large; that at the
Pylorus being Circular; The Valves of the Iejunum less; those of the Ilium
still less; insomuch, that the Lower Part of this Gut next the Colon scarce
affords any Appearance of them: See Fig. 3.

These Valves are composed of the Internal Membranes of the Intestines, which
being much larger then the Exterior, are necessarily laid up in Foldings, and
Frame these Parts. These Connivent Valves hinder the quick Descent of the
Contents of the Intestines, least the Chyle as well as the Excrementitious
Parts should escape the Mouth of the Lacteal Veins.

Fig. 3.
A Portion of the Ilium dried after Inflation.

A A, The External Surface of the Intestine.

B, The Internal --

C C, The Valves of this Intestine much less then in the Iejunum.

D, That end of the Ilium next the Iejunum.

E E, That next the Colon.

Fig. 4.
The Beginning of the Colon, Extremity of the Coecum, together with a Portion
of the Ilium dried after Inflation.

A A, The Coecum Adorned with its Blood Vessels.

B B, The Colon placed in the Right Ilia G G, Tab. 33. and C, Tab. 40.

C C, Its Blood Vessels Injected with Wax.

D, A Portion of the Ilium as it enters the Beginning of the Colon.

Fig. 5.
The same Parts of the Colon, Ilium, and Coecum, Expressed in the precedent
Figure, Opened to show the Valves of the Colon, and the entrance of the Ilium
into the Colon as they Appear after Inflation and drying them.

A, The Valve at the Orifice of the Coecum in the Colon.

B B, The Colon Opened to show its Inside.

C C, The Blood Vessels Injected with Wax.

D, Part of the Ilium before it enters the Cavity of the Colon.

E E, The End of the Ilium which hangs down loose into the Cavity of the Colon,
as Appears before drying of the Guts, which here Frames an Appearance of a
Connivent Valve.

F, The Orifice of the Ilium Opening into the Colon.

By this Contrivance we may easily conceive how the Excrements, when they have
past the Small Guts into the Colon, cannot return again: A likeness of which,
may be imitated if you take a Piece of Gut and put One End of it into the Neck
of a Bottle, and tying the other end of the Gut on the Outside of the Nosel of
the Bottle, filling the Bottle with Water by that Gut; and though you afterward
turn the Nose of the Bottle downwards, yet no Part of the contained Water can
come out, till it has so Pressed out the end of the Gut in the Bottle that it
becomes Inverted. This may serve to give us an Idea how it may happen in this
Part when the Excrements are rejected by the Mouth in Cholick and Iliack
Passions.

G G, The large Valves of the Colon, which like those of the small Guts are
partly Framed by the Looseness of the Internal Membrane of the Gut; and are here
in the Colon chiefly made by a Corrugation or Folding of the Membranes of the
Gut it self, by means of its Ligaments, Tab. 40. Fig. 1. D, and Tab. 54. d d.
These Ligaments of the Colon are truly Fleshy Fibers, and I am apt to think are
capable of contracting themselves and promote the passing on of the Contents of
this Gut. When the Ligaments of the Colon are divided, the Foldings of it which
help to compose its Valves, are loosned, and the whole Gut becomes almost plain
without any Inequalities. As the Ligaments of the Colon Descend toward the
Rectum they begin to Expand themselves, and at length Frame an External
Membrane for the Rectum.

H H, The Internal Concave Surface of the Cells of the Colon.

I I I, The External Unequal Surface of the Cells of the same Gut.

Fig. 6.
A Portion of the Rectum with Part of the Mesentery continued to it.

A A B B, The External Surface of the Rectum, on which the Ligaments of the
Colon compose a Tegument, whose Fibers are very strong, and are Extended
according to its Length.

C C D D, The Fatty Appendages, whose Extremities have diverse Figures.

E, The Mesentery.

F G, The Trunks of the Blood Vessels.

Fig. 7.
The Rectum Divided according to its Length, and Expanded to show its Inside.

A B, etc. The Internal Tunicle of the Rectum, which being much larger than the
External, necessarily Appears in many Folds in this Position. This Internal
Tunick of the Rectum is composed of a vast Number of Glands, to which diverse
Blood Vessels belong; of these, the Veins are considerably Large and are
commonly filled with Blood, by reason of their Position and the Blood Ascending
directly in them; whence it happens they become very much Distended when the
Blood does not readily pass on in their Superior Trunks; or when any sharp
Humor Affects this Membrane, these Veins become Tumified, and sometimes
discharge their Blood, and are called Haemorrhoides Apertae; if no Blood flows
from those Tumified Veins, they are called Haemorrhoides Caecae. The Glandules
employed in separating a Matter to Lubricate the Inside of the Rectum, and
cause the Excrements, though very much hardened to pass off easily, are in this
Case also very much Swelled, and a great Quantity of Mucus flows from them:
Hence the whole Inward Membrane of the Rectum becomes much Thickened, and when
pressed down beyond the Stricture of the Sphincter Muscle of the Anus, it is
called Procidentia Any. Though it is commonly supposed the Outward Membrane of
the Rectum as well as the Internal, is driven out in a Common Procidentia Any;
yet the following Case seems to evince the contrary, and that it is the
Internal Membrane of the Rectum only that is then Prolaps'd.

A Gentleman of about Twenty Seven Years of Age, had for several Years been
very much Afflicted with the Haemorrhoides and a Procidentia Any, who after a
sudden Debauch had a great Inflammation and Tumor Affected the Anus, attended
with great Pain: In the space of Twelve Hours, the Parts about the Anus
Appeared of a Livid Color; soon after a Mortification followed. The Sphincter
Muscle of the Anus being Relaxt, a Procidentia Any followed; the Prolapsed
Intestine (being exposed to the Matter which flowed from the Adjacent Parts)
soon suffered Mortification. The Patient after some Weeks recovered his usual
Strength, and in a few Months became perfectly Well. Nor did any inconveniency
follow by reason of the Mortification of the Prolapsed Intestine; but on the
Contrary, He continued Well, and was freed not only from the Habitual
Haemorrhoides, but was afterward freed from a Procidentia Any.





THE FORTIETH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE Trunk of the Body lying in a Supine Posture, and some of the Viscera of
the Abdomen Exposed to View.

A A, The Common and Proper Integuments of the Abdomen Dissected.

B, The Under-side of the Omentum as it Appears when Raised and remaining
Contiguous to the Colon.

C C, The Colon at its Beginning in the Right Ilia, and in its Progress over
the Right Kidney, by the Pylorus and under the Bottom of the Stomach: The
farther Progress of this Intestine is commonly so well Described, that we need
not say more of it in this Place.

c c, The Coecum.

D, That Part called One of the Ligaments of the Colon, which we take to be
Composed of Fleshy Fibers, etc.

E E, The Intestina Tenuia, or Thin Guts, which are the Duodenum Iejunum, and
Ileum; to these some add the Coecum.

F F, The Intestina Crassa, or Thick Guts, are the Colon and the Rectum; to
these the Coecum is commonly reckoned.

G H I, The Mesentery to which the Intestines are Contiguous. The Mesentery is
Composed of diverse Strata of Membranes, the outwardmost of which, on both Sides
of it, is a Continuation of the Internal Membrane of the Peritonoeum; between
these are placed diverse Membranaceous Loculi, which Enclose its Glands K K:
This Internal Part of the Mesentery is by some Esteemed as a Third Membrane
proper to this Part. The Rise or Connection of the Mesentery to the Stable
Parts, is at the Three Superior Vertebrae of the Loins on both Sides the
Arteria Magna, where it sends out the Arteria Coeliaca and Mesenterica
Superior. Besides Blood Vessels, the Mesentery is plentifully furnished with
Lympheducts and Nerves; the Latter are well Described by Dr. Willis and
Vieusenius; the Lympheducts are mentioned in the precedent Table; its Arteries
are: Figured in our Appendix; its Veins Correspond to them, and discharge their
Blood into the Liver by the Vena Porta.

K K, The Glands of the Mesentery through which the Chyle and Lympha passes to the
Receptaculum Chyli.

L, A Large Gland of the Mesentery near the Receptaculum Chyli, called by
Asellius, Pancreas.

M M, The Fat which in Humane Bodies is commonly very plentifully placed
between the Membranes of the Mesentery. In some Quadrupedes, especially in
Dogs, the Fat only Accompanies the Trunks of the Blood Vessels of the Mesentery.

Fig. 2.
This Figure is Copied from Bourdon's Third Table, Fig. 1.

A A A, The Mesentery in which its Vessels and Glands are here only Expressed.

B B, The Intestines.

C D, The Glandules of the Mesentery, through which the Chyle and Lympha pass
together from the Intestines to the Receptaculum Chyli. C D, Those Glands which
receive the Contents of the Vasa Lactea Primi Generis; F, That placed near the
Receptaculum Chyli which receive the Contents of the Venae Lacteae Secundi
Generis. A A, Inferior, Denote the Venae Lacteae Primi Generis. A, Superior and
E, Represents the Venae Lacteae Secundi Generis. E, Superior, Part of a
Lympheduct Arising from the Spleen.

G, Part of the Receptaculum Chyli, or the Beginning of the Ductus Thoracicus.

H, The Arteria Mesenterica.

I, The Vena Mesenterica.

A further Description of the Receptaculum Chyli and Ductus Thoracicus, is
Inserted in the Appendix, Fig. 11, 12.

Fig. 3, 4.
Show the different Insertions of the Thoracick-Duct into the Lower Side of the
Left Subclavian Vein; which in these Figures are Erroneously Expressed in the
Right Subclavian.

E E, The Subclavian Veins.

F F, The Thoracick-Ducts.

Fig. 5, 6.
A B B, One of the Lacteal-Vessels Blowed up and Dried, in which the Valves
Appear at a greater Distance from each other, then in a Lympheduct prepared in
the same Manner, Fig. 6.

THE FORTY-FIRST TABLE.
SHOWS the rest of the Viscera as they Appear within the Cavity of the Abdomen,
after the Intestines together with the Mesentery, are removed.

A A, The Lower Parts of the Kidneys. It Is well known the Kidneys are those
Parts which separate the Urine from the Blood; whence it is Conveyed by the
Ureters into the Bladder of Urine. Concerning the Structure of the Kidneys; See
Tab. 43.

B B, The Ureters partly Covered with Fat, in their way from the Kidneys to the
Bladder of Urine.

C, The Bladder of Urine somewhat Distended.

D D, The Spermatick Vein and Artery on both Sides Involved with Fat and
Membranes, as they pass toward the Testicles.

E, The Right Side of the Scrotum, with the Testicle of that Side remaining in
it. This Right Side of the Scrotum is Divested from the Left by a Suptum
Intermedium, mentioned by the Accurate Ruysch.

F, The Left Testicle taken out of the Scrotum.

G, The Bottom of the Stomach in Situ.

H H, The Liver in Situ.

I, The Pancreas as it Appears in its Proper Situation after the Intestines are
removed.

K, A Portion of the Duodenum cut off and tied below the Insertion of the Gall
and Pancreatick Ducts.

L, The Lower Part of the Rectum in like Manner tied up.

M, Part of the Mesentery according to Bidloo.

N, The Descending Trunk of the Arteria Magna.

O, The Ascending Trunk of the Vena Cava.

P, The Internal Surface of the Peritonaeum, as it Appears when Divided in a
Crucial Manner, together with the Common and the rest of the Proper Integuments
of the Abdomen. In the Upper Part of this Appearance of the Peritonaeum, the
Fibers of the Musculus Transversalis may be seen as they lie under it.

Q Q, The Fat withinside the Skin.

R R, The Superior and Inferior Parts of the Musculus Rectus Abdominis, Divided
as above Noted.

S, The Lower Part of the Spleen in Situ.

T, The Trunk of the Arteria Mesenterica Superior cut off near the Aorta.

V, A Portion of the Arteria Mesenterica Inferior in like Manner Divided.

W, The Umbilical Ligament of the Liver turned Upwards, and not freed from its
Enclosing Membranes.





THE FORTY-SECOND TABLE.
REPRESENTS the Kidneys, Testicles, Bladder of Urine, and Spermatick Vessels,
freed from the Body and Displayed.

A A, The Right Kidney:

B B, It Is Membrana Adiposa partly Separated.

C C, The Left Kidney freed from the Membrana Adiposa.

D D, The Glandulae Renales: After frequent Injecting of Wax into the Veins of
a Foetus, I have constantly found the Cavities of these Glands filled with the
Wax. If you Blow into the Veins of a Foetus, the Glands of the Kidneys will
soon become Distended with Wind: These Glands are soft and and Membranous in
the Foetus, in the Adult very hard, and proportionably Less, and not capable of
being Distended by Blowing into their Veins; nor does any Fluid Iniected by the
Veins, of an Adult, pass into the Cavities of these Glands. The Glandula
Renalis of the Right Side has Arteries from the Emulgent, and Arteria Phrenica.
The Gland of the Left Kidney has diverse small Arteries from the Descending
Trunk of the Arteria Magna: Their Veins are Two Trunks; One to each Gland, that
of the Right Side Arising only from the Gland of the Kidney it self, is Less
than the Left, and empties its self into the Ascending Trunk of the Vena Cava,
above the Emulgent Vein; that of the Left, Arises from the Arteries of the
Neighboring Parts, as well as from those of the Gland it self, and Discharges
its self into the Left Emulgent Vein K.

1 E, The Arteria Coeliaca cut off near its Origin.

2 E, The Trunk of the Arteria Mesenterica in like Manner cut off.

a F, The Descending Trunk of the Aorta below the Kidneys.

F F, The External Iliack Branches of the Great Artery.

G G, The Ascending Trunk of the Vena Cava below the Kidneys.

g g g, The Iliack Branches of the Vena Cava.

X G, The Spermatick Artery of the Right Testicle, which commonly Arises from
the Forepart of the Aorta near the Beginning of the Left Spermatick Artery;
but in the Subject whence this Figure was taken, it seems to Arise with Two
Trunks from the Right Emulgent Artery, or else the Operator committed a Mistake
in Dissecting these Parts here Expressed. In all the Subjects I have hitherto
Examined, I have constantly found the Spermatick Arteries to Arise near each
other, on the Forepart of the Aorta, as is Expressed on the Left Side, and
commonly Described by Anatomists. Riolan tells us he has observed One of the
Spermatick Arteries to Arise from the Emulgent; the like I have more than once
thought I had seen, but upon strict Examination, I found it a Branch from the
Emulgent Artery, Descending in the Duplicature of the Peritonaeum with the
Spermatick Artery and Vein; nor could I observe any Inosculation between it and
the Spermatick Artery.

The Spermatick Arteries being very small as they Arise out of the Aorta, I
don't much wonder that they have escaped the Eyes of the less Accurate
Dissectors, and give them occasion to suppose they were sometimes wanting.

G, The Spermatick Vein of the Right Testicle, Ending in the Vena Cava, as I
have constantly Observed it.

xF, The Left Spermatick Artery Arising from the Forepart of the Descending
Trunk of the Aorta toward the Left Side.

F, The Spermatick Vein of the Left Testicle which empties it self into the
Left Emulgent Vein in one Trunk most commonly; but sometimes I have seen it, as
in this Figure, Divided a little below the Emulgent Vein.

H H, The Ureters of their common Size Descending from the Kidneys to the
Bladder of Urine.

I, The Urine Bladder Distended with Wind.

K, The Left Emulgent Vein.

I, The Emulgent Artery of the Right Side.

M, Part of the Arteria Mesenterica Inferior.

N N, The Testicles.

O, The Epididymis of the Left Testicle.

P P, The Vasa Deferentia freed from the Tunica Vaginalis of the Preparantia.

22, Diverse Blood Vessels Propagated to the Peritonaeum from the Spermatick
Vessels.

THE FORTY-THIRD TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE External and Inferior Side of the Left Kidney.

A A B B, The Proper Membrane of the Kidney covering above Two Thirds of its
Body: The Superior Part of the Kidney being freed from its Membrane, some
Vestigiae of its Lobuli (when in the Foetus) do Appear.

C, The Emulgent Artery Pinned out.

D, The Emulgent Vein Pinned out.

E, The Vreter, and its Expansion within the Kidney, called the Pelvis, made
bare.

Fig. 2.
A A, The Concave Part of the same Kidney Represented in the former Figure,
Opened, to show the Ramifications of its Pelvis.

B B, The Blood Vessels.

C C, The Vreter and its Pelvis Branching within the Body of the Kidney. A
piece of a Tobacco-Pipe being Inserted to the Superior Branch of the Pelvis.

Fig. 3.
Half of the Kidney when Divided according to its Length.

A A, The External Unequal Surface and Glandulous Part of the Kidney.

B B C C, The Tubuli Vrinarii Arising from the Glands of the Kidney in their
Way toward the Papillae.

D, Half of the Pelvis Expanded, so that the Beginning of the Vreter from it
may be seen.

E, The Vreter hanging down.

F, The Blood Vessels of the Kidney.

The Proper Membrane of the Kidney is here Pinned out.

Fig. 4.
The Kidney Divided through its whole Length, from its Back to the Pelvis.

A A, The Urinary Tubes as they Appear in diverse Classes, in their Way toward
the Papillae in the Pelvis.

B C, The Glands and Urinary Tubes Interspersed with the Blood Vessels of the
Kidney.

D, The Pelvis or Infundibulum Opened, so that the going out of the Vreter may
be seen.

d, The Vreter.

E E, The Carunculae Papillares composed of the Endings of the Urinary Tubes,
which open into the Branchings of the Pelvis, into which the Urine is
discharged, in Order to its being transmitted to the Bladder of Urine by the
Vreter.

e e, The Fat within the Kidney lying on the Pelvis.

Fig. 5.
The Blood Vessels and Urinary Tubes of the Kidney Expressed by a Microscope.

A, The Proper Membrane of the Kidney.

B B, The Ends of the Blood Vessels broke off.

C C, The Blood Vessels of the Kidney which help to compose its Glands.

D D, The Glands of the Kidney composed of Blood Vessels, Urinary Tubes, Nerves
and Lympheducts.

The Nerves of the Kidneys as well as of other Glands in the Abdomen furnished
with Excretory Ducts, are very few, and their Trunks very small; nor does any
exquisite Pains affect the Kidneys themselves, though Stones composed of diverse
Angles are lodged in their Glandulous Parts; but the Parts whose Nerves are
Complext with those of the Kidneys, suffer most in such Cases. Though we reckon
the Nerves among the Parts which compose the Glands of the Kidneys, yet we
cannot think they are any otherwise Useful here, than Subservient to the other
Vessels which are immediately employed in the Secretion of the Urine, as the
Blood Vessels and Urinary Tubes; which are the Parts Organized for Separating
the Urine from the Blood. Nor are the Lympheducts otherwise employed here than
we have elsewhere taken Notice of, as in the Liver; to carry off Part of the
Succus Nutritious which is constantly conveyed to the Gland it self. How these
Parts are Organized, the following Experiments may a little Inform us.

If you Blow into the Emulgent Artery, the Wind will pass into the Vein of that
Name, Vreter, and Lympheducts; the the like will happen if you Blow either into
the Vreter or Emulgent Vein. If you Inject Mercury, all these Vessels will in
like Manner be Distended. If you Syringe Water into the Emulgent Arteries, it
will at first pass the Veins and Vreter; but if you continue Injecting it for
any time, the whole Kidney will at Length become Distended, and the Water will
no longer pass off again by those Vessels. Hence it Appears the Blood
consisting of Globular Bodies, (Proportionated to the Magnitude of the
Extremities of the Vessels moving in the Serum) readily pass on by a Succession
of Globules still driving others before them; whilst the Urinary Tubes (as they
Arise with small Orifices from the Sides of the Extremities of the
Blood Vessels) receive the Thinner or Urinous Part of the Blood, and Discharge
it into the Pelvis of the Kidney. In the Body of a Person of the First Rank I
lately Dissected, I found the Left Kidney Large, its Texture very Loose; and by
Blowing into its Vreter, the Emulgent Vein very suddenly became Distended: In
this Person among other Disorders, he had near Twenty Years before his Death,
very Feculent Urine: If his Urine was Evaporated by Heat as in a Spoon over a
Candle, its Feculent Part became still thicker; by which it appeared the
Nutritious Parts of the Serum of the Blood as well as the Urinous Part, past
off by the too great Laxity of the Urinous Pores in the Sides of the Blood
Vessels in the Kidney.

E, The Urinary Tubes in their way from the Glands to the Papillae.

F, The Extremities of the Blood Vessels which Compose the Glands of the Kidney.

G, The Urinary Tubes Composing the Papillae, where their Mouths open into one
of the Branches of the Pelvis.

H, A Branch of the Pelvis cut off.

Fig. 6.
A A, The Internal Concave Part of the Kidney opened.

B, Part of the Vreter.

C, The Pelvis freed of the Kidney.

D D, The Branches of the Pelvis within the Kidney also made bare.

E E, The Urinary Tubes which Arise from the Extremities of the Blood Vessels
of the Kidney, and open into the Branches of the Pelvis, Composing the Papillae.

Fig. 7.
The Vreter, Pelvis and its Ramifications freed from the Kidney and dried.

A, Part of the Vreter.

B, The Pelvis or Beginning of the Vreter lying within the Body of the Kidney.

C D, The Ramifications of the Pelvis cut from the Corpora Papillaria, or
Endings of the Urinary Tubes.







THE FORTY-FOURTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE Membranes of the Ureter Viewed with a Microscope.

A A A, etc. A Portion of the Ureter cut off near the Bladder and Expanded;

B, Its Exterior Membrane.

C D, Its Membranaceous Fibers running according to its Length, filled with Fat.

E, The Second Membrane or Lamella of the Ureters, consisting of Oblique
Muscular Fibers Intersecting each other.

F, The Blood Vessels lying between this and the First Membrane.

H, The Third or Internal Membrane of the Ureter, composed of Fibers much
Looser and standing at greater Distances, than those of the Former.

I I, Diverse Glandules which Appear in this Membrane, and Emit a Mucus to
Defend the Ureter from the Acrimonious Salts of the Urine.

Fig. 2.
The Inferior or Back-part of the Bladder of Urine, etc. together with the
Penis.

A B, etc. Portions of the Ureters in their Tortuous Progress to their Oblique
Insertions, between the Exterior and Inferior Membranes of the Bladder.

C C, The Bladder of Urine covered with Fat, as it is commonly found in Humane
Bodies.

The Bladder of Urine may be said to be a Dilatation of the Ureters; the
intimate Structure of the Membrane of both agree, except that the Muscular
Fibers of the Bladder are Stronger and Larger than those of the Ureters; the
Superior and Largest of them embracing the Bladder, like a Hand, as Spigelius
compares them; the Internal are Less, and Decussate the Superior with Various
Angles: Some Anatomists reckon these among the Muscles, and call them
Detrusores Urinae. The Glands of the Bladder of Urine are also Larger than
those of the Ureters, and are frequently Tumified as well as the Fibers in
Diseased Bodies, especially in those who for some time have been Afflicted with
a Stone in this Part, the Sides of the Bladder have been very much Thickened;
and by Compressing them a Mucus may be seen to Arise from its Internal Surface,
through diverse Ostiola or Excretory Ducts. The Bladder is Situated in the
Hypogastrium in the Duplicature of the Peritonaeum: When it is Inflated in the
Body, it exactly fill's that Cavity of the Abdomen, called the Pelvis; its
Upper Part is Suspended by the Urachus, which in some Animals would be liable
to fall on its Neck and hinder the Evacuation of Urine.

The Use of the Bladder is to Receive the Urine from the Ureters, and Contain
it till the Time of Excretion; whence it is Squees'd out partly by its own
Carnous Fibers, but chiefly by the Muscles of the Abdomen.

D, That Part of the Urethra that is Bended under the Os Pubis in its Proper
Situation, and is placed between the Sphincter Muscle of the Anus and
Prostatae. This Part of the Urethra is liable to be Wounded, and sometimes
Perforated by too hastily Introducing the Conductor into the Bladder, after an
Incision is made in the Perinaeum in Cutting for the Stone; whereby the
Operator afterward thrusts his Forceps between the Bladder of Urine and
Rectum. This Inadvertency I am persuaded is very often Practiced among the
Pretenders to Lythotomy, and frequently proves fatal to the Patient. One would
think it was hardly possible a Man in his Senses, and but tollerably acquainted
with Anatomy, could commit such Errors; yet of this I have met with more than
one Instance, when being called to Dissect the Deceased, in whom such Operators
have been so Unfortunate as to leave the Stone still in the Bladder.

E, The Vasa Preparantia or Blood Vessels of the Testes, involved in the
Peritonaeum.

F, The Testicle. Between F and E G, is that Part of the Spermatick Vessels,
called Corpus Pyramidale, and Plexus Pampiniformis or Varicosus.

G G, The Vas Deferens Ascending from the Testicle to the Vesiculae Seminales.

H H, The Vesiculae Seminales Blowed up by the Vasa Deferentia; that of the
Right Side having a Blow-Pipe still remaining in it.

I, The Back-Part of the Prostatae or Corpus Glandosum.

K K, The Back-Part of the Penis.

L L, The Musculi Directores Penis, whose Origin, Progress, and Termination are
Expressed Tab. 47. Fig. 5.

M, The Bulb of the Cavernous Body of the Urethra Divested of the Musculus
Accelerator Urinae, Expressed in the last mentioned Table; that Part of the Bulb
toward the Anus being cut off; its Internal Cavernous Part here Appears
Deprest, or drawn Inwards.

THE FORTY-FIFTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
IS the Testes with its Vessels and Membranes when freed from the Scrotum.

A, The Body of the Testicle.

B, Some Appearances of the Musculus Cremaster (according to Bidloo.)

C C, The Tunica Vaginalis;

D, Its Inferior Part cleaving to the Testicle;

E, Its Superior Part continued to the Peritonaeum.

F, The Serpentine Distribution of the Blood Vessels on the Testes.

G, That Part of the Testes next the Epididymis.

h, The Epididymis.

H, The Vas Deferens whole Thickness and Cavity is very truly Expressed at its
Extremity.

I, A particular Vaginal-Tunicle of the Vas Deferens, which Bidloo says has
Circular Fibers, but not here Expressed.

K, The Blood Vessels of the Testicle called Vasa Praeparantia, as they Appear
before any Injection or Inflation is made into them.

L, The Nerve of the Testicle.

Fig. 2.
The Testes, Vas Deferens, and Vasa Praeparantia Displayed, together with some
Lympheducts of the Former.

A, The Arteria Spermatica continued from a Portion of the Descending Trunk of
the Arteria Magna: I cannot but suspect this Part of the Figure to be Erroneous,
since in the many Subjects I have always observed the Origin of the Spermatick
Artery to be very Small, even much Smaller than its Inferior Trunk; insomuch,
that its Cavity Arising from the Arteria Magna, would scarce admit the Smallest
Probe commonly used, it being but just Capacious enough to receive a Large Hogs
Bristle.

a a, etc. The Ramifications of the Spermatick Artery in their Descent to the
Testes.

B, The Trunk of the Spermatick Vein with a Portion o^ the Vena Cava, into
which it Enters;

C D bb, etc. Its Various Anastomoses and Retiforme Inosculations, as it
Ascends from the Testes.

E E, The Valves of the Spermatick Vein which look from below Upwards, and
prevent the Descent of the Blood in that Vessel. Should it be asked why the
Spermatick Veins in Humane Bodies, and the Arteries in Quadrupedes should have
a Tortuous Progress toward the Testicles; and Vice Versa the Humane Spermatick
Arteries and Veins of Quadrupedes should pass Straight? We answer, Though the
Separation of the Semen in the Testicle is after the Manner of that of other
Liquors in Conglomerate Glands, yet we constantly find in all Animals, that the
Arteries of the Testes are Propagated from their Large Trunks at a considerable
Distance from them; and those of the Conglomerate Glands, are always supplied
with Blood Vessels from the next Neighbouring-Branch: And this Practice in
Nature we cannot at present Account for otherwise, than that the Blood in the
Testicles should not pass with that Velocity as it does in other Glands; else
what should be the Design of those many Turnings and Windings made in the
Spermatick Arteries of most, if not all Quadrupedes? But that every Angle of
their Contortions should take off the Impetus of the Impelled Blood from the
Heart. But the Subject of our present Animadversions here, offers an Objection.
Why than are the Spermatick Arteries in Humane Bodies Straight, when their
Progress is toward a Perpendicular Descent, upon the Account of the Erect
Position of the Body? We answer, That the Descending Progress of the Blood
might be a very good Argument of its Enjoying a freer Accession to the Testes;
but we constantly Observe in all Humane Bodies, that the Spermatick Arteries
are (as we have Intimated above) very Small at their Originals from the Arteria
Magna, which is a sufficient Impediment to any great Impetus of the Blood from
the Great Artery: Nor was this Contrivance in Nature necessary in Quadrupedes,
because it would be an Impediment in them in providing that Requisite Stock of
Semen to Impregnate the Female with her Numbers; or in regard a greater
Proportion of Semen was in them necessary on the Account of the Length of the
Cornua Uteri, which it must first pass through, before it can Arrive at the
Fallopian Tubes and Ovaria: Whence it is, that the Testes of Quadrupedes are
much Larger in Proportion, than the Humane. But why the Humane Spermatick Veins
are thus Divided and Inosculated with each other, when those of Quadrupedes are
Straight and fewer Trunks, is Accountable from their Positions; those of Men
being toward a Perpendicular Ascent to convey the refluent Blood; and those of
Quadrupedes near Horizontal. From hence the Necessity of making one of these
Blood Vessels Varicous, does Appear, especially the Humane Spermatick Veins;
which, if had the Arteries been also, as in Quadrupedes; the Spaces or
Perforations in the Muscles of the Abdomen for their Egress, must have been so
Large, as that the Intestines would have been continually liable to an
Extrusion.

F, Part of the Epididymis.

G, The Glandulous Part of the Testicle Divested of its Proper Membrane.

H H, The Vas Deferens partly freed from the Epididymis, to Exhibit some of
its Contortions.

I, The Tunica Vaginalis of the Vas Deferens.

K, The Tunica Albuginea, with some of the Glandulous Part of the Testicle
Raised with it.

L, Part of the Tunica Elythroides or Vaginalis.

M, Some of the Lympheducts of the Testicle Pinned out.

Fig. 3.
Part of the Vas Deferens that Composes the Epididymis, done much bigger than
the Life.

A A, Part of the Testicle.

B D, The Tortuous or Serpentine Disposition of the Vas Deferens in the
Epididymis; in which Manner the whole Body of the Epididymis is Composed of
that Vessel, or Secretory Duct of the Testicle.

C D, Another Separation of the Vas Deferens in the Epididymis.

E, The Vas Deferens.

I I, The Tunica Vaginalis of the Vas Deferens Composed of Circular Fibers
according to Bidloo.





THE FORTY-SIXTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
A, THE Glandulous Part of the Testicle Divested of its Proper Integument.

B B, The Tunica Albuginea, or Proper Membrane of the Testes Raised and Pinned
up.

C C, The Vessels of the Testes broken off in Raising the Albuginea.

D E, etc. Some of the Blood Vessels which Perforate the Tunica Albuginea.

F, Part of the Foldings of the Vas Deferens, which Composes the Epididymis,
made bare.

G, The Vas Deferens;

H, Its Cavity or Ductus which is very Conspicuous in all the Figures of the
preceding Table, and not Lettered.

I D, The Vasa Praeparantia or Blood Vessels of the Testes involved in their
Proper Membrane.

K, The Nerve of the Testes.

Fig. 2.
The Testes Divested of its Tunica Albuginea.

A, The Seminal-Vessels of the Testes Collectively passing to their Egress, in
Order to Compose the Epididymis.

B B, The Tunica Albuginea freed from the Testes.

C C, The Glandulous Part of the Testicle.

D D, The Seminal-Vessels or Tubes derived from their Originals, in the Sides
of the Arteries that Compose the Glands.

E E, The Orifices made by breaking off of the Blood Vessels as they pass through
the Tunica Albuginea.

F, The Seminal Tubes passing out of the Testes, which are afterward United
into one Trunk, whose Foldings, Turnings or Windings Compose the Epididymis;
whence it is continued (as is Expressed in the preceding Figure) and called Vas
Deferens.

Fig. 3.
The Testes Dissected Transversely.

A A, The Tunica Albuginea Raised.

B B, The Glandulous Part of the Testes where some Vestigia of the
Blood Vessels Appear.

C C, The Progress of the Seminal Tubes through the Substance of the Testes.

D, Their Trunks Collectively passing toward their Egress, as in the Former
Figure, which by some is called Ductus Highmorianus.

Fig. 4.
The Vessels of the Testes Expressed with a Microscope according to Bidloo, whose
Description take as follows. A, The Seminal-Vessels separated from each other.
B, Their Cavities Swelling in the Manner of Valves. C, The Blood Vessels
Accompanying the aforesaid Vessels, and Covering them with Glands. D E, The
Fragments of the Small Membranes. I am apt to believe this Figure of the
Seminal-Vessels of the Testes is Fictitious, or that it may be of the
Seminal-Vessels of the Epididymis; for I am well assured the Seminal-Vessels of
the Testes and their Blood Vessels, can with no Art be so Displayed as Bidloo
Describes these to be so Represented with a Microscope: But grant it was
Practicable so to Display those Vessels, yet I am sure it is not possible to
distinguish the Vessels which carry the Semen from those of the Blood; so that
such a Description must be Precarious. The Experiments I have made in Examining
the Testes, convince me that the Extremities of their Blood Vessels which
Compose their Glands, are much Less or more Tender than those of other Parts;
whence it is, if you Inject Mercury by the Spermatick Artery, it will not pass
back again by the Vein, as in the Kidneys and other Glands; but the Mercury
upon pushing it Forwards, will sooner break the Extremities of these Vessels,
and get out in the Tunica Albuginea, and Extend the whole Stone than return
again by the Spermatick Vein: Nor could I ever find the Lympheducts filled with
Mercury, upon Injecting it into the Spermatick Artery; but by Blowing into the
Vein of that Name, the Lympheducts soon become Distended, as Nuck has also
taken Notice in his Adenographia Curiosa, Page 53.

Fig. 5.
A, The Blood Vessels of the Testicle Injected with Wax, and not Separated from
their Inward Membrane, derived from the Peritonaeum.

B, The Spermatick Artery.

C, The Vein.

D D, The Spermatick Blood Vessels above the Testes which are Distributed to
the Epididymis. E, Vasa Deferentia; F, Tunica Albuginea; G, and to the Stone it
self H. The Sixth Figure shows the other Side of the same Testicle and Vessels,
which are Distinguished by the same Letters.

From what has been said, it Appears the Vasa Deferentia like the Secretory
Ducts of other Glands, Spring from the Extremities of the Blood Vessels of the
Testes; and agreeable to the Length and Tortuous Progress of the Blood Vessels
of these Parts, so their Secretory Ducts or Vasa Deferentia are of a vast
Length also, and Disposed in diverse Foldings in Composing that Part called the
Epididymis. The Vasa Deferentia thus Arising from the Epididymis, pass up
Straight with the Preparantia: Soon after they are in the Cavity of the
Abdomen, these Deferent Vessels leave the Preparantia, and Descend over the
Ureters in the Pelvis of the Abdomen, between the Bladder of Urine and the
Rectum; where they begin to Dilate themselves and Open into the Vesiculae
Seminales, as Appears in the following Table, Fig. 1, 2.

THE FORTY-SEVENTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
SHOWS the Fore-parts of the Penis, Glandulae Prostatae, and Vesiculae
Seminales, etc.

A A, The Vesiculae Seminales.

a a, The Blood Vessels; B B, their Branches on the Vesiculae.

C, The Membrane which covers the Vesiculae Seminales and Vasa Deferentia.

D Superior, The Vas Deferens of the Left Side appearing very much enlarged
before it enters the Vesiculae Seminales of that Side.

D D Inferior, The Vesiculae Seminales of the Right Side.

E, The Neck of the Bladder cut off at the Beginning of the Vrethra.

F F, The Forepart of the Prostatae divided to show the Inside of the Vrethra.

G, The Caruncula or Caput Gallinaginis on the Inferior or Back-part of the
Vrethra; as it appears when the Superior or Forepart of the Vrethra is divided.

H H, The Two Orifices of the Seed-Vessels, as they appear when the Upper Part
of the Caruncula or Caput Gallinaginis is snipt off with a Pair of Sizars. The
Ostia Prostatarum on both Sides the Caruncula do somewhat appear.

I I, The Upper Part of the Penis, called, Dorsum Penis, covered with its
Membrana Carnosa, whose Forepart with the True-skin, composes the Praeputium.

K K, The Corpora Cavernosa Penis cut from the Ossa Pubis.

L, The Bulb of the Cavernous Body of the Vrethra.

The Figure of the Cavernous Body of the Vrethra differs very much from those
of the Penis; That of the Vrethra being less in its Middle, and Large at both
Ends; whereas the Corpora Cavernosa Penis are Less at their Extremities, and
Large in their Middles.

M, The Glans composing the other Extreme of the Cavernous Body of the Vrethra.

N N, The Nerves of the Penis pinned out.

O O, The Arteries of the Penis.

P, The Vena Ipsius Penis where it is Comprest by the Transverse Ligament of
the Os Pubis, when the Penis is Erected.

Q, Part of the Membrana Carnosa Penis pinned out.

Fig. 2.
The Vesiculae Seminales cut through after Inflation and drying them, to show
their Insides.

A B C, The Cells of the Vesiculae Seminales so extended by Inflation, that the
Rete or Vesiculae Minores in their Insides do not appear.

D F F, The Insides of the Vasa Deferentia in like Manner so Extended by
Inflation, that their Vesiculae Minores do not appear.

G, The Two Seminal Ducts which discharge the Semen into the Vrethra.

H, Part of the Prostatae.

Fig. 3.
A, A. The Corpus Glandulosum or Prostatae divided.

B, C, etc. Its Glandulous Inside.

D D, The Ducts of the Prostatae which open into the Vrethra, at the Sides of
the Caput Gallinaginis, which are elegantly Expressed in the following Table,
Fig. 1. K.

F, F. Part of the Vrethra.

Fig. 4.
The Prostatae blowed up, their Excretory Tubes in the Vrethra and dried.

A, A, The Exterior Membrane.

B, B, The Interior Membrane composed of more carneous Fibers than the former.

C, C, etc. Their Transparent Vesicules extended.

D, D, Some of the Vesicules broke up.

E, E, Other Vesiculae that remain Hard and Extended.

F, F, Some Parts of the Ducts remaining Extended.

G, G, The Fragments of the Membranes.

Fig. 5.
The Muscles of the Anus and Penis in Situ.

A, B, C, D, The Musculus Sphincter Any: The Figure and Situation of this
Muscle is here well Expressed; though Part of it be frequently divided in Opening a
Fistulous Sinus of the Anus, yet the remaining Part of it is sufficient for its
proper Office of retaining the Faeces.

E, E, The Levatores Any: The Origination of which Muscles are best seen after
dividing the Ossa Pubis, to take out the Bladder of Urine with the Penis: They
spring from the Internal Parts of the last mentioned Bones, and descend close
over the Corpus Glandulosum or Prostatae. The Hinder Parts of these Muscles
derive their Broad, Thin, Fleshy Beginnings from the Ossa Ischii and Os Sacrum;
from these Places their Fibers descend to their Implantation, into the Lower
End of the Intestinum Rectum in the Anus.

These Muscles have a Twofold Office; first in drawing up the Anus, least it
should be too much pressed upon by the Foeces; secondly they Compress the
Prostatae and Vesiculae Seminales in Coitu, in Order to discharge their
Contents or Semen into the Vrethra.

F, F, The Directores Penis or Erectores: They arise Fleshy from the Lower
Margin of the Ossa Pubis where they are joined to the Ischii; whence they
ascend to their Implantations near the Beginnings of the Corpora Cavernosa
Penis.

The Position of these Muscles renders them capable of pulling the Penis
Inwards and Downwards; but by Means of a Ligament arising from the Ossa Pubis,
which is fastened to the Upper Part of the Penis, they have a different Effect
by drawing the Penis somewhat Upwards and Nearer the Pubes, whereby the great
Vein on the Dorsum Penis is Comprest, and the Erection of the Penis Promoted.

G, G, The Corpora Cavernosa Penis.

H, H, The Musculus Accelerator Vrinae covering the Bulb of the Cavernous Body
of the Vrethra: This derives its Origin from the Upper Part of the Vrethra L,
Fig. 1. on both Sides, and encompassing the Bulb, meets on its Inferior Part,
but after a considerable Progress on that Part of the Vrethra in the Perinaeum;
this Muscle divides its self and makes Two Tendinous Insertions on both Sides
the Corpora Cavernosa Penis, as is Expressed in this Figure.

Besides the Offices commonly ascribed to this Muscle of compressing the
Vrethra in driving out the Remains of Urine, and promoting the Ejaculation of
the Semen, both which Actions are chiefly done by the last described Parts of
it, embracing the Vrethra. It also Assists the Musculi Directores in promoting
the Erection of the Penis, by compressing the Bulb whose contained Blood is
then driven toward the Glans, in a greater Quantity than can immediately be
discharged by the Veins of the Bulb; the Glans thereby suddenly becomes
distended: But the Vigorous Action of this Muscle not continuing long, the
Veins of the Bulb which were then compressed, are again at Liberty to discharge
the retained Blood, and the Glans suddenly Sinks: Whence it comes that the
Glans is not always duly extended, when the Corpora Cavernosa Penis are Erected.

This Part of the Bulb and Accelerator Muscle, etc. are divided in Lithotomy,
or Cutting for the Stone in the Bladder; Whence it happens that the Cicatrice
of these Parts afterward, often hinders a complete Extention of the Glans
Penis in an Erection. The like happn'd in a Patient I was not long since called
to, who had a Fistulous Sinus in the Perinaeum, in whom I found this Bulbous
Part of the Cavernous Body of the Vrethra very much Indurated: Upon Enquiry he
told me, When his Penis was Erected, the Glans remained shrivelld and no Ways
Extended: Nor could the Corpus Cavernosum Vrethrae be extended, and therefore
he could by no Means Ejaculate the Semen at the Time of Erection; but the Semen
often came with the Urine.

I, The Musculus Transversalis Penis on the Left Side, that of the Right not
being Lettered; It Arises from the Knob of the Os Ischium immediately below the
Origination of the Musculus Director, and passes transversly to the Superior
Part of the Bulb of the Cavernous Body of the Vrethra.

K, The Glans or Balanus.

L, The Praeputium.

M, The Fraenum.

N, The Vrethra opened





THE FORTY-EIGHTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE Upper and Fore-parts of the Penis and Bladder of Urine, well Expressed after
a Curious Dissection.

A A, The Cavernous Bodies of the Penis Whole.

B B, That Part of the Skin which Composes the Praeputium.

b, The Reduplication or Inner Membrane of the Praeputium.

C D, The Blood Vessels which Adorn the Upper Part or Dorsum Penis.

E, The Glans or Balanus.

About the Neck of the Glans where the Prepuce is joined to the Penis, are
placed the Glandulae Odoriferae, taken Notice of by the Accurate Anatomist Dr.
Tyson. These separate a Matter, which serves to Lubricate the Prepuce, and make
it slide easily on the Glans. These Glandules of the Prepuce are frequently
very much Tumified in Venereal Contacts, and especially if these Parts happen
to be Ulcerated, whence a Foetide Matter proceeds.

F F, The Urine Bladder Opened.

G G, Parts of the Ureters next the Bladder.

H H, Portions of the Vasa Deferentia.

I I, Parts of the Vesiculae Seminales in View.

K, The Caruncula or Caput Gallinaginis, and Ostiolae Prostatarum as they
Appear after the Forepart of the Urethra is Divided.

K L, The Prostatae whose Upper Part is Divided with the Urethra.

M, The Vein of the Penis which is Comprest in an Erection, by a Ligament
placed under the Ossa pubis.

N N, The Two Arteries of the Penis.

O O, The Nerves.

P P, The Corpora Cavernosa freed from the Ossa Pubis and their Musculi
Erectores.

Q Q, Parts of the Musculus Accelerator Urinae freed from the Bulb of the
Cavernous Body of the Urethra, and Expanded.

Fig. 2.
A A, Parts of the Glans Penis viewed with a Microscope.

B B, The Common Membrane of the Penis or Praeputium.

C C, The Proper Membrane of the Glans separated.

D E F G, Diverse Rows of Fibers disposed like Membranes, and Intricately
interwoven with the Internal Membranes and Blood Vessels.

Fig. 3.
The Forepart of a Portion of the Penis, together with the Glans Dried after
Inflation.

A A A, The Inner-parts of the Corpora Cavernosa Penis.

B, The Septum of the Corpora Cavernosa.

C D, The Cells of the Cavernous Bodies which Open into the Sides of the Veins,
and are Sustained by the Fibers which pass to and fro' from the Capsula or
Exterior Membrane of the Corpora Cavernosa and Septum. These Fibers are not so
Conspicuous in the Humane Penis, as in that of a Horse: Nor are the Cells of a
Humane Penis so Evident as they are in Quadrupedes: This Structure of the
Cavernous Bodies of the Penis seeming to agree with the Spleen in the same
Animal.

E E, The Arteries passing through the Middle of each Cavernous Body of the Penis.

After taking off the Tops of the Corpora Cavernosa Penis, from a Patient who
had the Glans very much Ulcerated, I could easily take hold of the Ends of the
Bleeding Arteries with my Forceps, and pass a Ligature on their Trunks, and Tie
them; which Practice in such Cases is Preferable to the Application of
Stypticks which cause Pain.

F, The Glans.

G, The Orifice of the Meatus Urinarius in the Glans.

Fig. 4.
The Hinder-part of the Penis in like Manner prepared by Inflation, etc.

A A, A Portion of the Capsula of the Cavernous Body of the Penis cut, and
raised up; on which Part of the Rete of the Corpus Cavernosum does Appear.

B, The Corpus Cavernosum.

C, The Urethra Opened.

D, The Corpus Cavernosum Urethrae Divided.

E, The remaining Part of the Urethra and its Cavernous Body entire.

F, The Glans Penis.

Fig. 5, 6.
The Corpora Cavernosa Penis and that of the Urethra, after a Transverse
Section when Inflated and Dried.

A A, The Capsula or Strong Membrane of the Cavernous Bodies of the Penis.

B B, The Corpora Cavernosa Penis; in the Middle of each of which the Trunks of
Two Arteries pass according to their Length.

C, The Septum.

D, The Strong Membrane or Capsula of the Corpus Cavernosum Urethrae.

E, The Circular Cavernous Body of the Urethra.

A particular Account of the Structure of this Part is Inserted in an Appendix
to our Myotomia Reformata; where the Lympheducts of the Humane Penis are
Described, and some Phenomenon relating to them Explained: Since the Writing of
which, I have had an Opportunity of seeing the Lympheducts on the Penis of a
Dog, where I Observed by Blowing into the Veins, the Lympheducts were
immediately Distended.

THE FORTY-NINTH TABLE.
SHOWS the Cavity of the Abdomen of a Woman after the Intestines, Mesentery,
etc. are removed.

A A, The Internal Part of the Peritonaeum, together with the Common and Proper
Integuments of the Abdomen after a Crucial Section.

B, The Right Falloppian Tube of the Uterus somewhat Raised from within the
Pelvis of the Abdomen.

C, A Portion of the Intestinum Rectum.

D, The Bladder of Urine in Situ.

E, The Pubes.

F, The Arteria Magna with its Iliac Branches lying on those of the Vena Cava.

G, The Vena Cava.

H, The Stomach supported with a Stylus.

I, The Liver in Situ.

K, Part of the Spleen.

L, Part of the Left Kidney.

M M, Parts of the Musculus Psoi Magni.

N, The Ligamentum Venosum Umbilicale Turned up.





THE FIFTIETH TABLE.
REPRESENTS the Parts of Generation in a Woman Curiously Diffected, and placed
in their Natural Site.

A, The Right Kidney.

B, The Left Kidney.

CC, The Glandulae Renales with their Blood Vessels.

E, The Arteria Magna.

D D, The Ureters.

a, The Trunk of the Arteria Mesenterica Superior cut off.

b, The Trunk of the Arteria Mesenterica Inferior.

e e, etc. The rest of the Branches of the Great Artery; of which the Superior
are the Emulgents, the Inferior the Iliaci Externi, and Interni.

F, The Ascending Trunk of the Vena Cava.

f f f, The Various Ramifications of the Vena Cava; whereof the Superior are
the Emulgentes, the Middle the Vertebrales, the Inferior the External and
Internal Iliac Branches.

G G, The Spermatick Artery and Vein in their Progress to and from the Ovaria
Blowed up, and Separated from each other on the Right Side.

H H, The Spermatick Artery and Vein of the Left Side, still remaining within
their Coverings.

I, A Portion of the Intestinum Rectum Tied.

K, The Fundus Uteri lying under the Internal Membrane of the Peritonaeum.

L, The Bladder of Urine, in like Manner, under the Internal Lamina of the
Peritonaeum.

M M, The Tubae Falloppianae Adorned with their Blood Vessels.

m m, The Cavities of the Falloppian Tubes.

N N, The Ovaria.

n n, The Fimbriae of the Falloppian Tubes which Embrace the Ovaria after
Impregnation, as Appears Tab. 53. B, C. Fig. 1.

O, The Orifice of the Vagina or Pudendum.

P P, The Labii Pudendi.

Q, The Praeputium Clitoridis made by the Nymphae.

R R, The Nymphae.

T, The Upper Part of the Pudendum toward the Mons Veneris.

V, The Extremity of the Clitoris called Glans, covered with the Nymphae.

W W, The Ligamentia Teretia continued to the Fundus Uteri, and Pinned out.

Though these Parts have obtained the Name of Ligaments, yet their Structure and
Composition differ very much from the Ligaments of other Parts, which are Hard,
Dry and very Compact Bodies; whereas these Round Ligaments of the Uterus are
Composed of a great Number of Veins and Arteries; the Nerves and Lympheducts
are also said to Enter into their Composition: They Appear to be very
Extensible Parts, and are Coextended with the Fundus Vteri after Impregnation:
They are Broad toward the Fundus Vteri, and gradually Lessen themselves and
become Round as they Approach the Pubis, where they Terminate under the Fat:
They pass through the Muscles of the Abdomen, not unlike the Spermatick Vessels
in Men, whence Women are sometimes liable to have a Hernia Intestinalis; but
the Perforations of the Muscles not being so Large as in Men, those Ruptures do
not so often happen in Women.

X X, etc. A Large Portion of the Internal Lamina of the Peritonaeum covering
the Surface of the Fundus Vteri, Bladder of Urine, Ovaria and the like: This by
some is Erroneously called the Ligamentum Latum Vteri. Nor is there any such
Ligament belonging to the Vterus, unless this Part of the Peritonaeum may be so
called.

THE FIFTY-FIRST TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE Clitoris and Parts annexed, Dissected.

A, The Upper Part of the Clitoris with its Veins, which are comprest by the
Ligamentum Transversum of the Os Pubis in the Time of Coition, in like Manner
as the Vein of the Penis is in its Erection.

B B, The Two Crura Clitoridis, which arise from the Ossa P^bis, where they
appear Porous.

C C, Parts of the Labia Pudendi.

D, The Glans Clitoridis.

G G, The Nymphae which compose the Praeputium Clitoridis.

H, The Meatus Vrinaruis, or Passage of Urine.

E E, The Musculi Erectores Clitoridis, which arise from the External Margin of
the Os Ischium, and are Inserted to the Beginnings of the Corpora Cavernosa of
the Clitoris: Their Office is to draw the Clitoris to the Ossa Pubis, in Order
to stop the Refluent Blood in its large Vein, whence the Clitoris like the
Penis becomes Extended. By these Means the Clitoris is not only Dilated, but
the Labii Pudendi are in like Manner Extended by Two Cavernous Bodies or Retia
of Blood Vessels placed on each Side the Orifice of the Vagina externally.
These are accurately described by Reg. de Graaf de Mulierum Organis, Cap. VII.
and called Plexus Retiformis.

F F, Parts of the Musculus Sphincter Vaginae left at the Extremity of the
Clitoris. The Circular Fibers of this Muscle Encompass the Vagina on the
Retiform Plexus, and Compress its Veins, (which discharge their Blood into the
Vein of the Clitoris A.) By which Means the Plexus is filled with Blood, and
the External Orifice of the Vagina (about the Carunculae Myrtiformes) is
straighten'd and adequately embraces the Penis in a Mutual Coitus.

Fig. 2.
Part of the Clitoris cut off after Inflation and Drying.

A, The little Head or Glans Clitoridis.

B, Its Proper Membrane or Capsula.

C, Its Cavernulous Contexture.

D, Its Septum.

Fig. 3.
The Pudendum and Forepart of the Vagina Vteri Opened.

A, Part of the Vagina, which lies under the Bladder of Urine.

B B, The Vagina and Meatus Vrinarius divided.

C C, The Corpus Glandulosum or Part Analogous to the Prostatae in Men, divided.

D D, The Ductus Secretorii or Lacunae of De Graaf, within the Gland, which
have diverse Ostiola about the Meatus Vrinarius, whence Issues Part of the
Matter emitted in Coitu.

Besides these Ducts arising from Glands placed about the the Meatus Vrinarius,
there are others of the same Kind in the Vagina, and Two remarkable ones
arising from Two very conspicuous Glands, placed toward the Lower Part of the
Orificium Pudendi by the Anus, whose Ducts open at the Roots of the Carunculae
Myrtiformes externally on each Side the Pudendum. These and the abovementioned
Ducts discharge the Matter commonly called Semen.

E E E, The Meatus Vrinarius opened; at whose Extremity diverse of the aforesaid
Ostiola appear.

F F, The Labia Pudendi opened.

G, The Internal Rugous Membrane of the Vagina Vteri: This Internal Membrane is
much fuller of Rugae toward its Upper Part, B, C, D, here divided, than in the
Lower, G, next the Rectum: As it approaches the Pudendum, it becomes somewhat
Narrower, and behind or above the Orifice of the Meatus Vrinarius it frames a
Valvulous Appearance in Virgins of above 16 or 17 Years of Age. In Girls of 7
or 8, it appears to be a Transverse Membrane having a Small Perforation toward
its Upper Part. When the Hymen is broke, whether in Coitu or otherwise, the
divided Parts of it make the Carunculae Myrtiformes, whence it is, the Figure
and Number of those Caruncles are uncertain; Wierus, Parry, Hildanus and others
give us Histories of Cases where the Hymen has been Impervious after Twenty-Two
Years of Age, and such a Quantity of Menstrua Pent in the Vagina, etc. extend
the Lower Belly, as if they had gone with Child. Some Years since I was called
by my Ingenious Friend Dr. Chamberlin to see a Married Woman of above Twenty
Years of Age, whose Lower Belly was very much Distended, as if with Child. Upon
Examining the Pudendum, we found the Hymen altogether Impervious, and driven
out beyond the Labia Pudendi in such Manner, that at First Sight it appeared
not unlike a Prolapsus Vteri. In the Upper Part toward the Clitoris we found
the Orifice of the Meatus Vrinarius very open, and its Sides Extruded not
unlike the Anus or Cloaca of a Cock, and without any Difficulty I could put my
Forefinger into the Bladder of Urine. On dividing the Hymen, at least a Gallon
of Grumous Blood of diverse Colors and Consistencies came from her, which was
the retained Menstrua. The next Day no less a Quantity of the same Matter
flowed after removing the Pessary which I had put in the Day before. After
Three, or Four Days she was easy, and soon after recovered, and with in a Year
was delivered of a healthful Child. Her Husband told us, Though lying with her at
First was very painful to himself as well as to her, yet at last he had a more
easy Access; which could be by no other Way than the Meatus Vrinarius.

Fig. 4.
The Vterus, Ovaria and Falloppian Tubes Dissected.

A, B B, The Fundus Vteri opened to show the Cavity and Thickness of its Sides.

C C, The Collum Vteri leading from the Vagina to the Fundus, likewise opened.

D, The Os Tincae or Orifice of the Collum Minus.

E, The Vagina Vteri divided to show its Rugae.

F F, The Cavity of the Fundus Vteri as it appears before Impregnation, it
being of a somewhat Triangular Figure, and not exceeding the Magnitude it is
here represented of. Between D and F is the Collum Minus or Cervix Fundi Vteri,
where diverse Rugae are truly represented, in whose Sulci are the Orifices of
diverse small Tubes, which arise from a Glandulous Contexture of the Vessels of
this Part; whence proceeds a Pituitous Serous Matter, as may be seen by
Compressing this Part externally.

De Graaf de Mul. Organ. Generat. Inseroi. Cap. VIII. acknowledges his
Ignorance, to what End this Matter is here separated, unless it be to moisten
the Parts and excite Venery, etc. In preparing a Humane Vterus after Three
Months Impregnation, I found the Os Tincae and Collum Minus very much dilated,
and filled with a very Tough, Glutinous Matter. The like is taken Notice of by
Spigellius, Lib. VIII. Cap. XXIII. As the Time of the Partus draws in, the Os
Tincae still becomes Larger, and the Glutinous Matter increases, whereby it
prevents Abortions by opposing any Extrusion of the Chorion, notwithstanding
the Efforts made by the Foetus from within toward the Time of the Partus: This
Glutinous Matter also hinders the Intrusion of any Thing from the Vagina after
Impregnation. When this Matter is Vitiated as in a Fluor Albus, Impregnation is
Hindered.

G H H, The Orifices of the Falloppian Tubes in the Two Superior Angles of the
Fundus Vteri.

I I I I, Two Probes Inserted into each of the last mentioned Tubes.

K, A small Constricture in the Mouth of the Tube.

L L, The Right Falloppian Tube Opened and Expanded, whose Internal Membrane is
somewhat Rugous.

M N, The Right Ovaria entire.

O O O, The Fimbriae or Expansum Foliacium Tubae.

P P, A Broad Ligament between the Ovarium and Tube, not unlike to a Bat's Wing.

Q, The Left Ovaria Opened.

R R, The External Membrane of the Ovarium.

S S, T T, Diverse Glands and Transparent little Vessicules, which compose the
Ovaria.

V V, The Peritonaeum or External Tegument of the Vterus, which is called the
Ligamentum Latum.

W W, Portions of the Ligamenta rotunda Vterina.





THE FIFTY-SECOND TABLE.
THE Cavity of the Abdomen after its Viscera are removed.

A A, The Common and Proper Integuments of the Abdomen, Dissected and turned
Aside.

B B, The Diaphragma in Situ: It Arises Tendinous on the Right Side from the
Third, Second and First Vertebra of the Loins, and last of the Back (H); On the
Left, from the First of the Loins, and Last Vertebra of the Back; hence
Ascending with Fleshy Fibers on each Side running Straight, but toward the
Middle they pass somewhat Curvedly, Intersecting each other near the Oesophagus
(D), do as it were Embrace it: After which they become Tendinous and join with
its Upper Part (F), which Arises Thin and Fleshy from the Os Pectoris or
Sternum: Its Lateral Parts derive their Origins from the Cartilaginous Endings
of the Ribs and Lower Margin of the Last Rib (G) on each Side. From these Parts
the Fleshy Fibers of the Diaphragm (like Lines drawn from a Circumference
toward a Center) pass to its Middle Part, where its Tendinous Fibers are
Intercussated with each other and Exhibit a Rete. Besides its Perforation for
the Oesophagus in its Fleshy Part, it has another in its Tendinous one, no less
remarkable, to Transmit the Vena Cava (C). Its Double Origin at the Vertebrae
of the Loins gives Way to the Descending Trunk of the Arteria Magna (E), and
Two Ascending of the Ductus Chyliferus and Vena Azygos on the Left Side. In
Expiration this Lower Surface of the Diaphragm is Concave toward the Abdomen
(as here Expressed), and its Upper, Unequal toward the Thorax. In Inspiration it
Approaches toward a Plane next the Thorax as well as the Abdomen. If the
Viscera of the Lower Belly are taken out in Vivisection, the Inferior Surface
of the Diaphragm will Appear Unequal in Inspiration, and more especially if Two
small Wounds should be made into the Cavities on both Sides the Thorax, so that
the Ambient Air may Rush into its Cavities on each Side the Mediastinum; the
Diaphragma than will still remain Concave toward the Thorax, and Unequal
toward the Abdomen. Nor can Respiration be performed, except the Wounds in the
Thorax are Large enough to Discharge its contained Air freely again; whence it
happens that Wounds in the Thorax may suddenly prove Mortal, when no contained
Part is Injured. But in such Cases the External Wounds ought to be Enlarged
that the Air may have a Free Egress, which the Perforation of the Skin and
Muscles not corresponding, Hinders; but this seldom happens, because both Sides
of the Thorax are not very liable to be Wounded in such Manner at the same
time. If one Side of the Thorax only is Wounded, the External Air ought by all
means to be Pent out, though the Patient is not Incident to be Suffocated;
because the other Side of the Lungs are not Incommoded, yet the Intruded Air
ought to be let out, though it only Hinders the Dilatation of one Side of the
Lungs. In Dissecting a Morbid Body which had one Side of the Diaphragm very
much Deprest, (by the contained Water on the same Side of the Thorax) I found
the Lungs on that Side in great Part Mortified, and the Blood Stagnated; there
being some Air also broke out from the Bronchia into the Cavity of the Thorax,
which completely Hindered Inspiration on that Side of the Lungs.

B, The Blood Vessels of the Diaphragm, called Phrenicae.

C, The Perforation for the Vena Cava.

D, The Gula or Oesophagus cut off before it passes the Diaphragm.

E, The Trunk of the Arteria Magna in like Manner divided.

F, The Forepart of the Diaphragm toward the Cartilago Ensiformis.

G, The Back-part Contiguous to the last Rib.

H, The Tendinous Origin of the Diaphragm on the Right Side called Appendix.
The Chief Action of the Diaphragm is to Compress the Viscera of the Lower
Belly, in Order to Enlarge the Cavity of the Thorax in Inspiration: Nor can we
see any reason to doubt its being a Muscle elegantly Framed for this Action,
wherein diverse contingent Offices occur; as the great Work of Chylification is
Assisted by the frequent Compresses made by it, in its repeated Contractions;
and that not only in Promoting the Descent of the Contents of the Stomach and
Intestines; but also the Ascent of the Chyle by the Vasa Lactea and Blood by
the Vena Porta are also Promoted. It also hastens the Discharge of those
Liquors contained in the Excretory Ducts of those many Large Glands within the
Cavity of the Abdomen, as the Liver, Pancreas, Kidneys, etc. Not to mention
many other contingent Offices of this Part; as in the Exclusion of the Foeces
and Urine in both Sexes, and Foetus in Women, etc.

I I, The Vertebrae of the Loins with their Cartilaginous Interstitia joined by
Ligaments.

K K, The Musculus Psoas Magnus on the Right Side; the Psoas Parvus in this
Subject perhaps was wanting.

L L, The Psoas Magnus on the Left Side somewhat freed from the Vertebrae, and
Pined out: This large Fleshy Muscle derives its Origin from all the Vertebrae
of the Loins Internally, Laterally within the Cavity of the Abdomen, whence
Descending over the Superior Part of the Os Sacrum and Spine of the Ilium,
where it joins with the Fleshy Fibers of the Iliacus Internus (N), and passes
to its Implantation on the Superior Part of the Lesser Trochanter of the
Thigh Bone. This pulls the Thigh Upwards, and moves it Forewards in Walking,
Running, etc.

M, The Musculus Quadratus Lumborum, Described Tab. 30.

N N N, The Iliaci Interni in Situ: Either of these Muscles Arises from above
half the Superior Region and Internal Concave Part of the Os Ilium, and joining
with the Psoas Magnus, is Inserted with it to the Lesser Trochanter. The Office
of this Muscle, and the Psoas Magnus are the same.

O, Part of the Gracilis.

P P, Parts of the Triceps.

THE FIFTY-THIRD TABLE.
Fig. 1.
REPRESENTS the Forepart of the Fundus Uteri not long after Impregnation,
together with the Parts Annexed.

A, The Fundus Vteri.

B, The Left Falloppian Tube Distended, and its Foliated Expansions Embracing
the Ovarium; which Action, according to De Graaf does not Appear in Rabbets
till Twenty-four Hours after the Coitus.

C C, The Ovaria with their Protuberant Ova in their Folliculi.

D D, The Blood Vessels more Extended with Blood than before Impregnation.

E, The Right Falloppian Tube with its Fimbriae Expanded.

F F, Portions of the Blood Vessels of the Ovaria called Praeparantia and
Spermatica.

G G, A Portion of the Peritonaeum which makes the External Membrane of the
Vterus, and called Ligamentum Latum Vteri.

H H, The Uterine Round Ligaments lying under the Peritonaeum.

I, The Cervix Vteri Divested of its Common Membrane the Peritonaeum, to show
its Blood Vessels.

K K, The Vagina Vteri Inverted, where its Internal Rugae are well Expressed.

L, The Internal Mouth of the Vterus, called Os Tincae, somewhat Dilated.

Fig. 2.
A, The Left Uterine Tube (Expressed in the preceding Figure) pulled from the
Ovaria it Embraced with its Fimbriae; which remain Extended, together with its
whole Ductus.

B, The Fimbriated Orifice of the Tube Open.

C, Its Progress toward the Fundus Vteri: The whole Tube being of a deep Red
Color from its many Blood Vessels, especially the Veins which Frame a
Reticular Body, as may be Demonstrated either by Injecting them with Mercury,
or Inflation. Hence it Appears the Uterine Tubes (not unlike the Corpora
Cavernosa Penis Clitoridis, etc.) have their Reticulated Sides Extended, and
their Internal Cavities of Consequence Enlarged upon a particular Stop of the
Refluent Blood; but whether this Stop or Retardation of the Blood in the Veins,
made in the time of the Coitus, (which for some Reasons we are inclined to
suppose) or as De Graaf intimates Five or Six and Twenty Hours after; neither
our present Occasions nor Opportunities will allow us to Examine.

Fig. 3.
A A, The Falloppian Tube Opened, according to its Length.

B C C, Its Internal Membrane Divided and Expanded.

D D, A Probe Inserted into its Beginning near the Fundus Vteri, which is not
yet Divided.

The rest of the Adjacent Parts of this Figure are Explained Tab. 51. Fig. 4.

Fig. 4.
The Inferior or Back-part of the same Impregnated Vterus, etc. Expressed Fig. 1.
Its Vessels here being Injected with Wax.

A A, The Fundus Vteri somewhat Enlarged by reason its Veins are Injected with
Wax.

B B, The Veins filled with a Dark Colored Wax:

C, The Arteries with Red Wax: Both which Vessels become Distended by Injecting
of their Large Trunks on either Side.

D, Part of the External Membrane of the Vterus derived from the Peritonaeum,
Raised from the Cervix Vteri.

E, That Part of the Peritonaeum, called Ligamentum Latum Vteri.

F, The Ovaria of the Left Side.

G G, The Falloppian Tubes also filled with White Wax, and very Tortuous in
this Position, their Extremities being drawn from the Ovaria.

H, The Round Ligament of the Left Side.

I I, The Broad Ligaments like Batt's Wings joining the Falloppian Tubes to the
Ovaria, where the Blood Vessels passing to and from the Ovaria, are Expressed.

K K, The Vasa Spermatica cut off. These Spermatick Veins and Arteries are not
only Inosculated in their Large Trunks, with the Hypogastrick Veins and
Arteries of the Vterus, but those of the Right Side of the Vterus, are
Inosculated with the Left, in such Manner that by Injecting of Wax into one of
the Spermatick Veins, it will not only fill the Hypogastricks, but the
Spermatick Vein also of the contrary Side. The like will not happen by
Injecting Wax into the Arteries, because their Trunks are Smaller than the
Veins. But Mercury readily passes from the Arteries of one Side to those of the
other.





THE FIFTY-FOURTH TABLE.
SHOWS the Abdomen of a Woman opened after Seven Months gone with Child.

A A A A, The common Integuments of the whole Body divided and turned off.

B B, The proper Integuments of the Abdomen, viz. The Muscles and Peritonaeum
in like Manner divided.

C C. The Fundus Uteri very much enlarged; and in this Subject enclines more
toward the Right Side than the Left.

D D D, The Colon and Parts of the small Gutts as they appear above the Fundus
Uteri.

d d, The Muscular Compages of Fleshy Fibers called the Ligamentum Coli, well
Expressed.

E, That Part of the Fundus Uteri toward the Collum minus.

F F F, The Veins of the Uterus very much Dilated.

As the Time of the Birth draws on, so the Thickness of the Uterus is still
said to increase, and the Trunks of the Veins become still more and more
distended. The Trunks of the Arteries of the Uterus are also at that Time
proportionably Dilated. These Blood Vessels of the Uterus are inosculated with
those of the Placenta, as may appear by the Passing of Mercury from One to the
Other, so that if you pour it into the Hypogastrick Arteries of the Mother, it
will pass into the Veins of the Placenta as well as those of the Uterus: And on
the contrary the Mercury will pass from the Arteries of the Placenta to the
Hypogastrick Veins of the Mother, as also into the Veins of the Placenta. Hence
it appears there is a Circulation of Blood between the Mother and Foetus; and
it seems as if the Blood Vessels of both did Germinate and Inosculate with each
other. But this requires too much Speculation for my Occasions to admit of a
farther Enquiry at present. Therefore I shall here only speak of some
Phenomenon which offer in Childbearing.

If the Fundus Uteri remain Tumifi'd after Childbearing or an Abortion, the
Flux of Blood proves very great and sometimes destructive to the Mother,
because the Uterus does not Collapse, and by that Means close the Orifices of
the Broken-off Arteries of the Mother. The like Flux also happens from the same
Cause, when but Part of the Placenta comes away in the Partus; in which Case
the remaining Part ought to be removed as soon as possible.

THE FIFTY-FIFTH TABLE.
IS the Abdomen of the same Woman Opened, Represented in the Precedent Table.

A A A, The Fundus Uteri after a Crucial Section Expanded.

B B Inferior, The Inside of the Skin Covered with Fat.

B B Superior, C C, The Inside of the Peritonaeum.

D D, Part of the Colon above the Fundus Uteri.

E E, The External Unequal Surface of the Placenta freed from the Fundus Uteri.

F G H, The Asperities F, Little Hollownesses G, and Tubercles H, of the
Uterus, which receive and were received by the like in the Placenta.

I K, Part of the Chorion cleaving to the Internal Concave Surface of the
Placenta.

L, Part of the Urinary Membrane or Allantoides.

M, Part of the Amnios made bare, as it Appears filled with its containing
Liquor.

Though this Membrane which immediately Involves the Foetus, Appears in most
Parts very Transparent, yet here are a vast Number of Blood Vessels every where
dispersed through it. In diverse Parts of the Amnios in Cows, I have more than
once Observed Various Clusters of somewhat Opacous Bodies, which I am apt to
think are a Congeries of Glands, and help to Separate from the Blood, Part of
the Contents of the Amnios in which the Foetus moved, and is received by its
Mouth toward the time of the Partus.

N, Part of the Chorion Raised from the Amnios, and Left to the Uterus it self
on the Right Side.

Part of the Liver Appears above the Intestines immediately under the
Ensiformal Cartilage.





THE FIFTY-SIXTH TABLE.
THE Abdomen and Uterus of the same Woman (Figured in the Two precedent Tables)
Opened, after Seven Months gone with Child.

A, The Placenta Uterina freed from the Upper Part of the Uterus, and drawn
toward the Right Side, so that its Internal Concave Surface next the Amnios,
Appears Covered with the Chorion; under which the Arboreous Disposition of its
Blood Vessels are elegantly Expressed.

B, Part of the Chorion freed from the Amnios, and Raised with the Placenta,
to whose Concave Part it Adheres, and its continued (H) on the Umbilical Rope.

C, Part of the Urinary Membrane freed from the Amnios, and cleaving to the
Chorion.

D D, The Uterus with the Chorion Divided Cross-ways and Expanded. The
Inequalities of the Internal Surface of the Uterus are here Remarkable: Its
Blood Vessels as well as those of the Placenta not only Germinate, but
Inosculate with each other, as is above Noted.

E E, The Proper Integuments of the Abdomen, (viz.) the Muscles and Peritonaeum
in like Manner Divided.

F, The Foetus lying within the Transparent Membrane called Amnios.

G, The Amnios entire.

H, The Umbilical Rope Arising from the Placenta, and passing to the Navel of
the Foetus: Its Progress is Various, sometimes it Marches over the Right
Shoulder, sometimes over the Left close to the Neck; at other times it Ascends
toward the Breast, whence it is again Reflected to the Back of the Foetus, and
thence to the Navel. Though the Blood Vessels of the Umbilical Rope are Disposed
in the best Manner ( Vid. Tab. 60.62. Fig. 5.) to avoid their being Comprest in
any Contorted Position; yet it sometimes happens either through the shortness of
the Umbilical Rope, as in the Case mentioned by Hildanus, Cent. II. Observe. LI.
or by the great Struggling of the Foetus in Utero; that it is so Comprest, that
the Blood cannot pass in its Vessels: In which Case if an Abortion does not
happen, or if it is at the time of the Partus, and the Birth does not presently
follow, the Dead Foetus with its Secondines are retained in the Uterus; and if
the Mother Survives, they do gradually Putrify and come away; as Appears in
the History of a Case very well Attested in the Excellent Works of the above
mentioned Author, where the Bones with Part of the Muscles of the Limbs were
taken out near the Navel of the Mother, some Months after the Secondines
gradually came away at her Pudendum. A like Instance was lately Communicated to
me by the Ingenious Mr. Dale the Apothecary, who was an Eyewitness of it in a
Woman in the Country where he lives.

I K L M N O P, The Foetus lying in the Vterus in its Natural Posture.

The Posture of the Foetus in the Uterus varies very much, especially toward
the time of the Partus; this Order of it is then Inverst, the Head at that time
is downwards toward the Neck of the Womb. In the most easy Births, the Face
is turned toward the Back-bones or Os Sacrum. If any Part, besides the Head of
the Foetus offers it self first, (except both Legs together,) the Birth proves
Laborious, and sometimes very Dangerous; wherefore the Operator in such a Case
is Obliged (if possible) to reduce those Parts, and turn the Foetus to the most
Natural Order that can be.

THE FIFTY-SEVENTH TABLE.
A A, B B, DIVERSE Eggs of a different Size taken from the Ovaria of a Maid.

Fig. 2.
An Egg Impregnated; in which the Branches and Plexus of diverse Blood Vessels
Appear.

Fig. 3.
A Foetus with its Secondines, Twenty-five Days after Conception; in which the
Rudimerits of all the Limbs Appear.

A A, The Placenta Uterina.

B, The Chorion.

C, The Urinary Membrane according to Bidloo.

D, The Amnios Opened.

E, The Umbilical Rope between the Placenta and Foetus.

F, The Foetus.

Fig. 4.
A Foetus Forty Days after Conception, in which all the External Parts Appear
Distinct.

Fig. 5.
A Masculine Foetus about Two Months and a Half after Conception; in which the
Magnitude of the Head in Proportion to the rest of the Body is Remarkable. The
Conformation of the Bones at that time may be seen in the 100. Tab. Fig. 3, 4.

Fig. 6.
An Abortive Three Months after Conception, or there abouts Dried; so that the
Connection of its Bones may be seen in diverse Parts.

Fig. 7.
A Foetus of Eight Months taken out of the Uterus, together with its Placenta,
etc.

A, A Male Foetus, whose Hands are Contracted and Feet Contorted Inwards.

B C D, The Umbilical Rope continued in its wonted Progress between the Foetus
and Placenta.

E E, The Chorion covering the Internal Concave Surface of the Placenta, and
its Arboreous Ramifications of Blood Vessels derived from the Umbilical Rope.

F, Part of the Urinary Membrane.

G, Part of the Ammios.

H, A Portion of the Chorion.





THE FIFTY-EIGHTH TABLE.
A,SHOWS the External Convext Surface of the Placenta Uterina freed from the
Vterus.

The Placenta is composed of Blood Vessels of both Kinds derived from the
Mother and Foetus, which Frame Glandulous Bodies and Fibers, to which diverse
Succiferous Ducts are Inserted, says Bidloo.

These Succiferous Tubes and Glands I must confess never yet Occurred to my
Observation in Dissection, nor do I at present know who besides Professor
Bidloo mentions them: Here he only Names them among other Vessels of the
Placenta, and in Tab. 66. he Represents diverse Succiferous Ducts in the
Umbilical Rope; nor does he any where mention what Juice these Ducts of the
Placenta carry, or those of the Umbilical Rope; wherefore I shall here Venture
to add my Conjecture, and so proceed. If any Liquor Transcolated by Glands of
the Placenta is conveyed toward the Foetus, it is most likely that contained
in the Amnios; and though we have Observed Tab. ^5. diverse Glands placed at
Various Distances in the Amnios of Cows, yet we can by no means think they are
sufficient to supply that Membrane with a Necessary Quantity of Liquor for
Entertaining the Foetus: And since we have Observed diverse Tubercles on the
Surface of the Umbilical Rope, mentioned in the following Table (P). We cannot
tell how to reconcile those Phenomenon, but by supposing the greatest Part of
the Liquor of the Amnios, is conveyed thither from the Glands of the Placenta,
by the Ducts of the Umbilical Rope.

This Liquor of the Amnios not only serves to Facilitate the Motions of the
Foetus, but toward the time of the Partus it is partly received by its Mouth,
and is conveyed into its Stomach and Guts, and Administers Chyle to its
Lacteals and Thoracick-Duct; which is received by the Subclavian Vein of the
Foetus, and there joins with the Blood Transmitted from the Mother to the
Foetus. Thus the Stomach and Intestines as well as the Common Passages of Chyle
and Lympha of the Foetus are employed in the Uterus; by which means those
Channels are the more readily made use of, soon after the Birth, when the
Infant has no other way of receiving its Nourishment but by the Mouth. The
Chyle thus mingling with the Blood of the Foetus, so Thins it, that its
Circulation may be the better carried on by the weak Systole of its Heart;
whereby its Blood may be again Discharged into the Hypogastrick Veins of the
Mothers Uterus. The Liquor of the Amnios has another, as it were Accidental
Use, in Lubricating the Vagina at the Time of the Partus; the Foetus then
breaking the Amnios by its Struggling, its Contents flow by the Pudendum, which
they commonly call The Breaking of the Water.

B B, The Furrows or Clifts of the Placenta, which more or less Result from its
Tubercles.

C C, The Tubercles of the Placenta, which are Thick and Large toward their
Center, and Less toward their Circumference.

D D, The Chorion or External Membrane Involving the Foetus, Varigated with
Blood Vessels Springing from the Placenta, (and Umbilical Rope in some Animals)
and the Vterus it self in Humane Bodies.

E E, The Urinary Membrane called Alantoides, lying immediately under the
Chorion, and cleaving to it by Vessels and Fibers; it Environing the whole
Foetus, according to Bidloo.

The Existence of this Membrane is much Doubted of in Humane Bodies. I must
confess I never met with a Subject in which I could Discover it. The Midwives
take Notice of a By Water, as they call it, near the Time of the Partus; which
I am apt to think is the Contents of this Membrane breaking forth, which often
happens some Weeks before the Birth, and no ill Consequence follows.

F, Part of the Amnios or Internal Membrane Involving the Foetus.

G, Part of the Umbilical Rope Tied.

THE FIFTY-NINTH TABLE.
EXPRESSES the Membranes which Involve the Foetus; together with the Internal
Concave Part of the Placenta next the Foetus and Umbilical Rope. Which
altogether are called the Secondine, or Afterbirth, or Burden.

A A, The Amnios Separated from the Urinary Membrane; Though the Amnios appears
Transparent to the Naked Eye, it is full of Blood Vessels of both Kinds derived
from the Umbilical Rope: If Mercury is Injected into its Arteries and Veins,
their Extremities will (by the Assistance of a Microscope) appear continued to
each other; as in a Preparation of Part of the Amnios I have now by me, taken
from a Cow, mentioned in the 55th Table.

B B, A Portion of the Umbilical Rope arising from about the Middle of the
Internal Concave Side of the Placenta.

C C, Part of the Urinary Membrane not freed from the Chorion: In Cows and
other Quadrupedes, it is Long and Unequal; whence it is called Allantoides or
Farciminalis: It is placed between the Amnios and Chorion, and receives the
Urine from the Bladder by the Urachus through the Umbilical Rope. The Urachus of
Humane Bodies is scarce Pervious. I must acknowledge in the Subjects I have
Examined, I could never make the Wind pass from the Bladder of Urine into the
Urachus in the Umbilical Rope; but I have constantly found the Urachus
evidently Hollow from the Bottom of the Bladder to the Navel in a Foetus, and
very little further.

D D, The Chorion strictly cleaving to the Internal Concave Side of the
Placenta.

E E, The Cavities and Tracts of the Succiferous Ducts according to Bidloo.

F, The Umbilical Arteries Distended.

G G, The Internal Concave Surface of the Placenta next the Foetus.

H I, The Ramifications of the Arteries tending toward the Circumference of
the Placenta.

K K, The Large Ramifications of the Umbilical Veins Distended.

L, Their Lesser Branches.

N N, Diverse Indentations made in the Veins where the Arteries pass over them.

O, The Concourse of the Umbilical Vessels to their Enclosure in the External
Membrane of the Umbilical Rope (P).

P, That Part of the Umbilical Rope, whose External Surface in Cows is full of
Tubercles, which we suppose are placed at the Extremities of the Succiferous
Ducts, where they Discharge their Contents into the Amnios. This Part of the
Umbilical Rope in these Animals we find Distended with a Mucilaginous Matter,
somewhat Thicker than that contained in the Amnios, but like it in Color.





THE SIXTIETH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
DEMONSTRATES the Blood Vessels of Part of the Umbilical Rope and Placenta
Injected with Wax.

A B, The Concave Internal Surface of the Placenta next the Foetus.

C C, The Chorion.

D, Part of the Urinary Membrane according to Bidloo.

F F, etc. The Umbilical Arteries filled with Red Wax.

G G, etc. The Veins in like Manner Injected with White Wax.

H, The Umbilical Rope cut off.

I K M, The Propagations of Vessels from the Umbilical Rope to the Placenta.

Fig. 2.
A A, The Placenta cut transversly.

B C, The Thickness of the Placenta in a Transverse Section.

D D. Its Glandulous Body.

E E, Some large Branches of Blood Vessels Propagated from the Umbilical Rope
under the Chorion.

F, The Succiferous Ducts according to Bidloo.

G, Their little Hollownesses or Interstitia like Fat.

H H, A Portion of the Chorion, freed from the Placenta and suspended.

I I, The Blood Vessels which lie between the Chorion and Placenta.

K K, Their Ramifications as they appear under the Chorion on the internal
Concave Surface of the Placenta.

L, Part of the Urinary Membrane.

M, A Portion of the Amnios.

N, The Umbilical Rope cut off and tied.

Fig. 3.
The Umbilical Rope with Part of the Chorion.

A, Part of the Chorion freed from the internal Concave Part of the Placenta.

B, The Umbilical Rope cut transversly from the Foetus.

C C, The Two Umbilical Arteries cut off.

D, The Umbilical Vein in like Manner divided.

E, The Urachus according to Bidloo, Expressed in the following Figure between
the Two Arteries.

F F, The Umbilical Rope covered with its loose Membrane continued from the
Amnios.

Fig. 4.
A A, The Umbilical Rope cut transversly and viewed with a Microscope, after
its being immersed in hot Water.

B, The Trunk of the Umbilical Vein divided.

C C, The Trunk of the Two Umbilical Arteries in like Manner cut off.

D D, The Succiferous Tubes also divided.

E E, The Fibers contracted by the hot Water.

F, The thin contorted Tube of the Urachus, lying between the Two Arteries like
a loose or flagging Membrane.

Fig. 5.
The Umbilical Vein and Two Arteries Injected with Wax and dried, so that the
Urachus and Succiferous Tubes disappear.

THE SIXTY-FIRST TABLE.
Fig. 1.
A A, EXHIBITS the Placenta Uterina, after the Blood is Washed out of it.

B, The Chorion partly Raised from the Placenta, and lying Loosely on it.

C, Part of the Urinary Membrane according to Bidloo.

D D, The Contexture, and Reticular Plexus of the Vessels of the Placenta made
bare.

E E, The Concave Surface of the Placenta next the Foetus.

F F, The Blood Vessels.

G, A Portion of the Umbilical Rope.

Fig. 2.
A, Part of the Chorion separated from the Urinary Membrane, and supported on a
Piece of Paper.

B C, The Urinary Membrane Pinned out, from which the Chorion is separated.

D D, A Piece of Paper Rold up to support the Chorion.

Fig. 3.
A B B, Part of one of the Umbilical Arteries freed from the Umbilical Rope,
and Extended with Wind; in which the Various Inequalities of its Trunk
(occasioned by its Contortions with its Companion and the Umbilical Vein) are
Expressed.

C C, The same Artery Opened according to its Length, and Expanded.

Fig. 4.
Part of the Umbilical Rope.

A Inferior, Part of the Umbilical Vein Opened according to its Length.

A B B, The Umbilical Arteries enclosed in their Proper Membranes.

Fig. 5.
A, Part of the Blood Vessels of the Umbilical Rope Injected with Wax.

B B, The Two Arteries filled with Red Wax, in which may be observed the
Inequalities of their Trunks.

C, The Vein Distended with a Dark Colored Wax.

Fig. 6.
A A, Part of the Chorion freed from the Placenta.

B B, The Blood Vessels of both Kinds freed from the Glands Succiferous Tubes
and Ducts, according to Bidloo.

Fig. 7, 8.
The Branching of the Arteries and Veins on the Chorion, whose Capillary
Extremities frame Glands, and Escape the Sight of the Naked Eye.

Fig. 9.
This is not taken Notice of by Bidloo; but I supose it Represents Part of the
Blood Vessels of the Umbilical Rope, freed from their Membranes and not
Injected with Wax, or any Thing else; the Trunks of the Two Arteries and Vein
appearing Flaccid.





THE SIXTY-SECOND TABLE.
THE Abdomen of a Female Foetus Seven Months after Conception opened, to show
the Progress of the Umbilical Vessels toward its Navel.

A, The Umbilical Rope suspended.

C C, The Common and Proper Integuments of the Abdomen turned aside.

E G, The Umbilical Vein entering the Liver at a Fissure near the Middle of its
lower Part, whence the Ligamentum Suspensorium Hepatis may be here seen
continued to the Ensiformal Cartilage and Diaphragm.

F, The Liver, which in Proportion to the rest of the Viscera in a Foetus, is
very large, extending it self to both Hypochondria.

The Magnitude of the Liver in a Foetus rather Proceeds from a greater Quantity
of Blood carried into it by the Vena Umbilicalis, than any proper Office it
then Executes: This Disproportion of the Liver does not remit in an Infant, but
seems to continue in some Measure, till they are Four or Five Years Old: Hence
it is, that the Intestines of Infants and Children are supplied with more Gall
than those of riper Years; and are therefore incident to be gript much in the
lower Belly, and attended with a Diarrhoea. Nor do I in this conceive Nature
has any Ways committed a Mistake; for sure it is very necessary some notable
Discharge ought to be made of the Serosities in Children, whilst their Limbs
are not able to perform those Exercises which promote Perspiration and the like.

The Blood imported into the Liver by the Umbilical Vein meets with a contrary
Current of Blood in the Vena Porta, as it passes the Sinus to the Vena Cava;
whereby some of the Capillary Vessels about the Liver or Umbilical Vein are
frequently broken, and the Blood is discharged into the Cavity of the Abdomen.

In an Abortive Humane Foetus (after Seven Months Conception) I found the
Abdomen without any Integuments; its Viscera being exposed, as in this Figure:
Nor could I find so much as any Part of the Peritonaeum that had covered them;
which I suspected might have been broken. The Left Kidney also was exposed to
View. Besides this, the Top of the Skull was wanting, and instead of it a
Membrane distended with Grumous Blood. Very little Part of the Brain appeared
on the Basis of the Skull, but it was chiefly contained in the Specus of the
Vertebrae of the Neck. The Left Eye and Ear were wanting, as well as the Nose.
A Ligament of about an Inch in Length, fastened the great Toe of the Right Foot
to the Bone of the upper Jaw. The Left Arm was wanting; and instead of it,
something like a Hand was framed, seeming to have a Thumb and Forefinger: This
was tied by Two Ligaments; the one springing from the Carpus was short, and
fastened it to the Scapula; the other Ligament was longer, and arising between
those Parts which represented a Finger and Thumb, was sixth to the Basis of the
Skull on the same Side.

Upon opening the Thorax I found the Cone of the Heart pointing upwards; its
Basis toward the Diaphragm. And both Extremities of the Bastard Ribs of the
Left Side resting on their Vertebrae.

G G, The Two Umbilical Arteries Arising from the Two Internal Iliack Branches
of the Arteria Magna, and passing on both Sides the Bladder of Urine to the
Umbilical Rope.

H, The Bladder of Urine.

I, The Vrachus where it is visibly pervious.

The Ligamentum Suspensorium Hepatis, is here well Expressed between the
Umbilical Vein and Enfiformal Cartilage; and the Small Gutts in their Natural
Situation, are also Represented.

THE SIXTY-THIRD TABLE.
REPRESENTS the Cavities of the Abdomen and Thorax opened of the same Female
Foetus, Expressed in the preceding Table.

A, The Umbilical Rope suspended.

B, The Umbilical Vein.

C, Its Insertion into the Liver.

D D, The Two Umbilical Arteries, arising from the Two internal Iliack Branches
of the Arteria Magna. Vid. App. Fig. 3.56.56.

E E, The External Iliack Branches of the Great Artery, by our Author said to
be Internal; which in this View of the Parts does not appear.

F G, The Urachus.

H, The Umbilicus cut from the Common Integuments of the Abdomen.

I, The Head of the Foetus, which in Proportion to the rest of the Body is much
larger than in the Adult: See the Description at Tab. 1.

K, The Mammae, which in a Foetus of both Sexes contain a Serous Liquor.

L, The Thorax opened.

M M, The Abdomen in like Manner opened.

N, The Thymus in Proportion to the rest of the Parts, is very large in a
Foetus, and gradually lessens in the Adult: See Tab. 21.

O, The Heart, which in Regard to the other Viscera is very large.

P, The Lungs on the Right Side.

Q Q, The Kidneys, which appear Conglomerate, and are somewhat large.

R R, The Glands of the Kidneys or Capsulae Atrabilares are also large, and are
here removed from their proper Situation; they not only bordering on the
Kidneys, as in the Adult, but lie upon them, embracing their Upper Parts: In
this Figure they seem to be removed from their Proper Situation.

S S, The Ureters, which are also large and unequal.

T, The Bladder extended with Urine.

V, The Falloppian Tube, somewhat long, and very large in Proportion to the
rest of the Parts.

W, The Ovaria are also Large and Tumid.

X, The Fundus Uteri somewhat raised by the Suspension of the Bladder of Urine.

a, The Round Ligament of the Vterus of the Left Side.

b, The Arteria Magna, where the Emulgent Arteries pass to the Kidneys.

c, The Ascending Trunk of the Vena Cava cut off.

d d, The Diaphragma divided.

e, The Spleen in Situ.

The Stomach and Intestines are here laid aside.

f, The Sternum raised together with the Cartilaginous Endings of the Ribs,
where the Mammary Vessels on both Sides are Expressed.

Fig. 2.
A, The Bladder of Urine of a Foetus.

B, Its Ureters filled with Wax.

C D D, The Umbilical Vein and Two Arteries, according to Bidloo, which we
cannot think to be well Expressed.

E, The Descending Trunk of the Arteria Magna.

F, Its Bifurcation.

G G, Its Two Internal Iliack Arteries, whence the Umbilical Arteries arise.





THE SIXTY-FOURTH TABLE.
THE Professor Bidloo in Imitation of Steno and Bourdon, here adds Geometrical
Figures of the Disposition of the Tendons and Fleshly Fibers of diverse Muscles;
First of a single Fiber.

Fig. 1.
A, The Fleshy Part of the Fiber of a Muscle;

B C, B C, Its Two Tendinous Extremes making Obtuse Angles with the Fleshy Part.

Fig. 2.
Many of the Fibers Represented in the First Figure, Exposed in the same Plan
together, Framing an Oblique Angled Parallelogram.

A, B, The Order of the Moving, or Fleshy Fibers.

C, D, F, G, E, H, I, K, Their Tendinous Extremities: When any Additional
Matter passes into these Fleshy Fibers and Distends them, the Breadth which
they thereby Acquire, necessarily Shortens them, and their Tendinous
Extremities fixed to the most Movable Part, is pulled nearer the more Stable.
This Additional Matter we take to be the Blood, which is constantly in a
Progressive Motion, as well in the Capillary as in the Larger Trunks of its
Vessels; and when a sudden Stop or Retardation of it happens in the Trunks of
the Veins in Muscles, the Blood in the Extremities of those Veins necessarily
breaks forth by their Collateral Pores, and passes into the Cells of the Fleshy
Fibers; whence an Intumescence of those Fibers follows, and their Length is
necessarily Lessened. When I say the Blood as a Pondus Acts in Muscular Motion:
I mean that as a Fluid, it Insinuates where ever there is a Passage, and
necessarily Distends the Cells of the Fleshy Fibers, when it is pushed on by
the Arteries, and d o's not readily return by the Veins. This Structure of the
Extremities of the Blood Vessels in Muscles, renders the Appearance of their
Fleshy Fibers Red or more Bloody than other Parts, which are Furnished with a
far greater Number of Blood Vessels than the Muscles; as the Pancreas, Salival
Glands, and Cortical Part of the Brain. The Liver, Spleen, and Kidneys have
their Color, from the Number and Magnitude of their Blood Vessels always
filled with Blood. The Question is, How the Venose Channels are so
instantaneously Comprest that the Refluent Blood is Retarded? Till Enquiry and
Observation affords me something to the purpose, I shall say no more; choosing
to Recommend such Speculations, to those who have more Talent and Time to
bestow on them.

Fig. 3.
The Fibers of a Muscle Framing a Simple Parallelepipede Figure.

A, B, C, D, E, F, G, The Carnous Part.

H I, K L, The Tendinous Parts.

Fig. 4.
The Disposition of the Fibers of the Musculus Deltoides, said to be Composed
of Twelve simple Muscles.

A A, The Upper Part of the Deltoides toward the Top of the Shoulder.

B B, Its Lower-part.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, The Order of the Fleshy Fibers which
Frame Parallelograms, and Compose the Deltoide Muscle, fixed to their Tendinous
Extremities A B.

Fig. 5.
The Order of Fibers of the Musculus Biceps Humeri.

Fig. 6.
The Musculus Membranosus.

Fig. 7.
The Fibers of Part of the Gemellus.

We come next to the Muscles of the Artus or Limbs; and First to those of the
Whole Arm, by which is understood all the Part fastened to the Upper Part of the
Trunk of the Body, Arising at the Shoulder. Fig. 8. The Arm in common
Acceptance, is taken to be all that Part between the Neck of the
Shoulder Blade and Wrist (H). The Arm strictly speaking, is that Part between
the Shoulder and Elbow (B), which, otherwise, is called Humerus: It consisting
of One Bone, and is called Os Humeri, the Shoulder Bone, or Armbone. The
Lower-part of the Arm from the Elbow (B) to the Wrist (H), is called the Cubit,
and consists of Two Bones, called Vlna and Radius; we shall elsewhere speak of
the Articulations of these and other Bones. As some have Comprehended the
Shoulder or Arm, Cubit, Hand, and Fingers under the Title of the Whole Arm; so
others have called all those together, The Whole Hand. The Hand in common
Acceptance, is meant all that Part below the Cubit, or Wrist, consisting of
Four Fingers (M N O P) and a Thumb (L). The Palm (C) called Vola Manus;
opposite to which is the Back of the Hand or Dorsum Manus.

Fig. 8.
The External Muscles of the Arm, Cubit and Palm.

A A A, The Skin with its Parts Annexed freed from the Muscles.

B, The Internal Tubercle of the Os Humeri, whence the Musculus Pronator Radii
Teres, Palmaris Longus, Flexores Digitorum Communes, and Flexores Carpi do
Arise.

C, The Tendinous Expansion of the Palmaris Longus in the Palm; where, near the
Root of the Fingers it is Divided, to give Way to the Tendons of the Flexores
Digitorum.

D, The Biceps Cubiti.

E, The Pronator Radii Teres.

F, The Long Tendon of the Palmaris derived from a small Fleshy Bodied Muscle,
springing from the Internal Protuberance of the Os Humeri, here Expressed.

G, The Tendon of the Radialis Flexor Carpi, whose Description may be seen Tab.
67, 68.

H, The Transverse Ligament of the Carpus.

I, The Abductive Pollicis Arising from the Ligamentum Transversale Carpi, and
Ending at the Superior and External Part of the Second Bone of the Thumb. It
draws the Thumb from the Fingers, whence it derives its Name.

K, The Palmaris Brevis, or Caro Musculosa Quadrata; This springs from the
External Part of the Os Metacarpi Minimi Digiti, with a Thin Tendon
Encompassing the External Part of the Abductor Minimi Digiti becoming a Thin
Disgregated Fleshy Muscle in the Palm, as it is here Represented; it passes
under the Tendon of the Palmaris Longus, to its Tendinous Termination in the
Eighth Bone of the Carpus.

This Hollows the Palm by drawing the Bale of the Thumb or Mons Lunae, and
Metacarpal Bone of the Little Finger, nearer each other.

L M N O P, The Thumb and Four Fingers, with Part of the Skin remaining on them.

Q, The Head of the Os Humeri which was Articulated with the Scapula.

R R R, The Blood Vessels and Nerves passing withinside the Arm, between the
Musculus Biceps and Gemellus, of which the Former especially the Arteries are
to be Comprest in the time of Amputation; which may be performed with the
Fingers only, without any Compress or Boulsters under them; or with the hard
Twisting of a Ligature, which some use: The Compression being thereby the more
easily Commanded, to let the Arterious Blood pass out in Order to Discover the
Divided Large Arteries, so that they may be taken hold of with the Ends of the
Forceps and Ti'd; which Practice we cannot but Recommend in Amputations, or in
other Cases where Large Fluxes of Blood happen. Nor have I found any
considerable Inconveniency to the Patient, though the Trunk of the Nerve has been
also Ti'd up with the Artery, which the Diligent Operator may very easily avoid.

S, Part of the Musculus Deltoides.

T, Part of the Gemellus or Biceps Externus.

V V, The Tendinous Part of the Musculus Supinator Radii Longus.

W, The Flexor Carpi Vlnaris.

X, Part of the Musculus Flexor Digitorum Perforatus.

Y, The Abductor Minimi Digiti.

Z, Flexor Primi and Secundi Ossis Pollicis; It Arises Fleshy from the
Ligamentum Transversale Carpi, Bones of the Carpus at the Bottom of the Mons
Lunae, and Os Metacarpi of the Middle Finger; whence passes to its Insertion
partly to the Ossa Sesamoidea of the Second Internode, and partly to the First
Bone of the Thumb: This Disgregated Fleshy Muscle is very Divisible as Vesalius
takes Notice, and Appears Tab. 68. M N O O P. It moves the Thumb Variously
according to the several Disposition of its Series of Fibers, Inclining its
First and Second Bones, either Directly or Obliquely toward the Carpus and
Palm.

THE SIXTY-FIFTH TABLE.
REPRESENTS diverse Muscles of the Arm and Cubit.

A, The Musculus Deltoides Raised from its Origination and left at its
Insertion.

B, The Clavicula made bare.

C, That Part of the Deltoide Muscle, which Arises from the Spina Scapulae.

D, The Pectoralis cut from its Original, and left at its Implantation.

d, The Rotundus Major: It Arises from the Inferior Angle of the Scapula, and
becoming a round Fleshy Body, passes under the Superior Head of the Gemellus,
where it Grows Thinner and makes a Broad Flat but short Tendon Implanted below
the Neck of the Os Humeri. Its Office is to draw the Arm Backwards and pull it
somewhat Downwards.

E, The Subscapularis or Immersus: It fills the Internal Concave Part of the
Scapula, Arising Fleshy from its whole Basis and Superior and Inferior Costa
Internally, and in its Progress Lessens its self according to the Configuration
of the Scapula, and Running over its Juncture; it is Inserted to the Neck of the
Os Humeri in a Semicircular Manner. This draws the Arm to the Trunk of the
Body, and is made Use of by the Bag-pipe-Player to Compress his Bellows under
his Arm.

F, The Coracobrachialis: Its partly Fleshy and partly Tendinous Origination,
is at the extreme Point of the Processus Coracoides Scapulae, in its Descent
Growing Thicker, strictly Adhering to the Internal Head of the Biceps, which it
Parts from near its partly Tendinous and partly Fleshy Insertion, about the
Middle of the Internal Part of the Os Humeri.

f, A Trunk of a Nerve which passes through the last Described Muscle; whence
it is also called Persoratus.

G G, The Basis Scapulae.

H, The Processus Coracoides Scapulae.

I, The Biceps whose Two Heads or Tendinous Beginnings are here Expressed; the
one Arising from the Processus Coracoides (H) called the Internal Head, the
other Springing from the Upper Part of the Brink of the Acetabulum Scapulae
under the broad Ligament of the Articulation, and is called the External Head,
passing in a Sulcus or Channel on the Head of the Arm-Bone ( Vide Tab. 96. Fig.
1. D, E,) wherein it is enclosed by a Proper Ligament: In its Descent becomes
Fleshy, and joins with its other Head, Composing a Large Fleshy Muscle, which
becomes Less near the Articulation of the Cubit with the Shoulder Bone, and
presently Growing perfectly Tendinous, which Tendon is again Divided into Two;
the External being Thin, passes over the Musculus Pronator Radii Rotundus, and
makes an External Enclosure to all the Muscles on the Cubit. ( Vide App. Fig 1.
m.) The Internal (which is Short Thick and Round, as it is here Expressed) is
fastened to a Protuberance near the Upper Part of the Radius. ( Vide Tab. 96.
Fig. 6. A.) When this Muscle Acts, it Bends the Arm: Besides its common Office
to which its Lower External Tendon also more Advantagiously Contributes, by how
much the more it Approaches toward the other Extreme of the Radius from the Os
Humeri: This Lower Tendinous Expansion, by us called Fascia Tendinosa, has also
a further Use in Corroborating the Muscles of the Carpus and Fingers in their
Strenuous Actions, whose Office we have Endeavored to Explain in our Treatise
of the Muscles, where an Extraordinary Case in Practice, relating to this
Muscle, is Explained. Vid. Myotomia Resormata, Page 149.

K K, The Brachiaeus Internus: It Arises Fleshy from the Internal Part of the
Os Humeri at the Terminations of the Deltoides and Musculus Coracobrachialis,
and Descending over the Juncture of the Cubit with the Os Humeri, it is Inserted
partly Fleshy and partly Tendinous to the Superior and Forepart of the Ulna,
and Part of the Radius, as this Figure Expresses; which Latter I must confess I
never yet Observed in Nature. It Bends the Cubit.

L, Part of the Brachiaeus Externus.

M, The Internal Protuberance of the Os Humeri.

N, The Ulna.

O, The Radius.





THE SIXTY-SIXTH TABLE.
DIVERSE Muscles of the Arm and Cubit.

A, The Biceps freed from its Subjacent Muscles.

B, The Brachiaeus Internus in Situ.

C, D, E, The Biceps Externus or Gemellus: It has a Twofold Origin; the First
(C) or Superior, Arises Tendinous from the Superior Part of the Inferior Costa
of the Scapula Internally, and Marching out from between the Two Round Muscles,
soon Grows Fleshy, and joins with its Second Beginning (D), which Arises Broad
and Fleshy from the Upper and Back-part of the Os Humeri under the Deltoide
Muscle; soon after the Conjunction of these Two Heads, it becomes Externally
Tendinous (E), and is so Implanted to the Superior and External Part of the
Ulna, called Olecranum, Ancon, or the Elbow. Its Office is to Extend the Cubit,
which it does the more Advantageously, by how much the more it is Intertext
with Various Orders of Fibers. Hence it comes that Tumblers when they stand on
their Hands, can by the sudden Extension of their Cubits, immediately return to
their Feet.

F, The Infraspinatus: It lies below the Spine of the Scapula; It Arises
Fleshy from the Inferior Part of the Basis Scapulae, also from its Spine and
Inferior Costa (in those Bodies in whom the Teres Minor is wanting, as I am apt
to think, it was in the Subject by which this Figure was taken) whence Marching
in a Triangular Form according to the Figure of the Bone, it is Inserted to the
Upper Part of the Head of the Os Humeri. This moves the Arm directly Backwards.

G, The Supraspinatus, it being placed above the Spine of the Shoulder Blade.
It Arises Fleshy from the Superior Part of Basis Scapulae that is above the
Spine, as also from the Spine and Costa Superior of the Shoulder Blade, and
hence Marching between the Processus Coracoides and Anchoriformis, becoming
Tendinous as it Marches over the Juncture of the Humerus, and is so Inserted to
the most Superior Part of the Shoulder Bone. It Is Office is to lift the Arm
Upwards and somewhat Backwards toward the Occiput.

H, The Spina Scapulae.

I I, The Clavicula.

The Subclavian Muscle, freed from the first Rib and remaining on the
Clavicula.

K, The Rotundus Major.

L, The Os Humeri made bare.

M, The External Protuberance of the last named Bone, whence the Extending
Muscles of the Carpus and Fingers do Arise.

N, Part of the Supinator Radii Brevis, as it Arises from the Ulna, and passes
over the Upper Part of the Radius.

O, The Ulna.

X X, The Deltoides Arising from above one Third of the Inferior and External
Part of the Clavicula (II), where it is entirely Fleshy; it also Arises partly
Fleshy and partly Tendinous, from the whole Inferior Margin of the Spina
Scapulae (H), from hence Descending, soon becomes Thick and Fleshy, Growing
still Narrower, till it is Inserted by its partly Fleshy and partly Tendinous
Apex, to the Middle of the Os Humeri (L). This draws the Arm either directly
Upwards, or somewhat Forwards, or Backwards according to the Direction of its
differing Series of Fibers.

THE SIXTY-SEVENTH TABLE.
SOME of the Muscles Employed in Bending the Fingers and Carpus.

A, B, C, D, E, The Perforatus, or Sublimis, or Flexor Secundi Internodii
Digitorum, Dissected from its Original: It Arises partly Fleshy and partly
Tendinous, from the Internal Extuberance of the Os Humeri, between the Flexores
Carpi: It has also a Disgregated Fleshy Origination from the Forepart of the
Radius, between the Pronator Radii Teres, and Flexor Pollicis Magnus, soon
Composing a Fleshy Belly, Lessens its self where it begins to Divide into Two
Parts, each of which being again Subdivided, makes Four Roundish Tendons (c c c
c), included in their Proper Mucilaginous Membranes, and pass under the Annular
Ligament of the Carpus through the Palm: Near the First Internode of the Fingers,
each of these Tendons are again Divided or Perforated (E), to admit the Tendons
of the following Muscle to pass through 'em; these Tendons joining again, are
Inserted to the Superior Parts of the Second Bone of each Finger.

F, G, H, I, etc. The Perforans in Situ; it is also called Profundus and Flexor
Tertii Internodii Digitorum: It Arises Fleshy from near Two Thirds of the
Superior and Forepart of the Ulna, and Internal Edge of the Radius, as also
from the Ligament between the Radius and Ulna; it becoming a Large
Thick-Bellied Muscle; it Grows Outwardly Tendinous before it passes over the
Pronator Radii Quadratus, where Dividing into Four Round Tendons, which March
under those of the Perforatus (last Described) beneath the Transverse Ligament
of the Carpus, where the Lumbrical Muscles M, M, M, M, are said to Arise: These
Tendons pass the Palm H, H, H, H, and run through the Tendons of the former
Muscle and proceeding over their Extremities, Terminate in the Superior and
Forepart of the Third Bone of each Finger I I I I.

The Tendons of the First of these Two last Described Muscles A, B, C, D, being
Perforated E, to Transmit those of the Inferior Muscle F, H, and to their
Insertions I, etc. is a no less Useful than Stupendous Artifice in Nature: For
since its requisite the Fingers should be Bended with a considerable Strength,
and each of their Internodes should be Accommodated to different Tactile
Bodies, it was therefore Necessary the Muscles employed in that Action, should
not only be Large, Proportionable to the Force required; but that each
Internode should be Furnished with a Particular Instrument. The Internal
Protuberance of the Os Humeri, being a Necessary place for the Rise of Part of
these Muscles; but upon the Account of Bending the Cubit, the Extremes of that
Part of them might suffer some Approximation; it was therefore thought fit,
that Place should be allotted to the Bender of the Second Internodes of the
Fingers, to which not so much Force is required, as to the Bender of the Third
Internodes; for the Fingers like so many Leaves are more effectually moved,
when the Vis Movens is fastened to their Extremes, which is their Third
Internodes; wherefore the Strongest Muscles are there Inserted: Now the Origin
of the Superior Muscle being confined to the Internal Extuberance of the Os
Humeri, and Part of the Radius only, these Places could not Furnish Spaces for
a Muscle so Large as that of near Two Thirds of the Superior and Forepart of
the Ulna, Internal Edge of the Radius, and Intermediate Ligament of the Bones
of the Cubit, whence the Inferior Muscle Springs: Hence it Appears the Inferior
Muscle is much Stronger than the Superior; wherefore the Tendons of the Latter
are Perforated, to Transmit those of the Former in a right Progress to their
Terminations, at the Extremities of the Fingers: Nor is this Constructure only
Advantageous in Bending the Fingers only; but if the External Muscle should be
Divided Transversely, as I have sometimes seen it; yet the complete Flexion of
the Fingers has nevertheless been performed by the Internal Muscle; which is a
provident Contrivance in Nature.

K K, The Mucilaginous Membranes which Involve the Tendons of the Perforans,
those of the Perforatus not being Expressed in this Figure.

L L, The Ligamentum Transversum, or Annulare Divided.

M M, The Lumbricales, or Flexores Primi Internodii Digitorum. The Originations
and Progress of these are here so well Expressed, that they need no other
Description.

N N, etc. The Tendons of the Lumbrical Muscles passing to their Terminations,
with the Musculi Inter-Ossei.

O O, The Annular Ligaments of the Fingers Opened, which keep in the Bending
Tendons, when they Act.

P, The Abductor Pollicis.

Q Q, The Tendon of the Flexor Pollicis Longus.

R R, Flexor Secundi Internodii Pollicis.

S, The Trunk of that Nerve whose Branches are Propagated to the Fingers.

T, The Long Tendon and Bellied Part of the Muscle Palmaris.

V, The Radialis Flexor.

W, Part of the Ulnaris Flexor.

X, Part of the Supinator Radii Longus.

Y, The Artery whose Pulfation is commonly Felt near the Carpus.

Z, Pronator Radii Quadratus, partly in Sight.

*, The Internal Protuberance of the Os Humeri.

, Pronator Radii Teres.

ps, The Lower Part of the Bicipital Muscle.





THE SIXTY-EIGHTH TABLE.
THE Muscles Bending the Fingers, Thumb, Carpus, etc. Raised from their
Originations, and left at their Insertions.

a, The Perforatus.

b, The Perforans.

c c, etc. The Lumbricales.

d, d, The Six Inter-Ossei Muscles freed from between the Metacarpal Bones,
and left at their Insertions in Conjunction with the Tendons of the Extensor
Digitorum Communis. These draw the Fingers to each other, and Assist in
Extending them.

e, The Forefinger.

A, The Pronator Radii Teres, or Rotundus: It Arises from the Internal
Protuberance of the Os Humeri, and in its Oblique Descent, Cleaves to the
Flexor Carpi Radialis, Lessening its self at its Insertion a little above the
Middle of the Radius Externally. Its Name declares its Office, and Figure.

B, The Pronator Radii Quadratus, or Inferior Quadratus: It Arises from the
Lower and Inner Part of the Ulna, and passes Transversly over the Ligament,
joining the Radius to the Ulna, and is Inserted to the Superior and External
Part of the Radius. Its Name intimates its Use, and Figure.

C, The Supinator Radii Longus.

D, The Supinator Radii Brevis; left at its Insertion, which is here truly
Expressed.

E, Flexor Carpi Radialis: It Arises Fleshy from the Internal Protuberance of
the Os Humeri, Cleaves to the Pronator Radii Teres A; in Half its Progress,
becomes Tendinous, and runs under the Annular Ligament, and is Inserted to the
Upper Part of the Os Metacarpi; which Sustains the Forefinger as here Expressed.

F, The Little Finger.

G, The First Bone of the Thumb made bare.

H, The Adductor Pollicis ad Dorsum Manus, and Abductor Iudicis Raised both
together.

I, K, The Abductor Minimi Digiti: This we have often seen, as its here
Represented, Divided into Two, and sometimes Three Distinct Muscles, and each
of a differing Order of Fibers: It Arises First from the Ligamentum
Transversale, and Fourth Bone of the Carpus; Secondly from the Third Bone of
the Carpus; Thirdly and Lastly from the Superior Part of the Subjacent Os
Metacarpi: The Two First, Terminate at the Superior Part of the First Bone of
the Little Finger Forwards: The Latter Ends at the same Part of the said Bone
Internally and Laterally.

L, The Flexor Pollicis Longus: This we have Observed to have a Twofold
Beginning; the First and Superior of which is Sharp, but soon Grows Fleshy at
the Internal Protuberance of the Os Humeri, between the Perforatus and
Perforans: This Fleshy Body becoming Tendinous, again joins with the Middle
Tendon of its other Large Head. The Second and Inferior Origin of this Muscle
is that Part of it commonly Described and here Figured. It Arises with a Double
Order of Fleshy Fibers from immediately below the Superior Part of the Radius,
which Unite in a Middle Line or Tendon, not unlike the Fibrillae of a Feather
joining to their Stamina; and before it passes over the Articulation of the
Carpus, and under the Transverse Ligament, it Composes a somewhat Flat Strong
Tendon, running in an Interstice in the Musculi Flexor Primi, and Secundi
Internodii Pollicis, to its Implantation at the Superior Part of the Third Bone
of the Thumb.

M, P, O, Flexor Primi and Secundi Ossis Pollicis: It Arises from the
Ligamentum Transversale Carpi, and Bones of the Carpus at the Basis of the Mons
Lunae, and Os Metacarpi that Sustains the Middle Finger, and is Inserted to the
Ossa Sesamoidea of the Second Internode, and partly to the First Bone of the
Thumb. Its Actions are Various according to the Diversity of its Series of
Fibers. So it Bends the First and Second Bones of the Thumb either Directly or
Obliquely toward the Carpus and Vola Manus.

N, N, etc. The Abductor and Part of the Flexor Secundi Internodii Pollicis
Raised together.

Q. The Ulnaris Flexor Carpi: This like the Radialis derives its Origin from
the Internal Protuberance of the Os Humeri, as also from the Superior and
External Part of the Ulna, and is partly Inserted in some Subjects to the
Fourth Bone of the Carpus; but most commonly it passes farther on, and runs
under the Transverse Ligament, and is Implanted to the Upper Part of the Os
Metacarpis that Sustains the Little-Finger. Its Name denotes its Employment.

R, The Biceps left at its Insertion to the Radius.

S, The Brachiaeus Internus.

T, The Internal Tubercle of the Os Humeri.

V, The Ulna made bare.

W, The Radius.

X, The Ligament between the Ulna and Radius.

THE SIXTY-NINTH TABLE.
REPRESENTS the External Muscles lying on the Cubit, employed in Extending the
Fingers, Thumb and Carpus.

The Skin with the Parts annexed, Raised.

B, The Elbow, which Bidloo Erroneously calls the External Apophysis of the Os
Humeri.

C, The External Protuberance of the Os Humeri, which Bidloo (in like Manner)
calls the Internal Apophysis of that Bone.

D, F, The Radialis Extensor Carpi: This has Two Beginnings, and does indeed
represent Two distinct Muscles; The Uppermost (F) arises immediately above the
External Protuberance of the Os Humeri, below the Supinator Radii Longus; The
other Beginning is beneath the former, either from the Apex of the Extuberance
of the Os Humeri, or Superior Part of the Radius. Both its Tendons, marching
under the Extensores Pollicis, run under the Annular Ligament, and are Inserted
to the Superior Part of the Ossa Metacarpi of the Fore and Middle Fingers.
Vid. Tab. 71. F, I.

E, The Extensor Carpi Ulnaris: This Arises from the External Protuberance of
the Os Humeri, as also from the Upper Part of the Ulna, and is Inserted to the
Metacarpal Bone of the Little Finger. If this and the Ulnaris Flexor, Act, they
move the Hand Sideways toward the Ulna; and in like Manner, if the Radialis
Flexor and Extensor, Act, they move it toward the Radius.

G, Extensor Digitorum Communis, by some called Cnemodactilius; It springs from
the Outward Extuberance of the Os Humeri between the Extensores Carpi, and its
Tendons pass under the Annular Ligaments between the Lower Parts of the Ulna
and Radius, marching separately over the Back of the Hand, do transmit
Tendinous Filaments to each other, before they pass the First Internodes of
each Finger, and are Inserted to the First, Second, and Third Bones of the
Fore, Middle and Third Fingers. There being no Force required in Extending the
Fingers, we need not wonder that the Muscles employed in that Office are no
larger in Proportion to their Antagonists.

H, The Extending Muscles of the Thumb, which are distinctly Expressed in the
following Tables.

I, Part of the Tendon of the Musculus Indicator.

K Inferior, Abductor Minimi Digiti.

K Superior, The Lower End of the Ulna, next the Carpus B, its Upper Part
called Olecranum.

L, The Annular Ligament.

M, Extensor Minimi Digiti, Described in the following Table.

N, Part of the Ulnaris Flexor.

O, The Anconaeus: It Arises Fleshy from the Inferior and Back Part of the Os
Humeri, and growing Thicker as it Marches between the Superior Ends of the Ulna
and Radius, is Inserted to the lateral Part of the Ulna, a Thumbs Length below
the Olecranum, or Elbow. This Assists in Extending the Cubit.

P, Part of the Supinator Radii Longus: This Arises Broad and Fleshy from the
External Part of the Os Humeri, Three Finger's Breadth below the Termination of
the Deltoides; and Descending Obliquely, it gradually lessens its self, and
makes a Flat, Broad Tendon, which likewise grows Narrower till it is Inserted to
the External and Inferior Part of the Radius, near the Carpus. Vid. Tab. 68. C.

Q, Part of the Gemellus, which is sometimes continuous with the Anconaeus.

R, Part of the Brachiaeus Internus.

S, Part of the Biceps Cubiti.





THE SEVENTIETH TABLE.
DIVERSE Muscles which Extend the Carpus, Fingers, and Thumb; somewhat Separated
from each other and Raised.

A, The First Internode of the Forefinger.

B, The First Internode of the Little-Finger.

C Inferior, The Second Internode or Bone of the Thumb.

C Superior, The Musculus Extensor Tertii Internodii Pollicis:

This has a Broad partly Fleshy Origination from the Ulna, immediately below
the Beginning of the Extensor Primi Internodii, or between it and the
Iudicator, as also from the Ligament between the last named Bone and Radius,
whence. Descending Obliquely becomes Tendinous, as it Marches in a Proper Sinus
on the Inferior Appendix of the Radius, wherein it is Enclosed by an Annular
Ligament, passing over the Two Tendons of the Radiaeus Extensor, to its
Implantation at the Superior Part of the Third Bone of the Thumb.

D D, The Extensor Digitorum Communis.

E F, etc. Its Tendons passing over the First and Second Joints of the Fingers,
here supported with a Pen.

G G, The Radialis Extensor stretched out with a Pair of Compasses.

H H, The Ulnaris Extensor.

I, The Anconoeus.

K, The Extensor Minimi Digiti Proprius: This Arises partly Tendinous at the
Extremity of the External Protuberance of the Os Humeri, and partly Fleshy from
the Superior Part of the Ulna, between the Extensor Communis Digitorum, and
Ulnaris Extensor; and becoming Tendinous as it passes under the Ligamentum
Annulare at the Carpus, where it is Divided into Two, sometimes Three Tendons,
which are again United near their Insertions to the First, Second, and Third
Bones of the Little Finger.

L, Part of the Ulnaris Flexor.

M, The Upper Epiphysis of the Ulna.

N, The Musculus Iudicator, or Extensor Iudicis Proprius: This Arises Fleshy
from the External Part of the Ulna next the Radius, immediately below the
Extensores Pollicis, and in its Oblique Descent becomes Tendinous, Running
under the Annular Ligament on a Sinus, in the Lower Part of the Radius, and
passes over the Os Metacarpi Iudicis, joins with the Tendon of the Extensor
Communis Digitorum, and is Inserted with it.

O O, The Extensores Secundi and Tertii Internodii Pollicis.

P, The Lower Part of the Ulna.

Q Q Q, The Inter-Ossei.

R, The Abductor Minimi Digiti.

S, The Adductor Pollicis ad Dorsum Manus.

THE SEVENTY-FIRST TABLE.
SHOWS the Muscles Employed in Extending the Carpus, and Fingers, Raised, and
left at their Insertions.

A, The Radius made bare.

B, The Ulna made bare.

C, The Upper End of the Radius, Articulated with the Os Humeri.

D, The Ligament joining the Ulna and Radius together.

E, The Musculus Ulnaris Extensor.

F, I, cc, Radialis Extensor: I, by Bidloo is Erroneously called Extensor
Iudicis.

G, Supinator Radii Brevis: The Origin of this Muscle is here well Expressed and
its Insertion, Tab. 68. D.

H, Part of the Extensor Digitorum Communis.

K, Extensor Minimi Digiti Proprius.

L Superior, Extensor Tertii Internodii Pollicis.

M M, The Bones of the Carpus.

N N N, The Ossa Metacarpi.

O O, Extensores Primi and Secundi Internodii Pollicis, which derive their
Originations from the Ulna, like the Extensor Tertii Internodii, and are
Inserted to the respective Bones of the Thumb.

P, Part of the Extensor Communis Digitorum, together with the Iudicator.

Q, The Tendinous Origin of the Ulnaris Flexor, cut from the Ulna.

R, The Ligament Raised which Incloses the Ossa Carpi at their Articulations,
with the Radius.

S, The Adductor Pollicis ad Dor sum Manus: It Arises from the Lower Part of
the Os Metacarpi of the Forefinger, and Descends Obliquely to its Broad
Termination at the Superior Part of the First Bone of the Thumb.

T, The Abductor Minimi Digiti.

V V V, The Inter-Ossei.





THE SEVENTY-SECOND TABLE.
AS the Arm, Cubit, and Hand are comprehended under the Title of the Whole
Hand; so the Thigh, Leg and Foot, are in common called, the Foot. The Bones of
those Parts are Represented, Tab. 103, 104, 105. where we shall speak of the
particular Denominations of the Parts last mentioned: Our Business at present
being to Explain the Muscles which move the Bones; First of the Muscles which
move the Thigh Bone. The Skin and Fat of the Buttocks being Raised, the Muscle
which First offers its self to View, is the Glutaeus Major, here Raised and
laid aside to show its Inferior Surface (A.) The Superior or External Surface
of this Muscle Appears Composed of diverse Muscles, in whose Interstitia the Fat
is Inserted, and requires an Artificial Management of the Knife in freeing the
Muscle of it, so as to leave no Part of the Fat behind, nor Wound the Fleshy
Fibers of the Muscle.

A, B B, C, The Glutaeus Major Raised and Turned Downward. This Muscle is not
well Described by Anatomists, they only mentioning its Fleshy Part here
Expressed; besides which, it has a Large Broad Tendinous Part, Springing from the
Whole External Margin of the Spine of the Os Ilium (O O) next the Musculus
Communis of the Membranosus, whence Marching over the External Part of the
Glutaeus Medius (D); at the Great Trochanter (E E), it meets with the Fleshy
Part of this Muscle, Arising from the Posterior Part of the Spine of the Os
Ilium, hindermost Part of the Sacrum Laterally, and Os Coccygis, and Cleaving
to the Broad Ligament that is Extended between the Two last mentioned Bones and
Tubercle of the Os Ischium; its Fleshy Fibers Descend Disgregately in an almost
Semicircular Manner, and become Tendinous as they approach the Great Trochanter
where it is United with its First Described Tendinous Beginning, which together
Descending over the Great Trochanter, joins with the Tendon of the Membranosus
(of which hereafter,) and proceeds to Frame a Large, Thick, Strong Tendon (C,)
Inserted to the Linea Asperia on the Back of the Os Femoris, near Four Fingers
Breadth below the Great Rotator.

The First Described Tendinous Origin of this Muscle, does not only serve to
support its Fleshy Body, but its Fibers Extending themselves, Intersect those
of the Membranosus as they Cover all the Muscles of the Tibia, do more
Adequately Include those Muscles, and Corroborate them in their Actions; as we
have elsewhere Observed of the Muscles of the Cubit and Fingers. When this
Muscle Acts, it draws the Thigh directly Backwards.

I was lately Consulted in the Case of a Fistulous Ulcer a little above the
Great Trochanter; the Sinus tended Upwards, and was at least Two Inches Deep
from the Surface of the Skin, and about Three Inches in Length: I could
Discover the Bottom of the Sinus to be very hard like a Cartilage; nor was it
at all sensible to the Touch of the Probe, as the Patient Informed me; but on
the contrary, told me, I than seemed to Grate against the Bone. The Sinus had
been diverse times Opened, and the hard Body at the Bottom of it laid bare, but
the Wound could not be Cicatric'd: I Opened it again, and afterward cut out
the hard Cartilaginous Body which Covered the External Part of the Glutaeus
Medius; the Wound afterward Incarn'd, and was Cured in a few Days. This
Preternatural hard Body was Framed in the First Described Tendinous Part of the
Glutaeus Major, and the Blood Vessels would not Spring from it to afford
Incarnation; nor would common Escharoticks Act on it, wherefore it continued to
lie Bare; but after cutting it out through the Blood Vessels from the Subjacent
Muscle, the Glutaeus Medius Sprung up, and joined with those of the Membranes
under the Skin, by which means a Confirmed Ci^atrice was made. By this we may
be Informed how Useful Anatomy is in Surgery.

The like Case may happen on the Tendinous Expansion of the Inferior Part of
the Membranosus, on the Muscles of the Tibia and Tarsus, where dividing it only
according to its Length may be sufficient.

D, E E, F, Glutaeus Medius: This lies chiefly under the Tendinous Beginning of
the Maximus, Arising Fleshy from almost the Whole External Part of the Spine of
the Os Ilium, whence Descending becomes Thicker and Fleshy, and is Inserted (in
a Semicircular Manner E E) by a Short Strong Tendon, to the Superior and
External Part of the Great Trochanter.

This Muscle is not only Employed in Extending the Thigh, but is chiefly
Serviceable in Turning it Inwards; and this Action of it will Manifest it self,
if in Time of Dissection you give the Thigh that Motion as it lies on the
Table; you may then Observe the Forepart of this Muscle Notably Relaxt; and in
Living Persons when the Thigh is turned Inwards, you may see the Forepart of
this Muscle Tumified, which ought to be taken Notice of by Painters; or, if in
Performing that Action with your own Thigh you lay your Thumb on this Muscle,
you may easily Feel it move under the Skin: Besides these Actions, it is also
Employed in Stradling or Pulling the Thighs and Legs from each other; it
Cooperating with the Musculus Membranosus in that Action.

G, Part of the Triceps.

H, The Pyriformis or Iliacus Externus.

I I, Part of the Marsupialis.

K, The Great Crural Nerve.

L, The Appendix of the Os Ischium, whence the Muscles Bending the Tibia and
Musculus Quadratus do Spring.

M, A Ligament Protended from the Os Sacrum to the Tubercle of the Ischium, or
Os Coxendicis.

N, Part of the Os Sacrum.

O O, The Spine of the Os Ilium.

P, The Great Trochanter.

Q, Part of the Vastus Externus.

R, The Upper Head of the Biceps Femoris.

S, The Beginning of the Seminervosus.

THE SEVENTY-THIRD TABLE.
DIVERSE Muscles of the Thigh, etc.

A, The Glutaeus Major.

B, The Medius; both being Raised and left at their Insertions.

C, The Glutaeus Minor in Situ: It has a Semicircular Broad Beginning from the
Dorsum Ossis Ilii, whence its Fleshy Fibers Descend to their partly Fleshy and
partly Tendinous Insertion, at the Superior Part of the Root of the Great
Trochanter.

This Performs the same Office with the Medius, mentioned in the Description of
the preceding Table.

D, F, G, I, The Pyriformis, by some called Iliacus Externus, by others
Quadrageminus Primus: It Arises Round and Fleshy from the Inferior and Internal
Part of the Os Sacrum, within the Pelvis of the Abdomen, Descending from thence
Obliquely in the Great Sinus of the Os Ilium (Tab. 99. Fig. 2. F) above the
Acute Process of the Ischium ( Ibid. G,) and joins with the Glutaeus Medius
before it is Inserted to the Upper Part of the Root of the Great Trochanter.
This moves the Thigh somewhat Upwards and Turns it Outward.

E, The Os Sacrum.

H, That Part of the Marsupialis, called the Marsupium.

K, The Tubercle of the Os Ischium.

L, The Back-part of the Os Ilium.

M, The Great Trochanter.

N, The Musculus Quadratus Femoris: It Arises Broad and Fleshy from the
Epiphysis of the Os Ischium, and passes Transversly of an equal Breadth and
Thickness to its partly Fleshy and partly Tendinous Implantation, at the
Posterior Part of the Os Femoris* below the Great Trochanter: This turns the
Thigh Outward.

O, Diverse Muscles of the Tibia near their Origin.





THE SEVENTY-FOURTH TABLE.
SEVERAL Muscles Employed in Moving the Os Femoris, Raised from their
Originations, and left at their Insertions.

A, The Glutaeus Major, scarcely Appearing under the Medius.

B, The Glutaeus Medius, Freed from their Originations, and left at their
Insertions.

C, And Minor, Freed from their Originations, and left at their Insertions.

D, The Iliacus Externus, or Pyriformis hanging at its Insertion.

E, Part of the Triceps.

F, G, The Marsupialis or Bursalis, by some called Obturator Internus:

It Arises Broad and Fleshy from the Os Ilium, Ischium, Pubis, and Ligament
that is Extended in the Great Foramen of the Two last named Bones Internally;
whence passing Transversly, it is Inflected on the Sinus of the Ischium N; on
each Side of which, namely the Acute O, and Obtuse Process P, Arises its Second
Fleshy Body, called Marsupium G; which, Covering the Tendons derived from its
former Origin, Descends Obliquely with them to their Insertion at the Superior
Part of the Root of the Great Trochanter.

When this Muscle Acts, the Great Trochanter is directed toward that Part of
the Ischium N, whereon its Tendons are Inflected, not unlike a Pulley; by which
the Os Femoris is turned Outward.

H, The Obturator Exteruus cut from its Origin at the Great Foramen (R) of the
Os Ischium; its Name is derived from its Situation, its called Rotator Femoris
Extrorsum from its Use; it has a Large Fleshy Beginning from the External Parts
of the Os Ischium, Pubis, and Membrane that Covers the Foramen Externally,
(opposite to the Origin of the Marsupialis) passing Transversly Backwards,
Lessens its self, and Grows Tendinous at its Implantation to the Root of the
Great Trochanter.

I, The Head of the Os Femoris lying out of the Acetabulum, after the
Ligamentum Latum i^ cut off.

k, The Round Ligament of the Os Femoris which is Fastened to the Inferior Part
or Margin of the Acetabulum; whereby the Great Atrition of the Superior Part of
the Acetabulum, with the Head of the Os Femoris, is prevented in Walking,
Running, and the like Actions.

l, The Mucilaginous Gland Entertained in a particular Depressure in the Bottom
and Lower Part of the Acetabulum; whereby the too Great and often Compressure
of the Mucilage in Ordinary Motions of the Thigh, is Prevented.

m, Some Remains of the Mucilaginous Glands on the Neck of the Os Femoris, near
the Conjunction of the Ligamentum Latum; which is here taken off, to show the
Head of the Thigh Bone and Acetabulum of the Os Coxendicis.

K, The Os Ilium.

L, The Os Sacrum.

M, The Coccygis.

N, The Sinus of the Os Ischium in which the Tendons of the Marsupialis pass.

O, An Acute Process of the Ischium.

P, The Appendix of the Ischium whence Springs the Bending Muscles of the Tibia.

Q, The Lower Margin of the Os Pubis.

R, The Great Foramen of the Os Ischium and Pubis.

THE SEVENTY-FIFTH TABLE.
EXPRESSES diverse Muscles of the Tibia, and some of those of the Thigh.

A, B, C, The Sartorius, or Fascialis Longus, seu Longissimus Femoris: Itarises
Sharp and Fleshy from the Forepart of the Spine of the Os Ilium, close by the
Musculus Communis of the Membranosus, and Descending Obliquely Inwards on the
Rectus, and Vastus Internus, and over Part of the Triceps of an unequal Breadth
and Thickness; it meets with the Gracilis below the Middle of the Thigh
Internally, and Accompanies it in its Passage over the Internal and Inferior
Head of the Thigh Bone; where it becomes Tendinous as it passes under the
Strict Enclosure of the Fascia Lata, and is Inserted Four Fingers Breadth below
the Superior Part of the Tibia Internally; it is Employed in moving the Thigh
and Tibia Upwards, somewhat Forewards, and Inwards; in which Actions, the
Upper Part of this Muscle Appears through the Skin, which ought to be observed by
Painters, and Sculptors.

D, E, F, The Gracilis: It Arises somewhat Broad, partly Tendinous and partly
Fleshy from the Os Pubis Internally, between the Two First Heads of the
Triceps, and in its straight Descent on the Inside of the Thigh, Lessens it
self, becoming Tendinous a little above the Tendon of the last Described
Muscle, and is so Inserted immediately beneath it to the Tibia.

It Assists the Flexors of the Tibia.

G, The Rectus: It Arises Fleshy from a Prominence of the Os Ilium, between the
Forepart of its Spine and Acetabulum, (Tab. 99. Fig. 1.1,) thence Descends
directly between the Vastus Externus, and Internus, over the Crureus: Its
Fibers Externally Descend from a Middle Line Obliquely Laterally; Internally
they pass according to its Length, and become entirely Tendinous Four Fingers
Breadth above the Patella, where it is United with the Tendons of the Two Vasti
and Crureus, and is Inserted with them to the Tibia.

It Assists in Extending the Leg, as also in drawing the Thigh and Leg Upwards.

H, The Vastus Internus: It Arises partly Tendinous and partly Fleshy, at the
Linea Aspera on the Back-part of the Os Femoris, from immediately below the
Lesser Trochanter, to Three Fingers Breadth above the Inferior Appendix of that
Bone Internally and Laterally; whence its Fleshy Fibers Descend in an Oblique
and almost Semicircular Manner, and on a sudden becoming Tendinous, joins with
the Tendon of the Rectus, Vastus Externus, and Crureus, and is Inserted to a
Prominence on the Upper and Forepart of the Tibia after joining with the
Patella. Its Office is the same with the last named Muscles.

I, The Vastus Externus: Its Origin Externally is Tendinous, Internally Fleshy
from the Lower-part of the Great Trochanter, and Exterior Part of the Linea
Aspera of the Os Femoris; whence its Fibers Descend Obliquely Forwards, and on
the contrary become Outwardly Fleshy and Tendinous Internally, and immediately
becomes perfectly Tendinous, joining with the Tendons of the Two last Treated
of Muscles, and is Inserted with them (after joining with the Rotula) to the
Tibia, as is above mentioned.

K K, Parts of the Triceps.

L, The Pectineus, by some called Lividus and Flexor Femoris; it has a Thick
Broad Fleshy Origin from the External Part of the Os Pectinis, or Pubis,
between the Musculus Lumbalis, together with the Iliacus Internus, and Second
Head of the Triceps; whence Descending Obliquely Backwards, becomes a Flat
Strong Tendon near its Implantation to the Asperity, on the Posterior Part of
the Os Femoris, immediately below the Lesser Trochanter, and the Termination of
the Psoas. This Acting together with the Psoas Magnus, and Iliacus Internus, do
not only Assist those Muscles in drawing the Os Femoris Upwards, but by its
Oblique Curve Descent from its Origin to its Insertion: It Directs the Thigh
somewhat Outward, which is a provident Contrivance in Nature, least in
Walking, the Thigh-bones by their Oblique Position should be Incident to turn
Inwards; wherefore this Muscle is more particularly Employed in Directing the
whole Foot, viz. the Thigh, Leg, and Foot Outward, in a more Graceful Step.

M, The Psoas together with the Iliacus Internus, near their Insertions.

N, The Os Pubis.





THE SEVENTY-SIXTH TABLE.
DIVERSE Muscles lying on the Forepart of the Thigh.

A, The Musculus Communis of the Membranosus.

B, Part of its Tendinous Expansion Raised and Pinned out; it is called
Membranosus and Fascia Lata, from its large Membranous Expansion, Comprehending
all the Muscles of the Tibia, together with Part of those of the Thigh: It has
an Acute Fleshy Beginning from the Forepart of the Spine of the Os Ilium,
between the Origination of the Sartorius, and First Described Tendinous
Beginning of the Glutaeus Magnus, being Dilated to a Fleshy Belly after an
Oblique Descent, it becomes Tendinous Four Fingers Breadth below the Great
Trochanter; whence it Descends Directly over the Vastus Externus, to its Proper
Termination at the Superior Appendix of the Fibula; but in its Progress
thither, it is conjoined with the Tendinous Expansion of the Glutaeus Magnus,
that Arises from the Spine of the Ilium, Covering the External Part of the
Glutaeus Medius, and all the External Muscles of the Tibia, as well as those of
the Thigh Bone, and Descending over the Patella, Comprehends all the External
Muscles of the Tarsus and Toes, and joins with the Ligamentum Annulare, which
retains the Tendons of the Muscles of the Toes and Foot: Unless it may be
supposed this Fascia Lata should End at the Lowerpart of the Thigh Bone, or
Superior Parts of the Tibia and Fibula, and that the last Named Bones should
give an Origin to the Inferior Part of the Fascia; which seems to be Matter
more of Controversy than Use. When this Muscle Acts, it draws the Leg
Outward; its Tendon being joined with Part of the Tendinous Beginning of the
Glutaeus Magnus, having a differing Series of Fibers Intersecting each other,
do thereby Compose a Strong Involucrum, as well Including all the Common
Muscles of the Leg, as Covering the Proper; whereby those Muscles are
Corroborated in their Actions.

C, The Crureus or Femoreus: Its Origination is Large and Fleshy on the
Forepart of the Thigh Bone, from between the Greater and Lesser Trochanter, as
Appears Tab. 79. its Fibers Descend directly, and become entirely Tendinous a
little below the Upper Part of the Tendon of the Rectus, soon joining with that
Tendon, together with those of the Two Vasti, and Fixing to the Patella, is
afterward Implanted to a Prominence at the Superior and Forepart of the
Tibia. The Extending Muscles of the Tibia are much Stronger than their
Antagonists the Flexors, as Appears by their Magnitude and Conformation;
whether in respect to their Variety of Series of Fibers in General, or Triple
Order of those of the Rectus in Particular, and its Enclosure in the Fascia
Tendinosa: Nor is this Conformation without some considerable End Designed by
the Author of Nature; for should not the Legs be Extended with a Force
Exceeding the Incumbent Weight, we should be continually liable to an
Inflection at the Knees, through the Pressure of the Whole Body; much less should
we be able to Translate the Body from one Place to another. But the All-wise
Architect of Humane Bodies has so Framed these Muscles, as not only to make
them Useful in Supporting the Whole Body, and rendering them Effectually
Serviceable in Walking, Running, and the like: But through the great Proportion
of Strength of these Extending Muscles of the Tibia, they are also Capable
(upon Inflection at the Knees) by their sudden Acting to Extend the Legs with
such a Force, as to remove the Whole Body from the Place where it stood, as in
leaping: In which Action, the Extending Muscles of the Back, namely the
Sacrolumbales, Longissimi Dorsi, etc. and the Gasterocnemii of the Feet do in
like Manner Concur in Extending those Parts: A likeness of which is Represented
in a piece of Whale-bone, Vid. Borell. De Motu Animalium

D, Part of the Sartorius.

E, The Tendinous Part of the Gracilis.

F, A Portion of the Rectus, as it Appears hanging down.

G, The Vastus Internus Raised and hanging down.

H, Part of the Vastus Externus in like Manner Dissected.

I, The First and Largest Head of the Triceps, which Arises Broad and Fleshy
from the Inferior Edges and External Parts of the Os Ischium and Pubis, and
Descending with an Oblique Order of Fibers to its partly Tendinous and partly
Fleshy Insertion to the Linea Aspera of the Thigh Bone, immediately below the
Implantation of the Musculus Quadratus Femoris; the Lower-part of this Head of
the Triceps Composing a Strong Round Tendon, Inserted to the Superior Part of
the Internal and Lower Appendix of the Thigh Bone: The Second Head of this
Muscle Arises Tendinous from the Os Pubis, but in its Descent soon becomes
Fleshy, and joins with the Former, near its Insertion to the Middle Part of the
Linea Aspera of the Thigh Bone: The Third and last Beginning of the Triceps,
Springs from the Inferior Part of the Os Pubis, between the Origin of the last
Described Head, and Pectinaeus; and Descending Obliquely, joins with the First
Head near its Insertion to the Linea Aspera of the Thigh Bone, immediately
above the Termination of the Second Head. The Triceps moves the Thigh Variously
according to the Diversity of its Beginnings; so the First Described Part of it
draws the Thigh Bone Upwards, Inwards, and somewhat Backwards; the Second and
Third Beginnings of it, pulls the Thigh more Inwards, and Turns it somewhat
Outward, as when we put our Legs Across each other.

K, Parts of the Psoas, and Iliacus Internus.

L, The Musculus Pectinaeus.

M, The Os Pubis.

N, The Blood Vessels of the Thigh Ti'd.

O, The Patella or Knee-pan.

P, The Inferior and Internal Part of the Lower Appendix of the Thigh Bone.

Q, Part of the Tibia.

THE SEVENTY-SEVENTH TABLE.
SOME of the Muscles of the Thigh and Leg Dissected from their Originations,
and left at their Insertions.

A B C, etc. The Musculus Biceps Femoris: BB, Its Two Heads or Beginnings: C,
Its Termination.

D, The Semimembranosus, which in its Proper Situation is partly covered with
the Seminervosus (E): It has its Tendinous Origin from the Protuberance of the
Os Ischium, and composing a Broad, Flat Tendon in Half its Progress, on the
Backpart of the Thigh it becomes a Round Fleshy Belly, lying under the Long
Tendon of the Seminervosus: About the Lower Appendix of the Thigh Bone (M),
this Muscle is converted into a Strong Round Tendon, Running in a Channel on
that Appendix, and is afterward Inserted to the Superior and Back-part of the
Tibia: This Bends the Tibia, which Action it Performs the more Advantageously
by its Lower Tendons, passing in a Channel on the Inferior Appendix of the
Thigh Bone; which, as a Pully not only Directs it in its Office, but renders
its Action in Bending the Leg more Vigorous. It must be Granted, that if the
Tendon of this Semimembr anosus had past further on, and Terminated with those
of the Seminervosus, Gracilis, and Sartorius, it would have rendered it capable
of Performing its Action with Force; but in regard the Number of Tendons here
on this Internal Side of the Ham are already Increased to Three, the Fourth
could not well be admitted without some Inconveniency, either in Performing its
Office together with the Rest, or in the Figure of the Part: Besides it seems
to be no small Artifice in Nature, as well here in the Leg, as in the Arm, to
Furnish both with Proper Muscles, which should Gradually Bend them: Thus the
Shorter Beginning of the Biceps Femoris and the Muscle now Treated of, are
Analogous to the Brachialis Internus, Flexor Cubiti; and this Contrivance here
seems the more convenient in respect of Walking; in which a moderate Flexion of
one of the Legs is only Necessary, in Order to its Translation before the other.

E, The Seminervosus or Semitendinosus.

F, The Glutaeus Magnus Raised.

G, Part of the Glutaeus Medius.

H, The Back-part of the Thigh Bone made bare.

I, The Vastus Externus partly covered with the Tendinous Expansion of the
Membranosus.

K, The Tendon of the Membranosus on the Vastus.

L, M, The Two Prominencies of the Lower Appendix of the Thigh Bone, of which
the Internal (M) is furrowed to receive the Round Tendon of the Semimembranosus.

N, The Trunks of the Blood Vessels cut off in the Ham.

O, Part of the Crural Nerve.

P P, The Two Fleshy Beginnings of the Gasterocnemius Externus.





THE SEVENTY-EIGHTH TABLE.
REPRESENTS the Muscles on the Back-part of the Thigh partly freed from each
other, and left at their Originations and Insertions.

A, Part of the Glutaeus Major.

B B, Biceps Femoris in Situ: It having Two Beginnings; the Superior and
Longest of which, Arises from the Protuberance of the Os Ischium (G), in its
Descent becomes Large and Fleshy, and Lessening it self, joins with the
Inferior and Shorter Head, which Springs partly Fleshy and partly Tendinous
from the Linea Aspera of the Os Femoris, immediately below the Termination of
the Glutaeus Magnus; soon after these Two Heads or Beginnings of this Muscle
are United, it becomes Tendinous as it Descends in a Channel on the External
Part of the Lower Appendix of the Os Femoris, and is Implanted to the Superior
Epiphysis of the Fibula.

Besides the Office commonly Assigned, this Muscle together with the
Seminervosus and Semimembranosus; it is likewise Employed in Turning the Leg
together with the Foot, etc. Outward in Sitting with the Leg Bended.

C C, The Semimembranosus removed from its Proper Situation.

D D, The Seminervosus in like Manner Raised, and left at its Origination and
Insertion: This Arises from the same Protuberance of the Os Ischium (G), with
the Upper Beginning of the Biceps and Origin of the Semimembranosus (CC), and
Descending Obliquely Inward after making a Fleshy Belly, Composes a Round
Tendon above the Ham, which Descends to its Insertion with the Gracilis and
Sartorius, below the Upper Appendix of the Tibia Internally.

E, The Posterior Part of the Thigh Bone.

F F, Parts of the Gasterocnemius Externus.

G, The Protuberance of the Os Ischium where the Bending Muscles of the Tibia
abovementioned do Arise.

H, Part of the Triceps.

I, The Great Crural Nerve.



THE SEVENTY-NINTH TABLE.
EXPRESSES Parts of some Muscles remaining on the Forepart part of the
Thigh Bone.

A A, The Forepart of the Thigh Bone.

B B, Part of the Crureus Muscle Raised from the Os Femoris.

b b, A Portion of the Crureus still remaining on the Thigh Bone.

C, The Internal Part of the Patella, or Knee-pan.

D, The Inside of the Tendon of all the Extending Muscles of the Tibia United
above the Patella.

E E, The Mucilaginous Glandules of the Knee. The Situation of these Glandules
as well as others of this Kind, is so Contrived in the several Articulations of
Bones to which they belong, as that they are not liable to be Comprest by the
Apposition of the Bones in their Various Motions: Nor are they Destitute of
such a Compressure as is Necessary to Accelerate their Mucilaginous or Slimy
Juice, when Lodged in their Excretory Tubes. The Tubes or Excretory Ducts of
these Glands, do not Discharge their Contents like those of the Fauces, by open
Apertures; but are Carried beyond the Surface of their Glands, and Frame a
Fimbria or Fringe-like Appearance, which hangs Loose or Flaggy in the Sinus's
of the Articulations: This Contrivance in these Excretory Tubes of the
Mucilaginous Glands of the Joints, is not only Necessary to Defend their Mouths
from being Oppressed by the Mucilage contained in the Sinus's of the
Articulations in its Endeavor to Return again; but the too Plentiful Excretion
of this Mucilage is also prevented, and such a Quantity only Emitted as is
Necessary to Lubricate the Articulations in their Respective Motions. Hence it
Appears as in Violent Repeated Motions of the Bones, there is a greater Expense
of the Mucilage, so there is a constant Supply in Proportion to that Expense.

F, The Head of the Thigh Bone taken out of the Acetabulum, or Cavity of the
Hip-Bone.

G, The Ligamentum Latum, or Broad Ligament of the Coxendix, which Involved the
Articulation of the Thigh Bone with the Hip, here cut from the Margin of the
Acetabulum, and left at its Connection to the Neck of the Thigh Bone.

H, Part of the Great Trochanter.

The Muscles Adjacent to these Parts last mentioned, are here so confusedly
Expressed, as no Explanation of them can be Asserted.





THE EIGHTIETH TABLE.
THE Muscles on the Forepart of the Leg lying under the Fascia Lata.

A, The Upper Part of the Tibia next the Patella which Composes the Knee.

B, The Tendons of the Musculi Peronei in their Progress toward their
Insertions, as is Expressed in the following Table.

C, The Lower Appendix of the Fibula, called Malleolus Externus.

D, The Musculus Tibialis Anticus in Situ: Spigelius calls it Musculus Catenae,
because when it is Divided, the Patient is Obliged to Use a Sling to Support
the Foot for some time. I have more than once seen this Muscle Divided, whether
by Ignorantly Mis-applying of Causticks on Nodes of the Tibia, or in the Case
of a Fracture of that Bone, and the Patient after some Time has Recovered the
complete Action of Lifting up his Foot, by the Extensor Pollicis Pedis, H: The
Tibialis Anticus derives its Fleshy Origin from the Lower-part of the Superior
Apendage of the Tibia between its Prominence, where the Great Tendon of all the
Extending Muscles of the Leg is Inserted, and the Origination of the Musculus
Extensor Digitorum Pedis Longus seu Magnus; it also continues a Disgregated
Fleshy Origination for near Two Thirds of the Superior Part of the Tibia
Externally Laterally, next the Fibula; which Composing a Fleshy Belly, Lessens
its self in Half its Progress, and Growing into a Strong and somewhat Round
Tendon, Descends Obliquely over the Inferior Part of the Tibia, and under the
Annular Ligament, and is Inserted to the Superior and Internal Part of the Os
Metarsi Pollicis.

This pulls the Foot Upwards and Forwards, Directly.

E, The Peronaeus Longus.

F, The Extensor Digitorum Pedis Longus.

G, Part of the Tendons of the Extensor Digitorum Brevis.

H, The Tendon of the Musculus Extensor Pollicis Longus.

I, Part of the Gasterocnemius Externus.

N.B. That the Muscles are Expressed in this Figure under the Fascia Lata; which
like a Bandage retains their Tendons in their Proper Situation, in Order to
Perform their Offices in Extending the Toes and drawing the Foot Upwards. In
the following Figure the Fascia Lata is taken off, and the Muscles are
Represented more Distinct, being partly Separated, and their Tendons Raised.

Part of the Gasterocnemius Internus is Expressed in this Figure between E, and I.

THE EIGHTY-FIRST TABLE.
DIVERSE Muscles on the Forepart of the Leg, partly Divided from each other.

A, The Superior Apophysis of the Tibia, to which the Tendons of the Extending
Muscles (after joining with the Patella) are Inserted.

B, The Upper Appendix of the Fibula.

C, Part of the Tibia.

D, The Heel or Os Calcis.

E, The Musculus Tibialis Anticus.

F, The Extensor Digitorum Magnus or Longus, it being the Largest and Longest
Muscle that Extends the Toes: This has an Acute Fleshy Beginning Externally
from the Inferior Part of the Upper Appendix of the Tibia next the Fibula; as
also a Long Fleshy one from the Superior Part of the last Named Bone, and
Lessening it self in Half its Progress on the Leg, it joins with a Second
Broad, Disgregated Fleshy Beginning, continued for near Half the Inferior Part
of the Fibula; where Descending under the Ligamentum Annulare of the Talus, it
is Divided into Five Tendons, Four of which are Inserted to the Third Bones of
all the Lesser Toes; but the Fifth is Implanted on the Superior Part of the Os
Metatarsi of the Little Toe; which Part of it, Vesalius makes his Ninth Muscle
belonging to the Foot.

G, The Extensor Digitorum Brevis: It Arises Fleshy from the External and
Forepart of the Os Calcis, soon Dilating it self to a Fleshy Belly, which
being Divided into Four Fleshy Portions, become so many Tendons, passing over
the Upper Part of the Foot, make Acute Angles with the Tendons of the Former
Muscle, as they run over the First Internode of each Lesser Toe, to their
Insertions at the Superior Part of their Second Internodes.

H, The Extensor Pollicis Pedis Longus and Magnus: It being the Longest and
Largest Extender of the Great Toe: Its Beginning is Large and Fleshy on the
Forepart of the Fibula, from immediately below its Superior Appendix, to Four
Finger's Breadth above its Inferior one; and Descending under the Ligamentum
Annulare of the Tarsus, between the Tendon of the Tibialis Anticus, and the
Tendons of the Extensor Pedis Longus, Marching along the Superior Part of the
Foot; it is Inserted to the Upper Part of the Second Bone of the Great Toe; its
Name declares its Use.

I, The Peroneus Primus seu Magnus in Situ: In the following Table it is Raised
from its Origin, and left at its Insertion.

K, The Skin on the Bottom of the Foot, called Planta Pedis, taken off.

L L, A Style or Bodkin Supporting the Tendons of the Extensor Digitorum Longus.

M, The Lower Appendix of the Fibula, called Malleolus Externus.

N, Part of the Bone, called Talus and Astragalus made bare, so that its
Cartilaginous Surface that is Articulated with the Inferior Part of the Tibia
and Fibula, may be seen.

O, The Mucilaginous Gland of the Tarsus Entertained in the Large Cavity or
Interstitium, Framed between the Talus and Oblong Tubercle of the Os Calcis;
the Use of which Cavity and Mucus, is taken Notice of by Realdus Columbus Lib.
I. Cap. xxxii. to Moisten the Articulation of the Bones, least they become Dry
by their frequent Motion.

P, The Tendon of the Peroneus Longus Marching behind the Malleolus Externus,
in its Way to its Insertion in the Bottom of the Foot.

Q, Part of the Tendon of the Peroneus Secundus.

R, The Extensor Pollicis Brevis in Situ.

S, Part of the Gasterocnemius Externus.

T, Part of the Internus.

N. B. That the Fascia Membranosa which Helps to Compose the Annular Ligament,
between the Two Malleoli and Upper Part of the Foot or Tarsus, commonly, called
the Instep, is here taken off from its Continuance near Half the Lower-part of
the Tibia, that of the Upper Part of the Leg or Tibia remaining on, as is well
Expressed in this Figure.





THE EIGHTY-SECOND TABLE.
SHOWS the Extending Muscles of the Toes, together with diverse Employed in the
Motion of the Foot Dissected from their Originals, and left at their Tendinous
Insertions.

A, The Inside of the Tibialis Anticus freed from the Tibia.

B, The Peroneus Secundus, by some called Semifibulaeus: It has an Acute Fleshy
Beginning from above the Middle of the External Part of the Fibula, under the
Fleshy Belly of the Peroneus Longus, continuing to derive a Disgregated Fleshy
Beginning from the Posterior Sharp Edge of the Fibula, Composing a Fleshy
Belly; it Grows Tendinous as it passes behind the Malleolus Externus, under the
Tendon of the Peroneus Longus, and is Inserted to the Superior and External
Part of the Os Metatarsi of the Little Toe.

This draws the Foot Outward.

C, The Peroneus Primus or Longus, so called because it is the First that
offers its self to View, and the Longest Muscle placed on the Os Perone or
Fibula; it Arises Externally Tendinous, and Internally Fleshy, from above Half
the Superior Part of the Fibula, Descending somewhat Backwards, Composes a
Strong Flat Tendon, which becomes somewhat Round as it Marches in a Channel on
the Malleolus Externus; whence it is Inflected Forwards ( Tab. 81. P,)
Accompaning the Tendon of the Peroneus Secundus to its Insertion ( Tab. Ibid.
Q,); where the Tendon of this Muscle leaves it, and proceeds to March over the
Os Cuboides or Spongiosum, and under the Abductor Minimi Digiti; whence it
passes in Planta Pedis, between the Ossa Cuneformia and Tendons of the Muscles
Bending the Toes, to its Implantation at the Superior and Hindmost Part of the
Os Metatarsi of the Great Toe, as is Expressed, Tab. 86. Fig. 1. M, Ibid. Fig. 2.
F.

This Contrivance in Nature in conveying the Tendon of this Muscle, not only
over the Lower Appendix of the Fibula, but on the Os Spongiosum (as a Rope on a
Double Pully) is very considerable in respect to its Office; for since the Ball
of the Great Toe (to which Part this Tendon is Inserted) is Necessary for the
Center of Gravity to the Whole Body; it is an Instance of the Skill of the
Divine Architect so to Dispose of this Instrument, which brings that Center
toward a Perpendicular Bearing (which Necessarily Projects from the Fulciment
or Tibia), by adding this Double Pully; which Composing Angles of Contortion
does Reciprocally Augment the Force of making the Ball of the Great Toe
Approach toward a right Bearing with the Tibia; and by this means sustains the
Weight of the Body, tho it is not in a Direct Position with the Gravity of the
Whole.

D, The Extensor Digitorum Pedis Longus.

E E E, etc. Its Five Tendons Inserted to the Extreme Internode of the Lesser
Toes; Two of which go to the Little Toe, as here Expressed.

e, One of the Tendons of the Extensor Digitorum Magnus, Implanted on the Os
Metatarsi of the Little Toe.

F, The Extensor Digitorum Pedis Brevis.

f f f, Its Tendons.

G, The Extensor Pollicis Longus,

H, The Extensor Pollicis Brevis.

I, The Tibia.

K, The Fibula.

L L L, The Bones of the Tarsus Connected to each other, and the Ossa
Metatarsi, by Ligaments.

M, The Great Ligament of the Articulation of the Tarsus, with the Tibia and
Fibula Divided, to show the Upper Cartilaginous Surface of the Os Tali or
Astragalus.

N N, etc. The Musculi Inter-Ossei lying between the Bones of the Metatarsus.

O, The Abductor Minimi Digiti.

P, Part of the Flexor Pollicis Longus remaining in Situ on the Back-part of
the Fibula.

Q, Part of the Gasterocnemius Internus.

R, The Trunks of the Nerves and Blood Vessels which are Inservient to the
Muscles on the Forepart of the Tibia.

S, The Ligament between the Tibia and Fibula which Distinguishes the Muscles
of the Forepart from those behind.

THE EIGHTY-THIRD TABLE.
REPRESENTS diverse External Muscles of the Leg and Bottom of the Foot.

A, The Upper Appendix of the Tibia, which Helps to Compose the Internal
Lateral Part of the Knee.

B, The Body of the Tibia.

C, The Os Calcis.

D, Part of the Musculus Popliteus Inserted to the Upper and Internal Part of
the Tibia.

E, The Gasterocnemius Externus, so called, because it is the External Muscle
which Helps to Compose the Calf of the Leg: Ves^^ngius Distinguishes this here
Expressed, with its Companion on the Outside of the Calf, by the Name of
Gasterocnemius, and the Subjacent Muscle, he calls Soleus, from its Figure
being like that of the Sole-Fish, which Others, as Spigelius, etc. call
Gasterocnemius Internus. This External Muscle is also called Gemellus, it being
as it were Double; it having Two Distinct Fleshy Originations, from the
Superior and Hindmost Parts of each Tubercle of the Lower Apendage of the
Thigh Bone; which in their Descent are each Dilated into Two Large Fleshy
Bellies: The Innermost of which is Thickest, and Largest; each of these Fleshy
Bellies having a Differing Series of Fibers, join to each other, near where
they make a Broad Strong Tendon, which Narrowing it self, joins with the Great
Tendon of the Gasterocnemius Internus, Four Finger's Breadth above its
Insertion to the Os Calcis.

Riolan Asserts with Vesalius, That in the Two Beginnings of this Muscle, there
are Two Ossicula Sesamoidea; which we must Acknowledge with Marchette, have
hitherto Escaped our Observation, though it is likely it may be so in Aged Bodies;
as Appeared in a Subject I lately Dissected, on one Side only.

When this Muscle Acts, the Foot is said to be Extended or pulled Backwards,
which Motion of it is very Necessary in Walking, Running, Leaping, and Standing
on Tiptoe, etc. Hence it is those that Walk much, have these Muscles Larger
than others, through the frequent Use of them, and amongst whom those that carry
heavy Burdens, and especially Sedans or Chairs in this Town; and those who
wear Low-heel'd Shoes have these Muscles Remarkably Larger than others.

F, The Tendinous Expansion of the Musculus Plantaris freed from the Bottom of
the Foot.

G, The Perforatus, so called, because its Tendons are Perforated like those of
the Fingers. It is also called Flexor Secundi Internodii Digitorum Pedis, from
its Use, and Sublimis from its Situation: It Springs from the Inferior and
Internal Part of the Os Calcis, between the Musculi Abductores of the Greater
and Lesser Toes, Dilating it self to a Fleshy Belly; after it has passed the
Middle of the Planta Pedis; it is Divided into Four Fleshy Portions, which
become so many Tendons, and are Divided near their Terminations to Admit the
Tendons of the following Muscles or Perforatus, to pass through them to their
Insertions; these Tendons being United again, pass Underneath the Perforantes
to their Implantations at the Upper Part of the Second Bone of each Lesser Toe.

H H, The Tendons of the Perforans passing through the Divisions of those of the
Perforatus last Described.

I, The Tendon of the Flexor Pollicis Longus.

K, The Abductor Pollicis, so called from its Office: It Arises partly
Tendinous and partly Fleshy from the Internal and Lateral Part of the Os
Calcis, and in Half its Progress Composes a Tendon which joins with another
Beginning, Springing from the Os Cuniforme Majus, and Naviculare; both Marching
Forwards make one Tendon at its Insertion to the External Part of the Os
Sesamoides of the Great Toe Laterally: It draws the Great Toe from the rest.

L, The Abductor Minimi Digiti; this Muscle is Outwardly Tendinous and Inwardly
Fleshy in its Origin at the External Part of the Os Calcis, and becoming
Tendinous in Half its Progress on the Outside of the Foot; it joins a Second
Fleshy beginning of this Muscle, Springing from the Superior and External Part
of the Os Metatarsi of the Little Toe, makes one Tendon at its Insertion to the
Upper Part of the First Bone of the Little Toe Externally Laterally.

M, The Internal Malleolus.

N, The Tendon of the Tibialis Anticus.

O, The Tendon of the Gasterocnemii.

P, Part of the Small Long Tendon of the Musculus Plantaris, in its Descent
toward the Bottom of the Foot.

Q, Part of the Gasterocnemius Internus or Soleus.

Note, That Part of the Flexor Digitorum Pedis Perforans and Flexor Pollicis,
may be seen in this Position of the Part between M and Q; but the Membranes not
being taken off (in the Subject whence this Figure was taken) those Muscles are
here Expressed very Obscurely.





THE EIGHTY-FOURTH TABLE.
REPRESENTS the Muscles of the Hinderpart of the Leg, after the Gasterocnemii
are Dissected from their Originals, and left at their Insertions.

A A, The Two Inferior Heads of the Thigh Bone.

B, Part of One of the Semilunary Cartilages placed in the Articulation of the
Thigh Bone with the Tibia; this Cartilage together with that on the other Side
of this Articulation, Frame Two Shallow Cavities on the Tibia, which receive
the Prominencies of the Two Inferior Heads of the Thigh Bone: These Semilunary
Cartilages are Thick and Large, Externally toward the Surface of the Tibia, to
which they are Connected and Gradually become Thinner as they Approach the
Center of the Upper Part of the Tibia; their Figure very aptly Represents a
Half Moon; their Office is very considerable in preventing those frequent
Luxations and Dislocations which this Part, on very slight Occasions, would
otherwise be Incident to; for which End these Semilunary Cartilages are
Connected to the Broad Ligament which Invests this Articulation; which Ligament
is very well Expressed in this Figure, it being partly taken off from the
Hinder-part of the Articulation, to show the Two Heads of the Thigh Bone.

C, The Musculus Popliteus, by some called Subpopliteus: It Arises with a
Short Strong Tendon from the External Head of the Inferior Appendix of the Os
Femoris, whence Descending Obliquely over the Juncture, it becomes Fleshy or
more and more Expanding it self, till it is Implanted to the Superior Part of
the Tibia Internally, immediately below its Upper Appendix (a): This Muscle not
only Assists the rest Employed in Bending the Tibia, but it is Advantageously
Situated to Antagonize the Biceps Femoris, when the Leg or Knee is Bended in
Turning the Foot and Toes Inwards.

D, The Internal Part of the Tibia.

E E, Parts of the Gasterocnemius Externus Dissected from their Originations.

F, The Inferior or Internal Surface of the Gasterocnemius Internus; where a
very Elegant Disposition of its Fibers are Curiously Expressed, which Appearance
I have frequently Observed; but in some Subjects, and particularly in One I
lately Dissected, a quite different Series of Fibers of this Muscle Offered:
This Muscle lies under the Gasterocnemius Externus and Part of the Plantaris;
it is called Soleus from its Figure; its External Fleshy Part is Covered with a
Transparent Tendinous Expansion, which makes it Appear of a Livid Color; it
Arises partly Tendinous, but chiefly Fleshy from the Hindmost Part of the Upper
Appendix of the Fibula, and Back-part of the Tibia, immediately below the
Termination of the Subpopliteus, and Increasing to a Large Fleshy Belly
Composed of Various Orders of Fibers, all which being United into a Tendon,
join with the Tendon of the External Muscle, and are Inserted to the Superior
and Hindmost Part of the Os Calcis. The Talus together with the Toes being as
it were a Leaver to the Whole Body, ought therefore to be Attended with Muscles
of great Strength to Extend them; wherefore we find those Muscles so much to
Exceed their Antagonist the Tibieus Anticus, as well in the Advantageous
Constructure of their Differing Series of Fleshy Fibers, as their Magnitude and
Insertion at the Extremity of the Os Calcis; by which means they are not only
rendered Serviceable in Walking, Running, and the like; but do also Support the
Tibiae in Standing, least the Weight of the Body should make them Incline
Forwards at their Articulations with the Bones of the Feet.

G G, The Plantaris left at its Origination; or which I rather believe, after
Dissection from thence, and Raised, is there again Fastn'd; its Proper
Situation being between the Gasterocnemius Externus and Internus; the Latter of
which Muscles could not without Difficulty be taken from its Origination, as is
Represented in this Table, and the Plantaris left: This Muscle is so called
because its Tendon is Expanded in the Planta Pedis, like that of the Palmaris
in the Palm of the Hand: It Arises Fleshy from the Superior and Back-part of
the External Head of the Thigh Bone, immediately under the Outmost Beginning of
the Gasterocnemius Externus; whence Descending Obliquely between the Two
Gasterocnemii, Composes a Thin, Long, Flat Tendon, which passes Out from
between the Fleshy Bellies of the last named Muscles, and Descends Internally
Laterally by their Great Tendons (as is Expressed in the preceding Table P,) and
Marches over the Os Calcis, Expanding it self on the Sole of the Foot; where it
almost Inseparably Adheres to the Fleshy Body of the Musculus Flexor Digitorum
Perforatus, and is Inserted on both Sides the First Internodes of each Lesser
Toe, and sometimes to that of the Great Toe.

The Office of this Muscle is very Obscure; its Tendinous Expansion on the
Bottom of the Foot, is chiefly Serviceable in Defending the Subjacent Muscles,
Tendons, Nerves, and Blood Vessels, from being Comprest in Standing, Walking,
etc.

N. B. In some Bodies the Fleshy Beginning and Long Tendon of this Muscle is
wanting.

g, The Tendinous Expansion of the Plantaris separated from the Bottom of the
Foot.

H, A Large Nerve in its way to the Bottom of the Foot and Toes.

I, The Beginning of the Flexor Pollicis in Situ.

K K, Part of the Peroneus Secundus.

L, The Beginning of the Perforans in Situ.

M, The Abductor Pollicis.

N, The Skin and Fat taken off the Heel and Bottom of the Foot.

THE EIGHTY-FIFTH TABLE.
ALL the Muscles Represented in the Preceding Table Raised from their
Originals, and left at their Insertions.

A, The Inferior Part of the Musculus Popliteus at its Insertion to the
Internal and Upper Part of the Tibia.

a, The Internal Part of the Knee.

B, The Great Bone of the Leg called Tibia;

C, The Lesser Bone called Fibula.

D D, The Two Beginnings of the Gasterocnemius Externus;

E, its Conjunction with the Internal Gasterocnem Muscle.

F F, The Musculus Plantaris placed between the External and Internal
Gastarocnem Muscles.

G, The Tibialis Posticus, so called from its Situation on the Back-part of the
Tibia; it is also called Nauticus, from the Use which Mariners make of it in
Climbing up their Masts; it is placed under the Flexor Pollicis Longus and Part
of the Persorans Digitorum Pedis; in some Subjects it seems to have Two Fleshy
Bellies: This Muscle remains undivided between the Bones after the Circular
Incision for Amputations of the Leg below the Knee: It Springs from a partly
Tendinous and Fleshy Origination at the Superior and Back-part of the Fibula,
as also from the Ligament between the Tibia and Fibula; whence Descending,
becomes Tendinous as it runs in a Sinus on the Back-part of the Lower Appendage
of the Tibia called Malleolus Internus, under an Enclosing Ligament, and is
Inserted to the Os Naviculare: This Draws the Foot Upwards and Inwards.

H, The Perforans or Flexor Tertii Internodii Digitorum Pedis; It has an Acute
Fleshy Origination from the Back-part of the Tibia, immediately under the
Subpopliteus, having a Double Order of Fleshy Fibers United to a Middle Tendon
like the Flexor Pollicis Longus, but ceases to be Fleshy as it Marches behind
the Malleolus Internus, Running in a Channel over the Internal Part of the Os
Calcis, and under its Enclosing Ligaments; in Half its Progress through the
Bottom of the Foot, its Tendon is Divided into Four, which March through the
Fissures of the Tendons of the Perforatus I, and are Inserted to the Third
Bones of the Lesser Toes.

I, The Perforatus in Situ, Described Tab. 83.

K, The Flexor Pollicis Pedis Longus is an Antagonist to the Extensor Longus;
It Arises opposite to it from the Back-part of the Fibula, with a Double Order
of Fleshy. Fibers passing to a Middle Tendon; it ceases to be Fleshy as it
passes over the Juncture of the Talus, running through a Channel on the
Internal Part of the Os Calcis, its Tendon still Marches under the Tendon of
the Musculus Flexor Digitorum Longus Perforans, to which it most commonly
joins, and passes in a Depressure made in the Flexor Pollicis Brevis (Elgantly
Expressed in this Figure) to its Insertion at the last Bone of the Great Toe: Its
Name Declares its Office. There are many remarkable Parts Expressed in this
Figure, which have been already Explained in the preceding Tables, as the Os
Calcis made bare, the Malleolus Internus, the Musculus Abductor Minimi Digiti,
etc. Wherefore we shall not Insert particular Characters of them here, as we
have done in the foregoing Tables.







THE EIGHTY-SIXTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
EXHIBITS all the Muscles which Appear in the Bottom of the Foot, after the
Expansion of the Plantaris is removed.

A B C, The Musculus Lumbricalis, by some called Carnea Massa in Planta Pedis;
It Springs Fleshy from the Internal Part of the Os Calcis, and Growing
Tendinous, joins with the Tendons of the Perforatus; where Growing Fleshy
again, Divides its self, and Composes the Four Musculi Lumbricales F F E,
(properly so called from their Figure); all which become Tendinous at their
Insertions to the Internal Parts of each Lesser Toe, Laterally next the Great
Toe: It is also called Flexor Primi Internodii Digitorum Pedis, from its Use.

a a a, The Tendons of the Perforans Running through the Fissures of the Musculus
Perforatus; which is here Dissected from its Original, and left at its
Insertions to the Lesser Toes, that of the Little Toe being wanting.

D, Part of the Flexor Pollicis Longus.

G, The Abductor Minimi Digiti Pedis cut from its First Original at the Os
Calcis, and left at its Second, at the Metatarsi Minimi Digiti.

H, Part of the Abductor Pollicis.

I, The Flexor Pollicis Pedis Brevis in its Proper Situation.

K, The Transversalis Pedis in like Manner in Situ.

L, Parts of the Inter-Ossei.

M, Part of the Tendon of the Peroneus Longus, in its Way to its Insertion in
the Bottom of the Foot.

N, The Heel-bone.

Fig. 2.
A, Between C C, and D, The Flexor Pollicis Brevis: This, as Appears in the
preceding Table, seems to be Divided into Two Parts, by the Tendon of the Long
Muscle Bending the Great Toe passing over it: It Arises from the Os Cunesorme
Medium, and Marching over the Termination of the Peroneus Longus, is Implanted
to the Ossa Sesamoidea of the Great Toe, which Bones are (like the Patella)
afterward Tied to the Second Internode of that Toe: Its Name declares its
Office.

B, The Abductor Minimi Digiti cut from its Origin and Pinned up.

AAAA, The Musculi Inter-Ossei in Situ, somewhat Raised.

C C C, Part of the Abductor Pollicis, and Flexor Brevis.

D, The Adductor Pollicis: This Arises partly Tendinous and partly Fleshy from
the Inferior Part of the Os Cuneforme Tertium, after Composing a Fleshy Belly,
is Lessened at its Insertion to the Part of the Outermost Os Sesamoides of the
Great Toe: Its Denomination Expresses its Use.

E, The Transversalis Pedis, so called from its Situation: It Arises Tendinous
from the External Os Sesamoides of the Great Toe, and becoming a Fleshy Belly
in its Progress over the First Internodes of the Two next Toes, it is Lessened
at its Insertion to the Inferior Part of the Os Metatarsi of the Little Toe:
Its Office is to bring the Lesser Toe toward the Greater.

F, The Tendon of the Peroneus Longus at its Termination.

G, The Os Calcis.

N. B. Parts of the Tendons of the Perforatus and Perforans, are Expressed at
their Terminations on the Bones of the Toes.

Fig. 3.
A A, etc. The Eight Musculi Inter-Ossei of the Toes, according to Bidloo and
Others; the First of which lying on the Little Toe, we choose to call from its
Office, Flexor Primi Internodii Minimi Digiti, it not lying between the
Metatarsal Bones like the rest: Its Rise being from the Superior Part of the Os
Metatarsi Minimi Digiti, it passes Directly to its Insertion in the First Bone
of the Lesser Toe. The Inter-Ossei are in Number Seven, they derive their Names
from their Situation, and may each deserve a Proper Appellation from their Use:
The First next to the Muscle last Described, may be called Adductor Minimi
Digiti; the Second is the Largest, and draws the next Toe toward the Lesser,
and may be called Abductor Auricularis; the Third Antagonizes the Former, and
is an Adductor of that Toe; the Fourth is an Abductor Medii Digiti; the Fifth
is an Adductor of the same; the Sixth is an Adductor; and the Seventh an
Abductor Indicis Pedis: Their Origination, Progress, and Insertion, may be seen
Expressed in this Figure.

B B, C C, Diverse Muscles of the Great Toe which are confusedly Disposed.

D, The Abductor Minimi Digiti.

E, The Tendon of the Peroneus Longus, at its Implantation to the Os Metatarsi
of the Great Toe.

THE EIGHTY-SEVENTH TABLE.
HAVING Examined the Muscles of the Limbs and most of those of the Head, Trunk
and other Parts of the Body, and taken Notice of many of the most Remarkable
Ligaments in diverse Articulations of the Bones: We come next to View the Whole
Compages of the Bones when Dried, called the Skeleton; the Forepart of which
is Represented in this Table. If you Examine the Proper Situation of each Bone,
you will find none of them placed in a Perpendicular Bearing to each other:
Above Two Thirds of the Whole Head, Projects from its Articulation with the
Vertebrae of the Neck: The Whole Ribs and Sternum which Compose the Forepart
of the Thorax, together with all its Viscera, as well as the Viscera of the
Lower Belly, Project from the Vertebrae of the Back and Loins: The Claviculae
whose Positions are Horizontal, Support the Arms, by their Connections with the
Scapulae: The Articulations of the Thigh-bones are not Perpendicular to the
Grand Fulciment of the Head and Trunk; ( i.e. the Whole Vertebrae,) but are
placed before it. The Thigh-bones Stand Obliquely Inwards, and so do the
Tibiae, though not in so great a Manner. We Stand either on the Extremity of the
Os Calcis, and Ball of the Great Toe together; or else on the Ball of the Great
Toe only, as on Tip-Toe.

A, The Forehead-bone Divided into Two Parts, by means of a Continuation of the
Longitudinal Suture, which may be seen in diverse Subjects as here Expressed; nor
does such an Appearance Determine the Sex as some pretend.

B, The Bregma.

C, The Temple-bone called Squamosum.

D, The Yoke-bone or Os Iugale Composed of Two Process's; the one derived
Backwards from the Os Squamosum; the other Forwards from the First Bone of the
Upper Jaw.

E, The Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw.

F, The Lower Jaw Bone.

G, The Teeth called Incisores.

H, The First Rib near its Articulation with the Vertebrae of the Neck.

I, The Clavicula on the Right Side.

K, The Processus Coracoides Scapulae on the Left Side.

L, The Sternum or Brest-bone.

M M, etc. The Seven True Ribs.

N N, etc. The Five Bastard Ribs, called Nothae or Spuriae.

O O, etc. Diverse of the Twelve Vertebrae of the Back.

P P, etc. Four of the Five Vertebrae of the Loins; the Uppermost being hid by
the Cartilages of the Bastard Ribs.

Q, The Os Ilium.

R, Its Conjunction with the Os Pubis in the Acetabulum.

S, The Os Pubis.

T, The Os Sacrum.

V, The Upper Part of the Ossa Pubis, behind which, is the Os Coccygis, not to
be seen in this Position.

W, The Os Humeri or Shoulder Bone.

X, The Ulna, Expressed in its Whole Length in the Left Arm.

Y, The Radius; between which and Z, are contained the Eight Bones of the
Carpus.

Z, The Bones of the Hand, particularly those of the Metacarpus.

1, The Thigh Bone.

2, The Patella or Knee-pan.

3, The Tibia.

4, The Fibula.

5, The Bones of the Foot.







THE EIGHTY-EIGHTH TABLE.
IS the Back and Side of a Humane Skeleton.

What has been said in the preceding Page relating to the Position of the
Bones, with respect to their Bearing on each other, seems better Explained in
the Figure of this Table: Whereby it Appears, if the Muscles which draw the
Head Up, or Backwards, as well as those placed on the Back-part of the Whole
Spine, were not very Large as well as Numerous, the Trunk of the Body as well
as the Head, would be continually subject to fall Forwards. Nor could we Stand,
much less Translate the Body from one Place to another, if the Extending
Muscles of the Thigh-bones, those of the Tibiae and Feet, were not very Strong,
as is elsewhere taken Notice of in the Description of those Muscles. Hence we
may easily Conceive, why we can with less Difficulty continue a Progressive
Motion for a longer Time, than in a Standing Posture; the Former being an
Alternate Acting of most of the Muscles; the Latter a Continued or Tonic Action
of some few Muscles only. Hence also we may be Informed, why the greatest Part
of the Gravity of the Whole Body is sustained by one Leg only in Standing,
rather than with both at once: And diverse other Phenomenon of which my Time at
present will not give leave so much as to make mention.

A, The Forehead-bone.

B, The Bregma.

C, The Temple-bone.

D, The Yoke-bone.

E, The Bone of the Occiput; near E is the Mammiform Process.

F, The Bones of the Upper-Jaw.

G, The Lower Jaw Bone.

H, The Fourth Bone of the Upper-Jaw which Constitutes the greatest Part of the
Roof of the Mouth.

I I I I I, Five of the Spines of the Vertebrae of the Neck; the Uppermost
Arising from the Second Vertebra, being Short and Double, does not Appear in
this Posture.

I I Inferior, The Spines of the Two First Vertebrae of the Back or Thorax.

K K, etc. The rest of the Spines of the Vertebrae of the Back,

L L, Those of the Loins.

M, The First Rib.

N, The Scapula or Shoulder Blade.

n, Part of the Clavicula Articulated to the Spine of the Scapula.

O, The Internal Part of the Sternum or Os Pectoris.

P P, etc. The True Ribs.

Q Q, Some of the Inferior or Bastard Ribs.

R, The Os Ilium,

S, The Sacrum,

T, The Ischium,

V, The Coccygis.

W, The Internal Part of the Os Pubis.

X, The Os Humeri or Shoulder Bone.

Y, The Ulna.

Z, The Radius.

1, The Bones of the Hand.

2, The Thigh Bone.

3, The Patella.

4, The Tibia.

5, The Fibula.

6, The Bones of the Foot.

A Particular Description of each of these Bones, may be seen in the
Explications of the following Tables.

THE EIGHTY-NINTH TABLE.
THIS and the Three following Tables Represent the Bones of the Skull, and
those of the Upper and Under Jaws.

The Bones which Compose the Skull are the Ossa Frontis, Sincipitis, Occipilis,
Temporum, Sphenoides and Cribriforme: Of these the Four First are esteemed
Proper to the Skull; the Two Latter are said to be Common to the Skull and
Upper Jaw. The Bones of the Upper and Under Jaws will be more particularly
Treated of in Tab. 92.

Fig. 1.
The Unequal Fore-parts of the Forehead bone, with those of the Upper-Jaw and Os
Sphenoides, as they Appear Separated from the rest of the Bones of the Skull.

A, The Forehead-bone whose Superior Margin, Sutur'd with the the Ossa
Sincipitis, Composes near Two Thirds of a Circle.

B B B, Parts of the Superior Lamellae or Table which sticks out with Sharp
Edges and Points, which are received in the Interstitia of the like Framed by
the Ossa Sincipitis, which Conjunction is called Sutura.

C C, The Lower-part of the Frontal-bone, Composing the Superior Part of the
Orbit of the Eye.

D, A Process of the Os Frontis near the Great Cantbus of the Eye.

E, Another Process of the same Bone toward the Lesser Canthus.

F, Part of the Os Cuneiforme joined to the Frontal-bone, by Bidloo called Two
Eminencies of the last named Bone, on both Sides toward the Temples.

G, In this as well as the rest of the Bones of the Skull, may be seen diverse
Foraminulae for the coming in and going out of Blood Vessels, whether belonging
to the Dura Matter and Common Integuments of the Skull, or Duploi of the Skull
it self.

H, That Part of the Os Frontis, where a Cavity is Framed containing a
Pituitous Membrane, which is continuous with that of the Foramina Narium, and
Helps to Separate Part of the Mucus that is Excreted at the Nose. This Cavity
is often Divided with a Septum Osseum; as Appears in Tab. 91. Fig. 2. In some
Humane Skulls this Cavity scarce Appears, in others it is very Large,
especially in those who have Projecting Eyebrows. Those that take much Snuff
may have Part of it, get up into this Cavity, and there Lodge, and prove
Pernicious. In Quadrupedes these Cavities are Large and Divided by diverse Bony
Partitions, and Communicate with each other by Various Apertures: In Sheep I
have frequently found in those Cavities diverse Large Maggots, not unlike the
Great Eruca Terrestris. In Cows, Bulls, etc. these Cavities are very Large; in
these Animals the Pituitary Membrane which Invests these Cavities, frequently
becomes Inflamed and Thickened; whereby the Pituita is Pent up in these
Cavities, and causes a Disease in those Animals, called the Staggers; for which
the Country People (particularly in Sussex) perform this following Operation,
and the Animal is presently relieved.

The Head of the Beast being held in a convenient Posture, and the Operator
Furnished with a Mallet and Large Broad Chisel: With One or Two Strokes he
drives his Chisel into the Os Frontis, which Composes this Cavity; this done,
he raises up the Bone with its Superjacent Parts, by means of the Chisel; then
with his Fingers he Separates the Pituitary Membrane from the Bone, and draws
it out: This done, he presently Depresses the Raised up Parts with his Hand;
and the Divided Bone afterward Unites, and the Animal is seldom Troubled with
the like Disease afterward.

This Membrane filled with Pituita (they tell you) is a Water-bag lying on the
Brain.

The rest of the Bones Expressed in this Figure are Explained Tab. 92. Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.
The Internal Concave Parts of the same Bone Represented in the preceding
Figure.

A, That Part of the Os Frontis which receives the Forepart of the Brain.

B B, The Saw-like Appearance of the Os Frontis after Disjunction from the
Bones of the Sinciput, at the Coronal Suture.

C C, The Superior and Forepart of the Os Cuneiforme, joined to the
Frontal-bone.

D D, The Internal and Anterior Process's of the Os Cuneiforme, which Help to
Compose the Sella Equina, or Turcica; in this Sell the Pituitary Gland is
Lodged; the Contorted Trunks of the Carotid Arteries pass by it on each Side in
their Way to the Brain, where they send out diverse Small Branches which Help to
Compose the Rete Mirabile: This Process gives way to the Optic Nerves in their
Progress to the Eyes.

F F Inferior, Two Internal Long Processes of the Os Sphenoides joined with the
Os Frontis.

F F Superior, The Impressions which the Blood Vessels make in the Frontal-bone
in their Distribution on the Dura Matter.

G, An Internal Process continued from the Os Cribrosum or Ethmoides,
Distinguishing the Right Side of the Frontal-bone from the Left.

H, That Process of the Os Cribrosum, called Crista Galli.

I I, The Internal Part of the Os Cuneiforme or Sphenoides next the Brain.

K, The Lower-part of the Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw, which Composes the Roof
of the Mouth, by some called Os Palati.

L L, The Processus Pterygoides or Aliformis.

M M, The Internal and Back-parts of the Two First Bones of the Upper Jaw.

N, Part of the Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw, in which the Upper Teeth are
Fastened.

O O, Two of the Dentes Molares left in both Sides of the Upper Jaw.

P, The Septum of the Foramina Narium.

Q, That Part of the Os Cuneiforme that was joined to the Occipital Bone by
Syncondrosis, which Conjunction becomes entirely Bony in Aged Bodies.

R, The Two Hinder Processes of the Os Sphenoides, which Compose the Back-part
of the Sella Turcica, called Ephippium.

N. B. Between C D, and I, on either Side, is Expressed the Second Perforation of
the Os Sphenoides or Large Rima, through which pass the Third, Fourth, Sixth, and
a Branch of the Fifth Pair of Nerves, together with diverse Blood Vessels,
particularly a Large Branch of the Carotid Artery and Vein; which Latter is
Figured Tab. 9. Fig. 2. F. The other Foramen, here Expressed immediately under
the last mentioned, or between it and the Processus Pterygoides (L), is
reckoned the Third Foramen of the Os Cuneiforme, by which a Branch of the Fifth
Pair of Nerves passes out of the Skull: The rest of the Foramina of the Os
Cuneiforme are the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh; the First of these namely
the F^urth is Expressed in the First Figure of this Table, and again in Tab. 92.
Fig. 1. I, within the Orbit of the Eye, and in Fig. 2. of the same Table (V V);
by this Foramen, or rather Large Rima like the Second Foramen ( made by the
Fourth Bone of the Upper Iaw and Cuneiforme) pass the Branches of the Third,
Fifth and some of the Sixth Pan of Nerves, after passing through the Second
Foramen, to the Adjacent Muscles and Parts, together with Large Blood Vessels
of both Kinds, especially to the Temporal Muscle. The Fifth Foramen of the Os
Cuneiforme, is Composed at its meeting of the Os Petrosum and Occipitale,
Expressed Tab. 92. Fig. 2. X, X; which External Aperture there Represented, is
partly filled with a Cartilage, but its Internal Foramen Transmits the Carotid
Artery to the Lateral Part of the Sella Equina; which Artery First enters the
Cranium by the Os Petrosum, as Appears in the last mentioned Figure (Z Z); by
this Foramen the Intercostal Nerve passes out of the Skull. The Sixth
Perforation of the Os Sphenoides is Described in the last mentioned Table and
Figure (Y), and is Completely filled by a Branch of the Fifth Pair of Nerves:
The Seventh Foramen of this Bone is Externally Laterally Adjacent to the Sixth,
and is most commonly of an Oval Figure; by it a small Branch of the Carotid
Artery passes to the Dura Matter, Accompanied with a Vein Running Parallel with
it; which Frame those Sulci in the Bone, Expressed in this Figure (F F Superior),
and in that of Tab. 91. Fig. 2. F F.







THE NINETIETH TABLE.
THE Six First Figures Represent the Internal and External Surfaces of the rest
of the Proper Bones of the Skull, when Separated from each other at their
Sutures.

Fig. 1.
The Bone of the Sinciput or Bregma of the Right Side.

A A, The External Convext Part of the Bregma, Circumscribed by

B B, The Coronal Suture in the Forepart, joining it to the Os Frontis;

C C, The Sagittal Suture in the Superior Part, by which the Right and Left
Bregma are Distinguished;

D D, The Lambdoidal Backwards, by which it is Connected to the Os Occipitis.

D, A, B, The Inferior Side of the Bregma, on which the Superior Part of the Os
Temporum, and Part of the Os Cuneiforme Rests.

Fig. 2.
The Internal Surface of the Left Sincipital-bone next the Dura Matter and Brain.

A A, The Internal Concave Part of the Os Sincipitis.

B, C, D, The Furrows which the Blood Vessels of the Dura Matter, make on the
Internal Surface of this Bone; where may be observed many Foramina these
Vessels have, for their Entrance into the Meditullium^ of the Bone; sometimes
we have seen these Vessels Perforate the Cranium Directly, in more than in one
or two Places, especially toward the Occipu^, where Two of their Large
Foramina are commonly to be Observed on the External Surface of the Bone; but
here also they sometimes pass Obliquely into the Meditullium: The Number and
Magnitude of these Foramina for the Blood Vessels, may be seen to Increase near
the Impression which the Longitudinal Sinus makes in the Cranium.

E E, That Part of the Bregma that was Contiguous to the Os Temporale, and
Upper Part of the Os Sphenoides.

Fig. 3.
The Occipital Bone Separated at its Conjunction from the rest of the Bones of
the Cranium.

A, The External Convext Surface of the Occipital-bone, where the Muscles
Extending the Head, are Implanted, and Part of the Musculus Cucullaris does
Arise.

B, The First Great Foramen of the Occipital-bone, by which the Medulla
Oblongata Descends out of the Cranium into the Great Cavities of all the
Vertebrae.

C C, Two Depressed Protuberancies of the Occipital-bone, which are received
into the Shallow Cavities of the First Vertebrae of the Neck.

D, Two Depressures Framed at the Origin of the Musculi Recti Mi^ores of the
Head.

E, A Third Foramen Appearing in the Internal Part of the Left Side of the Os
Occipitis; by which the Nerve of the Ninth Pair on that Side passes out of the
Cranium; that of the Right Side not Appearing in this Position of the Bone. The
Second Foramen of the Os Occipitis, is Framed at its Conjunction with the Os
Temporum, and Helps to Compose the Specus which receives the Bulbous Part of
the Lateral Si?us, at the Beginning of the Internal Jugular Vein.

Fig. 4.
The Internal and Concave Part of the Os Occipitis next the Dura Matter, on Part
of the Cerebrum and Cerebellum.

A, B, C, A Rising in the Bone Framed Collateral to the Lower-part of the
Longitudinal Sinus, where it meets with the Two Lateral Sinuss's.

D F, Two Depressures parting to each Side from the Inferior Part of the last
mentioned Rising; in which the External Surface of the Lateral Sinuss's are
Entertained.

E, That Part where the Longitudinal and Lateral Sinuss's meet, which
Conjunction is called Torcular Herophili.

G G, Diverse Foramina by which the Blood Vessels enter the Meditullium of the
Bone.

Fig. 5.
The External Surface of the Os Temporale or Squamosum of the Right Side, when
freed from the Os Occipitis, Sincipitis, and Cuneiforme.

A, The Meatus Auditorius, being the continued Passage from the C^^c^a (Expressed
Tab. 12. Fig. 1. C, D, E,) to the Membrana Tympa^i: In this Meatus (by some
called Alve^re Auris, and Porus Auditorius,) is contained the Glandulous
Membrane, in which the Cerumen commonly called the Ear-Wax, is Separated from
the Blood; which Membrane is frequently Ulcerated, being very liable to
Obstructions is in Circulating Blood and Separated Matter, by reason of the
vast Numbers of Vessels that are Necessary in the Composition of its Glandulous
Structure; here also Arise Excrescencies, some of which we have seen very much
like those of the Foramina Narium, commonly called Polypi from their Figure:
Others I have Observed to be like Mulber^^s, and the Patient has suffered great
Pain when they have been but touched with a Probe: Nevertheless I have
frequently Consumed them with Causticks, and the Patient has recovered his
Hearing. These Excrescencies last mentioned, commonly Arise after
Impostumations on the Glandulous Membrane of the Ear.

B, A Sinus covered with a Cartilage, which receives the Head of the Long
Process of the Lower Jaw, by the Mediation of a Cartilaginous Body, Described
in our Appendix Fig. 8. S, T.

C, D, That Part of the Os Temporale placed between the Os Occipitale and
Cuneiforme, called the Third Process of that Bone, in which the Internal Organs
of Hearing are contained.

E, The Second Process of the Os Squamosum or Temporale, which joining with the
Process of the First Bone of the Upper Jaw, Composes that Bone called Iugale.

F, The First Process of the Temple-bone, called Mastoides or Mammiforme, whose
Internal Part is Cavernulous, and Opens into the Tympanum.

C, G, That Part of the Temple-bone which is Contiguous to the Os Occipitis.

G, H, That Part of the Temple or Squamous-bone placed on the Os Sincipitis.

H, C, The other Side Sutur'd with the Os Cuneiforme.

Fig. 6.
The Internal Face of the Os Squamosum next the Brain.

A, The Process of the Temple-bone, and may be called Processus Petrosus, as
well from its Appearance as Compactness; wherefore the Whole Temple-bone is by
some called Petrosum. In this Process are contained all the Internal Organs of
Hearing between A and C: As the Membrana Tympani, the Tympanum, the Musculus
Obliquus, the Musculus Internus and Musculus Stapidis; the Incus, Maleus,
Stapis and Ossiculum Quartum; the Meatus a Palato ad Aurem; the Foramen Ovale
and Rotundum; the Labyrinth and its Vestibulum; Three Semicircular Ducts, and
the Cochlea, together with its Lamina Spiralis, and the Expansion of the
Auditory Nerve within the Labyrinth and Cochlea.

B B, That Part of the Os Squamosum which cleav'd to the Bone of the Sinciput.

d, The Foramen by which the Auditory Nerve Enters the Os Petrosum, in its Way
toward the Labyrinth and Cochlea.

Having already said something of the Meatus Auditorius and the Membrane which
Invests it; the Order of Parts would require our next Examination of the
Membrana Tympani, and the Muscles within the Cavity of the Tympanum, etc. but
the succeeding Figures Representing the Four Little Bones of the Labyrinth,
Cochlea, and their Foramina only; we must Prosecute the Order set before us,
and refer to our Appendix to what properly belongs to this Place. ( Viz.) The
Muscles of the Internal Ear and Membrana Tympani.

Fig. 7.
The Labyrinth of the Left Ear of a Foetus.

A, B, C C, The Three Semicircular Ducts Cleared of the Membranes and Part of
the Os Petrosum; in which Bone they are entirely Enclosed in the Adult, and no
Marks of their Tracts Appear, as in the Foetus.

D, That Part of the Os Petrosum in which the Cochlea is contained, Part of
which is here Expressed, Broken up.

Fig. 8.
The Labyrinth and Cochlea of the Left Ear.

A, B, C, The Three Semicircular Ducts whose Cavities are Invested with a
Membrane, in which the Auditory Nerve is Expanded: The Extremities of these
Ducts Open into the Vestibulum of the Labyrinth, or Cavity immediately within
the Foramen Ovale, Figured in our Appendix: One of the Spiral Ducts of the
Cochlea also Opens into the Vestibulum.

D, Part of the Cochlea Opened, which consists of Two Spiral Ducts, or One Duct
Divided by a Bony Septum; which from its Figure is called Lamina Spiralis: One
of these Ducts (as above Noted) Opens into the Vestibulum of the Labyrinth, at
its Basis; the other in like Manner Ends its Basis at the Membrane within the
Foramen Rotundum. The Auditory Nerve is Expanded in like Manner in the Cochlea,
as in the Labyrinth.

Fig. 9.
The Four Little Bones of the Ear contained in the Tympanum, taken out, and
Represented in their Proper Articulations with each other.

A, The Malleolus, the Deprest Head of which, is received in the Shallow Cavity
of the Incus.

B, The Incus, Articulated with the Stapes by the Mediation of the Os
Orbiculare.

C, The Stapes.

.... D, The Os Orbiculare or Fourth Bone of the Tympanum.

These Bones we shall Figure in Situ in our Appendix.

Fig. 10.
The Malleolus taken from the rest of the Little Bones of the Ear, with Parts
of Two of its Muscles remaining to it.

A,., The Roundish Deprest Head of the Malleolus.

B..., A Ligament which Connects the Head of the Malleolus to the Incus.

C, The Neck of the Malleolus.

D D, The Two Process's of the Malleus, in which the External and Internal
Muscles are Inserted: Besides these Process's, its Long Production called the
Manubrium or Handle of the Malleus, is Remarkable, which Adheres to the Inside
of the Membra^a Tymp^ni.

Fig. 11.
The Incus in whose Lower-part (as its here Figured) is a Shallow Depressure
which receives the Roundish Head of the Malleus: Its Two Process's are here
well Expressed; of which the Shortest rests in a Sinus of the Os Petrosum, within
the Tympanum; but the Longer is Articulated with the Stapes, by the Mediation
of the Os Orbiculare.

Fig. 12.
The Stapes so called from its Figure, whose Basis Rests on the Margin of the
Fenestra Ovalis, as is here Expressed, and the Os Orbiculare lying under it;
which Latter is Delineated som^what bigger than the Life.

THE NINETY-FIRST TABLE.
Fig. 1.
SHOWS the External Unequal Surface of the Upper Part of the Skull, and its
Proper Sutures, Elegantly Expressed.

A, B, The Forehead-bone, by some called Os Coronale, Inverecundum, and Os
Puppis.

C, The Os Sincipitis or Verticis, by some called Bregma, either from the soft
moist Brain lying under it, or from its thin moist Constitution in Infants, and
sometimes in the Adult.

D, Part of the Os Occipitis, by some called Basillare, Os Prorae, Os Memoriae
and Os Pyxidis.

E E, The Coronal Suture.

F, The Sagittal Suture or Sutura Longitudinalis.

G G, The Sutura Lambdoides.

Though the Sutures here Expressed are Regular according to their Common
Appearance, yet in diverse Subjects we find Nature sport very considerably;
sometimes the Longitudinal Suture is Double, at other times it passes Obliquely
toward the Coronal Suture, and in some Subjects it Frames an Os Triquetrum at
its Conjunction with the Coronal Suture, or else diverse small Bones of Various
Figures; the like may be sometimes Observed in the Sutura Lambdoides, as also
in the Coronal Suture; of which Latter, the Figure here gives a Specimen on the
Right Side.

Fig. 2.
The Internal Concave Surface of the Upper Part of the Skull when Sawed from
its Basis.

A A, The Inside of the Ossa Bregmatis.

B B B, The Sutures as they Appear withinside the Skull Approaching to a simple
straight Line, which Conjunction of Bones is called Harmonia.

C, The Internal Part of the Os Frontis.

E, A Portion of the Inside of the Os Occipitis.

F F, The Channels Framed by the Blood Vessels of the Dura Matter: These
Insculptures or Furrows of the Bone, I found very Large in the Skull of a
Person I lately Dissected, who Died Apoplectick, in whom the Blood Vessels of
the Dura Matter were proportionably Augmented to the Magnitude of a Goose-Quill.
In this Subject diverse Large Foveae Appeared in the Skull, breaking out as it
were from the Impression of the Longitudinal Sinus; One of which Foveae
exceeded Half an Inch in its Diameter. When the Top of the Cranium was opposed
to the Light, the Foveae above mentioned, as well as the Large Furrows of the
Vessels Appeared Transparent, not unlike the Horn commonly made Use of in
Lanterns; nor indeed did the Thickness of the Skull in those Parts much exceed
it: By this, we may be Informed with what Caution we ought to Use the Trepan in
Perforating the Skull, especially near the Longitudinal Suture, as also
Laterally on the Bregma, where those Vessels usually take their Course; and
that more especially when the Patient has suffered under Habitual Headaches,
which was Remarkable in the Person last mentioned, even from his Infancy; for
doubtless these Cavities and Furrows have an early Date, from an Irregular
Formation of the Blood Vessels; whence the Refluent Blood is Subject to be
Retarded, and the Neighboring Parts as the Pericranium, etc. suffer Tension
and Pain.

B Superior and E, The Channel or Impression which the Longitudinal Sinus makes
in the Middle and Upper Part of the Skull, according to the Length of the
Sagittal Suture.





THE NINETY-SECOND TABLE.
Fig. 1.
SHOWS the Forepart of the Skull, in which Part of the Proper Bones of the
Skull already Described, and diverse of those of the Upper Jaw and the Bones of
the Lower Jaw, are well Expressed.

A, B, C, The First Bone of the Upper Jaw, constituting the Inferior Part of
the Orbit of the Eye, and Part of its Lesser Canthus, together with Part of the
Os Iugale and Cheek: B, That Part of it which Composes Part of the Os Iugale.

D, The Second Bone of the Upper Jaw, which may be called Os Lachrymale,
because the Ductus Arising from the Two Puncta Lachrymalia, passes through it
into the Foramina of the Nostril on that Side, together with a Branch of the
Fourth Pair of Nerves, and some Remarkable Blood Vessels.

Anatomists disagree in their Descriptions and Number of the Bones of the Upper
Jaw; Galen in Libel. de Ossib. reckons XI. De Partium Usu IX. In Introductorio
sive Medico Galeno Adscripto XII. to which Latter Vesalius Subscribes; but
Columbus mentions XIII. and at the same time in his Description, omits the
Third Pair of Vesalius and Others, and instead of them adds Two others, or
another Pair called Ossa Spongiosa, placed within the Nostrils: We cannot but
agree with Vesalius's Description, being so very clear and intelligible by the
Appearance of most, if not all Skulls; nor can we find any Reason to omit what
Columbus has added, so that the Bones of the Upper Jaw are XV in Number; viz.
the VI. Pair of Vesalius, the Two Ossa Spongiosa and Septum Narium of Columbus,
by him called Vomer, from the likeness it has to a Plow-Share or Coulter.

The Third Bone of the Upper Jaw is scarcely Expressed in this Figure, or in that
of Tab. 89. Fig. 1. by reason of the Foreshorten'd Site (as Painters Term it)
it is in, in this Position of the Cranium: This Third Bone of the Upper Jaw is
commonly of a Quadrangular Figure and very Thin, placed within the Orbit: The
precise Place of its Situation is Forewards, adjoining to the Second Bone of
the Upper Jaw, or Os Lachrymale; Backwards it sometimes Touches the Os
Cune^forme at One Angle only; Above it is Sutur'd with the Os Frontis; Below
with the Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw.

E, The Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw, which is the Largest of all the Bones of
the Jaw, Composing the Lower-part of the Orbit, the greatest Part of the
Palate, and containing all the Upper Teeth in its Sockets; its Upper Part is
joined to the Lower-part of the Forehead-bone, the Bone of the Nose, and Second
Bone of the Upper Jaw; Laterally to the First Bone of the Upper Jaw; Backward
to the Third, and Os Cuneiforme, and Lastly to its Fellow: The Large Foramen of
it (here Expressed immediately under the Orbit of the Eye) serves to Transmit a
Branch of the Fifth Pair of Nerves to the Muscles of the Lips, etc. The Second,
Third, Fourth and Fifth Foramina, are in Common with it and other Bones; of
these, the First is Composed at its Conjunction with the Os Lachrymale; (D) the
Second with the Os Cuneiforme; (I) the Third at its Conjunction with its
Partner near the Dentes Incisores Fig. 2. G; and the Fourth at its Conjunction
with the Os Palati (Ibid. Fig. 2. h h) Backwards: It has a Large Cavity which
Opens into the Foramen of the Nose; in the Lower-part of which Aperture the Os
Spongiosum, mentioned by Realdus Columbus, is placed: This Cavity is called
Antrum Maxillae Superioris; by some called Antrum Hig^^orianum, for what reason
I know not, since 'twas Described long before Dr. Highmore, as Appears by
Vesalius, Columbus, Baubinus, etc.

F, The Fifth Bone of the Upper Jaw, which with its Partner Composes the Upper
Bony Part of the Nose, its Sutures or Conjunctions with the other Neighboring
Bones and Figure are here so well Expressed, (...) it needs no other Description.

G, The Septum Narium whose Bony Forepart here Expressed, is Composed partly by
the Os Cribriforme, and partly by a Process of the Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw.

H, The Sixth Bone of the Upper Jaw or Os Spongiosum; this and its Partner are
mentioned by Columbus, and called Spongiosa: These we have constantly observed
to be Distinct Bones in Humane Skulls, as well as in those of Quadrupedes; in
which Latter, these Ossa Spongiosa have a very Remarkable Disposition; they
being Broad, Thin, Bony Bodies, Rol'd up very much like a Piece of Paper,
Expressed Tab. 61. Fig. 2. D D: Nor is this Involuted Disposition of these Bones
only in Quadrupedes, but in Humane Bodies also it is so Disposed (though not so
much Turned in) and Covered every where with the Pituitary Membrane, which
Invests the Inside of the Foramina Narium; on which the Branches of the
Olfactory Nerves are Expanded.

I, A Chink or Foramen Composed by the Os Cuneiforme, together with the Fourth
Bone, and Part of the First Bone of the Upper Jaw; commonly called the Fourth
Foramen of the Os Sphenoides, or the Third Foramen of the Fourth Bone of the
Upper Jaw.

K, The Os Frontis.

L, Part of the Left Bregma.

M, The Os Squamosum or Temporale.

Fig. 2.
The Inferior Surface of the Basis of the Skull.

A, The Os Occipitis.

B, Part of the Bregma.

C, That Part of the Os Temporale called Processus Mammillaris.

D, The Os Iugale Composed of a Process of the Os Temporum and First Bone of
the Upper Jaw.

E, The Four Dentes Incisores.

F Inferior, The Eight Dentes Molares, Four on each Side.

The rest are the Two Dentes Canini.

G, The Fourth Foramen of the Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw.

G, F, The Lower-part of the Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw next the Palate, by
some therefore called Os Palati.

H, The Seventh Pair of Bones of the Upper Jaw, called Ossa Palati; these Bones
are Perforated on each Side (h h) near the Dentes Molares; which Perforation is
in Common with the Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw, and is called the Fifth
Perforation of that Bone, as above mentioned.

These Seven Pair of Bones of the Upper Jaw make Fourteen on each Side, to
which Realdus Columbus adds another which has no Partner, and is reckoned the
Fifteenth Bone of the Upper Jaw.

I, The Fifteenth Bone of the Upper Jaw, by Columbus liken'd to a Coulter or
Plow-Share, making the Back-part of the Septum Narium.

K, The Processus Pterygoides or Aliformis, reckoned the First of the External
Process's of the Os Sphenoides.

The Musculus Pterigoideus Internus, Arises from the Internal Part of the Sinus
of these Process's, Vid. App. Fig. 8. g.

L, The Lower-part of the Processus, or Appendix Styloides; its Upper Part
being Broken off on both Sides in this Figure.

M, The Margin of the Meatus Auditorius in the Os Temporale of the Left Side.

N, The Sinus of the Os Petrosum or Temporale, which receives the Head of the
Long Process of the Lower Jaw.

O O, Two Process's of the Os Occipitis Articulated with the First Vertebra of
the Neck.

P, The Anterior Appendix or Process of the Os Occipitis; by Veslingius in his
Animad versions on his Figures of Chap. XIII. Erroneously called Os Sphenoides.

Q, The Processus Mammiformis or Mastoides of the Os Temporum, on the Left Side.

R R R, The Great Foramen of the Os Occipitis, by which the Medulla Oblongata
passes out of the Skull.

S S, The Asperities and Sinus's of the Bones of the Occiput, made by the
Insertions of the Muscles Moving the Head.

T T, The Internal Parts of the First Bones of the Upper Jaw.

V V, The Fourth Foramen of the Os Cuneiforme; Vid. Fig. 1. I.

W, Part of the Os Cuneiforme next the Aliform Process.

X X, The Fifth Foramen of the Os Cuneiforme, Composed at the Meeting of that
Bone with the Os Petrosum, and Forepart of the Occipital-bone on both Sides.

Y, The Sixth Foramen of the Os Cuneiforme at the Root of the Processus
Pterygoides, by which a Branch of the Fifth Pair of Nerves pass out of the
Skull.

Z Z, The Foramina of the Ossa Temporum, by which the Carotid Arteries First
Enter the Basis of the Skull.

Fig. 3.
The Inferior Part of the Lower Jaw.

a, The Internal Part of the Lower Jaw, whence the Musculus Mylobyoideus does
Arise.

b, A Large Foramen in the Internal Part of the Lower Jaw, by which the
Blood Vessels and a Branch of the Fifth Pair of Nerves pass to the Teeth, Fig.
1. b. The External Foramina of this Bone, by which the Branches of those
Vessels pass out of the Bone again to the Muscles of the Lips.

C, A Fore-shorten'd Appearance of the Processus Coronae of the Lower Jaw,
called the Short Process.

D E, The Head of the Long Process of the Lower Jaw called Condylus, which is
Articulated with the Os Temporum by the Mediation of a Moving Cartilage; Vid.
App. Fig. 8. T, S.

F, The Cervix or Neck of the Long Process of the Lower Jaw.

Fig. 4.
The Teeth of the Upper and Lower Jaw of one Side only, when taken out of their
Alveoli or Sockets.

A A, etc. The Dentes Incisores;

B B, The Canini;

C C, etc. The Molares.

Fig. 5.
The Right Side of the Lower Jaw in which the Alveoli or Sockets, after the
Extraction of the Teeth, are Represented.

A, The Processus Coronae, to which the Temporal Muscle is fixed.

B, The Processus Condylus.

C C, The Alveoli or Sockets of the Teeth.

Fig. 6.
A A, etc. Diverse Teeth Broken or Divided Variously, to show their Internal
Cavities or Sinus's.

Fig. 7.
One of the Grinding Teeth in like Manner Broken to Exhibit its Internal
Structure, Figured much Bigger than the Life.

A, The External Stony Part.

B, The Bony Striae of the Tooth Divested of its Stony Cortex.

C, The Internal Bony Part of the Tooth becoming more Porous, as it Approaches
its Middle Cavity.

D, The Middle Cavity or Hollow of the Tooth, Covered with a Membrane on which
the Blood Vessels and Nerves of the Tooth are Distributed; by which the Tooth
derives the Matter which makes it Germinate and repair that loss it sustains by
frequent Use on its Cortical or Stony Part: Thus when one Tooth is wanting in
either Jaw, the Opposite Tooth Grows Longer for want of its Resistance in
Mastication. When this Internal Membrane within the Cavity of the Tooth is
Exposed through the Breaking away of the Upper Part of the Tooth, it is most
Exquisitely sensible to the Touch of any hard Body, or cold Liquor; and very
frequently a Carnous Fungus will Arise from it: In these Cases the drawing out
of the Tooth is the best Remedy.

E, The External Membrane lying on that Part of the Tooth within the Socket or
Alveolus: They who Doubt of the Existence of such a Membrane may be satisfied
therein; After a Tooth is drawn from a Living or lately Dead Body, and laid in
Water for some Days, this Membrane will be very Conspicuous even to the Naked
Eye.

F, The Basis of the Tooth;

G, The Apex of one of its Roots where the Blood Vessels Arising from the
Parietes of the Alveolus or Socket, are Expressed, Running into that Part of it
which lies within the Alveolus.

Fig. 8.
The Stony Parts of the Teeth of a Foetus, which lying within the Jaw-bones,
are Covered with the Periostium, as Appeared in the Dissection I sometime since
made of a Humane Foetus; Vid. Tab. 101. L L.

A A, The Stony Capsula of one of the Dentes Incisores.

B B, That of the Caninus.

C C, etc. The Superior Stony Parts of the Dentes Molares in a Foetus.

Fig. 9.
The Os Hyoides or Bone of the Tongue, together with Two Process's of the
Scutiformal Cartilage.

A, The Middle Bone of the Os Hyoides,

B, Its Superior Part next the Tongue,

C, Its Internal Concave Part toward the Fauces,

D, Part of the Superior Long Process of the Scutiformal Cartilage of the Left
Side loosly Tied to the Extremity of the Os Hyoides of the same Side; that of
the Right Side is not Lettered in this Figure.

E, One of the Two Lateral Bones which Helps to Compose the Os Hyoides.

THE NINETY-THIRD TABLE.
FROM the Bones of the Head, we Pass to those which Support it and the Trunk of
of the Body. ( viz.) The Bones of the Neck, Back, Loins, Os Sacrum and
Coccygis; all these together have generally obtained the Name of Spina. Since
it is Necessary the Head and Trunk of the Body should be variously Moved, it was
therefore Requisite their Supporter should not Consist of One Bone only, but
that it should be Divided into many, which are called Vertebrae; of these,
there are Reckoned Twenty-four; ( viz.) Seven of the Neck; Twelve of the Back,
and Five of the Loins. In some Subjects we have Found but Six Vertebrae
belonging to the Neck; in another we Found Thirteen of the Thorax, and as many
Ribs; as Appears in a Skeleton now Hanging in the Middle of the Anatomical
Theater of the Surgeons of London; The like I don't Doubt may, or has been
Observed of the Loins: The Inferior Part of the Spine is Composed of the Os
Sacrum and Coccygis.

Fig. 1.
The Inferior Part of the First Vertebra of the Neck, called Atlas, because it
Supports the whole Head.

A, Its Forepart:

B, Its Back-part, wanting a Spinal Process:

CC, Its Transverse Processes Perforated to Transmit the Cervical Artery and
Vein.

D D, Two Oval Process's, whose Surfaces are Smooth and Covered with a
Cartilage, which Process's move to either Side on those of Fig. 3. B B.

Fig. 2.
The Upper Part of the First Vertebra of the Neck.

A, The Inside of the Back-part of the First Vertebra of the Neck next the
Medulla Spinalis.

B, The Outside and Forepart of the same Vertebra:

C C, Two Process's whose Two Shallow Cavities are Articulated with Two
somewhat^ Convext Prominencies of the Os Occipitis, Tab. 92, Fig. 2. O O; in
which Articulation the Head is Moved in Nodding Fore-wards, Back-wards and
Side-ways.

D, A Sinus in the Upper Part of this Vertebra, in which the Contorted Trunk of
One of the Cervical Artery, passes toward the Great Foramen of the Os
Occipitis.

N. B. It is Necessary the Great Foramen of this First Vertebra of the Neck
should be much Larger than any of the Inferior, least the Beginning of the
Medulla Spinalis should be Incommoded in Turning the Head to One Side; in which
Action, this First Vertebra Moves with the Head on the Axis or Toothlike
Process of the Second Vertebra of the Neck.

Fig. 3.
The Superior Part of the Second Vertebra of the Neck.

A, The Tooth-like Process on the Forepart of this Second Vertebra Inserted
behind the Forepart of the First Vertebra (A, B, Fig. 1, 2.) whose Apex A, is
Fastened by a Ligament to the Margin of the Forepart of the Great Foramen of
the Os Occipitis: Vid. Appen. Fig. 8. E.

B B, Two Process's, whose Cartilaginous Surfaces are of an Oval Figure, and
Correspond to those of Fig. 1. D D. whereby the Rotatory Motion of the Head is
Performed. The other Remarkable Parts of this Figure may be known by the
Explanation of the Following.

Fig. 4.
The Inferior Part of the Second Vertebra of the Neck:

A, The Tooth-like Process called Epistropheus.

B, The Inferior Surface of the Forepart of the Second Vertebra, joined to the
Superior and Forepart of the Third. Fig. 5. C.

C C, Its Transverse Process's Perforated to Transmit the Blood Vessels, as in
Fig. 1. C C.

D D, Its Two Oblique Descending Process's placed on the Two Oblique Ascending
of Fig. 5. A.

E, The Internal Part of the Second Vertebra next the Medulla Spinalis.

F, The Double - Spinal Process, to which the Superior Musculi Interspinales
are Inserted.

Fig. 5.
The Superior Part of the Third Vertebra of the Neck.

A, One of its Oblique Ascending Process's.

B, Its Transverse Process Perforated like as in the Two First Vertebra.

C, The Superior Part of the Body of the Third Vertebra, on which the Inferior
Part of the Second is Placed.

N. B. The Rest of the Figure may be Understood by the Explanation of the
Preceding.

Fig. 6.
The Lower Part of the Third Vertebra of the Neck;

A, Its Oblique Descending Process:

B, Its Transverse Process Perforated as above Noted.

Fig. 7.
The Superior Part of the First Vertebra of the Back.

A, Its Transverse Process not Perforated like those of the Neck.

B, Its Spinal Process on the Back-part.

C, A Shallow Depressure on the Forepart of the Transverse Process which
Receives the Tubercle of the First Rib. Vid. Tab. 94. Fig. 2. B.

D, One of the Oblique Ascending Process's, which Receives the Descending of
the Last Vertebra of the Neck.

E, The Sinus, in which some of the Axillary Nerves pass out of the Specus or
Great Foramen of the Vertebrae.

Fig. 8.
The Inferior Part of the same First Vertebra of the Back or Thorax:

A, Its Transverse Process:

B, Its Spinal Process.

C, A Shallow Depressure in the Transverse Process, to which the Second
Tubercle of the First Rib is Connected:

D, Its Oblique Descending Process, Received by the Ascending of the Next
Vertebra.

After Taking out the Viscera from the Cavity of the Thorax of the Late Earl of
Peterborough, I was Desir^d by One of his Physicians Dr. Iohnston (who
constantly Attended his Lordship some Time before his Death) to Examine the
Vertebrae of the Thorax, because his Lordship did not only Complain of very
Great Pains about the Eighth and Ninth Vertebrae of that Part, and particularly
the Right Hypochondrium, etc. but One of the Spinal Process's of those
Vertebrae was Observed to be very Prominent some Weeks before his Death; nor
could he Endure any Motion of the Trunk of his Body: Besides at that Time the
Lower Limbs were Destitute of Motion, as well as Exquisite Sense of Feeling. On
Freeing the Descending Trunk of the Arteria Magna and Ductus Thoracicus from
the Fore-parts of the Vertebrae of the Thorax, I Found a Tumor, whose Thick
Hard Membrane was chiefly Framed of the Ligaments of the Vertebrae* I Divided
the Tumor, and a Brownish Colored Matter Flowed from it: On farther
Examination I Found the Upper and Forepart of the Ninth, and in like Manner
the Lower Part of the Eighth Vertebrae of the Thorax Consumed and Gone;
insomuch that I could without Difficulty put the Top of my Forefinger into the
Foramen, and Feel the Medulla Spinalis Covered with its Membranes only. I Doubt
not but Part of the Matter contained in this Tumor, had Descended into the
Lower-part of the Specus of the Vertebrae of the Loins and Os Sacrum (since it
lay Open) whereby the Inferior Nervous Distributions were affected, and their
Proper Office Perverted; but Decency Forbid our Scrutiny in this Case, since
the Bodies of those Vertebrae must have been Cut away with a Chizel to have
made such a Discovery.

Fig. 9.
The Upper Part of One of the Vertebrae of the Loins:

A, Its Transverse Process: The Rest of its Parts may be known by the
Explanation of the Fifth and Seventh Figures.

Fig. 10.
The Inferior Part of the same Vertebra of the Loins, whose Explanation may be
Referred to Fig. 8.

Fig. 11, 12.
The Superior Parts of the Two Lower Vertebrae of the Loins;

A A, Their Tranverse Process's:

B B, Their Oblique Ascending Process's:

C C, The Bodies of the Vertebrae.

D D, Their Spinal Process's.





THE NINETY-FOURTH TABLE.
THE Ribs are Twelve in Number on either Side; sometimes we have found
Thirteen, at other times but Eleven on each Side; and frequently Twelve on one
Side and Eleven on the other: The Seven Superior are called, The True Ribs,
which are joined with the Sternum or Os Pectoris, by the Mediation of
Cartilages. The Inferior Ribs are the Nothae, Spuriae, or Bastard Ribs. The
Nine Superior Ribs have a Twofold Articulation to the Vertebrae of the Back;
the one Collateral to the Fore-parts of the Bodies of the Vertebrae; the other
to the Fore-parts of their Transverse Process's. The Two and sometimes Three
Inferior Ribs, are only Articulated to the Bodies of the Vertebrae; and don't
touch their Transverse Process's. The Lowest and Last Rib has not its
Cartilaginous Extremity Fastened to its Superior Rib, as the rest of the
Bastard Ribs have, but its Extreme Point gives an Origin to Part of the Oblique
Descending Muscle of the Abdomen.

Fig. 1.
The Inferior Part of the First Rib of the Right Side.

Fig. 2.
The Upper Part of the same Rib.

A A, That Part of the First Rib next the Sternum.

B B, Its Protuberance Articulated in a Sinus of the Transverse Process of the
First Vertebra.

C C, Its Little Head received in a Sinus of the Anterior Bodies of the First
Vertebra, Laterally.

D D, Its middle Broad Flat Part.

Fig. 3.
The Lower-part of the Sixth or Seventh True Rib of the Right Side.

Fig. 4.
The Superior Part of the same Rib.

A A, That Extremity of the Bony Part of the Rib joined to the Cartilage,
placed between it and the Sternum.

B B, The other Extremity Articulated to the Vertebra of the Back Laterally.

C, A Tubercle Articulated to the Transverse Process of the Vertebra.

E, Fig. 3. A Sinus Framed in the Inferior Part of the Rib for the Passage of
the Blood Vessels, which ought to be avoided in Perforating the Thorax, in Case
of an Empyema, etc.

Fig. 5.
The Lower Edge and Internal Part of the Eleventh Rib of the Right Side.

Fig. 6.
The Upper Edge, and Part of the External and Internal Parts of the same Rib.

Fig. 7, 8.
The Internal and External Parts of the Twelfth Rib.

THE NINETY-FIFTH TABLE.
REPRESENTS the Scapulae, Claviculae and Os Pectoris, or Sternum.

Fig. 1.
The External Convext Part of the Left Scapula or Shoulder Blade.

A B, The Outside of the Scapula a little Arched or Convext.

C, The Spina Scapulae;

D, Its Extremity called Acromion, Articulated to the Extremity of the
Clavicula.

E, The Processus Coracoides or Crow's-Bill-like Process, by some called
Ancyroides or Anchor-like.

F, The Processus Brevis, or Short Process of the Shoulder Blade which receives
the Head of the Arm-bone.

The Rest of the Parts which Circumscribe the Scapula, are Explained in the
following Figure.

Fig. 2.
The Internal Concave Part of the Right Shoulder Blade.

A B B, Various Eminencies on the Inside of the Scapula, whence the Fibers of
the Musculus Subscapularis take their Origin.

C, The Inferior Angle of the Scapula.

D, The Superior Angle of the Scapula.

E Superior, The Processus Coracoides.

F F G, The Foramina for the Blood Vessels, which pass in and out from the
Meditullium of the Bone.

G Inferior, The Sinus of the Short Process of the Scapula, in which the Head
of the Os Humeri is received.

G Superior, The Internal or Lower Part of the Acromion of the Scapula.

H, The Cervix or Neck of the Short Process.

N. B. From C to D, is called the Basis Scapulae; From D to F, the Costa
Superior; From H to C, the Costa Inferior Scapulae.

Fig. 3.
The Superior Part of the Right Clavicula or Channel-bone: Some call the
Claviculae, Ossa Humerorum: They are also called Furculae.

Fig. 4.
The Inferior Part of the Left Clavicle.

A, That Part of the Clavicle Articulated to the Superior Part of the Os
Pectoris or Sternum, in which Articulation a Cartilaginous Body is placed not
Unlike that of the Lower Jaw with the Os Temporum. Vid. App. Fig. 8. S, T.

B, That Extremity of the Clavicula joined to the Acromion of the Scapula, by
Two almost Plain Cartilaginous Bodies appos'd to each other, and Connected by
Ligaments: This Conjunction of the Clavicle with the Acromion of the
Shoulder Blade we have more than Once seen suffer a Dislocation: when the
Patient has fallen from some High Place, and the Top of the Shoulder or
Acromion of the Scapula has First come to the Ground. The Scapula with the Arm
in such Case will be Deprest, and the Outmost Extremity of the Clavicle will be
seen to Arise up: This Dislocation we Mention, because we don't find it taken
Notice of (or at least not commonly) by Authors.

C, The Middle Superior and External Part of the Right Clavicula.

D, The Middle Inferior and External Surface of the Left Clavicula. The Use of
the Claviculae is to support the Scapulae, together with the Ossa Humerorum.

Fig. 5.
The External and Forepart of the Os Pectoris or Sternum, whose Appearance in
the Adult Differs very much from that of the Foetus; as may be seen Tab. 101.6.
In Aged Bodies it is entirely United into One Bone; in some Adults it is divided
into Two; in others (as in this Subject) it has Three Distinct Bones.

A, The Superior and Largest Bone of the Sternum.

B, A Sinus which receives the Internal Round End of the Clavicula.

C, the Superior Part, or almost Semicircular Sinus of the Sternum.

D, The Middle Bone of the Os Pectoris.

E E E, The Sinus's in the Middle Bone of the Sternum Laterally; in which the
Cartilaginous Extremities of the True Ribs are Received.

F, The Lower Bone of the Sternum; the Extremity of which is commonly
Cartilaginous, and called Cartilago Mucronata or Ensiformis; Externally it
Frames that Cavity called Scrobiculus Cordis or Heart-pit, commonly called the
Pit of the Stomach: The Pains of which Part are called Cardialgiae, they
Affecting the Upper Orifice of the Stomach called Cardia, where the Plexuss's
of the Upper and Lower Stomach Nerves are made.





THE NINETY-SIXTH TABLE.
REPRESENTS the Bones of the Arms, together with the Two Bones of the Cubit:
These, together with those which Compose the Hand Represented in the Following
Table, are commonly called the Bones of the Whole Hand; but are properly
Divided as above. First of the Bone of the Arm, which is properly that Part
between the Elbow or Cubit and Shoulder; the Whole Arm Comprehends the Bones of
the Cubit.

Fig. 1.
A, The Forepart of the Os Humeri of the Right Arm;

B, The Round Head of its Upper Appendix Covered with a Cartilage, which is
Articulated with the Scapula by Arthrodia.

C, The Circular Sinus of the Upper Part of the Os Humeri, to which the
Ligament Involving the Juncture, together with the Tendons of the Musculus
Supraspinatus, Infraspinatus, Teres Minor and Subscapularis are Inserted.

D F, Two Prominencies of the Shoulder Bone.

E, A Sinus Framed between the Two last Mentioned Prominencies, wherein the
External Tendinous Beginning or Head of the Musculus Biceps is Received. Vid.
Tab. 65.1.

G, A Convext Protuberance of the Lower Appendix of the Shoulder Bone, which is
Received in a Shallow Concave Depressure on the Superior Extremity of the
Radius.

H K, That Part of the Os Humeri, that is Articulated to the Upper End of the
Vlna by Ginglymus.

I, The Internal Protuberance of the Os Humeri, from which the Greatest Part of
the Muscles Bending the Fingers and Carpus, together with the Musculus Pronator
Radii Teres and Palmaris Longus, do Arise.

L, An Interstice between the Lower Appendix of the Os Humeri and its Internal
Protuberance.

N, A Large Foramen for a Blood-vessel of the Bone.

I was lately Called to a Boy about 10 or 12 Years of Age, who Four or Five
Days before, in Playing with his Companion, Received such an Injury in One of
his Arms, as he could not afterward Move it Forewards or Backwards, much less,
Lift it up toward his Head; but had all the Actions of his Cubit and Fingers,
as we commonly Find in those who have Dislocated the Os Humeri from the
Scapula: After Examining the Shoulder, and Finding no such Dislocation; by
Moving the Arm, I Found the Bone near the Shoulder Grate very much, which I
Guess could be no otherwise than the Upper Appendix of the Os Humeri Divided
from the Bone. I then Reduced it to a Good Figure, and after Applying a
Plaster De Sapone to Attenuate the Extravased Blood, I Rol'd it up, and he has
Continued Easy ever since. The Tingling, as he Told me, he had at his Fingers
Ends, and Violent Pain in his Shoulder, Leaving him. I don't Find Authors
Mention such like Cases where the Appendages of Bones are Broken off in Young
Bodies; but I am Persuaded from other Examples as well as this; such Accidents
often Happen, and are not commonly Known by Surgeons.

N. B. These Fractures of Bones at their Appendages in Young Bodies, are sooner
United, than when the Middle-parts of Bones are Broken.

Fig. 2.
The Hinder-part of the Left Shoulder Bone.

M, A Cavity, in which the Superior and Back-part of the Vlna (Fig. 3, 4. C F),
called Olecranon, is Received in an Extension of the Cubit.

N N N, The Foramina for the Blood Vessels, which Pass to and from the Marrow,
and Internal Parts of the Bone.

Fig. 3.
The Vlna or Os Cubiti of the Right Arm:

A B, Its Internal Side, next the Trunk of the Body:

C, Its Superior Part or Olecranon Articulated with the Os Humeri:

D, Its Inferior Part, whose Lateral Smooth Surface is Received in a Sinus, at
the Inferior Part of the Radius Laterally.

E F, The Semicircular Sinus of the Vlna, which Receives, and is Received by
the Two Prominencies and Sinus of the Lower Appendix of the Os Humeri, (Fig. 1.
K H,) which Articulation is called Ginglymus.

G, The Inferior and Lesser Acute Process of the Vlna, called Styloides.

Fig. 4.
That Side of the Left Vlna next the Radius.

A, An almost Semicircular Sinus of the Vlna, in which the Upper Head of the
Radius, Fig. 5, 6. B B, is Received Laterally:

B C, Its External Side next the Radius; B, its Lower End next the Carpus; C,
its Superior (called Olecranum) toward the Os Humeri.

D, A Smooth Prominence at the Lower End of the Vlna, which is Received in a
Sinus of the Radius, as above-noted, Fig. 3. D.

E, The Anterior Process of the Vlna, which Frames the Semicircular Sinus,
Articulated with the Os Humeri, Fig. 1. K H. This Process is Received in a
Sinus at the Inferior and Forepart of the Os Humeri, (Expressed Fig. 1. above K
H) when the Cubit is Bended.

F, The Superior and Posterior Process of the Vlna in like Manner, Framing its
Upper and Semicircular Sinus, which Process is Received in the Cavity (M, Fig.
2.) of the Inferior and Back-part of the Os Humeri, in an Extension of the
Cubit.

G, Part of the Lesser Sharp Process of the Vlna, called Styloides.

Fig. 5.
The Hinder-part of the Radius of the Left Cubit.

A, The Neck of the Radius:

B, Its Superior Appendix; in whose Upper Concave Sinus, (not Expressed in this
Figure) Receives the Convext Tubercle of the Inferor Appendix of the Os Humeri,
Fig. 1. G.

C, D, The Inferior Part of the Radius, which is Articulated with the Bones of
the Carpus, Expressed, Tab. 97. Fig. 2.

E, A Sinus in the Radius Laterally which Receives the Inferior Head of the
Vlna, Fig. 3, 4. D D.

F, Another Sinus on the Inferior Part of the Radius, in which the Tendon of
the Musculus Extensor Tertii Internodii Pollicis and Indicator, is Entertained.
Vid. Tab. 70. C, N.

Fig. 6.
The Forepart of the Right Radius:

A, Its Tubercle a little Below its Neck, to which the Round Internal Tendon of
the Musculus Biceps is Inserted. Vid. Tab. 65, I.

B, A Smooth Cartilaginous Outside of the Superior Part or Head of the Radius;
which is Received in an almost Semicircular Sinus of the Upper End of the Vlna,
Fig. 4. A, By this Articulation of the Radius with the Vlna, the Former, i. e.
the Radius is Rendered Capable of Turning on the Vlna, like as on an Axis, the
Vlna at that Time Remaining Unmoved; which Motion of the Radius together with
the Hand, is Called either Pronation or Supination: Pronation is Performed when
the Palm of the Hand is Turned Down and the Back of it is Uppermost; and on the
Contrary, when the Palm is Turned Up and the Back is Undermost, it is Called
Supination.

C D, The Lower-part of the Radius Articulated with the Ossa Carpi.

N. B. The Foramina of the Blood Vessels of the Bones are well Expressed in this
Table.

THE NINETY-SEVENTH TABLE.
DEMONSTRATES the Bones of the Hand properly so called.

Fig. 1.
The Internal Parts of the Bones of the Hand, next the Palm.

These are Distinguished into Three Parts; viz. The Carpus or Brachialis, (1,
2, 3, 4, etc.) the Metacarpus or Postbrachialis (E E E); and the Fingers (F G H
I); First of the Bones of the Carpus or Wrist: These are Eight in Number, and
Composed of Two Orders or Ranks of Bones; of which the First Rank is commonly
reckoned to have Four 1, 2, 3, 4; the Two First of these Bones jointly Compose
a Smooth Convext Surface, Covered with a Cartilage which is received in a
Shallow Sinus at the Inferior Part of the Radius, Tab. 96. Fig. 5, 6. C D;
which Articulation is called Arthrodia: The Third Bone here Expressed, does not
Help to Compose the Articulation of either Rank, but is Fastened on the Fourth
by a Ligament, which Conjunction is called Syndesmosis; the Use of this Third
Bone, is to Help to Support the Transverse Ligament, under which the Tendons
Bending the Fingers pass: The Fourth Bone (placed between the Second and
Eighth) does not Compose either Rank, whether Articulated with the Radius or
Metacarpal Bones, but is Inserted between the Two Ranks: The Fifth Bone here
Expressed, is not properly to be reckoned among those of the Two Ranks, but like
the Fourth is placed between them, and is Articulated to the First Bone of the
Thumb; which Articulation may be called Synarthrosis: The Sixth Bone here
Expressed, ought to be reckoned the Seventh, the Sixth not being Expressed in this
Figure, but is Represented in Fig. 2. *: This may be properly reckoned the
First of the Second Rank, to whose Lower Part the Metacarpalbone of the
Forefinger is Articulated: The Seventh Bone of the Carpus (here Signed the
Sixth as above Noted) like the preceding, is Articulated with the
Metacarpal-bone of the Middle-Finger, and may be properly Esteemed the Second
Bone of the Second Rank or Order: The Eighth Bone of the Carpus (here Signed
Seventh and Eighth) is the Third and Last Bone of the Second Rank: The
Lower-parts of the Metacarpal-bones of the Little and Ring-Fingers, are
Conjoined to this Eigth Bone of the Carpus by Synarthrosis: The Upper-parts of
the Three Bones of the Second Rank last Treated of, (not unlike the Two First
of the First Rank) do Conjunctly Frame a Convext Oblong Smooth Surface on their
Upper-parts, which is received in a Concave fitted for it, framed by the
Inferior Parts of the Two First Bones of the First Rank: This Articulation made
by the Two Ranks of Bones of the Carpus, may also be called Arthrodia.

A B C D, The Four Bones of the Metacarpus, whose Upper-parts are Articulated
to the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Bones of the Carpus by Synarthrosis, and their
Inferior Parts with the Bones of the Fingers, by Arthrodia.

E E E, The Interstitia of the Metacarpal-bones, wherein the Musculi
Inter-Ossei are placed; the Internal Parts of these Bones toward the Palm are
Concave, as Appears in this Figure; but their External Parts toward the Back
of the Hand are Convext, as is Represented by Fig. 2; the like may be Observed
in the Bones of the Fingers and Thumb.

F F F, etc. The First Internodes, or Bones of the Fingers and Thumb.

G G, The Second Internodes.

H H H, etc. The Third and last Internodes of the Bones of the Fingers and
Thumb.

I I K K, The Articulations of the Bones of the Fingers with each other, and
the Two last Bones of the Thumb, is by Ginglymus; but the Fingers are
Articulated with the Metacarpal-bones by Arthrodia, as above Noted.

9, 10, 11, The Ossa Sesamoidea; of which Ten are said to belong to each Hand,
viz. Two of the Thumb placed on the Inferior and Internal Part of its First
Bone F; the other Eight are in like Manner placed on the Inferior and Internal
Parts of the Ossa Metacarpi. In Young Bodies these Bones are not found, as in
Others. They are apt to be lost in Freeing the Bones, whether by Boiling or
otherwise.

Fig. 2.
The Bones as they Appear on the Back-part of the Right Hand; for whose
Explanation Consult Fig. 1.

Fig. 3.
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, The Bones of the Carpus Separated from each
other.





THE NINETY-EIGHTH TABLE.
WE come now to the Two Bones which Compose the Lower-part of the Spina, namely
the Os Sacrum and Coccygis.

Fig. 1.
The Outside and Back-part of the Os Sacrum Composed of Four or Five Bones like
Vertebrae in the Foetus; all which are United in the Adult, and some Marks of
their Conjunction only Appear, especially on its Internal Concave Part. Vid.
Fig. 2. D.

A A A, etc. Some Vestigia or Marks of the Conjunctions of the Ascending and
Descending Process's of the Five Vertebrae, which Compose the Os Sacrum.

B B B B, The Foramina Framed by the last mentioned Transverse Process's, and
chiefly filled with a Cartilaginous Body; some small Branches of Nerves only
passing out of them to the Musculus Glutaeus Maximus.

C C C, D D, The Sinus's Framed on each Side the Os Sacrum, by the Meeting of
its Transverse Process's.

E, The Superior Surface of the Upper Part of the Os Sacrum, on which is placed
the Last Vertebra of the Loins.

F, The Specus or Great Foramen of the Sacrum, being continued from that of the
Vertebrae of the Back, by which the Nerves that Help to Compose the Cauda
Equina Descend to their Egress, through the Internal Foramina of this Bone, Fig.
2. B B B.

G G, A Sinus Framed in the Oblique Ascending Process of the First Vertebra of
the Os Sacrum, which receives the Oblique Descending Process of the Last
Vertebra of the Loins.

H H, Those Parts of the Sacrum joined to the Ossa Ilii by the Interposition of
a Cartilage; which Conjunction is called Syncondrosis.

I I, The Spines of the Sacrum.

k k, Two Process's of the Sacrum, Connected to the Two Process's of the Os
Coccygis, Fig. 3. A, B.

Fig. 2.
The Inside or Forepart of the Os Sacrum.

A A A, The Smooth Inside of the Five Vertebrae which Compose the Os Sacrum.

B B B, The Foramina by which the Nerves pass out from its Specus.

C C, D D, The partly Cartilaginous and partly Bony Connection of the Vertebrae
of the Sacrum.

E, The Inferior Part of the Sacrum joined to the Upper Part of the Os Coccygis.

Fig. 3.
The Back-part of the Os Coccygis, Composed of Five Bones joined to each other
by Syncondrosis.

A, B, Two Ascending Process's of the Os Coccygis, joined to those of the
Sacrum, Fig. 1. k k. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, The several Bones which Frame the Os
Coccygis.

Fig. 4.
The Internal Part of the Os Coccygis, whose Characters are Explained in the
preceding Figure.

THE NINETY-NINTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE Internal Concave Surface of the Os Innominatum, which in the Foetus is
Manifestly Composed of Three Bones; but become so United in the Adult, as that
no Marks of their Cartilaginous Conjunction does than Appear. This Bone is by
some called Ilium, Os Coxendicis, and Os Anchae, and sometimes Lumbare: For the
better Description of it, Anatomists have given distinct Names to the several
Parts of it, which Appear in the Foetus, as follow.

A B C D, That Part of the Os Innominatum, called Ilium:

A A A, The Internal Concave Part of it, in which the Musculus Iliacus Internus
is placed, called Costa Ilii:

B, The Spine of the Ilium:

C, The Foramina of the Blood Vessels which pass into its Meditullium or
Internal Part.

D, That Part of the Os Ilium joined to the Sacrum by a Cartilaginous
Interposition, which Conjunction is called Syncondrosis.

E, That Part of the Os Innominatum, called Os Pubis or Pectinis.

F, The Great Foramen of the Os Ischium, Composed by that Bone in Conjunction
with the Os Pubis.

G, The Forepart of the Os Pubis.

H, The Third Part of the Os Innominatum, called Os Ischium and Os Coxendicis.

I, A Prominence of the Os Ilium, whence the Musculus Rectus Femoris does
Arise: Vid. Tab. 75. G.

Fig. 2.
The External Convext Surface of the Os Innominatum:

A B B, Its Cavity, wherein the Head of the Os Femoris is received, called
Acetabulum and Pixis.

A, A Sinus Excavated in the Inferior Part of the Acetabulum, in which the
Mucilaginous Gland is placed: Vid. Tab. 74.1.

The Ligamentum Rotundum Figured Tab. 74. k, Arises from the Lower-part of the
Acetabulum toward its External Margin; whence it passes Upwards to its
Termination in the Head of the Os Femoris; which Disposition of that Ligament,
is no small Artifice in Nature, in preventing too great a Coalision of the
Superior Part of the Acetabulum with the Head of the Thigh Bone, in Walking,
Running, etc. as before Noted.

B B, The External Margin of the Acetabulum, whence the Ligamentum Latum does
Arise; which Ligament is Implanted in the Neck of the Os Femoris.

C D E, The Dorsum Ilii.

D Superior, The Spina Ilii.

E E, Diverse Processes toward the Back-part of the Ilium, where its other
Side, Expressed in the Former Figure D, is joined with the Sacrum.

F, A Sinus of the Os Ilium, in which the Musculus Pyriformis passes toward
its Implantation.

G, An Acute Process of the Ischium.

H, An Appendix of the Ischium, to which a Ligament Arising from the Os Sacrum
is Fastened: From this Appendix the Musculus Quadratus Femoris, and the Muscles
Bending the Tibia, do Arise.

I, That Part where the Os Ischium joins with the Os Pubis.

K, The Os Pubis or Pectinis.

L, The Great Foramen of the Ischium and Pubis.

N. B. The Three Bones which Compose the Os Innominatum, all meet and join in
the Acetabulum.





THE HUNDREDTH TABLE.
SHOWS the Bones of the Foetus of one Month to Seven Months after Conception.

Fig. 1.
A Skeleton of a Foetus about a Month after Conception; in which the
Cartilaginous Rudiments of Bones have diverse little Bony Specks or
Ossifications in the Arms and Legs.

Fig. 2.
The Skeleton of a Foetus of Six Weeks, in which the Rudiments of the Bones of
the Artus or Limbs do Appear in Bony Specks, somewhat Larger than those of the
preceding Figure; the Claviculae being Entirely Bony.

Fig. 3, 4.
The Fore and Back-part of the Skeleton of a Foetus of about Three Months; in
which the Beginnings of all the Bones Appear.

Fig. 5.
The Skeleton of a Foetus of about Four Months; in which the Bones with their
Cartilaginous Appendages do Appear, without any considerable Difference (except
in Magnitude) from those in the Two preceding Figures.

Fig. 6.
The Back-part of the Skeleton of a Foetus of about Four Months after
Conception.

In the Embryo, or First Rudiments of the Foetus within the Womb; those Parts
which afterward become Bones, are than Entirely Cartilaginous, till about the
End of the First Month after Impregnation; at which Time diverse Bony Specks or
Ossifications begin to Appear about the Middle of the Larger Bones of the
Limbs, especially in the Claviculae. Two Months after Conception, the Whole
Head does not afford any Bony Appearance, except the Third Pair of Bones of the
Upper Jaw, and the Two Bones which Frame the Lower Jaw, which about this Time
Appear Distinct. The Middle-parts of the Claviculae are Bony after the First
Six Weeks. The Shoulder-blades are without any Proper Figure about the Second
Month after Conception, at which Time their Ossifications begin in their
Middle-parts: About the Third Month their Spinal Process's begin to be Bony, as
well as their Coracoidal and Short Process's: Near this Time the Whole Spine,
or Vertebrae of the Neck, Back, Loins, Os Sacrum and Coccygis, begin to be
Bony. The Sixth Vertebra of the Back Internally, some Bony Specks in each
Vertebra Appear, and Gradually Lessen themselves to the Fifth Vertebra of the
Neck; the like Ossifications may be Observed to become Less and Less in each
Vertebra, toward the Lower-part of the Spine, to the Third Vertebra of the Os
Sacrum. The Incurvation or Bending Forwards of the Whole Spine at this Time, is
Remarkable. The Four Upper Vertebrae of the Neck, afford some Bony Appearances
Laterally, about the Third Month; near which Time the Bodies of the Three Upper
Vertebrae of the Os Sacrum, seem to Frame One Bone, but its Lateral Parts are
not Bony till the Fourth Month; at which Time the Bodies of the Third and
Fourth Vertebrae of the Neck begin to Appear. The Fifth and Sixth Month, the
Epistropheus or Second Vertebra of the Neck has a Bony Speck; but its
Tooth-like Process is yet Cartilaginous: The Forepart of the Atlas or First
Vertebra is yet wanting. The Os Coccygis is Cartilaginous till about the Eighth
or Ninth Month; at which Time, in its Internal Part, called its Body, Two
Offeous Specks Appear about the Bigness of Two great Pin's Heads. All the
Vertebrae of the Spine of the Foetus (at this Time) Appear Composed of Three
Bones; First that of the Bodies of the Vertebrae Forwards; Secondly its Two
Lateral Parts which Frame their Transverse Process's: Their Spinal Process's
not Appearing Bony till some Time after the Partus; whence (as Spigelius
Observes) Rope-Dancers, Tumblers, etc. by early Practice whilst they are
Children, the Spines of the Backbone give way to the Inflection of their
Vertebrae Backwards; the common Position of the Spines being Obliquely
Descending, they do thereby incline more Horizontal, and their Points are also
rendered more Obtuse.

The Os Innominatum about the Second Month after Conception is Cartilaginous,
except that Part of it called Ilium, where it Frames the Upper Part of the
Acetabulum, it has a Bony Speck about the Bigness of a Common Pin's Head. In
the Fourth Month the Os Coxendicis or Ischium, (another Part of the Os
Innominatum) has a Bony Appearance, where it meets the Ilium within the
Acetabulum, not exceeding the Head of a common Pin in Magnitude; the like may
be Observed of the Os Pubis within the Acetabulum: These Three Bones which
Compose the Innominatum, remain Distinguished in the Foetus by a Cartilaginous
Interposition, which continues till the Seventh Year, at which Age those
Cartilaginous Marks Disappear. In the Second Month all the Ribs except the
First and Last, are so hardened, that the Channels (Expressed Fig. 4. Tab. 94.
E,) or Sinus's for the Intercostal Blood Vessels and Nerves, Appear.

The Time of the Ossification of the Sternum is uncertain; but Eustachius is
mistaken in saying, It Is altogether Cartilaginous in Children Newly Born.
Kerckringius affirms he never Diffected a Foetus of Four Months, but he found
some Little Bony-Bodies in the Sternum. Their Number and Figure Varying in most
Subjects, we need not say more of them in this place. The Ossification of the
Artus is very Early, as Appears by the First and Second Figures of this Table,
where the Middle-parts of the Bones First Appear in little White Specks a Month
after Conception, as above Noted; but some of their Appendages are Entirely
Cartilaginous for some Months after the Birth. The Eight Cartilages of the
Carpus become Bony some Time after the Birth. The Appendages of the Bones of
the Metacarpus and Fingers, continue Entirely Cartilaginous some Months after
the Birth; the like may be Observed of the Feet and Toes; the Patellae in like
Manner are Entirely Cartilaginous some Months after the Birth.

THE HUNDRED and FIRST TABLE.
REPRESENTS the Fore-parts of the Bones' of a Foetus of Nine Months.

A, The Fronticulus framed at the Meeting of the Bones of the Sinciput and
Frontal Bones, it being a Discontinuation of those Bones in the Foetus; which
continues in the Infant for Diverse Months, and sometimes Years.

B B, The Two Frontal-bones.

C C, Parts of the Bregma or Sincipital-bones.

D D, The Sagittal Suture Extended to the Upper Part of the Nose.

E E, The Coronal Suture; they are called Sutures in Respect of their
Appearance in the Adult, but here in the Foetus they rather seem to Deserve the
Term Harmonia; they Approaching to simple Lines, and are not Indented till the
Bones become Hard; but since a Membrane Interposes, Spigelius call's this
Conjunction in Infants Synymensis.

F, The Cartilage of the Nose cut off;

G, Its Septum.

H H, The Upper-jaw, or properly the Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw.

I I, The Two Bones which Compose the Lower Jaw;

K, Their Suture, or more properly their Conjunction by Synchondrosis.

L L, The External or Stony Parts of the Teeth, yet lying within their Alveoli
or Sockets, and Covered with the Periostium of the Jaw Bone: The Time of their
Breaking forth is uncertain, and the Order they Appear in, is commonly well
known; yet in this too they sometimes vary, and the Dentes Canini Appear before
the Incisores; if their Eruption is Tedious, the Gums through frequent Use are so
hardened, as to Occasion ill Symptoms; in which Case not only the Gums, but the
Periostium, which at that Time immediately Cover's the Upper-parts of the
Sockets, is to be Divided by a Sharp Instrument; whereby the Imprisoned Tooth
is set at Liberty, and the Tension of the Periostium Relieved. In Practicing
this Operation, we ought to have Regard to the Time of the Eruption of those
Teeth we cut upon; for those only ought to have their Gums and Periostium
Divided, which Appear somewhat Prominent: By too early Dividing of those Parts
they Unite again, and their Cicatrice Render's them more Obstinate to the
Eruption afterward, especially if the Periostium its self was not Divided
before.

M, The Left Clavicle.

N, The Internal Part of the Right Scapula.

O, The Acromion of the Scapula joined with the Extremity of the Clavicle.

P, The Cartilaginous Appendix of the Os Humeri.

Q, The Os Humeri.

R R, The Ulnae.

S S, The Radii.

T T, The Cartilages which Compose the Bones of the Carpus on both Sides.

V V, The Ossa Metacarpi, whose Extremities are Cartilaginous.

W W, The Bones of the Fingers, whose Knuckles or Appendages are Cartilaginous.

X, The Vertebrae of the Neck;

Y, Those of the Back;

Z, Those of the Loins.

1, The Os Sacrum.

2, The Coccygis.

3, The Ilium.

4, Ischium.

5, Pubis.

6, 6, The Sternum with Diverse little Bony Bodies.

7, 7, The True-ribs.

8, 8, etc. The Bastard-ribs.

9, The Ensiformal Cartilage of the Sternum.

10, The Thigh Bone;

11, Its Trochanter Major yet Cartilaginous.

12, The Trochanter Minor in like manner Cartilaginous.

13, The Cartilage which makes the Patella.

14, The Tibia.

15, The Os Surae or Fibula.

16, The Cartilages which make the Bones of the Tarsus.

17, The Ossa Metatarsi.

18, The Bones of the Toes, which are Cartilaginous at their Extremities, like
those of the Fingers.





THE HUNDRED and SECOND TABLE.
IS the Back-part of the Skeleton of a Foetus of Nine Months.

A, Part of the Sagittal Suture.

B B, The Ossa Bregmatis.

C C, The Sutura Lambdoides.

D, The Os Occipitis which commonly in the Foetus is Divided into Four Bones;
Three of which Appear in this Figure; the Fourth lying between the Ossa
Petrosa, and is joined to the Os Sphenoides, Tab. 92. Fig. 2. P.

E, The Os Temporum or Squamosum not yet joined with that Part or Process of
it, called Petrosum.

F F, The Lower Jaw.

G, The Os Iugale.

H H, etc. The Seven Vertebrae of the Neck,

I I, etc. Twelve of the Thorax,

K K, etc. Five of the Loins, without their Spinal Process's.

L, The Right Scapula.

M. Part of the Right Clavicula.

N N, etc. The True Ribs.

O O, etc. The Bastard Ribs.

P, The Os Humeri.

Q, The Ulna.

R, The Radius.

S, The Cartilages which Compose the Bones of the Carpus.

T, The Bones of the Metacarpus.

V, The Bones of the Fingers.

W, The Os Sacrum;

X, The Ilium,

Y, The Ischium,

Z, The Pubis,

1, The Thigh Bone.

2, The Cartilaginous Appendages of the Lower-part of the Thigh Bone, and
Upper-parts of the Tibia and Fibula.

3, The Tibia,

4, The Fibula.

5, The Cartilages which Frame the Bones of the Tarsus.

6, The Bones of the Metatarsus.

7, The Bones of the Toes.

N. B There are diverse Remarkable Parts of this Figure, as well as of the
preceding Table, which have escaped Lettering: As the Spines of the Scapulae,
Cartilaginous Appendages of the Ossa Humeri, Ulnae, Radii, Femoris, Tibiae
Fibulae, etc. but most of these being already Lettered on other Figures of the
Bones, we shall Omit their Repetition on these, since the Additional Letters
already made with a Pen on these Figures, are so Numerous.

THE HUNDRED and THIRD TABLE.
THE Bones of the Inferior Artus or Limbs are Divided into the Thigh, Shank,
and Foot.

Fig. 1.
The Forepart of the Left Thigh Bone.

A, The Upper Appendix of the Thigh Bone, called its Head, covered with a
Cartilage, which is received in the Acetabulum of the Os Innominatum, Tab. 99.
Fig. 2. A B B.

The Round Ligament Arising from the Inferior Part of the Acetabulum, is
Inserted near the Middle of this Head of the Thigh Bone, Fig. 2. B. This
Articulation of the Thigh Bone with the Hip-bone, is called Enarthrosis.

B, The Trochanter Major, which in Young Bodies Appears joined with a Cartilage
to the Thigh Bone, and is therefore called an Epiphysis or Appendix.

C, The Cervix or Neck of the Os Femoris, to which the Ligamentum Latum is
Fastened.

D E, The Inferior Appendix of the Os Femoris, Framing Two Heads: The Smooth
Cartilaginous Surface which Appears between them, receives the Internal Surface
of the Patella, Fig. 4.

F, A Sinus whence the Musculus Poplitaeus has its Tendinous Origin.

Fig. 2.
The Posterior Part of the Right Thigh Bone.

A, Its Head.

B, A little Depressure, where the Ligamentum Rotundum is Implanted.

C, The Lesser Trochanter, to which the Musculus Psoas and Iliacus Internus,
are Inserted.

D E, The Two Inferior Heads of the Thigh Bone, which are received in Two
Shallow Depressures, Framed by Two Semilunary Cartilages, placed on the
Superior Part of the Tibia: The Sinus between these Two Heads, receives a small
Prominence on the Upper Part of the Tibia, especially in its Flexion: This
Articulation of the Thigh with the Tibia, is by Gynglimus.

F, The Great Trochanter, where the Musculus Pyriformis, Marsupialis, Obturator
Externus, and Parts of the Glutaei Medii, Minimi, and Quadratus Femoris, are
Inserted.

G G, The Linea Aspera, to which Part of the Musculus Quadratus Femoris,
Glutaeus Maximus, and the Greatest Part of the Triceps are Inserted: The Vastus
Externus and Internus, do chiefly Arise from the Linea Aspera.

In some Bodies, especially Aged, we find Two Ossa Sesamoidea on the Superior
Parts of the Two Lower Heads of the Thigh Bone D E: The Office of which, is to
Defend the Bending Tendons of the Tibia from too great a Collision on those
Heads of the Bone, which they would else be Subject to: The like Ossification I
have more than once Observed in the Tendon of the Peroneus Longus, at its
Contortion over the Os Calcis toward the Bottom of the Foot.

Fig. 3, 4.
The Former Figure Represents the External Rough Part of the Patella; the
Latter the Internal Smooth Surface of the same Bone covered with a Cartilage;
which is applied to the Forepart of the Juncture of the Os Femoris with the
Tibia, where it is Fastened by the Tendon of all the Extending Muscles of the
Tibia; wherefore by Spigelius its Conjunction is called Syntenosis. The Use of
the Patella (by some called Rotula, Mola, Scutum, Os Scutiforme, etc.) is to
prevent the Thigh Bone from Thrusting out Forwards, especially in Walking down
any Steep Place, and from Pressing on the Tendons of the Extending Muscles of
the Tibia: It also Defends the Articulation of the Thigh and Tibia, especially
in Kneeling; and like a Pully Acts on the Lower-part of the Os Femoris, to
Extend the Tibia when Inflected.





THE HUNDRED and FOURTH TABLE.
Fig. 1.
SHOWS the Forepart of the Right Tibia, or Major Focile of the Leg.

A A, The sharp Edge on the Forepart of the Tibia, called its Spina.

A Superior, A Prominence on the Upper Part of the Tibia, to which the Great
Tendon of the Muscles, Extending the Leg, is Inserted.

B, A Process in the Middle of the Upper Appendix of the Tibia, to which a
Ligament is Inserted, proceeding from the Hollow or Sinus, between the Heads of
the Lower-part of the Thigh Bone, Expressed Fig. 2. in the preceding Table.

C, The Malleolus Internus, Framed by the Lower Appendix of the Tibia.

Fig. 2.
The Back-part of the Left Tibia.

A A, That Part of the Tibia whence the Musculus Perforans, or Flexor Tertii
Internodii Digitorum Pedis, does Arise,

B, A Prominence in its Upper Appendix, to which a Ligament is Fastened,
continued from the Sinus between the Two Heads of the Lower Appendix of the Os
Femoris.

C, A Sinus in the Lower-part of the Tibia and its Appendix, in which the
Inferior Part of the Fibula is received.

D, Another Small Sinus in the Lower-part of the Tibia, wherein the Tendon of
the Musculus Tibialis Posticus passes toward its Insertion.

E, A Prominence received in a Shallow Depressure of the Upper Part of the
Fibula.

F, The Malleolus Internus.

Fig. 3.
The Back-part of the Left Fibula with its Lower End Uppermost, it is also
called Os Surae, Canna Minor, Focile Minus, and Os Peronae.

A A, The External Part of the Fibula.

B B, Its Edge, whence the Musculus Peronaeus Longus does Arise.

C C, The Two Extremes of the Bone, properly so called.

D, Its Lower Appendix which makes the Malleolus Externus.

E, Its Upper Appendix.

F, That Part of the Fibula, whence the Upper Part of the Musculus Flexor
Pollicis Longus, does Arise.

Fig. 3
A B C, etc. The Internal Part of the Right Fibula next the Tibia, with its
Lower End Uppermost, as in the Former Figure.

D, A Smooth Cartilaginous Surface of the Lower Appendix of the Fibula, which
is Entertained in the Sinus of the Lower-part of the Tibia, Fig. 2. C; and
Touches the Os Calcis Externally Laterally. Vid. Tab. 105. Fig. 1. A.

E, A Shallow Depressure on the Superior Appendix of the Fibula, which receives
the Prominence of the Tibia, Fig. 2. E.

F, The Superior Part of the Bone next its Appendix.

THE HUNDRED and FIFTH TABLE.
WE come now to the Bones of the Foot it self: These like those of the Hand are
Divided into Three Parts, viz. The Bones of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and those
of the Toes. The Tarsus is Composed of Seven Bones, which in this Table are
Represented Separated from each other; the

1, Is the Astragulus or Talus, by some called Os Balistae; 2, The Os Calcis,
Calcaneus or Pedis Calcar; 3, The Os Spongiosum, called Cuboides, Os Tesserae,
Grandinosum and Polymorphon; 4, 5, 6, The Three Ossa Cuneiformia; 7, The Os
Naviculare or Cymbiforme; it is also called Scaphoeides.
Fig. 1.
The Upper Part of the Bones of the Right Foot, when joined to each other with
Wires in their Natural Situation.

A B, The Os Calcis: A, Its External Lateral Smooth Side, Covered with a
Cartilage which touches the Internal and Lower-part of the Inferior Appendix of
the Fibula, called Malleolus Externus: B, The Upper Part of the Os Calcis,
Covered with a Cartilage which is received in a Sinus of the Lower Appendix of
the Tibia.

C, The Os Calcis.

D, The Os Naviculare.

E, The Os Spongiosum or Cuboides.

F G H, The Three Ossa Cuneiformia.

I K L M N, The Five Ossa Metatarsi or Second Division of the Foot.

1, 2, 3, etc. to 13, All the Bones of the Toes according to Bidloo, but we
suspect the Second Bone of all the Lesser Toes was wanting in the Subject, by
which this Figure was Delineated; for I am persuaded the Painter followed the
Life very strictly, as appears by the Figure.

Fig. 2.
The Bones of the Inferior Part or Bottom of the Right Foot.

A B, Part of the Astragalus.

C, The Os Calcis.

D, The Os Naviculare.

E, The Os Spongiosum or Cuboides.

G H, Two of the Ossa Cuneiformia.

I K L M N, The Ossa Metatarst.

O O, The Ossa Sesamoidea of the Great Toe.

N. B. The Bones of the Toes (as Expressed in the Former Figure) wanting their
Second Internodes.

Fig. 3.
One of the Nails.

A, The Upper Part of the Nail, commonly called its Root.

B, Its Side, which was Bordered with a Protension of the Cuticula.

C, Its External Unequal Part, where its Series of Fibers Appear Extended
according to its Length, from A to C.

D, Its Limbus or Extreme Part, which Projects over the Top of the Finger or
Toe.

The Nails Arise from their Subjacent Parts, called their Roots, Framed of a
Complication of Nerves and Blood Vessels; whence Horny Fibers or Tubes Arise,
and being United, Compose that Hard Body called the Nail. The Horny Fibers
which make the Outside or Unequal Surface of the Nail, Arise from the Lower-part
of its Root next the Second Internode of the Finger; the rest of the Horny
Fibers which Arise from the Superior Part of its Root toward the Top of the
Finger; successively make the Internal Concave Surface of the Nail: So that the
Extremity of the Nail which Extends it self beyond the Top of the Finger, is
Framed of all the Fibers which Arise from the Surface of its Root, and is much
Thicker than its other Extreme toward its Root: Hence it happens that the
External Surface toward the Root of the Nail is Protruded Forwards toward its
Top; as may be Observed if you Mark the Lower-part of the Nail toward its
Root, you will see it advance to the Top; which at Length is either Worn away
or cut off. When any Corosive Matter (as in a Paronychia or the like) destroys
the Tender Roots of the Horny Fibers, the Nail necessarily falls off; but
nevertheless it will Bud again, and a New Nail will Grow in its place; which
commonly does not prove so Beautiful as the Former, whether occasioned by too
early Using it, or its being Exposed to the External Air, or some inconvenient
Covering made Use of, to Defend it from Outward Injuries.



AN APPENDIX, Representing the EXTERNAL MUSCLES, And Diverse PARTS OF HUMANE
BODIES Which are either Omitted, or not well Expressed in the Preceding TABLES.
Done after the LIFE.



THE FIRST TABLE.
Fig. 1.
REPRESENTS the External Muscles as they Appear in their Proper Situation on
the Forepart of the Body, after the Skin, Fat, and Membranes are taken off,
together with the Musculus Quadratus Colli lying on each Side the Neck, and
Tendinous Expansion of the Musculus Membranosus from the Fore-parts of the
Thighs.

1, The Musculus Frontalis.

2, The Orbicularis Palpebrarum.

3, The Elevator Labit Superioris, and Dilatator Alae Nasi.

4, The Elevator Labii Superioris Proprius.

5, Part of the Elevator Labiorum Communis.

6, The Orbicularit seu Sphincter Labiorum.

7, The Depressor Labii Inferioris Proprius.

8, The Depressor Labiorum Communis.

9, The Zygomaticus seu Distortor Oris.

10, The Buccinator.

11, The Temporalis.

12, The Masseter.

a, The Parotid Salival Gland.

b, The Os Iugale.

c, The Salival Duct, where it Arises from the Parotid Gland, and passes over
the Masseter Muscle, whence it Marches through the Musculus Baccimator to its
Orifice in the Internal Membrane of the Mouth, against the Dentes Molares.

d, The Lower Jaw Bone made bare.

e, The Insertion of the Right Mastoid Muscle, to the Processus Mammiformis.

13, The Genichyoideus.

14, 14, The Mastoidei, where their Two Beginnings are Expressed on each Side;
the One from the Top of the Sternum^g and the Other from the Clavicula f: The
Termination of the Right Mastoid in the Pr^cessus Mammilaris e, is also Expressed.

15, The Sternobyoideus of the Left Side, that of the Right not being Figured.

16, 16, The Caracobyoideus Marching under the Mastoid Muscle.

17, 17, Parts of the Scalenus.

18, Part of the Elevator Scapulae.

19, 19, Parts of the Trapezius or Cucullaris, on each Side Inserted to the
Claviculae.

20, The De^toides.

21, 21, The Two Pectoral Muscles.

f, f, The Claviculae.

g, The Upper Part of the Os Pectoris or Sternum;

h, The Scrobicu^us Cordis at the Lower-part of the Sternum.

22, The Biceps Humeri.

23, 23, Parts of the Coracobrachiales.

24, 24, Parts of the Brachiales Flexores.

25, 25, Parts of the Brachiales Extensores.

i, A Branch of the Axillary Nerves, which passes between the Internal
Protuberance of the Os Humeri k, and the Olecranum or Elbow.

k, The Internal Protuberance of the Os Humeri.

l, The Large Trunk of the Axillary Artery, which is frequently Pricked by Bold
Blood-Letters.

m, A Thin Membranous Tendon Springing from the Musculus Biceps Humeri, which
is Expanded over all the External Muscles on the Cubit.

26, Part of the Brachialis Flexor.

27, Pronator Radii Teres.

28, 28, Radialis Flexor.

29, 29, Pal^oris Longus.

30, 30, Parts of the Musculi Flexores Secundi Internodii Perfor^^ue.

31, 31, The Ulnaris Flexor.

32, 32, The Supinator Radii Longus in both Arms.

33, Part of the Radialis Extensor.

34, A Tendon of the Flexor Tertii Internodii Pollicis.

35, 35, The Abductor Pollicis on both Hands.

n, The Ligamentum Annulare of the Carpus

o, o, The Tendinous Expansion of the Palmaris Longus.

36, The Caro Musculosa Quadrata.

37, The Abductor Minimi Digiti.

38, 38, The Fleshy Parts of the Obliquus Descendens Abdominis on both Sides,
41, 42, q, q, their Tendons Running over the Recti to the Linea Alba.

39, 39, Parts of the Latissimus Dorsi on both Sides.

40, 40, Parts of the Serrati Majores Antici.

41, 41, The Recti Abdominis, as they Appear under the Tendons of the Two
Oblique Muscles.

p, The Linea Alba.

q, q, The Tendons of the Two Oblique Muscles, called Linea Semilunaris, before
they March over the Rectus to the Linea Alba.

r, r, The Fore-parts of the Spines of the Ossa Ilii.

s, s, The Glandulae Inguinales; neither these Glans, nor those in the Axillae,
called Glandulae Axillares, are any where mentioned in the preceding
Descriptions: Their Office is to receive the Lympha from all the Inferior
Parts, and Discharge it again by their Exporting Lymphe-Ducts in its Way
toward the Thoracick-Duct. If any Parts of the Legs or Thighs are Diseased, as
in an Anasarca, with an Erysipelas, Abcess, Exulceration, especially with a
Caries of the Bone, and the like; you will most commonly find the Inguinal
Glandules Tumid and Hard: The like may be Observed of the Axillary Glands, when
the Mammae, Arms, Cubits, or Hands are in like Manner Affected. The
Intumescence of these Lymphatick Glands, in the Cases above mentioned, is
caused by the Vitiated Lympha, Arising from the Diseased Parts, not pasting the
Vesiculae Glandulosae; whence a Tumor is begun, and is still Increased by the
Accession of the succeding Lympha, and the Whole Gland becomes Distended to a
vast Magnitude; as Appeared in the Case of the Late Sir William Cranmer, in
whom, after Death, I found the Glandule of the Right Inguine to Weigh above Six
Pounds, and the Trunk of the Crural Artery passing through the Lower-part of it.
Though the Surface of this Tumified Gland seemed to have Matter Fluctuating in
diverse Parts of it, yet no other than a Glandulous Appearance Offered on
Dividing it Variously. The like Intumescence of the Inguinal Glands happened
after Castration, in a Hernia Carnosa of the same Side, which in like Manner
proved Fatal. In the Case of an Anasarca of one Leg, on which an Erysipelas
happened, I found the Inguinal Gland on the same Side very much Indurated and
somewhat Distended. When the Excoriation from the Erysipelas began to Abate of
the Flux of Matter, the Inguinal Gland above became more and more Distended; at
length the Outward Skin on it began to look Red, and soon after Imposthumated:
After the contained Pus was Discharged, I could pass my Probe very Deep into
diverse Interstices of the Gland, in which the Matter was Lodged; all which
Sinus's after some Weeks Closed by the Use of Desiccative Topics, with
convenient Bandage, without Hard Tents or Dozils. In this Case the Patient took
diverse Doses of Calamel, and Strong Purges. The like Intumescence of these
Glands also happens in Venerial Cases, especially when the External Parts of
the Penis are Ulcerated, as I have elsewhere taken Notice of.

t, The Os Pubis.

u u, The Process's of the Peritonaeum Covering the Spermatick Vessels, as they
Descend to the Testes.

42, The Pyramidales.

43, 43, The Musculus Communis Membranosi on both Sides, Part of its Tendinons
Expansion of the Left Side being Expressed, Fastened to the Upper Appendix of the
Fibula x.

44, 44, The Sartorius on both Sides.

45, Part of the Glutaeus Medius made Tumid by the Great Trochanter.

46, 46, The Rectus Femoris on both Thighs.

47, 47, The Vasti Externi.

48, 48, The Vasti Interni.

49, Part of the Pectineus.

50, 50, The Great and First Described Heads of the Triceps on both Sides.

51, 51, The Gracilis partly Expressed on both Sides.

w w, The Patellae or Knee-pans.

x, Part of the Tendon of the Membranosus, Inserted to the Upper Appendix of
the Fibula.

y, The Right Tibia made bare.

z, The Malleolus Internus.

*, The Malleolus Externus.

, The Annular Ligament of the Tarsus.

52, The Tibialis Anticus.

53, 53, The Extensor Pollicis Pedis Longus on both Feet.

54, Part of the Peroneus Secundus or Semifibuleus.

55, Part of the Peroneus Primus or Fibuleus.

56, 56, Parts of the Gasterocnemus Externus on both Legs.

57, Part of the Flexor Tertii Internodii Digitorum Pedis Perforans.

58, Part of the Gasterocnemus Internus.

59, The Abductor Pollicis.

60, Part of the Extensor Secundi Internodii Digitorum Pedis, or Extensor
Brevis.

61, The Tendon of the Extensor Pollicis Brevis.

62, The Extensor Tertii Internodii Digitorum Pedis Longus.

THE SECOND TABLE.
Fig. 1.
THE External Muscles and other Parts as they Appear on the Back-part of a
Humane Body, after the Skin, Fat, and Membranes are removed.

1, The Musculus Temporalis.

2, The Orbicularis Palpebrarum.

3, Part of the Zygomaticus.

4, The Depressor Labiorum Communis.

5, The Masseter.

6, Part of the Mastoideus.

7, Part of the Elevator Scapulae.

8, Part of the Splenius.

9, The Occipitalis.

10, 10, 10, The Cucularis or Trapezius, on both Sides.

a, The Os Bregmatis;

b, The Occipitis.

c, Part of the Sagittal Suture, or Longitudinal Suture.

d, The Lambdoidal Suture.

e, The Os Iugale.

f, The Parotide Salival Gland.

Under this Parotide Salival Gland, are placed diverse Lymphatick Glands, which
receive Lympha from their Importing Lymphe-ducts, Arising from the Neighboring
Parts as well as the Parotide Salival Gland it self. Besides these Lymphatick
Glands immediately under the Parotides, there are still others of the same kind
below them, lying near the Jugular Veins, and are continued to the Claviculae;
all these Transmit Lympha (by their Exporting Lymphe-ducts) either to the
Subclavian Glands, or to the Upper Part of the Thoracick-duct immediately.
These Lymphatick Glands become Tumid in Scrophulous Cases, and may be happily
removed by Incision, and no great Flux of Blood follow; which Practice is
Preferable to the Application of Escharoticks which are commonly made use of. I
have at this Time a Patient in whom not only the above mentioned Superior
Lymphatick Glands of the Left Side were Distended, but the Parotide Salival
Gland of the same Side was very much Indurated, and not a lit tle Distended
also; in the Middle of which Induration of the Parotide Gland, I found an
Aperture whence the Spittle Flowed in no small Quantity, in Mastication: In
Pressing the Part near the Aperture, I found the Spittle Gush out, which had
Lodged it self between the Skin and the Gland. After the External Skin was
Divided, I could plainly see the Spittle Arise from diverse Interstices of the
Lobuli of the Gland; when he Chaw'd any Thing, the Spittle Flowed on his
Handkerchief ( per Stillicidium,) which he was wont to hold under his Ear to
receive it. The Sinus's from whence the Spittle was Discharged being thus laid
Open, the Quantity of Spittle which Flowed, soon Abated; the Fungous Flesh
being removed by the Application of Gentle Escharoticks, the Flux of Saliva
Lessened. He Drinking of a Decoction of Sarsaparila, China, Lig. Guiaci, etc.
for his common Drink, and Eating of a very Drying Diet, such as Biskets,
Almonds, and the like.

Aquapendens in Treating of the Wounds of the Cheeks, mentions a clear Water
not unlike the Tears of the Eyes, which he saw Flow from a very small Hole when
the Patient Eat; to which he adds, Vnde and quomodo effluat, Ego certe nescio.

The Accurate Nuck tells us (from Roonhuyse a Dutch Writer) of a Patient in
whom the Spittle Flowed from an Ulcer in the Cheek, not unlike that above
mentioned: Nor was the Flux of Spittle Abated, and the Ulcer brought to a
Cicatrix without a Drying Diet, as the Incomparable Nuck takes Notice. A Flux
of Lympha sometimes happens in Wounds of the Limbs, where the Lymphe-ducts are
Wounded. After Letting Blood in the Flexure of the Cubit, I saw (the next Day)
a vast Quantity of Lympha had Stained the Shirt which lay over the Orifice, and
about the Arm; the next Day after, the Flux of Lympha Abated, and the Orifice
soon after Closed. Perhaps a great Part of that Thin Matter called Gleet, which
we find some Days after Amputations, or large Wounds, Flows from the Divided
Lymphe-ducts as well as Nutritive Tubes of the Part. When Lymphe-ducts are
broken in Old Ulcers, and the Flux of Lympha does not easily Abate, though the
Patient is confined to a Drying Diet. The like Difficulty attended the
restraining of the Flux of Lympha when a Lymphe-duct was Opened in an Issue in
the Leg, as was Communicated to me by Mr. Bernard and Mr. Guddier both
Experienced Surgeons of this Town; in which Case a Drying Diet stopped the Flux,
and the Ulcer was soon after Cicatric'd; though many Desicatives Topics, as well
as Actual and Potential Cauteries, had before proved Ineffectual. By this we
may see (however some endeavor to Disparage Anatomy) how Useful it is in the
Practice of Surgery.

g, The Spine of the Seventh Vertebra of the Neck.

h, h, The Tendons of the Cucularis on both Sides Inserted to the Spines of the
Scapulae.

i, i, The Extremities of the Spines of the Scapulae, to which the Claviculae
are Connected.

k k, The Lower Angles of the Scapulae.

l l, The Basis Scapulae.

m m, The Upper Appendices of the Vlnae, called Olecrani.

n n, The External Protuberance of the Ossa Humerum, where the Radii are
Articulated, and the Muscles Extending the Carpi and Fingers do Arise.

o o, The Inferior Appendix of the Vlna next the Carpus.

11, The Musculus Deltoides of the Right Side.

12, 12, The Infraspinatus on both Sides.

13, 13, Parts of the Rotundi Minores.

14, 14, The Rotundi Majores.

15, 15, 15, The Latissimi Dorsi.

* * Their Tendinous Parts passing over the Sacrolumbales and Dorsi Longissimi.

16, 16, Parts of the Rhomboides on both Sides, near their Insertions to the
Basis of the Shoulder-blades, ll.

17, 17, The Gemellus, or Biceps Externus on both Arms.

18, 18, Parts of the Brachiales.

19, 19, Parts of the Supinator Radii Longus on both Sides.

20, 20, The Anconeus:

21, 21, The Radialis Extensor on either Cubit.

22, 22, The Extensor Digitorum Communis:

23, 23, The Extensor Minimi Digiti:

24, 24, The Vlnaris Extensor:

25, 25, Parts of the Perforatus or Flexor Secundi Internodii Digitorum.

26, 26, The Vlnaris Flexor on both Cubits.

27, Parts of the Tendons of the Radialis Flexor and Palmaris.

28, 28, The Abductores Minimi Digiti on either Hand.

29, The Adductor Pollicis ad Dorsum Manus.

30, The Extending Muscles of the Thumb.

31, 31, Parts of the Oblique Descending Muscles of the Abdomen on both Sides.

32, The Glutaeus Major.

33, 33, Parts of the Glutaeus Medius on both Sides.

34, The Fleshy Part of the Membranosus or Musculus Communis Membranosi.

p p, The Back-part of the Spines of the Ossa Ilii.

q, The Os Sacrum.

r, A Prominence made by the Great Trochanter under the Tendinous Expansion of
the Glutaeus Major.

f, f, The Great Crural Nerves as they Descend in the Ham.

t, The Upper Appendix of the Fibula.

u u, The Lower Appendix of the Fibula, called Malleolus Externus.

w, The Lower Appendix of the Tibia or Malleolus Internus.

x, The Tendon of the Gasterocnemii.

y, The Os Calcis.

35, 35, Parts of the Vasti Externi.

36, 36, The Biceps Femoris on both Sides.

37, 37, The Seminervosi or Semitendinosi.

38, 38, The Semimembranosi.

39, 39, Parts of the Triceps Femoris on both Sides.

40* Part of the Gracilis on the Left Thigh.

41, Part of the Sartorius on the same Thigh.

42, Part of the Vastus Internus on the same Thigh also.

43, 43, The Gasterocnemii Externi.

44, 44, The Gasterocnemii Interni Covered with the Tendons of the Externi.

45, The Peroneus Longus.

46, 46, The Abductor Minimi Digiti on both Feet.

47, Part of the Tendon of the Extensor Digitorum Longus on the Right Foot.





THE THIRD TABLE.
Fig. 3.
SHOWS the Trunks and large Ramifications of all the Arteries of a Humane
Foetus, Injected with Wax, and Displayed after Dissection.

1, The Aorta, or Arteria Magna, cut from its Origin at the Orifice of the Left
Ventricle of the Heart.

2, The Trunk of the Great Coronal Artery of the Heart Arising from the
Beginning of the Aorta; the Rise of the Lesser Coronal Artery, not Appearing in
this Position of the Arteria Magna.

3, The Canalis Arteriosus Filled with Wax, by Injecting it into the Aorta:
This Arises from the Upper Part of the Trunk of the Pulmonick Artery (near its
Two Ramifications which pass into the Lungs) and after an Oblique Descent under
the Beginning of the Aorta, Empties it self into the Upper Part of its
Descending Trunk, as here Expressed 28. Besides this Communication between the
Right Ventricle of the Heart of a Foetus, and Arteria Magna; there is another
called Foramen Ovale, by which Part the Blood, at its Entrance into the Right
Ventricle, passes into the Pulmonick Vein, and the Left Ventricle of the Heart,
thence to the Aorta. Hence it Appears, That the Blood which Flows into the
Right Ventricle of the Heart of the Foetus, Passes immediately (by the Canalis
Arteriosus) to the Arteria Magna, as well as the Blood of the Left Ventricle
(which is Received immediately from the Vena C^^a, or Right Article of the
Heart) into the Pulmonick Vein, and Left Ventricle: So that the Blood in the
Foetus, which Runs into the Right Ventricle, passes immediately to the Aorta,
by the Systole of the Heart, as well as the Blood of the Left Ventricle: Not
does any Part of the Blood of the Right Ventricle pass into the Left; Or any
Blood of the Left Ventricle first pass the Right, as in the Adult. Hence the
Heart in the Foetus may be said to have but One Ventricle in Effect, since the
Blood which passes One, does not come into the Other, before it arrives at the
Aorta. After the Birth, when the Infant has Received Air into the Lungs (and
their Vesciculae remain Distended, and the Ramifications of the Pulmonick
Arteries and Vein consequently are more Displayed) the Blood th^^ begins to
pass their Extremities, more freely than before; and the Arterious Chanel at
length becomes neglected, as well as the Foramen Ovale; the Former becoming a
Lig^^^^, and the Latter Closing up. The too early Occlusion of these Passages
in Children, often produces many Disorders, as Inflammation of Diverse Parts of
the Head, Neck, and Lungs^ in which Cases, Bleeding is of great Use: Of this, I
have met with many In^^^nces in the Dissection of Children. I have often found
the Foramen Ovale open in the Adult: The Canalis Arteriosus, for what I have
observed, closes sooner than that Foramen.

4, 4, The Subclavian Arteries, Arising from the Arteria Magna, to which the
Axillary Arteries, and those of the Arms (23, 23,) are con^^'d.

5, 5, The Two Carotide Arteries Arising from Aorta, between the Subclavian
Arteries.

6, 6. The Two Vertebral Arteries, Arising from the Sub^lev^culae, which pass
through all the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck, from whence
they are freed.

7, 7. The Arteries which Convey Blood to the Lower Part of the Face, Tongue,
Adjacent Muscles, and Glandules.

8, 8. The Trunks of the Temporal Arteries Spring from the Carotides, and
giving Branches to the Parc^ide Glands (9, 9.) as well as the Temples (10, 10.)
also to the Neighboring Muscles, Hairy-Scalp, and Forehead.

11, 11. The Occip^tal Arteries, whose Trunks pass close by the Mammi^o^^
Process, and are Distributed on the Hinder Pa^^ of the Hairy-Scalp, where they
are Inosculated with the Branches of the Temporal Arteries.

12. Di^ers Arteries, which carry Blood to the Fauces Ga^ga^con and Muscles of
those P^^^^.

13, 13. The Contortions of the Carotid Arteries, as they pass the Basis of the
Skull to the Brain.

14, 14. Those Parts of the Carotid Arteries, where they pass by each Side of
the Solla T^^ica, where Di^e^^ Small Branches do Arise from them, and help to
Compose the Rete (...), which is more conspicuous in Quadrupedes than Men.

15, 15. The Contortions of the Vertebra Arteries, as they pass the Transverse
Processes of the First Vend^^ ^^ the Neck, toward the Great Foramen of the Os
Occiputis. I have more than once taken Notice, That the Cavities of these
Arteries, where they are Con^e^^ed, have been Larger than their Inferior
Trunks; whereby the Impetus of the Blood must necessarily be very much
Lessened, as well as by their Contortions only. In Quad^^pedes the Angles of
these Contortion: of the Arteries of the Brains are more Acute, which in them
is the more Necessary to Lessen the Force of the Blood at their Extremities, by
Reason of the Horizontal Position of their Trunks.

16. The Vertebral Arteries, where they Ascend on the Medulla Oblongata,
toward the (...) Protuberance, or Po^a Var^^.

17, 17. The Communicant Branches between the Carotid and Vertebral Arteries;
in this Subject, somewhat Larger than we Commonly find them.

18, 18. The Ramifications of the Arteries within the Skull; the Larger Trunks
of which lie between the Lobes of the Brain, and in its S^^^i. From the
Extremities of these Arteries of the Brain are Continued its Veins, whose
Trunks vary much in their Position from the Arteries: They Entering the Brain at
its Basis, and Distributing themselves, as above noted; whereas the Trunks of
the Veins are Extended on the Surface of the Brain, and Discharge their Blood
into the Longitudinal S^r^s. Nor does the Veins of the Brain Accompany its
Arteries at their Ingress, as in other Parts: Or the Arteries and Vein. of the
Dura Meter, pass the same F^ramen in the Basis of the Skull.

19, 19. The Arteries of the Larynx Thyroid Glandules, and Adjacent Muscles and
Parts, Arising from the Subclavian Arteries.

20, 20. Others Arising near the Former, which convey Blood to the Muscles of
the Neck, and Scapul^.

21, 21. The Mammariae, which Arise also from the Subclavian Arteries, and
Descend on the Cartilages of the True R^bs Internally, about Half an Inch
distant on each Side the Or Pectoris, or S^rm^n. Some Branches of these pass
through the Pectoral, as well as i^^^costal Muscles, and give Blood to the
Mammae, where they meet with some Branches of the Intercostal Arteries, to
which they are Inosculated. These Maminary Arteries join with the large Trunks
of the Epigastricks (57, 57.) also, by which Means the Impetus of the Blood in
Integuments of the Abdomen, is carried on with more Force; the Ex^^^es of the
Intercostal and Lumbal Arteries do also Inosculate with each other, as well as
with These.

22, 22. The Arteries of the Muscles of the Os Humeri, and some of those of the
Scapul^.

23, 23. Those Parts of the Large Trunks of the Arteries of the Arms, which are
liable to be Wounded in Opening the Vena Basilica, or Innermost of the Three
Veins in the Bending of the Cubit, (See Fig. 1. of this Appendix between 26.
and m,) where the Precise Progress of this Artery is Expressed.

24, 24. The Divisions of the Arteries of the Arm below the Flexure of the
Cubit.

25. A Communicant Branch of an Artery, Arising from the Trunk of the Artery of
the Arm, above its Flexure at the Cubit, which is Inosculated with the Arteries
of the Cubit below. In some Subjects you will not find This Communicant Branch,
as here repres^^d^ in whom there are diverse Smaller Branches of the same Kind.
By these (...) Branches (of the Upper Part of the Brachial Artery with those of
the Cubit) the Blood still passes, though the Trunk (23) is firmly Tied, which is
done In taking up the (...); as it is called when it is Wounded, in the Cause of
an Aneurisma. Besides firmly Tying the Trunk of the Artery above the Place
where it is Wounded; it is also Necessary to tie it in like manner below, least
the Blood Conveyed by the Communicant Branches to the Inferior Trunk, still
pours out at the Wound of the Artery from below, in a Retrograde Manner.

26. The External Artery of the Cubit, which makes the Pulse near the Carpus.

27. The Arteries of the Hands and Fingers.

28, 28. The Descending Trunk of the Arteria Magna.

29. The Arteria Bronchalis, Springing from one of the Intercostal Arteries; It
sometimes Arises immediately from the Descending Trunk of the Aorta, at other
times from the Superior Intercostal Artery, which Springs from the Subclavian.
These Bronchial Arteries Inosculate with the Pulmonary Arteries, as I have
elsewhere taken Notice, and which I s^re find is mentioned and Figured by the
Accurate Ruysch, Epist, Anatom. 6. Fig. 5. c, c, c.

30. A Small Artery Springing from the Forepart of the Aorta Descendens,
passing to ^ Gula^ Prysch tells us of Branches of Arteries from the Superior
Intercostal, which (...) the Gula.

31, 31. The Intercostal Arteries on each Side the Arteria Magna Descendens.

32. The Trunk of the Arteria Caeliaca, from whence Springs

33, 33. The Hepatick Arteries, and

34. The Arteria Cystica, lying on the Gallbladder,

35. The Arteria Cerenaria Ventriculi Inferior,

36. The Pylorica,

37, 37. The Epiplaica Dextra, Sinistra, and Media, Springing from the
Coronaria.

38. The Ramifications of the Coronary Artery, which embrace on the Bottom of
the Stomach.

39. The C^^r^ria Ventriculi Superior.

40, 40. The Phrenick Arteries, or the Two Arteries of the Diaphragm; that of
the Left Side Arising from the Trunk of the Arteria Magna, the Right Springing
from the Caeliacae.

41. The Trunk of the Splenick Artery, Arising from the Caeliaca: This is
Contorted in the Adult, as it appears Tab. 36.

42. Two Small Arteries going to the Upper Part of the Duodemum and Pancreas;
the Rest of the Arteries of the Pancreas Spring from the Splenick Artery in its
Passage to the Spleen.

43. The Trunk of the Arteria Mesenterica Superior, Turned toward the Right
Side.

44, 44. The Branches of the Superior Mesenterick Artery, freed from the Small
Guts; here the Various Anastomoses, the Branches of this Artery make in the
Mesentery, before they arrive at the Intestines, may be observed.

45. The Inferior Mesenterick Artery, Arising from the Arteria Magna.

46. A Remarkable Anastomosis of this Inferior Mesenterick Artery, with the
Superior.

47, 47, 47. The Branches of the Inferior Mesenterick Artery, as they pass to
the Intestinum Colon;

48, 48. Those of the Rectum.

49, 49. The Arteries of the Kidneys.

50, 50. The Vertebral Arteries of the Loins.

51, 51. The Spermatick Arteries, which descend to the Testes, are so Small as
to escape being Filled with Wax.

52. The Aneria Sacra.

53, 53. The Iliaci.

54, 54. The Rami Iliaci Externi:

55, 55. The Iliaci Interni; which are here Larger in the Foetus
proportionably, than in the Adult, by Reason of their Conjunction with the Two
Umbilical Arteries.

56, 56. The Two Umbilical Arteries cut off.

57, 57. The Epigastrick Arteries, which Ascend under the Right Muscles of the
Abdomen, and are Inosculated with the Mammariae, as above Noted.

58, 58. Branches of the External Iliac^ Arteries, passing between the Two
Oblique Muscles of the Abdomen.

59, 59. Branches of the Internal Iliack Arteries, which Convey Blood to the
Extending and Obturating Muscles of the Thighs.

60, 60. The Trunks of the Arteries, which pass to the Penis.

61, 61. The Arteries of the Bladder of Urine.

62, 62. The Internal Arteries of the Pudendum, which with those here Expressed
of the Penis, make the Hypogastrick Arteries in Women. The External Arteries of
the Pulendum, Arise from the Upper Part of the Crural Artery, which is
immediately below the Epigastricks.

63. The Penis Distended with Wind, and Dried.

64. The Glans Penis.

65. The Upper Part or Dorsum Penis, cut from the Body of the Penis, and Raised
to Show the Corpora Caevernosa Penis.

66, 66. The Corpora Caevarnosa Penis, Fred from the Ossa Pubis, and Tied after
Inflation.

67. The Two Arteries of the Penis, as they Appear Injected with Wax, in each
Cavernous Body of the Penis.

68. The Capsula, and Septum of the Corpora Cavenosa Penis.

69. The Crural Arteries.

70, 70. The Arteries, which pass to the Muscles of the Thighs and Tibiae: The
Nomination of each Muscle in this Place would be Tedious, and of no Use;
wherefore I shall pass Them by here, as I have done in the Arms; it being
sufficient, we know, the Progress of the Great Trunks, to avoid Wounding them
in Chirurgical Operations, or to find them on Occasion: We shall begin first
with the Description of the Trunk of the Arteries of the Arm. So soon as the
Subclavian Artery has past the Claevicula, it marches through the Axilla,
wherefore it is called Axillaris, whence it^. Trunk Descends between the
Masculus Brachiaeus Intermu and Externus, on the Inside of the Arm, and is
Divided below the Bending of the Cubit, as you see it Expressed in the Figure; it
Parting with Several Branches to the Neighboring Muscles, and Parts it Passes
by; Their Distribution not being alike in any Two Subjects, I have hitherto
Examined, or in the Right and Left Sides of the same, as appears in this
Figure: Though the Progress of their Large Trunks are commonly Uniform; yet in
that too, they vary considerably, and the Trunk of the Artery at the Flexure of
the Cubit sometimes runs Collateral with the Vena Basilica, though it most
commonly passes Under that Vein: Of this, Those that Let Blood ought to take
Notice, and that the Vessel they See or Feel has no Pulsation, before they
thrust their Launset into it. Nor can I omit a Useful Observation in this
Place; which is, That the Operator before He applies his Ligature on the Arm,
should first feel for the Artery, because afterward its Palsation cannot be so
easily Discovered; the Reason of which is Obvious. After Amputation, above the
Elbow, the Trunk of the Axillary Artery only, affords any Considerable Flux of
Blood: In Amputations below the Elbow, we find Two, sometimes Three, and Four
Considerable Trunks, which may require Tying Up; the Manner of which Practice
is so well Described in the Works of Ambrose Pary, I shall omit saying any
Thing of it in this Place, though it has been most commonly Disused in this
Kingdom till of Late; the many Conveniences of which Practice will (I don't
doubt) sufficiently Recommend it to a General Use, as well in other Impetuous
Fluxes of Blood, as in those after Amputations. After the External Iliack
Artery (54) is past out of the Cavity of the Abdomen, it obtains the Name of
the Crural Artery, (69.) and Descends obliquely on the Crural Vein, on the
Forepart of the Thigh, immediately Under the Musculus Sartorius: About Four
Fingers Breadth above the Knee, these Two Large Blood Vessels pass through the
Lower Part of the Musculus Triceps to the Ham, (71.) here the Vein is Placed
Above the Artery as in other Parts, and so Descends to the Foot, after being
Divided in Three Branches, as is Expressed in Fig. 72.

71. That Part of the Crural Artery, which passes the Ham.

72. The Three Large Trunks of the Arteries of the Leg.

73. The Arteries of the Foot.

Fig. 4.
The Extremities of the Veins and Arteries, as they Appear by a Microscope in
the Transparent Fin of a Living Grig.

A A, The Fin of a Grig, lying in a Glass Tube.

B B, The Cartilaginous Extremities of the Ribs, on which the Fin is Extended.

C C, The Small Scratches, or Streaks we commonly find in the Glass Tube.

D D, The Branches of the Arteries, Proceeding from their Larger Trunks in the
Body of the Grig, Conveying the Blood to the outmost Margin of the Fin.

E E, The Extremities of the Arteries, Continued to the Veins, wherein One
Globule of the Blood only moves before another. Besides these Communications of
the Veins with the Arteries, there are still others which are Larger, wherein
more than two Globules can pass together: Those are every where Interspersed
with the Lesser, as plainly appears in the Fin and Tail of the Flounder, Fig.
5. F.

F F, The Veins which convey the Refluent Blood to the Heart.

G G, The Magnitude of the Arta, taken by the Microscope.

Fig. 5.
The Extremity, or outmost Margin of the Side-Fin of a Small Living Flounder,
viewed with a Microscope.

A A, The Cartilaginous Extremities of the Ribs, on each Side of which, the
Trunks of the Great Blood Vessels pass.

B B, The Arteries.

C C, The Veins.

D D, Their Lesser Extremities Continued to each other.

E E, The Large Branches of Veins and Arteries, Inosculating with themselves,
before they arrive at their Extremities.

F F, The Larger Conjunctions of the Veins and Arteries, at the outmost Margin
of the Fin.

G G, The Arta which the Microscope took in, as it appears to the Naked Eye.

Fig. 6.
Represents (according to our Conception) the Origination of the Lympheducts
from the Extremities of the Blood Vessels.

A, The Small Branch of an Artery,

a a, Its Extremity Continued to the Vein.

B, The Branch of a Vein.

C, A Lympheduct Arising from the Extremities of the Blood Vessels, either by
the Mediation of Diverse Vesiculae, or Small Tubes; which have Apertures into
the Sides of the Blood Vessels.

Fig. 7.
The Manner of the Origin of the Excretory Ducts, from the Extremities of the
Blood Vessels.

A, The Artery.

B, The Vein.

C, A Branch of the Ductus Excretorius.

d d, The Extremities of the Blood Vessels.

e e, The Extremities of the Excretory Tubes, at their Rise from the Pores in
the Sides of the Blood Vessels, before they Unite in the Branch of the Duct.

THE FOURTH TABLE.
Fig. 8.
IS the Basis of the Skull with the First Vertebra of the Neck remaining on it,
together with diverse Muscles and other Parts.

A, B, C C, D D, The First Vertebra of the Neck: A, its Forepart, behind
which, the Tooth-like Process of the Second Vertebra is placed; B, its Back
part wanting a Spinal Process where the Musculi Recti Minores Postici Arise; C
C, The Transverse Process's: D D, Two somewhat Oval Process's of the First
Vertebra, which Move Sideways on the like Process's on the Upper Part of the
Second Vertebra of the Neck.

E, A Cavity immediately behind the Forepart of the First Vertebra, Fenced with
a strong Ligament Backwards next the Medulla Spinalis, in which the Tooth-like
Process of the Second Vertebra Tab. 93. Fig. 3, 4. A A, is received.

F, The Great Foramen, through which the Medulla Spinalis Descends from the
Head.

G, A Small Muscle, which from its Position I call Rectus Lateralis: I first
met with it in Dissection, some time since, and afterward found it was partly
Mentioned by Galen, and Described by Fallo^ppius: It Arises from the Superior
Part of the Extremity of the Transverse Process of the First Vertebra of the
Neck, and Ascends directly to its Implantation in the Os Occipitis; when it
Acts, it Nods the Head Laterally.

H, The Musculus Rectus Anterior Minor, so called from its Progress, Situation
and Size, it being much less than the Rectus Major, Tab. 18. L L. It Arises
from the Forepart of the First Vertebra, and is Inserted to the Appendix of
the Os Occipisis: This with its Partner Nod the Head Forewards, and may be
termed Annuentes.

I I, The Perforations in the Transverie Process's of the First Vertebra, in
which the Trunks of the Vertebral Arteries and Veins Pass.

K K, The Trunks of the Vertebral Arteries in their Contorted Passage between
the Transverse Process of the First Vertebra and Great Foramen (F) of the Os
Occipitis.

L L, The Mamiform Process's.

M M, The Cartilages of the Meatus Auditorius.

N N, A Probe Inserted into the Meatus a Palato ad Aurem. This Passage from the
Fauces admits the Air to Pass from thence into the Cavity of the Tympanum,
whereby the Membra^ea Tympani becomes more Distended, and the least Impetus of
the outward Air Shakes it, together with its little Bones that are Contiguous
to it. Besides this Passage into the Tympanum, there is another Passage out of
it, by the Upper Part of the Membrana Tympani into the Meatus Auditorius, by
which some in holding their Nostrils and Mouths, and forcing up their Breath,
can move a small Feather or the Flame of a Candle, when held near the Outward
Ear; in others it is still Opener, and they can Blow Smoke out at their Ears.
Though this Passage through the Tympanum is not commonly so Open as in the First
Case, yet naturally there is a Small Passage by the Upper Part of the Membrana
Tympani into the Measus Auditorius, which seems necessary, to the End when the
Tympamon is Filled with Air, any Sudden Impetus of the External Air should not
Violate the Membrana Tympani. The Meatus a Palato ad Aurem does not only Convey
Air into the Tympamon, but (constantly remaining Open) it Admits of a
Fluctuation of the Contained Air of the Tympamon, as well as a Fresh Supply: If
this Passage is Straightened, a Difficulty of Hearing necessarily Follows; if it
is totally Obstructed, a Deafness; in which Case, the Taking of Sneezing
Powders gives Relief.

O, The Glandulous Membrane Continued from the Foramina Narium to the Inside of
the Fauces.

P P, The Processus Scyloides.

Q, The Carotid Artery Cut off near its Entrance into the Os Petrosum.

R R, The Lower Parts of the Ossa Iugalia.

S, A Cartilaginous Body lying in the Depressure of the Os Temporum, where the
Processus Condyliformis of the Lower Jaw is Articulated.

T, The same Intermediate Cartilage of the Articulation Raised.

V, The Smooth Sinus in the Os Temporale, which Received the last mentioned
Cartilage.

t, Part of the Mucelaginous Gland of this Articulation, Clearing to the
abovementioned Cartilage.

W, The Upper Part of the Os Temporale Cut off.

X, The Os Occipitis, in like Manner Sawed off.

Y, The Musculus Occipitalis, as it Arises from that Part of the Os Occipitis,
where the Muscles of the Head are Inserted, whence Mounting it, soon becomes
Tendinous, and Marches on the Sincipus, where it is Joined with the Tendon of
the Fromalis: Unless it may be Supposed, that the Occipital and Frontal Muscles
are One Biventral Muscle, Arising from the Occiput and Inserted to the Lower
Part of the Skin of the Forehead, and being Fastened to the Hairy-scalp, Moves
it Forewards and Backwards, as well as Lifts up the Lower Part of the Forehead
with the Eyebrows.

Z Z, The Thinner Part of the Os Occipitis, where the Muscles of the Head are
Inserted.

a, The Gargareon Supported by the Probe, N N, Inserted into the Meatus a
Palato ad Aurem.

b b, The little Glandules, which Appear in Cutting the Fauces from hence.

c c, The Extremity of the Processus Pterygoides, or more properly the
Extremity of a Small Slender Process above the Processus Pterygoides in this
Position of the Skull; since Anatomists in Describing the Muscles of the Uvrela
have called this Process Pterigoides or Aliformis, we shall still Retain the
same Name, though the Aliform Process's Expressed, Tab. 92. Fig. 2. K, are Distinct
Process's, and no ways like these.

dd, The Musculi Sphenopirrigostaphilini, so called from their Origin,
Progress, and Insertion: they are also called Pterigopalatini and
Sphenoterigopalatini; they Arise Fleshy from an Acute Process of the Os
Sphenoides Expressed Appen. Fig. 15. H. whence they Pass to the Processus
Pterygoides, c c, where they become Tendinous, and are Reflected over those
Process's to their Insertions on the Forepart of the Gargareon: When these
Act, they Draw the Forepart of the Gargareus toward the Pterigoid Process's,
whereby it is pulled somewhat Upwards, as well as Forewards.

e e, The Sphenostaphilini: These Arise from the same Process's of the Os
Sphenoides with the former, and are Inserted on the Back-part of the Gargareon
Opposite to the Former. These Draw the Uvula Upwards and Backwards, whereby it
Prevents the Ascent of the Aliment into the Foramina Nariton in Deglutition, as
it Happens in those in whom the Uvula is wanting.

f, The Musculus Pterygoideus Externus Left at its Origin, at the External Part
of the Processus Pterygoides, as well as the Upper Part of the Os Sphenoides it
self; whence it Passes Backwards to its Insertion at the Neck of the Processus
Condyloides of the Lower-Jaw. When this and its Partner Act they Draw the
Lower-Jaw Forewards, whereby the Fore-teeth of the Lower-Jaw are Driven beyond
those of the Superior, as Falloppius Observes.

g, The Musculus Pterygoideus Internus also Freed from the Lower-Jaw, and Left
at its Origin: Tab. 15. Fig. 2. N. It Is Represented at its Insertion.

h, Some Appearance of the Septum Narium Backwards.

i i, The Denies Molares.

k k, The Canini.

l, The In^isores.

m, The Glandulae Labiorum, as they Appear in the Inside of the Upper Lip.
Under the InInternal Membrane of the Mouth; each of these Glands has an
Excretory Duct, which Perforates the Membrane of the Mouth at a small Papilla,
by which a Salival Humor is Emitted into the Mouth: The like Glands may be seen
on the Inside of the Cheeks.

n, The Tip of the Nose.

o, The Hairs of the Palpabrae.

Fig. 9.
The External Surface of One of the Glandulae Tonfillae or Amigdalae, where the
many large Foramina of its Excretory Ducts Appear, by which its Pituitous
Matter is Discharged into the Fauces, which joins with the Aliment in its
Descent to the Gula.

Fig. 10.
The Receptaculum Chyli Filled with Quicksilver, with the Neighboring
Lymphatick Glands remaining in their Proper Situation, together with the
Adjacent Parts; as I could make a Sketch of them whilst I was Demonstrating the
Parts of a Humane Body to some Worthy and Ingenious Gentlemen, when Professor
Bidloo favored me with a Visit.

A A, The Kidneys.

a a, The Emulgent Veins, of which that of the Right Side is Lower than the
Left.

B, The Ascending Trunk of the Vena Cava Distended with Wind; the Lower Part of
which is Comprest by the Iliack Artery of the Right Side.

b, The Trunk of the Vena Cava Cut from its Entrance into the Liver and Tied.

C C, Parts of the Two Iliack Veins, which may be seen Distended with Wind
below the Right Iliack Artery, as the Vena Cava is above; The External Iliack
Veins, as well as the Crutal Veins, lie immediately under the Trunks of the
Arteries that Accompany them, till they Pass by the Lower Part of the Musculus
Triceps and Os Femoris, to the Ham, where the Vein is Uppermost and the Artery
Passes Underneath, after the same Manner the Great Trunks of Veins and Arteries
do in other Parts. This Contrivance in Nature of Placing the Trunks of the
Iliack and Upper Parts of the Crural Arteries on the Veins, is an Admirable
Artifice to Accelerate the Ascension of the Blood to the Vena Cava and Heart,
as it Arises from the Inferior Parts, by means of the Pulsation of the
Arteries. If you Inject the Arteries with Wax and afterward Fill the Veins
with the same, you will see by the Figure of the Wax Contained in the Veins,
what Effect the Pulsations of the Arteries have on them, in Order to Promote
the Ascension of the Refluent Blood from below. In this Compressure made by the
Iliack Artery of the Right Side, on the Inferior Part of the Vena Cava its
Contained Blood is Forced to Ascend toward the Heart, the Valves in the Crural
Veins Opposing its Descent: By this means also the Pondus of the Refluent Blood
from below is Lessened, to the End its Motion may be the better Carried on at
the Extremities of the Vessels in the Legs and Feet, and a Kind of a Pulsation
made by the Vena Cava, whereby the Lymphatick Lumbal Gland R R, lying between
it and the Bodies of the Vertebrae is gently Comprest, of which hereafter.

D D, The Ascending Trunk of the Vena Cava below the Kidneys.

d d, The Iliack Arteries.

E, The Trunk of the Culiata Arteries Cut off.

F, The Trunk of the Mesenterica Superior in like Manner Cut off.

e e, The Arteries of the Testes; the Right Appearing at its Origin from the
Trunk of the Arteria Magna D; the Left Passing through the Lumbal Gland, Q.

f f, The Spermatick Veins near their Entrance into the Trunk of the Vena Cava
of the Right Side, and Emulgent Vein of the Left; where there are Valves
Placed, which Hinder the Descent of the Blood from those Large Vessels into
these Veins.

g g, The Upper Parts of the Ureters Distended with Wind;

h h, Their Lower Parts, as they Pass to the Bladder of Urine not Extended:
About these Parts of the Ureters, as they Descend over the Iliack Arteries, we
frequently find them Dilated by Reason of the Pulsation of those Arteries,
which Prevents the free Descent of the Urine, and especially Stones and Gravel,
both which often Pass them: Though more than once I have Seen One of the Ureters
completely Obstructed by Small Stones in this Part.

i, Some Fat Remaining on the Ureter, as it Passes out of the Kidney.

G G, The Glandulae Renales or Capsulae Atrabilares in Situ.

H H, The Lower Fleshy Part of the Diaphragm, which Arises from the Vertebrae
of the Loins.

I, The Fissura of the Diaphragm, in which the Gula Passes to the Stomach.

K, The Bladder of Urine Distended with Wind.

L, The Urachus Turned down.

M M, The Musculi Psoi Magni.

N. The Saecculus Chyliferous or Receptaculum Chyli (Expressed A. Fig. 11.) as it
Appears when Filled with Mercury, after freeing the Vena Cava, B, from its
Accompanying the A^eria Magna, D.

O, A Large Trunk of the Vinae Lactea Secundi Geruris, by which the Mercury was
Injected.

P, The Tube which Conveyed in the Mercury.

Q Q The Glandula Lumbalis of the Left Side, Lying partly on the Trunk of the
Arteria Magna.

R R, The Right Lumbal Gland, Lying partly under the Trunk of the Vena Cava.

S S, Some Communicant Branches of Lympheducts between the Two Lumbal Glands.

f f, The Lympheducts Arising from the Inguinal Glandules, App. Fig. 1. S S. as
well as Diverse other Lymphatick Glandules Lying on the Iliack Branches of
Blood Vessels (C C d d:) These Discharge all the Lympha, arising from the
Inferior Parts into the Lumbal Glands, whence it Passes immediately into the
Receptaculum Chyli, and is afterward Conveyed by the Thoracick Duct ( Fig. 11.
MM.) into the Subclarian Vein ( Fig. 12. HL:) This is the Ordinary Course of
the Lympha, arising from the Inferior Parts in its Way to the Mass of Blood
again. Hence it Appears, the Lympha of the Inferior Parts Meets with the Chyle
in its Receptaculum, whereby the Chyle is there not only farther Dilated, but
its Ascension is Accelerated toward the Subclavian Vein, by an Additional
Impetus from the Ascending Lympha.

Here we cannot but take Notice of a Considerable Artifice in Nature in the
Disposition of these Lymphatick Lumbal Glands, whereby the Progress of the
Lympha is Promoted toward the Receptaculum Chyli. As the Lympheducts Pass from
the Inferior Parts, they Accompany the Trunks of the Arteries, by whose
Continual Motion of Systole and Diastole, the Ascent of the Lympha is Promoted
as well as the Blood; but when the Lympha Arrives at the Lumbal Glands, the
Pulsation of the Ascending Trunk of the Great Artery being not sufficient (by
reason those Glands are much Larger than the Exterior Surface of that Artery
can give a Suitable Impulse to;) One of the Lumbal Glands R R, is Placed under
the Vena Cava B, or between it and the Vertebrae Lumbares, by which its
Vesiculae are gently Comprest, and their Contained Lympha is Pushed on toward
the Receptaculum Chyli.

T T, The Spermatick Vein and Artery on both Sides Involved in the Duplicature
of the Peritonaeum as they Pass toward the Testes.

Fig. 11.
The Lumbal Glandules with the Receptaculum Chyli and Part of the Thoracick
Duct etc. Filled with Mercury and Freed from the Body.

A, b b, The Receptaculum Chyli Composed of Three Trunks; One of which A, is
very Large Expressed at N, Fig. 10. the other Two are much less, and he
immediately under the Trunk of the Great Artery D, Fig. 10: This Division of the
Receptaculum Chyli into Three Trunks has not been taken Notice of, which Makes
me Suspect the Descriptions we have hitherto had of it, have been Taken from
Quadrupedes; where by Reason of its Horizontal Position, it is likely One
Secculus Chyliferus may be Sufficient; but in Men, in whom the Thoracick Duct,
and Receptaculum Inclines to a Perpendicular Position, it seems to be a
necessary Contrivance that it should be Divided into Three Channels (especially
before it entirely Passes under the Trunk of the Great Artery) the better to
Support the Chyle and Lymphe in their Ascending Progress.

a, The Trunk of a Lympheduct Arising from the Diaphragm.

B, The Ductus Thoracicus above the Diaphragm, where it Passes between the
Descending Trunk of the Arteria Magna and Bodies of the Vertebrae Thoracis;
which Disposition of it is very necessary, to the End the Pulsation of the
Artery may continually Press this Duct, and thereby Hasten the Ascent of its
Contents.

C, A Trunk of One of the Vasa Lactea Secundi Generis, Expressed Fig. 10. O, by
which the Mercury was Injected.

c, A Considerable Double Valve, which Hinders a Retrocession of Chyle and
Lympha in this Lacteal Vessel.

D, The Surface of the Left Lumbal Gland Placed on the Arteria Magna.

d, Another Small Trunk of the Vasa Lactea Secundi Generis, with a Small Gland
of the Mesentery, from whence it Arises.

E, The Lympheducts, which Arise from the Inferior Parts and Empty themselves
into the Left Lumbal Gland.

F, The Glandula Lumbalis of the Right Side Placed under the Vena Cava.

G H, The Lympheducts of the Inferior Parts, which Empty themselves into the
last mentioned Gland.

I, A Large Lympheduct, which Discharges in self into the Receptaculum Chyli
Majus.

K L, The Communicant Branches of Lympheducts between the Right and Left Lumbal
Glandules.

M M, The Thoracick Duct where its Valves, which Hinder the Descent of the
Chyle and Lympha, are faintly Expressed.

N N, Diverse Divisions and Inosculations of this Duct, whereby the Ascension of
the Chyle may be the better Carried on.

O, Diverse Lympheducts, which Arise from the Lymphatick Glands on the
Back-parts of the Lungs, and are the Exporting Lympheducts of those Glands;
their Importing Lympheducts Spring from the Lungs themselves and Adjacent Parts.

Fig. 12.
The Thoracick Duct at its Entrance into the Subclavian Vein, with its
Lympheducts Injected with Wax.

A, The Thoracick Duct where it Leaves the Descending Trunk of the Arteria
Magna, and Accompanying the Gula as it Passes toward the Left Side of the
Bodies of the Upper Vertebrae of the Thorax, in its Way to the Subclavian Vein,
where that of the Former Figure is Cut off and Tied.

B B, Two Lympheducts, which Sprang from the Thymus.

C, A Division and Inosculation of the Thoracick Duct.

D, A Large Lympheduct, whose Extremities Arise panly from the Thymus and
partly from the Right Subclavian Gland.

E, The Left Subclavian Lymphatick Gland. The Subclavian Glands (though not
Mentioned by any Author I Know of) are Two Large Glands Placed under each
Clavicle, and seem to be One of those Belonging to the Concatenation of Glands
of the Internal Jugular Vein: They Receive their Importing Lympheducts from the
Muscles of the Neck and Glands last Mentioned on the Jugular Veins, and perhaps
from the Thyroid Gland.

F G, The Exporting Lympheducts of the Subclavian Gland, which Empty themselves
into the Thoracick Duct.

H, The Large Trunk of the Thoracick Duct near its Entrance into the Subclavian
Vein.

I, The External and Superior Part of the Subclavian Vein.

K, Part of the Axillary Vein not Filled with Wax from the Thoracick Duct by
Reason of the Valves.

L, Parts of the Internal Jugular and Cervical Veins Cut off.

M, The Wax Injected by the Thoracick Duct Cut Transversely, with the Trunk of
the Vein as it Passes toward the Heart.

Fig 13.
A Lymphatick Gland with its Importing and Exporting Lympheducts Filled with
Mercury.

A, The Gland whose Vesiculae are Distended with Mercury.

E, The Importing Lympheduct, by which the Mercury was Injected into the
Vesiculae Glandulosae;

D D, Its Ramifications before they Enter the Gland.

C C, The Ramifications of the Exporting Lympheducts, as they Arise out of the
Gland and Unite in One Trunk, Called

B, The Exporting Lympheduct, which Passes either into the Receptaculum Chyli
immediately, or Thoracick Duct, or else into another Lymphatick Gland.

Besides this Communication of Lympheducts by the Mediation of Lymphatick
Glands; the Trunks of the Lympheducts themselves are frequently Inosculated
with each other, and though they commonly Enter into the next Lymphatick Gland
(where they Meet with a Fresh Supply of Lymphe Separated from the Blood Vessels
of the Gland, as well as an Impetus from thence) yet it sometimes Happens there
is a Communicant Branch from the Importing to the Exporting Lympheduct, as
Appears in the Following Figure.

Fig. 14.
A, The Gland Filled with Mercury as in the Foregoing Figure.

C, The Importing,

B, The Exporting Lympheduct.

D D, The Communicant Branch.





THE FIFTH TABLE.
Fig. 15.
DIVERSE Parts of the Organ of Hearing of a Man.

A, The External Convext Part of the Os Temporale.

B, Part of the Os Sincipitis.

C, The Processus Mastoides Continuous with the Os Temporum.

D, Part of another Process of the Os Temporale, which makes the Os Iugale.

E, The Processus Styloides.

F, Part of the Os Temporum, behind which the Carotide Artery passes toward
the Brain.

G G, Part of the Os Sphenoides.

H, An Acute Process of the Os Sphenoides, whence the Muscles of the Gargareon
Spring.

I, A Perforation between the Os Sphenoides and Temporum, by which the Ductus a
Pala^o passes into the Tymparnum.

K, The Sixth Foramen of the Os Sphenoides which is near the Root of the
Processus Pterygoides; by which a Branch of the Fifth Pair of Nerves passes out
of the Cranium. Vid. Tab. 92. Fig. 2. Y.

a, The Upper Part of the Porus Auditorius or Passage from the External Ear.

b b, The Breaking off of the Bone which Composes the Lower-part of the Meatus
or Porus Auditorius.

c, The Musculus Extermus Auris, by some called Laxator Externus. This Small
Muscle is placed under the Glandulous Membrane of the Porus Auditorius, which
Separates that Matter called the EarWax: In Beginning is Fleshy on the External
Margin, at the Upper Part of the Porus, soon becoming Tendinous, passes to its
Broad Tendinous Expansion on the External Surface of the Membrana Tympani. When
it Acts, it draws the Membrana Tympani toward a Plan Outward, together with
the Handle or Long Process of the Malleus; by which means the Great Concussion
made in the Outward Air, is Hindered from Violating the Membrana Tympani; which
at that Time is Relaxt.

d, The Long Process of the Malleus, called its Manubriton, lying immediately
under the Membrana Tympani, and is Contiguous to it.

e, The Membrana Tympani or Thin Transparent Membrane, commonly called the Drum
of the Ear.

f, A Sinus in the Os Temporum for the Articulation of the Processus
Condyloides of the Lower Jaw.

g, The Conjunction of the Os Sphenoides with the Os Temporum.

h h, The Edges of the last mentioned Bones Sawed ost.

* The Suture between the Os Temporum and Sincipitis.

Fig. 16.
The Organs of Hearing as they are made to Appear on the Internal Parts of the
same Bones, Represented in the foregoing Figure

A A, The Inside of the Lower-part of the Os Sincipitis which lies on the
Upper Part of the Os Temporum next the Brain.

a a, The Channels in the Bone which Receive the Blood Vessels lying on the
Dura Matter.

B, Part of the Os Occipitis.

b b b, The Conjunction of the Os Temporum with the Bones of the Sincipus and
Occipus, called Sutura Squamosa.

C C, The Os Temporum next the Brain.

c, That Part of the Os Temporum or Processus Perrosus of that Bone, which
Touches the Anterior Appendix of the Os Occipitis.

D, Part of the Os Sphenoides.

d, That Part of the Os Sphenoides at the Upper Part of the Processus
Pterygoides.

E, Part of the Os Iugale.

e, The External Semicircular Duct of the Os Petrosum Opened; Expressed at k,
Fig. 18.

F, The External Surface of the Os Petrosum, to which the Dura Matter firmly
Adheres.

f f, The External Lamina of the Os Petrosum cut off with a Chizel, to show the
Two Internal Muscles of the Malleus, Part of the Cavity of the Tympanum and the
Articulation of the Malleus with the Incus, with the Cavernulae of the Os
Petrosum which Communicate with those of the Processus Mastoides.

G, A Channel on the Os Petrosum, in which the Superior Long and Narrow Sinus
of the Dura Matter, passes from the Sella Turcica to the Tortuous Part of the
Lateral Sinus.

g, The Perforation in the Processus Petrosus, by which the Carotide Artery
passes in a Tortuous Manner toward the Sella Turcica to the Brain.

H.... The Head of the Malleus Articulated with the Basis of the Incus.

I... The Basis of the Incus and its Short Process in Situ.

K... The Musculus Obiiquus or Semicircularis Auris; this Du Verny Describes
instead of the Laxator Externus Expressed at c, in the preceding Figure: It is
placed in a Proper Furrow of the Bone which is above the Bony Part of the
Channel, from the Palate to the Ear, whence it Marches Obliquely to its
Insertion at a Small Acute Process near the Neck of the Malleus: When it Acts,
it draws the Handle of the Malleus Sideways toward the Os Iugale; whereby it
assists the External Muscle, in making the Memorana Tympani capable of
Resisting any great Impetus made in the Outward Air, from Injuring that
Membrane.

L... The Musculus Intermos Tympani Auris: The Fleshy Part of this, like the
Former, is Enclosed within a Bony Channel of the Os Petrosum, lying on the
Upper Side of the Bony Part of the Duct A Pala^o ad Aurem, as here Expressed;
when it is Advanced to the Upper Side of the Tympanum, it is Converted into a
Small Tendon which passes out of its Bony Channel, not unlike a Rope from a
Pully, to the Opposite Part of the Tympanum, and is Fastened to the Long
Process of the Malieus. This Muscle Arises from that Part of the Os Sphenoides
that Touches the Os Petrosum, and Helps to Frame the Aqueduct or Meatus a
Pala^o ad Aurem. The Strong Membrane which Lines the Bony Channel in which this
Muscle is Entertained, passes out with its Tendon to the Internal Acute Process
of the Malleus, where the preceding Muscle is Inserted. Placentinus seeing the
Tendon of the Former Muscle at its Insertion, and not Discovering that Muscle,
supposed it belonged to the Muscle last mentioned, which he Describes and
Figures with Double Tendinous Terminations. When this Internal Muscle of
Eustachius Acts, it draws the Long Process of the Malleus toward the Foramen
Ovale and Rotundum; whereby the External Surface of the Membrana Tympani
becomes Concave, and the Membrane it self much Extended, which is Necessary
when Sounds are Low.

M, The Foramen of the Os Sphenoides, by which a Branch of the Fifth Pair of
Nerves, passes out of the Skull.

N, The Foramen of the Processus Petrosus or Os Petrosum, by which the Auditory
Nerve passes to the Organ of Hearing.

Fig. 17.
The External Surface of the Os Temporum of the Right Side of a full Grown
Foetus.

A A A, Its Superior and Anterior Margin which was Contiguous to the Os
Sincipitis and Sphenoides:

B, Its Posterior Part which Touches the Os Occipitis.

C, A Large Foramen by which the Blood Vessels Enter the Bone; this Foramen
Appears at the Root of the Mammiform Process of the Adult; which Process does
not Appear in the Foetus.

D, A Process of this Bone in the Foetus at the meeting of the Os Sincipitis,
with the Os Occipitis, which is not Conspicuous in the Adult.

E, Part of the Os Iugale cut off.

F, The Sinus in which the Condyloide Process of the Lower Jaw, is Received.

G, That Part of the Os Temporum, called Processus Petrosus; wherein the Three
Semicircular Ducts and Cochlea are Excavated.

H... The Long Process of the Incus which is Articulated to the Upper Part of
the Stapes, by the Mediation of the Os Orbiculare.

I.... The Os Orbiculare and Stapes, Articulated to the Extremity of the Long
Process of the Incus.

K.... The Long Process of the Malleus which is Connected to the Internal
Surface of the Membrana Tympani.

By this mutual Articulation of the Four Little Bones of the Tympanum with each
other, and the Connection of the Internal Surface of the Membrana Tympani, to
the Long Process of the Malleus; whatever Motions are made by the Outward Air
which shakes that Membrane, the Malleus is necessarily Moved, consequently the
Incus and Stapes: Now the Basis of the Stapes exactly Covering the Foramen
Ovale, the Air contained in the Labyrinth and Cochlea, is thereby necessarily
Agitated, and the Effects of the Various Tremulous Motions of the Stapes, are
Represented to the Expansions of the Auditory Nerves, in the Labyrinth and
Cochlea.

L, The Circulus Osseus of the Foetus.

M..., Part of the Cochlea in Situ, Opened.

N.... The Tendon of the Musculus Stapedis Descending from the Os Petrosum, to
its Implantation on the Upper Part of the Stapes, whereby it Draws the Stapes
Upwards toward the Foramen, and Shuts it.

O, The Stapes.

P, The Ossiculum Quartum or Orbiculare.

Q, The Musculus Stapedis Freed from its Bony Pipe, Excavated in the Os
Perro^^on, near the Bottom of the Tympanum. The Pipe which contains the Fleshy
Part of this Muscle is Less than the Sixth Part of an Inch in Length, and is
much Larger than the Foramen, by which its Tendon passes to its Implantation in
the Stapes.

R -, - The Basis of the Incus where the Head of the Malleus is Articulated;

S. - - Its Short Process which Rests on the Os Petrosum;

T, - Its Long Process that is Articulated with the Stapes.

V. - The Head of the Malleus which is Articulated with the Incus.

W... That Part of the Long Process of the Malleus, where the Internal Muscle
of the Tympanum of Eustachius is Inserted.

X.. The External Acute Process of the Malleus, where it Begins to Cleave to
the Membrana Tympani;

Y -- Its Internal Acute Process, to which the Musculus Obliquus or Externus of
Du Verny, is Implanted.

Fig. 18.
The Internal Face of the same Os Temporum next the Brain, Represented in the
preceding Figure

A, The Internal Concave and unequal Surface of the Bone next the Dura Matter.

B, Part of the Os Iugale.

C, The Porous Substance of the Bone as it Appears after it is cut away to show
its Cavity, called Tympanum.

D, The Posterior Part of the Os Temporum which Touches the Occipital Bone.

E, The Extremity of the Processus Petrosus next the Anterior Appendix of the
Os Occipitis.

F... The Lower-part of the Annulus Osseus.

G... Part of the Musculus Obliquus Auris, left at its Insertion.

H.-. The Long Process or Handle of the Malleus.

I... Part of the Incus where it is Articulated with the Malleus.

K... The Os Petrosum cut away into the Cavity of the Tympanum F, G, H I, K.
The Tympanum Opened: Besides the Membrane of the Tympanum at the Extremity of
the Meatus Auditorius; the Cavity of the Tympanum is Lined with a Thin
Transparent Membrane, which (I am apt to think) is also Extended on the
Malleus, Incus, Os Orbiculare, and Stapes, since the Accurate Ruysch has
Observed diverse Blood Vessels on those Bones.

k, The Superior or External of the Three Semicircular Ducts Freed from the
Adjacent Part of the Os Petrosum, and Opened.

l, The Middle Semicircular Duct also Cleared and Opened.

m.... Part of the Third and most Internal Semicircular Duct also partly Opened.

n, The Foramen by which the Auditory Nerve Enters the Os Petrosum.

Fig. 19.
The Salival Glandules of the Lower Jaw, together with those under the Tongue,
Dissected.

A A, The Two Inferior Maxillary Glands, which are Represented in Situ, Tab.
15. Fig. 1. M M, Composed of diverse Lobuli, Enclosed in One Membrane.

B B, The Glandulae Sublinguales Covered with their Common Membrane; One of
which Glandules is Represented in Situ, in the last mentioned Table, Fig. 2. W.

C C, The Trunks of the Two Arteries which Spring from the Carotides, and
Convey Blood into the above mentioned Salival Glands.

D D, Two Branches of Arteries, Arising from the last mentioned Trunks, which
pass to the Tongue. Besides the Branches now mentioned, each of these Large
Trunks sends out another considerable Branch Expressed Tab. 12. Fig. 4. F. which
is Employed on the Muscles of the Face.

E, The Trunk of the Vein Arising from the Extremitties of the Arteries of
those Glands, and those of the Neighboring Parts.

F, A Branch of the Fifth Pair of Nerves.

G G, The Salival Ducts of the Inferior Maxillary Glands, as they pass to their
Excretory Pores at the Extremity of each Papilla placed under the Tongue.

H H, The Two Papillae last mentioned, where the Excretory Ducts of the
Sublingual Glands also empty themselves at the same Pores with the Two Salival
Ducts. This Protrusion of the Salival Ducts which Frame the Papillae, is a
necessary Contrivance to Hinder any Particle of the Masticated Aliment from
Entering those Ducts, or the Exceted Saliva from Repassing them.

I, The Salival Duct of the Right Side Opened according to its Length, and
Expanded.

K, A Small Stone as it Appeared lying in the above mentioned Duct: It was of a
bright Yellow Color, not unlike that of Arumpigmentum. In Dissecting these
Parts the Lesser End of it happened to Break off, as it is here Expressed.

Fig. 20.
The Internal or Back Side of the Larynx, with the Aspera Arteria and Part of
the Bronchia.

A, The Concare Part of the Epiglottis as it Appears when Pinned up.

a a, Diverse Small Glands at the Root of the Epiglottis, which are Covered with
a Loose Membrane which makes the Glottis, and is Continued to that of the
Inside of the Mouth, Fauces, and Gula.

B B, The Extremities of the Os Hyoides.

C C, The Ligaments which Fasten them to the Two Superior Long Processes of the
Scutiformal Cartilage.

D D, The Internal Concave Part of the Scutiformal Cartilage.

b b, The Two Long and Superior Processes of the Scutiformal Cartilage.

c c, The Superior Parts of the Arytenoidal Cartilages which were Covered with
the Loose Membrane above mentioned, and Compose the Glottis.

d, The Back-part of the Annular Cartilage.

E E, The Musculi Crico^rytenoidei Possici which Open the Arytenoidal
Cartilages c c, by Drawing them Backwards.

F, The Musculus Arytenoideus which Draws the Two Arytenoidal Cartilages nearer
each other, and Streightens the Rimula.

G, The Cartilaginous Part of the Windpipe Forewards.

H H, The Posterior and Membranous Part of the Windpipe next the Gula.

e e, Diverse Small Glands which Appear on this Membranous Part of the
Windpipe, and Beginning of the Bronchiae. The Excretory Ducts of these Glands,
I am persuaded, Discharge themselves into the Windpipe and Bronchia, and serve
to Moisten their Cavities, and Defend them from the Inspired Air, whence Arises
Part of that Moisture which is Rejected in Expiration; a great Part of it
Arising also from the Saliva, as the Air passes the Mouth; whence it happens,
less Moisture passes with the Expired Air by the Foramina Narium only, than
when we Expire through the Mouth; and consequently the Ha^^ms is more or less
Wet, as the Mouth is more or less Opened.

f f, The Beginning of the Bronchia.

The Glands above mentioned are most commonly Affected in Catarths, and most of
those Defluctions on the Windpipe which cause frequent Coughing.

Fig. 21.
A Portion of the Windpipe Opened and Pined out to show its Inside.

A A, Its Cartilages Divided according to the Length of the Windpipe.

B, Its Internal Membrane Composed of Longitudinal Fibers, Raised: This Draws
the Cartilages nearer each other, and Shortens the Windpipe.

C C, The Transverse Order of Fibers lying on the Membranous Part of the
Windpipe next the Gula: These Pull the Extremities of the Little Semicircular
Cartilages of the Windpipe nearer each other, whereby they Strenghten its
Canalis.

Fig. 22.
The Larynx or Upper Part of the Windpipe after the Scutiformal Cartilage is
taken off, as it Appears Laterally.

A, The Epiglottis;

B, Its Root cut from the Tongue.

C, The Arytenoidal Cartilage.

D, The Back-part of the Cricoidal or Annular Cartilage;

d, Its Forepart which Appears immediately under the Thyrois.

E, The Musculus Cricoarytenoideus Posticus.

F, The Thyroarytenoideus Freed from the Scutiformal Cartilage, and left at
its Insertion to the Arytenoidal Cartilage Lateraly.

G, The Cricoarytenoideus Lateralis; it Arising from the Cartilage Cricoides,
and is Inserted to the Arytenoides. It Assists with its Partner in Opening the
Glottis or Arytenoidal Cartilages.

H, Parts of the Windpipe.

Fig. 23.
The Larynx together with a Portion of the Windpipe.

A, The Epiglottis, by which the whole Larynx is Suspended, which makes it
Appear much longer in this than in the preceding Figure.

B, That Part of the Epiglottis cut from the Root of the Tongue.

C C, The Sides of the Scutiformal Cartilage drawn from each other;

a a, Its Superior Long Processes Tied to the Extremities of the Os Hyoides.

b, One of its Two Inferior Short Processes Cleaving to the Annular Cartilage.

c, One of the Arytenoidal Cartilages (which Compose the Rimula of the Larynx,)
Covered by the Glottis.

d d, The Annular Cartilage.

D, A Portion of the Windpipe.

E, The Membranous Part of the Windpipe which Touches the Gula, as it Descends
to the Stomach.

e, The Musculus Cricoarytenoideus Posticus.

f, The Cricoarytenoideus Lateralis.

g, The Thyroarytenoideus Arising from the Internal Concave Part of the Thyroid
Cartilage, and is Inserted to the Backpart of the Arytenoidal Cartilage above
the Insertion of the Cricoarytenoideus Lateralis: This and its Companion on the
other Side Acting together, Draw the Two Arytenoidal Cartilages nearer each
other, and Streighten the Rimula: They Act in Deglutition, whereby any Part of
the Aliment is effectually Hindered from Descending into the Larynx, by the
Assistance of the Epiglottis, which at that Time exactly Covers the Rimula.
These Muscles are so Strong in some, who by adequately Closing this Passage to
the Windpipe, can suffer Liquors poured into their Mouths to pass the Gula,
without the Action of Deglutition, or the Assistance of the Epiglottis; as it is
evident if they hold their Mouths Open and their Tongues Deprest, whilst a
Quantity of Liquor Descends from thence into their Stomachs.

The Use of the Epiglottis is to Cover the Glottis in Deglutition, so that the
Aliment may Descend over it into the Gula and Stomach. Nor has the Epiglottis
any Muscles to Depress it in that Action; but when the Tongue is Elevated, the
Epiglot is necessarily Deprest: Hence it is, when the Tongue is very much
Intumisied (as it is frequently in those who are in great Salivations) the free
Action of Deglutition is Hindered, and the Patient is necessitated to Swallow
even Fluids very leasurely, and not without Difficulty, especially if the
Tongue is so Distended, that it cannot be Contained within the Teeth.

Fig. 24
The Upper Part of the Tongue as it Appears when taken out with its Proper
Muscles.

A, The Tip of the Tongue.

B, Its Root Freed from the Epiglottis and Os Hyoides.

a a, The Vilous Nervous Bodies of the Tongue, which stand Obliquely from the
Apex or Tip of the Tongue toward its Root.

b b, The Glands placed at the Root of the Tongue, whose Excretory Pores may be
seen to Open in their Middle, whence a Salival Humor is emitted, nor unlike
the Glands of the Fauces and Foramina Narium, and those placed in the Cheeks
and Lips.

C C, The Musculi Ceratoglosii Expressed in Situ, Tab. 14. Fig. 1. D D, on one
Side.

D D, The Styloglossi in like Manner Expressed, Tab. ibid. Fig. ibid. C.

Fig. 25.
The Vesiculae Seminales with Part of the Vas Deferens, and their common Duct
which passes through the Prostatae into the Urethrae, Opened.

A A, Part of the External Surface of the Vesiculae Seminales, where the
Ramifications of Blood Vessels are Conipicuous to the Naked Eye.

B, C, The Larger Cells of the Vesiculae Seminales and Vas Deferens.

D, The Vas Deferens Opened.

b, c c, The Lesser Cells of the Vas Deferens and Vesiculae Seminales within
the Larger.

E, The Place where the Vas Deferens and Vesiculae Seminales Communicate with
each other.

F, The common Duct of the Vesiculae Seminales and Vas Deferens which passes
through the Glandulae Prostatae, and Discharges the Semen into the Ure^^ra.

THE SIXTH TABLE.
Fig. 26.
REPRESENTS the Internal Surface of the Basis of the Cranium, with the Inferior
Part of the Dura Matter remaining on it, done immediately after the Brain was
taken out; the Blood Vessels being first Injected with Wax.

A A, The Edges of the Skull, as they Appear when its Upper Part is Sawed off.

B B, Part of the Dura Matter lying on the Basis of the Skull.

C C, The Two Lateral Sinus's filled with Wax in their Declive and Tortuous
Progress, to their Egress at the Basis of the Skull.

d d, The Two Superior Long Sinus's which Communicate between the Circular
Sinus 22, and Lateral Sinus's.

e e, Two Inferior short Sinus's, which also Discharge themselves into the Two
Lateral Ones at their Egress.

f, The Os Cristae Gaelli or Middle Process of the Os Ethmoides or Cribrosum,
by which the Olfactory Nerves pass to the Foramina Narium.

g g, Diverse Blood Vessels of the Dura Matter, not Injected with Wax, by reason
of their Smallness.

h h, The First Arteries of the Dura Matter not filled with Wax.

i i, The Second Branches of the Arteries of the Dura Matter: These Arise from
the Carotides before they Enter the Skull, and pass through a small Foramen
Reckoned a Fifth of the Os Sphenoides, at the Root of an Acute Process of that
Bone, whence the Muscles of the Gargarton Spring: After these Arteries Enter
the Skull, their Larger Branches lie on the Exterior Surface of the Dura Matter,
as Expressed Tab. 6. Fig. 1, 2, and 4, which are Entertained in Furrows on the
Internal Surface of the Cranium, Expressed Tab. 91. Fig. 2. F F: As the Branches
of these Arteries become still more and more Divided, and less on the
Upper Part of the Dura Matter, so their Channels on the Top of the Skull scarce
Appear; nor do any of them Enter the Longitudinal Sinus, as Dr. Ridley has well
Observed. Besides those Branches of these Arteries which carry Blood to the
Dura Matter, there are others also which convey Blood to the Meditulliton of the
Skull A A, and do Inosculate with the Arteries of the Hairy-Scalp. The Branches
of these Arteries on the Dura Matter, are Accompanied with Veins, which do not
pass out of the Cranison at the same Perforation where the Arteries Entered,
but leave them where the Inferior and Foremost Angle of the Bregma Touches the
Os Sphenoides and Temporum Internally, and afterward pass between the Two
Internal Long Processes of the Os Sphenoides and Os Frontis, and March out at
the Second Perforation of the Os Sphenoides or Large Rima, Tab. 89. Fig. 2. C
D, I. Nor do the Larger Branches of these Blood Vessels always continue their
whole Progress between the Skull and Dura Matter, but Parts of them March in
Bony Enclosures of the Skull, especially at the Inferior Angle of the Bregma
above mentioned, and afterward pass our again in their Usual Manner: Nor are
the Perforations in the Os Sphenoides always Regular where these Arteries of
the Dura Matter Enter: They sometimes Marching through the Sixth Perforations of
the Sphenoides, where the Branches of the Far Quintum Nervorum pass out; at
other times their Perforations are at the Conjunctions of the Os Sphenoides
with the Ossa Petrosa, between the Acute Processes of the First named Bone, and
Perforations of the Latter where the Carotide Arteries Enter the Skull.

k, The Third Branch of the Arteries of the Dura Matter Enter the Cranium, where
the Eighth Pair of Nerves pass out: I don't remember I ever saw any Branches of
Veins Accompany these Arteries.

Besides these Arteries of the Dura Matter, I don't doubt but on a diligent
Search, many more may be found; and in some Subjects some of these may be
wanting, especially those in whom diverse Branches pass the Upper Part of the
Skull near the Longitudinal Suture; of which, we commonly find Two Remarkable
Ones toward the Occiput, as has been taken Notice of, Tab. 90. Fig. 2.

L, The Great Foramen of the Os Occipitis, by which the Medulla Oblongata
passes to the Specus in the Vertebrae.

m m, Some Veins of the Dura Matter which Communicate with the Inferior Short
Sinus's.

n, Part of the Os Iugale.

o o, The Os Ethmoides or Cribriforme, by which the Olfactory Nerves pass out
of the Cranium.

P P, The Optic Nerves cut off at their Egress.

q q, The Great Branches of the Carotide Arteries cut off at their Entrance
into the Cavity of the Skull.

r, One of the Nerves of the Third Pair on the Left Side, made hare from the
Duplicatute of the Dura Matter, in which it passes before it Marches out of the
Skull with the following Pair.

s s, The Fourth Pair of Nerves Freed from the Duplicature last mentioned, and
Turn' up at their passing the Second Perforation of the Os Sphenoides or Large
Rima, Expressed Tab. 89. Fig. 2. between C, D, I.

t t, The Fifth Pair of Nerves on the Right Side Expanded, before it is Divided
into Three Branches, on the contrary Side its Trunk is Whole. Vid. Fig. 27.

V, The Upper and Foremost Branch of the Fifth Pair of Nerves on the Left Side,
before it passes out of the Skull at the Second Perforation of the Os
Sphenoides, with the Third, Fourth, and Sixth Pair of Nerves.

w, The Nerve of the Sixth Pair on the Left Side Freed from the Duplicature of
the Dura Matter; in which it is Enclosed at a considerable Distance before it
Accompanies the Third, Fourth, and Foremost Branch of the Fifth Pair of Nerves
at its Egress.

x, The Intercostal Nerve of the Left Side, Composed of Two Branches from the
Fifth Nerve, and joining with the Body of the Sixth in this Subject, whether
this Disposition is Constant, I must confess my late Enquiries have not
afforded me an Opportunity of Observing.

y, The Two Branches of the Fifth Pair of Nerves which Help to Compose the
Intercostal Nerve.

z z, The Contortion of the Carotide Artery Collateral to the Sella Turcica.

1, 1, The Glandula Pituitaria lying in the Sella Turcica.

2, 2, The Circular Sinus or Vein Environing the Pituitary Gland, and was First
taken Notice of by Dr. Ridley.

3, The Infundibulum in whose Inside, I conceive, the Trunks of Exporting
Lympheducts pass from the Pinial Gland; besides which, the Inmost Cavity of the
Infundibulum it self Transmits the Aqueous Humor of the Ventricles of the
Brain into the Pituitary Gland, where it joins with the Lymphs above mentioned.

4, 4, Two Arteries taken Notice of by Vieustens, which pass out of the Cranium
to the Glandulous Membranes of the Foramina Narium and Neighboring (...).

5, 5, The Bended Parts of the Lateral Sinus's as they pass that Part of the
Cranium, where the Os Temporum, Sincipitis, and Occipitis meet.

6, Part of the Dura Matter Raised and Reclined Laterally, to show the Progress
of the Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Pair of Nerves.

7, 7, The Hard and Soft Trunks of the Auditory Nerves Entering the Os Petrosum.

8, 8, The Eighth Pair of Nerves or Par Vagum, together with the Accessory
Nerves (**) Accompanying them at their Egress.

**, The Accessory Nerves.

9, 9, The Ninth Pair of Nerves.

Fig. 27.
The Trunk and Three Branches at One of the Nerves of the Fifth Pair within the
Cranium.

A, The Trunk,

B, Its Gangleon,

C, Its Foremost Branch Expressed at V, in the preceding Figure, passing out of
the Skull at the Second Perforation of the Os Sphenoides;

D, Its Middle Branch somewhat less than the other Two, which passes out at a
Distinct Foramen of the Os Sphenoides, Collateral to the Sella Turcica, and is
Reckoned the Third Foramen of that Bone, Expressed Tab. 89. Fig. 2.

E, The Third Branch of this Nerve, which passes the Sixth Perforation of the
Sphenoides.

Fig. 28.
The Basis of the Brain with the Large Trunks of its Blood Vessels of both
Kinds Injected with Wax, some of their Ramifications being cleared of the Pia
Matter, together with the Ten Pair of Nerves of the Brain, and a Portion of the
Medulla Spinalis, etc.

A A, The Foremost,

B B, The Hindmost Lobes of the Brain.

C C, The Cerebellion which in this Subject was very Large.

D D, The Two Lateral Sinus's cut off after their Declive and Tortuous
Progress, Expressed in the First of the Two precedent Figures C C, 5, 5.

E E, The Trunks of the Vertebral Arteries as they pass the Transverse
Processes of the First Vertebra of the Neck, in their Tortuous Progress through
the Great Foramen of the Os Occipitis, to the Medulla Oblongata and Brain. Vid.
Append. Fig. 8. K K.

F, The Vertebral Sinus or Large Vein, in whose External Membrane the Wax is
Extravast, which makes it Appear with an Unequal Surface, as here Expressed.

G G G G G, A Continuation of the Dura Matter Divided according to its Length;
One Side lying on the Medulla Spinalis, the other being Raised and Pinned out.

a, A Foramen to whose Margin the Upper Broad Part of the Infundibulum is
Fastened, and Opens into it, insomuch that if you take out the Brain with the
Infundibulum remaining to it, and Insert a Blow-Pipe into the Fourth Ventricle,
you may thereby not only Distend that and the Two Lateral Ventricles with Wind,
but you will also see the Infundibulum Rise and be Distended also.

b b, Two White Protuberances behind the Infundibulum.

C C, Two Large Branches of the Carotide Arteries cut off, before they pass
between the Foremost and Hinder Lobes of the Brain.

d d, Two Communicant Branches between the Carotide and Cervical Arteries, by
which the Latter chiefly became filled with Wax, it being Injected into One of
the Trunks of the Carotide Arteries only of One Side: Hence we may be Informed,
not only of the Inosculations of the Large Branches of the Carotide Artery of
the Right Side with those of the Left, but of their Communications also with
the Vertebral Arteries, as they pass the Transverse Processes of the Vertebrae;
the Wax in such an Injection pouring out by the Vertebrals; as I have had
occasion more than once to Observe by Injecting these Arteries as above
mentioned, after the Head together with the Vertebrae of the Neck have been
taken from the Body.

e e e e, Two Large Branches of the Cervical Artery sometimes seeming as though
they came from the Communicant Branches; from the Foremost of these chiefly
Spring the Arteries of the Plexut Choroeides; from the Two Hindmost Arise those
Branches which go to the Chorocid Plexus of the Fourth Ventricle of the Brain.

f, Two Little Branches of the Carotides.

h h, The Two Trunks of the Vertebral Arteries which Compose the Cervical.

g, The Cervical Artery.

i i, The Spinal Artery whick by reason of the Retrograde Motion of the Wax, or
some Coagulated Blood in it near the Vertebral Artery, was not filled with Wax
as the rest.

k, A Small Branch of an Artery Running between the Fasciculae of the Nerve of
the Ninth Pair, on the Right Side near their Originals.

l l, Parts of the Cr^ra Medullae Oblongata, immediately before they meet at
their Conjunction under the Pons Varolii.

m m, The Annular Protuberance or Pons Varolii.

n, That Part of the Caudex Medullaris or Medulla Oblongata on the Right Side,
called by Willis and Vicussen^us, Corpora Pyramidalia,

o, That Part on the same Side, called Corpus Os^^^^^.

p, A Branch of the Carotide Arteries which Divide the Two Anterior Lobes of
the Brain from each other; from whence Spring some Small Branches which
Accompany the Olfactory Nerves at their Egress by the Os Cribriforme, Fig. 26.
4, 4.

q q, Little Branches from the Cervical Arteries which Run under the Pia Matter
that Covers this Part, and sometimes pass further to the Plexus Chorotides in
the Fourth Ventricle, and Cerebellum.

r r r r, Other Branches passing into the Annular Protuberance.

s s, The Two First Medullary Processes of the Cerebellum which are continued
to the Protuberancia Annularis, and seem to Compose Part of it: The Two Second
Processes of the Cerebel are Expressed Tab. 10 Fig. 1. S S.

t t, The Veins on the Cerebellum which pass according to its Sulci or External
Furrows which Vary very much in their Progress from those of the Brain it self.

v v v, Other Veins Variously Distributed on the Cerebel which Empty themselves
into the Lateral Sinus's.

w w, The Sulci of the Brain, in which large Branches of Veins and sometimes
Arteries may be seen.

x x x, Their Capillary Branches as they Appear under the Pia Matter on the
External Corrical Surface of the Brain.

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. The Ten Pair of Nerves of the Brain, with Seven of those
of the Spinal Marrow.

1, 1, The First Pair of Nerves of the Brain, called Par Olfaectorium, they are
much Larger in Brutes, and are Hollow; which Hollownesses Communicate with the
Ventricles of their Brains, but do not Appear so in Humane Bodies. They are
called Processus Mammillares, from their Appearance in Quadrupedes. By the
utmost Scrutiny that Exact Anatomizer of these Parts, Dr. Ridley and my Self
could make, we never Discovered but One Original to each of these Nerves; which
is from the Under and Foremost Part of the Crura Medulla Oblongata, whence they
pass in an Oblique Manner for some Space between the Fore and Hindmost Lobes of
the Brain, and March out from thence as Appears in the Figure: As they pass
through the Os Ethmoides (o o, Fig. 26.) these Medullary Bodies are Converted
into as many Nervous Fasciculi, as there are Perforations in that Bone, which
are afterward Expanded on the Glandulous Membrane that Invests the Foramina
Narium.

2, 2, The Second Pair of Nerves, called Optici, or Seeing Nerves: These Arise
from the Two Large Medullary Protuberances of the Brain, called Thalami
Nervorum Opticorum, Expressed in the following Table, c c, Fig. 30. and passing
over the Crura Medullae Oblongatae, March to their Conjunction here Expressed PS;
after parting from each other again, they soon pass the First Foramina of the
Os Sphenoides P P, App. Fig. 26. where the Great Branches of the Carotide
Arteries lie Contiguous to them; whence it happens in any great Plethora (as
after plentiful Drinking or the like) these Arteries by reason of their
Turgescence, so Press on the Optic Nerves, as to Distort the Course of their
Fibers, and make Objects seem Disordered. Some Branches of the Blood Vessels
are Visible to the Naked Eye at they pass through the Bodies of those Nerves, and
are Conspicuous also on their Expansions within the Bulb of the Eyes, which
Compose the Tunica Retinae.

3, 3, The Third Pair of Nerves passing out between the Two Branches of the
Cervical Artery e e e e; these Arise from the Upper and Forepart of the
Annular Process, where the Crura Medullae Oblongatae meet: Nor do the
Beginnings of these Nerves Appear till the Blood Vessels above mentioned and
Pia Matter are removed: They Enter the Duplicature of the Dura Matter on each
Side the Pituitary Gland, as Expressed Tab. 9. Fig. 3. H H, and pass out of the
Skull with the following Nerves, to the Muscles of the Eyes, wherefore these
are called Par Oculorum M^terium.

5, 4, The Fourth Pair of Nerves of the Brain as they Appear after their
Progress between the Cerebrum and Cerebellum: They Arise Remote from their
Appearance in this Figure, even at the Backside of the Medulla Oblongata, Tab.
10. Fig. 1. v v. In taking out the Brain you will find them under the Forepart
of the Second Process of the Dura Matter near the Sella Turcica: They March into
the Duplicature of the Dura Matter immediately under the Former, and pass the
Second Foramen of the Os Sphenoides with them into the Orbita Oculi: They are
called Par Patheticiam, either because some Branches of them pass to the
Oblique Minds of the Eye, or that considerable Branches (if not their Whole
Trunks) pass the Trochleae Cartilages of the Eyes.

5, 5, The Fifth Pair are very Large in their Originals, at the Upper and
Lateral Part of the Processus Annularis, near the Pedunculus or Second Process
of the Cerebellum. In taking out the Brain from the Basis of the Skull, you will
find these Nerves immediately under the Pathetick: Nor can you well see them to
cut them off (in this Operation) unless you First Divide the Second Process of
the Dura Matter, where it is Fastened to the Extremity of the Inner Process of
the Os Petrosum: After they pass over the Extremity of the last mentioned
Process they Frame Gangleons, and each is Divided into Three Branches
Reprepresented in the preceding Figure.

6, 6. The Sixth Pair of Nerves are about the Bigness of the Third, and Arise
from the Hinder-part of the Annular Process, not far from the Basis of the
Corpora Pyramidalia; as they pass on the Annular Protuberance, some Branches of
the Cervical Artery run over them: They Enter the Duplicature of the Dura Matter
below the Former. Vid. Tab. 9. Fig. 3. N N, and pass over the Extremity of the
Internal Process of the Petrosum with the Former, as is Represented Fig. 26. w.

7, 7, The Seventh Pair are the the Auditory or Hearing Nerves, each of which
are Composed of Two Nerves; the One being Hard, the other Soft, which have
Distinct Originals: The Former or Hard Trunk Springing from the Medulla
Oblongata; the Latter or Softer Arising very Remote from it, being continued
from diverse Bright Medullary Fibers that Appear in the Fourth Ventricle of the
Brain, whence they Creep on the Sides of the Caudex Medullaris, till they meet
with the Harder Trunk, which they Accompany to the Ossa Petrosa, Fig. 26. 7, 7.
The Soft Nerves being Expanded within the Labyrinths and Cochleas of the Organs
of Hearing; whilst the Hard Trunks pass through the Bone, and Expand themselves
in a Larger Field, as the Accurate Vieussens Represents them.

8, 8, The Eighth Pair of Nerves or Par Vagum; each of those have Ten or Twelve
Nervous Fibrillae Springing from the Medulla Oblongata, immediately below the
Annular Process m, m, and under the Corpora Olivaria o o, or between them and
the Third or Cordal Processes of the Cerebellum, Tab. 10. Fig. 1. W W, whence
they March Accompanied with diverse Small Blood Vessels of both Kinds, to their
Egress with the Lateral Sinus's 8, 8, Fig. 26. where they meet with the Spinal
Accessory Nerves * * which go out with them, and are Distributed as Vicussens
has Expressed them.

9, 9, The Ninth Pair of Nerves, whose Various Originals of the Right Side
differ from those of the Left: They continue to derive their Beginnings at
Various Distances from the Upper-parts of the Corpora Olivarea, to Half an Inch
in Length on the Caudex Medullaria; some of the Fibers of that on the Left
Side, passing over the Vertebral Artery of the same Side, when those of the
contrary Side pass from under it: After passing a short Space, these Nervous
Fibers Collectively pass the Third Perforation of the Os Occipitis. Vid. Fig.
26. 9, 9. Tab. 9. Fig. 3. R R. Tab. 90. Fig. 3. E.

k, A Small Branch of the Vertebral Artery which I have seen Injected with Wax,
and pass out with One of these Nerves.

* * The Spinal Accessory Nerves as they Ascend from under the Vertebral
Arteries to the Par Vagum: They Arise much Lower from the Medulla Spinalis than
Vieussens describes them, even from the Foremost and Hindmost Beginnings of the
Seventh Pair of Nerves of the Neck (16) and in their Collateral Ascent to the
Spinal Marrow, they still receive New Roots from all the Nervous Origins they
pass by, except those of the Ninth Pair of the Brain.

10, The Tenth Pair of Nerves of the Brain on One Side, or more properly the
First of the Neck, which pass out between the First Vertebra of the Neck and
the Os Occipitis.

11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, The rest of the Nerves of the Neck, which pass out
between the Vertebrae successively.

Fig. 29.
A A, Part of the Cerebellum;

a a, Its Second Processes which Help to Compose the Annular Protuberance.

B B, The Crura Medullae Oblongatae cut off from the Brain.

C C, The Annular Process Divided through its Middle, its External Surface (m m,
in the preceding Figure) being cut off with a Razor, or large sharp Knife.

b b, The Cineritious and Medullary Striae which Appear in this Section of the
Annular Protuberance.

c, The Middle Medullary Tract to which the Lateral Striae run.

d d, The Cineritious Part of the Medulla Oblongata under the Corpora
Pyramidalia: In this Section the Corpora Olivaria are Divided.

e, The Left Chordal Process partly in Situ.





THE SEVENTH TABLE.
Fig. 30.
THE Brain lying on its Basis after its Two Hemispheres are cut off, and the
Blood Vessels Injected with Wax; the Cerebellum remaining entire.

A A, The Inferior Part of the Fornix as it Appears when cut from its Roots b,
b. and turned Back, with Part of the Corpus Callosum remaining on it.

a a, The Blood Vessels that Appear on this Inferior Surface of the Fornix.

b b, The Roots of the Fornix.

c c, The Thalami Nervorum Opticorum or Beginnings of the Optic Nerves.

d d, The Corpora Striata; that of the Left Side remaining Whole; the Right
being Divided to show its Striae.

d d, The Crura Fornicis where they begin to Wind down on the Sides of the
Crura Medullae Oblongatae: These Crura of the Fornix are called Hyppocampi or
Bombycini.

e e, The Plexus Choroides whose Arteries Arise from the First Branches of the
Cervical Artery e e, Appen. Fig. 28.

f, The Meeting of the Plexus at the Root of the Fornix, where its Two Veins
pass to its other Part g g.

g g, The other Part of the Plexus Choroeides, whose Arteries Spring from the
Second Branches of the Cervical Artery, joined with the First by Communicant
Branches; which do not Appear here, by reason they lie under the Crura Fornicis
d d.

h h, Two Veins which Arise from the Upper-parts of the Plexus Choroeides, and
pass the Third Ventricle to the other Part of the same Plexus g g, near the
Nates and Testes.

i i i i i i, The Branches of the Carotide Arteries cut off, as they Appear
Injected with Wax, and passing between the Cortical Foldings of the Brain.

k, A Branch of a Vein which passes according to the Length of the Corpus
Striatum of the Left Side, and Discharges its Blood into the Veins of the
Plexus Choroeides; that of the Right Side being taken away to show the Striae.

l, Part of the Rima of the Third Ventricle that does somewhat Appear under the
Vein, h.

m, A long Medullary Tract between the Corpus Striatum and Thalamus Nervi
Optici, called by Dr. Willis, Processus Medullaris Transversus.

n n n n, The Centrum Ovale of Vieussens.

o, That Part of the Corpus Callosum by Vieussens, called Fornix Vera, between
which, and the Fornix p, is placed the Septum Lucidum, Dividing the Forepart
of the Right Ventricle of the Brain from the Left. This Septum by some called
Speculum, is a Continuation of the Inward Membrane which Invests the Two
Superior Ventricles, meeting in their Upperparts not unlike the Pleura on the
Sternum, where it Composes the Mediastinum, and Divides the Cavity of the
Thorax. In the Upper Part of this Septum I have more than once seen its
Duplicature filled with a Watrish Humor in Hydropick Brains, as Vieussens also
takes Notice.

O, The Fourth Sinus of the Dura Matter filled with Wax.

P, The Longitudinal Sinus cut off, where it meets the Fourth and Two Lateral
Sinus's, called Torcular Herophili.

Q Q, The Two Lateral Sinus's also Extended with Wax.

R, A Vein filled with Wax on the Second Process of the Dura Matter.

r, Some Branches of Veins as they Appear on the Second Process of the Dura
Matter.

p, The Fornix cut off near its Two Roots.

q q, Some Lymphe-ducts on the Plexus Choroeides which Accompany the Vein h h
h, in their Way to the Glandula Pinialis not seen in this Figure; that Gland
being placed under the Fornix A, a, with the Nates and Testes, as is Expressed
Tab. 10. Fig. 1. Q, O, O, P, P.

These Lymphe-ducts perhaps were seen by that Accurate Anatomist. Mons.
Beddevold, in Examining an Ox's Brain; of which he Communicated an Account to
the Accurate Nuck as Mons. Beddevold himself told me, and Appears in an Epistle
at the End of Nuck's Adenographia Curiosa. Vidi, says he, Lymphaticum in
Cerebro Bivino, quod examine tuo (ut Originem scias and Insertionem) erit
Dignissimum. Non long a Glandula Pineali, a qua Ramos forte habet, incumbit
Plexui Choroidaeo ad Infundibuli latera sese extendens.

S S S S, The Cerebellum Covered with the Second Process of the Dura Matter in
its Upper Part, and the Dura Matter it self on the Hinder-part.

f f, Some Branches of Veins which Appear filled with Blood on the Dura Matter,
Covering the Back-part of the Cerebellum; which vary in their Course from those
Subjacent Vessels on the Pia Matter, which are immediately Distributed on the
Cerebellum it self, and faintly Appear in those Strokes running somewhat
Parallel with the Lateral Sinus's.

T T, Parts of the Vertebral Arteries.

V V, The Vertebral Sinus's on which the Wax Appears Extravast, as in Fig. 28.
F.

W, The Back-part of the Medulla Oblongata Covered with the Dura Matter.

x x, A Probe Supporting the large Veins of the Plexus Choroides in the Third
Ventricle of the Brain.

The Medullary;

* * * The Cineritious Part of the Brain.

Fig. 31.
The Back-part of the Cerebellum cut through its Hinder-part and Reclined
Laterally; together with a Portion of the Medulla Spinalis.

A A A, The Cerebellum Covered with the Pia Matter only, where its Circular
Sulci in which its Large Blood Vessels pass, are Expressed, together with diverse
Arborious Ramifications of Blood Vessels, which Decussate those of its Sulci as
they March under the Pia Matter.

B B, The Branching of the Medullary Part of the Cerebellum, as it Appears when
Divided.

a, The Vermicular Process on the Back-part of the Cerebellum.

C C, The Two Pathetick Nerves near their Origin.

c c, The Nates;

d d, The Testes, in whose Surfaces the Blood Vessels Appear Distributed under
the Pia Matter.

f, The Glaudula Pinialis which we take to be a Lymphatick Gland, Receiving
Lympha from the Lymphe-ducts of the Plexus Choroeides, and Discharges it into
Exporting Lymphe-ducts which pass the Third Ventricle of the Brain, to the
Infundibulum and Glandula Pituitaria; the Manner we Conceive these Lymphe-ducts
pass the Infundibulum, is on its Internal Surface, and so pierce the Pituitary
Gland; it being unusual in the Practice of Nature for Lymphe-ducts before they
Arrive at the Receptaculum Chyl^ to Discharge their Contents in large Cisterns,
to be again transmitted by narrow Conduits to the Thoracick-duct, as it must
do, if as some Conceive, the Infundibulum it self is a mere Lymphe-duct, which
in some measure I am apt to think with Dr. Ridley it does; as I have already
intimated, Append. Fig. 26.3.

g g, The First Process's of the Cerebellum which pass toward the Nates.

e, The Transverse Process which Unite the Two First Processes of the
Cerebellum, whence the Pathetick Nerves take their Rise.

h h, The Third, or Cordal Process's Arising from the Cerebellum, and Descend
on both Sides the Medulla Oblongata.

i i, Some Bright Striae which Appear in the Fourth Ventricle of the Brain, and
Help to Compose the Medullary Trunks of the Auditory Nerves; these sometimes
have Various Originals from the Upper Part of the Fourth Ventricle; at other
Times some of these Striae Arise Lower than here Expressed.

k k, l l, n, The Fourth Ventricle Opened and Expanded.

o, The Beginning of the Medulla Spinalis.

p p, The Accessory Nerves.

q q, Those Parts of the Tenth Pair of Nerves which Arise from the Back-part of
the Medulla Spinalis.

m m, Parts of the Eighth Pair of Nerves where they meet the Accessory Nerves.

Fig. 32.
The Lower Jaw with some of the Muscles of the Under Lip remaining to it.

A, The External Left Side of the Bone made bare.

B, The Processus Condyliformis.

C, The Processus Corone.

D, An Acute Process, on the Internal Part of the Lower Jaw beyond the Dentes
Mollares, under which the Trunks of Nerves and Blood Vessels pass into the
Meditullium of the Bone, and give Branches to each Tooth.

d, Some Branches of the same Nerves and Blood Vessels Marching out of the Bone
again to the Muscles, Glands, and Membranes of the Lower Lip.

E, The Inside of the Lower Lip Co^er'd with its Proper Membrane.

F F, The Inner Face of the Musculus Depressor Labii Inferioris Proprius. Vid.
Tab. 12. Fig. 5. H.

G G, Some of the Small Salival Glandules which Appear immediately under the
Membrane E.

H H, These Muscles I could never find Described by any Author, though they are
constant in Nature, or at least in all those Bodies I have ever looked for
them. I call them Elevatores Labii Inferioris Proprii from their Office. They
Spring Fleshy from the Forepart of the Lower Jaw, immediately under the
Gengivae of the Dentes Incisores, and Descend to their Insertions in the Skin,
which Composes the Chin: When they Act, they Draw up the Skin on the Chin, and
make it Appear Variously Indented,

THE EIGHTH TABLE.
Fig. 33.
THE Muscles of the Face as they Appear after the Skin, Fat, Membranes, and
Musculi Quadrati Genarum are taken off.

A A, The Musculi Frontales.

B, The Orbiculares Palpebrarum.

C, The Musculus Dilatator Aloe Nasi.

D, The Elevator Labiorum Communis.

E E, The Elevator Labii Superioris Proprius.

F F, The Sphincter Labiorum.

G G, The Zygomatici seu Distortores Oris.

H H, The Depressor Labiorum Communis.

I, The Depressor Labii Inferioris Proprius.

K, The Buccinator.

L, The Temporalis.

M, The Elevator Auriculae.

N, The Masseter.

a, Part of the Os Iugale.

b, The Cartilage of the Auricula freed from the Skin.

c c, The Parotide Gland.

d, The Ductus Salivalis Superior of the Parotide Gland, as it Descends over
the Masseter through the Buccinator into the Mouth.

e e, A Branch of the Carotide Artery which passes through the Inferior Maxillary
Gland.

f, Part of the Lower Jaw Bone made Bare.

g, Part of the Inferior Maxillary Gland.

O, Part of the Musculus Biventer in Situ.

P, The Mastoideus.

Q, Part of the Cucularis.

R, Part of the Elevator Scapulae.

S S, Parts of the Musculi Sternohyoidei.

T T, Parts of the Coracohyoidei.

Fig. 34.
The Left Eye with its Muscles freed from the Orbit and Dried.

A. The Bulb of the Eye Filled with Wax.

a a, The Optic Nerve in like manner Distended with Wax.

B, A Portion of the Superior and External Margin of the Bone of the Orbit next
the Nose.

b..., A small Cartilage called the Trochlea, in which the Long Tendon of the
Superior Oblique Muscle (D) passes to its Insertion.

C, A Portion of the Inferior and External Margin of the Orbit, where the
Musculus Obliquus Inferior (I) takes its Origin.

D, The Obliquus Superior as it Arises from the Inferior Part of the Orbit, and
passes through the Trochlea b... to its Insertion on the Back-part of the Bulb of
the Eye. This Contortion of the Tendon of this Muscle renders it capable of
drawing the whole Bulb of the Eye Outward, and turning its Papilla Downwards.

E, The Musculus Atollens.

F, The Abducens.

G, The Deprimens.

H, The Adducens.

I, The Obliquus Inferior, whose Origin from the External Margin of the
Inferior Part of the Orbit, renders it capable of performing the same Action in
Opposition to the Trochlearis or Obliquus Superior, i. e. of drawing the
Posterior and Lateral Part of the Bulb of the Eye toward its Origin, whereby
the whole Eye is drawn Outward, and its Pupilla turned Upwards; else the
Projection of the Eyebrows would hinder our looking Upwards, unless the Head at
the same Time was drawn very much Back.

Besides these Proper Offices of the Two Oblique Muscles of the Eyes, they have
conjunctly a very useful common Office in holding the Bulb of the Eye as it
were on an Axis, they prevent its being drawn Inwards, when any of the Straight
Muscles Act; by which means, each performs its proper Office in turning the Eye
either Upwards, Downwards or Sideways; which is no Inconsiderable Artifice in
Nature.

Fig. 35.
Represents the Inferior Part of the Skull with its Basis uppermost; the Left
Side of the Lower Jaw together with the First Vertebra of the Neck and its
Muscles Arising from it, remaining to the Occiput.

A, The Left Side of the Lower Jaw.

B, The Musculus Pterygoideus Internus, in Situ.

C, The Foramen of the Fourth Bone of the Upper Jaw, by which a Large Branch of
the Fifth Pair of Nerves passes to the Muscles of the Face, and a Branch of the
Carotide Artery to the Inner Cavities of these Bones, as you see them Expressed
in the preceding Figure.

D, The Musculus Depressor Labii Superioris Proprius and Constrictor Aloe Nasi,
here cut from its Insertion to the Upper Lip, and left at its Origin from the
Gums of the Upper Jaw.

d, Part of the Elevator Labii Inferoris Proprius left to its Origin from the
Lower Jaw.

e, That Part of the Inferior Margin of the Orbit, where the Inferior Oblique
Muscle of the Eye Springs, Expressed in the preceding Figure at C.

E, The Os Iugale.

f f, The Styloidal Process's of which that of the Right Side is broken off,
which frequently happens by means of the Rope after the Common Execution of
Malefactors.

G G, The Mammiform Process's.

H, The First Vertebra of the Neck remaining on the Occiput.

g g, Two Process's of the First Vertebra of the Neck, which are Articulated
with the like Process's of the Second.

h, The Extremity of the Transverse Process of the First Vertebra.

i, The Musculus Annuens or Rectus Minor Anticus, Expressed somewhat
Foreshorten'd in Appen. Fig. 8.

k, The Rectus Lateralis or Abnuens Lateralis.

l, The Obliquus Superior Capitis.

m, The Musculus Rectus Minor Posticus.

I, The Auricula or Outward Ear.

n, The Lobe of the Ear cut off.

o, That Part of the Superior Orbit where the Trochlea is Fastened.

K K. The Os Occipitis.

L, The Os Squamosum.

M, The Os Frontis.

N, Part of the Os Sphenoides.





THE NINTH TABLE.
Fig. 36.
SHOWS diverse Muscles Employed in the Motions of the Head and Vertebrae of the
Neck, which Appear on the Back-part.

A, Part of the Hairy Scalp remaining on the Forepart of the Head.

B, The Os Occiputis, made bare.

C, Part of the Musculus Splenius left at its Insertion.

a, Part of the Os Iugale.

D D D, The Musculus Complexus Raised from its Insertion, to show its Inside.

E E, The Recti Majores, that on the Right Side remaining in Situ, that of the
Left hanging down from its Origin.

F F, The Obliqui Superiores, in Situ.

G G, The Obliqui Inferiores, in Situ.

H H, The Recti Minores, also in Situ.

b, The Processus Mastoides of the Left Side, made bare.

c, The Back-part of the First Vertebra of the Neck, made bare.

d, Part of the Complexus Inserted to the Mammiform Process, by Falloppius made
a Distinct Muscle, which with its Corresponding Part on the other Side, he
reckons the Third Pair of Muscles of the Head.

I I I I, The Spinales Colli, that of the Left Side remaining in Situ, the
Right being Raised from its Inferior Part, and Turned to One Side, to show its
Subjacent Muscle the Transversalis Colli.

K, The Transversalis Colli which Arises from the Transverse Processes of the
Inferior Vertebrae of the Neck, and is Inserted to the Spinal Processes of its
Superior Vertebrae.

L L L, The Musculi Interspinales Colli; These are not taken Notice of by
Authors, though they are Distinct Fair Muscles as they are here Represented: It
was for these Muscles the Spinal Processes of the Vertebrae of the Neck are
made Double: They draw the Spinal Processes nearer each other, when we pull the
Head very much Back, as when we would look on the Zenith.

e e e e, The Apices of the Double Spinal Processes.

f, The Extremity of the Spine of the First Vertebra of the Thorax.

Fig. 37.
Represents Part of the Organ of Hearing of a Calf, where a Small Bone
(Distinct from that placed between the Long Process of the Incus and Stapes)
may be seen in the Tendon of the Musculus Stapedis. Schelbamer tells us of the
like Bone found in some Animals lying in the Tendon of the Internal Muscle of
the Ear, Described by Eustachius; but whither he has mistaken it for the
Musculus Stapedis, no Opportunity has hitherto given me occasion to Observe.
The Knowledge of this Small Bone in the Tendon of the Musculus Stapedis of a
Calf, was Communicated to me by the Ingenious Dr. Adare; but there is no such
Contrivance in Humane Bodies.

A A, Part of the Os Petrosum.

B, The Foramen Rotundum.

C, The Stapes on the Foramen Ovale.

E, The Musculus Stapedis lying bare in the Cavity of the Tympanum; it not
being Enclosed in a Bony Channel in this Animal, as in Humane Bodies.

F, The Small Bone in the Tendon of the Musculus Stapedis, which is placed on a
Rising of the Os Petrosum, on which it Acts as on a Pully, by which means it
draws the Stapes from the Foramen Ovale.

G, The Cochlea Opened.

Fig. 38.
The Back-parts of the Muscles of the Pharynx and Oesophagus.

A A A, That Part which Composes the Pharynx.

B B, The Musculus Pterygopharyngeus: This is Erroneously Divided into Two Pair
of Muscles by Authors, as Appears by Tab. 34. Fig. 3, 4. after Bourdon: It has
Two Thin Fleshy Origins from the Roots of the Processus Pterygoides, and in a
Semicircular Manner Embraces the Back-part of the Glandulous Membrane of the
Fauces as well as the Tonsillae. When it Acts in Deglutition, it not only
Straitens the Fauces, but Compresses the Tonsillae, as well as the Lesser
Glands of the Fauces, and Forces out their contained Matter at the same Time,
to join with the Aliment in its Descent to the Stomach; this Muscle Acts in
like Manner in Secretion or Hawking up any Tenacious Matter, whither Log'd in
the Fauces or Excretory Ducts of the Tonsillae. I choose to make this a Distinct
Muscle from the Oesophageus, not only because its Extended on that Part called
the Pharynx, but it Acts Distinct from the Oesophageus; for when this is
Contracted in Deglutition, that is Dilated.

C C, The Tonsillae.

D D, The Musculi Stylopharyngei which draw the Fauces Upwards and Dilate them.

E E, The Oesophageus or Constructor Gulae.

F, Part of the Superior Long Process of the Scutiformal Cartilage, whence the
last mentioned Muscle partly Arises.

G, The Musculus Vaginalis Gulae, Covered with its External Membrane. The
Fibers of this Perforated Muscle of the Gula, have a Double Order of Fibers;
the External Descend according to their Length, the Internal Parts Obliquely;
the Former seem to Arise from the Arytenoidal Cartilages under the Glottis, and
passing somewhat Obliquely to the Back-part of the Gula, Descend to the
Stomach; the Latter Order of Fibers seem to be a Continuation of the
Constrictor Gulae, and Descend Obliquely to the Upper Orifice of the Stomach.
The Office of this Muscle is to Press the Aliment after Deglutition into the
Stomach, to which, by its own Weight it is apt to Descend in Humane Bodies; but
in Quadrupedes the Position of the Gula being Horizontal, this Muscle is
Composed of a Double Order of Spiral Fibers, mutually Intercussating each
other; as it is Described by Dr. Willis and Others.

Fig. 39.
A Portion of the Intestinum Duodenum Distended with Wind.

A, Its External Membrane, continued from the Peritonaeum, Raised.

B, The External Surface of the Gut with the last mentioned Membrane remaining
on it.

C, The External Longitudinal Fibers of the Intestine.

D, The Orbicular or Circular Fibers placed immediately under the Former, which
by Dr. Cole are thought to be Spiral, and a continued Thread from one Extreme
of the Gut to the other, by which means the Peristaltick Motion of the
Intestines are continued.

By what I could ever Observe in Examining these Fibers, whether after Boiling
or not, I must confess I could never be satisfied whither they are Continued
and of a Spiral Disposition, nor indeed is it possible to Untwist a Single
Fiber if they were so Disposed, by reason of its Smallness and Collateral
Adhesion to each other, by means of their Blood Vessels; but on the contrary
they rather Appear on very strict Examination, to be Semicircular, some longer
and others shorter; by which means they more Adequately bring the Sides of the
Intestine nearer each other, in Order to drive on its Contents. Besides this
Office of the Muscular Fibers of the Intestines, by their Reciprocal
Cooperation, they not only Compress their Subjacent Glands, and Drive out
their contained Mucus to join with the Aliment; but by Collaterally pressing
each Side of the Guts, they Open the Mouths of the Lacteal-Vessels to receive
the Chyle.

Fig. 40.
Represents a Portion of the Intestinum Iejunum Distended with Wind; its
External Membrane and Muscular Fibers being taken off.

A A, Some of the Semicircular Fibers still remaining on the Intestine.

C C, Diverse Small Glands scater'd at Various Distances between the last
mentioned Clusters of Glands.

We are beholding to the Learned Wepher and the Accurate Peyer, for the
Discovery of these Clusters of Glands of the Small Guts, as well as those
Solitary Glands scattered up and down in the Large Guts: Though Dr. Willis and
Others had mentioned a Glandulous Membrane of the Guts, yet it Furnished us with
no tolerable Idea of their Existence and Office. They are supplied with
Blood Vessels, Nerves and Lympheducts, in Common with the Intestines and
Excretory Ducts of their own; but I can by no means think the Nerves Import any
Part of the Matter, which these Glands Discharge by their Excretory Pores, into
the Cavity of the Intestine.

Peyer takes Notice that these Glandulous Clusters are placed in that Part of
the Gut, Opposite to its Connection with the Mesentery, but you will frequently
find them near the Mesentery; yet I never found them in that Part of the Gut,
to which the Mesentery is Connected.

The Matter they separate from the Blood, and Discharge by their Excretory
Pores into the Cavity of the Gut, is very Tenacious, and since its Comprest
from them by the Peristaltick Motion of the Guts, at the very instant the
Alimentary Contents are passing by, it affords us no mean Argument, that it
cannot so join with them, as to render any of the Chylous Particles more fit to
pass the Mouths of the Lacteal Vessels; but that it only serves as a Vehicle to
those Contents of the Guts, and Defends the Inward Villous Membrane from being
Offended, either by Sharp Humors, or any Acuminated Bodies which often pass
that Way.

The Glands of the Coecum, Colon and Rectum, which are Analogous to these of
the Small Guts, differ very much from them in Figure and Situation; the Former
lying in Clusters, whereas these from their Appearance, Peyer and Others call
Solitary Glands; they being Small, Lentiformal, and very Numerous, placed from
each other at Various Distances, not unlike the Stars in the Firmament.

All these Glands of the Intestines, as well as those of the Stomach, Liver,
and Pancreas, are Affected with Cathartick Medicines, and Help to Discharge the
Matter Evacuated by Stool; by Affected, I don't mean that the Purging Medicine
bestows any Particles, immediately as it passes by them into the Cavity of the
Gut; but that after its Particles are past into the Blood by the Chyle Ducts,
it meets with a Fit Strainer in the Parts last mentioned, as well as these
Glands by which it passes off again with the Serous Part of the Blood.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A.
ABdomen or Lower Belly Opened, Tab. 33, 40. of a Woman, T. 49. with Child, T.
54, 55, 56. of a Foetus, T. 62, 63. its Integuments, T. 31. Muscles vide
Muscles. Cavity, T. 41, 49, 52.

Acesabu^^nt, T. 99. Fig. 2.

Acretion of Parts in General, v. Introduction.

Acromion, v. Bones Scapula.

Adipose Ducts their Use, T. 4. F. 13.

Allontois, T. 55, 56, 57. F. 7. T. 58, 59. whence called, T. 59. a Description
of it, ib. its Use, ib. whether Existent in Humane Bodies, T. 58.

Alveari^^n, v. Ear Meatus Auditorius.

Alveoli, T. 92. F. 5.

Amnios, T. 55, 56, 57. F. 37. T. 58, 59. Transparent, full of Vessels, T. 55,
59. Uses of its contained Liquor, T. 58. Glands in it in Cows, and their
supposed Use, T. 55.

Amygdals, v. Tonsils.

Anasiomoses of Arteries and Veins, v. Arteries.

Anatomy proved Useful in Surgery, Introduct. T. 15. F. 2. T. 72. Ap. F. 2.

Aneon. v. Bones Ulna.

Animal Spirits, the Common Hypothesis concerning them, Rejected, T. 10. F. 6.

Annular Cartilage, T. 24. F. 5, 6, 7, 8. Ap. F. 20, 22, 23.

An^hesix, v. Ear External.

Antitragus, ib.

Aquaeductus Ateris, Ap. F. 8.

Arm, T. 1, 2, 3.

Arteries their Tunicks External, T. 24. F. 4. Middle or Fibrous, T. cad. F. 5.
Internal, T. cad. F. 6. farther they run from the Heart, they Subdivide and
Grow Thinner, ib. their Extremities Transparent, ibid. Viewed in the Fin of a
Living Grig, Ap. F. 4. of a Flounder, F. 5. Arteries and Veins a continued
Channel, ib. Tying them Advised in cutting off the Breast, T. 19. F. 5. in
Amputation, T. 64. F. 8. Direction for Tying them in an Aneurism of the Arm,
Ap. F. 3. how to Secure the Artery of the Lower-Part of the Face, etc. in
Incisions, T. 12., F. 14 Aneurism in a Small Artery coming out of the Skull to
the Forehead, and how Cured, T. 5. F. 1. a System of them by Bidloo Erroneous,
T. 24. F. 15. an Exact one, Ap. F. 3.

-- Aorta or great Artery, T. 22. F. 1, 7. Ap. F. 3. its Valves Semil^^^r. T.
22. F. 13. Ascending Trunk, T. 24. F. 1. Ap. F. 3. Descending Trunk, T. 41, 42,
49, 50, 63. F. 1, 2. Ap. F. 3.

-- Coronal of the Heart, T. 22. F. 11. Ap. F. 3.

-- Subclavian, Ap. F. 3.

-- Carotid, T. 6. F. 6. T. 9. F. 3. T. 14. F. 1. T. 15. F. 1, 2. Ap. F. 3, 8,
28, 30. their Contortions, T. 6. F. 6. Ap. F. 3. Reason of them, T. 6. F. 6.
passing by the Sella Turcica, Ap. F. 3, 26.

-- Vertebral, Ap. F. 3, 8, 28, 30. their Contortions, Ap. F. 3. Reason of
them, ib. their Cavities sometimes Larger there, ib. Ascending on the Medulla
Oblongata, ib.

-- Cervical, Ap. F. 28.

-- Communicant Branches, Ap. F. 3, 28.

-- Lower-part of the Face, Tongue, T. 12. F. 4. Ap. F. 3.

-- Temporal, Ap. F. 3. its Branches to the Parotid Gland, ib. Temples, ib.

-- Occipital, ib. Inosculates with the Temporal, ib.

-- Of the Fauces, Uvula, etc. ib.

-- Larynx, etc. ib.

-- Muscles of the Neck and Scapula, ib.

-- Mammary, T. 32. F. 1. Ap. F. 3. Inosculate with the Intercostals and
Epigastrick, ib.

-- Muscles of the Shoulder and Scapula, ib.

-- Arillary being the Beginning of the

-- Brachial, T. 64. F. 8. Ap. F. 1, 3. an Account of their Progress, Ap. F. 3.
their Division at the Cubit, ib. a Communicant Branch, ib. where Wounded in
Letting Blood, F. 1.

-- Cubit which makes the Pulse at the Wrist, T. 67. Ap. F. 3.

-- Hands and Fingers, Ap. F. 3.

-- Bronchial, Ap. F. 3. their Rise, ib. Inosculate with the Pulmonary, T. 24.
F. 1. Ap. F. 3.

-- Of the Gula, Ap. F. 3.

-- Intercostal, ib.

-- Celiack, T. 42. Ap. F. 3. its Various Ramifications making the

-- Hepatick, T. 38. F. 5. Ap. F. 3.

-- Systick, Ap. F. 3.

-- Coronary Inferior of the Stomach, T. 33, 34. F. 5. Ap. F. 3.

-- Pylorick, Ap. F. 3.

-- Epiploick, ib.

-- Coronary Superior, T. 34. F. 5. Ap. 3.

-- Phrenick, Ap. F. 3. their Origin, ib.

-- Splenick, T. 36. Ap. F. 3.

-- Of the Duodemun and Pancreas, Ap. F. 3.

-- Mesenterick Superior, T. 40. F. 2. T. 41, 42, 50 Ap. F. 3. Inosculate with
themselves and Mesenterick Inferior, Ap. F. 3.

-- Mesenterick Inferior, T. 40. F. 2. T. 41, 42, 50. Ap. F. 3. its Branches to
the Colon, Ap. F. 3. Rectum, ib.

-- Emulgent, T. 42, 43. F. 1. Ap. F. 3.

-- Vertebral of the Loins, Ap. F. 3.

-- Spermatick of a Man, T. 41, 42, 44. F. 2. T. 45. F. 1, 2. T. 46. F. 1, 5.
Ap. F. 3. their Rise, T. 42. an Error concerning it Noted, and the Cause of it,
ib. very small at their Beginning, T. 45. F. 2. Ap. F. 3. different in Men and
Brutes, and the Reason of it, T. 45. F. 2.

-- Spermatick of a Woman, T. 50, 53. F. 1, 3. Communicate with the
Hypogastricks, ib.

-- Sacrae, Ap. F. 3.

-- Iliack, T. 49, 50, 63. F. 2. Ap. F. 3. External, T. 42, 50. Ap. F. 3.
Internal, T. 50. Ap. F. 3. Larger Proportionably in a Foetus than in an Adult,
and the Reason, ib.

-- Umbilical, T. 59, 60. F. 1, 5. T. 61. F. 3, 4, 5, 7, 9. T. 62, 63. Ap. F.
3. Various Inequalities in their Trunks, T. 61. F. 3, 5. the Causes of them, F.
3.

-- Epigastrick, T. 32. F. 1. Ap. F. 3.

-- Of the Oblique Muscles of the Abdomen, Ap. F. 3.

-- Of the Extensors and Obturators of the Thigh, ib.

-- Penis, T. 47. F. 1. T. 48. F. 1. Ap. F. 3.

-- Bladder, Ap. F. 3.

-- Internal of the Pudendum, Ap. F. 3.

-- Hypogastrick how Composed, ib.

-- External of the Pudendum their Origin, ib.

-- Crural, ib. an Account of their Progress, ib.

-- Leg, ib.

-- Foot, ib.

-- Pulmonary, T. 22. F. 1, 8. T. 24. F. 2, 3. T. 25. F. 10.

-- Arthrodia, T. 97. F. 1. their Semilunar Valves, T. 22. F. 14.

Arytencides Cartilage, T. 24. F. 8. Ap. F. 20, 22, 23.

Aspera A^teria, v. Windpipe.

Asiragalus, v. Bones.

Atlas, v. Epistrophicus.

Atlas, v. Vertebrae.

Auricles of the Heart, v. Heart.

B.
BLadder of Urine of a Man in Situ, T. 41. taken out, T. 42. F. 2. of a Woman
in Situ, T. 49. taken out, T. 50. of a Foetus in Situ, T. 63. F. 1. taken out,
F. 2. its Back-part Covered with Far, T. 44. F. 2. Forepart Opened, T. 48. F.
1. Suspended by the Uracus, T. 44. F. 2. its Situation, ib. Structure, ib. Use,
ib. its Fibers and Glands sometimes Tumified, and cause a Thickness of its
Sides, ib.

Bladder of Gall, v. Gallbladder.

Blood, an Account of it according to the Chemists, T. 23. F. 15. Viewed with a
Microscope, T. cad. F. 16. no Fibers discernable in it, ib. its Fibrous
Appearance caused by a Coagulation of the Serum, ib. another way of Examining
it, ib. how made, Introduct.

Bones in an Embrio Cartilaginous, T. 100. F. 6. Time of their Formation, ib.
Appendixes sometimes Broken off, a Case Recited, T. 96. F. 1.

-- All in a Skelleton of an Adult; its Forepart, T. 87. (...) and (...) T. ^^
of a (...) Month after Conception, T. 100. F. 1. of Six Weeks, T. ead. F. 2. of
Three Months, T. ead. F. 3, 4. of Four Months T. ead. F. 5, 6. of Nine Months,
T. 101, 10^.

-- Skull, the External Surface of its Upper Part, T. 91. F. 1. Internal of the
same, T. ead. F. 2. Channels in it for the Passage of Vessels, ib. very Large
and Transparent in an Apopletick Person, ib. Inferior Surface of its Basis, T.
92. F. 2. Ap. F. 8, 36. Internal Part of the same, T. 9. F. 3. Ap. F. 26.

-- Forehead its Convext or Outer Part, T. 89. F. 1. a Description of its
Cavity, ib. its Inner-part, T. ead. F. 2.

-- Sinciput its External Part, T. 90. F. 1. Internal, F. 2.

-- Occiput External Part, T. 90. F. 3. Internal, T. 7. F. 2. T 90. F. 4.

-- Temples External Part, T. 90. F. 5. Ap. F. 15. in a Foetus, Ap. F. 17.
Internal Part, T. 90. F. 6. of a Foetus, Ap. F. 18.

-- Ear, T. 90. F. 9, 10, 11, 12. Ap. F. 15, 16, 17, 18.

-- Os Cuntiforme, T. 89. F. 1, 2. an Account of its Foramina, ib.

-- Os Cribrosum, T. 8. F. 3. T. 9. F. 3. T. 89. F. 2. Ap. F. 26.

-- Upper-Jaw, T. 89. F. 1, 2. T. 92. F. 1. their Number and Description, ib.

-- Lower-Jaw, T. 92. F. 3, 5. its Processes, Ap. F. 32.

-- Teeth, v. Teeth.

-- Tongue, T. 92, F. 9.

-- Vertebrae their Number, and Reason why Divided, T. 93. First of the Neck or
Atlas, F. 1, 2. Ap. F. 8. Second with its Toothlike Process, F. 3, 4. Third, F.
5, 6. First of the Thorax, F. 7, 8. T. 10. F. 8. a Caries found in them, the
Case Related, ib. Of the Loins, F. 9, 10, 11, 12.

-- Ribs their Number, Distinction, and Articulations, T. 94. the First, F. 1,
2. the Seventh, F. 3, 4. the Eleventh, F. 5, 6. the Twelfth, F. 7, 8.

-- Scapula or Shoulder Blade, its External Part, T. 95. F. 1. Internal Part,
F. 2.

-- Clavicle or Channel-bones, T. 95. F. 3, 4. its Joint with the Acromion
sometimes Dislocated, and the Symptoms, ib.

-- Starnum or Breast Bone in an Adult, T. 95. F. 5. in a Foetus, T. 101.

-- Shoulder Bone, T. 96. F. 1, 2.

-- Ulna, T. 96. F. 3, 4.

-- Radius, T. 96. F. 5, 6.

-- Carpus, T. 97. their Number, Disposition, and Articulations, ib.

-- Metacarpus, T. 97. F. 1, 2.

-- Fingers and Thumb, T. 97. F. 1, 2.

-- Ossa Sesamoidea of the Hand, T. 97. F. 1. of the Great Toe, T. 105. F. 2.
sometimes found on the Lower Heads of the Thigh Bone, T. 103. F. 2. also on the
Tendon of the Peroneus Longus, ib. in the Tendon of the Musculus Stapedis, Ap.
F. 37.

-- Os Sacrum, T. 98. F. 1, 2.

-- Os Cotoygie, T. 98. F. 3, 4.

-- Os Innomination in a Foetus consists of Three, therefore Distinguished into

-- Os Ilium, T. 99. F. 1, 2.

-- Os Ischium, T. 99. F. 1, 2.

-- Os Pubis, T. 99. F. 1, 2.

-- Thigh Bone, T. 103. F. 1, 2.

-- Patella or Knee-pan, T. 103. F. 3, 4.

-- Tibia, T. 104. F. 1, 2.

-- Fibula, T. 104. F. 3, 3.

-- Tarsus or Instep; which are the

-- Talus, T. 105. F. 1, 2.

-- Heel, ib.

-- Os Spongiosion of the Foot, ib.

-- Ossa Cuneiformia, ib.

-- Os Naviculare, ib.

-- Metatarsus, T. 105. F. 1, 2.

-- Toes, T. 105. F. 1, 2.

Brain, its Upper Part with its Membranes, T. 5. F. 2. Covered with the Dura
Matter, T. 6. F. 1. Hinder and Lateral Part with its Membranes, T. 6. F. 4. Two
Hemispheres, T. 8. F. 5. Foremost Lobes, T. 9. F. 1, 2. Ap. F. 28. Hinder
Lobes, T. 7. F. 1. T. 9. F. 1. Ap. F. 28. cut Transversly, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F.
30. Cortical Part, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 30. Anfractus or Windings on its
Surface, T. 5. F. 2. T. 8. F. 5. Medullary Part, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 30. Viewed
with a Microscope, the Distribution of Blood Vessels, the Glands and their
Tubes, T. 10. F. 2. its Arteries, v. Arteries Carotid, Vertebral Veins before
they Enter the Longitudinal Sinus, T. 6. F. 3. T. 8. F. 4. the Manner of their
Entrance, and the Reason of it, T. 6. F. 3. a Large Vein emptying it self at
the Torcular, T. 8. F. 2. Blood Vessels lying in the Duplicature of the Pia
Matter, T. 5. F. 2. T. 8. F. 5. Wounds liable to great and dangerous Fungus, T.
8. F. 5. in Concussions what Vessels injured, T. 5. F. 2.

Breasts of a Man, T. 1, 19. F. 2. in a Foetus of both Sexes they contain a
Serous Liquor, T. 63. of a Woman, T. 2, 19. F. 1. their Glands, Lactiferous
Ducts, Plexus of Blood Vessels, Sacculi Adiposi lying on them, T. 19. F. 1.
Nipple and Areola, v. Nipple. Arteries, Veins, Nerves, Lympheducts, T. 19. F.
5. Lactiferous Ducts, v. Lactiferous Ducts. Milky Tumors in them, how caused,
T. 19. F. 4.

Bregma, v. Bones of the Sinciput.

Bronchia, T. 24. F. 2, 3, 4. T. 25. F. 5, 6, 8, 9, 10. Ap. F. 20. Glands in
its Membranous Part, and their Use, Ap. F. 20. its Cartilages of Various Forms,
and how Connected, T. 25. F. 8. a Representation of it in Tin, T. ead. F. 11.
how to prepare it, F. 10.

C.
CAlamus Scriptorus, v. Ventricle, Fourth of the Brain.

Calcis Os, v Bones, Heel.

Canalis Arteriosus, Ap. F. 3. its Origin, Insertion, and Use, ib. after the
Birth it becomes a Ligament, ib.

Cartalis Venosus turned into a Ligament, T. 38. F. 5.

Canthus Greater and Less, v. Eye its External Part.

Caruncula Lachrymalis, ib.

Carunculae Myrtiformes how caused, T. 51. F. 3.

Carpus, v. Bones.

Cartilage Ensiformal, T. 26. F. 1. T. 95. F. 5.

Cartilages Semilunar on the Upper-head of the Tibia, T. 84.

-- Of the Larynx, T. 24. of the Windpipe, T. 25. F. 8.

Cataracts Directions for Couching, T. 11. F. 24.

Catarrhs the Parts Affected in them, Ap. F. 20.

Cavernous Bodies of the Penis, v. Penis.

Caul, v. Omentum.

Center of Gravity to the Whole Body, where, T. 82.

Centrum Ovale, Ap. F. 30.

Cerebel, T. 6. F. 2. T. 7. F. 1, 2. T. 8. F. 5. T. 9. F. 1. Ap. F. 28, 29, 30,
31. its Meditullium, T. 9. F. 1. T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 31. Vernicular Process, T.
7. F. 2. T. 8. F. 5. Ap. F. 31. First Process, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 31. a
Transverse Process joining them, ib. Second Process, Ap. F. 28, 29. Third or
Cordal Process, Ap. F. 29, 31.

Cheeks their Inside, T. 14. F. 1.

Chorion, T. 55, 56, 57. F. 3, 7. T. 58, 59, 60. F. 1, 2, 6. Branching of its
Vessels, T. 61. F. 7, 8.

Chyliferous Duct, v. Thoracick Duct.

Chylification, Introd.

Cilia their Cartilages, T. 11. F. 5.

Circulation between the Mother and the Foetus proved, T. 54. Manner of it
through the Heart of a Foetus, Ap. F. 3.

Clavicles, v. Bones.

Clitoris, T. 51. F. 1. The Glans, T. 50, 51. F. 1, 2. Prepuce, T. 50, 51. F.
1. what it is, ib. Crura, T. 51. F. 1. Contexture, T. 51. F. 2. Capsula or
Proper Membrane, ib. Septum, ib. Cause of its Extension, T. 51. F. 1.

Coccygis Os, v. Bones.

Cochlea, v. Ear.

Cacum, v. Intestines.

Colon, v. Intestines.

Columnae Carncae, v. Heart.

Conception, Introd.

Concha, v. Ear External.

Condylus Processus, v. Bones of the Lower Jaw.

Coracoidal Process, v. Bones Scapula.

Corpus Callosum, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 30. its Corpus Transversale, T. 10. F. 1.

Corpus Glandosum in Men, v. Prostates; in Women, v. Vagina.

Corpora Scriata, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 30.

Corpora Pyramidalia, Ap. F. 28.

Corpora Olivaria, Ap. F. 28.

Corpora Cavernosa Penis, v. Penis.

Corone, ib.

Cricoidal Cartilage, v. Annular.

Crista Galli, v. Bones Os Cribrosum.

Cuticle, v. Scarf-Skin.

D.
DIaphragm, v. Muscles.

Diastole of the Heart, T. 22. F. 1. v. Heart.

Diploe of the Skull, T. 5. F. 2. T. 9. F. 3.

Dislocation of the Clavicle and Acromion, v. Bones.

Dissimilar Parts, what, T. 4. F. 6.

Ductus Hygropthalmici Lachrimalis, T. 11. F. 5. Bilarius, T. 36. F. 1. M.
Pancreaticus, T. ib. F. ead.

-- Thoracis, Ap. F. 10, 11, 12. A Palato ad Aurem, Ap. F. 8. Hepaticus, T. 38.
F. 5.

Duodenum, v. Intestines.

Dura Matter, T. 5. F. 2. T. 6. F. 1, 2. T. 7. F. 2. T. 8. F. 1, 2, 4, 5. T. 9.
F. 2, 3. T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 26. Blood Vessels Distended with Wind, T, 6. F. 1.
lying in its Duplicature, T. 5. F. 2. pass from it to the Skull, T. 5. F. 2. T.
6. F. 1. a particular Account of them, Ap. F. 26. Quadruplicatures, T. 7. F. 1.
T. 8. F. 1. First Process, v. Falx. Second Process, T. 7. F. 1.

E.
EAR External, T. 12. F. 1. 2. the Meatus Auditorius, T. 90. F. 5. Ap. F. 15.
Cartilages of the Meatus, Ap. F. 8. its Glandulous Membrane, T. 90. F. 5. its
Use and Diseases, ib. The Membrane Tympani or Drum, Ap. F. 15. Annulus Osseus
in Embrio's, Ap. F. 17, 18. Cavity of the Tympanum, Ap. F. 16, 18. Lined with a
Membrane, F. 18. which is Communicated to its Bones, ib. a Passage into it from
the Palate, Ap. F. 8. another one of it into the Meatus, ib. The Use of both,
ib. its Bones, v. Bones. a Distinct one in the Ear of a Calf, Ap. F. 37.
Labyrinth, T. 90. F. 7, 8. Ap. F. 16, 18. Cochlea, T. 90. F. 8. Ap. F. 17, 37.
Foramen Rotundum, Ap. F. 37. its Muscles, v. Muscles.

Eggs taken from the Ovaria, T. 57. F. 1. Impregnated, F. 2. Introd.

Embrio, v. Foetus.

Empiema Caution in Opening, T. 94. F. 4.

Epidydymidae, v. Testicles.

Epigastrium, T. 1.

Epiglottis, T. 13. F. 1. T. 24. F. 5, 6, 7, 8. Ap. F. 20, 22, 23. Glands at
the Root of it, Ap. F. 20. its Use, T. 14. F. 1. Ap. F. 23. mistaken by some
for an Excrescence, T. 13. F. 1.

Epistropheus, T. 93. F. 4.

Eye its External Parts, T. 11. F. 1, 2. Glands, v. Lachrymal Glands.

-- Bulb, T. 11. F. 6, 11, 14. Ap. F. 34. its Muscles, v. Muscles.

-- Optic Nerve, v. Nerve.

-- Tunica Adnata, T. 11. F. 1, 6, 9. another Membrane of Columbus, T. 11. F. 9.

-- Tunica Sclerotis, T. 11. F. 11, 12, 16, 17, 18.

-- Tunica Cornea, T. 11, F. 11, 12, 16, 17.

-- Tunica Coroides, T. 11. F. 12, 17. Ligament. Ciliare, T. 11. F. 13. its
Use, ib.

-- Tunica Retina, T. 11. F. 14, 15, 17, 18. Iris and P^pilla, F. 6.

-- Humor Crystaline, T. 11. F. 19, 21, 23.

-- Humor Vitreous, T. 11. F. 20, 22, 24.

-- Humor Aqueous, F. 21.

F.
FOetus of Seven Months in the Womb, T. 56. its Posture Various, when best for
Birth, ib. of Twenty-Five Days after Conception, T. 57. F. 3. of Forty Days, F.
4. of Two Months and a Half, F. 5. of Three Months, F. 6. of Eight Months, F.
7. Opened, T. 62, 63.

Falloppian Tubes, T. 5. F. 3, 4.

Falx, T. 8. F. 1, 3, 4. its Use, F. 8.

Fat, T. 4. F. 13. its Membranes, ib. Globules with ther^ Blood Vessels, ib.
what it is, ib. Lobi of it on the Abdomen, T. 31.

Foetus their Glandulous Membrane, T. 14. F. 3.

Fermentation of the Aliment in Chylification, Introd.

Fermentation of the Blood in its Vessels, v. Intestine Motion of it.

Fiber of a Muscle, T. 64. F. 1.

Fibula, v. Bones.

Fistula Lachrymalis, its Cause and way of Cure, T. 11. F. 5.

Fistulous Ulcer in the Upper Part of the Thigh how Cured, T. 72.

Foramen Ovale Described, Ap. F. 3.

Fornix, Ap. F. 30. its Roots, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 30. Crura, Ap. F. 30.

G.
Gallbladder, T. 37. F. 2. T. 38. F. 3, 4, 5. its Duct, T. 37. F. 2. T. 38. F.
3, 5. Internal Membrane of the Duct, T. 38. F. 3. Valves in it how made and
their Use, ib. Gall-ducts Enter it, none into the Bladder, proved, T. 38. F. 3.

Gangleon in the Nerves, T. 10. F. 6. Ap F. 27.

Gargareon, v. Uv^la.

Ginglimus, T. 96. F. 1.

Glands Adipose, v. Omentum.

-- Axiliary, Ap. F. 1. their Use, Tumors in them how Cau^'d, ib.

-- Inguinal, Ap. F. 1. their Use, Causes of Tumors in them, Cases related, One
where it Weighed Six Pounds.

-- Lachrymal, T. 11. F. 1, 3, 5. their Ducts, T. ead. F. 5.

-- Lips, Ap. F. 8.

-- Lymphatick, Ap. F. 13, 14. those of the Neck Tumid in Scrophulas and their
Cure, F. 2.

-- Lumbal, Ap. F. 10, 11.

-- Maxillary, T. 15. F. 1. Ap. F. 19. their Arteries, Veins, Nerves,
Salival-duct, Ap. F. 15.

-- Miliary, v. Skin.

-- Mucilaginous of the Vertebrae, T. 10. F. 8. their Use, ib.

-- Parotide, T. 12. F. 2. Ap. F. 1, 2, 33. a Remarkable Case of an Abscess in
it, Ap. F. 2. its Salival-duct, T. 12. F. 2, 3. Ap. F. 1, 33. Symptoms and Cure
of it when Wounded, Ap. F. 2.

-- Piliferous, T. 4. F. 6.

-- Pinial, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 31. its Use, ib.

-- Pituitary, T. 9. F. 2, 3. Ap. F. 26.

-- Renales, ib. T. 42, 50. in a Foetus, T. 63. their

-- Composition and Vessels Described, T. 42. Subclavian, Ap. F. 12.

-- Sublingual, T. 15. F. 2. Ap. F. 19. their Blood Vessels, Nerves,
Salival-duct, Ap. F. 19.

-- Skin, or Sudoriferous, T. 4. F. 6.

-- Thyroid, T. 15. F. 2. T. 24. F. 7. their Use, Color and Compactness, T.
24. F. 7.

Glans Penis, T. 48. F. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Glottis how Composed, Ap. F. 20.

Gula or Gullet, T. 24. F. 1.

Gums, T. 13. F. 1. Viewed with a Microscope, F. 10.

H.
Haemorrhoids how Caused, T. 39. F. 7.

Hairs Viewed with a Microscope, T. 4. F. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. their Rise, T.
ead. F. 6. how Nourished and their Composition, ib.

Hairy-Scalp, T. 5. F. 1. its Piliferous Bodies, and Miliary Glands, ib. Number
and Largeness of its Blood Vessels Noted, ib.

Hearing how performed, Ap. F. 17.

Heart in Situ, T. 21, 24. in a Foetus, T. 63. taken out, T. 22. F. 1. cut
Transversly, F. 9. its External Membrane, F. 1. Fibers, T. ead. F. 2, 3, 4, 5.
how to prepare and show them, F. 2. The Right Auricle, T. 22. F. 1, 2. Opened,
F. 6, 8. Left Auricle, T. ead. F. 1, 2, 7, 8. The Right Ventricle, T. 22. F. 8,
9. Left Ventricle, T. ead. F. 7, 9. Columnae Carniae, F. 7, 10. their Origin,
Composition, and Use, F. 7. Valves Semilunar or Sigmoidal, F. 8, 13, 14. Mitral
or Tricuspid, F. 6, 7, 12. the Septum, F. 7, 9. a Sinus between the Ventricles,
F. 2, 3. Coronary Vessels, F. 8, 11. Nerves, F. 8. Glands at its Basis, T. 21.

Helix Auriculae, T. 12. F. 1.

Hernia of the Intestines, how Incident to Women, T. 50.

Hircus Ariculae, T. 12. F. 1.

Humor of the Amnios, v. Amnios.

Humors of the Eyes, T. 11. F. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

Hymen how Framed and its different Appearance, T. 51. F. 3. Imperforated in a
Married Woman, the History of it.

Hypochondrium, T. 1.

Hypogastrium, T. 1.

I.
ILia, T. 1. T. 32. Fig. 1. R R.

Inous, v. Bones of the Ear.

Infundibulum, T. 9. F. ^, 3. Ap. F. 26. its Connection to the Glandula
Pituitaria, T. 9. F. 2.

Inguina, T. 1.

Intestine Motion of the Blood in its Large Vessels, Introd.

-- Of the Chyle, Introd.

Intestines, T. 33, 40. F. 1, 2. their Fibers Described, Ap. F. 39. Glands
their Kinds, Disposition, and Use, Ap. F. 40.

-- Duodeman, Ap. F. 38. its Membranes External, and Muscular, ib. Perforated
by the Biliary and Pancreatick Ducts, T. 36. F. 1. Reason of its Curvation, ib.

-- Iejuam, T. 39. F. 1, 2. Ap. F. 39. External Membrane, T. 39. F. 1. Origin
of it, ib. Muscular Membrane, ib. Arteries, Veins, Nerves, ib.

-- Ileum, T. 39. F 3, 4, 5. Valvulae Connive^^^s how made, their Order, and
Use, T. 39. F. 2.

-- Coecum, T. 39. F. 4, 5. T. 40. F. 1.

-- Colon, T. 33, 39. F. 4, 5. its Cells, ib. Valves and how Caused, ib.
Ligament, T. 40. F. 1. T. 54. Composed of Fleshy Fibers, and their Use, ib.
Blood Vessels, T. 39. F. 4, 5. Reason why the Excrements cannot return, ib. an
Experiment illustrating how it happens in Iliack passions, ib.

-- Rectum, T. 3^. F. 6, 7. its External Coat whence derived, F. 6.
Blood Vessels, ib. Fatty Appendages of it, ib. Internal Coat, and its
Composition, F. 7. its Diseases, ib.

Iris, its Inner (...) ^. 11. F. 17. v. Eye.

K.
KIdneys in Situ, T. 41. in a Foetus Conglomerate, T. 63. taken out, T. 42, 43.
F. 1, 2. T. 50. their Adipose Membrane, T. 42. Proper Membrane, T. 43. F. 1, 3,
5. Pelvis, T. 43. F. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7. Glandulous Part, T. 43. F. 3. Viewed
with a Microscope, F. 5. Tubuli Urinarii, T. ead. F. 3, 4, 5, 6. Carunculae
Papillares, T. ead. F. 4, 5, 6. Emulgent Arteries and Veins, T. 42, 43. F. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5. Nerves, Lymphe-ducts and their Use, T. 43. F. 5. Manner of their
Secretion, ib. Stones in them, how they cause Pain, ib. Ill Effects of their
Laxity Related in a Case, ib.

L.
LAbyrinth, v. Ear.

Lachrymal Bone, v. Bones of the Upper-Jaw.

Lachrymal Ducts, v. Glands Lachrymal.

Lacteal Vessels, T. 39. F. 1. T. 40. F. 5. Ap. F. 10. their Valves, T. 40. F.
5. Rise, Progress, and Use, T. 39. F. 1.

Lactiferous Vessels in the Breast, T. 19. F. 1, 3, 4, 5. their Beginning,
Form, and Orifices, F. 4.

Lambdoidal Suture, v. Suture.

L^mina Spira^u, T. 90. F. 8.

Larynx, its Forepart, T. 24. F. 5, 7. Back-part, T. 24. F. 6, 8. Ap. F. 20.
Viewed Laterally, Ap. F. 22, 23. its Cartilages, v. Thyroidal, Annular,
Arytetenoidal, Epiglo^^^.

Ligament Annular of the Wrist, T. 64. F. 8. T. 67, 69. Ap. F. 1.

-- Of the Ancle, Ap. F. 1. how Composed, T. 81.

-- Imbanding the Tendons of the Fingers, T. 67.

-- Between the Ulna and Radius, T. 68, 71.

-- Between the Tibia and Fibula, T. 82.

-- Round of the Thigh Bone Fastened to the Acetabu^^m, and its Use, T. 74, 99.
F. 2.

-- Broad Covering the Joint of the Thigh and Hip, T. 79.

-- Investing the Knee, T. 84.

-- Of the Ancle Joint, T. 82.

-- Joining the Bones of the Tarsu^, T. 82.

-- Of Ossa Carpi at their Articulation, T. 71.

-- Reaching from the Os Sacrum to the Appendix of the Ischium, T. 72.

-- Ciliare, v. Eye.

Linea Alba, T. 31. Ap. F. 1.

Linea Semilunaris, ib. how Composed, ib.

Liver in Situ, T. 33, 41, 49. in a Foetus, T. 62. a Compages of Vessels and
the several Offices of them, T. 38. F. 5. how found in Dead Bodies, Three
Instances, ib. Scirrhoma Cured, ib. Proportionably Larger in a Foetus, and by
what means, T. 62. Discharges more Gall in Children, and the Benefit of it, ib.
taken out, T. 37. F. 1, 2. its Unequal Part, T. 37. F. 1. Concave Part, T. ead.
F. 2. Cut in Two to show its Inside, ib. Portion of it Viewed with a
Microscope, T. 38. F. 1. Lobuli of Glands, ib. Fissure in it, T. 37. F. 2.
Suspensory Ligament, T. 3 37. F. 1, 2. Umbilical Ligament, T. 37. F. 1, 2. T.
38. F. 5. T. 41, 49. External Membrane, T. 37. F. 1, 2. T. 38. F. 1. Hepatick
Artery, T. 37. F. 2. T. 38. F. 5. Vena Porta, T. 37. F. 2. T. 38. F. 2, 5. Vena
Caeva, T. 37. F. 2. T. 38. F. 2, 5. Nerves, Lymphe-ducts, and their Use, T. 38.
F. 5. Hepatick, or Gall-Ducts, T. 37. F. 2. T. 38. F. 1, 3, 5. their Orifice in
the Duodenum, T. 36. F. 1. Gallbladder, v. Gallbladder. how to Prepare a
Scheme of the Vessels, T. 38. F. 5. Capsula of the Vessels, T. 37. F. 2. T. 38.
F. 5.

Lungs in Situ, T. 21. in a Foetus. T. 63. taken out, T. 24. F. 1. Part of a
Lobe Divided, T. ead. F. 2, 3. their External Membrane, T. 24. F. 3.
Ramification of their Blood Vessels, T. 24. F. 2, 3. they Communicate with the
Intercostals and Bronchial, F. 1. Adhaesions how Caused, F. 3.

Lympha Course of it from the Inferior Parts, Ap. F. 10.

Lymphatick Glands, v. Glands.

Lympheducts their Origination, Ap. F. 6. Manner of Communication, Ap. F. 13,
14. of the Spleen, Penis, Testicles, Arise from the Veins, T. 36. F. 1. several
Arising from the Inferior Parts, Lungs, etc. Ap. F. 10, 11, 12.

M.
MAlleus, v. Bones of the Ear.

Malleoli, v. Bones, Tibia, Fibula.

Mammillary or Mastoid Processes, v. Bones of the Temples.

Maxillary Glands, v. Glands.

Meatus Auditorius, v. Ear.

Meatus from the Palate to the Ear, ib.

Meatus Cysticus. v. Gallbladder.

Mellastinum, T. 21. a Continuation of the Pleura, an Interstice in it Noted,
its Use, ib. that it Divides the Breast, proved- by an Hydropick Body, ib. its
Arteries, Veins, Nerves, Lymphe-ducts, ib.

Medulla Oblongata, its Crura, T. 9. F. 1. Ap. F. 28, 29. Caudex, T. 9. F. 1.
Ap. F. 28. Hinder-part going out of the Skull, T. 6. F. 2. T. 7. F. 2. T. 9. F.
1. a Portion of it cut off and Divided, T. 10. F. 4.

Medulla Spinalis with all its Nerves Springing from it, T. 10. F. 1. its
Beginning, Ap. F. 31. a Portion of it taken out of the Back, T. 10. F. 7.
Divided, F. 5. its Common Membrane, T. 10. F. 7. Sacculi of Fat between it, and
the Proper, ib. its Proper Membrane, T. ead. F. 5, 7.

Membrana Adiposa, v. Fat.

Membrana Carnosa, T. 4. F. 14. the same with the Common Membrane of the
Muscles, T. 4. F. 15. its Structure and Extension, ib.

Membrane Pituitous of the Cavity of the Forehead, T. 89. F. 1. its Use, ib.
Maggots found in it in Sheep, ib. why taken out for the Cure of the Staggers,
ib.

-- Glandulous of the Meatus Auditorius, v. Ear.

-- Mucilaginous Enclosing the Tendons of the Perfo^ rans, T. 67.

-- Of the Fauces, T. 13. F. 1. T. 14. F. 3. Ap. F. 8.

-- Of the Palate, T. 13. F. 1. T. 14. F. 3, 4.

Mesentery, T. 31. F. 1. T. 40. F. 1, 2. its Origin, Structure and Vessels, T.
40. F. 1. Glands, F. 1, 2. Vasa Lactea, v. Lacteal Vessels. Fat. T. 40. F. 1.

Metacarpus, v. Bones.

Metacarsus, v. Bones.

Milk derived from the Blood, T. 19. F. 5. a Description of it, ib.

Monstrous Conception, T. 62.

Mucilaginous Glands, T. 74. Description of their Excretory-Ducts in General,
T. 79.

(...) whence derived, T. 34. F. 5. Ill Consequences of wanting it in a
Remarkable Case, ib.

Muscles their Fibers, T. 64. F. 1, 2, 3. Disposition of them in the De^^ides,
T. ead. F. 4. in the Biceps of the Arm, F. 5. Membranosus, F. 6. Genaellus, F.
7. Motion how Performed by them, T. 64. F. 2. Introd. redder than other Parts,
the Cause of it, ib. Extensors of the Tibia, why Stronger than the Flexors, T.
76. the same in the Talus and Toes, and the Reason, T. 84. Tibialis Divided,
and the Use of the Foot recovered, T. 80.

Muscles, Abductor Auris, v. Retrahens Auriculam.

-- Abductor Indicis, T. 68. H.

-- Abductor Minimi Digiti Manus, ib. I, K,

-- Abductor Minimi Digiti Pedis, T. 86. F. 1. G.

-- Abductor Oculi, T. 12. F. 9. D.

-- Abductor Pollicis Manus, T. 64. 1.

-- Abductor Pollicis Pedis, T. 84. M.

-- Accelerator Urinae, T. 47. F. 5. H H.

-- Acclivis, v. Obliquus Ascendens.

-- Adductor Minimi Digiti Pedis, v. Transversalis Pedis.

-- Adductor Oculi, T. 12. F. 9. C.

-- Adductor Pollicis Manus, T. 71. S.

-- Adductor Pollicis Pedis, T. 86. F. 2. D.

-- Anconeus, T. 69. O.

-- Ani-scalptor, v. Latissimus Dorsi.

-- Any Sphincter, v. Sphincter Any.

-- Any Levator, v. Levator Any.

-- Annuens, v. Rectus Minor Anticus.

-- Antithenar, v. Adductor Pollicis Manus.

-- Aperiens Palpebram Rectus, T. 11. F. 4. A.

-- Arytaernideus, Ap. F. 9, 20. F.

-- Attollens Auriculam, T. 12. F. 2. A.

-- Attollens Nasi Alam, v. Elevator, etc.

-- Attollens Oculi, v. Elevator Oculi.

-- Attollens Palpebram, v. Aperiens Palpebram.

-- Auriculae Elevator, v. Attollens Auriculam.

-- Basiglossus, v. Tongue.

-- Bibitorius, v. Adductor Oculi.

-- Biceps Internus Humeri, T. 65. I.

-- Biceps Externus Humeri, v. Gemellus.

-- Biceps Femeris, T. 77. A, B, C.

-- Bicornis, v. Extensor Carpi Radialis.

-- Biventer, v. Digastricus.

-- Bractiaeus Externus, T. 65. L.

-- Bractiaeus Internus, T. 65. K K.

-- Bu^^inator, T. 12. A, B.

-- Bursalis, v. Marsupialis.

-- Caro Musculosa Quadrata, v. Palmaris Brevis.

-- Catenae, v. Tibieus Anticus.

-- Ceratoglossus, T. 14. F. 1. D D, H.

-- Ciliaris, v. Orbicularis Palpebrarum.

-- Clitoridis Musculi, v. Erector Clitoridis.

-- Cnemodactilius, v. Extensor Digitorum Communis Manus.

-- Collateralis Penis, v. Erigens.

-- Complexus, T. 16. F, G, H.

-- Constrictor Palpebrarum, v. Orbicularis.

-- Constrictor Labiorum, T. 12. F. 5. I.

-- Constrictor Alae Nasi seu Depressor Labii Superioris, Ap. F. 32.

-- Coratobrachi^lis, T. 69. F.

-- Coracohyoidous, T. 15. F. 2. C C, etc.

-- Cr^naster, T. 45. F. 1. B.

-- Cricoerytemoideus Posticus, Ap. F. 20. E E.

-- Cricoerytemoideus Lateralis, ib. F. 22. G G.

-- Cricothyroideus, T. 24. F. 5. H H.

-- Crurcus. T. 76. C.

-- Cubiteus Extensor v. Ulnaris.

-- Cubiteus Flexor v. Ulnaris.

-- Cucullaris, T. 27. A, B.

-- Declivis, v. Obliquus Descendens.

-- Delioides. T. 66. X, X.

-- Depressor Labii Superioris, seu Constrictor Alae Nasi, Ap. F. 35.

-- Depressor Labii Inferioris Proprius, T. 12. F. 5. H.

-- Depressor Labiorum Communis, T. ib. F. ib. C.

-- Depressor Maxillae Inferioris, v. Digastricus.

-- Depressor Oculi, T. 11. F. 7. C.

-- Detrusor Urinae, T. 44. F. 2. C C.

-- Diaphragma, T. 52. B, C.

-- Digastricus, T. 15. F. 1. A, B, C.

-- Dilatator Alae Nasi, T. 12. F. 5. E.

-- Director Penis, v. Erector.

-- Distortor Oris, v. Zygoma^icus.

-- Dorsi Latissimus, v. Latissimus Dorsi.

-- Dorsi Longissimus, T. 28. N.

-- Elevator Any, v. Levator.

-- Elevator Auris, v. Attollens Auriculam.

-- Elevator Oculi, T. 11. F. 7. A.

-- Elevator Labiorum Communis, T. 12. F. 5. D.

-- Elevator Labii Inferioris Proprius, Ap. F. 32. H H.

-- Elevator Labii Superioris Proprius, T. 12. F. 4. C.

-- Elevator Scapulae, v. Levator.

-- Erector Clitoridis, T. 51. E E.

-- Erigens seu Erector Penis, T. 47. F. 5. F F.

-- Extensor Carpi Radialis, T. 69 D, F.

-- Extensor Carpi Ulnaris, ib. E.

-- Extensor Communis Digitorum Manus, T. 69. G.

-- Extensor Digitorune Pedis Longus, T. 81. F.

-- Extensor Digitorum Brevis, T. ib. G.

-- Extensor Minimi Digiti Manus, T. 69. G.

-- Extensor Primi Ossis Pollicis Manus, T. 71. O.

-- Extensor Pollicis Pedis Longus, T. 81. H.

-- Extensor Secundi Ossis Pollicis Manus, T. 71. O.

-- Extensor Pollicis Pedis Brevis, T. 81. R.

-- Extensor Tertii Ossis Pollicis Manus, T. 70. C.

-- Externus Auris vel Laxator Externus, Ap. F. 15. c.

-- Fascialis, v. Sartorius.

-- Fascia Lata, v. Membranosus.

-- Fibuleus, v. Peroneus Primus.

-- Fidicinales, v. Lumbricales Manus.

-- Flexor Capitis, T. 18. L.

-- Flexor Carpi Radialis, T. 68. E.

-- Flexor Carpi Ulnaris, ib. Q.

-- Flexor Primi Internodii Digitorum Manus, v. Lumbricales Manus.

-- Flexor Pollicis Manus Longus, T. 68. L.

-- Flexor Pollicis Pedis Longus, T. 85. K.

-- Flexor Pollicis Pedis Brevis, T. 86. F. 2. A.

-- Flexor Primi Internodii Digitorum Pedis, v. Lumbricales Pedis.

-- Flexor Secundi Internodii Digitorum Manus, v. Perforatus Manus.

-- Flexor Primi and Secundi Ossis Pollicis Manus, T. 68. M, P, O.

-- Flexor Secundi Internodii Digitorum Pedis, v. Perforatus Pedis.

-- Flexor Tertii Intermodii Digitorum Manus, v. Perforans Manus.

-- Flexor Tertii Internodii Digitorum Pedis, v. Perforans Pedis.

-- Framalis, App. F. 33. A A.

-- Gasterocnemius Externus, T. 83. E.

-- Gasterocnemius Internus, T. 84. F.

-- Go^^^^, T. 66. C, D.

-- Genyoglossus, T. 14 F. 1. E, F, G, I, L,

-- Genyohyoideus, T. ib. and F. ead. O.

-- Glucaeus Major, T. 12. A.

-- Glucaeus Medius, ib. D.

-- Glucaeus Minimus, T. 73. C.

-- Gracilis, T. 75. D.

-- Graphoides, v. Digastricus.

-- Hyochyroideus, T. 15. F. 2. P.

-- Hypsiloglossus, v. Basioglossus, no such Muscle in Humane Bodies.

-- Iliacus Externus, v. Pyriformis.

-- Iliacus Internus, T. 52. N N.

-- Immersus, v. Subscapularis.

-- Indicator, or Extensor Indicis Proprius, T. 70. N.

-- Infraspinatur, T. 66. F.

-- Intercostales Externi, T. 26. C, D.

-- Intercostales Interni, T. 26. C, D.

-- Internus Auris, Ap. F. 16. L.

-- Interossei Manus, T. 68. d d.

-- Interossei Pedis, T. 86. F. 3. A A A.

-- Interspinales Colli, App. F. 36. L L.

-- Labiorum Sphincter, v. Constrictor Labiorum.

-- Latissimus Dorsi, T. 27.

-- Laxator Externus, v. Externus Auris.

-- Levator Any, T. 47. F. 5. E E.

-- Levator Scapulae, T. 28. G.

-- Lividus, v. Pectineus.

-- Longissimus Dorsi, v. Dorsi Longissimus.

-- Longissimus Oculi, v. Obliquus Superior.

-- Longus Colli, T. 18. A A.

-- Longus Femoris, v. Sartorius.

-- Lumbricales Manus, T. 67. M, N.

-- Lumbricales Pedis, T. 86. F, E.

-- Marsupialis, T. 74. F, G.

-- Mastoideus, T. 18. I I.

-- Masseter, T. 12. F. 4, 5. O O.

-- Membranosus, T. 76. B.

-- Minimi Digiti Manus Abductor, v. Abductor Minimi Digiti.

-- Minimi Digiti Pedis Abductor, v. Abductor Minimi Digiti.

-- Minimi Digiti Tensor, v. Extensor Minimi Digiti.

-- Mylohyoideus, T. 15. F. 1. E E.

-- Nauticus, v. Tibieus Posticus.

-- Nonus Humeri Placentini, v. Ro^^ndur Minor.

-- Obliquus Ascendens, T. 32. F. 1. R, P.

-- Obliquus Descenden^, T. 31. C, D, E, F, G.

-- Obliquus Minor seu Inferior Oculi, T. 11. F. 8. G.

-- Obliquus Superior Oculi cum Trochlea T. 11. F. 7. H.

-- Obliquus Inferior Capitis, T. 17. F F.

-- Obliquus Superior Capitis, T. ib. G, H.

-- Obliquus Tympani Auris, Ap. F. 16. K.

-- Obturator Externus, T. 74. H.

-- Obturator Internus, v. Marsupialis.

-- Occipitalis, App. F. 8. Y.

-- Oesophagaeus, seu Sphincter Gulae, App. F. 38. E.

-- Orbicularis Palpebrarum, T. 12. F. 4. D D.

-- Orbicularis Labiorum, v. Constrictor, etc.

-- Palmaris Longus, T. 64. C, F.

-- Palmaris Brevis, T. ib. K.

-- Patie^^iae, v. Levator Scapulae.

-- Pectoralis, T. 20. H.

-- Pectoralis Internus, v. Triengularis.

-- Pecti^^ns, T. 75. L.

-- Pedieus, v. Perforatus Pedis.

-- Perforans Manus, T. 67. A, B.

-- Perforans Manus, ib. F, G.

-- Perforatus Pedis. T. 83. G.

-- Perforans Pedis, T. 85. H.

-- Pero^^us Primus, T. 82. C.

-- Pero^^us Secundus, T. ib. B.

-- Plantaris, T. 84. G.

-- Platysma Myoides, v. Quadratus Genae.

-- Popliteus, T. 84 C.

-- Pronator Radii Teres, T. 68. A.

-- Pronator Radii Brevis seu Quadratus, ib. B.

-- Psoas Magnus.

-- Psoas Parvus.

-- Pierygoideus Externus, T. 12. F. 5. Q.

-- Pierygoideus Internus, T. 15. F. 2. N.

-- Pierygopalatinus, v. Sphenopterygopalatinus.

-- Pierygopharyngeus, App. F. 38. B.

-- Pyramidalis, App. F. 1, 42.

-- Pyriformis, T. 73. D.

-- Quadragemini, v. Pyriformis.

-- Quadratus Femoris, T. 73. N.

-- Quadratus Genae, App. F. 33.

-- Quadratus Lumborium, T. 30. V.

-- Radialis Extensor, v. Extensor Carpi.

-- Rectus Abdominis, T. 32. F. 1. L, M, N, O, P.

-- Rectus Femoris, T. 75. G.

-- Rectus Capitis Lateralis, Ap. F. 8. G.

-- Rectus Capitis Major Anticus, v. Flexor Capitis.

-- Rectus Capitis Minor Anticus, Ap. F. 8. H.

-- Rectus Capitis Major Posticus, T. 17. A, B.

-- Rectus Capitis Minor Posticus, T. ib. C, C.

-- Rectus Palpebrae, v. Aperiens, etc.

-- Renuans, v. Rectus Capitis Minor Anticus.

-- Retractor Alae Nasi, seu Elevator Labii Superioris, App. F. 33. C.

-- Retrahens Auriculam, T, 12. F. 1. B, C C.

-- Rhomboides, T. 28. A, B, C, D.

Rotundus Major, T. 65. d.

Rotundus Minor, v. Teres Minor.

-- Sacer, T. 29. M M.

-- Sacrolumbalis, T. ead. A, B, D, E.

-- Sartorius, T. 75. A, B, C.

-- Scalenus Primus, T. 18. B B.

-- Scalenus Secundus, T. 18. B B.

-- Scalenus Tertius, T. 18. B B.

-- Semifibuleus, v. Peroneus Secundus.

-- Semimembranosus, T. 77. D.

-- Seminervosus, T. ib. E.

-- Semispinatus, T. 29. M M.

-- Serratus Major Anticus, T. 20. D, E, etc.

-- Serratus Minor Anticus, T. 20. K.

-- Serratus Superior Posticus, T. 28. I.

-- Serratus Inferior Posticus, T. ib. K.

-- Soleus, v. Gasterocnemius Internus.

-- Sphenopterygopalatinus, App. F. 8. d d.

-- Sphincter Any, T. 47. F. 5. A, B, C, D.

-- Sphincter Gulae, v. Oesophagaeus.

-- Sphincter Labiorum, v. Constrictor.

-- Sphincter Vaginae Uteri, T. 51. F. 1. F F.

-- Sphincter Vesicae, T. 48. F. 1. K.

-- Spinalis Colli, App. F. 36. I I.

-- Splenius, T. 16. A A.

-- Stapedis, App. F. 17. Q.

-- Sternohyoideus, T. 15. F. 1. F F.

-- Sternothyroideus, T. 15. F. 1. H H.

-- Stylohyoideus, T. 15. F. 1. N.

-- Styloglossus, T. 14. F. 1. C.

-- Stylopharyngeus, App. F. 38. D D.

-- Subclaevius, T. 20. A.

-- (...) C.

-- Subscapularis, T. 65. E.

-- Succenturiatus, v. Pyramidalis.

-- Supraspinatus, seu Superscapularis, T. 66. G.

-- Supinator Radii Longus, T. 69. P.

-- Supinator Radii Brevis, T. 71. G.

-- Supopliteus, v. Subpopliteus.

-- Suspensor Testiculi, v. Cremaster.

-- Temporalis, T. 12. F. 4, 5. M, K.

-- Tensor seu Extensor Digitorum Manus, T. 69. G.

-- Tensor Pollicis, v. Extensor.

-- Teres Major, v. Rotundus Major.

-- Teres Minor, T. 66. F.

-- Thenar, v. Abductor Pollicis Manus.

-- Thyroarytaenoideus, App. F. 22. F.

-- Tibialis Anticus, T. 81. E.

-- Tibialis Posticus, T. 85. G.

-- Transversalis Abdominis, T. 32. F. 1. I, K, K.

-- Transversalis Colli, App. F. 36. K.

-- Transversalis Dorsi, v. Semispinatus.

-- Transversalis Lumborum, v. Sa^er.

-- Transversalis Femoris, v. Quadratus.

-- Transversalis Pedis Placentini, T. 86. F. 2. E.

-- Transversalis Penis, T. 47. F. 5. I.

-- Trapezius, v. Cucullaris.

-- Triangularis, T. 26. F. 1. B B.

-- Triceps, T. 76. I.

-- Trochlearis, v. Obliquus Superior Oculi.

-- Vaginalis Gulae, App. F. 38.

-- Vaginae Uteri Sphincter, v. Sphincter, etc.

-- Vastus Externus, T. 75. I.

-- Vastus Internus, T. ib. H.

-- Ulnaris Extensor, v. Extensor Carpi, etc.

-- Ulnaris Flexor, v. Flexor Carpi, etc.

-- Zygomaticus, T. 12. F. 4. E.

N.
NAils, T. 105. F. 3. their Origin and Composition, ib. Nates of the Brain, T.
10. F. 1. Ap. F. 31.

Navel, T. 1. R.

Navel-String, T. 56, 57. F. 3, 7. T. 59, 60. F. 3. T. 62, 63. its Loose
Membrane, T. 60. F. 3. Fibers, F. 4. Succiferous Tubes, T. 60. F. 4. a
Conjecture of their Use, T. 58. Part of its External Surface, in Cows full of
Tubercles, T. 59. its Course Various, T. 56. its Vessels Injured, have bad
Effects; Two strange Cases, ib.

Nerve Described by a Microscope, T. 10. F. 6. Fibrillae, and Manner of their
Cohaesion, ib. not Tubulated, ib. Blood Vessels pass with them, ib. Globules in
them, and whence Derived, ib. Fibers proceeding from the Brain, T. 10. F. 2.
from the Spinal Marrow, T. ead. F. 5. passing through the Dura Matter, ib. their
Gangleons, or Plexus Ganglio Form^s, T. 10. F. 4, 5, 6. Ap. F. 27.

-- Olfactory, T. 9. F. 1, 3. Ap. F. 18.

-- Optic, T. 9. F. 1, 2, 3. T. 11. F. 7, 9, 10, 11, 14* 15, 16. Ap. F. 26,
28, 38. their Conjunction, T. 9. F. 1. Blood Vessels, T. 11. F. 18.

-- Motory or Third Pair, T. 9. F. 1, 2, 3. Ap. F. 26, 28.

-- Pathetick, T. 9. F. 1, 3. Ap. F. 26, 28.

-- Fifth Pair, T. 9. F. 1, 3. Ap. F. 26, 27, 28. ^ Branch of them making the
Gustatory, T. 14. F. 1.

-- Sixth Pair, T. 9. F. 1, 3. Ap. F. 26, 28.

-- Auditory, T. 9. F. 3. Ap. F. 26, 28.

-- Par Vagum, T. 7. F. 2. T. 9. F. 3. Ap. F. 16, 28.

-- Accessory Spinal, T. 7. F. 2. T. 9. F. 3. Ap. F. 28.

-- Ninth Pair, T. 7. F. 2. T. 9. F. 3. Ap. F. 26, 28. Branches Running to the
Tongue and Larynx, T. 14. F. 1.

-- Tenth Pair, T. 7. F. 2. T. 9. F. 1. Ap. F. 28.

-- All of the Spinal Marrow, T. 10. F. 1. of the Neck, Ap. F. 28. Several
Branches of the Spinal Nerves, viz. Axillary, Ap. F. 1. One passing through the
Coracobrachiaeus, T. 65. Running to the Fingers, T. 67. Crural, T. 72, 77, 78.
Ap. F. 2. Trunks on the Forepart of the Tibia, T. 82. Running to the Bottom of
the Foot and Toes, T. 84. in the Ann, T. 64.

Nipple and Areola, T. 19. F. 1, 2. Viewed with a Microscope, F. 3, 4.
Structure of the Nipple, F. 4. how to Examine it, ib. Observations on the
Color of the Areola, F. 3.

Nose its External Parts, T. 14. F. 1.

Nostrils their Pituitary Membrane, T. 14. F. 5. its Nature and Extent, ib.

Nutrition, Introd.

Nymphae, T. 50, 51. F. 1.

O.
Occiput, v. Bones.

Olecranon, v. Bones, Ulna.

Omentum in Situ, T. 33.

-- Ala Superior, ib. Inferior, T. 40. F. 1.

-- Bursa and how to Demonstrate it, T. 33. F 21 Glands, T. 34. F. 1. Membranes
dear'd of F^^, T. ead. F. 2. Blood Vessels, T. 33.

Orbiculare Os, v. Bones of the Ear.

Ovaria Entire, T. 50, 51. F. 5. T. 53. F. 1, 4. in a Fo^tus, T. 63. Opened, T.
51. F. 5. their External Membrane, Glands, Vesiculae. ib. Ligament between them
and the Tube, ib. T. 53. F. 4. their Vasa Praeparantia, T. 53. F. 1, 4.

P.
PAlate its Bones, v. Bones of the Upper-Jaw. Glandulous Membrane, v. Membrane.

Pancreas in Situ, T. 36. F. 1. T. 41. External Membrane, T. 36. F. 1. Duct, T.
ead. F. 1, 2. Arteries, F. 1. its Use, F. 2.

Pancreas Asellii, T. 40. F. 1.

Par Vagum, v. Nerves.

Parotid Gland, v. Glands.

Passions why they disorder the Reason, T. 6. F. 6.

Patella, T. 103. F. 3, 4. its Use, ib.

Penis, T. 45. F. 1. T. 48. F. 1. its Back-part, T. 44. F. ^. its Membrana
Carnosa, T. 47. F. 1. Praepuce, T. 48. F. 1. how Composed, T. 47. F. 1.
Cavernous Bodies, T. 47. F. 1, 3. T. 48. F. 1. their Structure, T. 48. F. 3, 4,
5. Gians, T. 47. F. 1. T. 48. F. 1. Infiated, T. ead. F. 3, 4. Viewed with a
Microscope, F. 2. Glandulae Odoriferae, T. 48. F. 1. Muscles, v. Muscles.
Arteries, T. 47. F. 1. T. 48. F. 1. Ap. F. 3. Tying them Advised after
Excision, T. 48. F. 3. Veins, T. 47. F. 1. T. 48. F. 1. Nerves, ib.
Lymphoticks, T. 48. F. 6. their Origin, T. 36. F. 1.

Pericardium, T. 21. its Origin, Composition and Use, ib. Blood Vessels,
Lymphe-ducts, Glands that separate the Humor, Evident in some Morbid Bodies,
Instan'd in a Child, ib. Another Case where it Adhered to the Heart, ib.

Pericranium, T. 5. F. 1. T. 7. F. 2. its (...) and Blood Vessels, their
Number, whence derived, ib.

Periostium of the Skull, T. 5. F. 1. if different from the Pericranium, ib.

Peritonaeu^, T. 32. F. 1. its Internal Surface, T. 41. made up of diverse
Laminae, T. 32. gives a Membrane to each Viscus, ib. vastly Extended in
Dropsies, ib. Two Cases mentioned, ib. Examined with a Microscope, T. 32. F. 2.
Process of its Internal Membrane, T. 32. F. 3, 4. External Process, Ap. F. 1.
Perforations Described, T. 32. F. 2.

Petrosum Os, v. Bones of the Temples.

Pi^ Matter Covering the Brain, T. 8. F. 5. the C^^^bel, T. 9. F. 1. the Spinal
Marrow, T. 10. F. 1. Lining the Ventricles, ib.

Piles, v. Haemorrhoids.

Placenta Uterina, its Unequal Surface, T. 55, 58. Concave, T. 56, 59, 60. F. 1.
cut Transver^ly, T. 60. F. 2. Wash from its Blood, T. 61. F. 1. Twenty-Five
Days after Conception, T. 57. F. 3. its Composition, T. 58. an Hypothesis of
its Glands and their Use, ib. Blood Vessels filled with War, T. 60. F. 1. their
Ramifications, T. 56, 59. Re^^ula^ Ple^^^, T. 61. F. 1. Reason of removing it
after the Birth, T. 54.

Pla^^ra, T. 26.

P^^xus Chorocides, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 30. Delineated by a Microscope, T. 10.
F. 3. its Arteries and Veins Described, Ap. F. 30. Lymphe-ducts and Glands, T.
10. F. 3.

Plexus Pampiniformis, v. Vein Spermatick.

Pomum Ad^^^, T. 1.

Pons Varolii, v. Annular Procuberance.

Pores, v. Scarf-Skin.

Polypus of the Ear, T. 90. F. 5.

Procidentia Any how Caused, T. 39. F. 7. a Case, ib.

Prostates their Forepart Divided, T. 47. F. 1. T. 48. F. 1. Back-part, T. 44.
F. 2. their Inside Exhibited, T. 47. F. 3. Inflated, F. 4. their Ostiola, T.
47. F. 1. T. 4^. F. 1.

Pubis Os, v. Bones.

Pudendum of Women, T. 2, 50. Opened, T. 51. F. 3. the Labia, T. 50. Opened, T.
51. F. 3. how Extended, T. 51. F. 1.

Punctum Lachrymale, T. 11. F. 1.

Pupil, v. Eye.

Pylorus, v. Stomach Orifices.

R.
Radius, v. Bones.

Receptacle of Chyle, T. 40. F. 2. Filled with Mercury, Ap. F. 10, 11. Consist
in Humane Bodies of Three Trunks Described, Ap. F. 11.

Region of the Navel, T. 1.

Ribs, v. Bones.

S.
SArum Os, v. Bones.

Salival Glands, v. Glands Parotid, Maxillary, Sublingual.

Salival Ducts, ib.

Scapula, v. Bones.

Scarf-Skin of several Parts of the Body viewed with a Microscope, T. 4. F. 1,
2, 3, 4. Composed of diverse Strata of Scales, F. 1. how to show them, ib.

Scrobiculus Cordis, T. 1.

Scrotum, T. 41. Septum dividing it, ib.

Secondine, T. 59. what it is, ib.

Sensation by what Medium performed, T. 10. F. 6. Introd.

Sesanoidea Ossa, v. Bones.

Shoulders, T. 1.

Similar Parts, what, T. 4. F. 6.

Sinus Longitudinal of the Dura Matter Opened, T. 6. F. 1. Dried and Opened, T.
8. F. 1. Part of it Opened, T. 6. F. 3. Back-part Opened, T. 6. F. 2. Blown up
and Dried, T. 8. F. 2. cut Transversly, T. ead. F. 4. Orifices of Veins in it,
T. 6. F. 2, 3. T. 8. F. 1.

-- Lateral Opened, T. 6. F. 2. Dried, T. 8. F. 1, 2. Injected with Wax, App.
F. 30. its Tortuous Part Opened, T. 6. F. 4. Injected with Wax, App. F. 26. cut
off below it, App. F. 28. Bylbous Part, T. 6. F. 4, 5. its Use, ib. Transverse
Ligaments, T. 6. F. 2.

-- Fourth, T. 8. F. 2. Filled with Wax, App. F. 30.

-- Falcis Inferior Dried, T. 8. F. 1, 4.

-- Superior, App. F. 26.

-- Inferior, ib.

-- Circular, ib.

Skeleton, v. Bones.

Skin, its Outer Surface, as it Appears to the Naked Eye, T. 4. F. 5. Viewed
with a Microscope, F. 6. its Papillae made up of Glands and Nerves, T. 4. F. 6.
Sudoriferous Glands of Two Sorts, Pyramidal, and Miliary, ib. Sweat-Vessels,
Arteries, Veins, Nerves, Lymphe-ducts, ib.

S^ull, v. Bones.

Smelling how performed, Introd.

S^^ff much of it may be pemicious, T. 89. F. 1.

Spec^^ of the Vertebrae, v. Bones Vertebrae.

Specus of the Os Petros^um, v. Bones of the Temples.

Spina of the Back, v. Bones Skeleton.

Spines of the Vertebrae, v. Bones Vertebrae.

Sp^^gins^^ Os, v. Bones of the Upper Jaw, and Ta^^.

Spleen Lower-part in Situ, T. 41. of a Foetus, T. 63. Concave Part, T. 36. F.
1. Partly made bare, ib. External Membrane, T. 36. F. 1. of a Quadrupede, F. 4.
Proper Membrane, ^^ In^ide of it, F. 5. Cells in a Brute, T. 36. F. 4. Existent
in Men, and the Difference, ib. Fibers., T. ead. F. 4, 6. Arteries Injected, T.
36. F. 1, 3, 6. App. F. 3. Veins, T. ead. F. 1. Injected, F. 3, 6. Nervous
Plexus, T. 36. F. 6. Lymphe-ducts, T. ead. F. 1, 6. whence they Arise, F. 1.
its Office, Introd.

Sphaem^^^er Os, v. Bones.

S^yloi^es Process, v. Bones of the Temples, Ulna.

S^^pe^, v. Bones Ear.

Scaggers a Disease in B^^tes, the Cause and Cure of it, T. ^9. F. 1.

Stomach in (...), T. 33, 4^. taken out, T. 34. F. 5. its Orifices, T. 34. F.
5. T. 35. F. 8. Instated, F. 9, 10. External Membrane, T. 34. F. ^. a P^^ation
of it, T. 35. F. 1, 2. Muscular Membrane, T. 35. F. 4, 5. Orders of Fishes, ib.
Inner Membrane may be Divided into Three, viz. Villous, and how to Demonstrate
it, T. 35. F. 6. Gl^^dalous, how to show it, ib. Tendinous or Nervous, F. 7.
Superior and Inferior Coronary Blood Vessels, T. 34. F. 5. T. 35. F. 5.
Inosculating, T. 35. F. 1, 2. Plexus, F. 3. Plexus of Blood Vessels on the
Inside, F. ^ Nervous Plexus, T. 34. F. 5. Wounds of it not always Mental, their
Symptoms Two Cases Related, T. 35. F. 10.

(...), v. Bones.

Suture Co^^nal, Sa^ital, La^doid^l, T. 91. F. 1. often irregular, ib. as they
Appear on the Inside of the Sk^ll, F. 2. in Infants and Children, T. 101. E E.

Satures Bastard or False, T. 92.

T.
TA^^, v. Bones.

Ta^sus, v. Bones.

Tactus Organa, Introd.

Tasting how performed, ib.

Testicles, T. 41, 42, 44. F. 2. T. 45. F. 1. Divested of their Tunicles, T.
45. F. 2. T. 46. F. 1, 2. cut Transversly, T. 46. F. 3. proportionably Larger
in Quadrupedes than Men, Reason of it, T. 45. F. 2. Tunica Vaginalis, T. 45. F.
1, 2. Tunica Albuginea, T. 45. F. 2. T. 46. F. 1, 2, 3. Glandulous Part, T. 45.
F. 2. T. 46. F. 1, 2, 3. Seminal Vessels, T. 46. F. 1, 2, 3, 4. Epididymis, T.
42, 45. F. 1, 2. how Composed, T. 4^. F. 3. T. 46. F. 2. Vas Deferens, T. 42,
44. F. 2. T. 45. F. 1, 2, 3. T. 46. F. 1. T. 47. F. 1. its Contortions, T. 45.
F. 2, 3. T. 46. F. 1. Vaginal Tunick, T. 45. F. 1, 2, 3. Origin, Progress,
Insertion Described, T. 46. F. 5. Arteries, v. Arteries Spermatick. Veins, v.
Veins Spermatick. Extremities of both Less than in other Parts, T. 46. F. 4.
Nerve, T. 45. F. 1. T. 46. F. 1. Lymphe-ducts, T. 45. F. 2. their Origin, T.
36. F. 1.

Teeth, v. Bones.

Testes of the Brain, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 31.

Thalami Nervorum Optitorum, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 30.

Thighs, F. 1, 2, 3.

Thoracick-duct filled with Mercury, Ap. F. 11. its Insertion, T. 40. F. 3, 4.
Filled with Wax, Ap. F. 12. Divisions, and Valves, Ap. F. 11. Lymphe-ducts
Entering it, Ap. F. 12. its Advantageous Situation Noted, Ap. F. 11.

Thorax Opened, T. 21. in a Fo^tus, T. 63. its Viscera taken out, T. 24. F. 1.
Cavity, T. 26. Wounds in it may be suddenly Mortal without Hurting the
Viscaera, Reason of it and the Cure, T. 52. External Air must be kept out, an
Observation to confirm it, ib.

Thymus, in Situ, T. 21. in a Foetus, T. 63. Observations of its Bigness in
different Ages and Persons, T. 21. never wanting, ib. its Use, ib.

Tibia, v. Bones.

Tongue, T. 13. F. 1. its External Covering in Brutes viewed with a Microscope,
T. 13. F. 2, 3, 4, 5. Subjacent Membrane, its Superior Part, F. 6. Lowerpart,
F. 7. Small Vessels, ib. Nervous Papillary Plexus and Glands, F. 8. Appears
alike in Men, except the Horny Covering, F. 2. Villous and Nervous Bodies and
Glands in a Humane Tongue, Ap. F. 24. Various Orders of Fibers, T. 13. F. 9.
Muscles, v. Muscles.

Tonsils, in Situ, T. 13. F. 1. External Surface, Ap. F. 9.

Torcular Herophisi, T. 6. F. 2. T. 8. F. 2. Ap. F. 30. Vein Emp^ying it self
at it, T. 8. F. 2.

Tradaea or Windpipe its Forepart, T. 15. F. 2. T. ^4. F. 1, 7. T. 25. F. 8.
Ap. F. 22. Back-part, T. 24. F. 6. Ap. F. 20, 23. Small Glands which Appear on
it, their Use, Ap. F. 20. A Portion of it cut off, T. 25. F. 1. Opened, Ap. F.
21. External Membrane, T. 25. F. 1. Muscular Fassiculi lying between its
Cartilages, T. ead. F. 2. Glandulous Membrane, T. 25. F. 3. Internal Membrane,
T. ead. F. 4. Ap. F. 25. Order of its Fibers, and their Use, ib.

Trepan to be Used with great Care, T. 91. F. 2.

Trochlea of the Eye, T. 11. F. 7.

Tubae Falloppiaenae, T. 49, 50. in a Foetus, T. 63. Opened, T. 51, F. 5. T.
53. F. 3. Distended, in C^itu, and afterward, T. 53. F. 1, 2. by what means,
F. 2. Time of it uncertain, ib. Orifices, T. 51. F. 5. Cavity, T. 50. Internal
Membrane Rugous, T. 51. F. 5. Expanded, T. 53. F. 3. F^^riae, T. 50, 51. F. 5.
T. 53. F. 2. Embracing the Ovaria, T. ead. F. 1. Number of Blood Vessels and
Color Noted, T. 53. F. 2.

Tumor^ Milky, how Ca^^'d, T. 19. F. 4.

(...), v. Ear.

V.
VAgina Uteri Opened, T. 51. F. 3, 4. Inverted, T. 53. F. 1. Strained in C^^ta,
and by what means, T. 51. F. 1. (...) and Use, ib. other Glands their Ducts,
and Use Describe (...) Rugous Membrane Described, ib. Caen^^^l^ Myrtiformes and
Hymen, ib. Insertion of the Meatus Urinarius, T. 51. F. 3.

Vapors in Expiration whence they proceed, Ap. F. 20.

Vas Deserens, v. Testicles.

Vasa Breviae, T. 36. F. 1.

Vasa Praeparania in a Man, v. Artery Spermatick, Vein Spermatick.

Vasa Praeparantiae in a Woman, T. 50, 53. F. 1, 4.

Valves in the Veins, v. Veins.

Valvulae Connive^^^e, v. Intestines.

Valvulae Tricuspides or Mitrales, v. Heart.

Valvulae Sigmoides or Semilio^^res, v. Arteries, Aorta, Pulmonary.

Veins their Coats, T. 23. F. 1, 2, 3. Valves, T. ead. F. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. continued Channels from the Arteries, Ap. F. 4, 5. Use of the Valves, and
their Number Noted, T. 26. F. 6. their Distance, T. ead. F. 14.

-- Aryg^^, sc. Sine Pari its Use, Introd.

-- Umbilical Opened T. 61. F. 4. Injected, F. 5. Entering the Liver, T. 62, 63.

-- Spermatick, T. 42, 44. F. 2. T. 45. F. 1, 2. T. 46. F. 1. Injected, T. ead.
F. 5. their Ramifications on the Testes, T. 45. F. 1. Plexus Pampiniformis or
Varicosus, T. 44. F. 2. how they Empty themselves, T. 42. why T^^tnous in Men,
and Straight in Quadrupedes, T. 45. F. 2.

-- Internal Jugular, T. 6. F. ^5. T. 15. F. 1, 2. care must be had of it in
c^^ing (...) Necks, ib. if Wounded how to be Treated, ib.

-- Subclavian Wounded, and how Cured, T. (...)

-- On the Inside of the Arm, T 64. F. 8.

-- In the Ham, T. 77.

-- Of the Muscles on the Forepart of the Tibia, T. 8^.

-- Corresponding to the Arteria Bronchialis, T. 24. F. 1.

-- Pulmonick lying on the Bronchia, T. 24. F. 2. Entering the Heart, T. 22. F.
12.

Vena Cavae Descending Trunk, T. 24. F. 1. Ascending, T. 41, 42, 49, 50.
Branches Iliack, T. 42, 50. Emulgent, T. 50. v. Kidneys. Vertebral, T. 50.

Vena P^^sa it^ Use, Introd.

Ventricles of the Heart, v. Heart.

Ventricles of the Brain, T. 10. F. 1. Ap. F. 30, 31.

Vertebrae, v. Bones.

Vasiculae Seminales their Forepart, T. 47. F. 1. Instated, T. 44. F. 2.
Divided, T. 47. F. 2. Membrane, T. 47. F. 1. Vasiculae, F. 2. Seminal-ducts,
ib. Blood Vessels, T. 47. F. 1. Vesiculae Mi^^^, Ap. F. 25.

Ulna, v. Bones.

Umbilical Rope, v. Navel-String.

Umbilical Vessels, v. Arteries, Veins, Urachus, and Excretory-ducts.

Urachus, T. ib. F. 3, 4. T. 62, 63. an Account of it, T. 49.

Ureters, in Situ, T. 41. in a Foetus, T. 63. taken out, T. 42, 50. their
Origin, T. 43. F. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7. Insertion, T. 44. F. 2. Membranes Examined
by a Microscope, T. 44. F. 1.

Urethra where it Bends under the Os Pubic, T. 44. F. 2. sometimes Wounded by
Ignorant Lythoromists, Instances given, ib. Bulb of the Cavernous Body, T. 44.
F. 2. an Induration in it Hinders Erection of the Glans, an Observation proving
it, T. 47. F. 5. Opened, T. 47. F. 5. T. 48. F. 1. Caruncle and Ostiolae of the
Prosta^ in it, T. 48. F. 1. Cavernous Body Opened after Inflation, T. 48. F. 4.
cut Transversly, F. 6. Capsula, T. 48. F. 6. where Divided in cutting for the
Stone, T. 47. F. 5.

Urinary passage in Women, T. 51. F. 1. Opened, F. 3.

Uterus, T. 50. Opened, T. 51. F. 4. Cavity and Thickness before Impregnation,
ib. Forepart soon after Impregnation, T. 53. F. 1. Blood Vessels more Extended
than before, ib. Back-part of the same, T. ead. F. 4. Blood Vessels Injected,
ib. after Seven Months gone with Child, T. 54. the same Divided, T. 55, 56.
Veins much Dilated, T. 54. Inequalities of the Inner Surface, T. 56. Vessels
Inosculate with those of the Placenta, T. 54. External Membrane, T. 53. F. 4.
Round Ligament, T. 50, 53. F. 1, 4. their Composition and Progress, T. 50.
Broad Ligament, T. 50, 53. F. 1, 4. what it is, T. 50. Cervix or Neck Divested
of its common Membrane, T. 53. F. 1. Opened, T. 51. F. 4. its Orifice, ib.
Rugae, ib. Moistened with a Serous Liquor, T. 51. F. 4. stopped with a Glutinous
Matter after Impregnation, ib. Grows Thicker as the Birth Grows on, T. 5^.
(...) swelled after the Birth, ib.

(...), T. 13. F. 1. T. 14. F. 3. its Use in Deglutition, Introduct.

W.
WInd-Pipes its Upper Part, v. L^rynx. Middle-part, v. Trachea. Lower-part, v.
Bronchia.

Womb, v. Uterus.

Wounds Gleeting whence it proceeds, Ap. F. 2.

Wry Necks Caution in Cutting them, T. 15. F. 2.

Y.
YArd, v. Penis.

FINIS.

