CRACKFART and TONY; OR, Knave and Fool: IN A DIALOGUE OVER A Dish of Coffee,
Concerning MATTERS of RELIGION AND GOVERNMENT.

Printed in the Year. 1680.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN TOM and DICK.
Tom. SO! we Two are got together into a Corner of this Coffee-house, where
none can overhear us; Prithee Dick. let us Discourse like our selves.


Dick. Ay Tom. just like Cit. and Bumpkin; this is the place for Dialogues:
There sat Cit. where you do, and here sat Bumpkin where I do; now if we could
but talk so wisely.


Tom. Why! What discoursed they of Dick?


Dick. Of matters of Religion and Government; what should they talk of else?
it is all the Discourse now, from the Lord to the Fiddler, all are grown
Statesmen.


Tom. Well, and how handled they matters?


Dic. Pestilent well; and they begun about Petitions, things that have made a
great Bustle, and much Discourse.


Tom. Let us talk a little too, very freely our minds.


Dick. Come with all my Heart; but first clear your Eyes with the steem of the
Coffee, it is good for your Brain. It must be your task to speak, and write.


Tom. Write! why I have writ my self half purblind already, I write commonly in
my sleep, and Dream out politic Discourses: and Further Discoveries, which I
have thought many a time and often Old Nick Himself injects into my Skull, they
are such notable unlucky ones; the Government could never be at quiet for me in
those days of Your, till I got Four or Five hundred a Year by chattering, and
whilst that lasted, I was as mute as a Bell-founder, or Will. Pryn, when buried
amongst musty Records; but now to tell you the truth, I have nothing else to
live on, but my Wits, and yet am at my Wits-end, because I can get no living
Creature to answer me; that I might with a handsome color continue the Wrangle.


Dick. Let your Bookseller hire some body to reply.


Tom. Hang him; he says he loses by my works already, that I am grown a mere
Fumbler at Scribbling, and forced to be my own Plagiary; but a Book's a Book,
and a Bargain's a Bargain, and therefore hitherto I have done well enough with
him.


Dick. Well then, All Is well that ends well, but we come to argue matters of
State, and I say (as aforesaid) it must be your Province to invent and hold
forth.


Tom. And yours Dick. to hear and believe.


Dick. But I Will speak in my turn, though to little purpose.


Tom. You say well, for none always speaks to purpose, though he speaks
purposely.


Dick. I bar Riddles, for if you speak 'um, you must unriddle 'um too, and
that is Labor, you know my Capacity.


Tom. Well then I Will tell thee Dick, to speak purposely in our Language, is to
set People together by the Ears; and not to speak to the purpose is when for
all that, they will not go together by the Ears.


Dick. Very well, truly Tom.! very well, I see you are an enlightening Man, and
has a plaguey long snout of your own to smell a Presbyterian Plot. I begin
already to have my Eyes open, I can see through a Millstone as far as another:
You Will make me lose my Nature, and become Wise.


Tom. Never fear it, there be a great many Knowing Fools.


Dick. What at Riddles again!


Tom. How should we discourse else? That is such as read much, and understand
little, that hear wise men talk, and like Parrets can say after them; that have
the Languages without the Wit, to make true use of them: That talk like
Aristotle, and write like Seneca, but live like Sir Formal, and act like Sir
Foplin.


Dick. I say thou art an enlightening Man; that there should be such knowing
Fools: But most Fools are knowing in their own Conceits, at least they think
themselves wise.


Tom. But to our purpose, if there were not so many Fools, there would be fewer
Knaves: For if there were not a great many believing Fools, there would be far
less inventing, prateing, and scribbling Knaves.


Dick. You are much in the right in that; we have talked of Fools, but a word
or two of Knaves.


Tom. Well, I will endeavor to satisfy you in that, There are a very great
number of that profession, and we have also our Committees, and Sub-Committees,
Clubs, and Meeting Houses, even from Algate to Temple Bar, in the City of
Westminster, Burrow of Southwark, and in the Country, throughout England, and
in all the Chief Corporations thereof; and we go buzing, or rather roreing and
railing up and down against praying, desiring, entreating, requesting,
supplicating, and the like; as dangerous, abominable, profane, tumultuous,
incendarious, republicanical, and rebellious. Nay, we have our Gazets too, our
Pamphlets, our Poems, our Intelligences, our Compendiums, our Coffee-tales, and
more tricks by half than Cit. can be imagined to have.


Dick. I say you talk like a fallen Angel, a very Intelligence; What a fool was
I, to know nothing of your Clubs! but the Righteous call them Jesuitical.


Tom. It Is true, they have got that Title of late, and to tell you the truth,
those learned Gentlemen have much enlightened our Eyes, and taught us how to
carry things closely, and cunningly, and to work and undermine, They are the
Masters at Supping, and have laid down for us Mathematical Rules.


Dick. As how?


Tom. As when we have a mind to set People together by the Ears. to begin with
Religion, to invent new Plots, to raise Stories, to forge Lies, to Create
Relations, to make Dialogues, to feign things that never were, to cause
Jealousies, to stir up Feudes, to rail at the Presbyterians and other
Sectaries, and to frame them Clubs, Committees, Officers, Intelligences, nay,
to tell aloud their secret Whispers, Thoughts, and Motions of their Souls.


Dick. But why is all this? for what end? Don't we live in Peace? And has not
God given us Plenty and Riches, and a good King, that grants us all just
Liberties?


Tom. Why there is the thing Fool: I Will tell thee instantly in a Word, 'its to
break this Golden Chain, and to cause Commotions and Rebellion if we can.


Dick. What will you get by it?


Tom. I cannot tell Fool what you will get: But I am sure I shall get
sufficiently. It Is good to Fish in troubled Waters; and there were never any
Troubles yet, but as we had our Fingers in them, we knew (as they say) how to
lick 'em.


Dick. I thought all the Knaves had been among the Citts and Sectari^s.


Tom. No Fool. There be Court Knaves, and Jesuitical Knaves, Ungodly,
Unsanctifyed, Irreligious and Profane Knaves, as well as Demure, Religious,
and Saintlike Knaves, nay there be Monarchicals, as well as Republican Knaves:
Lords and Knights and Gentlemen, as well as Citts.


Dick. But pray Sir, are there not also, as many of my Profession too, besides
Bumpkins?


Tom. Yes sure; and most commonly, the Knave and the Fool goes together, as we
now do, for they love one another Strangely.


Dick. That Is Strange me thinks, yet I observe them often together.


Tom. The Knave knows not well how to be without the Fool; this Latter is the
others Instrument, his Tool with which he works Miracles: He makes use of him,
as the Monkey does of the Catts Foot, to pull the Nut out of the Fire. So Fool,
you must be my Instrument, and I will Instruct you, perhaps in time, you may
get Preferment as well as Bumpkin?


Dick. I Prithee do: I will endeavor to Learn.


Tom. Why first you must learn to Invent, mark me, nvent things that never
were, nor ever like to be; or if you are not good at Invention, we will do it for
you; then it must be your work to believe, and to cause our Inventions to be
believed, though they be against Sense and Reason, against Proofs, Oaths,
Witnesses, and Demonstration it self.


Dick. What, Narratives of Dragons, Prodigies, and Strange Sights? That Is the
way Citt takes.


Tom. No, no, Stranger Relations; though the Sun shine, you must say and
believe it is Night: Though the Land be Embroiled, and in great trouble, you
must think it is in Peace: Though the Wind Blow, you must say it is Calm, though
it be Sultry weather, you must cry it is damned Cold, an blow your Fingers.
Though you see Popery spread, you must say the Presbyterians, and Sectaries
bring it in under hand. Though you feel the Shoe ring the Foot, you must say
it is an easy shoe: You must endeavor to turn Plots into Ridic ule, and to make
Sectaries Jesuits, Knaves to seem Honest Men, and Honest Men Knaves.


Dick. But you must give me the means to do it.


Tom. Oh! You must be diligent, when we Write, Speak, Exclaim, Rail, Huff,
Roar, Swear, Rant, and Lampoon, to run every where, and publish them in all
Companies, and Places, especially among the Fools, the Roysters, the
God-dam-mees, the Jesters, the Fiddlers, the Careless, the Profane, the
Tyranical, the Rapacious, the Cheats, the Hectors, the Bullies, and the Shirks
in the Baudy-houses, Play Houses, Gaming Ordinaries, the Court of Requests, and
Westminster Hall, and every where, and in all Companies, to gain Credit, and
Especially among the Papists, and the Mungril Papists, who are neither Flesh,
nor Fish, nor good Red Herring:


Dick. I see a man may live and Learn, I think I have the Advantage of Bumpkin
in this.


Tom. That thou have, for you may do it with ease, and neither fear Pillory nor
Imprisonment. We have many great Men will take your part, the Jesuits underhand
will encourage you, and we have a Party too, that rather than you shall want,
know how to part with Money to Promote a good design, and that out of pure
Charity, can release persons out of Prison, to do their Stabbing jobs. Don't
think all the Policy lies in the Cits Lords.


Dick. And I must speak against Petitioning too, and Parliaments.


Tom. Ay against the first, with full mouth, Authority will back you; but
against the latter Cautiously, like a very Presbyterian. And though we could
heartily wish, there might never be any more Parliaments (unless it were to
make an Act that some of us might Supervise the Press) we must not say so,
because of the damned Privileges, and Old Musty Records, Magna Charta's and
many Moldy Statutes, which the Common People are fond of, and will draw an
Odium upon us:


Dick. But what was that true that Cit and Bumkin said the other Night, about
getting of Hands and Subscriptions to Petitions, and putting in false, and
Invented Names?


Tom. It Is no matter whither it were he or not, these New-fashioned Court-made
Citts are often given to Lying and Bragging, however though we don't believe it
our selves 'twill make much for us, if the People will believe it.


Dick. IN am afraid truly, they have the greatest Party on their side.


Tom. Thou talk now right Fool, but if they had, we are the Wisest, and know
how to be even with them: We know how to Chop and Change Persons in Business,
till we have Molded them to our Humor, and till we are sure we have got such,
as will at least Connive at our Politics.


Dick. I know not how it came about, that the Petitions fell so soon, both in
City and Country, till Cit Informed me.


Tom. I tell thee, thou must not believe all Citt says, he is a very Lying
Fellow, the truth on it was, many of us made use of their Wits in that Affair,
we spoke fair to some, we Threatened others, we Flattered many, and used no
small Diligence and Policy to put a Stop to Petitioning, which like an Itch had
spread over the Land, but indeed under the Rose, many were afraid, but more
had some Conscience, and loved the King, and Peace of their Country, and so
were extreme unwilling to displease His Majesty, since he had showed his
dislike, and this was the true Reason, that broke the Heart of the City and
Country Petitions, and put a stop to the inundation of Hands, that were coming
up.


Dick. Then I perceive, these Men had some Conscience, it is true indeed, Citt
said, they had got all sorts of Consciences.


Tom: No, no, they have not all the Consciences neither, for they have left
some for us. There is a Fools Conscience, and a Knaves Conscience, a Little
Conscience, a Large Conscience, and no Conscience at all;


Dick. I thought 'twas impossible for Citts to have left any Conscience, but
that they had engrossed all to themselves. But I pray; what do you mean by
these Consciences? Explain your self a little.


Tom. That I will for your Edification! Know then that a Little or Small
Conscience is no bigger than the Bag of a Bumble Be; and this may be called
the Fools Conscience: It Is usual to say, a Man has Little Conscience, and such
an one is he, that will take ones Money for nothing; that will strain at every
Gnat, Kicks at the very mention of any Papists having a hand in the Late Kings
Murder, or that is possible for a Protestant that cannot Swallow every little
Ceremony to be a good Subject. He is one that Promises much, and performs
Little, Receives all, and pays none, keeps his Whore, and breaks his Word with
her, runs in Debt, and then to the Friars, or a Protection, sets his
Instruments a work, and leaves them in the Lurch; Ruins the poor, to enrich
himself, Fires Houses, and Robs by the light of them, and endeavors to set the
World together by the Ears to get a Reward, or a Petty Place to Domineer in.


Dick. Who would think there was so much in a Little Conscience! What is then
your Large Conscience?


Tom. It Is much bigger than the Tun at Helderburgh, and that may be called the
Knaves Conscience. Ten Thousand pound will lie in one Crevice of it, and not be
seen at all. He that has it, can Swallow whole Lordships, and an Hundred
Thousand Pound will not fill one little Corner of it? It Is big enough to drain
the French Kings Finances, and our Kings Exchequer. It Is so wide, the Devil may
run a Race in it, and be out of Breath before he reaches the end of it. They
that have this Conscience Swear above half as many Oaths as they speak words,
spend all on their Whores, and leave their Wives in want. And the Whores have
this Conscience, that for a little sport, require Thousand's, large Setlements,
great Gifts, and if they could get it a Kingdoms Revenew.


Dick. Very good, but what is it to have no Conscience at all?


Tom. That Is a Jesuitical Conscience, such as can Swear all Oaths Glibly, take
all Tests, Profess all Religions and be of none, Lie, Swear, Forswear,
Imprecate, Attest, Blaspheme, Fire Houses, Conspire the Death of Princes, Lay
Plots, and Designs for Massacre, and Rebellion, and yet stoutly deny their
Guilt, even at the Gallows, and at the Last Gasp say, they are as Innocent as
the Child Unborn.


Dick. But have we no simple, true, Religious Conscience, that loves God for
Gods sake? That Submits to Laws Peacably, because Christ commands it? Obeys
Magistrates, Loves Peace, both in Church and State, because it is the Doctrine
of Jesus, and of his Apostles?


Tom. This sort of Conscience is not among us.


Dick. I heard Cit say, 'twas only to be found indeed in the Goal, or in the
Hospital, in Men in Adversity, or in Sickness.


Tom. It Is a Jewel indeed, the Elixir of the States Man, that would convert all
Evil Politics to Gold: The Philosophers Stone of a Divine, that would enrich
all his Thoughts with Celestial Treasure. But let us never seek after it, it is
as hard to be got as the Universal Medicine, or to be found as o Brazile. Hang
it, it is a Chymaera, to be looked for only among Rosierutians, or in Fairy Land.


Dick. But I heard Cit say, that Conscientious Men, might be known by their
Looks, Gestures, and Pulpit Actings.


Tom. True enough, we have of these sort of Conscientious Men, they are not all
among the Citts: Who more Demure than a Reverend Father Jesuit? That shall
give you words like Sugar, which are in the mean time Rank Poison? That can
Equivocate and Dissemble, and Smile in your Face, and if an opportunity be
given, Cut your Throat, or Fire your Houses? That can drink with you, and take
the Sacrament with you, and then wipe their Mouths and Plot the death of their
Sovereign, the Subversion of Religion, and Sub-plot, to put all off their own
Backs upon that of the Heretics? What think you, are not these Demure, Grave,
Holy-look'd, Conscientious Men? Then as for their Activity in the Pulpit; I
defy er'e a Presbyterian of them all, to come near a Seraphick Franciscan, or a
Mouthing Dominican. I once heard one of the former at York House, and never
Jugler, Tumbler, or Jack-Pudding, had more Postures than he had; therefore let
not Cit Brag of his Pulpit Activity.


Dick. But what say you to those Moving Metaphors that some of them have? There
they out do all others:


Tom. Neither, for we have enough Slip-Stocking Priests who have many more
delicious Similies, and pretty Metaphors, that would make a Man draw his Mouth
of one side: And that Learned grave Dulman in the University is not to be
forgotten, who praying for the young Students in that place, Cried, O Lord make
these Young Willows to grow up to be Old Oaks, that they may become Timber,
fit to Wanscote thy New Jerusalem.


Dick. So much for Conscience, and Conscientious Men: Let me now ask you what
Religion I should be of, or which is most convenient for my Capacity?


Tom. Don't you know what David the King says; The fool has said in his heart
there is no God. He has pointed forth thy Religion Fool; that is to say no
Religion, an Atheist in thy Heart, but what thou will in show.


Dick. I thought that had been your Religion; there be a very great number of
this Religion, who plainly testify it, both in their words and actions.


Tom. As for my Religion, though that shall never much trouble me, and it is
fashonable to scoff and jear at all Religions; and is a mark of wit and gentile
breeding so to do; yet I having some little belief, that there may be a God and
a Heaven, and an Hell, I think good to be of that Religion, wherein I may
purchase Heaven with my money, and buy it as men do Land: take my full wing of
Pleasure, commit all manner of Sins and Debaucheries; care not how I live, or
what I say or do all the week, and on Sunday Morning be made as clean as a
House that is new washed; and so as soon as all my filthy sins are carried away
by absolution, return again fresh and hungry to new Commons; and thus toties
quoties, from one weeks end to another, as long as I live. O! This is a brave
Religion; and a world such as I have lately embraced it; and all the brave
Whores have followed our steps; It gives authority to our Pleasures.


Tom. I think very well of this Religion, and I am resolved to believe this,
and profess the other for a time, for I find this to be in vogue, and to spread
mightily.


Dick. Yes, it is to promote this Religion that all this Puther is made; but we
most safely and cunningly do it, under a secure and dreadful notion, by railing
at the. Presbyterians, and pretending burning zeal for reformed Catholics;
whilst indeed we intend to pull down the reformed Bishops, and to set up the
Romish


Tom. But one thing Dick, I must mind you of, that you come short of Cit in.


Dick. What Is that?


Tom. You have not the Knack of getting by Imprisonment, or standing stiffly and
stoutly for the cause.


Dick. That Is your mistake Jack, for I tell you, they learnt that Trick of us;
for we have several, that weekly and daily search all the Prisons in Town, for
working Tools, that is, out of these Colleges do pick Persons fit for desperate
designs. Alas! in that Cit is a Fool to us; for we have those, that have lain
years, like Fies in the Inquisition in Newgate, the Kings Bench Fleet,
Gate House and other Prisons, only to pick and choose Instruments fit for our
purpose, and to insinuate into them, and to indoctrinate them; and having made
and molded them fit for purpose, paid their Debts, though of a considerable
value; or if in for other wicked Actions and flagitious Crimes, get their
Reprieves, and then their Pardons, or some way work their escape, and then
these are eternally obliged to us, being still Feed with money, and kept at the
public charge. Don't you see then Jack, that the way to Preferment is by being
clapped up? And we have Lords and great men too, that with their Purses and their
Guinees spare for no cost to bolster up the Cause.


Tom. But what if any of these should betray you, and confess all this at last?


Dick. We have besides the Impudence of Denying (for we work without
witnesses,) the way of Godfreying such a one presently, or of sending him
beyond Seas, as soon as we have done with him, or before he has any
opportunity, and then he is past telling Tales.


Tom. But will not your great men deceive them at last?


Dick. Not till they have fully done with them, and then are not so generous as
Cits great Men: before they dare not for their own Interest; and besides, they
have always Spies upon their actions and behavior; and if such a one spits but
awry, he is gone; he is then like a Cracked Tool, to be flung aside, and when he
has done what he was intended for; he becomes like a Wornout-Tool, fit only for
the Fire, or to take a Dance with COLEMAN at Tyburn.


Tom. I am well satisfied as to this point, and thank you that you are so free
with me, for I should be much troubled. if you should come behind Cit in any
thing; well, I think I am fitted now for your service, I pray you get me some
place or other, and let me be a perpetual working-Tool.


Dick. As most of your Capacity are; for our Fools are such incorrigible Tools
they never wear out: therefore you need not be afraid of being laid aside.


Tom. But have you as much Christian Liberty as Citt? And Freedom from all
Humane Laws, and only subject to the immediate Commands of God, and the Spirit,
though against the Written Laws, Divine and Humane, and the Commmands of Kings
and Governors?


Dick. Yes sure, more than Citt has: For we have a better way by half, than to
pore in the Scriptures, or to hearken to the Motions of the Spirit, which may
be irregular; therefore we have our Infallibility at Rome, who, like the Sun,
disperses his Beams, that is, the Priests, who carry his Infallibility all the
World over: And so instead of waiting on the Spirit, that sometimes is sullen,
and will not speak, we go but to the next Priest, and he gives all the Christian
Liberty that Citt so much brags of. And having his Priestly and Infallible
License, overthrowing the Government is no Treason, taking up Arms against the
King no Rebellion, robbing the Reformed Bishops, or the Heretical Presbyterian
Churches no Sacrilege, taking away Abbey and Church Lands so long settled on Lay
men, by Authority of Parliaments no Oppression, taking away Estates no Robbery,
Imprisoning, Racking, Burning, and Tormenting persons no Tyranny; and all this
under the Name and Notion of Religion, no Hypocrasie: forcing Oaths contrary to
ones Conscience, Perjury and Blasphemy, no Impiety; and the blowing up of the
King, House of Lords and Commons, Compassing, and Contriving the Death of their
Sovereign, or Stabbing and Shedding the Sacred Blood of Princes no Murder.


Tom. Very good, live and learn I say; before you informed me, I thought Citt
had been the most Public Man in the World; and had been best furnished with
Principles, to Act and bring about his Designs of any other; but I see you are
even with him, though he bragged he had more Villainies than the Jesuits.


Dick. I tell thee he is a very Bragadocio: For all those things he takes upon
himself, and which perhaps some of them have made use of, he had from the
Jesuits School. I tell thee man, they are in all Shapes, and become all to all
to promote the Cause.


Tom. But a word as to Oaths; Citt says, they are excellent at Swearing.


Dick. Nay then, if they surpass us at Swearing or at Forswearing either, I Will
be baked: For look you, they swore but once in a Year or two, and they were
only bare Oaths; now we swear our people once a Week, and seal it with the
Sacrament (a Knack Citt has not) when ever we have a Design on Foot; besides
the Christian Liberty that is granted ours, to to take all Oaths besides our
own, and to reckon them none: For to swear by a Protestant Bible is no more
obliging than if one had swore by the Alcoran.


Tom. I think now I am fully instructed, and fit for your purpose.


Dick. Stay, I heard you repeat a Golden Sentence of Citts. I will also furnish
you with one or two that you ought still to have in mind.


Tom. O I love Sentences, pithy short Memorials, and fit to be wrote down in my
Commonplace Book.


Dick. They are these, First, Asperse boldly, something will stick. To dye for
Treason at Tyborn, is the ready way to be Sainted at Rome. To commit Murder,
and to dye for it, is the best way to become a Martyr. To deny the Guilt of
Crimes, at the last Gasp, and to profess Innocence, is a Sign of Grace and
Jesuitical Fortitude. That the Pope exercises more Authority than God, who
pardons not Sinners without Repentance; whilst the Pope gives Indulgence for
Sins to be committed for Money for a 1000 years to come. To commit Murder,
Adultery, Theft, Drunkenness, and the like, are great Sins, unless advised or
consented to, by the Priest; and for the Good of the Cause. To murder an
Heretic, is no more Sin, than to kill a Dog: To stab an Excommunicated Prince
or other Magistrate, is the best way to become a Romish Hero, and to have
Elegies wrote in his Praise. To have any Trouble or Remorse of Conscience
before or after the Commitment of such sanctified Murders, is to fall from
Grace, and to merit Penance.


Tom. Very Good, I see Citt has not all the Golden Sentences, these will I put
down in my Book.


Dick. You must believe these as your Creed, have them by Heart, and as perfect
as your Paternoster or Ave-Maria.


Tom. But what Employment have you now?


Dick. I am a Knave by Profession, and therefore cannot want Employment, but
the chiefest thing that I get Money now by, is Scribbling all sorts of
Pamphlets, that may make for Our Cause; Damning the Presbyterians to the lowest
Pit of Hell, Lampooning and Dialoguing, and Lettering the Plot into Ridicule.


Tom. But are you well paid for it?


Dick. Better paid than you think for, and I have a Bag by me, to pay you too,
if you go about your Business handsomely. We have already almost brought it
about, to make the People believe, there is no Plot. Be sure you be diligent in
promoting that Belief, and bespatter the Evidence all you can: call them
Rogues, Vagabonds, Debauched Fellows, Perjured, Lying, Inventive Knaves and
Rascals. Fellows kept out of Charity, and released from Goals; any thing that
may beget an Odium of Them, and the Common Enemy.


Tom. But whom mean you, by the Common Enemy?


Dick. You are a Blind Fool, if thou see not that; why all that oppose
setting up of Popery, whether Church of England-men, Presbyterians, and the
rest of the Heretical Fry, by what Titles or Denominations soever; for they are
all Heretics, and alike to us.


Tom. Then it is not only the Presbyterian Protestants that you aim to overthrow.


Dick. No, No, though we pretend That, yet we aim also at Root and Branch.


Tom. What is that?


Dick. A through Reformation of the Whole. A setting up the Mass in its
Splendour, and the retrieving all our Church Lands, as fully and wholly as they
were before that Fat-Gut Harry the 8 th. took them from us. Come I tell thee,
we hope once more to Reign, and to push on the Plot, in spite of those pitiful
Rogues, Oats, Bedloe, Dangerfield, and the rest of them.


Tom. Bravely resolved. I think now, I am pretty well instructed in the
Methods, and Fundamentals of the Holy Cause.


Dick. I have yet some necessary Hints to qualify you the better for our
Design. First, as to your Behavior, you are to transform your self into all
Shapes; but you may for the present appear, Huffing, Ranting, and Hectoring in
the Coffee-Houses, and rail extremely at Oats and Bedloe; laugh aloud at the
Plot, and do all you can, to make it be unbelieved. Sometimes put it upon the
Presbyterians, and Commonwealths-men, and rather than fail, on the Earl of
Danby, or any Body else, but our selves: you must seem a very Hector, and make
a sneaking Citt afraid of you.


Tom. Very good, I understand you.


Dick. Then you must get the Art of Memory, mark me, the Art of Memory, to call
to Mind, Relate, Print and often talk of (notwithstanding the Acts of Oblivion)
all the Evils of our late Rebellion, the Murder of his Sacred Majesty Charles
the First; the Banishment of our King, the Suppression of the Cavaliers, the
Decimation and Confiscation of the Estates of the Royal Party. You must renew
all these things again daily, and paint them as ugly, and in the worst Shapes
you can. Here will be work for Tropes, Figures, and Metaphors. You must rake in
old Soars, and stinking Dunghills, to make the Stench come fresh into the
Nostrils of the Royal Party, to Incense them anew, and to cause Fears and
Jealousies both in the King, and in those who are zealous for him against this
Party; and though all that Wickedness, was acted by a few, the base and
disowned Company of Olivarians, yet put it upon the whole Presbyterian Party,
and mention not for your Ears, any Service they since did to his Majesty. And
though the King has forgiven, and past Acts of Grace and Oblivion, and
commanded that all should be forgot; yet I say, you must now revive all, and
put it upon the Citts.


Tom. Ay, these Citts are terrible Fellows, they have Pike and Gun too, and
they are able they say to do Service, if need be, if Monsieur should come to
aid us.


Dick. It Is true, if it were not for these Cits, we should do our Business, for
all the Bumpkins; but they are much agreed: yet if we could but find some Trick
to wrest Musket and Pike out of their Hands, we should do the Feat easily.


Tom. You say well, we might then fire Houses, and cut Throats at our Pleasure:
pick and choose as we please, the Fat from the Lean. But I doubt we are too
weak, our Party is too few.


Dick. Not so few as you think for neither; indeed the barefaced Papists, are
not so very numerous, but we have an Army in Masquorade.


Tom. Who are they?


Dick. Church Papists, and a many both Lay and Clergical, that do not much care
which End goes foremost. Some are down right Papists in their Hearts, others are
but Popishly inclined, but lean so much, that the lest Push of Advantage flings
them to Mass; and others are so absolutely Regardless, so they may get either
Money or Promotion, that they care not much, which sort of Bishops sets in the
Chair. And let me tell you, we have of all these, that will never dye Martyrs
for Protestantism no small Company, that when once the Scale begins to turn,
will bring it down on our side amain.


Tom. I am glad to hear on it. But I understand by Citt, that all the Sectaries
are unanimous, nay, and seem to close now, with all the moderate Church of
England-men in the main Points, for a joint Opposition of Popery.


Dick. And that I must ingenuously confess to thee, is no small Trouble to us,
and I have wondered at it, and scratched my Head for Vexation.


Tom. It Is their common Interest sure enough to be so, you know Interest will not
lie. They see the Deluge coming, and if they go into Parties, and stand not
closely and roundly together now, they will be overborne.


Dick. It must be therefore our Masterpiece to break'um: That is an other
Advice I am to give you: make 'um jealous one of another if you can; and say,
why if the Papists are overthrown, and rooted out of the Land, you
Presbyterians will be never the near, the Church of England will still Reign
and Tyranize over you, so that you had as good have the Popish Rocket, as the
Reformed Lawn-Sleeves. Then to the Church of England-men, you must say, If you
root out all the Papists out of the Land, the Presbyterians will be too hard
for you, and turn you a grazing again. The Papists are inconsiderable, and
serve but to Balance the Scales, and to make the Sectaries a little afraid of
their Party, therefore be wise and not severe against them.


Tom. This is as good as the Citts Canting, I like it well, it is politickly
said by my Troth. But another thing, the Citts are very credulous, and believe
their Printed Domestics more than their Creed, though the things are never so
improbable.


Dick. That Is but one Doctors Opinion, however, we love our Domestics too, and
swarms of other Pamphlets, that have private Marks, which are credited by our
Party, though the thing be impossible. And we have Legends of Lying Miracles,
which surpass the Domestics many a League, yet are no more doubted, than that
it is Day when the Sun shines. Besides, our Arts of insinuating, what ever a
Priest says, is believed by the Vulgar of our side, ipso facto. Nay, they are
bound to believe it, and that the Citts are not their Domestics.


Tom. Then I fancy, many of these Idle Reports, are cunningly spread by our
Party, and put upon the Citts.


Dick. 'Troth so they are, more than you are aware of; we are excellent at
spreading false News, and raising Slanders, it is one of our Mister-pieces.


Tom. O Heaven's! I thought most of those had been Citts Inventions.


Dick. There Is our Skill, first to raise them, and then to put it upon the
Citts; for it seems very unlikely, that they should come from us, because we
seem by many of them to bewray our own Nest. But it is no matter for that, if we
beshit it ten times over, we will make the Citts clean it.


Tom. But one Virtue Bumpkin excells you in, and that is Ignorance, for he
thought the Ten Commandments were made by Henry the Eighth, and called them the
Ten Tables.


Dick. Don't let that trouble you at all, for it is a Maxim among us, Ignorance
is the Mother of Devotion; and therefore we make it our Work, to keep the
Vulgar in Ignorance, and let them neither read Blble, or any other Book that
may administer to 'um the least ray of Light or Knowledge; so that many of our
people never so much as heard of Moses, and scarce any of them ever saw or
heard the Ten Commandments: For we have stifled one of them, and when any of
the rest is broken, can presently sodder it up again with a Confession. And as
for God Almighty, they take him to be as they have seen him pictured, an Old
Man somewhat like the Pope, sitting in a Chair, with a Rabble of He and She
Saints kneeling before him. Therefore let not Bumpkin think he has got the
start of us in that Virtue.


Tom. You have much rectified my Understanding: But one thing more before we
part. What if there should be an Hell now, and I should go thither at last for
all my pains? This Question Bumpkin asked Citt.


Dick. And how did Citt answer it?


Tom. By a pretty Simily of the Seven Deadly Sins, and Seven Vials; but the
Application was, that Men were seen still to thrive by all these Evil Ways, and
that they were not poison, as some would make them believe, but as sweet and
wholesome as Muskadine, and none seemed the worse for them; therefore there was
no danger in committing those Seven deadly Sins, or drinking out of the Seven
Vials.


Dick. 'Twas well said, and the Application will hold good also on our side;
but we have a trick that Citt has not, to cheat the Devil.


Tom. I pray what is that? I shall say then you are cunning indeed.


Dick. Why? We have a Purgatory to go to, when we die acting and rolling in the
Seven deadly Sins; and if they are so profitable as Citt says they are, we may
then be able to leave a little Money behind us for a Welsh Priest (or any other
Priest will do it as well) who by the muttering of a few Masses, releases a
Soul out of Purgatory, and sends him immediately to Paradise. I think then the
Devil is cheated for all his Baits of Seven deadly Sins.


Tom. Indeed, indeed we have here the advantage of Citt, and as I take it,
Encouragement enough to drink stoutly of Citt's Seven Vials of Deadly Sins.

But what think you of the Appeal? Citt braggs he knows who wrote it.


Dick. It Is no matter whoever wrote it, he was one of my profession; and I Will
tell you his name too under the Rose.


Tom. Prithee do, for I long to know.


Dick. It was one Mr. Turbulent, let him be Citt or otherwise; but more of such
I say, we fare the better for them: I know one got Fifty pound by that Job.


Tom. But what if Truman should come now, and having overheard our Discourse,
fall into Dispute with us?


Dick. Never fear; he rarely intermixes in our Company: but if he should, I know
how to handle Citt's Arguments, and they would damnably puzzle him.


Tom. Heblew all away with a puff, and fell Tooth and Nail to vindicate one
L'Estrange, prithee.


Dick. Who Is he? Do know him? Know him, Ay almost as well as Madam B. he is a
Wit, a plaguey Fellow at the Goos-quil, a very Lucian at Dialogues.


Tom. Well, but is he a Friend?


Dick. Hold thy prating, what a rude Fool art thou to question a Gentleman's
Religion; he that is not against us, is with us, and I never heard he ever
wrote against Catholics, (except it were a Protestant-Catholick, and that, he
says, is a Solecism) but he has peppered the Presbyterians. A Protestant he
says is a Lutheran, and Catholic the Characteristical Note of a Christian; and
it seems he would have the Church of England stick up her Bristles, and disown
all Fellowship with Protestants abroad, and knock out all Nonconformists Brains
at home, as the only way to prevent Popery. And in particular he has serenaded
Dr. Oats of late most notably; and caressed him just as Joab did Abner, and
would father that Bastardly project on him, with several other happy Jobbs. Ah
Jack! thou can not Fadome the Talents and necessary Abilities of this mighty
Bully of the Juck-pot. Let him go on and prosper, receive the Applauses of
Man's Coffe-House, and the Acclamations of St. Omerian Companions; but let thee
and I go on with our Chat.


Tom. But still I am afraid of some Eves-dropping True-man: For we live in a
damnable Informing Age.


Enter Goodman. Goodm. Though Truman be not here, I am one that has as honest an
Heart, perhaps, and desires to speak a word or two with you: For I have
overheard all the Rogueries.


Tom. Why, who are you? We know you not.


Goodm. My Name is Goodman, and I assure you I am no Knave, and have not over
much of the Fool in me neither. I am no Papist, either barefaced or
Vizard-masqu'd; I am no Citt or Factious Bumpkin; no Republican, nor yet
Fanatic; but since you ask the Question, I shall tell you, that I am a true
Lover of my King and Country, and one that perfectly hates all your Wicked
Villainies, that both you two, and Citt and Bumpkin discoursed of. It is such as
you that endeavor to set true Englishmen by the Ears: You are the Envenomed
Ferment of the Nation, that will neverleave working, till you have put it into
a Malignant Fever: You are a plague that infects the Blood, and Humors of this
political Body: You are Dogs that have licked up the Old Vomits, and are now
spewing all up again: You are the very Gaderine Swine the Devils entered into,
and are sent from the Bottomless pit, to roll your selves in all the Filthy
sinks and Standingpuddles of the Nation, to raise up a Stench enough to bring a
new Plague of War upon Three Kingdoms.


Tom. This is a very wrathful Fellow.


Dick. Come Sir, we care not a Fart for you, nor your Smilies neither; whatever
you are, or what ever you make us to be, we will go on in our Business.


Goodm. You will so? I question it not; for ye are the Catterpillars of the
Nation, the Locusts that would devour every thing: but yet, notwithstanding
both yours and Citts Politics, there will come an East Wind called Gods
Providence, that will sweep the Nation clean, from such Vermin.


Dick. In the mean time, dare you dispute with me about Government? and I Will
hold Citts Arguments against you.


Goodm. This is no Place for Disputes, and I desire not to meddle with
Governors, nor Governments. I have already told you what I am, and by that you
might believe, I am no Medler, nor troubled with the Itch of disputing.


Tom. What makes you meddle with us then, could not you let us alone?


Goodm. Because I am a Good Man in a Moral Sense, and cannot hear such wicked,
lewd, and abominable Discourses as have past between you, without a Reproof for
your Villainies. Therefore think of it, both of you, and be ashamed, (if you are
not quite past all Shame and Grace) and do not thus study worse than Magical
Arts to embroyl a Nation, to cause Fear and Jealousies in the People, Anger and
Suspicion in the King, and Magistrates to break the Blessed Unity of the King
and his People, to talk of Government and Privileges after your Rate, to
invent Lies and forge false Reports, and in fine, to bring all into a Flame and
Combustion.


Dick. Then you dare not Dispute with us?


Tom. No, No, he is afraid you will be too hard for him.


Goodm. What is your Argument?


Dick. First, That it is better to obey God than Man.


Goodm. I say so too, it is literally true, and if it were not absurd, to name
the Scriptures to such as scoff at them, I might tell you that God has said it
in them; Though you would from this, draw a false Inference, and set up an
Infallible Spirit, like the Quakers Light within you, and that should be
accounted the Commands of God, which should be dictated by this Spirit, though
contrary to those he has already laid down in his Written Word, for a Rule of
our Faith and Life. But, Sir, this I am sure is not your true Belief, though it
be Citts Argument, and you look on it as a two Edged Sword, that cuts every
way; for let me tell you, that you hold it better, and more lawful, to obey Man
than God, or your Earthly God (as some of you call him) than the heavenly God.
Don't you hold the Pope Infallible, and that he cannot Err? and therefore, what
ever he commands, though it be against the very Letter of the Sriptures, though
against the Ten Commandments, though against the Express Commands of Christ, and
the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Fathers of the Church of Christ, for
several Centuries immediately following: Nay, though against Nature, Reason,
and Sense it self, you do, (and are so bound to) both Believe and Act: And
therefore I think you may let Citts Argument alone, and hold your own.


Tom. Why, this is shamming, he runs from the point. -- To him with another of
Citts Arguments.


Dick. Well, what say you to the Sovereign Power being in the people?


Goodm. I say to you I am no Commonwealthsman, and I know there was a King, and
Sovereign power before there was a people. Those are not Arguments for either
you or me to meddle with: We are happy in our Monarch who cannot wrong us; But
such as you, by your Evil Councels and bad Designs may, when you try by all
evil ways to turn the Soevereignty to Tyranny, and the Imperial Crown to a
Despotical, which will never be: For the King loves his People too well to
desire it; and as long as he has the Love and Hearts of his People (which only
such as you strive to rob him of) he is a most absolute Prince, and may command
both their Lives and their Fortunes without Force or Compulsion. We may cry
out, O Fortunate Englishmen, if truly sensible of their own Happiness.


Dick. But is not the King one of the Three Estates?


Goodm. Yes, sure he is, or else there were not Three Estates; but he is as the
Head of the Body, and if the Hands should not administer Food to the Head, I am
of the Opinion, that the Body would soon become a Skeliton. I say again, of all
the Nations of the World, we are the most happy in the Constitution of our
Government; where the King and his People are so united and incorporated, as
the Head and Body of a Living Creature, that one cannot do Injury to the other,
without making both suffer, and endangering the ruin of the whole. And
therefore they ill advise, to break the Ancient Constitutions, Customs,
Privileges, and known Rights and Liberties of the people; and they as wickedly
endeavor, who would any way go about Sacrilegiously to rob the King of the
least Ray of Prerogative, which is the Halus or Glory that surrounds the Head
of Majesty.


Tom. Methinks the Gentleman speaks Reason.


Goodm. As on the one side, no Laws can be imposed on us, but by the Consent of
the people in their Representatives, and the Nobility and Clergy in theirs: So
on the other side, none can be made, that shall prejudice the Soverignty, or
infringe the King's Prerogative, without his Consent and Sanction; which Kings
are wise enough, not to grant in prejudice to themselves, as the People
likewise are careful not to frame any to their own Hurt: so that we certainly
have a most happy Constitution of Government, and a better cannot be desired,
when the King cannot do Injury to his People, nor they any ways hurt him,
without Rebellion on the one side, and Tyranny on the other.


Tom. But is not a Commonwealth, a better Government?


Goodm. We are a Commonwealth, though not in your Sense; and it is my Opinion,
that no better Government can be found in the Essence or Being, than what we
have; though as to the outward Branches, they may be better pruned perhaps, and
we see them in every Age, rectified by new and wholesome Laws; for some, like
decayed Limbs, become obsolete and without Life, such are cut off, and new
spring up in their Places, with new Sap and Vigor. I judge it much against the
Humor and Constitution of this People, to become such a Commonwealth as you
mean; for it will not be possible, but that in a little Time, he that can get
Power will be our Tyrant, as we saw by Example in the late Trial was made
thereof. And therefore you wicked Emissaries, leave off creating these
Jealousies and Fears of a Commonwealth; for the only way that I know to make
one, is that which you now take, to bring us out of Love with Monarchy, so into
Rebellion, Confusion and Anarchy, and to raise up the like Combustion this Land
too lately felt; which I pray God of his Mercy avert, and so I Will leave you.


Tom. This is a pestilent Fellow.


Dick. Ay, Ay, Let him prate: don't you be afraid of his East Wind of
Providence: go about your Business, and observe my Rules and Maxims. Let Good
men talk as long as they will; Words are but Wind, but if the Turn comes, we
two shall be Rich: And so Farewell.


FINIS.

